

FOREWORD 
"Restore the outlook of FINAL FANTASY from that of a 
jaded champion, back to being an eager challenger, aiming 
to be an RPG that could truly be called AAA standard." 
This was the target I set when the FFXV project started. 
Looking back on my memories of playing FINAL FANTASY 
from before I started working on it, the series was always a 
challenger to the title that paved the way for new and exciting 
eras. So I thought about what FFXV needed to do in order to 
be that way once again. 
Firstly, I made the idea of a "journey with your closest friends" the central 
axis of the player's experience, something that could only be realized using 
the latest technology. 
I also decided to implement an open-world structure and action-based 
battle system, to create a completely free sense of adventure. On top of 
that, I decided to recreate all the classic FINAL FANTASY elements using 
cutting-edge technology. Finally, I decided that we would deliver this new 
full-spec FINAL FANTASY, worthy of the latest-generation, to players all 
over the world at the same time. 
As I come to write these comments now, I can say that my many comrades 
and I are succeeding with all of the challenges that we took on during 
our own journey. We may have come up against obstacles on numerous 
occasions, but we were able to overcome them every time, growing and 
developing along the way to reach where we are right now. Nothing about 
this project did not present a challenge, and I believe that everyone involved 
was genuinely able to develop themselves through their involvement. 
In that sense, you can say that FFXV truly is the latest installment in the 
series, as it was created by the same people who made the previous games 
what they are, but having matured and grown even further as creators than 
ever before. So it brings me great joy to be able to deliver this title to all our 
fans around the world with a simultaneous release. 
Now let me say one thing about this book, or rather, about the way that the 
Piggyback team do their work. It was during the final phase of development 
that their job began - having to unravel an exceptionally unstable game that 
was full of flaws. At this stage, the balancing work was still incomplete and 
the game was far from what you could call playable. Even so, they stayed in 
Tokyo for several weeks and worked right there beside the development team, 
tenaciously playing unstable versions of the game without a day of rest. 
I sincerely hold their work in high regard, and have come to see that this 
guide they have created is an exceptional piece of work, being the perfect 
partner for adventurers everywhere. 
Finally, to all our fans who waited so long for this game - thank you very 
much for supporting us the whole time. We really did put everything we 
had into FFXV because of a simple desire to make everyone out there 
happy, so nothing would please me more than to know of you having fun 
with our game. 
FINAL FANTASY XV Director, Hajime Tabata 

CONTENTS 
An opening chapter designed to help you develop a good level of proficiency 
with the game's core systems, offering concise and accessible introductions 
to the features that matter most. 
1···················• 
........................ 
OUICKSTART 
PRIMER 
Game Structure 
Commands 
On-screen Display 
Exploration 
Combat 
Character Progression 
r·················· e WALKTHROUGH 
Introduction 
Enemy Analysis 
Map Legend 
~ ....................... 
~ 
Crash Course 
Chapter 01 
Chapter 02 
Chapter 03 
Chapter 04 
Chapter 05 
Chapter 06 
Chapter 07 
Chapter 08 
Chapter 09 
Chapter 10 
Chapter 11 
Chapter 12 
Chapter 13 
Chapter 14 
An all-in-one visual guide through the full Final Fantasy XV adventure, 
covering all available activities - from critical missions to optional challenges. 
With a flexible structure, this enables you to plot a course through the game 
that suits your playstyle. 
A comprehensive directory of every sidequest available in the game, with all 
the details you might need to complete them. 
··················· e SIDEOUESTS 
Rescues 
Broken Cars 
Scraps of Mystery 
Photo Ops 
Hunts 
Tours 
Dave 
Cid 
Takka 
Dino 
Cindy 
Sania 
Navyth 
Vyv 
Lestallum Merchants 
Holly 
Chocobos 
Wiz 
Allies & Miscellany 
Royal Tombs 
Dungeons 
Menaces 
Randolph 
6 
8 
10 
11 
12 
13 
16 
26 
28 
30 
30 
30 
31 
34 
42 
50 
58 
62 
68 
72 
78 
82 
88 
92 
94 
96 
106 
112 
114 
120 
126 
132 
135 
144 
146 
148 
150 
152 
154 
156 
158 
160 
162 
164 
166 
168 
170 
176 
176 
192 
198 

INVENTORY 
Weapons 
Accessories 
Food 
200 •>··············· 
202 
Attire 
Consumables 
Treasures 
Auto Parts 
Leisure Goods 
Key Items 
Shops 
208 
210 
214 
215 
216 
218 
220 
222 
223 
BESTIARY 
Enemy Sheet Structure 
Directory 
228 • ················· 
230 
Beasts 
Daemons 
Imperial Forces 
Bosses 
STRATEGY & ANALYSIS 
Questions & Answers 
Attributes 
Weaponry 
Elemancy 
Status Effects 
Combat Maneuvers 
Damage Calculation 
Character Development 
Ascension 
Party Setups 
Skills 
Mini-Games 
231 
234 
250 
261 
264 
266 • ················ 
268 
269 
272 
274 
282 
283 
292 
294 
296 
300 
303 
309 
EXTRAS 
Trophies & Achievements 
Secrets 
312 • ················ 
314 
Characters & Relationships 
History of Eos 
OUICKSTART 
315 
317 
318 
You will find a brief "Quickstart" section overleaf. This explains 
how you can use the guide in an optimal way. 
UPDATE NOTICE 
We have taken every step to ensure that the contents of 
this guide are correct at the time of press. Nevertheless, 
subsequent updates to the Final Fantasy XV game may contain 
adjustments, gameplay balancing, and even feature additions 
that could not have been included at press time. We will 
look to providing online updates and information on any such 
significant changes once these are notified by Square Enix. 
For details visit www.piggyback.com/en/ffxv. 
An exhaustive appraisal of all equipment and items - everything that you can 
put your hands on in the game is covered here. 
A fact-packed reference chapter featuring every enemy that you may 
encounter, detailing parameters, habitats, weaknesses, drops, and other 
notable characteristics. 
A masterclass that decodes FFXV's game systems and explains the 
underlying mechanics. 
A short but interesting collection of miscellaneous articles, including a guide 
to unlocking all Achievements and Trophies. 
5 

6 
QUICKSTART 
Final Fantasy XV is a game that grants you an enormous amount of freedom. Throughout the adventure, you always have an objective that enables 
you to advance the main storyline. However, you are completely free to ignore this for hours at a time if you wish, venturing far and wide in search of 
sidequests, sights, and potential treasures. 
With a game this vast, and hundreds of potential activities and challenges available, every player will arrive in the world with certain expectations. 
Some will want to focus on the main adventure to see how the story unfolds; others might spend most of their time exploring the vast expanses of 
Lucis. Meanwhile, expert players may seek ways to develop their party quickly in a rush to complete the game's most difficult optional challenges. 
How you play the game will directly determine how to best use this guide. 
Our guide is first and foremost a facilitator. No matter your playstyle or the level of assistance you require, you will find that this book offers the 
flexibility to suit your needs. 
r-.:r;ORATi'1~L------
=~=:=.:'""?-..:=.:.=:.!:-.. ':'=:::===:::-~ 
. 
This guide begins with a short Primer 
(see page 8). In this opening chapter, 
we introduce the game's essential 
concepts to enable you to start the 
adventure with confidence. If you 
are a newcomer to Final Fantasy 
games, this should be your first 
port of call. Even long-time fans 
will learn a lot by reading this chapter, 
as Final Fantasy XV is a distinct entry in 
the series; familiar in some ways, but very 
different in many others. 
If you really can't wait and prefer 
to launch the game immediately, 
note that you will find a "crash 
course" at the beginning of the 
Walkthrough chapter (see page 31). 
This is a very brief introduction that will 
take you through the game's basics in 
no more than a few minutes. 
2 
. -
• • 
• • 
•• 
s:-~
. 
;;~ 
1~ 
ITTi: 
. ==-: 
Our Walkthrough (see page 28) has been designed to 
suit your needs, no matter what these may be. 
<> Each region that you visit during the main storyline 
is covered with a large map featuring collectibles 
and points of interest, as well as caption call-outs 
pointing to all sidequests available in the area: 
essentially, this introduces everything you can do, 
with a minimum degree of assistance. 
<> This is followed by a traditional step-by-step 
walkthrough where we detail in a more linear 
fashion the path through each part of the journey. 
All along the main storyline, this dual structure 
puts everything you need at your disposal: maps, 
collectibles, captions, checklists, monster analysis, 
annotated screenshots, advice ... and much more. All 
the resources are there, leaving you free to shape your 
own tailor-made experience based on your personal 
play style and expectations. 

r 
r 
 
r 
r 
r 
r 
 
~~~~~~:~~ 
~~~~-.s;;::::~~~E:-;::~ 
li[li~IEi 
/l_'&E'iS!.Qli ___________
___ 
_ 
~ -:~: 
.~~ 
'2-~ e; 
,._--
.. 
~ 
,, 
7!1$c 
~ 
1fj. 
Reference Chapters 
.A: 
Whenever you have a question about a specific topic - systems. items, 
enemies, quests, you name it - you have access to a wealth of thematic 
reference chapters. These are all structured in a user-friendly way, making 
guide navigation a painless process. 
You will also find a comprehensive index at the back of this book. Simply 
look for a key term and you will find a corresponding page reference, 
leading you straight to the answer you require. 
in~ .... =-?·~.', sic:lequest-related- Questions 
Our Sidequests Chapter (page 112) offers a comprehensive directory 
of all optional missions available in the game, sorted by category and 
featuring all relevant details. For a large majority of these missions, our 
coverage is primarily visual and map-based: we do not just guide you; 
we show you. 
.. 
er 
--· 
-
¥""" · 
-
1c' ... ~ • Item-related auestions_ 
~_;;. ,~· 
-.....;::?, 
:;.;t.."" 
~ 
':J:' 
;*/ 
"" 
"""'11': · 4""' 
In the Inventory Chapter (page 200). we offer a comprehensive 
appraisal of all items. including where and how you can obtain them. If you 
are looking for better equipment, wondering what an intriguing accessory 
does. or craving new cooking recipes to receive superior party-wide 
attribute boosts, rest assured: we have the answers. 
This guide's Bestiary Chapter (page 228) details every enemy that you 
may encounter over the course of your journey. Each creature is covered 
with an individual sheet revealing habitats. drops, weaknesses. and other 
notable characteristics. Armed with such knowledge, you can develop 
efficient strategies against even the most resilie'nt foe, and obtain all 
potential combat rewards. 
Our Strategy & Analysis Chapter (page 266) dissects all of the game's 
systems. For expert and curious players alike. this is a potential goldmine. 
From battle preparations to combat maneuvers. mini-games to character 
progression, this is the chapter where we lift the curtain on many of 
FFXV' s underlying mechanics. 
Quickstart 



10 
GAME STRUCTURE 
Final Fantasy XV features a vast continent that you gradually unlock by completing main storyline chapters. While not directly engaged with primary 
quests, you are generally free to explore its world and take part in secondary pursuits. 
There is no right or wrong way to play. Some will choose to focus 
on advancing the storyline, while others will favor a more leisurely 
approach to completing critical missions in order to fully explore the 
grand world of Eos. 
Broadly speaking, there are three main types of activities available in 
Final Fantasy XV: 
<> Main Quests ([I] ) : These missions advance the main storyline 
upon completion. By default they are selected automatically, 
meaning that their waypoints and markers are displayed in priority 
on your map and mini-map. Some main quests take place in specific, 
one-off locales that you cannot leave until your task is complete. In 
these instances, the game always warns you beforehand and offers 
the opportunity to defer the quest in order to finish any pending 
business that you have in the area before you proceed. 
<> Sidequests & Optional Challenges ([I) ) : These 
assignments are generally shorter than main quests and involve 
a relatively simple objective - finding a specific item, hunting a 
particular creature, and so forth. Whenever you wish to complete a 
sidequest, be sure to select it in the dedicated "Quest" menu: this 
will ensure that your active waypoints on the map, mini-map and 
main screen all point to the relevant location. The game provides 
a recommended level for each quest, and this is particularly useful 
whenever you weigh up the merits of taking on an optional mission. 
While you will rarely be underprepared for main quests, you will 
regularly encounter sidequests that are best left until a later visit 
to the area. If you do not exceed or match a level requirement, it is 
usually prudent to wait until a later date. Our Walkthrough chapter 
offers comprehensive advice on which optional tasks are feasible 
at each stage in the storyline. As a general rule, we strongly 
encourage you to complete as many sidequests as you can. This 
is the best way to ensure that you constantly stay ahead of the 
overall difficulty curve. 
<> Free-Roaming: Even if you are not working on a quest there is 
still a lot that you can do in FFXV, such as exploring the spectacular 
environments of Eos, participating in mini-games, and encounters 
with ambient enemies where you can refine combat techniques and 
strategies that will serve you well in more critical scenarios. As well 
as gradually accumulating rewards and resources, roaming freely 
in-between missions can be an absorbing activity in and of itself, 
and you will be surprised by how many times the vast expanses and 
mesmerizing vistas of Final Fantasy XV will draw you in ((:DJ. 

COMMANDS 
The following table offers a handy recap of the main commands you will use throughout the adventure. 
Primer 
Default Controls Summary 
PS4 
XBOX ONE 
0 
0 
© 
@ 
@ 
m 
SUMMARY 
Used for basic movement. 
Used to control the game camera. 
Select which weapon to wield from the four available slots. Also used to navigate menus. While in the 
Regalia, play, pause or change the music. 
Jump. Used to interact with the environment and to confirm selection in menus. Hold to pull over while 
driving the Regalia. 
Hold to sprint while running. During combat, tap to attack and hold to perform automatic combos. Also 
used to cancel selection in menus. 
Used for warp-strike moves. Tap to warp forward; hold to point-warp to a suitable position (marked with a 
• Game Structure 
blue icon); with a target lock active, hold to blade-warp to an enemy. 
• commands 
Roll. During combat, tap to roll-dodge and hold to defend or to rescue fallen allies. Hold when near large 
objects to take cover. While in the Regalia, perform a Li-turn. While on a chocobo, sprint. 
Hold to lock on to the currently highlighted enemy target. You can change target by simultaneously tilting 
0 in the appropriate direction. While in the Regalia, cycle between camera views. 
Display the Item menu. While in the Regalia, accelerate. While on a chocobo, trot. 
During combat, once the gauge reaches a sufficient fill level. hold and select an ally's technique with 0 to 
unleash it. While in the Regalia, cycle between camera views. 
While in the Regalia, brake/reverse. While on a chocobo, hold to halt, tap to slide. 
Press while running to sprint. 
Display the main map. While locked on with @)/In, press to trigger target lock. 
Pause the game. 
Display the main menu. 

12 
ON -SCREEN DISP LAY 
0 \ Time of Day 
This icon reflects the current time of the day- hour by hour. Day hours are 
represented with a sun icon, and night hours with a moon icon. The time 
of day plays an important role in the game. Various creatures (including 
marks, your targets during hunting sidequests) can only be found during 
specific time windows, and monsters encountered at night tend to be far 
more dangerous than those you cross paths with during the day. 
Mini-Map 
This illustrates Noctis's immediate surroundings, including essential 
details such as waypoints, collectibles and assorted points of 
interactivity. See page 14 for details. 
~ 
\ 
Information 
The currently selected quest and its associated objectives are listed 
here, along with occasional contextual information. 
Party Data 
The display in the bottom-right corner of the screen shows HP bars 
(Hit Points) for your party members. A character's HP corresponds 
to his or her physical integrity. If this gauge is depleted, the 
character enters Danger status and is on the brink of death (see 
page 24 for details). The character you control, Noctis, also has 
an MP bar (Magic Points). This corresponds to his available magic 
energy pool. Special skills that Noctis uses (such as phasing and 
warp-striking) deplete this gauge, though it will gradually recharge 
over time. If you deplete the gauge completely, Noctis enters 
Stasis, where his special moves are temporarily disabled. 
Interactions 
Objects or individuals that you can interact with in the game world 
(using ®/0) are highlighted by prompts such as "Talk" or "Pick 
up" when you move within range. 
Stamina Gauge 
If you activate this setting in the pause menu, this represents 
how much energy you have left for effortful activities such as 
hanging from certain point-warp positions and sprinting. Once 
you curtail the activity, the gauge will refill quickly. If you fail to 
stop before the entire bar is exhausted, it will turn red and leave 
you unable to hang or sprint for several seconds until the gauge 
returns to green. 
Primary Arms & Armiger 
Noctis can have up to four primary arms equipped in the Gear 
menu, all assigned to 0. Simply press 0 in the corresponding 
direction to wield the weapon of your choice. You can switch 
weapons at any time, even in the heat of battle. Once you 
reach a particular milestone in the storyline, a circular gauge 
surrounding the Primary Arms display is introduced. This fills 
as you fight enemies; when it is full, you can unleash Noctis's 
special Armiger ability (see page 287). 
0\ Tech Bar 
Each of Noctis's current allies can equip a technique from the Gear 
menu. As you attack enemies and defend against their assaults, 
this gauge gradually fills. Once you have filled a sufficient number 
of segments of the gauge, you can unleash a technique by holding 
[j)/aJ and pressing 0 in the appropriate direction. A technique 
can require anything from a single segment to a full gauge. 
0 \ Status Effects 
Status effects are temporary beneficial or detrimental conditions. 
Food effects are represented by blue icons shown at the bottom of 
the screen. Combat effects appear next to the affected combatant's 
HP gauge (green icons for butts, red icons for ailments). 

r 
I' 
r 
EXPLORATION 
Exploration is one of the most important activities in Final Fantasy XV. The game world is very large and features countless points of interest, 
characters to talk to, collectibles to acquire and quests to complete. Scouring every last inch of Eos for new things to find or do is one of the great 
pleasures in this game, and you will be surprised by how often your curiosity is rewarded. 
Basic Movement 
r 
0>--~~~~~~~~~~-<> 
r 
<> Traveling from one destination to another on foot is extremely 
simple: you move Noctis around with @ and control the camera 
with(;). Note that you can invert both the Y axis and the X axis via 
the pause menu's Options. 
<> While running, hold ©/@ or press (!])/? to sprint and reduce 
the overall duration of your journeys. Sprinting gradually depletes 
your stamina bar. Stop sprinting and the gauge will refill gradually. 
If you deplete the entire bar, Noctis will be left out of breath and 
temporarily unable to sprint. 
<> There is a very useful trick to instantly refill your stamina while you 
are sprinting, though the way that you do this varies in accordance 
with your preferred method. If you activate the sprint with (!])/?, 
press the stick again a fraction of a second before the stamina bar 
reaches zero; if you sprint by holding ©/@. release the button at 
the same moment. If you succeed, Noctis will warp forward (G l 
and the gauge will be instantly replenished. This is not a technique 
that you can force by spamming button presses. It takes a little 
practice, but mastering it essentially enables you to sprint endlessly 
- a very welcome boon when navigating the vast expanses of FFXV 
<> You can jump by pressing ®/fJl. This can be used to vault over 
obstacles (G l and to climb when you encounter rocks or natural 
steps as you negotiate steep terrain (Ci)) Note that falling from 
great heights will cause damage, so be careful when you attempt 
tricky leaps, and always pause to consider potential injuries 
whenever dropping from a cliff might offer a useful shortcut. 
The Regalia & Fast Travel 
0>-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
After a handful of short opening quests you will gain access to the 
Regalia, a car that will be your principal method of long-distance 
transportation (9
J. There are two ways to use the Regalia: 
<> With the Auto option, you let lgnis do the driving - a feature that 
is only available during daylight hours. Simply choose a destination 
(from a list of discovered parking areas or current quests, or by 
manually pointing to a specific spot on the map) and you can then 
enjoy the ride. Note that you can actually override the car controls 
at any time. You can also hold ®!fJl to instruct lgnis to pull over if 
you see something of interest that you wish to investigate. When 
selecting a location you have previously driven to (marked by this 
i con: ~ ). you can fast travel there for a nominal price, shortening 
the trip to mere seconds. This becomes an essential feature later on 
in the adventure, as you regularly travel back and forth across Lucis 
to complete sidequests. 
<> With the Manual option, Noctis - and, by extension, you - is in 
control of the car. The controls are straightforward: steer with @, 
accelerate with @)/GI, brake/reverse with (Q)/l!J. make a U-turn 
with @/O. and hop out of the car by holding ®/fJl. 
Make a habit of regularly checking the fuel gauge in the bottom-left 
corner of the screen. Topping up your fuel tank every time you have 
access to a gas pump is the safest way to ensure that you will not run 
out of gas during a long journey. Should the Regalia coast to a stop 
after an unfortunate oversight, you will either need to push it manually 
to the next gas station (much like you do during the opening scene of 
Chapter 01 ). or you can pay Cindy to move it back to Hammerhead via 
the Tow option on the Map screen. 
:(' Primer 
On-screen Display 
13 

14 
Map & Mini-Map 
0»--~~~~~~~~~~~ 
Main Map: You can access the main map (.) at any time during 
active play from the main menu ([~lie) or by pressing ®l/ir. 
Noctis's position is represented by a circle and an arrow pointing in his 
direction of view ( ~) . Once on the map screen, you can scroll with@, 
zoom in or out as required with{.;), and drop a manual marker (referred to 
as "Destination") with @/O (Wl. Any area that you explore becomes 
unfogged, revealing any points of interest such as havens. If you are 
lost or just hopelessly isolated in the wilderness, the options on this 
screen may provide a solution: you can jump immediately to your last 
rest point, move instantly to the Regalia's current location (which can 
cut travel time after exploration). summon the vehicle to the nearest 
accessible road, call for Cindy to tow the car back to Hammerhead, or 
return to the entrance of a dungeon. 
Mini-Map: The mini-map (Q)J shows a small portion of the main 
map that corresponds with your immediate surroundings. The "N" icon 
on the outer edge always points north. The white circle in the center 
represents your character, Noctis, while the white arrow pointing from 
it represents the direction he is currently facing. All places of interest, 
points of interactivity and active waypoints are marked by icons on the 
mini-map. These disappear once out of the mini-map's boundaries -
with the exception of your currently selected quest waypoint, manual 
markers and the Regalia, which remain visible at all times. These 
appear either on the mini-map itself if you are close, or otherwise 
rest on its outer rim to indicate their approximate location over longer 
distances. 
Altitude Markers: Whenever a point of interest or monster is at a 
different elevation to Noctis, its icon on both the main map and the mini-
map features a small arrow in the bottom-right corner that indicates 
whether it is above (-o. ) or below (-0--) your current position. 
Collectibles & Points of Interactivity 
0»--~~~~~~~~~~~ 
As you explore the world of Eos you will regularly stumble across 
items. These appear as sma ll shining objects ((9) and can be picked 
up by pressing ®10 in close proximity. They can be anything from 
ingredients used to cook meals with ephemeral stat-boosting benefits 
while making camp at a haven, to treasures that can be sold in shops, to 
quest items that you must deliver to a particular recipient. 
The maps in this guide reveal the locations of all noteworthy collectibles 
in the game. However, if you intend to complete a first playthrough with a 
minimum of assistance, the following treasure hunting tips will be useful: 
<> Scour the environment for noteworthy collectibles as you travel 
through new and old areas alike. Whenever you notice dead-ends 
or alternative routes, take the time to explore them: they will 
sometimes contain a reward to acknowledge your curiosity. This is 
especially true during main quests that take place in unique areas. 
Map & Mini-Map Legend 
ANNOTATION 
MEANING 
[}] 
Main Quest 
Sidequest 
New Sidequest 
• 
Enemy 
Destination 
Hunt 
Hunt (Hard) 
~ 
Regalia 
~ Haven 
~ ~ 
Diner/Restaurant/ 
Tipster 
g] 
Lodging 
~ 
Shop 
~ 
Arms Vendor 
~ 
Grocer 
®l 
Noodle Wagon 
ANNOTATION 
MEANING 
ffi 
Treasure Spot 
JO~ 
Food Spot/ 
Mineral Deposit 
~ 
Elemental Energy: 
Fire Deposit 
$ 
Elemental Energy: 
Ice Deposit 
(fl 
Elemental Energy: 
Lightning Deposit 
Blockade 
Dungeon 
~ ~ Imperial Base 
* 
Royal Tomb 
uaJ 
Garage 
~ 
Parking Spot 
~ 
Gas Pump 
~ 
Fishing Spot 
C::J 
~ 
Rent-a-Bird 
~ 
Chocobo Salon 

r 
r 
,. 
r 
r 
r 
r 
r 
t 
r 
r 
r 
<> Deposits are found all over the game world and reward you with 
various items, including elemental energy required to craft spells, 
treasures with high resale value, and cooking ingredients. Make a point 
of collecting these whenever you encounter them to gradually increase 
your party's wealth and pool of resources. 
<> While searching for a quest item, do not forget to select the 
corresponding quest via the main menu. This will ensure that your 
destination is marked with a clear waypoint. 
In addition to collectibles, you will encounter numerous points of 
interactivity throughout the game world. These include plot-critical 
devices that must be operated to advance the story, and non-playable 
characters (NPCs) who can be engaged in brief conversations. To 
interact with devices or NPCs, press ®/e . 
Interacting with certain NPCs or collectibles will initiate sidequests. 
Feel free to accept as many of these as you can. There is no limit to how 
many you can have active at one time, and no obligation to complete 
them immediately. When you are ready to undertake a quest, simply 
select it from the list in the corresponding menu. 
Interactive Conversations 
0»--~~~~~~~~~~-<> 
At regular intervals during the adventure, you will encounter situations 
where yo1.1 are given a choice during a dialog. These interactive 
conversations, also referred to as "face-to-face" in the game, are all 
introduced via a screen that features a dialog bubble icon (Gi)). 
You are given a choice between two to four options during interactive 
conversations. Ultimately, events will unfold in the same manner no 
matter what line you select - there are no branching paths. However, 
this does not mean that your choices have no consequences: selecting 
certain responses leads to different rewards. In most cases, you can 
gain EXP or AP (two "currencies" used to develop attributes or abilities 
respectively - see page 26 for details). 
Our walkthrough highlights all "face-to-face" instances that have such 
practical consequences (not all do), detailing in each case what the 
possible rewards are. As a general rule of thumb, we suggest you 
prioritize answers leading to AP rewards - a resource that is harder to 
accumulate than EXP 
Gear & Gil 
0»--~~~~~~~~~~-<> 
Every item that you collect or earn as a reward is automatically 
transferred to your inventory. You can find the complete list of all items 
in this guide' s Inventory chapter (see page 200), along with all relevant 
details and availability conditions. 
<> Weapons, spells, and accessories are battle-oriented items that you 
can equip from the Gear menu. 
<> Spells have to be synthesized or crafted via the Elemancy menu. 
They require elemental energy, which you can absorb from deposits 
most commonly found around havens or by defeating enemies using 
weapons with energy-absorbing properties, such as Noctis's default 
sword. 
<> Treasures are regularly dropped by defeated foes or picked up as 
collectibles. Most of them are meant either to be sold to shopkeepers 
(offering a steady source of income) or to be used as catalysts capable 
of transmuting spells during the crafting process (see page 20). 
A few of them are required to complete sidequests. 
<> Ingredients are used by lgnis to cook dishes with temporary stat-
boosting benefits when you make camp at havens. 
<> Leisure Goods are items tied to mini-games. 
<> Auto Parts are used to customize or upgrade the Regalia. 
<> Key Items are unique, quest-related objects. 
<> Gil is the primary currency in the Final Fantasy universe. You need 
Gil to make any purchase. Gil can be obtained by completing quests 
and by selling items that you do not need, particularly treasures. 
Shops 
0>--~~~~~~~~~~-<> 
There are several types of shop in the game, each offering unique 
varieties of goods or services. Note that the equipment sold differs 
from store to store. 
Shops Overview 
SHOP 
SHOP TYPE 
DESCRIPTION 
Offer information (updating your map with 
TI~ 
Restaurant/ 
points of interest in the surrounding area) and 
Diner/Tipster 
sell meals (providing temporary stat boosts); 
they also act as hunt sidequest vendors. 
s 
Lodging 
Rent rooms or caravans, restoring all of your 
HP and tallying up the EXP you have acquired 
f:) 
Sell assorted items. including consumables 
Shop 
such as potions, cooking ingredients and 
auto parts. 
~ Arms Vendor 
Sell combat-oriented gear, such as weapons 
and accessories. 
o8u 
Garage 
Provide maintenance and customization 
services for your vehicle. 
Primer 
Exploration 
15 

16 
COMBAT 
Stealth & Combat Initiative 
Defensive Moves 
0»--~~~~~~~~~~-<Q»--~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Threat Meter: As you walk within range of enemies, a red threat meter appears at 
the top of the screen. This indicates that the foe in question is about to detect - and 
therefore attack - you. Some monsters react more quickly than others, but. generally 
speaking, expect early-game foes to be relatively slow (giving you ample time to take 
the initiative). whereas opponents in the later game will be swift to mount an assault. 
As long as potential assailants have not spotted you, in most cases because they are 
facing in a different direction, you can move stealthily and choose the best moment 
to strike. 
Warp-Kill: During certain missions. if you approach a human enemy without being 
detected before the formal commencement of hostilities, you may take them down 
instantly with a warp-kill. Press @/O when the corresponding button prompt appears 
on-screen to teleport to the target and kill it in a single blow, irrespective of its HP or 
resistances. If you are still incognito after a warp-kill. you can repeat the maneuver. 
Warp-Strike: In situations where a warp-kill is not a possibility (for instance. when 
your opponents are facing in your direction). a traditional warp-strike is a great way to 
commence your assault. This command enables you to teleport straight to a target. 
inflicting significant damage. The downside is that it can leave you isolated from your 
party members for a few seconds. and therefore subjected to the exclusive attention 
of all foes in proximity. This is a high-risk/high-reward strategy that you may usually 
find to be of merit. 
Roll-Dodge: One very effective way to avoid incoming enemy attacks is to roll-
dodge away from them, which is performed by tapping @/O This move is useful not 
merely to evade assaults. but also to quickly reposition Noctis in a more advantageous 
position - for example, behind an opponent. If you are unsure of the timing or range of 
an imminent enemy assault, preemptive roll-dodging is often the safest way to avoid 
injury. 
Defend/Phase: The defend command is the second staple defensive move. Simply 
hold @/O and Noctis will automatically evade enemy attacks. This command makes it 
easy to keep Noctis unharmed whenever you identify that an opponent is poised to hit 
you. There are, however, two limitations to this command. Firstly, phasing costs MP, so 
you need to monitor your gauge closely to avoid leaving yourself vulnerable at a critical 
moment. Secondly, some of the more powerful enemy blows cannot be phased through. 
With such attacks, you will need to either roll-dodge or perform a successful parry. 
Parry: Certain specific enemy attacks trigger an on-screen button prompt inviting you 
to guard with @/O. At first glance, this works just like the defend command. However, 
this is followed by a second prompt shortly afterwards, inviting you to parry with@/©. 
If you press the button on time, the assault is deflected; if you fail, the attack will hit you 
even though you were holding the guard button. Your reactions need to be very sharp 
for the maneuver to succeed. Each and every time the prompt appears. hold the guard 
button and be ready to press @/©within a fraction of a second. Almost all of the more 
demanding battles in Final Fantasy XV will test your ability to perform this skill, and we 
cannot emphasize enough just how important it is to master it. 

Counter: A successful parry is sometimes followed by a counter opportunity. In 
practical terms, you need to press @/€) a second time, moments after the initial 
parry. Just like the parry command itself. the timing window of this counterattack move 
is extremely tight and will require practice. An easy way to improve your strike rate 
early in the adventure is to press the button repeatedly after a successful parry; though 
a less than elegant solution, it should usually guarantee a counter. 
Crowd Management: A stalwart defense relies not only on parrying or dodging 
commands, but also on your ability to keep track of all enemies. You will often face 
large groups of foes where attacks can potentially arrive from any direction. Make good 
use of e to monitor opponents in the surrounding vicinity, paying special attention to 
swifter and more agile targets. Whenever you face four or more assailants at once, it 
usually pays to move to the periphery of the group, avoiding scenarios where you are 
quickly surrounded. It is also prudent to focus on eliminating foes one at a time, and 
to diligently target aggressors already weakened by your allies where possible. This 
enables you to more efficiently reduce the damage-dealing potential of enemy hordes. 
Cover: Taking cover is a contextual move that has a few interesting applications. 
To take cover, simply hold @/@ when the prompt appears in proximity to a suitable 
piece of scenery. Standing behind cover confers the benefit of faster regeneration of 
HP and MP. 
Stagger: If you manage to block an incoming enemy attack with the defend 
command while wielding a weapon of the shield type, you may briefly stagger the 
target in question. When facing particularly large creatures, the stagger effect might 
only occur if you achieve a "perfect defense" - in other words, should you initiate the 
defend command during the final animation frames before the enemy's attack lands. 
Warp: Warping (@/0) can be used as a defensive move to swiftly escape an 
incoming assault. If you tap the button briefly, Noctis will teleport forward, remaining 
immune during the warp process. If you hold while locked on to a target, Noctis will 
instead blade-warp to it. If you point-warp to a blue marker on the surrounding scenery, 
Noctis's MP is instantly restored. 
Escape: In emergency situations or when time is of the essence, you can escape a 
skirmish simply by sprinting away from the battle zone. This is represented by a glowing 
red perimeter on your mini-map. The moment you step out of these boundaries, the 
battle ends; any incapacitated party members will automatically climb to their feet. 
You can then heal up and reformulate your strategy before making another attempt, or 
seek an alternative route to your destination. It is also perfectly reasonable to use this 
to skip encounters against weaker enemies who will offer little or nothing in the way 
of tangible rewards. 
Primer 
Com bot 
17 

18 
Offensive Moves 
0.·r-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~-o 
There are many techniques that you can employ to defeat enemies. To truly master combat you'll not only need to acquire a proficiency in all of them, 
but also an intuitive grasp of when each move is most appropriate. 
Single Attacks: These are performed by pressing@/©. Each button press leads to 
a unique attack. though these can be repeated in rapid succession to perform combos. 
Automatic Combos: You can perform fluid combos by holding @/€).This leads 
to an automatic series of attacks aimed at the currently selected target and concluded 
with a powerful blow. Note that you can perform directional attacks after the first hit 
of a combo by tilting @ while pressing or holding the attack button. Each weapon 
category has access to different directional attacks. For example. greatswords can 
unleash a devastating charged blow if you hold (and eventually release) the attack 
button while tilting the stick away from your target. 
Lock On: You can lock on to any highlighted target by holding @J/ID. Once target 
lock has been activated, you can move it between adversaries within range with (\). 
Locking on enables you to focus all your efforts on one foe at a time, which negates the 
need for constant directional adjustments and simplifies the process of thinning enemy 
numbers whenever you fight groups. 
Finisher: If at any point you stop in the middle of a combo. even after a single attack. 
there is a brief window during which you may perform a Finisher - a powerful attack 
that can have special properties Simply release @/©. then press it again during the 
Finisher "window". With most weapons. a Finisher opportunity is indicated by a clear 
visual cue: Noctis taking a step backward. For swords. you need to press the button 
when Noctis extends his right arm outward. just as the sword begins to disappear. 
Break: Certain attacks have the ability to "break" the enemy. This system 
revolves around the fact that enemies have distinct body parts (also referred to as 
"appendages"). You can discern each distinct bodily target on an enemy by noting the 
appearance of a reticle; cycle through a foe's body parts with (\) while you are locked 
on to it. Triggering a break on a body part can lead to many different but universally 
positive effects. though the precise result depends on the enemy in question. You can 
find a complete analysis of this complex system on page 284. 
Switch Weapon: You are free to switch weapons in real time during combat 
by pressing 0 in the relevant direction. This feature is absolutely essential in that it 
enables you to exploit enemy weaknesses. as many opponents are actually vulnerable 
to specific weapon types. When you fight groups, two different species may very well 
be susceptible to different weapon types - so the ability to switch on the fly is pivotal. 
(

Warp-Strikes: Blade-warping is executed by locking on to a target and then 
holding @/@. With this command. Noctis teleports straight to the target and inflicts 
a powerful blow. at the cost of MP. The damage inflicted by warp-strikes is determined 
by the distance traveled. with long-range assaults being most effective. You can also 
point-warp to certain elevated positions (in short. any vantage point highlighted by a 
distinctive blue marker) whenever they are available. This enables you to temporarily 
move away from your opponents. enjoying a brief moment of respite (and full MP 
regeneration) before you warp-strike back to them when the timing is right. If you hold 
the warp button. you can perform multiple strikes in quick succession. Beware. though: 
this will rapidly drain your MP gauge. 
Blindsides: These are special contextual attacks that Noctis automatically performs 
when he stands behind an enemy. Though the attendant animation sequence makes 
them slower than normal attacks. they inflict much more damage. When facing large 
and slow creatures, maneuvering with roll-dodges to stay behind them can be a very 
effective strategy - both leaving you out of range of their primary attacks and in a 
position where you can subject them to a constant barrage of normal attacks and 
Blindsides. 
Critical Hits: Critical hits occur randomly as you perform standard attacks or 
combos. For every blow you deal. there is a small chance that it will automatically turn 
into a critical version that inflicts significantly greater damage. Certain weapon-induced 
Primer 
buffs can increase the probability of critical hits. 
Aerial Combos: Combos performed while Noctis is airborne enable him to maintain 
his position until the attack sequence is complete. which is often essential against 
flying targets or specific body parts on giant opponents. The most convenient way to 
initiate these is usually to acquire target lock and then use a warp-strike. Once Noctis 
has unlocked certain abilities in his Ascension tree. aerial combos can be extended by 
tilting 8 in any direction. 
Link Attacks: These are special contextual moves that Noctis performs when he 
stands in close proximity to another party member as they both initiate an attack. 
If both characters are directly behind a monster, for example, they may execute a 
Blindside Link (two Blindsides combined in a single action). All of these moves prove 
more powerful than standard blows thanks to bonus damage multipliers that are 
displayed on-screen while the assault is performed. 
ri c 
• Combat 
SIC'! 
19 

20 
Libra 
0>--~~~~~~~~~~~ 
Both Noctis and lgnis have access to Libra-related abilities. These 
enable you to scan enemies and reveal their weaknesses ((D) . 
By default, the Libra information of each opponent is sealed. To break 
this resistance, you need to lock on to the target while in Wait Mode. 
Given the importance of this system. we strongly suggest that you 
enable Wait Mode from the very beginning of the game (Pause menu 
-+Options -+ Combat). 
The Libra scanning process is not immediate. When you begin locking on 
to a target while in Wait Mode, you will see a circular gauge surrounding 
the enemy gradually fil l. It is only once the gauge is full that the Libra 
information will be displayed on the screen, in the top-left corner. 
Availability of the Libra information is represented by an icon ([]) that 
appears next to the enemy's name. 
lgnis can also reveal enemy intel. This requires you to first acquire 
lgnis's "Analyze" ability in the Teamwork Ascension tree. Whenever 
he successfully uses this ability in battle (which is shown in a small 
window that briefly appears above your party's HP display). you can 
subsequently reveal the corresponding target's Libra details without 
having to go through the usual scanning process. The ability is single-
target: it has to be applied to each enemy you face. 
Spells 
Though not an offensive move per se, the capacity to discover enemy 
strengths and weaknesses is critical in terms of combat strategy. Once 
you have identified which element or weapon type a creature is most 
susceptible to, you can subsequently equip weapons infused with the 
element in question, or craft a spell exploiting the same weakness, 
or switch to accessories offering enhanced resistance against the 
creature's strong element. 
0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
Unlike previous installments in the series, spells in Final Fantasy XV are 
considered as items. 
To have access to a spell, you first need to collect elemental energy from 
deposits, most commonly found around havens: ct>. $ and f . Hold 
®le while in close proximity to one of these resource nodes to absorb 
the energy ((9). You also need a Magic Flask- the physical container 
in which the spell will be stored. 
You can then craft any spell made from the element in question via the 
main menu's Elemancy entry. The more units of energy you use, the 
more powerful the spell will be - so a 30-unit Fire will be significantly 
stronger than a 10-unit Fire. You can even mix different elements 
together to create potent combinations. At any given time, you can 
only craft as many spells as you own Magic Flasks. When you cast a 
spell, only its components are consumed: the Magic Flask permanently 
remains in your inventory. 
Additionally, you can create unique transmuted spells by combining 
a catalyst with elemental energy during the crafting process, each 
catalyst offering a unique added effect. For instance, combining 10 units 
of Fire energy with a potion will lead to the creation of a Fire spell that 
will damage enemies while healing you. 
You can find a complete presentation of this rich and complex system 
in our Strategy & Analysis chapter (see page 274). For now, though, all 
you need to know is that there are three "tiers" of spells, as described 
in the following table. The higher the tier of a spell, the more potent its 
effects (both in terms of damage and effect radius). 
Spell Tiers 
TIER 
ELEMENT 
POWER REQUIRED 
SPELL NAME 
1 
~ Fire 
1 to 99 
Fire 
$ 
Ice 
1to99 
Blizzard 
f 
Lightning 
1to99 
Thunder 
2 ("-ra") 
~ Fire 
100 to 199 
Fira 
$ 
Ice 
100 to 199 
Blizzara 
f 
Lightning 
100 to 199 
Thundara 
3 ("-ga") 
~ Fire 
200 + 
Firaga 
$ 
Ice 
200 + 
Blizzaga 
f 
Lightning 
200+ 
Thundaga 

Once you have a spell in your inventory, you must equip it via the Gear 
menu, either as Secondary Arms for your allies, or as Primary Arms 
(available as 0 shortcuts during combat) for Noctis. Hold the attack 
button and aim with @: release the button to cast the spell. The spell 
will then be on cooldown for a short period before you can cast it again. 
If you run out of charges, the icon will disappear. 
Spells are very powerful in FFXV and should be considered as a 
special move that you employ when it is strategically appropriate, 
not as a matter of course. The simple fact that they are fairly effortful 
to prepare is evidence of this, but their raw power rather underlines 
the theory. 
One interesting application of spells is to use them to initiate combat 
against strong foes that are vulnerable to an element, or to launch 
surprise attacks on large groups of creatures stationed in close 
proximity (f)). Whenever you fail in a difficult battle, consider this 
strategy before you try again - it may ease the opening exchanges in a 
way that tips the odds in your favor. 
Special Abilities 
0·r-~~~~~~~~~---o 
Armiger 
Relatively early in the adventure (after you retrieve the Swords of 
the Wanderer during Chapter 03), Noctis obtains a special ability 
called Armiger. Its availability is represented by a circular gauge that 
surrounds the Primary Arms display in the bottom-left corner of your 
screen ( (D). The gauge fills gradually as you land blows and defend 
successfully. 
Once the gauge is full, you can unleash Noctis's Armiger skill by 
pressing [!)+@) /al + ~ 
simultaneously. This places Noctis in a 
heightened state where his stats are enhanced ( G). Think of it as the 
equivalent of Limit Breaks used in previous Final Fantasy installments. 
The gauge rapidly depletes while this mode is active. Once it is 
completely empty, Noctis returns to his normal self and the benefits of 
Armiger end instantly. 
• · Primer 
• 
Combat 

Techniques 
Noctis's allies can deploy special abilities known as "techniques". These 
are activated by holding [}) /~ 
and pressing 0 . Each of your allies is 
"mapped" to a direction on 0: lgnis to C, Prompto to <O, Gladiolus to 
0>, and occasional guests to O. 
Techniques are unlocked in the Ascension menu by spending AP (a 
system that we cover in more detail later in this chapter: see page 26). 
Essentially, your feats in the game regularly reward you with AP that 
you can spend as you please at the Ascension screen. Each character's 
first technique is unlocked by default. More advanced techniques 
await in their dedicated Ascension branches and involve significant AP 
investments. 
As a rule, techniques are very potent abilities with unique properties: 
some hit all enemies within a fixed radius (known as "area-of-effect" 
attacks, or ADE), while others have elemental properties, and so forth. 
Techniques can only be used once the tech bar on the left of the screen 
is sufficiently filled (G). Early techniques consume a single segment 
of the gauge, but later ones can require a full three-segment bar. The 
gauge fills gradually during battles, with the rate slightly accelerated 
when you perform successful attacks and blocks. 
In most battles, you can unleash techniques only rarely as the gauge is 
filled at a fairly ponderous crawl. This means that you need to make good 
use of these attacks once they are available. For example, Gladiolus's 
Tempest, a technique with area-of-effect damage, is perfect against 
groups of enemies as it affects all hostiles within a reasonably large 
area ($). Prompto's Piercer, meanwhile, is suitable for more resilient 
individual foes as it reduces their defense, increasing the damage dealt 
by the entire party. You can find a comprehensive explanation of this 
system on page 288. 
Battle Items 
0·~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
Press ®)!llll at any moment during battle to freeze time and display the 
Items menu, where you can use consumables held in your inventory($
). 
This enables you to, among other things, heal your characters with various 
potions, cure status ailments such as Poison, or resurrect allies who have 
fallen in battle. 

Combat Flow 
0»--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
At its core, combat in Final Fantasy XV is both intuitive and 
straightforward. You have access to two primary functions, which could 
even be described as "stances": attack and defense. Each of these is 
associated to a controller button: you attack with ©/© and defend 
with@/@. 
This might sound rather simple, but the system is deeper than you might 
expect, as so much rests on your ability to adapt to the unique timing of 
each enemy attack. You need to be ready to guard with @/@whenever 
you identify that an enemy is about to strike - for example, when you 
recognize an animation that telegraphs a specific assault. However, you 
also need to spend as much time as you can on the offensive in order to 
bring the battle to an end, which rather impedes your ability to defend 
with precision. This almost plays like a dance between you and your 
foes - a dance in which you keep time with the (often irregular) beat 
by switching between stances in accordance with the movements of 
your opponents. It is the sharpness of your reactions and your capacity 
to adapt to the tempo of enemy attacks that determines your success 
or failure. 
As you progress, new systems are gradually made available that serve to 
enrich this elementary yet engrossing system. Over time, and particularly 
if you intend to complete the harder optional activities, it becomes 
necessary to juggle all available moves simultaneously. Your objective is 
to constantly adapt to the situation and make decisions such as: 
O Attacking enemies with the weapon types they are vulnerable to; 
O Blocking and parrying their assaults with good timing; 
Wait Mode & Difficulty 
o Making the most of warp-strikes, including when there are point-
warp positions available on the battlefield; 
o Keeping track of all foes, including those behind you; 
o Constantly repositioning Noctis to limit your exposure to attacks 
from blind spots, to increase your chances of performing special 
moves such as Blindsides, and to exploit cover opportunities; 
o Switching weapons on the fly, as required, to optimize your damage 
output; 
o Unleashing techniques, spells or Armiger when you identify strategic 
openings; 
o Consuming battle items to maintain party health whenever 
necessary. 
It is vitally important that you adapt your strategy and actions to the 
enemies you face (reacting appropriately to their attack patterns and 
exploiting their weaknesses), while making the most of more contextual 
actions such as the activation of powerful attacks, all of which requires 
a constant "live" assessment of the current situation. 
So: the system seems simple at first - but the process of evaluating 
available MP, techniques, spells and items, while keeping track of all 
active foes, and both planning then executing your actions, all at the 
same time, is anything but. 
0)--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~----<> 
The combat system in Final Fantasy XV is more action-oriented than 
those found in most of its predecessors. The pace of battles is typically 
fast and relentless, requiring you to manage and observe multiple factors 
simultaneously and in real time: attack, defense, Noctis's position, ally 
behavior, enemy movements, camera orientation, and so forth. 
If you struggle to cope and find the tempo of combat too intense for your 
liking, consider visiting the Pause menu to activate Wait Mode: select 
Options, then switch the Combat entry from Active to Wait. 
Wait Mode affects the flow of time during battles. The principle is 
simple: when you issue commands with the controller (tilting @ or 
pressing buttons), time flows normally; when you are not making direct 
instructions, time stands still. 
If you ever feel overwhelmed or unsure about what your next step 
should be, Wait Mode might be exactly what you need. While the action 
is frozen, you can still observe your opponents and change targets 
with @. This enables you to get a clear sense of what is going on, 
where your allies and enemies are positioned, who is about to attack, 
and therefore what your best course of action might be. If you spot a 
group of monsters in close proximity, for instance, Wait Mode makes it 
much easier to fire off an area-of-effect spell or technique to take them 
all down before they disperse. In high-pressure situations, it removes 
the danger of scrutinizing your surroundings to locate and target the 
succor of a point-warp indicator, or to identify a rifleman firing at your 
party with impunity from an elevated vantage point and warp-strike to 
his position before his attacks take a toll. 
In each battle, you can only stay in Wait Mode for a limited amount of 
time: this is represented by a Wait Timer at the bottom of the screen. This 
gauge gradually depletes over time. If it reaches zero, Wait Mode ends 
and you return to Active Mode automatically. The timer is fully restored 
at the beginning of each battle. Here is a list of the main advantages 
granted by Wait Mode: 
o Wait Mode enables Noctis to access enemy intel using the Libra 
features (@)/ID), making it an essential tool to reveal their 
strengths and weaknesses. 
O While in Wait Mode, you can see colored lines linking each combatant 
to its current target: blue for allies, red for enemies. You can use 
this information to identify enemies who are targeting other party 
members, then strike them from behind while their attention is 
elsewhere. 
O During Wait Mode, you automatically lock on to targets. 
O If you initiate an attack on a distant target while in Wait Mode, 
Noctis runs faster than usual. 
The key to succeeding in battle often lies in your ability to assess 
situations accurately in order to enact the most appropriate strategy. 
The purpose of Wait Mode is to make that process less frantic - it gives 
you the time to observe and plan ahead. If Wait Mode is not enough and 
you still struggle with combat encounters in general, note that you can 
also lower the game's difficulty. To do so, open the Pause menu, then 
select the Difficulty entry and switch to Easy. This gives you an edge by 
lowering the attributes of enemies and by multiplying the Wait Timer 
by 10 - a welcome accessibility setting for less experienced players. 
Primer 
11: 
Combat 
23 

24 
HP, Danger Status & Death 
0»--~~~~~~~~~~~ 
The four members of your party each have a maximum HP value -
the amount of HP they have when at full health. As a rule, damage 
does not affect maximum HP: whenever a character sustains damage, 
only his current HP is lowered (his theoretical maximum HP value 
remains unchanged). Simply heal an injured character (for example with 
a consumable potion) or let him gradually recover over time and his 
current HP will be restored to the maximum HP limit. 
There are two situations that can lead a character's maximum HP to 
be reduced: 
<> If your current HP gauge is fully depleted by an enemy attack, your 
character enters Danger status. In this condition, your character's 
abilities are impaired: you cannot perform any action other than moving 
around at a slow pace (though you can still move marginally faster 
with @/€)) and displaying the Items menu to heal with an item. 
More importantly, in Danger status your maximum HP bar gradually 
drains, and can be further reduced by any additional damage inflicted 
by your opponents. To recover from Danger status, you need to use a 
recovery item, or to be assisted by another party member, or to remain 
unharmed long enough for your character to recover automatically. 
<> A specific type of enemies, Daemons, deal damage that reduces 
both your current HP and maximum HP simultaneously, making them 
particularly dangerous. Daemons typically roam at night and in dark 
environments such as tombs and tunnels. 
Whenever your maximum HP is reduced, your current HP can only be 
restored within the limit of your (diminished) maximum HP In other words, 
your maximum HP is capped, putting you in a very tight spot for future 
encounters !fl>J. To lift this penalty and restore your maximum HP back to 
normal, you will either need to rest at a camp or lodging, or to use powerful 
consumable items that are both rather expensive and generally scarce. 
If a maximum HP bar reaches 0, the character in question dies. If 
this happens to Noctis, you only have a few seconds to quickly use 
a recovery item, such as a Phoenix Down, or you will experience a visit 
to the Game Over screen. Fallen allies can also be resurrected with 
items such as Phoenix Downs. Note that a revived character sees his 
max HP value set to a very low level. 
MP 
0>--~~~~~~~~~--<> 
A feature only available to Noctis, MP (which stands for Magic Points), 
corresponds to his magic energy pool. Every time you perform technical 
combat skills (such as phasing or warp-striking), the move's cost is 
deducted from Noctis's MP gauge. The gauge is replenished in four ways: 
<> MP slowly refills automatically over time - a process that you can 
speed up by taking cover behind a large object. 
<> Point-warping to a blue marker on the surrounding scenery will 
instantly restore all of Noctis's MP 
<> Once you learn the Osmostrike Ascension ability, aerial attacks that 
strike true provide a boost to the gauge fill rate, which rewards 
aggressive strategies. 
<> Last but not least, various consumable items (such as Ethers) enable 
you to instantly refill the gauge to a level determined by their efficacy. 
When the MP gauge is exhausted, Noctis enters Stasis - a condition 
where all MP-based moves are temporarily disabled. During Stasis, Noctis 
briefly collapses if you try to perform MP-based moves. MP recovery will 
also stop for a few seconds, so it makes sense to avoid this condition 
entirely. Carefully monitor your MP gauge and be careful not to stack 
multiple costly techniques in quick succession (particularly warps, which 
tend to take a significant toll on MP). That one extra attack or action is 
rarely worth the punitive measures that Stasis inflicts. 
Attributes 
0>--~~~~~~~~~--<> 
Attributes are parameters that have a strong influence on your 
character's combat efficiency. These can be viewed via the Main Menu, 
and in more specific detail in the Gear section (Ci)). 
You can increase your attributes with gear, and with meals that you eat 
at restaurants or while camping. 
<> Gear can be relatively hard to come by or expensive to purchase, but 
the bonuses obtained through equipment remain active for as long 
as it is equipped. 
<> Meal-induced boosts are easy to trigger. The bonuses they provide 
are temporary, but making camp at a haven is free and only 
consumes ingredients, which can be farmed with little effort. 
Stat buffs are essential factors to take into account when preparing for 
battle. For example, if you are about to face a foe that uses Fire-infused 
attacks, equipping an accessory that buffs your resistance to this element 
will make a massive difference. Likewise, a boost to your magic stat will 
greatly enhance your performance if you plan to defeat an opponent with 
spells. More generally, having the party sit down for a suitable meal prior to 
attempting a tough battle (for instance, just before you face a fearsome hunt 
target) can be a very effective way to increase your chances of success. 

Attributes: Overview 
ICON 
ATIRIBUTE 
Q 
HP 
' 
Attack 
Defense 
~ 
Strength 
4i£1 
Vitality 
• 
Spirit 
/ 
Magic 
Fire 
Resistance 
Ice 
Resistance 
Lightning 
Resistance 
Dark 
Resistance 
Shot 
Resistance 
DESCRIPTION 
Your maximum HP value, when your HP gauge 
is full. 
Base stat that determines the damage dealt by 
physical attacks. 
Base stat that determines the damage incurred 
from enemy physical attacks. 
Affects the damage you deal with physical attacks. 
Affects how well you resist physical damage. 
Affects how well you resist magic damage. 
Affects the damage you deal with spells. 
Ratio by which damage incurred from Fire-type 
attacks is adjusted. 
Ratio by which damage incurred from Ice-type 
attacks is adjusted. 
Ratio by which damage incurred from Lightning-
type attacks is adjusted. 
Ratio by which damage incurred from Dark-type 
attacks is adjusted. 
Ratio by which damage incurred from ballistic 
attacks is adjusted. 
Status Effects 
0>--~~~~~~~~~--<> 
Status enhancements (also called buffs) are beneficial status effects that 
improve the defensive or offensive prowess of the user by boosting one or 
• Primer 
more of his or her attributes. Enhancements are most commonly bestowed 
by equipping specific pieces of gear (particularly accessories) or by eating 
meals. They are represented by square-shaped blue or green icons. 
Status alterations are detrimental effects that can hamper a combatant's 
ability to fight, either by reducing one of more of his stats or by inflicting 
a debilitating condition. Alterations are represented by red square-
shaped icons. When you are assailed by status alterations, you usually 
need to react quickly. The most common cure is to use a consumable 
item. There are also a number of accessories that can provide partial or 
complete protection against particular status alterations. 
Final Fantasy XV features a very large number of status effects, each 
with very specific applications, so this is a topic that we cover in greater 
detail in our Strategy & Analysis chapter (see page 282). 
Damage Types & Elements 
0>--~~~~~~~~~--<> 
All attacks in the game are either physical or magical in nature, the former 
dealing damage based on the Strength attribute (which applies to weapons), 
and the latter based on the Magic attribute (which applies to spells). 
Physical attacks can be either non-elemental (neutral) or elemental - in 
other words, imbued with an element from a subset of five elemental 
varieties. Spells are always elemental by nature. 
In addition, each weapon type inflicts a specific type of damage. 
Elements 
Damage Types 
ICON 
MEANING 
ICON 
MEANING 
~ 
Fire 
• 
Swords 
$ 
Ice 
• 
Greatswords 
~ 
Lightning 
• 
Polearms 
--0-
Light 
• 
Firearms 
(J 
Dark 
• 
Daggers 
• 
Shields • 
Machinery 
All enemies have a set of affinities, which determine the amount of 
damage they sustain from attacks. When you strike, the color of the 
damage values that appear on your screen indicates the nature of the 
target's affinity to the type of damage you're causing: white means 
standard damage; orange stands for increased damage (in other words, 
enemy weakness); purple denotes reduced damage (in other words, 
enemy resistance). Once you have identified a creature's weaknesses, 
it is up to you to adapt your gear accordingly to take advantage of them. 
For example, if a creature is weak to swords and to the Fire element, 
equipping a Fire-imbued sword (such as a Flame Tongue) will lead to 
optimal results. 
This "damage type" system is one of the cornerstones of combat in Final 
Fantasy XV We cover the properties of every single item and piece of 
equipment in our Inventory chapter. Though there is no need for you to 
explore this section of the guide for now, you will certainly come to rely 
on it for reference once you are further into the adventu r:_e. 
@ Combat 
25 

26 
CHARACTER PROGRESSION 
As you advance through the main storyline, your characters will become stronger 
and more resilient in many ways. Understanding and optimizing their progression 
is vital if you are to enjoy the game to its fullest and to remain on par with (or 
even ahead of) the difficulty cu rve. 
In this section we introduce the handful of systems that character progression 
revolves around. A more comprehensive analysis is offered in our Strategy & 
Analysis chapter (see page 294). but it makes sense for you to wait until you 
have more hands-on experience with the game before you delve into that chapter. 
Experience 
0>---~~~~~~~~~~~_____,, 
One of the ways to permanently increase character attributes is via the accumulation 
of experience points (EXP). You gather EXP both by defeating enemies in battles 
and by completing quests. Typically, imposing foes and demanding tasks offer 
substantially better EXP rewards than the extermination of mangy curs and simple 
fetch quests. Interactive conversations can also be an additional (thougr, marginal) 
source of EXP 
One important point to note is that you do not enjoy the benefits of your EXP 
gains immediately: you must first rest either at a lodging or by making camp at a 
haven. It is only then that you will see the EXP you have accumulated since your 
previous night of sleep added to each character's experience level !O ). 
Every time a character's EXP passes certain thresholds (every time the bar fills), 
he "levels up". Leveling up has multiple benefits, the most pertinent of which is 
that the character in question will experience attribute increases. Stat growth 
when you level up is automatic: you do not have to manually allot points into the 
different categories. You usually experience the more palpable benefits of leveling 
up immediately, especially during the opening hours of the story: whenever you 
face familiar monsters, you will notice how you inflict greater damage while 
sustaining less harm from their blows. 
When you study your outstanding missions in the Quest menu, a level 
recommendation is always listed. As a general rule, it's wise to favor missions 
where you meet or exceed the level recommendation, and leave those two or 
more points above your current level until later. 
Ascension 
0r---~~~~~~~~~~---
Another system that contributes significantly to permanently improving your 
combat performances is found in the Ascension menu, where you can study 
various development trees !G ). These are sorted by themes (Magic, Recovery, 
Techniques, and so on) and can be cycled through with (TI) & @)/£] & Ill). 
An Ascension tree is made of a series of interconnected nodes, each known as 
"nexus". As you unlock a nexus, it becomes active, immediately granting the 
character in question the promised bonus or new ability. 
To unlock a nexus, you need to invest the specified AP cost. Early nexuses cost 
only a handful of AP, but the prices tend to rise sharply as you move further along 
the branches. 
You can obtain AP primarily by leveling up, by completing quests, by making the 
dialogue selections that offer relevant bonuses during interactive conversations, 
by defeating enemies with specific moves (such as warp-strikes and parries). 
and by completing optional strategy objectives that are revealed at the beginning 
of certain battles. For example, one of your very first skirmishes in the game 
will challenge you to deal five blows on your enemies. Achieving this sub-goal 
will reward you with AP Later. you will be asked to perform gradually more 
complicated feats - defend against multiple enemy assaults, perform a set 
number of link-stri kes, and so forth. 
As long as you have the required AP, you can purchase available Ascension 
nexuses in any order that you wish. The choices that you make will affect 
how you perform in battle, and overlooking valuable upgrades can put 
you at a disadvantage. For instance, you have the option to unlock lgnis's 
Enhancement technique very early on. This essential command enables 
you to imbue Noctis's weapon with the element that your current target is 
weakest to. Prioritizing this all-important ability over less critical ones can 
give you an edge at the beginning of the adventure. You can also benefit 
by unlocking nexuses that provide AP bonuses at an early stage. 
As the various development trees open up, your options become more 
and more numerous. Prioritizing key unlocks that work well with your play 
style is of utmost importance, so take the time to study the descriptions 
of each one (and consult our advice) before you invest AP 
G 
Gear 
0r--~~~~~~~~~---<> 
A third way to improve your party's performance is to acquire improved 
gear that offers attribute boosts. Strictly speaking, gear-induced 
bonuses are not permanent (unlike bonuses secured through leveling 
up and Ascension unlocks) as they only last for as long as you keep the 
item in question equipped. However, as you will usually only remove a 
piece of gear to replace it with something better or more suited to a 
specific task, equipment in general remains one of the most powerful 
ways to improve the performance of party members. 
Shops are the most common source of gear. As you advance in the 
main storyline and explore the world of Eos you will regularly find new 
stores and merchants, with a gradual improvement in the quality of their 
products. Purchases are made by spending Gil, the in-game currency, 
which you accrue by selling monster drops and completing quests. As 
with Ascension unlocks, though, you will rarely be able to buy everything 
you could possibly want at any given time. Indeed, advanced equipment 
can prove expensive, so you will need to make strategic choices and 
prioritize the pieces that are likely to have the most impact on your combat 
prowess. If you are due to visit a dungeon guarded by creatures weak to 
Fire, a Fire-infused sword might make a world of a difference, whereas 
a defensive accessory of equivalent price would have an altogether 

more subtle effect. If you are too short of funds to be able to afford a critical item, 
Primer 
consider undertaking sidequests (particularly hunts) or "farming" local monsters 
until you have earned sufficient Gil. 
You can find comprehensive analysis of all gear in our Inventory chapter (see page 
200). including prices, availability conditions and stat boosts for every single item. 
Skills 
0>--~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
Each of your four party members has a unique skill. You can view their progression 
in their favored discipline at the level up screen when you rest at camps or 
lodgings. The following text offers a basic introduction to the system. You can, 
of course, find a complete presentation (with all related items, parameters and 
advice) in our Strategy & Analysis chapter on page 303. 
~
Fishing 
~ 
As you explore the vast expanses of Eos, you will gradually discover 
fishing spots where Noctis can practice his skill. You encounter the first one in 
the game's opening chapter once you reach Galdin Quay. 
The fishing mini-game is very straightforward to play, with all available commands 
listed on the screen. All you need is a line and a lure, and you are all set. Every fish 
that you catch rewards Noctis with a specific amount of skill points depending on 
its size and rarity. By leveling up, Noctis improves in various fields, from his actual 
fishing abilities to the efficiency of his equipment. 
n 
Survival 
c...._} 
Gladiolus is the party's survival expert. His skill increases as you run 
around in the world of Eos: the more steps you walk, the more skill points he 
obtains. Leveling up this skill is therefore very easy, and should happen steadily if 
you explore each region - even more so if you're happy to go off the beaten track. 
Gladiolus's skill governs the quality and variety of items you obtain at the end of 
battles, regardless of their outcome. These items are not enemy drops, but special 
objects "found" by your ally. At low Survival levels, the items you receive are 
relatively basic (potions, for example). but they become far more valuable at higher 
levels (in the form of mighty elixirs, or ingots with tremendous resale value). 
~n cooking 
tl ] 
lgnis is your party's official cook. Whenever you make camp at 
a haven, he will offer to prepare a meal which grants a temporary buff to all 
allies. Available dishes depend on which recipes he has mastered so far, and the 
ingredients you currently have in stock. 
<> Ingredients can be dropped by defeated enemies, purchased from shops, and 
obtained as collectibles scattered around the world of Eos. These are clearly 
marked with icons on the in-game map (Jtl & ffi). 
<> Recipes are obtained in a variety of ways, such as eating new dishes in 
restaurants or by defeating specific enemy types. 
lgnis obtains skill points by cooking, with higher totals available for more 
elaborate dishes. Leveling up enables him to unlock new recipes. 
~ 
Photography 
~ 
Prompto's skill is photography. Every photo that he takes grants 
him skill points. Each standard picture is worth a small amount of skill points 
while quest-related pictures, such as those taken during "Photo Op" or "Tour" 
sidequests, are worth far more. 
As he levels up, Prompto unlocks various color effects and techniques such as the 
ability to take selfies. You can review pictures when you rest at camps or lodgings. 
• Character 
Progression 
27 



INTRODUCTION 
Final Fantasy XV features a vast continent that you can gradually 
unlock and explore, region by region, as you complete quests that 
advance the main storyline Most locales have numerous sidequests 
and other assorted optional diversions to enjoy, so there are regular 
opportunities to leave the main narrative path to partake in profitable 
pursuits. This walkthrough covers all available activities, from critical 
missions to single-step interactions, to enable you to plot a course 
through the adventure that suits your playstyle. 
Each region that you visit is introduced in the guide with a double-page 
spread that features a large area map as its focal point. This highlights: 
<> The collectibles and points of interest for the area in question. 
<> A visual representation of the path that you follow to complete 
primary quests. 
<> The various sidequests and optional objectives that you might 
feasibly complete while in the area, taking your likely current level 
into account, with caption call-outs detailing basic requirements and 
essential advice. 
The pages that follow each map offer a traditional walkthrough for the 
main storyline events that occur on the corresponding map portion. 
This provides step-by-step guidance, with screenshots and captions 
detailing the actions you need to take. For ease of reference, each entry 
is identified by a clear number icon that links to the area map. 
If you would like to complete the adventure with minimal assistance, 
the map-oriented pages offer an easy-to-follow directory of all available 
activities and collectibles. Expert players can use these to plan their 
path through the adventure without fear of missing potential rewards. 
MAP LEGEND 
The following legend details annotations and icons that you will encounter 
throughout the Walkthrough chapter. Unless otherwise highlighted 
through a compass rose, our maps are oriented in accordance with 
the classic convention where "up" is always north, as with the main in-
game map. Note that random collectibles are displayed exclusively on 
our map poster to avoid cluttering the Walkthrough maps. 
ANNOTATION 
MEANING 
ANNOTATION 
MEANING 
t 
Player Movement 
II 
Accessory 
+ 
Walkthrough Step 
C1 
Auto Part 
~ Haven 
ff) 
Leisure Good 
u~ 
Diner/Restaurant/ 
II 
Key Item 
Tipster 
s 
Lodging 
Blockade 
rt} 
Shop 
Dungeon 
~ 
Arms Vendor 
~ ~ Imperial Base 
~ Grocer 
* 
Royal Tomb 
~ Noodle Wagon 
n 
Garage 
~ 
Elemental Energy: 
~ 
Parking Spot 
Fire Deposit 
$ 
Elemental Energy: 
~ 
Gas Pump 
Ice Deposit 
(/J 
Elemental Energy: 
~ 
Fishing Spot 
Lightning Deposit 
~ 
a 
Consumable Item 
~ 
Rent-a-Bird 
~ 
Treasure 
~ 
Chocobo Salon 
~ 
Weapon 
~ 
Mineral Deposit 

C RASH COURSE 
If you have not read our Primer chapter (see page 8), it might be a good idea to quickly digest these concise summaries of key features that you 
will encounter during the opening hours of the adventure. 
Quest Waypoints ([IJ & (DJ : These markers show you the general direction of 
your current quest objective on the main screen. overview map. and mini-map. To 
change your current activity. press [:ti/@ and select one of the available assignments 
in the Quests menu. Even if you have a fairly good idea of where a quest takes place, it 
still makes sense to activate its unique markers before you set off. If you would like to 
plot a path to explore a specific location. you can manually add a custom destination by 
pressing @/O on the main map screen. 
Movement & Stamina Bar: Basic movement controls are extremely user-friendly 
in FFXV. You move around with@. adjust the camera with (,i), and jump over obstacles 
with ®/(]). To speed up travel time on foot. sprint by holding @/© or by clicking 
@/'Ii-. If you deplete the stamina gauge completely, Noctis will be unable to sprint 
and jump for a short period of time. There is. however. a very useful trick that you can 
apply to instantly refill your stamina gauge while sprinting, though the method varies in 
accordance with your preferred control style. If you activate the sprint with @I+. press 
the stick again a fraction of a second before the stamina bar reaches zero; if you sprint by 
holding @/©.release the button at the same moment. If you succeed, Noctis will warp 
forward and the gauge will be instantly replenished. 
Mini-Map: The mini-map shows a small portion of the main map. The "N" icon 
on the outer edge of the mini-map always points north. The white circle in the center 
represents your character. Noctis. while the accompanying arrow represents the 
direction he is currently facing. All places of interest and points of interactivity that you 
have discovered in your immediate vicinity are marked by icons on the mini-map, but 
disappear once outside its boundaries. Your currently selected quest waypoint. active 
manual destination marker. and the Regalia are always visible. appearing on the outer 
rim of the mini-map at medium to long distances to illustrate their approximate location. 
Threat Meter & Enemies: Whenever you move within range of potential enemies, 
a red threat meter appears at the top of the screen. You can take this opportunity to 
strike first before your opponents spot you and attack, or to move to a safe distance if 
you wish to avoid conflict. The combat perimeter is represented on your mini-map with 
a red outline. If you run outside of these boundaries. your party will escape. 
Wolkthrough 
Introduction 
• Enemy Analysis 
• Mop Legend 
Crosh Course 

32 
Combat: There are two primary combat moves in FFXV. You attack with @/©, 
which you can hold for automatic assaults or tap to perform manual blows. To defend, 
use @/0: hold to defend continuously, or tap to roll-dodge away. These two buttons 
are all you will need to triumph in the early hours of the adventure, attacking your 
opponents with unfettered aggression with occasional brief interruptions to evade 
enemy assaults. Additional layers are gradually added to the combat system as you 
progress in the storyline, such as warp-strikes (performed by holding @/0) to teleport 
directly to enemies, the tactical boon of changing weapons with 0, and much more. 
Rest Areas & Outposts: You reach your first rest area, Hammerhead, in the 
opening minutes of the adventure. Rest areas and outposts typically feature services 
and amenities such as: 
+ Shops (f]j) where you can purchase gear and items. 
+ Restaurants ( ~ij ) where you can acquire information from tipsters to update your 
map, eat stat-boosting meals, and sign up for hunt sidequests. 
• Lodgings (i::=!l) where you can spend the night to heal wounds and, if you have 
accumulated sufficient experience points (EXP), level up your party. Though you 
cannot prepare meals at lodgings, and must pay a fee for their use, you gain an EXP 
bonus determined by the status of the establishment. 
There are many optional activities that ask you to provide individuals with specific 
items. Some of those are sold in shops. If you quickly browse the requirements for 
each area's sidequests in the walkthrough, you will find many instances where you can 
cut down on travel time by purchasing the necessary supplies in advance. 
Procurement Points (/!), ffi, ~ )
: Procurement points are scattered around 
the map. These are locations where you can find resources to collect, such as food 
ingredients, minerals, and treasures. Their icons are given a gray hue once you have 
plundered them. These resources will regenerate after a period of time. 
Point-Warp Positions: Whenever you notice a blue marker on an elevated 
position, you can point-warp to it by holding @/G. From here, you can warp again 
to hit a highlighted enemy; use ®.l/& and G to pick your target. The further the 
distance that you travel, the higher the potential damage your attack will inflict. You 
can also use point-warp positions to gain brief respite during hectic confrontations and, 
more importantly, to instantly refill Noctis's MP gauge. 
Havens !ml: As you explore the map you will encounter havens, highlighted 
over long distances by a thin column of smoke. Making camp at a haven enables 
you to "bank" the experience points (EXP) you have accrued and to prepare stat-
boosting meals. Unlike most role-playing games, you do not level up automatically 
in Final Fantasy XV: you must spend the night at a haven or a lodging to unlock 
the benefits of experience accumulated while defeating enemies and completing 
assignments. You will also generally find deposits 
(~ , $ , ~) in the area around 
havens. You can interact with these to absorb elemental energy, which is required to 
craft spells from the Elemancy menu. 
Making camp at certain havens for the first time triggers a short, story-oriented 
activity involving Noctis and one of his companions. It's a good idea to accept these 
opportunities when they are offered: they provide useful AP rewards. 
Regalia 
(~): Your car. the Regalia, is your primary mode of transportation. 
You can either choose the auto mode (where lgnis takes the wheel) or manual (where 
you drive yourself). In auto mode, you choose a destination in advance from available 
locations. If a fast travel icon is shown (I~), select "Yes" to instantly complete the 
journey for a nominal fee. 

Parking Spots ( ~ ): The presence of this icon usually suggests that there is 
something of interest in the vicinity, though you should bear in mind that some might 
be stopping points for a quest you have yet to unlock. Don't feel obliged to park in these 
designated bays; if you spot something of note, you can always pull over and park by 
the side of the road (even if lgnis is driving) by holding ®/O. 
Ascension: As you level up and complete quests and other objectives, you receive 
AP that you can spend in the Ascension menu. This enables you to unlock new abilities 
for all party members, including passive skills, offensive and defensive features, and 
special techniques. 
Sidequests & Optional Challenges: Though you always have main quest 
objectives to pursue, we strongly recommend that you make time to explore optional 
activities, particularly sidequests and hunts. You can also fruitfully travel the world 
for the sheer pleasure of exploring and encountering new fauna. vistas, and hidden 
locations. Any additional EXP. AP. or equipment that you acquire will only serve to make 
you stronger for main quests and high-level optional challenges. However, be wary to 
avoid enemies with levels above your own, especially during the opening hours. It's 
prudent to make regular saves if you wander far from the beaten path. 
Rent-a-Bird ( ~ ): After completing a specific hunt (see page 51), you unlock the 
option to rent chocobos, offering a fast and convenient means of transportation for 
the entire party. This is not something that you need think about until Chapter 03 at 
the earliest. 
Gear: Weapons and accessories that you acquire can be equipped from the Gear 
menu. Spells (which can be crafted in the Elemancy menu) and ally techniques 
(unlocked in the Ascension menu) are also assigned for use via this menu. 
Wolkthrough 
Crash Course 
33 

34 
CHAPTER 01 
PART l 
LEIDE: HAMMERHEAD REGION 
+- SIDE_Q!]_;_§I___ 
"Highway Helper" {see page 121) 
From Hammerhead, follow the road to the northwest 
to encounter a man who needs a repair kit to fix his 
broken car. You can purchase these from Hammerhead's 
Mini-mart; consider buying several for future instances 
of automobile failure. Deliver the item to the man to 
complete the quest 
._fil.PEO=U=ES=T'--~~~~~~~~ 
"Tired of Running· (see page 114) 
If you go west from the location where you fight the 
Bloodhorn during the main adventure, you will find an 
exhausted man hiding among the containers. Give him a 
potion to complete this short side mission. 
Daemons 
As a rule, you should only complete missions and 
explore the world during day time in the opening hours 
of the adventure. At night, dangerous Daemons replace 
the usual beasts encountered in the game. It takes a 
well-developed party to stand any chance against these 
extremely dangerous creatures. For now, make camp or 
head to a lodging whenever dusk is near. 
HUNT 
Hammerhead: "Varmints of the Wastelands" 
(see page 136) 
This hunt, activated at the diner, can be completed 
with ease from the beginning of the adventure. Your 
goal is to dispatch a group of Mesmenirs (vulnerable 
to Greatswords, Daggers, and Fire) a short walk to the 
southwest of Hammerhead, though you should note that 
they only appear during daylight hours. 
I}] Walkthrough Summary 
STEP 
QUEST 
DESCRIPTION 
Push the Regalia to Hammerhead. 
(See Overleaf For Details) 
+ 
+-+ 
The Pauper Prince 
Speak to Cindy, visit any shop, then return to Cindy. 
+-+ 
+-+ 
+ 
Eliminate three groups of Reapertails west of Hammerhead. 
Hunter Becomes 
Examine documents inside the shack to the west, then 
the Hunted 
dispatch two packs of Sabertusks before speaking to Dave. 
The Mutant 
Eliminate the Bloodhorn to the north 
Marauder 
The Errand Prince 
Speak to Cindy at Hammerhead, then jump into the Regalia 
and head for Longwythe Rest Area. 
~ A8 
A 
A J\ ~~ • 
~ · ~- --~~ -
~ ";. 
SIOEQIJ_EST 
"Search and Rescue" (see page 115) 
After completing The Mutant Maurauder, explore the 
vicinity of the junction between the dirt road and the 
highway to the northwest of Hammerhead to trigger this 
assignment. The man you need to rescue sits at the foot 
of a large rock right by the road. Hand over a potion to 
complete the quest. 
"Unlucky Driver" (see page 120) 
If you follow the dirt road directly south of the shack 
where you rescue Dave during the main story, you 
will encounter a despairing driver at the position 
marked here. Bring him a repair kit (available from 
Hammerhead's Mini-mart) to complete the quest. 

I
' 
"Stirred, Not Shaken" {see page 145) 
If you make camp at the Cotisse Haven, lgnis will offer 
Noctis the opportunity to help him cook in the morning; 
accept his request When the prompt appears, repeatedly 
tilt and rotate 8 during the conversation to complete 
the assignment 
HUNT 
Hammerhead: "Howling Wind of Hunger" 
(see page 136) 
This hunt pits you against a large group of Sabertusks 
roaming to the northeast of Hammerhead. They can 
be found at any time of day. Focus on crowd control, 
ideally with ally techniques such as Gladiolus's Tempest 
or charged Greatsword attacks as Noctis. Daggers, 
Firearms, and Ice are also very effective against this 
"The Hallowed Hill of Hammerhead" 
{see 1iage 145) 
Make camp at the Palmaugh Haven and 
Prompto will ask you to join him for a 
secret task. Follow the waypoint to the hill 
that overlooks Hammerhead to complete 
this side story. 
Shopping Opportunities 
Hammerhead's arms vendor has a few 
valuable weapons in store, including 
some that can prove very helpful for 
the opening hours of the adventure. In 
• 
Wolklhrough 
particular, don't miss the opportunity 
to purchase at least one of each of the 
following: a War Sword IGreatsword 
that can help with crowd control), a 
pair of Avengers (Daggers that can be 
useful to finish off toppled enemies), 
and a Cocytus la Firearm imbued with 
the Ice element). Equip Noctis with 
these (via the Gear menu), keeping in 
mind that you can switch weapons 
on the fly with 0 . This is an essential 
feature to exploit enemy weaknesses. 
In addition, it is easy to forget that 
you are in charge of your allies' 
equipment too. Improved weapons 
enable your team mates to perform 
significantly better in battle, and they 
too can exploit enemy weaknesses. 
One final word: consider making a 
brief stop at the local Mini-mart to 
buy a few potions, repair kits, and 
antidotes. These will all come in handy 
to save travel time when completing 
sidequests. 
QALJ 
Giant Hairy Horn 
~ 
Curved Fang 
~ I Metal Scrap 
OllJ 
Rusted Bit 
~ 
I Broken Harmonica 
.@!uj I Warrior's Anklet 
ft£J I Bronze Bangle 
@llJ i Garnet Bracelet 
I 
~ 
I Megalixir 
·~ 
Mega Phoenix 
~ 
Hi-Elixir 
~ 
Antidote 
@W 
Potion 
@.ill I Hi-Potion 
.@filJ j Phoenix Down 
Q,filJ 
Avengers 
~ 
Blade of Brennaere 
~ 
lronDuke* 
~ 
Oracle Ascension Coin 
Whitestone Shard 117%), 
I 
Blackstone Shardl17%), 
a:. 
Redstone Shard 117%), 
• '\::! 
I Bluestone Shard 117%), 
l 
Greenstone Shard 116%), 
Yellowstone Shard 116%) 
Silver Dust 140%), Gold Dust 
________ £3~
0
/o), Prism~~~~2_5~ 
*Only available after you finish the game 
• 
Chapter Ol 
35 

36 
STEP-BY-STEP WALKTHROUGH 
After the introductory scenes your first task as Prince Noctis is to push your car. the 
Regalia, by holding @J/llil. You can also familiarize yourself with camera movements 
(and, by extension, the striking environment) by tilting(.\) in any direction. 
NOTES 
a -~i_deqUE?St_S 
____ _ 
;=:--There are more sidequests to complete than you might suspect during the 
early chapters of FFXV. Though you may be tempted to focus on the main story 
to drive party development, it's actually the process of completing secondary 
tasks that will enable you to advance their skills beyond the gentle incline of 
the difficulty curve - and, moreover, bankroll the acquisition of superior gear, 
which can make a profound difference. Completing optional challenges grants 
you valuable rewards, upgrades, resources (both directly and indirectly as a 
consequence of exploration), and more besides. 
For these (very pertinent) reasons, we strongly advise that you make it a 
habit to regularly venture off the beaten path - especially as you have this 
walkthrough to assist you in only straying as far as you really need to. For each 
section of the game you will find map-linked callouts highlighting the location 
and requirements for all sidequests that you undertake. 
For this opening sequence in the Hammerhead region, any task that you fulfill 
before fighting the Bloodhorn (+
)will make that encounter a little easier. The 
same is true for every critical challenge that follows in the story: a little extra 
legwork and effort in advance will pay dividends at the times when you really 
need your party to perform. Refer to the previous page for callouts highlighting 
available sidequests at this stage of the adventure. 
SIDEQUEST CHECKLIST 
NAME 
TYPE 
PAGE 
Varmints of the Wastelands 
Hunt, Hammerhead diner 
136 
Howling Wind of Hunger 
Hunt. Hammerhead diner 
136 
The Hallowed Hill of Hammerhead 
Tour 
145 
Stirred, Not Shaken 
Tour 
145 
Highway Helper 
Broken car 
121 
Unlucky Driver 
Broken car 
120 
Tired of Running 
Rescue 
114 
Search and Rescue 
Rescue 
115 
Once at Hammerhead, speak to Cindy to receive a map of the continent. You can then 
enter the store or diner to trigger The Pauper Prince quest. lgnis suggests that you 
consult Cindy, so return to her to explain the situation. In the interactive conversation 
that follows, you have three options: 
+ "Ask for a discount" • Reward: 10 AP 
• "Ask for a loan" 
• Reward: 10 AP 
+ "Ask my friends" 
• Reward: 10 AP 
Make a brief visit to the diner's tipster to inquire about information on the surrounding 
area before you set out to eliminate the groups of monsters outside of Hammerhead. 
The first enemies are found by the broken telegraph post a short walk to the southwest 
of the gas station, as shown here. You can use the [I) icon to guide you. Don't neglect 
to complete the optional challenge that appears at the start of the battle. Each of these 
Strategy challenges that you beat will reward you with extra AP. which you can spend 
to unlock new skills for your party members in the Ascension menu. 
The second group awaits by another collapsed telegraph pole a short walk to the west. 
Use this opportunity to practice the art of defending: hold @/O to defend against 
enemy attacks, then finish them off. The third and final group of Reapertails is found 
roaming further west. Simply run alongside the main road until you reach them. Once 
again, follow the instructions to earn AP Taking down all foes completes The Pauper 
Prince quest. 

The Hunter Becomes the Hunted mission becomes active after the telephone 
conversation with Cindy. Head to the abandoned shack directly west of your position, 
as shown here. Examine the documents on the table in the far corner to trigger a 
battle against a rampaging mob of Sabertusks. A Greatsword's charged attack can 
work wonders in such close confines; alternatively, attacking with a Cocytus firearm 
can prove extremely effective here. as these creatures are vulnerable to Ice. 
Once all monsters are down. Dave appears outside the nearby shack. Speak to him 
to complete the Hunter Becomes the Hunted quest. Your choice during the 
interactive conversation leads to the following rewards: 
+ "Do it for free" 
• 
Reward: 30 EXP for the whole party 
• "Do it for a price" • 
Reward: 2 AP 
+ "Ask my friends" • 
Reward: 150 EXP for lgnis alone 
You are now ready to face your next foe: a large creature that awaits to the north, beyond 
the pipeline shown here. To tip the odds in your favor. open the Ascension menu and 
make sure you have unlocked lgnis's Enhancement nexus; you could also consider making 
a minor detour to the west to collect the powerful, Fire-infused Blade of Brennaere. 
available at a treasure spot position (see page 34). When you are all set. create a manual 
save. Your priority in the battle that follows is to roll-dodge away (press @/0) or phase 
through your opponent's attacks (hold @/0). particularly when you are within range of 
the creature's horn. Try to remain to the rear of this beast to avoid most of its attacks and 
to increase your chances of performing link-strikes - situational special attacks that inflict 
bonus damage when you are in close proximity with at least one companion. A Polearm 
infused with Fire via lgnis's Enhancement technique will exploit both of the Bloodhorn's 
weaknesses. though the Blade of Brennaere will also work wonders. Terminating the 
Bloodhorn completes the The Mutant Marauder quest. 
f Wolkthrough 
Move further west towards the next waypoint to find another group of monsters. To 
fulfill the strategy requirement. look at the windmill and hold @/O when you see a 
·' 
•· / 
blue marker on it. From your hanging position. hold @)/ID and press @/0: Noctis 
will automatically warp-strike to the current target - a technique that you will need to 
use frequently throughout the adventure. It's a good idea to practice it whenever you 
have the opportunity. 
Your new mission is called The Mutant Marauder. Before you head to the 
destination, though, make a stop at the nearby Merrioth Haven. a short walk to the 
southeast of your current position. Havens are easy to spot from a distance: each 
one is signposted by a distinct column of smoke. as illustrated here. Collect elemental 
energy from the deposits surrounding the haven before you make camp: this will enable 
you to craft spells (see page 18 for details). When you rest. the experience points 
(EXP) that you have accumulated so far will be processed automatically, levelling up 
your characters and granting them status boosts. These stat increases will be of great 
benefit during an imminent battle. 
You can now head back to Hammerhead to move on to a new location - though 
this is an opportune time to clear a handful of sidequests if you wish. Once you're 
ready, speak to Cindy to initiate The Errand Prince (see below for interactive dialog 
rewards) and drive to the Longwythe Rest Area. If you choose to have Noctis (and, 
therefore. you) drive to the next waypoint. you can find instructions for the Regalia on 
the screen. Essentially, you accelerate with @l/llii.. turn the wheel with 4) (which is 
only technically required at junctions; Noctis will automatically follow the road without 
your direct input) and. on arrival, hold ®/G when the prompt appears to park. Your 
choice during the interactive dialog with Cindy has the following results: 
+ "Accept" 
• 
Reward: 50 EXP for the entire party 
+ "Refuse" 
• 
Reward: Reward: 2 AP 
• "Ask my friends" • 
Reward: 200 EXP for Prompto alone 
'!I Chapter 01 
tr> • 
12 
r I. 
37 

38 
.__§JQ_rn,_l)~~H --
"Scraps of Mystery I" {see page 126) 
During your stop at the Longwythe Rest Area, head to the end 
of the covered walkway closest to the road (facing the booth 
where the proprietor sits, it's on your left) to find and collect a 
map hidden by a chair. Select this as your active quest and follow 
the waypoint until you reach the search zone surrounding the 
marker. Your goal is to find a collectible item inside the highlighted 
perimeter - and you should stop reading this entry now if you 
would prefer to do so without assistance. If you struggle to 
locate it, here's a hint: the item is at the foot of a large rock not 
too far from the center of the search area. Note that we provide 
immediate visual solutions for all "scavenger-hunt"-style missions 
in our Sidequests chapter. See page 126 to locate the item for 
this assignment. 
_ 5-HJl;_O JfSI __ _ 
"Gone Hunting" (see page 146) 
After you speak with the motel owner, talk to the man right 
in front of Noctis as the cutscene ends. He asks you to make 
a delivery for Dave, who stands across the road, outside the 
small building adjacent to the diner. Once you've given him 
the envelope, inquire about the quest by speaking to the local 
tipster - in other words, the man behind the counter of the 
diner. You can now head to the position this caption points to. 
Examine the campfire, then chase and defeat the Sabertusks 
that appear. Once you have dealt with them all (Gladiolus's 
Tempest technique can really help here), pick up the dog tag 
and take it back to Dave at the Longwythe Rest Area to 
complete the mission. 
+----~1fil:91)f;5-l _______ -- ----
"Broken-Down" (see page 121) 
Just a little to the south of the Longwythe Rest Area, 
you will find a driver standing close to his car on the 
side of the road. Give him a repair kit (available from 
Hammerhead's Mini-mart) to complete the quest. 
Longwythe Rest Area: "Mineside Mischief Makers" 
(see page 136) 
The Goblins you seek roam on the hill close to the entrance 
to the Balouve Mines if you visit at night. They are all weak to 
Fire-based attacks, as well as Polearms and Daggers. To avoid 
unwanted encounters while driving after dark, park the Regalia 
in nearby Longwythe and head to the waypoint on foot. Once 
you have defeated the Goblins, open the main map and select 
the "Return to Car" option for a quick return journey. 
Sl!)EOUF.§T 
"Krtty Catering" (see page 170) 
As you return to the Regalia after speaking to Dino, you can interact 
with a cat on the pier to begin this sidequest. Head to the nearby 
fishing spot, on the small pier a short walk to the west. Once you've 
caught a fish, return to the cat - which, you will find, doesn't seem to 
like raw fish. Seek the advice of the chef at the nearby restaurant, 
then take the dish that she prepares back to the cat to complete the 
mission. (Before you leave the area, buy a Lucian Tomato from the 
nearby shop: it will become useful for another sidequest very soon.) 
TOUR 
"Rise and Shine and Run" (see page 145) 
Make camp at the Lachyrte Haven and accept Gladiolus's offer. 
Follow him in the morning to initiate a race. Your objective is 
to reach the goal line first. Sprint at all times by using the trick 
that enables you to refresh your stamina bar just before it is fully 
depleted (see "Movement & Stamina Bar" on page 31 ). Gladiolus's 
reaction at the finish line is determined by how well you perform. 
._fill)_JQY _ §__"':'___ ___ _ 
"Conceal, Don't Feel" (see page 115} 
After completing A Cry for Help, head to the large barn 
close to the small shack where you encountered Dave 
for the first time. Hand over an antidote to the man 
"A Cry for Help" (see paye 115) 
If you head for the ruins to the northwest of Hammerhead 
after visiting the Longwythe Rest Area, you will find a 
man in need of your assistance. Heal him with a potion 
to complete this mission. 
Balouve Mines (see paye 178) 
Though you can freely enter and 
explore these mines, you will be 
unable to open the final gate until 
you acquire a specific key - and 
even then, defeating the enemy 
guarding the dungeon's innermost 
sanctum will be far beyond the 
capabilities of your party for many 
hours to come. It therefore makes 
sense to postpone your visit until 
a later time. 

LEIDE: GALDIN QUAY REGION 
CHAPTER 01 
PAI< I 2 
!See Overleaf For Details) 
i 
' 
STEP 
i QUEST 
DESCRIPTION 
+-• 
+-+ 
+-• 
The Errand 
Prince 
A Gentlemen's 
Agreement 
Ill Tidings 
Drive to the Longwythe Rest Area and speak to the motel 
manager, then drive to Galdin Quay to the south. 
Speak to Dino on the southernmost pier, then collect the minerals 
he requires from a deposit to the north and return them to him. 
~ 
Sharp Bone 
OEJ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
Giant Hairy Horn 
I Curved Fang 
I 
I ::::,"::::'"" Too'h 
Rusted Bit 
~ 
StarShell 
~ 
Fossil Shell 
~· 
Ammonite Fossil 
~ 
Garnet Bracelet 
tilU 
Bulletproof Vest 
&!lliJ 
Star Pendant 
@filJ 
Warrior's Anklet 
.ft,filj 
Bronze Bangle 
~ 
Fencer's Anklet 
.~ 
Amulet 
~ 
I Green Choker 
! 
~ 
lronBangle 
~ 
Megalixir 
~ 
Mega Phoenix 
t!W 
Remedy 
@,ill 
Hi-Elixir 
@ill 
Hi-Elixir** 
@ill 
Antidote 
~ 
Potion 
@:fill 
Mega- Potion 
~ 
Avengers 
~ 
Blade of Brennaere 
~ 
lronDuke* 
.~ 
Organyx* 
Oracle Ascension Coin 
Whitestone Shard (17%). 
Blackstone Shard(17%). 
Redstone Shard (17%). 
Bluestone Shard ( 17%). 
i Greenstone Shard (16%). 
1 Yellowstone Shard (16%) 
Silver Dust (40%). Gold Dust 
(35%). Prismatic Dust (25%) 
* Only available after you finish the game 
** Available from Chapter 09 
• 
Walkfhrough 
•:I 
> 
-
t 
( . / 
• 
Chapter 01 
I' 
39 

STEP-BY-STEP WALKTHROUGH 
a 
Sidequ_e~ts ___ _____ 
_ 
___ 
_ 
_ 
;=::--' 
There are two prime opportunities to clear up available sidequests during this 
section of the game: 
• The first opportunity is when you make the delivery to the motel manager 
in the Longwythe Rest Area (see step +i Look to complete the following 
assignments: Gone Hunting. Scraps of Mystery I. Broken-Down. A Cry 
for Help, Conceal. Don't Feel. Mineside Mischief Makers and The 
Hunter-Slaying Herd. 
• The second opportunity is before you return the Garnet Stone to Dino at 
Galdin Quay (see +i Consider completing Rise and Shine and Run. 
Peace to the Beach and Kitty Catering. 
SIDEQUEST CHECKLIST 
NAME 
Gone Hunting 
Scraps of Mystery I 
Broken-Down 
Mineside Mischief Makers 
The Hunter-Slaying Herd 
A Cry for Help 
Conceal, Don't Feel 
Rise and Shine and Run 
Peace to the Beach 
Kitty Catering 
TYPE . 
Dave 
Mystery map 
Broken car 
Hunt 
Hunt 
Rescue 
Rescue 
Tour 
Hunt 
Friendly Cat 
PAGE 
146 
126 
121 
136 
136 
115 
115 
145 
136 
170 
When you reach the Longwythe Rest Area. park the Regalia outside the motel. Speak 
to the manager in the small booth to deliver the goods. If you're open to diversions. this 
is a good time to complete a few local sidequests (see "Sidequests"). 
Take the Regalia and drive to Galdin Quay. Once you have parked, go through the main 
building and all the way to the pier at the far south of the map. Note that the woman 
behind the circular counter in the Mother of Pearl restaurant is the local tipster; pay her 
a quick visit as you pass. 

After checking the ferry movements (or lack thereof) at the waypoint, talk to Dino. This 
completes The Errand Prince and triggers the A Gentlemen's Agreement quest 
Here are the consequences of your choice during the interactive dialog with Dino: 
• "Listen to him" 
+ Reward: 80 EXP for each party member 
• "Stand my ground" + Reward: 150 EXP for lgnis alone 
When you are ready to proceed, speak to Dino at Galdin Quay to complete the 
A Gentlemen's Agreement quest Note that you will not return here for a while 
once you speak to him again ta advance the story, so make sure you are done with any 
unfinished business in the area beforehand. 
The linear path leading to a second combat encounter is represented here. Use the 
same tactics to eliminate your enemies. After the battle, don't forget to explore the 
two adjacent derelict rooms to collect items. 
You can now use the Regalia in auto mode to head straight to your destination via the 
Quest Location option. Once the Regalia is parked, follow the route shown here to 
reach the path to your objective. Walk around the giant bird (to assuage any anxiety: 
if the imposing creature detects you, it will simply fly away), then head to the mineral 
deposit to acquire a Garnet Stone. You are now ready to return to Dino at Galdin Quay. 
After delivering the item you will receive a Garnet Bracelet: an accessory that can be a 
fine gear addition for one of your party members. 
The Ill Tidings quest begins as you automatically drive towards the city of Insomnia. 
Once the car is parked, follow the path shown here to reach a first group of soldiers. 
Area-of-effect attacks can work wonders against packs of enemies: a spell, Gladiolus's 
Tempest technique, or swinging a charged Greatsword are all excellent options. If 
Noctis is subjected to heavy fire, use one of the cover points: move close, then hold 
@/O when the prompt appears. (If you have unlocked the Rapid Regen ability nexus, 
you will also benefit from increased gauge recovery speeds.) 
To reach the third and final battle in this chapter, follow the path shown here. Try to 
open the fight by warp-striking to the riflemen on the vantage point and deal with them 
as a priority - this prevents them from peppering your party with bullets while you fight 
their allies below. Once the dust settles. run to the final waypoint to complete both the 
Ill Tidings quest and Chapter 01 . 
·• Walkthrough 
·~ Chapter 01 
'It 
1 • 
41 

42 
"Scraps of Mystery II" (see page 126) 
You can initiate this quest by interacting with a map on 
the lower shelf of a small table with wheels in the Prairie 
Outpost. across the road from Monica's position. It makes 
sense to do so during your first visit to the outpost, as you 
will come across the corresponding location during the 
The Power of Kings main quest. on a similar wooden 
table in the northeast corner of the Keycatrich Trench 
battlefield. 
__ §_tR_EOUES.L_ ____ _ 
"Dust to Dust" {see page 146) 
If you completed the Gone Hunting quest in Longwythe 
(see page 38), Dave can be found at the Prairie Outpost, 
close to where you originally encountered Monica. Speak 
to him to initiate this quest, then retrieve the dog tag from 
an abandoned car to the south of the Prairie Outpost. 
_J 
SIQFOU".S!_ __ --=_- ----~ 
"Palpable Pain" {see page 114) 
After completing Tired of Running (see page 34), you can 
find a woman inside this building to the south of the Prairie 
Outpost. Heal her with a potion to receive your reward. 
--~~----- •. _.,...--~--~ J 
51.Q~ L'F.ST __________ _ 
"Scraps of Mystery Ill" (see page 126) 
You will find this map on the ground, outside a wooden 
shack to the south of the Prairie Outpost. It leads to a 
position to the west of Hammerhead. You will find the 
item to collect behind large collapsed beams surrounded I 
by other debris. 
i 
SIDEO J <n 
"Stranded on the Sand" (see page 120) 
If you have completed Highway Helper (see page 34), 
you can find another driver in need of assistance on the 
side of the dirt road to the south of the main road that 
leads from Hammerhead to the Prairie Outpost. Take him 
_J 
a repair kit (available from Hammerhead's Mini-mart) to J 
complete the quest. 
"Lost Without a Potion" (see page 114) 
After completing Search and Rescue (see page 34), 
explore the area above the rock tunnel that you drive 
through to reach Galdin Quay. Look behind the bushes 
and give the man a potion. 
----------1 
"The Aspiring Artisan" {see page 153) 
This quest can be completed alongside Scenic 
Delivery. Speak to Dino at Galdin Quay, then retrieve 
the Amethyst Stone he requires from a deposit just east 
of Longvvythe Peak and take it back to him. Before you 
leave, activate Dino's next mission: A Stone-Studded 
Stunner. This new objective is found in Duscae, so 
triggering it now will save you a long journey at a later 
date. 

LEIDE: PRAIRIE OUTPOST REGION 
CHAPTER 02 
~)!\I< I l 
"Hunters and Gatherers" (see page 151) 
Once you have completed Takka's first quest (Scenic 
Delivery). Takka asks you to obtain a Daggerquill Breast. 
You can find Daggerquills a short walk to the northeast 
of Hammerhead. Once there, use warp-strikes to reach 
them, then immediately launch a combo to stay airborne 
and inflict damage. Take the item back to Takka to 
complete this task. 
_, 
e 
.. 
......,;~...;;-;;,,.·:.-
;;;;,··,;;;~
;;;;I pl_D_E_Q~~~§_T ___________ _ 
"Scenic Delivery" (see page 151) 
As you begin the chapter in Hammerhead, speak to 
Takka (the diner owner) to trigger this quest. He asks you 
to find a Lucian Tomato for him. You can purchase one 
from the shop close to Galdin Quay's parking lot. Deliver 
it to Takka to complete the assignment. 
"Distress in the Desert" (see page 114) 
After completing Lost Without a Potion, return to 
the area where you encountered the giant bird during 
A Gentlemen's Agreement Follow the rock wall on 
your left after you cross the bridge to find a woman. 
Give her an antidote to complete this assignment. 
~~~~=...:.:..;...:.; 
ITJ Walkthrough Summary 
STEP 
QUEST 
I DESCRIPTION 
• 
·1 
~ SIDEOUE~?" 
__________ _ 
"Emergency Delivery" (see page 151) 
After you complete Hunters and Gatherers, Takka 
has a third mission for you: obtain a Garula Sirloin. 
Garulas can be found in the Duscae region. available 
from Chapter 03, just to the south of the gas station 
where you begin 
"Roadside Assistance" (see page 121) 
This driver appears on the road that leads from 
Hammerhead to the P!airie Outpost after you have 
completed Stranded on the Sand. Give him a repair kit 
to complete the quest. 
!See Overteaf For Detailsl 
+-+ 
+-+ 
Legacy 
Speak to Cid inside Hammerhead's garage, then drive to the Prairie Outpost and talk in 
turn to Monica and Cor. 
The Power of Kings 
Explore Keycatrich Trench to the east to retrieve a new Royal Arm. 
Legend -
MEANING 
~ 
Electrolytic Condenser 
OfilJ 
Quality Building Stone 
~ 
Giant Hairy Horn 
~ 
Curved Fang 
OJ!fil ! Ancient Dragon Tooth 
om 
Metal Scrap 
~ 
RustedBit 
OmJ 
Star Shell 
O!LJ 
Ammonite Fossil 
@illJ 
Warrior's Anklet 
fig.I : White Choker 
@filJ 
Bronze Bangle 
~ 
Fencer's Anklet 
ftm 
Amulet 
~ 
Green Choker 
fi.!!1} 
Silver Bangle* 
~ 
; Garnet Bracelet 
~ 
Star Pendant 
~ 
Megalixir 
~ 
Mega Phoenix 
~ 
Remedy 
@fiJ 
Hi-Elixir 
~ 
. Potion 
~ 
Mega-Potion 
~ 
Avengers 
~ 
Blade of Brannaere 
Ql'iJ 
Bioblaster 
~ 
lronDuke* 
~ 
Organyx* 
Oracle Ascension Coin 
Whitestone Shard (17%). 
Blackstone Shard(17%). 
Redstone Shard (17%). 
Bluestone Shard (17%). 
Greenstone Shard (16%). 
Yellowstone Shard (16%) 
~ 
Silver Dust (40%), Gold Dust 
_ -
--~(35%). Prismatic Dust (25%) 
*Only available after you finish the game 
Walkthrough 
Chapter 02 
43 

44 
STEP-BY-STE P WAL KTHROUG H 
Q Enemy _t-JJ9 l y~j_§ _(seEi__page ~~-1) 
NAME 
NOTES 
The Legacy quest begins during the ride to Hammerhead. Back at the gas station, 
approach Cid. After the cutscene. return to the Regalia and drive to the next waypoint: 
Prairie Outpost. 
Go through the temple gate at the top of the dirt path, where you meet Car and receive 
the Sword of the Wise: this is your first Royal Arm, a unique category of powerful 
weapons that drain your HP when you hit enemies (see page 286 for details). Speak to 
Car to complete the Legacy quest and initiate The Power of Kings. 
. '! 
=---Before you meet Car and visit Keycatrich Trench, there are a number of 
sidequests that you can complete. Gaining a level or two prior to facing the 
dungeon's many dangers will make things a lot easier. 
SIDEQUEST CHECKLIST 
NAME 
TYPE 
PAGE 
Lost Without a Potion 
Rescue 
114 
Distress in the Desert 
Rescue 
114 
Palpable Pain 
Rescue 
114 
Stranded on the Sand 
Broken car 
120 
Roadside Assistance 
Broken car 
121 
Scenic Delivery 
Takka 
151 
Hunters and Gatherers 
Takka 
151 
Emergency Delivery 
Takka 
151 
The Aspiring Artisan 
Dino 
153 
Scraps of Mystery II 
Mystery map 
126 
Scraps of Mystery Ill 
Mystery map 
126 
Dust to Dust 
Dave 
146 
Once at the outpost, talk to Monica. Save your progress: this will be your last chance 
to do so prior to a forthcoming battle. You can then head towards the waypoint to 
the north. 
Keycatrich Trench, your next destination, lies to the east of your current position. 
Retrace your steps to the junction and follow the dirt path to the northeast. 

Legend 
~~II.I-
~ 
! Electrolytic Condenser 1 
.~ 
1 Elixir 
·~
' Laser Sensor 
~
I Metal Scrap 
·~ 
Rusted Bit 
fi.!illJ i Green Choker 
.~ 
I Carbon Bangle 
--~
I Hi-Elixir __ _ 
I ~ 
· Ether 
: ~ 
Auto Crossbow 
.~ 
Oracle Ascension Coin 
50% Bronze Bangle. 
25% Potion. 
25% Debased Coin 
50% Elixir, 
25% Megalixir, 
25% Debased Coin 
Once inside the dungeon, follow the path shown on the map above. Go down the tunnel 
and take a right when you reach a fork. Follow the cables and activate the generator 
that they lead to: this will turn on the lights. Keep going down the main tunnel until 
you spot a rock wall with a hole on your right. Go through the gap shown on the 
accompanying screenshot. (If you wish to explore the other optional tunnel sections, 
refer to the dashed line on our map. Watch out for the rock that falls from the ceiling in 
the chamber at the bottom of the stairs.) 
When you enter the main battlefield area, you have two options. If you make your 
approach alongside the left-hand wall (northwest). you can run past the nearby 
®f· Walkthrough 
Garulessa and Garulets and head straight for the cave entrance. The second option 
is our recommended approach: follow the dirt path to face a large group of soldiers, 
followed by hard-hitting Magitek mechs. The infantry are supported by a manned turret: 
neutralize this emplacement immediately, as it can deal significant damage. Once all 
soldiers are down, deal with the bipedal tanks, ideally one at a time. Greatswords are 
supremely effective here (especially if enhanced by lgnis) as their sweeping attacks 
can hit multiple body parts simultaneously, while also destroying nearby missiles before 
they explode. There are more assailants further east (including another bipedal tank) 
that you may also wish to deal with. Winning this battle is much more demanding than 
sprinting past the Garulessa, but the EXP bonuses make it more than worthwhile. Don't 
neglect to collect the Bioblaster located on top of the rocks to the left of the dungeon 
before you continue. 
".. 
8 
KEYCATRICH TRENCH 
~N 
The path through the second half of the dungeon is fairly straightforward: take a left 
at the end of the corridor, then pass through the narrow passage between the steel 
plates. Open the steel door to your leh and activate another generator. The remaining 
corridors lead to the main chamber where you have to fight an Arachne (don't miss 
the Auto Crossbow directly on the way). Make the most of each parry opportunity and 
try to exploit the creature's weaknesses by using Greatswords or Machinery imbued 
with Fire thanks to lgnis's Enhancement technique (which you should definitely have 
unlocked in the Ascension menu by now). Boosted in this manner with a Greatsword 
in hand, Noctis can deal enormous amounts of damage to the Arachne, particularly 
with charged strikes (see page 18 for details on this move). Ignore the Tarantulas 
that spawn: instead, focus solely on your main target to take it down as quickly 
as possible. During the process, make sure you parry or roll-dodge away from its 
Lightning cloud attack. though. Once the monster falls, go through the hole in the rock 
wall to reach the final room and retrieve the Axe of the Conqueror. Leave the cave to 
complete The Power of Kings. 
45 

46 
CHAPTER 02 
PART 2 
"Cid Sophiar, Master Mechanic" (see 11age 148) 
Return to Hammerhead and speak to Cid outside 
the garage to trigger this chain of side missions. 
Completing the specified objectives will provide 
opportunities to upgrade various weapons. At this 
stage, you can have up to four in your possession: the 
Drain Lance from the end of Chapter 01; the Bioblaster 
found just outside Keycatrich Trench; the Auto 
Crossbow hidden inside Keycatrich Trench; and Noctis's 
default Engine Blade. Cid will upgrade any of these 
once you bring him the required parts, some of which 
are easy to obtain (such as a Metal Scrap). 
SIDEQ!J_E_~T _ 
"Scraps of Mystery V" (see page 127) 
This map is found on the floor of a collapsed building to 
the west of Hammerhead. It leads to a position west 
of Longwythe Peak; the item you need to collect lies on 
top of a large rock. 
"The Ever Regal Regalia" {see page 155) 
Speak to Cindy outside the garage to trigger this 
sidequest. Select this assignment in the menu then 
head to the waypoint. The Aero Wax lies inside a 
tunnel to the south of the Norduscaen Blockade. 
Eliminate the Goblins on the way, then pick up the 
item and return it to Cindy. You can then install it from 
Cindy's Customize menu. 
SIDEQ!J~§T 
"Scared and Stranded" (see page 115) 
After completing A Cry for Help (see page 38). head 
south from the shack you visited during the Hunter 
Becomes the Hunted quest. Another man in need of 
help is seated inside a small recess in a rock wall, not 
far from Merrioth Haven. Offer him a potion to obtain 
a reward. 
"The Ever Gleaming Regalia" (see page 154) 
After you complete The Ever Elegant Regalia. speak 
to Cindy again. Her next task requires access to Duscae, 
a location that you cannot visit until Chapter 03. You 
should still activate the quest now. though. When you 
arrive in Duscae, you can retrieve the necessary item in 
Alstor Slough, to the southwest of the gas station. 
+- --~IQEOUEST ________ _ 
"The Ever Elegant Regalia" (see page 155) 
After you complete The Ever Regal Regalia. speak to 
Cindy. This time she asks you to retrieve some ore from 
the Balouve Mines. just east of the Longwythe Rest 
Area. You can collect the ore at the dungeon's entrance, 
close to the elevator. then return it to Cindy 
Balouve Mines {see page 178) 
You can freely enter and explore the Balouve Mines, to 
the east of Longwythe Rest Area. at any point in the 
story. After you have received the key from Car and 
complete The Power of Kings main quest. you can 
technically clear the mines and obtain an additional 
Royal Arm. However. this is something that you should 
leave until later in the adventure - at this stage, you 
just won't be strong enough to face the powerful boss 
guarding the tomb. 
LEIDE: NORDUSCAEN BLOCKADE REGION 

!See Overleaf For Details! 
Declaration of War 
Return to Monica at the Prairie Outpost, then meet her again at the 
Norduscaen Blockade. Fight your way through the base with Car. 
--, 
"Scraps of Mystery IV" (see page 127) 
Though technically available to begin now, you should 
ignore this sidequest for the present time. The map 
portion is hidden in a small fenced enclosure at the 
Esterleiden Blockade, under a wooden table on wheels. 
To reach it you will need to clear the forces guarding 
the blockade, which is probably beyond your party's 
capabilities at this point. Worse, the item it leads to is 
found inside the nearby Crestholm Channels, a dungeon 
that you cannot clear until close to the end of your first 
playthrough. 
Legend 
ftfil.J· Warrior's Anklet 
em 
White Choker 
~ 
Bronze Bangle 
fi.ill 
Green Choker 
~ 
Iron Bangle 
.fifilj 
Silver Bangle* 
~ 
Garnet Bracelet 
i1LJ 
Bulletproof Vest 
.@!ill 
Emerald Bracelet 
~ 
Star Pendant 
@ill 
Megalixir 
-em 
Mega Phoenix 
~ 
Remedy 
~ 
Hi-Elixir 
~ 
Mega-Potion 
~ 
Blade of Brennaere 
~ 
Bioblaster 
~ 
Iron Duke* 
~ 
Avengers 
~ 
Oracle Ascension Coin 
Whitestone Shard (17%). 
Blackstone Shard(17%). 
~ 
Redstone Shard 117%). 
Bluestone Shard (17%), 
Greenstone Shard (16%). 
Yellowstone Shard ( 16%) 
~-
Silver Dust 140%). Gold Dust 
135%). Prismatic Dust (25%) 
*Only available after you finish the game 
Wolkthrough 
• Chapter 02 
47 

48 
STEP-BY-STEP WALKTHROUGH 
. 
After you visit the Keycatrich Trench dungeon (see step +L 
a number of side 
missions become available. Try to complete as many as you can before you 
begin your assault on the Norduscaen Blockade. 
SIDEQUEST CHECl<LIST 
NAME 
lYPE 
PAGE 
Scared and Stranded 
Rescue 
115 
An Exaggerated Injury 
Rescue 
115 
Cid Sophiar, Master Mechanic 
Cid 
148 
Scraps of Mystery IV 
Mystery map 
127 
Scraps of Mystery V 
Mystery map 
127 
Gorgers in the Dust 
Hunt 
136 
The Ever Regal Regalia 
Cindy 
155 
The Ever Elegant Regalia 
Cindy 
155 
The Ever Gleaming Regalia 
Cindy 
154 
The Declaration of War quest begins as you reach the cave exit. Take the time to tie 
up loose ends in the area (you will be leaving shortly). then return to the Prairie Outpost 
and speak with Monica. 
~ 
After you meet up with Car. follow the linear path through the base, eliminating 
the soldiers you encounter on the way. Feel free to use Car's Lion's Roar technique 
whenever the corresponding meter allows for it. Once all foes have fallen. go down the 
steps to the south and open the next door. In the second and third encounters. your first 
priority is to warp-strike to the elevated platforms and defeat the Riflemen stationed 
there. At the end of the linear path, drop down to the road. 
Once you are fully ready, make camp to process EXP and spend your AP in the 
Ascension menu before you head to the Norduscaen Blockade to find Monica. 
The final section of this chapter is a boss battle against a group of soldiers and Loqi 
controlling an MA-X Cuirass. An effective approach is to eliminate the Riflemen 
surrounding the battle zone with warp-strikes, then help your allies deal with the 
soldiers in the central area. Once they're all down. focus your assaults on Loqi 
himself. See the page to your right for details. Winning this battle completes the 
Declaration of War quest and concludes Chapter 02. 

( 
( 
In addition to Loqi himself, you must deal with a number of imperial troops. We 
strongly advise that you eliminate all of the smaller assailants before you turn your 
attention to the bipedal tank. Deal with the Riflemen first to prevent additional ranged 
damage, then focus on the Axemen (who are vulnerable to Polearms and Daggers). 
This will leave you with Loqi alone, making for a much more manageable battle. 
Loqi's mech has an assortment of components that you can destroy to limit his 
offensive capabilities: the launcher (which prevents further use of missiles). its arm 
generator (which disables the lightning storm attack) and, perhaps most importantly, 
its legs. If you focus on one leg and deal sufficient damage, the bipedal tank will be 
rendered defenseless for several seconds. If at any point you notice a large amount 
of oil on the ground, set it ablaze with a Fire-based spell. This creates a temporary 
inferno. causing massive damage to the boss. 
Every time you see the bipedal tank in a focused state with its shield-like arm 
appendage clearly visible, it means Loqi is charging his lightning storm attack. The 
preparation time is significant, so you can use this window of opportunity to unleash 
powerful assaults. Be swift to move away afterwards, though, as this area-of-effect 
attack is deadly and hard to dodge. Alternatively, unleashing an ally technique (such 
as Car's Lion's Roar) as the lightning storm attack begins can be an effective solution 
to remain unharmed, as your party is invincible during the entire animation. 
Loqi's only weakness is Machinery weapons. At this point in the story, you should 
have two of these: the Bioblaster found on the rocks outside the entrance to 
Keycatrich Trench, and the Auto Crossbow located inside that same dungeon. One 
possible strategy consists of staying relatively close to the bipedal tank's legs, and 
then unleashing a barrage of charged attacks (by holding the attack button before 
you fire). This can have a devastating effect, though the very nature of Machinery 
weapons impedes your ability to phase and move swiftly. If you struggle with this 
approach, switch to a more standard weapon. A Greatsword can prove effective, as 
its sweeping attacks are likely to hit multiple body parts simultaneously. 
Whenever Loqi fires at you, hold @/(+ to phase. Evading the missiles is easy 
enough, but be aware that you will be caught in the explosion if they hit the ground 
near you. Staying relatively close to your opponent can be a solution if you are 
regularly sustaining splash damage. 
Whenever you notice vertical targeting beams appear close to your position, sprint 
away, and remain on the move until they disappear: these are soon followed by 
missiles that cause severe damage. Note that the shipping containers in the boss 
arena all count as cover points. If Noctis is low on HP. move out of sight and press 
@/(+ when the prompt appears to trigger rapid recovery. 
Walkthrough 
\ i 
-~- Chapter 02 
·i r ,.~ 
':U' 
l;! 
I 
d A 
l 
q 
I, 
49 

50 
CHAPTER 03 
PART 
._PHOIO_Q~----
Disc (see page 133) 
Prompto offers to take a photo of the Disc of Cauthess 
on your way from Coernix Station - Alstor to Lestallum. 
Select this assignment as your current quest and follow 
the waypoint to complete it. 
{l!1J 
Om 
O!!fil 
ow 
Offil 
~ 
fiW 
@gl 
~ 
@,ill 
~ 
@ill 
~ 
~ 
~ 
eru 
-~ 
@W 
~ 
·itW 
.Qm 
Qill 
~ 
~ 
Great Garula Tusk 
Chrome Bit 
Behemoth Horn 
Mythril Shaft 
Laser Sensor 
I 
Beautiful Bottle 
Tiny Feather 
Fencer's Anklet 
Iron Bangle 
Amethyst Bracelet 
Camera Strap 
Black Choker* 
Megalixir 
Mega Phoenix 
Remedy 
Hi-Elixir 
Antidote 
Potion 
Hi-Potion 
Phoenix Down 
Calamity 
I 
Power Shield 
Hardedge 
Dominator* 
Oracle Ascension Coin 
, Whitestone Ore (17%), 
Blackstone Ore (17%), 
d:. 
I Redstone Ore (17%), 
• ~ 
Bluestone Ore ( 17%), 
Greenstone Ore (16%), 
1 Yellowstone Ore (16%) 
Whitestone Crystal (40%), 
~ 
Blackstone Crystal (35%), 
--~-~d stone Cryst~5%) 
*Only available after you finished the game 
STEP 
I QUEST 
I DESCRIPTION 
+ 
+-+ 
Burden of 
Expectation 
A Behemoth 
Undertaking 
Receive a call from Iris at Coernix 
Station - Alstor. 
Head to Wiz Chocobo Outpost, defeat 
Oeadeye, then drive to Lestallum. 
DUSCAE & CLEIGNE : 
NORTH REGION 
"Up Close and Personal" (see page 145) 
If you make camp at Pullmoor Haven, you will 
trigger this event that involves Noctis and Prompto. 
Your objective is to pick up mushrooms around 
the haven. Head to the designated area and look 
around: Prompto will call you whenever he finds a 
mushroom. Once you have enough, head towards 
the next waypoint. Let the Catoblepas move close 
and strike a pose of your choice, then make your 
way to the final waypoint. 
"All By Myself" (see page 116) 
Head to the north of the Disc of Cauthess. A hunter 
in distress lies just to the south of the main road. You 
can reach him by jumping to the northeast corner of 
the structure, then hand him a potion to complete the 
"The Professor's Protege" 
(see page 156) 
Speak to Sania in the southwest 
corner of Coernix Station - Alstor. 
She asks you to collect red frogs 
from a designated area in Alstor 
Slough. Once you have all five, 
deliver them to Sania. 
"Accursed Curiosity" 
(see page 117) 
After completing All By Myself, 
head west of Coernix Station -
Alstor. A man sitting on the rocks a 
short walk west from a tall pylon is 
"Fishing Buddies" 
(see page 159) 
Head to the south of the main lake 
in the Alstor Slough to encounter a 
man called Navyth. He challenges 
you to catch a crag barramundi 
from the nearby fishing spot. 
"Scraps of Mystery VI" 
(see page 129) 
You will find this map on the 
ground next to a wrecked car at 
the Roadside Scrapyard parking 
spot. It leads to the foot of a giant 
stone structure that spans the 
main road leading to Lestallum 
SIDEOUEST 
"Pilgrimage" (see page 170) 
Look for a man a short walk to the 
west of Wiz Chocobo Post; he's 
highlighted by a quest marker. If 
you interact with him, lgnis will 
suggest that you could visit the Disc 
of Cauthess. Accept his offer to 
begin this quest. We recommend 
that you take the Regalia and let 
lgnis do the driving (selecting the 
sidequest as your destination), as 
this will save you the trouble of 
finding your bearings in this vast 
new region. When you reach the 
gate, an Empire force will emerge 
You should be able to defeat 
these adversaries without too 
much trouble if you are Level 16 
or thereabouts, but if in doubt, run 

Chocobo Races 
After completing A Behemoth 
Undertaking. you can take part in 
chocobo races by signing up at a small 
wooden cabin on the opposite side of the 
highway from Wiz Chocobo Post. This 
mini-game features a selection of races 
to master, with more events unlocked 
later in the story. See page 167 for more 
details. 
Shopping Opportunities 
If you can afford the Fire-infused 
Blade of Brennaere (Greatsword) 
and the poison-inflicting Calamity 
(Firearm). both available from Wiz 
Chocobo Post's arms vendor, do so 
as a matter of priority. These can be 
extremely potent against foes with 
the corresponding weaknesses. 
..... , ·-· .,,;~· 1 ... ,.,. 146( 
• -·1 
If you have completed Dave's previous quest Dustto 
Dust, he now awaits you at Coernix Station - Alstor 
outside a small building to the northeast. Speak to him 
to initiate this quest then obtain information on the 
search area by speaking with the tipster at the station's 
• Wolklhrough 
restaurant. You can now retrieve the Rusted Dog Tag 
by following the waypoint: it's located in a field to the 
northwest of the Disc of Cauthess. Deliver the Rusted 
Dog Tag to Dave to complete the assignment. 
"Trembling with Fear· {see page 117i 
r· 
After completing the A Behemoth Undertaking hunt, 
head to this area to the east of Coernix Station - Alstor. 
A hunter in distress is hidden in a recess in the rocks 
--
Coernix Station - Alstor: "Galloping Garulas· 
{see page 136} 
These Garulas are available during the day only and 
should be relatively easy prey at this stage. They are 
weak to Fire, Greatswords. and Firearms. 
smEouEsr 
__ I 
'Wild Beasts on the Open Road· {see page 123) 
A man with a broken car stands on the side of the road 
that leads to W1z Chocobo Post. Give him a repair kit to 
1 
receive your reward. 
Wtz Chocobo Post "A Behemoth Undertaking· 
(see page 136) 
You can begin this special hunt (also covered in the main 
walkthrough overleaf if you require additional information) 
by following the path directly to the north of Wiz Chocobo 
Post. After the brief opening cutscene (where you witness 
trees being uprooted beyond the nearby rocks). follow the 
linear path until you reach a fence; jump over this. During 
the tailing sequence. stay a moderate distance behind the 
monster at all times. If you lose track of the beast look for 
the red dot on your mini-map. Once you have discovered 
its lair, squeeze through the narrow passage in the rocks to 
the northeast. then defeat the monster. 
"Where the Wild Chocobos Are" {see page 169i 
After completing the A Behemoth Undertaking hunt 
speak to Wiz to trigger this quest. All you need to do is 
return to the area just before the field where you tailed 
Deadeye and interact with a wild chocobo. Deliver the 
picture back to Wiz to end the assignment. 
--- ---
I 
.._ SIDEOUES.T ___ _ _ __ 
"Friends of a Feather" {see page 166) 
Accept Prompto's invitation to check the Chocobo Post at 
the beginning of the chapter to trigger this mission. The 
easiest solution is to drive to the outpost. though you are 
free to walk to it if you feel like exploring Duscae's wetlands 
on foot. Once at the Post speak to Wiz and accept the 
A Behemoth Undertaking hunt. When you have fu~illed 
that assignment. you can return to Wiz to complete this 
mission and unlock the option to ride chocobos. This makes 
it feasible to begin completing certain sidequests at night 
Wiz Chocobo Post: »Red in Tooth and Claw" 
(see page 136} 
This hunt pits you against a horde of Voretooths. They are 
l 
weak to Polearms, Shields, and Ice. They can potentially 
inflict the poison status ailment (indicated by a sickly 
green highlight on the afflicted party member. along with 
a draining HP gauge). so ensure that you have a couple 
of antidotes in stock before you engage them. 
'1 
..- Chopter03 
51 

52 
STEP-BY-STEP WALKTHROUGH 
The Burden of Expectation quest begins once you exit the Regalia upon arrival at the 
gas station. A cutscene is triggered as you step away from the car. Once this is over, 
refuel by pressing ®/(j) while in front of the gas pump. You can now either explore the 
region and complete sidequests, or head directly to Lestallum (lgnis will get you there 
if you choose the auto drive option). We strongly suggest that you accept Prompto's 
offer to visit the nearby Chocobo Post. This leads to an optional sidequest that is so 
important that we will cover it here as a main quest. If you use the local tipster's 
inquire option to pick up information on the region, you can let lgnis drive you to the 
Chocobo Post. 
Once at the Chocobo Post, speak to Wiz and accept the A Behemoth Undertaking 
hunt. If you have completed a reasonable number of sidequests so far, you should be 
strong enough for the challenge. If not, take the time to accomplish as many as you can 
now. This will not only help you to succeed here, but also to tackle the ordeals that lie 
ahead in Chapter 03 with greater confidence. With the hunt accepted, follow the dirt 
path to the north of the Chocobo Post. After the brief cutscene where you witness trees 
being uprooted, take the path to the right. 
Follow the path shown on the map to your right, collecting items and defeating any 
minor foes you encounter. When you reach the metal fence, simply jump above it to 
access the next section. 
~ 
1
8 
DEADEYE'S LAIR 
----· --
-
-
Legend --
~ 
Behemoth Horn 
{1W 
Broken Harmonica 
QfilJ 
Voretooth Bristles 
·Ow 
Crooked Helixhorn 
~ 
Strong Bone 

~nalysis lseepege2311 
NOTES 
a Sidequests 
SIDEQUEST CHECKLIST 
NAME 
TYPE 
PAGE 
Photo Op: Disc 
Photo Op 
133 
Up Close and Personal 
Tour 
145 
Wild Beasts on the Open Road 
Broken car 
123 
Trembling with Fear 
Rescue 
117 
All By Myself 
Rescue 
116 
Accursed Curiosity 
Rescue 
117 
Scraps of Mystery VI 
Mystery map 
129 
The Professor's Protege 
· Sania 
156 
Galloping Garulas 
Hunt 
136 
Beasts Wallow in the Wetlands 
Hunt 
136 
Red in Tooth and Claw 
Hunt 
136 
A Behemoth Undertaking 
Hunt 
136 
Final Resting Plains 
Dave 
146 
Fishing Buddies 
Navyth 
159 
Friends of a Feather 
Chocobo 
166 
Where the Wild Chocobos Are 
Wiz 
169 
Chocobo Races 
Chocobo 
167 
Pilgrimage 
Miscellany 
170 
In this section your goal is to tail Deadeye by moving stealthily at an optimal distance -
not so close that the creature detects you, but within sufficient proximity to keep sight 
of it in the dense mist. You can use cover points when required for additional security. 
Walk instead of running, and use tl to constantly keep the monster's shadowy outline 
in sight. If you lose track of the beast, look for the red dot on your mini-map. When the 
tailing sequence ends, enter Deadeye's lair by squeezing through the small passage 
in the rock. 
FINU F~NTm H 
1'i Wolkthrough 
C? 
~ Chapter 03 
In this final area, you have no choice but to defeat Deadeye. The Behemoth is very 
u. 
weak to Fire. and also vulnerable to Greatswords and Shields. This makes the Blade 
of Brennaere sold at Wiz Chocobo Post particularly effective, though another powerful 
two-handed blade enhanced by lgnis can work just as well. Fire spells can also prove 
devastating, particularly if you use them to detonate oil drums while Deadeye is nearby. 
As always, your priority should be to focus on defense first. though. Whenever you 
notice Deadeye moving a leg or his tail, be ready to press @/O immediately. The 
monster's special attacks offer you a chance to parry: try to make the most of these 
opportunities. If you are swift to press @/© to parry and counter after the defend 
, • 
08 
prompt appears onscreen, Noctis will execute a powerful riposte. If you lose too much 
HP. take cover behind low walls to recover quickly. Likewise, point-warp to a blue marker 
position if you ever run out of MP. 
Once Deadeye falls, slide through the gap at the north end of the map to leave the 
area; back outside, you can use the "Return to Car" option for an easy return journey, 
then report back to Wiz to end the mission. This unlocks an essential feature: the ability 
to rent chocobos from all Rent-a-Bird stations throughout Lucis. Chocobos combine 
respectable speed with the flexibility of on-foot travel, so riding them is a great way 
to explore the world. For now, though, return to the Regalia and head to Lestallum. 
I; 
li 
53 

54 
CHAPTER 03 
PART 2 
CLEIGNE: NORTH REGION 
- ----- ------------
Waterfall (see page 1331 
Prompto sees an opportunity for a photo near the waterfall that leads to the Glacial Grotto. 
Select this as your active quest and follow the waypoint to complete it. 
"Van, Interrupted" {see pagu 162) 
After completing A Suoll for Two speak to Prissock, a merchant at the market. Your mission 
is to find a stranded van (which you can reach with a minor detour on your journey to the 
Glacial Grotto for a main quest) and retrieve its cargo. Leave the Regalia at the parking spot 
directly south, then head down the steps; the van is a short walk to the north. Eliminate 
the Killer Bees, then interact with the rear of the vehicle to retrieve the cargo. Deliver it to 
Prissock to claim your reward. 
rn Walkthrough Summary 
(Seefr<arl&aff(Jl'lletailsl 
STEP 
I QUEST 
DESCRIPTION 
+ • -+ 
Burden of 
Expectation 
Sword In the 
Waterfall 
Once in Lestallum, speak to Iris, then Talcott. 
Head to the Glacial Grotto and clear the dungeon to 
retrieve the Royal Arms. Return to Talcott in Lestallum, 
then visit the city's lookout for a meeting. 
"An Eye for Islands" 
(see page 161) 
After completing The 
Perfect Landscape, speak 
to Vyv again. This time he 
sends you to Galdin Quay 
to take a picture of the 
Angelgard island. There 
are two possible photo 
positions: one immediately 
to your left after the steps 
leading to the main building, 
and one at the beginning of 
the farthest pier. Once you 
have the shot, return to Vyv. 
"Fishing, Naturally" 
(see page 158) 
After completing Fishing 
Buddies (see page 50). 
head to the River Wennath 
fishing spot to encounter 
Navyth again. This time he 
challenges you to catch 
a Cherrycomb Trout. This 
requires a Whiskers: Crystal 
lure, which you can buy 
from the nearby Burbost 
Souvenir Emporium shop. 
This species is most easily 
caught at dawn or dusk. 

"Scraps of Mystery XI" 
{see page 128) 
If you make a short journey to the 
north of Lestallum you can find a 
Mystery Map inside the ruins of 
a red-brick house. This leads to a 
"Ace of Carapace" 
{see page 162) 
After completing A Stroll for 
Two, speak to the Arms Vendor. 
He asks you to slay Bulettes 
located a short distance to the 
south of Lestallum. Once at 
the foot of the antenna pylon, 
eliminate the beasts. You can then 
deliver the required carapace to 
the Arms Vendor. 
"On the Hunt for a Harvest" 
(see page 162} 
After completing A Stroll for 
Two, speak to Furloch, a merchant 
from the market. Head to Furloch 
Farms, to the south of Lestallum, 
where you should talk to Furloch's 
nephew then slay the beasts in the 
nearby field. Harvest green beans, 
then report to the nephew, before 
returning to Furloch in Lestallum. 
"Mind the Trap" (see page 162) 
After completing A Stroll for 
Two, speak to Veenon's grandson 
at the market. Head to the Taelpar 
Rest Area and talk to the hunter. 
then go to the designated area to 
the south and remove the traps 
lying on the ground. Report back to 
the hunter first. then pick up your 
reward from Veenon's grandson. 
• 
Electrolytic 
OID 
Condenser 
Debased Coin 
I ~ 
Building Stone 
, ~ 
Slimy Oil 
~ 
Chrome Bit 
~ 
Earth Gemstone 
MythrilShaft 
Olli 
"Almost Out ofHope" (see page 119} 
A hunter in distress lies by the road to the north of 
Lestallum, partially concealed behind a rock. Give him 
a potion to save him. 
Shopping Opportunities 
Lestallum's Arms Vendor has a few noteworthy weapons 
in store. The Fire-infused Flame Tongue (Sword). the 
appendage-destroying Hardedge (Greatsword). the 
Ice-imbued Ice Spear (Polearm). and the Poison-inflicting 
Assassin's Daggers (Daggers) can all make a real 
difference against enemy types with related properties. 
Purchasing a few Maiden's Kiss consumables will also 
prove useful for a forthcoming challenge. 
=-·~--------, 
.._§JDEQUEST 
_ 
1 
"The Perfect Landscape" {see page 160) 
After completing A Stroll for Two following your first 
night in Lestallum, speak to Vyv - a journalist standing a 
j 
Gralean Medal 
of Distinction 
Laser Sensor 
Strong Whiskers 
Rusted Bit 
Beautiful Bottle 
Debased 
Silverpiece 
short way to the east of the city's lookout. Head to the 
two designated areas to take pictures. defeating any 
I 
nearby monsters that might interfere with the shots, then 
return to Vyv to receive your payment. 
I 
"A Stroll for Two" (see page 144} 
After you spend the night in Lestallum during your first 
visit, accept Iris's ofter to look around the city and then 
head to each waypoint in turn. The decisions you make 
during the interactive conversations with Iris have the 
following consequences: 
• "Accept" + Reward: 200 EXP for Noctis; 
"Decline" + Reward: 2 AP 
• ''.Act uninterested" + Reward: 2 AP; 
''.Act interested" + Reward: 250 EXP for Noctis 
I 
I 
• "Encourage her" + Reward: 250 EXP for Noctis; 
i 
"Express concern" + Reward: 2 AP 
I 
• "Deny the suggestion" + Reward: 300 EXP for Noctis; I 
"Make light of the subject'" + Reward: 2 AP 
i 
• "Agree with Iris" + Reward: 500 EXP for Noctis; 
1 
"Make light of the subject" + Reward: 2 AP; 
I 
"Change the subject" + Reward: Elixir xl 
J 
~~===-------
ICON j MEANING 
ICON MEANING 
tJfilJI 
@lJ 
.{iw 
~ 
Olli 
~ 1 
ow 
~ I 
~ 
awl 
{ill.l 
QllJI 
~ 
@.!ill 
~ 
~ , 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
t¥llli 
-~ I t 
... ':::1 
®" 
Shattered 
Timepiece 
~ 
~ 
Old Book 
~ 
Broken Harmonica '1!!1J 
Glass Gemstone ~ 
~!~~al Medal of ~ 
HydraulicCylinder 
-~ 
Dynamo 
~ 
Beetle Shell 
~ 
Thun. deroc Feather! @-ill 
Deadly Stinger 
Platinum Ingot 
!) 
CactuarNeedle 
1 
Bronze Bangle 
Carbon Bangle 
.!) 
Bulletproof Suit 
Moon Pendant 
Fire Crest 
Diamond 
Bracelet• 
Chobham Armor 
ChobhamArmor• 
Circlet' 
Insulated Inners 
Megalixir 
Mega Phoenix 
Remedy 
Hi-Elixir 
Potion 
Mega-Potion 
Power Shield 
Assassin's Daggers 
Hyper Magnum 
Dragoon Lance• 
CoernixOil 
Ebony Sticker 
Oracle Ascension 
Coin 
Magic Flask 
Spider Silk 
Deadly Waters: 
Seadevil 1501%, 
Deadly Waters: 
Sahagin 150%) 
Fatal Roulette: 
Bloody Eye 150%1. 
Hot Breather: Red 
Dragon 150%) 
Duscae: 
Whitestone Ore 
(17%),Blackstone 
Ore(17%}. 
Redstone Ore 
117%).Bluestone 
Ore(17%}. 
GreenstoneOre 
116%). Yellowstone 
Orel16%} 
Cleigne: Bluestone 
Crysta1(17%}. 
GreenstoneCrystal 
117%1,Yellowstone 
Crystall17%}. 
Whitestone Crystal 
(17%).Blackstone 
Crystal(16%}. 
Redstone Crystal 
(16%) 
Duscae: Silver 
Shardl40%}. 
GoldShardl35%}. 
~ !
Elixir 
®nl 
~ I 
~ I 
Prismatic Shard 
(25%) 
Hi-Potion 
Maiden's Kiss 
Phoenix Down 
~ I 
-~i 
Smelling Salts 
Gold Needle 
Cleigne: Silver Ore 
(40%). Gold Ore 
135%).Prismatic 
Ore(25%} 
'Only available after you 
finish the game 
• 
Wolkthrough 
• 
Chopler 03 
' 
' f ~l 
55 

56 
STEP-BY-STEP WALKTHROUGH 
~ 
.ew 
Olli 
@!J 
·~ 
·~ 
.fiill 
~ 
~ 
~ 
@fil 
·~ 
~ 
e) 
When you arrive in Lestallum. head to the waypoint to reach Hotel Leville and trigger a 
cutscene. Though technically a sidequest, A Stroll for Two is triggered automatically, 
so take a stroll around the city with Iris: this will enable you to familiarize yourself with 
Lestallum's main points of interest and, as a bonus. collect easy rewards (see page 55). 
Fossil Wood 
/ Rusted Bit 
Fossil Shell 
I Ammonite Fossil 
Carbon Bangle 
I Friendship Band 
Star Pendant 
Hi-Elixir 
Potion 
Elixir 
Ether 
Swords of the Wanderer 
Oracle Ascension Coin 
White Choker (25%). Elixir 
(25%). Hi-Potion (50%) 
Garnet Bracelet (25%). 
.!) 
Phoenix Down (25%). 
____ ~ent Dragon Tooth (50%) 
Your next quest, Sword in the Waterfall. is triggered during a conversation with 
Talcott back at the hotel. This involves locating a Royal Tomb. As the dungeon features 
Daemons, it's a good idea to ensure that you have a healthy stock of items that restore 
maximum HP, such as Elixirs (see page 22 for more information). Walk back to the 
Regalia, fill up the tank at Lestallum's station, then drive to the waypoint to the west. 
Once you leave the Regalia, head down the steps to the southwest then follow the trail 
shown in the accompanying screenshot. Enter the cave behind the waterfall via the 
sloped path on the right-hand side. 
fi1l 
GLACIAL GROTTO 
I 

Inside the dungeon, follow the path shown on the map to your left. During the sequences 
when you slide on ice slopes, you control Noctis's movements with@. You should note 
that, during the second sliding sequence, you can move to the right when descending 
to reach the ledge to the side of the slope, as shown here. Using this ledge is the only 
way to leave the dungeon manually (and, moreover, reach certain collectibles) should 
you choose to do so. As you explore the dungeon, you will face regular ambushes. 
Most are straightforward battles, but the Ronin enemy type deserves a little more 
respect. Exploit its vulnerability to Lightning, Daggers and Swords for optimal results. 
You need to repeat the traversal maneuver shortly afterwards when you reach the 
far end of the same chamber to the northwest. Pay special attention to the clear ice 
patches: they are extremely slippery, and can cause you to fall to a lower level. The 
final room before the tomb is guarded by Mindflayers and a number of minor daemons. 
Daggers and Lightning-based attacks are good choices here. If you have sufficient 
Lightning energy, a Thundaga spell will enable you to obliterate your opponents in the 
final ambush (see page 274 for more information on crafting spells). Once you have 
defeated all creatures, open the tomb's door to retrieve the Royal Arms (unlocking the 
Armiger ability in the process - see page 21 for details). Though you may be curious 
about the branching path that leads to a giant sealed door, it is of no consequence 
during this visit. 
(see page 231) 
NOTES 
After the second sliding sequence you land in front of an Arachne, a dangerous creature 
that can stop and electrocute its targets. Be swift to parry its assaults, and try to use 
Greatswords and/or Fire-based attacks to inflict maximum damage. After the battle, 
move close to the narrow ledge shown here and press ®/(]) when the prompt 
appears; you can then traverse to the other side. Be on your guard for ambushes. 
You can now return to Talcott at the Leville in Lestallum (and speak to Jared to receive 
a Magic Flask). then meet a familiar face at the lookout. Speaking to Ardyn beside his 
car will bring the chapter to a close. so you may wish to finish any outstanding business 
in the area before you do so. The line of dialog that you choose during the interactive 
conversation leads to the following results: 
+ "Take the whee/" 
• Reward 500 EXP for the whole party 
+ "Leave it to lgnis" 
• Reward: 1000 EXP for lgnis alone 
+ "Drive Ardyn's car" • Reward: 100 EXP for the whole party + 1 AP 
+ "Ride with Ardyn" 
• Reward: 2 AP 
Q Sidequests 
. 
--
'/ 
=::..-' 
SIDEQUEST CHECKLIST 
NAME 
TYPE 
PAGE 
A Stroll for Two 
Tour 
144 
The Perfect landscape 
Vyv 
160 
An Eye for Islands 
Vyv 
161 
Ace of Carapace 
Lestallum merchants 
162 
On the Hunt for a Harvest 
Lestallum merchants 
162 
Van, Interrupted 
Lestallum merchants 
162 
Mind the Trap 
Lestallum merchants 
162 
Photo Op: Waterfall 
Photo Op 
133 
Secure the Mountain Pass 
Hunt 
136 
Fishing, Naturally 
Navyth 
158 
Almost Out of Hope 
Rescue 
119 
Poor, Misfortunate Soul 
Rescue 
119 
Scraps of Mystery XI 
Mystery map 
128 
One Tune-up Too Many 
Broken car 
121 
Walkthrough 
·~ Chapter 03 
Iii 
57 

"Scraps of Mystery){" {see page 128) 
You will find this mystery map inside a fenced area with a 
lookout tower, to the west of the Disc of Cauthess. It is very 
well hidden in the grates of a small building. It leads to a 
position just north of Coernix Station - Cauthess, on a rock at 
the base of an east-facing cliff. 
"New to the Road" tsee page 122) 
A man with a broken car stands on the 
side of the road a short distance to the 
south of Coernix Station - Cauthess. 
Give him a repair kit to complete this 
assignment. 
"The Jolly Joyrider" (see page 122) 
There is an individual in need of a repair 
kit at the Secullam Pass parking spot. 
Tomb of the Just (see page 176) 
If you head southwest from Coernix 
Station - Cauthess, you will find a 
Royal Tomb a short walk along the dirt 
path that leads from the Secullam Pass 
parking spot. Other than potentially 
troublesome Coeurls. there's nothing to 
stop you from strolling inside to collect 
the Shield of the Just. 
Shopping Opportunities 
The arms vendors based in the Taelpar Rest Area 
and Lestallum have a few valuable weapons in 
their inventory, including the Fire-infused Flame 
Tongue and the Lightning-imbued Storm Lance. 
two remarkable additions to your arsenal to exploit 
enemy weaknesses. If you still haven't purchased 
the key weapons from Wiz Chocobo Post 
(particularly the Fire-infused Blade of Brennaere and 
the poison-inflicting Calamity). you should definitely 
do so now. 
"A Rocky End" (see page 146) 
If you have completed Dave's previous quest (see 
page 42). he awaits at the Cauthess Rest Area. 
outside the building opposite the diner. Once 
the mission has been activated, inquire about it 
by speaking to the diner's tipster. You will find 
the Scorched Dog Tag behind a large rock in the 
search area to the southwest. 

CHAPTER 04 
DUSCAE: 
WEST REGION 
[I) Walkthrough Summary 
(See Overleaf For Details) 
STEP 
QUEST 
DESCRIPTION 
+ 
A Dubious Drive 
Follow Ardyn to Coernix Station -
Cauthess. 
+ 
Onward to the 
Follow Ardyn again to the Disc of 
Disc 
Cauthess. 
+ 
The Archaean 
Make your way to the end of the 
ravine. 
·-· 
The Trial of Titan 
Defeat the Astral 
MEANING 
MEANING 
ICON 
MEANING 
Electrolytic Condenser 
Fencer's Anklet 
Potion 
Quality Building Stone 
Iron Bangle 
Hi-Potion 
Debased Coin 
Amethyst Bracelet 
Maiden's Kiss 
Building Stone 
Talisman 
Phoenix Down 
Slimy Oil 
Bulletproof Suit 
~ Smelling Salts 
Chrome Bit 
Moon Pendant 
~ Gold Needle 
Earth Gemstone 
Diamond Bracelet' 
~ Mega-Potion 
Ancient Dragon Tooth 
Titanium Bangle 
@ID 
MettleVX 
MythrilShaft 
Chobham Armor 
~ Power EX 
Gralean Medal of Distinction 
Black Choker* 
~ Calamity 
laser Sensor 
Insulated Inners 
-~ Power Shield 
Strong Whiskers 
Champion's Anklet' 
~ Hard edge 
Rusted Bit 
Megalixir 
~ Assassin's Daggers 
Tiny Feather 
Mega Phoenix 
~ Dominator* 
Debased Silverpiece 
Remedy 
~Xl 
Oracle Ascension Coin 
Iron Shavings 
Shattered Timepiece 
*Onlyavailableafteryoufinishthe game 
"Scraps of Mystery VIII" (see page 128) 
This mystery map lies at the foot of shelves 
inside the large warehouse next to the 
Cauthess Rest Area. Head to the designated 
area to the west of the Disc to find the treasure 
on the side of a wrecked imperial aircraft. Make 
sure you have antidotes ready in case you are 
attacked by Voretooths 
- ----------------- --- ----------=~] 
• SIDEOUJ,:_fil__ ____________________ 
1 
"The Professor's Protege - Yellow Frogs" {see page 156) 
I 
"Scraps of Mystery IX" (see page 128) 
This map is hidden at the Taelpar Rest Area. at the foot of a wall of the 
northernmost building. It points to a treasure to the east of this position. in 
Schier Heights. close to the dirt path that leads to the Daurell Caverns. Search 
at the base of a cliff just underneath the giant stone arch. to the right of a flat 
red rock and under the cover of a tree 
"Swallowed by Shadows" (see page 146) 
After you complete A Rocky End, Dave moves to the Taelpar Rest Area. Once 
you accept this new mission. inquire about it with the diner's tipster to learn the 
approximate position of the dog tag, then travel to the designated area to the 
southeast of the Cauthess Rest Area. The Twisted Dog Tag is found on the floor 
inside the storehouse; approaching it triggers a Voretooth ambush. 
You must have completed the first The Professor's Protege sidequest to 
activate this mission (see page 50). Speak to Sania at the Cauthess Rest Area. 
on the upper floor of the house adjacent to the diner. Head to the specified area 
in the Kettier Highland to the east and look for yellow frogs around the pond 
(they're all inside the fenced area. often hiding in grass patches along the rocks 
facing the pond). then deliver them to Sania. The frogs croak when you get 
close. so consider reducing the music volume to locate them more easily. 
"The Chopping Block" (see page 145) 
It you make camp at the Fallaughns Haven. to the southeast of Coernix Station -
Cauthess. you will trigger this brief mission. Your task involves pressing @/€> 
repeatedly as prompted. The quicker you are. the more lgnis will praise you - but 
you get the same reward irrespective of your performance. 
• 
Wolklhrough 
• 
Chapter 04 
59 

STEP-BY-STEP WALKTHROUGH 
NOTES 
The chapter opens immediately with the quest called A Dubious Drive. Follow Ardyn's 
car relatively closely, without tailgating, maintaining a distance of no more than 1,000 
feet. The onscreen waypoint should make this an uneventful drive. Just be ready to turn 
whenever Ardyn does. The quest ends when you arrive at Coernix Station - Cauthess. 
a Sidequests 
. 
;=::.....-
SIOEQUEST CHECKLIST 
-
-
.--------+--
Leave the Regalia at the tunnel entrance. then follow the 
ravine until you reach the Tomb of the Mystic. During the 
cutscene that ensues. press @/€) repeatedly as prompted. 
Be mindful of the portions of terrain that are ablaze as you 
advance through the area: standing on them will rapidly 
deplete HP This hazard and a few minor skirmishes aside, 
your progression will be straightforward. During the 
interactive conversation with Gladiolus, choosing "Yeah" 
or "Sort of' respectively rewards Noctis with the Riled 
status (increasing his strength by 50%) or the Roused 
status {increasing his vitality by 50%). We recommend the 
first option, as the bonus to Strength will help you finish off 
a resilient enemy soon. Simply follow the path shown on 
the map to the right and the occasional onscreen prompts. 
The Archaean is completed after you defeat the group of 
imperial troops at the end of the path; be ready to warp to 
the blue marker when Noctis falls. 
ICON I MEANING 
(}gJ j Sharp Tail Feathers 
@RD 
Megalixir 
~ 
Mega Phoenix 
~ 
Hi-Elixir 
Mega-Potion 
NAME 
TYPE 
PAGE 
New to the Road 
Broken car 
122 
The Jolly Joyrider 
Broken car 
122 
Tomb of the Just 
Royal Tomb 
176 
The Chopping Block 
Tour 
145 
Scraps of Mystery VIII 
Mystery map 
128 
Scraps of Mystery IX 
Mystery map 
128 
Scraps of Mystery X 
Mystery map 
128 
A Rocky End 
Dave 
146 
Swallowed by Shadows 
Dave 
146 
The Professor's Protege - Yellow Frogs 
Sania 
156 
The Onward to the Disc mission is triggered immediately and requires you to speak 
to Ardyn to continue. However, note that doing so will begin a linear sequence of main 
quest activities that will restrict your ability to explore freely and complete sidequests 
for a while. Once you are ready to proceed, follow Ardyn to the Disc of Cauthess - a 
simple drive during which you take a right at the first opportunity, then right again. Go 
through the gate once it's open and drive to the waypoint. The Onward to the Disc 
quest is then completed and replaced with The Archaean . 
fil 
TITAN CRATER 

The Trial of Titan. your new quest, is a spectacular boss battle against the Archaean 
himself. Parry and counter Titan's initial assaults (hold @/O, then quickly tap @/© 
when the prompt appears onscreen). During the sequence where you have to run up 
a slope, watch to your left (manually adjust the camera) and block with @/O before 
Titan attempts to land a blow. If you struggle with this, hold the button at all times 
while you walk up the hill. Once at the top, approach Gladiolus and he will hurl you up 
to the next level. Sprint away from Titan and point-warp immediately when you spot a 
blue marker in the distance. 
Each successful parry will provide you an opportunity to attack Titan's arm with 
impunity until he moves it. Aim to inflict maximum damage. Titan has no particular 
weaknesses or resistances, so simply use your most powerful weapon. 
As the battle unfolds, imperial forces will also assault Titan. Though they focus on the 
Archaean. you are free to take them down if you wish. This does not have any bearing 
on the progress of your fight with your primary foe, but it will enable you to rack up 
bonus EXP if you are powerful enough to eliminate them quickly and efficiently. 
Once the real battle begins, your absolute priority is to guard against Titan's attacks 
- though, thankfully, these are usually clearly telegraphed. When a successful block is 
followed by an onscreen prompt inviting you to counterattack, be quick to press @/© 
There are multiple blue marker positions that offer point-warp opportunities during the 
battle. These can be useful if you need to refill your MP, or to inflict damage with a 
warp-strike from long distance. Greatswords offer the best rewards for such attacks. 
As the battle reaches its climax, you will be challenged to inflict heavy damage to 
Titan within a limited time window. Use your most powerful moves (such as Armiger -
CT] + @J/d!J+la with a full Armiger gauge) and relentless combos when out of other 
options to hit the threshold. The conclusion of this battle marks the end of Chapter 04. 
~ Walkthrough 
i i 
l2 
1:; 
l 4 
6 1 

62 
, I
, I
, 
Legend -·-
~ Electrolytic Condenser 
{1ill 
GreatGarulaTusk 
~ Slimy Oil 
tj)JJ 
Chrome Bit 
~ Behemoth Horn 
~ Earth Gemstone 
~ Ancient Dragon Tooth 
~ MythrilShaft 
~ 
Gralean Medal of 
Distinction 
~ Laser Sensor 
.Qw 
Catoblepas Fang 
~ Fencer's Anklet 
~ Iron Bangle 
~ Amethyst Bracelet 
~ Bulletproof Suit 
~ Chobham Armor 
~ Black Choker* 
~ Insulated Inners 
~ Champion's Anklet* 
®11 
Megalixir 
~ Mega Phoenix 
.f!ill 
Remedy 
~ Hi· Elixir 
®!J 
Phoenix Down 
ft!uJ 
Mega· Potion 
~ Calamity 
Qw 
Power Shield 
~ Hardedge 
~ Assassin's Daggers 
~ Dominator' 
·~ Dragoon Lance· 
~ Oracle Ascension Coin 
Whitestone0rel17%). 
Blackstone Ore 117%). 
~ 
Redstone Orell 7%), 
BluestoneOre 117%). 
Greenstone Ore 116%). 
Yellowstone Ore 11 6%) 
" 
Silver Shard 140%). 
Gold Shard 135%). 
Prismatic Shard 125%) 
*Only available after you finish the game 
I 
"A Feathery Feast" !see page 168) 
After completing Biril on the 
Brink, speak to Wiz to begin this 
quest This time you need to find 
a specific ingredient to the west 
of the Cauthess Rest Area, close 
to Fallaughns Haven. Pick it up and 
deliver it to Wiz. Completing this 
quest unlocks the Fat Chocobo 
Triple·Decker at Wiz's restaurant· 
eating this dish will add the Stacked 
Ham Sandwich to lgnis's cooking 
repertoire, enabling you to increase 
the amount of EXP you obtain. 
STEP 
I QUEST 
I DESCRIPTION 
+-• 
• -+ 
+-+ 
The Hexatheon's 
Blessing 
The Trial of Ramuh 
Engaging the Empire 
Speak to Umbra and follow him. Touch the 
first two runestones. 
Explore Fociaugh Hollow and touch the third 
runestone. 
Make camp at Sothmocke Haven. then 
infiltrate Aracheole Stronghold to retrieve 
the Regalia. 
"Vegging Out" 
{see page 163) 
After completing Wild about 
Onions, speak to Furloch again. He 
needs you to harvest an aromatic 
root from a farm located to the 
south of the Cauthess Rest Area. 

"Bini on the Brink" 
{see page 168) 
After completing Where the Wild 
Chocobos Are (see page 51), speak to 
Wiz again to trigger this quest. He asks 
you to rescue a weakened chocobo. Head 
to the specified area to the south of the 
Cauthess Rest Area and heal the bird with a 
potion before you report to Wiz. 
DUSCAE: 
EAST REGION CHAPTER 05 
Wiz Chocobo Post: "Exorcism of the Nebulawood" 
{see page 136) 
These Mindflayers roam at night only. They are very weak 
to Polearms, Daggers, Lightning, and Light. 
"Thunder in Them Thar Hills" (see page 136) 
You need a Hunter Rank of Level 2 to be able to accept 
this hunt (see page 135). These Thunder Bombs are only 
available at night. They are weak to Swords, Daggers, 
and Light. 
------------i 
If you have won the initial batch of races, or should you 
complete them now, you will find three new events to 
compete in by speaking to the man in the small wooden 
cabin just south of Wiz Chocobo Post. See page 166 for 
more details. 
"Scraps of Mystery VII" (see page 129) 
This map is hidden in the middle of the chocobo racing 
area. You will find it in front of one of the buildings 
with a round, yellow roof, beneath the steps leading to 
the building's door. Head to the designated area near 
Fociaugh Hollow to find the treasure in a small dead-end, 
close to a pair of large square-shaped rock pillars. 
"A Stone-Studded Stunner" (see page 153) 
After speaking to Dino at Galdin Quay to activate this quest 
(which you hopefully did earlier during your previous visit 
to the resort), head to the waypoint at Malacchi Pond. 
You need to locate and collect three Heliodor Stones in 
the designated zone (note that you can also find a fishing 
spot and some interesting items in the area) and then 
take them back to the jeweler (which is only possible at 
the end of the chapter, once imperial blockades have been 
lifted). Before you leave Galdin Quay, accept Dino's next 
assignment - this will save you a long trip at a later date. 
"A Hurting Heart" (see page 1171 
An ailing hunter lies between rocks directly to the south 
of the chocobo racing courses, between the two parallel 
highways. Give him a potion to save him. 
! 
l 
"Wild about Onions" lsee page 163) 
---~--1 
After completing On the Hunt for a Harvest (see page 
55) return to Furloch, the Lestallum merchant. He asks 
you to harvest a bulbous onion from a farm to the south 
of Wiz Chocobo Post. Once you have it, deliver it to 
Furloch to complete the assignment. 
fJ Walkthrough 
,o Chapter 05 
63 

64 
STEP-BY-STEP WALKTHROUGH 
(see page 231) 
_ Q Sidequests 
. '/ 
;::::.---
SIDEQUEST CHECKLIST 
NOTES 
Interact with Umbra to begin The Hexatheon's Blessing, then follow the dog until 
a cutscene begins. 
The second runestone awaits to the west, on the other side of Coernix Station 
- Alstor. You will find it at the end of the passage shown here, guarded by a 
dangerous Griffon. This is a fearsome enemy, which you will most likely need to avoid 
at this point of the adventure: simply sprint straight to your objective to complete 
The Hexatheon's Blessing. 
NAME 
TYPE 
PAGE 
Bird on the Brink 
Wiz 
168 
A Feathery Feast 
Wiz 
168 
A Hurting Heart 
Rescue 
117 
A Stone-Studded Stunner 
Dino 
153 
Vs. lgnis 
Chocobo Race 
166 
Full Field 
Chocobo Race 
166 
Chocobo Hoops: Rocky Road 
Chocobo Race 
166 
Scraps of Mystery VII 
Mystery map 
129 
Untamed Wild Horses 
Hunt 
136 
Thunder in Them Thar Hills 
Hunt 
136 
Exorcism of the Nebulawood 
Hunt 
136 
Wild about Onions 
Lestallum merchant 
163 
Vegging Out 
Lestallum merchant 
163 
The opening objective is to touch the first runestone a long walk northeast of your 
current position. Going on foot is certainly an option, but you are strongly advised to 
rent chocobos (only available if you have completed the corresponding sidequest - see 
page 136) to greatly reduce travel time. To reach the runestone, go to the end of the 
path shown on this picture. Interact with it to trigger a cutscene. 
Your new quest The Trial of Ramuh. leads you to Fociaugh Hollow. far to the 
southeast; head through Alstor Slough and follow the path that leads south to the 
Chocobo Post to cut through the hills. Finding the third and final runestone involves 
negotiating a difficult dungeon, so make sure you are well prepared before you enter. If 
you plan to pick up supplies or complete any sidequests within easy traveling distance. 
do so before you set out for the waypoint. You pass the Chocobo Post and Killiam Haven 
on the way, so you should have access to all the amenities you might need. 

FOCIAUGH HOLLOW 
Legend ---
·~ 
Fossil Wood 
I fitt!J 
.~ 
Ancient Dragon Tooth 
.~ 
~ 
RustedBit 
~ I fossilShell 
~ I Debased Banknote 
,~ 
Ammonite Fossil 
Oracle Card 
I 
1 ~ 
II ~ 
~ I 
I 
·~ 
II 
MEANING 
Thieves' Way 
Blue Choker 
Titanium Bangle 
Oracle Ascension Coin 
Magic Flask 
Iron Bangle [25%). Amethyst Bracelet 
[25%).Fossil Wood [50%) 
Elixir [25%). Phoenix Down [25%). Potion [50%) 
The first part of the dungeon is mostly linear, with occasional branching paths leading 
to dead-ends. The lack of light can make navigation a little confusing on occasion, so 
refer to our map to make sure you do not get lost. You will regularly need to go through 
narrow or low passages: press ®/f.l) when the corresponding prompt appears. When 
you reach the large cavern after Prompto's disappearance, you can either follow the 
path or point-warp to any blue marker to reach your enemies immediately. Once the 
dust settles, resume your march to the third runestone. 
You will encounter a Naga in the final large chamber - a powerful and nimble opponent. 
The best strategy is to exploit her weakness to Greatswords, Daggers, Ice, and Light 
I avoiding all Fire-imbued assaults, which she resists). Try to equip your entire party with 
gear that falls into one of these categories for optimal results. A powerful Firearm can 
also prove handy here, offering the luxury of being able to engage from mid-range, in 
a position where you can defend more easily. Your opponent is unusually swift, so be 
prompt to press and hold @/O whenever you are in close proximity. If you are turned 
into a toad, quickly consume a Maiden's Kiss (hopefully you purchased a few of these 
while visiting Lestallum, as we suggest on page 55) to cure the ailment. Area-of-effect 
blows or techniques (such as charged attacks with Greatswords) can work very well 
here as they may hit multiple appendages simultaneously. If the monster summons 
water pillars from the ground, stay on the defensive until the barrage ends. 
Once the creature falls, you can finally touch the third runestone and exit the cavern to 
complete The Trial of Ramuh. 
fl N~L mrm. xv 
• Wolkthrough 
·'<!·· Chapter 05 
65 

66 
STEP-BY-STEP WALKTHROUGH (CONTINUED) 
Legend* 
ICON 
[ MEANING 
~ I Electrolytic Condenser 
~ 
ChromeBit 
~ I M.ythril Shah 
~ I Laser Sensor 
~ 
RustedBit 
~ 
I Bulletproof Suit 
~ 
Muscle Stimulant 
Reflex Enhancer 
j Mega-Potion 
Superior Restorative 
I Magitek Booster 
fll 
ARACHEOLE STRONGHOLD 
~ 
~ 
~ 
®lJ 
~ 
~ 
Gravity Well 
Warped Wings 
"Waituntilyoucompletewalkthroughentry 13beforeyoubeginyour huntforcollectibles, 
as this removes the time constraints th~t eKist at the start of the mission. 
The Engaging the Empire mission begins as you leave the Fociaugh Hollow cave. Your 
task is to recover the Regalia from the Aracheole Stronghold- a base located far to the 
west of your current position. Calling your chocobo is a must. as it's a long and weary 
journey by foot. After the party has conferred at the first waypoint. head to the nearby 
Sothmocke Haven to make camp. 
Your goal is to retrieve the Regalia from the imperial base. and you must do so before 
dawn. It is important to avoid being seen during the infiltration phase so proceed 
cautiously, using cover points whenever possible. You will need to defeat the local 
forces in your current area if detected. Your mini-map is a useful tool here: even if you 
can't directly see an enemy, the red dots that represent them enable you to monitor 
their whereabouts with a measure of precision. For the opening section, outside the 
base. simply follow lgnis's insiructions: you can easily take down the first two guards 
with warp-kills while their backs are turned. 

Once inside the base follow lgnis's lead. sticking to the shadows and taking cover 
whenever imperial troops are in the vicinity. When you reach the position shown 
here. warp-kill the closest guard while no one is looking, then do the same with his 
companions. The coast is now clear for you to approach the nearby laser barrier and 
disable it with the switch to the left. 
You can now disable the next laser barrier and head straight to the Regalia on the 
other side. 
Once the MA-X Maniple is down. head to the next laser barrier in sight and disable 
it, then brace yourself for another battle. There is another turret available here (see 
screenshot), vastly simplifying the process of destroying the MA-Veles bipedal tank. 
On your way toward the generator, you will notice a large warehouse: you can find 
the Gravity Well Machinery ihSide, though collecting it is only possible after eliminating 
multiple MA-Veles bipedal tanks. This task is eminently achievable with an advanced 
party and a powerful Greatsword equipped, but it is entirely optional as you can also 
revisit the base later to pick up the weapon. 
Beyond the barrier you will encounter another group of sentries. You need to warp-kill 
all of them. which is most easily achieved by point-warping to the elevated walkways 
above them. as shown here. From your perch. wait until they split and cannot see each 
other to take action. Alternatively, you can wait at your starting position until they 
turn to your left. and then strike them from behind. one after the other. Two additional 
guards should arrive shortly afterwards: eliminate them quietly in the same fashion. 
To destroy the MA-X Maniple and the troops supporting it. use the turret shown during 
the cutscene: approach it and press ®/Oto take the controls. Aim with@. zoom in 
with ~/Dl and fire with l@/Ull 
The generator you need to destroy is now close, but you will need to clear the area 
before you can reach it. Feel free to use the local turret as before, but you will soon be 
overwhelmed by enemy forces. When one of your allies falls. an onscreen prompt will 
ofter the opportunity to summon Rarnuh: do so immediately by holding lbil/l!J. Once 
all imperial forces have been defeated, retrieve the Regalia. To complete Chapter 05; 
return to Iris at Lestallurn. 
Wolklhrough 
Chopler 05 
67 

68 
CHAPTER 06 
"Tails Spin" (see page 162) 
After completing Ace of Carapace (see page 162). speak 
to Lestallum's Arms Vendor again. This time he needs you 
to slay some Spiracorns on a beach of the Maidenwater 
region. Once they're all dead, deliver the required item to 
the Arms Vendor. 
"A Flower for Iris" (see page 144) 
If you make camp at the Lam bath Haven, on the road to 
the Rock of Ravatogh, Gladio will ask if you can help him 
find a flower in the morning. l ook for it in the northwest 
part of the designated area. When you reach a cliff, Gladio 
will boost you up to the area where the flower awaits. 
"Sting Your Praises" (see page 162) 
For his final mission, on completion of Tails Spin, 
Lestallum's Arms Vendor asks you to bring him a 
Saphyrtail stinger. Head to the specified area, to the 
north of the road that leads to the Rock of Ravatogh, 
and eliminate the beasts before delivering the necessary 
item drop back to your client. 
"Strike a Pose!" (see page 145) 
Make camp at Spelcray Haven and Prompto will enlist 
you for a morning task. Head to the specified photo spot 
on the nearby pier, and strike a pose each time Prompto is 
ready to take a picture 
CLEIGNE: 
SOUTH REG ION 
"Aftermath of the Astral War" 
(see page 160) 
If you have completed Vyv 's previous 
quest (An Eye for Islands: see page 
161). speak to him again at his usual 
spot in Lestallum, close to the lookout 
This time he needs two shots of Taelpar 
Crag: one from the tower close to the 
northeast corner of Tollhends Stronghold, 
and one from the bridge to the east of Old 
lestallum. Once you have both pictures, 
return to Vyv 

Legend 
Assorted Sidequests 
Reaching Cape Caem unlocks a large batch of new sidequests throughout all three regions of 
Lucis. If you are in the mood, consider touring the continent to complete as many of these as you 
can - the boost to your party's stats will be significant. The table below details the new activities 
on offer, with page references to our Sidequests chapter where you will find detailed guidance. 
Cool Callatein Mist 
Hunt 
Cleigne (lestallum) 
136 
To Catch a Frog 
Hunt 
Cleigne (lestallum) 
136 
To Sting in Anger 
Hunt 
Cle1gne (l estallum) 
136 
Help Needed in EXINERIS 
Hunt 
Cleigne (Lestallum) 
136 
Avenge the Anglers 
Hunt 
Cle1gne (lestallum) 
136 
Voltage Fluctuation 
Hunt 
Cle1gne (Meldacio Hunter HO) 
138 
Car-mic Retribution 
Broken car 
Leide 
120 
Broken car 
Leide 
120 
I'm late! 
Broken car 
Duscae 
122 
Shoulda Been Serviced 
Broken car 
Ouscae 
122 
That Brand-New Car Smell 
Broken car 
Duscae 
123 
Vehicle Vexation 
Broken car 
Cleigne 
125 
Broken car 
Cleigne 
124 
Big Head Behind the Wheel 
Broken car 
Cleigne 
125 
A Driver in Despair 
Broken car 
Cleigne 
124 
Oh My Grease-Monkey Goddess! 
Broken car 
Cleigne 
125 
Rescue 
Ouscae 
116 
The Faint of Heart 
Rescue 
Ouscae 
117 
Scared and Lonely 
Rescue 
Cleigne 
119 
Where Art Thou, My Love? 
Rescue 
Cleigne 
118 
A Little Slip-Up 
Rescue 
Cleigne 
119 
Leide, Ouscae. Cleigne 
132 
Tomb of the Tall (see page 176) 
Though you can visit this Royal Tomb earlier in the adventure, doing so while you complete Vyv's 
Of Gods and Kings quest is advisable to limit wasted journeys. The Sword of the Tall that it 
is supposed to contain is missing. however. It has been stolen and can only be retrieved by 
defeating the guardian of Costlemark Tower - one of the most difficult dungeons in the game 
(see page 186). 
"Of Gods and Kings" (see page 161) 
After completing Aftermath of the Astral War, talk to Vyv again. Head to the designated 
area in the southeast section of Duscae and photograph the gate of the Royal Tomb, then 
the tomb itself. You can then report back to Vyv. 
[I] Walkthrough Summary 
!See Overleaf For Details) 
STEP 
' QUEST 
I DESCRIPTION 
·-----
• 
All Set to Set Sail 
Drive to Old Lestallum. 
~ 
Electrolytic Condenser ~ 
Debased Banknote 
f}llJ Imperial Medal of 
~ 
Honor 
Chrome Bit 
OllJ I 
Hydraulic Cylinder 
~ 
Earth Gemstone 
Oll.J Dynamo 
~ 
Ancient Dragon Tooth ~ 
I 
Beetle Shell 
~ 
Mythnl Shaft 
~ 
Thunderoc Feather 
ew 
Gralean Medal of 
~ 
I Splendid Building 
Distinction 
Stone 
~ 
Laser Sensor 
@ill Bronze Bangle 
~ 
Strong Whiskers 
@ill Iron Bangle 
Oill Rusted Bit 
~ 
Amethyst Bracelet 
Olli Tiny Feather 
~ 
1 Carbon Bangle 
~ 
1 
Debased Silverpiece 
ll.!!!J ' Talisman 
~
l lron Shavin gs 
.~ 
I Bulletproof Suit 
OfilJ I Shattered Timepiece 
~ 
Fire Crest 
8
1 
.@fill 
~ 
Glass Gemstone 
Moon Pendant 
-
J_ _____ 
~ 
Silver Bangle 
~ 
Warm Inners 
@RJ Ice Crest* 
~ 
Chobham Armor 
~ 
I Chobham Armor• 
~ 
Black Choker• 
~ 
I 
insulated Inners 
@!ti Champion's Anklet" 
~
' Megalixir 
~ 
Mega Phoenix 
t!!'.!11 
Remedy 
~ 
Hi-Elixir 
~ 
Antidote 
·tiW 
Elixir 
I ~ 
Hi-Potion 
·
- · 
Imperial Infiltration 
Infiltrate Fort Vaullerey and clear it of imperial 
forces. Talk to your allies once at Cape Caem. 
·-----
eru I Maiden's Kiss 
I ~ 
Hardedge 
I ~ 
Lucian King's Crest .. I 
fg)J!!l I Phoenix Down 
~ 
Assassins Daggers 
~ 
Regalia Crest 
~
I Gold Needle 
~ 
Dominator• 
~ I Crownsguard 
~ 
Mega-Potion 
~ 
Hyper Magnum• 
~ 
Oracle Ascension Coin 
~
Calamity 
~ 
Power Shield 
~ 
Dragoon Lance• 
~ 
Delta Daggers 
Whiskers: Crystal (50%). Needle 1,000: Metallicactuar (50%) 
~ 
Magic Flask 
Duscae: Whitestone Ore (17%). Blackstone Ore (17%). Redstone Ore(17%). Bluestone Ore 
(17%). Greenstone Ore (1 6%). Yellowstone Ore (16%) 
Cleigne: Bluestone Crystal (17%). Greenstone Crystal (17%). Yellowstone Crystal (1 7%). 
Wh itest o~e_ Crys ta l_ (17%). Blackstone Crystal (16%). Redstone Crystal j16%) 
Duscae: Silver Shard (40%). Gold Shard (35%). Prismatic Shard (25%) 
Cleigne: Silver Ore (40%). Gold Ore (35%). Prismatic Ore (25%) 
Walkthrough 
Chapler 06 
69 

70 
STEP-BY-STEP WALKTHROUGH 
The chapter begins with the All Set to Set Sail quest. Head to the waypoint to speak 
with Iris and initiate a long car ride. The Imperial Infiltration mission is triggered on 
the way. From Old Lestallum, head to the waypoint in Fort Vaullerey. 
As soon as the opportunity arises, begin performing warp-kills to clear the area of 
potential witnesses, then use point-warp to follow Caligo via the raised walkways. 
You can now join your allies to the northeast, with a number of imperial forces to 
defeat on the way. If there is any danger that you might be overwhelmed, simply run 
straight to the waypoint to trigger a cutscene; you should note, however, that you are 
only a short detour away from the unique Noiseblaster machinery weapon. Defeating 
the MA-X Maniple should pose little problem at this stage (particularly if you attack it 
with close-range charged Machinery blasts from behind) and completes the Imperial 
Infiltration mission. Once it's down, operate the generator to destroy it, and brace 
yourself for this chapter's real boss battle (see the page to your right). 
Once inside the base, tail the commander - Caligo - from a safe distance, remaining 
behind cover. 
Point-warp to the elevated walkway behind the gate where the bodyguards are now 
stationed. Isolated, the commander is easy prey to subdue with the same command 
as for a warp-kill. 
After you defeat Aranea, you are automatically sent back to Old Lestallum. Jump into the 
Regalia and resume your journey to Cape Caem with Iris, which will be punctuated by a 
few optional stops. Once at your destination, follow the onscreen instructions and talk to 
a handful of friends (Cindy, Talcott. and Iris) to complete the chapter. The consequences of 
your choice during the interactive conversation with Gladiolus are as follows: 
• "Wish him well" • 
Reward: 600 EXP for the whole party 
• "Hold him back" • 
Reward: 2 AP 
• "Ask my friends" • 
Reward: 1.500 EXP for lgnis alone 

Aranea is an incredibly swift and elusive tighter. At melee range she will often evade your 
blows with disconcerting ease as she subjects your party to a pitiless onslaught. In such 
scenarios, it makes sense to stay on the defensive: phase through her combos, countering 
only when you identify a clear opening (for example, if she targets one of your allies). 
Aranea's Highwind move is a curse if you do not react in time, but a blessing if you 
can successfully defend and then parry the technique: her most potent assault is also 
her primary weakness. Hold @/O when the onscreen prompt appears while Aranea 
is high in the air. then press @/€)immediately on arrival of the second prompt. Not 
only will you avoid all damage, you'll also execute a powerful counter that temporarily 
stuns Aranea. This is your chance to unleash your most powerful attacks to make a 
meaningful impression on her HP gauge. 
TYPE 
A Flower for Iris 
Tour 
144 
Strike a Pose! 
Tour 
145 
Aftermath of the Astral War 
Vyv 
160 
Of Gods and Kings 
Vyv 
161 
Tomb of the Tall 
Royal Tomb 
176 
Scraps of Mystery XIV 
Mystery map 
130 
Lestallum merchant 
Aranea's signature move is the Highwind, a "jump" attack that Final Fantasy fans will 
fondly recall as being the defining technique of the recurring Dragoon character class. 
It's not an ability that you will overlook: she leaps high in the air and then dives back 
down at high speed to inflict massive damage. 
Support troops are dropped into the battle at regular intervals. Eliminate them 
immediately; this is not a battle where you can readily afford to suffer the distraction 
of additional foes without consequence. 
Note: Most collectibles in the base are only available on a return visit. which you are 
free to undertake once the party reconvenes in Old Lestallum after the mission ends. 
See page 190 for a map of Fort Vaullerey. 
a Wolkthrough 

Shopping Opportunity 
One of Aranea's men offers a variety of weapons for 
sale just outside the Steyliff Grove dungeon entrance. 
The Ice Brand and Ice Spear are of particular interest, 
as several creatures in the dungeon (including its boss) 
are vulnerable to this element. If you have the money 
to spare. buy all available weapons to increase your 
tactical options. 
The Myrlwood (see page 188) 
You can now access this forest dungeon. which is 
conveniently close to your main objective in the region. 
If you have been completing many sidequests and 
leveling up steadily. you should be strong enough to face 
its dangers, including its final guardian - even without 
Gladiolus. If you struggle to defeat the first monsters 
you encounter in this jungle, however. backtrack and 
come back later with a more developed party. 
"The Ever Valorous Regalia" (see page 154) 
If you have previously completed The Ever Gleaming 
Regalia (see page 46) and accepted Cindy's new 
mission, head to the specified area and collect the 
component that lies by the dirt road. close to a car 
wreck. Return it to Cindy at the next opportunity. then 
install it via her customize menu to upgrade the Regalia. 
This welcome upgrade increases the car's top speed, 
reducing travel time between destinations. 

ow 
Olli 
(1uJ 
ow 
CLEIGNE: 
VESPERPOOL CHAPTER 07 
REG ION 
Head to Steyliff Grove. Make your way to the end of the dungeon and retrieve the 
Mythril. Once back outside, speak to Aranea. 
~onlyava i l ableafteryoufin i shthegame 
MEANING 
Glass Gemstone 
Fine Tail Feathers 
~ 
I Circlet• 
I 
Platinum Ingot 
~ 
I I Ether 
I 
Cactuar Needle 
~ Assassin's Daggers 
-- -f--- ---
-
-- ----- -
_ ____. __ ---- -
_,..J._ -----
-----------------
;;{: 
Bluestone Crystal (17%). Greenstone Crystal (17%). Yellowstone Crystal (17%). Whitestone Crystal (17%). 
' '\, 
Blackstone Crystal (16%). Redstone Crystal (16%) 
" 
II! Walkthraugh 

STEP-BY-STEP 
WAL KTHRO UGH 
. .  
Analysis _ls_e_e_page231_J _ 
NOTES 
You begin this chapter in the Regalia with the Party of Three quest active. If you have 
an itch to explore and attend to new sidequests. do so now - the main quest at the 
Vesperpool waypoint takes you into a lengthy trek through a dungeon. Remember. though, 
that you are a man down at the moment. which can make things a little more complicated 
if you plan to tackle high-level challenges. You should also note that you are locked in the 
Vesperpool region until you complete the chapter. When you are ready to continue. follow 
the main road in the direction of the waypoint and turn left just before you reach the second 
tunnel. as shown here. 
a Sidequests 
. -
-
--
-
'I 
~ SIDEQUEST CHECKLIST 
NAME 
TYPE 
PAGE 
The Myrlwood 
Dungeon 
188 
Tomb of the Rogue 
Royal Tomb 
176 
Photo Op: Lakefront 
Photo Op 
132 
The Ever Valorous Regalia 
Cindy 
154 
Go down the slope and leave the car when you reach the small dirt path shown here. 
You can now run toward the waypoint to the west. Speak to Ardyn when you reach 
him (there are a few quick optional conversations that you can have with him after your 
walk. if you like). then make your way to Aranea. Your choice during the interactive 
dialog with her leads to the following results: 
• "Remain silent" 
• 
Reward: 2 AP 
• "Ask my friends" • 
Reward: 1,500 EXP for both lgnis and Prompto 

A guard serves as an arms vendor outside the entrance. If you have yet to acquire it, 
pick up the Ice Brand sword and Ice Spear polearm as a priority. 
When you are ready to proceed. head to the dungeon entrance. Note that you can 
only enter Steyliff Grove at night. If it is daytime in your game, speak to Biggs by the 
entrance to advance time to the evening. The door will open when darkness falls. 
Once inside the dungeon. follow the path shown an this picture. You will encounter various 
monsters on the way, predominantly Skeletons, Reapers. and the Fire- and Lightning-absorbing 
flan variety known as the Creme BrQlee, with a few other species awaiting deeper in the dungeon. 
Most creatures are vulnerable to Ice-based attacks. except for Reapers. who resist this element; 
it's usually practical to finish these off last, though you can naturally switch to a different weapon. 
When facing large groups, Ice-infused area-of-effect assaults will prove immensely useful. If Noctis 
wields a greatsword. charged or spinning blows enhanced with Ice through lgnis's Enhancement 
technique are very powerful. You will occasionally notice 
------- --- --·-· -- -- -
walls or structures collapsing (for example. racks falling 
Legend 
~-
~·
I ChromeBit 
. 09J i Rusted Bit 
®ll 
Megalrxir• 
~ 
Phoenix Down* 
~ 
Magic flask 
from the ceiling, or bridges collapsing), preventing 
you from picking up an item or entering a room. Don't 
worry about these: you can backtrack later (after your 
encounter with a specific monster during step +1 
to 
secure the corresponding collectibles . 
This section is entirely linear, with a single combat 
encounter triggered when you approach the collectible 
item on the large balcony. If you ever struggle during a 
battle, consider unleashing Aranea's Highwind technique: 
this is an extremely powerful attack that harms all enemies 
caught in its area of effect. 
6 
STEYLIFF GROVE 
flNH rmm., xv 
~\ Wolkthrough 
~ Chapter 07 
75 

76 
STE P-BY-STEP WALKT HRO UG H 
(see page 2:!_11__ 
NAME 
NOTES 
STEYLIFF GROVE 
8 
Legend 
Ill 
MEANING 
~ 
Mythril Shaft 
ow 
Rare Coin 
@li 
Mega Phoenix 
®lJ I Hi-Elixir 
;.:) 
Heliodor Bracelet (25%). 
Ether (25%). Elixir (50%)• 
This is one of the dungeon's more complicated sections when you don't know where to go, but our annotated map should help you to navigate with ease. You will automatically 
fall when a portion of the ground collapses on two occasions, but nearby stairs will take you back up to the main floor level. When you are ambushed by an Iron Giant, try to quickly 
eliminate the weaker Daemons before the giant reaches you, then switch to a powerful Greatsword or a Light-elemental weapon if you have one. Most of the creature's attacks 
are slow and telegraphed in advance, so block and parry accordingly, then follow up with deadly counters. Ranged weapons can also be a viable alternative if you struggle to cope 
with melee combat. 

 
In this part of the dungeon you can keep to the central corridors to make swift progress, or explore 
the small chambers on the sides to pick up collectibles. If you ever feel lost, the red devices on the 
floor will teleport you back to the area's entrance. The hardest battle pits you against two Liches: 
focus on defending and parrying, countering with an Ice Brand at each opportunity. 
~ To obtain this collectible, you must first defeat 
the first Iron Giant. Goto the position where you 
find the Camera Strap on thefirstfloor(afterthe 
rockfallisrernoved)andusetheelevatortothe 
north. Two Necromancers and an Iron Giant will 
attackasyouapproachit. 
Legend • 
MEANING 
~ 
I Sapphire Bracelet• 
~ 
Oracle Ascension Coin 
~ 
MythrilOre 
This final room is home to Quetzalcoatl, a very dangerous boss. You will benefit from wielding an 
Ice Brand or, even better, an Ice Spear, in this battle. Alternatively, lgnis's Enhancement can greatly 
increase your damage output if Noctis is equipped with a non-elemental weapon, particularly a 
Polearm or a pair of Daggers. Quetzalcoatl is immune to Lightning so avoid this element at all 
costs. As always, pay attention to your enemy's assaults and phase/parry whenever you identify 
an oncoming blow. The timing window for parrying is extremely short but each successful parry 
leads to a powerful counter opportunity. When you see the monster's body crackling with sparks, 
though, run away: this foreshadows an unblockable lightning storm attack that affects a large 
area. If Noctis is struggling, take cover behind one of the small walls to recover. When Quetzalcoatl 
is on the ground, press your advantage with your most powerful attacks. If the relevant prompt 
appears onscreen, be quick to respond and summon an Astral to end the confrontation in style. 
Aranea's Highwind technique can also prove very useful here. Once the battle is over, pick up the 
Mythril Ore collectible on the ground before you leave the dungeon, then speak to Aranea at the 
waypoint outside to formally end the chapter. 
Legend • 
MEANING 
~
[ Talisman 
~Ethe r 
Knight's Anklet (25%1. Phoenix 
Oown (25%1. Elixir (50%) 
~ INH ~mm., xv 
l!i Walkthraugh 
'¢il, Chapter 07 
77 

CHAPTER 08 t CLEIGNE 
Legend 
' Onlyavailableafteryoufinishthe game 
ICON I MEANING .. 
MEANING 
O!ll 
Electrolytic Condenser 
I ~ 
Bulletproof Suit 
om 
Giant Feather 
~ 
Moon Pendant 
~ 
Slimy Oil 
~ 
Silver Bangle 
O,W I Earth Gemstone 
~ 
Fire Crest 
Olli 
Ancient Dragon Tooth 
~ 
Warm Inners 
~ 
Mythril Shah 
~ 
Ruby Bracelet 
~ 
Gralean Medal of Distinction 
~ 
Chobham Armor 
Olli 
Strong Whiskers 
~ 
Chobham Armor• 
{l9J 
Rusted Bit 
@m 
Circlet' 
~ 
Debased Silverpiece 
~ 
Megalixir 
~ 
Iron Shavings 
~
I Mega Phoenix 
~ 
Glass Gemstone 
®ii 
Hi-Elixir 
t}iw 
Debased Banknote 
®2J 
Elixir 
~ 
Strong Bone 
~ 
Hi-Potion 
Olli 
Imperial Medal of Honor 
~ 
Smelling Salts 
Olli 
Hydraulic Cylinder 
~ 
Ether 
om 
Dynamo 
~ 
Mega-Potion 
~ 
Beetle Shell 
~ 
Assassin's Daggers 
Olli 
Thunderoc Feather 
~ 
Hyper Magnum• 
Olli 
Deadly Stinger 
~
. Dragoon Lance* 
~
i Fine Tail Feathers 
I ~
I Wizard Shield• 
.ow 
Platinum Ingot 
QmJ 
Delta Daggers 
{jill 
Cactuar Needle 
~ 
Silver Ore 
~ 
Splendid Building Stone 
I ®ID · Prismatic Dust 
§fill 
Bronze Bangle 
I ~ 
Oracle Ascension Coin 
@fill 
Iron Bangle 
@ill 
Spider Silk 
~ 
Carbon Bangle 
!) 
Bloody Eye (50%),Hot Breather: Red Dragon (50%) 
!) 
Deadly Waters: Seadevil (50%), Deadly Waters: Sahagin (50%) 
~ I 
Bluestone Crystal {17%), Greenstone Crystal (17%), Yellowstone Crystal (17%), 
Whitestone Crystal [17%), Blackstone Crystal (1 6%), Redstone Crystal (16%) 
~ Silver Ore (40%), Gold Dre (35%), Prismatic Dre (25%) 
78 
The Rock of Ravatogh (see page 190) 
Depending on how developed your party is, you 
might be strong enough to survive the challenges this 
dungeon has in store. If you have been completing 
most sidequests, it should actually pose no problem 
whatsoever. The reward for climbing all the way to the 
top is no less than a Royal Tomb. 
Tomb of the Fierce (see page 176) 
At the very top of the Rock of Ravatogh lies a secret 
Royal Tomb in which the Mace of the Fierce awaits. 
To reach it. make your way to the large arena at the 
summit. just beyond a giant nest. A small opening in 
the arena's outer wall leads to a path. at the end of 
which you will find the tomb. 
Malmalam Thicket (see page 189) 
This forest dungeon shou!d now be within your level 
range if you have been completing many sidequests. 
If defeating its standard monsters proves taxing, you 
will certainly not be ready for the forest's guardian -
in which case it makes more sense for you to come 
back later. 
"Case of the Stolen Specs" (see page 144) 
If you make camp at the Pectriche Haven, in the 
middle of the Myrlwood, an event between Noctis 
and lgnis will occur. To find lgnis's glasses, head 
to the designated waypoint by the Royal Tomb. 
When the mini-game begins, sneak to the tree 
without being noticed while the chocobo takes 
the bait. Every time it turns around and looks in 
your direction, hold @/O to remain silent until 
it resumes its meal. Once you have the specs, 
you can either flee and leave the chocobo alive. 
or defeat it. 
"Blame the Beasts!" (see page 11 8) 
This man in distress can be found a short distance 
to the south of Capitis Haven. He ts hidden at the 
base of a large rock structure. Offer him a potion 
to get your reward. 

"Liege of the Lake" (see page 144) 
Make camp at the Capitis Haven to trigger this event involving Noctis and 
Gladio. Your goal is to fish a legendary creature, the Liege of lake Vesperpool. 
This is a very difficult cha llenge, requiring advanced equipment and a 
maximum Skill rank for Noctis. If you are not familiar with the fishing mini-
game just yet, consult our guide on page 304. 
"Scraps of Mystery XII" (see page 130) 
You will find this map at Meldacio Hunter HO, inside a small garbage bin 
behind the small wooden house with flowers on its terrace. It leads to a 
treasure hidden inside a small bunker to the east. 
Shopping Opportunities 
When your travels take you to Meldacio Hunter HO, make sure you purchase 
all four weapons sold by the local arms vendor: the Durandal (sword). Radiant 
lance (polearm) and Orichalcum (daggers) are infused with Light This is the 
element that all Daemons are weak to, making these weapons incredibly 
useful. Furthermore, the Black Prince shield boosts the bearer's Magic when 
used to block Dark-based attacks - again, a great boon for Noctis when facing 
Daemons. On a related note. you can find the (Ice-imbued} Ice Brand sword, 
along with other solid weapons. at Verinas Mart - Ravatogh. 
"The Perfect Cup" (see page 173) 
When you walk by the Cup Noodles truck in Lestallum, 
Gladio initiates an interactive conversation with you, 
asking you about your favorite ingredient. Your answer 
really matters here: you can choose between three 
scenarios that will lead you to go off in search of either a 
slab of Behemoth meat. an enormous egg from the nest 
atop the Rock of Ravatogh, or a crustacean carapace 
from the gigantic Karlabos. Whatever your choice, 
inquire about this mission at the local tipster (the owner 
of the restaurant in the city's main thoroughfare). then 
head to your chosen hunting ground. You should then 
1 
camp at a nearby haven after the battle. Note that you 
I 
can only complete one scenario per playthrough. ~ 
_ J 
lSee Overlea!ForOetails) 
STEP 
QUEST 
DESCRIPTION 
A Precious Source 
Eliminate the Daemons inside the 
of Power 
power plant. 
Brave New World 
Head to Cape Caem and speak to Cid. 
"Crazy about Cactuars" (see page 172) 
Talk to Talcott at Cape Caem to begin this two-step quest. The boy needs 
you to buy two cactuar figurines for him. One is at Wiz Chocobo Post, 
and the other in the antique shop in Lestallum. Take both of them to 
Talcott to complete the assignment 
"Living off the Land" {see page 171) 
Speak to Iris at Cape Caem before you take the ship to Altissia and you 
will trigger this quest. Head to the plot right next to the house and plant 
the seeds. Rest one night (conveniently, there's a room where you can 
do this in the nearby house) and then return the next day to harvest the 
carrots. completing this short task. 
Tony {see page 171} 
After you complete Living off the Land, a local restaurant owner called 
Tony introduces himself. He will exchange the Caem Carrots you grow 
and harvest for valuable items such as weapons or auto parts. You will 
impoverish the soil if you harvest carrots too frequently, so the best 
strategy is to make semi-regular visits. 
SIDEOUEST 
"A Feline Feast" (see page 171) 
If you completed Kitty Catering back in Galdin Quay earlier in the story 
(see page 38), the starving cat can now be found at the rear of Cape 
Caem's beacon. Talk to it to initiate this quest. then speak to Monica 
inside the house. She needs a Lucinian Sea Bass. which you can catch at 
the nearby fishing spot. Once you have it, take it back to Monica and she 
will use it to prepare cat food. Deliver the dish to the cat to end this quest. 
• Walkthrough 
" 
Chapter 08 
79 

STEP-BY-STEP WALKTHROUGH 
The A Precious Source of Power quest is active as you begin the chapter. Cross 
the bridge and head to the power plant's entrance. Once inside. eliminate all Daemons 
within the time limit !they're all weak to Fire, so equip suitable weapons in advance). 
then retrace your steps to leave the plant. This completes the initial quest. which is 
replaced with Brave New World. Now is the perfect time to attend to sidequests 
and other activities. as this will actually be your final opportunity to explore Leide. 
Duscae. and Cleigne for a while. A first port of call should be a quick visit to Iris close to 
Lestallum's car park to collect a new land novel) piece of equipment. 
Once you are ready to proceed. head to Cape Caem and take the beacon's elevator to 
the dock. Make sure you strike up a conversation with Car: he will give you a Magic 
Flask. You can then interact with the boat to initiate the journey to Altissia and complete 
Brave New World - thereby leaving Lucis behind tor some time. 
NOTES 
~ 
Sidequests 
~ 
SIDEQUEST CHECKLIST 
NAME 
Living off the Land 
Crazy about Cactuars 
The Perfect Cup 
A Feline Feast 
Blame the Beasts! 
Photo Op: Volcano 
Liege of the Lake 
Case of the Stolen Specs 
Scraps of Mystery XII 
Scraps of Mystery XIII 
Malmalam Thicket 
The Rock of Ravatogh 
Tomb of the Pious 
Tomb of the Fierce 
TYPE 
Ally 
Ally 
Ally 
Friendly Cat 
Rescue 
Photo Op 
Tour 
Tour 
Mystery map 
Mystery map 
Dungeon 
Dungeon 
Royal Tomb 
Royal Tomb 
PAGE 
171 
172 
173 
171 
118 
132 
144 
144 
130 
130 
189 
190 
176 
176 

 
o A Sudden Surfeit of Sidequests 
. 
. -
-
-----
'I 
=-
After you clear the power plant at the beginning of this chapter and trigger the Brave New World quest, a massive quantity of sidequests are unlocked all over Lucis. 
As taking the ship to Altissia will cause your party to leave Lucis for a while, this really is a great time to tour the entire continent and complete as many optional missions 
as you can. The bonus to your party's stats will be significant - which will make forthcoming main story challenges much easier. 
In addition to the sidequests described on the previous double·page spread, the accompanying table offers a handy checklist of all other new missions you now have access 
to. If you require further information or guidance, follow the page references to our comprehensive Sidequests chapter. 
NAME 
TYPE 
REGION 
PAGE 
Raindrops in the Night 
Hunt 
Leide !Hammerhead) 
136 
Wild Beauties 
Hunt 
Leide !Hammerhead) 
136 
Bounty-Hunted Beauties 
Hunt 
Leide (Hammerhead) 
136 
Sting in the Tail 
Hunt 
Leide (Longwythe) 
136 
Cranky Crustaceans 
Hunt 
Leide (Longwythe) 
136 
Beast over Brawn 
Hunt 
Leide (Longwythe) 
136 
Footfalls in the Dark 
Hunt 
Leide IGaldin Quay) 
136 
The Gourmands of Vannath 
Hunt 
Leide IGaldin Quay) 
136 
Stealers of Lives 
Hunt 
Leide iGaldin Quay) 
136 
A Nightmare Came by Ferry 
Hunt 
Leide IGaldin Quay) 
136 
They Came Back from the Mountain 
Hunt 
Cleigne ILestallum) 
136 
Rainstorm Duel! Poison Frog of Wennath 
Hunt 
Cleigne ILestallum) 
136 
Off with Their Heads! 
Hunt 
Cleigne ILestallum) 
136 
Horned Hunting Hazards 
Hunt 
Duscae (Taelpar Rest Area) 
138 
Hunters of Secullam Pass 
Hunt 
Duscae (Taelpar Rest Area) 
138 
Reclaiming Schier Heights 
Hunt 
Duscae (Taelpar Rest Area) 
138 
A Roaring in the Night 
Hunt 
Duscae (Taelpar Rest Area) 
138 
Shear Force 
Hunt 
Cleigne !Old Lestallum) 
138 
Blobs Ashore 
Hunt 
Cleigne !Old Lestallum) 
138 
Herald from the Depths 
Hunt 
Cleigne !Old Lestallum) 
138 
The Last Spiracorns 
Hunt 
Cleigne !Old Lestallum) 
138 
Threat from the Thicket 
Hunt 
Cleigne IMeldacio Hunter HQ) 
138 
Softly Now, Mighty Foes 
Hunt 
Cleigne IMeldacio Hunter HQ) 
138 
Chase That Chocobo! 
Wiz 
Duscae IWiz Chocobo Post) 
169 
Savior of the Species 
Wiz 
Duscae IWiz Chocobo Post) 
168 
Navyth's Challenge 
Navyth 
Duscae IVesperpool) 
158 
Angler's Nightmare 
Navyth 
Leide (Galdin Quay) 
159 
The Professor's Protege - Gigantoad 
Sania 
Cleigne !Old Lestallurn) 
156 
The Professor's Protege - Wyvern 
Sania 
Cleigne IVerinas Mart - Ravatogh) 
156 
The Professor's Protege - Myrlwood Firefly 
Sania 
Cleigne IMeldacio Hunter HQ 
157 
The Professor's Protege - Griffon 
Sania 
Cleigne ICoernix Station - Cauthess) 
157 
The Frogs of Legend 
Sania 
Cleigne IMeldacio Hunter HQ) 
157 
Dude, Where's My Car? 
Broken car 
Cleigne 
125 
Keep Calm and Keep Driving 
Broken car 
Cleigne 
124 
Various Photo Ops 
Photo Op 
Leide, Duscae, Cleigne 
132 
Lestallum's Finest 
Takka 
Leide !Hammerhead) 
150 
A Backwoods Burial 
Dave 
Cleigne (Old Lestallum) 
146 
Washed Away 
Dave 
Cleigne (Old Lestallum) 
147 
Mountains of Misfortune 
Dave 
Cleigne (Meldacio Hunter HQ) 
147 
The Witch of the Woods 
Dave 
Cleigne (Malmalam Thicket) 
147 
Reliable Royalty 
Dino 
Leide IGaldin Quay) 
152 
No Pain, No Gem 
Dino 
Leide IGaldin Quay) 
152 
Vyv's Volcanic Inspiration 
Vyv 
Cleigne ILestallum) 
160 
A Place to Call Home 
Vyv 
Cleigne ILestallum) 
161 
Steam Valve Inspection 
Holly 
Cleigne ILestallum) 
164 
Power to the Pylons 
Holly 
Cleigne ILestallum) 
164 
Holding Back the Dark 
Holly 
Cleigne ILestallum) 
165 
Balouve Mines 
Dungeon 
Leide 
178 
Daurell Cavern 
Dungeon 
Duscae 
184 
• 
Walklhrough 
1!1tu .1ur.: , ,,. 
1t ' 
' ~ 'i 
( 
l'J' 1; 
i' ,i.l 
• 
Chapter 08 
81 

"A Nightmare Upon the Water" (see page 138) 
You will find these Hecteyes at night. behind the Leville 
They are weak to Polearms. Shields, Lightning, and Light. 
Fishing Spot (see page 306) 
Altissia is home to a fishing spot. You can reach it by 
selecting "Altissia Docks" as a gondola destination 
Dock (see page 134) 
This photo opportunity triggers when you walk to the 
docks close to the leville hotel during the day. The 
picture has to be taken from the A!tissra Docks, which 
you can only reach via a gondola. 
"A Cactuar of Marble" (see page 226) 
Though this is not a true sidequest, as it doesn't lead to 
a palpable reward, you can purchase a Cactuar Sculpture 
from the JM Market shop right outside the leville hotel. 
Taking this figurine back to Cape Caem on your next visit 
there leads to a secret reaction from Talcott. 
~lf,l_EOUEST 
"Symbol of the Peace" (see page 172) 
As you arrive in Altissia for the first time you will hear 
about Lunafreya's wedding dress, as you pass by 
the small bridge a short walk to the northeast of the 
immigration booth. Head to Vivienne Westwood's 
store, which this caption points to. to complete this 
assignment. 
Bar (see page 134) 
for this photo opportunity, simply visit the small plaza 
opposite Weskham's bar, Maagho. du11ng daylight hours 
after completing the main quest that first leads you here. 

CHAPTER 09 
"Bewitched Blade Stains the Waters" 
(see page 138) 
This Daemon, a Ronin. roams at night in Listro Park. It is 
equally weak to Swords, Daggers, Lightning, and Light. 
Mini-Game: "Totomostro" 
If you head to the northeast section of the map, named 
Parco Listro, you will find a gondola (under the Parco 
listro Sud canopy) that can take you to the Colosseum. 
This location is home to a mini-game called Totomostro. 
The principle is simple: teams of monsters battle against 
each other, and you wager Galviano medals - the arena 
currency - on a selected team. If your prediction is 
right. ·you receive medal winnings equivalent to your 
wager multiplied by the odds. If you gamble well and 
accumulate medals, you can then trade them for prizes, 
including valuable auto parts. Turn to page 310 for a 
complete guide to Totomostro. 
A man named Alessio is seated at one of the tables of 
the restaurant opposite the Via Palsino station. He will 
trade items (mostly accessories) against any Oracle 
Ascension Coins that you own. The most valuable 
pieces require a large number of coins, though, so it 
makes sense to wait until you have a few dozen before 
you spend any. You can find the complete selection of 
his wares on page 227 
STEP 
I QUEST 
I DESCRIPTION 
• ·-· ·-· ·-· 
Altissia, City on 
the Sea 
The Summit 
Into the Fray 
The Trial of 
Make your way to Altissia and find Weskham's cafe· 
Maagho. 
Make a stop at Hotel Leville, then head to the 
Secretary's Estate and discuss terms with Camelia. 
Make your way to Leviathan. 
e
A4 
e c6 
e ca 
e
a1 
e a2 
e a3 
e a4 
e as 
e a6 
@PJ 
@PB 
@P9 
@R3 
t)R5 
~02 
@oJ 
@ 01 
~Xl 
ALTISSIA t 
MEANING 
Debased Coin 
Beautiful Bottle 
Debased Silverpiece 
Shattered Timepiece 
Old Book 
Broken Harmonica 
Glass Gemstone 
Debased Banknote 
Rare Coin 
Remedy 
Hi-Potion 
Maiden's Kiss 
Spirit ZX 
VerveWX 
Smelling Salts 
Gold Needle 
Mega-Potion 
Oracle Ascension Coin 
------
Walklhrough 
I' 
• 
Chapler 09 
I I 
83 

84 
STEP-BY-STEP WALKTHROUGH 
Q Sidequests 
. 
.. 
-----
---
'I SIDEQUEST CHECKLIST (ALTISSIA) 
NAME 
TYPE 
PAGE 
Symbol of the Peace 
Ally 
172 
A Cactuar of Marble 
Ally 
226 
Bewitched Blade Stains the Waters 
Hunt 
138 
A Nightmare Upon the Water 
Hunt 
138 
Ill Weeds Grow in the Night 
Hunt 
138 
Back Alley Spook 
Hunt 
138 
Photo Op: Palace 
Photo Op 
134 
Photo Op: Park 
Photo Op 
134 
Photo Op: Oock 
Photo Op 
134 
Photo Op: Bar 
Photo Op 
134 
Totomostro 
Mini-game 
310 
Walk up the stairs and speak to Weskham (note that the interactive conversation is 
conducted purely for information). then to Camelia once she appears. This activates the 
The Summit quest; Weskham also provides Noctis with a map of the city. You can then 
take the gondola again. this time choosing "The Leville Station" as your destination. 
If you struggle to locate the Secretary's Estate, refer to the map on the previous double-
page spread. The entrance is shown on this picture. Once you speak to the guard at the 
entrance there is no turning back, so make sure you complete any unfinished business 
beforehand. 
Your first task in Altissia is to go through immigration, where you have to decide 
whether to have lgnis or Cid do the talking; choose the former for a free entry. Head to 
Hotel Leville to the northeast of your position. Board the gondola just a few steps to the 
north of the hotel and select "Floating Market Station - Maag ho" as your destination. 
On arrival you will complete the initial quest: Altissia, City on the Sea. 
Enter the hotel to encounter Gentiana. This unlocks a new feature that enables you to 
return to Lucis (with your current stats) while resting. Since you are close, consider 
visiting the local arms vendor. found behind the hotel: of particular interest, she sells 
the HP-draining Blood Sword, the Lightning-imbued Thunderbolt. and the Fire-infused 
Flame Gun. With this achieved, you may now head toward Camelia's office to the east. 
Climb up the stairs and follow the long walkways leading toward the waypoint. 
The next sequence is an interactive cutscene. Noctis has a critical conversation with 
Camelia. and it is up to you to decide what he says. There are various possible outcomes 
depending on your choices. See the page to your right for a complete presentation of 
the system. The Summit is completed when the negotiations end. 

o The Neg_Q!lg_tion __ _ 
Once you choose to enter the Secretary's Estate you begin a long interactive conversation in which each of your choices has a !hidden) point value. In other words. every time 
you select an answer during the dialogue. you score a certain amount of points. The more points you accrue. the more you will earn Camelia's trust - and. as a fringe benefit. 
you can improve the final reward at the end of the conversation. 
The following diagrams present all the possible dialogue scenarios, including branching paths leading to different outcomes. If you wish to complete this challenge on your 
own on your first attempt. be aware that the best way to win the first secretary's unreserved trust is to choose to be truthful and show concern for Altissia. 
Dialogue Choices & Point Values 
No sweat. First things first... 
!The empire demands that 
Luna be handed over ... I 
Why does the Oracle seek to 
awaken the Hydraean? 
You know better than most 
what took place in Lucis with 
the Archaean. Tell me. what 
ha pened? 
I don't care to host a battle 
on my soil, the gods and the 
empire be damned. 
.. 
+3 
+2 
+2 
+1 
(So she wants us to evacuate 1-=~~~~-----+-+_2_--t 
her people ... ) 
+4 
To review. you are to ensure 
our citizens· safety and 
engage the empire. Oo we 
have an agreement? 
Respond pompously 
0 
+3 
+1 
My duty is to my citizens. 
Empathize with her position 
Should any harm befall them. 
Return the threat 
there will be a reckoning - for rR;;;;;;-;;i;,;;-------1--.~6$ .... ...,_ 
both king and Oracle. 
Remain silent 
• • 
',,j 
POINT TOTAL 
OUTCOME 
> 19 
Noctis won the first secreta1y's unreserved trust! 
13-19 
Noctis made a positive impression on the first secretary. 
7-12 
Noctis was able to secure teims. 
< 7 
Noctis somehow managed to secure terms. 
You're just like your father. 
Sa thanks 
Reject the association 
Ask her meaning 
A leader must know when to 
Show understanding 
bring out the steel. Surely you 
Put up a strong front 
understand this. 
Brush the subject aside 
TRIGGER LINE 13 
POSSIBLE OPTIONS 
You understand what I must 
Show understanding 
do. I will stop at nothing to 
Return the threat 
protect my people. 
Remain silent 
REWARD 
Oracle Ascension Coin x4 
Oracle Ascension Coin x3 
Oracle Ascension Coin x2 
Oracle Ascension Coin x1 
+2 
+2 
0 
+3 
+3 
+1 
POINTS 
(Move to trigger line 11) 
{Move to trigger line 12) 
+4 after choosing this 
option again 
Walkthrough 
"•t 
',.; 
L !!Lt 
Ob 
Chapter 09 
85 

86 
STE P-BY-STE P WALKTH ROUGH 
(see P<JRe 231) 
Your next mission, Into the Fray, requires you to reach a rendezvous point. Follow the 
linear path, eliminating enemies you encounter on the way. When you face snipers, 
consider warping to them to instantly close the gap, or guard continuously as you 
approach them. Use the interaction point when you reach the waypoint to trigger the 
next sequence. 
After a while, you will have a chance to warp directly to the Astral's body by pressing 
@/O, and thus complete Into the Fray. Note that there is only one way to earn a 
reward during the interactive conversation with Leviathan: choose to "Demand her 
power", then "Maintain a commanding tone" twice. This will reward you with 10 AP. 
but will also make the Astral stronger in the upcoming battle. All other dialogue 
selections lead to no reward at all. 
In the sequence that follows, Noctis is enhanced by the power of his ancestors. He can 
fly above Altissia and unleash devastating attacks. Attack relentlessly while Leviathan 
stands still, ideally using ranged projectiles while locked on to your target. 
During the event where you ride a small flying device with Prompto, be ready to guard 
with @/O then parry with @/0 whenever the corresponding prompts appear 
onscreen. 
The Trial of Leviathan begins when the creature hurls Noctis back to the streets of 
Altissia. During this sequence. focus primarily on defense. Your opponent outguns you 
and moves very quickly. Point-warp through the Astral's assaults using the various 
blue markers around the arena, and blade-warp to her whenever she stands still. You 
need to inflict enough damage with warp-strikes to trigger the next cutscene. Royal 
Arms with multi-hit warp-strikes (such as the Blade of the Mystic) can prove very 
effective here . 
• 
When the Astral goes into a fury, switch to defense. Survey your environment with Ci) 
to spot oncoming assaults. Her water projectiles are especially fast and dangerous. 
If in doubt, stay on the move and hold @/@at all times. 

Once this phase ends. go on the offensive again. Attack relentlessly, only stopping briefly 
when you face oncoming blows. Like before. be sure to lock on to your target by holding 
@l/D. as this will imbue your projectiles with homing functionality. 
Q Umbra's Power 
. 
·-
-- ------
'! 
;::::...-
Your brief encounter with Gentiana at the Leville unlocks a new feature: 
whenever you rest. whether at a haven or a lodging, you can now use the "Call 
Umbra" function to make trips back to Lucis. 
This can be a great way to make breaks in the main adventure and head back 
to complete any unfinished business. Your visit to Altissia so happens to have 
unlocked a number of light assignments in Leide, Duscae. and Cleigne - so feel 
free to make a quick break at the Leville to attend to these missions if you so wish. 
SIDEQUEST CHECKLIST (LUCIS) 
NAME 
TYPE 
REGION 
PAGE 
When You Believe 
Rescue 
Leide 
114 
Down On Your Luck 
Rescue 
Duscae 
116 
The Verge of Despair 
Rescue 
Duscae 
116 
In Low Spirit 
Rescue 
Duscae 
116 
Weary and Wounded 
Rescue 
Duscae 
117 
Injured and Introspective 
Rescue 
Cleigne 
118 
Losing Heart 
Rescue 
Cleigne 
119 
Keeping the Faith 
Rescue 
Cleigne 
118 
Not So Easy Anymore 
Rescue 
Cleigne 
118 
Careless in a Car 
Broken Car 
Lei de 
121 
Automotive Agitation 
Broken Car 
Leide 
120 
The Perpetual Passenger 
Broken Car 
Duscae 
123 
Through a Rose-Tinted Windshield 
Broken Car 
Duscae 
123 
Hurrying Home 
Broken Car 
Duscae 
123 
Tune-up, Shmune-up 
Broken Car 
Duscae 
122 
Pedal to the Metal 
Broken Car 
Cleigne 
125 
Alone on the Road 
Broken Car 
Cleigne 
124 
A Manic Motorist 
Broken Car 
Cleigne 
124 
When her health bar is depleted, Leviathan will provide you with a parry opportunity. Be 
ready to press @/O and @/© on time to deal the finishing blow. Defeating the Astral 
completes both The Trial of Leviathan and the chapter. 
flNH mrm.xv 
-~ Wolkthrough 

CHAPTER l 0 
Shopping Opportunities 
The arms vendor in this station has a few interesting 
pieces on offer. The Thunderbolt Greatsword will be 
an excellent investment for future challenges. A Flame 
Gun may also prove useful. You should also make a bulk 
order of curative items (particularly Antidotes. Smelling 
Salts, and Remedies) to make your life easier in a 
fonhcoming battle. 
CARTANICA STATION 
STEP 
QUEST 
DESCRIPTION 
Off the Rails 
Walk around until the train arrives. 
The Hand of the 
Use the elevator to go down to the mine. Clear the way to 
King 
the tomb at the bottom and retrieve the Royal Arm before 
returning to the train. 

You begin this chapter with the Off the Rails quest active. Head to the rear of the 
train. then walk all the way back to the front car. picking up collectibles and interacting 
with points of interest on your way. The quest is completed when the train arrives at 
Cartanica. 
Q Sidequests 
There are no sidequests unlocked 
during this chapter You are. of 
course. free to return to Lucis to 
complete existing challenges by 
using the "Call Umbra" function 
while resting. If you are aspiring 
to complete a 100% playthrough, 
this is probably a good time to 
consult our Sidequests chapter 
to learn 
more about optional 
activities and high-level challenges 
that are outside the scope of this 
walkthrough. We can't guarantee 
that you'll be ready for all of them, 
and there are some missions that 
cannot be played until after you 
complete the main storyline. but 
anything you do to improve the 
levels and capabilities of your party 
at this stage will be a worthwhile 
use of your time. 
Legend 
Ill 
MEANING 
i 
om I Chrome Bit 
Ofil.l i Mythril Shaft 
" 
I 
OJ!!I ! Laser Sensor 
~ I Beautiful Bottle 
(l!!1J I Broken Harmonica 
~ 
! Debased Banknote 
~ 
Rare Coin 
~ 
Ether 
@m 
Mega Phoenix 
~ 
Remedy 
~ I Antidote 
@fill I Mega-Potion 
The Hand of the King begins when you regain control of Noctis at the station. 
Once you have explored the two platforms in search of collectibles and shopping 
opportunities, head to the elevator at the waypoint. 
i; Walkthrough 
• Chapter 10 
89 

90 
STEP-BY-ST EP WALKTHROUGH (CON TINUED) -
fll 
Once at the mine. follow the path shown on our map. If night falls while you are 
exploring the dungeon. consider making camp at the nearby Plantagh Haven: navigation 
is much easier in broad daylight. The critical steps here are as follows: 
t: 
Interact with the roadblock. 
: Interact with the control panel. 
: Retrieve the generator key from the shed. 
Note that lgnis cannot use his Techniques during this section of the story. The Blade 
of Brennaere (Greatsword) and Ice Brand (Sword) will suffice for almost every enemy 
you encounter. 
8 
FODINA CAESTINO MINE 
Legend ~ 
~ 
i Earth Gemstone 
~ 
Beautiful Bottle 
Ofil.J ! Strong Bone 
0!1J 
Rough Scales 
~ 
Splendid Building Stone 
@Jill 
Ruby Bracelet 
@.ill 
Titanium Bangle 
@m 
Star Pendant 
~ 
Megalix1r 
~ 
Mega Phoenix 
@,ill 
Remedy 
@m 
Hi-Potion 
@filJ 
Mega Potion 
~ 
Generator Key 
From the location where you obtain the generator key, follow the path shown on our 
map and complete these necessary steps: 
+: Activate the first backup generator You will need to eliminate the Gigantoad in 
front of it: Polearms. Machinery, and Ice-based attacks are very effective here. 
i: 
Activate the second backup generator. 
: Interact with the control panel again. 
: Head down the slope and attempt to open the Royal Tomb at the bottom to trigger a 
boss battle. Note that the choice that you make during the interactive conversation 
with Gladio just beforehand will lead to stat boosts: "Show frustration" causes 
Noctis to receive the Riled status, increasing his strength by 50%, while "Show 
resolve" grants him the Roused status, raising his vitality by 50%. 

QMalboro 
When you try to open the Royal Tomb at the bottom of the mine, a Malboro ambushes you. 
The Malboro is weak to Greatswords, Machinery, and Fire (and resistant to Ice and 
Light). The Blade of Brennaere, regularly enhanced by lgnis. can be a good choice 
here, as its sweeping blows are likely to hit both the monster and its sprouts 
simultaneously. 
Malboro's Bad Breath is its most dangerous technique. Not only does it deal 
significant damage, it also inflicts multiple status ailments. To avoid it, your best 
option is to roll-dodge away. The good news is that this attack is telegraphed long in 
advance when the creature breathes in. The very moment that you notice this. you 
should start running away and prepare to roll-dodge or warp - ideally sideways to 
flank your opponent. 
An alternative strategy involves wielding a Firearm (the Flame Gun being an obvious 
choice) and assailing the Malboro from afar. Staying at a distance makes it much 
easier to avoid the creature's attacks, but extends the duration of the battle. 
The Malboro Sprouts that regularly spawn in the arena are a minor threat individually, 
but groups can make the encounter far more chaotic than it needs be. Cutting a 
swath through crowds with Greatswords can be effective, but a powerful Firaga spell 
will be even more potent. 
Bad Breath aside, the Malboro mostly employs traditional physical assaults: a biting 
attack that can be parried, opening up a potential counter, and a dash attack that 
can be blocked. Most players will benefit by adopting a very aggressive strategy, 
pummeling the target relentlessly until there is a prompt to block or parry the 
monster's standard blows, or a need to roll-dodge away from Bad Breath. 
Once the Malboro's HP is reduced to 25%, it goes berserk and becomes more 
aggressive. When its HP is down to 0. the creature falls, but resurrects instantly; 
after you take it down a second time, an onscreen strategy objective directs you to 
regroup. Move to the marked location and use the opportunity that follows to finish 
off your target while it is vulnerable. Retrieve the Royal Arm in the tomb before you 
reboard the train to complete the chapter. 
Wolkthrough 
I 
'f:10fl/ 
'\ 
;;, 
f' F 
.r 
) 
• Chapter 10 
91 

92 
CHAPTER 11 
STEP-BY-STE P WALKTH ROUG H 
After the cutscene, retrace your steps with Prompto to the back of the train. You will 
need to eliminate an Armored Axeman on the way. Note that the enemies you will 
encounter in this sequence are weak to Lightning, so prioritize weapons imbued with 
this element. If you purchased a Thunderbolt Greatsword from the Altissia or Cartanica 
arms vendor, now is a good time to equip it. Note that lgnis will not be with you to offer 
his essential element-inducing technique in this section of the story. 
As the Express Train for Trouble quest is initiated, chase Ardyn until he hides in a 
compartment. Open the door with ®/~l. then resume your chase. 
In this sequence, your goal is to protect the train, with its current structural integrity 
represented by the gauge at the top of the screen. The Shock Troopers are the primary 
threat. They move slowly, but will inflict severe damage once within range. 

As you also need to manage a steady stream of imperial troops, this encounter is a 
delicate balancing act. Focus on the most pertinent targets while always keeping track 
of the next Shock Trooper's advance. Whenever one gets too close to the train, eliminate 
it as an absolute priority Powerful daggers can be a solid choice here, as almost all of 
your opponents are weak to them. Weapons naturally imbued with Lightning can also 
wreak havoc, though Armored Assassins resist this element. In addition, make regular 
use of @l/lilli in conjunction with Iii: this is the most efficient way to keep tabs on all 
enemies in the arena. 
When the imperial assault crafts begin firing at the train, look for blue markers that 
indicate point-warp opportunities. To destroy these vehicles, you'll need to get up close. 
The second option is to man a turret on the side of a ship to take down other enemy 
vessels within range, though this is not easy to achieve given the chaotic nature of 
this encounter. 
When an imperial tank enters the fray, immediately warp to it and press @/€) to 
destroy it. You will then automatically warp back to the train. 
There are two ways to destroy the ships. The first is to eliminate Shock Troopers, as the 
ensuing explosion is sufficiently powerful to send the craft crashing down. Be swift to 
warp to a different ship when the one you're currently on begins to fall. If you fail to do 
so before the timer expires, the game will be over. 
When the imperial assault crafts have been destroyed, quickly warp back to the train. 
Don't worry about intervening obstacles: if you can see a blue marker, Noctis will warp 
through solid surfaces to reach safety. This completes the Express Train for Trouble 
quest and brings the chapter to a close. 
!W Walkthrough 
• Chapter 11 
93 

CHAPTER 12 
STEP 
I QUEST 
I DESCRIPTION 
: 
TE NE BRAE 
• 
No Turning 
Eliminate the Daemons on the train's rooftop. 
Back 
• 
Where She 
Speak to the characters willing to help you in Tenebrae. 
Lived 
• 
Into the Arctic 
Explore the train 
Crevasse 
·-· 
Breath of the 
Wipe out the Daemons outside the train. 
MEANING 
Qw 
Earth Gemstone 
ow 
Sky Gemstone 
t!.W 
Mega Phoenix 
~ 
Muscle Stimulant 
~ 
Reflex Enhancer 
~ 
Flesh Fortifier 
Magitek Booster 

STEP-BY-STEP WALKTHROUGH 
NOTES 
After the cutscene, the Where She Lived mission begins. Your objectives here are 
very straightforward and all clearly marked by waypoints: follow Aranea, speak to 
Biggs, then head southwest and speak to Maria. You are then free to reboard the train 
to resume the adventure - but before you do so, be sure to pick up collectibles and 
check out the shopping opportunities. There's an arms vendor inside the aircraft close 
to where you meet Biggs and Wedge. You can also eat and rest inside the coaches 
opposite your train; a good meal will provide welcome boosts. Once you're ready 
to leave Tenebrae, speak to Biggs and Wedge at the waypoint. This completes your 
current quest. 
The battle becomes rather more demanding when a Deathclaw joins the fray, This 
dangerous adversary has a few very powerful attacks, First, the creature can send 
small detachable laser turrets in your direction that burn everything along straight 
vectors as they approach, then again as they return to the monster. The turrets cannot 
be phased through on their way back, so you need to sprint or warp away before they 
hit you. A second move is even more challenging: a large beam sweeps the entire 
area and cannot be phased through, Your best option is to warp sideways through 
the beam, The Deathclaw can also make its detachable turrets swirl around its body, 
dealing damage to all within meiee range, Finally, it can propel its claws out before they 
return along the same path. 
The chapter begins with the No Turning Back quest, in which you face large groups of 
Daemons on the train roof. You are outnumbered in this battle, with Daemons lowering 
your maximum HP whenever they hit you, so prioritize defense. Guard constantly when 
you are under pressure, then seize any opportunity to counterattack. Light-imbued 
weapons are recommended here as all of your opponents are weak to this element. The 
quest ends when you reach the station. 
The Into the Arctic Crevasse quest begins in the train and ends automatically after 
a set period of time, so take this opportunity to explore the coaches and pick up all 
available collectibles. As soon as you are out of the train, Breath of the Glacian begins. 
Your objective is to defeat several waves of Daemons in the surrounding area. 
Given that defending isn't an easy task against the Deathclaw, your best bet is to finish it 
off as quickly as possible. It is weak to Shields, Machinery, Fire, and Light Any weapon 
naturally imbued with Light is a solid choice here. If you opt far a Durandal or Radiant 
Lance, you can perform long aerial combos, airdancing at the monster's back to inflict 
significant damage. As an added benefit, staying within melee range of the creature can 
make it easier to avoid its special attacks; its close combat skiiis, such as tail swipes, 
are much less of a threat and can be phased through or parried, An alternative option is 
to equip the Star of the Rogue (the Royal Arm obtained at the Myrlwood): you can use 
this to attack from a safe distance, and regularly point·warp io blue marker positions 
when you're in danger, Warp-strikes Imm these vantage points are powerful. but ihey 
quickly deplete your HP, so make sure you monitor this closely, Assailing the Deathclaw 
with a Flame Gun from range is also a viable strategy, but will extend the duration of the 
encounter, The rest of the chapter is story·orlented and poses no difficulty, 
Walkthrough 
Chapter 12 
95 

96 
CHAPTER l 3 
GRALEA 
ST EP-BY-STEP WALKTHROUGH 
Noctis is stripped of his weapons and magic as the The Imperial Capital quest 
begins. preventing him from fighting. This leaves you no choice but to sprint to the 
freight car at the back of the train. Hold the guard button at all times when in close 
proximity to Daemons; there are also instances where you can jump above them. Do 
not stop until you reach the Regalia. 
Dnce you're back on foot, head to the waypoint. When you are separated from your 
allies and ambushed by Daemons. quickly run away from them by jumping aboard the 
next train car. You are defenseless here. so escaping is the only option. Exit the train 
via the left-hand door and run up the stairs. The Imperial Capital ends when you 
enter the building. 
Note that your ability to manually save will be limited to occasional "safe rooms" 
throughout this chapter. In addition to this functionality. these rooms also enable you to 
rest land therefore restore Noctis's max HP) and to return to Lucis via the Call Umbra 
iunction. This latter feature can be especially important if you feel under-leveled. Many 
opportunities await you back in Lucis. and all the experience that you can acquire will 
make the challenges that lie ahead that much easier. 
After the cutscene. a driving sequence begins. Your goal here is to make it into Gralea 
before the city gate closes - or, more specifically, before the onscreen timer reaches 
zero. The driving controls are the same as usual !hold !@/al to accelerate and steer 
with GI. so the challenge lies in your ability to avoid the dangers and obstacles on 
the way. An efficient approach is to remain in the center of the road by default. gently 
adjusting your course whenever you encounter a hazard. During the final phase of the 
ride, the Regalia becomes a little harder to drive. Try briefly lifting off the accelerator 
every once in a while to keep the car under control: drifting can lead to unpredictable 
consequences. 
As the A King's Struggle quest begins. Noctis equips himself with the Ring of the Lucii. 
granting him three powerful commands: 
• Death l©/t])) is your standard attack, sentencing enemies to annihilation after 
channeling for a few seconds. Defeating opponents with this move partly heals 
Noctis. making it an essential survival tool. 
• Holy l@/01 enables you to counter as you phase through enemy attacks. This 
move cannot be used in exactly the same way as phasing, though, as holding the 
button constantly drains your MP. This defensive move must be deployed sparingly, 
and ideally executed a fraction of a second before an enemy attack hits Noctis. Each 
successful Holy restores a portion of your MP. however. making this a potentially very 
effective combat method with practice. 
• Alterna l@/GI is a charged attack that annihilates up to four targets in a small area. 
though you should note that it can only be used with a full MP bar and with a target 
locked on. This powerful last resort spell depletes all or most of Noctis's MP. If you 
need to refill your MP gauge quickly, consider consuming an Ether lor any other item 
with an equivalent effect), or find an object against which you can take cover. 

, 
This level features various switches that control associated doors. The first of these 
(marked Qi on our map) is just a few steps ahead of your starting position. Operating it 
unlocks the door to the'southeast. Head through it to operate switch Qi. then activate 
the main control at @; before you head to the elevator. The entire path is clearly marked 
on our map, so simply follow this if you need any visual guidance. Rest in the safe room 
on the way to restore your maximum HP. 
Q-Enemy Analysis (see page 231) 
---~---------
• 
Weak to Polearms, Daggers, Fire. and Light, 
• • 
'· 
resistant to Ice 
- - :,, 
e(_ 
" 
fl! 
GRALEA - PART l 
'ii· Wolkthrough 
Legend 
ICON 
MEANING 
O!!.l ! Laser Sensor 
~ 
I Beautiful Bottle 
I 
Cill 
I 
: Debased Silverpiece 
~ 
1 Iron Shavings 
~ 
' Debased Banknote 
~ 
Rare Coin 
~ 
I I Mega Phoenix 
~ 
I Hi-Elixir 
I Elixir 
Ether 
flesh Fortifier 
~ Chapter 13 
97 

98 
~ 
GRALEA - PART 2 
f r On!y available after upgrading your security clearance in 
the room to the south. 
In this section you will encounter Rogue Axemen. As these foes are near-impervious 
to standard damage. you will need to run away from them when they spot you, then 
hide in recesses in the walls until they depart. They patrol along set routes. so all you 
need to do is stay hidden until you see them pass in front of you. then quietly leave 
your hiding place and advance while their backs are turned. If you don't feel like playing 
hide-and-seek, simply obliterate the Rogue Axemen with the Alterna spell (hold @/O 
while locked on to them at close range) once they have spotted you. This has a steep 
MP cost, but you can recharge your MP by taking cover for a moment. Alternatively, 
repeated use of the Holy counter l@/01 will make short work of them. Note that 
another Rogue Axeman appears when you pick up the security card in the northeastern 
room. close to the first safe room. This enables you to push deeper into the facility, as 
shown on our map, following the waypoint to the west. When the path forks, eliminate 
the Rogue Axemen that appear. then continue traveling west to upgrade your security 
clearance to Level 2. You can now retrace your steps to where the path forks and head 
on to the next floor. 
To access this room. you need to squeeze through a small gap in the corner of the 
previous room. You are ambushed by an Uttu here. The Death spell takes a very long 
time to operate. so we suggest you opt for Holy instead: hold @/O right before each 
enemy attack until all of your opponents fall. You can then squeeze through the gap 
between the crates. as shown here, then use the device to improve your card's security 
clearance to level 3. With that done, retrace your steps all the way back to the central 
room. You can find the elevator a short walk to the west. 

Follow the waypoint and the path shown on our map. When you reach the room with 
the Gargantua, walk alongside the wall to your left without making any moves that 
might invite unwanted attention. Once down the stairs, you should find the rest of the 
way uneventful. You can defeat the monster with the Death and Holy spells if you wish, 
though this is a rather long process with no palpable reward. 
With the key card in hand, retrace your steps all the way to the control panel, once 
again avoiding the Gargantua. A King's Struggle ends when you activate the control 
panel. 
Legend -
MEANING 
O!!J I Chrome Bit 
~ 
Mythril Shaft 
~ 
Laser Sensor 
~ 
Shattered Timepiece 
ow 
1 Old Book 
Qw 
Debased Banknote 
~ 
Rare Coin 
ow 
Magnetron 
ow 
Magitek Core 
ow 
Dynamo 
GRALEA - PART 3 
-
MEANING 
I ~ 
I Megalixir 
~
\
Hi - E l ixi r 
~
!
Potion 
~ 
! MuscleStimulant 
I 
~ 
i Reflex Enhancer 
~
I Flesh fortifier 
~ 
I Superior Restorative 
~ 
II Security Card 
~ 
Elevator Card 
@ 
I Terminal/Switch 
~ 
' Tempered Shield 
J_ 
----
--
__ _L ___________________ L __________ 
---- ---
------· - -------
t> Wolkthrough 
I. 
' 
Jc 
"' Chapter 13 
99 

100 
Legend 
Ill, 
MEANING 
ICON 
MEANING 
Olli 
Chrome Bit 
~ 
I 
I 
I Hi-Elixir 
~ 
Mythril Shalt 
@m 
Elixir 
O!fil 
Gralean Medal of Distinction 
aw 
Muscle Stimulant 
,QgJ 
Metal Scrap 
~ 
Reflex Enhancer 
~ 
i Rare Coin 
~ 
I Ether 
~ 
Imperial Medal of Honor 
~ 
Mega-Potion 
~ 
Chobham Armor 
~ 
Superior Restorative 
fi,uJ 
Safety Bit 
~ 
Magitek Booster 
~ 
Megalixir 
- -- L ® 
Terminal/Switch 
The Zegnautus Keep quest is activated when you reach this floor level. In addition to 
the Ring of the lucii, you now also have access ta the Sward of the Father. Moments 
after you pass the safe roam, poison gas begins to spread through the area, reducing 
Nactis's HP. Follow the path an our map to reach a room where you can operate a 
device to decontaminate the air. Being spotted in this area will slaw your progress, 
and the longer you take to cleanse the air, the weaker you become. Hurry forward, 
using the Death command ta both defeat your enemies and heal Noctis. If you feel 
overwhelmed, consuming a Superior Restorative can prove handy ta mitigate the drain 
damage caused by the gas. 
la 
GRALEA - PART 4 
The route ta the next objective is rather straightforward. When you reach the terminal. 
upgrade your key card to security clearance level 4, and don't miss the opportunity to 
stock up an consumable items at the adjacent vending machine. Yau can now head to the 
elevator to the north. A Foras attacks you while you wait for the elevator to arrive. This is 
a very dangerous opponent that you cannot defeat for now. Immune to Alterna, it attacks 
relentlessly and unpredictably, making it hard ta find openings. Focus on defending, though 
you should note that both your standard phase move and Holy are ineffective against some 
of the monster's assaults, particularly one: when it vanishes and suddenly reappears, 
striking from above (fully regenerating its health in the process). The best way to dodge 
this is to roll-dodge away (you can keep track of the creature's movements on the mini-
map). Rush to the elevator as soon as it is available. 

After you partially restore power at the waypoint, you are attacked by the Foras again. 
As the creature restores its HP every time it vanishes to strike from above, running 
away is still the most practical solution: the monster will give up as soon as you reach 
the stairs to the west. An Uttu will attack you in the next main room. It should pose 
little difficulty at this stage: parry its assaults and it will quickly succumb to combos 
with the Sword of the Father. 
Enemy Analysis (see page 2311 
IEil 
GRALEA - PART 5 
You can now head to the second generator, shown here. You will encounter a few 
Rogue Axemen on the way, but these fall easily to the Sword of the Father. When the 
Foras joins the fray, however, flee and sprint straight to the elevator, following the path 
indicated on our map It will once again replenish its health every time it vanishes, so 
there is little point in facing it at this stage. 
Wolkthrough 
•'I> Chapter 13 
101 

After you partially restore power at the waypoint, you are attacked by the Foras again 
As the creature restores its HP every time it vanishes to strike from above, running 
away is still the most practical solution: the monster will give up as soon as you reach 
the stairs to the west. An Uttu will attack you in the next main room. It should pose 
little difficulty at this stage: parry its assaults and it will quickly succumb to combos 
with the Sword of the Father. 
Enemy Analysis (see page 231) 
fil 
GRALEA - PART 5 
You can now head to the second generator, shown here. You will encounter a few 
Rogue Axemen on the way, but these fall easily to the Sword of the Father. When the 
Foras joins the fray, however, flee and sprint straight to the elevator, following the path 
indicated on our map. It will once again replenish its health every time it vanishes, so 
there is little point in facing it at this stage. 
Wal
·~ . Cha

When you reach the nine adjacent square rooms. head to the central one. where you 
will find a panel displaying which doors are open via green lights. Before you touch the 
controls, retrieve the Panel B Key Card in the northwest room. then return to the 
panel and activate the corresponding switch. You can now collect the Panel C Key 
Card in the northeast room. Back at the panel, deactivate switch A and activate switch 
C instead: only Band C should be turned on to open the way to the exit. (Note that you 
must turn on either switches A and C or A and B to access the west and southwest 
rooms respectively.) 
Enemy Analysis lseeEaqe231) 
Follow the path shown on our map until you reach the room depicted here. Interact 
with the device to upgrade your key card once more (to Level 5 this time), then head 
to the back of the platform to the north and activate the switch. 

Q Enemy Analysis (see page ZlU _ 
NAME 
NOTES 
104 
GRALEA - PART 8 
After the battle against the Gargantua, retrace your steps to the security room filled with 
screens, then take the east corridor - but be prepared to face cohorts of Daemons on the 
way. Light-infused weapons and Holy (with the Ring of the Lucii) are very effective here. You 
will also find two vending machines, with the unit selling consumables offering a welcome 
opportunity to replenish your stocks of recovery items. In the room past the vending machines 
you will encounter the Foras creature one more time. 'Mth the help of your friends and your 
full arsenal, though, this is now a very different encounter. Foras is susceptible to Polearms, 
Shields, Lightning, and Light. so a Radiant Lance will make a difference. Whenever the 
monster focuses on one of your allies. redouble your offensive efforts to finally take it down. 

8 
GRALEA - PART 9 
Legend ·-·-·-
Ofil.I ' Shattered Timepiece 
I ~ 
, Bulletproof Suit 
I ~ 
: Muscle Stimulant 
~ 
Old Book 
@.ill 
Megalixir 
~ 
ow 
Rare Coin 
~ 
Hi-Elixir 
~ 
Imperial Medal of Honor ~ 
Hi-Potion 
As intimidating as he may look, Ravus is rather slow and has a tendency to telegraph his 
attacks; he either focuses before executing them, or he adopts a specific stance (such as 
raising an arm or kneeling down). Despite this, don't underestimate his capacity for dirty 
tricks. One of his blows can inflict Stop: the only way to get rid of this ailment is to wait until 
it wears off. though you can preemptively equip the party with accessories that prevent it, 
such as a Golden Hourglass or Ribbon. Ravus is also distinguished by his very large HP total, 
so defeating him is something of a marathon. To tip the odds in your favor, equip Light-
imbued weapons (Ravus's only weakness). avoiding all other elements (which he resists). 
Royal Arms such as the Sward of the Father can also be solid choices. 
If you struggle to beat Ravus, one safe method consists of staying as far away from 
him as possible (the arena is quite large) and launching opportune warp-strikes with 
your strongest weapon before retreating; you can also use the blue markers around 
the arena to the same effect This can be a bit of a grind, but maintaining a cautious 
distance between you and Ravus will mean that you are rarely in great danger. 
Reflex Enhancer 
Flesh Fortifier 
Some of Ravus's most dangerous attacks can be deceptive, as they require a charging 
time. You might be tempted to use this as an opportunity to attack while he is 
defenseless, but the price you will pay for your overenthusiasm will be high, as these 
attacks cannot be blocked or parried. So: when he kneels down, sprint or roll-dodge 
away from the imminent explosion of darkness that he unleashes as he stands up 
again. Likewise, when he charges for several seconds with a gray aura flowing from 
his body, flee. It fires in a cone in front of Ravus, so if you can position yourself behind 
him, you will be completely out of harm's way. Point-warping can also be an effective 
way to escape. 
The battle against Ravus is immediately followed by a confrontation with an imposing 
army of foes, including Foras, Gargantuas, and various other Daemons. You can survive 
(and even defeat multiple enemies) relatively easily by keeping Holy active at all times 
with the Ring of the Lucii, but the flow of enemies is endless. To make things worse, 
the hangar's gate soon begins to close, giving you very little time to leave. Against 
such odds, it's obviously necessary to take the elevator and just sprint to the exit 
Roll-dodge or jump above enemies, and don't stop for a moment until you go through 
the gate. Finally, head to the elevator and follow the linear platform to the end. The 
sequences that follow are best enjoyed with no guidance whatsoever. 
Walkthraugh 
(:l'v 
,[ 
jJ: Chapter 13 
105 

106 
CHAPTER 14 
Safe Rooms 
There are two rooms where you can rest in Insomnia, 
both accessible via an underground entrance. Feel 
free to use these liberally to restore your HP and to 
tally up EXP 
lseultalon 
This is one of the more dangerous creatures roaming in 
Insomnia. You should be familiar with its attack patterns 
and timing from your earlier encounter with a Deathclaw 
in Chapter 12. If you feel sufficiently strong enough to 
eliminate it, we suggest a very aggressive strategy. The 
creature is weak to Greatswords, so choose your most 
powerful blade in this category and infuse it with Fire 
via lgnis's Enhancement technique. Staying at melee 
range, execute sweeping blows to hit all body parts 
simultaneously and cause significant damage. Being 
so close to your target offers the benefit of keeping you 
out of range of its special attacks. For the rest. phase 
and parry consistently, and follow up with counters. 
If things go awry, seize any summoning opportunity 
that arises - an Astral can really tip the odds in your 
favor. 
Nagarani 
A sing!e Nagarani is manageable, but they are 
extremely deadly in pairs. Equip a powerful Greatsword 
and regularly infuse it with Lightning through lgnis's 
Enhancement technique: this makes area attacks that 
hit multiple body parts incredibly effective. Whatever 
happens. focus all your efforts on one of the creatures 
to eliminate it rapidly. If you are propelled away, warp· 
strike back to the specimen you have already weakened. 
The Nagaranis can petrify a target (immediately use 
a Gold Needle item when this happens) or turn a party 
member into a toad (which can be cured with a Maiden's 
Kiss); they can also summon a series of water pillars, 
forcing you to abandon your offensive and phase until 
the attack sequence ends. 
INSOMN IA 
Ariadne 
Relatively weak compared to the other monsters in 
the area, Ariadne can technically petrify your party 
members. If you immediately assail it with a Greatsword 
imbued with Fire via the Enhancement technique, 
though, it probably won't have the time to inflict any 
harm. 
Yajimbo 
This foe is also easy to defeat. 
Equipped with a Sword boosted 
with lgnis's Enhancement 
technique. parry its blows then 
counter immediately. It should pose 
little resistance. 

Legend .. 
MEANING 
~ 
Megalixir 
~. 
Mega Phoenix 
~Hi - Elixir .. 
MEANING 
I (}W 
Imperial Medal of Honor 
C!IJ 
Dynamo 
~ 
FireCrest 
Ulric's Kukris 
To obtain this powerful weapon, you first need to take 
the elevator up after defeating Jfrit. Now take the 
elevator back down to the ground floor and eliminate 
the two Red Giants that spawn where you fought 
lfrit [aerial combos with the Sword of the Father or 
other Royal Arms work well here. as the creatures 
resist traditional weapon types). Finally, dispatch the 
Psychomancer that spawns at the location marked by 
this icon: This is a very difficult challenge, requiring 
a high-level party: phase and parry consistently, 
countering with light-imbued weapons enhanced by 
lgnis. When the monster falls, it will drop the weapon 
on the ground, which you can then pick up. 
After the first two boss battles, head up the stairs, open the building's door and take 
the elevator I you will find a button by the elevator door). Once upstairs, a corridor will 
take you to the throne room, as shown on the image above. Follow your nemesis up 
the stairs and then warp back at street level to trigger the game's finale lsee page 
110 for details). 
During the opening section of the chapter !World of Ruin), the objective is to reach the 
top of the hill overlooking Galdin Quay. The Ring of the Lucii's Death spell can make 
short work of many of the Daemons you will encounter on the way, while Holy excels 
against groups. Light-imbued weapons are also effective. The harder creatures are 
immune to the effect of the ring, however, and will only fall to advanced strategies and 
a high-level Noctis. Feel free to use the local haven to rest between bouts of fighting or 
to call Umbra. If your current level is less than 45, we strongly recommend a trip back 
to Lucis to earn EXP through sidequests. Stock up on recovery items when you reach 
Hammerhead, then interact with the gate when you are ready to head to Insomnia. 
Once at the Crown City, your objective in the first section of the map is to reach the 
entrance shown here. Though the Eternal Troopers are insignificant, there are multiple 
dangerous creatures roaming in this area. Refer to the captions linked to this map for 
more details. If you feel under-prepared, this location can be exploited to farm EXP by 
repeatedly eliminating the enemies within your level of proficiency, then resting in the 
underground safe room close to your starting position 
Once underground, open the closed gate by activating the switch to the left, then 
proceed along the corridor to your left where you will encounter more opponents. 
Eliminate the troopers equipped with guns in priority. Once all foes are down, open the 
gate at the other end of the passage to reemerge at ground level. Head to the waypoint 
to trigger a first boss battle I see overleaf for details). Once this is over, open the gate 
and walk to the Citadel to engage a second boss. 
Wolkthrough 
• Chapter 14 
107 

108 
Q Behemoth King 
This monster is weak to Greatswords and Shields, and immune to Ice. Shields are 
perfect for defensive purposes but inflict limited damage. Greatswords, on the other 
hand, are optimal to deal damage but lead to protracted reaction times that are 
hardly compatible with this creature's ferocious rate of attack at melee range. One 
effective solution, though, is to opt for a Greatsword-based strategy that revolves 
around warp-strikes. Blade-warp to the monster, then immediately point-warp to 
a blue marker position, and repeat. This will leave you out of range of most of the 
Behemoth's attacks. while enabling you to deal significant damage. 
The monster's most dangerous attack is when it jumps high in the air then dives 
back, freezing everything around the point of impact. Make sure you successfully 
parry this blow, or point-warp to a blue marker position to avoid it. 
If you struggle with melee combat, consider using a firearm instead. This will enable 
you to stay clear of most of the monster's attacks - though, as usual, you will deal 
less damage and extend the overall duration of the battle. If you have retrieved 
the Star of the Rogue from the Myrlwood's Royal Tomb, you 
will be surprised by its efficiency as a ranged weapon: lower 
the monster's defense with Prompto's Piercer technique, then 
attack from a safe distance. This strategy limits your exposure 
to enemy assaults while offering solid damage output. You can 
occasionally point-warp to blue marker positions then blade-
warp to your opponent from there. though this will take a toll 
on your HP. 
If you have unlocked the Airstep line of abilities in the Combat Ascension tree (ideally 
all the way to the Airdance nexus), equip a powerful Sword or Polearm and unleash 
aerial combos: while airborne, you will be clear of many of the Behemoth's assaults 
(including the ones that freeze the ground). leaving you free to attack with impunity. 
Tilting 0 in the relevant direction will enable you to follow your foe closely and 
maintain a constant barrage of strikes. With suitable bonuses to your Strength, and 
any debuffs that you can inflict. this strategy can deal enormous amounts of damage. 
The Behemoth King will also regularly lift one of its forelegs and hit the ground with 
it, again freezing everything in the vicinity. This is also a blow that cannot be phased 
through, so move away from the area of effect whenever you notice the telltale signs 
that it is imminent. 
Whenever you manage to topple the Behemoth, attack it relentlessly with your best 
weapon until it stands back up again. This is where a powerful Greatsword can make 
a real difference. 

 
QJ1i)L _____ ······-------···-·····-··-------·-···-
1" Phase: During the opening section of the battle. lfrit remains seated on his throne. 
His main offensive technique is to regularly cast a stream of fire in your direction. You 
can phase through the entire attack via a lateral warp (with a brief tap on @/@) or 
a standard warp-strike through the flames. Attacking lfrit with rnelee weapons at 
ground level is complicated as he is hard to reach, and his flames regularly stop your 
assault. However. warp-strikes and aerial combos can be very effective. particularly 
with Ice-imbued Swords or Polearrns. If you have unlocked the Ascension nexuses 
enabling you to perform longer combos while in midair (the Airstep line of Combat 
abilities). this method works well. lfrit is likely to grab you and hurl you away alter a 
while. but this trade in damage works very much in your favor. 
2'' Phase: Once lfrit stands up after Baharnut's intervention, he becomes mJch 
more dangerous. He walks around the arena, often performing sword blows that 
emit fire waves. You can phase through these. or warp through them just as you 
did during the first section of the battle. Aerial combos are again recommended, 
particularly if you equip an Ice Brand or Ice Spear. or strengthen any powerful Sword 
or Polearrn with Enhancement. The key aspect to take into account is that lfrit is 
practically immune to damage when his body is ablaze. This means that you need to 
time your attacks accordingly. An efficient approach is to point-warp to a blue marker 
position and observe your opponent: the moment the flames disappear. warp-strike 
then follow up with a combo. 
2'' Phase: lfrit's most dangerous techniques occur when he jumps in the air. If he 
dives back towards you, make sure you parry the assault. If he _throws you in the 
air. follow the onscreen button prompts to defend yourself. or al very least warp 
before hitting the ground to mitigate the fall damage. Other Astrals will offer you their 
assistance after you deal enough damage. Feel free to summon them immediately by 
holding Ii]/ m 
to end the confrontation . 
1" Phase: Alternatively, you can opt for a Firearm or the Star of the Rogue. Staying 
at mid-range from your opponent you can shoot him relentlessly. To escape the 
flames corning your way, you will need to either roll-dodge or perform a lateral warp. 
Alter you have dealt sufficient damage. you will be given the opportunity to summon 
Baharnut. 
ll!· Walkthrough 
Chapter 14 
109 

110 
QA_rdyn 
PART l 
Being a former king of Lucis. Ardyn uses the exact same techniques as Noctis: 
he can change weapons on the fly and warp-strike from any position. This 
"mirror match" means that you should be familiar with all of his attacks and, in 
particular. the exact timing and length of his combos. Ardyn has no weaknesses. so 
wield whatever weapon type you are most comfortable with. The Ring of the Lucii 
can be a viable option: activate Holy every time Ardyn strikes and you will both dodge 
his assaults and deal damage. Players who struggle with Ardyn's attack patterns 
might find merit in this defense-oriented strategy. 
After taking enough damage, Ardyn will start launching warp-strikes 
more frequently and in rapid succession. You can take advantage of 
this by triggering "duels" between Noctis and his nemesis. during 
which you are invited to press the attack button frenetically. 
These can happen when you successfully parry an enemy 
warp-strike. when you hit your opponent with a warp-strike 
of your own. or when both combatants perform a warp-
strike simultaneously. 
When Ardyn performs a longer. sword-based combo, be patient and phase through 
all blows (or, even better, use the Ring of the Lucii's Holy spell). only counter-
attacking after his combo is over. Yau should be familiar with the number of hits in 
his combos based an the weapon type he's currently wielding. If in doubt, wait for 
the final attack, which is usually signposted by a slightly longer preparation time. 

 
The ultimate way to defeat Ardyn consists of defending against each of his attacks 
with shield blocks. This will enable you to regularly interrupt his combos and push 
him backwards, creating quick counter possibilities. This is a technically demanding 
strategy, as it requires you to constantly juggle weapons. If executed flawlessly, 
however, it will enable you to take down your opponent quickly. 
Ardyn will regularly cast spells during the battle. This is foreshadowed by an 
area-of-effect cloud appearing around Noctis. Accessories with elemental 
resistances can be a boon here. Alternatively, point-warp to any blue marker 
position to avoid the blast completely. 
After sustaining significant damage, Ardyn adopts a new behavior and 
starts using two special attacks: he summons a field of purple energy, or 
focuses with purple energy around him and follows up with a wide slash 
attack. Both of these can be parried, creating counter openings. 
~ 
Post-Credits Pla y 
PART 2 
The second stage of this grand showdown begins when Ardyn's HP is down by one 
third. At this point. Noctis will fly while wielding the weapons of his ancestors. The 
most important thing during this entire phase is to stay on the offensive. Keep Ardyn 
locked-on at all times. and either maintain him under a constant storm of homing 
projectiles from afar, or warp-strike to him to close the distance. Your speed and 
power should be sufficient to keep Ardyn stun-locked for entire barrages . 
Whenever Ardyn attacks you (which is signposted by the movements of the weapons 
around him). briefly phase to avoid damage, then switch back to your offensive 
strategy immediately. If you stay at a distance and use homing missiles, though, you 
will often be out of range of his assaults, leaving you free to attack with impunity. 
When both fighters hit the ground again, phasing is no longer an option, so focus 
one more time on attacking. After a quick exchange, you will see onscreen prompts 
inviting you to press the attack button. Do so as requested to bring the battle to 
an end. 
The final cutscenes do not mark the end of your journey through Final Fantasy XVs adventure. After the credits roll, you are offered the opportunity to save your game. 
If you later load this save file from the title screen, it will enable you to restart in Insomnia's underground safe room - in what is technically considered as a Chapter 15. 
By taking a rest. you can then use the "Call Umbra" function to return to Lucis or Altissia and resume your exploration of the world. In addition to sidequests that you have 
yet to complete, there are various challenges and missions that are only available during this Chapter 15 "epilogue" Simply turn the page to read about these endgame 
activities .. 
Wolkthrough 
., Chapter 14 
11 1 



11 4 
RESCUES 
These short and simple assignments require you to locate individuals in assorted states 
of despair as you explore, then save them with a specified recovery item: either a potion 
or an antidote. You should therefore always ensure that you have a healthy stock of these 
restoratives at hand, as it's not uncommon to stumble upon these mini-missions while 
involved with other pursuits. 
Rescue sidequests are not flagged within the game world until you move inside the 
boundaries of a small invisible perimeter that surrounds each person in distress. At this 
point, you can select the assignment as your active quest and search within the highlighted 
area to locate them, then provide the requested item. 
These mini-missions can be a lucrative source of EXP during earlier chapters if you know 
exactly where to look and approach them in an efficient order (especially so if tackled in tours 
that also encompass the similar Broken Car missions, and Hunts). Whenever you set out to 
a new destination, make a habit of referring back to this section to learn which rescues you 
can complete during the journey. 
Rescues: Leide 
• Unlock Cond~ion: Reach Chapter 02 and complete "Search 
and Rescue·'. 
• Reward: 350 EXP. 900 Gil 

• Sidequests 
• Rescues 
•l 
l' 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "A Cry for Help". 
• Reward: 300 EXP, 500 Gil 
115 

(!)Rescues: Duscae 
• Unlock Condition: Reach Chapter 09. 
• Reward: 1,500 EXR 6,000 Gil 
116 

• Unlock Condition: Reach Chapter 09 and complete "A Hurting 
Heart". 
• Reward: 1,000 EXR 2,500 Gil 
flNHmTm.H 
Sldequests 
Rescues 
117 

o 
Rescues: Cleigne 
• Unlock Condition: Visit Cape Caem. 
• Reward: 500 EXP. 1,500 Gil 
11 8 

+ Unlock Condition: Visit Cape Caem. 
+ Reward: 500 EXP, 1,500 Gil 
• Sidequests 
• Rescues 
119 

120 
BROKEN CARS 
In these missions your objective is to assist stranded drivers found by roadsides. They 
all need you to provide a repair kit - an item categorized as a treasure and available for 
purchase at Hammerhead's Mini-mart, as well as Mini-marts at all three Coernix Stations. 
As with potions and antidotes for rescue missions, we suggest that you carry several repair 
kits with you at all times to enable you to complete chance encounters immediately. 
a Broken Cars: Leide 
UNLUCKY DRIVER 
• Unlock Condition: Available from the start. 
• Reward: 300 EXP. 500 Gil 
• Unlock Condition: Reach Chapter 04 and complete "Car-mic 
Retribution". 
• Reward: 350 EXP. 900 Gil 

'>' Sidequests 
• 
Broken Cars 
• Unlock Condition: Available from the start. 
• Reward: 300 EXP, 500 Gil 
121 

o~_roken Cars: Duscae 
• Unlock Condition: Reach Chapter 09 and complete " 
Been Serviced". 
• Reward: 1,500 EXP. 6,000 Gil 
122 

I' 
• Sidequests 
• Broken Cars 
Iii 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "Through a Rose-Tinted Windshield" 
• Reward: 500 EXP, 1,500 Gil 
123 

124 
o 
Broken Cars: Clei9n~ 
• Unlock Condition: Reach Chapter 09 and complete "My Beloved 
Chariot". 
• Reward: 1,500 EX~ 6.000 Gil 

• Unlock Condition: Reach Chapter 09 and complete "A Manic 
Motorist". 
+ Reward: 1.500 EXP. 6,000 Gil 
* Sidequesls 
'"fV 
.• Broken Cors 
'•;• 
125 

126 
SCRAPS OF MYSTERY 
This extensive series of secondary sidequests is a giant treasure hunt that takes you on a 
near-complete tour of Lucis. Individual "Mystery Maps" that trigger numbered Scraps of 
Mystery quests are hidden in very specific locations, with no prompt or highlight to draw 
your attention unless you are standing right next to them. They are, therefore, very difficult 
to find without prior knowledge of where to look. 
Once you have a Mystery Map and select the assignment as your active quest. a search area 
will appear on in-game maps. You must then head to the location in question and scour the 
terrain until you find the corresponding Sylvester's Map Piece. 
Cl) Scrap~<2.!_ Myster_y: Leide _ 
• Unlock Condition: find Myste1y Map I 

Sidequesls 
• Scraps of Myslery 
Cl"!(! 
• Unlock Condition: Find Mystery Map IV 
127 

~ops 
of Mystery: Duscae . 
• Points To: Sylvester's Map Piece I 
128 

e> Sidequests 
.. :lee"· 
xt·cs 
Scraps of Mystery 
, 
-.1;0 C:µs 
' 
n, 
{J'l 
fftl 
• Unlock Condition: find Mystery Map IX 
1du;r 
129 

(!) Scraps of Mystery: Cleigne 
130 

,__ _______________ --------------- ---
fl Sidequests 
• Unlock Condition: Find Mystery Map XII 
It Scraps of Mystery 
• Points To: Sylvester's Map Piece K 
• Unlock Condition: Find Mystery Map XI 
• Unlock Condition: Find Mystery Map XIII 
131 

132 
PHOTO OPS 
Photo Ops are short quests that invite you to head to a specific location where Prompto can take a memorable picture. Each of these missions is activated 
during daylight hours when you enter "trigger zones" that we illustrate over the pages that follow. Once you cross the perimeter of these areas. a short 
interactive conversation occurs and officially triggers the quest. If you choose not to interrupt your journey and take the picture immediately, the Photo Op 
will thereafter appear in your list of available quests. 
To complete a Photo Op, select it as your current assignment and head to the waypoint. Each Photo Op quest that you complete rewards Prompto with 
skill points and the entire party with a modest EXP bonus. 

a Lucis 
·---~ 
PHOTO OP: MOUNTAIN 
• Unlock Condition: Reach Chapter 03 
• Reward: 200 EXP 
PHOTO OP: QUARRY 
, 
·---~ 
PHOTO OP: BATilEFIELD 
• Unlock Condition: Reach Chapter 05 
• Reward: 200 EXP 
• 
:1 
PHOTO OP: DISC 
• Unlock Condition: Reach Chapter 03 {must 
be completed before the end of Chapter 04) 
• Reward: 250 EXP 
·------------
PHOTO OP: LESTALLUM 
• Unlock Condition: Complete the "A Stroll For 
Two" tour in Chapter 03 
• Reward: 250 EXP 
PHOTO OP: CRAG 
<I> Sidequests 
lit Photo Ops 
133 

PHOTO OPS CONT. 
·--
PHOTO OP: PALACE 
·--
PHOTO OP: DOCK 
·--
PHOTO OP: BAR 
I 
134 

HUNTS 
Introduction 
0·>--~~~~~~~~~~ 
Hunts are sidequests that you can accept from tipsters - the owners 
of the many restaurants and diners scattered around the world of Eos. 
Each tipster has a list of hunts available for you to choose from, and may 
otter additional opportunities as you take down more and more targets. 
After you accept a hunt and complete the objective, you must report to 
any tipster (not necessarily the individual who originally commissioned 
your services) to formally complete it and claim your reward. 
As you can only have one hunt active at a time, you can cut down on 
travel time by completing these sidequests alongside other activities 
whenever possible. So before you accept a hunt, always take the time 
to consider all relevant criteria: 
<> Type: The nature of the hunt - either standard IC l or hard IB l. As a 
general rule, all hunts tend to feature far more challenging targets than 
those you encounter in the main storyline or most other sidequests. 
<> Target: The creature(s) you need to hunt, which can be anything 
from a single foe to a large group of enemies. 
<> Rank: The Hunter Rank required to accept the mission - a topic we 
will explain shortly. 
<> Level: The recommended level to face the target. 
<> Stars: The number of stars awarded to you for completing the hunt. 
Stars are the "currency" used to reach higher Hunter Ranks. 
<> Conditions: The time of day at which the target can be encountered. 
Specific weather requirements are also listed when applicable. 
<> Gil Reward: The amount of money you receive for completing the 
assignment. 
<> Item Reward: The item you receive in addition to the Gil reward. 
<> Subsequent Reward: The Gil payment you obtain every time you 
undertake a hunt after initial completion. Hunts differ from all other 
sidequests in that you can replay them as many times as you wish, 
though your fee will be substantially reduced, and there will be no 
further items in the subsequent reward packages. 
Hunter Rank 
0>--~~~~~~~~~~ 
You begin the adventure at Hunter Rank 1, and can gradually increase your 
standing by completing hunts. Each hunt awards you with a fixed sum of 
stars. Every time your total tally of stars passes a specific threshold, you 
level up and reach the next rank. Reaching higher ranks has two benefits: 
it grants you one-time rewards and, secondly, unlocks access to restricted 
hunts that are only accessible after you reach a specific rank. 
Hunter Ranks 
RANK 
TITLE 
STARS REQUIRED 
REWARD 
1 
Apprentice 
0 
2 
Trapper 
5 
Silver Bangle 
3 
Chaser 
15 
Sapphire Bracelet 
4 
Ranger 
30 
Gold Bangle 
5 
Slayer 
50 
Champion's Anklet 
6 
Officer 
40 
Black Choker 
7 
Guardian 
40 
Blue Diamond Bracelet 
8 
Grandmaster 
40 
Centurion Bangle 
9 
Hand of Mercy 
30 
Legatus Bangle 
10 
Alleyway Jack 
43 
Dark Matter Bracelet 
General Tips 
0>--~~~~~~~~~~ 
The following advice applies to all hunts. While some of it may seem 
a little straightforward, it's easy to forget the fundamentals of stress-
free hunting after a sequence of relatively easy encounters. 
and 
• Sidequests 
then suffer the consequences in a frustrating grind against a more 
redoubtable adversary. 
<> As a general rule, prioritize hunts with a reasonable recommended 
level compared to yours. If you attempt to defeat a target that 
significantly outranks you, the challenge will most likely be very 
steep. 
<> Rest at a haven and prepare a meal before attempting difficult hunts. 
<> 
<> 
<> 
<> 
<> 
<> 
<> 
Advanced dishes can have a profound effect on the stats of all party 
members. 
When the battle begins, you can often stay at the outer perimeter of 
the combat area before you engage. This enables you to fill your tech 
bar, and thus begin the battle with a noteworthy advantage. You can 
then exploit this to butt Noctis with elemental properties via lgnis, 
or to start the confrontation with a technique that lowers a target's 
defense. This works particularly well against large and ponderous 
creatures that struggle to keep up with the party. 
Once you unlock them later in the story, save your summons for 
harder enemies. You can only call Astrals on an occasional basis, so 
always try to make their interventions count. 
Whenever you face groups of enemies, crowd control is absolutely 
essential. Employ the area-of-effect attacks of a Greatsword or a 
powerful spell to eliminate or weaken multiple targets simultaneously. 
It's also possible to isolate enemies from their allies for easy kills. 
Always exploit vulnerabilities, and ideally more than one at a time. 
Taking advantage of favorable damage modifiers leads to optimal 
results and is the key to overcoming the hardest challenges. To do 
so, you can either wield weapons that are naturally imbued with an 
element, or make use of lgnis's pivotal "Enhancement" technique. 
This staple combat tactic becomes increasingly important as you 
progress through the main story - and it's just as relevant with 
hunts. 
Against the toughest creatures, don't forget that you have powerful 
magic at your disposal. By crafting advanced spells, you can 
potentially annihilate multiple targets in the blink of an eye. Consult 
our section on spell customization for more details (see page 274). 
Use "Finishers" liberally. These attacks deal significant damage, they 
regularly interrupt enemy actions, and they are capable of breaking 
body parts. You can perform them after one or two blows in a 
combo, enabling you to employ them at frequent intervals. 
Stock up on recovery items. For the harder hunts you should always 
take numerous potions of all kinds, as well as a good range of cures 
for status ailments (particularly antidotes). 
• PhOto Ops 
Hunts 
. '' 
11 
l '!' 
135 

Hunt Directory 
(/,>---~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~-
The following table lists all available hunts. You can find the positions where specific targets are found by looking up the appropriate numbered icons on the maps that begin on page 140 . 
.. 
• 
1 c 
Howling Wind of Hunger 
Hammerhead 
Sabertusk 
Daggers. Firearms. Ice 
Resistant to Fire and Light 
2 c 
Varmints of the Wastelands 
Hammerhead 
Mesmenir 
Greatswords, Daggers. Fire 
Resistant to Ice and Light 
3 c 
Gorgers in the Dust 
Hammerhead 
Flexitusk 
Daggers. Firearm s. Ice 
Resistant to Fire and Light 
4 c 
Raindrops in the Night 
Hammerhead 
Jumbo flan 
Light 
Resistant to all standard weapon types; employs HP·draining attacks 
5 II Wild Beauties 
Hammerhead 
Anaklaban 
Greatswords, Polearms. Lightning 
Resistant to Ice and Light 
6 II Bounty-Hunted Beauties 
Hammerhead 
Anakadom, Anak 
Greatswords. Polearms, Lightning 
Resistant to Ice and Light 
7 a Rookie Hunter Tragedy 
Hammerhead 
Ashen horn 
Polearms, Shields, Fire 
Resistant to Ice and Light 
8 a The Pride of the King 
Hammerhead 
Behemoth 
Greatswords. Shields 
Resistant to Fire and Light 
9 II Serpent of the Abyss 
Hammerhead 
Jormungand 
Swords, Daggers. Ice 
Employs Fire-elemental attacks; Immune to Fire 
10 II Lonely Rumblings in Longwythe 
Hammerhead 
Adamantoise 
Greatswords, Machinery 
Immune to Light 
11 c 
Mineside Mischief Makers 
Langwythe Rest Area 
Gob!in 
Polearms. Daggers, Fire. light 
Capable of stealing Potions; resistant to Ice 
12 c 
The Hunter-Slaying Herd 
Longwythe Rest Area 
Magnanir,Mesmenir 
Greatswords, Daggers. Fire 
Resistant to Ice and Light 
13 c 
Squash the Squirmers 
Longwythe Rest Area 
Flan 
light 
Employs HP-draining attacks; resistant to all standard weapon types 
14 a 
Cranky Crustaceans 
Longwythe Rest Area 
Shields hears 
Polearms, Firearms. Ice 
Employs attacks that bypass defense; resistant to Fire and Light 
15 a Sting in the Tail 
Longwythe Rest Area 
Saphyrtail 
Swords. Greatswords, Lightning 
Employs attacks that bypass defense; resistant to Ice and Light 
16 a Beast over Brawn 
Longwythe Rest Area 
Grandhorn. Dualhorn 
Polearms, Shields, Fire 
Resistant to Ice and Light 
17 D 
In the Drylands, It Rains Spines 
Longwythe Rest Area 
Gigantuar 
Greatswords, Machinery 
May invoke Stalwart status; employs fixed-damage (1,000 HP) 
attacks; resistant to Fire and Light 
18 II A Fistful of Gil 
Longwythe Rest Area 
Yojimbo 
Polearms, Firearms, Lightning, Light 
Employs Dark-elemental attacks capable of causing Instant Death; 
resistant to Fire 
19 c 
Peace to the Beach 
Galdin Ouay 
Rubyshears 
Greatswords. Shields, lee 
Resistant to Fireand Light 
20 II The Gourmands of Vannath 
Galdin Quay 
Sparkshears 
Greatswords, Shields, Ice 
Resistant to Fire and Light 
21 Iii 
Stealers of Lives 
Galdin Quay 
Glamhoth 
Polearms, Daggers. Fire, Light 
Capable of stealing Potions and Hi-Potions; resistant to Ice 
22 
Footfalls in the Dark 
Galdin Quay 
Hobgoblin 
Greatswords, Machinery, Fire. Light 
May invoke Tenacious status; may steal ingredients, resistant to 
Lightning 
23 a A Nightmare Came by Ferry 
GaldinQuay 
Seadevil 
Swords, Firearms, Ice 
Resistant to Fire and Light 
24 c 
Galloping Garulas 
Coernix Station - Alstor 
Green Garula, Garula 
Greatswords.Firearms,Fire 
Resistant to Ice and Light 
25 c 
Beasts Wallow in the Wetlands 
Coernix Station - Alstor 
Yellowtooth 
Polearms, Shields, Ice 
Capable of inflicting Poison status; resistant to Fire and Light 
26 a Untamed Wild Horses 
Coernix Station - Alstor 
Spiracorn 
Swords, Shields, Fire 
Resistant to Ice and Light 
27 a Reign Triumphant 
Coernix Station - Alstor 
Garulessa, Garula 
Greatswords, Machinery, Fire 
Resistant to Ice and Light 
28 a The Rogues of Rydielle Ley 
Coemix Station - Aistor 
Cockatrice 
Greatswords, Machinery, Fire 
Capable of inflicting Compromised and Poison statuses; resistant 
to Ice and Light 
29 a Marsh Madness! The Giant Awakens 
Coernix Station-Alstor 
Catoblepas 
Polearms, Machinery, lee 
Resistant to Lightning 
30 c 
Red in Tooth and Claw 
WizChocoboPost 
Voretooth 
Polearms, Shields, Ice 
Capable of inflicting Poison status; resistant to Fire and Light 
31 c 
A Behemoth Undertaking 
WizChocoboPost 
Dead eye 
Fire, Greatswords. Shields 
Resistant to Ice. Lightning, and Light 
32 a Exorcism of the Nebulawood 
Wiz Chocobo Post 
MJndflayer 
Polearms. Daggers. Lightning. Light 
Employs Ice-elemental anacks; capable of inflicting Mollified and 
Confusion statuses; resistant to Fire 
33 D 
Thunder in Them Thar Hills 
WizChocobo Post 
Thunder Bomb 
Swords, Daggers, Light 
Employs Lightning-elemental attacks; absorbs Lightning 
34 D 
A Most Behemoth Undertaking 
WizChocoboPost 
Behemoth Tyrant 
Greatswords, Shields 
Resistant to Fire and Light 
35 c 
Secure the Mountain Pass 
Lestallum (Thoroughfare) 
Saberclaw 
Firearms, Machinery, Ice 
Resistant to Fire and Light 
36 D 
Cool Callatein Mist 
Lesta!lum (Thoroughfare) 
Ice Bomb 
Swords, Daggers. Fire. Light 
Employs Ice-elemental attacks; absorbs Ice 
37 D 
To Sting in Anger 
Lestallum(Thoroughfare) 
Brutal Bee, Killer Bee 
Swords, Firearms. Fire 
Capable of inflicting Poison status; resistant to Lightning and Light 
38 
Help Needed in EXINERIS 
Lestallum (Thoroughfare) 
Garchimacera 
Swords. Shields, Fire. Light 
May invoke Tough status; may steal Potions and Ethers; resistant 
to Lightning 
39 Ii To Catch a Frog 
Lestallum (Thoroughfare) 
Hekatontoad 
Polearms, Machinery, Ice 
Resistant to Lightning and Light 
40 II Long Necks on the Plains 
Lestallum (Thoroughfare) 
Arba 
Swords. Machinery, Lightning 
Resistant to Ice and Light 
41 II They Came Back from the Mountain 
Lestallum !Thoroughfare) 
Megaloclaw 
Firearms, Machinery, Ice 
Resistant to Fireand Light 
42 D 
Rainstorm Duel! Poison frog of Wennath 
Lestallum (Thoroughfare) 
Gaiatoad 
Polearms. Machinery, Ice 
Resistant to Lightning and Light 
43 D 
Acquit Not Evil 
Lestallum (Thoroughfare) 
Alphagin, Sahagin 
Polearms, Shields, Ice 
Resistant to Fire and Light 
44 a No Stopping the Great Stink 
Lestallum (Thoroughfare) 
Malboro 
Greatswords, Machinery, Fire 
Resistant to Ice and Light 
45 Iii Trembling Killers 
Lestallum (Thoroughfare) 
Ziggurat 
Polearms, Shields, Lightning, Light 
Capable of inflicting Stop status; resistant to Fire 
46 a An Omen Crawls Upon the Ground 
Lestallum {Thoroughfare) 
Grootslang 
Swords, Daggers. Ice 
Resistant to Fire and Light 
47 D 
Bones Seek an Offering 
Lestallum (Thoroughfare) 
lseultalon 
Shields, Machinery, Fire, Light 
Employs Dark-elemental attacks; resistant to Ice 
Resistant to Greatswords; immune to Fire. Ice. and Lightning; 
48 
Dead General Strikes Down the King 
Lestallum (Thoroughfare) 
Ayakashi 
Polearms. Light 
employs Ice-elemental attacks and Dark-elemental attacks capable 
of causing Instant Death 
49 ii Avenge the Anglers 
Lestallum(Market) 
Albinogin 
Polearms. Shields, Ice 
Resistant to Fire and Light 
50 ii Ruler of the Brave Skies 
Lestallum(Market) 
Griffon 
Polearms. Daggers. Fire 
Resistant to Ice and Light 
51 a Off with Their Heads! 
Lestallum (Market) 
Arbagadol. Arba 
Swords, Machinery, Lightning 
Resistant to Ice and Light 
52 a Disquieted Queens 
Lestallum (Market) 
KillerOueen 
Swords, Firearms. Fire 
Capable of inflicting Poison status; resistant to Lightning and Light 
53 a The Web~Weaving Princesses 
Lestallum(Market) 
Ariadne, Kokyangwuti 
Greatswords. Machinery, Fire. Light 
Employs Lightning-elemental attacks; capable of inflicting Stop 
status; can summon minions; resistant to Lightning 
136 

-
•: 
• 
.. 
.. 
• • • 
. . . 
. .. 
: .. 
. .. 
The Weaverwilds 
2 
1 
All Times 
740 
Hi-Elixir 
140 
1 
~ 
TheWeaverwilds 
5 
1 
Daytime 
980 
Hi-Elixir 
190 
2 
OstiumGorge 
7 
1 
All Times 
1,570 
Iron Bangle 
31 0 
3 
• Sidequests 
Weaverwilds 
Hunter Rank: 2 
15 
2 
Nighttime 
2.390 
Megalixir 
470 
4 
The Weaverwilds 
Hunter Rank: 3 
22 
2 
Daytime 
3,350 
Megalixir 
670 
5 
The Weaverwilds 
Hunter Rank: 3 
28 
2 
Daytime 
4,220 
Megalixir 
840 
6 
The Weaver.vilds 
Hunter Rank: 4 
39 
3 
All Times 
7,330 
Mega Phoenix 
1,460 
7 
Keycatrich Ruins 
Hunter Rank: 6 
47 
3 
All Times 
10,020 
Mega Phoenix 
2,000 
8 
Crestholm Channels 
"Crestholm Channels" sidequest completed (see page 180) 
58 
4 
All Times 
16,560 
Ruby Bracelet 
3,310 
9 
-
longwythe Peak 
"Let Sleeping Mountains Lie" sldequest started !see page 174) 
99 
5 
All Times 
50,000 
Adamantite Bangle 
10,000 
10 
The Callaegh Steps 
7 
1 
Nighttime 
1,740 
Hi-Elixir 
340 
11 
Longwythe Peak 
8 
1 
Daytime 
1,830 
Hi-Elixir 
360 
12 
Longwythe Peak 
14 
2 
Nighttime 
2,280 
Hi-Elixir 
450 
13 
-
Longwythe Peak 
Hunter Rank: 2 
18 
2 
All Times 
3,160 
Megalixir 
630 
14 
Longwythe Peak 
Hunter Rank: 3 
25 
2 
All Times 
3,720 
Megalixir 
740 
15 
The Weaverwilds 
Hunter Rank: 3 
27 
2 
All Times 
4,010 
Megalixir 
800 
16 
-
Longwythe Peak 
Hunter Rank: 5 
40 
3 
Daytime 
7,550 
Rainbow Pendant 
1,510 
17 
The Three Valleys 
"Balouve Mines" sidequest completed (see page 178) 
61 
4 
Nighttime 
17,450 
Anti-darkness Inners 
3,490 
18 
Vannath Coast 
11 
2 
All Times 
1,950 
Hi-Elixir 
390 
19 
Vannath Coast 
17 
2 
All Times 
3,040 
Megalixir 
600 
20 
-
Vannath Coast 
17 
2 
Nighttime 
3,070 
Fencer's Anklet 
610 
21 
Vannath Coast 
Hunter Rank: 3 
20 
2 
Nighttime 
3,250 
Megalixir 
650 
22 
• Hunts 
Vannath Coast 
Hunter Rank: 3 
28 
2 
-
All Times 
4,250 
Carbon Bangle 
850 
23 
Alstor Slough 
12 
2 
Daytime 
2,010 
Hi-Elixir 
400 
24 
AlstorSlough 
14 
2 
All Times 
2,330 
Warrior's Anklet 
460 
25 
AlstorS!ough 
Hunter Rank: 3 
25 
2 
Daytime 
3,870 
Megalixir 
770 
26 
Alstor Slough 
Hunter Rank: 4 
32 
3 
Daytime 
5,280 
Mega Phoenix 
1,050 
27 
-
Rydielle Ley 
Hunter Rank: 4 
35 
3 
Daytime 
5,880 
Mega Phoenix 
1,170 
28 
Alstor Slough 
Hunter Rank: 4 
38 
3 
All Times 
6,560 
Blue Choker 
1,310 
29 
The Malacchi Hills 
12 
2 
All Times 
2,140 
Hi-Elixir 
420 
30 
-
The Nebulawood 
"friends of a Feather" sidequest started {see page 166) 
15 
2 
All Times 
3,020 
Amethyst Bracelet 
600 
31 
The Nebulawood 
19 
2 
Nighttime 
3, 190 
Moon Pendant 
630 
32 
-
The Malacchi Hills 
Hunter Rank: 3 
21 
2 
Nighttime 
3.330 
Megalixir 
660 
33 
The Nebulawood 
"A Behemoth Undertaking" hunt completed; Hunter Rank: 8 
62 
4 
All Times 
19.540 
Gold Bangle 
3,900 
34 
Pallareth Pass 
12 
2 
All Times 
2,270 
Hi-Elixir 
450 
35 
Callatein's Plunge 
22 
2 
Nighttime 
3,380 
Megalixir 
670 
36 
Coernix Bypass 
22 
2 
All Times 
3,390 
Green Choker 
670 
37 
EXINERIS Power Plant 
Reach Chapter 08 
24 
2 
Nighttime 
3,540 
Megalixir 
700 
38 
Paltareth Pass 
Hunter Rank: 3 
27 
2 
Daytime I Rainy 
4,070 
Megalixir 
810 
39 
Kelbass Grasslands 
Hunter Rank; 3 
28 
2 
Daytime 
4,480 
Megalixir 
890 
40 
Coernix Bypass 
Hunter Rank: 4 
30 
3 
All Times 
4,890 
Mega Phoenix 
970 
41 
-
UpperWennath 
Hunter Rank: 4 
32 
3 
Daytime/Rainy 
5,350 
Mega Phoenix 
1,070 
42 
Upper Wennath 
Hunter Rank: 4 
38 
3 
All Times 
6,650 
Knight's Anklet 
1,330 
43 
Kelbass Grasslands 
Reach Chapter 15 (game completed) 
38 
3 
All Times 
6,780 
Golden Hourglass 
1,350 
44 
Kelbass Grasslands 
Reach Chapter t 5 (game completed) 
57 
4 
Nighttime 
16,480 
Safety Bit 
3,290 
45 
Kelbass Grasslands 
Reach Chapter 15 !game completed) 
68 
4 
All Times 
26,840 
Red Choker 
5,360 
46 
-
Kelbass Grasslands 
Reach Chapter 15 (game completed) 
72 
5 
Nighttime 
33,790 
Dark Crest 
6,750 
47 
Kelbass Grasslands 
Reach Chapter 15 (game completed) 
99 
5 
Nighttime 
42,000 
Ribbon 
8,400 
48 
Callatein's Plunge 
24 
2 
All Times 
3,660 
Megalixir 
730 
49 
Kelbass Grasslands 
30 
3 
All Times 
4,935 
Mega Phoenix 
980 
50 
-
Kelbass Grasslands 
31 
3 
Daytime 
5,070 
Lightning Crest 
1,010 
51 
Coernix Bypass 
Hunter Rank: 4 
38 
3 
All Times 
6,850 
Mega Phoenix 
1,370 
52 
~ 
Greyshire Grotto 
"Burden of Expectation" main quest completed !Chapter 03) 
41 
3 
All Times 
7,950 
Mega Phoenix 
1,590 
53 
137 

Hunt Directory (continued) 
0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
.. 
• 
54 • 
In a Heat Haze of Glory 
lestallum (Market) 
Aramusha 
Swords, Daggers. lightning, light 
Employs Dark-elemental attacks capable of causing Instant Death; 
resistant to Fire 
55 • 
Hammer the Cannibals 
Cauthess Rest Area 
Skarnbulette. Bulette 
Shields. Machinery, Ice 
Resistant to Fire and Light 
56 II Things from the Past 
Cauthess Rest Area 
Necromancer 
Greatswords, Shields. Ice. Light 
Employs Dark-elemental attacks capable of causing Instant Death; 
summons Skeletons; resistant to lightning 
57 II Baby Snatchers 
Cauthess Rest Area 
Bussemand, Hobgoblin 
Greatswords.Machinery, Fire. Light 
May invoke Tenacious status; may steal ingredients. resistant to 
lightning 
58 II A Daemonic Orchestra 
Cauthess Rest Area 
Ereshkiga! 
Swords, Shields, Fire, Light 
May invoke Tough status: may steal Potions and Hi-Potions; resistant 
to Lightning 
59 • 
Cruel Giants of Duscae 
Cauthess Rest Area 
Ganymede 
Greatswords, Shields. Light 
Employs gravity-based (attractive) attacks; may invoke Tenacious and 
Stalwart statuses; resistant to Fire 
60 • 
Fiend of the fallgrove 
Cauthess Rest Area 
Jabberwock 
Polearms, Machinery, Ice 
Capable of inflicting Stone status; resistant to Fire 
61 II Devils Cry Curses 
Cauthess Rest Area 
Molokujata 
Greatswords, Shields. Fire 
Pertorms unblockable attacks. requiring you to stay behind it and at 
mid-distance; resistant to Ice and light 
62 II Horned Hunting Hazards 
Taelpar Rest Area 
Dualhorn 
Polearms. Shields. Fire 
Resistant to Ice and Light 
63 II Hunters of Secullam Pass 
Taelpar Rest Area 
Coeurl 
Swords, Daggers. Fire 
Employs Lightning-elemental attacks; immune to lightning; resistant 
to light 
64 II Reclaiming Schier Heights 
Taelpar Rest Area 
Redlegs, Hundlegs 
Swords, Greatswords, Ice 
Capable of inflicting Poison status; resistant to Polearms, Fire, and light 
65 • 
A Roaring in the Night 
Taelpar Rest Area 
Iron Giant 
Greatswords, Shields, light 
Employs gravity-based (attractive) attacks; may invoke Tenacious 
and Stalwart statuses; resistant to Fire 
66 II Old Denizens of the Woods 
Taelpar Rest Area 
ElderCoeurl 
Swords, Daggers 
Employs lightning-elemental attacks; capable of causing Instant 
Death; immune to Lightning; resistant to Fire. Ice. lightning, and Light 
67 II The Last Spiracorns 
Old lestallum 
Duplicorn. Spiracorn 
Swords, Shields, Fire 
Resistant to lee and light 
68 II Shear Force 
Old lestallum 
Mightyshears 
Polearms. Firearms. Ice 
Employs attacks that bypass defense; resistant to Fire and light 
69 II Blobs Ashore 
Old lestallum 
Gelatin 
Lightning, light 
Employs HP-draining attacks; resists all standard weapon types; 
absorbs Fire and Ice 
70 • 
Herald from the Depths 
Oldlestallum 
Karlabos 
Swords, Polearms. Ice 
Increased damage resistance until appendage is broken; resistant 
to Fire and light 
71 II Starving Beast Seeks food 
Old l estallum 
Aspidochelon 
Daggers, Machinery 
Capable of inflicting Poison status; resistant to Ice and Light 
72 II Malmalam Mirage 
Old lestallum 
Bandersnatch 
Polearms, Machinery, lightning 
Capable of inflicting Compromised status; resistant to Fire and light 
73 • 
Scrap It Now! 
Old Lestallum 
leukorn 
Swords, Shields. Fire 
Resistant to Ice and Light 
74 • 
Rulers of the Banks 
Old lestallum 
Coratdevil, Seadevil 
Swords, Firearms, Ice 
Resistant to Fire and light 
75 II Voltage Fluctuation 
Meldacio Hunter HQ 
Thunderoc 
Swords. Polearms. Fire 
Employs lightning-elemental attacks; resistant to lightning and light 
76 II Threat from the Thicket 
Meldacio Hunter HQ 
Killer Wasp 
Polearms, Daggers. Fire 
Capable of inflicting Confusion status; resistant to lightning and light 
77 • 
Softly Now, Mighty foes 
Meld?cio Hunter HQ 
Lich 
Swords, Firearms. lee. Light 
Resistant to lightning; capable of inflicting Disenchanted and 
Poison statuses 
78 • 
Mission: Invincible 
Meldacio Hunter HQ 
Black Flan 
light 
Employs Dark·elemental and HP-draining attacks; resists all damage 
types other than light 
79 • 
Divine Beast of the Underworld 
Meldacio Hunter HQ 
Quetzalcoatl 
Polearms, Daggers, lee 
Employs lightning-elemental attacks; immune to lightning 
80 II Hunter HQ Line of Defense 
Meldacio Hunter HQ 
Mushmahhu. 
Polearms, Shields, Ice 
Capable of inflicting Poison status; resistant to Fire and l ight 
Mushussu 
81 II Lovable Little Gluttons 
Meldacio Hunter HQ 
Regaltrice 
Daggers. Firearms, lightning 
Employs attacks that reduce HP to 1; resistant to Fire and Light 
82 II Felling the Mad. Old Trees 
Meldacio Hunter HO 
Treant 
Greatswords, Machinery, Fire 
Capable of inflicting Mollified and Confusion statuses; resistant to 
lightning and Light 
83 II Serpent of Risorath Basin 
Meldacio Hunter HQ 
Midgardsormr 
Swords, Daggers, Ice 
Capable of inflicting Poison status; resistant to Fire and light 
84 II Breeding Season: Hen Extermination 
Me\dacio Hunter HO 
Royalisk 
Polearms, Shields. Fire 
Capable of inflicting Mollified and Poison statuses; resistant to 
lightning and Light 
85 a Breeding Season: Rooster Extermination 
Meldacio Hunter HQ 
Kingatrice. Basilisk 
Greatswords, Machinery, Fire 
Capable of inflicting Compromised and Poison statuses; resistant 
tolceandliqht 
86 II People-Eating Snake Has Got to Go 
Meldacio Hunter HO 
Hvitrormr 
Swords, Daggers, Ice 
Capable of inflicting Poison status; resistant to Fire and light 
87 II A Wall in Our Way 
Meldacio Hunter HQ 
Oaemonwall 
Polearms, Machinery. light 
May invoke Tough status; may steal Potions and Hi-Potions; resistant 
to Fire. Ice. and liohtnino 
88 II Deadly Extermination 
VerinasMart Ravatogh 
Soldier Wasp. Killer 
Polearms, Daggers. Fire 
Capable of inflicting Confusion status; resistant to lightning and light 
Wasp 
89 II Verinas Mart Under Threat 
Verinas Mart- Ravatogh 
Wyvern 
Firearm s, Shields. Ice 
Resistant to lightning and Light 
90 a 
Red Lightning of Ravatogh 
Verinas Mart· Ravatogh 
Copperoc. Thunderoc 
Swords. Polearms,Fire 
Employs l ightning-elemental attacks; resistant to lightning and light 
91 II Pointiest Pins in the Volcano 
Verinas Mart - Ravatogh 
Reaperking 
Swords, Greatswords, lightning 
Employs attacks that bypass defense; resistant to lee and light 
92 • 
feathered Giant of the Firesmoke 
Verinas Mart • Ravatogh 
Zu 
Polearms, Machinery. Fire 
Resistant to Firearms and lightning; immune to light 
93 • 
Bewitched Blade Stains the Waters 
Altissia(Maagho) 
Ronin 
Swords, Daggers. lightning, light 
Employs Dark-elemental attacks capable of causing Instant Death; 
resistant to Fire 
94 • 
A Nightmare Upon the Water 
Altissia (Maagho) 
Hecteyes 
Polearms, Shields, l ight 
Capable of inflicting Compromised and Confusion statuses 
95 • 
Ill Weeds Grow in the Night 
Altissia (Maagho) 
Alv 
Firearms, Daggers, Ice. light 
Employs Ice-elemental attacks; capable of inflicting Mollified and 
Poison statuses; resistant to Fire 
96 II Back Alley Spook 
Altissia(Maagho) 
Mindflayer 
Polearms. Daggers, lightning. light 
Employs Ice-elemental attacks; capable of inflicting Mollified and 
Confusion statuses: resistant to Ice 
97 II The Case of the Disappearing Hunters 
Altissia(Maagho) 
Ton berry 
Daggers. Firearms, lee. Light 
Employs Fire-elemental attacks; capable of inflicting Stop status; 
resistant to liahtning 
98 II Will-o'-the·Wisps out on the Town 
Altissia {Maagho) 
Grenade 
Firearms, Machinery, Ice, light 
Employs Fire-elemental attacks; absorbs Fire 
II 
Employs Oark·elemental attacks; capable of inflicting Mollified. 
99 
A Lost Painting 
Altissia (Maagho) 
Chadarnook 
Fire.light 
Compromised. and Confusion statuses; resistant to lightning; very 
resistant to all standard weapon tvoes 
100 II Tourists Fade into the Night 
Altissia(Maagho) 
Salpinx 
Swords, Shields, Fire, light 
May invoke Tough status; may steal Potions and Hi-Potions; resistant 
to liahtnina 
101 • 
The Tragic Facts 
Altissia(Maagho) 
Master Tonberry 
Swords, Greatswords, Ice, light 
Employs Fire-elemental attacks; capable of inflicting Stop status and 
Instant Death; resistant to liohtnina 
102 • 
King of the Great Escape 
Altissia{Maagho) 
Bavarois 
Ice, lightning 
Employs HP-draining attacks; resists all weapon types; absorbs Fire 
138 

" 
• 
" 
.. 
• • • 
... 
... 
' " 
... 
-
EXINERIS Power Plant 
Reach Chapter 08 
52 
4 
Nighttime 
14,490 
Silver Bangle 
2,890 
54 
Kettier Highland 
38 
3 
All Times 
6,910 
Mega Phoenix 
1,380 
55 
. 
The fallgrove 
41 
3 
Nighttime 
8,080 
Rune Earring 
1,610 
56 
• 
Sidequests 
Saxham Outpost 
Hunter Rank: 5 
44 
3 
Nighttime 
8,890 
Mega Phoenix 
1.770 
57 
-
Kelbass Grasslands 
Hunter Rank: 7 
52 
4 
Nighttime 
14,800 
Mega Phoenix 
2,960 
58 
Kettler Highland 
Hunter Rank: 8 
65 
4 
Nighltime 
23.730 
Mega Phoenix 
4.740 
59 
-
Costlemark Tower 
"Costlemark Tower" sidequest completed (see page 186) 
66 
4 
All Times 
24,020 
Mega Phoenix 
4,800 
60 
TheMencemoor 
Hunter Rank: 9 
72 
5 
All Times 
35,940 
Black Choker 
7,180 
61 
Secullam Pass 
23 
2 
All Times 
3.480 
Megalixir 
690 
62 
Secullam Pass 
34 
3 
Daytime 
5,600 
Earth Pendant 
1,120 
63 
-
Schier Heights 
Hunter Rank: 4 
37 
3 
All Times 
6,220 
Mega Phoenix 
1,240 
64 
Schier Heights 
Hunter Rank: 4 
37 
3 
Nighttime 
6,310 
Mega Phoenix 
1,260 
65 
Thommels Glade 
Hunter Rank: 8 
63 
4 
Daytime 
22,540 
Fire Crest 
4,500 
66 
Lower Wennath 
29 
2 
Daytime 
4,610 
Megalixir 
920 
67 
Lower Wennath 
34 
3 
All Times 
5.730 
Mega Phoenix 
1,140 
68 
Malmalam Thicket 
35 
3 
Nighttime 
5,920 
Titanium Bangle 
1,180 
69 
~ 
I iJ 
"T' 
Leirity Seaside 
Hunter Rank: 5 
40 
3 
All Times 
7.730 
Mega Phoenix 
1.540 
70 
P' 
LowerWennath 
Hunter Rank: 6 
47 
3 
All Times 
11.790 
Mega Phoenix 
2,350 
71 
Malmalam Thicket 
"Malmalam Thicket' sidequest completed {see page 189) 
51 
4 
All Times 
13.500 
Mega Phoenix 
2.700 
72 
Coernix Bypass 
Hunter Rank: 7 
61 
4 
Daytime 
18,330 
Mega Phoenix 
3,660 
73 
The Maidenwater 
HumerRank: 8 
62 
4 
All Times 
20,550 
Towel 
4,110 
74 
• Hunts 
Pallareth Pass 
29 
2 
Daytime 
4,650 
Megalixir 
1.210 
75 
TheVesperpool 
Reach Chapter 08 
33 
3 
Daytime 
5.550 
Mega Phoenix 
1.110 
76 
Steyliff Grove 
Reach Chapter OB 
35 
3 
All Times 
6,060 
Mega Phoenix 
930 
77 
The Vesperpool 
Reach Chapter OB 
38 
3 
Nighttime 
7.020 
Mega Phoenix 
1.400 
78 
Steyliff Grove 
Reach Chapter 08 
38 
3 
All Times 
7,110 
Mega Phoenix 
1.420 
79 
Risorath Basin 
Reach Chapter 08 
42 
3 
All Times 
8,660 
Ice Crest 
1.730 
80 
TheVesperpool 
Reach Chapter 08; Hunter Rank: 5 
44 
3 
Daytime 
8,980 
Mega Phoenix 
1.790 
81 
The Vesperpool 
"The Myrlwood" sidequest completed (see page 18B) 
46 
3 
Nighttime 
9,900 
Mega Phoenix 
1,980 
82 
The Vesperpool 
Reach Chapter OB; Hunter Rank: 7 
54 
4 
All Times 
15,690 
Mega Phoenix 
3,130 
83 
TheVesperpool 
Reach Chapter 08; Hunter Rank: 8 
62 
4 
Daytime 
21,120 
Mega Phoenix 
4,220 
84 
i/F1y 
Risorath Basin 
Reach Chapter 08; Hunter Rank: 9 
70 
5 
Daytime 
30,320 
Mega Phoenix 
6,060 
85 
The Vesperpool 
Reach Chapter 08; Hunter Rank: 9 
78 
5 
All Times 
36,070 
Mega Phoenix 
7.210 
86 
Steyliff Grove 
Reach Chapter 08; Hunter Rank: 9 
84 
5 
All Times 
38,000 
Emerald Bracelet 
7,600 
87 
Ravatoghan Trail 
37 
3 
All Times 
6.440 
Mega Phoenix 
1,280 
88 
Ravatoghan Trail 
38 
3 
All Times 
7,290 
Sapphire Bracelet 
1,450 
89 
Ravatoghan Trail 
Hunter Rank: 5 
44 
3 
Daytime 
9,140 
Mega Phoenix 
1,820 
90 
Ravatoghan Trail 
Hunter Rank: 6 
47 
3 
All Times 
12,090 
Mega Phoenix 
2.410 
91 
The Rock of Ravatogh 
"A Perfect Cup" sidequest completed !see page 173) 
67 
4 
All Times 
25,300 
Champion's Anklet 
5.060 
92 
Altissia 
17 
2 
Nighttime 
3,130 
Megalixir 
620 
93 
Altissia 
20 
2 
Nighttime 
3.280 
Megalixir 
650 
94 
Altissia 
22 
2 
Nighttime 
3.450 
Megalixir 
690 
95 
Altissia 
26 
2 
Nighttime 
3,990 
Heliodor Bracelet 
790 
96 
Altissia 
First four hunts at Altissia completed 
29 
2 
Nighttime 
4.740 
Red Choker 
940 
97 
Altissia 
"The Case of the Disappearing Hunters" hunt completed 
31 
3 
Nighttime 
5.120 
Black Choker 
1,020 
98 
Altissia 
"The Cursed Canvas" sidequest accepted (see page 161) 
32 
3 
All Times 
5.480 
Handkerchief 
1,090 
99 
Altissia 
"The Case of the Disappearing Hunters" hunt completed 
35 
3 
Nighttime 
6,140 
Adamantite Bangle 
1,220 
100 
Altissia 
"The Case of the Disappearing Hunters" hunt completed 
41 
3 
Nighttime 
8,360 
Amethyst Bracelet 
1,670 
101 
Altissia 
"The Case of the Disappearing Hunters" hunt completed 
50 
4 
Nighttime 
13,190 
Diamond Bracelet 
2,630 
102 
139 

140 
A 
Geographic Hunt Overview: Leide 
'V 
You can find a directory of all hunts-;;;; pages 136 to 139. . 

, 
A 
Geographic Hunt Overview: Duscae 
V
-You- ca~~ directorv 01 a11 h~~~-o~ pages 135 to 13_9_. --
-
!!>· Sidequests 
r"w1torv 
,/ index 
P er Cnrs 
<11 Hunts 
\i·"1c:!nnt'.1 
,,,& 
141 

0 
Geographic _l::lunt Overview: Cleigne __ _ 
You can find a directory of all hunts on pages 136 to 139. 
142 

A 
Geographic Hunt Overview:: _~!!i~~~g ____________ _ 
'V You can find a directory of all hunts on pages 136 to 139_ 
• Sidequests 
•• Hunts 
143 

144 
TOURS 
Tours are short sidequests that involve unique 
moments shared by Noctis and his friends 
when they stay at specific havens. Resting at 
these camping sites will lead to an interactive 
conversation with a party member, who will 
usually ask a favor. All of these side stories 
are available once you can physically reach the 
appropriate havens 
In terms of gameplay, Tours are simple and 
generally involve a straightforward task, such 
as following onscreen prompts or collecting 
resources in a small area. Perhaps as an 
illustration of the growing bond between the 
prince and his retinue, these sidequests are 
noteworthy in that they offer a generous 20 AP 
towards party development on completion. 
This tour takes place in the middle of the Myrlwood and features 
Noctis and lgnis. To find your friend's glasses, head to the 
designated waypoint by the Royal Tomb. When the mini-game 
begins, sneak toward the tree without being noticed while the 
chocobo takes the bait. Every time it turns around and looks in 
your direction, hold @/O to remain silent until it resumes its 
meal. Once you have the specs, you can return to the campsite. 
In this scene. Gladio invites you to fish a legendary creature, the 
elusive Liege of the Vesperpool. This is a very difficult challenge,. 
requiring the best possible equipment, as well as the Giant 
Needle 10.000: Gold Gigantuar lure. Noctis's Skill should be at 
Level 10. and you will need sharp reflexes and a lot of focus as 
you battle against the Liege for several intense minutes. The key 
to victory lies in your ability to reel in only when your line is not 
under tension. which means that you always need to aim in. the 
current swimming direction of the fish. Consult our coverage,of 
fishing mechanics on page 304 if you are not yet familiar with th9 
mini-game. Completing this Tour rewards you with the Big Blaze 
Bahamut lure. 
This time it's Gladio who needs a favor. He asks you to help him 
find a flower for his sister. Look for it in the northwest part of the 
designated area. When you reach a cliff. Gladio will boost you up 
to the plateau above where the flower awaits. 
A STROLL FOR TWO: 
When you arrive in Lestallum during Chapter 03 and spend the 
night at the Leville, Iris asks you to explore the city with her. This 
simple task only requires you to follow a few waypoints as you 
visit l estallum's districts. Unlike with the haven-based tours, 
though, you will not receive 20 AP on completion 

THE CHOPPING BLOCK (fl\llAUGHNS HAVEN): 
Your task here is to press @/@ repeatedly as prompted. The 
quicker you are. the more lgnis will praise you - but you receive 
the reward no matter what his reaction might be 
For this light assignment. Prompto recruits you as a photo model. 
Head to the specified spot on the nearby pier, and strike a pose 
every time Prompto is ready to take a picture. 
UP CLOSE ANO PERSONAL (PULlMOOR HAVEN): 
In this tou r, travel with Prompto to the designated area and scour 
the ground for mushrooms. Once you have all three, go the spot 
by the lake. Wait for the Catoblepas to move close, then strike a 
pose before you run away (though you can attempt to defeat the 
creature if you feel strong enough to do so without the support 
of your other allies). Completing this Tour unlocks the Vintage 
photo filter., 
In this scene, follow Gladio to the beach. When the race begins, 
sprint constantly and employ the stamina refresh technique when 
the bar is almost empty to reach the finish line first You obtain 
the AP reward irrespective of how well you perform. 
STIRRED, NOT SHAKEN (COTISSE HAVEN): 
Your task here is to stir a dish by moving@ laterally or in steady 
circles. As with real cooking, maintain a consistent pace without 
overdoing things. lgnis's reaction will vary in accordance with 
your performance, but you receive the full 20 AP no matter the 
denouement. 
!n this sequence, all you need to do is head to the waypoint with 
Prompto to take a picture of the Grease-Monkey Goddess and 
her garage 
:fl Sidequests 
Tours 
145 

146 
Dave's Position: o S1dequest. --· 
GONE HUNTING 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "The Errand Prince" during Chapter 01. 
• Notes: After you've made the delivery to the motel owner in the 
Longwythe Rest Area, speak to the man right in front of Noctis 
at the end of the cutscene. opposite the main reception booth. 
You then need to deliver the envelope he gives you to Dave, 
who can be found across the highway, just outside the small 
building adjacent to the diner. With the quest accepted, inquire 
about it by speaking to the tipster. then head to the waypoint. 
Examine the campfire. then chase and defeat the Sabertusks that 
appear (Gladiolus's Tempest technique can really help here). After 
the battle. pick up the dog tag and take it back to Dave at the 
Longwythe Rest Area to complete the mission. 
• Reward: 500 EXP. Hi-Potion xl 0 
DUST TO DUST 
• Unlock Condition: Reach Chapter 02 and complete "Gone 
Hunting" 
• Notes: Speak to Dave at the Prairie Outpost, close to where 
you originally encounter Monica. You will find the dog tag in an 
abandoned car directly to the south of the Prairie Outpost. 
• Reward: 600 EXP. Mega-Potion x5 
FINAL RESTING PLAINS 
• Unlock Condition: Reach Chapter 03 and complete "Oust to Oust". 
• Notes: Speak to Dave at Coernix Station - Alstor, outside a 
small building to the northeast. Inquire about your mission with 
the tipster at the station's restaurant. The Rusted Dog Tag is 
located to the northwest of the Oise of Cauthess, in a field of 
grass. Take it back to Dave to complete the assignment. 
• Reward: 800 EXP. Elixir xl 0 
A ROCKY END 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "Final Resting Plains". 
• Notes: Speak to Dave at the Cauthess Rest Area. outside the 
building opposite the diner. Once the mission is active, inquire 
about it by speaking to the diner's tipster. You will find the dog 
tag behind a large rock inside the designated area to the south. 
._ Reward: 1,000 EXP. Hi-Elixir xl 0 
DAVE 
SWALLOWED BY SHADOWS 
• Unlock Condition: Complete ··A Rocky End" 
• Notes: Dave now moves to the Tae!par Rest Area. Once he's 
given you this assignment, inquire about it with the diner's 
tipster to unlock the waypoint. You can then head to the search 
area to the southeast of the Cauthess Rest Area. The Twisted 
Dog Tag is found on the ftoor inside the storehouse. You will be 
ambushed by Hundlegs before you can pick it up and return it 
to Dave. 
• Reward: 1.200 EXP. Hi-Elixir xl O 
A BACKWOODS BURIAL 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "Swallowed by Shadows" 
• Notes: Dave is now found in Old Lestal!um, under a canopy 
by the easternmost yellow house. Speak to the tipster at the 
local diner then head to the designated waypoint to the north. 
where the river branches into two streams. The Scratched Dog 
Tag lies near an abandoned wooden barn. Take it back to Dave 
to end the mission. 
• Reward: 1,500 EXP. Phoenix Down xlO 

 
WASHED AWAY 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "A Backwoods Burial" 
• Notes: StiH in Old Lestallum, Dave now needs you to retrieve 
a dog tag just to the north of Mynbrum Haven, in the northern 
part of Cleigne. The item lies on large rocks by the river, though 
you will need to eliminate local Sahagins before you can pick it 
up. Return the Crushed Dog Tag to Dave when you're done. 
• Reward: 1,800 EXP, Phoenix Down x1 O 
MOUNTAINS Of MISFORTUNE 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "Washed Away" and reach 
Chapter 07. 
• Notes: Having moved to Meldacio Hunter HQ, on the terrace 
of a house with potted plants, Dave requires your services yet 
again. Inquire about this mission at the Meldacio restaurant, 
then head to the specified destination to the northwest of your 
current position. close to the entrance of the Steyliff Grove 
dungeon. After clearing the location of enemies, retrieve the 
Polished Dog Tag at the foot of the ruins, then deliver it to Dave. 
• Reward: 2,000 EXP, Megalixir x5 
THE WITCH OF THE WOODS 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "Mountains of Misfortune" 
• Notes: For this final quest in the series, go to Verinas Mart -
Ravatogh and obtain information from the local restaurant. Travel 
to Malmalam Thicket and look for Dave on the dirt path leading to 
the forest. Take the small path that branches off to the left of the 
main trail: this leads to a wooden hut where Kimya awaits. She 
sends you to a new waypoint at the end of Malmalam Thicket, in 
front of the Royal Tomb. The Sullied Dog Tag lies a few steps to 
the left (west) of the tomb, at the foot of a tree and a large rock. 
Return to Kimya to obtain an explanation once you have the tag, 
then to Dave at Meldacio Hunter HO to complete the quest. 
• Reward: 2,500 EXP, Mega Phoenix x5 
"1 Sidequests 
• 
Dove 
147 

CID 
From the beginning of Chapter 02, you can speak to Cid outside the 
garage to trigger the "Cid Sophiar, Master Mechanic" sidequest. 
This is actually an entire set of secondary missions. Cid will offer you 
a sidequest to upgrade each weapon that bears the distinctive "+" 
upgrade icon. For example, giving him the Engine Blade will initiate the 
"A Better Engine Blade" assignment. 
Your goal each time is to retrieve both a weapon and the part required 
to upgrade it. His work will be complete after you fulfil a specific 
A Better Engine Blade 
A Better Engine Blade II 
A Better Engine Blade Ill 
Cid Sophiar, Master Mechanic 
A Better Drain Lance II 
A Better Auto Crossbow 
A Better Bioblaster 
A Better Circular Saw 
A Better Gravity Well 
A Better Noiseblaster 
A Better Drillbreaker 
A Better Force Stealer 
A Better Pair of Plunderers 
A Better Valiant 
A Better Absorb Shield 
number of quests or hunts, as revealed in our diagram below. You may 
then rest at a camp or lodging and Cid will call you in the morning to 
inform you that the upgraded weapon is ready. 
The following diagram lists all of these sidequests and reveals how 
to complete them. Note that Cid moves from his position outside 
Hammerhead's garage to Cape Caem's beacon from the end of 
Chapter 06 to the beginning of Chapter 09. 
Engine Blade: 
Available from the start 
Engine Blade II: 
Obtained when upgrading the Engine Blade 
Engine Blade Ill: 
Obtained when upgrading the Engine Blade II 
Drain Lance: 
Final battle of Chapter 01 
Drain Lance II: 
Obtained when upgrading the Drain Lance 
Auto Crossbow: 
Collectible inside Keycatrich Trench 
Bioblaster: 
Collectible outside Keycatrich Trench (see page 45) 
Circular Saw: 
Obtained from MA-X Cuirass [final battle of Chapter 02, against Loqi) 
Gravity Well: 
Collectible in Aracheole Stronghold !see page 66) 
Noiseblaster: 
Collectible in Fort Vaullerey (see page 190) 
Drillbreaker: 
Collectible in Formouth Garrison !see page 182) 
Force Stealer: 
Available from Tony in Cape Caem by trading Caem Carrots !see page 171) 
Plunderers: 
Available from Tony in Cape Caem by trading Caem Carrots I see page 171 ) 
Valiant: 
Available from Tony in Cape Caem by trading Caem Carrots !see page 171 ) 
Absorb Shield: 
Available from Tony in Cape Ca em by trading Caem Carrots I see page 171 I 

Rusted Bit: 
Common collectible 
Glass Gemstone: 
Common collectible 
Sturdy Helixhorn: 
Enemy drop (break appendage) Leukom (75%) (Old Lestallum hunt: 
Scrap It Now!), Spiracom (75%) (Old Lestallum hunt: The Last Spiracoms) 
Metal Scrap: 
Common collectible 
Coeur! Whiskers: 
Enemy drop: Coeurl (50%) (Duscae, southwest region), Elder Coeurl (100%) 
(Taelpar Rest Area hunt: Old Denizens of the Woods) 
Cactuar N_eedle: 
Collectible (south of Lake Vesperpool\; Enemy drop: Slactuar (I 00%) (very rare monster. 
·can appear in the morning in the following places: southwest of Perpetouss Keep, northwest 
of Hammerhead, north of Longwythe, east of Steylitt Grove, north of Fort Vaullereyl 
Dynamo: 
Collectible (Callatein's Plunge. outside Glacial Grotto!: 
Enemy drop: MA-Veles (50%1 (main quest Engaging the Empire}, MA-Veles-Bis (60%}, 
MA-Hoplomachus \95%) (sidequest: Formouth Garrison! 
Sky Gemstone: 
Sidequest reward (A Feline Feast) 
Hydraulic Cylinder: 
:Collectible (north of Fort Vaullerey); Enemy drop: MA-X Patria (97%), (dropped 
by landing crafts in random encounters on the world map from Chapter 05) 
Magnetron: 
Collectible (Gralea); Enemy drop: MA-Hoplomachus (5%) 
(sidequest: Formouth Garrison) 
Magitek Core: 
Collectible (Gralea); Enemy drop: MA-X Dux (100%) (sidequest: 
Formouth Garrison), MA-Patria (3%) (sidequest: Formouth Garrison) 
Monster Claw: 
Enemy drop: Bandersnatch (100%) (Malmalam Thicket) 
Barbed Scythe: 
Enemy drop: Killer Wasp (75%) (Ma Ima lam Thicket) 
Earth Gemstone: 
Common collectible 
Spiked Armor: 
Enemy drop (break appendage): Skambulette (75%) 
(Cauthess Rest Area hunt: Hammer the Cannibals) 
Engine Blade II 
& 500 EXP (available immediately) 
Engine Blade Ill 
& 800 EXP (available after completing one quest or hunt) 
Ultima Blade 
& 1,000 EXP (available after completing three quests or hunts) 
Drain lance II 
& 500 EXP (available immediately) 
Drain lance Ill 
& 800 EXP (available after completing one quest or hunt) 
Auto Crossbow Plus 
& 2,000 EXP (available after completing two quests or hunts) 
Bioblaster Plus 
& 2,000 EXP (available after completing two quests or hunts) 
Circular Saw Plus 
& 2,000 EXP (available after completing two quests or hunts) 
Gravity Well Plus 
& 2,000 EXP (available after completing two quests or hunts) 
Noiseblaster Plus 
& 2,000 EXP (available after completing two quests or hunts) 
Drillbreaker Plus 
& 2,000 EXP (available after completing two quests or hunts) 
Force Stealer II 
& 800 EXP (available after completing one quest or hunt) 
Plunderers II 
& 800 EXP (available after completing ~ne quest or hunt) 
Valiant II 
& 800 EXP (available after completing one quest or hunt) 
Absorb Shield II 
& 800 EXP (available after completing one quest or hunt) 

150 
TAKKA 
After you have retrieved your first Royal Arms 
during Chapter 02, speak with Takka (the owner 
of Hammerhead's diner) to begin a sequence of 
sidequests. Note that you need to move 500 feet 
away from Takka after completing a quest for the 
next one in the series to unlock. 
EVERYONE LOVES BEANS 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "Emergency Delivery". 
• Notes: Alter speaking to Takka. head to the designated area in 
Cleigne, a short distance to the north of Old Lestallum. Eliminate 
the Havocfangs that appear, then return to Takka for your 
reward. 
• Reward: 1,500 EXP. Leiden Pepper x5, Hulldagh Nutmeg x5, 
Killer Tomato x5 
LESTALLUM'S FINEST 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "Evel'/one loves Beans". 
• Notes: Once you receive the quest from Takka, head to 
Lestallum and speak to Furloch. one of the market's merchants. 
Now head to the mission waypoint. to the north of Coernix 
Station - Cauthess. The shipment is guarded by a Garulessa 
and a horde of Garulas. which are all weak to both Greatswords 
and Fire. Once the creatures fall, retrieve the shipment and 
deliver it to Furloch. You can then take the ingredients to Takka 
to conclude the mission. 
• Reward: 2,000 EXP. Griffon Breast x2, Saxham Rice x5, Schier 
Turmeric x5 

. 
• Unlock Condition: Reach Chapter 03, complete "Hunters and 
Gatherers" 
• Notes: Talk to Takka to trigger this mission, then head to the 
• 
Sidequests 
mission area. Eliminate the horde of Garulas in Alstor Slough, to 
1<' 
the southwest of Coernix Station - Alstor, then take the Garula 
Sirloin back to Takka. 
• Reward: 1,000 EXP. Cleigne Wheat x5, Killer Tomato x5, 
Saxham Rice x5 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "Scenic Delivery". 
• Notes: Talk to Takka to activate the mission, then head to the 
designated area to the northeast to find a horde of Oaggerquills. 
Eliminate them all !ignoring the Bandersnatch if you run into 
one), then return the Oaggerquill Breast they yield to Takka. 
• Reward: 500 EXP. Cleigne Wheat x5, Dualhorn Steak x5, Leiden 
Pepper x5, Hammerhead Hot Sandwich lnew restaurant dish 
that you can eat to learn a cooking recipe} 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "Lestallum's finest''. 
• Notes: for his final assignment, Takka has a big task for 
you - obtaining a Catoblepas Brisket To do so, head to Coernix 
Station - Alstor, and accept the "Marsh Madness! The Giant 
Awakens" hunt from the diner owner !which is only possible 
if you have reached Hunter Rank 4). The Catoblepas is weak 
to both Polearms and Ice, so be sure to prepare accordingly. 
Infusing a Polearm with Ice with lgnis's Enhancement technique 
is extremely effective. Focus on defending and parrying 
consistently and you should emerge victorious. Alternatively, 
staying at a safe distance and firing constantly with the Star of 
the Rogue (enhanced by lgnis) can work amazingly well; warp-
strikes with this weapon can prove deadly, but the attendant HP 
cost makes this a high-risk/high-reward strategy. Once you have 
a Catoblepas Brisket !which might require multiple attempts if 
you're not lucky in terms of item drops), return to Takka. 
• Reward: 3,000 EXP. Allural Shallot x5, Kettier Ginger x5, Sizzling 
Humongo-Steak (new restaurant dish that you can eat to learn a 
cooking recipe) 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "The Power ol Kings" during 
Chapter 02. 
• Notes: Accept the quest at Hammerhead's diner, head to the 
shop at Galdin Quay to buy a Lucian Tomato, then deliver it to 
Takka. You can actually buy this ingredient when you visit Galdin 
Quay during Chapter 01 to complete the quest immediately. 
• Reward: 300 EXP. Gighee Ham x2, Leiden Potato x2, Sheep 
Milk x2, funguar x2 
• 
Takka 
151 

152 
DINO 
After you complete Dino's quest during Chapter 01, you can return to him during Chapter 02 to initiate a series of side missions. 
To begin these quests, speak to Dino at his usual spot on a bench 
overlooking the dock at Galdin Quay. 
NO PAIN, NO GEM 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "Reliable Royalty". 
• Notes: In this new treasure hunt you have little onscreen help. 
The Ruby Stone you seek is hidden inside the Myrlwood !which 
can only be accessed from Chapter 07 onward). When you 
enter the forest's first clearing. hug the stone wall on your left 
and continue moving forward. You will soon spot a cluster of red 
ore containing the precious stone. You can find a detailed map 
of this dungeon on page 188. As usual. deliver this to Dino to 
collect your reward. 
• Reward: 2,000 EXP, Ruby Bracelet xl 
RELIABLE ROYALTY 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "A Stone-Studded Stunner". 
• Notes: This time, Dino sends you to locate a Sapphire Stone 
on the banks of Cleigne's main river. You can find it on a small 
beach at the very edge of the accessible area. Deliver it to Dino 
to complete the assignment. 
• Reward: 1,500 EXP. Sapphire Bracelet xl 

. 
A TREASURE BEYOND MEASURE 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "No Pain, No Gem" 
• Notes: For his final challenge, Dino asks you to retrieve an 
Emerald Stone hidden in the depths of the Costlemark Tower 
This is a late-game dungeon that you should visit only with a 
very developed party (see page 186). Note that you can only 
enter it at night. 
• Reward: 3.000 EXP, Emerald Bracelet xi 
A STONE-STUDDED STUNNER 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "The Aspiring Artisan". 
• Notes: After receiving this quest from Dino, head to the south 
of Wiz Chocobo Post (which can only be done from Chapter 03 
onwards) You need to find and collect three Heliodor Stones in 
the designated area, then take them back to the jeweler 
• Reward: 1,000 EXP, Heliodor Bracelet xi 
THE ASPIRING ARTISAN 
• Unlock Condition: Reach Chapter 02. 
• Notes: Talk to Dino. Once the mission is active. retrieve the 
Amethyst Stone found to the east of longwythe Peak, then 
return it to Dino. 
• Reward: 500 EXP, Amethyst Bracelet xi 
r1Numrm.H 
·ti· Sidequesls 
Dino 
1•' 
153 

154 
CINDY 
Once you complete "The Power of Kings" during Chapter 02, you can later visit Cindy at Hammerhead to 
begin a collection of sidequests that will furnish you with upgrades for the Regalia. Though some of these 
are purely cosmetic, others offer tangible improvements to the car's performance. 
THE EVER VALOROUS REGALIA 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "The Ever Gleaming Regalia" 
• Notes: Once this quest is active, head to the specified area in 
the west part of the Vesperpool (which is only possible from 
Chapter 07 onward) and collect the component that lies by the 
dirt road. close to a car wreck. Return it to Cindy at the next 
opportunity, then install it via her Customize menu to upgrade 
the Regalia. 
• Reward: 1.000 EXR Supercharger component (increases the 
Regalia's top speed) 
THE EVER GLEAMING REGALIA 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "The Ever Elegant Regalia". 
• Notes: Speak to Cindy and head to Alstor Slough, a short 
distance to the southwest of Coernix Station-Alstor (a location 
only available from Chapter 03 onward). The fiberglass Coating 
lies close to an old car, next to a small house by the lake. Once 
you have it. return it to Cindy. 
• Reward: 600 EXR fiberglass Coating component (keeps the 
Regalia clean) 
To initiate each of these quests. talk to Cindy at her usual position 
outside Hammerhead's garage. 
INTO UNKNOWN FRONTIERS 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "The Ever Illustrious Regalia" and 
"forrnouth Garrison" (see page 162) and reach Chapter 15. 
• Notes: After clearing formouth Garrison, explore the base to find 
a Strange Engine collectible. If you haven't done so already, return 
to Aracheole Stronghold (see page 66) and pick up the Warped 
Wings. With all three unusual parts retrieved (you obtain the 
Unstable Stabilizer automatically when you clear fort Vaullerey 
during Chapter 06). speak to Cindy and she will implement a 
remarkable Regalia upgrade that grants it the ability to fly. 
• Reward: Regalia Type-f 

THE EVER REGAL REGALIA 
• Unlock Condition: Reach Chapter 02 and complete "The 
Power of Kings" 
• Notes: Speak to Cindy, then retrieve the Aero Wax inside the 
tunnel that you can access from the south of the Prairie Outpost. 
Eliminate the Goblins on the way, pick up the item. and then 
return it to Cindy. You can then install it from Cindy's Customize 
menu. 
• Reward: 150 EXP, Aero Wax component for the Regalia 
(improves fuel efficiency) 
THE EVER ELEGANT REGALIA 
• Unlock Condition: Complete 'The Ever Regal Regalia" 
• Notes: Talk to Cindy, then head to the Balouve Mines. Retrieve 
the Redstone Shard at the dungeon's entrance, right next to the 
elevator. before you return it to Cindy to complete the quest. 
• Reward: 500 EXP, Hammerhead Decal. Racing Stripes I Decal. 
Basic Color Samples 
THE EVER ILLUSTRIOUS REGALIA 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "The Ever Valorous Regalia" 
• Notes: This time. Cindy needs you to retrieve a component 
hidden in the depths of the Crestholm Channels. This is a 
dungeon that can only be explored, let alone cleared. with 
a high-level party. The item lies in the room to the north of 
the second control panel, as described in step + of our 
walkthrough of the dungeon (see page 180). Once you have it, 
take it back to Cindy. 
• Reward: 3.000 EXP, Enhanced Headlights component (drive 
away Daemons when you take the Regalia out at night) 
'° Sidequests 
! 
~t 
& 
in 
;y~·i!S 
• f J :s 
Tours 
JV\ 
• 
Cindy 
\/1 ' 
'_r:<; oi 
1TJ 
·,1f.Fc!1nnts 
IC' y 
VJ~z 
Mies & 
M!sce!h:;nv 
Menoc~:::. 
155 

SANIA 
Sania's Position o 
S1dequest· 
When you reach Duscae for the first time, you can 
start this chain of quests by speaking to Sania at 
Coernix Station - Alstor. These require that you 
collect passive fauna, or obtain biological samples 
from reluctant and !perhaps understandably) 
belligerent owners. Like Dave, Sania moves to 
different locales on completion of each mission. 
~ 
THE PROFESSOR'S PROTEGE 
• Unlock Condition: Reach Chapter 03. 
• Notes: Speak to Sania at Coernix Station - Alstor. then head 
to the waypoint in Alstor Slough. Retrieve all the frogs (see 
screenshot), then return them to Sania. 
• Reward: 3,000 EXP. Star Pendant x1 
THE PROFESSOR'S PROTEGE - YELLOW FROGS 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "The Professor's Protege". 
• Notes: Speak to Sania at the Cauthess Rest Area, on the 
upper floor of the house adjacent to the diner. Head to the 
specified area to the east and look for yellow frogs around 
the pond (they're all inside the fenced area. as shown in the 
accompanying screenshot). then take them back to Sania. 
• Reward: 4,000 EXP. Rainbow Pendant x1 
THE PROFESSOR'S PROTEGE - GIGANTOAD 
• Unlock Cond~ion : Complete "The Professor's 
Yellow Frogs". 
• Notes: Sania now moves to Old Lestallum, near the town's east 
entrance. She asks you to bring her oil from G1gantoads. Head to the 
designated area and slay the creatures (exit the dungeon and return 
to the designated spot once more to fight another Gigantoad if you 
do not receive the Slimy Oil on your first attempt), then return their 
oil to Sania. 
• Reward: 5,000 EXP. Moon Pendant x1 
THE PROFESSOR'S PROTEGE - WYVERN 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "The Professor's Protege -
Gigantoad". 
• Notes: Now based in Verinas Mart - Ravatogh, Sania asks you 
to slay a Wyvern and obtain its wing. Head to the specified area 
in the Rock of Ravatogh dungeon (see page 190) and defeat the 
beast, then take its drop back to Sania. 
156 
• Reward: 8.000 EXP. Earth Pendant xl 

, 
 
Tttf?f!.~rESSOR'S PROTEGE - MVRLWOOO Fl!IEFL\' 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "The Professor's Protege -
Wyvern". 
• Notes: For this quest you can find Senia at Meldecio Hunter HQ 
on the wooden terrace closest to the tunnel. She sends you on an 
errand to catch three fireflies in the Myrlwood (see page 188). Ali 
three are available in the dungeon's final area, outside the Royal 
Tomb, but there's another requirement: fireflies only appear at 
night. Take them back to Sania to complete the assignment. 
• Reward: 10.000 EXP. Golden Hourglass x1 
TllE PROFESSOR'S PROTEGE - GRIFFON 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "The Professor's Protege -
Myrlwood Firefly". 
• Notes: Back in Duscae, at Coernix Station - Ceuthess, Senia 
asks you to slay a Gritton for her. To do so, you must first 
accept the "Ruler of the Brave Skies" hunt from lestallum's 
marketplace tipster. Head to the monster's habitat, to the 
northwest of Coernix Station - Cauthess. choosing equipment 
that will exploit its weakness to Greatswords and Fire. Rest at 
the nearby haven to enjoy a stat-boosting meal, then create 
a manual save. A defeated Griffon can yield multiple items. 
so there is no guarantee that you will find the feather that you 
need for Sania. If you get another drop, you can either load 
your previous save file to try again, or return to the tipster 
in Lestallum, report your successful hunt. then immediately 
restart the quest. As for the battle itself, focus on defending 
and panying when the Griffon flies around the battle zone, then 
go on the offensive once it lands. The Star of the Rogue cen be 
an excellent choice of weapon thanks to the homing ettect of 
its projectiles. After you obtain the feather, deliver it to Sania. 
• Reward: 12,000 EXP, Safety Bit x1 
THE FROGS OF LEGEND 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "The Professor's Protege -
Griffon". 
• Notes: Senia, now stationed et Meldacio Hunter HQ, 
challenges you to accomplish a seemingly impossible task - to 
find five Rainbow Frogs hidden in Lucis with no weypoint or 
information to guide you. This is, naturally, far less challenging 
when you know exactly where to look. Once you have ell five. 
take them to Sanie. 
• Reward: 15,000 EXP. Ribbon x1 
Qu!ckstori 
Prime 
wo:k1t1rough 
Sldequesls 
inventory 
Besticry 
<il!C!tq~ & 
.l\nn\·si~~ 
I txlros 
·.·.1,.' " !ntkt!: 
Novytl• 
\lyv 
' 
Lesta!iurn 
I 
Me1cl1ants 
"\ Holly 
t'.'; Ctiocobos 
Wiz 
i\i!ies & 
'· ' M!scanonv 
Royal TornDs 
{\ Dungeons 
l.,. . 
MentK0s 
i'.101·1dvlph 
157 

NAVYTH 
You can first encounter Navyth when you reach 
Duscae for the first time during Chapter 03. The 
fisherman is initially found close to the Alstor 
Slough fishing spot. near the cabin to the south 
of the main lake. Later on, he moves to different 
fishing spots as you complete missions for him. 
each time challenging you to catch particular 
specimens. 
To complete these quests you will need a solid 
understanding of the fishing mini-game. This 
includes concepts such as using a lure suitable 
for the species you're trying to catch, knowing 
at what time of day your target is more likely to 
be caught, and so forth. Before you attempt to 
fulfill these assignments, we recommend that 
you take the time to read our presentation of 
the fishing system. along with all key concepts 
and parameters. on page 303. 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "Fishing, Naturally", 
reach Chapter 07. 
• Fishing Spot: The Vesperpool - West Bank (Cleigne) 
+ Fish to Catch: Vesper Gar 
• Recommended Lure: Stinker: Malboro or Stinker: Malbodoom 
• Notes: Your target is identified by a large yellow dot if your 
skill level is at IO; you will need the best possible equipment 
(Dragon's Beard, Death Spin, Nereid); be patient, reeling in only 
when your tine is not under tension and always aiming in the 
direction that the fish is currently swimming. 
+ Reward: 3,000 EXP. Invincible Iron Giant xi 
+ Unlock Condition: Complete "Fishing Buddies". 
+ Fishing Spot: River Wennath (Cleigne) 
+ Fish to Catch: Cherrycomb Trout 
• Recommended Lure: Whiskers: Crystal 
• Notes: This fish is most easily caught at dawn or dusk; we 
recommend a skill level of at least 5. 
• Reward: 2.000 EXP. Butterlly Edge xi 

• Unlock Condition: Reach Chapter 03. 
• Fishing Spot: Neeglyss Pond (Alstor Slough) 
• Fish to Catch: Crag Barramundi 
• Recommended Lure: Sweet Jamming: Custard or Bomber: 
Ice Bomb 
• Notes: Relatively easy fish to catch. 
• Reward: 1,500 EXP, Knife T. Tonberry x1 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "Navyth's Challenge" 
• Fishing Spot: Vannath Coast (Galdin Ouay) 
• Fish to Catch: Murk Grouper (aka Devil of the Cygillan) 
• Recommended lure: Burrower: Abyss Worm 
• Notes: This is the ultimate fishing challenge. Your target is 
identified by a large yellow dot if your skill level is at 10, which 
is really indispensable here. Take the best possible equipment 
(including the Llymlaen reel from the Totomostro mini-game). 
You wi!I need to be extremely patient, changing your aiming 
direction on the fly to constantly match that of the fish, and 
reeling in with brief and controlled bursts, but never when the 
fish changes direction. The optimal time to inflict damage is 
right after the fish struggles for several seconds. causing your 
controller to vibrate. This is a very difficult and demanding duel 
between Noctis and the fish that will easily take 15 minutes. 
• Reward: 5,000 EXP, Tranquility x1 
'!!• Sidequests 
'l! Navyth 
159 

160 
VYV 
After you go on a tour of Lestallum with Iris 
during Chapter 03, you can meet a man called 
Vyv. This journalist asks you to take very specific 
photos for him - which can only be achieved 
during the day. Though the EXP rewards are 
welcome, it is perhaps the substantial Gil 
payments that make these travel-oriented 
missions worthwhile. 
To begin each of these quests, talk to Vyv at lestallum's lookout -
as shown here. 
THE PEN IS MIGHTIER THAN THE SWORD 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "A Place lo Call Home". 
• Notes: After accepting this assignment from Vyv, 
you have three photos lo take of imperial bases in 
Lucis: Formouth Garrison in leide (close to the Prairie 
Outpost). Tollhends Stronghold in Cleigne (north of Old 
lestallum). and Perpetouss Keep in Ouscae Ito the 
southwest of the Cauthess Rest Area). Note that each 
individual picture is part of a specific sub-quest that you 
need to select manually in the main menu to activate 
the corresponding waypoint. You may be attacked by a 
large number of imperial troops in each location, so be 
prepared in advance - and save beforehand. When you 
have all three pictures. report back to Vyv. 
• Reward: 4.000 EXP. 20.000 Gil 
vvv·s VOLCANIC INSPIRATION 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "QI Gods and Kings". 
• Notes: Once Vyv has given you this new assignment. head 
to the Rock of Ravatogh and go up the slope that leads to the 
lava waterfall (the long dead-end to the west of the map). The 
heat will take a heavy toll on your health. so pay attention to 
HP gauges. Biminate the Thunderocs on the way: they're weak 
to both fire and Firearms. Once at the top of the slope. take a 
picture at the photo spot. You can then repon back to Vyv. 
• Reward: 3.000 EXP. 15.000 Gil 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "An Eye for Islands". 
• Notes: This time Vyv needs two shots of Taelpar 
Crag: one from the lookout tower close to Tollhends 
Stronghold. and one from the bridge to the east of Old 
lestallum. Once you have both pictures. return to Vyv. 
• Reward: 2,000 EXP. 10.000 Gil 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "A Stroll for Two" during 
l, 
Chapter 03. 
• Notes: Speak to Vyv, then head to the two waypoints -
one to the north of the Oise of Cauthess and one by the 
chowbo racing courses. Return to Vyv to complete the 
assignment. 
• Reward: 1.000 EXP. 5.000 Gil 

THE CURSED CANVAS 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "The Pen is Mightier than the Sword", reach Chapter 09. 
• Notes: For this final assigninent from Vyv, head to Altissia after accepting the mission. Visit Maagho 
and begin the "A lost Painting" hunt, then travel to the hunt waypoint in the basement of the 
Secretary's Estate. Once in the basement. Prompto will automatically take a picture of the painting. 
Whether you complete the hunt or not is irrelevant here: all you need is the photograph. Return to 
Lucis using the "Call Umbra" feature while resting at the Levi lie, then report back to Vyv one final time. 
• Reward: 5,000 EXP, 25.000 Gil 
OF GODS AND KINGS 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "Aftermath of the Astral War" 
• Notes: Speak to Vyv. Head to the designated area in the 
southeast of Ouscae and photograph the gate of the Royal Tomb, 
then the tomb itself. Report back to Vyv. 
• Reward: 2,500 EXP, 12.500 Gil 
AN EVE FOR ISLANDS 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "The Perfect landscape". 
• Notes: Speak to Vyv, then head to Galdin Quay to take a 
photograph. Either site will suffice. Return to Vyv. 
• Reward: 1,500 EXP, 7,500 Gil 
A PLACE TO CALL HOME 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "Vyv's Volcanic Inspiration" 
• Notes: This new assignment from Vyv will take you to a 
familiar p!ace - the hill overlooking Insomnia, where you ended 
Chapter 01 many hours before. This should all be very familiar 
to you, so take the shot at the edge of the cliff before you return 
to Vyv. 
• Reward: 3,500 EXP, 17,500 Gil, Time photo filter 
FINH Fmm. xv 
\!! Sidequests 
·~· Vyv 
161 

162 
LESTALLUM MERCHANTS r 
After you complete a tour of Lestallum with Iris during Chapter 03, four merchants will 
subsequently offer you sidequests. One of them is the owner of the city's Arms Vendor. 
The other three are all found in the market Furloch, Prissock, and Veenon's grandson. 
• Vendor: Prissock (first quest) 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "A Stroll for Two". 
• Notes: Speak to Prissock, then head to the designated area 
to the northeast of the Glacial Grotto. Eliminate the Killer Bees 
surrounding the vehicle, retrieve its cargo and take it back to 
Prissock. 
• Reward: 2,000 EXP 
• Vendor: Arms Vendor (first quest) 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "A Stroll for Two". 
• Notes: Speak to the Arms Vendor, then head to the waypoint. 
Eliminate the Bulettes at the base of the antenna pylon to the 
south of lestal1um. then deliver their carapaces to the Arms 
Vendor. 
• Reward: 1,500 EXP; discount applied to all articles sold by this 
vendor 
• Vendor: Arms Vendor (third quest). 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "Tails Spin". 
• Notes: For his final mission, the Arms Vendor asks you to bring 
him stingers fiom Saphyrtails. Head to the specified area, to 
the north of the road that leads to the Rock of Ravatogh, and 
eliminate the beasts before making the delivery to your client. 
• Reward: 4,000 EXP; discount applied to all articles sold by this 
vendor 
TAILS SPIN 
• Vendor: Arms Vendor (second quest) 
• Unlock Condijion: Complete "Ace of Carapace". 
• Notes: Speak to the Arms Vendor then head to the designated 
waypoint, on the beach where Cleigne's main river branches. 
Slay the Spiracorns that appear there, then take their Supple 
Tails back to your client. 
• Reward: 2,000 EXP 
ON THE HUNT FOR A HARVEST 
• Vendor: Furloch (first quest) 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "A Stroll for Two". 
• Notes: Speak to Furloch then head to h~ farm, to the south of 
Coemix Station - Cauthess. Talk to Furloch's nephew before you 
s~y the beasts in the nearby field. Harvest green beans and check 
in with the nephew afterwards, then return to Furtoch in Lestallum. 
• Reward: 2,000 EXP; discount applied to all articles sold by this 
vendor 
MIND THE TRAP 
• Vendor: Veenon's grandson 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "A Stroll for Two". 
• Notes: Speak to Veenon's grandson, then head to the Taelpar 
Rest Area and talk to the designated hunter. Disarm the traps 
in the marked area to the south. then report back to the hunter 
before you later claim your reward from Veenon's grandson. 
• Reward: 1,500 EXP; discount applied to all articles sold by this 
vendor 

VEGGING OUT 
• Vendor: furloch (third quest) 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "Wild about Onions". 
• Notes: This time, Furloch needs you to collect an aromatic root 
from a position to the south of the Cauthess Rest Area. Once 
you have completed the harvest, take the requested items back 
to the merchant. 
• Reward: 3,000 EXP; discount applied to all articles sold by this 
vendor 
WILD ABOUT ONIONS 
• Vendor: furloch (second quest) 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "On the Hunt for a Harvest". 
• Notes: Speak to furloch, !hen head to the designated farm to 
the east of the Oise of Cauthess. Harvest the bulbous onion and 
deliver it to Furloch to complete the assignment 
• Reward: 2,500 EXP 
VAN, INTERRUPTED AGAIN 
• Vendor: Prissock (second quest) 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "Van, Interrupted" 
• Notes: Once you have received this assignment from Prissock, 
head to the specified area. to the southeast of Wiz Chocobo 
Post The abandoned van is clearly visible by the road, though 
you will need to deleat the local fauna to retrieve the cargo. Take 
it back to Prissock when you're ready to do so. 
• Reward: 2,500 EXP; discount applied to all articles sold by this 
vendor 
ill Sidequests 
Lestallum 
. ., Merchants 
163 

164 
HOL LY 
After you reach Cape Caem during Chapter 
08, you can begin this series of sidequests by 
speaking to Holly. 
To begin each of these quests. talk to Holly. She can be found in 
front of the entrance to Lestallum's power plant. as shown here. 
STEAM VALVE INSPECTION 
• Unlock Condition: Reach Chapter 08. 
• Notes: For her first assignment, Holly asks you to check 
eight valves in a designated area (broadly, the eastern half of 
lestallum). You're looking for sets of three vertical blue pipes 
with a trio of valves aligned horizontally - one per pipe. Scour 
the streets slowly and methodically, including the outer edges 
of the specified area. If you struggle to locate them all. refer to 
the accompanying screenshot. Return to Holly once you've fixed 
all valves. 
• Reward: 2.000 EXP. 2,500 Gil 
POWER TO THE PYLONS 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "Steam Valve Inspection" 
• Notes: After accepting this assignment from Holly, head to the designated areas and search in each one for a pylon with a ladder (the correct pylons can be identified from a distance by the presence of 
an orange cable car nearby). The one close to lestallum ("Power to the Pylons I") stands in the western half of the specified area. The one close to Old Lestallum ("Power to the Pylons 11"1 is found in the 
northern half of the search zone. The one to the north of Fort Vaullerey ("Power to the Pylons Ill") stands in the northern part of the specified area. Once you have checked the valve at the top of each pylon, 
return to Holly. 
+ Reward: 3,000 EXP. 5,000 Gil 

• Unlock Condition: Complete "Power to the Pylons" 
• Notes: This time, Holly ask you to check lights in three completely different locations in Lucis: one in Cleigne (Burbost Souvenir Emporium), and two in Duscae (Coernix Station - Cauthess and Cauthess 
Rest Area). Each device is marked with a dear waypoint, but feel free to refer to our screenshots for visual help. You are ambushed by monsters after the third inspection, but this should be a routine battle. 
Report back to Holly once you've completed all three steps. 
• Reward: 4.000 EXP, 10.000 Gil 
411. Sidequests 
4i> Holly 
165 

166 
CHOCOBOS 
There are numerous quests and activities that relate to chocobos. 
generally found in and around Wiz Chocobo Post. 
Friends of a Feather 
0>--~~~~~~~~~~ 
At the beginning of Chapter 03, your party automatically makes a stop at 
Coernix Station - Alstor. After Noctis receives a phone call from Iris, there 
is an interactive conversation with Prompto. Accept his suggestion to visit 
the Chocobo Post: this sets "Friends of a Feather" as your active sidequest. 
There are two steps that you must complete to finish this assignment: 
<> First. you need to speak to Wiz at the Chocobo Post. From Coernix 
Station - Alstor, it's a short Journey in the Regalia. 
<> Once the conversation with Wiz is over, speak to him again and 
select "A Behemoth Undertaking" from his list of hunts. Complete 
this noteworthy hunt (see page 52 for details) and return to Wiz to 
also finish "Friends of a Feather". 
Your payment is 1,500 EXP and a Chocobo Whistle. The real reward, 
though, is that you also unlock the Rent-a-Bird service. From now on, you 
can use any of these terminals to rent chocobos for your party, which 
makes it far less time-consuming to explore the vast expanses of Lucis. 
Rent-a-Bird 
0·>--~~~~~~~~~~ 
After you have completed the "A Behemoth Undertaking" hunt, all Rent-
a-Bird terminals 1§01 in Lucis become active. This is a major feature 
that expands your traveling options. 
For long-haul trips, the Regalia remains the best choice. It's fast. 
reliable, and practically free given the negligible cost of gas. For 
journeys where you leave roadways and car-friendly dirt trails behind, 
however. chocobos cut down travel time substantially. Their speed is far 
greater than moving on foot, while their agility makes it easier to bypass 
combat encounters that you are not inclined to take part in. 
To rent a chocobo, interact with any Rent-a-Bird station and purchase a 
rental ticket. The greater the duration, the higher the price - but don't 
let this dissuade you from long bookings, as the fees are relatively 
nominal. Rental chocobos return to the post when the lease expires. 
If this should end mid-ride, the chocobo will depart after you dismount. 
With your ticket in hand, you can whistle for your bird at any time. To 
do so, open the Items window with !@!ml. then press 0> and select 
"Call Chocobo". Your mount will appear almost instantly and take you 
wherever you please Refer to the section that follows for a complete 
overview of chocobo controls. 
By default, 
your chocobos 
have 
the 
following stats: running speed of 17 mph; 
sprinting speed of 25 mph; jumping height 
of 5' 5"; stamina of 60. The more time you 
spend riding chocobos (staying idle does 
not count - you need to be on the move). 
the more they level up, as shown in the 
Chocobo Levels table. Each additional level 
that you reach improves your chocobos' 
attributes or grants them a new ability. 
Chocobo Levels 
CHOCOBO 
RIDING 
LEVEL 
TIME 
2 min 
J 
6 min 
4 
8 min 
5 
12 min 
16 min 
20 min 
8 
20 min 
9 
24min 
10 
JO min 
BONUS 
New ability Dash de Chocobo 
(you can summon your chocobo to flee once per battle) 
Max stamina + 10, running speed increased 120 mph) 
New ability: Kick de Chocobo (your chocobo can join 
you in battles and deliver a devastating kick) 
Max stamina + 10, sprinting speed increased 128 mph) 
New ability: Dance de Chocobo (your chocobo can 
buff you) 
Max stamina + 10, jumping height increased (8' 8") 
New ability Rush de Chocobo 
(your chocobo can unleash a flurry of attacks) 
Max stamina + 10, stamina recovery rate x2 
Link de Chocobo: your chocobo can perform 
Blindside-link attacks with Noctis 
Chocobo Races 
0>--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~-
Once you have completed "A Behemoth Undertaking", you can take part 
in chocobo races by speaking to the man inside the small cabin across 
the highway south of Wiz Chocobo Post. 
General Information 
There are up to seven races available in total, though not all are 
immediately available - as revea led in the table on the right-hand page. 
Controls 
Controls during chocobo races are very straightforward. 
Controls: Overview 
PS4 
XBOX 
SUMMARY 
ONE 
@ 
@ 
Walk and steer 
G 
G 
Control camera 
@ 
© 
Jump 
® 
e 
Dismount 
@ 
0 
Sprint (only possible 
while trotting) 
Ifill 
QI1 
Trot 
lkID 
m 
Tap to slide, 
hold to halt 

Chocobo Races: Overview 
RACE 
UNLOCK 
COURSE 
REWARD 
CONDITION 
Complete 
Vs. Prompto 
"A Behemoth 
Short 
Rounsey Medal 
Undertaking" 
Vs. Gladio 
Win a race vs. 
Medium 
Destrier Medal 
Prompto. 
Chocobo 
Win a race vs. 
Short Course 
Hoops: Grange 
Gladio. 
Short 
Medal 
Gallop 
Win a race of 
Chocobo Hoops: 
Vs. lgnis 
Grange Gallop, 
Long 
Corser Medal 
and reach 
Chapter 05. 
Full Field 
Win a race vs. 
Short 
Fat Chocobo 
lgnis. 
Medal 
Chocobo 
Win a Full Field 
Long Course 
Hoops: Rocky 
race. 
Long 
Medal 
Road 
Win a race of 
Jennet Medal 
Chocobo Hoops: 
(you also obtain the 
Jockey Master Medal 
Vs. Iris 
Rocky Road. and 
Medium 
from the man at the 
reach Chapter 
reception after obtaining 
06. 
all other medalsl 
"Vs." Races 
In all "Vs." races. you compete against at least one of your 
friends. Your goal is to pass through each checkpoint and reach 
the finish line first. 
o Stamina: The key to succeeding in races is to optimize your 
use of stamina. Your chocobo's stamina bar appears in the 
bottom-left corner of the screen. Every time that you press 
@/+) to sprint, a small chunk is removed from the ba r. 
The bar only replenishes when you are not sprinting. The 
ideal strategy, then. is to initiate a sprint every time a 
previous dash comes to an end to remain at maximum 
speed at practically all times. 
o Slide: When the stamina bar is almost empty, perform a 
few consecutive slides by briefly tapping ~/J!i (once to 
initiate a slide. then again just after the chocobo jumps). This 
will maintain you at a higher speed than the basic trot. while 
refilling your gauge incrementally. As soon as it is sufficiently 
regenerated, you can go back to sprinting. 
o Greens: To win the more difficult races, consider resting at the 
nearby Killiam Haven. This will enable you to feed Greens to your 
chocobos, temporarily boosting their abilities. You can purchase 
these vegetables from the Chocobo Salon at Wiz Chocobo Post. 
Leveling up your chocobo by running around on the world map 
will also help by improving its attributes and speed. 
<> Mini-Map: You can view the position of your rivals on the 
mini-map - they're all represented by the initial of their 
name (except for Iris). This useful visual aid makes it easier 
to pace yourself and manage your chocobo's stamina. If they 
are far behind, you can ease off and take fewer risks. 
As a rule, you should be trotting with lfill!llll at all times. adjusting @ to 
either side whenever you need to turn (and leaving the stick alone the rest 
of the time). To boost your overall speed. you have two methods available, 
which you should use alternately: 
o Press @ /+) to sprint at regular intervals. Doing so enables you to 
reach maximum speed for a few seconds, but depletes your stamina. 
o Briefly tap ~/J!i as you trot to perform a forward slide. then tap it 
again right after the chocobo jumps. Not only does this give you a small 
burst of speed. but both taps refill a portion of your stamina bar. You might 
find it useful to watch the gauge, not the chocobo. to master the timing of 
the second (more profitable) button press. You can also use this stamina 
recharge trick while rid ing chocobos during general exploration. 
"Hoops" Races 
In the "Hoops" races. Noctis is alone on the course. You compete against 
the clock in what is essentially a "time attack" mode, where the challenge 
lies in passing through all checkpoints and jumping through all circular hoops 
on the track. 
<> Vegetables: Every time you grab a vegetable. Noctis enjoys a temporary 
but significant speed boost. Collect as many as you can: these make it 
much easier to reach the finish line within the allotted time. Ideally, you 
should try to sprint whenever you are not under the effect of a vegetable 
to maintain maximum speed. 
<> Jumps: To successfully pass through the hoops you need to perform 
timely jumps. You will also need to hop over obstacles such as crates. 
Familiarize yourself with this move to get a sense of its timing. Leaping a 
couple of steps before each object is usually the best approach. 
o Obstacles: Most of the obstacles on your way are relatively easy to 
navigate Adjust your trajectory in advance to slalom between them or 
jump over them. Note that holding the jump button lets you glide for a 
few yards: this can be a useful way to adjust the distances you cover 
when leaping. 
<> Elaborate Obstacles: In the second Hoop race (Rocky Road). multiple 
stacks of crates sometimes form a stair-like obstacle, and you have to 
climb to the highest "step" to be able to jump through the hoop. In these 
cases, the most important factor is your preparation. Try to make your 
approach so that the obstacle and the hoop beyond are aligned: this 
way, you can focus on the timing of your jumps without worrying about 
steering. 
FI N~l Fmm., x~ 
Sidequests 
Chocobos 
167 

168 
WIZ 
After you complete the "A Behemoth 
Undertaking" hunt, Wiz offers a sequence 
of assignments. Note that you need to 
move 1, 000 feet away from Wiz after 
completing a quest for the next one in the 
series to become available. 
SAVIOR OF THE SPECIES 
• Unlock Condition: Complete ··chase That Chocobo!" and 
reach Chapter 07. 
• Notes: Wiz's final mission requires you to retrieve a chocobo 
egg by the Vesperpool lake in Cleigne. You will need to eliminate 
a large horde of Sahagin monsters to achieve this. Once you 
have the egg, return it to Wiz. You then need to wait tor the egg 
to hatch, so attend to other quests until you receive an invitation 
to return. 
• Reward: 2,500 EXP 
A FEATHERY FEAST 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "Bird on the Brink". 
• Notes: Wiz now sends you to find a specific ingredient - Aegir 
Root -to the west of the Cauthess Rest Area, a few steps from 
Fallaughns Haven. Pick it up and deliver it to Wiz. 
• Reward: 1.500 EX~ fat Chocobo Triple-Decker {new restaurant 
dish that you can eat to learn a cooking recipe) 
BIRO ON THE BRINK 
• Unlock Condition: Complete 'Where the Wild Chocobos Are". 
• Notes: This time, Wiz asks you to save an ailing chocobo. Go 
to the designated area. to the south of the Cauthess Rest Area, 
and heal the bird with a potion before you report back to Wiz 
• Reward: 1.000 EXP 

WHERE THE WILD CHOCOBOS ARE 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "A Behemoth Undertaking" 
• Notes: For this first quest. Wiz asks you to take a picture of a 
chocobo located in what used to be Oeadeye's lair. Return to the 
field where you tailed Oeadeye in the fog and look for the bird, 
as shown here. Press ®IQ whi!e in close proximity to have 
Prompto take a photo, then return to Wiz. 
• Reward: 500 EXP, Xelphatol Apple Seeds x1, Dornan Plum Pits 
x1, Mamook Pear Seeds x1 
CHASE THAT CHOCOBO! 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "A Feathery Feast". 
+ Notes: For this new assignment. Wiz sends you to the Three 
Valleys region in Leide to rescue a chocobo. The bird is hiding 
behind the big wreck in front of the largest barn. Heal it with a 
potion, then report back to Wiz. 
• Reward: 2.000 EXP. Valfruit Seeds x1, 
O'Ghomoro Berry Seeds xi, Cieldalaes Pineapple Seeds x1. Han 
Lemon Seeds x1 
Sldequests 
JS 
·1 f. 
• 
Wiz 
169 

ALLIES & MISCELLANY 
Gladio: Training 
0)--~~~~~~~~~~~ 
Each haven otters an option to partake in a training session. At first, 
sparring with your party members is a great way to practice your basic 
combat skills. As your proficiency increases and you advance in the 
adventure, however, this becomes a challenge in and of itself. 
The mission is completed (with a 500 EXP reward) when you get close 
to the gate. An imperial attack force will appear simultaneously. You 
should be able to defeat these adversaries without too much trouble 
if you are Level 16 or thereabouts, but if in doubt, just sprint out of the 
combat area. 
Gladio: Training - Overview 
r--REWARos-, 
Friendly Cat: Kitty Catering 
NAME 
SPARRING OPPONENT 
ITEM 
AP 
Basic Drills (Level 51 
Gladio 
5 
Serious Practice (Level 101 
Gladio 
5 
Vs. Gladio and lgnis (Level 171 
Gladio & lgnis 
5 
Vs. Gladio and Prompto 
Gladio & Prompto 
5 
(Level 251 
Vs. Everyone (Level 451 
Gladio, lgnis & Prompto 
Gold Bangle 
5 
Final Trial (Level 901 
Gladio, lgnis & Prompto 
Blue Diamond 
5 
Bracelet 
lgnis: Pilgrimage 
0>)--~~~~~~~~~~ 
This sidequest is only available during Chapter 03. Look for a man a 
short walk to the west of Wiz Chocobo Post; he's highlighted by a 
quest marker. If you interact with him, lgnis initiates an interactive 
conversation where you can accept or refuse his suggestion. 
If you accept, head to your destination (the entrance gate to the Disc 
of Cauthess) however you see fit; taking the Regalia with lgnis as the 
driver is probably the easiest option. 
0r--~~~~~~~~~~ 
This sidequest becomes available after you meet Dino for the first time 
in Galdin Quay during Chapter 01. Follow the steps below to complete it: 
o Interact with the cat on the pier that leads into the main building at 
Galdin Quay. 
o Head to the fishing cabin on the nearby beach and purchase a 
handful of Spider Silk fishing lines and lures. (Alternatively, note that 
you can purchase a Giant Trevally Filet from the local general store 
and return to the cat immediately if you do not wish to fish.) 
o Fish from the adjacent pier until you get a bite. Aim with @ and cast 
your line with ® /~ You can then reel in with @l/lill, tilting @ in 
the relevant direction when corresponding prompts appear on the 
screen. If you wou ld like additional guidance, refer to our guide to 
this fishing mini-game on page 303. 
o Once you have the required fish, interact with the cat a second time. 
O Consult the chef, Coctura, at the nearby Mother of Pearl restaurant, 
inside the main building. 
o Take the dish she prepares to the cat. 
Your reward for completing this task is 600 EXP and Dragon Scales. 

Iris: Living off the Land 
<:;,>--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
Speak to Iris at Cape Caem after you reach Chapter 08 to trigger this 
quest. After the introduction, head to the plot next to the house and plant 
the seeds you received from Iris. Rest one night (you can sleep upstairs 
in the house) and come back the next day to harvest the carrots and 
complete this short task for 500 EXP. Note that the number of vegetables 
obtained after each harvest can vary in accordance with the weather, as 
described in the accompanying table. 
Harvest Yields 
CARROTS 
SUNNY 
CLOUDY 
RAINY 
HARVESTED 
WEATHER 
WEATHER 
WEATHER 
5 
20% 
10% 
5% 
4 
30% 
15% 
10% 
3 
50% 
30% 
20% 
2 
45% 
30% 
1 
35% 
Your first harvest triggers the arrival of a local restauranteur named 
Tony, who will exchange the Caem Carrots you grow for valuable 
items. You can then plant a new batch of seeds immediately. 
However, you must complete one quest (of any type: main story 
or optional) each time before you can plant subsequent crops and 
repeat the process. 
Tony's Trades 
NAME 
POSSIBLE ITEM 
COST 
Gil 
500 Gil 
1 carrot 
Vegetables 
Ulwaat Berries 
2 carrots 
Auto Parts 
Decal (Gladio, Noctis, Prompto, lgnis, or Umbra) 
3 carrots 
Weapons 
Force Stealer, Plunderers, Valiant. or Absorb Shield 
4 carrots 
Friendly Cat: A Feline Feast 
<:;,>--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
This sidequest becomes available during Chapter 08 if you have 
completed "Kitty Catering" and "Living off the Land". The steps required 
to fulfill it are as follows: 
" Sidequests 
O Interact with the cat behind the lighthouse at Cape Caem. 
o Speak to Monica inside the house. 
O Fish a Dark Allural Seabass from the local fishing spot (Caem Shore), 
just below Spelcray Haven. You can use the Deadly Waters: Coraldevil 
lure to achieve this, available at the JM Market - Caem shop. 
O Take the fish back to Monica. 
o Deliver the cat food made by Monica to the cat. Note that you can 
skip most steps in this quest by purchasing an expensive can of 
Luxury Cat Food from the JM Market - Caem shop, and deliver this 
directly to the cat. 
Your reward for completing this task is 1,200 EXP and a Sky Gemstone. 
Coctura: Berried Memories 
<:;,>---~~~~~~~~~~ 
This sidequest becomes available after you complete "Living off the Land". 
o Talk to Coctura, the chef behind the counter at Galdin Quay 
o Grow and pick Caem Carrots in the crop plot at Cape Caem. 
o Trade two Caem Carrots with Tony for Ulwaat Berries. 
o Deliver the berries to Coctura. 
Your reward for completing this task is 5,000 EXP. 3,000 Gil, Leiden 
rsr 
I 
Sweet Potato x1, Fine Cleigne Wheat x1, Ulwaat Berries x1. 
,_.,-)-,t 
t Allies & 
Miscellany 
171 

Talcott: Crazy about Cactuars 
<:/»--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
Once you reach Cape Caem during Chapter 08, Talcott will permanently 
reside at the house. Talk to him to begin this two-step mission, then set 
out to find the figurines. If you have already purchased one or both of 
them, quest steps will be completed automatically. 
<> "A Cactuar of Wood" is completed when you buy the Cactuar 
Statuette from the shop at Wiz Chocobo Post. 
<> "A Cactuar of Marble" is completed by buying the Cactuar 
Sculpture from the shop right outside the Leville hotel in Altissia. 
Taking this figurine back to Cape Caem leads to a secret reaction 
from Talcott. 
Prompto: Symbol of the Peace 
<> "A Cactuar of Mortar" is completed when you buy the Cactuar 
Model from the antique shop in Lestallum's market. 
Formally completing this quest is not quite the end of it, however. There 
are two additional steps you can take to elicit secret reactions from 
the boy. 
<> "A Cactuar of Mythril" is completed when you collect the Cactuar 
Effigy from the position shown here in Formouth Garrison (which 
is only possible after clearing this imperial base - a challenge that 
requires a very strong party). Th is leads to another secret reaction 
from Talcott. 
<:/>--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
During your stay in Altissia in Chapter 09, you will hear about Lunafreya's 
wedding dress when you approach the small bridge a short walk to the 
northeast of the immigration booths. Head to Vivienne Westwood's 
store, shown here, to complete this assignment. It is easy to find from 
the Secretary's Estate: if you follow the street to the south, you'll soon 
see it. Completing this short objective rewards you with 1,000 EXP. 

Glad io: The Perfect Cup 
0>--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
This mission becomes available after you reach Chapter 08 and trigger 
the "A Brave New World" main quest. Following a brief introduction 
cutscene called "A Need for Noodles", it is automatically triggered 
when you walk by the Cup Noodles truck in Lestallum, and begins with 
an interactive conversation where Gladio asks you about your favorite 
ingredient. Your answer really matters here, as it determines where you 
will go to acquire the foodstuff in question. There are three scenarios that 
lead you to either look for a slab of Behemoth meat, an enormous egg 
from the Zu's nest atop the Rock of Ravatogh, or a crustacean carapace 
from the gigantic Karlabos. After you have made your choice, inquire 
about this mission from the local tipster (the owner of the restaurant in 
the city's main thoroughfare), then head to your chosen hunting ground. 
Keep in mind that you can only complete one scenario per playthrough 
(receiving 4,000 EXP and a new Cup Noodle recipe in the process). 
Make a note of your choice to enable you to pick another when you 
return in a different playthroug h. 
Meat Scenario: Head to the designated area in Leide, just south of the Prairie Outpost. Defeat the Behemoth to obtain its meat, then make camp at a nearby haven to dine on Cup 
Noodles. The monster is weak to Greatswords and Shields, but resists Fire and Light damage. Choose your favorite weapons and focus on defending and parrying, making every 
counterattack possibility count. Try to target its legs as "breaking" them can topple the creature, offering you a chance to inflict massive damage. Greatswords can prove useful here 
thanks to their range and area-of-effect properties, enabling them to hit multiple body parts with a single, sweeping blow. 
Egg Scenario: Head to the summit of the Rock of Ravatogh in Cleigne. Take the small path to the right of the haven at the top until you reach the giant nest. Interact with one of 
the eggs in the nest, then leave the area via the tunnel on the other side. Rest at a haven to complete the assignment. 
Shrimp Scenario: Head to the designated area, a little to the west of Cape Caem in Cleigne. Eliminate the Karlabos and make camp at a haven to savor your hard-earned meaL 
This species is weak to Swords, Polearms. and Ice, and resistant to Fire damage. lgnis's Enhancement technique is useful here. 
Sidequests 
fv~'.r Co:s 
• Allies & 
Miscellany 
173 

174 
Cindy: Let Sleeping Mountains Lie 
0»--~~~~~~~~~~ 
If you return to Cape Caem via the Call Umbra feature after reaching 
Chapter 09, you will automatically receive a phone call from Cindy that 
triggers this quest. Here are the steps required to complete it: 
o Head back to Hammerhead and speak to Cindy. 
O Go to the Longwythe Rest Area and talk to Dave. 
o Speak to Dino inside the diner. Note that various sidequest vendors 
will also be available if you have taken part in assignments involving 
them. They will each give you a consumable if you speak to them. 
o Interact with Monica, who you will find to the east of Longwythe 
Peak. 
O The quest is completed as you automatically leave the premises 
after the Adamantoise appears, rewarding you with 1,000 EXP. 
O To defeat the Adamantoise, you will need to accept the "Lonely 
Rumblings in Longwythe" hunt. This is the most resilient creature 
in the game. For most players, defeating it will take a very long 
time, or seem impossible. The key to toppling this monster is to 
warp-strike to one of its body parts (preferably an eye or the neck), 
and perform endless aerial combos (tilt @ in the direction of your 
target to begin a new combo every time one ends). This requires 
the Airdance nexus in the Combat Ascension tree. Whenever 
you fall from a great height, perform a forward warp or point-
warp just before you hit the ground to avoid damage. You should 
also stock up on recovery items in advance, using them liberally 
throughout the fight, and seize any summon opportunity to speed 
up the process of emptying the monster's gigantic health bar. Both 
Armiger Freechain (an Ascension ability) and Magitek Boosters 
(a consumable) can also help you to temporari ly enjoy infinite MP, 
enabling long aerial combos. 
Stealing the Past 
0r--~~~~~~~~~~ 
After you have completed the main storyline and have unlocked the 
Regalia Type-F, you can activate this sidequest in Lestallum. 
1. At night time {between 21 :00 and 05:00). head to Lestallum's easternmost back 
alley, shown here. and listen to a conversation between two thieves by interacting with 
a window. This invites you to obtain additional information at Verinas Mart - Ravatogh, 
which you can do by talking to the local tipster. 
2. Making your approach with the Regalia Type -F {see page 155). land in the volcanic 
area shown here. to the northwest of Verinas Mart - Ravatogh. Flying at a low altitude. 
you will notice a dirt path that acts as a {short) landing track: this is easier to spot 
during daylight hours. 
3. Finally. make your way to the Pitioss Ruins dungeon entrance and interact with the 
crate on the right to complete this assignment. This rewards you with a Magitek Core 
and 50,000 EXP. Though it is entirely empty of enemies, this dungeon - which can only 
be entered at night - is undoubtedly the most complex labyrinth in the entire game. 

To reach this dungeon you must complete Cindy's final 
assignment and unlock the Regalia Type-F (see page 155 
for details). Now fly to the north of the Rock of Ravatogh 
and land in the otherwise inaccessible area beyond the 
rocks. Make your way up the slope until you reach the 
strange building. If you approach at night, the wall with 
the mysterious symbol will open. revealing the entrance 
to the game's most elaborate dungeon. This is a three-
dimensional. mind-bending. enemy-free maze that will 
seriously challenge your navigation and platforming skills. 
Everything in Pitioss revolves around your ability to 
accurately control Noctis. You will need to perfectly adjust 
your leaps to land on tiny ledges, carefully avoid hazards 
such as falling boulders and spikes. and more generally 
perform assorted physical feats with impeccable timing 
Furthermore, you will need no small measure of wit to solve 
the dungeon's puzzles - for example, by identifying how to 
reach a boulder that can fall in a specific position to trigger 
a switch. which will in turn open a door. 
Inside the dungeon, there are various devices that you 
need to interact with to create shortcuts or solve physical 
puzzles. Slashing colored blocks with your weapon is one 
of them, but expect many others, from boulders that need 
to be moved to destroy objects or open up a path. to giant 
mechanisms that you have to explore from all angles. 
Given the complexity of this structure's rooms. tl1e 
size of the dungeon. and the low level of light in these 
environments, a walkthrough relying on traditional text 
and screenshots would be of very little help (and trust 
us: we tried ). We have therefore prepared a full video 
guide showing how to clear each of Pitioss's rooms. 
For details simply scan the QR code above or visit 
www.piggyback.com/en/ffxv/pitioss. 
Sidequests 
) c 
., Allies & 
Miscellany 
175 

176 
ROYAL TOMBS & DUNGEONS 
In addition to those that you visit during the main storyline, 
there are numerous optional dungeons and tombs to find and 
explore. 
Dungeons 
0~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
There are multiple optional dungeons to be found in Lucis. 
When you enter one of them, a sidequest of the same name 
begins: to complete it. you need to defeat the boss guarding 
the dungeon and/or explore the local Royal Tomb. 
You will find a map showing their locations on the right, and 
walkthroughs to complete each one over the pages that 
follow. Though you can enter certain dungeons at an early 
stage in the story, it's wise to leave them until you at least 
meet the recommended level requirements. 
There are a few general tips that will increase your chances 
of success: 
0 The recommended 
level requirements 
are 
merely 
suggestions. If you wait until you comfortably exceed 
them, the dungeons will be far less challenging. 
0 Light-imbued weapons !sold at Meldacio Hunter HO) prove 
very effective against the denizens of these dungeons -
more precisely, all Daemons. If you do not own them yet, 
make this a top priority before you proceed. 
0 On a related topic, make the most of lgnis's element-
inducing Enhancement technique. This is an amazing tool 
for exploiting enemy weaknesses. and can be combined 
with additional weaknesses to specific weapon types to 
maximize your damage output. 
0 This may sound obvious. but don't forget that eating a 
stat-boosting meal prior to a dungeon crawl will give you 
a significant edge. Reserve your most powerful dishes tor 
the hardest dungeons and you will be surprised by how 
much of a difference this can make. 
tJ Tomb of the Wise: 
Tomb of the Conqueror: 
This is the second tomb you visit during Chapter 02, found 
at the end of the Keycatrich Trench tunnels [see page 45). 
Exploring it grants you the Axe of the Conqueror. 
Tomb of the Tall: 
---, 
Technically accessible du11ng Chapter 02. this tomb, home 
of the Bow of the Clever, is best cleared much later. when 
your party members' levels are in the late 50s or higher. It is 
found inside the Balouve Mines [see page 178) 
Tomb of the Just: 
This optional destination lies to the southwest of Coernix 
Station ~ Cauthess. You can enter it at any time, as early as 
during Chapter 03. Interacting with the tombstone inside will 
reward you with the Shield of the Just. 
This tomb. found in the southeast region of Duscae. can be explored at any time from Chapter 03 onwards. The Sword of the Tall is 
supposed to be contained within. but has actually been stolen and must be retrieved by defeating the boss of the Costlemark Tower 
dungeon (see page 186 for details}. This is a late-game challenge that you should leave until your party is suitably prepared - well over 
Level 60. 
l 
i 
__ I 
Tomb of the Mystic: 
This is the tomb you visit automatically during Chapter 04 
at the Disc of Cauthess (see page 60). It contains the Blade 
of the Mystic. 
ft Tomb of the Rogue: 
1 
This tomb awaits at the heart of the Myrlwood forest. 
Exploring this dungeon to its end (see page 188 for 
guidance} will reward you with the Star of the Rogue. 
Tomb of the Wanderer: 
This is the tomb found at the end of the Glacial Grotto 
dungeon, visited during Chapter 03 (see page 56). It yields 
the Swords of the Wanderer. 

0 
10 
This tomb is hidden on the heights of the Ravatoghan 
volcano. You can find a walkthrough for this dungeon on 
page 190. The Mace of the fierce is the prize awarded to 
those who visit it. 
Tomb of the Pious: 
This tomb, which contains the Scepter of the Pious. rests 
deep in Malmalam Thicket, a dungeon that we cover 
on page 189. 
Tomb of the Warrior: 
One Royal Tomb isn't found in Lucis, but instead in 
Succarpe. You visit 11 automatically during Chapter 10, 
and are rewarded for your efforts with the Katana of 
the Warrior. 
Crestholm Channels (Dungeon}: See page 180. 
' 
Formouth Garrison (Imperial Base}: See page 182. 
14 '""""'"---~~-----
Daurell Caverns (Dungeon}: See page 184. 
Costlemark Tower (Dungeon}: See page 186. 
1ij Malmalam Thicket (Forest}: See page 189. 
flN~LmTm. H 
Sidequests 
The Rock of Ravatogh (Dungeon}: See page 190. 
The Myrlwood (Forest}: See page 188. 
Glacial Grotto (Dungeon}: See page 56. 
21f Fociaugh Hollow (Dungeon}: See page 64. 
• 
Royal Tombs 
Dungeons 
Steyliff Grove (Dungeon}: See page 75. 
Zij._P_i-
tio_•_•_"_"_in_•_ID_u_n_g_eo_n_1:_s_e_e _p .a_g_e_11_5_
· ~~~ 
177 

BALOUVE MINES 8 
MEANING 
~ 
Mythril Shaft 
~ 
Rusted Bit 
~ 
Iron Shavings 
fi.ill 
I ! Friendship Band 
@.ill 
Circlet 
~ 
Emerald Bracelet 
~ 
Rainbow Pendant 
~ 
! Megalixir 
~ 
Elixir 
@ill 
Hi-Potion 
~ 
Silver Ore 
~ 
I Prismatic Dust 
~ 
' Gold Ore 
~ 
Oracle Ascension Coin 
~ 
Bow of the Clever 
I Champion's Anklet 
~ 
[25%), Prismatic Dust 
, [25%), Silver Ore [50%) 
~ 
Ruby Bracelet [25%), Gold 
Ore [25%), Elixir [50%) 
178 

Go through the open gate and walk up the hill. Once inside the cave, take the elevator. 
Exit at the first floor you reach (Bl Fl and follow the path represented on our map, which 
is fairly linear and leads to a few encounters with Goblins. When you reach the apparent 
dead-end, take the small path to the left to reach the level below; the presence of a Fire 
deposit should make it relatively easy to identify. 
When you reach the metal platform, use the easy-to-miss ladder shown here to climb 
down to the level below. Keep going down when you reach the rails. 
After you defeat the Aramusha, climb to the position shown here to find a very narrow 
gap in the wall. You finally reach the Royal Tomb on the other side. The reward for 
completing this quest is 10,000 EXP and the Bow of the Clever from the tomb itself. 
When you make it to this position. a set-piece ambush causes you to fall down to the 
lower level. Use area-of-effect moves to keep the crowd of Daemons under control. 
Once they have been neutralized, unlock the door at the bottom of the slope. 
A boss battle against an Aramusha awaits you in this large room. Despite the monster's 
high level, this battle is not as difficult as it might seem. This is a decidedly ponderous 
enemy, and the key to defeating it is simple: parry all of its blows. Assuming you do 
this, you will have numerous counter opportunities where you can unleash your most 
lethal combos without consequence. Quickly eliminate the Goblins at the start of the 
battle, then focus on parrying and countering as consistently as you can. To help tip the 
odds in your favor, equip Noctis with a Ourandal Sword and augment it further with the 
Enhancement technique. Be particularly wary of your opponent's Dark-elemental area-of-
effect attack: whenever you notice a purple perimeter appearing around the Aramusha, 
sprint. warp, or roll-dodge away, as this cannot be phased through and will kill all affected 
characters instantly. This foe has other moves that inflict Instant Death, making defense 
of paramount importance throughout the battle. 
The branching path beyond the narrow gap in the wall leads to this sealed door. 
behind which a very dangerous threat awaits. This challenge, covered in its dedicated 
sidequest section (see page 194). is one that you will face much, much later. 
Sidequests 
Ill Dungeons 
179 

180 
Leide: Crestholm Channels 
8 
CRESTHOLM CHANNELS 
To enter the dungeon, look for this opening in the fence, to your 
right after you pass the checkpoint Go down the staircase to find a 
hole in the ground leading to the Crestholm Channels. Once inside. 
your objective is to find and activate four control panels that open 
a gate to the dungeon's final boss. Note that it is very easy to get 
disoriented in this dungeon at first. with navigation complicated by 
the presence of one-way routes between levels, plus doors and 
shortcuts that can only be opened or activated from a specific side 
or elevation. 
Q
Enemy Ana lysis 
NAME 
The first control panel is just a few steps from your starting 
position. If you intend to plunder the dungeon of its treasures, 
now is a good time to make a methodical sweep of this main floor 
level. Avoid the slope with running water close to the first panel: 
this will propel you to a lower level and necessitate a rather long 
return journey. There's no pressure to pick up absolutely everything 
immediately, though, as you can backtrack to this floor from the 
lower reaches of the dungeon. Once you're ready, reconvene with 
the path shown on the map. When you reach a set of railings 
northeast of the control panel (at which point you are literally a few 
steps away from Sylvester's Map Piece 0), jump over to reach a 
tunnel that leads to the next level down. 
NOTES 
The second control panel is to your right as you head through this 
linear corridor section. If you are visiting to complete Cindy's "The 
Ever Illustrious Regalia" sidequest. the object that she requires 
can be found in the first room. When you reach the ledge to the 
south. interact with the raised ladder to create a shortcut. You are 
then safe to climb down. (Incidentally. if you are wondering how to 
reach the collectible on the opposite ledge, it can be accessed via 
a tunnel in the southeast of the level above.) 

Follow the path to the third control panel and activate it. Our 
route takes you to the next dungeon level down via a semi-hidden 
hole in the floor, which enables you to pick up an otherwise 
inaccessible collectible. Making the one-way drop means that you 
won't be able to return to this level until later. so you may wish to 
make a detour to find a handful of collectibles beforehand. On the 
next level. grab the items within easy reach and approach the slope 
with running water. 
Before you take the plunge, take a moment to prepare your party 
for the confrontation that awaits. The [entirely necessary) plummet 
to the bottom level of the dungeon will cause fall damage when you 
land, followed by an immediate ambush by a dangerous Nagarani. 
Equip your most suitable weapons in advance (this powertul sub-
boss is weak to Fire. Swords, Shields, and light, but resistant to 
lightning). 
Legend 
El~
·~+·- El1M4iiif!*EI MEANING 
ow I Chrome Bit 
I 
~ 
· Mythril Shaft 
09.l 1 Rusted Bit 
O,ill 
Iron Shavings 
@.:!!! 
Friendship Bond 
~ 
Moogle Charm 
i 
~ 
! Red Choker 
1 ~ 
Earth Pendant 
I ~ 
I 
@ill 
Target Scope 
~ 
e,w 
Auto-Changer 
~ 
Elixir 
~ 
Hi-Potion 
~ 
Hero's Shield 
~ 
Wyvern Lonee 
Blood Sword 
Oracle Ascension Coin 
Ruby Bracelet (25%), 
Ether (25%), Elixir (50%) 
Pendulum (25%), Elixir 
(25%), Ether (50%) 
Switch/Terminal 
Jormungand is a fearsome monster, weak to Ice. Swords, and Daggers, but resistant to Fire and light. 
Equip your favorite weapon (the Blood Sword found in the previous room can be an excellent choice) 
and regularly infuse it with Ice by employing lgnis's Enhancement technique. The Star of the Rogue can 
also be remarkably effective here as the creature has multiple body parts that can be hit simultaneously 
from a distance, making it much easier to survive; warp-strikes to the creature's head can hit multiple 
times, causing severe damage - though this also harms Noctis significantly. Phase through every enemy 
attack. and sprint or roll away from the devastating fire explosion that the monster regularly causes [it 
is clearly telegraphed by the presence of fiery particles gathering in the air). In addition. seize any parry 
opportunity to launch powerful counters: an Armiger can be a worthwhile expense in a battle as difficult 
as this. When Jormungand falls, make note of the ladder that enables you to go down the octagonal 
shah in the northwest of the arena: this leads to a sealed door, behind which lies a maze. You can only 
visit this challenging section of the dungeon aher completing the game (see page 192). 
After you traverse a narrow ledge and make a daring walk over a 
pipeline, you'll notice a green gate (marked by a. 
on our map). 
Make a note of this. as you'll be returning here shortly to meet the 
dungeon's boss. In the next room you'll encounter a Black Flan, 
another monster with sub-boss credentials. It is weak to Light 
alone, and has a resistance to all weapons except for Royal Arms. 
• 
Sidequests 
)1 i..:f(. '.Y 3-
r:(• -~ - S. 
~+ (' 
" 
b:, 
•· Dungeons 
181 

182 
Q Leide: Formouth_Garrison 
From your previous position. point-warp to the nearby elevated walkway and make your 
way to the next watchtower in line. You can then methodically eliminate the sentries 
(including the one by the turret. as well as any other imperial guard on the way) and 
disable all searchlights. 
With all sentries down, you are now free to disable the Magitek generator - unless your 
infiltration ended unsuccessfully with a barrage of gunfire, in which case you'll need to 
attend to the enemy forces beforehand. 
Your first task is to stealthily eliminate the guards on the watchtowers. Walk past the 
lifeless Magitek troops and move quietly toward the first tower and point-warp to a 
blue marker on the steps. From there, make your way upwards and warp-kill the sentry. 
You can then disable the searchlight. 
From the final watchtower (which has two searchlights). look down to the area where 
the Magitek troops are assembled. Identify the human patrols and quietly warp-kill 
those that move out of sight of their allies. Repeat this process to eliminate them all 
without being seen. 
Combat is now the order of business until the end of this mission. The first wave 
of enemies consists of cannon-fodder infantry and Magitek Assassins (weak to Ice, 
Polearms. and Daggers). The latter have attacks that can cause instant death, so be 
on your guard at all times: defend consistently and unleash brutal assaults whenever 
you have an opening. You then face a second wave featuring an MA Hoplomachus 
supported by an MA Veles-Bis. Both are weak to Lightning, Daggers. and Greatswords 
(but immune to Light and resistant to Fire): a Thunderbolt (naturally infused with 
Lightning) or any more powerful Greatsword boosted with the Enhancement technique 
will be effective here. Try to execute sweeping blows that hit multiple body parts or 
even both bipedal tanks simultaneously for optimal results. Alternatively, note that you 
can man the fixed turret to wreak havoc, but this works only if you eliminate all snipers 
first (otherwise, they will interrupt you constantly). 

FORMOUTH GARRISON 
fiJ 
After completing the mission, you can plunder the base for collectibles !though you 
may still face heavy resistance!. Of particular interest is the Strange Engine: a key item 
required to unlock the flying Regalia Type-F once you reach Chapter 15. 
The final battle pits you against an MA-X Cuirass and an MA-X Dux. both of which 
are weak to Machinery and Shields. but immune to light Equip both Noctis and 
Prompto with a weapon from this category - and if you have upgraded some of them 
by completing some of Cid's sidequests, all the better. You may also consider selecting 
one of Prompto's techniques that rely on Machinery to exploit both bipedal tanks' 
sole vulnerability. Close-range Machinery shots prove devastating, particularly if you 
charge them for a few seconds - though you should avoid charging for too long as 
your maximum damage per shot is capped at 9,999. Focus all your efforts on a single 
target, then attend to the other once the first has fallen. An alternative strategy involves 
manning the fixed gun emplacement to inflict consistent damage while your opponents 
focus their assault on lgnis. Gladiolus. and Prompto. You will probably be flushed out 
!though this happens rarely if you eliminate all snipers first). but you can simply take 
control of the turret again. 
Legend 
Ill 
MEANING 
Om.I 
Electrolytic Condenser 
~ 
Mythril Shaft 
~ 
Bulletproof Suit 
~ 
Chobham Armor 
@.u 
Megalixir 
0!!.11 
Muscle Stimulant 
@Jill 
Reflex Enhancer 
~ 
Flesh Fortifier 
~ 
Magitek Booster 
~ 
Drill breaker 
~ 
Strange Engine 
Enerov Analysis 
Sidequests 
Dungeons 
183 

184 
Daurell Caverns 
When you reach the scaffolding, don't forget to interact with the ladder, as shown on 
this picture. This will create a shortcut enabling you to climb back up should you need to. 
At the end of the path an Iron Giant ambushes you, and is soon joined by additional 
Daemons. The giant will tall quickly if you wield a weapon infused with Light (available 
from the Meldacio Hunter HQ arms vendor). Phase and parry whenever it attacks, 
but remain on the offensive most of the time. Try to defeat the Iron Giant in priority, 
if possible within seconds. as his blows can potentially destroy the nearby scaffolding, 
thus preventing you from reaching the section described in the next step. Important: 
before the final target falls, point-warp to the small platform at the top of the scaffolding 
in question. shown here. This is the only way to access this area as the blue marker 
disappears when the battle ends. Interact with the ladder to create a permanent 
shortcut. Your victory rewards you with 4.000 EXP. 
Q Enemy Analysis 
NAME 
NOTES 
From the entrance. you soon face a fork in the path. Both routes are entirely viable. We 
suggest you opt for the right-hand one. as shown on our map, as this will enable you to 
clear the dungeon of all ot its creatures before you trigger the boss encounter. Be patient 
and prudent in battles that pit you against multiple Daemons. The Ronin enemies. which 
you should be familiar with by this stage, are not hard to defeat if you parry their blows 
consistently, but their attacks take a toll if they land - some can even cause instant death. 
Stay on the defensive while many creatures are still alive, striking hard and quickly after 
each successful parry. Once their numbers dwindle, you can become more aggressive. 
When in front of the very narrow ledge, press ®/(\)to begin the traversal process 
From the platform at the top of the scaffolding, go through the small opening in the 
rock wall. You will find another sealed door on the other side, behind which a very 
hard challenge awaits; remember its location for a later visit. We cover these special 
optional endgame bosses in a dedicated section that begins on page 192. 
Necromancer 
Ronin 
Hecteyes 
Weak to Greatswords, Shields, Ice. and Light, resistant to Lightning 
_;~, .;~ ;:,;.;:-
'".;,;,,~.,, ~;r~ilJlll 
Weak to Swords, Daggers. Lightning, and Light, resistant to Fire 
t 
_,.,..'i.,'J"'~"V~,~;';'.&?.!1.~.;~~~ 
Weak to Polearms. Shields. and Light 
-
• -' 
• '?~::'4\:11:,~~~i ·r~~iliW:!:l~ 
Iron Giant 
Weak to Light. Shields. and Greatswords, resistant to Fire 

DAURELL CAVERNS 
f!l 
~ N 
., Sidequesls 
Legend .. 
MEANING 
~ 
Fossil Wood 
om 
Rusted Bit 
ow 
Strong Bone 
aw 
Ammonite Fossil 
OllJ 
Beetle Shell 
~ 
Silver Bangle 
~ 
Sapphire Bracelet 
~ 
Moogle Charm 
!-- ,_!· 
~ 
Heliodor Bracelet 
~. 
Hi-Potion 
~ 
Allural Shallot 
~ 
Hardedge 
~ 
Assassin's Daggers 
~ 
Oracle Ascension Coin 
1; ,, 
.!:) 
' Titanium Bangle (25%). 
-~ Dungeons 
Elixir (25%). Hi-Potion 
(50%) 
Hi-Elixir (25%). Ether 
1 
'l" 
!) 
(25%). Ancient Dragon 
Tooth (50%) 
-·-·-· 
-
--~.· 
185 

186 
Duscae: Costlemark Tower 
The entrance to Costlemark Tower is only open at night If you 
arrive during the day you will find it sealed. When you reach the 
room shown here, you have two possible routes: the way down the 
stairs with a broken pillar acting as a bridge (shown on our map). 
or the way past the tiny traversable ledge. beyond which you can 
jump down to the floor below. Both routes dovetail a little later on, 
so feel free to choose either. 
When you can finally interact with the cube in the southwest 
corner of the large square room, follow the path shown on our 
map to find the exit. Be very careful, as there are two interaction 
points midway through the cube section: do not touch the one in 
the dead-end to the south, but opt for the one to the east instead. 
Once you find an elevator, activate it to reach the final room. 
Follow our suggested path until you reach this large square room 
Make sure you do not inadvertently step on the bright red floor 
switch: this would take you back to the beginning of the dungeon. 
You might be under the impression that this room has no exit other 
than the red floor switch, but in fact it does. Examine the floor 
panels emitting a blue light in each corner of the room and you will 
notice that you can interact with one of them. The panels actually 
correspond to one side of a moving cube: when you activate them, 
the cubes move downward. By interacting with a cube multiple 
times, you will open up a path to a lower section of the dungeon. 
The trick is that all of the cubes but one are traps: they lead to a 
large room on the floor below, where multiple high-level Daemons. 
including Red Giants. await. Once you defeat all the monsters. a 
cube will take you back upstairs to the large square room. where 
you can try a different path. Every time you take a wrong path. the 
monsters in the room below become more numerous. making the 
encounters increasingly difficult. 
In the room with the Red Giants. you may have noticed a small gap 
in a wall that you can go through. This leads to a sealed door behind 
which a ferocious fiend is locked. You can face this creature during 
a specific sidequest (see page 192). though this task is unavailable 
until you have completed the main storyline. 
The game will leave you no choice but to use incorrect cubes at 
first. thereby causing you to visit the room below with increasing 
numbers of Daemons. In general, the first cube to be available is 
the one in the northeast (use the interaction point farther away from 
you when you have a choice; the closest one would take you back 
upstairs. requiring an extra loop); the second cube to be available is 
otten the one in the southeast, followed by the one in the northeast, 
and finally the correct one: the cube in the southwest corner of 
the room. This sequence is partly randomized, however: you may 
experience a different order. 
In the final room you are confronted by a fearsome Jabberwock. 
It is weak to Polearms, Machinery, and Ice !and resistant to Fire 
and light). Your most powertul weapon in either category, regularly 
boosted with lgnis's Enhancement technique. will give the best 
results. Equipping the Star of the Rogue can also be a solid choice 
to hit multiple body parts while remaining far enough away from 
the monster to avoid most of its assaults. Make sure your allies 
also wield well-adapted gear As ever, phase and parry to the best 
of your ability, and consider casting your most powerful Ice spells. 
Once the monster falls, you obtain 15,000 EXP and a Royal Arm -
the Sword of the Tall. Step on the red floor switch once you are 
ready to return to the dungeon's entrance. 
·

COSTLEMARK TOWER 
8 
Sidequesls 
Legend .. 
MEANING 
ow 
Chrome Bit 
~ 
Mythril Shaft 
@JiJ 
Platinum Bangle 
~ 
Moogle Charm 
~ 
Black Choker 
@ll.l 
The Good Chamberlain 
@ill 
Thieves' Way 11 
@.W 
Mega Phoenix 
~ 
, Mega Potion 
~ 
Durandal 
~ 
Radiant lance 
~ 
Orichalcum 
~ 
Oracle Ascension Coin 
Crusader's Anklet (25%). 
"' 
Dungeons 
~ 
Mega-Potion 125%1. 
Mega Phoenix (50%) 
~ 
Platinum Ingot (1%), 
Mega Phoenix (99%1 
187 

Q_§_nen:iv An9~ysis _ 
NAME 
NOTES 
CLEIGNE: THE MYRLWOOD 
fil 
188 
Progression in the dungeon is very straightforward, so simply follow the path represented 
on our map. Note that you can make camp at the local haven by making a brief detour to 
the south when you reach the branching path. 
When you reach the final section you are attacked by a dangerous opponent: a Treant. 
This creature is weak to Greatswords, Machinery, and Fire, so try to equip weapons from 
these categories for both Noctis and Prompto. lgnis's Enhancement technique, which 
imbues Noctis's weapon with Fire properties, is quite devastating here. The Treant's 
attacks are not particularly difficult to block, so parry at each opportunity. Alter the 
battle, open the nearby Tomb of the Rogue to retrieve a new Royal Arm: the Star of the 
Rogue. Your reward for this quest is 3,000 EXP 
Legend .. 
MEANING 
ICON -
~ 
I Megaphone 
~ 
Gold Bangle 
~ 
Mega Phoenix 
~ 
Star of the Rogue 
~ 
Oracle Ascension Coin 
@!Ll 
Super Baleen 
~ 
Whiskers: Chocolate 
i Sapphire Bracelet 
125%). Strong 
Bone 125%). Silver 
Ore 150%) 
Treant Branch 
~ 125%). Mandrake 
' Flower 125%). 
Strong Bone 150%) 
Talisman 125%). 
-!/· I Silver Ore 125%). 
Gold Ore 150%) 

NAME 
NOTES 
Legend 
ICON 
MEANING 
Olli 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
Q!W 
~ 
~ 
j Giant Crab Pincers 
, Moon Pendant 
I Thunderbolt 
' 
I 
Scepter of the Pious 
Delta Daggers 
I 
Malmashroom 
Prismatic Shard 
1 Oracle Ascension Coin 
I 
Sapphire Bracelet 
.!!) 
125%). Pendulum 125%). 
I Prismatic Shard (50%1 
: Star Pendant (25%). 
~ I Golden Hourglass (25%). 
Hi-Elixir (50%1 
---~------~---
Navigating this relatively linear dungeon is not particularly challenging. The only section 
where you might need a little help is shown on this screenshot. When you reach the 
waterfall. a short walk beyond the haven, climb to the top, then take a right. You will 
find a narrow gorge between the rock walls. leading to the final section of the forest. 
As you near the end of the dungeon you will notice a Royal Tomb in the distance, with 
a Bandersnatch to defeat before you can reach it. This creature is weak to Polearms, 
Machinery, and Lightning so prioritize these for all of your characters. Focus on defense if 
you struggle with the monster's speed, then use any parry opportunity to unleash lethal 
counters. One very reliable strategy consists of equipping the Star ofthe Rogue obtained 
from the Royal Tomb in the Myrlwood. Enhance it with lgnis, then fire repeatedly at 
your target from a distance. Occasionally point-warping to a blue marker position and 
following up with a warp-strike can inflict massive damage, but watch your own HP in 
the process. The sidequest is complete when the monster falls, leaving you free to claim 
the Scepter of the Pious in the Royal Tomb and a reward of 3,000 EXP 
fil 
MALMALAM THICKET 
• Sidequesls 
,., Dungeons 
189 

190 
lfil 
CLEIGNE: FORT VAULLEREY 
Legend 
I 
!l 
After you clear Fort Vaullerey 
during the main storyline (see 
page 70), you can return to this 
imperial base to pick up various 
collectibles. 
------
c.m Mythril Shaft 
~ 
laser Sensor 
~ 
Megalixir 
8 
In the watchtower 
~ 
@.gru 
~ 
i) 
On top of the shipping containers 
Muscle Stimulant 
Flesh Fortifier 
Magitek Booster 
0 
On top of a shipping container next to the hut 
0 
On top of the canvas-covered boxes 
~ 
Cerberus 
~ 
Noiseblaster 
Q Enemy Analy~s 
NAME 
NOTES 

As this dungeon is rather linear, your progression should be very smooth. When you 
reach the very steep portion of the climb, however, you might struggle a little. The key 
is to continually tilt@ forwards, making only very subtle lateral adjustments when you 
need to alter your course to the side. Stay calm and focused and you will soon manage 
to move up at a steady pace. Using the trick to refresh your stamina (by pressing/ 
releasing the corresponding button again when the gauge is about to be fully depleted) 
makes a big difference here. If you struggle. consider eating a meal that grants infinite 
stamina before visiting the dungeon: the Smoked Dualhorn Shank available from the 
nearby Verinas Mart - Ravatogh restaurant falls into this category. 
From the haven, you will notice a narrow rocky path that you can use to progress. 
Follow it until you reach a giant nest, and a large arena beyond. 
Legend 
When you reach this location. you might wonder how to make it to the top of the cliff 
There is a climbable surface that enables you to ascend after pressing ®/O. Use the 
same method to climb the second part of the cliff. 
Walk alongside the wall on the right-hand side of the arena (with the nest behind you): 
you will soon see a small opening leading to a path. at the end of which lies the Tomb 
of the Fierce. Open it to expand your collection of Royal Arms with the Mace of the 
Fierce and obtain 4,000 EXP. 
[53 
ROCK OF RAVATOGH 
~N 
~ 
·~ow 
MEANING 
-----
~ 
! Quality Building Stone I OW I Ammonite Fossil 
I ~ 
1 
Magic Flask 
O,Aw, Building Stone 
' .~ 
Ruby Bracelet 
; !) 
Silver Shard 125%). Silver Ore 125%). Silver Dust 150%) 
I 
I 
• 
I 
OJ;zJ I Tiny Feather 
i ~ 
1 
Kettier Ginger 
~ 
Gold Shard 125%). Gold Ore 125%). Gold Dust 150%) 
OW i Glass Gemstone 
~ 
Mace of the Fierce 
I !l 
Silver Ore 125%). Prismatic Dust 125%). Building Stone 150%) 
~J_Strong Bone__ 
i ~ 
O ra~~-Ascens10~ CcJ~ _l ~ 
Silver Bangle 125%). Fire Crest 125%). Tiny Feather 150%) 
Sidequests 
..., Dungeons 
191 

192 
MENACE BENEATH LUCIS 
After completing the main storyline and clearing four optional dungeons 
(Balouve Mines, Crestholm Channels, Daurell Caverns, and Costlemark 
Tower). you can trigger this quest by speaking to Ezma at Meldacio 
Hunter HQ. You will find her seated in a chair on a wooden terrace close 
to the local restaurant. She tasks you with one of the biggest and rnost 
challenging missions in the game, requiring you to defeat ferocious 
fiends sealed behind eight doors located around the Lucian frontier. 
These are found deep within the game's dungeons, usually mere steps 
away from the Royal Tombs or boss chambers. 
Using the key that you receive at the beginning of this quest, you can 
now unseal these doors. However. the monsters you need to eliminate 
are not directly beyond - you have a network of tunnels to explore first, 
with rooms filled with additional high-level enemies. Think of them as 
dungeons within dungeons. 
As you gradually progress and clear rooms of monsters, you go 
deeper and deeper into the maze. with branching paths leading to 
dead ends - and no in-game map whatsoever to help you. Your 
perseverance is rewarded, however. Not only do you accrue EXP 
from the numerous Daemons you defeat, but these mazes feature 
numerous collectibles, including va luable consumables, accessories, 
and even weapons. 
In this section, we offer a breakdown of the structure of each maze 
to help you identify which exit is the correct one whenever you reach 
branching paths, what monsters you can expect to encounter, and 
which valuable items you should look for. 
Objective 
Once you go through a sealed door and enter a maze. your primary goal 
is to make your way to the deepest room, where the maze's guardian 
awaits. Defeat this boss and your objective is complete; exploring each 
and every dead end is entirely optional. 
We will help you reach this goal by giving you a summary of the 
weaknesses and resistances of all fiends you will encounter in each 
maze, including bosses. 
You may complete the mazes in any order that you see fit. Once you 
have explored all eight and defeated the redoubtable menaces guarding 
their deepest rooms, report back to Ezma to complete this enormous 
sidequest. 
Maze Structure 
Each maze is composed of a combination of recurring segments. 
There are four standard segment types, which we have designated 
A, B, C, and D. Every standard segment type has a specific shape, 
but all of them are linear: as you become familiar with them, you will 
find it easier to navigate the mazes and know what to expect around 
every corner. 
<> Cave Mazes (Keycatrich Trench, Balouve Mines, Fociaugh Hollows, 
Glacial Grotto, Daurell Caverns. and Crestholm Channels) feature 
segment types A, B, and C. 
<> Ruins Mazes (Costlemark Tower and Steyliff Grove) feature all four 
types: A, B, C, and D. 
Each segment contains two rooms (where you will encounter enemies 
and find collectibles) linked by corridors (all empty). 
STANDARD SEGMENT TYPES & SHAPES 

~- . 
EXAMPLE OF STANDARD SEGMENT IN CAVE MAZES 
EXAMPLE OF STANDARD SEGMENT IN RUINS MAZES 
In addition to the standard segment types, you will regularly encounter 
segments that feature branching paths in their second room: one path 
leads to the deeper sections of the maze, while the others lead to dead 
ends with more collectibles and enemies to fight. 
Navigation in general is not easy as visibility is very low in these dark 
environments. Even linear sections can prove challenging because they 
feature twists and turns, or very large roorns. The risk of getting lost is far 
greater in rooms with multiple exits, though. If you choose one randomly 
and explore it to its end, remembering where you came from and where 
you're supposed to go when you backtrack can prove challenging. 
To help you know where to go when you face branching paths, we 
reveal the position of the correct door (to your left, right, or middle) 
in every single instance. You can also use the in-game compass as a 
f''"''""'~\ 
I 
~~ ~ -C:'!"~' 
'-~ 
""- : : 
--·~ :.\~ -
+ 
~ 
~ 
~' 
· ~ 
) 
.. "-:. " 
~: 
· 'd-
.... 
~· 1 
\""' 
'~~ 
....,._ ....•. ~~--..,,.., ·""""'" 
EXAMPLE OF SEGMENT WITH BRANCHING PATHS 
Navigation is further complicated by the presence of high-level 
opponents in most rooms. You might be tempted to run past them and 
head straight for the exit but it's usually impossible: gates regularly shut 
when you enter a room, blocking all exits. It's only once you've defeated 
all enemies that you can resume your progression in the maze. 
If you can't bear any more, departing via the "Return to entrance" option 
on the Map screen will warp you back to the maze's sealed door. 
Camps 
Every five segments you negotiate in a maze, you will find a camp. 
These enable you to rest and to refill your maximum HP completely - a 
welcome feature given that you will regularly face powerful Daemons. 
It goes without saying, however, that you should stockpile a mountain 
of supplies before you begin, particularly powerful recovery items such 
as Elixirs. 
In addition to their healing properties, camps are essential in that they 
enable you to "bank" the EXP that you accrue while defeating hordes 
of enemies. Indeed, resting at these locations is also the only way to 
record your progress with the auto-saves that occur automatically after 
the party sleeps. 
S1dequests 
t ll 
• Menaces 
193 

194 
~ A Menace Sleeps in Keycatrich (Lv. 55) 
Maze Location: Keycatrich Trench (see page 45) 
Maze Structure 
SEGMENT 
COLLECTIBLES (NORMAL) 
COLLECTIBLES (RARE) 
c 
Elixir 
Circlet 
B 
Hi-Potion 
Gold Bangle 
Laser Sensor 
Oracle Ascension Coin 
Branching paths -
Mythril Shaft 
Emerald Bracelet 
correct exit: left 
Shattered Timepiece 
(50% chance). 
c 
Quality Building Stone 
Hi-Elixir (25% chance). 
Splendid Building Stone 
or Hi-Potion (25% chance) 
Beautiful Bottle 
Rune Earring (50% chance). 
Debased Coin 
Ether (25% chance). 
Debased Silverpiece 
or Hi-Potion (25% chance) 
Prismatic Shard 
Camp 
Dominator {Greatsword) 
Branching paths -
laser Sensor 
Diamond Bracelet 
correct exit: middle 
Hi-Potion 
Wizard Shield 
B 
Mythril Shaft 
Gold Bangle (50% chance). 
Splendid Building Stone 
Elixir (25% chance). 
Branching paths -
Earth Gemstone 
or Hi-Potion (25% chance) 
correct exit: middle 
Sky Gemstone 
Oracle Ascension Coin 
A 
Beautiful Bottle 
Mega Phoenix (50% chance), 
Debased Coin 
Ether (25% chance), 
Debased Silverpiece 
or Hi-Potion (25% chance) 
Prismatic Shard 
Yellowstone Crystal 
Boss (Lakhmu Flan) 
Hyper Magnum (Firearm) 
Enemy Analysis 
NAME 
NOTES 
Ereshkigal 
Galvanade 
Black Flan 
Bavaro is 
Marshmallow 
Hecteyes 
Lakhmu Flan 
Weak to Swords. Shields. Fire. and Light; resistant to Lightning 
Weak to Firearms. Machinery, and Light; absorbs Lightning 
Weak to Light; resistant to all other damage types except for 
Royal Arms 
Weak to Ice. Lightning, and Light; resists all standard weapon 
types; absorbs Fire 
Weak to Fire. Lightning, and Light; resists all standard weapon 
types and Ice 
Weak to Polearms, Shields, and Light 
Weak to Light; resists all other standard damage types; use Royal 
Arms and be very aggressive to limit your exposure to its gravity-
based (attractive) attack 
~ A Menace Sleeps in Balouve (Lv. 78) 
Maze Location: Balouve Mines (see page 178) 
Maze Structure 
SEGMENT 
COLLECTIBLES (NORMAL) 
COLLECTIBLES (RARE) 
A 
Chrome Bit 
Hi-Elixir 
B 
Rusted Bit 
Megalixir 
Gold Ore 
Oracle Ascension Coin 
c 
Silver Ore 
Emperor's Anklet 
B 
Prismatic Dust 
(50% chance). 
Prismatic Shard 
Hi-Elixir (25% chance), 
Prismatic Ore 
or Hi-Potion (25% chance) 
Mythril Shalt 
Oracle Earring (50% chance). 
Potion 
Ether (25% chance). 
Hi· Potion 
or Hi·Potion (25% chance) 
Mega-Potion 
Ether 
Camp 
Apocalypse (Greatsword) 
Branching paths -
Chrome Bit 
• Megalixir 
correct exit: left 
Mythril Shaft 
• Platinum Ingot 
Earth Gemstone 
Platinum Bangle (50% chance), 
A 
Beautiful Bottle 
Elixir (25% chance). 
Branching paths -
Prismatic Oust 
or Hi-Potion (25% chance) 
correct exit: left 
Prismatic Shard 
Oracle Ascension Coin 
Prismatic Ore 
Hi-Elixir (50% chance). 
B 
Potion 
Ether (25% chance). 
Hi-Potion 
or Hi-Potion (25% chance) 
Mega·Potion 
• Oracle Earring (50% chance), 
Ether 
Ether (25% chance). or 
Hi-Potion (25% chance) 
Boss (Psychomancer) 
Death Penalty (Firearm) 
Enemy Analysis 
NAME 
NOTES 
Voretooth 
Hobgoblin 
Killer Wasp 
Mindflayer 
Imp 
Psychomancer 
Weak to Polearms. Shields. and Ice; resistant to Fire and Light 
Weak to Greatswords, Machinery. Fire, and Light resistant to 
Lightning 
Weak to Polearms, Daggers, and Fire; resistant to Lightning and 
Light 
Weak to Polearms. Daggers. Lightning, and Light; resistant to !ce 
Weak to Daggers, Firearms, Ice, and Light; resistant to Fire 
Weak to Greatswords, Shields. Ice. and Light; resistant to 
Lightning; employs Dark-elemental attacks capable of causing 
Instant Death; phase and parry consistently, countering with 
Light-imbued weapons enhanced by lgnis 

~ A Menace Sleeps in Fociaugh (Lv. 65) 
Maze Location: Fociaugh Hollows (see page 65) 
Maze Structure 
SEGMENT 
COLLECTIBLES (NORMAL) 
COLLECTIBLES (RARE) 
A 
Ammonite Fossil 
The Grand Chamberlain 
c 
Ancient Dragon Tooth 
Megalixir 
Duality Building Stone 
Oracle Ascension Coin 
Branching paths -
Splendid Building Stone 
Moon Pendant [50% chance). 
correct exit: middle 
Beautiful Bottle 
Ether [25% chance). 
B 
Debased Coin 
or Hi-Potion (25% chance) 
Debased Silverpiece 
Earth Pendant [50% chance). 
Potion 
Ether [25% chance). 
Hi-Potion 
or Hi-Potion 125% chance) 
Mega-Potion 
Ether 
Prismatic Shard 
Yellowstone Crystal 
Camp 
Organyx [Daggers) 
A 
Ammonite Fossil 
Lavender Oil 
Branching paths -
Ancient Dragon Tooth 
Centurion Bangle 
Duality Building Stone 
• Megalixir 
correct exit: right 
Splendid Building Stone 
Oracle Ascension Coin 
c 
Beautiful Bottle 
Diamond Bracelet 
B 
Earth Gemstone 
[50% chance). 
Sky Gemstone 
Ether [25% chance). 
Hi-Potion 
or Elixir [25% chance) 
Mega-Potion 
Ether 
Elixir 
Boss {Chandravarma) 
Enhancer [Sword) 
Enemy Analysis 
NAME 
NOTES 
Ziggurat 
Yojimbo 
Ganymede 
Skeleton 
Ara mus ha 
Chandravarma 
Weak to Polearms. Shields. Lightning, and light; resistant to Fire 
Weak to Polearms, Firearms. lightning, and light; resistant to Fire 
Weak to Greatswords, Shields. and Light; resistant to Fire 
Weak to Greatswords, Machinery, Ice, and Light; resistant to 
lightning 
Weak to Swords. Daggers. Lightning, and Light; resistant to Fire 
Resistant to all standard damage types except light; employs 
Fire-elemental and gravity-based [attractive) attacks; use Royal 
Arms and defend consistently, countering with aerial combos to 
the head 
~ A Menace Sleeps in the Grotto (Lv. 65) 
Maze Location: Glacial Grotto (see page 56) 
Maze Structure 
SEGMENT 
COLLECTIBLES (NORMAL) 
COLLECTIBLES (RARE) 
A 
Ammonite Fossil 
Black Belt 
B 
Ancient Dragon Tooth 
Megalixir 
Duality Building Stone 
Oracle Ascension Coin 
A 
Splendid Building Stone 
Mega-Potion [50% chance), 
B 
Beautiful Bottle 
Ether [25% chance), 
Debased Coin 
or Hi-Potion (25% chance) 
Debased Silverpiece 
Circlet [50% chance). 
Potion 
Ether [25% chance). 
Hi-Potion 
or Hi-Potion !25% chance) 
Mega-Potion 
Ether 
Prismatic Shard 
Camp 
Vigilantes [Daggers) 
Branching paths -
Ammonite Fossil 
Hi-Elixir 
correct exit: right 
Ancient Dragon Tooth 
Megalixir 
B 
Duality Building Stone 
Oracle Ascension Coin 
Splendid Building Stone 
Rainbow Pendant 
Branching paths -
Beautiful Bottle 
[50% chance). 
correct exit: middle 
Debased Coin 
Ether [25% chance). 
c 
Debased Silverpiece 
or Hi-Potion [25% chance) 
Potion 
Hi-Elixir [50% chance). 
Hi-Potion 
Ether [25% chance). 
Mega-Potion 
or Hi-Potion (25% chance) 
Ether 
Prismatic Shard 
Yellowstone Crystal 
Camp 
Platinum Ingot 
A 
Ammonite Fossil 
Hi-Elixir 
c 
Ancient Dragon Tooth 
Megalixir 
Duality Building Stone 
Oracle Ascension Coin 
B 
Splendid Building Stone 
Star Pendant [50% chance). 
Branching paths -
Beautiful Bottle 
ether 125% chance). 
Earth Gemstone 
or Hi-Potion [25% chance) 
correct exit: left 
Sky Gemstone 
Safety Bit [50% chance). 
Potion 
Ether [25% chance). 
Hi-Potion 
or Elixir (25% chance) 
Mega-Potion 
Ether 
Prismatic Shard 
Yellowstone Crystal 
Boss [Kengo) 
Executioner (Firearm) 
Enemy Analysis 
NAME 
NOTES 
Yojimbo 
Weak to Polearms. Firearms. Lightning, and Light; resistant to Fire 
Cryonade 
Very weak to Fire; weak to Firearms. Machinery, and Light; 
absorbs lee 
Skeleton 
Weak to Greatswords, Machinery, Ice. and Light; resistant to 
lightning 
Elder Coeurl 
Weak to Swords. Daggers, and Fire; resistant to Light; immune 
to Lightning 
Royalisk 
Weak to Polearms, Shields. and Fire; resistant to lightning and 
Light 
Ken go 
Weak to Polearms. Firearms, Lightning, and Light; resistant to 
Fire; employs Ice-elemental attacks. and Dark-elemental attacks 
capable of causing Instant Death; focus on parrying and retaliate 
with a Radiant lance regularly enhanced by lgnis 
Sidequests 
Menaces 
195 

196 
D A Menace Sleeps in Daurell (Lv. 72) 
Maze Location: Oaurell Caverns (see page 184) 
Maze Structure 
SEGMENT 
COLLECTIBLES (NORMAL) 
COLLECTIBLES (RARE) 
A 
Ammonite Fossil 
Emperor's Anklet 
Branching paths -
Ancient Dragon Tooth 
Megalixir 
Quality Building Stone 
Oracle Ascension Coln 
correct exit: left 
Splendid Building Stone 
Lavender Oil (50% chance), 
A 
Beautiful Bottle 
Ether (25% chance). 
c 
Debased Coin 
or Hi-Potion (25% chance) 
Debased Silverpiece 
• Hi-Elixir (50% chance). 
Beetle Shell 
Ether (25% chance). 
Potion 
or Hi-Potion (25% chance) 
Hi-Potion 
Mega-Potion 
Ether 
Camp 
Moogle Charm (Accessory) 
Branching paths -
Ammonite Fossil 
Hi-Elixir 
correct exit: middle 
Ancient Dragon Tooth 
Megalixir 
B 
Quality Building Stone 
• Oracle Ascension Coin 
Splendid Building Stone 
Field Medicine 
c 
Beautiful Bottle 
Golden Hourglass 
Branching paths -
Earth Gemstone 
(50% chance). 
Sky Gemstone 
Ether (25% chance). 
correct exit: right 
Debased Silverpiece 
or Hi-Potion (25% chance) 
Potion 
Hi-Elixir (50% chance), 
Hi-Potion 
Ether (25% chance). 
Mega-Potion 
or Hi-Potion (25% chance) 
Ether 
Camp 
Duel Code (Greatsword) 
A 
Ammonite Fossil 
Oracle Earring 
B 
Ancient Dragon Tooth 
Megalixir 
Quality Building Stone 
Oracle Ascension Coin 
B 
Splendid Building Stone 
Hi-Elixir (50% chance). 
c 
Beautiful Bottle 
Ether 125% chance), 
Earth Gemstone 
or Hi-Potion 125% chance) 
Sky Gemstone 
Mega Phoenix (50% chance). 
Potion 
Ether 125% chance). 
Hi-Potion 
or Elixir (25% chance) 
Mega-Potion 
Ether 
Prismatic Shard 
Yellowstone Crystal 
Boss (Mahanaga) 
Precision Lance (Polearm) 
Enemy Analysis 
NAME 
NOTES 
Malbodoom 
Weak to Greatswords, Machinery, and Fire; resistant to Ice and 
Light 
Voretooth 
Weak to Polearms. Shields, and Ice; resistant to Fire and Light 
Shieldshears 
Weak to Polearms. Firearms. Ice; resistant to Fire and Light 
Custard 
Weak to fire, Ice. and light; immune to all weapon types (except 
for the Ring of the Lucii); absorbs Lightning 
Sir Tonberry 
Weak to Greatswords, Swords, lee. and l ight; resistant to 
Lightning 
Coeur! 
Weak to Swords. Daggers, and Fire; immune to Lightning; 
resistant to Light 
Dolce 
Weak to Ice. lightning, and light; immune to all weapon types 
(except for the Ring of the Lucii); absorbs fire 
lseultalon 
Weak to Shields, Machinery, fire, and Light; resistant to Ice 
Mahanaga 
Weak to Swords, Shields. Lightning, and Light; resistant to fire; 
capable of healing; capable of inflicting Toad and Stone statuses; 
equip a Ribbon and a Durandal enhanced by lgnis; prioritize 
defense and counter with aerial combos to the head 
D A Menace Sleeps in Crestholm (Lv. 92) 
Maze Location: Crestholm Channels (see page 1 BO) 
Maze Structure 
SEGMENT 
COLLECTIBLES (NORMAL) 
COLLECTIBLES (RARE) 
Branching paths -
Rusted Bit 
Hi-Elixir 
correct exit: right 
Iron Shavings 
Megalixir 
c 
Chrome Bit 
Oracle Ascension Coin 
Mythril Shaft 
Anklet of the Gods 
c 
Debased Silverpiece 
(50% chance). 
Branching paths -
Debased Banknote 
Elixir 125% chance). 
• Potion 
or Hi-Potion 125% chance) 
correct exit: left 
Hi-Potion 
Hi-Elixir (50% chance). 
Mega-Potion 
Elixir 125% chance). 
Ether 
or Hi-Potion 125% chance) 
Elixir 
Phoenix Down 
Camp 
Mystic Circlet (Accessory) 
Branching paths -
Iron Shavings 
Tarot Card 
correct exit: middle 
Chrome Bit 
Megalixir 
c 
Mythril Shaft 
Oracle Ascension Coin 
Rare Coin 
Tarot Card (50% chance). 
Branching paths -
Debased Silverpiece 
Elixir 125% chance). 
correct exit: middle 
Debased Banknote 
or Hi-Potion (25% chance) 
c 
Potion 
Hi-Elixir (50% chance). 
Hi-Potion 
Elixir (25% chance). 
Mega-Potion 
or Hi-Potion (25% chance) 
Ether 
• Elixir 
Hi-Elixir 
Camp 
Mighty Guard (Accessory) 
c 
Ammonite Fossil 
Blue Diamond Bracelet 
c 
Ancient Dragon Tooth 
Megalixir 
Quality Building Stone 
Oracle Ascension Coin 
c 
Splendid Building Stone 
Hi-Elixir 150% chance). 
c 
Beautiful Bottle 
Ether 125% chance). 
Earth Gemstone 
or Hi-Potion (25% chance) 
Sky Gemstone 
Legatus Bangle (50% chance). 
Potion 
Megalixir 125% chance). 
Hi-Potion 
or Elixir 125% chance) 
Mega-Potion 
Ether 
Prismatic Shard 
Boss (Manxom) 
Gigas Bangle (Accessory) 
Enemy Analysis 
NAME 
NOTES 
Hvitrormr 
Weak to Greatswords. Shields, and Ice; resistant to fire and Light 
Killer Wasp 
Weak to Polearms, Daggers, and Fire; resistant to Lightning and 
Light 
Coraldevil 
Weak to Swords, Firearms. and Ice; resistant to Fire and light 
Phalaris 
Weak to Greatswords. Shields, and Fire; resistant to Ice and Light 
Seadevil 
Weak to Swords. Firearms, and Ice; resistant to Fire and Light 
Gaiatoad 
Weak to Polearms, Machinery, and Ice: resistant to Lightning 
and Light 
Havocfang 
Weak to Greatswords, Daggers, and Ice; resistant to Fire and light 
Malbodoom 
Weak to Greatswords. Machinery, and Fire; resistant to lee and light 
Manxom 
Weak to Polearms and lightning; resistant to Greatswords and 
Ice; capable of inflicting Stone status; phase and parry to the 
best of your ability, counterattacking with a powerful Polearm 
enhanced by lgnis; the Star of the Rogue can work well to fight 
from a safe distance. and multi-cast Thundaga spells can inflict 
massive damage 

Do A Menace Sleeps in Costlemark* (Lv. 99) 
Maze Location: Costlemark Tower (see page 186) 
Maze Structure 
SEGMENT 
COLLECTIBLES (NORMAL) 
COLLECTIBLES (RARE) 
c 
• Rusted Bit 
Megalixir 
A 
• Chrome Bit 
Oracle Ascension Coin 
A 
• Mythril Shaft 
Magitek Core (50% chance). 
• Debased Coin 
Onion Bangle (25% chance). 
B 
• Debased Silverpiece 
or Hypno Crown (25% chance) 
Camp (Megalixir) 
• Sky Gemstone 
Black Choker (50% chance). 
• Potion 
Elixrr (25% chance). 
Branching paths -
Hi-Potion 
or Hi-Elixir (25% chance) 
correct exit: middle 
• Mega-Potion 
Blue Diamond Bracelet 
c 
• Ether 
(50%chance). 
c 
• Elixir 
Elixir (25% chance). 
c 
Hi-Elixir 
or Hi-Elixir (25% chance) 
Camp [Megalixir) 
• Gigas Bangle (50% chance). 
Elixir (25% chance} . 
D 
or Hi-Elixir (25% chance) 
D 
Branching paths -
correct exit: right 
D 
Boss (Jormungand) 
• Soul of Thamasa (Accessory) 
Camp 
Megalixir 
D 
Chrome Bit 
Megalixir 
D 
• Mythnl Shaft 
• Oracle Ascension Coin 
Branching paths -
Debased Silverpiece 
Applied Sorcery 
Debased Banknote 
Celestriad (50% chance). 
correct exit: left 
Rare Coin 
Circlet (25% chance). 
B 
• Mega Phoenix 
or Hi-Elixir (25% chance) 
Camp (Platinum 
Sky Gemstone 
Tarot Card (50% chance). 
Ingot) 
Hi-Potion 
Megalixir (25% chance), 
Branching paths -
Mega-Potion 
or Hi-Elixir (25% chance) 
Ether 
Mega Phoenix (50% chance). 
correct exit: middle 
• Elixir 
Elixir (25% chance). 
A 
• Hi-Elixir 
or Hi-Elixir (25% chance) 
A 
A 
Camp (Mythril Ingot) 
B 
B 
D 
D 
Boss (Bilrost) 
• Dark Matter Bracelet (Accessory) 
Enemy Analysis 
NAME 
NOTES 
Havocfang 
Weak to Greatswords, Daggers. and Ice; resistant to Fire and Light 
Hobgoblin 
Weak to Greatswords, Machinery, Fire. and Light; resistant to Lightning 
Mindflayor 
Weak to Polearms, Daggers. and Light; resistant to Ice; absorbs 
Lightning 
Mafboro 
Weak to Greatswords, Machinery, and Fire; resistant to Ice and Light 
lron Giant 
Weak to Greatswords, Shields. and Light; resistant to Lightning; 
absorbs Fire 
Jormungand 
Weak to Swords, Daggers, and Ice; immune to Fire 
Goblin 
Weak to Polearms, Daggers, Fire, and Light; resistant to Ice 
Braindrainer 
Weak to Polearms. Daggers, Lightning, and l ight; resistant to Ice 
Elder Coeur! 
Weak to Swords and Daggers; immune to all three elements; 
resistant to Light 
Uttu 
Weak to Greatswords. Machinery, and Light; immune to Ice; absorbs 
Fire and Lightning 
Serpentess 
Weak to Greatswords. Daggers, and Light; immune to Fire; absorbs Ice 
Bilriist 
Weak to Swords. Daggers, and Ice; immune to Fire; employs Fire-
elemental attacks; regularly enhance your best Sword with lgnis and 
perform aerial combos; the Star of the Rogue can also be effective 
* Consumable items cannot be used in tllis maze, making progression extremely 
cllallenging_ 
Do A Menace Sleeps in Steyliff (Lv. 86) 
lS 
SEGMENT 
COLLECTIBLES (NORMAL) 
COLLECTIBLES (RARE) 
A 
• Rusted Bit 
• Megalixir 
A 
Iron Shavings 
• Oracle Ascension Coin 
A 
• Chrome Bit 
• Celestriad (50% chance), 
B 
• Mythril Shaft 
Purified Salt (25% chance). or 
Camp !Hi-Elixir) 
• Debased Coin 
Legatos Bangle (25% chance) 
Branching paths -
Debased Silverpiece 
• Emperor's Anklet 
correct exit: middle 
Rare Coin 
(50% chance). 
A 
Potion 
Elixir (25% chance), 
B 
• Hi-Potion 
or Hi-Potion (25% chance) 
B 
Mega-Potion 
• Hi-Elixir (50% chance), 
Garno IMeaalixir) 
• Ether 
Elixir (25% chance). 
c 
Elixir 
or Hi-Potion (25% chance) 
c 
Balmung (Sword) 
• Hi-Elixir (50% chance). 
Branching paths -
Elixir (25% chance}, 
correct exit: middle 
or Hi-Potion (25% chance) 
B 
Camn 
• Hi-Elixir 
A 
Rusted Bit 
• Megalixir 
A 
• Iron Shavings 
Oracle Ascension Coin 
c 
• Chrome Bit 
• Anklet of the Gods 
c 
Mythril Shaft 
Platinum Ingot 
Camn !Meoalixirl 
• Debased Coin 
• Platinum Bangle (50% chance), 
c 
Debased Silverpiece 
Elixir (25% chance). 
B 
Debased Banknote 
or Hi-Potion (25% chance) 
B 
Potion 
• Hi-Elixir {50% chance). 
B 
Hi-Potion 
Elixir (25% chance). 
Camn IMeoahxirl 
• Mega-Potion 
or Hi-Potion (25% chance) 
c 
Ether 
c 
Elixir 
A 
Aegis Shield (Shield) 
A 
Ca mo 
Meoalixir 
Branching paths -
• Chrome Bit 
• Megalixir 
correct exit: left 
• Mythril Shaft 
• Oracle Ascension Coin 
c 
Rare Coin 
Robe of the Lord 
c 
Sky Gemstone 
Centurion Bangle 
c 
Debased Silverpiece 
(50% chance). 
Camo IMeoalixirl 
• Debased Banknote 
Ether (25% chance). 
B 
Potion 
or Hi-Potion (25% chance) 
B 
• Hi-Potion 
• Purified Salt (50% chance). 
A 
Mega-Potion 
Megalixir (25% chance). 
A 
Ether 
or Elixir (25% chance) 
Camo IMeoalixirl 
Elixir 
• Hi-Elixir (50% chance). 
B 
Mega Phoenix 
Ether (25% chance). 
A 
or Hi-Potion (25% chance) 
A 
Hi-Elixir (50% chance). 
A 
Megalixir (25% chance). 
Camn IMenalixirl 
or Elixir (25% chance} 
B 
B 
D 
D 
Boss IMictlantecihuatl) 
Flayer !Polearml 
Enemy Analysis 
NAME 
NOTES 
Imo 
Weak to Daqqers, Firearms, Ice, and Lioht; resistant to Fire 
Psvchomancer Weak to Greatswords. Shields. Ice, and Light; resistant to Liahtnina 
Havocfana 
Weak to Greatswords, Daqqers, and Ice; resistant to Fire and Lioht 
Ronin 
Weak to Swords, Daggers, Lightning, and Light; resistant to Fire 
Matt:ha Mousse Weak to Fire and Liaht; resistant to all weapon tvoes 
Tonberrv 
Weak to Daggers. Firearms. Ice. and Light; resistant to Liohtnina 
Reaaltrice 
Weak to Daaaers. Firearms, and Liahtnina; resistant to Fire 
KillerWaso 
Weak to Polearms. Daqqers, and Fire; resistant to Liqhtnino and Licht 
Rovalisk 
Weak to Polearms. Shields. and Fire; resistant to Liahtninn and Linht 
Kin1Jatrice 
Weak to Greatswords, Machinery, and Fire; resistant to Ice and Liaht 
Wvvern 
Weak to Firearms. Shields. and lee; resistant to Liohtninn and Linht 
Griffon 
Weak to Polearms, Daqqers, and Fire; resistant to Ice and Liaht 
Dolce 
Weak to Ice, Lightning, and Light; immune to all weapon types (except 
for the Rina of the Luciil; absorbs Fire 
Custard 
Weak to Fire, Ice, and Light; immune to all weapon types (except for 
the Rina of the Luclll, absorbs Liqhtninq 
Mindflaver 
Weak to Polearms. Oaqqers, Liqhtnino, and Liaht; resistant to Ice 
Master 
Weak to Swords. Greatswords. Ice. and Light; resistant to Lightning; 
Ton berry 
employs Fire-elemental attacks; capable of inflicting Stop status and 
.,. Menaces 
Instant Death 
Mictlanrecihuatl Weak to Ice, Polearms. and Daggers; immune to Lightning; employs 
Lightning-elemental attacks; phase/parry whenever you identify an 
oncoming blow, and make the most of each counter opportunity with an 
enhanced Polearm and aerial combos 
197 

198 
RANDOLPH 
You must have finished the main storyline to access these quests. Load 
your "Chapter 15" save file, then return to Lucis with the "Call Umbra" 
function and visit Randolph in Lestallum. Be aware, though, that the 
monsters you face in these assignments are among the strongest and 
deadliest in the entire game. You can make a start on these quests with 
a well-developed party, but you'll need to be close to, or have reached, 
the level cap of 99 with all four party members to complete them all -
and, moreover, be equipped with the best gear available. Consult our 
Inventory (see page 200) and Strategy & Analysis (see page 266) 
chapters to prepare yourself in advance. 
The sensible approach is to tentatively begin each of these battles in turn 
and assess how much damage your party is inflicting. If the figures that 
appear are trivial, making no impression on the huge HP bar, disengage 
and return when you are more powerful. 
The creatures you pursue in these missions might not always appear 
immediately when you reach the designated area. They are considered as 
wild monsters, and are therefore not set to appear at all times: complex 
conditions govern which target spawns where. You will sometimes need 
to leave the area and return a little later (or, another potential solution, 
save and reload immediately) to meet the required foe. 
Randolph, your contact for this series of quests, is found in Lestallum at the end of the 
back alley just north of the Arms Vendor. 
A LEGEND IS BORN 
• Unlock Condition: Reach Chapter 15. 
• Bennu's Affinities: Weak to Polearms, Machinery, and lightning; resistant to Ice and immune to 
Light 
• Recommended level: 55 
• Notes: Randolph first sends you lo defeat a gigantic bird called Bennu to the south of the Prairie 
Outpost in leide. To optimize your damage output, choose your most powertul Polearm (the Wyvern 
Lance can work really well here) and regularly infuse it with lightning through lgnis's Enhancement 
technique (Prompto's Piercer also helps). Don't forget to eat a stat-boosting dish prior to the baltle, 
and equip your allies with appropriate gear. Your strategy should revolve primarily around aerial 
combos targeted preferably at the creature's head. With the relevant Ascension nexuses unlocked, 
you can pertorm long and powertul chained attacks, regularly refilling your MP bar by point·warping 
to blue marker positions. When the bird flies high in the air. be prepared for a parry opportunity: if 
you succeed, the creature will collapse, giving you a chance to inflict massive damage. Once the 
creature falls, deliver the Jet-Black Beak to Randolph. 
• Reward: 8.000 EXP. Iron Duke (Greatswordl 
DREADFUL LEGEND 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "A legend Is Born". 
• Mafbodoom's Affinities: Weak to Daggers and Ice; resistant to Greatswords, Fire. and light 
• Recommended Level: 65 
• Notes: For this second quest, you need to eliminate a Malbodoom in the Vesperpool region. Its 
Ma1broro Brat minions serve as distractions and damage sponges, so the best strategy is to focus 
on the main target. The Malbodoom itself is a far more dangerous version of the Malboro you 
encountered during Chapter 10. Equip your best daggers. ideally infused with Ice via Enhancement, 
then warp in to assail the Malbodoom from behind or to the side. When the Brats begin to 
congregate around your position, warp to a safe distance and wait for the pack to separate. 
The Malbodoom's signature Bad Breath attack presents the best opportunity to deal sustained 
damage: warp behind the creature just after it finishes taking in air, and you can assail it with an 
uninterrupted combo. 
• Reward: 10,000 EXP. Dragoon lance (Polearm) 

LEGEND WRAPPED IN AN HJIGMA 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "Dreadful Legend" 
• Sir Tonberry's Affinities: Weak to Daggers and Light; resistant to Greatswords, fire. Ice. and 
Lightning 
• Recommended Level: 75 
• Notes: Randolph's third assignment is to take out two Sir Tonberries that roam outside the Tomb 
of the Tall in the south of Ouscae. but only at night. Your opponents regularly perform long sword 
combos or rapid lunge attacks that all lead to a (very narrow) parry opportunity. It is pointless to try 
to attack during their combos, so defend consistently, giving your full attention to parry prompts. 
Swnt weapons are strongly recommended. particularly the Light-imbued Orichalcum daggers, as 
these exploit both of your foes' weaknesses. Be patient, only dealing one brief counter after each 
successful block. and make sure you focus all your assaults on the same target. Once you face a 
single Sir Tonberry, stick to the same strategy, though you can occasionally perform quick combos if 
you manage to position yourself behind your opponent while it focuses on one of your allies. 
• Reward: 12,000 EXP, Ziedrich (Shield) 
WONDROUS WEAPON 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "Cursed Legend". 
• Naglfar's Affinities: Weak to fire. Ice. Lightning and Light; resistant to all standard weapon types 
• Recommended level: 99 
• Notes: The final monster, Naglfar, awaits at night time at fort Vaullerey, in the middle of the 
warehouses outside the base. This creature resists all standard weapon types but is weak to all 
elements. This makes Royal Arms extremely well suited for this battle. Swih versions, such as the 
Sword of the Father. will give you more defensive flexibility. Make sure you regularly augment them 
with lgnis's Enhancement technique to increase your damage output. lt you have crahed many 
spells. particularly those cast in chains (see page 2741. this can be the perfect opportunity to use 
them. Naglfar is very fast for its large size, with a high attack rate. One effective strategy is to remain 
dose to the monster's sides. By flanking the creature, you are naturally out ot range at its frontal 
attacks. Phase or warp through each of its assaults, then immediately retaliate before the next one 
begins. Don't be greedy: you can only execute a few blows. Any prolonged combo will usually end 
poorly - unless your opponent unleashes one of its special laser·based attacks, leaving it ripe for 
a long sequence of blows while it is "locked" in a direction (or, even better, a powerful Ouadcast 
or Quintcast tier-3 spell; Stopcast spells can also work well to temporarily freeze your target). By 
alternating defensive sessions and quick·but·efficient offensive bursts, you will eventually grind 
down your opponent. Take its unique item drop to Randolph to complete one of the game's ultimate 
challenges. 
• Reward: 20,000 EXP, Zwill Crossblades (Daggers) 
CURSED LEGEND 
• Unlock Condition: Complete "Legend Wrapped in an Enigma". 
• Phalaris's Affinities: Weak to Greatswords; resistant to Polearms. Shields. Fire. Lightning. and 
Light 
• Recommended Level: 85 
• Notes: The fourth evil creature Randolph asks you to slay is a Phalaris found in Ouscae, to the south 
of fallaughns Haven. This is a very powertul beast. capable of inllicting huge amounts of damage. 
The main difficulty you will encounter is that the Phalaris has moves that cannot be phased through 
or defended against in any way: his hoof stomp and his rolling attacks. This means that you cannot 
realistically remain at melee range for more than a second or two. A possible strategy consists of 
perpetually running and roll-dodging around the monster so as to remain a few steps to the rear of it. 
You can then dart in to target its hind legs with your best two-handed blade, ideally with Prompto's 
Piercer technique keeping the foe's defense down at all times. Alternatively, wielding the Star of the 
Rogue can be an efficient solution to remain at a safe distance: make sure you do not step out of the 
Sldequests 
battle arena. though. as the Phalaris will quickly regenerate its health 
• 
Randolph 
• Reward: 15,000 EXR Soul Saber (Sword) 
199 



202 
WEAPONS 
To truly master combat in FFXV you'll need to acquire a solid understanding of how to employ different weapon types to suit the enemies you face. 
While you can artlessly bludgeon your way through the early hours of the story with whichever blade you please, later chapters will punish such 
tactical economy. Equip weapons with innate properties that match the vulnerabilities of foes in your current area, though, and you can greatly 
reduce the number of strikes required to defeat them. 
In this section we present an overview of all weapons available within each category, which will be useful as you strive to collect them all to expand 
your tactical options Each table provides the following information for each weapon: 
<> Attack: Basic attack power of the weapon. 
<> Critical: Base percentage chance to inflict a critical hit (double 
damage) with a weapon. 
translate to damage reduction, and values stack additively. For 
example: if you equip three weapons that have + 20, -40, and + 25 
to Fire resistance, your net effect is 5% damage reduction, which 
means you take 95% of normal damage from Fire attacks. 
<> Parameter Modifiers: Change in absolute value to Max HP, MP, 
Strength, Vitality, Magic, or Spirit when the weapon is equipped. 
<> Notes: Any special effects that have a bearing on a weapon's 
performance, or serve to enhance the bearer's capabilities. 
<> Resistances: Change in damage reduction percentages against 
ballistics or elements (Fire, Ice, Lightning, Dark). Positive values 
<> Availability & Price: Details on how to acquire a weapon, as well 
as the cost in Gil (if applicable) 
Swords 
<)r---~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
Available only to Noctis, swords are good general-purpose weapons. While their attack power is average, they strike quickly, provide useful bonuses 
to maximum MP, and offer a variety of special effects. The default Engine Blade and its upgraded variants are also invaluable in augmenting your 
spellcasting abilities, enhancing your Magic stat alongside their ability to absorb elemental energy from defeated foes. Swords, in short, are versatile 
weapons that are always strong contenders for at least one slot in any given loadout. 
w 
u 
"' 
w 
z 
w 
;:: 
"' "' 
u:: "' 
u 
w 
w 
w 
i5 
w "' "' 
z 
w 
w "' u 
u:: 
u:: 
u:: 
w 
w 
;:: 
u 
u; 
z 
BUY 
SELL 
i5 i5 
0 
i5 
u:: 
u:: 
z 
u 
w 
;:: 
NAME 
::;; 
i5 
"' 
;;'!; 
z "' 
NOTES 
AVAILABILITY 
PRICE 
PRICE 
0 
0 
0 
i5 
u; 
;;'!; 
"' 
::;; 
::;; 
:c 
::;; 
0 
0 
w "' 
(!) 
u; 
(GIL) 
(GIL) 
-' 
~ 
::;; 
::;; "' 
u; "' z 
w 
"" 
<§ 
c.. 
c.. 
~ 
~ 
w 
u; z "' 
u 
:c 
::;; 
z 
:::; 
u 
I-
"' 
w 
I- "" 
;:: 
;::: 
w 
~ "" 
w "' :c 
~ ~ "' ;:: 
"' 
< "" 
I-
a: 
:::> "' 
w 
(!) 
<C 
u 
::;; 
::;; "' > ::;; "' "' 
u:: 
2 
:::; 
c 
Engine Blade 
28 
3 
0 
5 
0 
0 
5 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 Absorbs elemental energy when 
• Default 
dealing the finishing blow to an enemy 
•Default 
Broadsword 
34 
3 
0 15 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 + 2% Critical Rate per combo hit 
• Shop: Hammerhead, 
150 
75 
Galdin Quay, Prairie Outpost 
Engine Blade II 
39 
3 
0 
6 
0 
0 
12 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 Absorbs elemental energy when 
• Sidequest: A Better Engine 
-
dealing the finishing blow to an enemy 
Blade (Cid) 
Airstep Sword 
64 
3 
0 
7 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Halves MP consumption in mid-air 
• Shop: Wiz Chocobo Post, 
300 
150 
Coernix Station - Cauthess 
Rune Saber 
77 
3 48 8 
0 
8 12 9 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
• Shop: Taelpar Rest Area, 
600 
300 
Lestallum 
Flame Tongue 
81 
3 
0 
7 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 28 0 
0 
0 Inflicts Fire-based damage 
• Shop: Taelpar Rest Area, 
800 
400 
Lestallum 
• Shop: Verinas Mart, imperial 
Ice Brand 
98 
3 
0 10 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
31 
0 
0 Inflicts Ice-based damage 
vendor outside Steyliff Grove 
1,500 
750 
in Chapter 07 
• Collectible: Cauthess Rest Area 
• Shop: Altissia, Cartanica, 
Blood Sword 
132 
3 
0 11 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 20% chance to recover 30 HP per hit 
Tenebrae, Gralea 
5,000 
2,500 
• Collectible: Crestholm 
Channels, Pitioss Ruins 
Engine Blade Ill 
134 
3 
0 
25 
0 
0 
18 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 Absorbs elemental energy when 
• Sidequest: A Better Engine 
dealing the finishing blow to an enemy 
Blade II (Cid) 
• Shop: Meldacio Hunter HQ, 
Durand al 
155 
3 
0 11 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 33 Light-elemental 
Hammerhead (Chapter 14) 
10,000 
5,000 
• Collectible: Costlemark Tower 
Enhancer 
173 
3 
0 12 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
• Collectible: Fociaugh Hollow 
6,000 
maze (Chapter 15) 
Damage bonus with lower stamina: 
• Sidequest: Cursed Legend 
Soul Saber 
202 
3 
0 12 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 + 4% for every percentage point 
(Randolph) 
9,000 
reduction under 50% 
Ultima Blade 
208 
3 
0 40 0 
0 30 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 Absorbs elemental energy when 
• Sidequest: A Better Engine 
dealing the finishing blow to an enemy 
Blade Ill (Cid) 
Damage bonus with lower MP: +4% 
• Collectible: Steyliff Grove 
Balmung 
248 
3 
0 
11 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 damage for every percentage point 
- 10,000 
reduction 
maze (Chapter 15) 
Blazefire Saber 
57 
3 
0 
9 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 -15% physical damage taken 
• Pre-order bonus 

Greatswords 
0•>--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
For pure. concentrated stopping power, greatswords are without peer. Available to Noctis and Gladiolus, they provide not only the highest attack of 
any standard weapon category, but also swing in wide, sweeping arcs capable of connecting with multiple foes at once. Most blades in this category 
also grant bonuses to Max HP. enabling you to weather minor hits as you cleave a path through massed enemy ranks. Naturally, greatswords attack 
very slowly and are often a questionable choice against small, nimble enemies. but can usually be wielded with confidence against hordes of weak 
creatures and the largest and most redoubtable opponents alike. 
w 
CJ 
"' 
w 
z 
w 
;::: 
"' "' u: "' 
CJ 
w 
~ 
w 
2S 
w "' "' 
z 
w 
w "' 
CJ 
u: 
u: 
w 
w 
;5 
CJ 
Vi 
z 
BUY 
SELL 
Ci 
Ci 
0 
Ci 
u: 
u: "' 
z 
CJ 
w 
;::: 
NAME 
::;; 
i5 
;::: 
z "' 
NOTES 
AVAILABILITY 
PRICE 
PRICE 
0 
0 
0 
i5 iii 
;::: 
!!l 
::;; 
:E 
::r: 
:E 
0 
0 
"' 
(.!) "' 
(GIL) 
(GIL) 
;;! 
(D 
::iE 
"' iii "' z 
w 
"' 
"-
"-
~ 
:E 
,_ 
Vi z "' 
CJ g 
::r: 
::;; 
z 
CJ 
,_ 
~ "' 
w 
,_ "' 
~ 
~ 
~ 
w 
-' 
~ iii 
w "' 
::r: 
iii 
"' 
;::: 
a: 
-' "' 
w 
(.!) "' 
li; 
::> 
<( 
< 
CJ 
::;; 
::;; 
> ::;; "' "' u: 
2 
::; 
Cl 
+ 15% damage per additional 
• Default 
Two-handed 
• Shop: Hammerhead 
Sword 
48 
2 
53 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
enemy within 65 feet radius 
• Collectible: Longwythe 
50 
25 
(max +100%) 
Rest Area 
War Sword 
71 
2 
65 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 0% chance to inflict 
• Shop: Hammerhead, 
150 
75 
Compromised 
Galdin Quay, Prairie Outpost 
• Collectible: north of Three 
Blade of 
89 
2 
82 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
27 
0 
0 
0 
Inflicts Fire-based damage 
Valleys (Leidel 
300 
150 
Brennaere 
• Shop: Wiz Chocobo Post, 
Coernix Station - Cauthess 
Claymore 
112 
2 
98 
0 
0 
32 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
• Shop: Taelpar Rest Area. 
600 
300 
Lestallum 
Absorbs elemental energy when 
• Cape Caem farm: trade in 
Force Stealer 
140 
2 
202 
6 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
dealing the finishing blow to an 
four Caem Carrots 
enemy 
• Shop: Lestallum, Verinas Mart, 
Hardedge 
153 
2 
153 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
+ 80% breakage on body parts/ 
imperial vendor outside Steyliff 
1.500 
750 
appendages (see page 284) 
Grove in Chapter 07 
• Collectible: Daurell Caverns 
• Shop: Altissia, Cartanica, 
Thunderbolt 
158 
2 
246 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
29 
0 Inflicts Lightning-based damage 
Tenebrae, Gralea 
5,000 
2.500 
• Collectible: Malmalam Thicket, 
Pitioss Ruins 
Duel Code 
206 
2 
468 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
+50% damage to lone enemies 
• Collectible: Daurell Caverns 
7,500 
within 65 feet radius 
maze (Chapter 15) 
Absorbs elemental energy when 
• Sidequest: A Better Force 
Force Stealer II 
244 
2 
308 
11 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
dealing the finishing blow to an 
Stealer (Cid) 
enemy 
+ 15% damage per additional 
• Chapter 14 (Gladiolus. 
Hyperion 
248 
2 
310 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
enemy within 65 feet radius 
default weapon: also sold at 
8,000 
4,000 
(max +100%) 
Hammerhead) 
• Collectible: west of 
Iron Duke 
253 
2 
0 
0 
0 
20 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Hammerhead (Chapter 15); 
5,000 
Sidequest: A Legend Is Born 
(Randolph) 
• Collectible: west of Coernix 
Dominator 
265 
2 
298 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
32 
Light-elemental 
Station - Alstor (Chapter 
6,000 
15): Keycatrich Trench maze 
(Chapter 15) 
Damage bonus when the wielder 
has low HP: Damage + (30 + 
• Collectible Balouve Mines 
Apocalypse 
332 
2 
403 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
9n)% where n stands for every 
maze (Chapter 15) 
- 10,000 
percentage point reduction under 
30% HP 
20% chance of inflicting 30% Max 
Masamune 
87 
2 
49 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
HP damage when the target's 
• Pre-order bonus 
HP is full 
"' Inventory 
, Weapons 
203 

204 
Polearms 
<))-----~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
Polearms are highly technical weapons available to Noctis and lgnis. A casual glance at their stats may leave you underwhelmed; despite their 
long reach and synergy with aerial attacks, they are subpar in raw power, have slow attack speed, and offer few secondary statistical bonuses. 
In fact, polearms are most effectively employed against specific enemy weaknesses or in loadouts designed to optimize certain strategies such 
as aerial combos. 
w 
0 
"' 
w 
z 
"' "' ~ "' 
0 
;!: w 
w 
w 
w "' "' 
z 
w 
en 
0 
u: u: Ci u: w 
w 
;!: 
0 
w 
c;; z 
BUY 
SELL 
0 
Ci 
0 
Ci u: u: 
en z 
0 
w ;!: 
NAME 
::;; 
;!: z "' 
NOTES 
AVAILABILITY 
PRICE PRICE 
0 
0 
0 
Ci 0 
c;; 
;!: 
en 
::;; 
::;; ::c 
::;; 
0 
0 
w 
en 
(!) c;; 
(GIL) 
(GIL) 
--' 
.... 
::;; 
::;; "' 
c;; 
en z 
w 
:.: < 
0.. 
0.. 
(!) 
~ 
.... 
w 
c;; z "' 
0 
0 
::c 
::;; z 
::::; 
0 
.... 
~ "' 
w .... :.: 
;!: 
;::: 
w 
~ 01 
w "' ::c 
01 ~ ~ "' ;!: 
0: 
--' "' 
w 
(!) "' 
< 
.... 
::::> 
<C 
0 
::;;: 
::;; 
en > ::;; 
en 
al u: 2 
::::; c 
Critical bonus when the wielder has 
Javelin 
18 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 low HP: Critical +(5 + 1 5n)% where 
• Default 
150 
75 
n stands for every percentage point 
• Shop: Galdin Quay, Prairie Outpost 
reduction under 30% HP 
Drain Lance 
32 4 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Absorbs elemental energy when 
• Main quest (Ill Tidings) 
dealing the finishing blow to an enemy 
Drain Lance II 
44 4 0 11 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Absorbs elemental energy when 
• Sidequest: A Better Drain Lance 
dealing the finishing blow to an enemy 
(Cid) 
Mythril Lance 
48 4 0 0 0 0 32 0 0 0 0 0 0 
• Shop: Wiz Chocobo Post, Coernix 
300 
150 
Station - Cauthess 
Rapier Lance 
57 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 + 80% breakage on body parts/ 
• Shop: Taelpar Rest Area, Lestallum 
600 
300 
appendages (see page 284) 
Storm Lance 
86 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Inflicts Lightning-based damage 
• Shop: Taelpar Rest Area 
1,500 
750 
• Shop: Lestallum, Verinas Mart, 
Ice Spear 
99 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Inflicts Ice-based damage 
imperial vendor outside Steyliff 
800 
400 
Grove in Chapter 07 
• Shop: Altissia, Cartanica, Tenebrae, 
Wyvern Lance 
115 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 + 50% damage in mid-air 
Gralea 
5,000 
2,500 
• Collectible: Crestholm Channels, 
Pittios Ruins 
Drain Lance Ill 
137 4 0 11 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Absorbs elemental energy when 
• Sidequest: A Better Drain Lance II 
dealing the finishing blow to an enemy 
(Cid) 
• Shop: Meldacio Hunter HO, 
Radiant Lance 
142 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Light-elemental 
Hammerhead (Chapter 14) 
10,000 
5,000 
• Collectible: Costlemark Tower, 
Pitioss Ruins 
• Collectible: northwest of Coernix 
Dragoon Lance 
164 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 15 14 16 0 
Station - Cauthess (Chapter 15); 
6,000 
Sidequest: Dreadful Legend 
(Randolph) 
• Mini-game: Totomostro 
Precision Lance 
172 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 + 10% Critical Rate 
• Collectible: Daurell Caverns maze 
7,500 
(Chapter 15) 
Flayer 
211 
4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Finishers deal + 80% damage 
• Collectible: Steyliff Grove maze 
10,000 
(Chapter 15) 
Gae Bolg 
64 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 +44% damage when using 
• Pre-order bonus 
warp-strikes 
Daggers 
<)>---~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
Like polearms, daggers - used by Noctis and lgnis - are situational weapons. They are defined by low attack power, but this is offset by the number 
of strikes you can land with each swift flurry of blades. This complements the ability of this weapon category to inflict a number of useful status 
ailments. Daggers also work well in spellcasting loadouts, with minor bonuses to MP and Magic. 
w 
0 
"' 
w 
z 
w 
;!: 
ffi "' u: "' 
0 
w 
w 
w "' "' 
z 
w 
en 
0 
u: u: Ci u: w 
w ;!: 
0 
w 
c;; z 
BUY 
SELL 
Ci Ci 
0 
Ci u: u: 
en z 
0 
w ;!: 
NAME 
::;; 
;!: z "' 
NOTES 
AVAILABILITY 
PRICE 
PRICE 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Ci c;; 
;!: 
(/) 
::;; 
::;;: 
::c 
::;; 
0 
0 
w 
en 
(!) (;; 
(GIL) 
(GIL) 
--' 
.... 
::;; ::;; "' 
(;; en z 
w 
:.: 
< 
0.. 
0.. 
(!) ~ 
.... 
w 
c;; z "' 
0 
0 
::c 
::;;: z 
::::; 
0 
.... 
~ "' 
w 
.... :.: 
;!: 
;::: 
~ ~ 
w ;!: ~ 01 
w "' ::c "' 
01 
"' 
0: 
::::> "' 
w 
(!) < 
< 0 
::;;: 
::;; :;; > ::;; 
en 
al u: 2 
::::; a 
Daggers 
20 
3 0 4 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 + 50% damage to enemies in 
•Default 
50 
25 
vulnerable status 
• Shop: Hammerhead 
Critical bonus when the wielder has 
• Shop: Hammerhead, Galdin Quay, 
Avengers 
41 
3 0 4 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 low HP: Critical + (5 + 1 5n)% where 
Prairie Outpost 
150 
75 
n stands for every percentage point 
• Collectible: west of Three Valleys 
reduction under 30% HP 
(Leidel 
Cutlasses 
53 
3 0 6 0 0 10 0 0 0 0 0 0 10% chance to inflict Mollified 
• Shop: Wiz Chocobo Post. Coernix 
300 
150 
Station - Cauthess 
Mythril Knives 
54 3 0 6 0 0 50 0 0 0 0 0 0 
• Shop: Taelpar Rest Area, Lestallum 
600 
300 

Daggers (Continued] 
Plunderers 
89 
3 0 10 0 
0 10 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 Absorb elemental energy when dealing 
• Cape Caem farm: trade in four 
the finishing blow to an enemy 
Caem Carrots 
• Shop: Lestallum. Verinas Mart. 
imperial vendor outside Steyliff 
Assassin's 
97 
3 
0 12 0 
0 10 0 
0 0 
0 
0 
0 10% chance to inflict Poison 
Grove in Chapter 07 
1,500 
750 
Daggers 
• Collectible: Malacchi Pond fishing 
spot. Vesperpool region. Daurell 
Caverns 
• Shop: Altissia, Cartanica, Tenebrae, 
Delta Daggers 
114 3 
0 
6 0 
0 15 0 
0 0 
0 
0 
0 10% chance to inflict Compromised 
Gralea 
5,000 
2,500 
• Collectible: outside the Rock of 
Ravatogh, Malmalam Thicket 
Plunderers II 
131 3 0 15 0 
0 30 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 Absorb elemental energy when dealing 
• Sidequest: A Better Pair of 
the finishing blow to an enemy 
Plunderers (Cid) 
Main Gauches 
133 
3 0 
7 0 
0 
0 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 + 50% damage to enemies in 
• Chapter 14 (lgnis, default weapon; 
8,000 
4,000 
vulnerable status 
also sold at Hammerhead) 
Orichalcum 
149 
3 0 
9 
0 
0 20 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 Light-elemental 
• Shop: Meldacio Hunter HO 
10,000 
5,000 
• Collectible: Costlemark Tower 
Ulric's Kukris 
151 
4 282 24 8 15 48 20 21 
5 
7 4 19 + 1 % to HP and MP recovery rates 
•Collectible: Insomnia (Chapter 14) 
15,000 
Organyx 
155 3 
0 10 0 25 23 32 0 10 10 10 10 
•Collectible: Galdin Quay (Chapter 15); 
6,000 
Fociaugh Hollow maze (Chapter 15) 
Vigilantes 
176 3 0 
8 
0 
0 20 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 5% chance to inflict Stop 
•Collectible: Glacial Grotto maze 
7,500 
(Chapter 15) 
Zwill 
203 
3 
0 
5 0 
0 25 0 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 +80% damage at full HP 
• Sidequest: Wondrous Weapon 
10,000 
Crossblades 
(Randolph) 
Mane Mashers 
55 45 0 13 0 
0 32 0 
0 0 
0 
0 
0 -30% Fire/lce/Liqhtninq damaqe 
• Pre-order bonus 
Firearms 
0»--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~-
F ire arms are precise weapons that also demand high manual dexterity to wield effectively. Available to Noctis and Prompto, they shoot quickly and 
provide solid attack power, but there's a catch: a drop-off in damage as the distance between the user and the enemy increases. Unlike melee 
weapons, firearms do not induce automatic character movement by default, so you will need to evade close-quarters enemy blows manually to 
maximize your damage output. Firearms shine against mobile opponents that regularly dodge melee weapons, or in difficult boss encounters where 
you are happy to fight a methodical ranged battle in order to sustain reduced damage. 
w 
CJ 
"' 
w 
z 
w 
;::: 
"' "' 
;;:: "' 
CJ 
w 
w 
w 
w "' "' 
z 
w 
Cl) 
CJ 
;;:: ;;:: i5 
;;:: 
w 
w 
;::: 
CJ w 
c;; z 
BUY 
SELL 
i5 i5 0 
i5 
;;:: 
;;:: 
z 
<> 
w 
;::: 
NAME 
Cl) ;::: z "' 
NOTES 
AVAILABILITY 
PRICE PRICE 
0 
0 
:::;; 
0 
i5 i5 c;; 
;::: 
Cl) 
:::;; 
:::;; 
::c 
:::;; 
0 
0 
w 
(I) 
Cl) 
(.!) c;; 
(GIL) 
(GIL) 
_. 
"- ¢ 
~ 
:::;; 
:::;; "' ifj c;; z 
w 
"' 
« "-
I-
z "' 
<> 
<> ::c 
:::;; z 
:::::; 
<> I-
w "' 
w 
I- "' 
;::: 
>= 
>< 
>< 
w 
;::: (ii iX ::l w "' ::c "' 
iX « « "' 
« a: 
::> "' 
w 
(.!) « 
!;( 
I-
CJ 
:::;; 
:::;; 
Cl) > :::;; 
Cl) "' 
;;:: 2 
:::::; 
0 
Handgun 
32 2 
0 0 
0 0 
0 
4 0 0 
0 
0 
0 +80% breakage on body parts/ 
•Default 
50 
25 
appendages lsee page 284) 
•Shop: Hammerhead 
Cocytus 
43 
2 
0 0 
0 0 
0 
7 
0 
0 0 
0 
0 Inflicts Ice-based damage 
•Shop: Hammerhead, Galdin Quay, 
150 
75 
Prairie Outpost 
• Shop: Wiz Chocobo Post, Coernix 
Calamity 
49 2 
0 0 
0 0 
0 
5 
0 
0 0 
0 
0 10% chance to inflict Poison 
Station - Cauthess 
300 
150 
• Collectible: north of Wiz Chocobo Post 
Mythril Pistol 
80 
2 
0 0 
0 0 42 11 0 
0 0 
0 
0 
• Shop: Taelpar Rest Area. Lestallum 
600 
300 
Valiant 
118 2 
0 11 
0 
0 
0 12 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 Absorbs elemental energy when 
• Cape Caem farm: trade in four 
dealing the finishing blow to an enemy 
Caem Carrots 
Enables snipe mode; only available 
• Item drop: MA Veles-bis appendage 
Cerberus 
120 2 
0 0 
0 
0 
0 
6 
0 0 
0 
0 
0 
110%) 
to Noctis 
• Collectible: Fort Vaullerey 
Critical bonus when the wielder has 
Rebellion 
124 2 
0 0 0 
0 
0 15 0 0 
0 
0 
0 low HP: Critical + (5 + 1.5n)% where 
•Shop: Verinas Mart, imperial vendor 
1,500 
750 
n stands for every percentage point 
outside Steyliff Grove in Chapter 07 
reduction under 30% HP 
Valiant II 
143 2 
0 14 0 0 
0 21 
0 
0 0 
0 
0 Absorbs elemental energy when 
• Sidequest: A Better Valiant (Cid) 
dealing the finishing blow to an enemy 
• Shop: Altissia, Cartanica, Tenebrae. 
Flame Gun 
145 2 
0 0 
0 0 
0 16 0 0 
0 
0 
0 Inflicts Fire-based damage 
Gralea 
5,000 
2,500 
•Collectible: Pitioss Ruins 
Quicksilver 
148 
2 
0 0 
0 
0 
0 18 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 + 80% breakage on body parts/ 
• Chapter 14 (Prompto. default 
8,000 
4,000 
appendages (see page 284) 
weapon; also sold at Hammerhead) 
Enforcer 
152 2 
0 0 
0 
0 
0 19 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 + 10% Critical Rate 
• Shop: Meldacio Hunter HQ 
10,000 
5,000 
• Mini-game: Totomostro 
Executioner 
214 
2 
0 0 
0 
0 
0 22 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 + 50% damage to lone enemies 
• Collectible: Glacial Grotto maze 
7,500 
within 65 feet radius 
(Chapter 15) 
•Collectible: north of Fort Vaullerey 
Hyper Magnum 
222 
2 
0 0 
0 
0 
0 21 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
(Chapter 15); Keycatrich Trench 
6,000 
maze (Chapter 15) 
Death Penalty 
236 
2 
0 0 
0 
0 
0 25 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 1 % chance to inflict Instant Death 
• Collectible: Balouve Mines maze 
- 10,000 
(Chapter 15) 
-. Inventory 
'II weapons 
205 

206 
Shields 
<)>-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~--> 
Shields are available to Noctis and Gladiolus. Depending on the wielder, they can be used in very different ways -though always broadly for defensive 
purposes. A number of shields offer conditional or temporary bonuses after blocking or taking damage, granting you the benefit of a quick recovery or 
opportunistic counterattack while controlling Noctis. Gladiolus makes best use of shields in coniunction with the Intercept and Royal Guard abilities, 
protecting Noctis from enemy attacks. 
w 
0 
"' 
w 
z 
w 
i5 
"' "' u: "' 
0 
w 
~ ~ 
~ "' "' 
z 
w 
en 
0 
i5 
w 
~ i5 
0 
w 
c;; z 
BUY 
SELL 
i5 i5 
0 
i5 u: 
z 
0 
w i5 
NAME 
::;; 
en i5 z "' 
NOTES 
AVAILABILITY 
PRICE 
PRICE 
0 
0 
0 
i5 i5 c;; 
i5 
!a 
::;; :e :c :E 
0 
0 
w 
en en 
t!) en 
(GIL) 
(GIL) 
-' 
t5 
:E ::;; "' c;; 
z 
w 
"" 
<( 
Q. 
Q. 
~ 
.... 
w 
c;; 'Z "' 
0 
0 
::r: ::;; :::; 
::::; 
(.) .... 
~ "' 
w .... "' 
i5 E ~ >< 
i5 (ii ii 
w "' ::r: "' 
"' 
<( "' 
< 
0:: 
::> "' 
w 
t!) 
<( 
!;;: 
.... 
'-' ::;; :e en > ::;; en "' u: Si! 
::::; 
0 
Kite Shield 
52 1 0 0 0 15 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 Recovers 50 HP per Blink 
• Shop: Wiz Chocobo Post, Coernix 
300 
150 
Station - Cauthess 
Absorb Shield 
83 
1 0 10 0 30 0 0 12 0 0 0 0 Absorbs elemental energy when 
• Cape Caem farm: trade in four 
dealing the finishing blow to an enemy 
Caem Carrots 
Ice Shield 
85 
1 0 0 0 18 0 0 10 0 22 0 0 +30% HP Recovery Rate for 5 
• Shop: Taelpar Rest Area, Lestallum 
800 
400 
seconds after taking Ice damage 
Thunder Shield 
93 
1 0 0 0 21 0 0 12 0 0 24 0 x4 Critical Rate for 5 seconds after 
• Shop: Verinas Mart, imperial vendor 
1,500 
750 
taking Lightning damage 
outside Steyliff Grove in Chapter 07 
Flame Shield 
97 
1 0 0 0 22 0 0 9 21 
0 0 0 + 300 Strength for 5 seconds after 
• Shop: Verinas Mart, imperial vendor 
1,500 
750 
taking Fire damage 
outside Steyliff Grove in Chapter 07 
• Shop: Altissia, Cartanica, Tenebrae, 
Hero's Shield 
103 
1 0 0 0 25 0 0 22 0 0 0 0 -30% damage from bullets 
Gralea 
5,000 
2,500 
• Collectible: Crestholm Channels, 
Pitioss Ruins 
Absorb Shield II 
129 
1 0 15 0 38 0 0 12 0 0 0 0 Absorbs elemental energy when 
• Sidequest: A Better Absorb Shield 
dealing the finishing blow to an enemy 
(Cid) 
+ 300 Magic for 5 seconds after 
• Shop: Meldacio Hunter HQ, 
Black Prince 
135 
1 0 0 0 32 0 0 13 0 0 0 22 taking Darkness damage 
Hammerhead (Chapter 14) 
10,000 
5,000 
• Collectible: Pitioss Ruins 
Power Shield 
136 
1 0 0 0 6 0 0 11 
0 0 0 0 
• Shop: Taelpar Rest Area, Lestallum 
600 
300 
• Collectible: Lestallum 
• Collectible: Verinas Mart - Ravatogh 
Wizard Shield 
141 
1 0 0 0 34 99 0 12 0 0 0 0 
region (Chapter 15); Keycatrich 
6,000 
Trench maze (Chapter 15) 
Aegis Shield 
172 
1 0 0 0 55 0 0 11 
0 0 0 0 10% chance to nullify any incoming 
• Collectible: Steyliff Grove maze 
10,000 
damage 
{Chapter 15) 
Ziedrich 
182 
1 0 0 0 50 0 0 14 0 0 0 0 + 200 Strength for 3 seconds after 
• Sidequest: Legend Wrapped 
7,500 
Blinking 
in an Enigma (Randolph) 
Machinery 
<):>--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~--> 
Machinery weapons are available to Noctis and Prompto. These slow but powerful cannons can be employed to defeat strong mechs, many of which 
are weak to machinery. Li ke greatswords, they can unleash charged attacks (hold and release the attack button) where the power increases with 
the duration of the charge; the resultant explosions have area-of-effect properties. As with firearms, however, they deal less damage as the distance 
between the user and the target increases. Last but not least, machinery weapons impede your ability to move swiftly and prevent you from warp-
striking, though they partly compensate for this by each giving you access to a special attack (performed with @/(;) . 
w 
'-' 
"' 
w 
z 
w 
i5 
"' "' u: "' 
'-' 
w 
w 
w 
i5 
w "' "' 
z 
w 
w 
en '-' 
u: u: 
u: w 
w 
~ '-' 
c;; z 
i5 i5 
0 
i5 u: u: 
z 
(.) w 
~ 
NAME 
:::; 
i5 
en 
~ z "' 
NOTES 
AVAi LABI LITY 
0 
0 
0 
i5 c;; 
~ 
en 
:::; ::;; 
::r: :e 
0 
0 
w 
en 
t!) c;; 
-' 
t!i 
::;; 
::;; "' c;; 
Cl) z 
w 
"' 
<( 
Q. 
Q. 
~ 
.... w c;; 'Z "' 
(.) 
'-' :c ::;; z 
::::; 
0 
.... 
~ "' 
w .... "" 
~ ;::: 
w 
(ii ii 
w "' :c 
ii ~ ~ "' i5 
<( 0:: -' "' 
w 
t!) "' 
!;;: 
lii 
::> 
cs 
(.) ::;; 
:IE 
> :::; 
Cl) "' 
u: Si! 
::::; 
Auto Crossbow 
61 
2 12 0 0 0 0 0 10 0 0 0 0 Special attack: fires a barrage of crossbow 
• Collectible: Keycatrich Trench 
bolts (60 MP) 
Bioblaster 
71 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Special attack: disperses a poisonous 
• Collectible: outside Keycatrich Trench 
mist (40 MP) 
Circular Saw 
82 2 0 0 0 9 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 Special attack: inflicts repeated damage 
• Item drop: MA-X Cuirass (100%) 
with spinning blades (40 MP) 
Gravity Well 
94 2 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 Special attack: pulls foes in with a gravity 
• Collectible: Aracheole Stronghold 
sphere (80 MP) 

Machinery (Continued) 
Noiseblaster 
128 2 0 0 0 0 0 11 0 0 0 0 
0 Special attack: emits a pummeling sonic wave 
• Collectible: Fort Vaullerey 
over a wide area (80 MP) 
Drillbreaker 
145 2 7 0 0 5 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 Special attack: inflicts repeated damage with 
• Collectible: Formouth Garrison 
piercing drills (80 MP) 
Auto Crossbow 
209 2 18 0 0 0 0 0 22 0 0 0 0 Upgraded version of Auto Crossbow 
• Sidequest: A Better Auto Crossbow (Cid) 
Plus 
Bioblaster Plus 
212 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Upgraded version of the Bioblaster 
• Sidequest: A Better Bioblaster (Cid) 
Circular Saw 
216 2 0 0 0 21 
0 0 12 0 0 0 
0 Upgraded version of the Circular Saw 
• Sidequest: A Better Circular Saw (Cid) 
Plus 
Gravity Well 
220 2 0 0 0 0 18 0 0 0 0 0 0 Upgraded version of the Gravity Well 
• Sidequest: A Better Gravity Well (Cid) 
Plus 
Noiseblaster 
227 2 0 0 0 0 0 23 0 0 0 0 
0 Upgraded version of the Noiseblaste1 
• Sidequest: A Better Noiseblaster (Cid) 
Plus 
Drillbreaker 
240 2 12 0 0 13 0 0 13 0 0 0 0 Upgraded version of the Drill breaker 
• Sidequest: A Better Drillbreaker (Cid) 
Plus 
Royal Arms 
<:;,?---~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
Available only to Noctis, the 13 Royal Arms are a set of unique weapons. While some are truly one-of-a-kind in terms of form and function, they 
all offer statistical bonuses and special characteristics. Attacks with these weapons consume HP and should be used sparingly and tactically, but 
they do have very potent applications. At any rate, it may be worthwhile to keep one or more slotted simply to enjoy the parameter boosts they 
grant - especially early in the story, when the difference can be significant You can find a complete analysis of the unique properties of all Royal 
Arms on page 286. 
w 
0 
"' 
w 
z 
"' "' 
~ °' 
0 
;'.!: 
w 
w 
w 
i5 
w 
°' "' 
z 
w 
w 
"' 
0 
u: 
u: 
u: 
w 
w 
;'.!: 
0 
(;; 
z 
Ci 
0 
i5 
u: 
;:;:: 
z 
0 
w 
;'.!: 
NAME 
0 
:e 
i5 
"' 
;'.!: 
z 
°' 
NOTES 
AVAILABllll'I 
0 
0 
0 
i5 
(;; 
;'.!: 
"' 
:E 
:E 
::c 
:E 
0 
0 
w 
"' 
(.') 
(;; 
-' 
~ 
:e 
:e "' 
(;; "' 
z 
w 
"' 
< 
"-
a. 
>-
.... 
w 
(;; 
z "' 
I-
0 
0 
:c 
:E 
z 
::; 
0 
.... 
w 
"' 
w 
.... "' 
;:: 
w 
~ °' 
-' 
"' 
;'.!: 
~ 
~ 
;'.!: 
-' 
w 
:r "' 
°' 
"' 
;;:: 
"' 
w 
(.') 
~ 
,_ 
:::> 
2§ 
0 
:e 
:e "' 
> 
:e "' 
al 
u: 
Si! 
::; 
Sword of the 
A sword that performs preemptive 
Wise 
194 
3 
100 
0 
0 
30 
30 
30 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
warp-strikes to close the distance 
Main quest: Legacy 
quickly 
Axe of the 
A polearm that performs slow but 
Conqueror 
483 
2 
0 
0 
60 
-80 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
powerful attacks, at the expense 
Main quest: The Power of Kings 
of defense 
Bow of the 
A bow that fires piercing arrows 
Clever 
203 
7 
0 
0 
0 
0 
80 
0 
50 
0 
0 
0 
0 
while allowing the wielder to move 
Royal Tomb: Balouve Mines 
freely about the battlefield 
Swords of the 
Dual swords that can transform 
153 
3 
0 
0 
0 
50 
0 
50 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
into a single weapon to deliver 
Main quest: Sword in the Waterfall 
Wanderer 
powerful blows 
Blade of the 
A longsword with the ability to 
Mystic 
396 
2 
150 
0 
0 
30 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
20 
increase the wielder's Strength 
Main quest: The Archaean 
through a unique self-buff 
A shuriken capable of dealing 
Star of the 
177 
2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
20 
20 
20 
0 
multiple hits in rapid succession, 
Royal Tomb: The Myrlwood 
Rogue 
either on different targets or on the 
various body parts of a single target 
Sword of the 
518 
2 
200 
0 
0 
0 
0 
-30 
0 
-40 
-40 
-40 
-40 
A greatsword that deals multiple 
Royal Tomb: Costlemark Tower 
Tall 
hits with each blow 
Shield of the 
A shield that enables cover status 
Just 
251 
1 
500 
-50 -100 100 
0 
0 
10 
10 
10 
10 
10 
when guarding, enabling HP 
Royal Tomb: Tomb of the Just 
recovery at the cost of MP 
Mace of the 
A mace with the ability to deal 
Fierce 
334 
2 
300 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
-50 
0 
0 
0 
0 
grievous breakage to body parts/ 
Royal Tomb: The Rock of Ravatogh 
appendages (see page 284) 
Scepter of the 
237 
2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
150 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
50 
A scepter that takes different forms 
Royal Tomb Malmalam Thicket 
Pious 
to perform a variety of attacks 
Trident of the 
A polearm that produces an 
Oracle 
388 
5 
0 
60 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
afterimage capable of performing 
Main quest: Breath of the Glacian 
additional attacks 
Katana of the 
361 
3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
100 
0 
25 
25 
25 
-50 
A longsword that attacks quickly 
Main quest: The Hand of the King 
Warrior 
and relentlessly after startup 
Sword of the 
141 
5 
0 
0 
100 
0 
100 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
A sword that briefly increases its 
Main quest: Zegnautus Keep 
Father 
wielder's Strength after Finishers 
fi lnvenlory 
Weapons 
207 

208 
ACC ESSO RIES 
With Ascension tree upgrades, your party members can eventually equip up to three accessories each. Most accessories provide significant, 
if straightforward, boosts to basic parameters, or resistances to elements or status ailments. These effects stack additively with equivalent 
boosts provided by weapons. Certain special or rare accessories offer benefits that are not available by any other means. These include cosmetic 
adjustments, ally-specific effects, and improvements to MP management. 
Accessories: Overview 
NAME 
Bronze 
Bangle 
Iron Bangle 
NOTES 
Max HP + 50 
Max HP+ 100 
AVAILABILITY 
.?~.op: Ga l di n . P.u.?JL~~~~? Outpost __ ~--_ 
Collectible: Hammerhead 
jne;;,y_~op~ 1mp .1~3%
_"1~---------------­
_§~~ Wiz Choe~ ~~-~~~!Ii~ StatiOf!.:_f_a_u thes~----·--· 
Hunt: Gorgers i~ theJl_~gl~f!l~erhead ) 
Collectible: Common 
E~e,;;id;o~-Alv~skeleton 1~c==---
Shop: Taelpar Rest Area, Lestallum, imperial vendor outside 
j!_e.Y!!!f Grove in _~~'!e_~~~r@.§__~art 
_____ _ 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
500 
1.200 
Carbon 
Bangle 
Max HP+ 150 
Hunt: A Nightmare_~".rn~-~Y- ~~cry_[Qe l_t!ir!_Qu_ayJ__ _______ 2,000 
Titanium 
Bangle 
Max HP + 200 
~ lectible: Wiz Choco~~! !.._~}.9£.'!L Grotto, Pitioss Ruins _ 
)~sticeM9.~~!~f~e-----·-·----------··-------·-------·-
Shop: Meldacio Hunter HQ, Altissia, Cartanica. Tenebrae, 
Q~<!~~--·------
Hunt: Blobs Ashore (Old Lestallum) 
C~ri~~!~_l~FOcia ug~ 
.~ .oi .10~ :.-.:-·::.:.:: 
I~_e_~_i~Op~-Skelet'ci~-~~~-Q~P-~.-v~.d~:~i~ili~L---~---· ·-
······-
Justice Monsters Five 
H~~1t~ -inaHeatH;~-e-OiGIO~ (Le;-t~! 1um , Market); 
-~.!!!!!§!Rank 2 reward 
----------·-
Silver Bangle 
Max HP +300 
~Qllectible: Verinas Mart, Daurell Cav~l', Pitloss Ru~ 
Gold Bangle 
Platinum 
Bangle 
Centurion 
Bangle 
Legatos 
Bangle 
Gigas Bangle 
Onion Bangle 
Adamantite 
Bangle 
White Choker 
Green Choker 
Blue Choker 
Red Choker 
Black Choker 
Garnet 
Bracelet 
Amethyst 
Bracelet 
Heliodor 
Bracelet 
Sapphire 
Bracelet 
Max HP +500 
Max HP+ 700 
Max HP 
+1 .000 
Max HP 
+1.200 
Max HP 
+ 1.500 
Max HP 
+2.500 
Max HP 
+ 10,000 
HP Recovery 
Speed + 2% 
HP Recovery 
Speed +3% 
HP Recovery 
Speed +4% 
HP Recovery 
Speed +5% 
HP Recovery 
Speed +6% 
Strength + 30 
Strength + 35 
Strength +40 
Strength + 45 
~ll!!:g~me; Totomostro 
~----
Enemv droo: Imo - dungeo.~
n ~
va~
ri~
an~
t ~
13~
%~
) __ _ 
Hunt: A Most Behem-;;ih Undertaking (Wtz Chocobo Post); 
-~.!")~Rank~ reward 
Train~9~.9!'1~~e training~~5 ________ 
_ 
Collectible: The Myrlwood, Hammerhead region (Chapter 15), 
Pitioss Ruins, Keycatrich Trench maze {Chapter 15) 
JustL~~_r~1_9"E_s~@Jive 
--------
Collectible: Costlemark Tower, Pitioss Ruins, Bai~-~~~ Mines 
_rn_<l!! IC h aJl.~c_l~L~'eyll!f_§co_v~ rnazeJChapter151 _ 
Justice Monsters Five 
Hunter Rank 8 reward 
Collectible: Fociaugh Hollow maze, Steyliff Grove maze 
lbgth _C_~eP.t!r_l _5L __ ... ___ ....... -··-··-- .. . 
Justice Monsters Five 
_fa~nJ~~-~~i!Ul rew?~.~------------··-----·----- " 
Collectible: Steyliff Grove maze, Crestholm Channels maze 
lboth_~~pter 15) ------------------
Justice Monster~ Five 
____ 
_ 
Collectible: Costlemark Tower maze, Crestholm Channels 
_rn;ize (both Chapter_15.J ___________ _ 
Justice Monsters,~F~
ive~--
Collectible: Costl9~rk Tower maze (ChajJter ~~L~--
)ustice Monsters Five ____________ _ 
Hunt Lonely Rumbles in Longwythe (Hammerheadl 
Collectible: Hammerhead, Glacial Grotto, Pitioss Ruins 
Enerny_9r9p~.l~Q!J~rrYl~'!>L ______ -. ___ -..... 
Collectible: Longwythe Rest Area. Pitioss Ruins 
~-l!.~_t:.Jo Sting .!n . ..A.~g~_rJ .~ .~i~.~l.!~.~..T.~_9_r9~-i~f?~e.J. 
~~~~Y drop: Master TonQ~ r-~y_ (§%) 
Hunt Marsh Madness! The Giant Awakens {Coernix Station 
~tor ) 
~L~c_tible.:12.~~g_h HolL~ ... Pitig_~~-~!:li~~---·- ___ ---··-------·-
Enemy drop: Tonberry - dungeon variant (5%) 
Hunt: An Omen Crawls Upon the Ground {LeWiUum, 
Thoroughfare); The Case of the Disappeared Hunters (Altissia) 
~Q~tible: PfilOsSR~-----===--==-­
~ 
dro_Q: Master Tonberry - dun~varian l (10%) 
Hunt: ikvils Cry Curses (leStal!um, Thoroughfare); ___ _ 
Hunter Rank 6 reward 
Collectible: Costlem-ark Tower, Wiz Chocobo Post (Chapter 151; 
_ Costlem!.r:_k Tower ma~_\gl.£P~~l~L -
____________ _ 
Shop: Wiz Chocobo Post, Coernix Station - Cauthess, 
_ !:_~t~Jl_u.0.~Ja_~.t-~~-~--~~a_,_Y._~rJ!l.9§ .. ~9.~. _ 
Collectible: Glacial Grotto. Pitioss Ruins 
_E_n ~_'!'J __ ~r_oF: .~_«b gg)ll i Q (3%) 
)_LJ_s.!l~_e_.M_9_n.§1ers Five ---· -·-
. ?ide.quest: The Aspiring A rtisci .~ (Di.Qq) 
--~~-Q1: . ..f\Be~emoth .. ~-~.9-~.~!.~t~.g ·(Wiz .chocq~gfq_s_tL_ 
Collectible: Near Coernix Station - Alstor, Fociaugh Hollow, 
Pitioss Ruins 
~ne_rn_)'._ifrQi]Y~mand 13'&)____=--- -
_J_ustice Monstersjive 
Shop: Meldacio Hunter HQ, Verinas Mart, Altissia, Cartanica, 
Tenebrae. Gralea, Hat!1merhead (Chapter 14) __ 
. .§l~~!:!~~~_A_gQ!!~.§.!!!_~ded StunnerJPJ!!.QL _______________ _ 
_ H~~t: Back Alley Spook IAltissia. Maaghol _____ _ 
_QQ!!.~!!.~~-~.Qaur~).1 ~~~~~_fil~litf.?.!.QY~---·-·-·-·--·--·­
Enefl!y droi:.i: Hobgoblin - dungeon variant. (3%) 
=~~~ue;t ~elia)lle]py~~y_IDino) ------------· 
-~~~nJer Rank 3 ~e_w..9IQ_ 
Collectible: Daurell Caverns. Steyl iff -G~~ve (go down th~e leva to;­
on the first floor once the rockfall is removed), Malmalam 
Thicket. Pitioss Ruins 
~-r:.~f!l_y_9_r_9pJj_qbgo blin - dU~-geon variant (3%) 
Justice Monsters Five 
2,500 
800 
2.000 
Accessories: Overview [Continued) 
NAME 
NOTES 
Ruby Bracelet Strength +50 
Emerald 
Bracelet 
Diamond 
Bracelet 
Blue Diamond 
Bracelet 
Dark Matter 
Bracelet 
Soldier's 
Anklet 
Warrior's 
Anklet 
Fencer's 
Anklet 
Knight's 
Anklet 
Crusader's 
Anklet 
Champion's 
Anklet 
Emperor's 
Anklet 
Anklet of the 
Gods 
Amulet 
Angel Earring 
Talisman 
Rune Earring 
Circlet 
Oracle Earring 
Mystic Circlet 
Hypno Crown 
Potpourri 
White Sage 
Power Stone 
Oracle Card 
Pendulum 
Strength +60 
Strength +70 
Strength + 80 
Strength + 100 
Vitality +30 
Vitality + 35 
Vitality +40 
Vitality +45 
Vitality +50 
Vitality +55 
Vitality + 60 
Vitality + 70 
Magic + 60 
Magic +70 
Magic +80 
Magic +100 
Magic + 150 
Magic + 200 
Magic +250 
Magic + 300 
Spirit +30 
Spirit +35 
Spirit +40 
Spirit +45 
Spirit + 50 
AVAILABILITY 
S ideg u_e_~.~ .:_.~g-.~~J0.:-~ .o ~em ( Di~~J 
Hunt: Serpent of the Abyss (Hammerhead) 
c-oli;~b~:-Bal~~;Mi~es, Verina·~-M;~t~The Rock of 
~avatog h,!itioss Ruins 
Justice Monsters Five 
?idequest: A Treasure Beyond Measure (Dino) 
Jil!.~t: A Wall in Our W~ (Meldacio Hu~~0:J.QL__ __ _ 
Collectible: Balouve Mines, Pitioss Ruins, Keycatrich 
l!:~~~~~ze (Chapter 15) 
Justice Monsters Five 
Mini-game: Totomostro 
Collectible: Schier Heights (Chapter 15); 
Fociaugh Hollow maze (Chapter 15), Keycatrich Trench 
maz~ ( Ch~ pt er 15) 
Hunter Rank 7reward 
Training: Final Trial 
Coile"ctib~Costlemark Tower maze. Crestholm Channels 
_f11aze lb_o_~ti_l'.~~p_ter 15) 
Justice Monsters Five 
---------
Hunter Rank 10 reward 
Collectible: Costlemark Tower maze {Chapter 15) 
Justice Monsters Five 
Shop: Galdin Quay, Prairie Outpost 
Collectible: Pitioss Ruins 
Shoe:_ Wiz C~~~_Post, -~~e!~.§~~~~~-~ -~~~~-~~---­
Hunt: Beasts Wallow in the Wetlands 
{Coe~nix ~ration - Alstor) 
Collectible: Hammerhead, Pitioss Ruins 
-~~_em y drop: Garchimacera (3%) 
Shop: Taelpar Rest Area, Lestallum. imperial vendor 
.°..~~ ~ ! .~~ St_eyliff Grav!! i~ ~·~-~p~~~-0_7 , 
Collectible: ~a i d~ ~~y._l,A{ i z Chocobo Post 
Hunt:_ Stealers of Lives (Galdin Quay) __ 
Enemy drop: Ereshkigal 13%). Salpinx 13%), Alberichj3%) 
Shop: Meldacio Hunter HO. Verinas Mart, Altissia, Cartanica, 
-~!!ebra~.-~~~~~ ~me!~ea9J~_~p-~~ .!.~L_ _____________ _ 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
t.000 
1.500 
2.000 
_Hunt: Acquit Not Evil (Lestal~mJ.~~~~~!.~L.____ 
2,500 
Collectibl!: Steyliff Grove. Pit~~-~~------
Enemy drop: Gargoyle (3%). Ereshkigal - dungeon variant (3%) 
Hunt: King of the Great Escape !Altissia) 
Enemy drop: Foras (3%) 
Collectible: Pitioss Ruins. Cauthess Rest Area region 
IChapt~- 1~1_____ _ 
Enemy drop Ziggurat 13%1 
Collectible: Daurell Caverns maze, Steyliff Grove maze, 
-~~1 -~_ll_~~ Mjnes maze (all Chapter 15) 
Collectible: Steyliff Grove maze, Crestholm Channels maze 
(both Chapter 15) 
Shop: Wiz Chocobo Post. Coernix Station - Ga ut~-~~~ __ 
Collectible~~ ld i n Quay 
Shop: Taelpar Rest Area. Lestallum, imperial vendor outside 
~yliff Grove in Chapter 07____ 
----·-··-------
Enef1ly drop: N3j!~_l8%). Kadru 18%) 
Shop: Meldacio Hunter HQ. Verinas Mart. Altissia, Cartanica, 
Tenebrae. Gralea. Ha~e~ead (Chapter 14) 
Collectible: Cauthess Rest Area, Steyliff Grove 
Enemy drop: Nagarani (4%), Mahanaga (8%) 
~-~~.J:~.~~s from the Past lf.?~!~.~~~~-~t A!~~) ______ _ 
Collectible: Insomnia, Pitioss Ruins, Keycatrich Trench maze 
1Cha£ter 151 
E_!lemy ~op: Serpentess l8%) 
Collectible: Balouve Mines. Meldacio Hunter HQ region 
(Chapter 15); Glacial Grotto maze (Chapter 15), Keycatrich 
Tr_e_nch_maze (Chapter_15) __ 
Collectible: Daurell Caverns maze, Balouve Mines maze 
lbo_th_fha.Jl.ler 151 
. 
Collectible: Costlemark Tower maze, Crestholm Channels maze 
_l~~th_Ghapter 15) -----------------------------·-·-· 
-~ollectible: Costlema~k-~wer maze (Chapter 15) 
-~hop: Galdin Guay, Prairie Ou_y>0st 
Collectible: Pitioss Ruins 
-~!!E~ Wiz Chos._~bo Post. Coernix Station - Cauthes_s _ 
Collectible: Pitioss Ruins 
-----·--
Enemy_cl!OP_~~a1~U:l_'li>l 
Shop: !~P-~~~.:;.!f..!~a . Lesta~~.r:!l _______ 
~--~-····-- __ 
Collectible: Pitioss Ruins 
-----·-------
Shop: Meldacio Hunter HQ, Altissia, Cartanica, Tenebrae, 
Qralea, Hammerhead (~-~~4 ) 
.9ollectible: Foc~~~Rh __ H.~l!ow. Pitioss Ruins 
_E~-~-~J.d. F.~P.: . .P~~~9.~ .~~.! .IJ~.~ .J ..... . 
Collectible: Pitioss Ruins 
1,000 
1.500 
2.000 
500 
1.200 
2.000 
2,500 

Accessories: Overview (Continued) 
NAME 
Lavender Oil 
Purified Salt 
Tarot Card 
Assist Suit 
Magit:ek Suit 
Magitek 
SuitV2 
NOTES 
Spirit +55 
Spirit +60 
Spirit +70 
Max HP + 500; Strength + 30; 
Vitality +20 
Max HP + 1.000; Strength + 70; 
Vitality +50 
Max HP + 2.000; Strength + 100; 
Vitality +70 
Star Pendant 
Prevents Poison status 
Rainbow 
Pendant 
Moon 
Pendant 
Prevents Confusion status 
Prevents Toad status 
Earth Pendant Prevents Stone status 
Golden 
Hourglass 
Safety Bit 
Ribbon 
Bulletproof 
Vest 
Bulletproof 
Suit 
Chohham 
Armor 
Fireproof 
Inners 
Fire Crest 
Prevents Stop status 
Prevents Instant Death 
Prevents all status ailments 
Reduces ballistic damage by 10% 
Reduces ballistic damage by 20% 
Reduces ballistic damage by 30% 
Reduces Fire damage by 20% 
Reduces Fire damage by 30% 
AVAILABILITY 
Collectible: Fociaugh Hollow maze, Daurell 
-~:Y~!.!1~_.Q'.19.?.~.JqQ~t~ .!!9.P.~.~ -r .l.?L. __ ____ .... ·-·-·--
Enemy drop: Braindrainer and Mindflayer-
_d_l!~_g_e_Q:_iy3£1.~!1!.J§%l ......... -.... -,.. ··---·-·----·-·-··-·---
~~_!!!l!~~~!i!f_G!~~~-maze (Cha~_U.§L_ 
Collectible: Costlemark Tower maze, 
S!_~tt!Qkn Qia~~~-~~~JQ2!b.£~p~--@ 
__ 
Enemy drop: MA-X Maniple 15%) 
Enemy drop: MA-X Angelus-0 195%) 
Enemy drop: MA-X Angelus-0 (5%) 
_§h2E'~-~~~]/!!Ql ___________________ ,_,_ 
-~Q~_g~_~§.t:.l~~-~~2f~_s.:;.Q.(~_E!.g_1~g~_.l§.~ .~!~.L __ _ 
Collectible: Fodina Caestino, Malmalam 
Thicket. Pitioss Ruins. Glacial Grotto maze 
IQ);ipl~~- 1 5) ________ _ 
Enem~~~~
-
_ 
S_h_op: Lestall_u_'!'._ _________ , 
Sidequest: The Professor's Protege -
.!'~~Q~J!2g.:;_~9_Qi_aL 
_______ _ 
Hunt: In the Drylands, It Rains Spines 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
3.000 
,J_~~g~_lie Rest A!."_aj____ _________ 3.000 
Collectible: Balouve Mines, Glacial Grotto 
maze (Chapter 15), Pitioss Ruins 
Enemy drOP:LiCh {3%1,Necrom"ancer (3%). -
Wraith(3%) 
____ 
_ 
Shop: lestaUu_!!I_ 
_ ______ _ 
Sidequest: The Professor's Protege -
Gigantoad (Sania) 
H~~-E~OfCism -Ot-the-Ne-bCl~~O;;d ___ _ 
IWiz Chocobo Post) 
COl1e-c-iible": Tae lP~·~-Rest Area. Malmalam 
Thicket. Pitioss Ruins, Fociaugh Hollow maze 
1Chapter_15) _ 
_ ________ _ 
Enemy drop: Chadarnook (5%). Psychomancer 
13%) 
Sidequest: Th-e-Prote-ssor-;-s -prot~Q~= wyvern 
(Sania) 
~~ji"j~~-ailim _ __:_-=.=-=----
Hunt: Hunters of Secullum Pass (Taelpar 
Rest Area) 
Collectible:FOciaugh-HoliQ; maze~r 15) 
Enemy dfoP:-PsYchOmancer - dungeon --
variant (3%1 
Sidequest: The Professor's Protege -
J-!yrJ~pq9 fice!IYJS~nia)_______ _ __ 
J.QQP: ~estallum ________ -----------·-----
Hunt: No Stopping the Great Stink {lestallum. 
. T._hgr.9.~_gbf~r.~l ................... ----··· --······· ···········-······ _ ----·---
Collectible: Pitioss Ruins. Oaurell Caverns 
mazeJChapter 15) ........ .. ·-·· ··- __ 
Sidequest: The Professor's Prot8g8-
Griffan (Sania) 
Huiit~Trembling Killer (lestallum. 
Tho rougbfar~L ___________ _ 
Collectible: Gralea, Pitioss Ruins, Glacial 
_§~~~~t~~~.!~.!§J_ _________ _ 
Enemy drop: Mindflayer - dungeon variant 
(1%). Ronin/Aramusha/Yojimbo/Kengo/ 
Ayakashi 11 %) 
Sidequest: Thf? F~og of leg_end (Sania) 
Hunt: -Dead Genera1Strikes Down the King 
(lestall~f!I. I~oro~ghfareL __ _ 
Alessio (trade in Oracle Ascension Coins) 
shop: WiZCho-;;-bc;p~;t-·Le-staiiUm,-coernTx--
3,000 
station - Cauthess. Verinas Mart 
-E-~e~y· ·d~ ·~p :· impe·riai .. R.if1ema·n··'6%f. 1mpe·;;ai ..... 2·000 
Sniper .11%), BatterySoldier(I%) 
·_§_h.D.P_:~-~~§i~.1i_u_rn .. _.~l~i-~~ 
i~.-.:_ ···-~-~ .. 
-_::~ ---···-·-··-·--·-·-· 
Hunt: Serpent of Risorath Basin (Meldacio 
Hunter HQ) 
·r0i1Bctlbi:-Tae1par Rest Are3;G~a1e-a··------
Eilemy-d·r"QQ:Ma"Q~Bk Ban.Q_erman (1%) 
Collectible: Gralea. region to the south of 
Lestallum !Chapter 15) 
Enemy drop: MA Veles-bis 15%1 
Shop: lestalluf"!l! Al!is~ 
Collectible: Pitioss Ruins 
Hunt rndDMizeCTS~ the Woods (Ta;ip~;·--· 
Rest Area) 
-Ene-mydfOP:lmp;~i~l -RTt1emar1-i"l·%~·"1~pe-r1a ·1"--
Sniper11 %J. ~atterySoldrer 11%) 
co 11~Ctibie: VerinaS Mart~ lrlSOrnni·a·--··-·---·-··--
-Enem·y·dro·P·: s·o·mb···ffo/~CG·renad·e ·!1 ~1o1: 
Oolce (3%1. Bavarois 12%) 
A19SSio-!trad-e-in oracle AsCenSiDn-COinSl--
5,000 
3.000 
Accessories: Overview (Continued) 
NAME 
NOTES 
AVAILABILITY 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
Warm Inners 
Reduces lcedamageby20% 
Shop: ~estallum, Altissia 
3,000 
Collectible: Verinas Mart, Pitioss Ruins 
Hunt: Hunter HO Line of Defense (Me~~ iO 
Inventory 
H_un!~HOJ 
Ice Crest 
Reduces tee damage by 30% 
Enemy drop: Ice Bomb 11%). Cryonade 11%). 
Gelatirij~~!~f!lall"."_ (2'1,1 
Alessio (trade in Oracle Ascension Coins) 
Shop: lest~llurT\. Al~ssia
. ____ ----
Insulated 
Reduces lightning damage 
Hunt: Thunder in Them Thar Hills 
3.000 
Inners 
by20% 
IWiz (;_hCl£~~1'~.st) ___________ 
_fQ!!.~ible : .ei!Lo1.~_f!uins 
-~!!D_t: 9ff with Their .. He.ads_ll~-~!~!~!.'."!! . .M~.~-~!L_ .. 
Lightning 
Reduces Lightning damage 
Enemy drop: Thunder Bomb ( 1 %), Galvanade 
Crest 
by 30% 
11 %1. Cust!!9J?~L C!~f!le BrUlee 11 %1 
Alessio (trade in Oracle Ascension Coins) 
Anti-darkness Reduces Darkness damage 
· H~nt: A Fistful ot Gil (Longwythe Rest Ar~~) 
Inners 
by20% 
Collectible: Pitioss Ruins 
........................ ., ............... 
" 
..... 
Hunt: Bones Seek an Offering llestallum. 
Reduces Darkness damage 
Thoroughfare) 
Dark Crest 
Enemy drop: Black Flan (1%), Lakhmu Flan 
by 30% 
12%), Matcha _~o~sse_1311,).Heete_yes (I%) 
_1\~~~j~~~-Q!?~~- '2sc~n._~~~~i~.~L 
___ 
Reduces Fire, Ice. and lightning 
Collectible: Costlemark Tower maze. Steyliff 
Accessories 
Celestriad 
damage by 30% 
Grove 11:1_?_z_~JQ!Jl~.J~.?.~le!_!_~J_ 
Justice Monsters Five 
Reduces Fire. Ice, lightning, and 
Collectible: Crestholm Channels maze 
Mighty Guard 
(Chapler 15) 
Darkness damage by 30% 
'2les .~~1~~9~~ . .9!~9~-~~~-n..~!<?.~-~~~~----
Stone Wall 
Reduces Fire, Ice. and ballistic 
Alessio (trade in Oracle Ascension Coins) 
damage by 30% 
--------··--·-··-·--··· 
Genji Gloves 
Reduces Lightning, Darkness. and 
Collectible: Pitioss Ruins 
ballistic damage by 30% 
Tempered 
Max HP + BOO; Vitality +40 
Collectible: Gralea 
Shield 
Magitek 
Max HP + I ODO; Vitality + 60 
Shield 
~ui@.ss - Formouth Garr~_tU.l_QQ~l-----·-
Towel 
Prevents accumulation of dininess Shop: Wiz C~O£~~ ~~! _________ -· 
5.000 
Hunt: Rulers of the Banks lQl~J~-l~~~~) 
Handkerchief 
Reduces accumulation rate of 
Shop: Wiz Chocobo Post 
I.ODO 
dir11ness by 66% 
Hunt: A lost Pai~ng (Altiss@.~ Maag~ 
White 
Doubles accumulation rate of 
Shop: lestallum 
1,000 
Sneakers 
dirtiness 
-----
------
Bandage 
Prevents bloodstains 
Shop: lesta!lum 
I.DOD 
Styling Gel 
Retains hairstyle 
Shop: Les~~~----·----- ________ 
1,000 
Moog le 
Collectible: Oaurell Caverns. Costlemark Tower, 
Charm 
EXP + 20% 
Pitioss Ruins, _ 
_Q~~L~l~-~-'-"~r-~-~--~-~? (qiapter 15) 
Ju~~~!02..~?!.~rs £ive 
Field 
Exclusive to Noctis; automatically 
Medicine 
uses potion when HP falls 
Collectible: Oaurell Caverns maze (Chapter 15) 
under50% 
Thieves' Way 
Exclusive to Noctis; reduces MP 
Collectible: Fociaugh Hollow 
consumption of phasing by 20% 
Thieves' 
Exclusive to Noctis; reduces MP 
Collectible: Costlemark Tower 
Way II 
consumption of phasing by 40% 
Exclusive to Noctis; automatically 
switches to the next clockwise 
Auto-changer weapon after each attack 
Collectible: Crestholm Channels 
or combo; Max HP + 100; 
Strength + 30; Vitality +30 
------------
Soul of 
Exclusive to Noctis; Max MP + 30 Collectible: Costlemark Tower maze 
Thamasa 
!Chapter 1_51_ ____ 
Robe of the 
Exclusive to Noctis; MP Recovery 
Collectible: Steyliff Grove maze {Chapter 15) 
l ord 
Rate + 25% 
Applied 
Exclusive to Noctis;automatically 
Collectible: Costlemark Tower maze 
Sorcery 
usesanEtherwhenMPfalls 
!Chapter 151 
under50% 
Black Hood 
Exclusive to Noctis; enables 
Collectible: Pitioss Ruins 
automatic phasing through attacks 
Friendship 
Increases link-strike activation 
Collectible: Balouve Mines. Glacial Grotto 
Band 
radius 
Megaphone 
Exclusive to G!adio; HP Recovery 
Collectible: The Myrlwood 
Rate + 10% for the whole par1y 
Black Belt 
Exclusive to Gladio; +50% 
Collectible: Glacial Grotto maze (Chapter 15) 
damage to large enemies 
-
--------
The Good 
Exclusive to lgnis; automatically 
Collectible: Fociaugh Hollow maze 
uses a Hi-Potion on Noctis when 
Chamberlain 
his HP falls under 50% 
!Chapter 15) 
----------·-----------
The Grand 
Exclusive to lgnis; automatically 
Collectible: Fociaugh Hollow maze 
uses an E!ixironNoctiswhenhis 
Chamberlain 
HP falls under 50% 
(Chapter 15) 
Target Scope 
Exclusive to Prompto; +50% 
Collectible: Crestholm Channels 
damage to small enemies 
Camera Strap Exclusive toPrompto; +5tomax 
Collectible: Wiz Chocobo Post. Steyliff Grove 
hotos er da 
209 

210 
FOOD 
Meals can provide your party with tremendous benefits to combat 
parameters. They are available either by speaking to the proprietor of 
one of the numerous dining establishments across Lucis or by employing 
lgnis's cooking skill at campgrounds. 
o Restaurants are an accessible source of butts, but most of their 
affordable meals provide modest enhancements; higher-end dining 
options are usually sold at a premium that makes them prohibitively 
expensive for regular consumption. 
Restaurant Meals 
O Cooking a recipe may require more legwork to acquire rare 
ingredients, but the subsequent boost is well worth the effort. This 
is especially true when you stop at a haven prior to confronting a 
particularly strong foe, where every advantage matters. 
Food-based bonuses apply additively after all bonuses from gear are taken 
into consideration. In other words, these attribute improvements do not 
enjoy the percentage-based modifiers granted by certain types of attire. 
<'.>>--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
Eating at a restaurant costs Gil, which can prove very handy when you have extra cash on hand and are looking for a quick boost in combat. Some 
of the higher-end recipes are almost prohibitively expensive, but confer very powerful effects. 
If availability of resources is taken out of the equation, there are two primary drawbacks to dining out when compared against a regular cooking 
regimen at havens. The first is that effects from restaurant food have a fixed duration of 24 in-game hours. The second is that you are obviously 
restricted to certain dining locations if you are seeking specific effects. 
Given that all effects from restaurant food are also obtainable through cooking, it is to your benefit to invest steadily in the latter. You should rely on 
restaurants less as you progress through the story, except for instances where it will help to complete short-term tasks in the immediate area. That 
said, lgnis learns many recipes by eating at restaurants - so trying all dishes marked with an asterisk once is an excellent way to extend your ally's 
culinary repertoire. 
Restaurant Meals: Overview 
Restaurant Meals: Overview (Continued) 
NAME 
EFFECTS 
PRICE 
RESTAURANT 
(GIL) 
NAME 
EFFECTS 
PRICE 
RESTAURANT 
(GIL) 
Chili con Carne 
+Strength + 20 
50 
Takka's Pit Stop 
+HP +50 
(Hammerhead I 
Green Smoothie 
+Fire/Ice/Lightning 
160 
Wiz Chocobo Post 
Resistance +90% 
+Strength + 150 
Leiden Jambalaya 
+HP + 200 
750 Takka's Pit Stop 
+ HP Recovery Rate 
(Hammerhead) 
Chocobo Club 
+Strength + 80 
Sandwich 
+HP + 400 
980 Wiz Chocobo Post 
+Prevents Toad 
xl.25 
+Strength + 80 
Takka's Pit Stop 
Hammerhead Hot 
+HP +200 
200 
(Hammerhead); complete 
Sandwich* 
Takka's sidequest: Hunters 
Fat Chocobo 
+HP + 400 
Wiz Chocobo Post; 
Triple-Decker* 
+EXP + 50% 
1.200 Complete Wiz's sidequest: 
A Feathery Feast 
and Gatherers 
+ infinite Stamina 
Takka's Pit Stop 
Peanut Sauce 
+Strength + 120 
760 
Lestallum, Surgate's 
Skewers 
+HP + 400 
Bean mine 
Sizzling Humongo-
+ HP + 1,000 
3,500 
(Hammerhead); complete 
Steak* 
Takka's sidequest: A Meat 
Most Magnificent 
+Strength + 150 
Lestallum, Surgate's 
Soup & Bread 
+HP Recovery Rate 
1,100 
Bean mine 
x2 
Jetty's 
+Prevents Poison 
50 
Various Crow's Nest Diners 
+Prevents Toad 
Kenny's Fries 
+HP +300 
150 Various Crow's Nest Diners 
+Strength + 80 
Bird-Broth Rice 
+ HP +250 
620 Lestallum, Surgate's 
with Curry* 
+HP Recovery Rate 
Beanmine 
Kenny's Salmon 
+Strength + 150 
1.480 Various Crow's Nest Diners 
+Vitality + 200 
Kenny's "Special" 
+Strength + 400 
The Original Crow's Nest 
+Magic +300 
9,800 
Salmon 
+Vitality + 300 
Orner (Old Lestallum) 
+Strength/Magic 
Mother of Pearl (Galdin 
Galdin Gratin 
+ 50, EXP+ 10% 
8,900 
Quay I 
+ HP + 500 
White Fish in 
+Strength + 160 
Mother of Pearl (Galdin 
Tomato Sauce 
+HP + 900 
2,800 
Quay) 
+Prevents Poison 
x1 .25 
+Magic + 200 
Lestallum Market, Tostwell 
Offal Stew• 
+HP Recovery Rate 
1,800 Grill 
xl.75 
+ + 2% damage 
per level for 
level difference 
Spicy Skewers* 
between attacker 
9,800 
Lestallum Market, Tostwell 
and higher-level 
Grill 
target 
+Strength +350 
+Strength + 120 
+ HP + l ,000 
Sea's Bounty 
+HP + 600 
1,800 Mother of Pearl (Galdin 
Risotto 
+HP Recovery Rate 
Quay) 
x1.25 
+Strength + 120 
Lestallum Market. Tozus 
Roti and Curry Plate 
+Magic +100 
l.600 Counter 
+HP + 200 
Steamed Crab with 
+Blocks Fire/Ice/ 
7.200 Mother of Pearl (Galdin 
Rock Salt 
Lightning 
Quay) 
+ Magic +500/ 
Mother of Pearl (Galdin 
Tenebraen Berry 
Strength 0 
17,500 Quay); Complete Coctura's 
Opera* 
+Critical hit rate 
sidequest: Berried Memories 
+ 10% 
Gysahl Chips 
+HP +400 
480 
Wiz Chocobo Post 
+Strength + 120 
Soul Soup 
+Spirit + 200 
1,280 
Lestallum Market. Tozus 
+Fire Resistance 
Counter 
+70% 
+HP +600 
Lestallum Market. Tozus 
Big Bread Buns 
+HP Recovery Rate 
1.480 Counter 
x1.5 
• Eating this dish unlocks a new recipe for lgnis. 

Restaurant Meals: Overview (Continued) 
Restaurant Meals: Overview (Continued) 
NAME 
EFFECTS 
PRICE 
RESTAURANT 
(GIL) 
NAME 
EFFECTS 
PRICE 
RESTAURANT 
(GIL) 
Mama Ezma's 
+ Strength + 150 
Meat Pie* 
+ Magic +150 
1,980 Meldacio Hunter HO 
+ HP +500 
+ Strength + 300 
Fettini di Cernia* 
+ HP + 1,000 
4,800 
Maagho 
+ Prevents Instant 
Meat & Onion 
+ Strength + 200 
2,850 
Meldacio Hunter HO 
Skewers*. 
+ HP +800 
Death 
+ HP +4,000 
Hunters' Ragout* 
+Strength + 350 
4,200 
Meldacio Hunter HO 
+HP +1500 
Maagho Lasagna 
+ EXP+ 100% 
80,000 
Maagho 
+Blocks Fire/Ice/ 
Verinas Spuds 
+HP +300 
150 
Verinas Mart - Ravatogh 
Lightning 
+ Strength + 120 
Tender Bird Fritters 
+ HP + 400 
980 
Verinas Mart - Ravatogh 
+ Fire Resistance 
Fine Caviar Canape* + Strength/Magic 
300,000 
Maag ho 
+75, EXP + 50% 
+ HP + 1,500 
+ 50% 
Smoked Dualhorn 
+ Strength +400 
Shank* 
+ HP + 1,000 
6,800 
Verinas Mart - Ravatogh 
+ infinite Stamina 
Wood-Smoked Fish* + Prevents Toad 
3,800 
Maagho 
+ Lightning 
Resistance + 50 
Set Dinner Course 
+ HP +500 
500 
Train restaurant 
* Eating this dish unlocks a new recipe for lgnis. 
Cooked Meals 
<:>·>----~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
You (or, more accurately, lgnis) can only cook a meal while making camp at a haven. To prepare a dish, you need two basic 'resources ingredients 
and a recipe. 
Ingredients 
There are various ways to source ingredients in the game. You can 
purchase some of them outright, farm them from enemies, pick them 
up as collectibles, or obtain them by fishing. All methods of acquisition 
for each ingredient are detailed in the accompanying table. 
In addition to their use in cooking recipes, ingredients can also serve as 
catalysts when crafting spells - for example, providing potent added 
effects, increasing a spell's power, or even leading to the creation of 
free duplicates. Refer to our section dedicated to Elemancy on page 
274 for details. 
Ingredients: Overview 
NAME 
AVAILABILITY AVAILABILITY: DETAILS 
Sahagin Liver 
Eneinv drop . ~lphagin (50%) 
Shop 
furloch Farms(Le.stalluin_J .. 
Kujala Marrow 
,_E.rie.my drop 
rv!()lokujata(75%) 
Arapaima Roe 
S.hop 
rvlin~ga_me _ 
Gamberetto's Catch __ (Altissia) 
Totornostro 
Birdbeast Egg 
Giant Trevally 
Fillet 
Trout Fillet 
Shop 
Collectible 
Shop 
Mrni-mart (Hammerhead). 
Aldare's (Galdin Quay). JM Market 
(Prairie Outpost), Kiosk (Wiz 
Chocobo Post). Fallstar Foods 
(Lestallum). JM Market (Old 
~_EOstal lum) 
Common 
JM Market (Cape Caem). 
- ~rn_beretto's Catch (Altissi".L__ _ 
~rvlini:9a111e __ _ £ishin_g __ _ 
JM Market (Cape Caem). 
Gamberetto's Catch(AltissiaL_ __ _ 
Shop 
M1ni:ga111e 
~ ishJng 
Nebula Salmon _Shoe 
_____ Gamberetto's_Catch (Altis_si.al_ _ _ _ 
Fillet 
Tide Grouper 
Fillet 
Sea Bass Fillet 
Platinum 
Myrltrout Fillet 
Barramundi 
Fillet 
Vesper Gar 
Fillet 
_.f".lini:[)iime 
_Shop 
Fishing 
__ Jrvl rviarket fa.ee Caernl 
Mini:game 
fishing 
Shop 
Gambere~t_o'.s Catch (Altissi<J) 
rvlini:garne 
fishing 
. Shop 
Gamberetto's Catch(Altiss1a) 
Min~ga_r:ne ... Fishing 
_ 
_ ___ ~- --
Shop 
Mini-game 
Minr-game 
JM Market (Cape Caem). 
Garnberretto~s.C~1£h_l~tis.Sia) 
~ishing 
Fishing 
..... .. 
BUY 
SELL 
PRICE 
PRICE 
400 
2,700 
1,350 
100,000 50,000 
20 
10 
100 
50 
240 
120 
560 
280 
2,200 
1.100 
1.380 
690 
3,900 
1.950 
300 
150 
1,800 
Ingredients: Overview (Continued) 
NAME 
AVAILABILITY AVAILABILITY: DETAILS 
Shop 
OldGotiLJnan_t:sBo_atl~ltissia) 
Ulwaat Berries 
Cape Caem 
Farm 
Trade in two Caem Carrots 
Sidequest 
Hunters and Gatherers, 
.. . Emergency Delivery_(Takk~) 
Cleigne Wheat 
JM Market (Longwythe Rest 
Fine Cleigne 
Wheat 
Saxham Rice 
Gighee Ham 
Garula Sirloin 
Anak Meat 
Dualhorn Steak 
Behemoth 
Tenderloin 
Chickatrice Leg 
Fine Gighee 
Ham 
Shop 
Area), Prissock General Store 
..... ......... _(Lestallum) 
Sideguest 
Berriedrviemories (Coctura) 
furloch farms (Lestallum). 
Shop 
JM Market (Old Lestallum), 
Old Gobunant's Boat (Altissia) 
... 
' 'E~-;rge~;;y De l i~ery, L~st~li~~·; 
Sidequest 
Finest (Takka) 
Shop 
Sidequest 
Shop 
Shop 
Enemy drop 
Shop 
Enemy _dro.E... _ 
Shop 
Sidequest 
Enemy drop 
Shop 
Enemy drop 
En~mydrop 
Shop 
-
·--------------··-· ··--·--· ··-··--··-·· -·-
Furloch farms (Lestallum). 
JM Market (Old Lestallum). 
JM Market (Cape Caem). Old 
Gobunant's Boat (Altiss1a) 
------------- -------- --- --------------··-··--······--··-···-·-·-
Scenic Delivery (Takka) 
Mini-mart (Hammerhead). Aldare's 
(Galdin Quay). JM Market (Prairie 
Outpost). Kiosk (Wiz Chocobo 
Post). Fallstar Foods (Lestallum), 
Jrvi rviark~t(QldLestallum) . 
Kiosk (Wiz Chocobo Post). Fallstar 
Foods (Lestallurn). JM Market 
(Old Lestallum). Parvinath General 
Store (Meldacio Hunter HO) 
-·-··-· ···-------------------------------------------------------- --------
Garula, Green Garula (75%): 
for Garulet 
JM Market (Longwythe Rest Area), 
Kiosk (Wiz Chocobo Post). fallstar 
foods (lestallum). JM Market (Old 
Lestallum). Parvinath General Store 
(Meldacio HLmter HQ) 
5_nak (50%): Anak Stag (25%) 
Fallstar Foods (Lestallum). Parvinath 
.General Store (Meldacio Hunter HO) 
Hunters andGatherers (Takka) . 
Dualhorn (75%1_ . 
furloch farms (Lestallum). Parvinath 
Gener<JISt(J[."_ (Meldacio Hunter HQ) 
Deadeye, Behemoth Tyrant, 
Rog_ue_ Behemoth(100%) 
Chickatrice 
Prissock General Store 
(Lestallum). Old Gobunant's Boat 
(Altrssia) 
BUY 
PRICE 
4,000 
100 
980 
200 
30 
120 
80 
160 
3,200 
400 
SELL 
PRICE 
2,000 
50 
490 
100 
15 
60 
40 
80 
1.600 
120 
200 
Inventory 
Food 
211 

212 
Ingredients: Overview (Continued] 
Ingredients: Overview (Continued) 
NAME 
AVAILABILITY AVAILABILITY: DETAILS 
Catoblepas 
Enemy drop 
Catoblepas (50%) 
Brisket 
--·----·---· ---··---·- --. 
Jabberwock 
Shop 
Parvinath General Store (Meldacio 
Sirloin 
_ Hunter HQ) 
Enemy drop 
Jabberwock (50%) 
Leukorn Steak 
_En_erT1y drop 
~u_korn (5~%) 
S i deq u_e~t 
Lestallum's Finest (Takka) 
Griffon Breast 
Shop 
Prissock General Store (Lestallum) 
Enerriy_~r~e __ _Griffo_n(75!0, Griffon -hunt (15%)_ 
Shop 
Furloch Farms (Lestallum), Parvinath 
Zu Tender 
General Store (Meldacio Hunter HO) 
------
-
Enemy drop __ Zu (25%) 
Midgardsormr 
Shop 
Prissock Gen_er~Store (Lestallum) __ 
Shank 
Enemy drop 
Midgardsormr, Grootslang (50%) 
-
· 
··············----·-----
-----
Daggerquill 
Enemy drop 
Daggerquill (50%) 
Breast 
Cup Noodles 
_ Sllol'_ 
Cup Noodles Wagon (LestallurriL _ 
Cleigne 
Shop 
JM Market (Cape Caem), 
Gamberetto's Catch (Altissia) 
Mollusk 
Collectible 
Old Lestalll]rll region 
Ca em 
Shop 
JM Market (Cape Caem), 
Pinkshrimp 
_ G.arn_bere_tt_o~~-t(;!'__L~~~~L __ 
Cleigne 
Shop 
JM Market (Cape Caem), 
Gamberetto's Catch (Altissia) 
Darkshell 
-
- -----
-
Collectible 
Old Lestallum region 
Sidequest 
Hunters and Gatherers, Everyone 
Loves Bea_n:; (Takka) 
---- ------
Mini-mart (Hammerhead). JM Market 
(Longwythe Rest Area), JM Market 
Leiden Pepper 
(Prairie Outpost), Kiosk Wiz Chocobo 
Shop 
Post), Fallstar Foods (Lestallum), JM 
Market (Old Lestallum), Parvinath 
General Store (Meldacio Hunter HO). 
Old Gobunant's Boat (Altissia) 
·- - -
Collectible 
Common in Leide 
Sideq u_e~'. _ Scenic D_elive_ry_l~~al 
Mini-mart (Hammerhead), 
Sheep Milk 
Shop 
JM Market (Prairie Outpost), Kiosk 
(Wiz Chocobo Post), Fallstar 
Foods (Lestallum) 
_ ,_ _________ ·------------
-------
Sidequest 
Lestallum's F irJ1!.5_ti'.9_~~L-
Schier Turmeric 
Shop 
Prissock General Store (Old Lestallum). 
JM Market (Old lestallum). Old 
GE_bl]f1ant~ Boat (Altissia) 
Common_irl__Duscae and Cleign_E'__ 
Hulldagh 
Nutmeg 
Collectible 
Shop 
Ev_eryo_n_e_Lci,,,,_s Beans (Takka_) _ _ 
Prissock General Store (Old 
lestallum). JM Market (Old 
Lestallum), Old Gobunant's Boat 
(Altissia) 
Collectiblll_ ___ Taelpar Rest Area region _____ _ 
Leiden Sweet 
Sidequest 
Berried Memori~ (Coctura) 
Potato 
-~o_ll_
ec_
ti_
bl_
e __ LonJJ_wy~h~~~~a region 
Shop 
--~~Cl_~_kGene r~_~o_rll_jl,El~allu_fT11 
Collectible 
TaelparRestArea_r_eQion ___ __ 
_ 
___ _ 
Smoking Wood 
Shop 
, ~arriberetto's Catch (Altissia) _ 
_l:_lll!e_~~~~ 
-~-~~~taJlu_rJ1r_~gion __ _ 
Tenebraen Oak 
_'.>!~e_gues! __ 
A__~_ea_t Most Magnifi~t_ t:Ta__kk~_ 
Kettier Ginger 
_'.l_~e._ __ -~~ rloch Farms (Lestallum) 
Co lle_c!!~e_ __ -~e_~n_<ls_Mart - _ Ravatogh re~~--
_2idegu_est 
A_~-a~f,jo_st Magnificent (Tak~a) __ 
Allural Shallot 
2hop 
Furloch Farms (lestallum) 
Aegir Root 
Alstroom 
Lucian Tomato 
Wild Onion 
Collectible 
Daurell Caverns 
_c;_~~ectible 
.!!!'~~ OtJ_ay_re~ 
_21:1op __ 
J~~_.<l':_ket (Old lestallum) 
_CCl_lle_c:~! ___ ~_oe_rriix._2~~[].:: Alstor re~Cl_n ___ _ 
Shop 
JM Market (longwythe Rest Area), 
Aldare's (Galdin Quay), JM Market 
(Prairie Outpost). Kiosk (Wiz Chocobo 
______ _f'.ost) ,Fallsta_r_l'oods _l!-~t~~urril _ 
Shop 
Collectible 
JM Market (Longwythe Rest 
Area), Aldare's (Galdin Quay), 
Kiosk (Wiz Chocobo Post), Fallstar 
Foo~~_(~sta llu_rrlL_ 
Wiz Chocobo Post and Cauthess 
Rest Area region 
BUY 
SELL 
PRICE 
PRICE 
600 
5,200 
2,600 
250 
3,200 
1,600 
4,800 
2,400 
2,400 
1,200 
30 
220 
110 
400 
200 
150 
75 
320 
160 
20 
10 
10 
250 
125 
600 
300 
80 
310 
155 
700 
350 
600 
300 
800 
400 
10 
200 
100 
200 
100 
100 
50 
NAME 
AVAILABILITY AVAILABILITY: DETAILS 
BUY 
SELL 
PRICE 
PRICE 
Sidequest 
Emergency Delivery, Everyone 
Killer Tomato 
•· 
__ 
L~0J_ll_'J ns (TakkaJ ___________ 
500 
250 
Shop 
Fallstar Foods (lestallum). Old 
Go~unant's Boat ~~i5-~'.'L 
§_i~~_eyt 
Scenic Delivery (Takka) 
--
Mini-mart (Hammerhead). 
Leiden Potato 
Shop 
JM Market (Prairie Outpost). 
40 
20 
Kiosk (Wiz Chocobo Post). 
·----
Fallstar Foo_cl_sJ~stal lum) --
Collectible 
Longwytil_e Rest~~ 
region 
-----
Eos Green Peas Collectible 
Common in Leide 
15 
--- ---------- -
--·------ ----
·-
----
Mini-mart (Hammerhead). 
JM Market (Prairie Outpost), 
Shop 
Kiosk (Wiz Chocobo Post). 
Funguar 
Fallstar Foods (lestallum). 
80 
40 
----
-·- - -·-··- _}_M Market (Old lestallu_rril 
-
_Sideg_uest 
Scenic Del~v~ry_ (Takka) 
-- -
Collectible 
Galdin Oua)'re_!licJ_rl___ 
- - --
---· 
Vesproom 
Shop 
JM Market (Old ~~allum) 
300 
150 
Collectible 
Meldacio Hu_riter_~Q region ____ 
---
Prissock General Store 
Malmashroom 
Shop 
(Lestallum), JM Market (Old 
1,000 
500 
lestallum) 
· --··--··-·· 
Collectible 
Malmalam Thicket 
Recipes 
As you progress through the game, lgnis can learn many different 
recipes for foods that provide a wide range of bonuses to your party. 
In the following table, we document all recipes in the game and provide 
the following information: 
o Ingredients Required: The ingredients necessary for lgnis to cook a 
dish (with an asterisk highlighting those that cannot be purchased). 
o Effects: The list of the effects conferred by the dish. 
o Skill Points: The amount of SP that lgnis earns for cooking the dish. 
o Learning Condition: The details of how lgnis can learn a recipe. 
o Favorite Food: A small sprite appearing next to an entry indicates 
when a dish is a character's favorite food (see box-out) 
To gain skill points (SP) efficiently, you must regularly cook food that 
requires ingredients; recipes that do not use raw ingredients make 
negligible contributions to skill advancement. Investment of resources into 
cooking is its own reward, leading lgnis to learn new recipes, as revealed 
in the following table. 
Recipes: Overview 
NAME 
INGREDIENTS 
EFFECTS 
SP 
LEARNING 
REQUIRED 
CONDITION 
Flame-Roasted 
+ Strength + 1 0 
Default 
Toast 
Toasty Rice 
+ HP + 50 
Default 
Balls 
--------------
Chilled Food Tin 
+HP +100 
Default (Chapter 10) 
- ~~reri~t_h +3Q_ 
Croque 
+Birdbeast Egg 
+Strength +30 
Madame _______ !._G~ee Ham 
Veggie Medley 
+Leiden Potato 
+Strength + 20 
Stew 
+Sheep Milk 
+HP + 150 
---- --------- -~£~-rl_[l~a:__ _____ -
+ Anak Meat 
+Strength + 40 
_! l eid_en Pepper __ ~H P +200 
+Giant Trevally 
Fillet 
+Wild Onion 
+ Anak Meat 
+ Lucian Tomato 
+ Daggerquill 
Breast* 
+Sheep Milk 
+Funguar _ 
+ Leiden Sweet 
Potato* 
+ Cleigne Wheat 
+Strength + 60 
+HP +200 
~t>,1agic __ -+: 50 
+ Strength + 60 
+ HP + 250 
+Strength + 80 
+HP +400 
+ Prevents Poison 
+Vitality + 200 
+ Spirit + 200 
+HP +1 ,000 
------ --- --- ------ -
40 Default 
40 Default 
50 Cooking skill Iv. 2 
50 Cooking skill Iv. 3 
50 Cooking skill Iv. 4 
60 Cooking skill Iv. 5 
60 Cooking skill Iv. 6 

Recipes: Overview (Continued) 
NAME 
Robust Bean 
Soup 
Creamy Milk 
Risotto 
Lasagna al 
Forno 
Gold Tail Soup 
Lestallum 
Stewed Tripe 
Seasoned 
Midgardsormr 
INGREDIENTS 
REQUIRED 
+ Eos Green Peas* 
+Leiden Pepper 
+Killer Tomato 
+ Malmashroom 
+ Saxham Rice 
+Sheep Milk 
EFFECTS 
+ HP +600 
+ HP Recovery 
Rate xl .5 
+Tech Boost 
+ 100% 
+ HP + 6DD 
+HP Recovery 
Rate xl .75 
+Prevents Toad 
SP 
LEARNING 
CONDITION 
60 Cooking skill Iv. 7 
70 Cooking skill Iv. 8 
- --------- ---------------------------------- -----------
---·-------·----- ·- --·---
• Jabberwock 
+ HP + 4,DOO 
90 Cooking skill Iv. 9 
Sirloin 
+EXP + 100% 
• Cleigne Darkshell •Blocks Fire/Ice/ 
+ Fine Cleigne 
Lightning 
Wheat 
+ Kujata Marrow 
+ Platinum 
Myrltrout Fillet 
+ Allural Shallot 
+ Catoblepas 
Brisket* 
~K~tti_~r~ i~~~L ___ 
+ Daggerquill 
Breast* 
+ Saxham Rice 
+ L~~~~-~-~~~----
+Saha gin Liver* 
+ Hulldagh Nutmeg 
+Killer Tomato 
+ Midgardsormr 
Shank 
+ Hulldagh Nutmeg 
+Killer Tomato 
-·-------
+ 100% Critical 
Rate 
+ HP Recovery 
Rate x2.5 
+Strength + 80 
+HP + 200 
-------
+Infinite Stamina 
+HP+ 1000 
------··--·---·-·-------··-·-
+Strength + 80 
+HP + 25D 
+Magic + 20D 
+HP Recovery 
Rate xl .75 
--------------
+ +2% damage 
per level for 
level difference 
between 
attacker and 
higher-level 
target 
+Strength + 350 
---- ------------ --
90 Cooking skill Iv 10 
50 Eat "Hammerhead 
Hot Sandwich" at 
Hammerhead 
80 Eat "Sizzling Humongo-
Steak" at Hammerhead 
------·---------------------------------------
60 Eat "Bird-Broth Rice 
with Curry" in Lestallum 
---------·---------·---
70 Eat "Offal Stew "in 
Lestallum 
90 Eat "Spicy Skewers "in 
Lestallum 
-- -~-~~_g_Q~Q _______ ---- --- ---------------------
•Cup Noodles 
+Strength + 30 
+ HP + 3DD 
Approach the Cup 
Noodles Wagon in 
Lestallum 
+Cup Noodles 
+Strength + 80 
Sidequest: 
+HP + 50D 
The Perfect 
_________ __ ____ .. ~Q~_±_2_Q!o_ __________ 
9_'.Jp_!§.~~~L _______ _ 
• Cleigne Mollusk 
•Strength + 120 
+ Caem Pinkshrimp + HP Recovery 
+ Saxham Rice 
Rate xl .25 
+ Leiden Sweet 
Potato* 
•Fine Cleigne 
Wheat 
+ Ulwaat Berries 
+ HP + 600 
+Magic + 5DD/ 
Strength 0 
70 Sidequest: 
Kitty Catering 
(Cat) 
10D Sidequest: 
Berried 
Memories (Coctura) 
+ Leukorn Steak 
+Strength + 150 
70 Eat "Mama Ezma's 
+ Dualhorn Steak 
+Magic + 1 OD 
Meat Pie" at Meldacio 
_____ __ _ !_~~e1~_ne ~~-~~-~- __ !!l_F'__":'."~~~ ------- l·-------•-H 
_
___ u_n 
____ t_e 
__ r 
___ H 
___ Q 
__________________ _ 
Hunters' Krazy 
Kebabs 
King's Stew 
+ Catoblepas 
Brisket* 
+Wild Onion 
+Behemoth 
Tenderloin 
+Griffon Breast 
+Strength + 200 
+ HP + BOO 
•Strength + 350 
+ HP + 1500 
SD 
Eat "Meat & Onion 
Skewers" at Meldacio 
Hunter HQ 
90 Eat "Hunters' Ragout" 
at Meldacio Hunter HQ 
_______ + KuJata Marr_~~-
Stacked Ham 
+ Garula Sirloin 
+ HP + 200 
Sandwich 
+Fine 
Ham + EXP + 50% 
60 Eat "Fat Chocobo 
Triple-Decker" at Wiz 
Chocobo Post 
Smoked 
+Behemoth 
+Strength +400 
90 Eat "Smoked Dualhorn 
Behemoth 
Tenderloin 
+ HP + 1,DOO 
Shank" at Verinas Mart 
+ Hulldagh Nutmeg + Infinite Stamina 
- Ravatogh 
_____________ .!_~oking Woor} _______________________________ _ 
Tide Grouper 
+Tide Grouper 
+Strength +300 
90 Eat "Fettini di Cernia" 
Carpaccio 
Fillet 
+HP +1,DDO 
in Altissia 
• Aegir Root* 
+ Prevents Instant 
Death 
--·---- - ---------------------·-
----- --·-·--------·---·-·· 
Sea Bass Saute +Sea Bass Fillet* 
+ HP +1,500 
80 Eat "Wood-Smoked 
• Tenebraen Oak 
• Prevents Toad 
Fish" in Altissia 
+ Ice Resistance 
+50 
-----------------
--------
Royal Banquet 
+ Arapaima Roe 
+Strength/Magic 
120 Eat "Fine Caviar 
Canape 
• Kettier Ginger 
+75 
Canape" in Altissia 
+ Allural Shallot 
+ EXP +50% 
Recipes: Overview (Continued) 
NAME 
INGREDIENTS 
EFFECTS 
SP 
LEARNING 
REQUIRED 
CONDITION 
Mother & Child 
+ Chickatrice Leg* 
+ HP +1,000 
70 Watch a woman eat 
Rice Bowl 
+ Birdbeast Egg 
+ EXP +3D% 
this dish on a table near 
+ Saxham Rice 
+ Drop Rate 
Lestallum's lookout 
+5D% 
---------
----------
----
~-----------
Skewered Wild 
•Trout Fillet 
+ Strength + 150 
70 Catch a Rainbow 
Trout 
+ Leiden Pepper 
+ HP +800 
Trout 
__ _ _________ . --·-------------- -~~!~~~11.~~I~_a_r} __ ·l··-···-·····I···-·-·-···--·-·····-·-·-·-···· ·······--······ .. , 
Excellent Oven-
+Platinum 
+Strength + 350 
100 Catch a Platinum 
Roasted Trout 
Myrltrout Fillet 
+ HP + 2,000 
Myrltrout 
Grilled Wild 
Barramundi 
Nebula Salmon 
Teriyaki 
+ Allural Shallot 
+ Fire Resistance 
+ Barramundi Fillet +Strength + 80 
+Schier Turmeric 
+ HP +500 
-------------- ----------------------
-----·----·----·-·-·-···-
.Nebula Salmon 
•Strength + 150 
Fillet* 
+Magic + 150 
60 Catch a Crag 
Barramundi 
9D Catch a Nebula Salmon 
i ------- - ···---·-·-·-···--··--·-· i -~ ~~119_ci_g~-~~~f!i~9- + HP + 600 
Legendary 
+Vesper Gar Fillet* +Strength + 500/ 
90 Catch a Vesper Gar 
Herb-Grilled 
+Schier Turmeric 
Magic 0 
____ \NJl~.!P-~---- + Leid!~_P.!fl~ ----------- - ·-----
Dry-Aged 
Tender Roast 
Stew 
Crispy Zu 
Skewers 
+ Garula Sirloin 
• Leiden Potato 
+Lucian Tomato 
•Strength +SD 
+ HP + 250 
+ Zu Tender 
+ HP + 250 
+Fine Cleigne 
+Critical Rate 
Wheat 
+ 20% 
50 
Unlocked after your first 
Garula Sirloin drop 
100 Unlocked after your first 
Zu Tender drop 
Spicy Long-
+ Dualhorn Steak 
+Strength + 5D 
50 Unlocked after your first 
_ _Q1_1~!11~~n ~teak ~i:'.lE 
Bone Rib Stea~ 
-~~~~~n Pepper 
_ .!_~£ + 200 _____ _ 
Packed 
Mushroom 
Stew 
Three-
Mushroom 
Kebabs 
+Alstroom 
+Vesproom 
+Alstroom 
+Vesproom 
+ Malmashroom 
+Strength/Magic 
+ 200 
+Max HP reduced 
to 10% 
+Strength + 150 
+HP + BOO 
+ Prevents most 
status ailments 
70 Unlocked after 
collecting your first 
Vesproom 
80 Unlocked after 
collecting your first 
Malmashroom 
---- - ---·--·---·-----
- - -------------
Crown City 
+ Jabberwock 
+Strength + 40D 
90 Unlocked after your first 
Roast 
Sirloin 
+ HP +3,000 
Jabberwock 
________ +Leiden~ppe~ 
______ 
1 ____ Sirloir:J!~P 
Royal Road 
Paella 
Hearty Cutlet 
on Rice 
+ Cleigne Mollusk 
+Strength + 150 
80 Unlocked when you 
+ Cleigne Darkshell + HP + 1,DOO 
see the corresponding 
+ Saxham Rice 
+Infinite Stamina 
magazine cover (inside 
a small wooden building 
to the east of Coernix 
+ Griffon Breast 
+ Fine Cleigne 
Wheat 
+ Saxham Rice 
S~tio_n -9a_uth~~s) 
+Strength + 250 
90 Unlocked when you 
+HP + 1,500 
see the corresponding 
magazine cover (under 
the road bridge, 
directly south of the 
----------------------------------------- _ _ _____________ 
_ ________ y~~p~rp_~? I) __ 
Crispy Cheese 
Pizza 
+Strength + 1 DO 
+Infinite Stamina 
+ Prevents Poison 
1 Pre-order bonus 
* Ingredients that cannot be purchased. 
FINU F~NTm@ XV 
·~· Inventory 
~. Food 
213 

214 
ATTIRE 
Noctis and his friends unlock a selection of different outfits as you progress through the story. Attribute bonuses granted by attire are percentage-
based, therefore retaining their utility throughout the game: the effects are applied to your parameters after all additions from weapons and 
accessories have been calculated. The Casual Outfit line also offers a situational tactical advantage, protecting the party from a number of debilitating 
status ailments. 
Attire: Overview 
WEARER 
NAME 
EFFECT 
UNLOCK CONDITION 
Prince's Fatigues 
Max HP +20% 
Default 
Prince's Fatigues (No Jacket) 
Strength/Magic + 20% 
Default 
Casual Outfit 
Prevents Mollified, Disenchanted, Burnt, 
Default 
Frozen, and Shocked statuses 
Casual Outfit (No Jacket) 
Critical Rate + 20% 
Default 
Kingly Raiment 
Vitality/Spirit + 30% 
Main Quest: Reunion and Recovery 
Noctis 
Kingly Raiment (No Jacket) 
HP Recovery Rate +3%; MP Recovery Rate 
Main Quest: Reunion and Recovery 
+ 6% 
Royal Raiment 
Max HP + 25%; Max MP + 25% 
Pre-order bonus 
Royal Raiment (No Jacket) 
Magic + 30%; Infinite Stamina 
Pre-order bonus 
Thermal Suit 
Max HP + 20%; Blocks Fire damage and Burnt 
Only during "A Precious Source of Power" 
status 
(main quest) and hunts occurring inside 
the power plant 
Crownsguard Fatigues 
Max HP + 20% 
Default 
Crownsguard Fatigues (No Jacket) 
Strength/Magic + 20% 
Default 
Casual Outfit 
Prevents Mollified, Disenchanted, Burnt, Frozen, 
Default 
and Shocked statuses 
Allies 
Casual Outfit (No Jacket) 
Critical Rate + 20% 
Default 
Kingsglaive Garb 
Vitality/Spirit + 30% 
Main Quest: Reunion and Recovery 
Kingsglaive Garb (No Jacket) 
HP Recovery Rate + 3% 
Main Quest: Reunion and Recovery 
Thermal Suit 
Max HP + 20%; Blocks Fire damage and Burnt 
Only during "A Precious Source of Power 
status 
(main quest) and hunts occurring inside the 
power plant 

CONSUMABLES 
Consumable items in Final Fantasy XV are plentiful. Most can be purchased in shops or collected throughout the world, and you should not hesitate 
to employ them in battle to sustain your offensive momentum or prevent an untimely defeat. To use consumables. press ®llml and select the 
necessary entry in the menu. Note that all consumables also have interesting properties when used as catalysts in spell-crafting recipes - turn to 
page 27 4 for details. 
Consumables: Overview 
NAME 
Potion 
Hi-Potion 
Mega-
Potion* 
Superior 
Restorative 
Ether* 
Elixir 
Hi-Elixir 
Megalixir* 
EFFECT 
Recover 50% of 
target's max HP; 
remove Danger 
status 
Recover 100% of 
target's max HP; 
remove Danger 
status 
Recover 1 00% of 
max HP of all party 
members; remove 
Danger status 
+30% to target's 
HP Recovery Rate 
for 30 seconds 
Recover 100% of 
max MP; removes 
Stasis 
Restore 50% of 
lowered max HP 
and recover 100% 
of max HP and max 
MP; remove Danger 
status and Stasis 
Restore 100% of 
lowered max HP 
and recover 100% 
of max HP and max 
MP; remove Danger 
status and Stasis 
Restore 1 00% of 
lowered max HP 
and recover 100% 
of max HP and max 
MP for all party 
members; remove 
Danger status and 
Stasis 
AVAILABILITY 
Shop: common 
Collectible: in various outposts and 
dungeons 
--
Gladio's Survival skill: level 1-3 
3% - Goblin, Reaper, Flan. Jumbo 
Flan; 8% - Arachne 
Justice Monsters Five 
Enemy drop: 8% - Tarantula, 
_l<~k_yang~_t_i_ ___ _ 
Shop: common 
~i~~-9_~~~-~: __ Gone_~~n t!n_~ (Dav!)__::-_J<_~Q__ 
Collectible: in various outposts and 
-~~-~~~-~~s _________________ -- ---------------- -
Gladio's Survival skill: level 3-7 
Enemy drop: 3% - Glamhoth, Snaga, 
Reaper (Lv. 34); 10% - Iron Giant, 
Ga_rgantua 
_ 
Justice Monsters Five 
_Sidequest: D_ust to Dust (Dave) - _x5 __ _ 
Gladio's Survival skill level 8-10 
Collectible: in va_rious dungeons 
Enemy drop:_~'Y"-~-~e9_~~ __ _ 
Collectible: Gralea 
, _Z~gnautus K~~ -
Enemy drop: 5% - Imperial Soldier, 
Imperial Trooper 
Shop JM Market - Altissia; 
Cartanica; Tenebrae; Gralea 
Collectible: in various dungeons and 
mazes 
Gladio's Survival skill: level 4-7 
Enemy drop: 5% - Ronin 
Shop: common 
____ _ 
Sidequest: Final Resting Plains (Dave) 
-x10 
,_Gladio's S urviva_l _s_~~: ~~~-~1 _5 ~~g _________ _ 
Collectible: in various dungeons and 
mazes 
Item drop: 3% - Goblin (dungeon); 
5% - Aramusha Kokyangwuti; 8% -
Arachne, Ariadne, Deathclaw 
----·-------- --·---! 
Justice Monsters Five 
Shop: co_mmon _ _ 
_ 
Sidequest: A_~oc~y End (Dav~] -:- x1_Q __ 
Collectible: in various dungeons and 
mazes 
Gladio's Survival skill: level 6-10 
Hunt: common 
Enemy drop: 5% - Iron Giant; 
8% - Uttu, Chandravarma, lseultalon 
Justice Monsters Five 
Sidequest: Mountains of Misfortune 
(Dave) -x5 
--·-·----·-·-·· ·--·---·--··-----------
---------·- ---
Collectible: in various outposts, 
d~nge~~- a_~-~-~a_~~s_____ 
_ ____ __ __ _ 
Gladio's Survival skill: level 9-10 
Hunt: common 
Enemy drop: 1 % - Ganymede (dungeon, 
hunt); 3% - Phalaris (dungeon). 
Behemoth King 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
50 
100 
100 
400 
800 
Consumables: Overview (Continued) 
NAME 
EFFECT 
AVAILABILITY 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
Shop: common 
A Backwoods Burial (Dave), 
Phoenix 
Revive downed 
Washed Away (Dave) - xl 0 each 
1,000 
Down 
target 
Collectible: in various dungeons and 
mazes 
Gladio's Survival skill: level 7-10 
---------··-
Collectible: in various outposts, 
dungeons and mazes 
----
---------
---
Mega 
Revive all downed 
Sidequest: The Witch of the Woods - x5 
Phoenix* 
party members 
-
·-
Hunt: common 
------ ·-------------·--·------·-·- ·-------------
Justice Monsters Five 
Shop: common 
.. 
Remove Poison 
Antidote 
status from target 
Gladio's Survival skill level 1-4 
10 
Collectible: in various outposts 
·-- -·- -
-
---
Common in Cleigne and from Chapter 
Remove Stone 
09 onward 
Gold Needle status from target 
------·-·-·--------------·----·---·····-
------------·----·-·-·····-··-
50 
Collectible: Taelpar Rest Area, 
Lestallum, Old Lestallum, Altissia 
-------
------·-------·-
·------------
Common in Cleigne and from Chapter 
Smelling 
Remove Confusion 
09 onward 
--
50 
Salts 
status from target 
Collectible: Cauthess Rest Area, 
Lestallum. Meldacio Hunter HO, Altissia 
---
Common in Cleigne and from Chapter 
Maiden's 
Remove Toad status 
09 onward 
Kiss 
from target 
---··--
--
100 
Collectible: Coernix Station - Cauthess, 
Lestallum, Cape Caem, Altissia_ 
Remove Poison, 
Shop: JM Market - Altissia; 
Stone, Confusion, 
Cartanica; Tenebrae; Gralea 
Remedy 
and Toad statuses 
Gladio's Survival skill: level 2-6 
500 
from target 
-~~~c_!~~~~j~ var i ~~-s ou_t_Eos~s ---
Increase Strength 
Shop: Meldacio Hunter HO - Parvinath 
Power EX 
of target by 100 for 
General Store; JM Market - Caem, 
500 
120 seconds 
Altissia 
--
Increase Vitality of 
Meldacio Hunter HO - Parvinath 
Mettle VX 
target by 100 for 
General Store; JM Market - Caem, 
500 
120 seconds 
Altissia - ---
-----
Increase Magic of 
Shop: Meldacio Hunter HQ - Parvinath 
Verve WX 
target by 100 for 
General Store; JM Market - Caem, 
500 
120 seconds 
Altissia 
---
--~ -
Increase Spirit of 
Shop: Meldacio Hunter HQ - Parvinath 
Spirit ZX 
target by 100 for 
General Store; JM Market - Caem, 
500 
120 seconds 
Altissia 
I 
Collectible: imperial bases, Gralea 
----·----- --------------. ·-
Increase Strength of 
Muscle 
Enemy drop: 3% - Eternal Trooper; 5% 
Stimulant 
target by 200 for 40 
- Battery Soldier, Magitek Axeman, 
seconds 
Armored Axeman, Imperial Spearman, 
Armored Assassin, Magitek Assassin 
-·----·------·-·-·--·--
-·-·--· 
--
---·---
Increase Vitality of 
Collectible: Gralea 
Flesh 
--
- -
-
------
Fortifier 
target by 200 for 40 
Enemy drop: 3% - Suicide Trooper; 
seconds 
1 O_!'o - Magitek Bannerman 
-- -- -
Collectible: 1mpe 
bases, Gralea 
Reflex 
Automatically evade 
Enemy drop: 3% - Rogue Axeman, 
Enhancer* 
attacks without 
Haywire Axeman; 5% - Imperial 
input for 20 seconds 
Rifleman, Imperial Sniper, Magitek 
Swordsman, Armored Swordsman 
-----------------------·-----·------·-··- ·- -------------
Reduce MP 
Collectible: Gralea 
Magitek 
consumption to zero 
Booster* 
Enemy drop: 5% - Magitek Swordsman, 
for 20 seconds 
Magitek Axeman 
--------- - ·------- ... 
- -----------·---··-
Set rr:oogle plushie 
Iris Lestallum (Chapter 08) 
Moog le 
on the field; the 
Plushie 
enemies around the 
plushie will target it 
* Only available for Noctis. 
Inventory 
Attire 
Consumables 
215 

216 
TREASURES 
As you progress through the game, you will gradually amass a collection of treasures - some through exploration, many by defeating enemies in 
battle - for which vendors will pay generous amounts of Gil. Not surprisingly, the more valuable items in this category are only obtainable from 
stronger opponents, or drop as a result of breaking enemy appendages. Note that certain weapons (such as the Hardedge Greatsword) provide 
a massive boost to damage inflicted on appendages, which can be useful to know if you are seeking specific rewards by dicing your foes prior to 
defeating them. 
Not all treasures are meant to be sold, however, as some are required to complete sidequests (we have marked these with an asterisk). This applies 
to the Repair Kit, for example, an item that enables you to complete the "broken car" missions (see page 120). Other treasures necessary for 
sidequests include those that Cid requests in order to upgrade some of your weapons (see page 148). This includes Rusted Bits and Metal Scraps. 
Additionally, most treasures have potent properties when used as catalysts in spell-crafting recipes. You can find all the details from page 274 
onwards, but don't be too swift to sell your most valuable pieces unless you are in dire need of cash. You will be amazed when you find out how 
treasures can turn raw elemental energy into devastating spells (which can be cast up to five times in a row rather than once only), or even free 
copies of these spells. 
Treasures: Overview 
NAME 
Metal Scrap* 
Rusted Bit* 
Iron Shavings 
Shattered 
Timepiece 
Chrome Bit 
Fossil Shell 
Fossil Wood 
Ammonite Fossil 
Ancient Dragon 
Tooth 
Dragon Scales 
Mythril Shaft 
Sharp Bone 
Strong Bone 
Electrolytic 
Condenser 
Laser Sensor 
Dynamo* 
AVAILABILITY 
AVAILABILITY: DETAILS 
Collectible 
Common in Leide 
Collectible 
Common 
-
------ ----------
Collectible 
Common 
Collectible 
Common in Cleigne 
Collectible 
Collectible 
Collectible 
Collectible 
Collectible 
I~ v~~~s dun_geon~------
Galdin Quay, Glacial Grotto, Fociaugh 
Hollow 
Common 
In v~ious dungeons 
Cauthess Rest Area, Fociaugh Hollow, 
Daurell Caverns, Meldacio Hunter HQ 
----------------------
---
Collectible 
Collectible 
Collectible 
Collectible 
Enemy drop 
Collectible 
Enemy drop 
Common in Leide 
!-------------
_l ~".'_~ious dunge_o~s _ 
Common in Leide 
lmp~rial bases, Gralea_ 
30%- MA Veles (50% at Lv. 35); 
95°~_- MA-~_f\'1aniple 
Callatein's Plunge (outside Glacial 
Grot!~J. ~ralea, ln s9i:ri~~'!__-
50% - MA Veles (50% at Lv. 35); 
60% - MA Veles-Bis; 95% - MA 
H~!9machus 
Collectible 
Gralea, Insomnia 
SELL 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
25 
300 
200 
500 
BOO 
25 
1 
400 
800 
600 
900 
16 
200 
200 
500 
900 
Magitek Core* 
Sidequest 
Stealing the Past 
25,000 
_ §~-~~y 
__ ~r:?_p ____ 1-9_~~-= -~~-X _QU~~~-~-=--~~-X_l°~~~---
Star Shell 
Tiny Feather 
Collectible _____ -~9!9_in Oua1____ 
210 
Collectible 
Common in Duscae 
90 
Giant Feather 
Beetle Shell 
Building Stone 
Quality Building 
Stone 
Splendid Building 
Stone 
Old Book 
Collectible 
Hammerhead region, Verinas Mart -
_Ra~togh 
Collectible 
Meldacio Hunter HO, Oaurell Caverns 
--- ----
---
Collectible 
Common in Duscae and Cleigne 
_(s~uth regiori) 
Collectible 
Hammerhead region, Rock of Ravatogh 
Collectible 
Various dungeons 
Collectible 
Lestallum 
Broken Harmonica Collectible 
Lestallum, Deadeye's lair 
Gladio's Survival skill: level 7-10 
Common i~Cleigne 
Platinum Ingot 
Skill 
Rare Coin 
Mythril Ingot 
Collectible 
Skill 
Gladio's Survival skill: level 10 
Glass Gemstone* 
-~~!~~~-~-~ I~ ______ -~~-s!91~~mJ:~-e~-~~~~-o~k ~B_~atogh 
Earth Gemstone* 
Collectible ___ S!2_~on i_f!_~J~_il)~-------- _ 
Sky Gemstone* 
Beautiful Bottle 
Debased Coin 
Collectible 
Tenebrae, various dungeon mazes 
(Chapter 15) 
Sici~q~e~i---rA-F~~;;-~F;~t(Fri~~dly-C~t) - ------- -
T~if:Y~~~ ---l~~-~~-i-~_9-~~~~-~----=~==--
180 
800 
50 
350 
600 
100 
600 
10,000 
1,000 
20,000 
1,100 
1,500 
2,500 
120 
150 
Treasures: Overview (Continued) 
NAME 
Debased 
Silverpiece 
Debased 
Banknote 
Gralean Medal of 
Distinction 
AVAILABILITY 
AVAILABILITY: DETAILS 
Collectible 
Various outposts in Cleigne 
Collectible 
Common in Cleigne 
Collectible 
East of Lestallum, Gralea 
Imperial Medal of 
Collectible 
Honor 
Gralea 
Magnetron* 
Hydraulic 
Cylinder* 
Wind-up Lord 
Vexxos 
Hunter's Medal 
Garula Tusk 
Garula Fur 
Collectible 
Gralea 
-~-~my drop 
Collectible 
Mini-game 
-~% - MA Hoplomachus 
_North ~f Fo_~_yau l~erey'. _Grale~ 
Justice Monsters Five 
-~idequest ______ _tvl_e~ac~-~:-~!'_9t_~~~~~ _______ _ 
Shop 
Enemy drop 
Burbost Souv~n_i: ~mporium 
Appendage: 100% - Garula, Green 
Garula 
-~emy drop __ -~~ :: Garu!~~'.3_ ____________________ _ 
Mini-game 
Great Garula Tusk 
Collectible 
Totomostro 
C~e rnix Stati_on - _ A!stor region 
Hairy Horn 
Hardened Hoof 
Giant Hairy Horn 
Thick Hide 
Worn Incisor 
E~eflly ~~fl__ __ 
~_p-~i:i_~~-~:_:_~()_g!o _::::_~~r_u}!l_~~-~ -
Enemy ~r~p 
App_~!l_d_age 100~/o_ ::_ Q u_~!hor~ 
Enemy drop 
Collectible 
Enemy drop 
100% - Bloodhorn, Ashenhorn, 
Grandhorn, Dualhorn (Lv 23) 
---
-
Galdin Quay region 
Appendage: 100% - Ashenhorn; 75% -
Grandhorn; 50% - Dualhorn (Lv. 23) 
-
-----
-----·--
-
---------
i~J'_'.J_r_D_p ______ _'._QO_'}'o --~~id_och~ lo n_ _______________ _ 
Ap.e_e_ndage: 100% -:- A~idoc h e l or:_ ___ _ 
Coeur! Whiskers* 
En_emy drop 
50% - Coeur!; 100% - Elder Coeur! 
Sabertusk Claw 
Curved Fang 
-~~n_i:\!~~_8-_____ ~_o!o_r12_o_~!r? ____ ·--·--
_§hop ________ ~rbost Souvenir Emporium 
Enemy drop 
Collectible 
50% - Sabertusk; 100% - Frekitusk, 
Alphatusk __ 
_ -~~fl_"':'Ythe R_est_~e~_region 
Voretooth Bristles 
Enemy drop 
50% - Voretooth; 75% - Yello~oth 
Havocfang Hide 
_l:"nemy dr~_ 
50% -:=__ Ha~~~~~ng 
Scaled Skin 
Barbed Poison 
Needle 
Crimson Tongue 
Hard Whiskers 
Mesmenir Horn 
_§~op ________ -~~~9-~!_Souv_e.n_~--~~_P.~~-~-------------
Enemy drop 
50% -
~ushussu; 100% - Mu~hmah~~-
Enemy drop 
Appendage: 50% - Mushussu; 100% 
-Mushmahhu 
_§n_emy dr~p 
50%- M.~_Qa l oclaw~ -~~-~f-~_n_9 ________ _ 
_!:_n__8._fll_Y_ d_r_op____ 
80% - Mesmen_~; ~~ =-~-~~~n_~r ___ _ 
Shop 
Burbost So~_venir Empo!ium 
Appendage: 50% - Mesmenir; 100% 
Enemy drop 
- Magnanir 
Supple Tail 
~_n_8._my__dr_op ___ 7~~--:- Spiracorn, ~l)P~icorn 
Crooked Helixhorn Enemy drop 
Appendage: 75% - Spiracorn 
SELL 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
600 
500 
1,500 
2,500 
1,500 
1,600 
500,000 
50,000 
140 
250 
700 
190 
100 
1,400 
1,600 
2,050 
1,500 
90 
150 
120 
150 
240 
1,250 
200 
70 
160 
230 
1,300 

Treasures: Overview (Continued) 
NAME 
Anak Fetlock 
Anak Antlers 
Giant Curlhorn 
Sahagin Scale 
Sharp Head Fin 
Slimy Oil 
Rough Scales 
Catoblepas Fang 
Curved 
Hollowhorn 
Cockatrice 
Tail Feathers 
AVAILABILITY 
AVAILABILITY: DETAILS 
Shop 
Bur~ost S9uvenir._~rnJl..orium_ 
E 
d 
100% - Anaklaban, Anakadom; 75% 
--~~-:~ ~_ri_ __ -=~_n_9~_§_!9_g _____________________ _ 
-~_12_DE__ ___ ~~st_§~~-~enir Empo!~_r:i:1 _ __ 
Enemy drop 
Appen~ge: 50% = An_a~ Stag 
Enemy drop 
Appendage: 10% - Arba; 100% -
Arbagad9I 
-~!2~-~~~p 
______ -~~-9-~=-~~-~jl_~'. _0J~ino~---------
-~-~m._y~p _____ l~-= ~9~evil; ~%-=...Co '.9 l devil 
Enemy drop 
75% - Gigantoad, Hekatontoad; 100% 
--------------~-::._§a_~~9-~9 _________________ _ 
~n.~niy_~o_p ______ !?~o__::::_ Gur~n.g~tch 
En_i:my 9rop __ 5CJ_'l'o -
Cato_~!e_e~ 
_ 
Enemy drop 
Appendage: 100% - Kujata 
Enemy drop 
100% - Cockatrice 
Cockatrice Crest 
~n.El_'!lJ_~~--- ~e.P.~.129~~0_9~-=._Cockat_'.i~_I'. _______ _ 
Basilisk Plumage 
~nemy ~~9.L 
____ 85%- Bas i lis~----- __ _ 
Insect Stinger 
Barbed Scythe* 
Behemoth Horn 
Griffon Feather 
Griffon Claw 
_Enemy dro_e_ _ 75% - Killer Bee 
~!2_~rnX9!.9P _____ 2~!"-:::.!~~~~- yy_~_~_,~ldier Wasp 
Shop 
____ §~rbos t So~_ve_12ir_ ~lllpor~um 
~9_11~~ibl~ ------ _'!Y_iz Sh_o_~~~~!~_!_re~io_r:. __ ~~a~eye~l~r. 
Appendage: 100% - Behemoth, 
Enemy drop 
Behemoth Tyrant, Oeadeye, Rogue 
Behemoth, Behem_oth King 
Enemy drop 
Enemy drop 
25% - Griffon (15% - Hunt; 100% -
_du_ngeon) 
Appendage: 100~ - Griffon 
Bulette Carapace 
, _En~my drop - ~00%- Bulette 
Shield Spike 
~nemy drop 
Appendage 75% -
~ul~t_te_ 
Malboro Eye 
_Enemy drop 
100% - Malboro 
Malboro Vine 
Monster Claw* 
Monster Jaw 
Greatsnake Scale 
Greatsnake Crest 
Centipede Legs 
Centipede Jaw 
Prawn Antennae 
Enem y__d~9_e_ 
5~/o =-fv!a!~oro ~_i:J_ll_S_ _~alboro Brat 
En~in_v_~rop ___ -~0-~ 
-
Bander_sn_a!~h 
_E_12EJ_my drop ____ Appendage: 75% - Bandersnatch 
Enemy _~.'.~fl. ____ ?Q!~-=-~~dga rdSE!_i:n_r:;_ -~9_Q_°lll__-:::__~-~~D_~rnr_ 
Appendage: 25% - Midgardsormr; 
Enemy drop 
100% - Hvitrormr 
- ---·-------· ~------" 
-·---
_g_o_!~~~t!~le _____ 
".'Y~~C~coE_9 Post region ______ _ 
~_emy drop_ 
_1_ 00% - Hundlegs (50% chance for x3) _ 
!_n~my dr_[!p__ __ Afl.fl_l'.~~9_9_~Q'Yo_:::_~~-~~legs 
Enemy drop 
Appendage: 100% - Karlabos, 
_ -~-~9-~~Ka rla~_o~ -----
Scorpion Stinger 
_E_n~my drop__ 30% :::-~P-~Y0.'.l.~--------
Treant Branch 
~nemy_ ~'.Cl_e ____ _1!_~_=...'.~~~ntj1 OOo/o__~~-~~nt versio_'.1_) __ _ 
Treant Trunk 
Enemy drop 
Mandrake Flower _Enemy drop 
Wyvern Wing 
E~my drop 
Appendage: 100~ 
- Treant 
25% - Mandrake 
75%-Wyvern 
Sharp Tail 
Feathers 
Thunderoc 
Feather 
Zu Beak 
Dragon Horn 
Scarlet 
Splinterbone 
Great Anak 
Antlers 
Arba Spur 
Centipede Feet 
Centipede Teeth 
Rough Shell 
Fine Slimy Oil 
Sharp Bristles 
Enemy drop 
50% - Oaggerquill; 25% - Oynoaevis 
Enemy drop 
75% - Thunderoc, Copperoc 
-~ nemy drop___ _ ?5% - Zu 
Enemy drop 
Enemy drop 
Enemy drop 
Appendage: 25% - Jabberwock; 
100% - Manxom 
Appendage: 100% - Quetzalcoatl 
Appendage: 50% - Anaklaban; 
100% - Anakadom 
--------·-------------------·----·----
~0em y drofl_ ______ ?_5_'!'o - Arba_; 1 OQ% - Arba_~adol 
Enemy_~9P_____ _1_9_0_'."-=--~-~~Je~ _f?_Q~--~~-il_~_ce~D_.'._~}) ___ _ 
_Enemy drop 
Enemy drop 
Appendage: 1 OQ~ - Redlegs 
75% - Karlabos 
Collectible 
East of Lestallum 
----
-~-
_Enemy_dro_p ____ 7? '.J'o =-~_aiatoa_dJ~\1: -~L 
__ 
Enemy drop 
Enormous Stinger 
Enemy drop 
50% - Voretooth (Lv. 68); 
7~% -:- V~re toot~- ( ~~-- 72) 
75% - Brutal Bee 
SELL 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
300 
900 
1,700 
450 
1,900 
210 
250 
2,000 
2,400 
1,100 
1,900 
350 
150 
240 
2,500 
2,600 
3,400 
160 
1,200 
1,400 
2,250 
900 
1,600 
1,100 
1,900 
60 
320 
700 
190 
800 
1,600 
1,400 
1,600 
150 
700 
3,000 
2,400 
2,750 
1,900 
290 
120 
800 
1,600 
2,600 
1,500 
360 
Treasures: Overview (Continued) 
NAME 
Deadly Stinger 
Strong Whiskers 
Giant Hoof 
Fearsome Hoof 
Colorful Griffon 
Claw 
AVAILABILITY 
AVAILABILITY: DETAILS 
E~_El_'!lJ_~r.~p _____ 7§_~_:::: _~1 1_1'.~_Q_l!~_El_~--------
-~-~l l ~~t~~~El_ ___ __ __ _!a.~ i ea.r -~~~t- ~rea_r~Qi?n_ 
Enemy drop 
Enemy drop 
Enemy drop 
50% - Coeur! (dungeon), Elder Coeur! 
(dungeon) 
100% ::::_ ~ujata _______ _ 
Appendage: 100% - Griffon (dungeon) 
Translucent Skin 
Enemy drop 
75%- Quetzalcoatl; 100% - Quetzalcoatl 
(hunt), Mictlantecihuatl 
Fine Tail Feathers 
Enemy drop __ 100% .::::._ Kingatrice _ 
Magnificent 
Tail Feathers 
Enemy drop 
100% - Kingatrice (Lv 83) 
SELL 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
700 
3,400 
650 
3,500 
4,800 
600 
1,650 
2,450 
Fine Crest 
Enemy_J!.9fl... __ ~P.P~~~~~-!.22'.l'"...:::~~~-a~El___________ 
2,400 
Magnificent Crest 
Enemy ~~p_ __ -~fl_fl_e~~~-Q_e~_~gg_!'~ ::::-~i~_g_~t!~~~J..~~~-Q~~~L 
3,400 
Beautiful Hide 
Enemy drop ____ ~~~% -
Havo~f<J_n9 (~v. 93) 
2, 750 
Big Scorpion 
Stinger 
Scorpion Barb 
Hard Scale 
Cactuar Needle* 
Heavy Scale 
Spiked Armor* 
Hardened Hide 
Jumbo Needle 
Sharp Scythe 
Enemy drop 
75% - Rea perking 
,~nemy ~9.P __ 25% ::::.£l.~~ertai l ___________ _ 
_§~~y_ d~~e ____ 50% - ~!P_~il__Qi~----------------
En_e_niy_~~o_p __ 
100% - Sl 
__ a 
____ c 
___ t 
__ u 
___ a 
____ r 
_________________ _ 
Collectible 
____ -~?.~th __ ~!~~~_e-~~~e.8!P?.9.!.. __ 
Enemy dro_p_ __ 80% - S_eade_vil j~unQeO~) '._~?..':<l_!d_EJ_vi! __ _ 
Enemy drop __ ,_!l.ppendage: ~-!"...::: __ Skarnbu let~ _____ _ 
Enemy drop_ 
100% - Manxom; 50% - Jabberwock 
Enemy ~r9p__ 100% -
~gantuar 
_§_nemy dr9p __ 
75% - Killer Wasp (dun~_.8.? n ) 
Beautiful Plumage 
E n~n:iY drop ___ ~-5% -
Roya~~-~-
Gorgeous 
Plumage 
Tough Shell 
Giant Crab 
Pincers 
Strong Pincers 
Small Beak 
Downy Feathers 
Dragon Claw 
Enemy drop 
85% - Royalisk (dungeon) 
E_n~ ri:y _d~op_ _____ _ !_99% -__ S 
__ k 
__ a_r_n 
__ b 
__ u 
____ l 
__ e_tt _
___ e 
____________________________________________ , 
Collectible 
Malmalam Thicket 
----------·-------- ·----------------------
- ·--------------
50% - Shieldshears; 100% -
Enemy drop 
Mig_htyshEJ_~-- ____ _ 
Enemy:~~----- -~O_!'o_:::_ Sh ield~~~8.!sJdungeon) 
- ~nemy ?r~p ___ -~5% ::: R_e_g_<J_l t~i~e 
--~~-e~y droe __ ?_?_%::: ~~J!~~_e_(~~~El_9~L __ 
_Enemy_d!oe__ -~OQ
0
~o - Wyv_e~_Ld~~geo~L_ ____________ _ 
1,200 
40 
1,100 
50 
2,000 
2,300 
4,400 
100 
1,500 
2,350 
3,350 
900 
375 
1,875 
400 
2,300 
8,000 
Drooping Whiskers Enemy droe__ 
100%-: Jori:nun~~nd__ __ 
__ ___________ 
1,950 
Divine Whiskers 
_Enemy drop 
100% -
Jor_rn u_n.g~~d_ (du_n.~~~n_)_________ 
4,950 
Crab Carapace 
Enemy drop 
Sturdy Helixhorn* 
Enemy drop 
Rotten 
Splinterbone 
Enemy drop 
25% - Stoneshears; 50% -
Rubyshears_;_ 75~ 
-
~_pa!~s~ears 
Appendage: 10% - Ouplicorn; 
75% - Leukorn 
Appendage: 100% - Mictlantecihuatl 
75 
1,350 
6,000 
Large Hollowhorn 
Enemy drop 
Appendage: 100% - Molokujata, 
4,000 
1----- _ 
Phalaris (Ran_~Cl_lp-'2_ ver~~~) ________ _ 
Adamantite 
Enemy ~~.fl._ ____ 1_QQ'.~_::: Ad~man_~~~-------- ____________ 
15,000 
Hammerhead - Mini-mart; Coernix 
Repair Kit* 
Bluegill Scale 
Bluegill Fin 
Catfish Barbel 
Shop 
Mini-game 
Stations (Alstor, Cauthess, Lestallum); 
Old Lestallum - JM Market 
Fishing 
Mini-gam_~---- .£~s~~ng ____________ _ 
~in~-game 
___ Fishing 
King Catfish Heart 
~~ni=9-~~-~------
~i~~~-L 
___ _ 
Jade Gar 
Mirrorscale 
Snakehead Teeth 
Mini-game 
Fishing 
Mini-ga~e _ 
~hing 
Snakehead Scales Mini-game 
Alstor Bass Bones Mini-game 
Fishing 
Fishing _______ _ 
Phoenix Bass 
Bladder 
Mini-game 
Fishing 
Arapaima Scales 
Mini-game 
__ 
-~!~~-i~g __ 
Barrelfish Scales 
-~in i-ga_~-~ _____ F.i_shinQ 
Murk Grouper Eye Mini-game 
Fishing 
50 
100 
10 
500 
2,500 
10 
100 
50 
1,000 
1,000 
* Required for sidequest completion 
~· Inventory 
,,. Treasures 
217 

218 
AUTO PARTS 
Auto parts are items that enable you to modify the Regalia when you 
speak with Cindy at Hammerhead. Completing Cindy's quest line (see 
page 154) will introduce you to the basics of customization. You'll find 
more items in this category through exploration (mostly represented 
by a pickaxe icon), and buy some of them in stores. It is also possible 
to expand your car radio selection by purchasing music collections 
from merchants. In terms of palpable gameplay benefits, the most 
important subcategory here is the set of components that improve the 
performance and appearance of the Regalia. It is definitely worth your 
while to obtain these as soon as they become available. 
Paint Pigment 
NAME 
AVAILABILITY 
AVAILABILITY: DETAILS 
Whitestone Shard 
Collectible 
Lei de 
Blackstone Shard 
Collectible 
Lei de 
Redstone Shard 
Collectible 
Leide 
Bluestone Shard 
Collectible 
Lei de 
Greenstone Shard 
Collectible 
Leide 
Yellowstone Shard 
Collectible 
Lei de 
Silver Dust 
Collectible 
Lei de 
Gold Dust 
Collectible 
Lei de 
Prismatic Dust 
Collectible 
Lei de 
Whitestone Ore 
Collectible 
Duscae 
Blackstone Ore 
Collectible 
Duscae 
Redstone Ore 
Collectible 
Duscae 
Bluestone Ore 
Collectible 
Duscae 
Greenstone Ore 
Collectible 
Duscae 
Yellowstone Ore 
Collectible 
Duscae 
Silver Shard 
Collectible 
Duscae 
Gold Shard 
Collectible 
Duscae 
Prismatic Shard 
Collectible 
Duscae 
Whitestone Crystal 
Collectible 
Cleigne 
Blackstone Crystal 
Collectible 
Cleigne 
Redstone Crystal 
Collectible 
Cleigne 
Bluestone Crystal 
Collectible 
Cleigne 
Greenstone Crystal 
Collectible 
Cleigne 
Yellowstone Crystal 
Collectible 
Cleigne 
Silver Ore 
Collectible 
Cleigne 
Gold Ore 
Collectible 
Cleigne 
Prismatic Ore 
Collectible 
Cleigne 
Color Sample Books 
NAME 
AVAILABILITY 
AVAILABILITY: DETAILS 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
Basic Color 
Sidequest 
The Ever Elegant Regalia (Cindy) 
Samples 
Advanced Color 
Shop 
Hammerhead - Mini-mart 
3,000 
Samples 
Expert Color 
Shop 
Coernix Station - Lestallum 
10,000 
Samples 
Mythic Color 
Mini-game 
Totomostro 
Samples 
Decals and Stickers 
NAME 
AVAILABILITY 
AVAILABILITY: DETAILS 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
Hammerhead 
Sidequest 
The Ever Elegant Regalia (Cindy) 
2-Tone 
Shop 
JM Market - Longwythe 
300 
Fan Service 
Shop 
JM Market - Altissia 
10,000 
Pop Art 
Shop 
Wiz Chocobo Post - Post Kiosk 
3,000 
Beaux Arts 
Shop 
Hammerhead - Mini-mart 
1,000 
Abstractification 
Shop 
JM Market - Old Lestallum 
6,000 
Crownsguard 
Collectible 
Cape Caem 
Armory on 
Shop 
Meldacio Hunter HQ - Parvinath 
6,000 
Wheels 
General Store 
The Beast 
Shop 
Galdin Quay -Aldare's 
2,000 
Guardians 
Shop 
JM Market -Altissia 
8,000 
Big Bang 
Mini-game 
Totomostro 
Eos 
Shop 
Lestallum - Moatte's Odds 'n' 
8,000 
Ends 
Justice Monsters 
Mini-game 
Justice Monsters Five (app 
Five 
version) 
Carbuncle 
Shop 
JM Market -Altissia 
10,000 
Cindymobile 
DLC 
Pre-order bonus 
Gold Chocobo 
DLC 
Pre-order bonus 
Platinum 
DLC 
Pre-order bonus 
Leviathan 
16-Bit Buddies 
DLC 
Pre-order bonus 
Racing Stripes I 
Sidequest 
The Ever Elegant Regalia (Cindy) 
Racing Stripes II 
Shop 
Coernix Station - Alstor 
500 
Racing Stripes Ill 
Shop 
Coernix Station - Alstor 
500 
Racing Stripes IV 
Shop 
Galdin Quay - Aldare's 
500 
Racing Stripes V 
Shop 
Galdin Quay - Aldare's 
500 
Royal Stripes I 
Shop 
Burbost Souvenir Emporium 
500 
Royal Stripes II 
Shop 
Burbost Souvenir Emporium 
500 
Carbon Weave 
Shop 
Verinas Mart - Ravatogh 
500 
Check Pattern 
Shop 
Verinas Mart - Ravatogh 
500 
Flames I 
Shop 
Lestallum - Moatte's Odds 'n' Ends 
500 
Flames II 
Shop 
Lestallum - Moatte's Odds 'n' Ends 
500 
Flames Ill 
Shop 
Lestallum - Moatte's Odds 'n' Ends 
500 
Regalia Crest 
Collectible 
Cape Caem 
Lucian King's 
Collectible 
Cape Caem 
Crest 
Noctis Sticker 
Caem Farm 
Trade in 3 Caem Carrots 
Gladio Sticker 
Caem Farm 
Trade in 3 Caem Carrots 
Prompto Sticker 
Caem Farm 
Trade in 3 Caem Carrots 
lgnis Sticker 
Caem Farm 
Trade in 3 Caem Carrots 
Luna Sticker 
Shop 
JM Market - Altissia 
3,000 
Chocobo Sticker 
Shop 
Wiz Chocobo Post - Post Kiosk 
1,500 
Moogle Sticker 
Shop 
Wiz Chocobo Post - Post Kiosk 
1,500 
Cactuar Sticker 
Shop 
Wiz Chocobo Post - Post Kiosk 
1,500 
Caution: Wild 
Shop 
Meldacio Hunter HQ - Parvinath 
1,000 
Beasts Sticker 
General Store 
Bullet Hole 
Shop 
JM Market - Old Lestallum 
1.000 
Sticker 
Hammerhead 
Shop 
Hammerhead - Mini-mart 
150 
Sticker 
Cavalier Sticker 
Shop 
Lestallum - Mini-mart 
150 
Coernix Oil Sticker Collectible 
Lestallum 
Ebony Sticker 
Collectible 
Lestallum 
Umbra Sticker 
Caem Farm 
Trade in 3 Caem Carrots 
A Little Friend 
Shop 
JM Market -Altissia 
2,000 
Sticker 

Soundtracks 
NAME 
AVAILABILITY 
AVAILABILITY: DETAILS 
PRICE (GIL) 
Memories of FF 
Default 
Memories of FFll 
Shop 
JM Market - Longwythe 
100 
Memories of FFlll 
Shop 
Coernix Station - Alstor 
100 
~ Inventory 
Memories of FFIV 
Shop 
Hammerhead - Mini-mart 
100 
Memories of FFV 
Shop 
Galdin Quay -Aldare's 
100 
Memories of FFVI 
Shop 
JM Market - Taelpar 
100 
Memories of FFVll 
Default 
Memories of FFVlll 
Shop 
Hammerhead - Mini-mart 
100 
Memories of FFIX (Disc 1) - OST 
Shop 
Coernix Station - Cauthess 
100 
Memories of FFIX (Disc 2) - OST Plus 
Shop 
Coernix Station - Cauthess 
100 
Memories of FFX 
Shop 
Wiz Chocobo Post - Post Kiosk 
100 
Memories of FFXI (Disc 1) - OST 
Shop 
Burbost Souvenir Emporium 
100 
Memories of FFXI (Disc 2) - Rise of the Zilart OST 
Shop 
Burbost Souvenir Emporium 
100 
Memories of FFXI (Disc 3) - Chains of Promathia OST 
Shop 
Burbost Souvenir Emporium 
100 
Memories of FFXI (Disc 4) - OST Plus 
Shop 
Burbost Souvenir Emporium 
100 
Memories of FFXI (Disc 5) - Wings of the Goddess OST 
Shop 
Burbost Souvenir Emporium 
100 
Memories of FFXll 
Shop 
Verinas Mart - Ravatogh 
100 
Memories of FFXlll 
Default 
Memories of FFXIV (Disc 1) - OST Original Soundtrack 
Shop 
Coernix Station - Lestallum 
100 
Memories of FFXIV (Disc 2) - A Realm Reborn OST 
Shop 
Coernix Station - Lestallum 
100 
Memories of DISSIDIA FF 
Shop 
JM Market - Old Lestallum 
500 
Memories of FF TYPE-0 
Shop 
JM Market - Altissia 
1,000 
Memories of Dissidia 012 FF 
Shop 
JM Market - Old Lestallum 
500 
Lucian Cruisin' Collection 
Default 
Afrojack 
Default 
Memories of KINGSGLAIVE 
Default 
Auto Ports 
Memories of JUSTICE MONSTERS FIVE 
Default 
R 
Components 
NAME 
EFFECT 
AVAILABILITY 
AVAILABILITY: DETAILS 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
Supercharger 
Increases top speed to 60 mph 
Sidequest 
The Ever Valorous Regalia (Cindy) 
Turbocharger 
Increases top speed to 70 mph 
Mini-game 
Totomostro 
Aero Wax 
Improves fuel efficiency 
Sidequest 
The Ever Regal Regalia (Cindy) 
Airflow Compensator 
Further improves fuel efficiency 
Shop 
Coernix Station - Lestallum 
6,000 
Auxiliary Tank 
Increases fuel capacity 
Shop 
Coernix Station - Lestallum 
6,000 
Magitek Generator 
Eradicates the need for fuel 
Mini-game 
Totomostro 
Fiberglass Coating 
Protects the vehicle from dust, chips, and scratches 
Sidequest 
The Ever Gleaming Regalia (Cindy) 
Reinforced Fiberglass Coating 
Further protects the vehicle from dust, chips, and scratches 
Shop 
Verinas Mart - Ravatogh 
8,000 
Superhydrophobic Coating 
Completely protects the vehicle from dust, chips, and scratches Shop 
JM Market - Altissia 
20,000 
Enhanced Headlights 
Drive off Daemons at night 
Sidequest 
The Ever Illustrious Regalia (Cindy) 
219 

220 
LEISURE GOODS 
This category encompasses everything in your inventory that pertains 
to leisure activities in the game: chocobos, fishing, and betting in the 
Totomostro mini-game in Altissia's Arena Galviano. This section offers a 
complete catalog with acquisition details. 
Chocobo Leisure Goods 
Caem Carrots (the vegetables that you can plant and harvest at Cape 
Caem once you reach Chapter 08 as part of the "Living off the Land" 
sidequest) also fall into the Leisure Goods category, but are covered 
elsewhere in the guide. Refer to page 171 for details. 
0·>--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
In addition to the Chocobo Whistle (an item that you receive for 
completing the "Friends of a Feather" sidequest that enables you to rent 
chocobos - see page 166), there are three sub-categories of items: 
<> Color goods enable you to change the appearance of the chocobos 
you mount, both for Noctis and his allies, from the Chocobo Salon 
close to Wiz. 
Chocobo Leisure Goods 
CATEGORY 
NAME 
AVAILABILITY 
Special 
Chocobo Whistle 
Sidequest 
Xelphatol Apple Seeds 
Sidequest 
Xelphatol Pear 
Chocobo races 
Doman Plum Pits 
Sidequest 
Doman Pear 
Chocobo races 
Mamook Pear Seeds 
Sidequest 
Mamook Pear 
Chocobo races 
Valfruit Seeds 
Sidequest 
Color 
Val Pear 
Chocobo races 
O'Ghomoro Berry Seeds 
Sidequest 
O'Ghomoro Pear 
Chocobo races 
Cieldalaes Pineapple Seeds 
Sidequest 
Cieldalaes Pear 
Chocobo races 
Han Lemon Seeds 
Sidequest 
Han Pear 
Chocobo races 
Replica Medal 
Sidequest 
Short Course Medal 
Chocobo races 
Long Course Medal 
Chocobo races 
Rounsey Medal 
Chocobo races 
Medals 
Destria Medal 
Chocobo races 
Corsa Medal 
Chocobo races 
Jennet Medal 
Chocobo races 
Fat Chocobo Medal 
Chocobo races 
Jockey Master Medal 
Chocobo races 
Gysahl Greens 
Default 
Mimett Greens (boost chocobos' stamina) 
Shop 
Greens 
Curiel Greens (boost chocobos' galloping speed) Shop 
Reagan Greens (boost chocobos' gliding ability) Shop 
Sylkis Greens (boost all chocobos' abilities) 
Shop 
Totomostro Leisure Goods 
<> Medals are awarded for winning chocobo races and are used to 
decorate your mounts at the Chocobo Salon. 
<> Greens are vegetables that you can feed to your chocobos when 
you make camp at a haven to provide them with temporary status 
boosts. 
AVAILABILITY: DETAILS 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
Friends of a Feather 
Where the Wild Chocobos Are (Wiz) 
Secret collectible (see page 316) 
Where the Wild Chocobos Are IWiz) 
Secret collectible (see page 316) 
Where the Wild Chocobos Are (Wiz) 
Secret collectible (see page 316) 
Chase That Chocobol (Wiz) 
Secret collectible (see page 316) 
Chase That Chocobo! (Wiz) 
Secret collectible (see page 316) 
Chase That Chocobo! (Wiz) 
Secret collectible (see page 316) 
Chase That Chocobol (Wiz) 
Secret collectible (see page 316) 
Complete the A Behemoth Undertaking hunt. making it possible to ride chocobos 
Win Chocobo Hoops: Grange Gallop (Chapter 5 +) 
Win Chocobo Hoops: Rocky Road (Chapter 6 +) 
Win vs. Prompto 
Win vs. Gladio 
Win vs. lgnis 
Win the Full Field race 
Win vs. Iris 
Earn all other medals 
Always available to feed your chocobos 
Wiz Chocobo Post - Chocobo Salon 
480 
Wiz Chocobo Post - Chocobo Salon (after completing "Bird on the Brink") 
480 
Wiz Chocobo Post - Chocobo Salon 
780 
Wiz Chocobo Post - Chocobo Salon (after completing "Savior of the Species") 
1,500 
0)-----~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~---<> 
Horns are items that are used in the Totomostro battles 
Horns 
that take place at Arena Galviano in Altissia. They enable 
you cheer for the monsters you bet on to grant them 
temporary bonuses - see page 310 for details. 
You automatically receive the Horn of Fortitude when you 
play the mini-game for the first time. The other Horns can be 
purchased from the merchant who has a stall a short walk 
from the gondola station that leads to the Arena Galviano. 
Their prices and effects are listed in the table to the right. 
NAME 
Horn of Resolve 
Horn of Tenacity 
Horn of Fortitude 
Horn of Cleansing 
Horn of Madness 
EFFECT 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
Increases the supported monster's attack 
30,000 
Increases the supported monster's defense 
24,000 
Heals the supported monster 
Cures the supported monster of status ailments 
8,000 
Increases the supported monster's strength, but decreases its 
18,000 
defense 

Fishing Leisure Goods 
0>--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~--<> 
Your success in the fishing mini-game is determined by the tools and 
materials you use. This section lists all of the fishing items and reveals 
how to obtain them. To learn more about the mini-game. see page 303. 
Lines 
NAME 
~iSpider 
~- Silk 
Rods 
SHOP AVAILABILITY 
Galdin Quay - Bob's Bait Emporium, All three Coernix 
Stations, Burbost Souvenir Emporium, JM Market 
- Caem, Dory of the Deep, Tabby's Tackle Shack, 
Bert's Bobbers 'n' Stuff, JM Market -Altissia 
Galdin Quay - Bob's Bait Emporium, Coernix Station 
- Lestallum, Burbost Souvenir Emporium, JM Market 
- Caem, Dory of the Deep, Tabby's Tackle Shack, 
Bert's Bobbers 'n' Stuff, JM Market -Altissia 
Burbost Souvenir Emporium, Bert's Bobbers 'n' Stuff, 
JM Market - Altissia 
NAME 
AVAILABILITY 
___ _ _ _ Mind 
Breaker 
From the beginning 
....., .... 
v--'lf""
. 'Z""~
"'=;;;;;J' Hell Blaster 
Shop: Dory of the Deep 
_,.....,,.....,_....-..,, .. Butterfly 
Edge 
.._..,.._,.,._ --- Death Spin 
.......... , -1'-'f--.--_-_..,,. Tranquility 
Reels 
NAME 
-- Menkar 
..._ Acubens 
Shop: Tabby's Tackle Shack; Complete 
Navyth's second sidequest: Fishing, 
Naturally (se~page_1_58) __ _ 
Pre-order bonus 
Shop: Bert's Bobbers 'n' Stuff 
Complete Navyth's fourth sidequest: 
Angler's Nightmare (see page 159) 
AVAILABILITY 
From the beginning 
Shop Dory of the Deep 
DURABILITY 
1,000 
1,500 
2,000 
DEFENSE 
60 
100 
150 
180 
210 
290 
ATTACK 
130 
160 
.,,,,,. Fomalhaut 
Pre-order bonus 
200 
Galatea 
Shop Tabby's Tackle Shack 
240 
~
Nereid 
....... Llymlaen 
Shop: Bert's Bobbers 'n' Stuff 
270 
Totomostro mini-game (see page 310) 
330 
Lures 
NAME 
- Stinker: Malboro 
Stinker: Malbodoom 
1------·--···········-··----··----·---· 
Stinker: Great 
Malboro 
Burrower: Mad Pink 
Sandworm 
------
Burrower: Green 
Sandworm 
~ 
Burrower: Abyss 
Worm 
-------------
--·------·---·---
Sweet Jamming: 
Custard 
AVAILABILITY 
SUITED FOR 
Giant Trevally 
Bob's Bait Emporium Snakehead 
Bert's Bobbers 'n' 
Stuff 
Garnet Snakehead 
Vesper Gar 
- ----- -- --- --------------
Vesper Gar 
-------------- --------·- ·---------------
Jade Snakehead, 
--·---
________ -~~pp~ir~-~-~~~~~-~-~~ --------
Bert's Bobbers 
Cleigne Brown Trout 
'n' Stuff, Coernix 
Callatein Brook Trout 
Station - Lestallum, 
Dory of the Deep 
Cleigne Brown Trout, 
____________ -~_u_rk __ G!_o~~-r _______________ _ 
Crag Barramundi 
------ Bob's Bait Emporium, 
~ 
Sweet Jamming: 
Coernix Station -
Flan 
Alstor 
Giant Trevally 
Galdin Trevally 
Sweet Jamming: 
Mousse 
Lures (Continued) 
NAME 
AVAILABILITY 
SUITED FOR 
~ 
Deadly Waters: 
Zipper Barramundi 
--------------~~-~~_gill _ 
---- - - Tabby's Tackle 
~ 
Deadly Waters: 
Shack, JM Market -
Dark Allural Sea Bass 
-_ ------~f:l!_~!~~_vil 
---- - - Caem 
~ 
Deadly Waters: 
· 
Seadevil 
Maiden Brook Trout 
---------------- ------- -----------------------·---·--------------
........ Tidal Might 
Leviathan 
DLC/Pre-order bonus Giant Trevally, Crag 
Barramundi, Rainbow Trout 
-----------·---·-----------·-
----------·············-···-·--····-··--·-··--·-········-······---·----·-·-
48( Needle 1,000: 
Cactuar 
Needle 1,000: 
Metallicactuar 
-
- - ---
Needle 1,000: Gold 
Cactuar 
Coernix Station -
Cauthess 
- --------
------------ --- ------
Giant Needle 10,000: 
__ __________ _§_i_g_~~!~-~r _____ _ 
~ Giant Needle 10,000: Bert's Bobbers 'n' 
_____________ IYl_l}!_~l--~-~.i:;tuar 
Stuff 
Lucian Catfish 
Lucian Catfish 
Golden Catfish 
Jade Snakehead 
Sapphire Snakehead 
Jade 
~- Giant Needle 10,000: 
Sapphire Snake head, 
________ ---~I~-~~-~-~~~~~--------- ___________________________ N Qb~e __ Arapai ma 
Bomber: Bomb 
Alstor Bass 
Jumbo Tusk: Garula 
- Coernix Station -
Alstor, Bob's Bait 
Emporium 
------ ·----------
Jumbo Tusk: Green 
Garula 
-----
-----
Jumbo Tusk: 
Garulessa 
Tabby's Tackle 
Shack, Coernix 
Station - Lestallum 
Shop: JM Market -
Altissia; Sidequest: 
Navyth's Challenge 
- ---- ~~- gage l~~)_ __ 
Crag Barramundi 
Phoenix Bass 
Garnet Snakehead 
Jade Snakehead 
Alstor Bass 
King Catfish 
Crag Barramundi, 
Ranker Tonberry 
Whiskers: Pearly 
___ IYl«:l_«:)_g_l_I} 
Collectible 
_________ IL~_e§rQ~Pe!'._~~SR~!_-~a!_ __ _ 
_Dragon 
,...._ Hot Breather: Blue 
Dragon 
-
Knife T. Tonberry 
......,.. Big Blaze Bahamut 
Fatal Roulette: 
Ahriman 
---------------------- ----~ --------
Burbost Souvenir 
Emporium, Dory of 
the Deep 
- Burbost Souvenir 
Emporium, Tabby's 
Tackle Shack 
Complete Navyth's 
first sidequest: 
Fishing Buddies 
Tour sidequest: 
Liege of the Lake 
Rainbow Trout 
~~~r!y_~_orrib_ Irout 
Callatein Brook Trout 
Tide Grouper 
Nebula Salmon 
Nebula Salmon, Chrome 
Rainbow Trout 
Nebula Salmon, Rainbow 
Trout, Lucinian Sea Bass 
Tide 
Grouper, Dark Allural Sea 
Bass. N_oble Ara~aima 
Alstor Bass 
Fatal Roulette: 
Dory of the Deep 
_F 
J~-~~-l!_g_~y_~ -------------
Glowing Barrelfish 
Fatal Roulette: 
-- ~!c:Jc:J~Y _E_y_e 
Stormer: Focalor 
Stormer: Purple 
--
- ~~!!Y_ ~()~~)_()! __ 
Stormer: Chert 
Focalor 
Big Master Typhon 
JM Market - Altissia 
Phoenix Bass 
Cygillan Sea Bass, 
_ 
Str ipedQ9rra~~-~g i 
Lucinian Sea Bass, 
-~!'.ip~g_ Q~~~9_f!l_u~g i_ 
Cygillan Sea Bass. 
Striped Barr~m-~n di 
Totomostro mini-
Pink Jade Gar 
game (see page 310) 
1--------------------------------- 1 
11
--
---------------·--·-·--·-··-
----
I 
Gemlight: Caster 
Carbuncle 
JM Market - Altissia Platinum Myrltrout 
e Inventory 
Leisure Goods 
221 

222 
KEY ITEMS 
Key Items are generally linked to quests, though two of them play a special role: Magic Flasks determine how many spell types you can have in your 
inventory (see page 274 for details); Oracle Ascension Coins can be traded in exchange for valuable items thanks to a special vendor called Alessio 
who is found in Altissia (see page 227) . 
Items in this category do not carry over when you start a new playthrough in New Game+ mode. 
NAME 
AVAILABILITY AVAILABILITY: DETAILS 
NAME 
AVAILABILITY AVAILABILITY: DETAILS 
Default 
lnfernian's Shard 
Main quest 
Reunion and Recovery 
Main quest 
Hunter Becomes the Hunted 
Enticing Truffle 
Side quest 
Up Close and Personal (Tour) 
Main quest 
Legacy 
Volcanic Bouquet 
Sidequest 
A Flower for Iris (Tour) 
Main quest 
Burden of Expectation 
Broken Dog Tag 
Sidequest 
Gone Hunting (Dave) 
Main quest 
Sword in the Waterfall (speak to Jared) 
Bent Dog Tag 
Sidequest 
Dust to Dust (Dave) 
Magic Flask 
Main quest 
The Hexatheon's Blessing 
Main quest 
Brave New World (speak to Car at the dock) 
Collectible 
Fociaugh Hollow 
Rusted Dog Tag 
Sidequest 
Lost in the Wilderness (Dave) 
Scorched Dog Tag 
Sidequest 
A Rocky End (Dave) 
Twisted Dog Tag 
Sidequest 
Final Resting Plains (Dave) 
Collectible 
Steyliff Grove 
Scratched Dog Tag 
Sidequest 
Swallowed by Shadows (Dave) 
Collectible 
Cape Caem 
Crushed Dog Tag 
Sidequest 
Washed Away (Dave) 
Collectible 
The Rock of Ravatogh 
Polished Dog Tag 
Sidequest 
A Backwoods Burial (Dave) 
Collectible 
Pitioss Ruins 
Sullied Dog Tag 
Sidequest 
The Witch of the Woods (Dave) 
Collectible 
Hammerhead 
Behemoth Round 
Sidequest 
The Perfect Cup (Gladio) 
Collectible 
Longwythe Rest Area 
Glimmering Zu Egg 
Sidequest 
The Perfect Cup (Gladio) 
Collectible 
Galdin Quay 
Collectible 
Prairie Outpost 
Collectible 
Coernix Station - Alstor 
Collectible 
Keycatrich Trench 
Collectible 
Coernix Station - Cauthess 
Collectible 
Wiz Chocobo Post 
Collectible 
Cauthess Rest Area 
Collectible 
Taelpar Rest Area 
Karlabos Carapace 
Sidequest 
The Perfect Cup (Gladio) 
Sealbreaker's Key 
Sidequest 
Menace Beneath Lucis 
Rainbow Frog 
Sidequest 
The Frog of Legend 
Yellow Frog 
Sidequest 
The Professor's Protege - Yellow Frogs 
Red Frog 
Sidequest 
The Professor's Protege 
Myrlwood Firefly 
Sidequest 
The Professor's Protege - Myrlwood Firefly 
Myrlwood Firefly 
Sidequest 
The Professor's Protege - Myrlwood Firefly 
Myrlwood Firefly 
Sidequest 
The Professor's Protege - Myrlwood Firefly 
Food Shipment 
Sidequest 
Lestallum's Finest 
Collectible 
Lestallum 
Prissock's Package 
Sidequest 
Van, Interrupted 
Collectible 
Burbost Souvenir Emporium 
Prissock's Package 
Sidequest 
Van. Interrupted Again 
Collectible 
Meldacio Hunter HQ 
Mystery Map 
Sidequest 
Scraps of Mystery I (Leidel 
Collectible 
Verinas Mart - Ravatogh 
Mystery Map 
Sidequest 
Scraps of Mystery II (Leidel 
Collectible 
Altissia 
Mystery Map 
Sidequest 
Scraps of Mystery Ill (Leidel 
Collectible 
Fociaugh Hollow 
Mystery Map 
Sidequest 
Scraps of Mystery IV (Leidel 
Oracle Ascension Coin 
Collectible 
Daurell Caverns 
Collectible 
Costlemark Tower 
Mystery Map 
Sidequest 
Scraps of Mystery V (Leidel 
Mystery Map 
Sidequest 
Scraps of Mystery VI (Duscae) 
Collectible 
Pitioss Ruins 
Collectible 
Steyliff Grove 
Collectible 
Glacial Grotto 
Collectible 
The Myrlwood 
Collectible 
Malmalam Thicket 
Collectible 
The Rock of Ravatogh 
Mystery Map 
Sidequest 
Scraps of Mystery VII (Duscae) 
Mystery Map 
Sidequest 
Scraps of Mystery VIII (Duscae) 
Mystery Map 
Sidequest 
Scraps of Mystery IX (Duscae) 
Mystery Map 
Sidequest 
Scraps of Mystery X (Duscae) 
Mystery Map 
Sidequest 
Scraps of Mystery XI (Cleigne) 
Mystery Map 
Sidequest 
Scraps of Mystery XII (Cleigne) 
Mystery Map 
Sidequest 
Scraps of Mystery XIII (Cleigne) 
Collectible 
Balouve Mines 
Mystery Map 
Sidequest 
Scraps of Mystery XIV (Cleigne) 
Collectible 
Fociaugh Hollow maze (Chapter 15) 
Sylvester's Map 
Sidequest 
X Marks the Spot (Cleigne) 
Collectible 
Daurell Caverns maze (Chapter 15) 
Sylvester's Map Piece A 
Sidequest 
Scraps of Mystery I (Leidel 
Collectible 
Costlemark Tower maze (Chapter 15) 
Sylvester's Map Piece B 
Sidequest 
Scraps of Mystery II (Leidel 
Collectible 
Glacial Grotto maze (Chapter 15) 
Sylvester's Map Piece C 
Sidequest 
Scraps of Mystery Ill (Leidel 
Collectible 
Steyliff Grove maze (Chapter 15) 
Sylvester's Map Piece D 
Sidequest 
Scraps of Mystery IV (Leidel 
Collectible 
Keycatrich Trench maze (Chapter 15) 
Collectible 
Balouve Mines maze (Chapter 15) 
Collectible 
Crestholm Channels maze (Chapter 15) 
Enemy drop 
100% - Cactuar 
Lodging Coupon 
DLC 
Pre-order bonus 
Gas Coupon 
DLC 
Pre-order bonus 
LOKTON LX-X1 R 
DLC 
Pre-order bonus 
Crown City Smartphone 
Main quest 
From the start 
LOKTON LX-30 
Main quest 
From the start 
Sylvester's Map Piece E 
Side quest 
Scraps of Mystery V (Leidel 
Sylvester's Map Piece F 
Sidequest 
Scraps of Mystery VI (Duscae) 
Sylvester's Map Piece G 
Side quest 
Scraps of Mystery VII (Duscae) 
Sylvester's Map Piece H 
Sidequest 
Scraps of Mystery VIII (Duscae) 
Sylvester's Map Piece I 
Side quest 
Scraps of Mystery IX (Duscae) 
Sylvester's Map Piece J 
Sidequest 
Scraps of Mystery X (Duscae) 
Sylvester's Map Piece K 
Sidequest 
Scraps of Mystery XI (Cleigne) 
Sylvester's Map Piece L 
Sidequest 
Scraps of Mystery XII (Cleigne) 
Sylvester's Map Piece M 
Side quest 
Scraps of Mystery XIII (Cleigne) 
Sylvester's Map Piece N 
Sidequest 
Scraps of Mystery XIV (Cleigne) 
Map of the Continent 
Main quest 
The Pauper Prince 
Garnet Stone 
Main quest 
A Gentlemen's Agreement 
Red Tusk 
Main quest 
The Mutant Marauder 
Amethyst Stone 
Sidequest 
The Aspiring Artisan (Dino) 
Cindy's Parcel 
Main quest 
The Errand Prince 
Heliodor Stone 
Sidequest 
A Stone-Studded Stunner (Dino) 
Sealed Envelope 
Main quest 
The Errand Prince 
Heliodor Stone 
Side quest 
A Stone-Studded Stunner (Dino) 
Intricate Coin 
Main quest 
The Errand Prince 
Heliodor Stone 
Sidequest 
A Stone-Studded Stunner (Dino) 
M.E. 756/05/17 Morning 
Main quest 
Ill Tidings 
Edition 
Sapphire Stone 
Sidequest 
Reliable Royalty (Dino) 
Ruby Stone 
Sidequest 
No Pain, No Gem (Dino) 
Tombkeep's Key 
Main quest 
The Power of Kings 
Mark of the Archaean 
Main quest 
The Trial of Titan 
Mark of the Fulgurian 
Main quest 
The Trial of Ramuh 
Mythril Ore 
Main quest 
Party of Three 
Emerald Stone 
Sidequest 
A Treasure Beyond Measure (Dino) 
Coctura's Cat Food 
Sidequest 
Kitty Catering 
Monica's Cat Food 
Sidequest 
A Feline Feast 
Luxury Cat Food 
Shop 
JM Market - Caem 
Warped Wings 
Main quest 
Engaging the Empire (Aracheole Stronghold) 
Mythril Component 
Main quest 
A Precious Source of Power 
Unstable Stabilizer 
Main quest 
Imperial Infiltration (Fort Vaullerey) 
Moogle Plushie 
Main quest 
Brave New World 
Strange Engine 
Sidequest 
Formouth Garrison 
Map of Accordo 
Main quest 
Altissia, City on the Sea 
Cid's Old Hammer 
Sidequest 
A Better Engine Blade Ill 
Messengers' Amulet 
Main quest 
The Summit 
Mark of the Hydraean 
Main quest 
The Trial of Leviathan 
Ring of the Lucii 
Main quest 
The Trial of Leviathan 
Lovers' Notebook 
Main quest 
The Trial of Leviathan 
lgnis's Cane 
Main quest 
The Hand of the King 
Randolph collection item: 
Sidequest 
A Legend Is Born (Randolph) 
Jet-black Beak 
Randolph collection item: 
Sidequest 
Dreadful Legend (Randolph) 
Malboro Tentacle 
Randolph collection item: 
Sidequest 
Legend Wrapped in an Enigma (Randolph) 
Chef's Knife 
Generator Key 
Main quest 
The Hand of the King 
Mark of the Glacian 
Main quest 
Breath of the Glacian 
Randolph collection item: 
Sidequest 
Cursed Legend (Randolph) 
Resplendent Hollowhorn 
Security Card 
Main quest 
A King's Struggle 
Panel B Card Key 
Main quest 
A King's Struggle 
Randolph collection item: 
Sidequest 
Wondrous Weapon (Randolph) 
Squirming Bone 
Panel C Card Key 
Main quest 
A King's Struggle 
Cactuar Statuette 
Shop 
Wiz Chocobo Post - Post Kiosk 
Elevator Key 
Main quest 
A King's Struggle 
Cactuar Model 
Shop 
Lestallum - Veenon's Pantry 
Scribbled Note 
Main quest 
Zegnautus Keep 
Cactuar Sculpture 
Shop 
JM Market - Altissia 
Mark of the Draconian 
Main quest 
Reunion and Recovery 
Cactuar Effinv 
Side au est 
Formouth Garrison 

SHOPS 
In this section we provide a comprehensive overview of all merchants in Final Fantasy XV, sorted by category. 
Arms Vendors 
0>---~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~--
These vendors sell gear: weapons and accessories. 
Hammerhead - Culless Munitions 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
Broadsword 
Two-handed Sword 
War Sword 
Weapon 
Daggers 
Avengers 
Handgun 
Cocytus 
Prairie Outpost - Culless Munitions 
Goldin Quay - Culless Munitions 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
Broadsword 
War Sword 
Weapon 
Avengers 
Cocytus 
Javelin 
Bronze Bangle 
Accessory 
Soldier's Anklet 
Potpourri 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
150 
50 
150 
50 
150 
50 
150 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
500 
1,000 
500 
Wiz Chocobo Post - Culless Munitions 
Coernix Station (Cauthess) - Culless Munitions 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
Airstep Sword 
300 
Blade of Brennaere 
300 
Weapon 
Mythril Lance 
300 
Cutlasses 
300 
Calamity 
300 
Kite Shield 
300 
Iron Bangle 
1,200 
Garnet Bracelet 
800 
Bulletproof Vest 
2,000 
Accessory 
Warrior's Anklet 
1,500 
White Sage 
1,200 
Amulet 
1,000 
Towel* 
5,000 
Handkerchief* 
1,000 
* Only available at Wiz Chocobo Post 
Taelpar Rest Area - Culless Munitions 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
Rune Saber 
600 
Flame Tongue 
800 
Claymore 
600 
Rapier Lance 
600 
Weapon 
Storm Lance 
800 
Mythril Knives 
600 
Mythril Pistol 
600 
Power Shield 
600 
Ice Shield 
800 
Carbon Bangle 
2,000 
Fencer's Anklet 
2,000 
Accessory 
Angel Earring 
1,500 
Power Stone 
2,000 
Garnet Bracelet 
800 
Bulletoroof Vest 
2,000 
Lestallum - Culless Munitions 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
Rune Saber 
600 
Flame Tongue 
800 
Claymore 
600 
Hardedge 
1,500 
Rapier Lance 
600 
Weapon 
Ice Spear 
1,500 
Mythril Knives 
600 
Assassin's Daggers 
1,500 
Mythril Pistol 
600 
Power Shield 
600 
Ice Shield 
800 
Carbon Bangle 
2,000 
Garnet Bracelet 
800 
Accessory 
Fencer's Anklet 
2,000 
Bulletproof Vest 
2,000 
Angel Earring 
1,000 
Power Stone 
2,000 
Lestallum - Veenon's Pantry 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
Bulletproof Suit 
5,000 
Fireproof Inners 
3,000 
Warm Inners 
3,000 
Accessory 
Insulated Inners 
3,000 
Styling Gel 
1,000 
White Sneakers 
1,000 
Bandage 
1,000 
Kev Item 
Cactuar Model 
1,000 
Meldacio Hunter HQ - Culless Munitions 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
Durandal 
10,000 
Weapon 
Radiant Lance 
10,000 
Orichalcum 
10.000 
Black Prince 
10,000 
Titanium Bangle 
2,500 
Heliodor Bracelet 
2,000 
Accessory 
Talisman 
1,500 
Knight's Anklet 
2,500 
Oracle Card 
2,500 
Verinas Mart (Ravatogh) - Culless Munitions 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
Ice Brand 
1,500 
Hardedge 
1,500 
Ice Spear 
1,500 
Weapon 
Assassin's Daggers 
1,500 
Rebellion 
1,500 
Thunder Shield 
1,500 
Flame Shield 
1,500 
Heliodor Bracelet 
2,000 
Talisman 
1,500 
Accessory 
Knight's Anklet 
2,500 
Carbon Bangle 
2,000 
Garnet Bracelet 
800 
Bulletoroof Vest 
2,000 
Pergula Legionis (Aranea's Vendor) 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
Ice Brand 
Hardedge 
Ice Spear 
Weapon 
Assassin's Daggers 
Rebellion 
Thunder Shield 
Flame Shield 
Carbon Bangle 
Accessory 
Angel Earring 
Fencer's Anklet 
Altissia - Culless Munitions 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
Thunderbolt 
Hero's Shield 
Weapon 
Blood Swore! 
Wyvern Lance 
Delta Daggers 
Flame Gun 
Altissia - Carliano 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
Bulletproof Suit 
Fireproof Inners 
Warm Inners 
Insulated Inners 
Accessory 
Titanium Bangle 
Heliodor Bracelet 
Talisman 
Knight's Anklet 
Oracle Card 
Cartanica - Armeria Madiani 
Tenebrae - Pergula Legionis 
Gralea - Venditio Armorum 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
Blood Sword 
Thunderbolt 
Weapon 
Wyvern Lance 
Delta Daggers 
Flame Gun 
Hero's Shield 
Titanium Bangle 
Heliodor Bracelet 
Accessory 
Talisman 
Knight's Anklet 
Oracle Card 
Hammerhead - Culless Munitions 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
Durandal 
Hyperion 
Weapon 
Radiant Lance 
Main Gauches 
Quicksilver 
Black Prince 
Titanium Bangle 
Heliodor Bracelet 
Accessory 
Talisman 
Knight's Anklet 
Oracle Card 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
1,500 
1,500 
1,500 
1,500 
1,500 
1,500 
1,500 
2,000 
1.000 
2,000 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
5,000 
5,000 
5,000 
5,000 
5,000 
5,000 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
5,000 
3,000 
3,000 
3,000 
2,500 
2,000 
1,500 
2,500 
2,500 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
5,000 
5,000 
5,000 
5,000 
5,000 
5,000 
2,500 
2,000 
1,500 
2,500 
2,500 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
10,000 
8,000 
10,000 
8,000 
8,000 
10,000 
2,500 
2,000 
1,500 
2,500 
2,500 
Inventory 
Key Items 
Shops 
223 

224 
General Stores 
0·>--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~-
These shops sell consumables, as well as certain items from other categories. 
Hammerhead - Mini-mart 
Wiz Chocobo Post - Post Kiosk 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
Potion 
50 
Potion 
Hi-Potion 
100 
Hi-Potion 
Consumable 
Elixir 
400 
Hi-Elixir 
800 
Consumable 
Elixir 
Hi-Elixir 
Phoenix Down 
1,000 
Phoenix Down 
Antidote 
10 
Antidote 
Treasure 
Repair Kit 
100 
Pop Art 
Hammerhead Sticker 
150 
Chocobo Sticker 
Beaux Arts 
1,000 
Auto Parts 
Moogle Sticker 
Auto Parts 
Advanced Color Samples 
3,000 
Cactuar Sticker 
Memories of FFIV 
100 
Memories of FFX 
Memories of FFVlll 
100 
Key Item 
Cactuar Statuette 
Gighee Ham 
30 
Gighee Ham 
Birdbeast Egg 
20 
Birdbeast Egg 
Ingredient 
Sheep Milk 
10 
Leiden Potato 
40 
Anak Meat 
Garula Sirloin 
Funguar 
80 
Wild Onion 
Leiden Pepper 
20 
Ingredient 
Lucian Tomato 
Sheep Milk 
Leiden Potato 
Funguar 
Longwythe Rest Area - JM Market 
Leiden Pepper 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
Dualhorn Steack 
Cleiane Wheat 
Potion 
50 
Hi-Potion 
100 
Consumable 
Elixir 
400 
Hi-Elixir 
800 
Phoenix Down 
1,000 
Lestallum - Moatte's Odds 'n' Ends 
Antidote 
10 
Auto Parts 
2-Tone 
300 
Memories of FFll 
100 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
Anak Meat 
80 
Potion 
Wild Onion 
100 
Hi-Potion 
Cleigne Wheat 
100 
Elixir 
Leiden Pepper 
20 
Hi-Elixir 
Ingredient 
Gighee Ham 
30 
Consumable 
Phoenix Down 
Birdbeast Egg 
20 
Antidote 
Sheep Milk 
10 
Gold Needle 
Leiden Potato 
40 
Smelling Salts 
Funauar 
80 
Maiden's Kiss 
Eo 
Auto Parts 
Flames I 
Flames II 
Goldin Quay-Aldare's 
Flames Ill 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
Potion 
50 
Hi-Potion 
100 
Consumable 
Elixir 
400 
Hi-Elixir 
800 
Lestallum - Sypert Sundries 
Phoenix Down 
1,000 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
Antidote 
10 
The Beast 
2,000 
Auto Parts 
Racing Stripes IV 
500 
Racing Stripes V 
500 
Consumable 
Smelling Salts 
Maiden's Kiss 
Star Pendant 
Memories of FFV 
100 
Rainbow Pendant 
Gighee Ham 
30 
Accessory 
Moon Pendant 
Birdbeast Egg 
20 
Earth Pendant 
Lucian Tomato 
200 
Golden Houralass 
Wild Onion 
100 
Ingredient 
Giant Trevally Fillet 
100 
Trout Fillet 
240 
Sheep Milk 
10 
Anak Meat 
80 
Dualhorn Steak 
160 
Lestallum - Fallstar Foods 
Cleiane Wheat 
100 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
Gighee Ham 
Taelpar Rest Area - JM Market 
Birdbeast Egg 
Anak Meat 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
Garula Sirloin 
Lucian Tomato 
Potion 
50 
Hi-Potion 
100 
Ingredient 
Killer Tomato 
Wild Onion 
Consumable 
Elixir 
400 
Hi-Elixir 
800 
Leiden Pepper 
Sheep Milk 
Phoenix Down 
1,000 
Dualhorn Steak 
Antidote 
10 
Leiden Potato 
Auto Parts 
Memories of FFVI 
100 
Funauar 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
50 
100 
400 
800 
1,000 
10 
3,000 
1,500 
1,500 
1,500 
100 
500 
30 
20 
80 
120 
100 
200 
10 
40 
80 
20 
160 
100 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
50 
100 
400 
800 
1,000 
10 
50 
50 
100 
8,000 
500 
500 
500 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
50 
100 
3,000 
3,000 
3,000 
3,000 
3,000 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
30 
20 
80 
120 
200 
500 
100 
20 
10 
160 
40 
80 
Lestallum - Furloch Farms 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
Behemoth Tenderloin 
Zu Tender 
Kujata Marrow 
Ingredient 
Kettier Ginger 
Allural Shallot 
Saxham Rice 
Fine Cleigne Wheat 
Lestallum - Prissock General Store 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
Fine Gighee Ham 
Griffon Breast 
Midgardsormr Shank 
Ingredient 
Schier Turmeric 
Hulldagh Nutmeg 
Cleigne Wheat 
Malmashroom 
Smoking Wood 
Lestallum - Cup Noodles Wagon 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
In redient 
Cu Noodles 
Old Lestallum - JM Market 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
Potion 
Hi-Potion 
Consumable 
Elixir 
Hi-Elixir 
Phoenix Down 
Antidote 
Treasure 
Repair Kit 
Abstractification 
Auto Parts 
Bullet Hole Sticker 
Memories of DISSIDIA FF 
Memories of DISSIDIA 012 FF 
Funguar 
Alstroom 
Vesproom 
Ingredient 
Malmashroom 
Fine Cleigne Wheat 
Schier Turmeric 
Hulldaah Nutmea 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
3,200 
4,800 
2,700 
600 
800 
200 
980 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
400 
3,200 
2,400 
250 
600 
100 
1,000 
310 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
220 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
50 
100 
400 
800 
1,000 
10 
100 
6,000 
1,000 
500 
500 
80 
200 
300 
1,000 
980 
250 
600 
Coernix Station (Cauthess) - Shop & Cafe 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
Potion 
50 
Hi-Potion 
100 
Consumable 
Elixir 
400 
Hi-Elixir 
800 
Phoenix Down 
1,000 
Antidote 
10 
Auto Parts 
Memories of FFIX (Disc 1) 
100 
Memories of FFIX (Disc 2) 
100 
Treasure 
Repair Kit 
100 
Spider Silk 
30 
Needle 1,000: Cactuar 
50 
Needle 1,000: Metal Cactuar 
50 
Needle 1,000: Gold Cactuar 
50 
Leisure 
Gighee Ham 
30 
Goods 
Birdbeast Egg 
20 
Anak Meat 
80 
Garula Sirloin 
120 
Dualhorn Steak 
160 
Saxham Rice 
200 
Leiden Pepper 
20 

Prairie Outpost - JM Market 
Meldacio Hunter HQ - PaNinath General Store 
Cape Caem - JM Market 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
Potion 
50 
Potion 
50 
Potion 
50 
Hi-Potion 
100 
Hi-Potion 
100 
Hi-Potion 
100 
Consumable 
Elixir 
400 
Hi-Elixir 
800 
Elixir 
400 
Hi-Elixir 
800 
Elixir 
400 
Hi-Elixir 
800 
Phoenix Down 
1,000 
Phoenix Down 
1.000 
Phoenix Down 
1.000 
Antidote 
10 
Antidote 
10 
Antidote 
10 
"' Inventory 
Gighee Ham 
30 
Consumable 
Gold Needle 
50 
Consumable 
Gold Needle 
50 
Birdbeast Egg 
20 
Smelling Salts 
50 
Smelling Salts 
50 
Sheep Milk 
10 
Maiden's Kiss 
100 
Maiden's Kiss 
100 
Leiden Potato 
40 
Power EX 
500 
Power EX 
500 
Ingredient 
Funguar 
80 
Mettle VX 
500 
Mettle VX 
500 
Leiden Pepper 
20 
Lucian Tomato 
200 
SpiritZX 
500 
Verve WX 
500 
SpiritZX 
500 
Verve WX 
500 
Anak Meat 
80 
Dualhorn Steak 
160 
Auto Parts 
Armory on Wheels 
6,000 
Caution: Wild Beasts 
1,000 
Giant Trevally Fillet 
100 
Trout Fillet 
240 
Behemoth Tenderloin 
3,200 
Barramundi Fillet 
300 
Jabberwock Sirloin 
5,200 
Zu Tender 
4,800 
Ingredient 
Leiden Pepper 
20 
Anak Meat 
80 
Garula Sirloin 
120 
Ingredient 
Tide Grouper Fillet 
2,200 
Cleigne Darkshell 
320 
Caem Pinkshrimp 
150 
Cleigne Mollusk 
400 
Saxham Rice 
200 
Dualhorn Steak 
160 
Kev Item 
Luxurv Cat Food 
20,000 
Coernix Station (Alstor) - Shop & Cafe 
Spider Silk 
30 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
Potion 
50 
Hi-Potion 
100 
Coernix Station - Lestallum Shop & Cafe 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
Leisure 
Super Baleen 
100 
Goods 
Deadly Waters: Seadevil 
200 
Deadly Waters: Coraldevil 
200 
Deadlv Waters: Sahaain 
200 
Consumable 
Elixir 
400 
Hi-Elixir 
800 
Phoenix Down 
1.000 
Antidote 
10 
Treasure 
Reoair Kit 
100 
Racing Stripes II 
500 
Auto Parts 
Racing Stripes Ill 
500 
Memories of FFlll 
100 
Spider Silk 
30 
Sweet Jamming: Custard 
50 
Leisure 
Sweet Jamming: Flan 
50 
Goods 
Sweet Jamming: Mousse 
50 
Bomber: Bomb 
50 
Bomber: Ice Bomb 
50 
Bomber: Thunder Bomb 
50 
Potion 
50 
Hi-Potion 
100 
Consumable 
Elixir 
400 
Hi-Elixir 
800 
Phoenix Down 
1.000 
Antidote 
10 
Repair Kit 
100 
Treasure 
Memories of FFXIV (Disc 1) 
100 
Memories of FFXIV (Disc 2) 
100 
Airflow Compensator 
6,000 
Auto Parts 
Auxiliary Tank 
6,000 
Expert Color Samples 
10,000 
Cavalier 
150 
Spider Silk 
30 
Super Baleen 
100 
Jumbo Tusk: Garula 
200 
Malmalam Thicket - House of Hexes 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
Potion 
50 
Hi-Potion 
100 
Elixir 
400 
Hi-Elixir 
800 
Consumable 
Phoenix Down 
1,000 
Antidote 
10 
Gold Needle 
50 
Smelling Salts 
50 
Maiden's Kiss 
100 
Leisure 
Jumbo Tusk: Green Garula 
200 
Jumbo Tusk: Garulessa 
200 
Goods 
Burrower: Mad Pink 
200 
"' Shops 
Sandworm 
Burrower: Green Sandworm 
200 
Burrower: Abyss Worm 
200 
Burbost Souvenir Emporium - Shop & Cafe 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
Verinas Mart - Ravatogh 
Potion 
50 
Hi-Potion 
100 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
Consumable 
Elixir 
400 
Potion 
50 
Hi-Elixir 
800 
Hi-Potion 
100 
Phoenix Down 
1,000 
Memories of FFXI (Disc 1) 
100 
Consumable 
Elixir 
400 
Hi-Elixir 
800 
Memories of FFXI (Disc 2) 
100 
Phoenix Down 
1,000 
Memories of FFXI (Disc 3) 
100 
Antidote 
10 
Auto Parts 
Memories of FFXI (Disc 4) 
100 
Memories of FFXI (Disc 5) 
100 
Royal Stripes I 
500 
Roval Strioes II 
500 
Sabertusk Claw 
180 
Reinforced Fiberglass Coating 
8,000 
Carbon Weave 
500 
Auto Parts 
500 
Check Pattern 
Memories of FFXll 
100 
Garula Tusk 
280 
Mesmenir Horn 
320 
Treasure 
Scaled Skin 
480 
Commeatus Armorum (Aranea's Vendor) 
Anak Fetlock 
600 
Anak Antlers 
1,800 
Behemoth Horn 
5,000 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
Spider Silk 
30 
Potion 
50 
Super Baleen 
100 
Hi-Potion 
100 
Dragon's Beard 
50 
Elixir 
400 
Leisure 
Hot Breather: Red Dragon 
50 
Goods 
Hot Breather: Green Dragon 
50 
Hot Breather: Blue Dragon 
50 
Hi-Elixir 
800 
Consumable 
Phoenix Down 
1,000 
Antidote 
10 
Whiskers: Pearly Moogle 
50 
Gold Needle 
50 
Whiskers: Crystal 
50 
Smelling Salts 
50 
Whiskers: Chocolate 
50 
Maiden's Kiss 
100 
225 

226 
Altissia - JM Market 
Altissia - Old Gobunant's Boat 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
Potion 
50 
Fine Gighee Ham 
400 
Hi-Potion 
100 
Leiden Pepper 
20 
Elixir 
400 
Schier Turmeric 
250 
Hi-Elixir 
800 
Phoenix Down 
1,000 
Hulldagh Nutmeg 
600 
Ingredient 
Killer Tomato 
500 
Antidote 
10 
Ulwaat Berries 
4,000 
Gold Needle 
50 
Saxham Rice 
200 
Consumable Smelling Salts 
50 
Fine Cleigne Wheat 
980 
Maiden's Kiss 
100 
Ether 
100 
Altissia - Gamberetto's Catch 
Remedy 
500 
Power EX 
500 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
Mettle VX 
500 
Caem Pinkshrimp 
150 
Spirit ZX 
500 
Cleigne Mollusk 
400 
Verve WX 
500 
Cleigne Darkshell 
320 
Superhydrophobic Coating 
20,000 
Platinum Myrltrout Fillet 
3,900 
Fan Service 
10,000 
Arapaima Roe 
100,000 
Guardians 
8,000 
Auto Parts 
Carbuncle 
10,000 
Tenebraen Oak 
700 
Ingredient 
Giant Trevally Fillet 
100 
A Little Friend Sticker 
2,000 
Trout Fillet 
240 
Luna Sticker 
3,000 
Barramundi Fillet 
300 
Memories of FF TYPE-0 
1,000 
Nebula Salmon Fillet 
560 
Key Item 
Cactuar Sculpture 
3,000 
Tide Grouper Fillet 
2,200 
Spider Silk 
30 
Sea Bass Fillet 
1,380 
Super Baleen 
100 
Dragon's Beard 
500 
Stormer: Focalor 
200 
Leisure 
Goods 
Stormer: Purple Berry 
200 
Focal or 
Stormer: Chert Focalor 
200 
Invincible Iron Giant 
200 
Gemlight: Caster Carbuncle 
3,000 
Leisure Goods Shops 
0·>--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~-o 
These merchants are dedicated exclusively to the sale of leisure goods. 
Goldin Quay - Bob's Bait Emporium 
CATEGORY ITEM 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
Spider Silk 
30 
Super Baleen 
100 
Poppeck: Chocobo 
50 
Poppeck: White Chocobo 
50 
Poppeck: Red Chocobo 
50 
Leisure 
Sweet Jamming: Custard 
50 
Goods 
Sweet Jamming: Mousse 
50 
Sweet Jamming: Flan 
50 
Bomber: Bomb 
50 
Bomber: Ice Bomb 
50 
Bomber: Thunder Bomb 
50 
North of Old Lestallum - Tabby's Tackle Shack 
CATEGORY ITEM 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
Spider Silk 
30 
Super Baleen 
100 
Deadly Waters: Sahagin 
200 
Deadly Waters: Coraldevil 
200 
Deadly Waters: Seadevil 
200 
Hot Breather: Red Dragon 
50 
Leisure 
Hot Breather: Green Dragon 
50 
Goods 
Hot Breather: Blue Dragon 
50 
Jumbo Tusk: Garula 
200 
Jumbo Tusk: Green Garula 
200 
Jumbo Tusk: Garulessa 
200 
Butterfly Edge 
7,000 
Galatea 
6,800 
The Vesperpool - East Bank - Bert's 
Bobbers 'n' Stuff 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
Spider Silk 
Super Baleen 
Dragon's Beard 
Stinker: Malboro 
Stinker: Malbodoom 
Stinker: Great Malboro 
Giant Needle 10,000: 
Gigantuar 
Leisure 
Giant Needle 10,000: 
Goods 
Metal Gigantuar 
Giant Needle 10,000: 
Gold Gigantuar 
Burrower: Mad Pink 
Sandworm 
Burrower: Green 
Sandworm 
Burrower: Abyss Worm 
Death Spin 
Nereid 
Wiz Chocobo Post - Chocobo Salon 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
Mimett Greens 
Leisure 
Curiel Greens 
Goods 
Reagan Greens 
Sylkis Greens 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
30 
100 
500 
200 
200 
200 
200 
200 
200 
200 
200 
200 
12,000 
9,600 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
50 
50 
50 
300 
Cartanica - Articoli do Viaggio Machialga 
Tenebrae - Commeatus Armorum 
Gralea - Venditio lnstrumentorum 
Hammerhead - Mini-mart (Chapter 14) 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
Potion 
50 
Hi-Potion 
100 
Elixir 
400 
Hi-Elixir 
800 
Phoenix Down 
1,000 
Consumable Antidote 
10 
Gold Needle 
50 
Smelling Salts 
50 
Maiden's Kiss 
100 
Ether 
100 
Remedy 
500 
Daurell Caverns - Dory of the Deep 
CATEGORY 
ITEM 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
Spider Silk 
30 
Super Baleen 
100 
Burrower: Mad Pink 
200 
Sandworm 
Burrower: Green 
200 
Sandworm 
Burrower: Abyss Worm 
200 
Leisure 
Whiskers: Pearly Moogle 
50 
Goods 
Whiskers: Crystal 
50 
Whiskers: Chocolate 
50 
Fatal Roulette: Ahriman 
50 
Fatal Roulette: Floating Eye 
50 
Fatal Roulette: Bloody Eye 
50 
Hell Blaster 
3,000 
Acubens 
4,500 

Special Vendors 
0r--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~--<> 
In Altissia, you will find two special vendors. 
<> The first is a man by the name of Alessio, who is located at one 
of the tables at the restaurant opposite the Palsino Street gondola 
station. Alessio is an unusual merchant who takes payment only in 
the form of Oracle Ascension Coins. Oracle Ascension Coins are key 
items: turn to page 222 to find out where to obtain them. 
<> The second, Sondonda, is found on the Listro Park plaza. You can do 
business with him at his stand, a short walk from the gondola station 
that leads to Arena Galviano. Sondonda sells Horn items that affect 
the Totomostro mini-game, which we cover on page 310. 
Altissia - Alessio 
ITEM EXCHANGE 
ORACLE ASCENSION COINS 
Megalixir 
1 
Fire Crest 
4 
Ice Crest 
4 
Lightning Crest 
4 
Dark Crest 
8 
Mighty Guard 
20 
Stone Wall 
30 
Ribbon 
40 
Altissia - Sondonda 
ITEM 
EFFECT 
PRICE 
(GIL) 
Horn of Resolve 
Increases the supported monster's attack 
30,000 
Horn of Tenacity 
Increases the supported monster's defense 
24,000 
Horn of Cleansing 
Cures the supported monster of status ailments 
8,000 
Horn of Madness 
Increases the supported monster's strength, 
18,000 
but decreases its defense 
Lodgings 
0r--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~--<> 
Stopping at a lodging offers a unique benefit in the form of a multiplier 
that grants bonus EXP. but you must always pay a fee in Gil for the 
privilege. Though this also means that you forgo the advantage of lgnis 
rustling up a stat-boosting dish, the additional experience can be quite 
significant if you have completed numerous sidequests since your last 
rest. Players seeking to level up their party as quickly as they can should 
take this into account as they plan their adventures. 
To give your party the best possible preparation for the rigors of the 
endgame (and, more pressingly, the challenges of Chapter 15), the 
optimal time to exploit the EXP bonuses offered by lodgings begins after 
you reach Chapter 08. At that stage, a large number of sidequests are 
unlocked at once. Continue to Altissia until you obtain the "Call Umbra" 
function, which enables you to return to Lucis. The final step before 
you can begin power-leveling is to travel to Hammerhead and complete 
Cindy's "The Ever Illustrious Regalia" sidequest. 
With the Regalia fitted with the Enhanced Headlights upgrade, you're 
all set to employ a profitable EXP-boosting exercise: complete as many 
sidequests as you can in Lucis in a single marathon session (ideally with 
an EXP bonus multiplier induced by a meal, such as the Fat Chocobo Triple-
Decker available from Wiz Chocobo Post - see page 294), without resting, 
then go back to Altissia and bank your EXP with a stay at the Royal Suite 
in the Leville to claim the maximum x3 multiplier. As the 30,000 Gil fee 
for each stay is far from trivial, you'll obviously need to make extensive 
progress in sidequest completion to make the expense worthwhile. 
A few additional tips for boosting EXP gains by staying at premium 
lodgings: 
<> If you spend a productive day of completing multiple sidequests before 
you reach Altissia, the x2 multiplier available at Quayside Cradle in 
Galdin Quay is a decent alternative for power-leveling. 
<> Be wary of actions that will advance the storyline to the next Chapter 
if you are planning to maximize EXP gains with a stay in lodgings: this 
can lead to accumulated EXP being banked automatically - with no 
multiplier whatsoever. 
<> Making camp at havens grants no EXP bonuses, so this is a poor 
choice for power-leveling. However, camping right after you have 
stayed at a lodging can be a great solution to enjoy both the EXP 
multiplier from a hotel and a stat-boosting meal. 
<> Though you could technically ignore a// non-essential quests until you 
reach Chapter 08 to increase later EXP gains with marathon tours of 
Lucis before staying at the Royal Suite, bear in mind that there is a 
hard level cap of 99 - so it's not really necessary. 
The following table provides all relevant details for every lodging you will 
encounter in the game. 
NAME 
PRICE (GIL) 
EXP TALLY 
Hammerhead (Caravan) 
30 
x1 .2 
Longwythe Rest Area - Three Z's Motel 
300 
x1 .5 
Galdin Quay (Caravan) 
30 
x1 .2 
Galdin Quay - The Quayside Cradle 
10,000 
x2.0 
Prairie Outpost (Caravan) 
30 
xl.2 
Coernix Station - Alstor (Caravan) 
30 
x1 .2 
Wiz Chocobo Post (Caravan) 
30 
x1 .2 
Coernix Station - Cauthess (Caravan) 
30 
x1 .2 
Cauthess Rest Area (Caravan) 
30 
x1 .2 
Taelpar Rest Area - Three Z's Motel 
300 
x1.5 
Lestallum - The Leville 
300 
x1 .5 
Old Lestallum - Three Z's Motel 
300 
x1 .5 
Burbost Souvenir Emporium (Caravan) 
30 
x1 .2 
Verinas Mart - Ravatogh (Caravan) 
30 
x1 .2 
Meldacio Hunter HQ (Caravan) 
30 
x1 .2 
Cape Caem - Hidden Getaway 
0 
x1 .0 
Altissia - The Leville 
500 
x1 .5 
Altissia - The Leville (Royal Suite) 
30,000 
x3.0 
Vagoni Albergo di Cartanica 
30 
x1 .1 
Tenebrae - Roues du Repos 
30 
x1.1 
Inventory 
Shops 
227 



DIRECTORY 
If you are seeking information on a specific monster, you can use this alphabetical 
directory to track it down with ease. The classification we use is as follows: 
o Beasts are creatures available at any time of the day or during daylight hours. 
o Daemons are generally encountered at night_ or in dark environments such as 
caves and dungeons. 
O Imperial Forces are troops guarding specific places such as Niflheim bases. 
They can also be randomly dropped by landing crafts as you travel on the world map. 
O Bosses are special enemies that appear during main quests. 
NAME 
PAGE 
NAME 
PAGE 
NAME 
PAGE 
Adamantoise 
249 
Anaklaban 
238 
Aspidochelon 
235 
Alberich 
252 
Arachne 
254 
Ayakashi 
254 
Albinogin 
239 
Aramusha 
253 
Bandersnatch 
245 
Alpha gin 
239 
Arba 
238 
Basilisk 
241 
Alphatusk 
235 
Arbagadol 
238 
Battery Soldier 
261 
Alv 
250 
Ariadne 
254 
Bavarois 
259 
Anak 
238 
Armored Assassin 
262 
Behemoth 
244 
Anak Calf 
238 
Armored Axeman 
261 
Behemoth IGng 
244 
Anak Stag 
238 
Armored Swordsman 
262 
Behemoth Tyrant 
244 
Anakadom 
238 
Ashen horn 
235 
Ben nu 
249 
NAME 
PAGE 
Bilrost 
247 
Black Flan 
260 
Bloodhorn 
235 
Bomb 
258 
Bosses 
I 
264 
Brain drainer 
257 
Brutal Bee 
242 
Bulette 
243 
Bussemand 
252 
Cactuar 
249 

NAME 
PAGE 
Catoblepas 
Chadarnook 
Chandravarma 
Chickatrice 
Cockatrice 
Coeur! 
Copperoc 
Coraldevil 
Creme Brfilee 
Cryonade 
Custard 
Daemonwall 
Daggerquill 
Dead eye 
Death claw 
Dolce 
Dualhorn 
Duplicorn 
Dynoaevis 
Elder Coeurl 
Ereshkigal 
Eternal Trooper 
Falxfang 
Flan 
Flexitusk 
Foras 
Gaiatoad 
Galvanade 
Ganymede 
Garchimacera 
Gargantua 
Gargoyle 
Garula 
Garulessa 
Garulet 
Gelatin 
Gigantoad 
Gigantuar 
Glamhoth 
Goblin 
240 
255 
255 
241 
242 
237 
249 
240 
259 
258 
260 
255 
249 
243 
255 
260 
235 
239 
249 
237 
252 
261 
236 
259 
235 
257 
240 
259 
255 
252 
255 
257 
234 
234 
234 
259 
240 
249 
250 
250 
NAME 
PAGE 
Grandhorn 
Green Garula 
Grenade 
Griffon 
Grootslang 
Gurangatch 
Havocfang 
Haywire Axeman 
Hecteyes 
Hekatontoad 
Hobgoblin 
Hundlegs 
Hvitrormr 
Ice Bomb 
Imp 
Imperial Rifleman 
Imperial Sniper 
Imperial Spearman 
Imperial Trooper 
Iron Giant 
lseultalon 
Jabberwock 
Jormungand 
Jumbo Flan 
Kadru 
Karlabos 
Ken go 
Killer Bee 
Killer Queen 
Killer Wasp 
Kingatrice 
Kokyangwuti 
Kujata 
Lakhmu Flan 
Leukorn 
Lich 
MA Hoplomachus 
MA Veles 
MA Veles-bis 
235 
234 
258 
244 
246 
240 
236 
262 
260 
240 
251 
246 
246 
258 
250 
261 
261 
262 
261 
254 
256 
245 
246 
259 
252 
247 
254 
242 
242 
243 
242 
254 
241 
260 
239 
256 
263 
263 
263 
NAME 
Magitek Assassin 
Magitek Axeman 
Magitek Bannerman 
262 
261 
262 
Magitek Swordsman 
262 
Magnanir 
238 
Mahanaga 
253 
Malbodoom 
245 
Malboro 
244 
Malboro Brat 
245 
Malboro Sprout 
Mandrake 
Manxom 
Marshmallow 
Master Tonberry 
Matcha Mousse 
MA-X Angelus-0 
MA-X Cuirass 
MA·X Dux 
MA-X Maniple 
MA-X Patria 
Megaloclaw 
Mesmenir 
Mictlantecihuatl 
Midgardsormr 
Mightyshears 
Mindflayer 
Molokujata 
Mushmahhu 
Mushussu 
Naga 
Nagarani 
Naglfar 
Necromancer 
Phalaris 
Psychomancer 
Quetzalcoatl 
Reaper 
Reaperking 
Reapertail 
245 
248 
246 
259 
258 
260 
263 
263 
263 
263 
263 
236 
237 
244 
246 
247 
256 
241 
237 
236 
252 
252 
256 
256 
241 
257 
244 
254 
248 
248 
NAME 
PAGE 
Red Giant 
Redle gs 
Regaltrice 
Rogue Axeman 
Rogue Karlabos 
Ronin 
Royalisk 
Rubyshears 
Saberclaw 
Sabertusk 
Sahagin 
Salpinx 
Saphyrtail 
Sea devil 
Serpentess 
Shieldshears 
Shock Trooper 
Sir Tonberry 
Skarnbulette 
Skeleton 
Slactuar 
Snag a 
Soldier Wasp 
Sparkshears 
Spiracorn 
Stoneshears 
Tarantula 
Thunder Bomb 
Thunderoc 
Ton berry 
Treant 
Uttu 
Voretooth 
Wraith 
Wyvern 
Yellowtooth 
Yojimbo 
Ziggurat 
Zu 
255 
246 
241 
262 
247 
253 
242 
247 
236 
235 
239 
252 
248 
240 
252 
247 
262 
258 
243 
250 
249 
250 
243 
247 
238 
247 
254 
259 
249 
258 
248 
254 
236 
256 
248 
236 
253 
257 
249 
Bestiary 
Directory 
231 

232 
ENEMY SHEET STRUCTURE 
~~~~~41~,, ~p~ ~)~~~; :r~~i:~r~.~~~:~~)}~
~ -
--c.~L·. 
..r 
~:-
Each enemy sheet in this chapter is a compact container of attributes and descriptors. Be sure to read through this short presentation to learn what 
the contents of each sheet represent, and how you might use this information to inform your strategic approach. 
D IRON GIANT 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
30 
41 3 
22 
Yes 
Chance 
10% 
Appendage 
Size 
3 
HP 
27,300 
Strength 
3.140 
Vitality 
137 
Spirit 
105 
Items 
Hi-Potion 
·-01 :::~.~ 
Element 
100% 
Fire (12) 
D 
AV 
Time 
20:30 to 03:59 
D IDENTIFICATION -
The name of the 
enemy, and a render of its in-game 
appearance. 
Natural Habitat 
Common; Duscae (Daurell Caverns); Cleigne (Steyliff Grove) 
Ouest 
Main Quest: Party of Three 
UTES -
The enemy's primary 
stats: 
~1 STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death 
<> Size describes the approximate scale 
of each adversary (technically, each 
adversary's hit box) using a number: 
from 1 for the smallest enemies to 5 for 
the most colossal foes. 
~I!!!! • 
100% 
120% 
100% 
50% 
100% 
100% 
120% 
<> Level, 
HP, 
Vitality, 
Strength, 
and Spirit are used to determine 
the creature's basic offensive and 
defensive parameters. 
DI NOTES 
Employs gravity-based (attractive) attacks. May invoke Tenacious and Stalwart 
statuses. Break effects: Vitality -40 (body/30%). Strength -30 (arms/30%). 
<> EXP shows the number of base experience points rewarded for 
defeating this opponent. 
<> Libra indicates how long in seconds you need to lock on to a target in 
Wait Mode to unlock its intel. As a rule, the shorter the duration, the 
higher the success chance for lgnis's Analyze ability, and vice versa. 
A select number of enemies have an entry of "IMM": this indicates 
immunity to Libra and Analyze. 
<> Parry reveals whether this enemy has attacks that can be parried or 
not. 
D DROPS - A catalog of all other possible combat rewards from this 
opponent and the chances of receiving them. 
<> In addition to primary drops, some enemies have a chance of providing 
a secondary (and sometimes rare) item instead. Normal and secondary 
drops span mutually exclusive ranges on the probability spectrum; you 
can only acquire one. If the normal and rare drop chances are both 
100%, you are guaranteed one or the other. 
<> Appendages are another source of conditional drops: break the 
corresponding body part, and you have a chance of receiving the item 
listed. 
<> Finally, if the party has the ability to absorb elemental energy from a 
defeated foe through an equipped weapon, the "Element" row lists 
the chance of doing so, as well as elemental type and number of units 
which will be obtained. 
AV 
B 
- The encounter conditions for this enemy. There 
are three general condition types: 
<> Time refers to the period of a given day when enemies can be 
encountered. 
<> Natural Habitat describes where enemies naturally spawn in 
particular areas by default: you do not need to be engaged with a 
specific quest to find them. 
<> Quest covers both main quests and sidequests (we have avoided 
all location spoilers by referring solely to the relevant names), as 
well as hunts. Each hunt entry is followed, in parentheses, by the 
location of the tipster that provides this hunt, not the location of 
the enemy itself. For a full list of all hunts and a map showing 
where the targets are found, turn to page 136. 
El STATUS AILMENTS - Indicates whether this enemy is resistant 
or immune to infliction of any or all of the following status ailments: 
Instant Death, Alterna, Poison, and Stop. See page 282 for details 
on status effects. 

l:;J AFFINITIES - Values indicating the innate percentage modifier applicable to 
specific types of damage dealt to the enemy. 
<> A value equal to 100% indicates normal damage. 
<> A value greater than 100% indicates increased damage (displayed in 
orange in the game) - in other words, that the enemy has a weakness to 
that damage type. 
<> A value lower than 100% indicates reduced damage (displayed in purple 
in the game) - in other words, that the enemy has a resistance to that 
damage type. 
<> Enemies may also be completely immune to a damage type (IMM) or even 
absorb it (ABS). regaining HP instead of sustaining damage. 
The damage types represented by each icon are as follows: 
Weapons 
• II m • • • 
Swords 
Greatswords 
Polearms 
Daggers 
Firearms 
Shields 
Machinery 
Elements 
Fire 
Ice 
Lightning 
Light 
D NOTES -
Summarizes important descriptive characteristics 
applicable to this enemy, such as any capabilities related to 
parameter enhancement, infliction of debilitating effects on party 
members, conditional modifiers, and any elementally imbued or 
otherwise special attacks that they may employ. You can use this to 
prepare your defense accordingly. 
Our notes also offer any relevant information on the creature's body 
parts, and the consequences of breaking appendages. 
~ A body part modifier corresponds to a damage modifier that is 
unique to a specific body part. For example, you will often read: 
"Body part modifiers: -50% damage from weapons until broken 
(head)". This means that the monster in question takes 50% 
less damage when you target its head, and that this resistance 
disappears once you break that body part. As a general rule of 
thumb, body parts with such a modifier correspond to the ones 
you need to break to obtain the creature's appendage drop. 
~ A statement such as "Break effects: Strength -30% (head/15%)" 
means that the creature's head has a durability of 15% of its total 
HP, and that breaking the head causes its Strength to be reduced 
by 30%. You can find a complete explanation of the complex body 
parts and breakage system on page 284. 
@ Bestiary 
@ Enemy Sheet 
Structure 

234 
GARULET 
Size 
Level 
4 HP 
EXP 
12 Strength 
Libra 
1.5 Vitality 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
r 
.. 
Chance 
Primary 
50% 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
30% 
r ILA 
Time 
Natural Habitat 
Duscae (AlstorSlough. OiscofCauthess) 
Quest 
GREEN GARULA 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
l nme 
12 
27 
1.5 
Yes 
Chance 
75% 
100% 
50% 
Quest 
Hunl: Galloping Garulas (Coernix Station - Alstor) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death 
Size 
HP 
Strength 
Vitality 
Spirit 
19.300 
1,250 
102 
73 
Items 
GarulaSirtoin 
GarulaTusk 
lce(51 
04:00to20:29 1 
I! ! ! ! ! ! ! 1!. ! 1~ : 
I 
NOTES 
Body part modifiers: -50% damage from weapons until broken (horn). Break 
effects: Strength -i 5% (horn/20%1: Vitality -30% (body/30%. rear/20%). 
---------
---------------------·----
Natural Habitat 
Rest Area) 
Quest 
I STATUS AILMENTS -
GAR ULA 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry r 
.. 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Size 
10 HP 
17 Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
75% 
100% 
50% 
I! ! ! ~ ~ ~ ! 1! ! 1~ :: 
I 
NOTES 
Body part mod_ifiers: -50% damage from weapons until broken_ (horn). Break 
effects: Strength -15% (norn/20%); Vitality ·30% (body/30%, rear/20%) 
------
-------------------------~--
Natural Habitat 
Quest 
GARULESSA 
Size 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
32 
HP 
227 Strength 
10 Vitality 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
I 
~~~:asry 
Cha;~ 
Secondary 
Appendage 
100% 
Element 
100% 
I Time 
Ouscae (Alstor Slough, Oise of Cauthess) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death, immune IO Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1! : 1~ : 
I 
NOTES 
Body part modifiers: -50% damage from weapons until broken (horn). Break 
effects: Strength -15% (horn/20%); \fitality-30% (body/30%. rear/20"(,)_ 
-------------------------------
GARULA 
Size 
Level 
10 HP 
17,900 : 
EXP 
17 Strength 
1.010 ' 
Libra 
1.5 Vitality 
88 1 
Parry 
Spirit 
68 
!""" 
Chance 
Items 
Primary 
75% 
Garu!aSir!oin 
Secondary 
Appendage 
100',0 
GarulaTusk 
Element 
50% 
lce(4J 
I Time 
04:00to20:29 ! 
Quest 
Hunts: Reign Triumphant (Coernix Station - Alstor). Galloping Garulas (Coernix 
Station - Alstor) 
I STATUS AILMENTS -
I! ! ! ! ~ ~ ! 1!, ! 1~ : : 
I 
NOTES 
Body part modifiers: -50% damage from weapons until broken. (horn) Break 
effects: Strength -15% (horn/20%); Vitahty-30% (body/30%, rear/20%) 
GARULESSA 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
"F: 
l
:~i~asry 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Time 
Size 
32 HP 
227 Strength 
10 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
74,000 
6.130 
193 
138 ' 
Chance 
75% 
100% 
50% 
Items 
Garulafw 
GreatGarulaTusk i 
lce l6J ' 
04:00to20:29 
Quest 
Hunt: Reign Triumphant (Coemix Station ~ Alstor) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death. immune to Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 
1~% ! 1~ : 
I 
NOTES 
Body part modifiers: -50% damage from weapons untii broken (horn). Break 
effects: Strength -15% (horn/20%); Vitality -30% lbody/30%. rearJ20",,,). 
-----------·---------------------------------------./ 

L lllf'"' 
Natural Habitat 
BLOODHORN 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
:~i~a
5
ry 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
TI me 
Size 
2 HP 
71 
Strength 
10 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
100% 
100% 
Uuest 
Main Guest: The Mutant Maurader 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death and Stop 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1! ! 1~ 1: 
I 
NOTES 
Employs attacks that reduce maximum H~ Body part modifiers: -50% damage 
f~o
0~ 
7~~d\~~1~t;~~~JIW,)lhorn) Break effects: Strnngth -15% (horn,120%); Vitality 
DUAL HORN 
l evel 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Size 
23 
HP 
16,000 
110 Strength 
1.570 
3 Vitality 
106 
Yes Spirit 
82 
I 
DROPS 
Chance 
Items ! 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
100% 
DualhornSteak [ 
50% 
Giant Hairy Hom i 
50% 
lce(5J j 
Time 
04:00 to 20:29 
Natural Habitat 
Leide (east of Hammerhead, south and east of The Three Valleys, 
aroundlongwythePeak) 
Uuest 
I STATUS AILMENTS -
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1! ! 1~ : : 
I 
NOTES 
Body part modifiers: -50% d_arnage from weapons until broken (horn). Break i 
____ -:_ 
effects: Slrength -15% (horn,120%); V1tality -30% (bodyi30%, rear/20%). 
! 
____________________________________ __/ 
£1 ." 
Natural Habitat 
ASHENHORN 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
~:::~ary 
Appendage 
Element 
Time 
Size 
39 HP 
220 Strength 
3 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
100% 
100% 
50% 
Guest Hunt: Rookie Hunter Tragedy (Hammerhead! 
I STATUS AILMENTS Highly resistant to Instant Death, resistant to Aiterna 
I! ! ! ~ ! ~ ! 1! ! I~ : i 
I 
NOTl'S 
Bodi• part modifiers: -50% damage ham weapons until broken (horn). Brnak 
!:'::,--
effects: Strength -15% (horn/20%); Vitality -30% lbody/30%. rear/20%). 
: 
--- ___________________________________________ _/ 
Time 
Natural Habitat 
Guest Main Quest: Hunter Becomes the Hunrod 
I STATUS AILMENTS -
Size 
2 HP 
4 Strength 
1-5 V-rtality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
100% 
30% 
1 
800 
lllUI m m II D B ~ * ' -<>- ' 
00 00 00 
-
00 ~ ~ ~ -
~ ~ 
rm• ........... ,,.,_ 
______ 
____/ 
DUALHORN 
l evel 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Size 
12 HP 
30 Strength 
3 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
75% 
100% 
50% 
11.100 
750 
77 
64 
Items ; 
Hardened Hoof : 
Hairy Horn , 
lce(S) 
Time 
04:00to20:29 ' 
Natural Habitat 
Leide (east of Hammerhead, south and east of The Three Valleys, 
aroundlong1•rf1hePeaki 
Guest 
I STATUS AILMENTS -
I! ! ! ! ! ! ! 
I~~ ! 1~ : 
I 
NOTES 
Body part modifiers 50% damage from weapons until broken (horn) Break 
effects Strength 15% (horn,120%) V1tahty 30% (body/30% rear/20%) 
--------------------------- - __ __/ 
Natural Habitat 
DUALHORN 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Size 
23 
HP 
22.000 
110 Strength 
1,900 
3 Vitality 
127 
Yes Spirit 
99 
l
:~~a~y 
Chance 
Items 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Time 
100% 
DualhornSteak 
50o/o 
GiamHairyHom 
50% 
lcet5J 
Anytime 
Guest 
Hunt: Horned Hunting Hazards [Taelpar Rest Areal 
I STATUS AILMENTS -
I! ! ! ~ ! ~ ! 1! ! 1~ : 
I 
NOTES 
Body pan modifiers: -50% damage from weapons unti.I broken (horn). Break 
effects: Strength -15% (hom;20%); Vitality -30% (bodyi30%, rear/20%). 
--------------------------~ 
Natural Habitat 
ASPIDOCHELON 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
::~~ary 
Appendage 
Element 
Time 
Size 
62 
HP 
1,152 Strength 
10 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
100% 
100% 
100% 
Guest 
Hunt: Starving Beast Seeks Food (Old Lestallum) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death, Altema. and Poison 
162,500 
32,040 
267 ; 
200 i 
Items ' 
Thick Hide 
Worn Incisor 
lce(B) 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! .!~ ! I~ : 
I 
NOTES 
Capable of inflicting Poison status. Body part modifiers: -50% damage from 
weapons unta broken (horn). Break effects: Strength -15% lhorn/20%); Vilality -30% 
lbody/30%.rear/i5%). 
SABERTUSK 
l evel 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Size 
2 HP 
4 Strength 
1-5 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
I 
DROPS 
Chance 
Natural Habitat 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Guest 
Hunt: Howling Wind of Hunge1 (Hammerhead) 
I STATUS AILMENTS -
100% 
30% 
1 
900 
260 
40 ' 
38 
Items ; 
Sabenusk Claw ' 
Fire(2) 
Anytime 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! ! 1: I~ : 
I"'"' ........ ,,,., .... ,._, 
------------------
DUALHORN 
Natural Habitat 
-
l evel 
EXP 
Libra 
Size 
12 
HP 
30 Strength 
3 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
75% 
100% 
50% 
2 . 
15,300 : 
910 
93 
76 
Hardened Hoof 
Hairy Horn 
lcel51 
Anytime 
Guest 
Hunt: Beast Over Brawn llongwythe Rest Area) 
I STATUS AILMENTS -
I! ! ! ! ! ! ! 1!% ! I~ : 
i 
I 
NOTES 
Body pan mod:hers 50% damage from weapons un111 broken (horn) Break 
effects Strength 15% lhorn/20%1 Vitality 30% lbody/30% rear/20%1 
------------------- ------------
- ---- ---- - --- ---- / 
GRAND HORN 
Natural Habitat 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
~~i~~asry 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Size 
27 
HP 
53.000 
107 Strength 
3.120 
3 Vitality 
190 
Yes Spirit 
147 
Chance 
Items : 
100% 
Hardened Hoof 
75% 
Giant Hairy Horn 
50% 
lce(51 
Anytime 
Quest Hunt: Beast Over Brawn {Longwythe Rest Area) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Highly resistant to Instant Death, resistant to Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1! ! 1~ :. 
I 
NOTES 
Body pan modifiers: -50% damage from weapons until broken (horn). 81eak 
effecls: Strength-15% (horn,120%); Vitality-30% (body/30%, rear/20%). 
_____________________________________________ _/ 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Size 
2 HP 
4 Strength 
1.5 VitaMy 
Yes Spirit 
1 
800 
260 
35 ' 
33 ' 
Chance 
Items 
50% 
SabertuskClaw 
30% 
Fire(2) 
Time 
04:00to2D:29 
Natural Habitat 
Leide (Hammerhead region. Weavenyilds region. Longwythe Peak 
region, Keycatrich battlefie!dl 
Quest 
I STATUS AILMENTS -
I! ! ! ! ! ! ! s! 1! 1~ ! 
l'ITT" ••• "''°' ~-· .• ;> l"o!OO>J 
Time 
Natural Habitat 
Guest 
Hunt: Gorgers in lhe Dust (Hammerhead) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death 
Si2e 
7 HP 
10 Strength 
1-5 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
1()()'1, 
30% 
1 
8,400 
600 
69 
65 
Items 
SabertuskClaw 
Firel21 
Anytime 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! s! 1! 1~ ! 
I"'"'~~·=:~:·-~ ------ --
Bestiary 
Beasts 
235 

236 
VORETOOTH 
Size 
Level 
12 HP 
EXP 
20 Strength 
Libra 
1.5 Vitality 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
50% 
30% 
Duscae(AlstorSlough.DiscofCauthess. Taelparregion) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Poison 
I! ! ! ~ ! ~ ! 5! 1! 1~ :: 
[~~=~~-~""'""""""'"'" .'"''~· 
Ouest • 
VORE TOOTH 
Size 
Level 
72 
HP 
EXP 
553 Strength 
Libra 
1.5 Vitality 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
75% 
30% 
Leide !BalouveMinesmaze-Chapter 151 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Alterna and Poison 
14,800 
22.300 
firel21 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 5! t! 1~ : 
['"' ''""". ""'• """ '"'" ... '""' '"" . '" ''"""'' 
uT ' 
Size 
Level 
30 HP 
EXP 
82 Strength 
Libra 
1.5 Vitality 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
50% 
30% 
1 
27.700 
3,370 
122 
110 
Items 
Crimson Tongue 
Fire(2} 
Anytime 
Ouest 
Hunt: They Came Back from the Mountain llestallum. Thoroughfare} 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! s! 1! 1~ : 
I~~ ··-~-,. ,,,~·:,· .. ~--·-------
Natural Habitat 
Quest 
HAVOC FANG 
Size 
Level 
22 
HP 
EXP 
52 Strength 
Libra 
1.5 Vitality 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Elernont 
I Time 
Cleigne !fort Vaullereyreg;on) 
Chance 
50% 
30% 
I STATUS AILMENTS . 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 5! 1! 1~ : 
rm -"'"""""""""" "~' ········ '"" '"' '""""" 
Size 
12 
HP 
11.300 
20 Strength 
810 
1.5 Vitality 
67 
Yes Spirit 
65 
Chance' 
Items 
50% 
VoretoothBristles 
30% 
firel21 
Anytime 
Ouest 
Hunt: Red in Tooth and Claw (Wiz Chocobo Post) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Poison 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 5! 1! 1~ : 
l'ITT~ """'"'""'""~'"""'"--"''"" , .. , ... ,. 
YELLOWTOOTH 
Sizo 
14 
HP 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
25 Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
75% 
30% 
Ouest 
Hunt: Beasts Wallow in the Wetlands !Coernix Station - Alstor) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death and Poison 
fire!21 
Anytime 
I! ! ! ~ ! ~ ! 5! 1! 1~ : 
1·m~:,. ...... -~""''" ............ ,, .... '"·-
FALXFANG 
• 
ILABI T' 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Natural Habitat 
Cartanica (fodina Caestino) 
Ouest 
MainOuest:TheHandoftheKing 
I STATUS AILMENTS . 
Size 
28 
HP 
72 Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
50% 
30% 
l i 
7.800 i 
2.040i 
90 
81 
Items ; 
CrimsonTongue ! 
firel21i 
04:001020:29 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 5! 1! 1~ : 
I""' """""" """ ''""'"°"'· 
I 
________________________ ___/ 
HAVOC FANG 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Size 
79 
HP 
731 
Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
Secondary 
Appendage 
1 
17.400 
27,580 
126 
109 
Items ; 
Beautiful Hide! 
I 
~~i~asry 
Ch~"; 
Element 
30% 
firel21' 
•fAILABILITY 
I Time 
Anytime . 
Natural Habitat 
leide (Crestholm Channels maze - Chapter 15); Duscae !Costlemark ! 
Tower maie · Chapter 15); Cleigne !Steyliff Grove maze - Chapter 151 
' 
Quest 
-
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 5! 1! 1~ : , 
rITTU .... ·-· 
0~""'" ~M _,, .. 
, '""' • "°' 1"00•1•>>1 
_________ 
/ 
Size 
68 
HP 
13,200 
504 Strength 
19.780 
1.5 Vitality 
120 
Yes Spirit 
105 
,Chance 
!toms 
50% 
Sharp Bristles 
30% 
fire (2) 
Anytime 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Alterna and Poison 
I! ! ! ! ~ ! ! 5! 1! 1~ : 
1 •m• """" "'- ~ •• '""' •~,.•~ """' ·'"' '""""" 
Size 
12 HP 
19 Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
1 
4,600 
690 
61 
59 
Chance 
Items 
25% 
Curved fang 
30% 
fire 12) 
Ar11'lime 
AVAILABILITY 
Natural Habitat 
Dynneldale} 
Cleigne(northandsouthoflestallum.WennathRiverhead, 
Quest 
I STATUS AILMENTS • 
I! ! ! ~ ! ~ ! 5! 1! 1~ : 
rm· ·~--·m ........ ,..,,,., 
SABERCLAW 
Level 
EXP 
·Libra 
Size 
12 HP 
19 Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
25% 
30% 
I 
N~~:~~~L~~at 
Ouest 
Hunt Secure the Mountain Pass (Lestallum Thoroughfare} 
I STATUS AILMENTS 
1 
11.300 
810 
67 
65 
Curved fang 
Firel21 
I! ~ ! ! ! ! ! 5! 1! t~ ~ 
MUSHUSSU 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Size 
24 
HP 
75 Strength 
i.5 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
1 i 
7.500 ! 
1.760 1 
87 1 
79 1 
Items ! 
.Scaled Ski~ ! 
50% 
Barbed Poison Needle ; 
50% 
50% 
firel31
1· 
I 
AVAILABILITY 
Anytime 
Natural Habitat 
Ouest -
J 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resis1ant to Poison 
1 
I! !! ! ! ! ! ! ! .! .~ : I 
I 
NOTES 
Capable of inflicting Poison status. Break effects: Vitality -30% (body/35%, 
I 
tail/25%). 
I 
----------
___) 

Size 
24 
HP 
75 Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
50% 
50% 
50% 
Barbed Poison Needle ! 
Fire(3) 
Anytime ! 
I 
N:~:~~~~~at 
O.Uest 
Hunt Hunter HO lme of Defense {Me!dacm Hunter HOJ 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant 10 Poison 
I! ! ! ~ ! ! ! 5! 1! I~ :: . 
I 
NOTES 
Capab1e of 111fhctmg Poison status Break effects Vrtahty 30% ibod~/35% 
tail/25%) 
·-·-·---·-------·--···--·-···--·----
-·····-·--···---·-----------·----
-
-
- / 
Size 
34 HP 
353 Strength 
3 Vitality 
Yes 
Spirit 
33.700 
Chance 
Items f 
50% 
Coern1 Whiskers 
~ 
100% 
Lightning(8) ' 
04:00to20:29 : 
l
~::~~~~tat 
Guest 
Hunt Hunters of Secul!am Pass tTae1par Rest Area) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant 10 Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1! 1! ~ :: 
1 
I 
NOTES 
Employs lightning·elementai anacks 02pab:e of inflic.ting Shocke.d status 
Capableofcausinglnstant0eath.Breakeffects:Vitalny -15%1body160%) 
___ ./ 
AVAllABILITV 
Natural Habitat 
Size 
63 
HP 
1,328 Strength 
3 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
100% 
100% 
Guest 
Hunt: Old Denizens ol the Woods (Taelpar Rest Area) 
I STATUS AILMENTS H!ghly resistant to Instant Death. immune to A!terna 
I! ! ! ~ ! ! ! 1! 1! I~ : 
I 
NOTES 
Employs lightning-elemental attacks capab~e of infli~ting Shocked status 
Capable of causing Instant Death. B1eak effects: Vita!:ty -15% fbody/60%}. 
MESMENIR 
6.TIR!BlfffS 
Size 
level 
5 HP 
6,900 
EXP 
6 Strength 
500 
Libra 
1.5 Vitality 
63 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
55 
I 
::~~a~ 
Ch•;: 
Secondary 
Appendage 
50% 
Mesmenir Ham 
Element 
5D% 
lce(3) 
Hard\Nhiskers 
Items 
I 
~-::~~~:tat 
lrime 
{)4 00 to 20 29 
lluest 
Hunts Varmmts or tne Wastelands (Hammerhead) The Hunter Slaymg Herd 
llongwytheAestArea) 
I STATUS AILMENTS 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1! = 
I~ :: 
I 
NOTES 
Body pa~ modifiers: -50% damage fromweap. ons ".ntil broken !head}. Break 
effects: Strength -15% !head/20%); Vitality-15% lbody/30%) 
Size 
42 HP 
222 Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
130 1 
Chance 
Items I 
100% 
SC<JledSkin 
100% 
Barbed Poison Needle 
50% 
Fire(3) 
Anytime 
l
~~~~~~tat 
Guest 
Hunt Hunter HQ Line of Defense !Meldac10 Hunter HOj 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death. Alterna. and Poison 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! ! 1! 1~ 
: 
I 
I 
NOTES Capable of inflicting Pmson status B•eak effects Vrtal1ty 30% lbody/35%. 
I 
ta1v25~.1 
. Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
_ Element 
71 
2.136 
Yes 
Chance 
50% 
100% 
I 
-- -- ---
__ ) 
Size 
HP 
Strength 
Vitality 
Spirit 
ltems l , 
Strnng\.Vhiskers ! :I 
lightningl12J I 
I
AVll1LABILI1Y 
Natural Habitat 
Quest 
-
Libra 
Size 
34 
HP 
353 Strength 
3 Vitality 
Parry 
Yes 
Spirit 
1 ' 
24.400 ' 
3,900 ' 
9i i 
112 
Items
~ 
I 
:~~~asry 
Ch•;: 
CoeurlWhiskers 
~ 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
100% 
Lightning (8) i 
I Time 
Anytime 1 
l eide(north regionJ;Duscae{Mencemoorregion,sauthwest region) 1 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Aiterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ! ! 1! 1! I~ :: ! 
I 
NOTES 
Employs Lightning-elemental attacks ca~ab~e of inflicting Shocke.d status. 
Capable of causing Instant Death. Break effects: Vitality -15% (body/60%) 
/ 
Libra 
Size 
63 
HP 
1.328 Strength 
3 Vitality 
~ Parry 
Yes 
Spirit 
t 
59.600 
22.250 
136 
121 
fl
:;ary Ch;;: 
CoeurlWhiskers 
ppandage 
lement 
100% 
Lightningl101 
.~rtytime 1· 
IAVAILABILITV 
Natural Habitat 
Guest 
I 
Ouest -
l nme 
Ouscae iDaure!I Caverns maze - Chapter 15) 
AllAILABlUTY 
Natural Habitat 
I Time 
CleigneJG!acialGrottomaze· Chapter t5) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Attema 
l I STATUS AILMENTS Highly resistant to Instant Death. immune to Altema 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ !. 1! 1! I~ :: I I! ! ! ! ! ! ! ,!, 1! I~ : 
I 
NOTES 
Employs Lightning-elemental anacks capable of inflicting Shocked status J I 
NOT£S Employs lightning elemental anacks capable ol 1pfl1ctmg Shocked status. 
Capable of causing Instant Death. Break effects: Vrtality -15% lbody/60%) 
Capable of causing Instant Death Break effects Vitality 15% (body/60%) 
-------·--------------------·--------·-·-·--------------···-·-·-- - - --- --- ----
-------
Size 
1 l 
93 HP 
123,000 
3.578 Strength 
3 Vitality 
52.080 
154 
Yes 
Spirit 
Chance 
50% 
100% 
135 
Items 
Strong Whiskers I 
lighmingl16l l 
Natural Habitat 
Duscae jCostlemark Tower maze - Chapter 15} 
-"I 
Guest 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Aiterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ! ! 1! ,! I= 
I 
NOTES 
Employs Lightnmg elementai attacks caoable of mflict.ng Snacked status 
Capable of causing Instant Death Break effects Vitaloty 15% lbody/60%) 
I 
~
I 
5Dll I 
I 
MESMENIR 
ATf'"'.!SU ~ ES 
Size 
level 
HP 
2.900 
EXP 
Strength 
420 
Libra 
1.5 Vitality 
57 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
50 
I 
DROPS 
Chance 
Items 
Primary 
80% 
Hard Whiskers 
Secondary 
Appendage 
50% 
Masmenir Horn 
Element 
50% 
lcel31 
I Time 
Anytime 
l
~:~~~~~tat 
leide (Hammerhead region, south of the longwythe Rest Area) 
Guest -
I STATUS AILMENTS . 
I! ~ ! ! ! ~ ! 1! = 
I~ :: 
I 
NOTES 
Body pan mod. ifters: -50% damage lrom weapons u.ntil broken (head). Break 
effects: Strength · 15% lhead/20%); V1tal1ty -15% (bodw:JO%J 
$ Bestiary 
<11 Beasts 
237 

238 
MAGNANIR 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Size 
8 HP 
21 
Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
16,500 
930 ' 
83 
76 
Items 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
60% 
HardWhiskers : 
Natural Habitat 
100% 
50% 
Uuest 
Hunt: The Hunter-Slaying Herd llongwythe Rest Areal 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistam to Instant Death 
MesmenirHorn 
lce(31 
04:00to20:29 
I! ! ! ~ ! ~ ! 1! ! I~ : 
I 
IJOTES 
Body part modifiers: -50% damage from weapons until broken (head). Break 
effects: Strength -15% (head/20%): Vitahty-15% lbody/30%1. 
/ 
AVAIL 
Natural Habitat 
ANAK 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Size 
9 HP 
16 Strength 
3 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
50% 
50% 
Uuest 
Hunt: Bounty-Hunted Beauties (Hammerhead) 
I STATUS AILMENTS -
17.400 
960 
87 
67 
Items 
AnakMeat 
lce(3J 
04:00to20:29 
I! ! ! ! ! ! ! ,:,k ! 1~ 
: 
i 
I 
NOTES 
Body part modrlrers 50% damage from weapons untrl broken (horn/ Break 
effects Strength -15% lhorn/20%). Vrtahty 30% lbody/25% hrndlegs/25'ro) 
___ _/ 
ANAKADOM 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Size 
28 
HP 
1i5 Strength 
3 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
100% 
66,200 
4,640 
185 
;33 · 
Items ! 
Anakfetlock i 
100% 
50% 
GreatAnakAntlers 
lcel31 
I 
~~~~ra l ~Lab:tat 
Time 
Quest 
Hunt Bounty Hunted Beautres (Hammerhead) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Highly resistant to Instant Dealh, resistant to Allerna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1! ! I~ : 
I 
IJOTES 
Body part modifiers: -50% damage from weapons unlil broken (ho.rn). Break 
effects: Strength -15% (horn/20%); Vitality -30% lbody/15%. hindlegs/25%) 
VA ABll 
Natural Habitat 
ARBA 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Size 
28 
HP 
61,800 
128 Strength 
4.000 
10 Vitality 
178 
Yes 
Spirit 
153 
Chance 
Items 
25% 
ArbaSpur 
10% 
Giant Curlhorn 
50% 
lce!3) 
Quest 
Hunts: Long Necks on !he Plains llestallurn, Thoroughfare). Ott with Their 
Heads! llestallum.Market) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death 
I! ! ! ! ~ ~ ! 1!~ ! I~ :: 
I 
NOTES 
Body part modiliers: -50% d.amage from weapons until broken (hor. nl. Break 
effects: Suength -15% (horn/20%); Vrtahty-30% (body/25%. hindlegs/15%) 
--- -·-·--·----- -· -------
AV 
.ABILITY 
Natural Habitat 
Quest -
ANAKCALF 
Size 
level 
HP 
EXP 
Strength 
Libra 
Parry 
1.5 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Chance 
25% 
50% 
Time 
Leide(northregion): Ouscae (lakeAlstor) 
I STATUS AILMENTS -
2,700 
370 
54 
40 
Items 
AnakMeat 
lce (3) 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1! ! I~ ! 
r~ ............ ,,.,._ "_,,,, ....... ,,, .. , 
ANAK STAG 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Size 
22 
HP 
30 Strength 
3 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
I 
DROPS 
Chance 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Time 
75% 
50% 
50% 
Natural Habitat 
Leide (nonh region); Duscae (lakeAlstor) 
Quest 
I STATUS AILMENTS -
19,400 
1,870 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1!. ! I~ : 
I 
llOTES 
Body part modifiers: -50% damage from weapons until broken (horn). Break 
effects: Strength -15% lhorn/20%); Vitality -30% (body/15%. hind!egs/25%), 
-- --- - --- --
ARBA 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Time 
Size 
28 
HP 
128 Strength 
10 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
25% 
10% 
50% 
3 
28,800 
3.180 ' 
126 
108 
Items 
ArbaSpur ! 
GiantCurlhorn 
lce(3) 
04:00to20:29 
Natural Habitat 
Duscae (Oise of Cauthess region. Mencemoor region!; Cleigne 
(north region) 
Quest 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death 
I! ~ ! ! ~ ~ ! 1! % ! I~ :: 
NOTES 
Bod·1 part modifiers: -50% damage from weapons unlil broken (horn). Break 
effects: Strength -15% (horn/20%1: Vitality -30% lbody/15%, hindlegs/25%). 
SPIRACORN 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Secondary 
Size 
25 
HP 
111 
Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
7,700 
1,550 
89 
76 
Items 
Supple Tail 
I 
~~i~:ry 
Cha;;~ 
Appendage 
75% 
CrookedHelixhorn 
Element 
50% 
lce (4) 
I Time 
08:00to03:59 
Natural Habitat 
Cleigne (Coernix Bypass, Did Lestallum region, Fort Vaullerey region, 
Maidenwater.Dynneldale) 
Quest -
I STATUS AILMENTS -
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1! % ! I~ :: 
I 
NOTES 
Body part modifiers: -50% damage from weapons un. til broken (head). Break 
effects: Strength -15% lhead/20%): Vitality -15% lbody/30%) 
----------
-
-
- --------------- --- ________ _, 
ANAK 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Size 
9 HP 
16 Strength 
3 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
50% 
12,400 
790 
72 
55 
Items : 
AnakMeat i 
Natural Habitat 
Tirne 
Leide(northregion);OuscaellakeAlstorJ 
Quest 
I STATUS AILMENTS -
I! ! ! ! ! ! ! 1! ! 1~ : 
I 
NOTES 
Body part modifiers 50% damage from weapons until broken !horn) Break 
effects Strength 15% (horn/20%). Vrtalrty 30% (body/25%, hmdiegs/25%) 
'/Al• 
IL,ry 
Natural Habitat 
-------
-~ 
ANAKLABAN 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Size 
22 
HP 
74 
Strength 
3 Vitality 
57,100 
2,850 
171 
124 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
100% 
50% 
50% 
Anakfetlock 
GreatAnakAntlers 
lce(3) 
Quest 
Hunt: Wild Beauties (Hammerhead) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Highly resistant to Instant Death, resistant to Alterna 
I! ! ! ~ ! ~ ! 1!. ! I~ 
: 
I 
NOTES 
Body part modifiers: -50% damage from weapons until broken (ho.rn). Break 
effecls: Strength -t 5% lhorn/20%); Vitalrty -30% (body/25%, hindlegs/25%) 
i 
- ) 
B 
!)-
Natural Habitat 
ARBAGADOL 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
~~i~asry 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Time 
Size 
31 
HP 
138 Strength 
10 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
100% 
100% 
50% 
31,000 
4,140 : 
131 ! 
111 
Items 
ArbaSpur 
Giant Curlhorn 
lce(4) 
04:00to20:29 
Quest 
Hunt: Ott with Their Heads! (leslallum, MarketJ 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to lnstanl Death and Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1!% ! 120'• 
50% 
NOTES 
Body part modifiers: -50% damage from weapons until b1oken (horn). Break 
effects: Strength -15% (horn/10%); Vitality -30% (body/25%, hindlegs/25%) 
81 
Natural Habitat 
SPIRACORN 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Size 
25 HP 
18,100 , 
111 
Strength 
1,830 
1.5 Vitality 
99 , 
Yes Spirit 
85 
l
~~i~~a~y 
Chance 
Items 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Time 
75% 
Supple Tail 
- I 
75% 
Crooked Helixhorn 
~ 
50% 
lce(4) 
04:00to20:29 
Quest 
Hunts: Untamed Wild Horses (Coernix Station - Alstor). The Las! Spiracorns 
!Old Lestallum) 
I STATUS AILMENTS -
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! !~% ! 1~ ! I 
I 
NOTES 
Body part modifiers:. -50% damage from weapons u.ntil broken (head). Break 
effects: Strength-15%ihead/20%);Vitality-15%(body/30%) 
-------

DUPLICORN 
Natural Habitat 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I
~~~.~ 
SeC<Jndary 
Appendage 
Element 
Time 
Quest Hunt: The last Spiracorns (Old Leswl!uml 
I STATUS AILMENTS . 
Size 
29 HP 
145 Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
2 
27.BOO 
2,950 1 
11~: 1 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
75% 
1()% 
5()% 
Supple Tail I 
· I 
SturdyHefixhorn I 
lcel4l l 
04:001020:29 i 
I! ! ! ! ! ! ! 1! ! I~ ! 
I 
llOTF.S Be&, pan moM.€!5 ·50% damage from weapons ur.trl brokon lheadl Broak 
effects Strengtll ·15% {head/20%1 Vita'llY -15% (body/30%1 
- · ·-·····-·--··-·-·-----·----·-~··-------·-- _____ _) 
SAHA GIN 
Size 
18 HP 
73 Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
2 
21.500 
l,600 
1oa 
92 
Chance 
!tams 
1001> 
SahaginSrale 
Time 
NaturalHabitat 
· 
Guest Hum: Acqu~ Not Evil (Leslalium, Thoroughfare) 
I STATUS AILMENTS -
fire(3l 
Att(lime 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! ! 1! 1~ :: 
r~ ·~· .. ~-·~~---
ALBINOGIN 
Site 
level 
24 HP 
25.800 
EXP 
iil Strength 
2.360 
Libra 
15 Vitality 
120 
Parry 
Ye! Spirit 
103 
r· 
Chance 
Items 
Primary 
)O(fj(, 
SahaginS!:k 
Socomfary 
Appendage 
Element 
:ff/, 
F•e!~l 
Time 
Pfr{l:<rie 
Naturallfabilat -
I STATU.S AllMEJffS Resis'.arrt ti> los!ettt Drotn 
I! ~ ! ! tr. ~ ! ! .! ,= :. 
r= ........................ . 
J 
ALPHAGIN 
Sire 
level 
38 HP 
38,900 
EXP 
2&3 Sffengtll 
6.630 
Libra 
1.5 V'nar11y 
141 
Party 
Y85 Spiril 
H9 
r~ 
Cltaflce 
ff<>m• 
Primaiy 
Wlf, 
Satr>..{jinl.her 
Secandary 
~ 
H¥dSc;.le 
Apf)Mdage 
Elemem 
5Cll\ 
Fiml11 
Tims 
Arrf.ime 
Natural Habitat 
I STATUS AllMENJ$ R!:tit!Zfll w lrr.ian 0-.,;;!I! and Altlilm 
I! ! ! ! IM 
I~ ! ! ,! ~ : 
1-......... ~ ........ _, 
--------------------
LEUKORN 
Size 
level 
51 
HP 
57.600 
EXP 
444 Strength 
14,870 ; 
Libra 
1.5 Vitality 
160 
Parry 
Yes Spiri1 
134 
r 
.. 
Chanco 
Items ' 
Primary 
50% 
leukornSteak j 
Secondary 
Appendage 
75% 
SwrdyHelixhorn ' 
Element 
50% 
lce{4i 
Time 
04.00w20:29 
Naturaf Habitat 
Guest 
Hunt: Scrap ft Now' !Old LeS'.al!um) 
I STATUS AILMENTS ll€sistant w lnsram Oea!h and Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ! ! ,! ! ,~ : 
I 
NOTES !Jody pa1t roodnie1s: ·50% damage frorn weapono until brof.En {hearll. Brea~ 
effects: Sueng1h -i5% lhead/20%1: Vi1a!ity -15% lbod'lf'30%l. 
--- -------------------------------·--··----·-·--·-·-·-·----·-----
SAHAGIN 
Size 
level 
18 HP 
6.600 
EXP 
73 Strength 
1,120 
Libra 
1.5 Vitality 
81 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
69 
r· 
Chance 
hems 
Primary 
100',(, 
SahaginScale 
SoC1lndary 
Appendage 
Element 
50% 
frrel3) 
I Time 
Afl'/lirne 
Natural Habitat 
Cleigne: lWennath Riverhead, north and east of the Vesperpool. 
Maidenwa1er) 
Guest • 
I STATUS AILMENTS -
Bestiary 
I!!!!!!!! 
12911 
1011'> 
53% 
r:~:=·~=---. 
····--·--- j 
Beasts 
239 

240 
BEASTS 
TY 
SEADEVIL 
U E-> 
Size 
Level 
28 HP 
9,000 
EXP 
168 Strength 
2.240 
Libra 
1.5 Vitality 
94 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
81 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Chance 
20% 
Sharp Head Fin 
50% 
Natural Habitat 
Cleigne (Maidenwater. Cape Caem region! 
lirei3J , 
An·~ime
: 
! 
I 
Quest 
l 
I STATUS AILMENTS . 
I 
I! ! ! ! ! ! ! 5! 1! 1~ :: I 
r,., ...... ru ...... """""'' 
I 
--------------------------
_____ .. _______________ ) 
CORALDEVIL 
Size 
Level 
61 
HP 
EXP 
744 
Strength 
Libra 
1.5 Vitality 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I r.me 
Chance 
80% 
50% 
26,500 
17,950 
126 
106 
Items 
Heavy Seate 
Fire(6J 
Anytime 
Leide (Crestholm Channels maze · Chapter 15} 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death and Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 5! 1! 1~ : 
I~" __ ,~.-.... ,, ... _ .. 
GIGANTOAD 
' £~ 
Size 
3 j 
Level 
27 
HP 
21.500 I 
EXP 
186 Strength 
2.980 j 
Libra 
3 Vitality 
107 I 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
91 j 
I 
DROPS 
Chance 
Items j 
Primary 
75% 
Slimy Oil I 
Secondary 
· j 
Appendage 
- I 
Element 
50% 
Lightning(3) 1 
VAi 
tlllY 
Time 
04:00 to 20:29 I 
Natural Habitat 
Ra!nv weather only: Duscae {Lak~ Alstor, Oise of Cauthess. 
t 
Mencemoor. south reg10n); Cleigne (north region. Ma1denwa1er) 
] 
Guest 
Sidequest: The Professor's Prntege - Gigantoad (Sania) 
! 
'Ill 
I STATUS AILMENTS -
1:_~~!=!~~ :. _:j 
GAIATOAD 
AV 
11n 
I UT 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Size 
91 HP 
2.928 Strength 
3 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
75% 
50% 
Natural Habnat 
leide (Creslholm Channels maw · Cr.apter 151 
Ou est 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Alterna 
134.000 
52,500 
162 
132 
Items 
fine Slimy Oil ; 
i 
Lightning(6)' 
~me ! 
I! ! ! ! ! ! ! 1!~ 1! ~ : 
[_:-·:·:':~::___ ---·' 
AVAllABtUTY 
Natural Habitat 
SEADEVIL 
I 
IT 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
:~i=a~ 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Time 
Size 
2 : 
28 HP 
28.BOO ! 
168 Strength 
3.180' 
1.5 Vitality 
126 i 
Yes Spirit 
108 ' 
Chance 
Items 
2D°k 
Sharp Head Fin 
50% 
Fire(3} ! 
Anytime: 
Cluest 
Hunts: A Nightmare Came by Ferry (Galdin Quay). Rulers of the Banks (Old 
lestallum} 
I STATUS AILMENTS -
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 5! 1! 1~ :. . 
I'"" ... '""" """ '"' ""'"""' 
i 
_______________________________ _/ 
Size 
61 
HP 
823 Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
83.200 ' 
25.210 : 
169 ' 
141 i 
Chance 
85% 
Items · 
Sharp Head Fin 
50% 
Natural Habnat 
Clues! 
Hunt:RulersoftheBankslDldLestallumJ 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death and Allerna 
Firel6J; 
Anytimei 
I! ! ! ! ! ! ! s! 1! 1~ :. 
1 
rm "'"'~oo• •••·'"''""""'· 
HEKATONTOAD 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Size 
27 
HP 
186 Strength 
3 Vnality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
100% 
3 ' 
63,000. 
4.520' 
183 ' 
155. 
Items · 
Slimy Oil 
50% 
Lightning(3)' 
I 
AVAILABILITY 
04:00 ta 20:29 ' 
Natural Habitat 
Clues! 
Hunt To Catch a Frog (lestallum Thorough<areJ (ramy weather only} 
I STATUS AILMENTS Highly resistant to Instant Death. reEistant to Alterna 
I~ ! ! ! ! ! ! 1! 1! ~ : ; 
I 
NOTES 
Break effects Vitailty -30% (headt'20%. body/40%1 
------------------------_____ _/ 
AVAILABIUIY 
CATOBLEPAS 
"' 
T e 
s 
Size 
Level 
38 
HP 
EXP 
1.323 Strength 
Libra 
20 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
50% 
50% 
100% 
Natural Habitat 
Duscae (Lake Alstor} 
Ou est 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Dealh and Alterna. resislent to Stop 
I! ! ! ! ! ! ! 1! 1! :. : , 
[~-·~~"'''"'"~==·=------------. 
./ 
A~AI °' "' 
SEADEVIL 
'RUF 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
~~i~a~y 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Size 
86 
HP 
1.577 Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
Chance 
80% 
100% 
Spirit 
48.600 • 
37,130 
141 , 
115 1 
Items 
Heavy Scale 
-, 
Fire (BJ 
Natural Habitat 
Leide (Crestholm Channels maze - Chapter i 51 
Anytime ! 
Cluest -
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 5: 1! 1~ : 
l'ITT" ....... "' ""'" '"' '""'"'" 
I 
------------------·--------------------
--------·---) 
GU RAN GATCH 
v 11.J' 
llY 
Natural Habitat 
JU cs 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
:~i~a
5
rv 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Time 
Cartanica (fodinaCaestinoJ 
Ouest 
Main Quest: The Hand of the King 
I STATUS AILMENTS -
Size 
29 
HP 
179 Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
Chance 
75% 
50% 
Spirit 
2 ' 
9,200 
2.530 1 
96 
82 1 
Items 
Rough Scales 
Fire(3J ! 
0400to 2029 
I! ! ! ! ~ ~ ! s! 1! 1~ 
I""' ·~"""' "";". "'""""'' 
GAIATOAD 
IL, fl 
Natural Habitat 
....... 
1t.i ns 
Level 
EXP 
Size 
32 
HP 
256 Strength 
3 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
75% 
50% 
72.20~ I 
6,390 ' 
192 1 
163 
Items 
SlimyOil . 
Lightning(3J i 
04:00to20:29 I 
lluest 
Hunt: Rainstorm Duel! Poison Frog of Wennath (leslallum, Thoroughlarej 
(rainy weather only} 
I STATUS AILMENTS Highly resistant to Instant Death. resistant to Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1! 1! ~ :: 
T"" Bl'TES 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Size 
41 
38 
HP 
113,500 
1,323 Strength 
15.380 i 
20 Vitality 
420 I 
Cha::: Spirit 
It:~~ i 
50% 
Catoblepas Brisket I 
50% 
Catob!epasFang j 
100% 
Lightning1121 I 
Anytime I 
I 
I 
~~~:~~~~:at 
lluest Hunt Marsh Madness' lhe Giant Awakens (Coerrnx Stat•on - Alstor} 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death and Alterna, resistant to Stop 
1::::~~::~,~:·~~----~--. ~J 

I 
AVAILABllllY 
Natural Habitat 
Ouest -
Size 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
58 
HP 
4.281 Strength 
10 Vitality 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
I 
: :i: asry 
Ch;;: 
Secondary 
Appendage 
100% 
Element 
100% 
I Time 
Duscae(DiscofCauthessreg;on, Mencemoor) 
I STATUS AILMENTS H;ghly resistant to Instant Death. resistant to Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1~% ! I~ : 
I 
NOTES 
Body part modifiers: ·50% damage from weapons until broken (head). Break 
effects: Strength· 15% (head/20%); V1ta!ity -50% (body/8%. legs/Hl%). 
-----------·--------·--------- --·-·--·-·--·-·-·-·-------------·-·-·--·---·-
.b 
Size 
.,, .• :I 
Level 
85 
HP 
EXP 
9.870 Strength 
81.590 
Libra 
10 Vitality 
299 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
206 I 
Chance 
Items 
100% 
ResplendentHollowhorn 
100% 
LargeHollowhorn 
100% 
Lightl1;ng(6) 
Anytime 
Natural Habitat I 
AVAILABlttTY 
Quest 
S1dequest Cursedlegend(Rando!ph) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death and Alterna. resistant to Stop 
I! ! ~ ! ! ~ ! s! I: ~ : 
I 
NOTES 
Body pa1t modifie1s: -50% damage from weapons until broken (head). Break 
effects: Strength -15% (head/20%); Vitality -50% (body/8%. legs/I 0%). 
REGALTRICE 
Ai 
Size 
1 j 
Level 
81 
HP 
19.700 I 
EXP 
1.213 Strength 
27,340 
Libra 
1.5 Vitality 
130 I 
Natural Habitat 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Size 
72 
HP 
6.820 Strength 
10 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
75% 
25% 
100% 
100% 
Fearsome Hoof 
LargeHollowhorn 
Ice (201 
Anytime 
I 
AVAILABILITY 
Clues! 
Hun! Devils Cl)' Curses (Caulhess Rest Area) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Highly resistant 10 Instant Death. immune to Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1! = 
I~ : 
I 
NOTES 
Body part modifiers: -50% damage from weapons until broken (head). Break 
effects: Strength -i5% (head/20%); Vitality -50% lbody/8%. legs/10%1. 
----------------·------------------------------
CHICKATRICE 
'S 
Level 
14 
EXP 
44 
Libra 
1.5 
Parry 
Yes 
I""" 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Chance 
75% 
50% 
I 
~atu~al H~~itat 
Cleigne (Vesperpo! i::ion) 
Quest 
-
I STATUS AILMENTS -
Size 
HP 
Strength 
Vitality 
Spirit 
I 
2,500 
640 
62 
56 
Items 
Chickatriceleg 
fire (3) 
08:00 1003:59 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! s! 1! 
I~ : 
rm• ·~~"""" """""''" ,, ~·--"''"• ""'"'00 ''" 
BASILISK 
Size 
Level 
24 
HP 
EXP 
165 Strength 
Libra 
3 Vitality 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
107 j 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
I 
:~:sry 
Cha7n;~ 
Downy Fe~:~:: I 
I 
::i:a~ 
Chas~~ 
Secondary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Appendage 
Element 
50% 
Fire (5) 
Element 
50% 
AY tLABILITY 
I Time 
Anytime I 
IAIL.ISILIT' 
Time 
Natural Habitat 
Cleigne (Steyliff Grove maze· Chapter 15) 
Natural Habitat 
Cleigne (Vesperpool region) 
Quest 
Quest 
-
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Alterna 
, I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant lo Poison 
I! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! .! ,;. : I 1! ! ! ! ! ~ ! .! .: ~ : 
I 
NOTES Employs attacks that reduce HP to 1; capable ot inthcting Confu S1on status. J I 
NOTES 
Capable of i_nflicting Mollified and Poison status. Break ettec1s· Vita!!ly -30% 
(body/30%, taiV30%) 
·-·-·--·----------------------------·------· 
- ---------------------------------------------------
I 
AVAILABILITY 
Natural Habitat 
Clues!
· 
PHALARIS 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Size 
85 
HP 
7.960 Strength 
10 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
3% 
100% 
Leide (Crestholm Channels maze - Chapter 15) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death and Allerna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1!% ! 
4 i 
316.800 
61,150 ' 
267 : 
185 ! 
Items ! 
Megalixir j 
Lightning (6J j 
Anytime 
100% 
50% 
I 
NOTES 
Body part modifiers: -50% damage tram weapons until broken (head). Break 
!'•_:·. 
effects: Strength -15% (head/20%); v;tality -50% (body/8%. legs/ 10%). 
i 
: 
-------------------------·-.. -·---------------·-·----.--.. ·-·-·----·-·-- -_______________ / 
A IL 
LITT 
Natural Habitat 
REGAL TRICE 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Size 
44 
HP 
336 Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
I 
DROPS 
Chance 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
75% 
50% 
Clues! 
Hunt: Lovable Little Glutton (Meldacio Hunte• HO) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resislant to Instant Death and Alterna 
44.50~ I 
9.400 
151 
It~:: I 
Small Beak 
fire(3; 1 
04:00to20:29 I 
I 
I! ! ! ~ ! ~ ! ! 1! I~ : 1
1 
r~ -"W"• ,_,,,,, ""°' -~ 0 '"""" °""" '""' i 
---------- - ------------------------------------
- ./ 
~ JlftlLITl 
Natural Habitat 
Size 
24 
HP 
24.40~ I 
165 Strength 
2.060 I 
116 . 
100 
3 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
85% 
50% 
Items I 
Beautiful Plumage I 
lce(4J : 
04:00to 20:29 
Ouest 
Hunt: Breeding Season: Rooster Extermina!ion tMe!dacio Hunter HO} 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Poison 
I! ! ! ! ! ! ! 1!. 1! ~ : . 
I 
NOTES 
Capable ot inflicting Mollified and Po. ison status. Break effects: Vitality -30% 
lbody/30%.1a1l/30%}. 
---·-----------·-··----·----
Bestiary 
Beasts 
241 

242 
BEASTS 
ROYALi SK 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Size 
82 
HP 
2.215 Strength 
3 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
85% 
100% 
l
~::~.~~a;tat 
Cleigne (SteyliffGrovemaze-Chapter 15) 
Quest 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Alterna and Poison 
97.600 
37,5i0 
154 
126 
Anytime j 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! t!/. t! ~ :: 
1 
I 
NOTES 
Capable of 1nfhctmg Mollified and Poison status Break effects Vitality 30% 
(body/30% tail/30%1 
------------- ----------------------------) 
COCKATRICE 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
~~i:asry 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I 
N:~:.~~~abitat Cleigne (Vesperpo:ii~:ionJ 
Quest 
Size 
35 HP 
419 Strength 
10 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
100% 
100% 
50% 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death, Alterna. and Poison 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! ,~% ! 
2 
32.900 
I 
NOTES 
Capable of inflicting_ Compromised and Poison statuses. Break effects: Vitality 
-30% (head/30%. body/30%1 
KINGATRICE 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Size 
83 
HP 
2.766 Strength 
10 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
2 
135.200 
46.190 
185 
152 
100% 
MagnificentTailFeathers 
100% 
Magnificent Crest 
100% 
lce(8) 
I 
~:tu~~~~~tat 
Cleigne (Stey!rff Gr!~::aze - Chapter 151 
Quest 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resisl!lnt to Instant Dr:ath, Alterna. and Poison 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! ,! ! I~ ! 
I 
NOTES 
Capable of inflicting Compromised and Poison stutuses. Break effects: Vitality 
-30% (head/30%. body/30%1. 
-·--···-· --·----------··-·-··------ -·-··------------·------------
KILLER BEE 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Size 
10 HP 
24 Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
l
::i~.~y 
Chance 
VAILABfl, Y 
Natural Habitat 
Secondary 
Ap11endage 
Element 
I Time 
75% 
30% 
Quest Hunt: To Sting in Anger (Lestailum. TMroughfarel 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Poinon 
I ' 
J.ooo f 
540 ! 
56 : 
52 ! 
ltoms J 
lnsectStingor I 
Anytime ! 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! ,! ,! ~ ~ , 
I''"' -"""" ~'"'"'"' ., .... , '''-·""""""" ' 
-----·------------------·-·--·------------_/ 
AILARILITI 
Natural Habitat 
Quest -
ROYALi SK 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Size 
62 HP 
1.152 Strength 
3 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
2 
60,200 
20,260 
140 
111 : 
ltems i 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Chance 
85% 
Gorgeous Plumage , 
50% 
I Time 
Cleigne(Glacia1Grollomaze-Chapter15) 
Lighlning(5l i 
Anytime ' 
I 
STATUS AILMENTS Highly resrstam to Instant Death, immune to Alterna. resistant 
to Poison 
I• a • m II D II ~ * {I 
-<>- I 
100·• 
100% 
12lll\ 
100% 
10lll\ 
120% 
100% 
120% 
100% 
5oi. 
50·• I 
I 
NOTES 
Capable ol inflicting Mollified and Poison status. Break effects: Vilahty -30% 
!':':_ 
(body/30%. ta1V30%). 
: 
----·-----·-·-----------------------------------·-·-----·---------_/ 
Natural Habitat 
COCKATRICE 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
~~i~a~y 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Time 
Sizo 
35 
HP 
419 Strength 
10 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
100% 
100% 
Cockatrice Crest ' 
50% 
lce\41 · 
Quest 
Hunt·TheRoguesofRydielleley(CoernixStation-AlstorJ 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death. Alterna. and Poison 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! ,!. ! I~ : 
. 
I 
I 
NOTES 
Capable of inflicting Compromised and Poison statuses. Break effects: Vitality 
-30% (head/30%. body/30%). 
_______________________________________ / 
lJ 
Natural Habitat 
KINGATRICE 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
~~i:a~y 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Sizo 
70 HP 
1,914 Strength 
10 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
2: 
204.500 ' 
39,870 i 
z49 ; 
207
1 
Items 
100% 
fineTa1IFealhers 
100% 
fine Crest ! 
50% 
Ice (51 ' 
04:00 to20:29 : 
Quest 
Hunt· Breeding Season· Rooster Extermination IMeldacio Hunter HQJ 
I 
STATUS AILMENTS Highly resistant to Instant Death. immune to Allerna. resistant 
to Poison I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1! ! I~ : 
! 
I 
rJOTES 
Capable of inflicli_ng Compromised and Poison s\atuses. Break effects: Vi\ality 
-30% (head/30%. body/30%1. 
-------------------------------------·--·--·-·--·--· 
VAIL BIUTY 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
:~i:a~y 
Secondary 
Appendauo 
Element 
I Tirne 
Size 
1 ' 
22 
HP 
22.000 
77 Strength 
1,960 ; 
1.5 Vitality 
ilO i 
Yes Spirit 
101 i 
Chance 
Items ! 
75% 
EnormousStinge; ! 
30% 
lightning (2) ! 
Anytime i 
Quest Hunt:ToStrnginAngerllestallurn. Thoroughfare) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death and Poison 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1! 1! ~ : 
1 
r~· .... .,.,, .. ~~~ .. ·-·'"· .. ., .. 
,,., .. ,,.°' 
----------·--------------·---
____ / 
Natural Habitat 
Size 
62 
HP 
1.152 Strength 
3 Vitality 
171.000 
30.490 
238 
Yes Spirit 
199 
Chance 
Items 
85% 
Beautiful Plumage 
50% 
lightning(5) 
04:00to20:29 
Quest 
Hunt: Breeding Season: Hen Extermination (Meldacio Hunter HQ) 
I 
~T~~~:n AILMENTS Highly resistant to Instant Death. immune to Alterna. resistant 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! ,!% 1! :. : 
I 
NOTES 
Capable of i_nflrcting Mollified and Poison status. Break effects: Vitality -30% 
lbody/30%,larV30%J 
1 
-----------·---------------·-· ---·--------------------·-------------·----·-·-·-·-
... J 
KINGATRICE 
~r • 
Size 
Level 
70 HP 
98,200 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
31,830 
1,776 Strength 
10 Vitality 
175 
146 
Items 
fine Tail Feathers 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
100% 
100% 
50% 
MagnificentCrest '/ 
lce(SJ , 
Natural Habitat 
Cleigne (Glacial Grotto maze - Chapter 151 
Anytime I 
Quest -
I 
I 
STATUS AILMENTS Highly resistant lo lns.tant Death. immune to Alterna. resistant 
I 
toPOISOn 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1! ! I~ : I 
I 
NOTES 
Capable of inflicting Compromised and Poison statuses. Break effects: Vitality 
-30%(head/30%.body/30%J. 
) 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
Love\ "" t< 
10 ~i;e 
1 30~ I 
EXP 
24 
Strength 
'470 I 
Libra 
1.5 Vitality 
47 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
43 
I 
:~:asry 
Ch•;;~ 
Insect s::~:·_r· : 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Elemont 
30% 
lighlning(2J I 
Time 
Anytime ! 
Natural Habitat 
Ouscae (Mencemoorl; Cleigne (south of Lestallum. fort Vaullerey 
region.Maidenwater,Wenna!hRiverhead.OynneldaleJ 
Quest 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant lo Poison 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! ,!. 1! ~ :.: 
I=·. 
°"'' m •••• •~o '"'~ ••• •••• '"" · "' ,.,._, 
i IL 
r 
Natural Habitat 
KILLER QUEEN 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
:~i:a~y 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Elemont 
Timo 
Si2e 
38 
HP 
202 Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chunce 
75% 
50% 
35.00~ I 
6.180 ! 
135 
121 : 
ltems 1 
Deadly Stinger I 
- 1 
l.ightningl3; 1 
Anytime \ 
I 
Quest 
Hunt: Disquieted Queens (l estallum. Market! 
II 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death. Alterna. and Poison 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! ,! ,! ~ : I 
["_ 
"""''"'~··_··~~:~-·~···'"·:·::·~ J 

Size 
7.80~ I 
28 HP 
133 Strength 
2,040 
1.5 Vitality 
90 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Yes 
Chance 
75% 
l
:~i::.y 
Element 
50% 
Spirit 
81 
Items 
Barbed Scythe 
Lightningl3) 
AV 
LABt 'rV 
I Time 
Natural Habitat 
CleignelVesperpooll 
Anytime I 
Quest 
I STATUS AILMENTS -
I 
I 
I 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1! 1! ~ :. i 
I """ "·". ·~, .. '"···· .. ~ .................... '""""' 
-------------··-·----·-·--···----·-·····----·-··-·····--··-·-·-··---··-·-·-·-···--·····-----
KILLER WASP 
Size 
Level 
76 
HP 
EXP 
909 Strength 
Libra 
1.5 Vitality 
Parry 
Yes 
Spirit 
Secondary 
Appendage 
2 1 
33,600 
29,290 ' 
132 
115 
Items I 
Sharp Scythe ! 
I 
:~i:a~y 
Cha~~ 
Element 
5()1b 
Lightningl3) 
AVAi .A81LITY 
I Time 
Anytime 
Natural Habitat 
leide IBalouve Mines maze - Chapte1 15); Cleigne iSteylitt G10ve 
maze-Chapter15J 
Quest 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1~% 1! ~ : : 
I'"" -· .... ,,,. "'"'" ~-.. , .. " 
.. , 
,.~ ...... ,.,,,.., 
SKARNBULETIE 
Size 
Level 
38 
HP 
41,200 ' 
EXP 
288 Strength 
8,170 
Libra 
1.5 Vitality 
149 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
125 
I"""" 
Chance 
Items 
Primary 
100% 
ToughShell : 
Secondary 
Appendage 
75% 
Spiked Armor 
Element 
50% 
firel4J 
Bii -
Time 
Natural Habitat 
O.uost 
Hunt: Hammer the Cannibals ICauthess Rest A1eaJ 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1! 1! 1~ :: 
I 
NOTES .Body pail modifiers: -50%. '.damage from weapons until b10ken (body). Break 
effects:V1tality-15%1bodyl5()1bJ 
ROGUE BEHEMOTH 
Lovel 
EXP 
Size 
3 
35 HP 
69,800 
1,153 Strength 
5,990 
20 Vitality 
191 
Yes Spirit 
162 
Chance 
Items 
100% 
Behemoth Round 
100% 
Behemoth Horn 
100% 
firei33J 
Anytime 
I STATUS AILMENTS Highly resistant to Instant Death, 1esis1<1nt lo Altema and Stop 
188% 
121% 
108\ 
108% 
108% 
121% 
lat% 
58% 
118% 
lM 
5"" 
I 
NOTES 
Bodv pa1t modifiers 50% damage frnm weapons unn' broken !head) Break 
ettects Strength 15% lhead/15%) Vitahty 60% lbody/5%. legs/8% ta1Vl0%J 
' 
I 
-- --
- ----- -------- -
----- -- - ------
____ ) 
KILLER WASP 
Size 
Level 
33 
HP 
64,700 
EXP 
151 
Strength 
5,530 
Libra 
1.5 Vitality 
180 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
I"""" 
Chance 
Primary 
75% 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
50% 
Time 
1
Naturai~ab1tat 
0.uost 
Hunts Threat from the Thicket (Meldac.o Hunter HO), Deadly Extermmatron 
(VermasMart Ravatogh) 
I STATUS AILMENTS • 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1! 100% ~ : 
I~':' """''''~''" "~'"'w::~:=••·'~ '~'~' 
BULETIE 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
:~i~~as~ 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Size 
14 
HP 
46 Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
Yes 
Spirit 
Chance 
100% 
75% 
50% 
Ouscae (Disc of Cauthess. Mencemoor. south region} 
I STATUS AILMENTS 
I! ! ! ! 10~ ~ ! s! 1! ,~ : 
I 
NOTES 
Body pan moaniers: -50%. damage from weapons until broken (body). Break 
ettects: Vitality -15% lbody/50%1 
DEAD EYE 
Size 
Level 
15 HP 
48,200 
EXP 
820 Strength 
2.200 
Libra 
20 Vitality 
157 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
136 
r-· 
Chance 
Primary 
100% 
Secondary 
Appendage 
100% 
Element 
100% 
Timo 
O.uest 
Hunt: A Behemorh Undertaking IWiz Chocobo Post} 
I STATUS AILMENTS Highly 1esistant lo Instant Death. resistant to Altema and Stop 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 3! ! ~ : 
I 
NOTES 
Body part modifiers: -50% damage from weapons until broken !head}. Brnak 
ettects: Strength -30% lhead/15%1; Vitalily -20% lbody/5%, legs/8%. taiV10%1. 
-----· --
---------·-----····-·---·· ----·--···--· ·--·-···---·--·---·-------·-·-·-----
SOLDIER WASP 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
:~i:a~y 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Natural Habrtat 
Cleigne IMalmalam Thicket) 
37 
209 
1.5 
Yes 
Chance 
75% 
50% 
I
AVA•LABILITY 
I Time 
O.uest Hunt Deadly Exte1mmat10n (Vermas Man - Ra1atoghl 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death and Alterna 
Size 
10.20~ I 
HP 
Strength 
4,080 ! 
Vitality 
99 1 
Spirit 
89 1 
Items I 
Barbed Scythe 
lightningl31 
Anytime 
I! ! ! ! ~ ~ ! 1!~ 1! ~ :. : 
[':--·~~·:~~'"'""' ..... ,,, '"'" ·~= 
! 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Natural Habitat 
14 
46 
1.5 
Yes 
Chance 
100% 
75% 
50% 
O.uest 
Hunt: Hammer the Cannibals !Cauthess Rest Area} 
I STATUS AILMENTS -
Sizo 
HP 
1 1 
19,700 ' 
1.440 1 
Strength 
103 1 
89 ! 
ltoms i 
BuletteCarapBce · 
Vitality 
Spirit 
Shield Spike 
firel4J 
Anytime 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1! 1! ,~ : : 
effects:v.tality-15%(bodyl50%J. 
' 
I 
NOTES 
.Body part modiliers: -50% damage lrom weapons until broken !body). Break 
I 
-----------
Bestiary 
Beasts 
243 

244 
-
__.,. 
~ 
?-
• 
.,-
• 
j •• 7<7i.,....""""""'..,.,.i>< ~·~·"'~ 
.~) 
...... 
"' 
BEASTS 
, 
" 
" 
. ~ . 
Natural Habitat 
BEHEMOTH 
_Tb 
Size 
level 
47 
HP 
EXP 
2,064 Strength 
Libra 
20 Vitality 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
100% 
100% 
100% 
Quest 
Hunt: The Pride of the King {Hammerhead) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Highly resistant to Instant Death. resrstant to Alterna and Stop 
i 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 5! t! t~ ~ I 
I 
NOTES 
Body part modifiers: -50% damage from weapons untrl broken .{head). Break 
j·· .• 
effects: Strength -15% {head/15%1: Vitality -60% {body/5%, legs/8%, tail/10%). 
! 
_ 
..................... _,. ___________ , .. , ____________________ .. ___ ,_ .. ,_ .. ____ ,, __ , __ ) 
l
~:~~~I H~~tat 
Quest 
• 
GRIFFON 
'H u·cs 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Duscae {northof AlstorSloughl 
Size 
53 HP 
3.153 Strength 
30 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
25% 
75% 
!00% 
!00% 
120.700 ' 
20.120 i 
255 
191 
ltems l 
Griffon Feather ; 
Griffon Breast ! 
Gritton Claw ! 
Ice 181 ; 
Anytime i 
I 
t~T~[
0
~S AILMENTS Highly resistant to Instant Death, resistant to Alterna, immune 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1!% : I~ : j 
I'm" ""'' '""" v"''". "" '"'°''""· """ "''"'"""'' 
l
~:tu~I ~~b1tat 
Quest 
Marn Guest PartyofThree 
Size 
32 
HP 
844 Strength 
20 Vitality 
Yes 
Spirit 
3 i 
64.600 ; 
4.840 
184 i 
157 i 
Chance 
Items : 
75% 
TranslucentSkin f 
!00% 
100% 
Scarlet Splinterbon~ t 
lightningl81 ! 
Anytime I 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death, Alterna. and Stop 
I!!!!!!! 1! ! I~ : 
I 
NOTES 
Employs Lrghtnrng elemental attacks capable of rntlrctrng Shocked status 
Break effects Vrtalrty -40% {body/20% wrngs/15% larl/20%) 
..... ______________ .. ----- ------------------------- ----- _____ / 
I 
N:~~~I ~~~at 
Quest 
Marn Guest The Hand of the King 
Size 
38 
HP 
1.203 Strength 
10 Vitality 
Spirit 
3 
35,000 
6.180 
135 
121 
Chance 
Items 
100% 
MalboroEye 
100~ 
lcel81 
Anytime 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death and Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! t! ! 1~ ~ 
I 
NOTES 
Capable of inf.licting Mollified. Compromised. Disenchanted. Cursed. Poison. 
and Confusion statuses 
Size 
4 
42 
HP 
120.900 
!.930 Strength 
13.720 
IMM Vitality 
236 ! 
Yes 
Spirit 
t99 l 
ltems l 
3% 
Megalixir j 
- l 
100% 
Behemoth Horn l 
100% 
lce{48) ! 
Natural Habitat 
Anytime j 
Quest 
Main Quest The Cure for Insomnia 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death and Alterna, resistant to Stop 
I!!!!!~! 1! ! t~: 
I 
I 
I 
I 
NOTES 
Employs Ice elemental attacks capable of rnflrct1ng Frozen staius Body part 
modifiers 50% damage from weapons until broken (head) Break effects Strength 
15% (head/15%), Vitalrty 60% (body/5% legs/8% tarl/10%) 
_______________ .... ________ ............. ----------------------····---- ____ _/ 
GRIFFON 
Size 
level 
30 HP 
79,200 
EXP 
1.052 Strength 
5.260 
Libra 
30 Vitality 
221 
Parry 
Yes 
Spirit 
170 
I 
DROPS 
Chance 
Primary 
15% 
Griffon Feather 
Secondary 
15% 
Griffon Breast 
Appendage 
25% 
GrrtfonClaw 
Element 
100% 
lcel81 
I Time 
Quest 
Sidequest: The Professors Protege - Gritton {Sanial: Hunt: Ruler of the Brave 
Skies(lestallum.Market) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death. Alterna. and Stop 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! t! = 
I~ : 
I'm" """""" '""" '"' '""'""'· ''"" "' '""""'' 
j lft!COATL 
r1I1 ..... """".~·"' · ~=et 
Natural Habitat 
EXP 
Libra 
Size 
3 ' 
38 
HP 
107.400 
1,t23 Strength 
9.790 
20 Vitality 
221 · 
Yes Spirit 
186 
Chance 
Items ; 
100% 
Translucent Skin 
100% 
ScarletSplinrerbone 
50% 
lightning(6J 1 
Anytime 
Quest 
Hunt: Divine Beast of the Unde~vorld JMeldacio Hunter HOI 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death. Alterna. and Stop 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1!, t! I~ 1! 
I 
NOTES 
Employs Lightning-elemental attacks capable of inflicting Shocked status 
Break effects: \litalrty -40% {body/20%. wings/1 5%. tail/20%). 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Size 
38 
HP 
l,203 Strength 
10 Vitality 
Chance 
100% 
t00% 
Spirit 
Quest 
Hunt: No Stopping the Great Stink (lestallum. Thoroughfare) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death. resistant to Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1~% ! too% m 
I 
NOTES 
Capable of inf.lrcting Mollified. Compromised. Disenchanted. Cursed. Poison. 
and Confusion statuses 
-··-·------------------·------·-----------···-·-·--·----·--··-·-··-··--·-····' -
··-· 
Natural Habitat 
BEHEMOTH TYRANT 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Size 
3 I 
62 
HP 
236,800 ' 
3.842 Strength 
40.710 I 
30 Vitality 
266 I 
Yes Spirit 
223 1 
I 
DROPS 
Chance 
Items I 
Primary 
"100% 
Behemoth Tenderloin_ 
Secondary 
Appendage 
100% 
Behemoth Horn I 
Element 
100% 
foe 1161 1 
I Time 
Anytime ! 
I 
! 
Quest 
Hunt: A Most Behemoth Undertaking (\Oliz Chocobo Post) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death and Altema. resistant to Stop 
I!!!!!~! ~ t! I~ :
: 
I 
NOTES 
Body part modifiers: ·50% damage from weapons until broken (head). Break 
' 
effects: Strength -15% {head/t5%J; Vitalrty-60% (bodYi5%, legs/8%, taiV10%). 
I 
----- ....... ___________ .... _, 
_____ ... -... -............. -........ _____ 
j 
GRIFFON 
Size 
3 ! 
Level 
84 
HP 
262,200 1 
EXP 
9,829 Strength 
58.090 I 
Libra 
30 Vitality 
293 I 
Parry 
Yes 
Spirit 
216 1 
Chance 
Items 
1 
100% 
Griifonfeather 
100% 
Colorful Gritton Cla~ ! 
100% 
lcel16) I 
Time 
Anytime l 
Natural Habitat 
Cieigne (Steyliff Grove maze - Chapter 15) 
i 
Quest 
'Ill 
I STATUS AILMENTS Highly resistant to Instant Death. immune to Alterna and Stop 
I 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! t!~ ! I~ : 
I 
r"' ........ , . 
.,,,. '"' '""""· ,.,,,'"' ''"·""'" 
I 
. 
J~:EC I:~=~-
love I 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Time 
'UT," 
Size 
90 
HP 
5.276 Strength 
20 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
3 1 
457,900 1 
9t.070 
299 1 
246 : 
Items I 
Chance 
100% 
100% 
50% 
Trans:ucent Skin l 
Rotten s.plinterbon~ I 
lrghtning(61 i 
I 
Anytime
~ 
Natural Habitat 
Cleigne {Steylitt Grove maze - Chapter 15) 
I 
Ou est 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death. Alterna. and Stop 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1:% 1! I~ t: 
I 
NOTES 
Employs Lightning-elemental att.acks capable ot inflicting Shocked status 
Break effects: Vrtality -40% (body/20%. wrngs/15%. tarl/20%). 
·------------- ---·------ -- --
MAL BO RO 
l 
R1tsUTE~ 
Size 
level 
76 
HP 
EXP 
5,175 Strength 
Libra 
10 Vitality 
Parry 
S11irit 
Chance 
!00% 
100% 
Time 
Duscae (Costlemark Tower maze - Chapter t 51 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death. resistant to Alterna 
108.70~ I 
41.100 ' 
176 
153 
Items \ 
MalboroEve 
lcel12; 1 
Anytime I 
I 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1!% ! t~ 
: 
I 
NOTES 
Capable of infl.icting Mollified. Compromised. Disenchanted. Cursed. Poison. 
and Confusion statuses 

MALBODOOM 
J''. 
Size 
3 I 
Level 
85 
HP 
136.800 I 
EXP 
6,186 Strength 
51.440 I 
~:;r: 
10 ~~~::ty 
:~~ I 
I 
~~i~~a~y 
Ch:;~ 
Malbor
1
;eE7: 1
1 
Secondary 
Appendage 
-
Element 
100% 
lce\121 
ILABlllTY 
I Time 
Anytime I 
Natural Habitat 
leide iCrestholm Channels maze - Chapter 15); Duscae (Daurell 
Cavernsmaze-Chapter15);Cleigne (outsidePitmssRuinsJ 
I 
Quest 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death and Alterna 
I! ! ! ~ ! ~ ! 1!. ! 
(f -0- ' 
1ooi;, 
so% 
I 
NOTES 
Capable of infl_icting Mollified, Compromised, Disenchanted. Cursed. Poison. 
and Confusion statuses 
----·-------- ----·--·-·-·-----------··-·--·-·-··-----·-·-···----··-··-·-·--·----------·-·-···-
MALBORO SPROUT 
"I 
Size 
1 
Level 
38 
HP 
35.000 
EXP 
61 
Strength 
6,180 
Libra 
1.5 Vitality 
135 
Parry 
Spirit 
121 
r 
.. 
Chance 
Items 
Primary 
5% 
MalboroVine 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
30% 
l1ghtning(2) 
VAILABIUTY 
Time 
20:30to03:59 i 
Natural Habitat 
Quest 
Hunt: No Stopping the Great Stink (lestallum. Thoroughfare) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death and Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ~ ~ ! ,! t! ~ : 
I'"'" ·-------
Eo 
Size 
Level 
47 
HP 
141,200 
EXP 
2.064 Strength 
21.020 
Libra 
20 Vitality 
276 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
100% 
Monster Claw 
75% 
Monster Jaw 
100% 
fire(10) 
I II.ABILITY 
Anytime 
Natural Habitat 
Quest 
Hunt: Malmalam Mirage !Old lestallum) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Highly resistant to Instant Death. resistant to Altema and Stop 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 5! 1= I~ : 
I 
NOTES Body pa1t modifiers: -50% damage from weapons until b1oken !head). Break 
- effects: Strength -15% (head/20%); Vitality -40% (body/5%, taiV8%. legs/10%). 
AVAtlABl ITY 
Natural Habitat 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
4,021 
IMM 
Yes 
Chance 
25% 
75% 
25% 
100% 
Uuest 
Hunt: fiendolthe fallgrove (CauthessRestArea) 
4 : 
238.200 ! 
Strength 
47.560 
Vitality 
306 
Spirit 
228 
Items 
JabberwockSirloin ! 
Hardened Hide 
Dragon Horn 
fire (8) 
Anytime 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death and Alterna. resistant to Stop 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 5! 1! 1~ I:: 
I 
NOTES 
Capable of inflicting Stone status. Break effects: Vitalrty -60% (head/15%, 
body/8%,tail/10%, legs/10%). 
MAL BO DOOM 
Size 
Level 
65 
HP 
244,300 
EXP 
6,186 Strength 
48,160 
Libra 
10 Vitality 
265 
Parry 
Spirit 
231 
Chance 
Primary 
!""" 
100% 
MalboroTentacle 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
100% 
lcel121 
AVAILABILITY 
Natural Habitat 
I Time 
Quest Sidequest:Oreadfullegend (Randolph) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death. Alterna. and Poison 
I! ~ ! ! ! ~ ! 5~ 1! I~ : 
I 
NOTES 
Capable of inf_licting Mollified. Compromised. Disenchanted. Cursed. Po:son. 
and Confusion statuses 
------------·-·-·-·-- --- --- -·-··-·---------·--·---------·---·---·-------------------·--
MALBORO BRAT 
Size 
Level 
48 HP 
146.300 
EXP 
93 Strength 
21.500 
Libra 
1.5 Vitality 
240 
Parry 
Spirit 
213 
r· 
Chance 
Primary 
5% 
MalboroVine 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
30% 
lightning(2) 
TY 
Time 
Natural Habitat 
Quest 
Sidequest: Oreadful legend(Randolph) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death. resistant to Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1! 1! ~ : 
r_
ES--
Size 
Level 
58 
HP 
EXP 
3,090 Strength 
Libra 
IMM Vitality 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
50% 
50% 
25% 
100% 
lABt 
Natural Habitat 
Duscae\CostlemarkTowerJ 
Ou est 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death and Alterna. resistant to Stop 
I! ! ! ! ~ ~ ! 5! 1! 1~ 1! 
I 
NOTES 
Capable of inflicting.Stone status. Break effects: Vitalily -60% (head/15%. 
body/8%, tail/10%.legs/10%) 
--- -··-·- --·-·- --·---·-·-----
MALBORO SPROUT 
Natural Habrtat 
/\TT 
?IT 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
I 
AVAii.ABiLiTY 
Quest 
Main Quest The Hand of the King 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Alterna 
38 
61 
1.5 
Chance 
5% 
30% 
~ 
150'• 
I!!!!!~! 
r" 
Size 
HP 
Strength 
Vitality 
Spirit 
• 
110% 
10,600 
4.370 
101 
90 
Items 
MalboroVine 
Lightnrng(2) 
Anytime 
(f 
-(>-
50'! 
50% 
--------------·-··-------------·--·-·---·--·-·-·---·-·--·-····--·· .. -··-·-·--.. -·_,. ___ _ 
AnRl0>1 Tt.~ 
Size 
Level 
38 
HP 
75.800 
EXP 
1.323 Strength 
8.160 
Libra 
20 Vitality 
222 
Yes Spirit 
168 
Chance 
Items 
100% 
Monster Claw 
75% 
Monster.Jaw 
100% 
fire(8) 
Bil I 
Anytime 
Natural Habitat 
Quest 
Sidequest:MalmalamThicket 
I STATUS AILMENTS Highly resistant to Instant Death. resistant to Alterna and Stop 
I! ! ! ! ! ! ! 
5~ 1! I~ : 
I 
NOTES 
Body part modifiers; -50% d~mage from weapons un_til broken (head)_. Break 
effects: Strength-15% (head/20%); Vrrality-40% (body/5%. tail/8%. legs/10%) 
0 Bestiary 
'')• 
l 
@ Beasts 
245 

246 
I 
Natural ~abitat 
Quest 
-
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Size 
94 
HP 
9,770 Strength 
IMM Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
I 
DROPS 
Chance 
Primary 
100% 
Secondary 
Appendage 
100% 
Element 
100% 
I Time 
leide (Grestholm Channels maze - Chapter 15) 
4 
483,700 
105.320 
342 
252 
Items 
Hardened Hide 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death and Alterna. resistant to Stop 
I! ~ ! ~ ! ~ ! ,! ! ,~ : 
I 
NOlES 
Capable of inflicting Stone status. Break effects: Vitality -60% (head/15%, 
body/8%. taiV10%, legs/10%J. 
REDLEGS 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
:~i:asry 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Size 
2 
37 
HP 
33.700 
476 Strength 
5.760 
1.5 Vitality 
132 
Yes Spirit 
118 
Chance 
50% 
Centipede feet 
50% 
Centipede feet 
100% 
Centipede Teeth 
50% 
Fire(4) 
l
~.~~ral ~~bitat 
Time 
Quest 
Hunt Reclarmrng Schrer Herghts (Taelpar Rest Area) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death. Alterna. and Poison 
I! ~ ~ ! ! ~ ! s! ,! ,~ : 
I 
NOHS 
Capable of inflicting Poison status. Break effects: Strength -t 5% (head/25%}; 
Vitahty-15%(body/35%). 
Natural Habitat 
GROOTSLANG 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
:~i~a
8
rv 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Time 
Size 
68 HP 
2g3.700 
2.385 Strength 
53.150 
20 V"rtality 
22g 
Yes Spirit 
275 
Chance 
50% 
MidgardsormrShank 
50% 
GrealsnakeScale 
25% 
GreatsnakeCrest 
100% 
Fire(8) 
Quest 
Hunt: An Omen Crawls Upon the Ground (lestallum. lhoroughlare} 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death and Alterna. resistant lO S10p 
I! ! ! ! 100% ~ ! s! ,! ,~ ~ 
I 
NOTES 
Capable of inflicting Poison status. Break effects: Vitality -40% thead/10%. 
upper and lower body/20%. tarVI 5%}. 
----------------
--------------------·-··--··-·--·----·-------
JORMUNGAND 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Size 
50 HP 
1.421 
Strength 
IMM Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
I 
:~i~~asry 
100% 
01ooping \IVhiskers ' 
_ , 
Secondary 
_ 
Appendage 
Element 
AVAILA81LlfY 
Time 
100% 
Firel8J i 
Anytime , 
Natural Habitat 
leide (Cresthohn Channels} 
Uuest -
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death and Altema. resistant to Stop 
111% 
1119% 
100\ 
110ll 
11111% 
!Diil 
1111'!. 
1MM 
1211% 
1!11% 
111'11 
I 
NOTES 
E~ploys Fire-elemental attacks capable of inmcting B~rnt stat.us. Break 
effects: Vitality -20% (head/10%. upper and lower body/20%, ta: Vi 5%) 
--·- ·- ·---·----·--·--·---·-·-·-·-·- -·-·····--·-----·····---··-·-
HUNDLEGS 
lb 
t.) 
Size 
level 
20 HP 
EXP 
148 Strength 
Libra 
1.5 Vitality 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
I 
:~i::.Y 
Cha5n;~ 
~li-~!I Secondary 
50% 
Appendage 
100% 
Element 
50% 
A\A.LA6 I 
Timo 
Natural Habitat 
Duscae (south region. Disc of Cmrthess) 
Quest -
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Poison 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1! 1! : ! : 
I 
NOTES 
Capable of inflicting Poison status. Break effects: Strength · 15% (head/25%}: I 
Vitahty-15% (body/35%}. 
• 
·----·-----------------·------· ----.. ·---·-·-·-- ----------.. ·--·-·-·-·-··--./ 
Natural Habitat 
Uuest 
MIDGARDSORMR 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Cleigne (Callatein'sPlunge) 
Size 
54 
HP 
1,404 Strength 
20 Vitality 
146,goo 
22.770 . 
1g2 
Yes Spirit 
231 i 
Chance 
Items l 
50% 
MidgardsormrShank ! 
50% 
GreatsnakeScale . 
25% 
GreatsnakeCrest 
50% 
Firet6} 
Anytime : 
I STATUS AILMENTS Highly resistant to Instant Death. resistant to Alterna and Stop 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! s! ,! 1~ ! . 
I 
NOTES 
Capable of inflicting Poisons_ tatus. Break effects: Vitality -40% (head/ID%. 
upper and lower body/20%. taiV15%} 
~1U IL 
Natural Habitat 
Quest 
HVITRORMR 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
:~i~~a
5
rv 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Size 
78 HP 
3,368 Strength 
20 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
3 ' 
268.200 
54,140 
215 ; 
255 ; 
Chance 
Items 
100% 
GrealsnakeSca!e 
I 00% 
Greatsnake Crest 
100% 
Fire(8) : 
Time 
Anytime ' 
leide (Crestholm Channels maze - Chapter 15} 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death and Alterna. resistant to Stop 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! ! 1! 
I~ : 
I 
tlOTES 
Capable of inflicting Poison status. Break effects: Vitality -40% (head/10%, 
upperandlowerbody/20%. tarV15%}. 
' 
-----·---------------
----·-·-·--···--· ----·-·----------·--·----·-
JORMUNGAND 
A 
t.J,Bll "Y 
Natural Habitat 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
:~~~:ry 
Secondary 
Appendage 
--
Element 
I Time 
Quest 
Hunt: Serpent of the Abyss (Hammerhead) 
Size 
58 
HP 
1,g/8 Strength 
IMM Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
100% 
100% 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death and Alterna. resistant to Stop 
12f!. 
11111'\ 
!Bf.I 
121!i 
111% 
11111'\ 
llllr.i 
!MM 
1W\ 
Jiii', 
111111 
I 
NOilS Employs Fire-elemental attacks capable of inflicting Burnt stat. us. Break 
effects: Vitahty-20% ihead/10%. upper ar.d lower body/20%, taiV15%} 
HUNDLEGS 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Size 
20 
HP 
148 Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
2j 
20,800 ' 
1.700 1 
104 1 
g4 1 
l
:~i~~asry 
'Wlillll~~ Secondary 
50% 
50% 
100% 
50% 
Items I 
Centipede Legs I 
Centipede legs : 
AVAii 
Natural Habitat 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Cen_tiped.eJaw ! 
Lrghtnrng(4l i 
Anytime ! 
Ouest 
Hunt: Reclaiming Schier Heights (TaelparRestArea) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Poison 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1!% 
I~ : : i 
I 
NOT_ES 
Capable of inflicting Poison status. Break effects: Strength -15% (head/25%}: i 
Vitahty-15%(body/35%). 
I 
rl" 
Natural Habitat 
) 
MIDGARDSORMR 
Size 
54 
HP 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
1.404 Strength 
20 Vitality 
205.700 
30.410 
214 
258 
Yes Spirit 
I 
OROPS 
Chance 
Primary 
50% 
Secondary 
50% 
Appendage 
25% 
Element 
50% 
I Time 
Items 1 
MidgardsormrShank 1 
~«::::~:~: ~:::~ I 
Fire(6) 
Anytime 
Quest 
Hunt: Serpent of Risorath Basin (Meldacio Hunter HO} 
I STATUS AILMENTS Highly resistant to Instant Death, resistant to Alterna and Stop 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! s! ,! ,~ : 
I 
NOTES 
Capable of rnflictrng Parson status Break effects Vrtahty 40% (head/10% 
upper and lower body/20% tarV15%) 
---- ------
- _____ __/ 
L/I 
Natural Habitat 
HVITRORMR 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
<..ttS 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Size 
78 
HP 
3.30g Strength 
20 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
3 ! 
374.200 I 
72.250 
240 
285 
Items 
100% 
GreatsnakeScale 
100% 
Greatsnake Crest t 
100% 
Fire 181 
Anyt:me 
Quest 
Hunt: People-Eating Snake Has Got to Go (Meldacio Hunter HO) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death and Allerna. resistant to Stop 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! s! 1! 1~ ! . 
I 
NOTES 
Capable of inflicting Poison status_ Break effects: Vitality -40% (head/10%. 
upper and lower body/20%. tarV15%). 
----------------
------------ ----------·-·-----·--·--·--
iv ILAB 
rv 
JORMUNGAND 
Size 
Level 
g5 HP 
EXP 
5,856 Strength 
Libra 
IMM Vitality 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
_ 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
100% 
100% 
Natural Habitat 
Ouscae (Costlernark Tower nme - Chapter 15) 
Uuest -
603,600 ! 
105.280 . 
24g 
311 
Items 
Oi\-ineWhiskers 
lce(lO) i 
Anytime 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death and Altema, resistant to Stop 
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ M 
~ ~ ~ ~ ~
· 
I 
NOTES 
Employs Fire-elemental attacks capable of inlirctrng Burnt stat_ us. Break 
effects: l'italrty-20% {head/10%, upper and lower body/20'\,. larV15%} 
-·----·-·--------
----·-----·---·-.. ··- .. ··--·-·--·-·--·-
--·- - __ .. ./ 

ILABILJ'!Y 
Natural Habitat 
Quest 
Time 
Size 
99 
HP 
6.424 Strength 
IMM Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
100% 
100% 
Duscae !Costlemark Tower maze - Chapter 15) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death and Alterna. resistant to Stop 
Anytime 
I!!!~!~! 1! ,! I~ 1! 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Size 
40 
HP 
651 
Strength 
10 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
tL•TY 
Natural Habitat 
Quest 
Hunt: Herald from the Depths !Old lestallum) 
75% 
100% 
50% 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death and Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 5! ,! 
Anytime · 
100% 
5D% 
I 
NOTES Employs fire-elemental attacks capable of inflicting Burnt and Dverhea.ted 
~:ses Br:::t'.=~~~0% (hea~1 0%, upper and lower oody/20%. ta1V15%) I 
NOTES 
Body part modifiers 60% damage from weapons until broken (all parts) Break 
elfects St,ength 15% (claw/20%). Vitality 30% (upper and lower body/20%1 
_) 
ROGUE KARLABOS 
STONESHEARS 
Size 
3 
~~~:I 
5~~ ~~=l~~th 
7~:m t~ 
~~~:I 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
194 l 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Chance 
Items : 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
100% 
Karlabos Carapace , 
Primary 
Secondary 
j 
Secondary 
Appendage 
100% 
Prawn Antennae i 
Appendage 
Element 
50% 
frrel61 : 
Element 
I Time 
Anytime 
'TY 
I Time 
Natural Habitat 
Natural Habitat 
leidelGaldinOuayregionl 
Quest 
Sidequest: The PerlectCup IGladiol 
Quest 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 5! t! 
I~ ~ 
I 
NOTES 
Body part modifiers: -60% damage from weapons until broken (all pa.rtsl. Break ' 
effects: Strength -15% (claw/20%1; Vitality -30% (upper and lower body/20%) 
--------------------------------- ------------- ________________________________________ _/ 
Size 
4 HP 
11 
Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
25% 
50% 
SPARKSHEARS 
SHIELDSHEARS 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Size 
17 
HP 
55 Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Size 
18 HP 
68 Strength 
3 Vitality 
Parry 
Yes 
Spirit 
Anytime 
87 
78 
75% 
1 
20.400 
1.620 
103 
93 
Items 
Crab Carapace 
Giant Crab Pincers 
Secondary 
Appendage 
l
~~:a~y 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Time 
50% 
fire(3) 
Anytime 
I 
:~i:asry 
Cha;~ 
Element 
50% 
fire 131 
Quest 
Hunt: The Gourmands of Vannath IGaldin Quay) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 5! ,! t~ :: 
['=·~·"-"'-" ·~··"' '"'" '" '~'"~ 
MIGHTYSHEARS 
VAILABtLITY 
Natural Habitat 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
:~i:asry 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Time 
Quest 
Hunt: Shear force IOldlestalluml 
Size 
34 
HP 
211 
Strength 
3 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
2 1 
32.700 
5.400 . 
131 118 
Items 
100% 
Giant Crab Pincers 
50% 
firel31 : 
Anytime 
I Time 
Any1;me ! 
Natural Habitat 
Cleigne (fort Vaullerey region. Maidenwater. Cape Caem region) 
Quest 
I STATUS AILMENTS -
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 5! t!· 
t~ :: 
I..... "'"" .. , ....... """" ..... ., .. , ..... , ... '"""'""' 
•TY 
Natural Habitat 
Quest 
4 
SHIELDSHEARS 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Size 
70 HP 
1.242 Strength 
3 Vitality 
Yes 
Spirit 
Chance 
50% 
50% 
I Time 
Duscae(Oaure!ICavernsmaze - Chapter 151 
74,400 
29.830 
143 
126 ; 
Items 
Strong Pincers 
fire(31 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death and Altema 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 5! ,! I~ :: i I! ! ! ! ! ! ! 5!. 1! 
1~ :: ,-
1'"'" ··'"" .,.~ ~ , ........... ~"' w ••• '" ,, • .,,.., I I'""' ····~ .,,.,. ,.,. ............. ,"'. ,,,,., '" "''""" 
-------------------------------------- ------------------- ---------
- ---- ·------------------------------------ -- -
,) 
KARLABOS 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
:~i~~a~y 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Cleigne (leiritySeaside) 
Size 
40 
HP 
651 
Strength 
10 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
75% 
100% 
50% 
89,000 1 
B.840 
166 
202 
Items ; 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death and Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 5! 1! ,~ :: ! 
I 
NOTES 
Body part modifiers: -60% damage from weapons until broken {all parts). Break , 
effects: Strength -15% (claw/20%1; Vitality -30% (upper and lower body/20%1. 
' 
RUBYSHEARS 
ry 
Natural Habitat 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Quest 
Hunt: Peace to the Beach (Galdin Quay) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death 
Size 
1 
11 
HP 
16.100 
30 Strength 
1,060 
1.5 Vitality 
84 
Yes Spirit 
Bl 
Chance 
Items 
50% 
Crab Carapace 
50% 
firel3J 
Any1ime 
I!!!!!~! 5! 
\1Di\ 
\DD% 
5D ~\ 
• cA IL 
Natural Habitat 
SHIELDSHEARS 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Size 
18 HP 
68 Strength 
20.800 
1,700 
3 Vitality 
104 
Yes Spirit 
94 
Chance 
50% 
Giant Crab Pincers 
50% 
fire(31 
Quest Hunt: Cranky Crustaceans (longwythe Rest Area) 
I STATUS AILMENTS -
I! ! ! ~ ! ~ ! 5! ,! t~ :. 
I~"' .. ,.,""ITT'"'""".,.,. .... ""'" '"'"'. '" ,._ 
Bestiary 
Beasts 
247 

248 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Size 
HP 
Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
25% 
50% 
AVAILABIL "'Y 
Natural Habitat 
Leide (Hammerhead region); Cleigne(Ravatoghregion) 
O.uest 
I STATUS AILMENTS 
lce(3J 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1!1 ! 1~ : 
1 
·~.. ,,,,, ................. ~ ,, .... ,, ... ,,,, ""···"" 
I 
~~~~~~~~:llat 
Quest 
SAPHYRTAIL 
Love I 
EXP 
Size 
25 
HP 
93 Strength 
Libra 
1.5 Vitality 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Cleigne (The Rock of Ravatogh) 
Chance 
30% 
50% 
I STATUS AILMENTS . 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1!, ! 
1 
3,400 
1-· ""'"" '""" '"' "'"" ....... '""" '""". '" ,._ 
AVAILABIUTY 
Natural Habitat 
Quest 
TREANT 
Level 
EXP 
Lihra 
Parry 
l
~~i~~.~ 
Socondary 
Appendago 
Eloment 
I Time 
Cleigno(TheMyrlwood) 
Size 
38 
HP 
209 Strength 
10 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
80% 
100% 
50% 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death and Alterna 
TreantTrunk 
Lightnmgl5J 
I! ! ! ! ! ! ! 1~% 1! ~ : 
Vitality -45% (hoad/15%, body/15%, tarl/15%). 
I 
NOTES 
Capable of inflicting Mollified.and Confusion s1atuses. Break effects: 
AVAILASIUTY 
Natural Habitat 
Time 
Size 
38 
HP 
361 Strength 
15 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
75% 
100% 
Quest Hunt: Verinas Marl Under Threat (Verinas Mart· Ravatogh) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Highly resistant to Instant Death, resistant to Alterna 
36.400 
5,820 
139 
lightningl8J 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1!% 1! :. : 
rm ... """ "'""'. """'"'" 
50% 
lcel41 
l
~a~u~~~L!~tat 
Leide (north region~me 
Quest · 
Anytime 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death and Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1!. ! 1~ :. 
I~.. , 
............. ·~ .. ···~ ................. ,,. ,._ 
SAPHYRTAIL 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Size 
25 
HP 
93 
Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
Yes 
Spirit 
1: 
18.700 
2,220 
98 
89 
Chance 
Items 
30% 
Scorpion Stinger 
30% 
lce(2) 
Anytime 
Quest Hunt: Sting in the Tari (longwythe Rest Areal 
I STATUS AILMENTS . 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1! ! 1~ : · 
["" ""'"' .... '"" °"'" """ ••. '""" '""". "' '"""",, 
TREANT 
Size 
Level 
46 
HP 
EXP 
312 Strength 
Libra 
10 Vitality 
Parry 
l
:~i~~a~y 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Time 
Chance 
100% 
100% 
50% 
Quest Hunt: felling the Mad Old Trees IMeldacio Hunter HOJ 
Spirit 
91,400 . 
13,220 
243 
183
1 
Items I 
Treant Branch j 
· 1 
TreantTrunk 
Lightning(5) 
20:30to03:59 i 
I STATUS AILMENTS Highly resistant to Instant Death, resrstant to Al1erna 
I! ! ! ! ! ! ! 1~~ 1!. ~ : 
I 
NOT.ES 
Capable of inflicting Mollified and Confusion statuses. Break effects· 
Vrtahty -45% (head/15%, body/15%, tail/15%). 
~--
---
AVAlLABIUr 
Time 
Size 
86 
HP 
2,928 Strnngth 
1.5 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
100% 
100% 
Natural Habitat 
Cleigne (Steylitt Grove maze· Chapter 151 
Quest 
301,900 
62.220 
265 
217 
lterns
1 
Dragon Claw : 
·1 
i 
lightning(18J i 
Anytime 
I STATUS AILMENTS Highly resistant to Instant Death, resislant to Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1!. 1! ~ :. 
[" ""'''"" """' """"'~' 
i 
_) 
Size 
47 HP 
325 Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
1 
50,900 
13,580 
152 
135 
75% 
Big Scorpion Stinger 
50% 
lcel41 
Quest 
Hunt Pointiest Pins in the Volcano (Verinas Mart - Ravatogh) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death and Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1! ! 1~ : 
r 
.. ,,, ............................ , 
..... ,, . 
.,.,,,., 
MANDRAKE 
Level 
32 
HP 
EXP 
165 Strength 
Libra 
1.5 Vitality 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
1 
8.700 
1.660 
108 
82 
Primary 
Secondary I 
DROPS 
25% 
Mandrake Flower 
VAILABll ll 
Natural Habitat 
Quest -
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
50% 
Cleigne (The Myrlwood, Malmalam Thicket) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Alterna 
Lightningl31 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1!. 1! ~ :. 
I 
NOTES 
Capable of inflicung Mollified and Confusion statuses. Break ettecls 
Vitality-15%1body/60%). 
Natural Habitat 
Quest 
· 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Cleigne (The RockofRavatoghJ 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Alterna 
Size 
38 
HP 
361 
Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
75% 
100% 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1!% 1! 
[" ·~:· .. ·:==~ -
21 
11,400 1 
4.120 ' 
104 i 
ss J 
Items ! 
WyvemWing I 
-: 
Lightning(8J j 
·~· 1 
! 
, ~
I 
50% 
50% I 
\

Parry 
Size 
1 
8 HP 
1.100 
13 Strength 
370 
1.5 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
45 
42 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Chance 
50% 
50% 
ltems l 
, ·Sharp Tail feathers j 
Dagger quill Breast I 
I 
~:~:~~~~~at 
Element 
I Time 
30% 
1.ightning(2J j 
20:3otoo3:s9 I 
leide(northregionJ 
I 
Quest · 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Stop 
! 
I!!!!!!! 
~ $ , -<>-
! ! 
120% 100% 
50% 
5Dl\ I 
I'""' ""'"""' '"''. """" .. y .. /.6 .. 0·'·h···J·---·---·····-- .. .. 
I 
Size 
29 HP 
86 Streogth 
1.5 Vitality 
Yes S11irit 
1 
21.200 1 
2.600 
as ' 
107 I 
Chance 
Items 
75% 
ThunderocFealher 
30% 
Lightning 121 
04:001020.29 
Natural Habitat I 
AVAllABILITY 
Quest 
Hunt Voltage Fluctuatron IMeldacro Hunter HOJ 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Stop 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1~% 1: ~ :. 
I 
NOTES 
Employs lightning·elemental attacks capable of infircting Shocked status 
Breakellects:Vitalrry-15%ibody/60%J. 
SLACTUAR 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Size 
15 HP 
3.333 Strongth 
1.5 Vitality 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
Secondary 
Appondage 
1 
5,000 
770 
74 
60 
Items 
CactuarNeedle 
I 
:~i:a~y 
Ch:: 
Element 
50% 
Firel991 1 
I 
AVAtlA81LITY 
I Tr me 
04 00 to 07 59 
Natural Habitat 
Duscae {southwest of Perpetouss Keep north of Alstor Sroogh) 
Lerde {northwest of lk•mmerheacl north of loogwythel. Clergne {east of Steylrll 
Grove. north of Fort VaullereyJ very rare monster will only respawn after a rn1f1Jmurn 
ol15mrnutes 
Quest 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Demfl and Altcrna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 5: ,! t~ : ! 
I 
NOTES 
May rnvoke Stalwart staws Employs lrxed-darnage 11 000 HP) attacks Break i 
eftem Vrlahty -15% {body/60%1 
----------
BENNU 
Sizo 
· ~~~c l 
5 2i~ ~:.ongth 
Secondary 
4 
198,300 
I
~~~ '"~ :~7;( 
~l~:;::ge 
100% 
l.ighlning 124) 
I
AVAJLAlllUTY 
,. Tfme 
Natural Habitat 
Quest Sidequest:AlegendfsBorn !Randolph) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death. Alterna, Poison, and Stop 
I! ! ! ! ! ! ! 1!1 ! ,~ : 
I 
NOTES 
Body part modifiers: ·25% damage from firearms and t 10% danmge from 
F;o~."J;r~
1
~g;~;;,~.a;.~'a9;o~~7'win~~;
0
-ni's\~"J:~;~g';:~~;;;P~~~.~j"~g~'1i~~vl ; 
fire. Ice. and lightnrng {legs); -50% damage from weapons and -25% from foe. Ice. 
andlightniogftai!J 
·-··--···-········· .. ·-·····-···· .. ······-· .. ·--·--·····"··--···---·--·-·-· .... -.. -..................... -.---· .. ··-·-·-···-····--·-
Size 
Level 
18 
HP 
EXP 
39 Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
Chance 
25% 
Spirit 
30% 
Lightrring{2) 
I 
~:~~~~~~bitat 
Quest 
Mam Quest The Archaean 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Stop 
Time 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1!. ,! ~ :: 
rff· ...... " 
,; ... , ,.., .... ,. 
;;;;;:::= ........................................................ / 
Size 
1 
44 
HP 
47.000 
24•1 Strength 
9.970 
1.5 Vitality 
125 
Yes Spirit 
152 
Chance 
75% 
Thunderocfeather 
50% 
lrghtning(3) 
I 
N~~~~~ ~~tat 
Quest 
Hunt RedlrghtningofRavatogh IVerrnasMart Ravatoglr) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death. resrstant to Alterna. rmmune to Stop 
I! ! ! ! ! ! ! 1!k 1: ~ :: , 
Break eflects: Vrtalrty -15% {body/60%). 
. 
I 
NOTES 
Employs lighlning·elemental attacks capable of rnllicting Shocked slatus. 
-~y--··--··--·--· · · 
GIGANTUAR 
Size 
Level 
40 HP 
35.900 
EXP 
1,470 Strength 
6.500 
Libra 
10 Vitality 
156 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
118 
DROPS 
Chance 
Primory 
100% 
Jumbo Needle 
Secondary 
Appondago 
Element 
100% 
firel99) 
AVAILABILITY 
f Timo 
Natural Habitat 
Quest 
Hunt: In the Drylands. It Rains Sprnes tlongwythe Restf\rea) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death and Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 5!. t! 1~ : 
I 
NOTES .May invoke Stalwart status. Employs fixed-damage {1.000 HP) a1tatks. Break 
effects:Vrtality -15%tbody/60%J. 
--------
-
-·-- ------
ADAMANTOISE 
~· 
Size 
Level 
99 
HP 
5.624,400 
EXP 
40,260 Strength 
190.690 
IMM Vitality 
325 
Spirit 
223 
Chance 
100% 
Adamantite 
AVAlWIUlY 
Natural Habitat 
100% 
fire{99) 
Guest 
Srdequost: Let Sleeping Mountains Lie !Cindy); Hunt: lonely Rumblings in 
longwythe {Hammerhead! 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death. Alterna, Poison, and Stop 
I! ! ! ! ! ! ! 1!% I: 
I~ :: 
I 
NOTES 
Bo. dy part modi1iers: -25% damage from weapons, fire. and Ice {head and 
legs): + 50% damage from weapons. ftre. and Ice {neck); + 150% di.Image from 
weapons. frre.andlce{eyes). 
-----------
fR!f,J 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Size 
29 
HP 
86 Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
1 . 
4.100. 
1,920; 
73 
91' 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Chance 
75% 
Items \ 
Thunderocfeather i 
I 
AVAILABILITY 
Natural Habitat 
Guest 
f Time 
Cleigne {Ravatogh region) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Stop 
30% 
Lightning!21 
Anytime i 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1! t: ~ : 
l 
I 
NOTES 
Employs Lightning.elemental a. ttacks capable nf irrflicting Shocked status. 
Breakeffects:Vrta!ity-15%{body/60%) 
__ j 
CACTUAR 
..-.-f.'l8U 1 ..'.S 
• Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Size 
15 HP 
3,333 Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
1 ' 
5,000 
770 
74 
60' 
I 
:~i:a~y 
Ch;;;: 
Oracle l\scensro~t~:: 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
50% 
fire(99) 
I
AVAllABtUTY 
I Time 
04:00to 07:59 
Natural Habitat 
Duscae (southwes1 of Perpetouss Keep, north of Alstor Slough); 
Leida {northwest of Hammerhead, north of longwyll1e); Cle1gne least of Steylilf Grove. 
north of fort Vau!lerey}; rare monster. will only respawn after a m1mrnum of 15 minutes 
~ 
Quest . 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death and Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 5! 1! 
1~ :. 
I 
NOTES 
May rnvoke Stalwart sta\Us Employs 1rxed damage 11 ODO HPJ attacks Break 
effects Vrtalrty-15%{body/600,,) 
-
.. / 
~~~: 
Parry 
Size 
67 
HP 
6.764 Strongth 
45 Vitality 
Spirit 
Chance 
~~;~~.r.ry 
;~; 
I 
DROPS 
Natural Habitat 
. 
Appendage 
Eierliont 
100% 
I 
AVAILABILITY 
I Time 
Quost 
Hunt: feathered Giant of 1he firesmoke {Verirrus Marl · RavatoghJ 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune lo Instant Death. Alterna. Poison. and Stop 
4 
100,200 
133.100 
t45 
136! 
Items 
ZuTender 
ZuBeak 
Liylttnirrg{16J 
Anytime ! 
I! ! ! ! ~ ! ! 1!% 1: ~ : 
I 
NOUS 
Body part modifiers: ·25% darnaoe from firearms and +10% darnaoe lrorn 
~~84hd;~~a.; g;~~.~t~:a
9:o~~{w~~~);
0
:;s5~~e~~~;~~~.~~r~~;i:p~~~nD~vJ~~~,~~ t~~~y); 
Fire, Ice. and Lightning {legs}; -50% damage from weapons :ind ·25% from Fire, Ice, 
andl.ightmng{tmlJ. --------
.., Bestiary 
0- Beasts 
249 

250 
AILAB I 
GOBLIN 
Size 
level 
7 HP 
EXP 
1 Strength 
Libra 
1.5 Vitality 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
3% 
30% 
Natural Habitat 
Common; Leide (Keycatrich Trench. Balouve Mines) 
Quest 
Main Guest: The Power of Kings 
GLAMHOTH 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Size 
17 HP 
5 Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
I 
DROPS 
Chance 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Quest 
Hunt: Stealers of Lives (Galdin Quay) 
3% 
30% 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death and Poison 
1 , 
1.100 : 
370 
48 
lcel2J: 
Anytime : 
1 
18.600 
1.470 
97 
88 
Hi-Potion 
lce(2) 
20:30to03:59 f 
I! ~ ! ! ! ~ ! 1!1 ! I~ I:: 
I 
NOTES 
Ca. pable of stealing Potions and Hi·Potions. Break effects: Vitality -20% 
lbody/30%1 
IMP 
l evel 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Size 
78 
HP 
126 Strength 
11 
Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
I 
18,800 
26.990 
Items 
I 
~~i:a~y 
Chan3~: 
Silver Bangle 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
50% 
fire(3) ; 
VAILABILITI' 
I Time 
Anytime • 
Natural Habitat 
Leide (Balouve Mines maze- Chapter 15); Cleigne ISteyliff Grove 
! 
maze-Chapter15J 
Quest 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Alterna and Poison 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 5! 1! 1~ 1! I 
I 
NOTES 
Employs Ice-elemental attacks. Capable. of inflicting Moliified and Poison 
statuses. 8reakeffects: V1tality-20%(body/30%) 
SKELETON 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Size 
24 
HP 
16 Strength 
5 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
I 
DROPS 
Chance 
AVA LABIL "'I 
Natural Habitat 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Common; Cleigne(SteyliffGrove) 
Quest 
MainQuest:PartyofThree 
I STATUS AILMENTS -
5% 
30% 
I! ! ! ! ! ! ! 1!. I: :. 
['_""''" ~' •:·~•• "~' •oo•~"'"' .;w. '"'"~· 
GOBLIN 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Size 
HP 
Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
Yes 
Spirit 
Chance 
3% 
30% 
2,40~ I 
420 1 
51 
47 , 
ltems i 
Potion 1 
lcel2; 1 
ABI rrv 
Natural Habitat 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
20:30to03:5g 
Quest 
Hunt: Mineside Mischief Makers (Longwythe Rest Areal 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Poison 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1! % ! 1~ ! Iii 
I 
NOTES 
Capable of stealing Potions and Hi-Potions. Break effects: Vitality -20% 
(body/30%). 
----------· ---------
AV llA 
IT' 
Natural Habitat 
SNAGA 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Size 
30 
HP 
13 Strength 
8 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
3% 
30% 
Quest 
Main Quests: No Turning Back, A King's Struggle 
I STATUS AILMENTS -
2,580 
1,870 1 
76 ' 
n: 
Items : 
Hi-Potion ! 
lcel2J 
Anytime 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1~% ! I~ :. 
I 
NOTES 
Ca.pable of stealing Potions and Hi-Potions. Break effects: Vitality -20% 
lbody/30%1 
ALV 
l evel 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Size 
22 
HP 
8 Strength 
11 
Vitality 
Yes 
Spirit 
Chance 
3% 
30% 
Quest 
Hunt: Ill Weeds Grow in the Night (Altissia. MaaghoJ 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death and Poison 
24,100 ; 
1,980 1 
93 
115 1 
Items 
Iron Bangle 
-: 
Firel21 
20:30to03:59 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! s! ,! 1~ ! , 
I 
NOTES 
Employs Ice-elemental attacks. Capable. of inflicting Mollified and Poison 
statuses. Break effects: Vitality -20% lbody/30%1 
ILAtllt ~ 
SKELETON 
J,,_E 
Size 
Level 
65 
HP 
EXP 
118 Strength 
Libra 
5 Vitality 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Chance 
5% 
30% 
1 
12.500 
17,970 
116 
101 
Titanium Bangle 
Lightningl21 
Natural Habitat 
Duscae (fociaugh Hollow maze - Chapter I 5); Cleigne !Glacial 
Grotto maze-Chapter 151 
Quest 
-
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1!. 1! ~ 1! 
[_ 
o~•::~·~•'- "'~'""" '"'" 
m '"""~ 
VAILA811 TV 
Natural Habitat 
Quest 
GOBLIN 
Size 
Level 
84 
HP 
EXP 
131 
Strength 
Libra 
1.5 Vitality 
Parry 
Yes 
Spirit 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Elernont 
I Time 
Chance 
3% 
50% 
Duscae (Costlemark Tower maze - Chapter 15) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Alterna and Poison 
1 
20,300 
31,340 
125 
109 
Elixir 
lce \31 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1!% ! I~ ! 
I 
NOTES 
Capable of stealing Mega-Potions and Megalixirs. Break effects: Vitality 
-20%(body/30%J. 
-----------------
IMP 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Size 
13 HP 
3 Strength 
11 
Vitality 
Yes 
Spirit 
1 
2.400 
650 
50 
65 
I 
~~~~a~y 
Cha~;, 
Items 
Bronze Bangle 
Natural Habitat 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
30% 
Firel21 
I Time 
Anytime 
Common; Duscae (fociaugh Hollow); Cleigne (Glacial Grotto) 
Quest 
Main Guests: Sword in the Watertall, The Trial of Ramuh 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Poison 
I! ! ! ! ~ ~ ! 5! I: I~ 1!. 
I 
NOTES 
Employs lce·elemental attacks. Capable of inflicting Mollified and Poison 
statuses.Breakeffects:V1tality-20%(body/30%). 

HOBGOBLIN 
Size 
level 
20 HP 
EXP 
B Strength 
Libra 
B Vitality 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Chance 
3% 
30% 
Common; Cleigne lfociaugh Hollow) 
I STATUS AILMENTS -
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1! 1! ~ I: 
I 
NOT.ES 
May invoke Tenacious status. May steal ingredients. Break effects: 
Vitahty-20%lbody/30%). 
/ 
HOBGOBLIN 
Size 
1 
level 
88 
HP 
46.600 
EXP 
171 
Strength 
39,440 , 
Libra 
B Vitality 
134 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
115 ' 
Chance 
Primary 
Secondary I 
DROPS 
3% 
Sapphire Bracelet 
I 
AVAILABILITY 
Natural Habitat 
Quest 
-
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
50% 
Duscae (Costlemark Tower maze · Chapter 151 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Alterna 
lightningl3) 
Anytime i 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1!~ 1! ~ I: 
I 
N.OT.ES 
May invoke Ten.acious status. May steal ingredients. Break effects 
Vttahty·20%lbody/30%) 
HOBGOBLIN 
Size 
1 
Level 
20 
HP 
21.100 ' 
EXP 
B Strength 
1,720 
Libra 
S Vitality 
102 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
92 
r 
.. 
Chance 
Items ; 
Primary 
3% 
Garnet Bracelet 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
30% 
Lightningl21 
I Time 
20:30to03:59 
Natural Habitat 
Guest 
Hunts: footfalls in the Dark (Galdin Guay). Baby Snatchers (Cauthess Rest 
Areal 
I STATUS AILMENTS -
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1!% 1! 
~ I: 
I 
NOTES 
May invoke Tenacious status. May steal ingredients. Break effects 
Vitality -20%(body/30%1 
AV L Bltln 
Natural Habitat 
Tower) 
Quest 
HOBGOBLIN 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Secondary 
Appendage 
74 
104 
B 
Yes 
Size 
1 : 
HP 
32,BOO i 
Strength 
27060 ' 
Vitality 
127 ' 
Spirit 
112 ! 
Items : 
HeliodorBracelet ! 
- i 
I 
~~i~~a~y 
Chan;~ 
Element 
50% 
Lightningl31 i 
I Time 
Anytime i 
leide (Balouve Mines maze - Chapter 151; Duscae (Costlemark 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1! % 1! 
~ I: i 
I
N.OTES 
May invoke Ten.acious status. May steal ingredients. Break effects 
Vrtality-20%1body/30%1 
______ / 
Bestiary 
e Daemons 
251 

252 
BUSSE MAND 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
:~~a~y 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Time 
Size 
44 
HP 
30 Strength 
8 Vitality 
1 
13.400 
7.120 
107 
Yes Spirit 
96 
Chanco 
3% 
Amethyst Bracelet 
30% 
Lightning 12! 
AVAILABIL 
Natural Habitat 
leide {Crestholm Channels); Duscae {Costlemark Tower! 
Quest 
Hunt: Baby SnatcheJS {Cauthess Rest Areal 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death and i\lterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1!% 1! ~ 1! 
Vitality -20% (body/30%) 
I 
NOT£S 
May invoke Ten.acious status May steal ingredients. Break effects: 
ERESHKIGAL 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Size 
39 
HP 
52 Strength 
11 
Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
3% 
1 
29.300 
5.530 
95 
116 
Items 
KnighrsAnklet 
30% 
Lightningl2J 
AVAILABILITY 
Anytime i 
Natural Habitat 
l.eide {Crestholm Channels. Keycatrich Trench maze - Chapter 15). 
' 
Duscae ICostlemarkTowerl 
Quest -
I STATUS AILMENTS Rcsislant to Instant Death and Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1!% 1! ~ : 
I 
NOTES 
May rnvoke Tough status May steal Potions and Hr Pot:ons Break effects 
Vitahty·20%tbody/30%) 
__ / 
AVAii.A 
T't 
Natural Habitat 
Quest 
MainOuest:ReunionandRecovery 
I STATUS AILMENTS -
Size 
37 
HP 
42 Strength 
11 
Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
3% 
30% 
I! ! ! ! ! ! ! 1!. 1! ~ 1:: 
I 
NOTES 
May invoke Tough status May steal Potions and Hr Potions Break effects 
""tal.ty -20%(body/30%J 
Natural Habitat 
KADRU 
I 
Lo vol 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
:~i:sry 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Time 
Quest 
Main Quest: Zegnautus Keep 
I STATUS AILMENTS . 
Size 
30 HP 
374 Strength 
15 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
8% 
100% 
2i 
21.000 
2.390 
68 
84 
Items 
Angel Earring 
firel81 
Anytime 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! s~ 1! 1~ 1! 
I 
NOTES 
Capable of inflicling Toad status. Capahle of self-destruction. Break effects 
Vitality -20% (all body parts/30%J. 
~------------------------ --- ------·-·-·- --·-·-·-- -
GARCHIMACERA 
AllA"1 IT 
Level _,/' 
EXPY' 
Libra 
Parry 
l
::i=a
5
ry 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Duscae(CostiemarkTower) 
Quest 
Main Guest: A Precious Source of Power 
I STATUS AILMENTS -
Size 
1 
24 HP 
18.700 
18 Strength 
1,830 
11 Vitality 
78 
Yes Spirit 
98 
Chance 
3% 
Warriors Anklet 
30% 
Lighlningt2i 
I! ! ! ! 100% ~ ! ,! 1: 
~ ,! 
Vitahty-20%lbody/30%1. 
I 
NOTES 
May invoke Tough status. May steal Potions and Ethers. Break effects: 
Natural Habitat 
Size 
39 HP 
52 Strength 
11 
Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
3% 
30% 
Quest 
Hunt: A Daemonic Orchestra ICauthess Rest Area) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death and Allerna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1! 
1: 
~ 1! 
Vitalily -20% lbody/30%). 
I 
NOUS 
May invoke Tough status. May steal Potions and H:-Potions. Break effects: 
Size 
1 
37 
HP 
4.720 
42 Strength 
2.790 
11 
Vitality 
84 
Yes Spirit 
64 
Chanco 
3% 
Fencers Anklet 
30% 
Lightning(2) 
Anytime 
Quest 
Main Ouest: Reunion and Recovery 
I STATUS AILMENTS -
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1! 
1! 
~ ! 
I 
NOTE.S May invoke Tou.gh status. May steal Potions and Hi-Potions. Break effects 
Vitality -20% lbody/30%1 
-----· ------· -----·------·----·-····-········--·-········---- ··-----------·-···· •.•.• ./ 
AIL 
l1r 
Natural Habitat 
(Chapter141 
Quest -
NAGARANI 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Sizo 
49 
HP 
1.228 Strength 
22 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
I
:~:.~ 
Chance 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Time 
4% 
100% 
122.700 
17.070 
181 
219 
Talisman 
Fire t81 
I STATUS AILMENTS Highly resislant to Instant Death, resistant to Alterna and Stop 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! .! 1: 1~ ,! 
I 
NOTES 
Capable of healing. Capable of intt:cting ioad status. Break effects· Vitaliry 
-20% iall body pans/30%1. 
·-------------------------· --- ----··-----·-·--·-·-·-··-
GARCHIMACERA 
VAILABI 
~~;V 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Size 
1 
24 
HP 
25.900 
18 Strength 
2.210 
11 Vitality 
94 
Yes 
Spirit 
118 
Chance 
Ito ms 
3% 
Warrior's Anklet 
30% 
lightningl21 
20:30to03:59 
Quest 
Hunt: Help Needed in EXINERIS llestallum. Thoroughfare) 
I STATUS AILMENTS -
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1!. 
1! 
~ 1! 
Vitalrty-20%1body/30%1. 
I 
NOT.ES May invoke Tough status. May steal Potions and Ethers. Break effects 
----·-·----------------··-·-·····------
Natural Habitat 
Insomnia 1Chapter141 
Size 
35 HP 
40 Strength 
11 
Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
3% 
30% 
Quest 
Hunt: Tourists Fade into the Night IAltissia. Maaghol 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resrstant to Instant Death and Alterna 
35,100 
5.080 
109 
t34 
Items 
fencer's Anklet 
lighlningl21 
20:301003:59 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! ,!, 1! 
~ ,! 
Vita!ity-20%1body/30%1. 
I 
NOTES May invoke Tough status. May steal Potions and Hi-Potions Break effects: 
AVAILA l> V 
Natural Habitat 
NAGA 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
:~~:.~y 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
DuscaefFociaughHollowJ 
Quest 
Main Guest: Tire Trial of Ramuh 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death 
Size 
30 HP 
374 
Strength 
15 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
8% 
100% 
30.700 
3,toOO 
102 
126 
An[JelEarring 
frrelBI 
I~ ! ! ~ ! ~ ! s! 1! 1~ 1! 
I 
NOT.ES 
Capable of inflicting Toad status. Capable of self-destruction Break effects 
Vitalrty-20%1allbodypar1S/30%). 
SERPENTESS 
lboT 
Lovet 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Size 
95 
HP 
4.726 Strenoth 
15 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
2 1 
196.400 1 
66.910 : 
158 ! 
186 1 
VAILA lllr 
Natural Habitat 
Quest -
l
::i=a~y 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Chance 
8% 
100% 
I Time 
011scaetCostlema1kTowermaze · Chapter 15) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant 10 lns1ant Death and Alterna 
ltoms l 
Rune Earring I 
· I 
·! 
Firef12J : 
Anytime I 
I 
I! ! ! ! ! ! ! 1! ! 1~ 1: 
1 
I 
NOTES 
Capable of inlficting Toad status. Capable ol self.destruction. Break effeCJS 
Vitality -20% fall body parts/30%). 
-·-·-·-·-·-·-·- --------·-·---------·----··-----------.. -· ····--··-·-··-······-
___ ) 

I
AVAU.ABILITY 
Natural Habitat 
Quest 
-
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Size 
78 
HP 
3,603 Strength 
22 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
8% 
100% 
I Time 
Duscae(DaurellCavernsmaze-Chapter 15) 
I 
STATUS AILMENTS Highly resistant to Instant Death, immune to Alterna. resistant 
to Stop I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 5! 1! \~ 1! 
I 
NOTES 
_Capable of healing. Capable of in_flicting Toad and Stone statuses. Break 
eftects:V1tahty-20%(allbodyparts/30%) 
I 
AVAILABILITY 
Natural Habitat 
Quest 
-
i;TTR!BUTES 
Size 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
80 
HP 
4,123 
Strength 
8 Vitality 
Yes 
Spirit 
Chance 
1% 
100% 
Cleigne (SteyliffGrovemaze-Chapter 15) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ! ! 5! 1! 
91.400 
37.840 
145 
126 
Safety Bit 
, 
-<>- i 
120% 
11Dll 
NOTES 
Employs Dark-elemental attacks capable of causing Instant Death. Break 
effects:Vitality-20%(body/30%) 
YOJIMBO 
ATTR:Bl!TES 
Size 
Level 
EXP 
46 
HP 
1.210 Strength 
46,500 
11.450 
r 
t 
Size 
54 
HP 
2.025 Strength 
11 
Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
1~~::~~ Ii 
245 
217 
Items 
Safety Bit I 
1% 
50% 
Natural Habitat 
Quest 
Hunt: A fistful of Gil (longwythe Rest Area) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death, resistant to Alterna 
firei6; 1 
20:30to03:59 
I! ! ! ! ! ! ! 5! 1! \~ 1! 
I 
NOTES 
Employs Ice-elemental attacks capable of ir.tlicting Frozen status. and 
~ba~~~~~
0
~ntal attacks capable of causing lnsiant Death_ Break effects: Vitality -20% 
Size 
17 HP 
140 Strength 
8 Vitality 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
I 
:~i:asry 
Chan;~ 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
50% 
I
AVAILABI llY 
I Time 
Natural Habitat 
Duscae {Daurell Caverns): Cleigne (Glacial Grotto) 
Quest 
Mam Quest Sword 1n the Waterlall 
I STATUS AILMENTS -
I! ! ! ! ~ ~ ! 5! 1! 1~ ,! 
I 
NOTES 
_Employs Dark-elemental attacks capable ol causing Instant Death. Break 
effects: V1taMy-20%(body/30%). 
I 
AV ILABILllY 
Natural Habitat 
Quest 
ARAMUSHA 
AT"RIBUTES 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Secondary 
Appendage 
50 
1,520 
8 
Yes 
Size 
HP 
39,500 
Strength 
12.120 
Vitality 
127 
Spirit 
112 
Items 
Safety Bit 
I 
:~i~a~y 
Chan
1c~ 
Element 
50% 
fire 161 [ 
I Time 
An·~ime 
leide (Balouve Minesi; Duscae ifociaugh Hollow maze • Chapter 15) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death, resistant to Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 5! 1! 
I~ 1! 
I 
NOTES 
Employs Dark-elemental attacks capable of causing Instant Death. Break 
effects:Vitality-20%(body/30%)_ 
_ 
/ 
Size 
17 
HP 
234 
Strength 
8 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
1% 
50% 
l
~~~~~~:tat 
• 
Quest 
Hunt Bewitched Blade Stains the Waters {Alt1ss1a Maagho) 
I STATUS AILMENTS . 
41,100 
1,060 
138 
125 
Safety Bit 
fire\61 
I! ! ! ! ! ! ! 5! 1! I~ 1! 
I 
NOTES 
_Em_ploys Dark-elemental attacks capable of causing Instant Death. Break 
effects:V1tahty-20%1body/30%)_ 
ARAMUSHA 
Size 
1 
Level 
52 
HP 
175,600 
EXP 
1.738 Strength 
27.710 
Libra 
B Vitality 
243 
I 
AITRIBUTCS 
Parry 
Yes 
Spirit 
215 ' 
Items : 
Elixir 
Secondary 
Appendage I 
:~i:a~y 
Chan;~ 
1 
Element 
50% 
I 
N~~~~~~~~t~t 
I Time 
firelol i 
20:30to03:59 ! 
Quest 
Hunt In a Heat Haze of Glory (lestallum Market) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death, resistont to Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ! ! 5! 1! \~ 1: : 
I 
NOTES 
_Employs Dark-elemental attacks capable of causing Instant Death. Break 
effec1s:V11ality-20%(body/30%). 
----~/ 
• 
Bestiary 
o Daemons 
253 

254 
Size 
71 
HP 
3,153 Strength 
11 
Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
1% 
Element 
100% 
I Time 
Natural Habitat 
Duscae (Glacial Grotto maze - Chapter 15) 
Clue st 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resislant to Instant Death, immune to Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ~ ~ ! s! 1! 
1 
290.200 
58,250 
265 
234 1 
Items 
SafetyBit · 
firel8J 
An)1ime 1 
120% 
120% 
I 
NOTES 
Employs Ice-elemental attacks capable of inflicting frozen status. and 
Dark-elemental attacks capable of causing Instant Death. Break effects: Vitality -20% 
(body/30%1. 
-··--·· ·--------·--' 
ARACHNE 
Size 
level 
12 HP 
EXP 
114 Strength 
Libra 
11 
Vitality 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Chance 
8% 
100% 
Leide IKeycatrichTrenchJ;Cleigne !Glacial Grotto) 
I STATUS AILMENTS -
13,000 
780 
55 
77 
I! ~ ! ~ ! ~ ! 1! 1! :. 1! 
I 
NOTES 
Employs l ightning-elemental attacks capable of inflicting Shocked and Stop 
statuses. Can summon Tarantulas. Break effects: Vitality -20% (all body pans/30%). 
unu 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Size 
97 
HP 
7,534 Strength 
22 Vitality 
Spirit 
Chance 
8% 
100% 
I 
N:t~~ I Habitat 
Duscae (Costlemark Tower maze - Chapter 15) 
nuest -
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Alterna 
122.000 
53.520 ' 
103 
129 · 
Items 
Hi-Elixir 
lightning(101 
I! ~ ! ! ! ~ ! ! 1! ~ 1: 
I 
NOTES 
Employs Lightning-elemental attacks capable_ of_inflicting Shocked and Stop 
staluses. Can summon Kokyangwuus. Break effects: Vitality -20% (all body pans/30%1 
AV 
Natural Habitat 
Clues! -
KOKYANGWUTI 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Summoned by Ariadne and Uttu 
Size 
41 
HP 
163 Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
8% 
30% 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death and Alterna 
41.400 
7,570 
143 
121 
Items 
Potion 
lcel21 
I! ! ! ! ! ! ! t~% ! 1~ 1! 
[' "'"~=:~,=~ 
Size 
99 HP 
6,805 Strength 
667.40~ I 
147,000 
11 
Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
1% 
lt:!~ I 
Safety Bit 
Appendage 
:i 
Element 
100% 
I Time 
fire(10) : 
20:30to03:59 I 
Quest 
Hunt: Dead General Strikes Down the King (lestallum. Thoroughfare) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death and Alterna 
Ima mm mo11 ~ * '
-<>- : 
100% 
51111 
11111\ 
10111\ 
10111\ 
100% 10111\ 
IMM 
IMM 
IMM 
110% I 
I 
NOTES 
Employs Ice-elemental attacks capable of inflicting Frozen status. and 
Oark-e!emer_1tal attacks capable of causmg Instant Death. Break effects: Vitality -20% 
(body/30%1 
-
--------------------
Size 
level 
12 
HP 
18,500 
EXP 
114 Strength 
Libra 
15 Vitality 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
DROPS 
Chance 
Primary 
8% 
Secondary 
Appendage 
100% 
lightning 181 
Natural Habitat 
Quest 
Main Guest: The Power of Kings 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death 
I! ! ! ~ ! ~ ! 1!% 1! :. ! 
I 
NOTES 
Employs lightning-elemental attacks capable of inmcting Shocked and Stop 
statuses. Can summon Tarantulas. Break effects: Vitality -20% (all body pa(ts/30%). 
AIL llli'Y 
Natural Habitat 
ARIADNE 
level 
EXP 
Size 
41 
HP 
873 Strength 
Libra 
15 Vitality 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
lnsomnia(Chapter 14) 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
8% 
100% 
Quest 
Hunt: The Web-Weaving Princess llestallum, Market) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Highly resistant to Instant Death. resistant to Alterna 
lightning(SI 
Anytime 
I!!!~!~! 1! 1!:.:: 
I 
NOTES 
Employs lighlning-elemental attacks capable of inflicting Shocked and Stop 
statuses. Can summcn ~okyangwutis-~~::ects Vitality-20% la~~:::: 
IRON GIANT 
l evel 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Size 
30 
HP 
413 Strength 
22 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
3 ' 
27.300 1 
3.140 i 
137 , 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Chance 
5% 
100% 
105 
Items 
Hi-Elixir 
fire(12J 
20:30to03:59 
t•AB 
TY 
Natural Habitat 
Common; Duscae (Daurell Caverns); Cleigne (Steyliff Grovel 
Quest 
MainOuest:PartyofThree 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death 
I I 
* ' -<>- I 
l•••m 111111 ~ 
10111\ 
11111\ 
10111\ 
10111\ 
10111\ 
11111\ 
106% 
5111\ 
16111\ 
10111\ 
11111\ 
I 
I 
NOTES 
Employs gravity based (attractive) attacks May mvoke Tena.emus and Stalwart , 
statuses Breakeffects Vitality 20%1allbodyparts/30%J 
j 
I 
-------
-------
-----
_) 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Cleigne (Steyliff Grove) 
Quest 
MainGuest:Partyof Three 
Size 
25 
HP 
302 Strength 
15 Vitality 
Chance 
10% 
50% 
Spirit 
Size 
1 
17,800 
1.960 
94 
86 
Hi-Potion 
lce(4) 
Level 
32 
HP 
18.400 
EXP 
654 Strength 
2.760 
Libra 
22 Vitality 
68 
Parry 
Spirit 
89 
DROPS 
Chance 
Primary 
8% 
Hi-Elixir 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
100% 
lighlning(8J 
Time 
Natural Habitat 
Quest 
Main Guests: A Kingis Struggle. Zegnautus Keep 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1!1 1! :. ,! 
I 
NOTES 
Employs lightning-elemental attacks capable of _inflicting Shocked and Stop 
statuses. Can summon Kokyangwutis. Break effects: Vitality -20% (ail body paits/30%) 
TARANTULA 
A llABIUT'r 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Natural Habitat 
Summoned by Arachne 
Quest 
I STATUS AILMENTS -
Size 
8 HP 
10 Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
8% 
30% 
1 
900 
350 
44 
39 
Potion 
Ice Ill 
I! ! ! ~ ! ~ ! 1!1 ! I~ 1! 
I'm" """ ~"" '~'" '""""""' 
IRON GIANT 
AVAILABIUT" 
Natural Habitat 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
:~i~a
5
ry 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Time 
Size 
37 
HP 
627 Strength 
22 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
1()% 
100% 
Quest 
Hunt: A Roaring in the Night (Taelpar Rest Area) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death, resistant to Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ! ! 5! 1! 
97,600 
8.980 
235 
179 
Hi-Potion 
Firel16J 
I 
NOTES 
Employs gravity-based (attractive) attacks. May invoke Tenacious and Stalwan 
statuses. Break effects: Vitality -20% (all body partsi30%J. 

IRON GIANT 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
llASIL TY 
Time 
Size 
90 HP 
9.211 
Strength 
22 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
1% 
100% 
Natural Habitat 
Duscae (Costlemark Tower maze - Chapter 15) 
Quest 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death and Alterna 
3i 
150,100 I 
I 
53.;~~ I 
152 1 
Items 
Megalixir 
Fire(12) 
Anytime 
I! ! ! ~ !. ~ ! ! 1! I~ 1! ! 
I 
NOTES Employs gravity based (attractive) attacks May mvoke Tenacious and Stalwart 
statuses Breakeffects Vitality 20%lallbodypartsf30%) 
- --
-
-- --- ------------ _______ _/ 
Size 
level 
66 
HP 
EXP 
4,585 Strength 
Libra 
22 Vitality 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
DROPS 
Chance 
Primary 
1% 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
100% 
~Al' ABtllT'I 
Time 
Natural Habitat 
Duscae (Fociaugh Hollow maze - Chapter 15) 
3 
238,600 
46,080 
299 
221 
Items 
Megalixir 
...-: 
Fi1e(12) 
Anytime 
Quest 
Hunt: Cruel Giants of Duscae (Cauthess Rest Area) 120:30 to 03:59 only) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death and Altema 
I! ~ ! ! ! ~ ! 5! 1! 1~ : 
I 
NOTES Employs gravity-based (attractive) attacks. May invoke Tenacious and Stalwart 
statuses. Break effects: Vitality -20% (all body parts/30%). 
~V41lABIL, TY 
Natural Habitat 
l evel 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Quest 
Hunt: A Lost Painting (Altissia, Maagho) 
Size 
32 HP 
1.485 Strength 
15 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
5% 
50% 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death and Alterna 
Lightning ISi 
Anytime 
lllllllm 81 Dm ~ * f-<>-
211'> 
10'!. 
111'!. 
111'!. 
111'!. 
111'!. 
1D'!. 
111r1 
mo~ 
so~ 
120% 
I 
NOTES Invokes changes in resistances between physical and magic. Employs Dark-
elemental attacks. _Capable of inflicting Mollified, Comprom1Sed. and Confusion sta!Uses. 
Break effects: Vit• hty -20% (all body paits/30%). 
---------
---
, ___ , .. ___ .,, ___ ,____ 
_ _____ .. ____________ ........... ../ 
DEATHCLAW 
AVA1tAa1urr 
Natural Habitat 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
'
DROPS 
Primary 
1 Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
0.Uest 
MainOuest:BreathoftheG/acian 
Size 
34 
HP 
387 Strength 
45 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chanco 
100% 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Deoth and Alterna 
72.300 
4,030 
14t 
185 
Elixir 
Ice 181 
I! ~ ! ! ! ~ ! 1! ! 1~ : 
1 
I 
NOTES 
Employs Dark-elemental attacks. Breok effects: 
;····:: ... 
Vita!ity -20%(allbodyparts/30%). 
; 
__________________________ 
, _____ _/ 
GARGANTUA 
"•y 
Natural Habitat 
Quest 
MainOuest:ZegnautusKeep 
l evel 
EXP 
Libra 
Size 
30 HP 
413 Strength 
22 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
10% 
100% 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to lnstanl Death and Alterna 
27.300 
3,140 
137 
105 
Items 
Hi-Potion 1 
Fire(16i 
An~1ime 
I! ! ! ~ ~ ~ ! 5! 1! 1~ 1::: ! 
I 
NOTES 
Employs gravity-based (attractive) attacks. May invoke Tenacious and Stalwart 
statuses. Break effects: Vitality -20% (all body parts/30%). 
RED GIANT 
Size 
level 
42 
HP 
EXP 
1,972 Strength 
Libra 
45 Vitality 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
81,800 
10,080 
230 
174 
Items 
Primary 
Secondary I 
DROPS 
8% 
Mega-Potion 
Natural Habitat 
Uuest 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
100% 
Duscae (Costlemark Tower): lnsmonia (Chapter 14) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death and Alterna. res:stant to Stop 
Fire(16) 
An11ime . 
I~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 5! : ~ I~ 
NOTES 
Employs File-elemental and gravity·based (attractive) attacks. May invoke 
Tenacious and Stalwart statuses. Break effects: Vitality -50% (all body paits/30%) 
ILl1 
Natural Habitat 
DAEMONWALL 
l evel 
EXP 
limo 
Size 
84 
HP 
11.320 Strength 
115 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
5% 
100% 
Quest 
Hum: A Wall in our Way (Meldacio Hunter HO) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death and Alterna. resistant to Poison 
I! ! ! ~ ! ~ ! ! ! ~ 
I 
NOTES 
Capable ol inflic_ting Poison and Stone statuses. Break effecls 
Vitality-20%{body/30%) 
--------
Size 
66 
HP 
4,585 Strength 
22 Vitality 
Yes 
Spirit 
DROPS 
Chance 
Primary 
1% 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
100% 
A• 
ll!T 
I Time 
Natural Habitat 
Duscae lfociaugh Hollow maze - Chapter 15) 
Quest 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death and Allerna 
3 ' 
83,300 ; 
27.570; 
188: 
139 ' 
ltems l 
Mega!i;idr · 
Fire(12) • 
Anytime 
I!!!~!!! !! 
1~ ! ' 
I 
NOTES 
Employs gravity based !attractive) attacks May mvoke Tenacmus and Stalwa,t 
statuses B1eak effects V1tahty 20% (all body parts/30%) 
"""""-"""""""""" ___________________________ .. _____ .. _______ .. _________ .... ________ .. 
-
- - -- _ _./ 
Quest 
CHANDRAVARMA 
Size 
level 
73 
HP 
EXP 
6,332 Strength 
Libra 
45 Vitality 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Chance 
8% 
100% 
Ouscae {Fociaugh Hollow maze - Chapter 15} 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death and Alterna. resistant lo Stop 
3 • 
285.600; 
56,9801 
306 : 
229 ! 
Items 1 
Hi-Elixir 
Fi1el16). 
An;1ime i 
I~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 5! : ~ 1! · 
I 
NOTES 
Employs Fire elemental and gravity based !attractive) attacks May 1111oke 
Tenacious and Stalwart statuses Break effects Vitality 50% (all body parts/30%) 
_______________ 
., _______________ .. ____ .. _________ 
-
- -- ------ --- ----____ / 
Bestiary 
Daemons 
255 

256 
DAEMONS 
ISEULTALON 
r 
1r ..... r-
Size 
Level 
72 
HP 
EXP 
2,177 Strength 
Libra 
45 Vitality 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
Primary 
8% 
Secondary 
Appendage I 
DROPS 
Chance 
Element 
100% 
lce(lO) 
llAI 
I Time 
20:30to03:59 
Natural Habitat 
Insomnia (Chapter 14); Duscae (Daurell Caverns maze - Chapter 15) I 
Quest 
Hunt: Bones Seek an Offering (lestallum. Thoroughfare) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death and Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! ,~. ! I~ ,! II, 
I 
NOTES 
Employs Dark elemental attacks Break effects Vitality 20% (all body 
paits/30%) 
I 
LICH 
Hr!IBUTES 
Size 
35 HP 
______ _/ 
81.80~ I 
7,270 
157 
192 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
:~i=a~y 
204 Strength 
45 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Items I 
RainbowPendant I 
Chance 
3% 
Natural Habitat 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
50% 
Quest 
Hunt: Softly Now. Mighty Foes IMeldacio Hunter HO) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Alterna 
:I 
lightningl6J : 
20:301003:59 i 
I 
-Q- 1 
110% I 
I! ! ! ! ~ ~ ! 1! 
1! 
~ 
I 
I 
NOTES 
Employs fire elemental attacks Capable of inflicting Disenchanted status 
Break effects Vitality 20%(body/30%) 
I 
___/ 
MINDFLAYER 
'\. 
1 !UTb 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Size 
19 
HP 
144 Strength 
45 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
3% 
50% 
I 
N:t~ral ~ab;tat 
Quest 
Hunt: Exorcism of the Nebulawood (Wiz Chocobo Post) 
I STATUS AILMENTS -
I! ! ! ~ ! ~ ! 1!% ! 
74 
117 
ltems 1 
White Sage I 
· 1 
lce(5) , 
20:30to03:59
1 
110• 
110~ 
I 
NOTES 
Employs Ice-elemental attacks. Capable_ of inflicting Mollified and Confusion 
statuses. Break effects: Vitality -20% (body/30%) 
l'Rt8UHS 
Size 
Level 
86 HP 
EXP 
2,853 Strength 
Libra 
45 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
2% 
100% 
Duscae (Costlemark Tower maze - Chapter 15) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1! 
1! 
148,800 i 
41,lOO i 
105 [. 
156 i 
I 
Items ! 
SafetyBit l 
- 1 \ 
lce(8i l 
Anytime I 
! 
ABS 120% 
I 
NOTES 
Employs Ice elemental attacks Capable of tnftrcting Mollified and Contusion 
statuses Break effects Vitality 20% lbody/30%1 
----·-·---------·-·-------·-·--··-------------------------
- ---- -- _____ / 
I IRtBlJT s 
Size 
3 
120 HP 
875.700 
4,885 Strength 
45 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
153,380 
260 
323 , 
I 
Items ! 
100% 
Squirming Bone ! 
- , 
A~JILABILllY 
Natural Habitat 
100% 
lce(99Jj 
20:30to03:59. 
Quest 
Sidequest:WondrousWeapon(Randolph) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death and Alterna. weak to Stop 
! 
i 
I I 
I~ ! ! ~ ~ ~ !' 1! 
1! 
I~ 
-¢- i 
110% i 
; 
I 
NOTES 
Employs Dark-elemental attacks. Break effects: Vitality -20% (all body 
parts/30%)_ 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------- ) 
LAB! 
Natural Habitat 
WRAITH 
,. .. T 
IT 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
:~i~~:.y 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Size 
2 
32 
HP 
23,300 
126 Strength 
3.410 
45 Vitality 
88 
Yes 
Spirit 
108 
Chance 
Items ! 
3% 
Rainbow Pendant ! 
50% 
Lightning (6) 
Quest 
MainOuests: lntotheArcticCrevasse.ZegnautusKeep 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! ,!. 
1! 
~ I~ 
I 
NOTES 
Employs Fire-elemental attack_s. Capable of inflicting Disenchanted status. 
Breakeffects:Vitality-20%(body/30%) 
~TTRI JTE~ 
Size 
Level 
26 HP 
EXP 
233 Strength 
Libra 
45 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
2 ' 
108,400 
4,450 
132 
205 
Chance 
Items 
5% 
White Sage 
50% 
lcei51 
20:30to03:59 
Natural Habitat 
Guest 
Hun',: Back Alley Spook (Altissia. Maagho) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death. resistant to Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1! ! 1~ 1: 
I 
tlOTES 
Em. ploys Ice-elemental attacks. Capable_ of inflicting Mollified and Confusion 
statuses.Breakeffects:Vitality -20%(body/30%) 
NECROMANCER 
~TTRIRUTt o 
Size 
Level 
41 
HP 
EXP 
455 Strength 
Libra 
45 Vitality 
Yes 
S11irit 
Chance 
3% 
50% 
lightningi6) 
A Att.ABlllTl 
Natural Habitat 
Duscae (Daurell Cavems) 
Quest 
Main Quest: Party of Three; Hunt: Softly Now. Mighty Foes {Meldacio 
Hunter HQ) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death 
I! ! ! ! ! 120% ! 1! 
1! 
~ :: 
I 
NOTES 
Employs Dark-elemental attacks capable of causing Instant Death. Summons 
minions.Breakeffects:Vitality -20%(body/30%). 
LICH 
.,..... 
"'U..,E...-. 
Size 
27 
HP 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
201 
Strength 
22 Vitality 
21.400 , 
2,620 
85 1 
104 , 
Parry 
Yes 
Spirit 
I 
DROPS 
Chance 
Primary 
3% 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
50% 
ltems j 
Rainbow Pendan~ ! 
- ) 
lightning(6) 
Anytime 
I
~~~~~~ H~brtat 
Cleigne (Steyliff t:~:le 
Quest 
Hunt Things <rom the Past (Cauthess Rest Area) (20 30 to 03 59 only) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1!. 1! ~ ,! 
I 
NOTES 
Employs Fire-elemental attacks. Capable ol inflicting Disenchanted status 
Break effects: Vrtahty-20% lbody/30%). 
I 
MINDFLAYER 
ATT.llBUTff 
Size 
Level 
19 HP 
EXP 
144 Strength 
Libra 
45 Vitality 
Parry 
I
OROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
3% 
50% 
Natural Habitat 
Ouscae (Fociaugh Hollow); Cleigne (Glacial Grotto) 
Quest 
Main Quests: Sword in the Waterlall. The Trial of Ramuh 
I STATUS AILMENTS -
21 
20.200 ' 
1,400 I 
62 1 
97 ! 
Items ! 
White Sag~
! 
- I 
lcei5) 1 
Anytime 
I! ! ! ~ ! ~ ! 1!% ! I~ 1! 
I 
NOTES 
Employs Ice-elemental attacks. Capable_ of inilicting Mollified and Confusion 
statuses. Break effects: Vitality -20% (body/30%) 
.! 
MINDFLAYER 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
::i~:.~ 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Size 
75 
HP 
2,061 
Strength 
45 Vitality 
Yes 
Spirit 
Chance 
5% 
100% 
2 1 
112,600 1 
31.860 I 
102 
152 ! 
Items ' 
LavenderOil : 
- 1 
-- 1 
lcef81 1 
Time 
Anytime ; 
~::~ r.ab~a~~~~a;
51 
leide (Balouve Mines maze-Chapter 15); Cleigne (Steyliff Grove 
I 
Quest 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! ,!% ! 110% 
110% 
I 
NOTES 
Employs Ice-elemental attacks. Capable of inflicting Mollified and Confusion 
statuses.Breakeffects:Vttality-20%(body/30%). 
NECROMANCER 
Natural Habitat 
ATTRIBUTES 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Time 
Size 
41 
HP 
455 Strength 
45 Vitality 
99.50~ I 
11.010 1 
173 1 
210 ; 
Yes 
Spirit 
Chance 
3% 
Items I 
RainbowPendant [ 
~ ! 
50% 
Lightning (6) j 
20:30to03:59 ! 
Guest 
Hunt: Things from the Past (Cauthess Rest Area) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death 
I! ! ! ! ! ! ! 1! 1! ~ 1! I 
~~r~;s B~~~~oiJe~~;'~i~~li'~n-~6~\~~~~.;;g~r of causing Instant Death. Summons 
I 
: 
----···--······--· ·-----·----·-------

Natural Habitat 
Clues! 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
82 
2.080 
45 
Yes 
Chance 
3% 
100% 
l nme 
Cleigne(SteyliffGrovemaze·Chapter 15) 
Size 
HP 
Strength 
Vitality 
Spirit 
L1ghtning(8) 
Anytime 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death and Alterna 
I! ! !! ! ! ~ ! '~' ,! :. ,:; I 
I 
NOTES Emp1oys Dark elemental attacks capable of causing Instant Death Summons 
minions Break effects Vitality -20% (body/30%1 
····-·--·-·-·-··-·------------·- ------------- ____ / 
GARGOYLE 
1.1 -n llJ t 
Size 
1 
level 
32 
HP 
7.800 I 
EXP 
182 Strength 
840 , 
Libra 
5 Vitality 
46 
. Parry 
Spirit 
50 
Chance 
3% 
50% 
ltems i 
Knight's Ankle~ ; 
firel51 
Time 
Size 
82 
HP 
2,080 Strength 
45 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
3% 
100% 
Natural Habitat 
Leide (Balouve Mines maze - Chapler 15); Cleigne (Steyliff Grove 
maze-Chapter15) 
Clues! 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death and Altema 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1! ,! ~ 1! 
l evel 
57 
EXP 
1.200 
Libra 
5 
Chance 
3% 
50% 
Size 
1 
HP 
51.400 
Strength 
17.410 
Vitality 
130 
Spirit 
115 
Items 
Champion's Anklet 
fire(5) 
Anytime 
A1 
Time 
Natural Habitat 
Ouscae (fociaugh Hollow maze - Chapter 15) 
Clues! 
Hunt:TremblingKillers(lestallum. Thoroughfare) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Alterna 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Alterna 
I!!!!!~! 5! 1! I~ 1! I I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 5! 1! 120% 
120% 
I 
NOTES 
Capable of infl.icti.ng Stop status. Body part modifiers: +30% damage from 
II 
weapons (body); +60% damage from weapons (head); + 100% damage from weapons i 
(back). Break effects: Vrtahty -50% (back/10%). 
-------
A tLABIUTY 
Natural Habitat 
FORAS 
rfi 
level 
EXP 
' Libra 
Parry 
Clues! 
MainOuest:ZegnautusKeep 
35 
423 
8 
Chance 
3% 
50% 
Size 
21 
HP 
Strength 
33.800 1 
7,470 
Vitality 
Spirit 
i07 
83 
Items 
Crusaders Ankle'. I 
fire(5) 
Anytime ! 
I 
I 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death and Alterna 
i 
I! ! ! ! ! ! ! 5! 1! 1~ t! i 
I 
rJDTES 
Capable of inflicting Stop status. Body part modifiers: +5% damage from 
weapons (body); +30% damage from weapons (back); + 40% damage from weapons 
(weak spot in the back). Break effects: Vitality-30% (back/10%). Vitality -50% (weak 
spotmtheback/10%). 
--
--·-··-·-·-··-·--·-·-·-·-
··-·---------·--· 
I 
rJOTES 
Capable of inflicting Stop status. Body part modifiers: + 30% damage from 
weapons (body); + 60% damage from weapons. (head); + 100% damage from weapons 
(back). Break effects: Vitahty -50% (back/10%) 
BRAINDRAINER 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
95 
3,139 
45 
Yes 
Chance 
5% 
100% 
Size 
HP 
Strength 
Vitality 
Spirit 
185,000 
52,590 
109 
162 
Lavender Oil 
lce(8) 
Anytime 
Natural Habitat 
Ouscae (Costlemark Tower maze - Chapter 15) 
Quest -
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Alterna 
I! ! ! ! !! ~ ! 1! ! 1~ I:: 
I 
NOTES 
Employs Ice-elemental attacks. Capable of inflicting Mollified and Conlusron 
statuses. Break effects: Vitality--20% (body/30%). 
I 
------
--·-·-·-·--•
·-·--------·-----·-·---------·-····-········-··-··-·--··-···-·-·---·-··--·-····-----' 
FORAS 
~It: Tl; 
Size 
level 
35 HP 
18,200 
EXP 
423 Strength 
8,930 
Libra 
8 Vitality 
184 
Parry 
Spirit 
178 
r-· 
Chance 
Primary 
3% 
Crusaders Anklet 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
50% 
fire(5) 
AV LABIUTY 
l nme 
Natural Habitat 
lluest MainOuest:ZegnautusKeep 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death and Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ~ ~ ! 5! 1! ,~ I:: 
I 
NOTES 
Capable of inflicting Stop status. Body part modifiers: +5% damage from 
weapons (body); +30% damage from weapons (back); +40% damage irom weapons 
~;;~rn s£~\~~~
1
~,;jk1. Break effects: Vitality -30% lback/10%). Vitality -50% (weak 
- -
-
---· 
- -----
- -------------
Bestiary 
~ · Daemons 
257 

258 
AV 
~ .,. 1'Y 
Natural Hebttat 
TON BERRY 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Size 
29 HP 
231 
Strength 
15 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
I 
:~~:asry 
Chanco 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
5% 
50% 
Quest Hunt: The Case of the Disappearing Hunters (A!tissia. Maag!tol 
I STATUS AILMENTS -
1 i 
31.300 i 
3.840 ! 
105 ' 
129 1 
ltems j 
WhiteChoker ! 
Lightning(33) ' 
20:30to03:59 : 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1!~ I~ ~ 1! I 
I 
NOTES 
Employs fire-elemental attacks capable of inflicuo_g Burnt status. Capable of 
mfliclrny Stop status. Break effects: Vitality -20% lbody/30%). 
./ 
MASTER TONBERRY 
Size 
lovol 
88 HP 
EXP 
9.233 Strength 
Libra 
45 Vitality 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
I 
DROPS 
Chance 
Primary 
t0% 
Secondary 
Appendaae 
Element 
50% 
I 
WAILA~l"TY 
I Time 
Natural Habitat 
Cle1gne {Steyhtt Grove maze Chapter 15) 
Quest 
512.500 
96.620 
244 
289 
Red Choker 
I 
~T~[
0
~S AILMENTS Highly resistant to Instant Death. immune to A!terna. resistant 
I! ! ! ! 10K ~ ! 1! ,! ~ ,! 
I 
NOTES 
Employs Fire-elemental attacks capable of mfhc11ng Burnt status Capable of 
mfllctrng Stop status and Instant Death Break effects Vitality -20% (body/30%) 
____________________ : .. ~-----
- --- -- --- --- - __ / 
BOMB 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Size 
15 HP 
17 Strength 
15 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
1% 
2t 
5.400 t 
850 
54 i 
71 ' 
ltoms 1 
Fire Crest ' 
VAllJ 
!TY I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Tims 
100% 
Fire(12l i 
20:30to03:59 i 
Natural Habitat 
Common 
nuost -
I STATUS AILMENTS -
I! ! ! ! 10~ ~ ! ! ,! ,~ ,;;: 
1 
I 
NOTES 
Employs fire-elemental attacks capable of inflicting Burnt status. Can self-
i',.,· •. 
destruct. damaging all nearby characters. Break effects: Vitality -20% (body/30%). 
! 
------------------------· ____________________________________________ _; 
ICE BOMB 
I. U 
Lovel 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Socondary 
Appendage I 
:~~~a~y 
-----
Elemont 
I Time 
Common 
I STATUS AILMENTS • 
Size 
22 HP 
27 Strength 
15 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chonce 
1% 
100% 
~ ~ ~ 00 
M 
~ ~ ~ W 
7.7.00 
1.390 
69 
86 
I 
I 
NOTES 
Emp\O\'S Ice elemental attacks capable of mfhctmg frozen status B1eak 
effects Vitaloly 20% ibody/30%) 
·----·---------------- ----·------------------------------------------- - -- ________ _/ 
. .... 
.,.,. -,. ,,. .. , 
.. 
,); 
~ 
" 
'\ 
IAILA81• V 
Natural Habitat 
Quest -
TON BERRY 
u l 
Size 
level 
84 
HP 
EXP 
2.888 Strength 
Libra 
15 Vitality 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
5% 
50% 
I Time 
Cleigne(SteyliffGrovemaze - Chapter15) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resrstant to Alterna 
I 
335,200 
66,040 
216 
255 
Blue Choker 
lightningl99) 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1! ,! ~ :: 
I 
NOTES Employs fire-elemental attacks_ capable of inflicting Burnt status. Capable of 
inflicting Stop status. Break effects: Vitality -20% (body/30%1. 
SIR TONBERRY 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appsndago 
Element 
I Time 
Size 
75 
HP 
6.774 Strength 
45 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
6% 
50% 
Ouscae {Oaurell Caverns maze -Chapter 15) 
267.400 
52.890 
210 
7.49 
Red Choker 
l ightningl661 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death and Altema. resistant to Stop 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! ,! 1! ~ ,: 
I 
NOTES 
Employs frre elemental attacks capable of 1nflictmg Burnt status Capable of 
mtlicling Stop status and Instant Death Break effects Vi!ality 20% {body/30%) 
' 
- -
------- --
--------------- - _________ ) 
GRENADE 
Vi L 
I\. 
Natural Habitat 
Quest -
Common 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
:~i~~asry 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Time 
I STATUS AILMENTS ReS1stant to Alterna 
Size 
31 
HP 
48 S11ength 
15 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
1% 
100% 
2 ; 
9.400 
2.720 
78 
96 
Items ' 
fire Crest · 
frre(121 , 
20:30to03:59 ' 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! ! 4! ,~ 1;: 
I 
NOTES 
Employs frre elemental attacks capable of mfircung Burnt status 
Capab1e of causing a large exp!osmn that can summon up to th11;1e Bombs 
Break effects Vitality -20% lbody/30%) 
------------------- ------------------------ - - -- ----- _ _/ 
ICE BOMB 
'" 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Secondary 
Appendage 
l
:~i~~asry 
_______ Element 
IAll.Al!ILITY 
Natural Habitat 
I Tims 
Size 
22 
HP 
27 Strength 
15 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
1% 
100% 
Quest 
Hunt: Cool Cal!atein Mist llestallum. Tho1oughfare) 
I STATUS AILMENTS . 
24.100 • 
1,980 ' 
93 i 
ften1s ! 
lceC1est • 
-! 
lcei12l I 
20 301003 59 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! u! ! 1~ 1! 
1 
I 
NOTES Employs Ice-elemental attacks capable of mfi1cting Frozen status 
Break effects Vitality -20% lilody/30%) 
-----------------------·----··--··---
----- ------- ___ _) 
MASTER TONBERRY 
AVA1 
T' 
Naturnl Habitat 
It. 
FS 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
:~i~~asry 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Tims 
Guest 
Hunt· TheTragicfacts{Attissia,Maagho) 
Size 
41 
HP 
1-617 Strength 
45 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
6% 
50% 
1 ! 
99,50o i 
11,810 : 
173 
210 
Items 
Green Choker 
Lightning{33) 
20:301003:59 
I STATUS AILMENTS Highly resistant to Instant Death. resistant to A\\erna and Stop 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1!~ 1! ~ 1! 1
1 
inllicting Stop status and Instant Death. Break effects: Vitality ·20% ibody/30%1. 
I 
I 
NOTES 
Employs fire-elemental attacks capable of inflicting Burnt status. Capable ot 
. 
-----··--· 
···----------·----·------··· ·----···--··-----··--------·---------·----·---- -
___________ J 
A.Vil 
'TY 
Natural Habitat 
SIR TONBERRY 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Size 
75 
HP 
7.472 Strength 
45 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
100% 
50% 
Guest 
Sidequest: legend Wmpped in Enigma (Randolph) 
1 I 
372.700 
70.560 
235 i 
210 1 
Items I 
Chefs Kni f~ 
lightning i99; 1
1 
20:30to03:59 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death and Alterna. resistant to Stop 
I 
I! ~ ! ! ! ~ ! 5! ! ~ 1! I 
I 
NOTES 
Employs frre elemental at1acks capable of mfl1ct1ng Burnt status Capable of I 
mflrctmg Stop status and Instant Death Break effects Vitality 20% {bodyi30%) 
------------------------------··-------·------------- -- --- --J 
GRENADE 
IY 
Natural Habitat 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Size 
31 
HP 
48 Strength 
15 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
1% 
100% 
Quest 
Hunt: Will-o'-the-Wisps 0111 on !he Town {Altissia. Mm1gho) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Alterna 
2 1 
31.300 ! 
3,840 
105 i 
129 : 
Items \ 
fireCiest I 
I 
fire{12; i 
20:30to03:59 i 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! ! ! 1~ 1: · 
I 
NOTES 
Employ_ s fire-elemental attacks capable of inflicting Burnt status. 
Capableofcausingala1geexplosion thatcansummonuptothree8ombs. 
Break effects: Vitality -20% (body/30%1. 
-----------·-·- ·-----··-·-·------------·-··-- ----·----------------------· 
CRYONADE 
JT 
Size 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
:i~~a~ 
Secondary 
Appendage 
_____ 
_. 
Element 
M •t>l;fl\TV 
Time 
65 
HP 
289 Strength 
15 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
1% 
100% 
Natural Habitat 
Cleigne (Glacial Grotto maze - Chapter 151 
n.uost -
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Al1erna 
20.so~ I 
20.570 ' 
105 1 
125 ' 
Items I 
Ice Crest ' 
lcei17.; I 
An11ime ; 
I 
188% 
till< 
188% 
1119% 
12911 
1fltll 
121% 
!GI% 
ABS 
!Dlf\ 
11~ 
*~~:~~ff~~~:u~~'.iii~!~2n~e{~~~~~U!J~t can summon up to three Ice Bombs 
I 
NOTES 
Employs Ice-elemental attacks capable ot innic1ing froien status. 
-----·--------·--- - ------·-·-·--·-·--·-----·-·-- -----·-·-··-·-·--------·-----·-·-··--··-' 

THUNDER BOMB 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
:~i~a~y 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
t 
Time 
Size 
21 
HP 
25 Strength 
15 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
1% 
100% 
Natural Habitat 
Common; Ouscae {Fociaugh Hollow) 
Quest 
Main Quest: The Trial of Ramuh 
2 i 
~:~~~ I 
:~ I 
Items I 
Ughtning Cres~ 
Lightningl12) ' 
Anytime + 
I 
NOTES . Employs Lightning-elemental attacks capable of inflicting Shocked status 
Break effects: Vitality -20% {body/30%). 
FLAN 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
:~i~a~y 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Size 
14 HP 
23 Strength 
15 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
3% 
100% 
1 
2,500 
690 
50 
66 
Items 
Potion j 
. I 
lightning{l21 
Time 
Anytime 
Natural Habitat 
Common; Leide {Crestholm Channels); Ouscae {Costlemark Tower); 
Cleigne {Glacial Grotto) 
Quest 
Main Quest: Sword in the Waterlall 
I STATUS AILMENTS . 
I~ ~ ! ~ ~ ~ !11! 1! 
I~ : 
I 
oom '·•~ "'~'''• "''°" ""' '"'"' '"'" ,,,,. 1-0<1 
CREME BRULEE 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
:~~a~y 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
llAB<UT'r 
Time 
Natural Habitat 
Cleigne !Steyliff Grovel 
Quest 
MainOuest:PartyofThree 
I STATUS AILMENTS . 
Size 
1 
25 
HP 
3,700 
55 Strength 
1,450 
15 Vitality 
68 
Yes Spirit 
85 
Chanco 
I terns 
1% 
Lightning Crest 
100% 
Firet12) 
Anytime 
I~~~~!~ !I! 1! 
~I:: 
I ""' ..... ,,., 
.. ;~" .~ .. , 
..... ,, .... 
,,,,. ''" ,,._, 
MARSHMALLOW 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
~~:;J.,v 
Appondoge 
Elenrnnt 
Time 
Sizo 
52 HP 
222 Strongth 
15 Vitality 
Ves Spirit 
Chance 
2% 
100% 
Natural Habitat 
leide tKoyca1richTrcnchrnaze-Chapter 15) 
Quest • 
I STATUS Al~MENTS Resiswnt to Alter nu 
1 
9,400 : 
10,300 
93 
112 
Items , 
lceC1es1 ; -I 
-1 
lccl\21 
Anytime 
lma•m II D• ~ * f
-<>-
iG% 
50% 
58% 
50I\ 
50% 
50% 
50% 
120il 
SOI\ 
121111 
110% 
['" "''" "'""";• "'°" ·~· '""" "M" ,,,. '"°"""' 
'L 
Natural Habitat 
THUNDER BOMB 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
> I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Size 
21 
HP 
25 Strength 
15 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
1% 
100% 
Quest 
Hunt: Thunder in Them Thar Hills (Wiz Chocobo Post) 
I STATUS AILMENTS 
23,600 
1,870 
90 
113 
lightning Crest 
lightning{121 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1! 
1! 
~ 1!: 
I 
NOTES 
Employs l1ghtn1ng elemental attacks capable of 111f11cting Shocked status 
Breakeffects Vitality 20%{body/30%1 
- --- --· ---·----· --·-·---------··---·· ..•.• -- -
- -- - - -- - - ---------_ _/ 
FLAN 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Size 
14 
HP 
23 Strength 
15 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
3% 
1 
18,200 
i.130 
71 
94 
Potion 
l
:~i~a~v 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Time 
100% 
Lightning{121 
Natural Habitat 
Quest 
Hunt: Squash the Squirmers {longwythe Rest Area) 
I STATUS AILMENTS . 
Ima• m •ma 4 * {I
-<>- ! 
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ : 
~ -
-
00 
-
I'm" ,,,., .. ,,.,, .. ;. ··"· ......... ,.., ,,., .,.,,,,. 
-··--··-·--·---·--·------··- -·-··-··-·---·-----··--·---·-----·----·--- ··-·- ---··-- ·----··--·_) 
GELATIN 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
::i~:a~y 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Time 
Size 
35 
HP 
101 
Strength 
15 Vitality 
Ves Spirit 
Chance 
2% 
100% 
Natural Habitat 
leide (Crestholm Channels), Ouscae {Costlemark Tower) 
Quest 
Hunt: Blobs Ashore IO!d Lestallum) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Alterna 
lce{l2) 
I~ ~ ! ~ ~ ~ !I A! ! I~ 1! 
I '""' ,.,.,, "'"'"' .,, ... ·~ ........ ; 
.. ,, .. '"""""' 
GALVANADE 
T 
~ T 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
Size 
2 
54 
HP 
21.200 
18B Strength 
12,970 
15 Vitality 
99 
Yes 
Spirit 
120 
I 
DROPS 
Chance 
1% 
lightning Crest 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
100% 
Lightning{12) 
AVA 
Time 
Natural Habitat 
Duscae tCostlemark Tower); leide {Keycatrich Trench maze · 
Chapter 15) 
Quest · 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Alterna 
I! ! ! ~ ! ~ ! 1! . 
1!. ~ 1! 
I 
NOTES 
Employs Lightrnng·elemental attacks capable ol inflicting Shocked status 
Capable of causrng a large explosion that can summon up to three Thunder Bombs 
Break effects: Vitality -20% {body/30%). 
JUMBO FLAN 
Natural Habitat 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
~~i~a~y 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Time 
Quest 
Hunt: Raindrops in the Night (Hammerhead) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death 
Size 
15 HP 
26 Strength 
15 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
3% 
100% 
I 
18,700 
1.210 
72 
95 
Items 
Potion 
lightning{121 
20:30to03:59 
l~~~~~~!I 
1! 
1! 
1~ ! 
1_:_::~:·~"=:~=~='~1·•-
j 
BAVAROIS 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
~::a~y 
, 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Time 
Size 
50 
HP 
207 Strength 
15 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
2% 
100% 
Natural Habitat 
leide tKeycatrichTrenchmaze-Chapter 151 
Quest Hunt: King of the Great Escape (Altissia. Maagho) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Alterna 
I~~!~~~!'! 
1! 
I~ I~ 
I 
.m.. '··~ "., ..... , """' ... ,,., ..... ; .. ,,,,, '"""'""'' 
Bestiary 
• 
Daemons 
259 

260 
DAE MONS 
DOLCE 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Size 
72 
HP 
455 Strength 
15 Vitality 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
Secondary 
Appendage 
l i 
16.400 I 
22.360 I 
102 1 
122 i 
Items i 
Fire Crest j 
I 
~~i~:ry 
Chan3c~ 
Element 
i00% 
Fire{12J i 
AVAIL BIUTY 
I Time 
Anytime i 
Natural Habitat 
Duscae {Daurell Caverns maze - Chapter 15); Cleigne ISteyliff Grove i 
maze -Chapter 15) 
' 
Quest 
* 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Alterna 
I~ ~ ! ~ ! ~ ! A! 
1! 1~ 1! : 
I 
NOTES 
Employs HP draining a1tacks Immune to all weapon types ,nclud1ng Royal 
Arms Break effects Vitality 20% (body/30%) 
---·----·-··------------- -----------·-·-------------·--·-·-··- --- -- _) 
BLACK FLAN 
r~tBU E 
Size 
Level 
38 HP 
EXP 
144 Strength 
Libra 
22 Vitality 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
I 
~~i~::ry 
Chan;~ 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
100% 
I 
AVAr 
BILJTY 
I Time 
Natural_ Habitat 
leide {Crestholm Channels); Insomnia (Chapter 14); Leide 
{KeycatnchTrenchmaze-Chapter 15) 
lluest -
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death and Alterna 
42.100 
5,850 
110 
142 
Dark Crest 
lce{12J 
I~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ !I 5! ! ~ 1: 
I 
NOT_ES 
Employs Dark-e_lemental and HP-draining attacks. Break effects 
Vitality -20% {body/30%) 
CUSTARD 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Size 
72 HP 
455 Strength 
15 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
2% 
100% 
l
~atu~~~~tat 
Cleigne{Steyliff Grovemaze - Chapter 15) 
Quest 
* 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Alterna 
16.400 
22.360 ! 
102 ! 
122 ! 
Items ! 
lightning Crest ! 
:i 
lightning{12J ! 
Anytime j 
Im II II m II D II ~ * I 
-<>- i 
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ -
rn 
-
I 
NOTES 
Employs HP dra1n111g attacks Immune to all weapon types mcludmg Royal 
Arms Break effects Vitality 20%(body/30%J 
------·---·--·-----------·---
-----------·---·-···--·-·- - ------- - - -
../ 
BLACK FLAN 
R 
'E 
Size 
Level 
38 HP 
EXP 
144 Strength 
Libra 
22 Vitality 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
r 
.. 
Chance 
Primary 
2% 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
100% 
/AtlABIL TI 
I Time 
Natural Habitat 
lluest 
Hunt: Mission: Invincible {Meldacio Hunter HO) 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death and Alterna 
I~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ !I 5! 50% 
I 
NOUS Employs Dark-elemental and HP-draining attacks. Break effects· 
Vitality-20%{body/30%J. 
AVAILAB L 
Natural Habitat 
Guest 
HECTEYES 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Duscae (Daurell Caverns) 
I STATUS AILMENTS -
Size 
20 
HP 
77 Strength 
15 Vitality 
Yes Spirit 
Chance 
1% 
50% 
91.100 
7,350 
156 
202 
Dark Crest 
50% 
110% 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1! , 
1! 
1~ 1! 
I 
tJOTES 
Capable of inllic_ting Compromised and Confusion statuses. Break effects 
Vitahty-20%(body/30%J 
-----------
---
·----~--------- --
MATCHA MOUSSE 
·~ BJTH 
Size 
21.50~ I 
Level 
83 
HP 
EXP 
644 
Strength 
30,570 
Libra 
15 Vitality 
107 I 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
126 1 
r 
.. 
Chance 
Items I 
Primary 
3% 
Dark Crest 
Secondary 
:I 
Appendage 
Element 
100% 
lce{12J 
I Time 
Anytime 
Natural Habitat 
Cleigne {Stey!iff Grove maze - Chapter 15) 
Quest 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death, resistant to Alterna 
I~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ! 1:% ! ! 1! 
[ ·~··==~-====~-_) 
LAKHMU FLAN 
,a1 tS 
Size 
274.00~ I 
Level 
61 
HP 
EXP 
388 Strength 
39.180 
Libra 
22 Vitality 
210 
Parry 
Yes Spirit 
269 
r~ 
Chance 
Items 
Primary 
2% 
Dark Crest 
Secondary 
Appendage 
-I 
Element 
100% 
lce{12J l 
81 
l 
I Time 
. 
I 
Natural Habitat 
leide {KeycatrichTrenchmaze - Chapter15) 
Anynme l 
lluest 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death and Alterna 
I~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ !I s! ! ~ 1! 
Vitality -20% {body/30%) 
I 
NOHS 
Employs Dark-e_lemental and HP-draining attacks. Break effects: 
------------
- -----
HECTEYES 
m - ' 
Size 
Level 
20 
HP 
EXP 
77 Strength 
Libra 
15 Vitality 
Parry 
Yes 
r-· 
Chance 
Primary 
1% 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
50% 
Time 
I 
Natural Habitat 
lluest 
Hunt A Nightmare Upon 1he Water {Altissia Maaghol 
I STATUS AILMENTS -
Spirit 
24.60~ I 
1,620 
as ! 
111 1 
Items I 
I 
Dark Crest I 
-I 
fire(6J i 
I 
20:30to03:59 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1!% 
1! 
1~ 1! 
'I 
V1tality-20%{body/30%J. 
I 
N_OT_ES 
Capable of inflicting Compromised and Confusion statuses. Break effects: 
------------·-·--------------------------------- ----------------- j 
HECTEYES 
,. 
t 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
55 
499 
t5 
Chance 
Size 
HP 
24.400 
Strength 
t2,830 
Vitality 
97 
Spirit 
124 
Items 
l
:~i:asry 
1% 
Dark Crest 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
50% 
firel61 
IAIL 
tl TY 
I Time 
Anytime 
Natural Habitat 
Leide {Keycatrich Trench maze - Chapter 151; Cleigne {around 
PitiossRuins) 
lluest -
I STATUS AILMENTS Flesistant to Alterna 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1!% 
1! 
1~ ~ 
I 
N_OTES 
Capable of inflic_ting Compromised and Confusion statuses. Break effects 
Vrtality-20%1body/30%) 
------·-·-----·---------

IMPERIAL FORCES 
IMPERIAL TROOPER 
T · 
Size 
1 
Level 
16 HP 
2.600 ' 
EXP 
42 Strength 
800 
Libra 
1.5 Vitality 
64 , 
Parry 
Spirit 
55 l 
I 
DROPS 
Chance 
Items I 
Primary 
5% 
Superior Restorative ! 
Secondary 
1% 
Bulletproof Vest l 
Appendage 
l 
Element 
30% 
lightning(2) i 
AVAILABI 11'1r 
Time 
Anytime i 
Natural Habitat 
Leide (hill overlooking Insomnia); imperial bases; landing crah drops i 
fromChapter05toChapter08 
i 
I 
Quest 
Main Guests: Engaging the Empire. Imperial Infiltration 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Po1Son and Stop 
I! ! ! ! ~ ~ ! 1!~ 1! ~ I: 
r 
.. 
-------- -- -
--- -------_ _) 
IMPERIAL RIFLEMAN 
AVAILABILITV 
Natural Habitat 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
~~i~:a~y 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Elem ant 
I Time 
leide (Esterleiden Blockade) 
Quest 
Main Quests: Ill Tidings. The Power of Kings 
Size 
4 HP 
11 
Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
Spirit 
Chance 
5% 
1% 
30% 
1 
1.000 1 
300 
40 
37 : 
Items ! 
Rellex Enhancer I 
Bulletproof Vest j 
lighlningl21 i 
Anytime I 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Poison and Stop 
1 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1!% 1! ~ 1! 
! 
1-·. 
I 
--- -------- --- -- -------------------------- --- -- -- -- -- ______ _/ 
tf:, 
-~ 
MAGITEK AXEMAN 
AVAILABILITY 
Natural Habitat 
l evel 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
~~i~~a~y 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Size 
1 
6 HP 
2,400 
16 Strength 
370 
1.5 Vitality 
50 
Spirit 
44 
Chance 
Ito ms 
5% 
MuscloStimulanl 
5% 
MagitekBooster 
50% 
lcel4) 
Anytime 
Quest 
Main Quests: Ill Tidings, Main Quest: The Power of Kings 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Poison and Stop 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1!% ! .~ 1! 
rD 
I/ ILABlllTY 
'\.Na~I Habitat 
Quest 
Main Quest: Ill Tidings 
IMPERIAL RIFLEMAN 
QI UT 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Size 
3 HP 
8 Strength 
1 
1,000 
260 
1.5 Vitality 
39 
Spirit 
35 
Chance 
Items 
5% 
Superior Restorative : 
1% 
Bulletproof Vest 
30% 
lightning 12) 
Anytime 1 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Poison and Stop 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! ,!% ,! ~ 1! 
rB 
ABo 
Natural Habitat 
BATIERY SOLDIER 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
~~i~~~y 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Time 
Size 
1 
HP 
1.000 
Strength 
280 
1.5 Vitality 
46 
Spirit 
36 
Chance 
5% 
MuscleStimulan1 
1% 
Bulletproof Vest 
30% 
lightning 121 
Quest 
MainOuest:ThePowerofKings 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Poison and Stop 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1! 
100% ~ 1: 
r _
ES __ 
_ 
IMPERIAL SNIPER 
Size 
1 
l evel 
16 
HP 
EXP 
47 Strength 
2,500 
860 
62 
57 
LABI ITI 
Natural Habitat 
Libra 
1.5 Vitality 
Parry 
Spirit 
I 
DROPS 
Chance 
Primary 
5% 
Secondary 
1% 
Appendage 
Element 
30% 
Time 
Leide(hillover!ookinglnsomnia);imperialbases 
Quest 
Main Guests: Engaging the Empire, The Trial of leviathan 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Poison and Stop 
Reflex Enhancer 
Bulletproof Vest 
Lightning(2J 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1! ,! ~ 1: 
I"'". 
MAGITEK AXEMAN 
Size 
24 
HP 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
103 Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
7.400 
1.460 
83 
Parry 
Spirit 
72 
Items 
Muscle Stimulant 
Secondary 
5% 
MagitekBoostei 
Appendage I 
:~i~a~y 
Chan5~ 
Element 
50% 
lce(4) 
llfY 
I Time 
Anytime 
Natural Habitat 
Leide (Fm mouth Garrison); Duscae (Aracheole Stronghold); landing 
craftdropsfromChapter05 toChapler08 
Uuest -
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Poison and Stop 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! ,!. ! 1~ ,: 
r 
.. 
AVAILABILITY 
Natural Habitat 
IMPERIAL RIFLEMAN 
~ l\P lul,. TE:S 
Size 
Level 
16 
HP 
900 
320 
EXP 
42 Strength 
, Libra 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
1.5 Vitality 
44 
Spirit 
49 
Chance 
5% 
Superior Restorative 
1% 
Bulletproof Vest 
30% 
Quest 
Main Quest: Express Train for Trouble 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Poison and Stop 
I! ! ! ! ! ! ! 1!1 1! 
~ ,: 
rm 
-<111~ --- -------------------------- -- -------- -------- -- - ----J 
V ILA ILITV 
Natural Habitat 
BATIERY SOLDIER 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
~~i~~a~y 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Size 
1 ; 
t6 HP 
2,500 i 
42 Strength 
790 i 
1.5 Vitality 
71 
Spirit 
55 ! 
Chance 
Items 
5% 
MuscleStimulanl 
1% 
Bulletproof Vest 
30% 
Lightning 12) 
Anytime ~ 
leide(hilloverlookinglnsomnia);imperialbases 
Quest 
Main Quests: Engaging the Empire, Imperial Infiltration. The Trial of leviathan 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Poison and Stop 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! ,! 1! ~ 1: 
rm 
ETERNAL TROOPER 
A I Bt 
Natural Habitat 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
A11pendage 
Element 
I Time 
lnsomnia1Chapter14) 
Quest 
Main Guest: The Cure for Insomnia 
Size 
1 
35 
HP 
4.800; 
42 Strength 
2.960 · 
1.5 Vitality 
86 
Spirit 
73 
Chance 
Items 
3% 
Muscle Stimulant l 
30% 
lightning(2) 
Anytime 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Alterna, immune to Poison and Stop 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! ,!. 1! ~ ,: ! 
I""' 
ARMORED AXEMAN 
Natural Habitat 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
I 
AVAILABILITY 
Quest 
MamOuest ExpressTra•nforTrouble 
Size 
31 
HP 
1 
166 Strangth 
1.5 Vitality 
1.000 
630 
22 
24 
Chance 
5% 
5% 
50% 
Spirit 
Muscle Stimulant 
MagitekBooster 
lcel41 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Alterna. immune to Poison and Stop 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1! ! 1~ ,: 
I""'. 
• 
Bestiary 
fl Daemons 
• Imperial Forces 
261 

262 
Natural Habitat 
nu est 
MAGITEK BANNERMAN 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
:~i~~.~y 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Size 
6 HP 
2,200 
18 Strength 
360 
1.5 Vitality 
56 
Spirit 
44 
Chance 
Items 
10% 
Flesh fortifier 
1% 
Bulletproof Suit ! 
50% 
lightning(4) 
Time 
Anytime 
RandomlandingcraftdropsinlucisfrornChapter02onward 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Poison and St0p 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! ,! 1! ~ 1: 
I""' .... ,.~ ..... , 
·™····"·' ·"···:·· .••. .. ~ 
MAGITEK SWORDSMAN 
R!tillTES 
' Level 
Size 
18 HP 
1 I 
EXP 
Libra 
68 Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
6.100 [ 
970 1 
75 
54 
Parry 
Spirit 
I 
DROPS 
Chance 
Primary 
5% 
Secondary 
5% 
A11pendage 
Element 
50% 
Time 
Natural Habitat 
landing craft drops from Chapter 05 to Chapter 08 
!luest MainOuests:EngagingtheEmpire. The Trial of leviathan 
Items 
RefiexEnhancer 
MagitekBooster 
fire(4J 
Anytime 
i.J I fY 
Natural Habitat 
Quest 
en lo IE 
Size 
love! 
18 HP 
EXP 
73 Strength 
Libra 
1.5 Vitality 
Parry 
Spirit 
I 
DROPS 
Chance 
Primary 
10% 
Secondary 
2% 
Appendage 
Element 
50% 
I Time 
landingcrahdropsfromChapter05!0Chapter08 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Poison and Stop 
1 
5.500 
1,000 
83 
63 
flesh fortifier 
Bulletproof Suit 
lightning(4J 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1:% 1! ~ 1! 
1 
·m •• .,~,... ,~.,~.,, ....... ,,, ......... 
,~ •• 
- -··--~·---------------------------------- -
-- ·- -
-
ARMORED SWORDSMAN 
Natural Habitat 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
:~i~a~y 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Time 
!luest MainOuest:ExpressTrainforTrouble 
Size 
32 
HP 
187 Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
Chance 
5% 
50% 
Spirit 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Poison and Stop 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Alterna. immune to Poison and Stop 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 5! ,! 1~ 1! I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! ! 1! 1~ 
100% 
rou 
I r 
.. 
____________ . ________________________ _/ 
--- -----
MAGITEK ASSASSIN 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
:~i:a~y 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Time 
Size 
47 
HP 
476 Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
108 
Spirit 
96 
Chance 
Items 
5% 
Muscle Stimulant 
50% 
Liylrtninu (4j 1 
Natural Habitat 
landing cralt drops from Chapter 09 onward 
Quest 
Sidequest: ForrnouthGarrison 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resiswnt to Alterna, immune to Poison and Stop 
I! ! ! ! ! ! ! ,!% 1! ~ t: 
r
"
_··-··-·-··-· ··-··· ····-······ ·· ·-······-· ···--·-·· ·-·-···-·············-···--·-··-·-·-··- ·······-··--·---·--·---·-·--····"' 
SHOCK TROOPER 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
~~i~~a~ 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Time 
Natural Habitat 
!luest MarnOuest:ZegnautusKeep 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune lo Poison and Stop 
Size 
31 
HP 
97 Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
Spirit 
Chance 
3% 
30% 
1 
3.800 ' 
680 I 
26 ' 
20 ' 
ltems
1 
f!eshfortifrer ' 
I 
:1 
Fire!1l ; 
Anytime 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 5~ ,! 1~ 1: , 
r Mrn ""'°"''" .. '""'~ 
________________ ./ 
ARMORED ASSASSIN 
.~ 
Natural Habitat 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
:~~=y 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Time 
Quest 
MalnOuest:ExpiessTrainforTrouble 
Size 
1 
34 
HP 
960 
244 Strength 
790 
1.5 Vitality 
20 
Spirit 
22 
Chance 
Items 
5% 
Muscle Stimulant 
2% 
Gravity Well 
50% 
lightning 141 
Anytime 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Alterna. immune 10 Poison and Stop 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! ,! 1! ~ ! 
I'""'. 
-----·-----·-·---·-·-- -·-·-·- ·----·-·-·----------·---··---- --- -··---····-·····-·----/ 
ROGUE AXEMAN 
V !.lo lJT' 
Natural Habitat 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
~~i::.v 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
I Time 
Size 
33 
HP 
166 Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
Spirit 
Chance 
3% 
30% 
Clues! 
Main Quests: The Imperial Capital, Zegnautus Keep 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Poison and Stop 
1 
6.800 i 
4,0~~ i 
ni 
Items ' 
RellexEnhancer i 
Lightning II) 
I! ! ! ! ! ! ! 1! 1! 
~ 1! 
1-· 
Natural Habitat 
Quest 
* 
i<n ·- S 
Size 
l evel 
44 HP 
EXP 
385 Strength 
Libra 
i.5 Vitality 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Spirit 
Chance 
10% 
50% 
I Time 
landingcraftdrops fromChapter05onward 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Altema. immune to Poison and Stop 
I! ~ ! ! ! ~ ! ,:% ,! 
12.BOO 
6,550 
120 
91 
Items 
Flesh Fortifier 
lightning(4) 
Anytime 
50% 
100% 
NOTES Employs lightning·elemental attacks capable ol inllicting Shocked status 
IMPERIAL SPEARMAN 
Natural Habitat 
!luest MainOuest:TheArchaean 
,3l fES 
Level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
:~i=:ry 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Time 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Poison and Stop 
Size 
18 HP 
1 l 
3.200 ! 
60 Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
2~~ I 
48 1 
ltems 1 
Chance 
5% 
50% 
Spirit 
Musc leStimulan~ i 
lightning(4J I 
Anytime I 
I 
f 
4-
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1!~ ,! 
50% 
100% 
r~ 
SHOCK TROOPER 
Natural Habitat 
level 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
:~i:asry 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Time 
!luest MainOuest:ExpressTrainforTrouble 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Poison and Stop 
Size 
31 
HP 
97 Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
Chance 
3% 
30% 
Spirit 
1 
1.200 1 
720 1 
22 
24 
Items 
fleshfortifier 1 
~ ! 
fire(l) ! 
Anytime [ 
I! ! ! ! 120% ~ ! s! 1! 1~ 1! 
! 
I'"" 
""''"''""'""~ 
--·-··-···-··-·-·--·---·-·-··---· 
HAYWIRE AXEMAN 
Natural Habitat 
Love! 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
l
:~i::ry 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Time 
Size 
37 
HP 
209 Strength 
1.5 Vitality 
Chance 
3% 
30% 
Spirit 
) 
1 1 
7.200 i 
4.510 , 
98 
83 
It oms 
RellexEnhancer 
l.ightninglll
ll 
Anytime 
I 
! 
!luest MainOuests:ZegnautusKeep 
i 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Poison and Stop 
I 
I! !! ! ! ! ~ ! ,! ,! ! : I, 
[ 

A 
l• Bl -
Time 
Size 
17 
HP 
311 
Strength 
12 Vitality 
Chance 
30% 
100% 
Spirit 
Natural Habitat 
leide IEsterleiden Blockade); Duscae {Aracheole Stronghold); 
Cleigne {fort Vaullerey); landing craft drops from Chapter 05 to Chapter OB 
Quest 
Main Quests: The Power of Kings, Engaging the Empire 
I STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death. immune to Poison and Stop 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 5~ f! 1~ : 
I 
NOTES 
Body part modifiers: -90% damage from all damage types {all body parts) 
Breakeffects:weapondestroyed{destructibleweapons/3%). 
Size 
Level 
46 HP 
EXP 
1,976 Strength 
Libra 
12 Vitality 
Parry 
Spirit 
DROPS 
Chance 
Primary 
60% 
Secondary 
5% 
Appendage 
Element 
100% 
AVAILABILITY 
Time 
Natural Habitat 
onward 
Quest 
Sidequest: formouthGarrison 
I 
:~:1~osp AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death and Alterna. immune to Poison 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 5~ 1! 1~ :: 
I 
NOTES 
Capable of inflicting Stone status. Body part modifiers: -90% damage from 
~le~~~;iJ!i~;f es (legs and arms). Break effects: weapon destroyed {destructible 
MA-X CUIRASS 
Size 
Level 
51 
HP 
EXP 
3,553 Strength 
Libra 
30 Vitality 
Parry 
Spirit 
r~ 
Chance 
Primary 
100% 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
100% 
ILAPtll 
Time 
Natural Habitat 
Quest 
Sidequest:FormouthGarrison 
I 
STATUS AILMENTS H'ghly resistant 10 Instant Death, immune to Alterna, immune to 
Poison, immune to Stop 
: 
I! ! ! ! IDO> ~ ! 1! 1! 1~ :: : 
I 
I 
~IOTfS Employs lightning-elemental atta_cks capable of inflicting Shocked status. 
i 
Breakettects:weapondestroyed{destructibleweapons/10%). 
I 
Size 
Level 
76 HP 
EXP 
4.780 Strength 
Libra 
IMM Vitality 
Parry 
Spirit 
Primary 
97% 
Secondary 
3% 
Appendage I 
DROPS 
Chance 
Element 
100% 
lightning 133) ' 
AVAILABIL'T" 
I Time 
Anytime 
Natural Habitat 
landing craft drops from Chapter 05 onward atter youve defeated 
aMA-XManiple 
Ou est 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death. Alterna. Poison, and Stop 
I!!!!!~! 1! I: 1~
:.: 
I 
NOTES 
Emp!oys lightning-.elemental attacks c.apable of inflicting Shocked status. 
Body part modifiers: -90% damage from all damage types (legs). -30% damage from 
all damage types {arms). -10% damage from all damage types {hands). Break effects: 
weapon destroyed {destructrbleweapons/10%1 
--- ------- ---- --------J 
Size 
46 HP 
1.976 Strength 
12 Vitality 
Spirit 
Chance 
60% 
5% 
100% 
Time 
Anytime 
Natural Habitat 
leide lformouthGarrisonJ; landingcraftdropsfromChapter09 
onward 
Quest 
Sidequest: FormouthGarrison 
I 
STATUS AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death and Allerna, immune to Poison 
and Stop 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 5! 1! t~ 
I 
NOTES 
Capa. ble of inflicting Toad status. Body part modifiers: -90% damage_ from 
alldamagetypesllegsandarms).Breakeffects:weapondestroyed{destructrble 
weapons/3%) 
MA HOPLOMACHUS 
Size 
-<>- I 
IMM I 
3i 
Laval 
45 HP 
45,700 ! 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
1,884 
12 
Chance 
95% 
5% 
100% 
Strength 
Vitality 
Spirit 
10,130 ; 
137 
122 
Items [ 
Dynamo I 
Magnetro~ I 
firelBl i 
Time 
Anytime , 
Natural Habitat 
Landing craft drops from Chapter 09 onward 
Quest 
Sidequest:formouthGarrison 
I 
:~:1~
0
~ AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death and Alterna. immune to Poison 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 5! ,! 1~ :: 
I 
NOTES 
Employs fire-elemental attacks capable of inflicting Burnt status. Body part 
modifiers: -90% damage from all damage types {all body parts). Break effects: weapon 
destroyed{destructibleweapons/10%). 
. 
---· --------------------·--------·- - ----·----------·-·-···-.... ·-----------.. ........ .. 
Size 
Level 
23 
HP 
EXP 
605 Strength 
Libra 
30 Vitality 
Parry 
Spirit 
Chance 
95% 
5% 
Assist Suit 
100% 
lightning{33) 
Natural Habitat 
0510ChapterOB 
Quest 
MainOuest:EngagingtheEmpire 
I 
~
0
Tt~~:n ~~dMS~~;s Highly resistant to Instant Death, resistant to Alterna, immune 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1!1 1! I~ :: ' 
I 
NOTES 
Employs lightning-elemental attacks capable of inllic.ting Shocked status. 
' 
Breakeffects:weapondestroyed(destruclibleweapons/10%) 
--------------
./ 
Size 
Level 
51 
HP 
EXP 
4,286 Strength 
Libra 
30 Vitality 
Parry 
Spirit 
Chance 
tll0% 
100% 
Time 
Natural Habitat 
Quest 
Sidequest:FormouthGarrison 
I 
STATUS AILMENTS Highly resistant to Instant Death, resistant to Alterna, immune 
to Poison and Stop 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! t!% I: I~ :: 
I 
NOTES 
Body part. modifiers: -90% damage from all damage types {all hody partsj. 
Breakeffecls:weaoondestroyed{destructibleweapons/1ll%}. 
Tl'."S 
Size 
46 
HP 
47,300 
1,976 Strength 
10,890 
12 Vitality 
139 
Spirit 
124 
Chance 
Items • 
60% 
5% 
Dynamo 
Tempered Shield 
100% 
fire{B) · 
!LA 1 I 
Time 
Anytime r 
Natural Habitat 
leide {Formouth Garrison); landing craft drops from Chapter 09 
onward 
Quest 
Sidequest: Formouth Garrison 
I 
:::1~osp AILMENTS Resistant to Instant Death and Alterna, immune to Poison 
I~ ! ! ! ! ~ ! 5! 1! I~ :: 
I 
NOTES 
Capable of inflicting Confusion status. Body part modifiers: -90% damage 
fromall damagetypes{legsandarmsJ.Breakeffects:weapondestroyed{clestructible 
weapons/3%). 
Level 
22 
EXP 
709 
Libra 
IMM 
Parry 
Size 
HP 
Strength 
Vitality 
Spirit 
46,20~ ! 
2,240 ' 
307 1 
844 ' 
Items I 
Circular Saw i 
· : 
· l 
Chance 
100% 
liglttning{33) 1 
Anytime 1 
100% 
Natural Habitat 
I 
I 
Quest 
Main Quest: Declaration of War 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death, Allerna. Poison. and Stop 
-<>- I 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1! 1! 1~ IMM 
I 
rlOTES 
Employs lightning-elemental atta_cks capable of inflicting Shocked status. 
Break effects: weapon destroyed {deslruclrble weapons/I 0%). 
Size 
Level 
55 
HP 
124,900 
EXP 
3,572 Strength 
23,370 
Libra 
30 Vitality 
441 
Parry 
Spirit 
1,172 
!"'" 
Chance 
Primary 
95% 
LaserSensm 
Secondary 
5% 
Assist Suit 
Appendage 
Element 
100% 
lightnrng{33J 
I Time 
leide{formouthGarrison) 
I ~Tt~~:n ~l~:s~~;s Highly resistant to Instant Death, resistant to Altarna, immune 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! 1! I: I~ :: 
I 
NOTES 
Employs lightning-elemental anacks capable of inflic.ting Shocked status. 
Breakeffects:weapondestroyed{destructibleweapons/10%) 
Leval 
EXP 
Libra 
Parry 
I 
DROPS 
Primary 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Elemont 
I Time 
99 
22,108 
IMM 
Chance 
95% 
5% 
100% 
Size 
HP 
Strength 
Vitality 
Spirit 
202.000 
152,300 
2,959 
5.125 
MagitekSuit 
MagitekSuitV2 
lighlning{99) 
Landing crattdropsduringChapter 15afteryou'vedefeateda 
Quest 
I STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death, Alterna, Poison. and Stop 
I! ! ! ! ! ~ ! ,!, t: I~ ~ 
I 
NOTES 
Employs lightning-elemental attacks capable of inflicting Shocked status. 
Body part modifiers: -90% damage from all damage types {all bo<ly parts). Brea\ effects: 
weapondestroyed{destructibleweapons/10%). 
-
-
-
~--
• 
Bestiary 
~- Imperial Forces 
263 

264 
s 
Size 
25 
HP 
213.000 
0 Strength 
580 
IMM Vitality 
76 
Spirit 
99 
Chance 
Items 
Quest 
Main Quest: The Trial of Titan 
I 
STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death, 
Alterna, Poison, and Stop 
100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 
100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 
'"OTES UoO-e-ak-ab-le _______ _j 
~f':..i 
Size 
26 
HP 
1,903 Strength 
67 
45 
Vitality 
56 
Spirit 
109 
Chance 
Items 
100% 
Lightning (10) 
Anytime 
Main Quest: Imperial Infiltration 
I 
STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death 
and Alterna, weak to Poison and Stop 
I
!!!!!,~ 
11 
~ * ff 
-<>-
-
100% 100% 100% 100% 120% 
I 
NOTES Capable of dodging. Employs powerful 
Highwmd technique. 
___ ___) 
Parry 
l
~~:~y 
Secondary 
Appendage 
Element 
Size 
42 
HP 
2.486 Strength 
IMM Vitality 
Spirit 
Chance 
100% 
I
AVAILABILI 'V 
Time 
Quest 
Mam Quest The Trral of Leviathan 
Ice (33) 
Anytime 
I 
STATUS AILMENTS Immune to Instant Death, 
Alterna, Poison, and Stop 
Ii~;;:! 
A 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
. I 
NOTES Moves swiftly, but is weak to projectiles 
with homing properties. 

j 
[, 
Size 
Size 
44 HP 
46 
HP 
4,411 
Strength 
5,929 Strength 
IMM Vitality 
IMM Vitality 
Spirit 
Spirit 
Chance 
Chance 
100% 
100% 
Main Quest: Reunion and Recovery 
Main Quest: The Cure for Insomnia 
100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 
100% 
50% 
50% 
50% 
120% 
I 
NOTES Employ' D•<k-•l•m""'"' '"'""''""' 
F ! N~L mmv H 
e Bestiary 
1lf; '> 
Size 
58 
HP 
6,501 
Strength 
IMM Vitality 
Spirit 
Chance 
100% 
Main Quest: The Cure for Insomnia 
D I 
100% 100% 1~o 1:0 100% r 
~ * y 
-v-
100 % 100% 100% 100% 
I 
NOTES Capable of phasing and warp-striking. 
Employs elemental spells. Employs Dark-elemental 
techniques. 
__) 
265 



268 
QUESTIONS & ANSWERS 
As most readers will likely arrive at this packed chapter with very specific queries in mind, we open it with a collection of useful jumping-off points. 
There is much, much more to learn in the many pages of advice and analysis that follow, of course, but we confidently assume that many of the 
following questions will be the cause of a first visit. 
Which weapons should I use? 
-+ Weaponry, page 272 
How does the Elemancy system work? 
-+ Elemancy, page 274 
What do I need to know about Ascension? 
-+ Ascension, page 296 
What do all the status effects in the game mean? 
-+ Status Effects, page 282 
What do the in-game stats mean? 
-+ Attributes, page 269 
How do character skills work? 
-+ Skills, page 303 
What exactly is happening during combat? 
<> What are all the different types of weapon attacks? 
-+ Combat Maneuvers, page 283 
<> What's so special about the Royal Arms? -+ Royal Arms, page 285 
<> What are my allies doing? -+ Ally Coordination, page 288 
<> What do the different techniques do? -+ Techniques, page 288 
<> What is Armiger? -+ Armiger, page 287 
<> What are my defensive options? -+ Defense, page 292 
<> How can I summon my Astrals? -+ Summons, page 291 
How is damage calculated? 
-+ Damage Calculation, page 292 
How does the post-battle Report Card work? 
-+ Report Card, page 294 
How do I play the mini-games Justice Monsters Five and 
Totomostro in Final Fantasy XV? 
What are my stat gains when leveling up? 
-+ Parameter Growth, page 294 
-+ Mini-Games, page 309 
Reading Notes 
What are some interesting party setups? 
-+ Party Setups, page 300 
REFERENCE CHAPTERS 
Walkthrough & Sidequest 
Inventory & Bestiary 

ATTRIBUTES 
Before we delve into advanced mechanics governing combat and party setups, it is necessary to explain the core attributes for party members and 
enemies. 
HP 
0>--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
There are three fundamental states of HP that apply to Noctis and his 
allies. 
<> Base HP is an absolute value that is determined by the character's 
level and gear, plus bonuses derived from consuming meals and 
other boosts. You can dramatically augment this total with certain 
pieces of equipment and foodstuffs, which is by far the best way to 
enhance your survivability. 
<> Current HP is the active value that can be reduced by damage from 
enemy attacks, and is recovered either passively (albeit gradually) or 
by manual recovery methods. 
<> Maximum (Max) HP is the upper limit to which Current HP can 
be recovered through standard restorative means. By default. it is 
equivalent to Base HP This value diminishes as a result of attacks 
from Daemon-type enemies, as well as any depletion that occurs 
during the Danger status. 
The HP bar displays up to three shades to demonstrate the relationship 
between these three values. Your Base HP spans the entire length of 
the bar. Current HP is filled in white. Any black represents a reduction 
in Max HP from the base value. Finally, gray indicates the difference 
between Current HP and Maximum HP 
In other words, as illustrated in the accompanying diagram: 
<> White: Current HP 
<> Gray: Passively recoverable Max HP 
<> White + Gray: Max HP 
<> Black: Max HP reduction (cannot be recovered passively) 
<> White + Gray + Black: Base HP 
Current HP 
Recovery 
Max HP 
Base HP 
Max HP 
Reduction 
If Current HP is less than Max HP, the difference can be recovered 
passively over time, though at a fairly ponderous rate. The default 
recovery speed is 0.4% per second for Noctis and 3% per second for 
allies. Entering a cover state (look for scenery where the @/@prompt 
appears) improves the recovery rate to 4% per second for Noctis, rising 
to 14% when you unlock the eminently affordable Rapid Regen nexus 
on the Recovery Ascension tree. Always make use of cover when you 
can, as it enables you to replenish both Max HP and MP quickly without 
diving into your stocks of restorative items. 
Passive regeneration of HP and the restorative effects of basic potions 
are limited by the value of Max HP To recover Max HP to the full Base 
HP value, you must rest at a lodging or camp, or use elixir-type items. 
Damage Over Time & Fall Damage 
Noctis and his friends can be afflicted with negative statuses that 
gradually drain HP over time. These effects cannot kill your characters. 
however: the reduction will stop at 1 HP 
<> Poison: Removes 1.2% Max HP per second 
<> Envenomed: Removes 2.4% Max HP per second 
<> Burnt/Frozen/Shocked: Removes 3% Max HP per second 
Damage-over-time rates also apply to enemies that are susceptible to 
these effects, ranging from 0.5 to 2% Max HP per second. 
Noctis can also suffer the unfortunate effects of gravity if he plunges 
incautiously from a lofty vantage point. A 33-foot drop results in a loss 
of 20% Max HP At 50 feet. this increases to 40%; at 100 feet, 60%; 
and beyond 330 feet. 100%. Landing in water mitigates the damage to 
a maximum of 20%. 
Danger 
When a party member loses all Current HP in combat. the Danger status 
is triggered: the affected character has no Current HP left, and therefore 
only the gray Max HP bar is displayed. Worse, this bar depletes at a 
steady rate. You therefore need to react quickly whenever this happens. 
<> Noctis can use a recovery item to remove the Danger status 
immediately from himself or his allies. 
<> Noctis loses 1.5% of Max HP per second while in Danger status; 
allies experience a slower Max HP reduction of 0.4% per second. 
<> Noctis can recover from Danger status after 30 seconds if he survives. 
<> Noctis's allies do not recover from Danger status automatically and 
must be rescued by Noctis or other party members. To do so as 
Noctis, simply move within range and hold @/@. 
<> Allies can also rescue Noctis when they are not focusing on another 
task (such as completing a combo or any other animation). If you do 
not wish to use a restorative item, stumble towards your nearest 
healthy ally while taking care to avoid enemy attacks. 
In addition to the constant penalty to their health, characters in 
Danger status have severely limited capabilities: they have reduced 
movement speed, and cannot perform attacks or defensive maneuvers. 
Furthermore, Noctis loses his ability to warp and gradually recover 
MP However, passive attributes - such as a character's defensive 
parameters - are unaffected by the Danger status. 
Death 
If the Max HP of a character in Danger status is fully depleted, he will 
fall to the ground. Should this happen to Noctis, you have no more 
than a few seconds to react and revive him with a Phoenix Down (or 
some other functionally equivalent item). If you fail to do so, the game 
is over and you will need to restart from your most recent save (or a 
checkpoint. should one be available). 
Note that there is no urgency when other party members fall: you can 
apply a Phoenix Down whenever you like, finish the battle without them 
to avoid squandering your supplies if you prefer, or even escape the 
battle to revive them instantly with their Max HP at 25% of their Base HP 
.l\I.. Strategy & 
· Analysis 
,... Questions & 
"" Answers 
269 

270 
MP 
<:>·;>--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
Noctis employs Magic Points to perform a variety of unique abilities. Unlike HP, character advancement and choice of gear are the only ways to 
increase his maximum MP. Allied characters do not maintain or use MP. 
Consumption 
These are the governing principles of MP expenditure in battle. 
1. Warping: All warp-related actions (activated with @/\)) consume 
30 MP. 
2. Defensive Phasing: Phasing also consumes MP. The longer you 
press the guard button before the evasive maneuver takes place, 
the more MP is consumed. The exact formula is: MP consumed = 3 
+ (7 x t/5), where t corresponds to the length of the button press in 
seconds. The upper limit on this value is 15. The more accurate your 
defensive button presses are, therefore, the less MP you'll need to 
spend. 
3. Shield Guard: Holding @/@ to guard with a shield consumes 
3 MP, regardless of how long the button is pressed. Shield usage 
therefore greatly improves defensive MP efficiency. 
4. Aerial Maneuvers: Once you unlock the Airstep ability in the 
Ascension tree (and its subsequent upgrades, Airstride and 
Airdance), Noctis can perform extended air combos. Other aerial 
abilities include Death Drop, which enables Noctis to warp into 
range from afar to begin an aerial combo, and the evasive maneuver 
Airslip. Each of these expensive moves costs 20 MP per use, so they 
are best deployed when strategically expedient. Indiscriminate use 
will often lead to rapid MP bar depletion and the Stasis condition. 
5. Holy & Death: These unique spells, granted by the Ring of the Luc ii, 
consume 10% and 5% of Max MP respectively per second of usage. 
Recovery 
By default, MP recovers automatically at a rate of 2% of Max MP per 
second; this increases to 12% per second while in cover (and 22% after 
you unlock Rapid Regen in the Ascension tree), making cover a very 
cost-effective way to regain MP whenever it is available. 
Stamina 
In combat, point-warping to a blue marker position instantly refills all 
MP. Whenever you have access to such a vantage point, it essentially 
gives you access to infinite MP. Ethers and Elixirs also restore all MP 
immediately and are worth stockpiling for long or difficult fights in which 
you plan to use MP liberally. 
Stasis 
Noctis enters Stasis when his MP bar is fully depleted (in other words, 
when he performs an action that costs as much or more than his 
remaining MP). While in Stasis, MP recovery is halted. Noctis will also 
briefly collapse if you try to perform MP-based moves. 
To relieve Stasis, you need to stop attacking for several seconds, 
until passive MP recovery resumes automatically. Taking cover makes 
the process almost instantaneous. Alternatively you can use an MP 
recovery item or point-warp to a blue marker position to immediately 
refill your gauge. 
0,r-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~---<> 
By default, the stamina bar allows for a maximum duration of 10 
seconds of sprinting, or hang time from an elevated blade-warp point. 
The Sprinter and Distance Runner Ascension abilities increase this value 
to 15 and 20 seconds respectively. 
If you fully deplete the stamina bar, it will turn red. While the bar is 
red, Noctis can no longer sprint and is incapable of warping. The bar 
becomes green once again (with all attendant penalties removed) when 
it refills to 50% of the maximum. 
With a bit of practice, you can essentially enjoy unlimited stamina while 
sprinting by performing a ·stamina refresh". This is performed by hitting 
@/? within 0.6 seconds of the meter hitting zero, or by releasing 
© !©within the same timeframe, depending on your sprinting method. 
If successful, the stamina bar will refill entirely as Noctis performs a 
short warp forward and continues sprinting. 
Note that there is a refractory period after every failed attempt where 
you attempt to activate the warp too early, during which a refresh is not 
possible. In these instances, you will need to wait until the bar refills to 
at least a fifth of its maximum before you try again. You cannot simply 
hit the stick or button and hope to trigger it serendipitously; mastering 
the timing is essential. 

Combat Parameters 
0·~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~---o 
Party members and enemies have a set of basic parameters used to determine damage calculations for attacks. 
o Weapon Power contributes to physical damage by party members 
against enemies. Enemies do not employ this parameter. 
o Strength is the basis for physical damage by party members and all 
damage dealt by enemies. 
o Magic governs the damage output of crafted spells (and a small 
selection of weapons, which we will cover later) . While all permanent 
party members are capable of using spells, Noctis will naturally 
outperform his friends in this respect and should be the primary 
caster in any magic-oriented strategy. 
o Vitality and Spirit determine defense against physical and magic 
damage respectively. 
Also of critical importance are resistances to both damage types 
and status ailments. Resistances, or lack thereof, provide pivotal 
Enemy Intel 
0>>--------
modifiers that can make a huge difference in dealing or sustaining 
damage from attacks. 
o Resistances to the five types of damage (ballistic - from enemy 
firearms or other missile weapons - and Fire, Ice, Lightning, and 
Dark) are reflected in changes to percentage values. These indicate 
the amount of mitigation that each character receives against a 
particular damage type. On the other hand, enemies have a much 
broader range of resistances that also encompass the party's arsenal 
of different weapon types. 
o Resistances to status ailments determine your chances of 
applying status effects to your enemies. When it comes to your 
party members, you can think of it in a more binary way: all forms of 
ailment prevention grant full immunity to the status in question, so 
you need only worry about whether or not you need protection (either 
from gear or food) against a certain ailment. 
Your party has access to two methods to determine an enemy's basic 
attributes (HP and affinities to damage types). This knowledge is pivotal 
in that it enables you to exploit the weaknesses of your opponents (and 
avoid their resistances) by choosing equipment and/or elements that 
they are vulnerable to. 
o Libra is an ability available to Noctis when Wait Mode is active (a 
combat setting that you can turn on or off in the Options menu): simply 
hold @)/In while locked on to a target until the circular gauge is 
filled. Libra guarantees success on practically all creatures in the game. 
However, the time you have to wait before the intel is revealed varies 
for each enemy species. As a rule, the stronger the foe, the longer 
you have to wait. We reveal the exact duration associated with each 
creature in our Bestiary (see page 228). 
o Analyze is an Ascension ability unique to lgnis. It is found in the 
Teamwork tree, and functions as a percentage chance for lgnis to 
uncover enemy weaknesses. Broadly speaking, this chance is high 
against weaker foes, and low against the most dangerous ones. 
Whenever the ability is successful, you can subsequently reveal the 
corresponding target's intel without having to go through the Libra 
scanning process. 
Note that a small selection of enemies in the game are immune to Libra 
and Analyze. With these, you can instead study their corresponding 
entries in our Bestiary chapter to assess their parameters. 
.ii Strategy & 
Analysis 
Attributes 
271 

272 
WEAPONRY 
The basic properties and principles of usage for different weapon categories is detailed in a separate section that begins on page 202 of the Inventory 
chapter. Over the pages that follow, however, we take a much more in-depth look at the systems that govern their performance in combat. 
Melee Weapons 
0>--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
By far the most notable subset in your arsenal, melee weapons offer a 
variety of different playstyles for the enthusiastic brawler. 
<> Swords are excellent general-purpose weapons. Their strength is 
their versatility: they are rapid in attack, quick to recover, and offer 
the most robust aerial move set (being one of only two weapon 
categories that can perform sustained aerial combos once you 
unlock the Airstep branch of Ascension abilities). 
<> Greatswords are by far the strongest class in terms of raw power. 
A full-powered charge attack is likely to produce unparalleled 
damage numbers. They also offer incredible crowd control with their 
broad, sweeping attacks; even against packs of more agile enemies, 
a wide, indiscriminate sweep is usually enough to deal damage to 
multiple foes at once. 
<> Polearms match up well against slow, powerful foes best 
confronted with a measure of skillful anticipation. This characteristic 
is accentuated against large, lumbering enemies, as polearms - like 
swords - are capable of sustained aerial combos. 
<> Daggers are capable of unleashing a torrent of attacks against an 
open foe, and enable the wielder to evade oncoming reprisals easily. 
The high degree of mobility provided by daggers enables the wielder 
to set up attacks from the rear with ease, and reap the benefits 
of corresponding damage multipliers. Additionally, many variants in 
this category carry a chance to inflict status ailments or deal extra 
damage in certain situations. 
<> Shields are primarily defensive weapons. Although evasion is 
usually the better option for a sustained offensive, sometimes it is 
far more effective to absorb incoming damage: to weather a shower 
of attacks from multiple assailants or a barrage of sniper shots, for 
example - a situation in which phasing would severely deplete your 
MP bar, whereas blocking with a shield costs very little. Shields 
can also deal respectable damage while easily maintaining your 
defensive pose. You can also equip them to take advantage of the 
parameter boosts granted by some of the individual weapons in this 
category. 
Ranged Weapons 
0·>---~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~-<> 
Your options for ranged weaponry are much more limited. These 
weapons are usually employed to exploit specific weaknesses, or 
against nimble enemies that cannot easily be engaged in hand-to-hand 
combat. 
<> Firearms allow a fair degree of mobility while generally keeping the 
user out of harm's way. At long range, their effectiveness drops off: 
they provide reliable but unimpressive damage, chipping away at 
an enemy's HP pool while front-liners hold its attention and perform 
more disruptive attacks. If you wish to maximize your firepower, you 
will need to reduce the distance and shoot from up close. 
<> Machinery weapons are cumbersome to wield. They are essentially 
the ranged equivalent of greatswords, though you cannot perform 
warping abilities while using them. They offer good stopping power 
and are particularly effective against large mechanical enemies. 
They are also capable of charged attacks. Like firearms, these 
weapons suffer a damage penalty at range. Unleash the full force 
of their attacks at close quarters for maximum effect. Machinery 
weapons have additional close-range applications in the form of a 
special attack unique to each device. This is performed with @/fJ 
and can prove devastating if timed correctly 
The damage drop-off for ranged weapons is calculated relative to their 
maximum range. For firearms, the maximum range is 100 feet; for 
machinery, 50 feet. Damage drops off in 10% increments corresponding 
to the maximum range. Therefore, firearms will deal 90% of their 
maximum damage beyond 10 feet, 80% beyond 20 feet, and so on. At 
maximum range, ranged weapons deal only 1 damage; beyond that, no 
damage is dealt at all. 

Cerberus 
0>-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~--
Though technically a firearm, Cerberus is a unique sniper rifle that performs 
differently from any other weapon in the game. It has high break power, 
but severely impairs mobility. Its maximum range is 320 feet when scoped, 
200 feet when locked on normally, and 100 feet without locking on. 
Press @)/ID to enter the default targeting mode, which switches 
the camera to an over-the-shoulder perspective. Noctis can only move 
slowly and adjust his horizontal aim in this position. Point-warps, jumps, 
and defensive maneuvers are all possible, briefly reverting the camera 
to its normal state. 
Royal Arms 
Use @/fj to enter zoom mode. You can continue to press the button 
to cycle through the two different zoom levels. In addition to greater 
precision, zoom mode allows for biaxial targeting - making it much 
easier to snipe an appendage, for example. To exit zoom mode, use 
®!fll or perform a dodge-roll. 
Given the severe restrictions that it places on Noctis's abilities, this 
firearm should be employed only for surgical long-range strikes to 
induce the break status on an enemy. For a complete explanation of 
break power and the break status, see page 284 
0>-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
The Royal Arms are a set of 13 special weapons collected by Noctis over 
the course of his journey. Only seven of the 13 are automatically earned 
through main quest progression; the rest must be tracked down in their 
scattered locations throughout the world (see page 176). 
Royal Arms are extremely powerful, offering very high parameter boosts, 
but consume HP with each action. In most cases, you should use them 
sparingly to avoid carelessly triggering Danger status. Once you can 
stockpile HP recovery items, or if you have easy access to cover points 
during battles, sustained Royal Arms usage becomes more tenable. 
Royal Arms are covered in exhaustive detail on page 286. 
Ring of the Lucii 
0>-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
This special item is added to your arsenal towards the end of the main 
storyline. It provides access to three unique abilities that offer great 
advantages, but incur extreme MP costs. Combined use of the Ring 
of the Lucii with MP-replenishing methods such as point-warping can 
prove very effective in certain post-story challenges. 
O Holy is essentially a defensive phase followed by a counterattack. 
It drains MP by 10% of your maximum each second, but restores a 
generous amount with each successful counter, making it supremely 
efficient against large groups of aggressive enemies - a common 
sight in the Chapter 15 mazes (see page 192). 
Elemental Properties 
O Death acts as a type of time bomb; as long as you hold down 
©!@ persistently, the spell eventually kills any target that is not 
immune to its effects. It drains MP by 5% of your maximum every 
second. 
o Alterna instantly kills targets in a small area (after a charge time), 
but can only be used with a full MP gauge. Unless you are at a very 
high level of development, it depletes all of your MP at once and 
leaves you in Stasis. 
0·>-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~-<) 
Almost every combat encounter in the game can be won more 
efficiently by properly exploiting enemy weaknesses. A large majority 
of monsters are vulnerable to one weapon type and one element. If you 
can exploit both weaknesses at once (for example, on a target weak 
to both Swords and Ice), the result is often devastating. This makes 
weapons with an innate elemental affinity incredibly useful. 
lgnis's elemental binding technique, Enhancement - obtainable through 
Ascension - is perhaps even more effective. This grants you the ability 
to imbue Noctis's weapons (even the non-elemental ones) with the 
element that your current target is weak to, and subsequently enjoy 
damage bonuses. You should make it an absolute priority to learn this 
technique as early as you can. 
• 
Strategy & 
Analysis 
• 
Weaponry 
273 

274 
ELEMANCY 
In Final Fantasy XV, spells are employed by the party primarily as consumable, free-aim projectiles equipped in a weapon slot. All craftable spells, 
without exception, are elemental: they require at least one unit of energy of either Fire, Ice, or Lightning. These three elements lie at the heart of 
everything you can produce with the spellcrafting system. 
(As a side note, Light and Dark are also elements, but they are not available through spells: Light is accessible to your party via Light-elemental 
weapons, while Dark is the sole preserve of specific enemies.) 
Spells can be extremely powerful. Unlike with ranged weapons, there is no distance-based damage drop-off, but a cooldown period means that 
you need to wait 30 seconds between successive casts. This value holds regardless of how many spells are equipped, or what type of spell it is. 
Elemental spells also produce environmental aftereffects at the target site, which can deal secondary damage to allies and enemies alike. 
Crafting Basics 
0·)--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
You can craft your arsenal of spells in the Elemancy menu (GD): 
I. Choose the elemental energy that you want to invest: anything 
between a single unit of one element, to 99 units of all three 
elements. Select an elemental energy type with 0 and add or 
remove units with []) & (fil)/aJ & ID. 
II. You can optionally add an item to the mix (again, anything from 
1 to 99 units). Items combined to elemental energy in this manner 
are known as "catalysts" - they provide added effects to spells. A 
spell enhanced through the adjunction of a catalyst is said to be 
"transmuted". Select a catalyst with 0 and ®/~. then add or 
remove units with []) & (fil)/aJ & ~-
Ill. Once you have chosen all ingredients, select the Craft option to 
create the spell. You can then opt to equip it directly, or to store 
it for later use. By default, you create three copies of each spell, 
though this amount can be increased with catalysts and with the 
Bonuspell line of abilities - a process we will come back to shortly. 
You can review the spells that you have previously crafted by pressing 
@/@, then automatically craft them again if you have the required 
ingredients in stock. 
A spell can only be employed in battle if you equip it as a Primary Arm 
for Noctis or a Secondary Arm for his allies. To cast one, hold the attack 
button, aim with@, then release. You should note that casting a spell 
triggers a cooldown, which is visible on the spell's icon in Noctis's 
Primary Arms display (Cf)). You can only unleash a new spell once the 
cooldown triggered by a previous casting is over. 
Magic Fla sks 
0>--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~--
You can carry as many spell types as you own Magic Flasks. You will find 
the list and availability conditions of all Flasks on page 222. Obtaining all 
of them should be a priority to expand your Magic arsenal. 
One essential fact to keep in mind, however, is that you can actually carry 
up to 99 copies of the same spell within a single Flask; even with one Flask 
Elem ents 
in your inventory, for example, you could enter a battle with 99 units of 
Thundaga. Once you have access to more varied and powerful resources, 
you can exploit this feature by duplicating spells for free (a process that 
we will describe shortly). Even with a handful of Magic Flasks, you can 
potentially have hundreds of devastating spells in stock. Note that you 
can empty a Magic Flask of its contents with (Q)/-0- if required. 
0·)--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
There are three raw elements that you can farm and combine when 
crafting spells: Fire, Ice, and Lightning. These are available as elemental 
energy, which you can gather in two ways: 
O You can absorb it from deposits commonly found around havens 
(f)), and occasionally inside dungeons. Each deposit typically 
holds approximately 33 units of energy, so it takes a visit to three 
havens to max out your stocks. This value can be increased by 
learning the Elementalism line of Ascension abilities. 
0 Alternatively, you can "drain" elemental energy from the enemies you 
defeat in battle. This is only possible if you wield one of the few weapons 
with this property, including your default Engine Blade - see page 202 for 
details. Accumulating elemental energy with this method can be time-

consuming, however. Most creatures have a relatively low chance of 
yielding energy (on average, 50%, though you can improve this by 50% 
by unlocking the Elemagnetism Ascension ability), and only offer low 
amounts (a handful of units of one elemental energy type). Keeping one 
of these weapons equipped at all times will at least enable you to top up 
your resources, though you can certainly optimize the process by hunting 
specific enemy species. For example, Voretooths each have a 30% 
chance of yielding two units of Fire energy when you kill them. Given that 
they tend to roam in large packs, stalking their habitats can potentially 
reward you with significant amounts of energy for crafting. Likewise, 
Spiracorns can offer a steady source of Ice energy if you are sufficiently 
strong to take them down quickly. The individual enemy sheets in the 
Bestiary chapter reveal all relevant details to farm elemental energy with 
this method, including information on monster habitats and drops. 
Catalysts & Added Effects 
0>--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
Added effects are special properties that are introduced to basic 
elemental spells through the adjunction of a catalyst during the crafting 
process. The item used determines the nature of the added effect, 
while the number of items committed serves to improve the effect. 
Each increment is determined by a value known as effect level, which 
is usually multiplied by the number of copies of the catalyst used. The 
effect level of each catalyst is listed in a table available at the end of this 
section (see page 279). 
Catalysts & Added Effects: Overview 
ADDED EFFECT 
GENERAL DESCRIPTION 
Quintcast (5 Chain) 
Cast a spell up to five times. 
Here is a simple example to help you visualize how this works: the 
Healcast effect enables a spell to heal its caster while dealing damage 
to the targeted enemy. You can create this effect by using a potion as a 
catalyst during the crafting process. A potion has an effect level of 25, 
which means that a single unit will lead to a spell restoring 25% of the 
caster's HP If you craft the same spell but this time with two potions as 
catalysts, its healing properties will be doubled (50%); use three potions 
in the recipe and the effect is tripled (75%). This general principle applies 
to almost all crafting combinations. 
NOTES 
------- - ----·---
--------- - -
The first spell is guaranteed. Each potential subsequent spell in the 
chain has a chance to succeed or fail (minimum success rate: 50%), 
according to the following formula: 
Ouadcast (4 Chain) 
Cast a spell up to four times. 
--·-------
··- ----·---
--- ···-·--·-·-----·--·-·---· --
--------·-- ------------------------------- ·------------------
Tricast (3 Chain) 
Cast a 
----- Success chance = 50 + (catalyst's effect level x amount of 
-~~:~~~~-~~~-~~~! __ ---- --~-~:~-~:~~~-~~--~~~~~~~~~~-·------------------------------------- -~~~'I~!sy_~~-~L_ _____________________________________ -- ------------------
Venomcast (Poison) 
Cast a spell with a chance to inflict Poison status on the target. 
A status effect can be inflicted on the target (in addition to the spell's 
-C-u-
rs-
e-
ca-s~A~t;c-k-- C-as-t a- s-p-ell ~ t_
h_
a_c-
ha-
nce to inflict Mollified status on the-ta-rg_e_t -
- - damage). The chance for this to succeed is the result of the following 
formula: 
Killcast (Death) 
with a chance to inflict Instant Death on the 
-·----··-·-·---·-·----·---·-·-·-··- -·-·-··---·--- ··-
·--·--------·-···--·-·-·-----·-·-··---·----·--·--·-·--·-----·-·--------- --··---··----·------··--·-
Healcast (Healing) 
Cast a spell and heal the caster. 
Success chance = (catalyst's effect level) x (number of catalysts 
used). 
The proportion of HP healed is the result of the following formula: 
Percentage healed = (catalyst's effect level) x (number of catalysts 
used). 
The chance not to consume the energy is the result of the following 
Freecast (Free Magic) 
Cast a spell with a chance not to consume the elemental energy it was 
formula: 
crafted with. 
Expericast (EXP Bonus) 
Cast a spell and give an EXP bonus to the caster. 
Failcast (Misfire) 
Powercast (Compact) 
--- -- -----------+ 
Blastcast (Backfire) 
Gambling effect: either the spell casting fails, or the spell is cast 
successfully and inflicts significant damage. 
Cast a spell of increased intensity (but with unchanged range). 
Cast a spell inflicting significant damage on both the target and the 
caster. 
Chance= 
I 100. 
The amount of EXP received is the result of the following formula: 
Bonus EXP = (catalyst's effect level) x (number of catalysts used) 
x 100. 
The chance for the spell to fail is the result of the following formula: 
Fail chance = (catalyst's effect level) x (number of catalysts used) 
I 100. 
Unlike other added effects, this means that the more you reinforce the 
effect_ the highe ~ ~e chances th~ ~~r-~p ell~rl2!s_~ re :__ ___ . __ 
The increased damage is already factored in the catalyst's power value. 
Powercast spells remain tier-1 spells even if their power exceeds the 
100 threshold. 
The increased damage is already factored in the catalyst's power value. 
The caster's HP is reduced to 1. 
Maxicast (Limit Break ) Cast the ultimate elemental spell. 
This effect is set by default at Level 99. even with a single catalyst. The 
_________ 
________ -------·---
- ~~_mage dealt ~-12_~eak~~~ual limit oI_~'.~§-~~------- ___________ _ 
None 
Some catalysts have no added effect though many of these can still 
prove beneficial by adding power to a crafted spell or facilitating its 
duplication. 
•.iJ Strategy & 
Analysis 
Elemancy 
275 

276 
Catalysts & Spell Duplication 
0}--~~~~~~~~~~~ 
In addition to the added effects that they can confer on spells, catalysts 
have another hidden but powerful property: they can be employed to 
duplicate spells. In short, they enable you to create extra copies of a 
spell without spending additional elemental energy. 
Here is an illustration of this principle: let's say that you are set to visit 
a dungeon guarded by enemies that you know are weak to Ice. As a 
precautionary measure, you create a powerful Blizzard spell for emergency 
situations. If things go awry, this will be your get-out-of-jail card in any 
given battle. If you spend 90 units of Ice-elemental energy and confirm 
the crafting, you end up with three Blizzard spells (three being the default 
amount of copies you receive when crafting). each with a power of 90. 
However, if you add a Crooked Helixhorn to the mix (a treasure catalyst 
dropped by Spiracorns when you break their horn appendage). you will 
obtain not just three copies of the Blizzard spell, but four copies - with 
the duplicated copy costing nothing but the catalyst consumed. Use 
two Crooked Helixhorns and you will obtain two duplicate copies in 
addition to the original three. Use five Crooked Helixhorns and you will 
obtain five free duplicates. In all of these instances. you only consume 
90 units of Ice-elemental energy. 
We reveal the amount of copies required for each catalyst to create a 
duplicate spell in an overview table at the end of this section (see page 
279). These values are decimals, so you will need to round them up. For 
example, with the duplication value of 1.25 for a Metal Scrap, it takes 2 
catalysts to get one extra copy. 
If you want to create duplicates. bear in mind that these values work 
linearly and are an accurate incremental representation of the duplication 
process. For example, with the Metal Scrap, you can multiply 1.25 by 
the number of duplicates that you want, then round up to the nearest 
integer to calculate the exact number of catalysts that you need to use. 
In other words, you get two extra copies with 3 catalysts (2 x 1.25 = 
2.50 rounded up to 3), three extras with 4 catalysts (3 x 1.25 = 3.75, 
rounded up to 4), and so forth. 
All duplication values lower than 1 deserve a special mention: a single 
catalyst with such a value will lead to the creation of at least one 
duplicate. The lower the value, the more duplicates are generated. 
The Flesh Fortifier (a consumable). has a duplication value of 0.50. This 
means that one of these items alone will lead to the crafting of two 
duplicates. Likewise, Ulwaat Berries have a duplication value of 0.25, 
and thus generate four extras each. This property makes all catalysts 
with a duplication value lower than 1 precious. 
Note that unlocking the Bonuspell abilities in the Magic Ascension tree 
enables you to receive free duplicates every time you craft a spell: one 
extra with Bonuspell, and two extra with Bonuspell 11. 
Power 
0>--~~~~~~~~~--<> 
The power, or potency, of a spell is determined primarily by the number 
of units of elemental energy used during the crafting process. If you 
create a spell with four units of Fire energy, for example, it will have a 
potency value of four on your screen. 
When you combine multiple elements together. the predominant 
element offers one unit of power for each unit of energy. Any secondary 
element offers one unit of power for every two units of energy. 
In case of equal quantities, Fire is always considered as prevalent, and 
Ice prevails over Lightning. For instance, a spell made of 10 units of Fire 
and 10 units of Ice will be a Fire spell (Fire prevails over Ice) with a power 
of 15. This value is the sum of 10 units of Fire and 5 from Ice (10 I 2 = 5). 
Any catalyst used in crafting also adds to the spell's overall potency, 
based on its own power value (revealed at the end of this section - see 
page 275). 
Finally, unlocking the Powercraft abilities in the Magic Ascension tree 
adds a fixed value to the power of every spell that you craft. 
The complete formula to calculate a spell's potency is as follows: 
Power = (number of units of the majority element) + (number of 
units of the minority elements I 2) + ("catalyst's power value" x 
"number of catalysts") + Powercraft ability bonus 
Tiers 
<)>~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
When you reach specific power thresholds, a spell changes tier. These 
boundaries are set at 100 and 200. A Fire-elemental spell made with a 
potency of 100 or 200 will turn into Fira or Firaga respectively. Tiers are easy 
to recognize via the use of suffixes: "-ra" for tier 2 and "-ga" for tier 3 spells. 
The higher the tier, the wider a spell's area of effect will be, increasing the 
risk that your own party members might be caught in the blast. 
Tiers: Overview 
TIER 
ELEMENT 
POWER REQUIRED 
SPELL NAME 
~ 
Fire 
1to99 
Fire 
---· --------·-·- - ----
- -
-
u.a
.' 
L\1-' 
Ice 
1to99 
Blizzard 
Lightning 
1to99 
Thunder 
Fire 
100 to 199 
Fira 
2 ("-ra") 
Ice 
100 to 199 
Blizzara 
Lightning 
100 to 199 
Thundara 
Fire 
200 + 
Firaga 
3 ("-ga") 
~~ 
Ice 
200+ 
Blizzaga 
Lightning 
200 + 
Thundaga 
Given that your maximum stocks of elemental energy are capped at 
99, you can only reach the highest spell tier through the adjunction 
of catalysts (or Powercraft abilities, but these require steep AP 
investments). Each catalyst has a basic power value: this value is added 
to the number of units of elemental energy. For example, a spell made of 
96 units of Ice energy will be a (tier-1) Blizzard (with a potency of 96). If 
you add a catalyst with a power value of 2, the tally is raised to 98. Add 
a second copy of the same catalyst and the power tally reaches 100, 
turning the spell into a (tier-2) Blizzara. 

Hybrid Spells 
0>---~~~~~~~~~~~ 
Things become a little more complicated when you combine energy of 
different types together in the same spell. Everything boils down to one 
key factor: the proportions of each element used. 
The one critical concept that determines the nature of a hybrid spell 
revolves around whether the predominant element is in absolute majority 
or simple majority. An element is in absolute majority when it represents 
50% or more of all the energy units composing a spell. 
Consider the following two examples: 
Example l 
Example 2 
<> In the first example, the Fire element is in absolute majority (10 units 
of Fire out of a total of 18 units overall represents 55.56% - more 
than 50%). 
<> In the second example, the Fire element is in simple majority (10 
units of Fire out of a total of 22 units overall represents 45.45% -
less than 50%). 
This simple concept has important repercussions in the game: 
<> When one element in a multi-element spell is in absolute majority 
(which is the case of Fire in example 1 above). this element prevails 
over the others. In example 1 above, the spell cast is "Fire". 
<> When no element in a multi-element spell is in absolute majority 
(which is the case in example 2 above), no element prevails. In 
example 2 above, the spell crafted is called Unicast. When you 
use it. you randomly cast Fire, Blizzard, or Thunder, but you do not 
choose which one. 
Key Points 
0·r--~~~~~~~~~~~ 
Here is a list of the most important points you need to keep in mind 
while crafting spells. 
<> If you want to be certain of the nature of the spells you cast, you 
need to ensure that one of the elements it is crafted with is present 
in absolute majority. A simple majority leads to random results. 
<> When two or three elements are mixed in equal quantities in a spell, 
the game uses a simple tiebreaking rule: Fire prevails over the other 
two, and Ice prevails over Lightning (in mathematical terms: Fire > 
Ice > Lightning). 
<> Adding a catalyst to elemental energy during the crafting process 
provides added effects to spells (except when you choose 
catalysts without the capacity to introduce added effects, that 
is). The more units of a catalyst you use, the greater the potency 
of its effects. 
<> Adding a catalyst to elemental energy during the crafting process 
can also lead to the creation of free duplicates: additional copies 
of the spell generated without consuming any additional elemental 
energy. The amounts of units required for each catalyst to give birth 
to a duplicate are listed in the table at the end of this section (see 
page 279). 
<> The primary factor that determines the tier of a spell is its potency: 
with a power between 1 and 99 you craft a tier-1 spell; with a power 
between 100 and 199 you craft a tier-2 spell; with a power of 200 
and beyond you craft a tier-3 spell. 
<> Given that you can only carry up to 99 units of elemental energy 
of each type, you need to use catalysts to increase the power 
value of your spells if you want to craft spells of the highest tiers. 
Each catalyst has a basic power value: this value is added to 
the power provided by the units of elemental energy used in the 
spell. A Garula Sirloin, for example, has a power value of 4, and 
will therefore add 4 units to the tally. Let's imagine you craft a 
spell with 90 units of Ice: a power of 90 translates into a tier-1 
spell: Blizzard. If you add 3 Garula Sirloins to the mix, though, you 
end up with a tally of 102 (90 + (4 x 3) = 102) and therefore a 
Blizzara spell. 
<> The Powercraft line of Ascension abilities can also be used to raise 
the potency of your spells. These require substantial AP investment. 
but their effects are permanent once unlocked. 
<> Some catalysts cause a spell to be launched multiple times 
(Quintcast = up to five times, Ouadcast = up to four times, 
Tricast = up to three times, Dualcast = twice). In the case of 
hybrid (multi-element) spells with no absolute majority, all spells 
in the chain are of a random element: for example, a Tricast 
spell will cast up to three spells, each of a random element. In 
the case of multi-element spells with one element in absolute 
majority, the first spell in the chain is always of the predominant 
element; the following spells in the chain are randomly of either 
the predominant element or the element of the strongest minority. 
A Tricast: Fire-Blizzard spell will always begin with Fire (absolute 
majority), and will then follow up with either Fire or Blizzard for the 
next two spells in the chain. 
<> All spells cast in a chain are of the same tier. "Tri cast II", for instance, 
will cast three tier-2 spells (in other words, any of Fira, Blizzara, or 
Thundara, then a second time any of the three, and again a third 
time any of the three, at random). 
Iii Strategy & 
' Analysis 
:¢' Elemancy 
277 

Spells: Overview 
0»--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Fire-Elemental-Only Spells 
Hybrid Spells I Simple Majority 
SPELL CRAFTED 
SPELL CRAFTED 
ADDED 
TIER l 
TIER 2 
TIER 3 
ADDED 
TIER l 
TIER 2 
TIER 3 
EFFECT 
(POWER: 1-99) 
(POWER: 100-199) 
(POWER: 200+) 
EFFECT 
(POWER: 1-99) 
(POWER: l 00-199) 
(POWER: 200+) 
None 
Fire 
Fira 
Fi raga 
None 
Unicast 
Unicast II 
Unicast Ill 
Ouintcast 
Ouintcast: Fire 
Ouintcast: Fira 
Ouintcast: Firaga 
Ouintcast 
Ouintcast 
Ouintcast II 
Ouintcast Ill 
Ouadcast 
Ouadcast: Fire 
Ouadcast: Fira 
Ouadcast: Firaga 
Ouadcast 
Ouadcast 
Ouadcast II 
Ouadcast Ill 
Tricast 
Tricast: Fire 
Tricast: Fira 
Tricast: Firaga 
Tri cast 
Tricast 
Tricast II 
Tricast Ill 
Dua least 
Dualcast: Fire 
Dualcast: Fira 
Oualcast: Firaga 
Dua least 
Dua least 
Oualcast II 
Oualcast Ill 
Venomcast 
Venomcast: Fire 
Venomcast: Fira 
Venomcast: Firaga 
Venomcast 
Venomcast 
Venomcast II 
Venomcast Ill 
Cursecast 
Cursecast: Fire 
Cursecast: Fira 
Cursecast: Firaga 
Cursecast 
Cursecast 
Cursecast II 
Cursecast Ill 
Stopcast 
Stopcast: Fire 
Stopcast: Fira 
Stopcast: Firaga 
Stopcast 
Stop cast 
Stopcast II 
Stopcast Ill 
Kill cast 
Killcast: Fire 
Killcast: Fira 
Killcast: Firaga 
Killcast 
Kill cast 
Killcast II 
Killcast Ill 
Healcast 
Healcast: Fire 
Healcast: Fira 
Healcast: Firaga 
Healcast 
Healcast 
Healcast II 
Healcast Ill 
Freecast 
Freecast: Fire 
Freecast: Fira 
Freecast: Firaga 
Freecast 
Freecast 
Freecast II 
Freecast Ill 
Expericast 
Expericast: Fire 
Expericast: Fira 
Expericast: Firaga 
Expericast 
Expericast 
Expericast II 
Expericast Ill 
Failcast 
Failcast: Fire 
Failcast: Fira 
Failcast: Firaga 
Failcast 
Failcast 
Failcast II 
Failcast Ill 
Powercast 
Powercast: Fire 
Powercast: Fire 
Powercast: Fire 
Powercast 
Powercast 
Powercast 
Powercast 
Blastcast 
Blastcast: Fire 
Blastcast: Fira 
Blastcast: Firaga 
Blastcast 
Blastcast 
Blastcast II 
Blastcast Ill 
Limit Break 
Flare 
Flare 
Flare 
Limit Break 
Maxi cast 
Maxicast 
Maxicast 
Ice-Elemental-Only Spells 
Hybrid Spells I Absolute Majority: Fire -- Highest Minority: Ice 
SPELL CRAFTED 
SPELL CRAFTED 
ADDED 
TIER l 
TIER 2 
TIER 3 
ADDED 
TIER l 
TIER 2 
TIER 3 
EFFECT 
(POWER: 1-99) 
(POWER: l 00-199) 
(POWER: 200+) 
EFFECT 
(POWER: 1-99) 
(POWER: l 00-199) 
(POWER: 200+) 
None 
Blizzard 
Blizzara 
Blizzaga 
None 
Fire 
Fira 
Fi raga 
Ouintcast 
Ouintcast: Blizzard 
Ouintcast: Blizzara 
Ouintcast: Blizzaga 
Ouadcast 
Ouadcast: Blizzard 
Ouadcast: Blizzara 
Ouadcast: Blizzaga 
Tricast 
Tricast: Blizzard 
Tricast: Blizzara 
Tricast: Blizzaga 
Ouintcast 
Ouintcast: 
Ouintcast: 
Ouintcast: 
Fire-Blizzard 
Fira-Blizzara 
Firaga-Blizzaga 
Ouadcast 
Ouadcast: 
Ouadcast: 
Quad cast: 
Fire-Blizzard 
Fira-Blizzara 
Firaga-Blizzaga 
Dualcast 
Oualcast: Blizzard 
Dualcast: Blizzara 
Dualcast: Blizzaga 
Tri cast 
Tricast: Fire-Blizzard 
Tricast: Fira-Blizzara 
Tricast: Firaga-Blizzaga 
Venomcast 
Venomcast: Blizzard 
Venomcast: Blizzara 
Venomcast: Blizzaga 
Cursecast 
Cursecast: Blizzard 
Cursecast: Blizzara 
Cursecast: Blizzaga 
Dua least 
Dualcast: 
Oualcast: 
Dualcast: 
Fire-Blizzard 
Fira-Blizzara 
Firaga-Blizzaga 
Venom cast 
Venomcast: Fire 
Venomcast: Fira 
Venomcast: Firaga 
Stopcast 
Stopcast: Blizzard 
Stopcast: Blizzara 
Stopcast: Blizzaga 
Cursecast 
Cursecast: Fire 
Cursecast: Fira 
Cursecast: Firaga 
Kill cast 
Killcast: Blizzard 
Killcast: Blizzara 
Killcast: Blizzaga 
Stop cast 
Stopcast: Fire 
Stopcast: Fira 
Stopcast: Firaga 
Healcast 
Healcast: Blizzard 
Healcast: Blizzara 
Healcast: Blizzaga 
Killcast 
Killcast: Fire 
Killcast: Fira 
Killcast: Firaga 
Freecast 
Freecast: Blizzard 
Freecast: Blizzara 
Freecast: Blizzaga 
Healcast 
Healcast: Fire 
Healcast: Fira 
Healcast: Firaga 
Expericast 
Expericast: Blizzard 
Expericast: Blizzara 
Expericast: Blizzaga 
Freecast 
Freecast: Fire 
Freecast: Fira 
Freecast: Firaga 
Failcast 
Failcast: Blizzard 
Failcast: Blizzara 
Failcast: Blizzaga 
Powercast 
Powercast: Blizzard 
Powercast: Blizzard 
Powercast: Blizzard 
Expericast 
Expericast: Fire 
Expericast: Fira 
Expericast: Firaga 
Failcast 
Failcast: Fire 
Failcast: Fira 
Failcast: Firaga 
Powercast 
Powercast: Fire 
Powercast: Fire 
Powercast: Fire 
Blastcast 
Blastcast: Blizzard 
Blastcast: Blizzara 
Blastcast: Blizzaga 
Blastcast 
Blastcast: Fire 
Blastcast: Fira 
Blastcast: Firaga 
Limit Break 
Freeze 
Freeze 
Freeze 
Limit Break 
Flare 
Flare 
Flare 
Lightning-Elemental-Only Spells 
Hybrid Spells I Absolute Majority: Fire -- Highest Minority: Lightning 
SPELL CRAFTED 
SPELL CRAFTED 
ADDED 
TIER l 
TIER 2 
TIER 3 
ADDED 
TIER l 
TIER 2 
TIER 3 
EFFECT 
(POWER: 1-99) 
(POWER: l 00-199) 
(POWER: 200+) 
EFFECT 
(POWER: 1-99) 
(POWER: l 00-199) 
(POWER: 200+) 
None 
Thunder 
Thundara 
Thundaga 
None 
Fire 
Fira 
Fi raga 
Ouintcast 
Ouintcast: Thunder 
Ouintcast: Thundara 
Ouintcast: Thundaga 
Ouadcast 
Ouadcast: Thunder 
Ouadcast: Thundara 
Ouadcast: Thundaga 
Tricast 
Tricast: Thunder 
Tricast: Thundara 
Tricast: Thundaga 
Ouintcast 
Ouintcast: 
Ouintcast: 
Ouintcast: 
Fire-Thunder 
Fira-Thundara 
Firaga-Thundaga 
Ouadcast 
Ouadcast: 
Quad cast: 
Quad cast: 
Fire-Thunder 
Fira-Thundara 
Firaga-Thundaga 
Dualcast 
Oualcast: Thunder 
Oualcast: Thundara 
Dualcast: Thundaga 
Tricast 
Tricast: Fire-Thunder 
Tricast: Fira-Thundara 
Tricast: Firaga-Thundaga 
Venomcast 
Venomcast: Thunder Venomcast: Thundara Venomcast: Thundaga 
Cursecast 
Cursecast: Thunder 
Cursecast: Thundara 
Cursecast: Thundaga 
Dua least 
Oualcast: 
Dualcast: 
Dua least: 
Fire-Thunder 
Fira-Thundara 
Firaga-Thundaga 
Venomcast 
Venomcast: Fire 
Venomcast: Fira 
Venomcast: Firaga 
Stopcast 
Stopcast: Thunder 
Stopcast: Thundara 
Stopcast: Thundaga 
Cursecast 
Cursecast: Fire 
Cursecast: Fira 
Cursecast: Firaga 
Kill cast 
Killcast: Thunder 
Killcast: Thundara 
Killcast: Thundaga 
Stop cast 
Stopcast: Fire 
Stopcast: Fira 
Stopcast: Firaga 
Healcast 
Healcast: Thunder 
Healcast: Thundara 
Healcast: Thundaga 
Kill cast 
Killcast: Fire 
Killcast: Fira 
Killcast: Firaga 
Freecast 
Freecast: Thunder 
Freecast: Thundara 
Freecast: Thundaga 
Healcast 
Healcast: Fire 
Healcast: Fira 
Healcast: Firaga 
Expericast 
Expericast: Thunder 
Expericast: Thundara 
Expericast: Thundaga 
Freecast 
Freecast: Fire 
Freecast: Fira 
Freecast: Firaga 
Failcast 
Failcast: Thunder 
Failcast: Thundara 
Failcast: Thundaga 
Powercast 
Powercast: Thunder 
Powercast: Thunder 
Powercast: Thunder 
Expericast 
Expericast: Fire 
Expericast: Fira 
Expericast: Firaga 
Failcast 
Failcast: Fire 
Failcast: Fira 
Failcast: Firaga 
Powercast 
Powercast: Fire 
Powercast: Fire 
Powercast: Fire 
Blastcast 
Blastcast: Thunder 
Blastcast: Thundara 
Blastcast: Thundaga 
Blastcast 
Blastcast: Fire 
Blastcast: Fira 
Blastcast: Firaga 
Limit Break 
Electon 
Electon 
Electon 
Limit Break 
Flare 
Flare 
Flare 
278 

Hybrid Spells I Absolute Majority: Ice - Highest Minority: Fire 
Hybrid Spells I Absolute Majority: Lightning - Highest Minority: Fire 
SPELL CRAFTED 
SPELL CRAFTED 
ADDED 
TIER l 
TIER 2 
TIER 3 
ADDED 
TIER l 
TIER 2 
TIER 3 
EFFECT 
(POWER: 1-99) 
(POWER: 100-199) 
(POWER: 200+) 
EFFECT 
(POWER: 1-99) 
(POWER: 100-199) 
(POWER: 200+) 
None 
Blizzard 
Blizzara 
Blizzaga 
None 
Thunder 
Thundara 
Thundaga 
Quintcast 
Ouintcast: 
Ouintcast: 
Ouintcast: 
Blizzard-Fire 
Blizzara-Fira 
Blizzaga-Firaga 
Quintcast 
Ouintcast: 
Ouintcast: 
Ouintcast: 
Thunder-Fire 
Thundara-Fira 
Thundaga-Firaga 
Quadcast 
Ouadcast: 
Ouadcast: 
Quad cast: 
Blizzard-Fire 
Blizzara-Fira 
Blizzaga-Firaga 
Quadcast 
Ouadcast: 
Ouadcast: 
Ouadcast: 
Thunder-Fire 
Thundara-Fira 
Thundaga-Firaga 
Tri cast 
Tricast: Blizzard-Fire 
Tricast: Blizzara-Fira 
Tricast: Blizzaga-Firaga 
Tri cast 
Tricast: Thunder-Fire 
Tricast: Thundara-Fira Tricast: Thundaga-Firaga 
Dualcast 
Dualcast: Blizzard-Fire Dualcast: Blizzara-Fira Dualcast: Blizzaga-Firaga 
Dualcast 
Dualcast: Thunder-Fire Dualcast: Thundara-Fira Dualcast: Thundaga-Firaga 
Venomcast 
Venomcast: Blizzard 
Venomcast: Blizzara 
Venomcast: Blizzaga 
Venom cast Venomcast: Thunder Venomcast: Thundara Venomcast: Thundaga 
Cursecast 
Cursecast: Blizzard 
Cursecast: Blizzara 
Cursecast: Blizzaga 
Cursecast 
Cursecast: Thunder 
Cursecast: Thundara 
Cursecast: Thundaga 
Stopcast 
Stopcast: Blizzard 
Stopcast: Blizzara 
Stopcast: Blizzaga 
Stopcast 
Stopcast: Thunder 
Stopcast: Thundara 
Stopcast: Thundaga 
Kill cast 
Killcast: Blizzard 
Killcast: Blizzara 
Killcast: Blizzaga 
Kill cast 
Killcast: Thunder 
Killcast: Thundara 
Killcast: Thundaga 
Healcast 
Healcast: Blizzard 
Healcast: Blizzara 
Healcast: Blizzaga 
Heal cast 
Healcast: Thunder 
Healcast: Thundara 
Healcast: Thundaga 
Freecast 
Freecast: Blizzard 
Freecast: Blizzara 
Freecast: Blizzaga 
Freecast 
Freecast: Thunder 
Freecast: Thundara 
Freecast: Thundaga 
Expericast 
Expericast: Blizzard 
Expericast: Blizzara 
Expericast: Blizzaga 
Expericast Expericast: Thunder 
Expericast: Thundara 
Expericast: Thundaga 
Failcast 
Failcast: Blizzard 
Failcast: Blizzara 
Failcast: Blizzaga 
Failcast 
Failcast: Thunder 
Failcast: Thundara 
Failcast: Thundaga 
Powercast 
Powercast: Blizzard 
Powercast: Blizzard 
Powercast: Blizzard 
Powercast Powercast: Thunder 
Powercast: Thunder 
Powercast: Thunder 
Blastcast 
Blastcast: Blizzard 
Blastcast: Blizzara 
Blastcast: Blizzaga 
Blastcast 
Blastcast: Thunder 
Blastcast: Thundara 
Blastcast: Thundaga 
Limit Break 
Freeze 
Freeze 
Freeze 
Limit Break Electon 
Electon 
Electon 
Hybrid Spells I Absolute Majority: Ice - Highest Minority: Lightning 
Hybrid Spells I Absolute Majority: Lightning - Highest Minority: Ice 
SPELL CRAFTED 
SPELL CRAFTED 
ADDED 
TIER l 
TIER 2 
TIER 3 
ADDED 
TIER l 
TIER 2 
TIER 3 
EFFECT 
(POWER: 1-99) 
(POWER: 100-199) 
(POWER: 200+) 
EFFECT 
(POWER: 1-99) 
(POWER: l 00-199) 
(POWER: 200+) 
None 
Blizzard 
Blizzara 
Blizzaga 
None 
Thundaga 
Thundara 
Thundaga 
Quintcast 
Ouintcast: 
Ouintcast: 
Ouintcast: 
Blizzard-Thunder 
Blizzara-Thundara 
Blizzaga-Thundaga 
Quintcast 
Ouintcast: 
Ouintcast: 
Ouintcast: 
Thunder-Blizzard 
Thundara-Blizzara 
Thundaga-Blizzaga 
Quad cast 
Quad cast: 
Ouadcast: 
Ouadcast: 
Blizzard-Thunder 
Blizzara-Thundara 
Blizzaga-Thundaga 
Quadcast 
Ouadcast: 
Ouadcast: 
Ouadcast: 
Thunder-Blizzard 
Thundara-Blizzara 
Thundaga-Blizzaga 
Tricast 
Tri cast: 
Tricast: 
Tricast: 
Blizzard-Thunder 
Blizzara-Thundara 
Blizzaga-Thundaga 
Tricast 
Tri cast: 
Tricast: 
Tricast: 
Thunder-Blizzard 
Thundara-Blizzara 
Thundaga-Blizzaga 
Dualcast 
Dualcast: 
Dualcast: 
Dualcast: 
Blizzard-Thunder 
Blizzara-Thundara 
Blizzaga-Thundaga 
Dua least 
Dua least: 
Dua least: 
Dualcast: 
Thunder-Blizzard 
Thundara-Blizzara 
Thundaga-Blizzaga 
Venomcast 
Venomcast: Blizzard 
Venomcast: Blizzara 
Venomcast: Blizzaga 
Venomcast Venomcast: Thunder 
Venomcast: Thundara Venomcast: Thundaga 
Cursecast 
Cursecast: Blizzard 
Cursecast: Blizzara 
Cursecast: Blizzaga 
Cursecast 
Cursecast: Thunder 
Cursecast: Thundara 
Cursecast: Thundaga 
Stopcast 
Stopcast: Blizzard 
Stopcast: Blizzara 
Stopcast: Blizzaga 
Stopcast 
Stopcast: Thunder 
Stopcast: Thundara 
Stopcast: Thundaga 
Kill cast 
Killcast: Blizzard 
Killcast: Blizzara 
Killcast: Blizzaga 
Killcast 
Killcast: Thunder 
Killcast: Thundara 
Killcast: Thundaga 
Healcast 
Healcast: Blizzard 
Healcast: Blizzara 
Healcast: Blizzaga 
Healcast 
Healcast: Thunder 
Healcast: Thundara 
Healcast: Thundaga 
Freecast 
Freecast: Blizzard 
Freecast: Blizzara 
Freecast: Blizzaga 
Freecast 
Freecast: Thunder 
Freecast: Thundara 
Freecast: Thundaga 
Expericast 
Expericast: Blizzard 
Expericast: Blizzara 
Expericast: Blizzaga 
Expericast 
Expericast: Thunder 
Expericast: Thundara 
Expericast: Thundaga 
Failcast 
Failcast: Blizzard 
Failcast: Blizzara 
Failcast: Blizzaga 
Failcast 
Failcast: Thunder 
Failcast: Thundara 
Failcast: Thundaga 
Powe re a st 
Powercast: Blizzard 
Powercast: Blizzard 
Powercast: Blizzard 
Powercast Powercast: Thunder 
Powercast: Thunder 
Powercast: Thunder 
Blastcast 
Blastcast: Blizzard 
Blast cast: Blizzara 
Blastcast: Blizzaga 
Blastcast 
Blastcast: Thunder 
Blastcast: Thundara 
Blastcast: Thundaga 
Limit Break 
Freeze 
Freeze 
Freeze 
Limit Break Elect on 
Electon 
Electon 
Catalysts : Overview 
0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
Catalyst Parameters 
NAME 
Antidote 
Elixir 
Ether 
Flesh Fortifier 
~ Gold Needle 
-g Hi-Elixir 
i Hi-Potion 
ADDED 
EFFECT 
POWER EFFECT UNITS REQUIRED 
VALUE 
LEVEL FOR DUPLICATION* 
Venomcast 
16 
25.00 
-- ----------··-·--------- --
--------------·----
Tricast 
3 
8.33 
Dua least 
None 
Killcast 
Tricast 
Healcast 
10 
0.50 
10 
16.67 
7.14 
50 
12.50 
u 
Magitek Booster 
Ouintcast 
20 
40 
--·-·-------·-·-----··-··--·-··-··-·---------- ---------- -·- -------
Maiden's Kiss 
1pcast 
0 
24 
16.67 
Mega Phoenix 
Mega-Potion 
Megalixir 
Ouadcast 
10 
1.82 
- ------------- -
------------- -
Healcast 
99 
2.94 
--- -- ---·-----·-- --
-----------· -------------
Ouintcast 
5 
2.63 
Catalyst Parameters (Continued) 
NAME 
Mettle VX 
ADDED 
EFFECT 
None 
POWER EFFECT UNITS REQUIRED 
VALUE 
LEVEL FOR DUPLICATION* 
10 
Moogle Plushie 
None 
Muscle Stimulant 
Phoenix Down 
~ Potio_~--------------­
:0 i Reflex Enhancer 
Power EX 
u 
Remedy 
Smelling Salts 
Spirit ZX 
Superior Restorative 
Verve WX 
- + ··-·-·······-·········+ ---·-·-· .. ·· ! .. ··-····· .. --.... ·+ ·· ..................... --...... _ 
.. ___ .. .. 
None 
Tri cast 
Healcast 
25 
None 
Ouintcast 
10 
25 
Dua least 
0 
5 
···---·--- ------·-·-- -- -- --
Cursecast 
0 
22 
None 
Dua least 
75 
None 
0 .. 50 
2.38 
20 
10 
8.33 
16.67 
10 
2.86 
10 
Strategy & 
Analysis 
Elemoncy 
279 

280 
Catalyst Parameters (Continued) 
NAME 
ADDED 
EFFECT 
POWER EFFECT UNITS REQUIRED 
VALUE 
LEVEL FOR DUPLICATION* 
Aegir Root 
-
-···--·-------------
Allural Shallot 
Alstroom 
Anak Meat 
Arapaima Roe 
--·-·------··------·----·-·-
Barramundi Fillet 
Behemoth Tenderloin 
Healcast 
Quad cast 
Cursecast 
None 
Expericast 
None 
None 
99 
33 
10 
3 
15 
30 
I·-·-·····-·-·-·----------··-······--···········---····-·-······----····-·-··+ - ·····-·-···--- ··· ·-"·"+ ······-·········- 1-----· ·-···-·····- ------· -· 
Birdbeast Egg 
None 
---·----"---·--------· ----- ----------·------ -·----
Caem Pinkshrimp 
6.25 
3.85 
2.86 
3.57 
3.03 
2.38 
1.39 
3.03 
1.85 
----·-·---·-----·····--·-------------·--··-···---
Dua least 
None 
--·-·--------------·--·-
Catoblepas Brisket 
26 
1.14 
-----------
Chickatrice Leg 
None 
2.63 
--···-·---···--------·-·---
------ -··-·-· ······--··-·-·-·-·-·-·-- -·-·-
________ .. _ ·-··------------ --
-~l~i~~: _D_~~~~~!~--- _____ 1 _ _g~~~-~s-~-- _________ ________ 
1. 79 
£!_~~"-!'...~~~---- ----~~~~~~~~~ - ·---------- --- 1 
1.92 
--~~C.~!!".:_~-~:_a_t ____________ __l:l_~~~~~~~-- _____ o _______ ?_5___ _ 
____________ 2 
____ ·_ 9 
__ 4 _____________ , 
Cup Noodles 
Healcast 
0 
99 
4 
--
--
--------
- °--~~-9-e~~-uil~ --~!~-~~! _______ N_~n~----- , -------·-····-·+ ·-·---·---·-··+-···-··-··---·-.. 3·--·· 8 
____ 5 ________________ 1 
Dualhorn Steak 
Eos Green Peas 
None 
None 
Fine Cleigne Wheat 
Healcast 
---·--····-·-------
---·-·· ------
---------
Fine Gighee Ham 
None 
--------·------···--·----.. ·· ------------------··---------·- ---------------
Funguar 
Garula Sirloin 
Venomcast 
None 
~i~~!_!~~~!~ -~~l!~! __________ _None ________ ··-··+ ·--··· 
Gighee Ham 
Griffon Breast 
None 
None 
33 
-- --------
50 
10 
2.78 
5 
2.38 
4.55 
3.13 
2.38 
4.17 
0.98 
;;; Hulldagh Nutmeg 
Ouadcast 
None 
1 
31 
6.25 
Q) 
-
-
-
J 
Jabberwock Sirloin 
Kettier Ginger 
------
----- -·----
Killer Tomato 
- ~11_jata Marrow 
Leiden Pepper 
Leiden Potato 
Leiden Sweet Potato 
Leukorn Steak 
Lucian Tomato 
Ouadcast 
Healcast 
Tri cast 
Cursecast 
Heal cast 
Heal cast 
None 
Healcast 
Malmashroom 
Killcast 
f
-
---
---- --
-- -----·----- +-
Midgardsormr Shank 
None 
------ -----
-----
Nebula Salmon Fillet 
None 
Platinum Myrltrout Fillet None 
-----
-
-
-
-·-
24 
34 
3 
_S~~agi"- ~i~~r __ ····-·····----·-··---···--•··T 
___ r_i_c 
__ a 
_____ s __ t_ 
----·-··--- I--········-··-·· 
Saxham Rice 
Heal cast 
Schier Turmeric 
Tricast 
Sea Bass Fillet 
None 
Sheep Milk 
Dualcast 
Smoking Wood 
Tricast 
-------------------------------------- ---·- ----- ---------------·-------
Tenebraen Oak 
Quad cast 
4.17 
50 
2.27 
15 
1.14 
15 
4. 17 
-----
10 
5.56 
20 
5.56 
30 
10 
25 
1.05 
2.38 
128 
1.54 
2.38 
2.09 
2.38 
2.38 
7.14 
2 09 
8.33 
8.33 
!i~-~~_r:o11_p_er Fil!~! ________ -~on_e ___________ ~ -- ____ _ 
4.55 
2.09 
Trout Fillet 
None 
2 
Ulwaat Berries 
V~5-P_~L ~.ilr Fillet 
Vesproom 
----- ... ---- - . 
Wild Onion 
Zu Tender 
Adamantite 
~ Alstor Bass Bones 
~ Ammonite Fossil 
I-'= Anak Antlers 
Anak Fetlock 
Healcast 
None 
Stopcast 
Healcast 
None 
10 
52 
Limit Break 
99 
None 
99 
15 
10 
Stop 
75 
Dualcast 
22 
Cursecast 
25 
2.38 
0.25 
2.08 
2.63 
4.17 
0.83 
0.2 
3.03 
1.35 
2.08 
3.03 
Catalyst Parameters (Continued) 
NAME 
ADDED 
EFFECT 
POWER EFFECT UNITS REQUIRED 
VALUE 
LEVEL FOR DUPLICATION* 
1 ~n-~!:".! _Dra!!~". __ !o~th 
Arapaima Scales 
Arba Spur 
Barbed Poison Needle 
Stopcast 
None 
Cursecast 
Venomcast 
Barbed Scythe 
None 
Barrelfish Scales 
None 
1 ~a~~~~~-~_lu~age 
Beautiful Bottle 
Dua least 
1 
----·--
Freecast 
0 
99 
1.20 
1.92 
40 
2.22 
99 
1.33 
1.33 
3.03 
38 
1.54 
Beautiful Hide 
Beautiful Plumage 
Quad cast 
Tri cast 
Quad cast 
16 
10 
1.54 
1.52 
26 
--·--·-··-·-- ----·---------------------·-··-------
.. -------·----·-·--····-
Beetle Shell 
16 
10 
0.93 
Behemoth Horn 
Ouintcast 
15 
2.50 
!i ~~~~i_ll_"- -~~!!er 
Kil least 
42 
2.38 
- - -----· --- --------- -------------·----··-·-
, _Blueg_iU __ ~!". 
None 
2.38 
Bluegill Scale 
None 
3.03 
Broken Harm 
___ o_n 
__ i_c_a 
__________________ , .. _ 
S 
___ t 
__ o 
___ p_c_a 
__ s 
__ t 
_________ , ________________ + 99 
Building Stone 
None 
30 
1 
3.03 
Bulette Carapace 
Dualcast 
12 
15 
1.39 
-------·------·--·----··-·---·---·---------------- -·-··--·-··-·-·-··-·-·----· --··-··· ---··· 
Free cast 
None 
Cactuar Needle 
Catfish Barbel 
Catoblepas Fang 
Quadcast 
22 
1 ~enti_~.:~~ - ~::! 
Cursecast 
2 
Centipede Ja~ ------ ___ 5 ursecast 
Centipede Legs 
Cursecast 
Centipede Teeth 
Cursecast 
--
- -
-
-
Chrome Bit 
Dualcast 
16 
Cockatrice Crest 
Expericast 
Cockatrice Tail Feathers 
Dualcast 
10 
25 
33 
20 
33 
10 
2 
25 
3.03 
0.91 
6.25 
2.50 
8.33 
1.82 
·--- -- ------
0.67 
33.33 
1.54 
(/)I ···· 
~ Coeur! Whiskers 
Killcast 
Ouintcast 
Dua least 
52 
25 
10 
1.33 
3.03 
1.52 
m 
~ Colorful Griffon Claw 
16 
2 
Crab Carapace 
Crimson Tongue 
Cursecast 
47 
1.25 
Crooked Helixhorn 
Tricast 
20 
1.00 
--· - --·--------- --- . - ----·-- -------·- -----------------· ----------- ------------· ---- -------·-----------------·---·-
Curved F!!!1.9 ______ --·------- -~...9-~~-------- __ 
2.94 
------------··--·-·-·-··-
Curved Hollowhorn 
Ouadcast 
18 
1.43 
---------
---------- ----------------
~_l'.~_!i-~'l_~_!i!!g_~_ __ _ ___ .. ~~-l)QQ:l_".!3St ____ 4 ___ ---~-9 ___ ________ _lJ_J ______ _ 
Debase._!!_ Banknote 
Expe ~cast 
Debased Coin 
Exp~ ricas! 
Debased Silverpiece 
Expe_tj_~ast 
Divine Whiskers 
None 
-- --------
--- --
8 
36 
4.00 
4.00 
4.00 
1.03 
Downy Feathers 
Ouadcast 
4 
18 
1.52 
Dragon Claw 
Limit Break _J ? ______ ____ 
3.03 
Drag_o!!_Horn 
_____ Q_!Jj_~!_".Cl_st 
33 
10 
2.27 
Rr~go_11 __ ~c;_aj~~ --- __ _____ 
Tricast 
_ 8 
2 
105 
R_~(J.0_P!l1R'!llhis_~ers 
None 
18 
-_1_1_8 __ 
_Qy_I)_~~-°-
None 
. __ }? __________________ Q:Z~-----------
Earth _g_e.~~!_o11e. ______________ Q_1J(J_~!:'.CI_~ ---- __ JL_ ___ __)_?_ _ _________ _ ____ _ 
_ El_e.C:!!OIY!~C: ~_(Jn_~ll!!~_(l_r: __ -~_()~-~ 
12 
-~!!.O!_'!!!l~~ -~!!_'!..g_fl_r _________ ~11_[lrn_c.9_~~ ___ J 
_F_e..!!!_~(J~ e H_o_of_________ 
Cursecast 
52 
-~~'!~ -~~ll~_t __________ ____ 
E_~P.~!~(J_St 
5 
Fine Sli_my Oil 
Cursecast 
18 
Fine Tail Feathers 
Dualcast 
18 
Fossil Shell 
S_!_gpcas~ .. 
F()~s_! I Wood__ 
Stopc9_st 
Garula Fur 
Tricast 
Garula Tusk 
Dualcast 
Giant Crab Pincers 
Blastcast 
-·- --- ·-----------· ·-
Giant Curlhorn 
-- .. --- ---- -· --
-
Giant Feather 
---·-·-·--·-·--·---
-·-----·-·--·-····-
Gi_~ll! _l!!!l~Y 
_ 1!0~11 __ _ 
Ouadcast 
Tricast 
Tri cast 
1 
24 
12 
99 
----·--------·-----·-·-
75 
3 
0.91 
2.27 
1.33 
33.33 
-·---------------~------------
99 
49 
1.22 
1.14 
52 
1.79 
28 
1.92 
- -
1 a-- --- T5o 
10 
2.50 
24 
14 
0.5 
1.19 
3.03 
2.08 
Giant Hoof 
Cursecast 
42 
50 
1.67 
-6-i ~-~~--il~-~~t~~~-
------ ---- -:r;;c~;t _______ -- ,-3--- --15-------------- -1---------
----·----·-
---------·-·-
G_(J!_g_e._o_l!_~__!'l_l!__l_!!~ge. _________ Q_~Cld ~ast 
8 
__ ?§ _____________ 1 !tL ______ _ 
0.33 
Gralean Medal of 
Quad cast 
Distinction 
12 
28 

Catalyst Parameters (Continued) 
NAME 
ADDED 
EFFECT 
POWER EFFECT UNITS REQUIRED 
VALUE 
LEVEL FOR DUPLICATION* 
Great Anak Antlers 
Quad cast 
18 
1.61 
------------·-----------·--
Great Garula Tusk 
Tricast 
10 
12 
2.22 
-----------
- -- -
-·- ·- - ---·- -·-·-···-·-·-·----·······-·-·-·-·-···----- - ·--------·----- -----·-- ---- -------------
Greatsnake Crest 
Quadcast 
26 
24 
3.03 
-------·----·----·-·----------
---·--·--- -·-
- ---
- ----·--·-·--·--
G reatsnake Scale 
None 
33 
1.19 
Griffon Claw 
_ g~~~ t-~(l~~
-
10 
4.55 
Griffon Feather 
None 
2 
0.50 
----- -
--- -~--·--
- ---------
-~~!'Y!l~-".!1________________ _____ Q!:J.91~_9~!__ ______ g___ _ ___ 5___ --------~ :9_L 
_____ _ 
Hard Scale 
Tricast 
8 
42 
2.08 
- --- --
- --- ------·-----------------·--
Hard Whiskers 
Hardened Hide 
Dualcast 
5 
2.63 
Limit Break 
48 
- ----------·----·---·----------------· -----------
Hardened Hoof 
Cursecast 
1 
-··-·- -· -·---·-·------- ·-··--·----·-----------· ·-·-·-···-
Havocfang Hi~e 
Heavy Scale 
Hunter's Medal 
Hy_d_i:.~_~Jic Cylinder 
Dualcast 
1 
Tricast 
43 
Limit Break 
90 
Quintcast 
42 
30 
25 
10 
20 
2.86 
118 
2.94 
1.22 
0.02 
2.00 
Imperial Medal of Honor 
Quintcast 
24 
36 
0.25 
_ 
l'!S~_C_!_~!~!ler 
Ve_n_~~~_9~t __ 1 ___ __ }_Q __ _______ 2:~~--------
!~!l_~-~_!1~~~!1_g~------------ ___ _E__~~~<l~! 
32 - ___ 1] ___ _________ Q}} _______ _ 
Jade Gar Mirrorscale 
None 
12 
2.27 
Jumbo Needle 
Freecast 
0 
K~!!Il _~~!f!~~ -~-1!-~!L ____ _ _ _ ~-~-~~ ------ . __________ ______ _ ____________ ?:Q? __ 
</) 
_L~_r!l~--~°-~~o-~~orn _______ Q~inl~?-~ t ______ 1 Q_ _ _ 12 
0.75 
0.83 
0.20 
~ Laser Sensor 
None 
22 
~ !Yl_~_9i!!l~~o_~~-----
Quintcast 
99 
48 
!Yl~!l!!~!~o__!!_ _____________ ____ g_~i~_~_ci_g ___ _?_L ___ _!L ___________ ?.:.QQ _________ _ 
Magnificent Crest 
_Expericast 
5 
33.33 
_l'.fl_ag_n_ifi_cent Tail ~!l~!~!lrs Dual_c..a~! __ 
28 
IYl_~!~~!D__~_y_e __ 
------ ~Q~~!~-9-~-- __ 12 
Malboro Vine 
Killcast ______ 1_ 
Mandrake Flower 
Quintcast 
0 
Mesmenir Horn 
IV!e!al Sc!ap 
Monster Claw 
Tricast 
Dualcast 
---·-·- - ---·--·-·-- ·---···-- --·--
Quadcast 
21 
Monster Jaw 
None 
99 
- --··--·····-·-.. -------------·--
----------- ----·--
------- --
_IYl__!!~~- ~ro_upe_~ ~VI! 
None 
____ 1 L _ 
_Mv_thril Ingot 
Freecast 
99 
~_y_!~_r:~~-~haft ___________ _Q.~~Q~~S_!_ 
12 
Q_I_~ -~°-°--~-----
__________ Ex~er!~~_t __ 
Phoenix Bass Bladder 
_Platinum Ingot 
Prawn Antennae 
-----·-···--·-·-···-
····-·-···-
Oualit_v -~ -uilding Stone 
Rare Coin 
-~-~p_a_i_~- ~!~---
None 
4 
Freecast 
99 
Blastcast 
2 4 
None 
48 
Expericast 
8 
None 
3 
- -------------------- -- --------
49 
1.02 
50 
4. 76 
50 
8.33 
----------
5 
2.56 
12 
1.96 
1.25 
2.38 
3.03 
2.27 
0.83 
2.78 
-----------------
2.38 
0.50 
2. 17 
-~_o_tt..!'.!1_.§_~!~!.1.~!l_!~!'.!!.I'._____ Jif!JJl§_r_~a~-- ___ ]_?_ ·-
4 .17 
Rough Scales 
Dualcast 
10 
1.54 
Practical Applications 
Cata lyst Parameters (Continued) 
NAME 
-~~_ugh _$hell 
ADDED 
EFFECT 
Tricast 
POWER EFFECT 
UNITS REQUIRED 
VALUE 
LEVEL FOR DUPLICATION* 
25 
1.1 8 
-~-~-~!l'.~_!!i!__ _______________ 
£'.3.i!~-~!____ __g __ ----~--______ o_:§_~---------
Sahertusk Claw 
None 
1 
3.03 
--------·-------· ··------------------···--·-··-··--·--·-·- ----
Dualcast 
3 
38 
1.92 
Scaled Skin 
Dualcast 
10 
2.08 
----·-··· 
- -------- ---·------·--···-----·--
-·---·-······-·-·-·-··-·-·-···- ··-·-···-·-
Searle!~~!~~~~---- _g_~~tcas t . ____ _g __ __ lL ___ ]Jl} __ _ 
-~£°-!Pi".'~ -~~-r-~-------- _____ ~~~~f!l_c_~~l-____ J___ _ __ ?L -------~:?-~-------
-~-~".'!P_i_o_!! _~i!!fJ_I'.! _________ __ ~i ~£9.~! _____ _____ ! _______ 1_6 ___ ---·--··---··-~.:?..?. _________ _ 
Sharp_ 
Br:i!J~ _ 
Dual~a~ ___ ! _ --~~---- __ _ 
____ ]_J_2 __________ _ 
~_h_a_~!! -~i~!!ll_s _____________ ~!2~£'.3.~~ _____ ?. _______ 9_~ _ .. _________ ?_:?L ______ _ 
-~-~~!P !!ll~~--~-i_'! _____________ _ 
g_~~?-~_C.a.?.~--
12 
99 
___ ··- .... ! .:~.~- -
Sh~!P_~_~yt_he___ 
None 
5 
1.33 
Quadcast 
Sharp Tail fll_at~_!l!_~--
7.14 
--·-··--··-··-----·-·-·-
_Shat:tllre~}imepiece__ _ ___ Q~~l~.a.~! ___ _ 
25 
0.50 
~hilJ.l~ _Spike 
~rica_s_t ·- ________________ ?~--- ______ -~-:-~?. _. 
Sky Gemstonll 
Failcast 
99 
75 _ 
0.03 
_S.!!._~y_ Q!! _______________ S.!:1.i:.~e_~9_s! __ ___ L _ 
----~~--- ________ J~l! _______ _ 
Small Beak 
Powercast 
25 
1.33 
-·-·--------·--·---------- ------·-----·-·-- ·-·-------·- --··-·-·-·-··--· ··--·-·---·-·-··-·····-·-
</) Snakehead Scales 
None 
4 
2.38 
;Q):::i 
Snak~~_ll_~~ _ 
_!_e_et~------- _ ~o~~ ------- ____ 2___ _________ _ ______ _}g3_ 
~ -~ei~~cl_-~!_'!'~! _________________ !!!~a.~! ______ ---?~ - - __ }Q ____ ---- ____ §}} __ 
Sple~~id Buj_l~i~g §_tone 
None 
65 
1.92 
Star Shell 
Stopcast 
_____ 1 ____ 52 
2.17 
Dualcast 
16 
25 
1.33 
-~-t!!l_nfJ_f>_i~E_er_~ __ 
-~ l_il~!~?-~l __ --~ --- ________________ Q:5 
Strong_~h~_kers 
Killcast 
18 
99 
1.25 
-~!~!dy _~~!~-~~!.!!._ _ ______ _I~~a._sL_____ 
3 
----~L __________ Q~L ______ _ 
§~eei!l_!.'!i_I_ ______________ Q.~'.3.~~~?.~--- ______ ! _______ 2_~-- ______ J_}~-------
Th ick Hide 
Tricast 
8 
10 
1 00 
- -------------
-
- - --- ----·-- ----- -·--------- --- ---
Thunderoc Feather 
Quadcast 
1 
7.14 
I!~y_ F_ll~!~ll~ ---
___________ g_ualcast 
5 
2.08 
Io_~-9_~ Shell 
Dualcast 
___ 
4_~ --- ______ 2.27 
Translucent Skin 
Cursecast 
20 
99 
0.65 
Treant Branch 
Tricast 
1.1 4 
-----------·------------------·----·---- ---.. ··-- ----- -·-----·-···-·-······-
--····--·-·····--·-·- ··-·-·-···-·-···--
T rea nt Trunk 
Healcast 
2 
99 
0.98 
-
··--··-··---------------·-··-------·-------· --·-·-·-·------·------·-··-·--·-- -----·-·-·-· ·-·-··--·····--·-·-··-·-·-·-·-··-·-----
~Voretoot~ristles 
___ _Qua l c~ 
__ 
1 -~-3-
3.03 
-----·· ------ -----
Win~-~Jl_!_()!~. Y~.J<O~- ___ ~im i!J3_r~9-~_ ----~Q ___________ _ 
0.02 
Worn Incisor 
Cursecast 
33 
99 
0.63 
----·-·------·-------·---·------- ------·--·----
---·--·--··· -----·-·--· ··--·-·-··-·--·-·-··---···-
W'{Vl!_r:'! YYing 
________ Tri~.?-~----
12 
25 
1.39 
Zu Beak 
Limit Break 
90 
0.70 
*The values in this column work linearly and are an accurate incremental 
representation of the duplicating process. For example. with the duplication value 
1.25 for a Metal Scrap, you can multiply 1.25 by the number of duplicates that you 
want. then round up to the nearest integer to calculate the number of catalysts 
that you need to use. In other words. you get one extra copy with 2 catalysts. two 
extras with 3. three with 4, four with 5, five with 7, and so forth. 
0r--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
Catalysts with a low resale value that you acquire in great quantities 
over the course of a playthrough can serve as basic enhancers for non-
critical spells. For example, a single Metal Scrap (a common and generic 
treasure with a resale value of 25 Gil) is all it takes to grant any spell 
a Dualcast property. In other words, sacrificing the 25 gil essentially 
buys you a 51 % chance (default 50%, plus 1 % from the Metal Scrap's 
effect level) to cast a second spell for free. The same principle applies 
to Voretooth Bristles and Garula Tusks. 
The Killcast added effect has a chance to immediately eliminate any 
creature vulnerable to the Instant Death status if successful. You can 
increase your chances by taking the effect level to its maximum 99 
value. This is easily achievable by adding two Coeurl Whiskers to a 
crafting recipe, which can be farmed with ease from their owners in 
the southwest region of Duscae. Killcast is never guaranteed to work, 
however: even at level 99, the effect only translates into a 19.8% chance 
to succeed on a creature with no resistance (and less on others). As 
a rule, all bosses are immune to Instant Death, but the Killcast effect 
still has noteworthy applications. Many denizens of the mazes that you 
have to explore during the difficult "Menace Beneath Lucis" sidequest, 
for instance, can be killed in this manner - and the effect will apply to 
entire crowds if you cast tier-3 spells. 
Strategy & 
Analysis 
~ Elemancy 
281 

282 
STATUS EFFECTS 
Status effects are temporary conditions that have a beneficial or 
detrimental impact on a target, be that one of your party members or 
an enemy. The majority of them are straightforward in nature, affecting 
basic attributes or other parameters such as damage resistance. For 
example, an enemy might enhance its Strength to deal more damage -
or inflict another effect to cripple yours, severely blunting your offensive 
capabilities. This is not something to fear unduly, as your party has 
access to a vast array of statistical boosts, protective bonuses, and 
unique enhancements, many of which can persist for long stretches of 
time, providing wide-ranging benefits. 
A comprehensive grasp of status effects can enable you to ensure victory 
before a fight actually begins - especially with foes where the difficulty 
of a battle is determined primarily by their characteristic use of debuffs. 
Food Effects 
0>--~~~~~~~~~----9 
Status changes conferred by the consumption of meals are represented 
with blue icons. The more common effects, related to parameter 
changes, are usually incremental, denoted in-game by the "level" of the 
effect. For example, a level 3 Attack Boost provides + 30 to Strength, 
equivalent to an increment of 10 per level. Effects that do not display 
associated levels exist in a single form. 
Food effects last for variable periods of time - see page 210 for details. 
Food-Induced Status Effects 
ICON NAME 
EFFECT 
Ci HP Boost 
+50 Base HP per level 
G Regen Boost 
+ 25% HP Recovery Rate per level 
~ Attack Boost 
+ 10 Strength per level 
liJl Defense Boost 
+ 10 Vitality per level 
PJ Magic Boost 
+ 10 Magic per level 
0 Spirit Boost 
+ 10 Spirit per level 
0 
Critical Boost 
+ 10% Critical Rate per level 
ct Flameproof 
+ 10% Fire resistance per level 
m Frostproof 
+ 10% Ice resistance per level 
r.i Stormproof 
+ 10% Lightning resistance per level 
~ EXP Boost 
+ 10% EXP per level 
ct Perception Boost + 10% item drop rate per level 
~ Poisonproof 
Immune to Poison 
~ Toad proof 
Immune to Toad 
~ Death-Defying 
Immune to Instant Death 
@ Immune 
Immune to all ailments 
~ 
Resistance 
Immune to Fire, Ice, and Lightning damage 
Boost 
II Fresh 
+ 50 Strength/Magic. + 10% EXP 
El Prime 
+ 75 Strength/Magic, + 50% EXP 
• 
Braveheart 
+ 500 Strength, Magic reduced to 0 
9 
Magemaster 
Strength reduced to 0, + 500 Magic 
B Last Stand 
+ 500 Strength. + 500 Magic, Max HP reduced to 10% 
@) Clairvoyant 
Guaranteed critical hits 
When the attacker's level is below the defender's level, 
e Equalizer 
the attacker inflicts more damage according to the 
formula: Bonus modifier = level difference x 2% 
G1 Endurance 
Sprint indefinitely without using stamina 
g 
Tech Boost 
On Noctis: + 100% to tech bar fill rate; on allies: + 100% 
leveling rate and guaranteed critical hits for techniques 
Other Effects 
0>--~~~~~~~~~~---<> 
Conditional status changes that are not bestowed by meals are shown 
as green icons when they are beneficial (buffs) and as red icons when 
they are detrimental (ailments). 
Many of these are analogous to food-based effects; the difference is 
that these do not persist between battles. Parameter changes are not 
bound to increments; instead, they are specific values corresponding to 
a particular ability or trigger, induced either by the player or the enemy. 
Combat Status Effects 
ICON NAME 
EFFECT 
;a Revitalized 
Increases HP Recovery Rate 
fl!! Tenacious 
Increases Strength 
m Stalwart 
Increases Vitality 
Pl Enchanted 
Increases Magic 
II Spiritual 
Increases Spirit 
D Flameboost 
Imbues weapons with Fire and increases Fire magic 
potency 
H Frostboost 
Imbues weapons with Ice and increases Ice magic 
potency 
mi Stormboost 
Imbues weapons with Lightning and increases 
Lightning magic potency 
~ Carbuncle's Blessing Increases Strength and Vitality 
m Nimble 
Triggers automatic evasion of enemy attacks 
" 
Inspired 
Negates all MP costs 
Sharp 
Reveals an enemy's weaknesses 
II Berserk 
Increases Strength and Magic by 100%, but reduces 
Vitality and Spirit to zero 
rn Riled 
+ 50% Strength 
rJ Roused 
+ 50% Vitality 
II Critical 
Increases Critical Rate 
~ Tactical 
+ 100% to tech bar fill rate INoctis); + 100% leveling 
rate and guaranteed critical hits for techniques (allies) 
D Danger 
Party member is in critical condition; see previous 
section covering HP 
Down 
Unable to participate in battle 
Mollified 
Reduces Strength 
Compromised 
Reduces Vitality 
Disenchanted 
Reduces Magic 
Cursed 
Reduces Spirit 
Broken (Neutralized) 
Reduces Strength and Magic due to a broken body part 
Broken (Defenseless) Reduces Vitality and Spirit due to a broken body part 
Poison 
Inflicts damage over time 
fjJ Envenomed 
Inflicts prolonged damage over time 
II Confusion 
Disoriented: Controls for Noctis are reversed. while 
allies attack nearby targets indiscriminately 
D Toad 
Transformed into a toad 
m Stone 
Turned into stone; removes all other statuses, 
and prevents all damage, but also precludes movement 
rt] Stop 
Suspended in time and immobilized 
II Burnt 
Inflicts Fire damage over time 
Frozen 
Inflicts Ice damage over time 
Shocked 
Inflicts Lightning damage over time 
Threatened 
Focuses enemy attacks on a single target 
Enervated 
Reduces all attributes 
Overheated 
Inflicts damage over time with intense heat 
Chocobos 
0>--~~~~~~~~~~~ 
Beneficial effects can be bestowed upon chocobos by feeding them 
certain foods when you camp at a haven. 
Chocobo-Related Status Effects 
ICON NAME 
EFFECT 
SOURCE 
a Chocobold 
Increases chocobo 
Mimett Greens 
stamina 
m 
Chocoboost 
Increases chocobo top 
Curiel Greens 
speed 
m 
Chocobounce 
Increases chocobo jump 
Reagan Greens 
distance 
f'J Chocobest 
Increases chocobo 
Sylkis Greens 
stamina, top speed, and 
jump distance 

COMBAT MANEUVERS 
No matter how well equipped or primed you may be for a given battle, a deep understanding of all the attacks and maneuvers at your disposal can 
still make a world of difference. In this section, we reveal how to graduate from the button-mashing barbarity that sufficed for the early chapters of 
the story in favor of activating specific moves with surgical precision. 
Weapons 
0»---~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~--o 
There are many finer points related to weapon performance, governed by systems of hidden attributes that are rarely apparent in the game menus 
or onscreen combat dialog. Knowing the underlying parameters and more granular details concerning weapon handling can really help to improve 
your combat performance. 
Blitz 
The auto-attack feature "Blitz," which is activated by holding down 
© /@, automatically performs a vanilla combo that culminates in a 
finale attack. 
Greatswords and daggers offer the shortest and longest combos 
respectively, while Blitz combos performed with swords, polearms, and 
firearms are of medium length. Machinery weapons are single-shot only. 
With all melee weapons, Noctis can warp to an enemy with the first hit of a 
combo to close the distance quickly: this is most easily achieved by holding 
@towards a locked-on target. This command does not consume any MP 
The combo counter on the left side of the screen, above the tech 
bar, indicates the number of successive hits you have landed. Any 
interruption (including damage taken from an enemy) resets the 
counter. Allies do not contribute to the combo counter. 
Finishers 
If at any point you stop in the middle of a Blitz combo, even after a single 
attack, there is a brief window during which you may perform a Finisher 
- a powerful attack that can have special properties. Simply release 
© /@, then press it again during the Finisher "window". 
With most weapons, a Finisher opportunity is indicated by a clear visual 
cue: Noctis taking a step backward. For one-handed swords, the indicator 
is more difficult to spot, and triggering the Finisher will take some practice 
to perform consistently: instead, you need to press the button when Noctis 
extends his right arm outward, just as the sword begins to phase out. 
Finishers 
WEAPON 
DESCRIPTION 
CATEGORY 
Swords 
Overhead swing or horizontal slash 
Greatswords Spin attack 
Polearms 
Long-range forward stab; repeatable with a second back-step trigger 
Daggers 
Dual horizontal slash 
Firearms 
Powerful shot with accompanying back-step 
Shields 
Overhead swing 
Directional Attacks 
Available for weapons with Blitz capabilities, directional attacks are 
triggered after the first hit of a combo by tilting @ while pressing 
or holding the attack button. Each weapon category has access to 
different directional attacks. 
The table on the upper right provides all directional attack details for 
every applicable weapon category: directional input, visual description 
of the animation, and whether it can be triggered during a Blitz combo 
or as a Finisher. 
If you learn to utilize Finishers and directional attacks in an efficient 
and timely manner based on situational awareness, you will have truly 
mastered the art of adaptive attack inputs in the midst of battle. 
Directional Attacks 
WEAPON 
CATEGORY 
Swords 
Greatswords 
Polearms 
Daggers 
Firearms 
Shields 
DIRECTION 
RELATIVE 
TO TARGET 
DESCRIPTION 
DURING 
AS A 
BLITZ 
FINISHER 
Away 
Toward 
Away 
Toward 
Sideways 
Away 
Away 
Sideways 
Any 
Away 
Backflip attack; repeat for a 
second backflip followed by a 
warp attack forward into the 
./ 
./ 
e_r:i~_m l'_ ______ ·-··-·-------------·-------·-·--·-·- -·--·-·-·-·-·-· ·-·-· _________________ _ 
Speeds up combo: replaces 
slow, horizontally sweeping 
second and third swings with a 
faster Y ~'.!J~_~l - ~~~QllQ_ ~\i'Vi_n_g 
Charged attack; hold for up to 
three seconds then release; 
Noctis flashes purple at full 
charge 
Upward leap (followed by diving 
plunge attack against small 
enemies) 
____________ _ 
Strike up to three times with 
sweeping blows that have more 
horizontal reach but deal less 
damage 
Evasive backflip (can be 
repeated once) that finishes 
with a forward lunge attack into 
!~~-~..r:1~rl1Y ___________ _ 
Back-step followed by daggers 
./ 
!h~~-\i'Vll_~ t_ lh_E!_.f'.~~~'L_____________ 
-·------ -----
Sidestep in the corresponding 
direction; hold to repeat 
indefinitely 
Dive in the corresponding 
direction while shooting; must 
___ b_e_locked _011 to ~arg_e!___ _ 
Close-range, overhead shield 
throw directly forward that 
pierces through targets 
Aerial Attacks 
Only two weapon categories are capable of sustained aerial assaults. You 
can attack in the air with any Blitz-enabled weapon, but to remain airborne 
you must be using either a sword or polearm. In addition, you must 
have unlocked the Airstep Ascension ability (and, ideally, the successive 
nexuses down that branch of the Combat Ascension tree). This equipment 
restraint also applies to the Death Drop ability, which is a great way to 
close the distance from afar while consuming less MP than with a warp-
strike. Once you learn the Osmostrike Ascension ability, aerial attacks that 
connect recover MP ( ~ 2.5% of your maximum MP per hit). 
Blindsides 
Blindsides are special attacks that occur automatically when you launch 
a blow from behind - specifically within a cone of 60 degrees to the 
rear of the enemy. Party members enjoy an additional damage multiplier 
of 1.5 when executing a Blindside. Consider honing your skills at roll-
dodging if you wish to adopt a hit-and-run playstyle that maximizes this 
damage bonus - especially with a greatsword or pair of daggers. 
The multiplier for Noctis' s Blindside attacks with daggers increases to 
1.75 and 2.0 respectively when he learns the Stalker and Super Stalker 
Ascension abilities. 
• Strategy & 
Analysis 
• Status Effects 
• Combat 
Maneuvers 
283 

284 
Warp-Strikes 
Warp-strikes are special attacks performed by pressing @/O while 
locked on to a target. This can be repeated multiple times in a row by 
holding down the button, but the maneuver takes a toll on your MP 
gauge: each warp costs 30 MP 
A warp-strike deals damage based on the distance between Noctis and his 
target: the farther the target, the more damage the command deals - and 
vice versa. From one edge of a standard battle zone to the opposite edge, 
you can easily score a 4.0 multiplier, for example. You can further improve 
warp-strike damage multipliers through Ascension, by learning the Warp 
Factor and Warp Factor II abilities, which grant 25% and 50% bonuses 
respectively. At short distances, the multiplier will be less than 1.0, with a 
minimum of 0.5 if you are warp-striking from right next to the enemy. The 
Point-Blank Warp-Strike Ascension ability eliminates this penalty. 
Warp-strikes are primarily attack moves, with significant damage 
potential and stopping power. You also receive 1 AP every time you defeat 
a target with this move. In addition, warp-strikes can have a few creative 
applications. Most notably, the start-up of the warping animation makes 
Noctis briefly invincible. You can exploit this feature in various instances: 
<> As a way to fly "through" enemy attacks (particularly projectiles) 
without sustaining damage. 
<> As an aerial dodge before you learn the Airslip Ascension ability. 
<> As a means to maintain your combo counter. 
Body Parts & Breakage 
~--~---~~~~~-
Weapon attacks have the ability to "break" the enemy, with the word "BREAK" 
appearing onscreen when it occurs (ED). This system revolves around the 
fact that enemies have distinct body parts (also referred to as "appendages" 
in the game, though a creature's torso also counts in this respect). You can 
discern each distinct bodily target on an enemy by noting the appearance of a 
reticle; cycle through a foe's body parts with tl while you are locked on to it. 
Triggering a break on a body part can lead to various, universally positive, 
effects (including penalties to the creature's attributes, impediments to 
damage mitigation specific to a body part, and unique appendage drops 
when applicable). The precise result depends on the enemy in question, as 
documented in each monster's Notes in our Bestiary chapter. 
Here are the key principles governing how the system works: 
<> Whatever body part of an enemy you target, the damage you deal is 
depleted from the creature's overall HP total. Body parts do not have 
individual HP allocations. 
<> On the other hand, each body part has a separate, hidden durability 
parameter. The durability of a body part is defined as a percentage 
of the enemy's Max HP 
<> The majority of attacks in the game deal an equal amount of damage 
(HP depletion) and "breakage" (durability depletion). However, the two 
concepts are distinct from each other. Certain weapons have properties 
that enable them to inflict more breakage than they deal damage. 
<> Break can occur once you have inflicted sufficient breakage by 
reducing the durability of a body part to 0. Break status frequently 
induces parameter changes, such as lowered Strength or Vitality. 
Consult our Bestiary chapter entries to learn about break effects 
achievable against specific enemies. 
<> Even if a body part's durability is reduced to 0, it will not be 
automatically broken. Only break-capable attacks will induce the 
break status. You can find the list of all break-capable attacks in the 
dedicated table below. Note that you must use a weapon of some 
kind; spells are not break-capable. 
<> Destroying a body part reduces one of the target's attributes 
(either Vitality or Strength) by a certain percentage. Knowing what 
stat each appendage is tied to can prove immensely useful when 
facing dangerous enemies. If a creature inflicts massive damage, 
for example, lowering its Strength by 30% can greatly increase your 
chances of survival. Conversely, reducing the Vitality of an opponent 
that soaks up damage can help to shorten the battle. 
<> Certain weapons and a few specific individual attacks in specific 
weapons, categories, grant breakage bonuses (see tables below). 
The Hardedge greatsword, for example, will inflict 80% extra 
breakage with every blow (in other words, 1.8 times more breakage 
than damage). 
<> As an illustration of the above principles: consider the lowly 
Sabertusk, an enemy with a single targetable area (the body). Its 
durability is equal to 60% of its Max HP of 1,200. This means that 
with most attacks, the enemy will break once 720 points of damage/ 
breakage have been dealt (assuming that you deal a break-capable 
blow). If you instead perform a suitable attack that deals only 400 
damage, but carries a x1 .8 breakage modifier (for example, by 
wielding a Hardedge), you would still break the enemy because you 
have depleted the enemy's durability (400 x 1.8 = 720). 
<> Last but not least, don't quixotically target a body part if an 
enemy's behavior makes it consistently difficult to reach. Though 
break bonuses can be useful, try not to pursue them at the expense 
of staccato attack patterns that will ultimately extend the duration 
of a fight. 
Break-Capable Attacks 
WEAPON CATEGORY BREAK-CAPABLE ATTACKS 
.~!I ______________ ~~~~~~-~_!_~~~~~~~~t~~~.P~!!_!_~~--------------
Greatswords 
Blitz initial hit~~~t~~ ta_b;_ ~h-~'.9 ~~-~ttack; a_e! ial attack 
Polearms 
Machinery 
Aerial attack 
Charged attack 
Break Power Bonuses: Weapons 
WEAPON CATEGORY 
Greatswords 
Polearms 
Firearms 
WEAPON NAME 
BREAKAGE BONUS 
Hardedge _____ __ ------~~ -
_ 
Quicksilver ____________________ , ·· -···-··················-···-···-x ___ 1 
_____ ._8 
______ ····-············-···-····· ....... . 
Cerberus 
x10.0 
Break Power Bonuses: Attac ks 
WEAPON CATEGORY 
ATTACK TYPE 
BREAKAGE BONUS 
Blitz initial 
x1 .1 
------·---·---.. -·-······--··-----
- - ----···--·------------·--·---··--··-·- ·---
Greatswords 
Blitz stab 
···········•·······--·········· ·-····· ·-··x 
____ 1 
____ · 
__ 1 
......................................... , 
Blitz finale 
x1 .3 
----··-·····--·---··---·--·-------- ------·----··-·--··-·---------- ---·-------------------------·--·· ··---------·-··-··--··-·-·--------------·------·----------
Aerial attack 
x1 .1 
-·-·---~-------·--·-······-·- ······ -·- · -· --······-·--··--·----···--·-·---- --·-·-·--·--------··-·-
Polearms 
-~-~~al di_v_~_~_t!~-~ ~- f ·----··· ____ x1 .5 
Circular Saw 
x1 .5 
- -
- --
-----···-· -·-
Drillbreaker 
x1 .3 
Machinery 

Attack Damage Modifiers 
ATTACK TYPE • • • • • • 
II 
Standard* 
1.0 
1.6-1.92 
1.1 
0.75 
1.0 
1.2 
1.3 
Weak attacks** 
0.8-1.28 
0.77 
0.45-0.6 
Strong attacks*** 
2.4 
1.32 
Blitz finales 
1.3 
2.08 
1.43 
0.9 
1.0 
1.56 
1.3 
Finishers 
1.5 
0.8 + 1.92 
1.65 
0.9 
1.5 
1.8 
Counterattacks 
1.2 
2.88 
1.1 
0.75 
1.0 
1.56 
1.95 
Aerials 
1.0 
1.6 
0.77 
0.6 
1.0 
1.2-1.8 
1.3 
Warp-strikes 
1.0 
1.28 
0.88 
0.56 
1.0 
0.6 
Parries 
5.0 
6.4 
4.4 
3.0 
1.3 
4.8 
5.2 
Link-strikes 
3.0 
4.8 
3.3 
2.25 
3.0 
3.6 
3 9 
* 
"Standard" refers to mid-string single-hit attacks during Blitz combos. It also applies to any attack type that we have previously described, but not specifically categorized 
in the table. 
" 
Weak attacks include the dagger throw during the corresponding directional attack. and multi-hit attacks in the middle of Blitz combos. 
*** "Strong attacks" refers to the greatsword charged attack (base modifier value) and aerial dive attacks. 
Attack Damage Modifiers 
For every attack performed. there is a hidden damage modifier value 
specific to both the category of weapon, and the specific type of attack 
used. Consider a regular sword attack to be the standard as a basis of 
comparison. The full table of damage modifier values is shown above. 
Some attack types have slight variability, so we have presented those 
values as a range for the sake of accessibility. 
Intermission 
O Royal Arms do not perform Finishers. Directional attacks are possible 
in some cases during Blitz combos. 
o Airstep attacks are not possible with Royal Arms. These maneuvers 
remain exclusive to standard swords and polearms. Additionally, no 
aerial MP recovery takes place when you attack with Royal Arms. 
o Royal Arms are considered an "absolute" damage property. With 
only very few exceptions, no enemies are strong or weak to them, 
regardless of form; in other words, almost every opponent has a set 
100% damage susceptibility to all Royal Arms. When facing foes 
with high resistances to all standard damage types, this makes 
Royal Arms incredibly powerful. 
!°)·· Strategy & 
Analysis 
We have now presented the complete mechanics of every attack 
performed with standard weaponry, with the exception of Royal Arms. 
To review. here is a quick summary of all concepts related to weapon 
attacks up to this point. 
o Any boost to Strength that you can secure is more beneficial with 
most Royal Arms. because it is effectively counted twice for the 
,,.. ~~~~~~ers 
o Standard weapon attacks performed during Blitz combos may have 
variations triggered by manually stopping the combo (Finisher), or by 
specifying a direction with@ (directional attacks). 
o Swords and polearms are capable of performing sustained aerial 
combos. Aerial attacks can also restore MP with the Osmostrike 
ability unlocked through Ascension development. 
o Damage multiplier bonuses may apply in the following situations: 
charged attacks, blindsides, and warp-strikes. 
o All weapon attacks inflict both damage (reducing the target's HP 
total) and breakage (reducing the durability of enemy body parts/ 
appendages). Certain attacks and weapons have breakage bonuses. 
Only a certain subset of attacks can actually induce the break status; 
these are referred to as "break-capable". 
O Each attack has a specific damage modifier that acts on top of basic 
combat parameters in the final damage calculation. 
Now that you are intimately familiar with attack properties relevant to 
regular weapons. it will be much easier to understand the mechanical 
details of Royal Arms - many of which have characteristics that defy 
standard weapon categorization. 
Royal Arms 
Here are the most notable differences between standard weapons and 
Royal Arms: 
o When you begin a Blitz combo with Royal Arms, Noctis usually has 
much greater forward momentum at longer distances from a target. 
These initial strikes also tend to be slightly stronger than those of 
regular weapon types. 
purposes of damage calculation (see page 293). The Bow of the 
Clever and Scepter of the Pious are the two exceptions; they gain 
damage boosts from bonuses to Magic. 
o To counterbalance the generally high Attack stats of Royal Arms, as 
well as the secondary Strength or Magic bonus to offensive output, 
attack damage modifiers tend to be lower overall when compared 
with those of standard weapons. as shown in the following table: 
Royal Arms: Attack Damage Modifiers 
ATTACK TYPE 
MULTIPLIER 
Standard* 
0.7 
Strong attacks** 
0.84-1 .05 
Blitz finales 
1.4 
Aerials 
0.7 
Parries 
2.8 
Link-strikes 
2.1 
~ 
"Standard" refers to mid-string single-hit attacks during Blitz combos. It 
also applies to any attack type that we have previously described, but not 
specifically categorized in the table. 
In this table, "strong attacks" refers instead to opening attacks of Blitz 
combos and counterattacks. 
O Finally, and perhaps most importantly: Royal Arms deplete a 
percentage of your Max HP with every attack that successfully 
deals damage (except parries). The effect ranges from 2-4% with 
most standard attacks, but the loss can be much more significant 
with warp-strikes. The HP reduction is actually proportional to the 
damage modifier of an attack. as a percentage of Max HP; the 
stronger the attack, the higher the HP "cost". In short, always keep 
a careful watch on your HP when using these powerful weapons. 
With these basics established, we can delve more deeply into the 
distinct characteristics of individual weapons. and any exceptions to 
the points made above. 
285 

286 
Sword of the Wise (Attack: 194) 
<> Handles similarly to a regular sword 
<> Performs a two-hit warp-strike with a delayed 
second hit (damage modifier/HP cost: 0.84/12% 
+ 0.42/6%) 
<> Unlike almost all other weapons, the initial hit of a 
Blitz combo is the strongest (damage modifier: 1.4). 
not the finale (damage modifier: 0. 7); in combination 
with its excellent distance-closing properties, this is 
one of the best moves in the game, and makes for a 
great weapon to use with hit-and-run tactics 
<> Enables a backflip as a backward directional attack 
Blade of the Mystic (Attack: 396) 
<> Handles like a combo-friendly greatsword; while 
the initial Blitz hit is slow, subsequent attacks are 
performed in quick succession 
<> Performs a unique warp-strike that begins with 
Noctis firing three arcing projectiles toward the 
enemy while standing in place, before warping 
forward to deliver a physical attack (damage 
modifier: 0.35 for each projectile as well as the 
physical attack; HP cost is 15% for the physical 
attack only) 
<> Pause at any time during a Blitz combo to trigger 
a unique Tenacious self-buff that increases 
Noctis's Strength by 100 for 10 seconds. This is 
repeatable but does not stack with any existing 
Tenacious effect 
Trident of the Oracle (Attack: 388) 
<> Handles similarly to a polearm 
<> Creates an afterimage of Noctis after each 
attack that persists briefly and performs up to 
three additional attacks at that location (damage 
modifier: 0.42 each) 
<> Performs an aerial diving warp-strike consisting 
of up to three hits (damage modifier/HP cost: 
0.49/14% + 0.7/3% + 1.4/24%), with follow-up 
afterimage attacks (damage modifier: 0.49 per hit) 
<> Enables an evasive leap, followed by an aerial 
dive attack as a sideways or backward directional 
attack; this dive attack has a x1 .5 bonus to 
breakage 
Scepter of the Pious 
(Attack: 237, Magic: +150) 
<> This weapon uses the Magic stat in damage 
calculation 
<> Performs a two-hit aerial warp-strike (damage 
modifier/HP cost: 0.49/7% + 0.63/13.5%) 
\ \ 
<> Unique weapon that assumes different forms based 
on directional input 
ATTACK TYPE 
WEAPON FORM 
Blitz initial hit 
Trident of the Oracle 
Non-directional Blitz combo 
Sword of the Wise 
Forward directional Blitz combo 
Sword of the Tall (finale: Axe of the 
Conqueror) 
Sideways directional Blitz combo 
Blade of the Mystic (no self-buff) 
Backward directional Blitz combo Trident of the Oracle 
' 
Sword of the Tall (Attack: 518) 
<> Handles similarly to a greatsword 
<> Features a unique serrated blade that deals 
multiple hits with every attack; later hits deal 
higher damage (damage modifier range: 0.07-
0.14) 
<> Performs a warp-strike capable of dealing more 
than 10 hits (damage modifier/HP cost: 0.07 /1 %, 
0.21 /3% with the last hit) 
<> Has a breakage multiplier of 0.50 applied to all 
attacks, except for warp-strikes 
Bow of the Clever (Attack: 203, Magic: +80) 
<> This weapon uses the Magic stat in damage 
calculation 
o Handles similarly to a firearm, while 
offering the mobility of daggers 
<> Regular attacks have a maximum range of 
80 feet and are subject to a range modifier (see page 272). 
but you should note that this weapon's projectiles are slow 
and can therefore easily miss from a distance 
<> Most attacks have a lower damage modifier overall (0.49) 
but can pierce enemies (hitting multiple lined-up targets or 
different body parts of large foes) 
o Deals bonus damage to enemies in the vulnerable condition 
o Performs a special warp-strike that stops in front of the 
enemy to shoot three arrows rapidly at close range (damage 
modifier/ HP cost: 0.35/5% x 3) 
Star of the Rogue (Attack: 177) 
<> Handles like a long-range pair of daggers 
<> Performs a multi-hit warp-strike that ends 
with a backward evasive flip (damage 
modifier/HP cost: 0.32/4.5% for the first 
hit. 0.14/3% for subsequent hits) 
<> Enables aerial attacks with directional input during Blitz 
o Standard attacks can pierce enemies (hitting multiple lined-up 
targets or different body parts of large foes) 
<> Maximum range: 130 feet for regular attacks, 65 feet for warp-
strikes 
Mace of the Fierce (Attack: 334) 
<> Handles similarly to a greatsword 
<> Features extremely slow and linear attacks that 
have poor tracking against agile enemies, but all 
attacks are break-capable 
<> Performs a slow two-hit warp-strike (damage 
modifier/HP cost: 0.28/8% + 0.49/14%) 
<> All other attacks have a damage modifier of only 
0. 7, including parries, but feature huge breakage 
multipliers; see the table below 
<> Obviously, this weapon focuses on breaking the 
enemy with well-timed attacks rather than raw power 
ATTACK TYPE 
BREAKAGE MULTIPLIER 
Standard 
2.0 
Blitz initial hit 
2.5 
Blitz finale 
2.5 
Aerial 
2.5 
Parry 
30 
Warp-strike (2 hits) 
2.0 + 30 
\ 

Swords of the Wanderer (Attack: 153) 
<> Handles similarly to daggers when the weapon is 
dual-wielded during a Blitz combo. with weaker 
mid-Blitz attacks overall (damage modifier: 0.56) 
<> Performs a multi-hit warp-strike (damage 
modifier/HP cost: 0.28/4% per hit. but 0.63/9% 
with the last hit) 
<> Provides slower, more focused hits in combined 
form as a forward directional attack 
<> Enables an evasive leap, followed by an aerial dive 
attack as a sideways or backward directional attack 
Shield of the Just 
(Attack: 251, Strength: -100) 
<> Handles almost exactly like a regular 
shield, including the warp-strike (damage 
modifier/HP cost: 0.49/7%) 
<> Holding @/O enables Noctis to enter a 
defensive stance similar to cover status, 
with the same bonus HP regeneration, but 
also draining MP Given the Strength and MP 
penalties of this weapon to begin with, it may 
be most useful as a healing tool for players who 
don't use much MP 
Sword of the Father (Attack: 141, Strength: +100) 
<> Handles similarly to Sword of the Wise, but with 
unique attack animations, including a three-hit 
warp-strike (damage modifier/HP cost: 0.42/6%) 
that features follow-up afterimage attacks 
(damage modifier: 0.21 per hit) 
<> Enables a unique Tenacious self-buff by performing 
a Blitz finale, which increases Noctis' s Strength by 
200 for 5 seconds; this is repeatable, but does not 
stack with any existing Tenacious effect 
Axe of the Conqueror 
(Attack: 483, Strength: +60) 
<> Handles similarly to a greatsword 
<> Performs an aerial, diving warp-strike (damage 
modifier/HP cost: 1.4 /42%) 
<> Performs slow and powerful but fairly linear 
attacks 
<> Enables an aerial diving attack as a forward 
directional attack 
Katana of the Warrior (Attack: 361) 
<> Handles similarly to a sword, but with extended 
range and much faster Blitz combos after the 
initial hit 
<> Performs a delayed, single-hit warp-strike 
(damage modifier/HP cost: 0.49/10.5%); 
successive warp-strikes can be chained 
extremely quickly 
\ \ 
~ 
Armiger 
Armiger is represented by a circular gauge that surrounds Noctis's 
Primary Arms display. Gauge growth occurs only during combat, but 
persists between battles. The gauge consists of 40,000 points, which 
you can accumulate with the following methods: 
<> All weapons and attack types add to the gauge, even Royal Arms. 
Generally, expect to gain 100-800 points for most attacks whenever 
you deal damage, with stronger attacks providing more points. 
<> Warp-strikes with standard weapons (not Royal Arms) provide only 
100 points (0.25% of the gauge), making them a poor choice for 
Armiger accumulation. 
<> Standout methods of accumulation with standard weapons include 
greatsword charged attacks and counterattacks, as well as blinks 
with shields; each of these maneuvers rewards 1,600 points. 
<> Phasing is by far the most efficient form of accumulation; each 
successful phase contributes 2,000 points to the gauge (5% of the 
total). You can exploit this by phasing multiple attacks consecutively, 
such as a barrage of rifle shots from imperial soldiers. This can help 
you to fill your Armiger bar very quickly. Ideally, blink instead of 
phasing continuously to reduce the attendant MP cost. Note that 
this trick does not apply to shield blocks or other defensive moves. 
Once the gauge has been filled, you can trigger Armiger by pressing 
(1J.) + @)/ 41 +In. When you do this, the gauge will deplete until it 
is empty or until combat status ends. By default. it takes 10 seconds 
to fully deplete the gauge. If Noctis enters Danger status during an 
Armiger assault, the mode ends immediately - though you will keep the 
remaining gauge "charge". 
In Armiger mode, Noctis will enjoy the benefits of greatly increased 
attack speed and power. He will also occasionally dodge projectiles 
automatically, without requiring any player input, and is much less likely 
to be knocked down or to experience knockback effects against strong 
attacks. Finally, all attacks during Armiger have a bonus multiplier of 1.5 
to breakage, and are break-capable. 
All of your acquired Royal Arms are summoned by Noctis during Armiger. 
While Noctis cycles through the weapons to perform relentless attacks, 
the weapons themselves automatically home in on the target to deal 
additional damage. 
ROYAL ARMS VARIANT 
DAMAGE MODIFIER: 
DAMAGE MODIFIER: 
NOCTIS 
AUTOMATED 
Sword of the Wise 
1.2 
0.3 
Axe of the Conqueror 
1.3 
03 
Bow of the Clever 
1.5 
035 
Swords of the Wanderer 
1.4 
035 
Blade of the Mystic 
1.5 
0.4 
Star of the Rogue 
0.4* 
0.4 
Sword of the Tall 
0.5* 
0.45 
Shield of the Just 
1.2 
0.45 
Mace of the Fierce 
1.6 
0.5 
Scepter of the Pious 
u 
0.5 
Trident of the Oracle 
1.8 
0.6 
Katana of the Warrior 
1.9 
0.6 
Sword of the Father 
2.0 
0.7 
* Capable of multiple hits 
Armiger and its related Ascension nodes are not accessible until you 
obtain the Swords of the Wanderer during Chapter 03. Armiger-related 
abilities improve its frequency and duration in the following ways: 
<> Armiger Harvester: Boost bar gain by 30% 
<> Iron Armiger: Reduce bar depletion by 30% (essentially adding 
~4.3 seconds to Armiger duration) 
ill Strategy & 
Analysis 
Combat 
Maneuvers 
287 

288 
Ally Coordination 
0·)--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~---o 
Weapon Attacks 
Gladio, lgnis, and Prompto can each equip two weapon types. In 
general, you can expect that regular weapon attacks by allies, with 
parameters and choice of weapon being equal, will deal roughly half the 
damage that Noctis can in an equivalent situation. 
Conditional Abilities 
Conditional abilities are actions that your allies can perform automatically 
in specific circumstances. These conditions are usually related to the 
user's HP or in response to Noctis attacking or being attacked. You can 
unlock all of these abilities at the Ascension screen (see page 296). 
Conditional Abilities: Gladiolus 
NAME 
II D DESCRIPTION 
Reflex 
.,/ 
Perform a disruptive counterattack. Damage modifier: x2 
Engage 
.,/ 
Perform a powerful preemptive strike. Damage modifier: x2 
Intercept 
.,/ 
Guard Noctis when HP is high 
Ally Weapons: Overview 
CHARACTER 
PRIMARY WEAPON 
SECONDARY WEAPON 
Gladiolus 
Greatsword 
Shield 
lgnis 
Dagger 
Po lea rm 
Prompto 
Firearm 
Machinery 
Furthermore, all allies may perform Deathblows after you unlock the 
requisite node in Ascension. This weapon-independent ability enables 
them to perform powerful attacks against enemies in Vulnerable status, 
featuring a damage modifier of x2.5, upgradable to x3.5 with the 
Ultimate Deathblow Ascension ability. 
Antagonize 
.,/ 
.,/ Perform a disruptive kick when Noctis is defending. Damage modifier: x1 .5 (x2.5 with Acute Antagonism) 
Conditional Abilities: lgnis 
NAME 
D m 
DESCRIPTION 
Analyze 
.,/ 
.,/ Automatically scan for enemy weaknesses; see page 271 for details 
Venom Fang 
.,/ 
.,/ When Noctis is attacking an enemy with a Blitz combo, inflict Poison on the target for 60 seconds. Damage modifier: x1 (x1 .5 with Virulent Venom) 
Lancet 
.,/ 
Perform a counterattack and drain an enemy's HP equal to damage dealt when own HP is low. Damage modifier: x2.5 
Regenerate 
.,/ Heal an ally with a hidden item when HP is high 
Conditional Abilities: Prompto 
NAME 
~ D DESCRIPTION 
First Shot 
.,/ 
Perform a preemptive strike that adds one segment to the tech ba r. Damage modifier: x1 .5 
Scintilla 
.,/ 
Perform a counterattack and inflict Stop when HP is low. Damage modifier: x2.0 
Ballistic 
.,/ 
Unleash critical damage on an area when HP is high. Damage modifier: x0.4 per hit 
Shock Drop 
.,/ 
Inflicts Shocked for 3 seconds on an enemy Noctis is attacking in mid-air. Damage modifier: x2 (x4 with Sharp Shock) 
Techniques 
Techniques are advanced ally actions that are activated by holding 
(!J)/aJ and pressing 0 . Each ally is "mapped" to a direction on 0: 
lgnis to C. Prompto to <0. Gladiolus to O>. and occasional guests to 
O. As guest party members play a part in a mere fraction of the total 
play time, we will focus exclusively on details for your permanent allies 
in this section. 
Technique usage is governed by the tech bar - the green gauge that 
appears above Noctis's weapons display. The tech bar fills slowly 
but persistently during battles (and by one full segment when certain 
conditional abilities are triggered - see previous section). up to a 
maximum of three segments. Each deployed technique consumes a 
certain number of segments. As the bar does not carry over between 
battles, there is no point in conserving this resource; you should spend 
it liberally whenever it might provide an advantage. 
By default, your allies only have access to one technique each, but can 
acquire additional specialties via their Ascension trees - though only 
one can be equipped at a time. Like conditional abilities, techniques can 
be bound to specific weapon types. 
Certain techniques give Noctis a follow-up opportunity: if you press 
the attack button while the corresponding prompt appears on-screen, 
Noctis will land an extra blow on his ally's target. 
Every time you activate a technique, its level bar fills by an increment. 
When you reach the number of activations required, the technique 
levels up, which results in an increase of its critical rate. 
For Noctis, eating a favorite food speeds up the fill rate of the tech 
bar by 100%. For an ally, a favorite food doubles the leveling rate for 
any of their techniques that you use (in other words, each activation 
counts for two) , and also guarantees critical hits. Favorite foods 
are indicated in-game by a character sprite that depicts the party 
member who will receive a boost. See page 21 1 for a complete list 
of favorite foods. 

Techniques: Gladiolus 
NAME 
1111 SEGMENTS DESCRIPTION 
LV. l I LV.2 1 LV.31 LV.41 LV.51 LV.61 LV.71 LV.81 LV.91 LV.10 
+ Sweeping attack with a greatsword (default technique). 
Activations Required to Level Up 
Tempest 
,/ 
1 
+ Damage modifier: 0.4 + 2.0 finisher (0.4 + 4.0 when 
0 I 2 I 3 I 4 I 5 I 6 I 7 I 8 I 
I 
critical). 
Critical Rate (%) 
+ Possible follow-up by Noctis; damage modifier: 1.0 
0 I 3 I 6 I 9 I 12 I 15 I 18 I 24 I 
I 
+ Greatsword attack on a single enemy that can break body 
Activations Required to Level Up 
0 I 2 I 3 I 4 I 5 I 6 I 7 I 8 I 9 I 
Dawn hammer 
,/ 
2 
parts, with possible follow-up attack by Noctis. 
+ Damage modifier: 5.5 (1 1.0 if critical) (breakage x2 5) 
Critical Rate (%) 
0 I 4 I 8 I 12 I 24 I 28 I 32 I 36 I 40 I 
+ Deals damage to nearby enemies with a shield shockwave. 
Activations Required to Level Up 
0 I 2 I 3 I 4 I 5 I 6 I 
I 
I 
I 
Cyclone 
,/ 
2 
+ Damage modifier: 2.0 + 0.3 shockwave (4 0 + 0.6 for 
critical) 
Critical Rate (%) 
0 I 2 I 5 I 9 I 14 I 20 I 
I 
I 
I 
+ Guards Noctis with a shield. Enables breakout attack from 
Activations Required to Level Up 
Royal Guard 
,/ 
1 
cover. 
0 I 2 I 3 I 4 I 5 I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
+ Possible follow-up by Noctis; damage modifier: 4.D (breakage 
Critical Rate (%) 
x3). 
0 I 2D I 40 I 60 I 1 DD I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
+ Frontal, sweeping greatsword attack that can break body 
Activations Required to Level Up 
0 I 100 I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Impulse 
,/ 
3 
parts. 
Critical Rate (%) 
+ Damage modifier: 8.D (16.D for critical) (breakage x2 5). 
0 I 25 I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Techniques: lgnis* 
NAME 
ma SEGMENTS DESCRIPTION 
LV. l I LV.21 LV.31 LV.41 LV.51 LV.61 LV. 71 LV.81 LV.91 LV.10 
+ Sets up Noctis to warp-strike multiple enemies in succession 
Activations Required to Level Up 
with a dagger (default technique). 
0 I 2 I 3 I 4 I 5 I 6 I 7 I 
I 
I 
Mark 
,/ 
1 
+ Damage modifier: 0.7 (1.4 critical) 
+ Possible follow-up by Noctis; damage modifier: 1.0 + 3.0 
Critical Rate (%) 
(first hit 2.D when critical). 
0 I 4 I 8 I 12 I 24 I 28 I 32 I 
I 
I 
+ Concentrates all of the party's attacks on a single foe at a 
Activations Required to Level Up 
Overwhelm 
,/ 
,/ 
2 
time. Noctis performs standard attacks with his currently 
0 I 2 I 3 I 4 I 5 I 6 I 7 I 8 I 
I 
equipped weapon, while his allies perform Deathblow 
Critical Rate (%) 
attacks. 
1 D I 15 I 2D I 25 I 3D I 35 I 40 I 5D I 
I 
Activations Required to Level Up 
Regroup 
,/ 
,/ 
2 
+ Brings all allies together in stalwart defense. Rescues from 
0 I 2 I 3 I 4 I 5 I 6 I 7 I 8 I 
I 
Danger and restores HP quickly. 
Critical Rate (%) 
1D I 15 I 2D I 25 I 3D I 35 I 4D I 50 I 
I 
+ Imbues Noctis's weapon with the element (Fire, Ice, or 
Activations Required to Level Up 
Lightning) that is the weakness of the current target, for 6D 
D I 2 I 3 I 4 I 5 I 6 I 
I 
I 
I 
Enhancement 
,/ 
,/ 
1 
seconds; also boosts inherent damage of that element from 
Critical Rate (%) 
weapons and elemancy. 
0 I 8 I 17 I 27 I 38 I 50 I 
I 
I 
I 
+ Elemental damage + 70 ( + 100 if critical). 
+ Devastating Fire attack with a dagger that can break body parts. 
Activations Required to Level Up 
Sagefire 
,/ 
3 
+ Explosion damage modifier: 4.0 (8.0 if critical). 
D I 1Do I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
+ Knife throw explosion damage modifier: 2.0 (4.0 if critical) 
Critical Rate (%) 
+ Burnt for 10 seconds (20 if critical). 
D I 25 I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
* lgnis's Libra Elementia technique is automatically unlocked during Chapter 1 D. It cannot be leveled up. Damage modifier: 1.5. Possible follow-up by Noctis; damage modifier: 1.0 
Techniques: Prompto 
NAME 
1111 SEGMENTS DESCRIPTION 
Lv.1 I Lv.2 I LV.31 Lv.41 Lv.s I LV.61 Lv.1 I LV.81 LV.91 Lv.10 
+ Piercing firearm shot that can hit multiple enemies in a line (default 
Activations Required to Level Up 
technique). Reduces enemy defense and can break body parts. 
0 I 2 I 3 I 4 I 5 I 6 I 7 I 8 I 9 I 10 
Piercer 
,/ 
1 
+ Damage modifier: 3.5 (7.D if critical) (breakage x3), Vitality 
Critical Rate (%) 
-100 (-150 if critical) (2D seconds) 
50 I 55 I 60 I 65 I 75 I 8D I 85 I 9D I 95 I 99 
+ Possible follow-up by Noctis; damage modifier: 1.0 
+ Draws enemy attention with a firearm for 20 seconds. 
Activations Required to Level Up 
Starshell 
,/ 
2 
+ Inflicts the Enervated status to Daemons, reducing their 
D I 4 I 12 I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
attributes. 
Critical Rate (%) 
+ Light-elemental. 
2D I 50 I 80 I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
+ Machinery attack on a single enemy. Can break body parts. 
Activations Required to Level Up 
Damage modifier: 8.D (16.0 if critical) 
D I 2 I 3 I 4 I 5 I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Recoil 
,/ 
2 
+ Damage modifier: 8.0 (16.D if critical) (x2.5 breakage), Burnt 
Critical Rate (%) 
(10 seconds). 
10 I 
I 14 I 
I 20 I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
+ Possible follow-up by Noctis; damage modifier: 1.0 
12 
16 
Activations Required to Level Up 
Gravisphere 
,/ 
1 
+ Draws enemies in an area closer together with machinery. 
D I 2 I 3 I 4 I 5 I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Critical Rate (%) 
1D I 12 I 14 I 16 I 2D I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Activations Required to Level Up 
Snapshot 
,/ 
,/ 
1 
+ Takes photos in battle. Up to five can be saved. 
D I 5 I 5 I 5 I 5 I 5 I 5 I 10 I 10 I 5D 
Critical Rate (%) 
2D I 25 I 3D I 35 I 4D I 45 I 50 I 60 I 7D I 10D 
Activations Required to Level Up 
Trigger-Happy 
,/ 
3 
+ Area-of-effect firearm attack that can break body parts. 
0 I 100 I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
+ Damage modifier: 0.5 per bullet, 8.D finale (x1 .5 breakage) 
Critical Rate (%) 
D I 25 I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
)" 
·I 
Strategy & 
Analysis 
289 

290 
Link-Strikes 
Noctis is able to perform link-strikes with any ally when he is equipped 
with a sword, greatsword, or polearm. 
When an ally is within range and Noctis performs either a Blindside 
blow or a parry counterattack, there is a chance to trigger a link-strike. 
If multiple allies are available for a link-strike, one is chosen at random. 
All link-strikes have a damage multiplier of 3.0, scaling with the Attack 
stats of the party members taking part. 
Healing and Recovery 
Each of your allies is capable of learning three tiers of "First Aid" abilities 
that provide temporary reprieves from damage sustained in battle when 
their HP is low. Higher tiers restore more HP and grant temporary boosts 
to defensive parameters. In Ascension, you need to unlock each of these 
abilities individually for each of your party members. 
<> First Aid restores 20% of Max HP 
<> Advanced First Aid restores 40% of Max HP and boosts Vitality by 
200 for 15 seconds. 
<> Expert First Aid restores 60% of Max HP and boosts Vitality and 
Spirit by 200 for 15 seconds. 
The party also has access to Ascension abilities that provide temporary 
parameter boosts for rescuing allies from Danger status. Healing items 
being plentiful and easy to use, however, we consider these Ascension 
abilities to be of low priority. 
<> Savior's Fortitude boosts an ally's Vitality by 200 for 30 seconds 
when he is taken out of Danger. 
<> Savior's Vengeance boosts an ally's critical hit rate by 20% for 30 
seconds when he is taken out of Danger. 
<> Savior's Force boosts an ally's Strength by 200 for 30 seconds 
when he is taken out of Danger. 
<> Comeback fully restores an ally's HP when he is taken out of 
Danger. 
Armiger Chain 
During Armiger (see page 287). you can trigger a special group attack 
known as Armiger Chain: simply press (1] +@J /a.J +ln again. This 
empties the remainder of the circular Armiger gauge immediately. 
There are spatial restrictions to using Armiger Chain. If there is an 
environmental obstacle preventing usage, the button prompt will be 
grayed out and you will get an audio cue signaling an invalid input when 
you attempt to activate it. 
Note that Armiger Chain and its related Ascension nexuses are 
unavailable until you acquire the Blade of the Mystic. This is due to 
the fact that each party member actually equips one of the first four 
mandatory Royal Arms as part of the attack: 
<> Prompto: Sword of the Wise (damage modifier of 1.5). 
<> Gladiolus: Axe of the Conqueror (damage modifier of 1.4). 
<> lgnis: Swords of the Wanderer (damage modifier of 1.2). 
<> Noctis: Blade of the Mystic (damage modifier of 1.8). 
Noctis can learn additional bonuses from Armiger Chain usage through 
Ascension: 
<> Armiger Warchain boosts Armiger Chain damage by 50%. 
<> Armiger-Chain Reaction rewards you with 1 AP every time you 
use Armiger Chain. 
<> Armiger Sagechain doubles the amount of EXP gained by defeating 
an enemy with Armiger Chain. 
<> Armiger Freechain eliminates MP consumption for 60 seconds 
after using Armiger Chain. 
Even if Armiger Chain does not appeal to you as an offensive option, the 
Armiger Freechain ability has great strategic potential. Given the nature 
of MP as a premium resource, and the fact that many powerful abilities 
are tied to its rapid consumption, a 60-second window of uninhibited 
magic use presents an opportunity to unleash an extremely powerful 
torrent of attacks after the expiration of Armiger - including warp-strikes 
and Airstep combos. 

Summons 
0>----~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~---<) 
Once you have obtained the mark of an Astral by surviving its trial. it can 
assist you in battle when specific requirements are met. These conditions 
depend on both the party's current condition and environmental factors, 
as detailed in the table below. 
To unleash a summon's special attack, hold (Q) ;.m for several seconds 
when the corresponding prompt appears on your screen; you will also 
notice that the screen turns red with heartbeat sound effects played in 
the background. 
All Astral attacks are extremely powerful and have wide area-of-effect 
properties, hitting all enemies on the battlefield. This does not necessarily 
mean that you should call for an Astral each and every time you are 
offered the opportunity, however. Indeed, these powerful deities will only 
Summons Overview 
NAME 
RECRUITMENT 
PARTY CONDITION FACTOR 
volunteer their support on a semi-regular basis, and only once per battle 
(with the exception of very specific set-piece boss encounters). 
In practical terms, the game performs a summon probability check every 
10 seconds during battles. If both party conditions and environmental 
requirements are met, the summon prompt appears on your screen. If 
you accept it by holding (Q) ;.m, the Astral comes to your aid - but a 
hidden cooldown is also triggered, preventing you from calling another 
summon for a while. 
This is why it makes sense to save summoning opportunities for fights 
that really matter. such as boss battles or difficult hunts. Wasting a deity 
attack on a horde of Voretooths or Mesmenirs will provide a spectacle. 
granted, but this is something you may regret if you face a more serious 
threat shortly afterwards. 
ENVIRONMENTAL FACTOR 
Titan 
End of Chapter 04 
The more of your allies that fall in battle. the higher the chances that Titan will assist you in wide, open-air locations. On flat terrain, he 
Titan will help you. 
will punch the ground; in other areas, he will throw a rock at your 
targets. 
Ramuh 
Leviathan 
Shiva 
Bahamut 
Chapter 05 
The longer your party is involved in a battle, the higher the chances 
_____ tiiat Ramub_will help you. 
__ 
Ramuh is potentially available in any area, including interior sections 
such a_s dungeons 
__ _ 
Leviathan can only manifest herself when Noctis is in Danger status. 
Leviathan will assist you in locations that are reasonably close to 
End of Chapter 09 
The longer he remains in this state, the higher the chances that she 
large bodies of water, such as major lakes and areas near to the 
__ 
w_ill o._tt_er_h_er_assistance. 
___ c_o_as __ t_. _______ _ ____ 
_ 
End of Chapter 12 
Shiva's tendency to assist you is a combination of the summon 
Shiva is available in any sizable area, appearing in both open-air and 
probabilities of the other Astrals. __ 
~erior sections if there is sufficient clearance. 
_ 
_ __ 
Chapter 14 
Bahamut appears exclusively during a boss battle in Chapter 14. 
SUMMONS: ENVIRONMENTAL AVAILABILITY 
C=:J Titan 
lll!!!!i!I] Ramuh & Shiva 
~ 
Leviathan 
0 Strategy & 
Analysis 
Combat 
Maneuvers 
I 
< 
291 

292 
Defense 
0-r-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
Compared to offensive maneuvers, your defensive options are relatively 
simple in mechanical terms. Below, we highlight the important details 
for each one. 
<> Phase: Noctis performs automatic evasion of enemy attacks by 
phasing, which costs a maximum of 15 MP; the shorter the duration 
of the button press, the lower the resource use. The MP expenditure 
of this move can be reduced by unlocking the Light Phase and 
Ultralight Phase Ascension nexuses. 
<> Parry: A successful parry prevents all damage, restores some MP 
for most weapon types, and produces a devastating counterattack. 
Less obvious is the result of a failed parry, where you respond to 
the initial block prompt but fa il to meet the tight time window for 
the secondary ©/@ indicator. A failed parry will either result in no 
penalty, making it equivalent to a phase. or a partial reprieve: Noctis 
will sustain damage, but the total will be significantly lower than 
with a missed block prompt. 
<> Roll-Dodge: The roll-dodge move is performed by holding a 
direction with @ and pressing @/O. This staple maneuver costs 
no MP, relieves the threat of a direct frontal assault on Noctis, and 
is also capable of setting up Blindsides. Additionally, roll-dodging is 
an excellent recovery tool for when Noctis is knocked down or flung 
into the air; roll-dodging can be used to cut the recovery animation 
short and immediately restore your offensive momentum. 
<> Cover: When Noctis takes cover against a large object or wall, 
he enjoys increased recovery rates for HP (4% per second) and 
MP (12% per second), later boosted to 14% HP and 22% MP per 
second once you unlock the Rapid Regen node on his Ascension 
tree. These recovery rates also apply when Noctis is hanging from 
an aerial warp point. Not every battlefield has cover points, but you 
can manually trigger cover-based benefits at any time by blocking 
with the Shield of the Just (available from the Tomb of the Just from 
Chapter 03), or by employing Gladio's Royal Guard technique. 
<> Blinking: You can nullify the MP cost of phasing by performing a 
Blink, which is a successful phase performed within 0.16 seconds of a 
connecting enemy attack. The Blink Boost Ascension ability improves 
this maneuver by replenishing 5 MP with each successful execution. 
DAMAGE CALCULATIO N 
<> Impervious: The Impervious Ascension ability enables Noctis to 
negate damage after the fact. acting as a failsafe for an unsuccessful 
Blink or a missed phasing/parrying opportunity. Simply press the 
guard button immediately after being hit. 
<> Warp Out: This is a situational warping ability that speeds up 
recovery when Noctis is launched into the air by an enemy attack. 
A brief @/O button prompt will appear; if you make the specified 
press within the timing window, Noctis will warp safely to the 
ground in an upright position. This incurs the standard cost of 30 MP 
for a warping maneuver, however - so if MP is at a premium, it may 
be better to simply eat the dirt and use a roll-dodge afterwards to 
expedite your recovery. 
<> Stasis Guard: During Stasis, Noctis can no longer phase and 
assumes this defensive stance instead, significantly reducing 
damage taken from enemy attacks. Generally, it's much more 
effective to simply perform a roll-dodge instead. If you have a shield 
equipped, though, you can perform a normal guard, blocking all 
damage even during Stasis. 
<> Shield Guard: Guarding with a shield consumes only 3 MP, which 
is rather cheap compared with phasing, especially if you need 
to maintain a defensive posture for more than the briefest of 
moments. There are still benefits to precise timing with a shield, 
though: it is not exclusively employed for turtling up. Performing the 
equivalent of a Blink with a shield equipped can produce a significant 
disruptive effect on the enemy, creating an opening for a timely 
counteroffensive. 
<> Decoys: There are several ways to set up decoys on the battlefield. 
Noctis can create his own after a point-warp with the Warp Decoy 
Ascension ability. Gladio and Prompto are perhaps better suited to 
provide reliable distractions with their techniques, particularly Gladio 
with an equipped shield. Finally, you can drop the Moogle Plushie 
(given to you by Iris in Lestallum in Chapter 08) on the battlefield to 
draw the enemy's attacks away from the party. The Moogle decoy 
has limited durability, but you can take it to Iris at Cape Caem to 
have her repair it when required. 
This section summarizes all computations that take place during battle. The calculations discussed here apply to all combat situations with only a 
handful of exceptions (such as the "1000 Needles" attack by Cactuar-type enemies that inflicts a fixed amount of damage). 
General Formula 
0-r-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
Presented as a product of mechanically different factors. the basic 
damage formula is: 
Damage = A x Bx C x D x E 
These five factors (A to E) are detailed in the next five sections: 
A = Base Damage 
B = Target Defense 
C = Affinity Modifier 
D = Conditional Modifier(s) 
E = Random Modifier 
This is a universal formula, applicable to attacks conducted by both 
party members and enemies. Damage per hit is capped at 9,999, with 
the exception of the following, which have the specific property of being 
able to exceed this limit. 
<> Limit Break spells 
<> Link-strikes. after unlocking the Limitless Link Ascension node 
<> Limit Break, an Ascension ability available to each of your allies that 
applies to techniques 

Base Damage (A) 
0·>--~~~~~~~~~~~ 
This is the primary calculation that is performed during an attack. 
Physical and magic attacks obey different formulas. 
Physical 
The formula for physical base damage is as follows: 
A = (Strength + Weapon Power + Level x 3) x Attack Damage 
Modifier x 2 
Weapon Power applies only to party members; this value is zero for 
enemies. When wielding standard weapons, this is equivalent to the 
Attack parameter of the equipped weapon (as detailed in our Inventory 
chapter). Note that the in-game Stats section in the Gear menu shows 
a single "Attack" stat that is actually the sum of this value and your 
character's Strength. 
With Royal Arms this value is actually the sum of the Attack parameter 
of the weapon, plus Noctis's Strength or Magic. For the Bow of the 
Clever and Scepter of the Pious, this value is Magic; for all others, it 
is Strength. 
This again brings up some interesting ramifications when you consider 
the properties of Royal Arms. A good example is the Sword of the 
Father, with an Attack parameter of 141 and a bonus to Strength of 
100. In fact, the Weapon Power value when using this weapon is 141 
+ 100 = 241. Additionally, the bonus to Strength alone is factored 
again in the damage calculation. This means the effective Attack stat 
of this weapon, compared with a standard weapon with no Strength 
bonus, is actually 341 . 
Attack Damage Modifier refers to the damage modifier values that 
we previously discussed in Combat Maneuvers (see page 285).As party 
members have much smaller HP pools, even at high levels, enemy 
attack damage modifiers are generally lower, broadly in the vicinity of 
one tenth the values that the party enjoys. 
Magic 
The formula for Magic base damage differs between party members 
and enemies. For party members, the calculation is: 
A =(Magic+ 100) x (Spell Power+ 20) x (Level+ 20) x 1/200 
Spell Power is the "Potency" value that appears on your screen when 
you craft a spell, as explained in the section on Elemancy on page 274. 
For enemies, who do not have a Magic stat. the formula is the same 
as that for physical base damage, with specific damage modifiers for 
individual spells. 
U1uu11s Un.rm1n~s n.nd 
Dnnycruus Dncmuns! 
ttvrrn;rs.q,LlllVk.l 
Target Defense (B) 
0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
The defense formula is: 
B = 1 I (1 + Vitality/ 100) against physical attacks 
B = 1 I (1 + Spirit/1 00) against magic 
This means that Vitality and Spirit are parameters with diminishing 
returns. At a low base value, even a minor increase in either stat can 
prove to be very effective, as the amount of damage reduction you 
receive per point is quite significant. On the other hand, the higher 
the value, the less you stand to gain from additional investment. For 
example, you can achieve 50% physical reduction at 100 Vitality, but 
only 67% reduction at 200 Vitality and 75% reduction at 300 Vitality. 
As your base Vitality improves, it becomes much more appropriate to 
focus on increasing Max HP instead, which also improves your capacity 
to survive magic damage. 
Affinity Modifier (C) 
0·>-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~-<> 
This is a simple check against the affinity of the target to the damage 
type being dealt. These are the resistances or weaknesses to damage 
types that we reveal in the Bestiary for each monster: 
<> Check for nullification of the damage type. If true, then no damage is 
dealt. This corresponds to immunity ("IMM") in our Bestiary sheets. 
<> Check the target's resistance for the damage type. This corresponds 
to the percentages in our Bestiary sheets. If more than one type 
applies (e.g., swords and Fire with the Flame Tongue), multiply the 
resistances together to obtain a single percentage value. 
<> Limit this result to a value between 0 and 999. 
<> If the target absorbs this damage type ("ABS" in our Bestiary 
sheets), convert the result into HP restoration. 
The value of C is the result of this procedure. 
Conditional Modifiers (D) 
0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
Conditional modifiers refer to the set of possible multipliers that apply 
after all basic factors of character parameters, equipment. and attack 
properties have been taken into consideration. For added percentage 
values, simply convert to a multiplier (e.g., + 10% -+ x1 .1) for the 
functional equivalent. 
The following is a list of conditional modifiers that may come into play: 
<> Range modifier for ranged weapons 
<> Charged attack multiplier for greatswords and machinery (up to 6.0) 
<> Blindside modifier 
<> Warp-strike distance modifier 
<> Combo counter bonus from Noctis's Chained Fury Ascension ability 
<> Weapon-specific modifiers (e.g., Two-handed Sword against 
multiple enemies, Wyvern Lance with aerial attacks) 
<> Critical hit multiplier (2.0) 
<> Enemy vulnerable state multiplier (1 .5) 
The net factor 0, representing the compounded value related to 
conditional modifiers in the damage calculation formula, is the product 
of all such factors that apply in any situation. 
Ra ndom Modifier (E) 
0·>--~~~~~~~~~~~ 
This factor translates into a value between approximately 0.94 and 1.06. 
Essentially, there is always a ±6% random variation in any situation. 
.. ( .. 
* Strategy & 
Analysis 
\'fl. Combat 
Maneuvers 
• , Damage 
~. Calculation 
;.1 
293 

294 
CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT 
Earning EXP 
0r--- -----
-
- -------------------------<> 
Gaining levels through experience points, or EXP, works a little differently 
in Final Fantasy XV in comparison with most contemporary role-playing 
games. Leveling must be triggered by camping, resting at lodgings, or 
by completing a chapter. 
EXP can be earned through combat (each monster that you defeat 
rewards you with a fixed EXP value, as revealed in our Bestiary), quest 
completion (see the Sidequests chapter), exploration (see page 299), 
and interactive conversations (as detailed in our Walkthrough) . You can 
increase the EXP totals you obtain by the following methods: 
<> Secure good grades in your post-battle Report Cards. 
<> Equip a Moogle Charm accessory (EXP + 20%). 
<> Eat specific restaurant meals: Galdin Gratin (Galdin Quay, EXP 
+ 10%), Fat Chocobo Triple-Decker (Wiz Chocobo Post, EXP + 50%), 
Maag ho Lasagna (Maagho, EXP + 100%), Fine Caviar Canape 
(Maagho, EXP + 50%). 
<> Eat specific cooked meals: Lasagna al Forno (EXP + 100%), Cup 
Noodles (perfect) (EXP + 20%), Stacked Ham Sandwich (EXP 
+ 50%), Royal Banquet Ca nape (EXP + 50%), Mother & Child Rice 
Bowl (EXP + 30%). 
Report Card 
<> Finish off an enemy with an Armiger Sagechain (EXP + 50%). 
<> Catch fish with the Reel Experience Ascension ability unlocked 
(variable EXP for catching specific types of fish, see page 304). 
<> Drive the Regalia with the Road life Ascension ability unlocked ( 10 
EXP for every ~ 0.54 miles driven in any mode). 
<> Travel while riding a chocobo with the Chocobonus Ascension ability 
unlocked (10 EXP every ~ 0.35 miles). 
<> Win a chocobo race with the Chocoracer Ascension ability unlocked 
(50 EXP per race won). 
<> Maximize your accumulated EXP with a bonus modifier by staying 
at a lodging, up to a maximum x3 multiplier if you stay at The Leville 
(Royal Suite) in Altissia. Turn to page 227 to find out about an efficient 
power-leveling strategy that makes the most of this feature. 
Note that if lgnis, Gladiolus, or Prompto are in the "down" status when 
a battle ends, they will not receive EXP for that fight. The losses can 
be quite significant if they are unconscious when you defeat the final 
boss of a dungeon or complete a major story encounter, as they may 
miss the final quest bonuses as well. Stocking extra Phoenix Downs to 
revive stricken party members before you deliver the coup de grace on 
a target of any significance, then, is a worthwhile investment. 
0r------------------- --------------o 
The Report Card is a measure of how well you perform in each battle. 
The higher the "grades" you obtain, the more bonus experience you 
receive. 
Each enemy that you defeat rewards you with a fixed sum of EXP, 
irrespective of your performance, as detailed in our Bestiary chapter. In 
addition to this base EXP, you can receive extra experience as a result of 
bonus multipliers in accordance with the following criteria: 
<> The number of successful parries you perform (Defense). 
<> The number of Blindsides you perform (Stealth). 
<> The proportion of enemies you defeat during the encounter 
(Offense). As long as you do not flee from a battle, you always 
receive the maximum grade in this category. 
Parameter Growth 
The total experience you receive is calculated as follows: 
Total EXP = Base EXP x (1 + Defense Bonus + Stealth Bonus 
+ Offense Bonus) 
Report Card: Overview 
REPORT CARD 
BONUS 
DEFENSE 
STEALTH 
OFFENSE 
(PARRIES) 
(BLINDSIDES) 
(ENEMIES DEFEATED) 
A+ 
0.4 
4 
6 
100% 
A 
0.3 
3 
4 
90% 
8 
0.2 
2 
2 
80% 
c 
0.1 
1 
1 
50% 
D 
0 
0 
0 
< 50% 
0'>--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~-
As their level increases, your party members earn natural boosts to their base combat parameters: HP, Strength, Vitality, Magic, Spirit, and, for Noctis 
alone, MP Additionally, as we illustrated in the earlier section on damage calculation, levels provide bonuses to physical attack damage dealt by the party. 
The following diagrams illustrate base parameters for the party as they hit specific milestones. 
12.000 ~iifirl•PttJHM 
1:.:::1-~==-------
6,000f--------------------
Noctis 
Gladiolus 
lgnis 
Prompto 
I 
4,000 I 
I 
2,000 i 
1 
... 
~ 
0 +--, --, 
--,--r----.--~~-
1 
1 o 20 
30 
40 
50 · 60 
70 · 8D19099' Level 
400 
350 +
1 -----------~::___~ 
I 
NOCTIS 
300t-
i 
250 -+-------~~~-------
200 -+-------J~----#-------
150 -+---~---.1'---------
1 00 +-~----F-----------
50 +----==---
Cegen~---
strength 
-
Vitality 
-
Magic 
Spirit 
0 -+--~~-~~~~-~~~~-~ 
1 
1 o ' 20 
30 
40 ' 50 
60 
70 
80 · 90 
99 
' Level 

450-+3fiullellilrW 
400 : 
,,.,,..,,, 
350 1 
/7 
300-1------------------
25+---
-! -----
~~~
I 
I 
100 ! 
~ 
! ~ 
+-~ -----
0 t------T--,---
,---,-- ,----1 
1 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
99 
IGNIS 
400 
350 : r 
300+----·---
l 
250-i---------
I 
PROM PTO 
50 . 60 ' 70 
80 
90 
99 
400 -
350 -t 
300+--
~ 
250 ~:-------~------
200 ~: -------1-------
LeQ_~~--
Strength 
Vitality 
Magic 
Spirit 
Level 
Legend 
Strength 
Vitality 
Magic 
Spirit 
Level 
Legend 
Strength 
Vitality 
Magic 
Spirit 
l 
~---~ 
15 0 +:--------------~ 
! 
0 -~--,---,--~~-~~-~~~~ 
1 
1 o 20 
30 
40 
50 
60 · 70 
80 · 90 · 99 · Level 
Ascension Bonuses 
Certain Ascension nodes provide additional boosts to the party's core 
stats once unlocked with AP These affect all party members identically 
in the following manner: 
<> Health Level, Health Level II, and Health Level Ill add level x 2, level x 
5, and level x 10 respectively to the party's HP totals. These effects 
do not stack; only the highest multiplier unlocked applies. 
<> Experimagic adds Noctis's level to his maximum MP 
<> Strength Level, Vitality Level, Magic Level, and Spirit Level enhance 
the respective stats for each character by that character's current 
level. Magic Level can be upgraded to Magic Level II, which adds 
level x 3 and, like the Health Level abilities, does not stack. 
Clearly, these nodes do not grant significant bonuses early on in your 
adventure compared with those offered by equipment or foods, and 
especially not when there are many more beneficial nodes to unlock. 
They become interesting investments only later on in the adventure, 
once your party's levels are in the 50s and beyond. 
Conclusions 
We can summarize the primary trends in parameter growth as follows: 
<> HP and Strength enjoy remarkable gains from levels 30 through 70, 
with peak growth occurring in the 40-60 range. At very low and very 
high levels, these increases are much less impressive. 
<> Noctis has by far the highest Magic stat followed by lgnis with half 
the proficiency, while Prompto and Gladiolus lag far behind. Noctis 
should be the team's spell caster in practically all situations. If you 
ever equip one of his allies with a spell. it should be lgnis. 
<> Vitality and Spirit gains are relatively paltry throughout. To augment 
these values, if required, you will have to rely on gear and status 
effects. It is worth noting that Gladiolus has the best survivability in 
the party by far, as his HP and Vitality growth easily outpaces other 
party members. 
Taking stock of these observations, we would argue that, beyond 
Level 70, it becomes essential to complement natural stat growth by 
equipping suitable gear and consuming the right foods. Purely grinding 
for levels is simply not enough. If you struggle against a specific late-
game foe, identifying its strengths and weaknesses in advance and 
preparing accordingly will always lead to the best results. 
Earning AP 
0)--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
Ability Points (AP) are required to unlock Ascension abilities. AP can be 
acquired in the following ways: 
<> Every time a party member gains a level (fixed amount of 3 AP per 
character per level). 
<> By successfully fulfilling strategy prompts that appear at the 
beginning of certain battles. 
<> By defeating an enemy with a warp-strike, blindside, or parry (1 AP 
in each case). 
<> By camping; you gain 1 AP each time by default, as long as the 
campsite is different from the previous time you camped; this value 
is upgraded to 2 AP with the Happy Camping Ascension node in the 
Exploration tree, and finally to 3 AP with the Happier Camping node. 
<> By completing Tours (see page 144). which all reward you with 20 AP 
<> By selecting specific dialogue options during interactive conversations 
(as detailed in our walkthrough). Because it is much easier to gain 
EXP than AP, we recommend that you always prioritize the latter 
whenever applicable. 
Additionally, you may unlock other means of AP acquisition through 
Ascension: 
<> Armiger Action: 1 AP for activating Armiger 
<> Armiger-Chain Reaction: 1 AP for activating Armiger Chain 
<> Magic Action: 1 AP for casting Elemancy spells 
<> Aperture: 1 AP for every Snapshot taken in combat that features 
Noctis in the photograph 
<> Appetize: 1 AP for cooking a party member's favorite food 
<> Angler Action: 1 AP for catching a fish 
<> Sportfishing: Bonus AP for catching specific types of fish (see page 
304) 
<> Roadrunning: 1 AP for every 1.25 miles driven in the Regalia, in any 
mode 
<> Chocobump: 1 AP for every 0.875 miles traveled while riding 
chocobo 
<> Chocojockey: 1 AP for winning a chocobo race 
Strategy & 
Analysis 
Character 
Development 
295 

296 
ASCENSION 
Available from the main menu, Ascension is the means by which 
your party acquires new abilities and improves its combat prowess. 
By unlocking new combat maneuvers and improving existing moves 
through Ascension, you can greatly expand your tactical options in 
combat. 
Your entire party shares a single pool of AP used to unlock Ascension 
nexuses. There are eight thematically different Ascension trees, 
consisting of distinct nexus branches that confer a wide range of 
benefits. You can find complete diagrams of each tree over the pages 
that follow. 
There are four types of Ascension abilities, represented by distinctive 
colored nexuses: 
o Yellow nexuses ($ ) and purple nexuses ( ) refer to new 
combat abilities or enhancements to existing abilities. 
o Green nexuses (9 ) denote ally techniques. 
O Red nexuses (ft) highlight abilities learned after specific story 
events. 
Armiger Tree 
.. 
0>>-------------'~ 
~
l Everyti;;,.eyoucraft~
­
spell.rece1vetwo 
e~
xtracop1es 
--. 
of it. 
Bonuspell II , 
(999 AP) 
~ 
Action 
~--'\ 
(48 AP) 
/ ~:~~\ i~~· 
~-/ youconjure_ 
c~~~~r 
/------
. ----•.• 
• 
Gain unlimited MP J 
L for 60 seconds after I 
~ executing ! 
, 
Armiger ! 
\ __ ~h~j 

Recovery Tree 
0>--~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
( Deal heavy damage 
\ 
i ~aac~:~~~ ~aenm~:i~hbody \~, 
parts and create openings for 
j 
~'.l~-w-up attacks. 
___) 
------- -
,;--~ 
I Imbues Noct1s's 
\ ' 
I 
weapon with 
\ 
the element that 
~------
<is the weakness of 
I 
, the current targetfor 60 
! 
; seconds; also boosts 
I 
: inherent damage of that J 
, element from weapons 
l and spells. 
'----------
. : . . 
/-8~~-;t;;:'-
-~ 
1
rat:
1
~/2~~i~~~ ~~ I 
;--
seconds when he is J 
,_ _ !~~~ out of Danger.; 
,,-::---- - ----~ 
1 Recover40% 
: of HP and boost 
! Vitality by 200 for ""-,.____ 
: 15 seconds when 
• 
, HP is low. 
i 
----- ___ __/ 
0 
Strategy & 
· Analysis 
~- Ascension 
297 

298 
Combat Tree 
IL 
0>~~~~~~~~====~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 1 
( lncreaseNoctis's ', 
i MP by the number . 
r'Pert~4 
! unlimited 
'\.. 
number of 
~ 
Airstepsduring 
I 
aerial combos (costs ! 
20 MP per Airs~~ 
l ~:l~~~ls ~--' 
i gained. 
r 
. 
·-
Airstep 
16A~
) 
Us.etheattack ) 
button and the I 
left stick to take a 
[ 
step in mid-air after I 
\ 
attacking. one time only. ) 
Significantly --,\ 
1mcrease 
~ 
damage dealt 
: after entering stasis 
_____ 
...../ 
i Boost damage 
I dealt when 
' performing 
uninterrupted 
'I combos l+ 0.3% 
damage per chained 
j' 
, hit). 
'· 
__) 
Impervious 
1333AP) 
·~ 
damage by 
pressing the I 
guard button 'j 
l 
immediately after 
being hit. 1 
Teamwork Tree 
___ ___,. 
• 
0>~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~111~ 
( unleash critical ---,J, 
I damage on an area 
: us.ingafirearm //-
1 when HP is 
/ / 
~ 
Limitless 
Link 
r-----... 
(999 AP) 
/ 
Damage · 
~ 
fromlink- ; 
strikescan l 
breaktheusua1 i 
1 
9.999 cap. i 
'-._ ______ .../ 

( Prom;~~~ 
equip two 
/-' 
1accessories. / A 
Jaccessories. 
'-. _______ ____,.I 
Exploration Tree 
0>~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
( z53 chance t,;-~;~;~~ 
i two items instead of one 
I every time Gladio 
l
finds one through 
his Survival 
'~~~~ 
( ---
Gain extra A Pf; -, 
: catching big fish leach 
~
specieshasits
1 
'\_~wn value). J 
r------. ------.... 
f 
Gain 1 AP every ·1 
: 
time you. cook a 
'----. 
party member's 
'··.. 
favor1te food. ! 
·····-·· _) 
Strategy & 
Analysis 
Ascension 
299 

300 
PARTY SETUPS 
In this section we offer development analysis for your party, in the context of everything that has been examined over the course of this chapter 
so far. The ultimate goal is to encourage you not to pick a "one size fits all" solution, but to experiment and cultivate your personal style of play. For 
some readers, traveling the vast world will be of secondary importance to exploring the systems that underpin everything that you actually do in it. 
Strategic Considerations 
0>--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
You should frame the deliberation of how to allocate your resources among the four characters by asking yourself key questions, such as: 
<> Do I want to empower Noctis as much as possible, or do I want my whole party to contribute to the battle? 
<> Do I want each member to specialize in a certain role, or do I focus on maximizing the effectiveness of one or two specific team tactics? 
<> Do I prefer melee or ranged combat? 
<> Do I favor any of my three allies? 
EXP gains tend to occur at roughly the same rate for all party members. Individual proclivities and proficiencies aside, it is only through your choice of 
gear and Ascension abilities that you can truly imbue each of the four heroes with genuinely unique and useful characteristics. However, this requires 
that you invest resources that are available in limited quantities: Gil or collectibles for gear, and AP for Ascension. 
A haphazard approach to developing each character can lead to a rather plain party, with everyone playing a similar kind of role. By steering Noctis, 
lgnis, Gladio, and Prompto towards particular types of specialization, though, you can really change the way that you approach each battle. 
Character Specialization 
0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
The two primary factors governing which role each ally is best suited for 
are attributes and abilities. If you need a refresher, turn to page 294 for 
the former and page 288 for the latter. 
NOCTIS 
Noctis is the most versatile character. His stats (and the fact that you 
control him directly) make him the best choice for damage-dealing 
purposes. You can further enhance this trait through food effects and 
suitable gear, but more importantly by prioritizing the right abilities in his 
Ascension tree. Notable avenues of specialization include: 
<> Aerial combos: Once you have unlocked the Airstep branch of 
abilities, aerial combos become possible with either swords or 
polearms. They can prove particularly useful against large enemies. 
Many bosses and high-level hunt targets belong to this category, 
often featuring targetable body parts that you cannot reach from the 
ground. Against such opponents, sustained airborne assaults can 
work wonders. 
<> Magic: Noctis has by far the best Magic stat in the party. If you 
equip him (and/or any of his allies) with weapons that absorb 
elemental energy from defeated enemies, and enhance Noctis's 
absorption from elemental deposits with the Elementalism and 
Elementality abilities, you will receive a steady stream of energy 
throughout the adventure, enabling you to craft (and cast) many 
spells. Given that almost all enemies in the game are extremely 
vulnerable to one of the three main elements, this can be a powerful 
way to exploit their weaknesses, especially if you enhance Noctis's 
magic with well-chosen gear. 
GLADIOLUS 
Gladiolus is defined by his naturally high Strength and HP stats. This 
means you can specialize him in two ways: 
<> Damage-dealer: With his high Strength (which you can increase 
with accessories and food) and access to greatswords (the most 
powerful basic weapons in the game), Gladio can complement 
Noctis when it comes to inflicting damage. Unlock his greatsword-
based abilities in priority (Engage, Reflex, Dawnhammer, Impulse) 
and his repertoire of attacks will expand, enriching your tactical 
possibilities. 
<> Tank: A completely different approach is to capitalize on Gladio's 
large HP pool (which you can further boost with accessories and 
food effects). By equipping him with a shield, you can make use 
of Ascension abilities that offer protection to Noctis, such as Royal 
Guard and Intercept. When Gladiolus operates as a classic tank to 
absorb enemy assaults, Noctis's survivability improves dramatically. 
IGNIS 
lgnis can be considered as an expert tactician thanks to a wide variety 
of abilities that buff Noctis or weaken enemies. Potential roles for him 
include: 
<> Elementalist: lgnis's key specialty is derived from his element-
binding capabilities. Unlock his Analyze ability and Enhancement 
technique as early as you can in the adventure: this enables you to 
exploit enemy weaknesses with Noctis, drastically increasing your 
damage potential. 
<> Secondary caster: Though not on a par with Noctis, lgnis has 
a Magic attribute that significantly surpasses the paltry arcane 
capacity of his other two allies. If you equip him with Magic-boosting 
accessories, he becomes the best candidate to cast spells (use his 
secondary arms slot to equip them) when it is tactically necessary. 
In addition, you can furnish him with the Plunderers daggers so that 
he regularly collects elemental energy from the foes he defeats, 
further fueling your ability to craft spells. 
<> Sapper: lgnis's weapon of choice is a pair of daggers. Multiple 
weapons in this category incur a chance to inflict status ailments. 
Other effective means are lgnis's Venom Fang ability, or crafted 
spells with an added status ailment effect, such as Venomcast. 
When you face resilient targets or bosses, this can be an effective 
way to give the whole party an edge. 

PROM PTO 
Prompto has the lowest attributes of the group overall, but his unique 
abilities can nevertheless make him a powerful asset on the field. His 
default Piercer technique retains its usefulness throughout the game, 
penetrating enemy defenses and raising the party's damage potential. 
His aptitude for ranged combat can be employed in the following ways: 
<> Machinist: Equipping Prompto with powerful machinery can be a 
very worthwhile investment. Multiple high-level bosses in the game 
are weak to this weapon category. Having two characters equipped 
with machinery can make a profound difference in all of these battles. 
<> Crowd controller: Prompto can be specialized to fight against 
groups of enemies thanks to various abilities with area-of-effect 
properties. Of particular interest, unlock Gravisphere (Prompto draws 
enemies in an area to a single point, making them ripe for an area-
of-effect attack or spell from Noctis), Ballistic, and Trigger-Happy. 
Notable Configurations 
i.J· Strategy & 
Analysis 
0·>--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~--<> 
In addition to the specialization scenarios detailed so far, there are 
powerful setups that you can prepare to make the most of certain 
weapons or status effects. 
<> Tetra-elementalist: Noctis has access to four weapon slots, and 
there are four elements that you can use in the game to exploit 
enemy weaknesses. One general-purpose setup, therefore, is to 
equip the prince with four weapons each imbued with a distinct 
element. You can acquire a full set of elemental weapons once you 
reach Chapter 03, enabling you to switch weapons on the fly and 
adapt to whichever foe you are currently facing, as shown in the 
following table: 
Elemental Weapons Available By Chapter 03 
ELEMENT 
WEAPON 
SHOP 
Blade of Brennaere 
Wiz Chocobo Post, Coernix Station 
Fire 
Flame Tongue 
Taelpar Rest Area, Lestallum 
------------ ------------------ -- -------
Gocytus 
Hammerhead 
---·---·-·-·-----------·-·--------------·-- ----·-----------------------------------------·-·--·--·-
Ice 
Ice Spear 
Lestallum, Verinas Mart - Ravatogh 
Light 
----------------
- ------------------
-----~---------------
Ice Brand 
Durand al 
Radiant Lance 
Orichalcum 
Verinas Mart -
Taelpar Rest Area 
---
---·---------- --------- ---------- ----
Meldacio Hunter HQ 
<> Black Mage: With intelligent resource management, you can 
maintain an arsenal of powerful spells throughout the game (see 
the box-out overleaf for an example). turning Noctis into a traditional 
"black mage". This makes it possible to deal grievous bursts of 
elemental damage that are unmatched in power, especially early in 
the game. During the cooldown period between two spells, Noctis 
should serve as an alert supporter with secondary contributions to the 
battle. You can chip away at the enemy with ranged attacks, or wade 
into the melee with an equipped shield (the Magic boost offered by 
the Wizard Shield makes it an especially interesting choice). 
<> The Ring of the Lucii method: Though very much a post-story 
trick, you can achieve great results by combining the Ring of the 
Lucii (which can quickly or instantly eliminate targets with its 
Death and Alterna attacks, at the cost of MP) and point-warping 
(which enables you to recover all MP instantly). Alterna has area-of-
effect properties, so this can be a supremely useful strategy during 
Chapter 15, though most bosses are immune to this spell. Death, 
on the other hand, can take a while to operate but tends to work 
against more foes. When you are surrounded by many enemies, the 
Holy counter can prove quite potent too. Whenever you have access 
to blue marker positions, this is a strategy worth considering 
<> EXP rush: With the right preparations, it is possible to obtain large 
sums of EXP Eat a Stacked Ham Sandwich cooked by lgnis to boost 
your gains by 50%, equip a Moog le Charm accessory for another 20% 
bonus, and look for enemies that yield large sums of EXP An efficient 
raid in a dungeon (or, even better, a maze - see page 192) filled with 
enemies can turn into a profitable EXP-farming opportunity. 
<> Appendage breaker: Breaking body parts of certain enemies can 
• Porty Setups 
have very positive consequences, such as removing resistances or 
just making them more vulnerable to damage. This strategy can be 
employed against the dangerous Red Giants found in Costlemark 
Tower and Insomnia, for example: they suffer a penalty of -100 to 
their Vitality once broken. First, equip your party with breakage-
boosting weapons such as the Hardedge (and, for Noctis, relevant 
Royal Arms such as the Mace of the Fierce or the Sword of the 
Tall); second, unleash ally techniques that can break body parts 
(such as Gladio' s Dawn hammer). You might inflict less damage until 
the target is broken, but this will be more than compensated for 
afterwards - at which point you can switch to weapons suited to 
raw power to press your advantage. 
<> Glass cannons: If you like high-risk/high-reward strategies, 
have lgnis cook a Packed Mushroom Stew (which only requires 
Alstrooms and Vesprooms -
see page 213). This grants your 
characters a nice bonus of + 500 to both Strength and Magic 
with the Last Stand effect. Equip accessories that further enhance 
Strength and use Power EX consumables (which grant an additional, 
stackable + 100). This will make your party fabulously powerful.. 
but incredibly fragile, with Max HP reduced to 10% of its base value 
until the effect expires. If you use this preparation in the appropriate 
situations, though, few monsters will live long enough to capitalize 
on this self-inflicted weakness. Buy a full stock of cheap potions 
and a number of Phoenix Downs, and be quick to revive any party 
members that fall as you watch enemies melt before your onslaught. 
301 

302 

SKILLS 
Each of your four party members has a unique skill that corresponds to their favored discipline. There are 10 levels of development for each skill. 
To level up, you need to obtain Skill Points (SP). Much like EXP, SP is tallied while camping or resting at lodgings, or at the end of a chapter. 
The SP totals required to reach each level are detailed in the accompanying table. All skills follow this simple progression. 
SP Requirem ents 
LEVEL 
SP REQUIRED TO LEVEL UP 
TOTAL SP REQUIRED 
1 
50 
0 
2 
100 
50 
3 
150 
150 
4 
200 
300 
5 
250 
500 
6 
300 
750 
7 
350 
1,050 
8 
400 
1,400 
9 
500 
1,800 
10 
2,300 
Fishing 
0>--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~-o 
The fishing mini-game is available from the beginning of the adventure. 
Noctis has all the basic tools required to get started, so all you need is a 
fishing spot. The most convenient place for a first experience is Vannath 
Coast, a small pier found on the beach at Galdin Quay. Once you are 
familiar with the basics, you can use this section to understand all of the 
mini-game's mechanics and improve your performance. 
Controls & Basics 
Once you are in position at a fishing spot, use the simple commands 
listed in the following table to control Noctis. 
Fishing Controls 
PS4 
XBOX ONE 
SUMMARY 
0 
0 
Aim; after casting, pull the line in any direction 
® 
e 
Cast 
© 
@ 
Quit 
@) 
llII 
Reel in 
Gl 
@ 
Open the Tackle menu to change your equipment 
Essentially, you choose your equipment from the Tackle menu, which you 
can open with Gl/@. Once you are ready, aim with 0 : a blue marker 
represents the position where your lure will reach the water. Use this 
in conjunction with the mini-map in the top-right corner of the screen 
(where fishes are marked with colored dots: yellow for edible fish that 
yield ingredients, blue for prized fish that yield treasures) to target spots 
where a specimen is likely to bite. Press ®10 to cast. Once the lure is 
in the water, reel in with @l/llII, adjusting the direction of the line with 
0 . Tapping @l/llII and intermittently pausing is often the best way to 
get a fish's attention. The fish's "interest" is represented by a red bar at 
the top of the screen (similar to the threat meter that appears prior to 
each battle). Your goal is to adapt your maneuvers so as to build up the 
red bar until it stretches to the length of the whole screen horizontally -
at which point the fish will bite. 
Fish Battles 
From the moment a fish bites, a duel begins between Noctis and his 
potential catch. Your goal is to reel it in, but you have to pay attention 
to your line's durability. 
<> Fish Bite: To initiate a fish battle, you first need to react swiftly 
when you get a bite. Tilt 0 in the direction indicated on your screen. 
If you fail to do so, the fish will immediately swim away. 
<> Reeling In: To reel in, hold @l/llII. This causes the fish's stamina to 
decrease, as represented by the horizontal gauge at the top of the 
screen. Once this gauge is empty, the fish is yours. 
<> Tension: A fish that has bitten will constantly swim in a direction, 
often changing course without warning. This causes your line to 
suffer, but you can mitigate the process by aiming accordingly. 
As a rule, you should always be tilting 0 to the left or right, in 
accordance with where the fish is currently swimming. If you 
do nothing, a (hidden) tension gauge fills slowly. If you aim in 
the wrong direction, the gauge fills quickly (leading to controller 
vibrations); if you tilt the stick in the correct direction, the tension 
bar remains empty. Tension results in damage to your line. When 
the line's durability reaches zero it breaks, making you lose both 
the line and the lure that you were using. Managing tension is the 
cornerstone of this mini-game: against the toughest species you 
need to constantly push in the correct direction, adjusting your aim 
with sharp reflexes, while reeling in via brief bursts and releasing 
the tension the rest of the time to limit the damage caused to your 
line. 
<> Fish Attacks: Whenever a fish jumps in the air, it effectively 
"attacks" you. Swiftly tilt 0 in the direction specified on screen to 
negate the damage to your line and lower the fish's stamina. 
• Strategy & 
Analysis 
• 
Party Setups 
Skills 
303 

304 
Fishing Equipment 
You can find a complete list of all fishing items in our Inventory chapter 
(see page 221). Each equipment type has a specific function, and 
securing the best item of each kind will have a very positive impact on 
how you perform in this mini-game: 
o Lines: There are only three types of line. You will occasionally 
find some as collectibles, but your main source of these will be to 
purchase them from shops. The more durability a line has, the longer 
it can withstand tension (and therefore damage) inflicted by fish. 
Conversely, the greater the power stat of a fish, the more it will 
harm your line's durability. 
o Rods: The primary attribute of rods is defense, a stat that determines 
how well they mitigate the damage inflicted on your line. You can 
obtain more resilient rods from shops and by completing sidequests 
for Navyth (see page 158). 
O Reels: Reels determine your attack stat - that is, how quickly you 
deplete the stamina bar of a fish when you reel it in. You will find quality 
reels at various tackle shops, though the ultimate item in this category 
(Llymlaen) is a reward in the Totomostro mini-game (see page 310). 
O Lures: There are many lures available in the game, and the one you 
need at any given time depends on various factors. 
O Lure Type: There are six main categories of lure, each proving 
particularly efficient in specific conditions: Popper lures are 
effective when seeking fish near the surface; Pencil lures are 
effective when fishing at dawn or dusk; Swisher lures bring 
sleepy fishing spots to life; Crankbait lures excel when there 
are underwater obstacles; Minnow lures are effective in clear 
waters; Vibration lures are ideal in wide areas. 
o Lure Weight: As a rule, the heavier a lure, the deeper it will go 
underwater, and the bigger the fish you will be likely to catch. 
O Lure Color: Generally speaking, fish are attracted by lures of a 
color close to their own. For example, the Poppeck: Red Chocobo 
is suited for the Garnet Snakehead species. 
Fish OveNiew 
NAME 
FISHING SPOT(S) 
SUITED LURE(S) 
Horned 
Crestholm Reservoir, Neeglyss 
Pond, Swainsmere, Forgotten 
+Any 
Bluegill 
Pool 
Chipped 
Neeglyss Pond, Swainsmere, 
+Any 
Bluegill 
Forgotten Pool, Rachsia Bridge 
Crestholm Reservoir, 
+ Bomber: Bomb 
All of these factors need to be taken into account when you choose a 
lure. Fortunately, this process is greatly simplified by the availability of 
recommendations, as shown in the "Suited For" column of our Inventory 
table (see page 221 ). When there are multiple lure possibilities, all you 
have to do is choose the one most adapted to the environment (clear 
water, underwater obstacles, wide area, and so on). 
Skill Level 
Every time you successfully reel in a fish, Noctis receives skill points. 
The total he receives depends on the value of his catch, as revealed in 
the "Fish Overview" table. Whenever you reach specific milestones, 
Noctis levels up and enjoys a bonus for all future fishing sessions. 
Skill Level Bonuses 
SKILL LEVEL 
BONUS 
1 
2 
Fishing line wears down 25% less quickly when fish struggle. 
3 
Tackle shops offer a 10% discount on all items. 
4 
Chances of hooking a fish are increased by 25%. 
5 
Ability to catch bigger fish (up to 31.5 inches). 
6 
Tackle shops offer a 30% discount on all items. 
7 
Fishing line wears down 50% less quickly when fish struggle. 
8 
Chances of hooking a fish are increased by 50%. 
9 
Tackle shops offer a 50% discount on all items. 
10 
Ability to catch bigger fish (up to 59 inches). 
Fish 
Though catching a random fish is not particularly difficult, finding (let 
alone reeling in) the more advanced and uncommon specimens can 
be quite a challenge. To make this whole process far easier, we have 
prepared the following overview that shows you where, when, and 
how you are most likely to catch the fish of your dreams. In addition, 
we reveal how much SP each specimen will contribute to Noctis's skill 
progression, and how much EXP and AP they're worth once you have 
unlocked the corresponding Ascension abilities. Note that fish of the 
various Bluegill types are all considered as low-value species: you can 
catch them with any lure. 
SP 
EXP 
AP 
ITEM 
RARITY STAMINA POWER 
OBTAINED 
Bluegill 
10 
c 
10,000 
Scale 
10 
Bluegill 
c 
20,000 
1.1 
Scale 
~ 
Alstor Bass 
Alstor Bass 
(small) 
Swainsmere, Malacchi Pond, 
+ Jumbo Tusk: Garulessa 
10 
Bones 
c 
30,000 
1.2 
Daurell Spring, Rachsia Bridge 
+ Fatal Roulette: Ahriman 
Cygillan Sea Gondola Marina 
+ Stormer: Focalor 
10 
Sea Bass 
40,000 
1.2 
Bass (small) 
+ Stormer: Chert Focalor 
Fillet 
Rainbow 
Forgotten Pool, River Wennath, + Tidal Might Leviathan 
Trout (small) The Maidenwater 
+ Knife T. Tonberry 
10 
Trout Fillet 
D 
30,000 
+Whiskers: Pearly Moogle 
Giant 
+ Poppeck: Chocobo 
Giant 
Trevally 
Vannath Coast 
+ Sweet Jamming: Flan 
10 
Trevally 
30,000 
0.8 
(small) 
+ Tidal Might Leviathan 
Fillet 
~ Glowing 
Vannath Coast 
+ Fatal Roulette: Floating Eye 
10 
Barrelfish 
c 
35,000 
1.1 
Barrelfish 
Scales 
+ Hot Breather: Green Dragon 
Nebula 
Nebula 
Rachsia Bridge, 
+ Hot Breather: Blue Dragon 
55 
Salmon 
80,000 
2.2 
Salmon 
The Maidenwater 
+ Knife T. Tonberry 
Fillet 
+ Big Blaze Bahamut 
Snakehead 
Malacchi Pond, Daurell Spring 
+ Poppeck: White Chocobo 
15 
Snakehead 
c 
50,000 
1.3 
Teeth 
Cherrycomb 
River Wennath 
+Whiskers: Crystal 
15 
Trout Fillet 
40,000 
1.2 
Trout 
Glimmering 
The Vesperpool - East Bank, 
+Any 
15 
Bluegill 
30,000 
1.2 
Bluegill 
The Vesperpool - West Bank 
Scale 

. 
Fish Overview (Continued) 
NAME 
.<i~
lj:I
. ~ 
••. -... r Lucian 
~ 
Catfish 
FISHING SPOT(S) 
SUITED LURE(S) 
Crestholm Reservoir, Neeglyss 
+ Needle 1,000: Cactuar 
Pond, Swainsmere, Malacchi 
Pond 
+ Needle 1,000: Metallicactuar 
Cleigne 
~Q!!!?f!~8 Brown Trout Myrlwood Falls 
(small) 
+ Burrower: Mad Pink Sandworm 
+ Burrower: Abyss Worm 
---~~!lJI'!!!~• Maiden 
The Maidenwater, Myrlwood 
+ Deadly Waters: Sahagin 
- .;&.o.--u 
..... Brook Trout 
Falls 
Galdin 
Trevally 
Rainbow 
Trout (big) 
Garnet 
Snakehead 
Giant 
Trevally 
(big) 
Vannath Coast 
+ Sweet Jamming: Mousse 
Crestholm Reservoir, Neeglyss 
+ Bomber: Bomb 
Pond, Swainsmere, Malacchi Pond, + Jumbo Tusk: Garulessa 
Daurell Spring, Rachsia Bridge 
+ Fatal Roulette: Ahriman 
Forgotten Pool, River Wennath, 
The Maidenwater, 
+ Stormer: Focalor 
• Stormer: Chert Focalor 
• Tidal Might Leviathan 
• Knife T. Tonberry 
• Whiskers: Pearly Moogle 
Malacchi Pond, Daurell Spring, 
+ Poppeck: Red Chocobo 
The Vesperpool - West Bank 
+ Jumbo Tusk: Garula 
Vannath Coast 
• Poppeck: Chocobo 
+ Sweet Jamming: Flan 
+ Tidal Might Leviathan 
Fan Bluegill 
The Vesperpool - West Bank 
+ Any 
Crag 
Barramundi 
Zipper 
Barramundi 
• Sweet Jamming: Custard 
Neeglyss Pond, The Vesperpool • Bomber: Ice Bomb 
- East Bank 
+ Ranker Tonberry 
+ Tidal Might Leviathan 
River Wennath, Myrlwood Falls + Hot Breather: Blue Dragon 
Daurell Spring, The Vesperpool + Bomber: Thunder Bomb 
- East Bank 
• Fatal Roulette: Bloody Eye 
Rachsia Bridge 
+ Deadly Waters: Coraldevil 
Cleigne 
-~;;llJl!lllal!!!fia• Brown Trout Myrlwood Falls 
+ Burrower: Mad Pink Sandworm 
• Burrower: Abyss Worm 
(big) 
Jade 
Snake head 
Striped 
Barramundi 
Daurell Spring 
Caem Shore 
+ Giant Needle 10,000: Gigantuar 
+ Jumbo Tusk: Green Garula 
• Stinker: Great Malboro 
• Giant Needle 10,000: Gold Gigantuar 
• Stormer: Purple Belly Focalor 
+ Knife T. Tonberry 
+ Stormer: Focalor 
+ Stormer: Chert Focalor 
• Stormer: Purple Berry Focalor 
"'lllllllf• Callatein 
+ Burrower: Green Sandworm 
~ 
Brook Trout 
River Wennath, Myrlwood Falls • Whiskers: Chocolate 
""' C Dark Allural 
Caem Shore 
_ 
_. 
Sea Bass 
Sapphire 
Snakehead 
Golden 
Catfish 
Platinum 
Myrltrout 
The Vesperpool - East Bank, 
The Vesperpool - West Bank 
Crestholm Reservoir, The 
Vesperpool - East Bank, The 
Vesperpool - West Bank 
Myrlwood Falls 
+ Deadly Waters: Sea Devil 
+ Big Blaze Bahamut 
+ Stinker: Great Malboro 
+ Giant Needle 10,000 Gold Gigantuar 
+ Giant Needle 10,000: Metal Gigantuar 
+ Needle 1,000: Gold Cactuar 
+ Gemlight: Caster Carbuncle 
+ Ranker Tonberry 
Tide Grouper Caem Shore, Gondola Marina 
+ Hot Breather: Red Dragon 
+ Big Blaze Bahamut 
+ Ranker Tonberry 
-i.a;i!lllliliiill!fe Vesper Gar 
The Vesperpool - West Bank 
+ Stinker: Malboro 
~(illiJ@~gliiliiii'idf" King Catfish 
Neeglyss Pond 
Murk 
Grouper 
l."tl!iliil:fii'lD' Noble 
I' 
Arapaima 
,.. ... =~~ Pink Jade 
Gar 
Vannath Coast 
The Vesperpool - East Bank 
Daurell Spring 
+ Stinker: Malbodoom 
+ Invincible Iron Giant 
+ Burrower: Abyss Worm 
+ Giant Needle 10,000: Gold Gigantuar 
• Big Blaze Bahamut 
+ Big Master Typhon 
SP 
EXP 
20 
35 
15 
15 
45 
50 
10 
40 
60 
25 
30 
12 
100 
12 
70 
12 
75 
12 
35 
12 
85 
12 
95 
17 
180 
17 
80 
17 
160 
17 
140 
17 
120 
23 
200 
23 
400 
23 
300 
30 
500 
30 
600 
ITEM 
AP 
OBTAINED 
Catfish 
Barbel 
Trout Fillet 
Trout Fillet 
Giant 
Trevally 
Fillet 
Alstor Bass 
Bones 
Sea Bass 
Fillet 
Trout Fillet 
Snakehead 
Teeth 
Giant 
Trevally 
Fillet 
Bluegill Fin 
Barramundi 
Fillet 
Trout Fillet 
Phoenix 
Bass 
Bladder 
Barramundi 
Fillet 
Trout Fillet 
Snake head 
Scales 
Sea Bass 
Fillet 
Barramundi 
Fillet 
Trout Fillet 
Sea Bass 
Fillet 
Snakehead 
Scales 
Catfish 
Barbel 
Trout Fillet 
Tide 
Grouper 
Fillet 
Vesper Gar 
Fillet 
RARITY STAMINA POWER 
c 
50,000 
1.2 
30,000 
1.2 
A 
40,000 
1.3 
27,500 
c 
55,000 
1.9 
c 
80,000 
1.7 
D 
50,000 
1.8 
c 
60,000 
1.7 
B 
50,000 
1.5 
A 
40,000 
1.3 
A 
50,000 
1.6 
A 
80,000 
1.8 
65,000 
1.8 
60,000 
1.9 
80,000 
1.9 
70,000 
1.9 
100,000 
1.6 
A+ 
100,000 
A 
70,000 
1.6 
A 
120,000 
1.8 
A 
90,000 
2.1 
A 
100,000 
1.7 
A+ 
100,000 
2.2 
A 
180,000 
B 
150,000 
2.1 
Kin~;aa~fish A+ + 
300,000 
2.5 
Murk 
A++ 
350 000 
2.7 
Grouper Eye 
' 
40 
1,000 
12 
Arapaima 
Scales 
A++ 
400,000 
2.5 
40 
800 
Jade Gar 
1 O Mirrorscale 
A+ 
300,000 
2.8 
Strategy & 
-' Analysis 
e Skills 
305 

-- ' 
FISHING SPOTS 
0 Tabby's Tackle Shack 
0 Bert's Bobbers 'n' Stuff 
0 Dory of the Deep 
0 Bob's Bait Emporium 
Gondola Marina 
Cygillan Sea Bass. Lucinian Sea Bass. Tide Grouper 
306 
I 
_ j 
e Vannath Coast 
6 
Giant Trevally, Galdin Trevally, Murk Grouper, Glowing 
Barrelfish 
Crestholm Reservoir 
Horned Bluegill, Lucian Catfish, Alstor Bass, Golden 
Catfish 
e Neeglyss Pond 
8 
Horned Bluegill. Chipped Bluegill. Lucian Catfish. Alstor 
I Bass. Crag Barramundi, King Catfish 
Swainsmere 
Horned Bluegill. Chipped Bluegill. Lucian Catfish, Alstor 
Bass 

Forgotten Pool 
11 
Horned Bluegill, Chipped Bluegill, Rainbow Trout 
------, 
e Daurell Spring 
12 
Snakehead, Garnet Snakehead, Jade Snakehead. Alstor 
Bass. Phoenix Bass. Pink Jade Gar 
13 
River Wennath 
Cherrycomb Trout. Rainbow Trout. Callatein Brook Trout. 
Chrome Rainbow Trout 
e Rachsia Bridge 
14 
Chipped Bluegill, Zipper Barramundi, Alstor Bass. Nebula 
Salmon 
e The Maidenwater 
15 
Rainbow Trout. Maiden Brook Trout, Nebula Salmon 
Caem Shore 
16 
Striped Barramundi, Tide Grouper, Dark Allural Sea Bass 
e The Vesperpool - East Bank 
17 
Glimmering Bluegill, Phoenix Bass, Crag Barramundi. 
e 
18 
Golden Catfish. Sapphire Snakehead, Noble Arapa1ma 
The Vesperpool - West Bank 
Glimmering Bluegill, Fan Bluegill, Golden Catfish, Garnet 
Snakehead, Sapphire Snakehead, Vesper Gar 
e Myrlwood Falls 
19 
Cleigne Brown Trout, Platinum Myrltrout. Maiden Brook 
Trout. Callatein Brook Trout. Chrome Rainbow Trout 
Strategy & 
Analysis 
Skills 
307 

308 
Survival 
0>--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~---o 
Gladio's survival skill enables you to find items after battles while 
traveling the world. All enemies in an encounter must be defeated in 
order to trigger this skill's effect. 
Skill Level 
Survival levels up in accordance with the number of steps that you take. 
More precisely, Gladio obtains SP based on the difference between two 
counters: "Current Step Total" and "Step Total at Previous Rest". 
The following two points summarize the underlying mechanics. 
<> Gladio's survival level determines both the probability of finding an 
item, as well as what the item could be. As survival increases, the 
selection of items improves. 
<> The number of steps that Noctis has taken since Gladio last found 
an item influences the chance that he will find another after a 
subsequent fight. 
Reward Probability 
There is a chance that Gladio will find an item after every battle where all 
enemies in the red combat zone have been defeated. The probability is 
determined primarily by the number of steps that Noctis has taken since 
the previous bout of combat. The probability of a successful survival 
check ("p"), resulting in a reward item, is calculated as: 
p = (10 +Skill Leve/)1100 
As the number of steps taken between each battle increases, you 
gradually acquire a greater chance to procure a reward. The number of 
times the game performs this calculation ("n") is determined as: 
n = (Current Step Total - Step Total After Previous Battle) x 0.01 
In other words, the game performs the p calculation n times. As soon 
as this results in a success, the process stops and you gain an item. You 
can only ever receive one item per battle. Therefore, the final reward 
probability ("r") per battle is: 
r = 1 - {1- p)U 
Cooking 
0>--~~~~~~~~~~~ 
lgnis's cooking skill information is largely covered in the Inventory 
chapter (see page 211). 
To make the most of food-based effects, you should aim to unlock lgnis's 
Aftertaste nexuses early in the story. This will enable you to extend the 
duration of food effects derived from meals eaten at havens, as detailed 
here: 
<> Default: until nightfall (up to 12 hours) 
<> Aftertaste (18 AP): until sunrise on the following day (up to 24 
hours) 
<> Lingering Aftertaste (99 AP): until nightfall on the following day 
(up to 36 hours) 
<> Persistent Aftertaste (333 AP): until sunrise on the day after next 
(up to 48 hours) 
Reward Type 
The contribution of Gladio's survival level to the overall chance that an 
item is found is actually very small. Instead, survival level determines the 
type of item you will receive. Here there is also a probability distribution, 
where each level has its own pool of possible items, and higher levels 
result in more valuable items. The full breakdown is listed in the 
accompanying table. 
Survival Rewards 
LEVEL 
REWARDS & PROBABILITIES 
• 45%: Potion 
1 
• 25%: Fossil Shell 
• 15%: Beetle Shell, Antidote 
• 5%: Glass Gemstone 
--·----
---------~ ·- · -- --------·--------------·-
• 40%: Potion 
2 
• 20%: Antidote 
• 15%: Fossil Shell, Beetle Shell 
• 10%: Remedy 
, ___ 
------
• 25%: Potion 
3 
• 20%: Hi-Potion 
• 15%: Remedy 
• 10%: Fossil Shell, Beetle Shell, Rare Coin, Antidote 
-
-
• 20%: Hi-Potion, Ether 
4 
• 15%: Remedy 
• 10%: Beetle Shell, Debased Silverpiece, Rare Coin, Antidote 
• 5%: Fossil Shell 
-----------------·-------
5 
• 20%: Hi-Potion, Ether, Elixir 
• 10%: Beetle Shell, Rare Coin, Debased Silverpiece, Remedy 
-----
• 20%: Hi-Potion 
6 
• 15%: Elixir, Hi-Elixir 
• 10%: Rare Coin, Debased Banknote, Remedy, Ether 
• 5%: Glass Gemstone, Beetle Shell 
----
• 15%: Elixir, Hi-Elixir, Phoenix Down 
7 
• 10%: Glass Gemstone, Rare Coin, Debased Banknote, Hi-Potion, Ether 
• 5%: Beetle Shell 
--
-
• 20%: Mega-Potion, Phoenix Down 
8 
• 15%: Hi-Elixir 
• 10%: Glass Gemstone, Rare Coin, Debased Banknote, Elixir 
• 5%: Beetle Shell 
------
• 20%: Phoenix Down 
9 
• 15%: Mega-Potion, Hi-Elixir 
• 10%: Glass Gemstone, Rare Coin, Debased Banknote, Elixir 
~--
~-~~§eetle Shell, Megalixir 
----·---·--------·--
• 20%: Phoenix Down 
10 
• 15%: Hi-Elixir, Mega-Potion 
• 10%: Rare Coin, Debased Banknote, Elixir 
• 5%: Glass Gemstone, Platinum Ingot, Beetle Shell, Megalixir 
Photography 
0·>--~~~~~~~~~~~ 
Prompto's photography skill provides mementos of each day in Eos 
that you can peruse whenever the party rests. Every picture taken 
rewards him with SP Improving Prompto's skill level unlocks additional 
shooting techniques and color filters for your photographs. Though his 
photographs will sometimes contain stills taken in the heat of battle, the 
skill has no effect on combat performance. 
Photography: Skill Level Overview 
LEVEL 
IMPROVEMENT 
1 
Default 
--2-
j Filter: R;;dtrip ----- -
=----!-_l~~f~~~-~----==~-= 
__ 
5_1-~I!.!_er: Daw_n __ 
6 
Skill: Prompto can take photos 
_____ 
~v~n_:-v~~n ~~~~e_i:_ 
_______ _ 
10 
-
1-~~~ Bloon:i______ 
_ __ _ 
Skill Prompto can take photos 
ev~n __ ".':'~-~-~-~-~~~~~y_ __ _____ _ ___ _ 
~!~L ~~~!_n~L 
______ _ 
Skill Prompto can include himself 
in group pictures 
Photography: SP Rewards 
ACTION 
SP 
Automatic p 
5 
Snapshot (Prompto's 
5 
combat technique) ___ -
Group picture 
20 
~----------------------·-·-··-·--· ··-·-··-·-
Complete a Tour sidequest 
20 
with Prompto 

MINI-GAMES 
Justice Monsters Five 
0»--~~~~~~~~~~~ 
Rules 
Justice Monsters Five is a popular game in the world of Final Fantasy XV. 
Available in all Crow's Nest Diners (and in the cafe where Alessio can 
be found in Altissia), this mini-game could be described as a variant of 
pinball. It requires you to fire projectiles named orbs at enemy orbs in an 
attempt to destroy them by fully depleting their HP bars. 
Defeating all enemy orbs in a wave enables you to reach the next 
wave. A boss encounter occurs every few waves, pitting you against a 
more robust target. You begin with a set of four random orbs, and the 
game ends whenever all four of them run out of HP. Each orb's HP is 
represented by the semi-circular green gauge to the left side of its icon. 
Controls & Basics 
The game's controls are listed in the following table. 
Justice Monsters Five Controls 
PS4 
XBOX ONE 
SUMMARY 
Tap to shoot, hold to charge. A charged orb uses 
one of three special properties: burst, climb, 
_
or pierce 
[D ;@) 
GJ/ Erl 
While shooting or charging: slice an orb, giving it 
a spin that affects the trajectory ~t foll~ws 
Select orb 
@ 
--- ______ J~-- --- ~~~~-~!~----------·-----------------------------
@ 
© 
@ 
€) 
Use Hero Tech 
Ou it 
Though this might not be immediately apparent, Justice Monsters Five 
is game that requires very precise timing. Your success is based on your 
ability to shoot your orb at the right moment as it moves back and forth 
on the arc-shaped bumper at the bottom of your screen. If you shoot 
while the orb is on the left end of the bumper, it will be propelled toward 
the right side of the board, and vice versa. In short: any shot will go in 
a direction inversely proportional to how far to the side of the bumper it 
is when you shoot. This process is illustrated in the following diagram: 
The next step is to familiarize yourself with the various types of attacks 
at your disposal: 
o Simple Shot: Tap ® ;e to shoot an orb. Simple shots are fired 
instantly, with no delay, and can be performed in rapid succession to 
quickly eliminate nearby enemies. 
o Charged Shot: Hold ® ;e then release to launch your orb's 
special attack. A charged shot is fired after a delay, which you need 
to take into account to time your strikes. Each orb has one of three 
possible charged properties, as shown by the letter in the bottom-
left corner of its icon: 
Justice Monster Five: Charged Shots 
ICON 
MEANING 
Burst: shot explodes upon impact, dealing additional damage 
Climb: shot runs up walls, enabling you to hit enemies from 
behind when there is no object blocking progression on the way 
-- -
-- -- ----
--
Pierce: shot penetrates enemies, which is effective both against 
weak points and to hit multiple aligned targets 
O Hero Tech: Whenever the blue tech bar on the right-hand side of an 
orb's icon is full, you can press @/O to unleash its Hero Tech - the 
creature's ultimate power. Depending on the nature of the orb, this 
can be anything from a healing spell to a devastating attack. Note 
that it can be extremely beneficial to use the Hero Tech of an orb 
that is not currently on the board: by selecting a different orb (but 
not swapping to it) before using the Hero Tech ability, the selected 
orb joins the game for a short time after using its Hero Tech. This 
enables you to have a markedly stronger offence with two orbs on 
the board at once. 
Last but not least, it is essential that you pay attention to enemy attacks. 
At regular intervals, you will see colored beams radiating from your 
opponents: these represent harmful blows that you need to dodge by 
timing your shots appropriately. The intervals between enemy assaults 
tend to be relatively lengthy, though, leaving you with plenty of time to 
aim or even to perform multiple quick shots in rapid succession. If you fail 
to avoid an attack, it causes damage to your orb, reducing its life total. 
Elements & Orbs 
Justice Monsters Five has a rotating roster of default orbs. In addition to 
these, you can unlock more orbs by playing the app version of the game. 
Each orb is naturally infused with an element (as revealed by the element 
icon appearing next to each creature's level), so it is in your interests to 
identify which creature you are currently aiming at and use an orb of the 
opposed element to inflict maximum damage. 
O Fire is strong against Earth, which 
is strong against Lightning, which 
is strong against Water, which is 
strong against Fire. 
o Light is strong against Dark, and 
vice versa. 
Strategy & 
Analysis 
Skills 
• Mini-Gomes 
309 

310 
In-Game Events 
During games, various events can occur based on your actions. This 
includes a slot machine mini-game that confers various bonuses when 
you obtain two or three identical symbols. 
In-Game Events 
ICON 
c 
0 
Justice Slots 
ICON 
Boards 
MEANING 
A combo is triggered when you hit an enemy at least twice 
within three seconds. The more a combo grows, the more 
damage each subsequent blow deals. 
Bosses have weak points that are indicated with this icon. 
Striking a weak point deals massive damage. 
A reward that restores a medium amount of HP to all orbs. 
EFFECT 
• 2 Slots out of 3 - Restores 50% HP to all orbs 
• 3 Slots out of 3 - Restores 100% HP to all orbs 
• 2 Slots out of 3 - Reduces current HP of enemies by 20% 
• 3 Slots out of 3 - Reduces current HP of enemies by 50% 
• 2 Slots out of 3 - Fills all orb tech bars by 50% 
• 3 Slots out of 3 - Completely fills all orb tech bars 
• 2 Slots out of 3 - Grants two treasure chests 
upon stage completion 
• 3 Slots out of 3 - Grants five treasure chests 
upon stage completion 
• 2 Slots out of 3 - Grants 30,000 bonus points 
• 3 Slots out of 3 - Grants 100,000 bonus points 
Each wave takes place on a board with a unique layout. Much like in a 
game of pinball, environmental features will cause your orbs to bounce 
or potentially alter their trajectory. Learning to identify these hazards 
is essential. The ideal scenario, generally speaking, is to fire shots 
along optimal paths that avoid unwanted collisions in order to attack 
your targets from behind, where multiple bounces can generate large 
combos. You will also occasionally encounter kickout holes on certain 
boards: these will briefly trap your orb then release it, potentially 
increasing your chances to strike enemies from behind. 
Rewards 
The rewards you obtain by playing Justice Monsters Five depend on the 
amount of treasure chests you earn during each game, as shown in the 
upper-left corner of the screen: the more chests, the better your reward. 
They also depend on whether you are playing on a standard machine, 
where each game costs 10 Gil (all machines in Lucis, and all but one 
in Altissia), or on the unique, special machine near Alessio in Altissia, 
where each game costs 10,000 Gil (see the screenshot at the bottom 
of the page). 
Most of the items you can obtain are accessories, some of which are 
quite valuable. The mini-game's ultimate reward, though, is a treasure 
called Wind-up Lord Vexxos, as shown in the table below. You can 
either sell this for half a million Gil, or use it as one of the most potent 
spellcrafting catalysts in the entire game (see page 274). 
Justice Monsters Five is also available as an app for smart devices. 
Playing on the app will reward you with additional orbs in the main game 
as well as a decal for the Regalia. 
Reward Overview 
CHESTS 
REWARD (l 0-GIL GAME) 
99 
Celestriad 
90 
Emerald Bracelet 
80 
Platinum Bangle 
70 
Ruby Bracelet 
60 
50 
45 
40 
35 
30 
25 
Oracle Earring 
Gold Bangle 
Sapphire Bracelet 
Mega Phoenix 
Titanium Bangle 
Amethyst Bracelet 
Carbon Bangle 
20 
Garnet Bracelet 
15 
10 
Hi-Elixir 
Elixir 
Hi-Potion 
2 
Potion 
Totomostro 
REWARD (l 0,000-GIL GAME) 
Wind-up Lord Vexxos 
Onion Bangle 
Dark Matter Bracelet 
Assist Suit 
Gigas Bangle 
Blue Diamond Bracelet 
Legatus Bangle 
Moogle Charm 
·-···--·--.................................. _ ....... . , 
Mystic Circlet 
Centurion Bangle 
Emerald Bracelet 
Platinum Bangle 
Ruby Bracelet 
Mega Phoenix 
Hi-Potion 
0»--~~~~~~~~~~-
1 f you take the gondola from the station in the northeast of Altissia 
(under the Parco Listro Sud canopy), you will reach Arena Galviano - a 
colosseum where "Totomostro" tournaments are held. 
In this mini-game, your goal is to earn medals by betting on the outcome 
of battles involving groups of monsters. In short, you select the team that 
you believe is most likely to win, and you wager Galviano medals - the 
arena's currency. If your prediction is right, you receive medal winnings 
equivalent to your bet multiplied by the odds. If your prediction is wrong, 
you lose your wager. If you gamble well and accumulate medals, you can 
then trade them for prizes, including valuable auto parts. 
Medals 
Medals are the mini-game's currency, used to place wagers and offered 
as a reward for successful bets. The first thing you need to do when 
you play for the first time is to purchase some medals, at a cost of 10 
Gil apiece. 
We suggest that you buy as many as you can afford. To optimize returns 
on your investment of both time and Gil, it makes sense to take risks. 
Feel free to play a few basic test runs with nominal amounts at stake, but 
once you are familiar with the system, big wagers are the way to earn 
the best rewards. You can naturally save before you head to the arena, 
then reload your game in the event that things go awry. 

Wager 
Once you are ready to play, select the Wager option to reach the Teams 
screen. This is where the monster contenders are introduced. There are 
three factors that you can use to decide which team you will bet on: 
<> Odds: This numerical value represents the ratio between the amounts 
staked by all betters. The greater this number, the better your potential 
reward will be. As a rule, though, high odds indicate greater risks, so 
consider all other factors before you wager all your medals. 
<> Condition: This represents the physical form of each team. The 
more blue arrows in the gauge ( 1 ). the better they will perform. 
<> Team Composition: This is probably the most important information 
of all. Based on your own experience in the main game, you should 
have a solid understanding of how each monster might perform, 
particularly in terms of their resilience, attack power, and attack 
frequency. Another vital consideration is area-of-effect techniques; 
this can be critical when a single creature such as a Dualhorn faces 
a horde of weaker foes. Level is often the key attribute to take into 
account. though. You might automatically think to back a pack of 
creatures against a single beast. but if that individual monster is 
several levels higher, it will generally prevail. Use this knowledge 
to make informed decisions and you will be surprised by how often 
your predictions prove correct. 
Once you have chosen a team, you have one last chance to adjust your 
wager. If you are ready, select Begin Match to proceed. 
Battles 
Totomostro battles are gladiatorial bouts in which you do not play a direct 
part. Monsters fight on their own, positioning themselves and attacking 
as directed by their Al routines. There is, however, one way to influence 
the outcome: by cheering with Horns. 
Horns can be purchased from the merchant who has a stall a few steps 
from the gondola station that leads to the Arena Galviano. Their effects 
and prices are listed in the following table. 
Horns 
Horn of Resolve 
Horn of Tenacity 
EFFECT 
Increases the supported 
team's attack. 
Increases the supported 
team's defense. 
COST (GIL) 
30,000 
24,000 
--------------1------------------
Horn of Fortitude* 
Horn of Cleansing 
Heals the supported team. 
Cures the supported team 
of status ailments. 
8,000 
-·----·---------:-----------1-·----
Horn of Madness 
Increases the supported 
monster's strength, but 
decreases its defense. 
18,000 
'Available by default 
You can cycle through horns with [1) &@:l/al&ID. You have an 
opportunity to blow one at regular intervals: all you have to do is press 
©!@ repeatedly when the corresponding prompt appears on your 
screen. The effect of the horn occurs once you fill the gauge completely. 
Even if you find the prices a bit steep, rest assured that horns are very 
potent and can turn the tide of many battles. Blowing the Horn of 
Resolve and Horn of Tenacity at the beginning of a round gives your team 
a significant edge. Using the other three contextually can also save your 
monsters from defeat. 
High-risk wagers combined with clever use of horns make it possible 
to acquire the maximum amount of medals in just a few games, and 
therefore to purchase the best prizes. 
Outcomes 
At the end of each game of Totomostro, there are three possible outcomes: 
<> Your Team Won: The medals that you wagered are multiplied by 
the odds and the updated balance is returned. 
<> Your Team Lost: All the medals that you wagered are permanently 
lost. If you bankrupt yourself with a bold stake, consider loading your 
previous save file and trying again. 
<> Draw: If at least one member of two different teams is still standing 
when the timer expires, the bout ends in a draw. Your original wager 
is returned. 
Prizes 
Prize Overview 
ITEM 
Magitek Generator* 
Diamond Bracelet 
Big Bang* 
NOTES 
Auto part that eradicates the 
need for fuel 
An accessory which increases 
strength considerably 
..................................... +. 
Decal set for the Regalia 
COST (MEDALS) 
3,600,000 
1,250,000 
450,000 
Mythic Color Samples* 
Color sample book for the Regalia 
360,000 
240,000 
Arapaima Roe 
Enforcer 
Precision Lance 
Llymlaen* 
Big Master Typhon 
Silver Bangle 
Turbocharger* 
Coeur! Whiskers 
Great Garula Tusk 
An item that can be sold for 
50,000 Gil, or used as either an 
ingredient in a very beneficial 
meal or as a powerful Elemancy 
catalyst 
A firearm with an improved 
critical hit rate 
A polearm with an improved 
critical hit rate 
A fishing reel which offers the 
ultimate angling experience 
A vibration lure for the fishing 
mini-game 
An accessory which increases HP 
moderately 
Auto part that increases the 
Regalia's top speed 
A treasure that can be sold for 
1,500 Gil or used as a Killcast 
catalyst with decent duplicating 
capabilities 
A treasure that can be sold for 
1.700 Gil or used as a Tricast 
catalyst with decent duplicating 
capabilities 
180,000 
120,000 
85,000 
45,000 
34,000 
15,000 
7,500 
2,500 
•can be obtained only once 
Strategy & 
Analysis 
Mini-Gomes 
311 



TROPHIES & ACHIEVEMENTS 
Final Fantasy XV's collection of Trophies and Achievements offer a good blend of story and gameplay milestones. 
Main Story Accolades 
ICON 
NAME 
TROPHY 
© 
UNLOCK CONDITION 
~ Insomnia's Waking Nightmare 
Bronze 
10 
Reach Chapter 01 (see page 34) 
~ Departure 
Bronze 
10 
Complete Chapter 01 (see page 34). 
~ No Turning Back 
Bronze 
10 
Complete Chapter 02 (see page 42). 
i)) 
The Open World 
Bronze 
10 
Complete Chapter 03 (see page 50). 
Ci}) 
Living Legend 
Bronze 
10 
Complete Chapter 04 (see page 58). 
~ Dark Clouds 
Bronze 
10 
Complete Chapter 05 (see page 62). 
<i) 
A Way Forward 
Bronze 
10 
Complete Chapter 06 (see page 68). 
~ Party of Three 
Bronze 
10 
Complete Chapter 07 (see page 72). 
Ci)) 
Seaworthy 
Bronze 
10 
Complete Chapter 08 (see page 78). 
~ Callings 
Bronze 
10 
Complete Chapter 09 (see page 82). 
~ The Heart of a King 
Bronze 
10 
Complete Chapter 10 (see page 88). 
(j)) 
In the Dark 
Bronze 
10 
Complete Chapter 11 (see page 92). 
~ End of Days 
Bronze 
10 
Complete Chapter 12 (see page 94). 
~ Redemption 
Bronze 
10 
Complete Chapter 13 (see page 96). 
<@) 
Homecoming 
Silver 
50 
Complete Chapter 14 (see page 106). 
~ Chosen King 
Gold 
110 
Defeat lfrit on Normal difficulty (see page 109). 
Sidequest & Mini-Game Accolades 
ICON 
NAME 
TROPHY 
© 
UNLOCK CONDITION 
Q 
High Five for Justice! 
Bronze 
10 
Play the Justice Monsters Five mini-game. You can find machines at all Crow's Nest restaurants and in Altissia. 
~ Spinning a Yarn I 
Bronze 
10 
Complete one sidequest (see page 112). 
~ Spinning a Varn II 
Bronze 
10 
Complete five sidequests. 
~ Spinning a Yarn Ill 
Bronze 
10 
Complete 10 sidequests. 
~ Spinning a Yarn IV 
Bronze 
10 
Complete 20 sidequests. 
~ Spinning a Yarn V 
Bronze 
10 
Complete 40 sidequests. 
~ Weaving a Tapestry 
Silver 
50 
Complete 80 sidequests. 
~ My First Hunt 
Bronze 
10 
Complete a hunt. You can unlock this at the beginning of the game. Accept Takka's first hunt at Hammerhead's 
diner and eliminate the designated targets a short distance away (see page 135). 
~ 
Defeat an Adamantoise. This can be accomplished as part of Cindy's Let Sleeping Mountains Lie sidequest, 
Tortoise Toppler 
Gold 
110 
available from Chapter 09 onwards. This is a high-level task, however, that requires very specific preparations -
turn to page 17 4 for details. 
~ 
:· 
The World Wanderer 
Platinum 
Unlock all other Trophies (PlayStation 4 only). 
Combat Accolades 
ICON 
NAME 
TROPHY 
© 
UNLOCK CONDITIQN 
~ Just Hangin' Around 
Bronze 
10 
Point-warp to a blue marker position during a battle. You will probably unlock this when you rescue Dave during 
Hunter Becomes the Hunted at the beginning of the game. 
G} 
Brother-in-Arms 
Bronze 
10 
Order an ally to perform a Technique. This can be achieved fairly early in the story: simply hold (l;j)/.iJ and select 
the corresponding ally's command with 0 once the tech bar is sufficiently filled (see page 22). 
~ Blind Spot 
Bronze 
10 
Perform a Blindside Link. Fight close to your allies while behind an enemy and this will happen automatically 
(see page 290) 
~ 
Perform a Parry Link. This happens automatically and randomly when you successfully parry enemy attacks with 
Noct You Like a Hurricane 
Bronze 
10 
allies nearby. To parry, hold @/O when the corresponding prompt appears on your screen. then follow up by 
pressing©/@ in a timely manner (see page 16). 
~ The Power of Kings 
Bronze 
10 
Unleash Noctis's Armiger. This becomes possible once you clear the Glacial Grotto dungeon during Chapter 03. 
Once your circular gauge is full, press (l;j) + @l/d +ID to deploy Armiger (see page 21). 
~ Magical Worker 
Bronze 
10 
Craft a spell. This is performed in the Elemancy menu and simply requires one unit of elemental energy, which 
you can absorb from any deposit found close to a haven (among other places; see page 274). 
~ Black Mage 
Bronze 
10 
Cast a spell. Once you have crafted a spell, equip it in the Gear menu and you can then use it in battle 
(see page 274). 
~ 
Summon an Astral. This can be achieved from Chapter 05 onwards. Astrals are available in specific locations 
Divine Intervention 
Bronze 
10 
once particular conditions have been met (see page 291 for details). When a prompt invites you to summon one, 
simply hold ~/l!l for several seconds until the animation begins 
314 

Character Progression Accolades 
ICON 
NAME 
TROPHY 
® 
UNLOCK CONDITION 
~ Quadruple Threat 
Bronze 
10 
Equip a weapon in all four of Noctis's Primary Arms slots. This can easily be achieved from the Gear menu once you have four 
different weapons in your inventory. 
~ Faithful Heir 
Silver 
50 
Obtain al1·13 Royal Arms. While you will acquire over half of them during the main story, the others are hidden in the depths of optional 
dungeons, making this a late-game task. Refer to our section on Royal Arms and Dungeons for detailed guidance (see page 176). 
-
New Power 
Bronze 
10 
Learn your first ability. This can be achieved very early in the game. Open the Ascension menu and unlock a cheap ability such as 
Airstep in the Combat tree. 
~ Self-Improved 
Silver 
50 
Unlock any 20 nexuses. You can find a complete overview of all Ascension development trees and the related costs on page 295. 
~ Self-Mastered 
Gold 
110 
Unlock 50 nexuses in the Ascension trees. Turn to page 295 for details. 
Skill Accolades 
ICON 
NAME 
TROPHY 
® 
UNLOCK CONDITION 
~ Angling Rookie 
Bronze 
10 
Raise Noctis's fishing skill to Level 2 (see page 304). 
~ Survival Rookie 
Bronze 
10 
Raise Gladio's survival skill to Level 2 (see page 308). 
~ Photo Rookie 
Bronze 
10 
Raise Prompto's photography skill to Level 2 (see page 308) 
~ Cooking Rookie 
Bronze 
10 
Raise lgnis's cooking skill to Level 2 (see page 308). 
~ Angling Expert 
Bronze 
10 
Raise Noctis's fishing skill to Level 10 (see page 304). 
~ Survival Expert 
Bronze 
10 
Raise Gladio's survival skill to Level 10 (see page 308) 
~ Photo Expert 
Bronze 
10 
Raise Prompto's photography skill to Level 10 (see page 308). 
~ Cooking Expert 
Bronze 
10 
Raise lgnis's cooking skill to Level 10 (see page 308) 
~ 
Catch an image of Gentiana in a photo. Prompto can do this automatically at random when you are in Lucis after you complete 
Immortal Photobomb 
Bronze 
10 
the Trial of Ramuh during Chapter 05. The picture can only be taken between 06:00 and midnight, and the chances for this to 
happen increase with the time your party stays awake: the longer they spend without resting, the higher the probability. 
Transportation Accolades 
ICON 
NAME 
TROPHY 
® 
UNLOCK CONDITION 
i)) Learner's Permit 
Bronze 
10 
Drive the Regalia in manual mode. This can be achieved for the first time during Chapter 01, when the car is repaired after 
completing The Mutant Marauder (see page 34). 
~ Chocobo Jockey 
Bronze 
10 
Ride a chocobo. This becomes possible after completing A Behemoth Undertaking (see page 50). 
~ 
Drive the Regalia Type-F This becomes possible after completing the game and loading your newly created save tile that 
Regalia Pilot 
Silver 
50 
enables you to return to Lucis in a Chapter 15 epilogue. It you have cleared Formouth Garrison and picked up the Strange Engine 
collectible, return to Cindy to unlock this upgrade (see page 154). 
SECRETS 
Secret Magazines 
0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~--¢ 
There are two secret magazines that you can interact with to unlock new cooking recipes for lgnis. These are very hard to find without help, though 
the following visuals should make for an easy search. 
+ Location: To the east of Coemix Station-· Cauthess, inside a small wooden building. 
+ Recipe Unlocked: Royal Road Paella (see page 213). 
• Location: Hidden under the road bridge, directly to the south of the Vesperpool. 
• Recipe Unlocked: Hearty Cutlet on Rice (see page 2131. 
• Extras 
Trophies & 
® Achievements 
• 
Secrets 
315 

316 
Secret Chocobo Collectibles 
0·r----~~~~~~~~~-
There are seven secret collectibles hidden on the chocobo race 
courses. However, these can only be picked up during specific 
races, and some only appear when specific weather or time 
conditions apply. Obtaining these items unlocks new plumage 
colors for your mounts at the nearby Chocobo Salon. 
You can find all relevant details in the accompanying table 
and annotated map. Note that these collectibles are all 
located outside of their respective race courses. To retrieve 
them, forget about the race in progress, and slowly scour the 
specified location until you notice an item lying on the ground. 
You can pick it up simply by walking over it. and get to keep 
each item irrespective of the race's outcome. 
O'GHOMORO PEAR 
CIELDALAES PEAR 
Secret Collectibles 
ITEM 
AVAILABILITY/CONDITIONS 
Cieldalaes Pear 
Race vs. Prompto or Full Field, 
or Chocobo Hoops: Grange Gallop 
Xelphatol Pear 
Race vs. Gladio or Iris 
Han Pear 
Race vs. lgnis, or Chocobo Hoops: 
Rocky Road 
Doman Pear 
Race vs. Prompto or lgnis (rainy 
weather) 
Mamook Pear 
Any Hoop race (rainy weather) 
O'Ghomoro Pear 
Race vs. Prompto, lgnis, or Full Field 
at night (between 20:30 and 03:59) 
Val Pear 
Chocobo Hoops: Rocky Road at 
night (between 20:30 and 03:59) 
MAMOOKPEAR 

CHARACTERS & RELATIO NSHIPS 
This diagram illustrates the 
nature of the relationships 
between the game's main 
characters. 
0 
·~ 
:;::: 
<( 
·-·---------- --------------------
- --------
---.~------
r? ! 1j 
§ , 
!i i 
-~ 
g~ 
+ 
Secrets 
,. Characters & 
Relationships 
317 

OLD CALENDAR ERA 
t I 
t 
' 
l 
318 
I I 
Allied forces of Lucis 
and Accardo lose 
I I 1 
Niflheim initiates its 
expansion policy, 
declaring war on 
neighboring countries 
to increase the 
empire's territory. 
the war against the 
Niflheim army; Accardo 
is annexed by the 
empire. 
Lucis, Accardo. Tenebrae 
and Niflheim agree on using 
the same new calendar. 
Niflheim conquers 
the land of Tenebrae, 
except the Fenestala 
Manor, home of Family 
Fleuret. from which all 
Oracles descend. 
Ancient history is marked by the prosperity of the civilization of Solheim. When this civilization was at its 
peak, the betrayal of one of the six Astral gods, lfrit, led to a conflict known as the Great War of Old. This 
was fueled by the spreading of a mysterious parasite. causing the death of millions, and ultimately the fall 
of Solheim. Two individuals were chosen by the gods to lead mankind to survival: the first Oracle, a woman 
from the Fleuret family; and a man from the Lucis Caelum family who received two gifts from the gods: 
the Crystal. and the Ring of the Lucii. Using these artifacts, the Chosen King ended the blight. From the 
ashes of the war rose four new countries: the Kingdom of Lucis. Tenebrae (led by the Oracle). an alliance 
of commercial free cities forming Accardo, and the empire of Niflheim. which aspired to recreate the 
domination of the ancient civilization (led by the Aldercapt family). 
Niflheim starts mass-
producing Magitek 
soldiers in preparation 
for the forthcoming all-
out war against Lucis. 
Using the power of the 
Ring and the Crystal, 
the King of Lucis 
raises a magic barrier 
protecting Insomnia 
for the first time. This 
leads to a temporary 
geopolitical status quo. 
The war between Niflheim and Lucis 
begins; the troops of Lucis are forced 
to retreat. 
M.E.729 
Death of King Mars; coronation of 
King Regis (Noctis's father). 

Birth of Noctis, son of 
Regis and Aulea. 
King Regis marries Aulea, 
his childhood friend. 
Eight-year-old Prince 
Noctis is attacked by 
Daemons and gravely 
injured. He is sent to 
Tenebrae to receive 
medical care, and 
spends a few weeks 
in the company of 
Lunafreya, the Oracle's 
daughter. 
The Crystal "chooses" 
Noctis as the one who 
will save the world. 
During Noctis's stay, the Fenestala 
Manor is attacked and conquered 
by the Niflheim empire. King Regis 
manages to save his son just in time, 
and brings him back to Lucis's capital 
city: Insomnia. Oracle Sylva, Lunafreya's 
mother, is killed during the attack. 
Shiva, one of the six 
Astrals, awakens. She 
is defeated by the 
Niflheim empire. 
Lunafreya becomes 
the new Oracle, under 
the watchful eye of the 
empire. 
King Regis founds the 
Kingsglaive, an elite 
guard corps that can 
use some of the King's 
powers. 
King Regis, who is growing old and 
whose powers are weakening, realizes 
that Lucis has no hope of winning 
the war. He accepts a cease-fire and 
agrees to sign a peace treaty with the 
empire. He sends Noctis to Altissia 
before the imperial forces arrive in 
Insomnia as a precaution. This marks 
the beginning of Final Fantasy XV. 
319 

INDEX 
~t 
-
l~~,;·, < ~ 
~ 
·;;~~~~\?. . 
' 
•, 
If you are looking for specific information, this alphabetical listing is just what you need. To avoid potential spoilers, note that critical page references 
are written in red. 
KEYWORD 
PAGE 
KEYWORD 
PAGE 
KEYWORD 
PAGE 
KEYWORD 
PAGE 
2 Chain 
275 
Attack 
25 
Combat Flow 
23 
Exploration 
13 
3 Chain 
275 
Attack Damage Modifiers 
285 
Combat Maneuvers 
283 
Exploration (Ascension Tree) 
299 
4 Chain 
275 
Attire 
214 
Combat Parameters 
271 
Express Train for Trouble 
92 
5 Chain 
275 
Attributes 
24, 269 
Combat Status Effects 
282 
Extras (Chapter) 
312 
A Backwoods Burial 
146 
Auto Crossbow 
206 
Combo 
18, 283 
Failcast 
275 
A Behemoth Undertaking 
52 
Auto Crossbow Plus 
207 
Commands 
11 
Fast Travel 
13 
A Better Absorb Shield 
148 
Auto Parts 
218 
Components (Regalia) 
219 
Favorite Food 
213 
A Better Auto Crossbow 
148 
Automotive Agitation 
120 
Conceal, Don't Feel 
115 
Final Resting Plains 
146 
A Better Bioblaster 
148 
Avengers 
204 
Consumables 
22, 215 
Finisher 
18, 283 
A Better Circular Saw 
148 
Axe of the Conqueror 
207, 287 
Controls 
11 
Fira 
276 
A Better Drain Lance II 
148 
Backfire 
275 
Cooked Meals 
211 
Firaga 
276 
A Better Drillbreaker 
148 
Ballistic 
288 
Cooking 
27, 308 
Fire Resistance 
25 
A Better Engine Blade 
148 
Balmung 
202 
Costlemark Tower 
186 
Firearms (Weapon Type) 
205 
A Better Engine Blade II 
148 
Balouve Mines 
178 
Counter 
17 
First Shot 
288 
A Better Engine Blade Ill 
148 
Beasts !Enemy Category) 
234 
Cover 
17, 292 
Fish Overview 
304 
A Better Force Stealer 
148 
Behemoth King 
108 
Crafting 
20, 274 
Fishing 
27, 303 
A Better Gravity Well 
148 
Berried Memories 
171 
Crash Course 
31 
Fishing Buddies 
159 
A Better Noiseblaster 
148 
Bestiary (Chapter) 
228 
Crazy About Cactuars 
172 
Fishing Equipment 
221, 304 
A Better Pair of Plunderers 
148 
Big Head Behind the Wheel 
125 
Crestholm Channels 
180 
Fishing Leisure Goods 
221 
A Better Valiant 
148 
Bioblaster 
206 
Crestholm Reservoir 
306 
Fishing, Naturally 
158 
A Cactuar of Marble 
172 
Bioblaster Plus 
207 
Critical Hits 
19 
Fishing Spots 
306 
A Cactuar of Mortar 
172 
Bird on the Brink 
168 
Cup Noodles (Sidequest) 
173 
Flame Gun 
205 
A Cactuar of Mythril 
172 
Black Prince 
206 
Cursecast 
275 
Flame Shield 
206 
A Cactuar of Wood 
172 
Blade of Brennaere 
203 
Cursed Legend 
199 
Flame Tongue 
202 
A Cry for Help 
115 
Blade of the Mystic 
207, 286 
Cutlasses 
204 
Flayer 
204 
A Driver in Despair 
124 
Blame the Beasts! 
118 
Cyclone 
289 
Fociaugh Hollow 
65 
A Dubious Drive 
60 
Blastcast 
275 
Daemons (Enemy Category) 
250 
Fodina Caestino 
90 
A Feathery Feast 
168 
Blazefire Saber 
202 
Daggers (Weapon Type) 
204 
Food 
210 
A Feline Feast 
171 
Blindside 
19, 283 
Damage Calculation 
292 
Food Effects 
282 
A Flower for Iris 
144 
Blink 
292 
Damage Types 
25 
Force Stealer 
203 
A Gentlemen's Agreement 
41 
Blitz 
18, 283 
Danger Status 
24, 269 
Force Stealer II 
203 
A Hurting Heart 
117 
Blizzaga 
276 
Dark Resistance 
25 
Forgotten Pool 
306 
A King's Struggle 
96 
Blizzara 
276 
Daurell Caverns 
184 
Formouth Garrison 
182 
A Legend is Born 
198 
Block 
16, 292 
Daurell Spring 
306 
Fort Vaullerey 
190 
A Little Slip-Up 
119 
Blood Sword 
202 
Dave (Sidequests) 
146 
Free cast 
275 
A Manic Motorist 
124 
Blue Marker Positions 
32 
Dawnhammer 
289 
Friends of a Feather 
166 
A Meat Most Magnificent 
151 
Body Parts 
284 
Dead eye 
53 
Furloch (Sidequests) 
162 
A Menace Sleeps in Balouve 
194 
Bosses (Enemy Category) 
264 
Deadeye's Lair 
52 
Gae Baig 
204 
A Menace Sleeps in Costlemark 
197 
Bow of the Clever 
179, 207, 286 
Death 
24, 269 
Game Structure 
10 
A Menace Sleeps in Crestholm 
196 
Brave New World 
80 
Death Penalty 
205 
Gear 
26, 33 
A Menace Sleeps in Daurell 
196 
Break 
18, 284 
Decals 
218 
Gear !Basics) 
15 
A Menace Sleeps in Fociaugh 
195 
Breakage 
284 
Declaration of War 
48 
General Stores 
224 
A Menace Sleeps in Keycatrich 
194 
Breath of the Glacian 
95 
Defend 
16, 292 
Gil 
15 
A Menace Sleeps in Steyliff 
197 
Broadsword 
202 
Defense 
25 
Glacial Grotto 
56 
A Menace Sleeps in the Grotto 
195 
Broken Car Sidequests 
120 
Delta Daggers 
205 
Gondola Marina 
306 
A Place to Call Home 
161 
Broken-Down 
121 
Difficulty Setting 
23 
Gone Hunting 
146 
A Precious Source of Power 
80 
Builds 
300 
Diner 
15 
Gravisphere 
289 
A Rocky End 
146 
Burden of Expectation 
52, 56 
Dino !Sidequests) 
152 
Gravity Well 
206 
A Stone-Studded Stunner 
153 
Caem Carrots 
171 
Directional Attacks 
283 
Gravity Well Plus 
207 
A Stroll for Two 
144 
Caem Shore 
306 
Distress in the Desert 
114 
Greatswords (Weapon Type) 
203 
A Treasure Beyond Measure 
153 
Calamity 
205 
Dog Tags 
146 
Greens 
220 
Abilities !Allies) 
288 
Call Umbra 
87 
Dominator 
203 
Guard 
16, 292 
Absorb Shield 
206 
Car controls 
13 
Down On Your Luck 
116 
Habitat 
233 
Absorb Shield II 
206 
Careless in a Car 
121 
Dragoon Lance 
204 
Handgun 
205 
Accessibility 
10 
Car-mic Retribution 
120 
Drain Lance 
204 
Hardedge 
203 
Accessories 
208 
Cartanica 
88 
Drain Lance II 
204 
Havens 
32 
Accursed Curiosity 
117 
Case of the Stolen Specs 
144 
Drain Lance Ill 
204 
Healcast 
275 
Ace of Carapace 
162 
Catalysts 
275 
Dreadful Legend 
198 
Healing Items 
22, 215 
Achievements 
314 
Catalysts (Overview) 
279 
Drillbreaker 
207 
Hero's Shield 
206 
Added Effects 
275 
Cerberus 
205, 273 
Drillbreaker Plus 
207 
Highway Helper 
121 
Aegis Shield 
206 
Chapter 01 
34 
Drops 
233 
History of Eos 
318 
Aerial Combo 
19, 283 
Chapter 02 
42 
Dualcast 
275 
Holding Back the Dark 
165 
Aftermath of the Astral War 
160 
Chapter 03 
50 
Dude, Where's My Car7 
125 
Holly ISidequests) 
164 
Airstep Sword 
202 
Chapter 04 
58 
Duel Code 
203 
Horns (Totomostro) 
220, 310 
Alas, Poor Hunter ... 
11 8 
Chapter 05 
62 
Dungeons 
176 
HP 
24, 269 
Alessio 
227 
Chapter 06 
68 
Duplication (Spell) 
276 
Hunt Directory 
136 
All By Myself 
116 
Chapter 07 
72 
Durandal 
202 
Hunter Becomes the Hunted 
37 
All Set to Set Sail 
70 
Chapter 08 
78 
Dust to Dust 
146 
Hunter Rank 
135 
Ally Coordination 
288 
Chapter 09 
82 
Easy Mode 
23 
Hunters and Gatherers 
151 
Almost Out of Hope 
119 
Chapter 10 
88 
Elemancy 
20, 274 
Hunts 
135 
Alone on the Road 
124 
Chapter 11 
92 
Elemental Energy 
20, 274 
Hurrying Home 
123 
Altissia, City on the Sea 
84 
Chapter 12 
94 
Elemental Properties 
273 
Hybrid Spells 
277 
An Exaggerated Injury 
115 
Chapter 13 
96 
Emergency Delivery 
151 
Hyper Magnum 
205 
An Eye for Islands 
161 
Chapter 14 
106 
Enemy Analysis 
30 
Hyperion 
203 
Analyze 
20, 271 
Character Progression 
26, 294 
Enemy Attributes 
232 
Ice Brand 
202 
Angler's Nightmare 
159 
Character Specialization 
300 
Enemy Drops 
233 
Ice Resistance 
25 
Antagonize 
288 
Characters & Relationships 
317 
Enemy Intel 
20, 271 
Ice Shield 
206 
AP 
26, 295, 302 
Apocalypse 
203 
Chase That Chocobo! 
169 
Chocobo Leisure Goods 
220 
Enemy Weaknesses/Resistances 
233 
Enforcer 
205 
Ice Spear 
204 
Icons 
14 
Appendages 
284 
Chocobo Levels 
166 
Engage 
288 
I fr it 
109 
Aracheole Stronghold 
66 
Aranea 
71 
Chocobo Races 
166 
Cid ISidequests) 
148 
Engaging the Empire 
66 
Engine Blade 
202 
Ill Tidings 
41 
I'm Latel 
122 
Ardyn 
110 
Arena Galviano 
310 
Cid Sophiar, Master Mechanic 
148 
Cindy (Sidequests) 
154 
Engine Blade II 
202 
Engine Blade Ill 
202 
Imperial Forces 
261 
(Enemy Category) 
Armiger 
21, 287 
Circular Saw 
206 
Enhancement 
289 
Imperial Infiltration 
70 
Armiger (Ascension Tree) 
296 
Circular Saw Plus 
207 
Enhancer 
202 
Impervious 
292 
Armiger Chain 
290 
Claymore 
203 
Escape 
17 
Impulse 
289 
Armiger Gauge 
12 
Cocytus 
205 
Everyone Loves Beans 
150 
In Low Spirits 
116 
Arms Vendors 
223 
Collectibles 
14 
Executioner 
205 
Ingredients 
21 1 
Ascension 
26, 33, 296 
Color Sample Books 
218 
EXP 
26, 294 
Initiative 
16 
Assassin's Daggers 
205 
Combat 
16 
Expericast 
275 
Injured and Introspective 
118 
Astrals 
291 
Combat !Ascension Tree! 
298 
Exoerience 
26 
Insomnia 
106 

KEYWORD 
PAGE 
KEYWORD 
PAGE 
KEYWORD 
PAGE 
KEYWORD 
PAGE 
Interactive Conversations 
15 
Intercept 
288 
Parameter Growth 
294 
Parking Spots 
33 
Shops 
223 
Shoulda Been Serviced 
122 
The Professor's Protege - Yellow 
156 
Frogs 
Into the Arctic Crevasse 
95 
Parry 
16, 292 
Sidequest 
10, 31, 33 
The Rock of Ravatogh 
190 
Into the Fray 
86 
Party of Three 
74 
Sidequests (Chapter) 
112 
The Summit 
84 
Into Unknown Frontiers 
154 
Party Setups 
300 
Skills 
27, 303 
The Trial of Leviathan 
86 
Inventory (Chapter) 
200 
Pedal to the Metal 
125 
Skill Trees 
296 
The Trial of Ramuh 
64 
Iron Duke 
203 
Phase 
16, 292 
Skipping Cutscenes 
15 
The Trial of Titan 
61 
Javelin 
204 
Photo Ops 
132 
Snapshot 
289 
The Verge of Despair 
116 
Justice Monsters Five 
309 
Photo Ops (Altissia) 
134 
Sondonda 
227 
The Vesperpool - East Bank 
306 
Katana of the Warrior 
207, 287 
Photography 
27, 308 
Soul Saber 
202 
The Vesperpool - West Bank 
306 
Keep Calm and Keep Driving 
124 
Piercer 
289 
Soundtracks 
219 
The Witch of the Woods 
147 
Keeping the Faith 
118 
Pilgrimage 
170 
Spawn 
233 
Threat Meter 
16, 31 
Key Items 
222 
Keycatrich Trench 
45 
Pitioss Ruins 
175 
Plunderers 
205 
Special Vendors 
227 
Spells 
20 
Through a Rose-Tinted 
123 
Windshield 
Killcast 
275 
Plunderers II 
205 
Spells (Overview) 
278 
Thundaga 
276 
Kite Shield 
206 
Point-Warp 
32 
Spirit 
25 
Thundara 
276 
Kitty Catering 
170 
Points of Interactivity 
14 
Sprinting 
13 
Thunder Shield 
206 
Lancet 
288 
Polearms (Weapon Type) 
204 
Stamina 
270 
Thunderbolt 
203 
Legacy 
44 
Poor. Misfortunate Soul 
119 
Stamina Gauge 
12, 31 
Tiers (Spell) 
276 
Legend (Map) 
14, 30 
Potency 
276 
Star of the Rogue 
188, 207, 286 
Time of Day 
12 
Legend Wrapped in an Enigma 
199 
Power Shield 
206 
Starshell 
289 
Time line 
318 
Leisure Goods 
220 
Power to the Pylons 
164 
Stasis 
24, 270 
Tipster 
15 
·~ Index 
Leisure Goods Shops 
226 
Powercast 
275 
Stats (Ascension Tree) 
299 
Tired of Running 
114 
Lestallum Merchants 
162 
(Sidequests) 
Precision Lance 
204 
Primary Arms Display 
12 
Status Effects 
12, 282 
Stealing the Past 
174 
Tomb of the Clever 
176 
Tomb of the Conqueror 
176 
Lestallum's Finest 
150 
Primer (Chapter) 
8 
Stealth 
16 
Tomb of the Fierce 
177 
Let Sleeping Mountains Lie 
174 
Prissock (Sidequests) 
162 
Steam Valve Inspection 
164 
Tomb of the Just 
176 
Libra 
20, 271 
Procurement Points 
32 
Steyliff Grove 
75 
Tomb of the Mystic 
176 
Liege of the Lake 
144 
Quadcast 
275 
Stickers 
218 
Tomb of the Pious 
177 
Lightning Resistance 
25 
Quest 
10, 31 
Sting Your Praises 
162 
Tomb of the Rogue 
176 
Limit Break 
275 
Quicksilver 
205 
Stirred, Not Shaken 
145 
Tomb of the Tall 
176 
Lines (Fishing) 
221, 304 
Quintcast 
275 
Stopcast 
275 
Tomb of the Wanderer 
176 
Link-Strike 
19, 290 
Rachsia Bridge 
306 
Storm Lance 
204 
Tomb of the Warrior 
177 
Living Off the Land 
171 
Radiant Lance 
204 
Stranded on the Sand 
120 
Tomb of the Wise 
176 
Lock On 
18 
Randolph (Sidequests) 
198 
Strategy & Analysis (Chapter) 
266 
Tony (Caem Carrots) 
171 
Lodgings 
227 
Rapier Lance 
204 
Strength 
25 
Totomostro 
310 
Lo qi 
49 
Ravatogh 
190 
Strengths (Enemy) 
25 
Tours 
144 
Losing Heart 
119 
Ravus 
105 
Strike a Pose! 
145 
Training (Camp) 
170 
Lost Without a Potion 
114 
Rebellion 
205 
Summons 
291 
Treasures 
216 
Lures 
221 , 304 
Recipes 
212 
Survival 
27, 308 
Trembling with Fear 
117 
Mace of the Fierce 
191, 207, 286 
Recoil 
289 
Swains mere 
306 
Tricast 
275 
Machinery (Weapon Type) 
206 
Recovery 
269 
Swallowed by Shadows 
146 
Trident of the Oracle 
207, 286 
Mage Mashers 
205 
Recovery (Ascension Tree) 
297 
Switch Weapons 
18 
Trigger-Happy 
289 
Magic 
20, 274 
Reels 
221, 304 
Sword in the Waterfall 
56 
Trophies 
314 
Magic (Ascension Tree) 
296 
Reflex 
288 
Sword of the Father 
207, 287 
Tune-up, Shmune-up 
122 
Magic (Attribute) 
25 
Regalia 
13, 32 
Sword of the Tall 
186, 207. 286 
Tutorial 
10 
Magic Flasks 
222, 274 
Regalia Type-F 
155 
Sword of the Wise 
207, 286 
Two-handed Sword 
203 
Main Gauches 
205 
Regenerate 
288 
Swords (Weapon Type) 
202 
Ulric's Kukris 
205 
Main Quest 
10, 31 
Regroup 
289 
Swords of the Wanderer 
207, 287 
Ultima Blade 
202 
Malacchi Pond 
306 
Reliable Royalty 
152 
Sylvester's Map Pieces 
126 
Umbra 
87 
Malmalam Thicket 
189 
Rent-a-Bird 
33. 166 
Symbol of the Peace 
172 
Unlucky Driver 
120 
Map 
14 
Rescue Sidequests 
114 
Tails Spin 
162 
Up Close and Personal 
145 
Map Legend 
14, 30 
Rest Areas 
32 
Takka (Sidequests) 
150 
Upgraded Weapons 
148 
Mark 
289 
Restaurant 
15 
Talcott 
172 
Valiant 
205 
Masamune 
203 
Restaurant Meals 
210 
Teamwork (Ascension Tree) 
298 
Valiant II 
205 
Maxicast 
275 
Reunion and Recovery 
103 
Tech Bar 
12 
Van. Interrupted 
162 
Maximum HP 
24, 269 
Ring of the Lucii 
273 
Techniques 
22, 288 
Van, Interrupted !-\gain 
163 
Meals 
210 
Rise and Shine and Run 
145 
Techniques (Ascension Tree) 
297 
Vannath Coast 
306 
Menace Beneath Lucis 
192 
River Wennath 
306 
Tempest 
289 
Veenon's Grandson (Sidequests) 
162 
Mind the Trap 
162 
Roadside Assistance 
121 
Tenebrae 
94 
Vegging Out 
163 
Mini-Games 
309 
Rock of Ravatogh 
190 
That Brand-New Car Smell 
123 
Vehicle Vexation 
125 
Mini-Map 
12. 14, 31 
Rods 
221. 304 
The Archaean 
60 
Venom Fang 
288 
Misfire 
275 
Roll-Dodge 
16, 292 
The Aspiring Artisan 
153 
Venomcast 
275 
Monster Directory 
230 
Royal Arms 
207, 285, 286 
The Chopping Block 
145 
Vigilantes 
205 
Mountains of Misfortune 
147 
Royal Guard 
289 
The Cursed Canvas 
161 
Vitality 
25 
Movement 
13, 31 
Royal Tombs 
176 
The Errand Prince 
40 
Vyv (Sidequests) 
160 
MP 
24, 270 
Rune Saber 
202 
The Ever Elegant Regalia 
155 
Vyv's Volcanic Inspiration 
160 
My Beloved Chariot 
124 
Sagefire 
289 
The Ever Gleaming Regalia 
154 
Wager 
310 
Myrlwood 
188 
Sania (Sidequests) 
156 
The Ever Illustrious Regalia 
155 
Wait Mode 
23 
Myrlwood Falls 
306 
Saving 
10 
The Ever Regal Regalia 
155 
Waiting for Help 
120 
Mythril Knives 
204 
Savior of the Species 
168 
The Ever Valorous Regalia 
154 
Walkthrough (Chapter) 
28 
Mythril Lance 
204 
Scared and Lonely 
119 
The Faint of Heart 
117 
War Sword 
203 
Mythril Pistol 
205 
Scared and Stranded 
115 
The Frogs of Legend 
157 
Warp 
17 
Navyth (Sidequests) 
158 
Navyth's Challenge 
158 
Scenic Delivery 
151 
Scepter of the Pious 
189, 207, 286 
The Hallqwed Hill of 
145 
Hammerhead 
Warp-Kill 
16 
Warp-Strike 
19, 284 
Neeglyss Pond 
306 
Scintilla 
288 
The Hand of the King 
89 
Washed Away 
147 
New to the Road 
122 
No Pain. No Gem 
152 
Scraps of Mystery 
126 
Scraps of Mystery I 
126 
The Hexatheon's Blessing 
64 
The Imperial Capital 
96 
Weaknesses/Resistances 
25, 233 
(Enemies) 
No Turning Back 
95 
Scraps of Mystery II 
126 
The Jolly Joyrider 
122 
Weapons 
202 
Noiseblaster 
206 
Scraps of Mystery Ill 
126 
The Maidenwater 
306 
Weary and Wounded 
117 
Noiseblaster Plus 
207 
Scraps of Mystery IV 
127 
The Mutant Marauder 
37 
When You Believe 
114 
Not So Easy Anymore 
118 
Scraps of Mystery V 
127 
The Myrlwood 
188 
Where She Lived 
95 
Of Gods and Kings 
161 
Scraps of Mystery VI 
129 
The Pauper Prince 
36 
Where the Wild Chocobos Are 
169 
Off the Rails 
89 
Oh My Grease-Monkey Goddess! 
125 
Scraps of Mystery VII 
129 
Scraps of Mystery VIII 
128 
The Pen is Mightier than the 
160 
Sword 
Wild about Onions 
163 
Wild Beasts on the Open Road 
123 
On the Hunt for a Harvest 
162 
Scraps of Mystery IX 
128 
The Perfect Cup 
173 
Wiz (Sidequests) 
168 
One Tune-up Too Many 
121 
Scraps of Mystery X 
128 
The Perfect Landscape 
160 
Wizard Shield 
206 
On-screen Display 
12 
Scraps of Mystery XI 
131 
The Perpetual Passenger 
123 
Wondrous Weapon 
199 
Onward to the Disc 
60 
Scraps of Mystery XII 
130 
The Power of Kings 
44 
World Map 
318 
Oracle Ascension Coins 
222 
Scraps of Mystery XIII 
130 
The Professor's Protege 
156 
World of Ruin 
107 
Organyx 
205 
Orichalcum 
205 
Scraps of Mystery XIV 
130 
Search and Rescue 
115 
The Professor's Protege -
156 
Gigantoad 
Wracked with Anxiety 
116 
Wyvern Lance 
204 
Outfits 
214 
Secrets 
315 
The Professor's Protege - Griffon 
157 
X Marks the Spot 
130 
Outposts 
32 
Overwhelm 
289 
Shield of the Just 
207. 287 
Shields (Weapon Type) 
206 
The Professor's Protege -
157 
Myrlwood Firefly 
Zegnautus Keep 
100 
Ziedrich 
206 
Paint Pigment 
218 
Shock Drop 
288 
The Professor's Proteae - Wwern 
156 
Zwill Crossblades 
205 
Palnable Pain 
114 
Shop Tvpes 
15 

CREDITS 
The Complete Official Guide to Final Fantasy XV 
is a Piggyback Interactive Limited production. 
Piggyback 
Publishers: 
Louie Beatty, Vincent Pargney 
Project Directors: 
Simone Dorn, Matthias Loges, Carsten Ostermann 
Editorial Director: 
Mathieu Daujam 
Editor: 
James Price 
Co-Author: 
Tony Gao 
Support: 
Hirofumi Yamada, David Schunk 
logistics: 
Angela Kosik 
Art Directors: 
Jeanette Killmann & Martin C. Schneider @ Glorienschein 
Designers: 
Christian Runkel, Christian Schmal 
English Version 
Sub-Editing: 
I Maura Sutton 
French Version 
Editors: 
Claude-Olivier Eli ~a be , Mathieu Daujam 
German Version 
Editor: 
Klaus-Dieter Hartwig 
Sub-Editing: 
Dagny Hildebrandt, Barbara Bode 
Italian Version 
Editor: 
Synthesis Global Solutions SA 
Localization Manager: 
Marco Auletta 
Spanish Version 
Editor: 
Synthesis Iberia SL 
Localization Manager: 
Gus Dfaz 
Preprint 
Tino Bordusa, Dietmar Bormann, Nicole Hannowsky, Ilse Huttner, Anke Mattke, 
Ralf Muller-Hensmann, Petra Reidath, Stefan Reiter, Arwed Scibba, Torsten Wedemeier, 
Katja Wolf (AlsterWerk) 
Important: 
Piggyback Interactive Limited has made every effort to determine that the information contained in this book 
is accurate. However, the publisher makes no warranty, either expressed or implied, as to the accuracy, 
effectiveness, or completeness of the material in this book; nor does the publisher assume liability for 
damages. either incidental or consequential that may result from using the information in this book. The 
publisher cannot provide information regarding game play, hints and strategies. or problems with hardware 
or software. Questions should be directed to the support numbers provided by the game and device 
manufacturers in their documentation. Some game tricks require precise timing and may require repeated 
attempts before the desired result is achieved. 
© 2016 Piggyback Interactive Limited. All rights reserved. 
Piggyback® is a registered trademark of Piggyback Interactive Limited. 
PIGGYBACK.COM and the Piggyback logo are trademarks of Piggyback Interactive Limited. 
© 2016 SQUARE ENIX CO .. LTD. All Rights Reserved. MAIN CHARACTER DESIGN: TETSUYA NOMURA 
FINAL FANTASY. SQUARE ENIX and the SQUARE ENIX logo are registered trademarks or trademarks of 
Square Enix Holdings Co .. Ltd. 
Thank you for your dedicated support throughout, your five-star 
welcome d.uring our stay in Tokyo, as well as your contributions. 
SQUARE ENIX CO., LTD 
Hajime Tabata 
Akio Ofuji 
Yasuaki Nasu 
Kenichi Shida 
Tomohiro Hasegawa 
Chinatsu Kobayashi 
Kenichiro Yuji 
Takatsugu Nakazawa 
Saari ltamuro 
Kazuya Takahashi 
Yayoi Hattori 
Kazuki Sato 
Hirota Nishi 
Prasert "Sun" Prasertvithayakarn 
Shau lgarashi 
Tomonori Ishikawa 
Junichi Miyajima 
Seiji Nanase 
Masashi Takizawa 
Tsukasa Toya 
Woonchang Sung 
Takayuki Kanbayashi 
Kunio Ikeda 
Shinichiro Naito 
SQUARE ENIX, INC. 
Yutaka Sano 
Lila Shin 
Loren Petty 
SQUARE ENIX EUROPE 
Adrian Arnese 
Mike Adebayo 
Alex Moresby 
Yuko Tomizawa 
Stephanie Journau 
Australian warranty statement: 
Shinji lwase 
Norihito Ueno 
Yusuke Naora 
lsamu Kamikokuryo 
Chihiro Hashi 
Yuuki Matsuzawa 
Takashi Honjo 
Yuusaku Nakaaki 
Mizushi Sugawara 
Yasuyuki Matsunami 
Takahiro Ito 
Masanori Sato 
Ken Kawashima 
Haruka Usui 
Hiroko Gunji 
Kiyotaka Katsuki 
Yasushi lwasaka 
Shintaro Minamino 
Kazutaka Kurosaka 
Yumi Katsuyama 
Kakuko Obinata 
Yoshinobu Okushi 
Tatsuya Ikeda 
... and all the FFXV Development Team 
Steven Rodriguez 
Jeremy Wong 
Emma Featherstone 
Janet Swallow 
Amit Chokshi 
Thalya Merican 
This product comes with guarantees that cannot be excluded under the Australian Consumer Law. You 
are entitled to a replacement or refund for a major failure and for compensation for any other reasonably 
foreseeable loss or damage. You are also entitled to have the goods repaired or replaced if the goods fail to 
be of acceptable quality and the failure does not amount to a major failure. 
This product comes with a 1 year warranty from date of purchase. Defects in the product must have 
appeared within 1-year. from date of purchase in order to claim the warranty. 
All warranty claims must be facilitated back through the retailer of purchase, in accordance with the retailer's 
returns policies and procedures. Any cost incurred, as a result of returning the product to the retailer of 
purchase - are the full responsibility of the consumer. 
Printed in the United States of America. 
978-1-908172-98-3 
978-1-911015-20-8 
978-1-908172-99-0 


THE ULTIMA GUIDE 
"I sincerely hold the Piggyback team's work in high regard and 
have come to see this guide as an exceptional piece of work, 
being the perfect partner for adventurers everywhere. " 
TOTALLY COMPREHENSIVE 
Hajime Tabata 
Director, Final Fantasy XV \ 
0>--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~;:;;.--i: 
All secrets, bonuses, rewards, collectible items, hidden parameters, 
Trophies and Achievements ... you won't miss a thing. 
ALL-IN-ONE VISUAL SOLUTIONS 
0>~~~~~~~~~~~~~~--' 
At-a-glance annotated maps and screenshots lead you through every 
moment of the adventure. We don't just guide you; we show you. 
MAXIMUM FLEXIBILITY 
0>--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
Our Walkthrough chapter holds all the keys to optimal progression: 
visuals, collectibles, sidequest call-outs, checklists, monster 
analysis ... and much more. Tailor your experience to suit your needs. 
ALL GAME SYSTEMS DECODED 
0»--~~~~~~~~~~----. 
Character development, combat maneuvers, weapons, 
abilities, skills, damage output, unlockables - all fully 
analyzed and documented by our experts. 
.. -
0 l 00% COMPLETE 
""~.., .. 
MAIN MISSIONS, SIDEQUESTS AND OPTIONAL CHALLENGES -
ALL STREAMLINED FOR l 00% COMPLETION! 
, ~~~ 
',\;_)g~' 
~~gf~·& 
POSTER INSIDE 
~ ....... 
:~· 
INCLUDES A MAP POSTER 
._:$' 
COVERING THE MASSIVE 
... 
GAME AREA! 
ISBN 978-1-908172-99-0 
ll§§ u.s $24.99 HI CAN. $32.99 
• ~~1J~1J~ 1J1J~m 1~1~1~1111111 • uu uu 0 
piggyback• 
~.., .. _. .... _,_., 
,- --
a~
_.,_ ...... --
·-
...-..... -.... -
.. 
~ ... ,#,._,..._ 
:.:....-.. --....... -~·---· 
§~£:1if:~ 
.......... ___ ................. ---·-
·~-....... 
-~--·llff•-" ... 
~~.1'1>"~!<.~\~- ---
- -· --
==~~:.:~:.? 
;:-=:Er:r~-::~t:~ ·-
11..-..... -~ ... .;o<flo_,...,. 

