
FINANCIAL REPORTING 
& ANALYSIS
Lawrence Revsine
Late of Northwestern University
Daniel W. Collins
Henry B. Tippie Research 
Chair in Accounting
Tippie College of Business
The University of Iowa
W. Bruce Johnson
Sidney G. Winter 
Professor of Accounting
Tippie College of Business
The University of Iowa
H. Fred Mittelstaedt
Deloitte Foundation 
Professor of Accountancy
Mendoza College of Business
University of Notre Dame
Leonard C. Soffer
Clinical Professor of Accounting
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
6
th
EDITION

FINANCIAL REPORTING & ANALYSIS
Published by McGraw-Hill Education, 2 Penn Plaza, New York, NY 10121. Copyright © 2015 by 
McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. Previous editions 
© 2012, 2009, and 2005. No part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by 
any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written consent of McGraw-Hill 
Education, including, but not limited to, in any network or other electronic storage or transmission, or 
broadcast for distance learning.
Some ancillaries, including electronic and print components, may not be available to customers outside 
the United States.
This book is printed on acid-free paper. 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 DOW/DOW 1 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 
ISBN 978-0-07-802567-9
MHID 0-07-802567-2
Senior Vice President, Products & Markets: Kurt L. Strand
Vice President, General Manager, Products & Markets: Martin J. Lange 
Content Production & Technology Services: Kimberly Meriwether David
Managing Director: Tim Vertovec
Brand Manager: James Heine
Director of Development: Ann Torbert
Development Editor: Gail Korosa
Marketing Manager: Kathleen Klehr
Director, Content Production: Terri Schiesl
Content Project Manager: Lisa Bruflodt
Buyer: Jennifer Pickel
Media Project Manager: Shawn Coenen
Cover Designer: Studio Montage, St. Louis, MO.
Cover Image: © Tetra Images/Getty
Compositor: Aptara®, Inc.
Typeface: 10/13.5 Times
Printer: R. R. Donnelley
All credits appearing on page or at the end of the book are considered to be an extension of the 
copyright page.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Revsine, Lawrence.
Financial reporting & analysis / Lawrence Revsine [and three others]. —6th edition.
   pages cm
   ISBN 978-0-07-802567-9 (alk. paper)
  1. Financial statements. 2. Financial statements—Case studies. 
  3. Corporations—Accounting.
  I. Title. II. Title: Financial reporting and analysis.
 HF5681.B2R398 2015
 657'.3—dc23
 
2013050959
The Internet addresses listed in the text were accurate at the time of publication. The inclusion of a 
website does not indicate an endorsement by the authors or McGraw-Hill Education, and McGraw-Hill 
Education does not guarantee the accuracy of the information presented at these sites.
www.mhhe.com

The authors dedicate this work to:
Daniel W. Collins—Melissa, Theresa, Ann, and my late wife, Mary
W. Bruce Johnson—Diane and Cory
H. Fred Mittelstaedt—Laura and Grace
Leonard C. Soffer—Robin, Michael & Rachelli, Andy, and Leah

iv
Lawrence Revsine
At the time of his passing in 2007, Lawrence Revsine was the John and Norma Darling Dis-
tinguished Professor of Financial Accounting, Kellogg Graduate School of Management, 
Northwestern University. A graduate of Northwestern University, he joined its accounting 
faculty in 1971.
 
Larry was a leading authority on various financial reporting issues and published more 
than 50 articles in top academic journals. He was a consultant to the American Institute of 
Certified Public Accountants, the Securities and Exchange Commission, and the Financial 
Accounting Standards Board and served on the Financial Accounting Standards Advisory 
Council. He was also a consultant to industry on external reporting issues and regulatory cases 
and taught extensively in management development and continuing education programs in the 
United States and abroad.
 
Larry was a master at making accounting come alive in the classroom. He had an un-
common knack for creating a sense of mystery and excitement about seemingly mundane 
accounting topics. Each class had a clear message that Larry delivered with great energy 
and enthusiasm. And each class was sprinkled with anecdotes conveyed with an element of 
wit that only Larry could pull off. It was his deep understanding of the subject matter and 
his dynamic delivery that endeared him to so many Kellogg students over the years. 
Among the many awards he received for teaching excellence are: the American Account-
ing Association’s Outstanding Educator Award; the Illinois CPA Society’s Outstanding 
Educator Award; the Sidney J. Levy Teaching Award, presented by the Kellogg Dean’s 
Office; and the 1995 Reunion Class Alumni Choice Faculty Award, given to the Kellogg 
faculty member who has had the greatest impact on the professional and personal lives of 
Kellogg alums.
 
Larry was passionate about changing the way financial accounting is taught, and he was 
the driving force behind this book. As you read this book, listen carefully and you will hear 
his voice echo from every page.
Daniel W. Collins
Henry B. Tippie Research Chair in Accounting, Tippie College of Business, The University of 
Iowa; BBA 1968, Ph.D. 1973, The University of Iowa
Professor Collins was the recipient of the University of Iowa Board of Regents Award for 
Faculty Excellence in 2000 and the American Accounting Association (AAA) Outstanding 
Educator Award in 2001. His research focuses on the role of accounting numbers in equity 
valuation, earnings management, and the relation between firms’ corporate governance 
 mechanisms and cost of equity and debt financing. A frequent contributor to the top academic 
accounting journals, he has been recognized as one of the top 10 most highly cited authors in 
the accounting literature over the past 20 years.
About the Authors

 
About the Authors 
v
 
Professor Collins has served on the editorial review boards of the Journal of Accounting 
Research and the Journal of Accounting and Economics. He has also served as associate edi-
tor of The Accounting Review and as director of publications for the AAA. Professor Collins 
has served on numerous AAA committees including the Financial Accounting Standards 
Committee and has chaired the Publications Committee, the National Program Committee, 
and the Doctoral Consortium Committee. He also served on the Financial Accounting Stan-
dards Advisory Council.
 
A member of the American Accounting Association, Professor Collins is a frequent 
 presenter at research colloquia, conferences, and doctoral consortia in the United States, 
 Australia, and Europe. He has also received outstanding teaching awards at both Michigan 
State University and The University of Iowa.
W. Bruce Johnson
Sidney G. Winter Professor of Accounting, Tippie College of Business, The University of Iowa; 
BS 1970, University of Oregon, MS 1973, Ph.D. 1975, The Ohio State University
W. Bruce Johnson joined the University of Iowa faculty in 1988 and has served as director of 
its McGladrey Institute for Accounting Education and Research, accounting group chairman, 
and associate dean for graduate programs. In the latter position, he was responsible for Iowa’s 
MBA and Executive MBA programs.
 
Professor Johnson previously held faculty appointments at the University of Wisconsin, 
Northwestern University, the University of Chicago, and the China European International 
Business School (CEIBS).
 
His teaching and research interests include corporate financial reporting, financial analysis, 
value-driven management systems and investment strategies, executive compensation prac-
tices, and forensic accounting. He received the Gilbert P. Maynard Award for Excellence in 
Accounting Instruction and the Chester A. Phillips Outstanding Professor Award.
 
A well-respected author, Professor Johnson’s articles have appeared in numerous schol-
arly publications and in academic and professional journals. He has served on the editorial 
boards of several academic journals and as a litigation consultant on financial reporting mat-
ters. He is a former member of the Financial Reporting Executive Committee (FinREC) of 
the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants and past president of the Financial 
Reporting and Accounting Section (FARS) of the American Accounting Association (AAA). 
He has also served as a research consultant to the Financial Accounting Standards Board and 
on the Research Advisory, Professional Practice Quality, and Outstanding Educator commit-
tees of the AAA. He is a member of the AAA and Financial Executives International. He was 
formerly senior vice president for Equity Strategy at SCI Capital Management, a money 
management firm.
H. Fred Mittelstaedt
Deloitte Foundation Professor of Accountancy, Mendoza College of Business, University of 
Notre Dame; BS 1979, MS 1982, Illinois State University, Ph.D. 1987, University of Illinois
Fred Mittelstaedt joined the University of Notre Dame faculty in 1992. He has served as the 
Department of Accountancy chairman since 2007. Prior to coming to Notre Dame, he held a 
faculty appointment at Arizona State University.
 
Professor Mittelstaedt has taught financial reporting courses to undergraduates, masters in 
accountancy students, MBAs, and Executive MBAs. While at Notre Dame, he has received 

vi 
About the Authors
the Kaneb Undergraduate Teaching Award and the Arnie Ludwig Executive MBA Outstand-
ing Teacher Award.
 
His research focuses on financial reporting and retirement benefit issues and has been 
 published in the Journal of Accounting and Economics, The Accounting Review, Review of 
Accounting Studies, the Journal of Pension Economics and Finance, and several other 
 accounting and finance journals. He is a reviewer for numerous academic journals and has 
served on the Editorial Advisory and Review Board for The Accounting Review. In addition, 
he has testified on retiree health benefit issues before the U.S. House of Representatives 
 Committee on Education and the Workforce.
 
Professor Mittelstaedt is a past president of the Federation of Schools of Accountancy and 
is a member of the American Accounting Association and the American Institute of Certified 
Public Accountants. Prior to joining academia, he was an auditor with Price Waterhouse & 
Co. and received an Elijah Watt Sells Award for exceptional performance on the May 1980 
Uniform CPA Exam.
Leonard C. Soffer
Clinical Professor of Accounting, Booth School of Business, The University of Chicago; BS 
1977, University of Illinois at Urbana, MBA 1981, Kellogg School of Management, North-
western University, Ph.D. 1991, University of California at Berkeley.
Leonard Soffer rejoined the faculty of the University of Chicago in 2007. He was previously 
an Associate Professor of Accounting and Associate Dean of the Honors College at the Uni-
versity of Illinois at Chicago, where he was named the Accounting Professor of the Year. He 
also has served on the faculty of Northwestern University’s Kellogg School of Management.
 
Professor Soffer has taught financial reporting, managerial accounting, and corporate valu-
ation courses to both MBAs and Executive MBAs. He previously taught the consolidations 
and foreign currency translation modules of a nationally recognized CPA review course. He 
also teaches a financial reporting course to executive education students.
 
Professor Soffer’s research focuses on the use of accounting information and analyst 
reports, particularly in the context of corporate valuation. His research has been published 
in The Journal of Accounting Research, The Review of Accounting Studies, Contemporary 
Accounting Research, Accounting Horizons, Managerial Finance, and The Review of 
 Accounting and Finance. He is a co-author of the book Financial Statement Analysis: A 
Valuation Approach.
 
Professor Soffer is a member of the American Accounting Association, The American In-
stitute of Certified Public Accountants, and the Illinois CPA Society. He served for 12 years 
on the Accounting Principles Committee of the Illinois CPA Society, and chaired or co-
chaired the committee for three years. Before entering academia, Professor Soffer worked in 
accounting and finance positions, most recently in the Mergers and Acquisitions group of 
USG Corporation. He was a winner of the prestigious Elijah Watt Sells Award for his perfor-
mance on the Uniform CPA Exam.

vii
O
ne of our objectives in writing this book is to help students become skilled preparers 
and informed consumers of financial statement information. The financial reporting 
environment today is particularly challenging. Accountants, auditors, and financial 
analysts must not only know the reporting practices that apply in the United States (U.S. 
GAAP), they must also be aware of the practices allowed in other countries under 
 International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). Adding to this challenge is the fact that 
the  Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) and its global counterpart—the Interna-
tional Accounting Standards Board (IASB)—have issued in the past few years an unprece-
dented number of proposed new standards intended to improve financial reporting practices 
worldwide and to achieve convergence of U.S. GAAP and IFRS. These proposed new stan-
dards will change in fundamental ways when revenue is recognized, how certain assets and 
liabilities are  measured, and how information is presented in financial statements. We believe 
it is essential for students not only to comprehend the key similarities and differences between 
current U.S. GAAP and IFRS, but also to grasp the significant changes to those standards that 
are on the horizon.
 
Our other objective in writing this book is to change the way the second-level course in fi-
nancial accounting is taught, both to graduate and undergraduate students. Typically this 
course—often called Intermediate Accounting—focuses on the details of GAAP with little em-
phasis placed on understanding the economics of business transactions or how financial state-
ment readers use the resultant numbers for decision making. Traditional intermediate 
accounting texts are encyclopedic in nature and approach, lack a unifying theme, and empha-
size the myriad of intricate accounting rules and procedures that could soon become outdated 
by new standards.
 
In contrast, we wrote Financial Reporting & Analysis, Sixth Edition, to foster a “critical 
thinking” approach to learning the subject matter. Our approach develops students’ understand-
ing of the environment in which financial reporting choices are made, what the options are, 
how accounting information is used for various types of decisions, and how to avoid misusing 
financial statement data. We convey the exciting nature of financial reporting in two stages. 
First, we provide a framework for understanding management’s accounting choices, the effect 
those choices have on the reported numbers, and how financial statement information is used in 
valuation and contracting. Business contracts, such as loan agreements and management com-
pensation agreements, are often linked to accounting numbers. We show how this practice cre-
ates incentives for managers to exploit the flexibility in financial reporting standards to 
“manage” the reported accounting numbers to benefit themselves or shareholders. Second, we 
integrate current real-world financial statements and events into our discussions to illustrate 
vividly how financial reporting alternatives and subjective accounting estimates give managers 
discretion in the timing of earnings and in reporting the components of financial position. We 
believe this approach—which focuses on the fundamental measurement and reporting issues 
that arise from both simple and complex business transactions, and how financial statements 
are used for decision making—better prepares students to adapt as business transactions and 
accounting standards continue to evolve.
 
An important feature of our approach is that it integrates the perspectives of accounting, 
corporate finance, economics, and critical analysis to help students grasp how business transac-
tions get reported and understand the decision implications of financial statement numbers. We 
Preface

viii 
Preface
cover all of the core topics of intermediate accounting as well as several topics often found in 
advanced accounting courses, such as consolidations, joint venture accounting, and foreign cur-
rency translation. For each topic, we describe the underlying business transaction, the GAAP 
guidelines that apply, how the guidelines are implemented in practice, and how the financial 
statements are affected. We then go a step further and ask: What do the reported numbers mean? 
Does the accounting process yield numbers that faithfully present the underlying economic 
situation of a company? And, if not, what can financial statement users do to overcome this 
limitation in order to make more informed decisions? A Global Vantage Point discussion then 
summarizes the key similarities and differences between U.S. GAAP and IFRS, and previews 
potential changes to both.
 
Our book is aimed not only at those charged with the responsibility for preparing financial 
statements, but also those who will use financial statements for making decisions. Our defini-
tion of financial statement “users” is broad and includes lenders, equity analysts, investment 
bankers, boards of directors, and others charged with monitoring corporate performance and 
the behavior of management. As such, it includes auditors who establish audit scope and con-
duct analytical review procedures to spot problem areas in external financial statements. To be 
effective, auditors must understand the incentives of managers, how the flexibility of U.S. 
GAAP and IFRS accounting guidance can be exploited to conceal rather than reveal underlying 
economics, and the potential danger signals that should be investigated. Our intent is to help 
financial statement readers learn how to perform better audits, improve cash flow forecasts, 
undertake realistic valuations, conduct better comparative analyses, and make more informed 
evaluations of management.
 
Financial Reporting & Analysis, Sixth Edition, provides instructors with a teaching/learning 
approach for achieving goals stressed by professional accountants and analysts. Our book is  de-
signed to instill capacities for thinking in an abstract, logical manner; solving unstructured prob-
lems; understanding the determining forces behind management accounting choices; and instilling 
an integrated, cross-disciplinary view of financial reporting. Text discussions are written, and 
exercises, problems, and cases are carefully chosen, to help achieve these objectives without sac-
rificing technical underpinnings. Throughout, we explain in detail the source of the numbers, the 
measurement methods used, and how transactions are recorded and presented. We have strived to 
provide a comprehensive user-oriented focus while simultaneously helping students build a strong 
technical foundation.
Key Changes in the Sixth Edition
The first five editions of our book have been widely adopted in business schools throughout the 
United States, Canada, Europe, and the Pacific Rim. Our book has been used successfully at both 
the graduate and undergraduate levels, and in investment banking, commercial lending, and other 
corporate training programs. Many of our colleagues who used the first five editions have pro-
vided us with valuable feedback. Based on their input, we have made a number of changes in this 
edition of the book to achieve more effectively the objectives outlined above. Key changes 
 include the following:
• Updated Global Vantage Point sections
 
• Identify key differences between U.S. GAAP and IFRS.
 
• Discuss financial statement excerpts of companies that follow IFRS.
 
•  Summarize proposed new accounting standards issued by the FASB and/or the IASB as 
part of their convergence project.
• Incorporation of all FASB and IASB standards, exposure drafts, and discussion papers re-
leased through July 2013.
• New Chapter 5 appendix on Segment Reporting.
• New or updated company examples throughout the book.
• New and revised end-of-chapter materials including exercises, problems, and cases tied to 
Global Vantage Points or to proposed new FASB and IASB standards.

 
Preface 
ix
Chapter Revision Highlights
Chapter 1: The Economic and Institutional Setting for 
 Financial Reporting
• Streamlined discussion of how and why international 
 accounting standards are developed.
• Explanation of the FASB Accounting Standards Codifica-
tionTM project.
• Expanded description of the FASB Conceptual Framework.
Chapter 2: Accrual Accounting and Income Determination
• Revised discussion of alternative formats for presenting 
comprehensive income.
• Revised Global Vantage section that highlights key 
 differences between other comprehensive income (OCI) 
components under IFRS versus U.S. GAAP.
• Updated exhibits from company reports throughout the 
chapter.
• Updated data displays on transitory earnings components 
(special or unusual items, discontinued operations, and 
 extraordinary items).
Chapter 3: Additional Topics in Income Determination
• Revised Global Vantage Point section that discusses key 
 differences between IFRS and U.S. GAAP on revenue 
 recognition with examples.
• New discussion of FASB/IASB recent proposals on revenue 
recognition.
• Updated exhibits from company reports throughout the chapter.
Chapter 4: Structure of the Balance Sheet and Statement of 
Cash Flows
• Revised Global Vantage section that highlights key differ-
ences in where certain transactions are reported on the cash 
flow statement under IFRS versus U.S. GAAP.
• New problem material on IFRS versus U.S. GAAP cash flow 
statement items.
• Updated exhibits from company reports throughout the 
chapter.
Chapter 5: Essentials of Financial Statement Analysis
• Added new discussion of cause-of-change analysis.
• Updated exhibits from company reports throughout the 
chapter.
• Moved discussion of bankruptcy prediction models from 
 appendix to chapter itself.
• Added new appendix on Segment Reporting.
Chapter 6: The Role of Financial Information in Valuation 
and Credit Risk Assessment
• Updated existing exhibits from company reports throughout 
the chapter.
Chapter 7: The Role of Financial Information in Contracting
• Updated examples throughout the chapter.
Chapter 8: Receivables
• Updated the Global Vantage Point section on IFRS similarities 
and differences, and the implications of the FASB Exposure 
Draft on Financial Instruments.
• Revised discussion on bad debt expense to be consistent with 
proposed ASU on Revenue Recognition.
• Introduced a new allowance for doubtful accounts analysis 
using Krispy Kreme.
• Updated the troubled debt restructuring discussion regarding 
what constitutes financial difficulties and concession under 
ASU 2011-02.
• Updated existing company examples throughout the chapter.
Chapter 9: Inventories
• Updated Global Vantage Point section on the differences 
between U.S. GAAP and IFRS and added new case 
materials.
• Updated inventory method and LIFO reserve statistics.
• Provided new examples of inventory write-offs and fraud.
• Added Whole Foods inventory disclosures to tie to Chapter 5 
discussions.
Chapter 10: Long-Lived Assets
• Updated and expanded Global Vantage Point section on the 
differences between U.S. GAAP and IFRS.
• Expanded discussion of conceptual underpinnings of 
 accounting for long-lived assets.
• New impairment example using Krispy Kreme.
• Streamlined discussion of difficulties associated with analyzing 
historical cost financial statements.
• New Whole Foods example to tie to Chapter 5 examples.
• Added and updated new problems and cases.
• Updated web appendix on current value accounting for IFRS 
issues; available on www.mhhe.com/revsine6e.
Chapter 11: Financial Instruments as Liabilities
• Updated Global Vantage Point sections on IFRS guidance 
for liability presentation, long-term debt, hedge accounting, 
and contingent liabilities.
• New section on loan guarantees and ASC 460.
Chapter 12: Financial Reporting for Leases
• Updated Global Vantage Point section on the differences 
 between U.S. GAAP and IFRS and the Exposure Drafts 
jointly developed by the FASB and the IASB.
• Updated comparison of operating and capital lease obligations 
by industry.
• New Whole Foods example for illustrating constructive capi-
talization to tie to Chapter 5 examples.
• Added and updated problems and cases tied to FASB/IASB 
Exposure Draft and existing IFRS.

x 
Preface
Chapter 13: Income Tax Reporting
• Added discussion of how the Patient Protection and Afford-
able Care Act affected many companies’ deferred tax assets 
and resulted in earnings charges when the law was enacted.
• Added explanation of why deferred tax positions for a 
company never reverse even though individual items do 
reverse.
• Added discussion of deferred taxes and the cash flow 
statement.
• Updated exhibits from company reports throughout the 
chapter.
Chapter 14: Pensions and Postretirement Benefits
• Updated Global Vantage Point section on differences 
 between U.S. GAAP and IFRS.
• Added new diagram of pension relationships.
• Updated and redesigned presention of statistics on plan 
 assets by plan type, assumptions, and funded status.
• Revised analysis for GE by using 2012 information.
• Added discussion of immediate recognition of actuarial 
gains.
• Added new problems and cases.
Chapter 15: Financial Reporting for Owners’ Equity
• New section on convertible debt that may be settled in cash.
• Added new examples and updated existing examples of 
 company disclosures.
• Additional problem material on distinguishing equity from 
debt transactions.
Chapter 16: Intercorporate Equity Investments
• Reorganized material on debt investments so that it all 
 appears together in the appendix.
• Reorganized material on purchase and pooling of interests 
methods so they appear together in the chapter itself.
• Updated exhibits from company reports throughout the 
chapter.
Chapter 17: Statement of Cash Flows
• Added appendix showing a simple way to use Excel to 
 derive cash flow statements.
• Updated exhibits from company reports throughout the 
chapter.
Appendix: Time Value of Money
• Added discussion of Excel.
Stephen Brown, University of Maryland- 
College Park
Doug De Vidal, University of Texas at Austin
Barbara Durham, University of Central 
Florida-Orlando
Coby Harmon, University of California-
Santa Barbara
Richard Houston, University of 
Alabama-Tuscaloosa
Frimette Kass-Schraibman, Brooklyn College
Adam Koch, University of Virginia
Bradley Lail, Nc State University-Raleigh
Kathryn Maxwell (Cordova), University 
of Arizona
Kevin Melendrez, New Mexico State 
University-Las Cruces
Brian Nagle, Duquesne University
Ramesh Narasimhan, Montclair State University
Sia Nassiripour, William Paterson University
Keith Patterson, Brigham Young 
University-Idaho
Bonita Peterson-Kramer, Montana State 
University-Bozeman
Maryann Prater, Clemson University
Atul Rai, Wichita State University
Eric Rothenburg, Kingsborough Community 
College
Lynn Saubert, Radford University
Mike Slaugbaugh, Indiana University/Purdue 
University-Ft Wayne
Sheldon Smith, Utah Valley University Orem
Robin Thomas, Nc State University-Raleigh
Terry Tranter, University of Minnesota-
Minneapolis
Acknowledgments
Colleagues at Iowa, Northwestern, and Notre Dame, as well other universities, have served as 
sounding boards on a wide range of issues over the past years, shared insights, and provided many 
helpful comments. Their input helped us improve this book. In particular, we thank: Jim Boatsman,  
Arizona State University; Brad Badertscher, Tom Frecka, Chao-Shin Liu, Bill Nichols, and Tom 
Stober, University of Notre Dame; Cristi Gleason and Ryan Wilson, University of Iowa; Tom 
 Linsmeier, the Financial Accounting Standards Board; Larry Tomassini, The Ohio State University; 
Robert Lipe, University of Oklahoma; Don Nichols, Texas Christian University; Nicole Thibodeau, 
Willamette University; Paul Zarowin, New York University; and Stephen Zeff, Rice University.
 
We wish to thank the following professors who assisted in the Sixth Edition’s development:

 
Preface 
xi
Robert Trezevant, University of Southern 
California
Marcia R. Veit, University of Central 
Florida-Orlando
Kenton Walker, University of 
Wyoming—Laramie
Mike Wilkins, Texas A & M University
Michael Wilson, Metropolitan State 
University
Jennifer Winchel, University of South 
Carolina
We are particularly grateful to Ilene Persoff, Long Island University/CW Post Campus, for her 
careful technical and editorial review of the manuscript, Solutions Manual, and Test Bank for the 
Sixth edition. Her insightful comments challenged our thinking and contributed to a much im-
proved new edition.
Lester Barenbaum, La Salle University
Gerhard Barone, Gonzaga University
John Bildersee, New York University
Sharon Borowicz, Benedictine University
John Brennan, Georgia State University
Philip Brown, Harding University
Shelly L. Canterbury, George Mason 
University
Jeffrey Decker, University of 
Illinois—Springfield
Ilia Dichev, Emory University
Timothy P. Dimond, Northern Illinois 
University
Joseph M. Donato, Thomas College
Michael T. Dugan, University of Alabama
David O. Fricke, University of North 
Carolina—Pembroke
Michael J. Gallagher, Defiance College
Lisa Gillespie, Loyola University—Chicago
Alan Glazer, Franklin and Marshall College
Cristi Gleason, University of Iowa—Iowa City
Patrick J. Griffin, Lewis University
Paul Griffin, University of California—Davis
Donald Henschel, Benedictine University
James Irving, College of William & Mary
Kurt Jesswein, Sam Houston State University
Gun Joh, San Diego State University—San 
Diego
J. William Kamas, University of Texas at 
Austin
Jocelyn Kauffunger, University of Pittsburgh
Robert Kemp, University of Virginia
Michael Kubik, Johns Hopkins University
Steve C. Lim, Texas Christian University
Chao-Shin Liu, University of Notre Dame
Don Loster, University of California—Santa 
Barbara
Troy Luh, Webster University
David Marcinko, Skidmore College
P. Michael McLain, Hampton University
Krish Menon, Boston University
Kyle S. Meyer, Florida State University
Stephen R. Moehrle, University of 
Missouri—St. Louis
Bruce Oliver, Rochester Institute of Technology
Erik Paulson, Dowling College
Chris Prestigiacomo, University of 
Missouri—Columbia
Richard Price, Rice University
Vernon Richardson, University of 
Arkansas—Fayetteville
Tom Rosengarth, Bridgewater College
Mike Sandretto, University of 
Illinois—Champaign
Paul Simko, University of 
Virginia—Charlottesville
Praveen Sinha, California State University at 
Long Beach
Greg Sommers, Southern Methodist 
University
Carolyn Spencer, Dowling College
Victor Stanton, University of 
California—Berkeley
Jack Stecher, Carnegie Mellon University
Thomas L. Stober, University of Notre Dame
Phillip Stocken, Dartmouth College
Ron Stunda, Birmingham Southern College
Kanaiyalal Sugandh, La Sierra University
Eric Sussman, University of California—Los 
Angeles
Nicole Thibodeau, Willamette University
Mark Trombley, University of Arizona
Suneel Udpa, University of California—
Berkeley
Clark Wheatley, Florida International 
University—Miami
Colbrin Wright, Central Michigan University
Christian Wurst, Temple 
University—Philadelphia
Paul Zarowin, New York University
We are grateful to the many users of prior editions whose constructive comments and suggestions 
have contributed to an improved Sixth Edition.

xii 
Preface
 
Alan Jagolinzer, University of Colorado—Boulder, provided invaluable help in updating many 
of the Global Vantage Point sections of the book and related end-of-chapter materials. We are 
grateful to him for his work on this edition.
 
We are grateful to our supplements contributors for the Sixth edition: Barbara Muller, Arizona 
State University, who prepared the Test Bank; Peter Theuri, Northern Kentucky University, who 
prepared the Instructor’s Manual; and Beth Woods, Accuracy Counts, who prepared the online 
quizzes and PowerPoints®.
 
We gratefully acknowledge the McGraw-Hill/Higher Education editorial and marketing teams 
for their  encouragement and support throughout the development of the Sixth edition of this book.
 
Our goal in writing this book was to improve the way financial reporting is taught and mastered. 
We would appreciate receiving your comments and suggestions.
—Daniel W. Collins
—W. Bruce Johnson
—H. Fred Mittelstaedt
—Leonard C. Soffer

xiii
Walkthrough
Chapter Objectives
Each chapter opens with a brief introduction and summary 
of learning objectives to set the stage for the goal of each 
chapter and prepare students for the key concepts and practices.
2
T
his chapter describes the key concepts and practices that govern the measurement 
of annual or quarterly income (or earnings) for financial reporting purposes. 
Income is the difference between revenues and expenses.1 The cornerstone of 
income measurement is accrual accounting. Under accrual accounting, revenues are 
recorded (recognized) in the period when they are “earned” and become “realized or 
realizable”—that is, when the seller has performed a service or conveyed an asset to a 
buyer, which entitles the seller to the benefits represented by the revenues, and the value to 
be received for that service or asset is reasonably assured and can be measured with a high 
degree of reliability.2 Revenues are considered realizable when the related assets received or 
held are readily convertible to known amounts of cash or claims to cash.3 Expenses are the 
expired costs or assets that are used up in producing those revenues. Expense recognition 
is tied to revenue recognition. Therefore, expenses are recorded in the same accounting 
period in which the revenues are recognized. The approach of tying expense recognition 
to revenue recognition is commonly referred to as the “matching principle.”
 
A natural consequence of accrual accounting is the decoupling of measured earnings 
from operating cash inflows and outflows. Reported revenues under accrual accounting 
generally do not correspond to cash receipts for the period; also, reported expenses gen-
erally do not correspond to cash outlays of the period. In fact, accrual accounting can 
produce large differences between the firm’s reported profit performance and the 
amount of cash generated from operations. Frequently, however, accrual accounting 
earnings provide a more accurate measure of the economic value added during the 
period than do operating cash flows.4
2
Accrual Accounting and 
Income Determination
1 In this text, we use the terms profit, earnings, and income interchangeably.
2 In “Elements of Financial Statements,” Statement of Financial Accounting Concepts (SFAC) No. 6, the Financial 
 Accounting Standards Board (FASB) defines revenues as “inflows or other enhancements of assets of an entity or settle-
ments of its liabilities (or a combination of both) from delivering or producing goods, rendering services, or other 
activities that constitute the entity’s ongoing major or central operations” (para. 78). Expenses are defined as “outflows or 
other using up of assets or incurrences of liabilities (or a combination of both) from delivering or producing goods, ren-
dering services, or carrying out other activities that constitute the entity’s ongoing major or central operations” (para. 80).
3 “Recognition and Measurement in Financial Statements of Business Enterprises,” Statement of Financial Accounting 
Concepts No. 5 (Stamford, CT: FASB, 1984), para. 83. Assets that are readily convertible to cash have both the follow-
ing characteristics: (a) interchangeable (fungible) units, and (b) quoted prices available in an active market that can 
rapidly absorb the quantity held by the entity without significantly affecting the price.
4 Economic value added represents the increase in the value of a product or service as a consequence of operating activi-
ties. To illustrate, the value of an assembled automobile far exceeds the value of its separate steel, glass, plastic, rubber, 
Chapter
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you 
will understand:
 1. The distinction between cash-basis 
versus accrual income and why 
 accrual-basis income generally is 
a better measure of operating 
performance.
 2. The criteria for revenue recognition 
under accrual accounting and how 
they are used in selected industries.
 3. The matching principle and how it is 
applied to recognize expenses under 
accrual accounting.
 4. The difference between product 
and period costs.
 5. The format and classifications for a 
multiple-step income statement and 
how the statement format is de-
signed to differentiate earnings com-
ponents that are more sustainable 
from those that are more transitory.
 6. The distinction between special and 
unusual items, discontinued opera-
tions, and extraordinary items.
 7. How to report a change in account-
ing principle, accounting estimate, 
and accounting entity.
 8. The distinction between basic and 
diluted earnings per share (EPS) and 
required EPS disclosures.
 9. What comprises comprehensive 
 income and how it is displayed in 
 financial statements.
 10. Other comprehensive income differ-
ences between IFRS and U.S. GAAP.
 11. The procedures for preparing 
fi
i l
d h
Boxed Readings
Sidebar margin boxes call out key concepts in each 
chapter and provide additional information to reinforce 
concepts.
News Clip boxes provide 
engaging news articles that 
capture real world financial 
reporting issues and 
controversies.
188 
CHAPTER 4
Structure of the Balance Sheet and Statement of Cash Flows
defaulting on required interest and principal payments (see Chapter 5 for further discus-
sion of capital structure ratios).
 
In addition to assessing the mix of debt versus equity financing, the balance sheet and 
 related notes to the financial statements provide information for evaluating the maturity 
structure of the various obligations within the liability section. This information is 
 critical to assessing the liquidity of an entity. Liquidity measures how readily assets can 
be converted to cash relative to how soon liabilities will have to be paid in cash. The bal-
ance sheet is the source of information for a variety of liquidity measures (detailed in 
Chapter 5) used by analysts and commercial loan officers to assess an entity’s 
creditworthiness.
 
In addition to the liquidity measures that focus on short-term cash inflows and cash needs, 
balance sheets provide information for assessing long-term solvency—a company’s ability to 
generate sufficient cash flows to maintain its productive capacity and still meet interest and 
principal payments on long-term debt. A company that cannot make debt payments when due 
is technically insolvent and may be forced to reorganize or liquidate.
 
Operating and financial flexibility refers to an entity’s ability to adjust to unexpected 
downturns in the economic environment in which it operates or to take advantage of profitable 
investment opportunities as they arise. Balance sheets provide information for making these 
assessments. A firm that has most of its assets invested in specialized manufacturing facilities 
(for example, a foundry) has limited ability to adjust to economic downturns and, thus, has 
limited operating flexibility. Similarly, a firm with minimal cash reserves and large amounts 
of high interest debt will have limited ability to take advantage of profitable investment op-
portunities that may arise
Maturity structure refers to 
how far into the future the 
obligations will come due.
As part of a joint effort with 
the IASB, the FASB re-
cently worked on a project 
on financial statement pre-
sentation that would require 
firms to use the term “state-
 
Why Financial Statements Are Important 
5
ACCOUNTING’S PERFECT STORM
WorldCom’s revelation in June 2002 that it improperly hid 
$3.8 billion in expenses during the previous five quarters, or 
longer, set a low-water mark in a tide of accounting scandals 
among many firms. One of every 10 companies listed on the 
U.S. stock exchanges (or 845 companies in total) found flaws 
in past financial statements and restated earnings between 
1997 and June 2002. Investors in those companies lost more 
than $100 billion when the restatements were announced. By 
comparison, only three companies restated earnings in 1981.
 
According to some observers, a confluence of events dur-
ing the late 1990s created a climate in which accounting fraud 
wasn’t just possible but was likely! This was accounting’s 
perfect storm: the conjunction of unprecedented economic 
growth with inordinate incentive compensation, an extremely 
aggressive management culture, investors preoccupied with 
quarterly profits, and lax auditors. At companies that didn’t 
make the Wall Street earnings number by even as little as a 
penny, the stock price tanked and put top management jobs at 
risk. Individually, some of these forces may have been good 
news. But when they all came together, it was a disaster wait-
ing to happen.
 
Congress responded to the almost daily onslaught of ac-
counting scandals by passing the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX) 
in late July 2002. This legislation was hailed as the most 
groundbreaking corporate reform since the 1934 Securities Act 
that, among other things, had established the Securities and 
Exchange Commission. Key provisions of SOX are intended 
to strengthen auditor independence and improve financial 
statement transparency by:
• Requiring the CEO and CFO to certify in writing that the 
numbers in their company’s fi nancial reports are correct. 
Executives face potential civil charges of fraud or criminal 
charges of lying to the government if their company’s num-
bers turn out to be bogus.
• Requiring each annual report of a public company to in-
clude a report by management on the company’s internal 
control over fi nancial reporting. Among other things, this 
report must disclose any material internal control weak-
nesses (i.e., defi ciencies that result in more than a remote 
likelihood that a material accounting misstatement will not 
be prevented or detected).
• Banning outside auditors from providing certain nonaudit 
 services—bookkeeping, fi nancial system work, appraisals, ac-
tuarial work, internal audits, management and human resource 
consulting, investment-advisory work, and the auditors’ other 
advocacy-related services—to their audit clients so that inde-
pendence is not compromised. Fees paid to auditors for ser-
vices must now be disclosed in the client’s annual report.
• Requiring public companies to disclose whether the audit 
committee—comprising outside directors and charged with 
oversight of the annual audit—has a fi nancial expert and if 
not, why not. Companies must also now reveal their off-
balance-sheet arrangements (see Chapters 8 and 11) and 
reconcile reported “pro forma” earnings (see Chapter 5) 
with the audited earnings number.
In the words of one observer, “Our free market system does 
not depend on executives being saintly or altruistic. But mar-
kets do rely on institutional mechanisms, such as auditing and 
independent boards, to offset opportunistic, not to mention il-
NEWS CLIP
Recap boxes provide students a summary of each section, 
reminding them of the key points of what they just covered in 
small doses to reinforce what they just learned.
RECAP
Comprehensive income measures a company’s change in equity (net assets) that results 
from all nonowner transactions and events. It is composed of both bottom-line accrual 
income that is reported on the income statement and other comprehensive income 
components. Other comprehensive income comprises selected unrealized gains and 
losses on incomplete (or open) transactions that bypass the income statement and that 
are reported as direct increases or decreases to stockholders’ equity. Firms are required 
to report comprehensive income in a statement that is displayed with the same promi-

xiv 
Walkthrough
Icons
Special “Getting Behind the Numbers” icons appear throughout the text to highlight and link 
discussions in chapters to the analysis, valuation, and contracting framework. Icons in the end-
of-chapter materials signify a variety of exercises or direct students to the text website for 
 materials such as Excel Templates.
PROBLEMS / DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
Foremost Company owns a royalty interest in an oil well. The contract stipulates that Fore-
most will receive royalty payments semiannually on January 31 and July 31. The January 31 
payment will be for 30% of the oil sold to jobbers between the previous June 1 and November 
30, and the July 31 payment will be for oil sold between the previous December 1 and May 
31. Royalty receipts for 2014 amounted to $150,000 and $240,000 on January 31 and July 31, 
respectively. On December 31, 2013, accrued royalty revenue receivable amounted to 
P2-1
Determining royalty 
 revenue (LO 2)
AICPA
ADAPTED
Problems/Discussion 
Questions
SUMMARY
• This chapter highlights the key differences between cash and accrual income 
measurement.
• In most instances, accrual-basis revenues do not equal cash receipts and accrual expenses 
do not equal cash disbursements.
• The principles that govern revenue and expense recognition under accrual accounting are 
designed to alleviate the mismatching of effort and accomplishment that occurs under 
h b
i
ti
Summary
CASES
Corrpro Companies, Inc., founded in 1984, provides corrosion control–related services, 
systems, equipment, and materials to the infrastructure, environmental, and energy mar-
kets.  Corrpro’s products and services include (a) corrosion control engineering services, 
systems, and equipment, (b) coatings services, and (c) pipeline integrity and risk assess-
ment services. The following information was abridged from the company’s March 31, 
Year 3, Form 10-K.
C2-1
Conducting financial reporting 
research: Discontinued 
 operations (LO 6)
Cases
EXERCISES
In November and December 2014, Gee Company, a newly organized magazine publisher, re-
ceived $36,000 for 1,000 three-year subscriptions at $12 per year, starting with the January 
2015 issue of the magazine.
Required:
How much should Gee report in its 2014 income statement for subscriptions revenue on an 
accrual basis? How much revenue would be reported in 2014 on a cash basis?
E2-1
Determining accrual- and 
cash-basis revenue (LO 1)
AICPA
ADAPTED
Exercises
International
Analysis
Contracting
Valuation
T  R  E   T   C    H
S
.mhhe.com/revsine6e
www
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
Collaborative
AICPA
ADAPTED
IMA
ADAPTED
CFA
ADAPTED
Look for the International 
icon to read the new 
 coverage of IFRS integrated 
throughout the text.
End-of-Chapter Elements
The text provides a variety of end-of-chapter materials to reinforce concepts. Learning 
 objectives are included for each end-of-chapter item, making it  easier than ever to tie your 
 assignment back to the chapter material.

 
Walkthrough 
xv
Student Center
The text Online Learning Center at www.mhhe.com/revsine6e contains a variety of student 
study materials including:
• Online interactive quizzes include multiple-choice questions so students can quiz them-
selves. Grading occurs on the spot!
• Spreadsheet transparencies prepared by the authors are templates that provide students 
text data in Excel format.
• PowerPoint slides are included for students to review key lecture points.
Instructor Resource Center
The Instructor’s Resource Center contains all of the instructor materials for your course in one 
convenient location at www.mhhe.com/revsine6e.
• Additional problem and case material for most chapters is provided for instructors in PDF 
form.
• The Solutions Manual prepared by the text authors is an extensive ancillary that provides 
detailed solutions for every end-of-chapter assignment.
• The Instructor’s Resource Manual contains chapter overviews, outlines, and questions 
and answers. It also includes teaching tips and suggested readings to enhance your 
 lectures and discussion groups.
• The new Test Bank includes a variety of examination questions to test students’ grasp of 
chapter-by-chapter concepts and applications.
• The EZ Test Computerized Test Bank is the computerized version of the Test Bank that 
enables you to create your own exams.
• Powerpoint Lecture Slides include key lecture points as well as a variety of exhibits from 
the text.
• McGraw-Hill Higher Education and Blackboard have teamed up. What does this mean 
for you? Whether your institution is already using Blackboard or you just want to try 
Blackboard on your own, we have a solution for you. McGraw-Hill and Blackboard can 
now offer you easy access to industry leading technology and content, whether your cam-
pus hosts it, or we do. Be sure to ask your local McGraw-Hill representative for details.
 
To learn more about these supplements, visit the Revsine/Collins/Johnson/
Mittelstaedt/Soffer text website at www.mhhe.com/revsine6e or contact your 
McGraw-Hill sales representative.
AACSB Statement
The McGraw-Hill Companies is a proud corporate member of AACSB International. Under-
standing the importance and value of AACSB accreditation, Financial Reporting & Analysis 
recognizes the curricula guidelines detailed in the AACSB standards for business accredita-
tion by connecting selected questions in the Test Bank to the six general knowledge and skill 
guidelines in the AACSB standards.
 
The statements contained in Financial Reporting & Analysis are provided only as a guide 
for the users of this textbook. The AACSB leaves content coverage and assessment within the 
purview of individual schools, the mission of the school, and the faculty. While Financial 

xvi 
Walkthrough
Reporting & Analysis and the teaching package make no claim of any specific AACSB 
 qualification or evaluation, we have within Financial Reporting & Analysis labeled selected 
questions according to the six general knowledge and skills areas.
Assurance of Learning Ready
Many educational institutions today are focused on the notion of assurance of learning, an 
important element of some accreditation standards. Financial Reporting & Analysis is de-
signed specifically to support your assurance of learning initiatives with a simple, yet power-
ful solution. Each test bank question for Financial Reporting & Analysis maps to a specific 
chapter learning objective listed in the text. You can use our test bank software, EZ Test and 
EZ Test Online, to easily query for learning objectives that directly relate to the learning objec-
tives for your course. You can then use the reporting features of EZ Test to aggregate student 
results in similar fashion, making the collection and presentation of assurance of learning data 
simple and easy.

xvii
Chapter 1 
The Economic and Institutional Setting for Financial Reporting 1
Chapter 2 
Accrual Accounting and Income Determination 53
Chapter 3 
Additional Topics in Income Determination 123
Chapter 4 
Structure of the Balance Sheet and Statement of Cash Flows 187
Chapter 5 
Essentials of Financial Statement Analysis 239
Chapter 6 
The Role of Financial Information in Valuation and Credit Risk 
Assessment 309
Chapter 7 
The Role of Financial Information in Contracting 371
Chapter 8 
Receivables 417
Chapter 9 
Inventories 469
Chapter 10 
Long-Lived Assets 545
Chapter 11 
Financial Instruments as Liabilities 601
Chapter 12 
Financial Reporting for Leases 687
Chapter 13 
Income Tax Reporting 745
Chapter 14 
Pensions and Postretirement Benefits 825
Chapter 15 
Financial Reporting for Owners’ Equity 889
Chapter 16 
Intercorporate Equity Investments 953
Chapter 17 
Statement of Cash Flows 1031
Appendix  
Time Value of Money 1093
Index 1103
Brief Contents

xviii
Contents
Chapter 1 
The Economic and Institutional Setting 
for Financial Reporting 1
WorldCom’s Curious Accounting 1
Why Financial Statements Are Important 2
Untangling the Web at WorldCom 3
Economics of Accounting Information 6
Demand for Financial Statements 7
Disclosure Incentives and the Supply of Financial 
Information 10
A Closer Look at Professional Analysts 14
Analysts’ Decisions 14
The Rules of the Financial Reporting Game 16
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles 16
Who Determines the Rules? 19
The Politics of Accounting Standards 20
FASB Accounting Standards CodificationTM 21
Adversarial Nature of Financial Reporting 23
Aggressive Financial Reporting: 
A Case Study 24
An International Perspective 27
International Financial Reporting 29
APPENDIX: GAAP in the United States 35
Early Developments 36
Emergence of GAAP 37
Current Institutional Structure in the 
United States 40
Chapter 2 
Accrual Accounting and Income 
Determination 53
Example: Cash versus Accrual Income 
Measurement 54
Measurement of Profit Performance: 
Revenues and Expenses 57
Criteria for Revenue Recognition 60
Recognizing Expenses Associated with the 
Revenues (Matching) 64
Income Statement Format and Classification 65
Special or Unusual Items (Item 2) 67
Discontinued Operations (Item 3) 68
Proposed Changes for Reporting Discontinued 
Operations 70
Extraordinary Items (Item 4) 71
Frequency and Magnitude of Various Categories 
of Transitory Income Statement Items 72
Reporting Accounting Changes 74
Earnings per Share 80
Comprehensive Income and Other 
Comprehensive Income 81
Global Vantage Point 85
APPENDIX: Review of Accounting Procedures and 
T-Account Analysis 88
Understanding Debits and Credits 90
Adjusting Entries 92
Closing Entries 96
Chapter 3 
Additional Topics in Income 
Determination 123
Revenue Recognition Prior to Sale 124
Percentage-of-Completion Method 124
Completed-Contract Method 129
Revenue Recognition on Commodities 130
Revenue Recognition Subsequent to Sale 134
Installment Sales Method 134
Cost Recovery Method 136
Preface vii

 
Contents 
xix
Revenue Recognition for Specialized Sales 
Transactions 138
Franchise Sales 138
Sales with Right of Return 141
Bundled (Multiple-Element) Sales 142
Earnings Management 144
Popular Earnings Management Devices 147
Accounting Errors, Earnings Restatements, and 
Prior Period Adjustments 152
Global Vantage Point 157
IFRS Revenue Recognition and 
Measurement 157
Long-Term Construction Accounting 158
Installment Sales 161
Joint IASB/FASB Project on Revenue 
Recognition 162
Chapter 4 
Structure of the Balance Sheet and 
Statement of Cash Flows 187
Classification Criteria and Measurement 
Conventions for Balance Sheet Accounts 188
Analytical Insights: Understanding the Nature 
of a Firm’s Business 196
International Differences in Balance Sheet 
Presentation 198
Notes to Financial Statements 200
Statement of Cash Flows 202
Cash Flows versus Accrual Earnings 204
Deriving Cash Flow Information 209
Global Vantage Point 214
Chapter 5 
Essentials of Financial Statement 
Analysis 239
Basic Approaches 239
Financial Statement Analysis and Accounting 
Quality 240
A Case in Point: Getting Behind the Numbers at 
Whole Foods Market 242
Examining Whole Foods Market’s Financial 
Statements 243
Profitability, Competition, and Business Strategy 255
Financial Ratios and Profitability Analysis 255
ROA and Competitive Advantage 258
Return on Common Equity and Financial Leverage 262
Global Vantage Point 264
Liquidity, Solvency, and Credit Analysis 265
Cash Flow Analysis 272
Financial Ratios and Default Risk 289
APPENDIX: Segment Reporting 281
Definition of a Reportable Segment 281
Required Disclosures 283
Case Study: Harley-Davidson, Inc. 284
Chapter 6 
The Role of Financial Information in 
Valuation and Credit Risk Assessment 309
Business Valuation 310
The Discounted Free Cash Flow Approach to 
Valuation 310
The Role of Earnings in Valuation 314
The Abnormal Earnings Approach to Valuation 317
Fair Value Accounting 321
Global Vantage Point 323
Research on Earnings and Equity Valuation 323
Sources of Variation in P/E Multiples 325
Earnings Surprises 330
Credit Risk Assessment 333
Traditional Lending Products 333
Credit Analysis 334
Credit-Rating Agencies 336
APPENDIX A: Discounted Cash Flow and 
Abnormal Earnings Valuation Applications 340
Valuing a Business Opportunity 340
Valuing Whole Foods Market’s Shares 344
APPENDIX B: Financial Statement Forecasts 347
Illustration of Comprehensive Financial 
Statement Forecasts 348
Chapter 7 
The Role of Financial Information in 
Contracting 371
Conflicts of Interest in Business Relationships 372

xx 
Contents
Debt Covenants in Lending Agreements 372
Finalizing the By the Cup Loan 373
Affirmative Covenants, Negative Covenants, and 
Default Provisions 374
Mandated Accounting Changes May Trigger Debt 
Covenant Violation 376
Managers’ Responses to Potential Debt Covenant 
Violations 377
Management Compensation 379
How Executives Are Paid 380
Proxy Statements and Executive 
Compensation 385
Incentives Tied to Accounting Numbers 386
Catering to Wall Street 390
Regulatory Agencies 392
Capital Requirements in the Banking 
Industry 393
Rate Regulation in the Electric Utilities 
Industry 394
Taxation 396
Fair Value Accounting and the Financial Crisis 397
The Meltdown 397
The Controversy 398
Analytical Insights: Incentives to “Manage” 
Earnings 400
Chapter 8 
Receivables 417
Assessing the Net Realizable Value of Accounts 
Receivable 417
Estimating Uncollectibles 417
Assessing the Adequacy of the Allowance for 
Uncollectibles Account Balance 419
Estimating Sales Returns and Allowances 421
Analytical Insight: Do Existing Receivables 
Represent Real Sales? 422
Imputing Interest on Trade Notes Receivable 427
The Fair Value Option 431
Accelerating Cash Collection: Sale of Receivables 
and Collateralized Borrowings 433
Sale of Receivables (Factoring) 434
Borrowing Using Receivables as Collateral 435
Ambiguities Abound: Is It a Sale or a 
Borrowing? 436
A Closer Look at Securitizations 437
Securitization and the 2008 Financial Crisis 441
Some Cautions for Financial Statement 
Readers 442
Troubled Debt Restructuring 443
Settlement 445
Continuation with Modification of Debt Terms 445
Evaluating Troubled Debt Restructuring 
Rules 449
Global Vantage Point 450
Comparison of IFRS and GAAP Receivable 
Accounting 450
Expected FASB and IASB Actions 451
Chapter 9 
Inventories 469
An Overview of Inventory Accounting Issues 469
Determination of Inventory Quantities 472
Items Included in Inventory 475
Costs Included in Inventory 475
Manufacturing Costs 476
Absorption Costing versus Variable Costing 476
Vendor Allowances 480
Cost Flow Assumptions: The Concepts 481
First-In, First-Out (FIFO) Cost Flow 482
Last-In, First-Out (LIFO) Cost Flow 483
FIFO, LIFO, and Inventory Holding Gains 484
The LIFO Reserve Disclosure 488
Inflation and LIFO Reserves 493
LIFO Liquidation 493
Reconciliation of Changes in LIFO Reserve 497
Improved Trend Analysis 497
Eliminating LIFO Ratio Distortions 499
Tax Implications of LIFO 501
Eliminating Realized Holding Gains for FIFO 
Firms 502
Analytical Insights: LIFO Dangers 503
Empirical Evidence on Inventory Policy Choice 504
Lower of Cost or Market Method 506
The Contracting Origins of the Lower of Cost or 
Market Method 509
Evaluation of the Lower of Cost or 
Market Rule 510

 
Contents 
xxi
Global Vantage Point 511
Comparison of IFRS and GAAP Inventory 
Accounting 511
Future Directions 512
APPENDIX A: Eliminating Realized Holding Gains 
from FIFO Income 515
APPENDIX B: Dollar-Value LIFO 517
APPENDIX C: Inventory Errors 522
Chapter 10 Long-Lived Assets 545
Measurement of the Carrying Amount of 
Long-Lived Assets 546
The Approach Used by GAAP 547
Long-Lived Asset Measurement Rules 
Illustrated 549
Intangible Assets 555
Asset Impairment 558
Tangible and Amortizable Intangible Assets 558
Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets 561
Case Study of Impairment Recognition and 
Disclosure—Krispy Kreme Doughnuts 561
Management Judgments and Impairments 561
Obligations Arising from Retiring 
Long-Lived Assets 563
Assets Held for Sale 564
Depreciation 565
Disposition of Long-Lived Assets 569
Financial Analysis and Depreciation Differences 569
Exchanges of Nonmonetary Assets 572
Exchanges Recorded at Book Value 574
Global Vantage Point 576
Comparison of IFRS and GAAP Long-Lived Asset 
Accounting 576
Chapter 11 Financial Instruments as Liabilities 601
Balance Sheet Presentation 601
Global Vantage Point 603
Debt or Equity? 603
Bonds Payable 604
Characteristics of Bond Cash Flows 604
Bonds Issued at Par 605
Bonds Issued at a Discount 606
Bonds Issued at a Premium 609
Graphic Look at Bonds 611
Book Value versus Market Value after Issuance 613
Option to Use Fair Value Accounting 616
Global Vantage Point 620
Managerial Incentives and Financial 
Reporting for Debt 621
Debt Carried at Amortized Historical Cost 621
Imputed Interest on Notes Payable 625
Analytical Insights: Future Cash Flow 
Effects of Debt 627
Incentives for Off-Balance-Sheet Liabilities 631
Hedges 633
Typical Derivative Instruments and the Benefits of 
Hedging 634
Financial Reporting for Derivative 
Instruments 640
Hedge Accounting 641
Fair Value Hedge Accounting 643
Cash Flow Hedge Accounting 646
Hedge Accounting for a Forecasted 
Transaction 649
Hedge Effectiveness 649
Global Vantage Point 651
Contingent Liabilities 652
Measuring and Recognizing Loss 
Contingencies 652
Recording Gain Contingencies 654
Loan Guarantees 654
Global Vantage Point 655
Chapter 12 Financial Reporting for Leases 687
Evolution of Lease Accounting 687
Why Lessees Like the Operating Lease 
Method 689
The Securities and Exchange Commission’s 
Initiative 689
Lessee Accounting 690
FASB ASC 840 Criteria for Capital Lease 
Treatment 690
Capital Lease Treatment Illustrated 692

xxii 
Contents
Executory Costs 695
Residual Value Guarantees 696
Payments in Advance 698
Financial Statement Effects of Treating a Lease 
as a Capital Lease versus Treating It 
as an Operating Lease 699
Lessees’ Financial Statement Disclosures 705
Lessor Accounting 706
Sales-Type and Direct Financing Leases 706
Lessors’ Operating Leases 708
Distinction between Capital and 
Operating Leases 708
Direct Financing Lease Treatment Illustrated 709
Guaranteed versus Unguaranteed Residual 
Values 713
Financial Statement Effects of Direct Financing 
versus Operating Leases 713
Sales-Type Lease Treatment Illustrated 715
Additional Leasing Aspects 716
Sale and Leaseback 716
Other Special Lease Accounting Rules 718
Financial Reporting versus Tax Accounting 
for Leases 718
Lessors’ Disclosures 718
Global Vantage Point 719
Comparison of IFRS and GAAP Lease 
Accounting 719
FASB and IASB Joint Exposure Draft 722
APPENDIX: Making Financial Statement Data 
Comparable by Adjusting for Off-Balance-Sheet 
Leases 724
Chapter 13 Income Tax Reporting 745
Understanding Income Tax Reporting 746
Temporary and Permanent Differences between 
Book Income and Taxable Income 746
Problems Caused by Temporary Differences 748
Deferred Income Tax Accounting: Interperiod Tax 
Allocation 751
Deferred Tax Liabilities 752
Deferred Tax Assets 755
Net Operating Losses: Carrybacks and 
Carryforwards 757
Deferred Income Tax Asset Valuation 
Allowances 759
Classification of Deferred Tax Assets and 
Deferred Tax Liabilities 764
Deferred Income Tax Accounting When Tax Rates 
Change 764
Permanent Differences 769
Understanding Income Tax Note Disclosures 770
Current versus Deferred Portion of Current 
Period’s Tax Provision 770
Reconciliation of Statutory and Effective 
Tax Rates 770
Details on the Sources of Deferred Tax Assets 
and Liabilities 775
Why Don’t a Company’s Deferred Tax Assets 
and Liabilities Seem to Reverse? 776
Deferred Taxes and Cash Flow 777
Measuring and Reporting Uncertain Tax 
Positions 778
Assessing Uncertain Tax Position Related to a 
Permanent Difference 779
Recording Uncertain Tax Position Related to 
Timing of Deductibility 780
Making Changes or Resolving Uncertain Tax 
Positions 781
Assessing Disclosures on Uncertain Tax 
Positions 782
Extracting Analytical Insights from Note 
Disclosures 783
Using Deferred Tax Notes to Assess Earnings 
Quality 783
Using Tax Notes to Improve Interfirm 
Comparability 786
Global Vantage Point 788
Approach for Recognizing Deferred Tax 
Assets 788
Reconciliation of Statutory and Effective Tax 
Rates 789
Reporting Deferred Taxes on the Balance 
Sheet 789
Disclosure of Income Tax Amounts Recognized 
Directly in Equity (Other Comprehensive 
Income) 791
Uncertain Tax Positions 791
IASB Exposure Draft on Income Taxes 792

 
Contents 
xxiii
APPENDIX: Comprehensive Interperiod Tax 
Allocation Problem 793
Computation of Taxable Income 795
Calculation of Taxes Payable 797
Calculation of Change in Deferred Tax Asset and 
Liability Accounts 797
Calculation of Income Tax Expense 799
Hawkeye’s Tax Note 800
Chapter 14 Pensions and Postretirement Benefits 825
Rights and Obligations in Pension Contracts 825
Accounting Issues Related to Defined Benefit 
Pension Plans 828
Financial Reporting for Defined Benefit Pension 
Plans 830
A Simple Example: A World of Complete 
Certainty 830
The Real World: Uncertainty Introduces Gains 
and Losses 835
Journal Entries for Changes in Funded Status 844
Determinants of Pension Funding 845
Case Study of Pension Recognition and 
Disclosure—General Electric 847
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income 
Disclosure and Deferred Income 
Taxes 856
Additional Issues in Computing Expected 
Return 857
Extraction of Additional Analytic Insights from 
Note Disclosures 858
Postretirement Benefits Other Than Pensions 861
Analytical Insights: Assessing OPEB Liability 866
Evaluation of Pension and Postretirement Benefit 
Financial Reporting 867
Global Vantage Point 868
Comparison of IFRS and GAAP Retirement 
Benefit Accounting 868
Chapter 15 Financial Reporting for Owners’ Equity 889
Appropriate Income Measurement 889
What Constitutes the “Firm”? 890
Why Companies Repurchase Their Stock 892
Compliance with Contract Terms 896
Legality of Corporate Dividend Distributions 900
Shareholders’ Equity: Financial Statement 
Presentation 902
Global Vantage Point 903
Earnings per Share 904
Simple Capital Structure 905
Complex Capital Structure 906
Analytical Insights 909
Is Earnings per Share a Meaningful Number? 910
Global Vantage Point 911
Accounting for Share-Based Compensation 911
Historical Perspective 912
Opposition to the FASB 913
The Initial Compromise—SFAS No. 123 915
Stock Options Debate Rekindled 916
Current GAAP Requirements 919
Options Backdating Scandal 923
Convertible Debt 924
Background 925
Financial Reporting Issues 926
Analytical Insights 927
Convertible Debt That May Be Settled 
in Cash 928
Global Vantage Point 930
Chapter 16 Intercorporate Equity Investments 953
Minority Passive Investments: Fair Value 
Accounting 954
Trading Securities 955
Available-for-Sale Securities 958
Income Tax Effects 959
Other-Than-Temporary Impairment of Available-
for-Sale Equity Investments 960
Minority Active Investments: Equity Method 961
When Cost and Book Value Differ 963
Fair Value Option for Equity Method 
Investments 965
Controlling (Majority) Interest: Consolidation 966
Acquisition Method and Preparation of 
Consolidated Statements (100% 
Acquisition) 967

xxiv 
Contents
Acquisition Method with Noncontrolling Interests 
(Less Than 100% Acquisition) 970
Income Statement Consolidation 972
Accounting for Goodwill 973
Previous Approaches to Consolidated 
Statements 975
The Purchase Method 977
Pooling of Interests 981
Financial Analysis Issues—Acquisition Method 
and Purchase Method 982
Financial Analysis Issues—Acquisition Method 
vs. Pooling of Interests 984
Variable Interest Entities 985
Accounting for Foreign Subsidiaries and Foreign 
Currency Transactions 987
Foreign Currency Transactions 987
Foreign Subsidiaries 989
Global Vantage Point 994
Accounting for Financial Assets (Marketable 
Securities and Investments) 995
Consolidated Financial Statements and 
Accounting for Business 
Combinations 999
Accounting for Special Purpose Entities (SPEs) 
or Variable Interest Entities (VIEs) 1000
Accounting for Joint Ventures 1000
FASB Exposure Draft on Financial 
Instruments 1000
APPENDIX: Accounting for Investments in Debt 
Securities 1004
Held-to-Maturity Securities 1004
Available-for-Sale Securities 1005
Trading Securities 1007
Other-than-Temporary Impairments 1007
Chapter 17 Statement of Cash Flows 1031
Statement Format 1032
The Direct Method 1032
The Indirect Method 1035
Other Elements of the Cash Flow Statement 1039
Preparing the Cash Flow Statement 1040
Cash Flows from Operating Activities 1040
Cash Flows from Investing Activities 1045
Cash Flows from Financing Activities 1046
Reconciling between Statements: Some 
Complexities 1047
Discrepancies in Current Accruals 1049
Discrepancies Related to Property, Plant, 
and Equipment 1050
Simultaneous Noncash Financing and 
Investing Activities 1051
Analytical Insights: Ways Operating Cash Flows 
Can Be Distorted or Manipulated 1053
Changes in Working Capital Accounts 1053
Accounts Receivable Sale (Securitization) versus 
Collateralized Borrowing 1053
Capitalizing versus Expensing 1054
Software Development Costs 1054
Capital versus Operating Leases 1055
Cash Flow Effect of Stock Option Expensing 1057
Global Vantage Point 1059
Reporting of Interest Received and Paid, 
Dividends Received and Paid, and Tax 
Refunds and Payments 1060
APPENDIX: Worksheet Approach to Indirect 
Method Cash Flow Statement 1063
Appendix 
Time Value of Money 1093
Future Value 1093
Present Value 1094
Present Value of an Ordinary Annuity 1096
Present Value of an Annuity Due 1097
Index 1103

1
Chapter
“No one ever said accounting was an exact science.”
I
n late June 2002, WorldCom stunned investors by announcing that it intended to 
restate its financial statements for 2001 and the first quarter of 2002.1 According to 
the company’s press release, an internal audit of capital expenditures had uncov-
ered $3.8 billion in improper bookkeeping transfers from line cost expense—an income 
statement item—to the balance sheet. Without those transfers, the company would have 
reported a loss for 2001 and the first quarter of 2002. The company’s chief financial of-
ficer was fired, and its controller resigned. Trading in the company’s stock was immedi-
ately halted. When trading resumed a few days later, the stock was worth only 6 cents 
per share, having lost more than 90% of its value.
 
The accounting scandal at WorldCom, along with those involving many other highly 
visible companies during the late 1990s and early 2000s, were watershed events. Inves-
tors, regulators, and politicians worldwide lost confidence in the soundness of U.S. 
 accounting standards, the transparency of corporate financial reports, the expertise and 
independence of auditors, and the integrity of U.S. financial markets. Congress responded 
by passing the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, which contained sweeping reforms intended to restore 
public confidence. To understand why the reforms were needed, and how they have 
shaped today’s financial reporting environment, let’s step back in time to May 2002 and 
take a close look at the WorldCom scandal. After all, as the philosopher George Santayana 
has said: “Those who cannot learn from history are doomed to repeat it!”
WorldCom’s Curious Accounting
According to a report on the company from a highly regarded Wall Street analyst, 
WorldCom is doing surprisingly well despite tough times throughout the industry. The 
company is a global leader in the telecommunications industry, providing a complete 
package of communications services (voice, data, and Internet) to businesses and 
1
The Economic and Institutional Setting 
for Financial Reporting
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you 
will understand:
1. Why financial statements are valuable 
sources of information about 
companies.
2. How the demand for financial infor-
mation stems from its ability to im-
prove decision making and monitor 
managers’ activities.
3. How the supply of financial informa-
tion is influenced by the costs of pro-
ducing and disseminating it and by the 
benefits it provides.
4. How accounting rules are established, 
and why management can shape the 
financial information communicated 
to outsiders and still be within those 
rules.
5. Why financial reporting philosophies 
and detailed accounting practices 
sometimes differ across countries.
6. Why International Financial Reporting 
Standards (IFRS) influence the ac-
counting practices of U.S. companies.
1 This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter. It is 
sold with the understanding that the publishers and the authors are not engaged in rendering legal, accounting, invest-
ment, or other professional services. If legal advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent 
professional person should be sought.
1

2 
CHAPTER 1
The Economic and Institutional Setting for Financial Reporting
 consumers. WorldCom grew very fast—an average of 58% each year from 1996 through 
2000—as a result of a nearly insatiable demand for wireless communications and high-speed 
Internet access. Then, in March 2001, the dot-com bubble burst and Internet spending came to 
a screeching halt. Telecommunications companies suddenly faced excess capacity and shrink-
ing demand for their services.
 
Despite the industry downturn, WorldCom reported better-than-expected 2002 first quar-
ter results: sales of $8,120 million and pretax profits of $240 million. That’s a 16% decline 
in sales and a 40% decline in profits, but other firms in the industry, including giants such as 
AT&T, are reporting even steeper sales and earnings decreases. WorldCom shares look 
 incredibly cheap at the current price of $2 per share. As one stock analyst points out, “The 
company has $2.3 billion in cash, which translates into a $20.50 book value per share. And 
you have to pay only $2 a share for this gem! You cannot find a more attractive investment 
opportunity in the market.” Perhaps investors have overreacted to the slump in wireless and 
Internet spending by penalizing WorldCom’s stock too much. If so, now may be the ideal 
time to buy.
 
A closer look at WorldCom’s financial statements confirms what the analyst is saying. 
Sales and earnings outpace the competition by a wide margin. Operating cash flows are posi-
tive and exceed the cash being spent for capacity expansion, and the balance sheet remains 
healthy. Overall, the company seems to be on a solid footing.
 
But what’s this? An article in this morning’s newspaper raises a new concern. The article 
says that WorldCom’s “line costs,” the rent WorldCom pays other companies for the use of 
their telecommunications networks, are holding steady at about 42% of sales. That’s odd 
because line costs as a percentage of sales are rising at AT&T and other companies in the 
industry. WorldCom decided several years ago to lease large amounts of network capacity 
instead of building its own global communications network. These leases call for fixed rental 
payments each month without regard to message volume (“traffic”). This means that World-
Com must still pay the same amount of rent even though its customers are not sending much 
traffic through the network these days. What seems odd to the news reporter is that the same 
rental payment each month combined with lower traffic revenue should produce an increase 
in line costs as a percent of sales. Higher line costs per dollar of revenue should translate into 
lower profits. That is what’s happening at other companies, but at WorldCom, line costs 
haven’t increased.
 
You call your broker, who confirms that WorldCom’s stock is available at $1.75 per share 
in early trading. Should you take advantage of this investment opportunity and buy 10,000 
shares? Should you avoid the stock because WorldCom’s income statement may contain a 
line cost accounting torpedo that could potentially sink the share price? Should you take a 
closer look at company fundamentals—traffic volume, line costs, and other business 
 aspects—before deciding whether to buy or avoid WorldCom shares? The unusual trend in 
line costs could indicate that WorldCom is successfully managing its excess capacity prob-
lems during a period of slack demand, or it could be a cautionary yellow flag warning of 
problems at the company.
 
What do you do?
WHY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS ARE IMPORTANT
This dilemma illustrates a fundamental point: Without adequate information, investors cannot 
properly judge the opportunities and risks of investment alternatives. To make informed deci-
sions, investors use information about the economy, various industries, specific companies, 
and the products or services those companies sell. Complete information provided by reliable 

 
Why Financial Statements Are Important 
3
sources enhances the probability that the best decisions will be made. Of course, only later 
will you be able to tell whether your investment decision was a good one. What we can tell 
you now is that if you want to know more about a company, its past performance, current 
health, and prospects for the future, the best source of information is the company’s own 
financial statements.
 
Why? Because the economic events and activities that affect a company and that can 
be translated into accounting numbers are reflected in the company’s financial statements. 
Some financial statements provide a picture of the company at a moment in time; others de-
scribe changes that took place over a period of time. Both provide a basis for evaluating what 
happened in the past and for projecting what might occur in the future. For example, what is 
the annual rate of sales growth? Are accounts receivable increasing at an even greater rate than 
sales? How do sales and receivable growth rates compare to those of competitors? Are ex-
penses holding steady? What rates of growth can be expected next year? These trends and 
relationships provide insights into a company’s economic opportunities and risks including 
market acceptance, costs, productivity, profitability, and liquidity. Consequently, a company’s 
financial statements can be used for various purposes:
• As an analytical tool.
• As a management report card.
• As an early warning signal.
• As a basis for prediction.
• As a measure of accountability.
 
As our prospective WorldCom stockholder knows, financial statements contain informa-
tion that investors need to know to decide whether to invest in the company. Others need fi-
nancial statement information to decide whether to extend credit, negotiate contract terms, or 
do business with the company. Financial statements serve a crucial role in allocating capital to 
the most productive and deserving firms. Doing so promotes the efficient use of resources, 
encourages innovation, and provides a liquid market for buying and selling securities and for 
obtaining and granting credit.
 
Periodic financial statements provide an economic history that is comprehensive and quan-
titative and, therefore, can be used to gauge company performance.2 For this reason, finan-
cial statements are indispensable for developing an accurate profile of ongoing performance 
and prospects.
 
WorldCom stockholders learned an even more important lesson: Financial statements 
sometimes conceal more than they reveal.
Untangling the Web at WorldCom
In late May 2002, Cynthia Cooper, WorldCom’s vice president of internal audit, and two 
of her employees discovered a series of questionable accounting entries made during 2001 
and the first quarter of 2002. To Cooper’s dismay, she realized that $3.8 billion of line cost 
expense had been shifted from the income statement to the balance sheet, a deceptive prac-
tice that made WorldCom look far more profitable than it actually was. In early June, she 
2 Published financial statements do not always contain the most up-to-date information about a company’s changing 
economic fortunes. To ensure that important financial news reaches interested parties as soon as possible, companies 
send out press releases or hold meetings with analysts. Always check the company’s investor relations website for any 
late-breaking news.

4 
CHAPTER 1
The Economic and Institutional Setting for Financial Reporting
and a coworker discussed the line cost transfers with a WorldCom board member who 
chaired the audit committee. The committee then launched its own investigation. Based on 
its report, WorldCom’s board decided in late June to restate the company’s financial state-
ments and to terminate the employment of two top executives. Figure 1.1 shows how 
WorldCom’s profit picture for 2001 and early 2002 changed after the reported numbers 
were corrected.
 
The accounting rule that WorldCom violated is easy to understand. It says that when ex-
penditures (think “money spent”) provide a future benefit to the company, then and only then 
can the expenditures be recorded as balance sheet assets (Chapters 2 and 10 provide the de-
tails). This means that if the company spends a dollar today buying equipment that will be 
used for the next five years (the “future benefit”), the dollar spent should be shown as a bal-
ance sheet asset. But what if the dollar spent doesn’t buy a future benefit? Then it cannot be 
shown as a balance sheet asset but instead must be shown on the income statement as a current 
period expense. That’s the rule!
 
What did this accounting rule mean for the money WorldCom spent on line costs? Recall 
that these line costs were just the monthly rent WorldCom paid to other companies for the use 
of their communications networks and systems. Because the rent had to be paid each month, 
the money WorldCom spent wasn’t buying a future benefit. So, all line costs should have been 
shown on the income statement as a current expense. Instead, WorldCom improperly “trans-
ferred” $3.8 billion of these costs from the income statement to the balance sheet where they 
were shown as an asset. This transfer violated the accounting rule for asset recognition and 
allowed WorldCom to appear more profitable than it actually was. The improper transfer also 
inflated WorldCom’s operating cash flows.
 
Over the next few weeks, the situation at WorldCom grew far worse:
• Shareholder class action lawsuits were filed against the company and its management.
• The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) sued the company for accounting fraud 
and launched its own investigation.
• Five company executives were indicted on criminal charges, and four pleaded guilty.
• The company defaulted on a $4.25 billion credit line and was negotiating new payment 
terms with more than 30 banks.
2$600
1Q
2001
2Q
3Q
4Q
1Q
2002
 2$400
2$200
$0
Company profit or loss (in millions)
$200
$400
$600
$800
As reported
As restated
Figure 1.1 
WORLDCOM’S 
 DISAPPEARING PROFITS
WorldCom improperly trans-
ferred a total of $3.8 billion in 
line cost expenses from the 
income statement to the 
 balance sheet. This chart 
shows the company’s profits 
(in  millions) by quarter as 
 reported originally and 
as later restated.

 
Why Financial Statements Are Important 
5
• In mid-July 2002, WorldCom filed for bankruptcy. The company was saddled with more 
than $40 billion in debt and had less than $10 billion in assets that could be readily 
 converted into cash.
• In August of that year, the company acknowledged more than $7 billion in accounting 
 errors over the previous several years.
 
The investigation would eventually uncover more than $11 billion in improper transfers 
and other accounting improprieties at the company. At least two dozen WorldCom employees 
were dismissed or resigned over the fraud. WorldCom—which now calls itself MCI and in 
2006 became a subsidiary of Verizon—reached a settlement with the SEC to pay $750 million 
in penalties, then the largest fine ever levied against one company by the SEC. The company’s 
ACCOUNTING’S PERFECT STORM
WorldCom’s revelation in June 2002 that it improperly hid 
$3.8 billion in expenses during the previous five quarters, or 
longer, set a low-water mark in a tide of accounting scandals 
among many firms. One of every 10 companies listed on the 
U.S. stock exchanges (or 845 companies in total) found flaws 
in past financial statements and restated earnings between 
1997 and June 2002. Investors in those companies lost more 
than $100 billion when the restatements were announced. By 
comparison, only three companies restated earnings in 1981.
 
According to some observers, a confluence of events dur-
ing the late 1990s created a climate in which accounting fraud 
wasn’t just possible but was likely! This was accounting’s 
perfect storm: the conjunction of unprecedented economic 
growth with inordinate incentive compensation, an extremely 
aggressive management culture, investors preoccupied with 
quarterly profits, and lax auditors. At companies that didn’t 
make the Wall Street earnings number by even as little as a 
penny, the stock price tanked and put top management jobs at 
risk. Individually, some of these forces may have been good 
news. But when they all came together, it was a disaster wait-
ing to happen.
 
Congress responded to the almost daily onslaught of ac-
counting scandals by passing the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX) 
in late July 2002. This legislation was hailed as the most 
groundbreaking corporate reform since the 1934 Securities Act 
that, among other things, had established the Securities and 
Exchange Commission. Key provisions of SOX are intended 
to strengthen auditor independence and improve financial 
statement transparency by:
• Creating the Public Companies Accounting Oversight 
Board (PCAOB) charged with establishing audit, indepen-
dence, and ethical standards for auditors; investigating audi-
tor conduct; and imposing penalties.
• Requiring the CEO and CFO to certify in writing that the 
numbers in their company’s fi nancial reports are correct. 
Executives face potential civil charges of fraud or criminal 
charges of lying to the government if their company’s num-
bers turn out to be bogus.
• Requiring each annual report of a public company to in-
clude a report by management on the company’s internal 
control over fi nancial reporting. Among other things, this 
report must disclose any material internal control weak-
nesses (i.e., defi ciencies that result in more than a remote 
likelihood that a material accounting misstatement will not 
be prevented or detected).
• Banning outside auditors from providing certain nonaudit 
 services—bookkeeping, fi nancial system work, appraisals, ac-
tuarial work, internal audits, management and human resource 
consulting, investment-advisory work, and the auditors’ other 
advocacy-related services—to their audit clients so that inde-
pendence is not compromised. Fees paid to auditors for ser-
vices must now be disclosed in the client’s annual report.
• Requiring public companies to disclose whether the audit 
committee—comprising outside directors and charged with 
oversight of the annual audit—has a fi nancial expert and if 
not, why not. Companies must also now reveal their off-
balance-sheet arrangements (see Chapters 8 and 11) and 
reconcile reported “pro forma” earnings (see Chapter 5) 
with the audited earnings number.
In the words of one observer, “Our free market system does 
not depend on executives being saintly or altruistic. But mar-
kets do rely on institutional mechanisms, such as auditing and 
independent boards, to offset opportunistic, not to mention il-
legal, behavior.”* The Sarbanes-Oxley Act strengthens those 
important institutional mechanisms and, in so doing, calms the 
accounting storm.
* Robert Simmons as quoted in CFO Magazine (August 2002).
NEWS CLIP

6 
CHAPTER 1
The Economic and Institutional Setting for Financial Reporting
former chief executive officer (CEO) and chief financial officer (CFO) were both sentenced to 
lengthy prison terms. In March 2004, after correcting hundreds of thousands of accounting 
entries, WorldCom restated profits by $74.4 billion for revenues, expenses, asset write-downs, 
and adjustments to liabilities including the $11 billion of fraudulent transactions first uncov-
ered in 2002. Most experts agree that WorldCom’s accounting improprieties were designed to 
meet the financial targets of Wall Street analysts and to sustain a high stock price despite 
 diminished economic prospects for the industry.
 
Financial statement fraud is rare.3 Most managers are honest and responsible, and their fi-
nancial statements are free from the type of distortions that occurred at WorldCom. However, 
this example underscores the fact that investors and others should not simply accept the num-
bers in financial statements at face value. Instead, they must analyze the numbers in sufficient 
detail to assess the degree to which the financial statements faithfully represent the economic 
events and activities of the company.
 
Company data used by investors and analysts come primarily from published financial 
statements and from the company’s willingness to provide additional financial and operating 
data voluntarily. Management has some latitude in deciding what financial information will 
be made available and when it will be released. For example, although financial statements 
must conform to accepted standards, management has discretion over the particular account-
ing procedures used in the statements and the details contained in supplemental notes and 
related disclosures. To further complicate matters, accounting is not an exact science. Some 
financial statement items, such as the amount of cash on deposit in a company bank account, 
are measured with a high degree of precision and reliability. Other items are more judgmen-
tal and uncertain in their measurement because they are derived from estimates of future 
events, such as product warranty liabilities.
 
Statement readers must:
• Understand current financial reporting standards.
• Recognize that management can shape the financial information communicated to outside 
parties.
• Distinguish between financial statement information that is highly reliable and informa-
tion that is judgmental.
 
All three considerations weigh heavily in determining the quality of financial statement 
information—and thus the extent to which it should be relied on for decision-making pur-
poses. By quality of information, we mean the degree to which the financial statements are 
grounded in facts and sound judgments and thus are free from distortion. The analytical tools 
and perspectives in this and later chapters will enable you to understand and better interpret 
the information in financial statements and accompanying disclosures as well as to appreciate 
fully the limitations of that information.
ECONOMICS OF ACCOUNTING INFORMATION
In the United States and other developed economies, the financial statements of business en-
terprises serve two key functions. First, they provide a way for company management to 
transfer information about business activities to people outside the company, which helps 
3 See 2012 Report to the Nation on Occupational Fraud & Abuse (Austin TX: Association of Certified Fraud Examiners Inc., 
2012). To learn more about accounting’s “perfect storm” and the unprecedented wave of financial statement errors and irregu-
larities uncovered at U.S. companies during the past two decades, see S. Scholz, The Changing Nature and Consequences of 
Public Company Financial Restatements: 1997–2006 (Washington DC: The Department of the Treasury, April 2008).

 
Economics of  Accounting Information 
7
solve an important problem known as information asymmetry. Second, financial statement 
information is often included in contracts between the company and other parties (such as 
lenders or managers) because doing so improves contract efficiency.
 
Information asymmetry just means that management has access to more and better informa-
tion about the business than do people outside the company. The details vary from one business 
to another, but the idea is that information initially available only to management can help people 
outside the company form more accurate assessments of past economic performance, resource 
availability, future prospects, and risks. Financial statements are the primary formal mechanism 
for management to communicate some of this private information to outside parties.
 
Business enterprises enter into many different types of contracts. Examples include com-
pensation contracts with managers who work for the company, debt contracts with bankers 
who loan money to the company, and royalty contracts with inventors who license products to 
the company for sale to consumers. Often these contracts contain language that refers to veri-
fiable financial statement numbers such as “operating profit” for calculating managers’ bo-
nuses, “free cash flow” for determining loan compliance, and product “sales” for computing 
royalty payments. Contracts tied to financial statement numbers can restrict the range of deci-
sions made by management and thereby align management’s incentives with those of the 
other contracting parties (Chapter 7 explains how).
 
Financial statements are demanded because of their value as a source of information 
about the company’s performance, financial condition, and resource stewardship. People 
demand financial statements because the data reported in them improve decision making.
 
The supply of financial statement information is guided by the costs of producing and 
disseminating it and the benefits it will provide to the company. Firms weigh the benefits they 
may gain from financial disclosures against the costs they incur in making those disclosures.
 
To see financial statement demand and supply at work, consider a company that seeks to 
raise money by issuing common stock or debt securities. Here financial statements provide 
information that can reduce investor uncertainty about the company’s opportunities and risks. 
Reduced uncertainty translates into a lower cost of capital (the price the company must pay 
for new money). Investors demand information about the company’s past performance, op-
portunities, and risks so that the stock or debt securities can be properly priced at issuance. 
Because companies need to raise capital at the lowest possible cost, they have an economic 
incentive to supply the information investors want. In this section, you will see that the amount 
and type of financial accounting information provided by companies depend on demand and 
supply forces much like the demand and supply forces affecting any economic good. Of 
course, regulatory groups such as the SEC, the Financial Accounting Standards Board 
(FASB), and the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) influence the amount and 
type of financial information companies disclose as well as when and how it is disclosed.
Demand for Financial Statements
The benefits of financial statement information stem from its usefulness to decision makers. 
People outside the company whose decisions demand financial statement information as a key 
input include:
1. Shareholders and investors.
2. Managers and employees.
3. Lenders and suppliers.
4. Customers.
5. Government and regulatory agencies.
Managers have a steward-
ship responsibility to inves-
tors and creditors. The 
company’s resources belong 
to investors and creditors, but 
managers are “stewards” of 
those resources and are thus 
responsible for ensuring their 
efficient use and protecting 
them from adversity. To learn 
more about the stewardship 
role of accounting, see 
V. O’Connell, “Reflections 
on Stewardship Reporting,” 
 Accounting Horizons (June 
2007): pp. 215–227.

8 
CHAPTER 1
The Economic and Institutional Setting for Financial Reporting
Shareholders and Investors 
Shareholders and investors, including investment 
 advisors and securities analysts, use financial information to help decide on a portfolio of 
 securities that meets their preferences for risk, return, dividend yield, and liquidity.
 
Financial statements are crucial in investment decisions that use fundamental analysis to 
identify mispriced securities: stocks or bonds selling for substantially more or less than they 
seem to be worth. Investors who use this approach consider past sales, earnings, cash flow, 
product acceptance, and management performance to predict future trends in these financial 
drivers of a company’s economic success or failure. Then they assess whether a particular 
stock or group of stocks is undervalued or overvalued at the current market price. Fundamen-
tal investors buy undervalued stocks and avoid overvalued stocks.
 
Investors who believe in the efficient markets hypothesis—and who thus presume they 
have no insights about company value beyond the current security price—also find financial 
statement data useful. To efficient markets investors, financial statement data provide a basis 
for assessing risk, dividend yield, or other firm attributes that are important to 
portfolio selection decisions.
Of course, shareholders and investors themselves can perform investment 
analysis as can professional securities analysts who may possess specialized 
expertise or some comparative advantage in acquiring, interpreting, and 
 analyzing financial statements.
Shareholders and investors also use financial statement information when 
evaluating the performance of the company’s top executives. This use is re-
ferred to as the stewardship function of financial reports. When earnings and 
share price performance fall below acceptable levels, disgruntled shareholders 
voice their complaints in letters and phone calls to management and outside directors. If this 
approach doesn’t work, dissident shareholders may launch a campaign, referred to as a proxy 
contest, to elect their own slate of directors at the next annual meeting. New investors often 
see this as a buying opportunity. By purchasing shares of the underperforming company at 
a bargain price, these investors hope to gain by joining forces with existing shareholders, 
 replacing top management, and “turning the company around.”
 
The focal point of the proxy contest often becomes the company performance as described 
in its recent financial statements. Management defends its record of past accomplishments 
while perhaps acknowledging a need for improvement in some areas of the business.  Dissident 
shareholders point to management’s past failures and the need to hire a new executive team. 
Of course, both sides are pointing to the same financial statements. Where one side sees suc-
cess, the other sees only failure, and undecided shareholders must be capable of forming their 
own opinion on the matter.
Managers and Employees 
Although managers regularly make operating and 
 financing decisions based on information that is much more detailed and timely than the in-
formation found in financial statements, they also need—and therefore demand—financial 
statement data. Their demand arises from contracts (such as executive compensation agree-
ments) that are linked to financial statement variables.
 
Executive compensation contracts usually contain annual bonus and longer term pay com-
ponents tied to financial statement results. Using accounting data in this manner increases the 
efficiency of executive compensation contracts. Rather than trying to determine firsthand 
whether a manager has performed capably during the year (and whether the manager deserves 
a bonus), the board of directors’ compensation committee needs to look only at reported prof-
itability or some other accounting measure that functions as a summary of the company’s (and 
thus the manager’s) performance.
The efficient markets hypothesis says a stock’s 
current market price reflects the knowledge and 
expectations of all investors. Those who adhere 
to this theory consider it futile to search for un-
dervalued or overvalued stocks or to forecast 
stock price movements using financial state-
ments or other public data because any new 
 development is quickly and correctly reflected 
in a firm’s stock price.

 
Economics of  Accounting Information 
9
 
Employees demand financial statement information for several reasons:
• To learn about the company’s performance and its impact on employee profit sharing and 
employee stock ownership plans.
• To monitor the health of company-sponsored pension plans and to gauge the likelihood 
that promised benefits will be provided on retirement.
• To know about union contracts that may link negotiated wage increases to the company’s 
financial performance.
• More generally, to help employees assess their company’s current and potential future 
profitability and solvency.
Lenders and Suppliers 
Financial statements play several roles in the relationship 
between the company and those who supply financial capital. Commercial lenders (banks, 
insurance companies, and pension funds) use financial statement information to help decide 
the loan amount, the interest rate, and the security (called collateral) needed for a business 
loan. Loan agreements contain contractual provisions (called covenants) that require the bor-
rower to maintain minimum levels of working capital, debt to assets, or other key accounting 
variables that provide the lender a safety net. Violation of these loan provisions can result in 
technical default and allow the lender to accelerate repayment, request additional security, 
or raise interest rates. So, lenders monitor financial statement data to ascertain whether the 
covenants are being adhered to or violated.
 
Suppliers demand financial statements for many reasons. A steel company may sell mil-
lions of dollars of rolled steel to an appliance manufacturer on credit. Before extending credit, 
careful suppliers scrutinize the buyer’s financial position in much the same way that a com-
mercial bank does—and for essentially the same reason. That is, suppliers assess the financial 
strength of their customers to determine whether they will pay for goods shipped. Suppliers 
continuously monitor the financial health of companies with which they have a significant 
business relationship.
Customers 
Repeat purchases and product guarantees or warranties create continuing 
relationships between a company and its customers. A customer needs to know whether the 
seller has the financial strength to deliver a high-quality product on an agreed-upon schedule 
and whether the seller will be able to provide replacement parts and technical support after the 
sale. You wouldn’t buy a personal computer from a door-to-door vendor without first check-
ing out the product and the company that stands behind it. Financial statement information 
can help current and potential customers monitor a supplier’s financial health and thus decide 
whether to purchase that supplier’s goods and services.
Government and Regulatory Agencies 
Government and regulatory agencies 
demand financial statement information for various reasons. For example, the SEC requires 
publicly traded companies to compile annual financial reports (called 10-Ks) and quarterly 
financial reports (called 10-Qs). These periodic financial reports are filed with the SEC and 
then made available to investors and other interested parties. This process of mandatory 
 reporting allows the SEC to monitor compliance with the securities laws and to ensure that 
investors have a “level playing field” with timely access to financial statement information.
 
Taxing authorities sometimes use financial statement information as a basis for establishing 
tax policies designed to enhance social welfare. For example, the U.S. Congress could point to 
widespread financial statement losses as justification for instituting a corporate income tax 
 reduction during economic downturns.
In the United States and 
most other industrialized 
countries, the accounting 
rules that businesses use for 
external financial reporting 
purposes differ from those 
required for income taxation 
purposes. As a consequence, 
corporate financial reporting 
choices in the United States 
are seldom influenced by the 
U.S. Internal Revenue Code. 
See Chapter 13 for details.

10 
CHAPTER 1
The Economic and Institutional Setting for Financial Reporting
 
Government agencies are often customers of businesses. For example, the U.S. Army pur-
chases weapons from suppliers whose contracts guarantee that they are reimbursed for costs 
and that they get an agreed-upon profit margin. So, financial statement information is essen-
tial to resolving contractual disputes between the Army and its suppliers and for monitoring 
whether companies engaged in government business are earning profits beyond what the con-
tracts allow.
 
Financial statement information is used to regulate businesses—especially banks, insur-
ance companies, and public utilities such as gas and electric companies. To achieve econo-
mies of scale in the production and distribution of natural gas and electricity, local governments 
have historically granted exclusive franchises to individual gas and electric companies serving 
a specified geographical area. In exchange for this monopoly privilege, the rates these com-
panies are permitted to charge consumers are closely regulated. Accounting measures of profit 
and of asset value are essential because the accounting rate of return—reported profit di-
vided by asset book value—is a key factor that regulators use in setting allowable charges.4 If 
a utility company earns a rate of return that seems too high, regulators can decrease the allow-
able charge to consumers and thereby reduce the company’s profitability.
 
Banks, insurance companies, and savings and loan associations are subject to regulation 
aimed at protecting individual customers and society from insolvency losses—for example, a 
bank’s inability to honor deposit withdrawal requests or an insurance company’s failure to 
provide compensation for covered damages as promised. Financial statements aid regulators in 
monitoring the health of these companies so that corrective action can be taken when needed.
 
Regulatory intervention (in the form of antitrust litigation, protection from foreign imports, 
government loan guarantees, price controls, etc.) by government agencies and legislators con-
stitutes another source of demand for financial statement information.
4 This regulation process is intended to enhance economic efficiency by precluding the construction of duplicate facilities that 
might otherwise occur in a competitive environment. Eliminating redundancies presumably lowers the ultimate service cost 
to consumers. Regulatory agencies specify the accounting practices and disclosure policies that must be followed by compa-
nies under their jurisdiction. As a result, the accounting practices that utility companies use in preparing financial statements 
for regulatory agencies sometimes differ from those used in their shareholder reports.
RECAP
Financial statement information has value either because it reduces uncertainty about a 
company’s future profitability or economic health or because it provides evidence about 
the quality of its management, about its ability to fulfill its obligations under supply agree-
ments or labor contracts, or about other facets of the company’s business activities. 
 Financial statements are demanded because they provide information that helps improve 
decision making or makes it possible to monitor managers’ activities.
Disclosure Incentives and the Supply 
of Financial Information
Commercial lenders sometimes possess enough bargaining power to allow them to compel 
companies to deliver the financial information they need for analysis. For example, a cash-
starved company applying for a bank loan has a strong incentive to provide all of the data the 
lender requests. Most financial statement users are less fortunate, however. They must rely on 
mandated reporting (for example, SEC 10-K filings), voluntary company disclosures that go 
beyond the minimum required reporting (for example, corporate “fact” books), and sources 
outside the company (for example, analysts and reporters) for the financial information 
needed to make decisions.

 
Economics of  Accounting Information 
11
 
What forces induce managers to supply information? Browse through several corporate 
financial reports and you will notice substantial differences across companies—and perhaps 
over time—in the quality and quantity of the information provided. Some companies rou-
tinely disclose operating profits, production levels, and order backlogs by major product cat-
egory so analysts and investors can quickly spot changes in product costs and market 
acceptance. Other companies provide detailed descriptions of their outstanding debt and their 
efforts to hedge interest rate risk or foreign currency risk. Still other companies seem to dis-
close only the bare minimum required. What explains this diversity in the quality and quantity 
of financial information?
 
If the financial reporting environment were unregulated, disclosure would occur volun-
tarily as long as the incremental benefits to the company and its management from supply-
ing financial information exceeded the incremental costs of providing that information. In 
other words, management’s decisions about the scope, timing, and content of the company’s 
financial statements and notes would be guided solely by the same cost and benefit consid-
erations that influence the supply of any commodity. Managers would assess the benefits 
created by voluntary disclosures and weigh those benefits against the costs of making the 
information available. Any differences in financial disclosures across companies and over 
time would then be due to differences in the benefits or costs of voluntarily supplying finan-
cial information.
 
In fact, however, financial reporting in the United States and other developed countries is 
regulated by public agencies such as the SEC and by private agencies such as the FASB. The 
various public and private sector regulatory agencies establish and enforce financial reporting 
requirements designed to ensure that companies meet certain minimum levels of financial 
disclosure. Nevertheless, companies frequently communicate financial information that 
 exceeds these minimum levels. They apparently believe that the benefits of 
the “extra” disclosures outweigh the costs. What are the potential benefits 
from voluntary disclosures that exceed minimum requirements?
Disclosure Benefits 
Companies compete with one another in  capital, 
labor, and product markets. This competition creates incentives for manage-
ment to reveal “good news” financial information about the firm. The news 
itself may be about a successful new product introduction, increased con-
sumer demand for an existing product, an effective quality improvement, or 
other matters favorable to the financial perception of the company. By voluntarily disclosing 
otherwise unknown good news, the company may be able to obtain capital more cheaply or 
get better terms from suppliers.
 
To see how these incentives work, consider the market for raising financial capital. Com-
panies seek capital at the lowest possible cost. They compete with one another in terms of 
both the return they promise to capital suppliers and the characteristics of the financial instru-
ment they offer. The capital market has two important features:
1. Investors are uncertain about the quality (that is, the riskiness) of each debt or equity instru-
ment offered for sale because the ultimate return from the security depends on future events.
2. It is costly for a company to be mistakenly perceived as offering investors a low-quality 
(“high-risk”) stock or debt instrument—a “lemon.”5
The SEC passed Regulation Fair Disclosure, 
known as “Reg FD,” to prevent selective disclo-
sure by companies to market professionals and 
certain shareholders. Reg FD helps to level the 
playing field between individual investors and 
institutional investors by limiting what manage-
ment can say in private conversations with an 
analyst or investor, or in meetings and confer-
ence calls where public access is restricted.
5 “Lemon,” when describing an automobile, refers to an auto with hidden defects. In financial capital markets, “lemon” refers 
to a financial instrument (for example, stock or debt securities) with hidden risks. See, G. Akerlof, “The Market for ‘Lem-
ons’: Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 1970, pp. 488–500.

12 
CHAPTER 1
The Economic and Institutional Setting for Financial Reporting
This lemon cost has various forms. It could be lower proceeds received from issuing stock, a 
higher interest rate that will have to be paid on a commercial loan, or more stringent condi-
tions, such as borrowing restrictions, placed on that loan.
 
These market forces mean that owners and managers have an economic incentive to 
supply the amount and type of financial information that will enable them to raise capital 
at the lowest cost. A company offering attractive, low-risk securities can avoid the lemon pen-
alty by voluntarily supplying financial information that enables investors and lenders to gauge 
the risk and expected return of each instrument accurately. Of course, companies offering 
higher risk securities have incentives to mask their true condition by supplying overly opti-
mistic financial information. However, other forces partially offset this tendency. Examples 
include requirements for audited financial statements and legal penalties associated with issu-
ing false or misleading financial statements. Managers also want to maintain access to capital 
markets and establish a reputation for supplying credible financial information to investors 
and analysts.
 
Financial statement disclosures can convey economic benefits to firms—and thus to 
their owners and managers. However, firms often cannot obtain these benefits at zero cost.
Disclosure Costs 
Four costs can arise from informative financial disclosures:
1. Information collection, processing, and dissemination costs.
2. Competitive disadvantage costs.
3. Litigation costs.
4. Political costs.
 
The costs associated with financial information collection, processing, and dissemination 
can be high. Determining the company’s obligation for postretirement employee health care 
benefits provides an example. This disclosure requires numerous complicated actuarial com-
putations as well as future health care cost projections for existing or anticipated medical 
treatments. Whether companies compile the data themselves or hire outside consultants to do 
it, the cost of generating a reasonable estimate of the company’s postretirement obligation can 
be considerable. The costs of developing and presenting financial information also include the 
cost incurred to audit the accounting statement item (if the information is audited). Owners—
who are the shareholders—ultimately pay all of these costs, just as they ultimately bear all 
other company costs.
 
Another financial disclosure cost is the possibility that competitors may use the informa-
tion to harm the company providing the disclosure. Several disclosures—financial and 
 nonfinancial—might create a competitive disadvantage:
• Details about the company’s strategies, plans, and tactics, such as new products, pricing 
strategies, or new customer markets.
• Information about the company’s technological and managerial innovations, such as new 
manufacturing and distribution systems, successful process redesign and continuous 
 quality improvement methods, or uniquely effective marketing approaches.
• Detailed information about company operations, such as sales and cost figures for 
 individual product lines or narrow geographical markets.6
6 R. B. Stevenson, Jr., Corporations and Information: Secrecy, Access, and Disclosure (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins 
 University Press, 1994).
Many firms promise to pay 
some of the health care 
costs employees incur after 
retirement. See Chapter 14 
for details.

 
Economics of  Accounting Information 
13
 
Disclosing sales and profits by individual product line or geographical area may highlight 
opportunities previously unknown to competitors, thereby undermining a company’s market-
place advantage. For example, Uniroyal Inc., an automobile tire manufacturer, objected to 
disclosing its financial data by geographical area because:
this type of data would be more beneficial to our competition than to the general users of financial 
data. This is especially true in those countries or geographical areas where we might not be as 
diversified as we are in the United States. In these cases, the data disclosed could be quite  specific, 
thereby jeopardizing our competitive situation.7
Labor unions, major suppliers, or key customers may also use the company’s financial infor-
mation to improve their bargaining power, which would increase the company’s costs and 
possibly weaken its competitive advantage.
 
Litigation costs result when shareholders, creditors, and other financial statement users 
initiate court actions against the company and its management for alleged financial misrepre-
sentations. For example, it’s common for shareholders to initiate litigation when there’s a 
sudden drop in stock price soon after the company has released new financial information. 
Shareholders who sue will claim that they would not have purchased company shares if they 
had known then (back when they bought the stock) what they know now (after the company’s 
disclosure).
 
The costs of defending against suits, even those without merit, can be substantial. Beyond 
legal fees and settlement costs is the damage to corporate and personal reputations and the 
distraction of executives from productive activities that otherwise would add value to the 
company.
 
There are potential political costs of financial reporting, especially for companies in highly 
visible industries such as oil and pharmaceuticals. Politically vulnerable firms with high earn-
ings are often attacked in the financial and popular press, which alleges that those earnings 
constitute evidence of anticompetitive business practices. Politicians sometimes respond to 
(or exploit) heightened public opinion. They propose solutions to the “crisis” that is causing 
high earnings, thereby gaining media exposure for themselves and improving their chances 
for reelection or reappointment. These “solutions” are often political initiatives designed to 
impose taxes on unpopular companies or industries. The windfall profits tax levied on U.S. oil 
companies in the early 1980s is one example. This tax was prompted, in part, by the large 
profit increases that oil companies reported during several years prior to enactment of the 
legislation.8
 
Antitrust litigation, environmental regulations, and the elimination of protective im-
port quotas are other examples of the costs politicians and government bureaucrats can 
impose on unpopular companies and industries. Financial reports are one source of infor-
mation that politicians and bureaucrats can use to identify target firms or industries. For 
this reason, astute managers carefully weigh political considerations when choosing what 
financial information to report and how best to report it. As a result, some highly  profitable—
but politically vulnerable—firms may make themselves appear less profitable than they 
really are.9
7 Uniroyal Inc. correspondence as reported in G. Foster, Financial Statement Analysis (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 
1986), p. 185.
8 There is another side to this “excessive profits” story. Politicians sometimes respond to public concern over record losses at 
highly visible companies by providing subsidies in the form of government loan guarantees (for example, Chrysler Corpora-
tion), import tariffs (for example, Harley-Davidson), and restrictions on the activities of competitors.
9 To learn more about the costs and benefits of accounting disclosures, see A. Beyer, D. Cohen, T. Lys, and B. Walther, “The 
Financial Reporting Environment: Review of Recent Literature,” Journal of Accounting and Economics (2010).

14 
CHAPTER 1
The Economic and Institutional Setting for Financial Reporting
A CLOSER LOOK AT PROFESSIONAL ANALYSTS
Financial statement users have diverse information needs because they face different 
 decisions or may use different approaches to making the same kind of decision. For exam-
ple, a retail customer deciding which brand of automobile to purchase needs far less financial 
information about each automotive manufacturer than does a long-term equity investor who is 
planning to purchase stock in one of those companies. Similarly, a commercial banker 
 engaged in asset-based lending—meaning the borrower’s inventory or receivables are pledged 
to repay the loan—needs far different financial information about the business 
than does a banker who lends solely on the basis of the borrower’s projected 
future cash flows.
It would be difficult (maybe impossible!) to frame our examination of 
corporate financial reporting and analysis around the diverse information 
needs of all potential users—investors, lenders, customers, suppliers, man-
agers, employees, regulators, and so on—and the varied decisions they 
might possibly confront. Instead, we focus attention on professional analysts. But we 
 define analyst broadly to include investors, creditors, financial advisors, and auditors—
anyone who uses financial statements to make decisions as part of their job. Let’s see what 
professional analysts do.
Analysts’ Decisions
The task confronting equity investors is first to form an educated opinion about the value of 
the company and its equity securities—common and preferred stock—and then to make in-
vestment decisions based on that opinion. Investors who follow a fundamental analysis ap-
proach estimate the value of a stock by assessing the amount, timing, and uncertainty of 
future cash flows that will accrue to the company issuing the stock (Chapter 6 shows how). 
The company’s financial statements and other data are used to develop projections of its fu-
ture cash flows. These cash flow estimates are then discounted for risk and the time value of 
money. The discounted cash flow estimate or fundamental value (say, $25 per share) is then 
compared to the current price of the company’s stock (say, $18 per share). This comparison 
allows the investor to make decisions about whether to buy, hold, or sell the stock. Financial 
statement information is essential, in one way or another, to this and other equity invest-
ment strategies.
 
Creditors’ decisions require an assessment of the company’s ability to meet its debt-
related financial obligations through the timely payment of interest and principal or 
through asset liquidation in the event interest and principal cannot be repaid. Creditors 
include commercial banks, insurance companies and other lenders, suppliers who sell to 
the company on credit, and those who invest in the company’s publicly traded debt securi-
ties. Creditors form educated opinions about the company’s credit risk by comparing 
RECAP
A company’s financial reporting decisions are driven by economic considerations and thus 
by cost-benefit trade-offs. Companies that confront distinctly different competitive pres-
sures in the marketplace and that face different financial reporting costs and benefits are 
likely to choose different accounting and reporting practices. A clear understanding of the 
economic factors that influence a company’s financial reporting choices can help you to 
assess more keenly the quality of the provided information. That’s what we’ll help you do 
in this textbook.
“To perform good audits, we need more skills than 
just forensic accounting . . . general accounting 
skills, tax planning, risk management, and secu-
rities analysis are all vital competencies for 
auditors to possess.” Samuel DiPiazza, Jr., 
 former global CEO of PricewaterhouseCoopers.

 
A Closer Look at Professional Analysts 
15
 required principal and interest payments to estimates of the company’s current and future 
cash flows (Chapter 5 explains how). Companies that are good credit risks have projected 
operating cash flows that are more than sufficient to meet these debt payments, or they 
possess financial flexibility: the ability to raise additional cash by selling assets, issuing 
stock, or borrowing more.
 
Companies judged to be high credit risks are charged higher rates of interest and may have 
more stringent conditions—referred to as covenants—placed on their loan agreements. These 
loan covenants may restrict the company from paying dividends, selling assets, buying other 
companies, forming joint ventures, or borrowing additional funds without the lender’s prior 
approval. Other types of covenants, particularly those based on reported accounting figures, 
protect the lender from deterioration in the borrower’s credit risk. This is why 
creditors must monitor the company’s ongoing ability to comply with lending 
agreement covenants. Financial statement information is indispensable for 
assessing credit risk and monitoring loan covenant compliance.
 
Financial advisors include securities analysts, brokers, credit rating agen-
cies, portfolio managers, and others who provide information and advice to 
investors and creditors. They are often able to gather, process, and evaluate 
financial information more economically and accurately than individual in-
vestors and creditors can because they possess specialized skills or knowledge 
(for example, industry expertise) or because they have access to specialized 
resources provided by their organizations. As a consequence, financial advi-
sors can play a crucial role in the decision-making process of investors and 
creditors. Securities analysts and credit rating agencies, in particular, are 
among the most important and influential users of financial statements.
 
Independent auditors carefully examine financial statements prepared by the company 
prior to conducting an audit of those statements. An understanding of management’s reporting 
incentives coupled with detailed knowledge of accounting rules enables auditors to recognize 
vulnerable areas where financial reporting abuses are likely to occur. Astute auditors choose 
audit procedures designed to ensure that major improprieties can be detected.
 
But the Treadway Commission believes that independent auditors can (and should) do more:
The potential of analytical review procedures for detecting fraudulent financial reporting has not 
been realized fully. Unusual year-end transactions, deliberate manipulations of estimates or 
 reserves, and misstatements of revenues and assets often introduce aberrations in otherwise 
 predictable amounts, ratios, or trends that will stand out to a skeptical auditor.10
 
Current auditing standards require independent auditors to use analytical 
review procedures on each engagement. Why? Because they can help auditors 
avoid the embarrassment and economic loss from accounting “surprises,” 
such as the one uncovered at WorldCom.
 
Independent auditors need to be well versed in the techniques of financial 
analysis to design effective audits. That’s why auditors are included among 
those people we call “analysts.” Current auditing standards echo the lessons 
of past audit failures: You can’t build a bulletproof audit unless you know 
how the game is played. That means understanding the incentives of manag-
ers and being a skilled financial analyst.
10 Report of the National Commission of Fraudulent Financial Reporting (Washington, DC: 1987), p. 48. The “Treadway 
Commission”—officially the National Commission on Fraudulent Financial Reporting—was formed in 1985 to study the 
causal factors that can lead to fraudulent financial reporting and to develop recommendations for public companies and their 
independent auditors, for the SEC and other regulators, and for educational institutions.
“Consideration of Fraud in a Financial State-
ment Audit,” Statement of Auditing Standards 
No. 99 (New York: AICPA, 2002)—also known 
as AU Section 240—provides examples of 
fraud risk factors that auditors must be aware 
of in designing audit procedures: rapid growth 
or unusual profitability compared to other firms 
in the same industry; unduly aggressive finan-
cial targets; a significant portion of management 
pay tied to accounting numbers; an excessive 
 interest by management in maintaining or increas-
ing the firm’s stock price or earnings trend; and 
ineffective board of directors or audit committee 
oversight of the financial  reporting process.
Analytical review procedures are the tools 
 auditors use to illuminate relationships among 
the data. These procedures range from simple 
ratio and trend analysis to complex statistical 
 techniques—a tool kit not unlike that used by 
any  financial analyst. The auditor’s goal is to 
 assess the general reasonableness of the reported 
numbers in relation to the company’s activities, 
 industry conditions, and business climate. Astute 
auditors are careful to “look behind the numbers” 
when the reported figures seem unusual.

16 
CHAPTER 1
The Economic and Institutional Setting for Financial Reporting
THE RULES OF THE FINANCIAL REPORTING GAME
“There’s virtually no standard that the FASB has ever written that is free 
from judgment in its application.”
—D. R. Beresford, chairman of the FASB (1987–1997)11
Professional analysts are forward looking. Their goal is to predict what will happen in the 
future to the value of a company and its ability to repay debt. Financial statements and notes 
depict the past: an economic history of transactions and other events that have affected the 
company. These past data provide analysts a jumping-off point for forecasting future events, 
especially future earnings and cash flows.
 
To extrapolate into the future from financial statement data, investors, creditors, and their 
financial advisors must first understand the accounting measurement rules, estimates, and judg-
ments used to produce the data. Financial statements present a picture of the company at a 
point in time, a picture that translates many (but not all) of the economic events affecting the 
business into financial terms. For example, the company’s accounting system translates the act 
of providing goods and services to customers in exchange for promised future cash payments 
into financial statement amounts known as “sales revenue” and “accounts receivable.” This 
linkage between economic events and how those events are depicted in a financial statement 
can sometimes seem mysterious or confusing. For example, some companies record sales rev-
enue before goods are actually delivered to customers. Other companies record revenue at the 
date of customer delivery. And still others record revenue only when payment for the goods is 
received from the customer, which can be long after delivery (Chapter 3 explains why). We’ll 
now look more closely at the rules that govern accounting and financial reporting practices.
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles
Over time, the accounting practitioners and standards setters have developed a network of 
conventions, rules, and procedures, collectively referred to as generally accepted accounting 
principles (GAAP). The principles and rules that govern financial reporting continue to de-
velop and evolve in response to changing business conditions. Consider, for example, the 
lease of retail store space at a shopping mall. As people moved from the city to the suburbs, 
shopping malls emerged as convenient and accessible alternatives to traditional urban retail 
stores. Leasing became a popular alternative to ownership because it enabled retailing compa-
nies to gain access to store space without having to bear the burden of the large dollar outlay 
necessary to buy or build the store. Leasing was also attractive because it shared risks—such 
as the risk of competition from a new mall opening nearby—between the retailer and shop-
ping mall owner. As leasing increased in popularity, the accounting profession developed 
RECAP
Financial statement information helps investors assess the value of a firm’s debt and 
 equity securities, creditors assess the company’s ability both to meet its debt payments 
and to abide by loan terms, financial advisors and securities analysts to do their job of 
providing information and advice to investors and creditors, and auditors both to 
 recognize potential financial reporting abuses and to choose audit procedures to detect 
them.
11 As quoted by F. Norris, “From the Chief Accountant, a Farewell Ledger,” The New York Times, June 1, 1997.

 
The Rules of  the Financial Reporting Game 
17
practices, some complex, that are followed when accounting for leases. The practices that 
evolved are now part of GAAP and are discussed in detail in Chapter 12.
 
The goal of GAAP is to ensure that a company’s financial statements clearly represent its 
economic condition and performance. To achieve this goal, financial statements should pos-
sess certain qualitative characteristics (summarized in Figure 1.2) that make the reported in-
formation useful:12
• Relevance: The financial information is capable of making a difference in a 
decision. Relevant information helps users form more accurate predictions 
about the future (predictive value), or it allows them to better understand 
how past economic events have affected the business (confirmatory value).
• Predictive value: The information improves the decision maker’s abil-
ity to forecast the future outcome of past or present events. For exam-
ple, suppose a company’s balance sheet lists accounts receivable of 
$200,000 and an allowance for doubtful accounts of $15,000. This 
 information has value for predicting future cash collections— 
management is saying that only $185,000 ($200,000 − $15,000) of 
the receivables will be collected.
• Confirmatory value: The information confirms or alters the decision maker’s earlier 
beliefs. For example, suppose we learn next year that the company mentioned above 
collected $190,000 of its accounts receivable instead of the $185,000 originally fore-
casted. This information has confirmatory value and indicates that management’s 
 earlier estimate of doubtful accounts was too high.
• Materiality: Omission or misstatement of the information could influence the decisions 
that financial statement users make about a specific reporting entity.
Since the 1960s, accounting standards setters in 
the United States have been building a conceptual 
framework for financial reporting—a coherent 
system of objectives and fundamentals intended 
to guide the evolution of GAAP. These State-
ments of Financial Accounting Concepts estab-
lish the basics, such as why general purpose 
financial reports are produced and what kinds 
of information they should provide but they are 
not actual accounting rules.
Relevance
Faithful representation
Primary
characteristics
Materiality
Completeness
Neutrality
Components
Comparability
Verifiability
Timeliness
Understandability
Enhancing
characteristics
Free from
material error
Decision
usefulness
Predictive
value
Confirmatory
value
Figure 1.2 DESIRABLE CHARACTERISTICS OF ACCOUNTING INFORMATION
Source: “Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting: Chapter 1, The Objective of General Purpose Financial Reporting, and Chapter 3, Qualitative Characteristics of Useful 
 Financial Information,” Statement of Financial Accounting Concepts No. 8 (Norwalk, CT: FASB, September 2010).
12 See “Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting: Chapter 1, The Objective of General Purpose Financial Reporting, 
and Chapter 3, Qualitative Characteristics of Useful Financial Information,” Statement of Financial Accounting Concepts 
No. 8 (Norwalk, CT: FASB, September 2010). This concept statement replaces SFAC No.1 and No. 2.

18 
CHAPTER 1
The Economic and Institutional Setting for Financial Reporting
• Faithful Representation: The financial information actually depicts the underlying eco-
nomic event. If a company’s balance sheet reports trade accounts payable of $254.3 mil-
lion when the company actually owes suppliers $266.2 million, then the reported  figure is 
not a faithful representation of the amount owed. To achieve faithful representation, the 
financial information must be complete, neutral, and free from material error.
• Completeness: Financial information can be false or misleading if important facts are 
omitted. Including all pertinent information helps to ensure that the economic event is 
faithfully represented.
• Neutrality: Information cannot be selected to favor one set of interested parties over 
another. For example, accountants and auditors cannot allow a company to reduce 
an estimated doubtful accounts expense just so the company can evade a bank loan 
covenant.
• Free from material error: Many economic events depicted in financial reports are 
 measured under uncertainty. Because estimates and judgments are common, we should 
not expect all accounting measurements to be error-free. However, some minimum 
level of accuracy is also necessary for an estimate to be a faithful representation of an 
economic event.
 
Materiality plays a critical role, first in management’s judgments in preparing the finan-
cial statements, and then in the judgments of independent accountants who audit the state-
ments. Suppose management unintentionally fails to record a $100,000 expense and the 
bookkeeping error is discovered shortly after the end of the quarter. Unless this error is cor-
rected, quarterly earnings will be overstated by, say, 2.4%, but the overstatement will reverse 
out next quarter when the expense is eventually recorded. Is the misstatement material? 
Should the quarterly financial statements be corrected now? Or is the self-correcting misstate-
ment immaterial and unimportant?
 
According to both the FASB and the SEC, the answer depends on both quantitative (the 
amount of the misstatement) and qualitative (the possible impact of the misstatement) consid-
erations. Financial statements are materially misstated when they contain omissions or mis-
statements that would alter the judgment of a reasonable person.13 Quantitative materiality 
thresholds, such as “an item is material if it exceeds 5% of pre-tax income,” are inadequate 
because they fail to recognize how even small misstatements can impact users’ perceptions. 
For example, a small percentage misstatement can be material if it allows the company to 
avoid a loan covenant violation, reverses an earnings trend, or transforms a loss into a profit.
 
Figure 1.2 also identifies four qualitative characteristics—comparability, verifiability, 
timeliness, and understandability—that enhance the decision usefulness of relevant and 
 representationally faithful financial information. Comparability across companies allows 
analysts to identify real economic similarities in and differences between underlying eco-
nomic events because those similarities or differences are not obscured by accounting meth-
ods or disclosure practices. Consistency, another facet of comparability, occurs when the 
same accounting methods and disclosure practices are used to describe similar events from 
period to period. Consistency allows trends—and turning points—in economic performance 
or condition to be identified because the trends are not masked by changes in accounting 
methods or disclosure practices.
13 Material misstatements can result either from errors, which are unintentional, or fraud, which is intentional and meant to 
deceive financial statement users. See “Materiality,” SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 99 (Washington, DC: SEC, August 12, 
1999) and the FASB’s Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 250-10-S99-1 Accounting Changes and Error Corrections—
Overall—SEC Materials—Materiality.

 
The Rules of  the Financial Reporting Game 
19
 
Verifiability means that independent measurers should get similar results 
when using the same yardstick. For example, the 2012 net sales of $11,699 mil-
lion reported by Whole Foods Market, the organic grocery chain, is verifiable to 
the extent that knowledgeable accountants and auditors would agree on this 
amount after examining the company’s sales transactions for the year. So, verifi-
ability refers to the degree of consensus among measurers. Financial informa-
tion that lacks verifiability is less reliable for decision purposes. Timeliness 
refers to information that is available to decision makers while it is still fresh 
and capable of influencing their decisions. An example is sales to customers 
made during the current quarter as opposed to sales made a distant quarter ago. 
Understandability is the characteristic of information that enables users to com-
prehend its meaning. Management has a responsibility to ensure that the com-
pany’s financial information is properly assembled, classified, characterized, 
and presented clearly and concisely. Professional analysts also have a responsi-
bility. They must not only possess a reasonable understanding of the business and economic 
events, they must also be able to read financial reports and be willing to study the information.
 
No single accounting method has all of these characteristics all of the time. In fact, GAAP 
frequently requires financial statement users to accept a compromise that favors some qualita-
tive characteristics over others. For example, GAAP financial statements would show a real 
estate company’s office building investment at its historical cost (original purchase price) 
minus accumulated depreciation. The most relevant measure of the office building is often the 
discounted present value of its expected future rental revenues, but this measure is not as rep-
resentationally faithful or verifiable as historical cost because future vacancy rates are unpre-
dictable and must be estimated. GAAP’s use of historical cost trades off increased 
representational faithfulness and verifiability for decreased relevance. Qualitative trade-offs 
such as this arise frequently and make it difficult to identify what are the “best” accounting 
methods and disclosure practices. Of course, cost also is a pervasive constraint on the infor-
mation that financial statements can provide. GAAP recognizes that financial reporting costs 
must be justified by the benefits of reporting that information.
Who Determines the Rules?
The U.S. federal government, through the SEC, has the ultimate authority to determine the 
rules to be followed in preparing financial statements by companies whose securities are sold 
to the general public in the United States. This authority was given to the SEC 
when it was established in 1934 by Congress in response to the severe stock 
market decline of 1929. The SEC requires companies to file both annual and 
quarterly financial statements as well as other types of reports. The SEC’s 
Electronic Data Gathering and Retrieval (EDGAR) system receives, pro-
cesses, and disseminates more than 500,000 financial statements every year. 
In 2009 alone, the EDGAR website logged over 1 billion searches.
 
Although the SEC has the ultimate legal authority to set accounting principles in the United 
States, it has looked to private-sector organizations to establish these principles. (The SEC 
retains enforcement authority.) The FASB, or simply “the Board,” is the organization that 
 currently sets accounting standards in the United States. The SEC monitors the FASB’s 
Conservatism in accounting strives to ensure 
that business risks and uncertainties are ade-
quately reflected in the financial reports. For 
 example, it is prudent to record possible losses 
from product liability litigation as soon as those 
losses become probable and measurable. Doing 
so helps statement readers assess the potential 
cash flow implications of the litigation even 
though an exact dollar amount has not yet been 
determined. Unfortunately, conservatism is 
sometimes used to defend poor accounting 
 judgments such as overstated provisions for 
“big bath” restructuring costs or “cookie-jar” 
 reserves described in Chapter 3.14
14 See R. Watts, “Conservatism in Accounting, Part I: Explanations and Implications,” Accounting Horizons, September 
2003, pp. 207–21; and R. Watts, “Conservatism in Accounting, Part II: Evidence and Research Opportunities,” Accounting 
Horizons, December 2003, pp. 287–301.
Prior to the establishment of the FASB, the 
American Institute of Certified Public Accoun-
tants (AICPA) had the primary responsibility for 
setting accounting standards in the United States. 
The AICPA’s Auditing Standards Board still sets 
standards for private company audits.

20 
CHAPTER 1
The Economic and Institutional Setting for Financial Reporting
 activities and works closely with the FASB in formulating reporting rules. Although the FASB 
is funded through accounting support fees levied against issuers of securities (as provided for 
by the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002), it exists as an independent group with seven full-time 
members and a large staff. Board members are appointed to five-year terms and are required 
to sever all ties with the companies and institutions they served prior to joining the Board.
 
Auditing standards for public companies are set by the Public Company Accounting 
Oversight Board (PCAOB), a private-sector, nonprofit corporation created by the Sarbanes-
Oxley Act of 2002. The PCAOB has two central roles: (1) to establish standards for auditing 
and ethics at public accounting firms under its jurisdiction and (2) to inspect and investigate 
the auditing practices of public accounting firms. The PCAOB can bar a person from partici-
pating in audits of public companies in the United States. The Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX) 
prohibits accounting firms that are not registered with the PCAOB from auditing public com-
panies in the United States. The SOX act also requires foreign accounting firms that audit 
U.S. companies to comply with PCAOB rules. Currently, about 2,400 U.S. and foreign 
 accounting firms are registered with the PCAOB.
 
How are financial reporting standards determined outside the United States? In some coun-
tries, it’s by professional accounting organizations akin to the FASB, and in other countries, 
it’s by commercial law and/or tax law requirements. The growth of global investing has 
spurred the development of worldwide accounting standards. These standards are now written 
by the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB). The IASB works to formulate 
accounting standards, promote their worldwide acceptance, and achieve greater convergence 
of financial reporting regulations, standards, and procedures across countries. The IASB has 
issued 13 International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), and still retains many of the 41 
International Accounting Standards (IAS) issued by the IASB’s predecessor body, the Interna-
tional Accounting Standards Committee (IASC). The IASB reviews existing IAS and often 
issues revised guidance as IFRS.
The Politics of Accounting Standards
Standards setting in the United States and most other countries is a political as well as techni-
cal process. FASB members make choices among financial reporting alternatives, and the 
particular alternative selected is unlikely to satisfy everyone. In making these choices, FASB 
is expected to serve a diverse constituency that includes preparers, auditors, and users of 
 financial statements as well as the public interest. The preference of any one constituent may 
differ substantially from that of some other constituent, and those divergent viewpoints can be 
difficult (if not impossible) to reconcile. To ensure that their voice is heard in the standards-
setting process, professional associations, industry trade groups, regulatory agencies, indi-
vidual companies (e.g., Apple) and even prominent individuals (e.g., Warren Buffett) can and 
do exert pressure on the FASB as new accounting rules are being deliberated. Disgruntled 
constituents lobby FASB, the SEC, and Congress, and sometimes take more direct action:
• Claiming irreparable injury because of an adverse effect to its debt-to-equity ratio, the coun-
try’s largest electric power company sued in the 1950s to block mandatory recognition of 
deferred tax liabilities (Chapter 13). The U.S. Supreme Court ruled against the company.
• Congress enacted the investment tax credit (ITC) in 1962 as part of an economic stimulus 
package. Under the ITC, businesses were permitted to reduce their income tax payable 
in the year in which a qualifying asset (think “equipment”) is purchased and put to use. A 
newly established accounting standard spread GAAP recognition of the ITC benefit over 
several years instead of recording it immediately. Many companies were not pleased by 
International

 
The Rules of  the Financial Reporting Game 
21
this approach because it presented a less favorable near-term earnings picture. Under pres-
sure from industry, accounting firms, and the Kennedy administration, the SEC stepped in 
and allowed immediate recognition, thus forcing a change to established GAAP.
• As part of the Energy Policy and Conservation Act of 1975, Congress instructed the SEC 
to require all oil and gas companies to use the same accounting method in their financial 
statements. At the time, companies could choose between two alternatives—successful 
efforts or full costing. The issue was added to the FASB agenda and the Board later al-
lowed only successful efforts. Most small and medium-sized oil and gas producers were 
using full costing. They vigorously protested FASB’s decision and enlisted support in 
Congress, the Departments of Energy and Justice, and the Federal Trade Commission. 
Those agencies believed that successful efforts would cause many producers to curtail 
their exploration activities (thus contributing to an oil shortage) or drive them into mergers 
with big oil companies (thus reducing the number of competitors in the industry). Once 
again, the SEC stepped in and overruled FASB’s position.15
• By the 1990s, employee stock options were a popular form of compensation especially 
among cash-starved high-technology firms. One reason was that GAAP did not require 
firms to record an expense when stock options were doled out. FASB was increasingly 
uncomfortable with this approach and moved to require a recorded expense. An unprece-
dented lobbying campaign by small, high-technology firms secured congressional support 
and prevented FASB from requiring recognition of the stock option expense in companies’ 
financial statements. Chapter 15 tells you more of the story.
Political pressure exerted by interested parties continues to shape the debates surrounding 
sensitive and controversial U.S. accounting standards. Some industry representatives and 
 politicians blamed a type of fair value accounting (called mark-to-market accounting) for 
contributing to the global financial crisis and the ensuing collapse of many banks. Although 
the intensity and frequency of political influence on financial reporting practices is unlikely to 
diminish in the future, it is important to remember that accounting standards reflect both:
1. Sound concepts coupled with independent and objective decision making by standards 
setters such as FASB.
2. Compromises necessary to ensure that proposed standards are generally acceptable.16
FASB Accounting Standards Codification™
Over the years, the FASB and its predecessors in the United States have published a seem-
ingly endless stream of pronouncements—concept statements, standards, opinions, interpreta-
tions, bulletins, and so on—that collectively constitute GAAP. Financial statement preparers 
(company accountants) and their independent auditors struggled to determine where to look 
for answers to financial accounting and reporting questions. For instance, at one time more 
than 200 pronouncements described GAAP revenue recognition rules. Many of the pro-
nouncements were industry specific and some produced conflicting results for economically 
similar transactions.
15 A chronology of the events surrounding this oil and gas accounting controversy can be found in G. Foster, “Accounting 
Policy Decisions and Capital Markets,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, March 1980, pp. 29–62.
16 To learn more about the politics of U.S. accounting standards, see Z. Palmrose, “Science, Politics, and Accounting: A View 
from the Potomac,” The Accounting Review, March 2009, pp. 281–98 and S. Zeff “The Evolution of U.S. GAAP: The Politi-
cal Forces behind Professional Standards,” The CPA Journal, January 2005, pp. 19–27 and February 2005, pp. 19–29.
Chapter 7 describes fair 
value accounting and the 
role it may have played in 
the crisis.

22 
CHAPTER 1
The Economic and Institutional Setting for Financial Reporting
 
Because the pronouncements were not equally authoritative, eventually the need arose to 
establish a pecking order among them. Responding to this need in 1975, the AICPA defined 
the phrase generally accepted accounting principles and established a GAAP hierarchy in 
Statement on Auditing Standards No. 69.17 According to the AICPA, GAAP is:
. . . a technical accounting term that encompasses the conventions, rules, and procedures necessary 
to define accepted accounting practice at a particular time. It includes not only broad guidelines of 
general application, but also detailed practices and procedures. (para. 2.02)
The GAAP hierarchy provided preparers and auditors with guidance about where to look for 
answers to financial accounting and reporting questions such as how to value convertible debt 
securities or when to record asset impairment charges. The hierarchy also provided guidance 
on how to resolve matters when the underlying pronouncements suggested different account-
ing approaches for the same business transaction. But it did not eliminate 
conflicting guidance or the need to search a voluminous GAAP literature for 
answers.
 In 2009, the FASB completed a five-year effort to distill the existing GAAP 
literature into a single database by creating the Accounting Standards Codi-
fication (or ASC), an online filing cabinet that groups all authoritative rules 
into roughly 90 topics.18 ASC is now the authoritative source of U.S. account-
ing and reporting standards for nongovernmental entities, in addition to guidance issued by 
the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). Accounting Standards Updates (or ASUs)  
modify the codification, provide background information about the revised guidance, and 
provide the basis for conclusions on changes made to ASC.
ASC Topical Structure and Referencing 
The ASC uses a structure in which 
the FASB’s authoritative accounting guidance is organized into topics, subtopics, sections, 
subsections, and paragraphs. Topics, the broadest categorization of related guidance, are 
grouped into four areas: presentation matters relating to financial statements or notes; finan-
cial statement accounts such as Receivables, Inventory, or Revenue; broad transactions 
 including business combinations and derivatives; and industries where specialized GAAP 
unique to an industry (airlines or gaming) or type of activity (software development) is 
 described. Subtopics represent subdivisions of a topic and are generally distinguished by 
type or scope. For example, Operating Leases and Capital Leases are two 
subtopics of the Lease topic. Sections are subdivisions such as Recognition, 
Measurement, or Disclosure that denote the nature of the content in a sub-
topic. Subsections and paragraphs allow further segregation and navigation 
of content.
 Topics, subtopics, and sections are numerically referenced and correlate 
very closely to International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). An example of the nu-
merical referencing is ASC 305-10-05 where 305 is the “Cash and Cash Equivalents” topic, 
10 denotes the “Overall” subtopic, and 05 is the “Overview and Background” section.
17 “The Meaning of Present Fairly in Conformity with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles,” Statement of Auditing 
Standards No. 69 (New York: AICPA, 1975). 
18 “The FASB Accounting Standards CodificationTM and the Hierarchy of Generally Accepted Accounting Principles—a 
Replacement of FASB Statement No. 162,” Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 168 (Norwalk, CT: FASB, 
2009), which is codified as FASB ASC 105, Generally Accepted Accounting Principles.
ASC includes some authoritative rules issued by 
the SEC but it is not the official source of SEC 
guidance on accounting and financial reporting 
matters and does not contain all SEC rules, 
 regulations, interpretive releases, and staff 
guidance.
Throughout this book, we use ASC numerical 
references when mentioning current U.S. GAAP 
but we use the original pronouncement reference 
(e.g., SFAS No. 162) when tracing the evolution 
of U.S. accounting practices.

 
Adversarial Nature of  Financial Reporting 
23
ADVERSARIAL NATURE OF FINANCIAL REPORTING
GAAP permits alternatives (such as LIFO versus FIFO for inventory valuation), requires  estimates 
(for example, the useful life of depreciable assets), and incorporates management judgments 
(are assets impaired?). Managers have a degree of flexibility in choosing specific accounting 
techniques and reporting procedures, and the resulting financial statements are sometimes 
open to interpretation.
 
Managers have reasons to exploit this flexibility. Their interests may conflict with the in-
terests of shareholders, lenders, and others who rely on financial statement information. Some 
companies adopt exemplary reporting standards while others tend to be less forthright. Ana-
lysts who understand these conflicting incentives as well as the flexibility available under 
GAAP will see that a decision based on uncritical acceptance of financial statement data may 
turn out to be naïve—and financially dangerous.
 
The flexibility of GAAP financial reporting standards provides opportunities to use accounting 
tricks that make the company seem less risky than it really is. For instance, some real liabilities 
such as equipment leases can be transformed into off-balance-sheet (and thus less visible) items. 
The company would then appear, from the balance sheet data alone, to have less debt and more 
borrowing capacity than is really the case. Commercial lenders who fail to spot off-balance-sheet 
liabilities of this sort can understimate the credit risk lurking in their loan portfolios.
 
Companies can also smooth reported earnings by strategically timing the recognition of 
revenues and expenses to dampen the normal ups and downs of business activity. This strategy 
projects an image of a stable company that can easily service its debt even in 
a severe business downturn. The benefits of such deceptions can be large if 
lenders are fooled.19 Furthermore, once the loan is granted, the company has 
additional incentives to report its financial results in ways that avoid default 
on loan covenants tied to accounting numbers.
 
Self-interest sometimes drives managers to manipulate the reported financial 
statement numbers to earn bonuses linked to sales or earnings targets. For ex-
ample, if earnings are down late in the fiscal year, product deliveries may be 
accelerated to increase recognized revenues and income before year-end. Man-
agers may also delay until next year discretionary expenses such as building 
repairs and maintenance if earnings this year are expected to be too low. On the 
other hand, if earnings are comfortably above the bonus goal, managers may 
write off obsolete equipment and inventory or increase allowances for uncol-
lectible trade receivables, whereas those same accounting adjustments are often 
postponed when earnings are inadequate.
 
Another way in which financial reporting practices can be molded to suit management’s 
interests is to downplay the significance of contingent liabilities, such as unresolved product 
liability lawsuits, that may affect firm value. For many reasons, management is likely to 
 understate the true significance of a major legal contingency. In a lawsuit, candid disclosure 
could compromise the company’s legal strategy. Similarly, public disclosure of impending 
financial hardships may harm the company if creditors respond by accelerating loan repay-
ment schedules, curtailing trade credit, or seeking to liquidate the business.
 
This discussion states the case boldly and may portray the motives underlying financial 
reporting practices in an unflattering light. In reality, most companies strive to provide fair 
19 Lenders are fooled when they mistakenly assign too little risk (thus charging too low an interest rate) to the borrowing. An 
interest cost savings of one-half of a percentage point on $1 billion of borrowings equates to $5 million (pre-tax) per year. If the 
company is in a 34% tax bracket and its stock trades at 15 times earnings, the payoff for concealing credit risk on financial state-
ments is $49.5 million in share value. This value increase represents a wealth transfer to shareholders from creditors.
Manville Corporation’s 1982 bankruptcy 
changed the way analysts view legal contingen-
cies. Although some people had been asking 
questions about the company’s exposure to 
 asbestos-related litigation for quite some time, 
Manville’s bankruptcy announcement caught 
most analysts and investors by surprise. That’s 
because the company’s last quarterly report prior 
to bankruptcy estimated the total cost of settling 
asbestos-related claims at about $350 million, 
less than half of Manville’s $830 million of 
shareholders’ equity. Manville’s bankruptcy 
 announcement put the potential damages at no 
less than $2 billion, and the company’s stock 
plunged by 35% the next day.

24 
CHAPTER 1
The Economic and Institutional Setting for Financial Reporting
and reasonable disclosure of their financial affairs. Some of these companies are undoubtedly 
motivated as much by honor and integrity as by the knowledge that they will be rewarded for 
being forthright. Other companies take full advantage of the leeway available under GAAP.
 
The SEC and the FASB provide constraints that limit the range of financial statement dis-
cretion. Auditors, sound corporate governance practices, and the courts further counterbalance 
opportunistic financial reporting practices. Nevertheless, the analyst should recognize the 
 adversarial nature of financial reporting, maintain a healthy skepticism, and understand that 
financial disclosures sometimes conceal more than they reveal. The flexibility inherent in 
GAAP can have dire consequences for those caught unaware.
Aggressive Financial Reporting: A Case Study
“We’re not saying they’re cooking the books, but there’s ample evidence to 
wonder if everything is on the up-and-up.”
—Arthur Russell, equity analyst at the investment firm of Edward Jones20
As the information technology sector ballooned during the 1990s, Computer Associates Inter-
national Inc. (CA) emerged as the world’s third-largest software company. In the business of 
software for managing mainframes and computer networks, CA was king. It offered business 
customers more than 1,200 software products that operated and connected large computers, 
storage technology, wireless products, and high-tech security systems. Annual revenues hit 
nearly $7 billion by fiscal 2000, net profits approached $700 million, and the company’s 40% 
operating margin rivaled that of Microsoft Corporation.
 
Investors were well rewarded for the company’s success. An investor who bought CA stock 
for $5 a share in January 1990 could have sold the stock for $75 in January 2000 when the 
tech bubble peaked. That’s a whopping 1,400% investment return, or about 31% each year for 
10 straight years. As for CA’s management team, in 1998, the company’s top three officers 
took home stock grants collectively worth $1.1 billion, the largest award of this sort ever paid 
to U.S. executives. Outraged by the sheer size of the awards, investors sued the company and 
a judge later reduced the awards by almost half, but even $500 million is a princely sum.
 
CA and other software companies faced a vicious downturn in customer sales once the dot-
com bubble burst in 2000. As customers cut back their software spending, CA’s stock price 
tumbled (see Figure 1.3). CA changed its revenue accounting policies in May 2000 and sliced 
a hefty $2.56 billion off the total for the previous five years. Then in July 2000, CA said that 
quarterly revenues would fall short of analysts’ estimates. Investors ran for cover, and the 
stock plunged 42% that day.
 
CA revamped its software license contracts in October 2000 and began offering customers 
more flexible payment terms. Rather than making a single upfront payment, customers could 
opt for a “subscription” plan and pay the multiyear license fee in equal installments over time. 
CA also radically changed the way it reported its financial results. In addition to the required 
GAAP financial statements where all contract revenue was booked immediately, CA provided 
“pro forma” results that recalculated past revenue and earnings as if they were based on the new 
subscription approach. The difference between the two sets of numbers, GAAP and “pro forma,” 
was often quite startling. In the first quarter after adopting the new approach, CA reported pro 
forma profits of $247 million while under GAAP it suffered a $342 million loss. Analysts didn’t 
entirely trust the pro formas numbers, in part because revenue was being double counted.
 
Aggressive accounting concerns continued to dog CA for several years. In February 2002, 
the company announced that the SEC had launched an investigation into CA’s accounting 
20 As quoted in S. Hamm, “Getting to the Bottom of Computer Associates,” BusinessWeek, September 30, 2002.

 
Adversarial Nature of  Financial Reporting 
25
practices. The announcement followed on the heels of an investment rating downgrade of CA 
debt. News articles in the financial press described the company’s accounting woes and ques-
tioned whether there was anything improper or illegal about the way CA kept its books.
The Accounting Issues 
The first accounting controversy surfaced in May 2000 when 
CA changed how it booked revenues from software licenses that were renegotiated during the 
 licensing period. Here’s an example to illustrate the issue. Suppose that CA sells a one-year soft-
ware license on July 1, 1999, for $20 million to a business customer who pays the full amount in 
cash upfront. On January 2, 2000, the customer renegotiates the license, adding several more 
software products and extending the licensing period for another six months. The new license 
bundle is priced at $25 million, but the customer pays only $15 million cash after deducting a 
$10 million credit for the unused portion of the original (July 1999) license. The following diagram 
shows the licensing period and payment associated with the original and renegotiated contract.
$0
$10
$20
$30
$40
$50
$60
$70
$80
January 26, 2000:
Revenues for the quarter 
grow by 33% and the 
stock peaks at $75.
May 15, 2000:
Changes revenue
recognition method for
the first time.
October 25, 2000:
Changes software contract terms and
begins providing pro forma results.
Critics say it hides shrinking revenues.
February 22, 2002:
Says that it is the subject
of accounting probe by 
the SEC.
February 5, 2002:
Debt rating is lowered
by rating agency.
July 3, 2000: Says quarterly
revenues will fall 20% short of
analysts’ expectations.
Figure 1.3
COMPUTER ASSOCIATES 
INTERNATIONAL
Daily Stock Price from 
January 4, 1999, through 
December 31, 2002.
Original $20 million contract
Renegotiated $25 million contract
6/30/2000
12/31/2000
Contract value
Credit for unused
portion of license
Amount actually paid
$20 million
$20 million
$25 million
(10) million
$15 million
1/2/2000
7/1/1999

26 
CHAPTER 1
The Economic and Institutional Setting for Financial Reporting
 
How did CA account for the original and renegotiated license? Consistent with GAAP, the 
company booked the entire $20 million of revenue from the original contract on July 1, 1999. 
That’s when the customer signed the licensing agreement, the software product was delivered, 
payment occurred, and CA’s obligation to the customer ended.
 
What about the renegotiated license? Well, prior to May 2000, CA would book as revenue 
the entire value of the contract ($25 million) even though the customer paid only $15 million 
for the added software and extended license. In effect, CA double counted $10 million of 
revenue associated with the original license agreement, first as part of the $20 million re-
corded in 1999 and then again as part of the $25 million in 2000. To square its books in 2000, 
CA would deduct as a “cost of sales” the $10 million credit the customer received for the 
 unused portion of the original license.
 
Investors and analysts who were unaware of the double counting at CA would mistakenly 
presume that software revenue increased over time, from $20 million in 1999 to $25 million 
in 2000 in our example. However, the reality of our example is that both software revenue and 
cash receipts from customers instead declined from $20 million to $15 million.
 
CA stopped double-counting revenue on renegotiated software licenses in May 2000. 
When the company announced this accounting change, investors and analysts learned that 
double counting had added $2.56 billion to software revenue over the previous five years.
 
The second accounting controversy at CA stemmed from the company’s decision in 
 October 2000 to roll out a new subscriptions-based business model and begin reporting results 
using nonstandard pro forma accounting in its press releases. Here’s an excerpt from the quar-
terly earnings press release issued just after CA launched the new business model and 
 revamped accounting:
Reaping the benefits of an innovative business model designed to provide greater flexibility to 
customers, to improve revenue predictability, and to unlock shareholder value, Computer Asso-
ciates International, Inc. (NYSE: CA) today reported financial results for its third fiscal quarter. 
The results, reported on a pro forma pro rata basis, beat analysts’ consensus earnings per share 
estimates of $0.40 by $0.02.21 [Emphasis added]
The press release also stated that pro forma software revenue increased 13% to $1.284 billion 
compared to the same quarter the previous year and that pro forma operating income  increased 
28% to $247 million. CA touted the pro forma numbers as providing more clarity to investors 
and analysts because they presented sales as if all revenues—past, present, and future—were 
based on the company’s new subscription business model.
 
Also disclosed in the quarterly earnings press release, the company’s GAAP financial 
statements painted a very different picture of performance that quarter. Software revenue mea-
sured according to GAAP was only $783 million, down almost 53% from the same quarter 
one year earlier. The company also had a GAAP loss of $342 million compared to a profit of 
$401 million one year earlier. CA urged investors and analysts to ignore the traditional GAAP 
numbers and to instead focus on the nonstandard pro forma numbers.
 
The discrepancy between the GAAP and pro forma numbers made it tough for analysts and 
investors to determine whether the company’s business was actually improving or worsening 
on a quarter-to-quarter basis. Some just scratched their heads. “They are definitely selling soft-
ware for sure,” said one analyst, “[but] it is hard to tell how much and to whom. . . .”22 Critics 
complained that the pro forma numbers allowed CA to hide the fact that it had previously 
stretched accounting rules to inflate sales. While analysts seemed perplexed, investors were 
decisive in their reaction, sending the stock up 5.8% the day quarterly earnings were released.
You’ll learn more about 
GAAP revenue recognition 
rules in Chapters 2 and 3.
21 Computer Associates International Inc. press release issued January 22, 2001.
22 A. Berenson, “Computer Associates Stock Drops Sharply Once Again,” The New York Times, February 22, 2002.

 
An International Perspective 
27
Questions to Consider 
This scenario raises several intriguing questions about 
 corporate financial reporting practices, managerial behavior, and the influence of accounting 
information on the decisions of investors, creditors, and others:
• How flexible is GAAP, and how much latitude is available to managers in the choice of 
“acceptable” accounting practices?
• What factors influence the accounting methods managers use? Why do firms change 
 accounting methods? Does a change in accounting imply that previously reported 
 figures (those produced using the old method) were incorrect?
• Do company disclosures make clear what accounting methods are used? Do those disclo-
sures enable analysts to adjust reported figures when a company’s accounting method 
 either deviates from industry norms or changes through time?
• Can firms use one accounting method in their GAAP financial statements and some other 
nonstandard (pro forma) method when reporting results in press releases?
• How do analysts and investors use reported earnings and balance sheet numbers when 
valuing a firm’s common stock?
• How does an accounting change alter creditors’ opinions about a company’s future cash 
flows and credit risk?
Perhaps the most provocative question, however, centers on the allegations raised in 2002 by an 
SEC investigation into Computer Associate’s accounting practices. Did the company violate 
GAAP and mislead investors by using accounting procedures that failed to provide an accurate and 
timely portrayal of historical profit performance, current financial condition, and future pros-
pects? Subsequent chapters of this book help you formulate answers to these and related ques-
tions about financial reporting practices in the United States and other countries.
Epilog 
Computer Associates admitted in October 2003 that some software license con-
tracts had been backdated, a practice known internally as “the 35-day month,” to mask declin-
ing performance and meet Wall Street forecasts for quarterly sales and profits. An internal 
investigation was launched, and CA restated $2.2 billion in sales that had been improperly 
booked during 1999 and 2000. The company spent $30 million on the investigation and 
 reviewed tens of thousands of internal e-mail messages and 1,000 license agreements with 
customers. Employees who did not cooperate with the investigation were fired.
 
The Justice Department and the SEC sued CA and several top executives. CA agreed in 
2004 to pay $225 million in restitution to shareholders and submit its accounting to an inde-
pendent monitor. Seven former executives pleaded guilty to civil charges of securities fraud 
and obstruction of justice in connection with the company’s accounting scandal. Two other 
top executives, the company’s former chief executive and the former top salesman, confessed 
to a wide-ranging conspiracy to inflate sales and interfere with the subsequent federal inquiry. 
They are serving prison sentences of up to 12 years each.
AN INTERNATIONAL PERSPECTIVE
Because financial reporting practices vary widely in countries outside the United States and 
because international business transactions are now more frequent and complex, the profes-
sional life of an analyst—in any country—has become more difficult. Multinational compa-
nies are regularly shifting resources throughout the world. These shifts cannot be accomplished 
efficiently without reliable financial information that permits careful analysis of investment 
opportunities and continuous control over how resources are deployed. Multinational companies 
Backdating occurs when 
someone intentionally alters 
the contract signing date so 
that revenue can be booked 
in an earlier period. For ex-
ample, suppose a customer 
and seller sign a $20 million 
software license agreement 
on January 3, 2000, but then 
backdate it to December 30, 
1999. Unless the backdating 
is discovered, the seller 
would mistakenly record the 
$20 million as revenue in 
1999 rather than in 2000.
Accounting scandals are not 
unique to U.S. firms. Promi-
nent foreign firms where 
 accounting irregularities have 
been uncovered include 
 Livedoor (Japan), Royal 
Ahold (the Netherlands), 
Parmalat (Italy), and Satyam 
Computer Systems (India).

28 
CHAPTER 1
The Economic and Institutional Setting for Financial Reporting
must also resolve differences in national currencies and accounting rules when combining the 
financial statements of all their foreign and domestic businesses into consolidated reports.
 
The Coca-Cola Company, for example, conducts business in more than 200 countries, 
hedges foreign currency cash flows, and uses foreign loans to finance investments outside the 
United States. Sales in North America (Canada and United States) represented 44.2% of 2011 
worldwide revenues and generated 22.8% of worldwide operating income. By contrast, Latin 
America sales were only 9.4% of 2011 operating revenues, but this region produced 27.7% of 
Coca-Cola’s worldwide operating income.
 
Understanding the economic, political, and cultural factors that contribute to regional dif-
ferences in operating performance is daunting even for the most experienced financial analyst. 
Yet assessing a multinational company’s current performance and future prospects requires 
experience, knowledge, and skill with these factors.
 
Global competition is prevalent in most industries today as companies facing mature do-
mestic markets look outside their home borders for new customers and growth. Exhibit 1.1 
presents sales, net income, and assets for three automobile manufacturers that compete on a 
worldwide basis: Ford Motor Company, Fiat S.A., and Honda Motor Company. Honda, a 
Japanese firm, reports financial statements in Japanese yen, Ford uses U.S. dollars, and Fiat, 
an Italian company, uses the euro for financial reporting purposes. Which company was the 
most profitable?
 
In the upper part of Exhibit 1.1, the financial statement amounts reported by these three 
companies are not directly comparable because each firm uses a different currency. For ex-
ample, Honda had sales of 10,011,241 million yen but how does this yen-denominated amount 
compare to Ford’s revenue of $129,166 million? The yen/dollar exchange rate averaged 
110.10 for the year. This means that each U.S. dollar was worth about 110.10 yen. In the case 
of Fiat, the euro/dollar exchange rate averaged about 0.68 for the year. The lower part of the 
EXHIBIT 1.1
Ford, Fiat, and Honda
Revenue, Net Income, and Assets (in millions)
 
Ford Motor Co. 
Fiat S.A. 
Honda Motor Co.
 
(United States) 
(Italy) 
(Japan)
As reported in local currency
 Revenue 
129,166 
59,380 
10,011,241
 Net income 
(14,672) 
1,721 
137,005
 Assets 
218,328 
61,722 
11,818,917
U.S. dollar equivalents
 Revenue 
129,166 
87,368 
100,012
 Net income 
(14,672) 
2,532 
1,369
 Assets 
218,328 
87,009 
121,510
Local currency 
U.S. dollar 
Euro 
Yen
Accounting methods 
U.S. GAAP 
IFRS 
U.S. GAAP
Fiscal year-end 
December 31 
December 31 
March 31
Note: Sales and net income in the lower part of the table are restated into U.S. dollars using the average exchange rate 
for the fiscal year because the flows occur throughout the year. Year-end assets are restated into U.S. dollars using the 
exchange rate as of the end of fiscal year.
Source: Company financial statements. 

 
An International Perspective 
29
exhibit shows each company’s sales, net income, and assets expressed in U.S. dollars. Here, 
you can see that Ford has the largest sales ($129,166 million), but Fiat is the most profitable 
($2,532 million).
 
Another factor complicates our analysis. Financial statement comparisons of this type become 
less meaningful when accounting standards and measurement rules vary from one country to 
another. Both Ford and Honda use U.S. GAAP, but Fiat prepares its financial statements using 
IFRS. As a result, Fiat’s lower reported sales and net income might not be attributable to eco-
nomic factors if IFRS income recognition rules are more conservative than U.S. rules. Analysts 
must be aware of potential differences in accounting standards and guard against the tendency to 
assume that financial statements are readily comparable across national borders.
International Financial Reporting
Stock exchanges around the world now offer domestic investors the opportunity to purchase 
securities (primarily common stock) issued by foreign companies. Foreign companies com-
prise roughly 14% of the stocks listed on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) and over 20% 
of those listed on the London Stock Exchange (LSE). Clearly, investors who choose to concen-
trate on a specific industrial or commercial sector are compelled to think globally these days.
 
Before the early 1990s—when cross-border investing was nascent— 
accounting standards for use by domestic companies were developed by 
home-country organizations (e.g., Accounting Standards Board in the United 
Kingdom and the French Conseil National de la Comptabilité in France).23 
The resulting diversity of financial reporting recognition, measurement, and 
disclosure rules used in different countries complicated global investment 
 decisions. Even the philosophy and objective of financial reporting varied 
considerably between nations.
 
Two widely divergent financial reporting approaches existed. First was a 
group of countries whose financial statements were intended (at least in prin-
ciple) to capture and reflect the underlying economic performance and condition of the report-
ing entity. Financial reporting rules in those countries were designed to achieve this goal and 
thereby help investors and creditors make informed decisions. We’ll call this reporting 
 philosophy the economic performance approach.
 
The second group of countries had financial accounting and reporting rules 
that did not necessarily try to capture “economic reality.” Instead, financial 
statements in those countries simply conformed to mandated laws or detailed 
tax rules designed to achieve purposes such as raising tax revenues to fund 
government activities or stimulate capital investment. We’ll call this other re-
porting philosophy the commercial and tax law approach. Because this ap-
proach was widespread, investors reading foreign financial statements were 
often confronted with unfamiliar reporting rules, unique tax-driven financial 
statement items, and country-specific nuances. Happily, this confusing array 
of cross-border financial reporting options has been greatly simplified in 
 recent years.
23 To learn more about differences in accounting practices around the globe and the evolution of international accounting 
standards, see C. Nobes and R. Parker, Comparative International Accounting (Edinburgh Gate, England: Prentice Hall, 
2008); F. Choi and G. Meek, International Accounting (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2008); and M. Plumlee, Inter-
national Financial Reporting Standards (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2010).
This approach originated and evolved in both the 
United Kingdom and the United States. In turn, 
this Anglo-American accounting perspective 
 influenced financial reporting practices in most 
British Commonwealth countries and many 
 others. The phrase true and fair view is central 
to this perspective because it  expresses the notion 
that a company’s financial statements must re-
flect the  underlying economic performance and 
conditions experienced by the company.
Examples include France, Italy, and Belgium, 
where national tax laws still heavily influence 
 financial statements prepared for domestic distri-
bution. In Germany, Japan, and Switzerland, both 
commercial and tax laws influence the accounting 
and reporting standards. For example, to qualify 
for the extra depreciation tax deduction allowed by 
German tax law, a company’s financial statements 
must show the same depreciation charges shown 
on the tax return. Conformity requirements of this 
sort greatly restrict the ability of financial state-
ments to reflect economic  performance.

30 
CHAPTER 1
The Economic and Institutional Setting for Financial Reporting
Why Do Reporting Philosophies Differ Across Countries? 
A coun-
try’s financial reporting philosophy does not exist in a vacuum. Instead, it evolves from and 
reflects the specific legal, political, and financial institutions within the country as well as 
social customs. As one example, German workers have been entitled to representation on the 
governing boards of German companies since the early 1950s. Understandably, these labor 
representatives championed accounting practices that would ensure firm continuity—and thus 
future employment opportunities. Partially as a consequence of labor’s active board participa-
tion, Germany developed ultraconservative accounting rules and dividend guidelines designed 
to protect companies’ survival prospects and workers’ jobs. So, financial reporting differences 
across countries sometimes mirror societal differences.
 
Cross-country differences in financial reporting practices also arise from differences in 
how companies obtain financial capital. In countries where the bulk of capital is attracted 
from a broad base of external investors, those investors understandably want comprehensive 
data to help them select appropriate securities. So, external investors who provide capital de-
mand a reporting system that accurately depicts a company’s past economic performance and 
its future prospects. The United States, United Kingdom, and Canada are examples of this 
type of broad-based ownership because an exceedingly large portion of firms’ capital require-
ments in these countries are provided by individual debt and equity investors—either through 
direct investment in companies or indirectly through pension plans and mutual funds. The fi-
nancial reporting environment in these countries has evolved to meet this public financial 
market demand for information.
 
By contrast, in countries such as Japan and Germany, only a small amount of firms’ finan-
cial capital has historically been provided by individual investors. The primary capital provid-
ers in Germany have been several large banks—and the government itself. The German stock 
market is small. Similarly, large banks provide much of the financing in Japan; in addition, 
companies there also raise capital from members of their associated corporate group. Indi-
vidual investors were relatively unimportant in Japan. In countries such as Germany and 
 Japan, these few important capital providers wield great power including the ability to acquire 
information directly from the firm seeking capital. Because of this concentrated power and 
the insignificance of the public financial market, the demand for economically realistic 
reporting standards was low. Instead, financial reporting standards conformed to income tax 
rules or commercial law.
 
But sources of financing do shift over time. When this happens in a country, changes in the 
financial reporting environment occur as well.
Globalization and the Rise of IFRS 
As cross-border barriers in markets for 
goods, labor, and capital relaxed in the mid-1990s, international competitiveness increased. 
Companies throughout the world sought new global buyers for their goods and services by 
expanding and investing in new facilities and technologies. This expansion fueled a need for 
companies to access new and ever-larger sources of capital to finance these initiatives. But in 
countries that used the commercial and tax law approach to financial reporting such as France, 
Germany, and Japan, companies faced a severe disadvantage in raising capital. Foreign inves-
tors and other potential capital providers demanded transparent financial reports prepared 
using familiar reporting standards that reflected underlying firm economic performance. 
Statements based on narrow, national commercial law or tax rules, which companies in these 
countries normally provided, were deemed unsuitable. Consequently, many firms in countries 
where financial reports used the commercial and tax law approach felt compelled to pro-
vide foreign investors with supplemental financial statements prepared using U.S. GAAP 
These loosely interconnected 
corporate associations are 
called keiretsu. Keiretsu 
members  typically own 
shares of other member 
firms, an arrangement that 
provides a source of capital 
and further aligns the group’s 
incentives toward mutual 
benefits. Cross-ownership 
in the 20% to 30% range is 
not unusual.
IFRS—like U.S. GAAP—
embrace the economic 
 performance approach to 
 financial reporting. State-
ments prepared using IFRS 
are designed to provide a 
“fair presentation” of the 
underlying economic condi-
tions experienced by the 
company.

 
An International Perspective 
31
or international standards called IFRS. The hope was that the financial statements would be 
more understandable to foreign investors if they were prepared using procedures required by 
potential investors’ home countries. Daimler-Benz began issuing U.S. GAAP financial state-
ments in 1996, and Hoechst AG issued IFRS reports beginning in 1995. These two German 
companies apparently believed that U.S. GAAP- or IFRS-based financial reports would help 
attract more capital from investors outside their home country.
 
As this trend accelerated, a two-tiered financial report system emerged in many countries 
that previously had used the commercial and tax law approach to financial reporting. In the 
first financial reporting tier, rigid book/tax conformity is maintained in parent company fi-
nancial statements. The parent is an amalgamation that corresponds to the tax-paying and 
statutory entities comprising the firm—often (but not always) in the form of a holding com-
pany. Because the parent company statements conform to the commercial or tax law, they 
satisfy national legal rules. In the second financial reporting tier, separate statements directed 
to potential foreign investors are prepared. They are called consolidated financial statements 
(or group statements in foreign accounting terminology). These group statements include all 
of the company’s various operating subsidiaries. Firms hoped that these group statements—
prepared using more investor-friendly and familiar U.S. GAAP or IFRS rules—would facili-
tate access to foreign capital.
 
In 2001 and 2002, accounting scandals at companies such as Enron, WorldCom, Health-
South, and Global Crossing tarnished the reputation of U.S. financial reporting practices and 
lowered the appeal of U.S. GAAP for some foreign firms. Many believed this tipped the scale 
in favor of IFRS rather than U.S. GAAP as companies began to cope with the financial report-
ing demands of globalization. In June 2002, the Council of the European Union (EU) required 
all publicly traded EU companies to adopt by 2005 IFRS for financial reporting in consoli-
dated statements. In the words of the European Commission:
The regulation will help eliminate barriers to cross-border trading in securities by ensuring that 
company accounts throughout the EU are more reliable and transparent and that they can be 
more easily compared.24
The regulation affected approximately 8,000 companies in the EU and dramatically enhanced 
the visibility of IFRS.
International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) 
International Finan-
cial Reporting Standards are established by the IASB, an organization formed in 2001. Its 
predecessor, the International Accounting Standards Committee (IASC), was created in July 
1973 following an agreement by professional accounting organizations in Australia, Canada, 
France, Germany, Japan, Mexico, the Netherlands, Ireland, the United Kingdom, and the 
United States. The IASB has four stated goals:
1. To develop a single set of high-quality, understandable, enforceable, and globally 
 accepted international financial reporting standards (IFRS).
2. To promote the use and rigorous application of those standards.
3. To take account of the financial reporting needs of emerging economies and small and 
medium-sized entities.
4. To promote and facilitate the adoption of IFRS through the convergence of national 
 accounting standards and IFRS.
Consolidated financial state-
ments are described in 
Chapter 16.
24 European Commission Press Release, June 7, 2002.

32 
CHAPTER 1
The Economic and Institutional Setting for Financial Reporting
There are exceptions. For 
example, IFRS does not 
 permit use of the last-in, 
first-out (LIFO) method 
of inventory accounting 
 (described in Chapter 9).
The IASB and its predecessor committee have issued 54 standards and 
54 interpretations of those standards. The accounting practices set forth 
in these international standards are now in use by some, or all, 
 domestic-listed companies in 125 countries worldwide, although juris-
dictional variations persist. These variations arise because each country 
still has its own accounting standards-setting organization that must 
approve IFRS for use by domestic companies, and approval is not au-
tomatic. For example, financial institutions in Europe are not required 
to follow one provision of the international hedge accounting standards 
in IAS 39, “Financial Instruments: Recognition and Measurement,” because the provision 
was not sanctioned in the EU.
 
Compared to U.S. GAAP, IASB standards allow firms more latitude. IFRS often permit 
different accounting treatments for similar business transactions and events. Some critics con-
tend that this latitude is a natural result of the diversity of the IASB’s membership and 
constituencies.
 
IFRS differ from U.S. GAAP in another important way—the level of detail they encom-
pass. IFRS frequently follow a more generalized overview approach than do U.S. GAAP 
standards. This difference in the level of standards-setting detail has generated a strong debate 
about which of the two approaches is preferable. Critics of the principles-based IASB ap-
proach contend that IFRS are so general and the implementation guidance so ambiguous that 
company managers have excessive latitude in choosing accounting practices. This latitude 
makes it easier for them to evade debt covenant restrictions, realize bonus targets, reach earn-
ings goals, and/or achieve other contracting incentives. Critics of IFRS contend that because 
U.S. GAAP contains more detailed rules and implementation guidance, similar transactions 
tend to result in more similar accounting treatments.
 
Supporters of the IASB approach counter that IFRS are built on broad principles and are 
not narrowly defined, detailed standards such as those found in rules-based U.S. GAAP. They 
further assert that under a broad principles approach, the standard’s financial reporting objec-
tive is made clear. This leads to closer conformity between the financial statement numbers 
and the underlying economic reality. By contrast, they argue that narrow U.S. GAAP rules 
allow managers to invent loopholes that conform to the letter of the standard but simultane-
ously violate its spirit. These critics point to examples like Enron’s use of off-balance-sheet 
special purpose entities (SPEs) to mask corporate profitability and hide corporate liabilities. 
Provided that certain narrow guidelines were satisfied, U.S. GAAP did not require SPE 
 consolidation, thereby allowing Enron’s consolidated financial statements to conceal its dete-
riorating real business condition from investors and creditors.25
 
The SEC and FASB both admit that certain GAAP standards provide too much detailed 
guidance and too many scope exceptions.26 Since 2004, the FASB has endeavored to draft 
standards that clearly identify the accounting objective, explain the accounting principle(s) 
 being applied, avoid bright-line rules, and provide enough implementation guidance for 
 consistent application.27 In recent years, the FASB has also worked jointly with the IASB to 
draft new pronouncements, which has helped move GAAP closer to principles-based guidance.
The European Commission, in conjunction with the 
Accounting Regulatory Committee (a group composed 
of representatives of the Member State governments), 
must “endorse” IFRS for required use by EU compa-
nies. The Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee 
of the European Parliament can initiate delaying 
 actions, and the Parliament has veto power over 
 Commission endorsement.
25 This loophole is now mostly closed in U.S. GAAP. See the Variable Interest Entities Subsections under ASC Topic 810: 
Consolidation (pre-Codification FASB Interpretation No. 46). SPEs are discussed in Chapters 8 and 16.
26 See Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), Study Pursuant to Section 108(d) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 on the 
Adoption by the United States Financial Reporting System of a Principles-Based Accounting System (Washington, DC: SEC, 
July 2003) and FASB, Proposal: Principles-Based Approach to U.S. Standard Setting (Norwalk, CT: FASB, October 2002).
27 See “On the Road to an Objectives-Oriented Accounting System,” The FASB Report (Norwalk, CT: FASB, August 2004).

 
An International Perspective 
33
The March toward Convergence 
Consider the financial reporting choice faced 
by Toyota Motor Company, the Japanese automobile manufacturer. The company’s stock is 
traded on the Tokyo Stock Exchange and on the New York Stock Exchange. Investors world-
wide can buy or sell Toyota shares on either exchange. Which set of presently available 
 country-specific accounting standards—Japanese GAAP or U.S. GAAP—should Toyota use 
to prepare its financial statements?
 
Perhaps the best answer is neither! Suppose there is a third choice, a single set of account-
ing standards accepted worldwide and one that more fairly presents Toyota’s economic per-
formance and condition to global investors. This is the goal of the growing movement toward 
international convergence of accounting standards.
 
The arguments favoring convergence are both clear and compelling. Differences in ac-
counting practices and reporting systems make cross-border comparisons difficult and costly 
and impose an increasing burden on economic efficiency. Without convergence, some coun-
tries might be tempted to reduce the quality of their accounting standards in a short-sighted 
attempt to attract foreign firms to list on their local stock exchanges. As a first step toward 
achieving convergence, more and more countries outside the United States are requiring their 
listed companies to adopt IFRS rather than domestic GAAP.
 
The FASB and IASB have also worked toward eliminating differences between U.S. 
GAAP and IFRS. The process began with the October 2002 Norwalk Agreement that focused 
on short-term projects aimed at convergence improvements in accounting for nonmonetary 
exchanges, business combinations, and changes in accounting policies. In 2006, the FASB 
and IASB signed a memorandum of understanding, endorsed by the SEC and European Com-
mission, which outlined a process for achieving even greater convergence.28 These efforts 
have achieved some success, in part because U.S. GAAP and IFRS are grounded in the same 
economic performance philosophy. However, important differences between U.S. GAAP and 
IFRS remain. Here are three examples:
1. Reversal of inventory write-downs. Both IFRS and U.S. GAAP require companies to write 
down inventory if its market value declines below what the company paid for it (Chapter 9 
tells you why and how). Under IFRS, the inventory value is also written back up to the higher 
initial figure if its market value recovers but U.S. GAAP does not permit “loss reversals.”
2. Extraordinary items. IFRS does not let companies segregate onetime events from normal 
income and designate them as extraordinary, as does U.S. GAAP (Chapter 2). This means 
that Gold Reserve Inc.’s $86 million GAAP extraordinary loss stemming from the 2008 
government expropriation of its Venezuelan mining properties would be included in 
 normal income under IFRS rules.
3. Research and development costs. U.S. GAAP requires R&D expenditures to be charged 
to expense in the period when they are made (Chapter 10). IFRS is more lenient and 
 allows “development phase” expenditures to be capitalized if technical feasibility and 
other criteria demonstrating value creation are attained.
In late 2009, the IASB and FASB agreed to redouble their convergence efforts with an aim of 
achieving solutions by June 2011 on several major projects that address consolidation, fair 
value measurement, revenue recognition, leases, and financial statement presentation among 
other topics. Working together, the IASB and FASB have sought to develop a single set of 
high-quality, compatible accounting standards that can be used for both domestic and cross-
border financial reporting. The path to achieving this goal may be long.
28 See A Roadmap for Convergence between IFRSs and U.S. GAAP—2006 Memorandum of Understanding between the 
FASB and the IASB (Norwalk, CT: FASB, 2006).

34 
CHAPTER 1
The Economic and Institutional Setting for Financial Reporting
 
Meanwhile, the SEC has been considering whether it might allow U.S. firms to adopt 
IFRS.While acknowledging that IFRS use may benefit some U.S. companies, the SEC also 
has expressed concern that (1) the transition to IFRS might be prohibitively expensive; (2) the 
United States may not have sufficient influence over IASB standards setting; and (3) that the 
U.S. legal environment relies heavily contract language that refers to “U.S. GAAP.” As a re-
sult, the SEC staff is exploring other (more time-consuming) approaches such as standard-by-
standard GAAP revisions aimed toward convergence.29
 
The SEC already permits foreign businesses to list their securities on a U.S. stock exchange 
as long as certain procedures are followed. Foreign businesses that do not use U.S. GAAP or 
IFRS to prepare their financial statements must file a Form 20-F each year with the SEC. This 
form is designed for the convenience of U.S. financial statement readers because it reconciles 
the company’s reported financial results—specifically, earnings and shareholders’ equity—as 
shown in foreign GAAP or IFRS to what those numbers would have been under U.S. GAAP. 
This presumably allows investors to evaluate the performance of foreign issuers relative to U.S. 
companies using a common reporting basis—U.S. GAAP. However, the Form 20-F reconcilia-
tion may not fully achieve this goal. The reason is that SEC rules do not  require foreign firms 
to prepare complete financial statements on a U.S. GAAP basis. It requires only that Form 20-F 
identify the differences between the company’s home-country financial statements and U.S. 
GAAP. When no “finalized” financial statements in U.S. GAAP are provided by the foreign 
firm, the burden of constructing financial statements comparable to those provided by U.S. 
companies falls on the analyst. This task is often not straightforward.
All companies listed on the 
London Stock Exchange are 
required to use IFRS.
Foreign issuers are given six 
months to file the Form 20-F 
reconciliation, a substantial 
delay after the issuance of 
current home-country finan-
cial statements.
RECAP
The diversity in international accounting practices has narrowed in recent years as more 
countries around the globe embrace IFRS. The FASB and IASB have been working to-
ward eliminating differences between U.S. GAAP and IFRS, and the SEC has shown some 
(albeit cautious) interest in potentially adopting IFRS in the United States. Nonetheless, 
diversity in accounting practice remains a fact of life. Readers of financial statements 
must never lose sight of this diversity.
Financial statements are an extremely important source of information about a company, its 
economic health, and its prospects. They help improve decision making and make it possible 
to monitor managers’ activities.
• Equity investors use financial statements to form opinions about the value of a company 
and its stock.
• Creditors use statement information to gauge a company’s ability to repay its debt and to 
check whether the company is complying with loan covenants.
• Stock analysts, brokers, and portfolio managers use financial statements as the basis for 
their recommendations to investors and creditors.
• Auditors use financial statements to help design more effective audits by spotting areas of 
potential reporting abuses.
29 Final Staff Report: Work Plan for the Consideration of Incorporating International Financial Reporting Standards into the 
Financial Reporting System for U.S. Issuers (Washington DC: SEC, July 2012).
SUMMARY

Investors, creditors, and other interested parties demand financial statements because the in-
formation is useful. But what governs the supply of financial information?
• Mandatory reporting is a partial answer. Most companies in the United States and other 
developed countries are required to compile and distribute financial statements to share-
holders and to file a copy with a government agency (in the United States, that agency is 
the SEC). This requirement allows all interested parties to view the statements.
• The advantages of voluntary disclosure are the rest of the answer. Financial information 
that goes beyond the minimum requirements can benefit the company, its managers, and 
its owners. For example, voluntary financial disclosures can help the company obtain cap-
ital more cheaply or negotiate better terms from suppliers. But benefits like these come 
with potential costs: information collection, processing, and dissemination costs; competi-
tive disadvantage costs; litigation costs; and political costs. This means that two compa-
nies with different financial reporting benefits and costs are likely to choose different 
accounting policies and reporting strategies.
Different companies choose different accounting policies and reporting strategies because fi-
nancial reporting standards are often imprecise and open to interpretation. This imprecision 
gives managers an opportunity to shape financial statements in ways that allow them to 
achieve specific reporting goals.
• Most managers use their accounting flexibility to paint a truthful economic picture of the 
company.
• Other managers mold the financial statements to mask weaknesses and to hide problems.
• Analysts who understand financial reporting, managers’ incentives, and the accounting 
flexibility available to managers will maintain a healthy skepticism about the numbers 
and recognize that financial statements sometimes conceal more than they reveal.
The accountant’s and analyst’s job is made more difficult when financial reporting measure-
ment and disclosure rules differ across national boundaries. Reporting rules in some countries 
such as Canada, the United Kingdom, and the United States evolved to reflect firms’ underly-
ing economic performance. But reporting rules in many other countries—France, Germany, 
and Japan, for example—merely complied with taxation or other statutory requirements.
• Globalization forced many firms in countries using a commercial or tax law approach to seek 
foreign capital. In turn, this has led countries around the world to move to IFRS, making it 
easier for firms in their countries to raise capital in domestic and foreign financial markets.
• The FASB and IASB are working together to converge U.S. GAAP and IFRS but the road 
may be long and bumpy.
APPENDIX
GAAP IN THE UNITED STATES
This is a brief, historical overview of the public and private sector organizations that have in-
fluenced the development of financial accounting practices in the United States. As you shall 
see, some organizations have explicit legal authority to decide what constitutes U.S. GAAP. 
Other organizations lack that authority but remain influential.30
30 We gratefully acknowledge the substantial contributions of Professor Stephen A. Zeff to the material in this appendix.
 
Appendix 
35

36 
CHAPTER 1
The Economic and Institutional Setting for Financial Reporting
Early Developments
Corporate financial reporting practices in the United States prior to 1900 were primarily in-
tended to provide accounting information for management’s use. Financial statements were 
made available to shareholders, creditors, or other interested external parties 
on a limited basis. The New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), established in 
1792, was the primary mechanism for trading ownership in corporations. As 
such, it could establish specific requirements for the disclosure of financial 
information and thereby dictate accounting standards for corporations whose 
shares it listed. Beginning in 1869, the NYSE attempted to persuade listed 
companies to make their financial statements public. Few companies 
 complied. The prevailing view of corporate management was that financial information was 
a private concern of the company and that public disclosure would harm the company’s 
 competitive advantage.
 
Passage of the Sixteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution in 1913 and subsequent leg-
islation allowing the federal government to tax corporate profits set the stage for expanded 
corporate financial disclosure. This legislation required companies to maintain accurate finan-
cial recordkeeping systems; the goal of this legislation was to ensure proper tax accounting 
and to facilitate collection. However, corporate financial disclosures to outsiders were still 
limited.
 
The stock market crash of 1929 and the Great Depression that followed provoked wide-
spread concern about financial disclosure. Some observers alleged that the collapse of the 
stock market was due largely to the lack of meaningful requirements for reporting corporate 
financial information to investors and creditors.31 Many also believed that economic condi-
tions would not improve until investors regained confidence in the financial markets.
 
When Franklin D. Roosevelt was sworn in as president in March 1933, the economy was 
still paralyzed, unemployment was rampant, and the nation’s banking system was on the verge 
of collapse. In the Senate, public hearings exposed a pattern of financial abuse by such distin-
guished banking institutions as J.P. Morgan, National City Bank, and Chase National Bank 
that included insider trading, market manipulation, reckless speculation, and special favors to 
influential friends.
 
In an effort to bolster public confidence and restore order to the securities market, Con-
gress enacted the Securities Act of 1933, which required companies selling capital stock or 
debt in interstate commerce to provide financial information pertinent to es-
tablishing the value and risk associated with those securities. One year later, 
the act was amended to establish the SEC as an independent agency of the 
government, an agency whose function was to regulate both the securities 
sold to the public and the exchanges where those securities were traded. Com-
panies issuing stock or debt listed on organized exchanges were required to 
file annual audited reports with the SEC.32 The SEC was also empowered to establish and 
enforce the accounting policies and practices followed by registered companies.
 
These powers are given to the SEC in Section 19(a) of the Securities Act of 1933 as 
amended:
. . . the Commission shall have authority, for the purposes of this title, to prescribe the form or 
forms in which required information shall be set forth, the items or details to be shown in the 
balance sheet and earning statement, and the methods to be followed in the preparation of 
The library archive at the University of 
 California at Berkeley contains examples of 
public company annual reports dating back to 
the 1850s. The archive includes General Electric 
(1892), National Biscuit Company (Nabisco, 
1898), and Procter & Gamble (1891).
In January 1933, the NYSE began requiring all 
companies seeking exchange listing to submit 
independently audited financial statements and 
to agree to audits of all future reports.
31 See E. R. Willet, Fundamentals of Securities Markets (New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1968), pp. 208–14.
32 Security registration statements and other reports filed under the 1934 amendments to the Securities Act are public infor-
mation and are available for inspection at the SEC and at the securities exchange where the company’s securities are listed.

 
Appendix 
37
 accounts, in the appraisal or valuation of assets and liabilities, in the determination of deprecia-
tion and depletion, in the differentiation of recurring and nonrecurring income, in the differenti-
ation of investment and operating income, and in the preparation, where the Commission deems 
it necessary or desirable, of consolidated balance sheets or income accounts of any person di-
rectly or indirectly controlling or controlled by the issuer, or any person under direct or indirect 
common control with the issuer. The rules and regulations of the Commission shall be effective 
upon publication in the manner which the Commission shall prescribe.
In addition to its primary pronouncement—Regulation S-X, which describes the principal 
formal financial disclosure requirements for companies—the SEC issues Financial Reporting 
Releases, Staff Accounting Bulletins, and other publications stating positions on accounting 
and auditing matters.
 
The SEC’s Division of Corporation Finance (DCF) reviews the financial statements in both 
periodic filings and prospectuses to ensure compliance with SEC requirements. The DCF 
writes deficiency letters to companies when it has questions about their accounting and dis-
closure practices. If a company cannot satisfy the DCF’s concerns, it must revise and reissue 
its financial statements accordingly. Companies that fail to do so risk an SEC-imposed trading 
suspension or offering curtailment. No other securities commission in the world has such 
 extensive authority to regulate financial reporting practices.
 
Accounting Series Release No. 4, issued in April 1938, first expressed the SEC’s position 
that generally accepted accounting principles for which there is “substantial authoritative sup-
port” constitute the SEC standard for financial reporting and disclosure. The release further 
indicated that a company filing financial statements reflecting an accounting principle that had 
been formally disapproved by the SEC or for which there was no substantial authoritative sup-
port would be presumed to be filing misleading financial statements even though there was full 
disclosure of the accounting principles applied. However, the release did not provide guidance 
as to what the SEC meant by substantial authoritative support. This void was later filled.
Emergence of GAAP
The Securities Exchange Act of 1934 required the financial statements of all publicly traded 
firms to be audited by independent accountants but only if so stipulated by the SEC, which 
soon did so. This requirement elevated the role of the independent accoun-
tants’ professional organizations. These organizations were active in influenc-
ing accounting policy prior to the 1930s, but the securities acts accentuated 
the need for more formal accounting standards and for systematic public an-
nouncement of those standards.
 
During the years immediately following passage of the 1933 and 1934 secu-
rities acts, the SEC relied primarily on the American Institute of Certified 
 Public Accountants (AICPA), the national professional organization of certi-
fied public accountants, to develop and enforce accounting standards.33 In response to the SEC 
and to the growing need to report reliable financial information, the AICPA created the Com-
mittee on Accounting Procedure in 1939 to establish, review, and evaluate accepted accounting 
procedures. This committee began the practice of developing U.S. financial accounting and 
reporting standards in the private sector. The SEC, by a narrow vote, expressed its support for 
this private-sector approach to establishing U.S. accounting standards. The SEC did not delegate 
its standards-setting authority to the committee—by law, it cannot delegate that authority.
In 1938 and 1939, Congress permitted compa-
nies to use a new inventory method—LIFO or 
last-in, first-out described in Chapter 9—for in-
come tax purposes, but only if LIFO is also used 
in corporate annual reports to shareholders. This 
is one of the very few instances in which tax 
policy has influenced GAAP.
33 The American Association of Public Accountants was established in 1887 and represented the core of the accounting pro-
fession in the United States. The name of the organization was changed to the American Institute of Accountants in 1917, and 
it became the AICPA in 1957.

38 
CHAPTER 1
The Economic and Institutional Setting for Financial Reporting
 
Until its demise in 1959, the AICPA’s Committee on Accounting Procedure was responsi-
ble for narrowing the differences and inconsistencies in accounting practice. The committee 
issued 51 Accounting Research Bulletins (ARBs) and four Accounting Terminology Bulletins 
that set forth what the committee believed GAAP should be. These pronouncements were not 
binding on companies or their auditors.
 
In 1959, the AICPA established the Accounting Principles Board (APB) to replace the 
Committee on Accounting Procedure. The APB’s basic charge was to develop a statement of 
accounting concepts—that is, a conceptual foundation for accounting—and to issue pro-
nouncements resolving current accounting controversies. During its existence from 1959 to 
1973, the APB issued 31 Opinions and four Statements designed to improve financial ac-
counting and disclosure. (Opinions were mandatory accounting standards, Statements were 
not.) At the outset, the force of these pronouncements, as with earlier ARBs, depended on 
general acceptance and persuasion. The APB sought compliance with financial reporting stan-
dards by attempting to persuade corporations and independent auditors that the standards 
improved the quality of financial reporting. By 1964, many accounting professionals and 
business leaders were convinced that persuasion alone could neither reduce the tremendous 
latitude available under then-existing accounting and reporting practices nor eliminate incon-
sistencies in the application of those practices. Critics cited instances in which identical trans-
actions could be accounted for by any one of several different methods and net income could 
be manipulated by selecting a particular accounting approach from among several considered 
to be “generally accepted.”
 
A turning point in the development of corporate financial reporting standards occurred in 
October 1964 when the Council (or governing body) of the AICPA adopted a requirement that 
was later incorporated into the rules of ethics for independent CPAs:
Rule 203—Accounting Principles:
A member shall not (1) express an opinion or state affirmatively that the financial statements or 
other financial data of any entity are presented in conformity with generally accepted accounting 
principles or (2) state that he or she is not aware of any material modifications that should be 
made to such statements or data in order for them to be in conformity with generally accepted 
accounting principles, if such statements or data contain any departure from an accounting prin-
ciple promulgated by bodies designated by Council to establish such principles that has a mate-
rial effect on the statements or data taken as a whole. If, however, the statements or data contain 
such a departure and the member can demonstrate that due to unusual circumstances the finan-
cial statements or data would otherwise have been misleading, the member can comply with the 
rule by describing the departure, its approximate effects, if practicable, and the reasons why 
compliance with the principle would result in a misleading statement. [As amended.]34
This requirement provided further impetus to corporations and their auditors to implement the 
accounting standards prescribed in APB opinions and in earlier pronouncements not super-
seded by these opinions. (Of course, the SEC’s DCF is responsible for ensuring GAAP com-
pliance.) This in turn caused greater attention to be focused on the APB’s activities.
 
Complaints about the process used to develop financial reporting and accounting stan-
dards surfaced in the 1960s and early 1970s. Corporate management, government regulators, 
and other interested external parties voiced concern about the lack of participation by orga-
nizations other than the AICPA, the quality of the opinions issued, the failure of the APB to 
develop a coherent conceptual foundation for external financial reporting, the insufficient 
34 The Special Bulletin approved by the Council in 1964 referred to departures from APB Opinions, not GAAP, and did not 
mention the term misleading. In 1973, the Council approved the inclusion of language from the Special Bulletin as Rule 203. 
The GAAP “override” provision described in the last sentence of Rule 203 is rarely seen these days in the financial state-
ments of companies subject to SEC oversight, and most observers believe the SEC will not accept departures from GAAP.

 
Appendix 
39
output by the APB, and the APB’s failure to act promptly to correct alleged accounting and 
reporting abuses.
 
The APB was not immune to criticism from politicians, government regulators, and the 
business community. One example occurred in the early 1960s when the APB attempted to 
resolve the question of accounting for the investment tax credit. The APB initially required 
the tax credit to be treated as a balance sheet item, a reduction in the asset’s purchase cost, 
rather than as an immediate increase to earnings. This decision met with strong resistance 
from government, business, and several major accounting firms who argued that the APB’s 
approach would impede economic growth. After the SEC said it would allow both methods in 
filings with the Commission, the APB had no alternative but to rescind its 
earlier pronouncement (Opinion No. 2) and to permit the earnings increase 
(Opinion No. 4).35 This change in the accounting standard enabled firms to 
use the accounting methods they preferred for the investment tax credit. This 
disagreement over the accounting treatment for the investment tax credit epit-
omized the political interference inherent in the establishment of GAAP.
 
The 1971 Study Group on Establishment of Accounting Principles (or 
“Wheat Committee”) was formed by the AICPA to review and evaluate the 
private-sector standard-setting process as well as to recommend improve-
ments where possible. This committee was created because of growing con-
cern among accounting professionals over the APB’s ability to withstand 
pressure from the business community. The committee recommended that a new and indepen-
dent, full-time standards-setting organization be established in the private sector to replace the 
APB. This recommendation, which the AICPA approved and which became effective in July 
1973, created the FASB. The FASB was the first full-time accounting standards-setting body 
in the world.
 
The FASB differed from its predecessors in several ways:
1. Board membership consisted of 7 voting members, in contrast to the 18 members on the 
APB.
2. Autonomy and independence were enhanced by requiring members to sever all ties with 
their prior employers and by dictating that the FASB directly pay member salaries.
3. Broader representation was achieved by not requiring board members to hold a CPA 
license.
4. Staff and advisory support was increased substantially.
 
Accounting Series Release No. 150, issued by the SEC in December 1973, formally ac-
knowledged that financial accounting pronouncements of the FASB (and its predecessor orga-
nizations) are ordinarily considered by the SEC as having “substantial authoritative support” 
and thus are the SEC standards for financial reporting and disclosure. Accounting practices 
that are contrary to FASB pronouncements are considered to not have such support. This 
 release also reaffirmed the SEC’s private-sector approach to standards setting. It said,
the Commission intends to continue its policy of looking to the private sector for leadership in 
establishing and improving accounting principles and standards through the FASB with the ex-
pectation that the body’s conclusions will promote the interests of investors.
35 In fact, Congress passed legislation in December 1971 permitting the investment tax credit to “flow through” to reported 
earnings in the year the credit was taken against the company’s federal tax obligation. This situation illustrates the ultimate 
power of the Congress over the establishment of financial reporting and accounting standards in the United States. See “Ac-
counting for the Investment Credit,” APB Opinion No. 2 (New York: AICPA, 1962); “Accounting for the Investment Credit,” 
APB Opinion No. 4 (New York: AICPA, 1964).
During the transition period between the APB 
and FASB, the SEC took a more active and ag-
gressive role in policy making. During its last 
nine months of operation (October 1972 through 
June 1973), the APB issued seven opinions in an 
attempt to complete its agenda of in-process ac-
counting policy considerations. The SEC issued 
eight releases on accounting matters during this 
same period and another nine during the first 
year of the FASB.

40 
CHAPTER 1
The Economic and Institutional Setting for Financial Reporting
Current Institutional Structure in the United States
The SEC still retains broad statutory powers to define accounting terms, prescribe the 
methods to be followed in preparing financial reports, specify the details to be presented in 
financial statements, and enforce financial accounting and reporting rules. Under the Secu-
rities Act of 1933, companies wanting to issue securities interstate must file a prospectus 
with the SEC. The prospectus is a public document prepared for each new security offering 
containing information about the company, its officers, and its financial affairs. The finan-
cial section of the prospectus must be audited by an independent CPA who is registered to 
practice before the SEC. Once securities have been sold to the public, the company is re-
quired to file publicly accessible, audited financial statements with the SEC each year. 
These annual statements are known as the 10-K filing. In addition, unaudited quarterly fi-
nancial reports (called 10-Q filings) are required. The annual 10-K disclosure requirements 
closely overlap the information in the company’s published financial statements but are 
more extensive.36
 
Although the SEC has wide statutory authority to impose financial reporting rules, it con-
tinues to rely on private sector organizations (currently the FASB) to set accounting standards. 
The SEC has occasionally forced these organizations to tackle critical problems, and it once 
rejected an accounting standard issued by the FASB.37 Such situations occur rarely.
 
Since July 1973, the FASB has been responsible for establishing accounting standards in 
the United States. The FASB has issued more than 70 Accounting Standards Updates (ASUs), 
168 Statements of Financial Accounting Standards, eight Statements of Financial Accounting 
Concepts, and numerous interpretations. FASB Technical Bulletins, Staff Implementation 
Guides, Staff Announcements, and Staff Positions provide clarification and interpretation 
guidance, but they represent the views of staff, not the Board. In 2009, the FASB distilled this 
voluminous GAAP literature into a single authoritative database called the Accounting Stan-
dards Codification (ASC).
 
The FASB has neither the authority nor the responsibility to enforce compliance with 
GAAP. That responsibility rests with company management, the accounting profession, the 
SEC, and the courts. Some observers believe that compliance is the weak link in the private-
sector standards-setting chain. These critics point to frequent litigation on financial report-
ing matters in the courts, the escalating cost of liability insurance premiums paid by audit 
firms, and criticism by the SEC’s chief accountant regarding the independence of external 
auditors.38
36 The financial reporting and accounting requirements pertaining to SEC registrants are described in the following publica-
tions: Regulation S-X, the original and comprehensive document issued by the commission that prescribes financial reporting 
rules and the forms to be filed with the SEC; Accounting Series Releases, which are amendments, extensions, and additions 
to Regulation S-X; Special SEC Releases that relate to current issues as they arise; Accounting and Auditing Enforcement 
Releases (AAERs), which document the SEC response to accounting and auditing irregularities; and Financial Reporting 
Releases (FRRs). The FRRs and AAERs are the successors to Accounting Series Releases. Staff Accounting Bulletins are 
issued by Office of the Chief Accountant and DCF and serve as interpretations of Regulation S-X and its amendments, exten-
sions, and additions; they do not carry the legal weight of SEC releases.
37 “Financial Accounting and Reporting by Oil and Gas Producing Companies,” Statement of Financial Accounting Standards 
(SFAS) No. 19 (Stamford, CT: FASB, 1977). This statement was issued after protracted deliberation, and it identified a single 
method of accounting that was to be followed by all affected companies. In August 1978, the SEC ruled that a new method 
of accounting for oil and gas reserves needed to be developed and that in the meantime, companies could use any method that 
had been generally accepted prior to SFAS No. 19. This directly contradicted the FASB and required the issuance of both a 
statement suspending SFAS No. 19 and a second FASB statement finally bringing the SEC and FASB into conformity with 
one another. SEC involvement was, in part, due to enactment of a public law requiring an investigation into and action on the 
state of oil and gas accounting rules by December 25, 1977. Such legal deadlines in connection with the accounting stan-
dards-setting process are rare.
38 W. P. Schuetze, “A Mountain or a Molehill?” Accounting Horizons, March 1994, pp. 69–75.

 
Appendix 
41
 
The FASB follows a “due process” procedure in developing Accounting Standards Up-
dates. This process is designed to ensure public input in the decision process. Most updates 
issued by the FASB go through three steps:
1. Discussion-memorandum stage: After the Board and its staff have considered a topic 
on its agenda and perhaps consulted with experts and other interested parties, it issues a 
discussion memorandum. This memorandum outlines the key issues involved and the 
Board’s preliminary views on those issues. The public is invited to comment in writing on 
the memorandum, and public hearings are sometimes held to permit interested individuals 
to express their views in person.
2. Exposure-draft stage: After further deliberation and modification by the Board and its 
staff, an exposure draft of the proposed update is issued. During this stage, a period of not 
less than 30 days, further public comment is requested and evaluated.
3. Voting stage: Finally, the Board votes on whether to issue an ASU describing amendments 
to the Accounting Standards Codification or to revise the proposed update and reissue a 
new exposure draft. For a proposed update to become official and a part of GAAP, a 
 majority of Board members must approve it.
 
Influential groups and organizations use the FASB’s due process to plead for alternative 
solutions. The arguments often include cost-benefit considerations, claims that the proposed 
accounting treatment is not theoretically sound or will not be understood by users, implemen-
tation issues, and concerns that the proposed update will be economically harmful to specific 
companies, industries, or the country.39 Government agencies, preparer organizations such as 
the Business Roundtable, and industry trade organizations such as Financial Executives Inter-
national create substantial pressures on the Board. Some contend that the interests of inves-
tors, creditors, and other financial statement users are not always well represented in this 
political forum. Others disagree.
 
What does the future hold? According to one keen observer of the process by which 
 accounting principles are established in the United States, history is destined to repeat itself:
When a highly prescriptive standards setter is coupled with a rigorous enforcement process 
used by a government regulator to secure compliance with accounting standards, especially in a 
confrontational society such as the United States, companies and even branches of government 
will lobby the standards setter not to approve standards that interfere with their business plans 
and strategies. This is what has happened increasingly in the United States since the 1970s, 
and there is no sign that, on sensitive and controversial issues, it will diminish in intensity or 
frequency.40
Public Company Accounting Oversight Board 
When Congress gave the 
task of setting accounting standards to the newly created SEC in 1934, it left the job of over-
seeing auditing standards and individual audit firms to the accounting profession. For nearly 
seven decades, the AICPA and its predecessor organization have performed the job. In the late 
1970s, the AICPA formed the Public Oversight Board to monitor the conduct of auditors. The 
Board was funded by the dues paid by members of the AICPA’s SEC Practice Section, but it 
had little power to enforce auditing standards or discipline wayward audit firms.
39 For example, SEC reversal of SFAS No. 19 was justified on the grounds that implementation of the proposed accounting 
standard would sharply inhibit petroleum exploration and development activities.
40 S. A. Zeff, “The Evolution of U.S. GAAP: The Political Forces Behind Professional Standards,” The CPA Journal, Febru-
ary 2005.

42 
CHAPTER 1
The Economic and Institutional Setting for Financial Reporting
 
The Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB), the successor to the old 
Board, is funded by mandatory fees from public companies and operates under the SEC’s 
oversight. The new Board was created by the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX) of 2002. The 
PCAOB is empowered to establish auditing standards, including standards for independence 
and ethics, and to conduct periodic quality reviews (“inspections”) of auditors’ work. It can 
also investigate alleged audit failures and impose penalties on auditors and their firms. The 
PCAOB can fine, censure, suspend, or bar from practice auditors and audit firms for 
wrongdoing.
SOX Compliance 
The groundbreaking SOX was enacted to rein in earlier accounting 
abuses by strengthening auditor independence and improving financial reporting transpar-
ency. In addition to establishing the PCAOB, SOX requires company compliance in a number 
of areas. For most companies, Sections 302 and 404 represent the bulk of SOX compliance 
work. The following is a brief overview of each section.
Section 302: Corporate Responsibility for Financial Reports. This section requires CEOs 
and CFOs to personally certify the accuracy of financial statements and related disclosures in 
the annual and quarterly reports. CEOs and CFOs must certify that those statements fairly pre-
sent in all material aspects the results of operations and financial condition of the company.
Section 404: Management Assessment of Internal Controls. This section requires an annual 
evaluation of internal controls and procedures for financial reporting. CEOs and CFOs must 
periodically assess and certify the effectiveness of internal controls and procedures. Companies 
are obliged to include an internal control report in their annual report. Among other things, this 
report:
• Acknowledges management’s responsibility for establishing and maintaining internal control 
over financial reporting.
• Contains an assessment of the effectiveness of the company’s internal control over  financial 
reporting as of the end of the most recent fiscal year.
• Discloses any material weaknesses uncovered in the company’s internal controls.
Section 404 also requires a company’s external auditor to examine and report on manage-
ment’s assessment of internal controls as well as the effectiveness of the controls 
themselves.
 
In addition to these provisions, SOX Section 906 requires CEOs and CFOs to sign and 
certify that the company’s financial statements comply with SEC reporting requirements 
and fairly represent the company’s financial condition and results. Willful failure to com-
ply with this requirement can result in fines of up to $5 million and imprisonment for up to 
20 years.
 
The accounting profession and SEC have long recognized that sound internal controls are 
essential to ensure financial statement credibility. For example, in December 1977, after hun-
dreds of public companies disclosed bribes, kickbacks, and political payoffs, Congress 
amended the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 to require issuers to have reasonable internal 
controls. In 1981, the U.S. Senate attempted to delete this section of the law but failed. Over 
the years, several professional groups have urged the SEC to require management reporting to 
shareholders on the effectiveness of internal control. Among these are the Report of the Na-
tional Commission on Fraudulent Financial Reporting (the Treadway Commission) in 1987, 
the Public Accounting Oversight Board in 1993, and the General Accounting Office in 1996. 
In the end, a crisis of confidence and congressional action rather than a proactive SEC  resulted 
in legislation requiring that corporations have adequate internal controls to ensure complete 
and accurate financial reporting.

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
43
PROBLEMS / DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
Required:
1. Explain why each of the following groups might want financial accounting information. 
What type of financial information would each group find most useful?
 
a. The company’s existing shareholders.
 
b. Prospective investors.
 
c. Financial analysts who follow the company.
 
d. Company managers.
 
e. Current employees.
 
f. Commercial lenders who have loaned money to the company.
 
g. Current suppliers.
 
h. Debt-rating agencies such as Moody’s or Standard and Poor’s.
 
i. Regulatory agencies such as the Federal Trade Commission.
2. Identify at least one other group that might want financial accounting information about 
the company, and describe how it would use the information.
P1-1
Demand for accounting 
 information (LO 1)
P1-2
Incentives for voluntary 
 disclosure (LO 3)
Required:
1. Describe how the following market forces influence the supply of financial accounting 
information:
 
a. Debt and equity financial markets.
 
b. Managerial labor markets.
 
c. The market for corporate control (for example, mergers, takeovers, and divestitures).
2. What other forces might cause managers to voluntarily release financial information 
about the company?
3. Identify five ways managers can voluntarily provide information about the company to 
outsiders. What advantages do these voluntary approaches have over the required finan-
cial disclosures contained in annual and quarterly reports to shareholders?
P1-3
Costs of disclosure (LO 3)
Required:
1. Define each of the following disclosure costs associated with financial accounting infor-
mation, and provide an example of each cost:
 
a. Information collection, processing, dissemination costs.
 
b. Competitive disadvantage costs.
 
c. Litigation costs.
 
d. Political costs.
2. Identify at least one other potential disclosure cost.
P1-4
Determining why financial 
 reporting rules differ (LO 5)
Allocating resources in the most efficient manner maximizes the wealth of any country. It is 
generally acknowledged that financial information plays an important role in efficient re-
source allocation.
Required:
Given that both of the preceding statements are correct, why are the financial reporting rules in 
some countries (e.g., Canada and the United States) designed to be very helpful to external inves-
tors whereas in other countries (e.g., Germany and Japan) they are intended to be less helpful?

44 
CHAPTER 1
The Economic and Institutional Setting for Financial Reporting
P1-5
Generally accepted 
 accounting principles 
(GAAP) (LO 4)
A friend of yours sent an e-mail asking about generally accepted accounting principles 
(GAAP). It seems your friend was browsing through Whirlpool Corporation’s recent annual 
report and she spotted the following statement:
The financial statements have been audited by Ernst & Young LLP, an independent registered 
public accounting firm, whose report, based upon their audits, expresses the opinion that these 
financial statements present fairly the consolidated financial position, statements of income and 
cash flows of Whirlpool and its subsidiaries in accordance with accounting principles generally 
accepted in the United States.
She asks you what generally accepted accounting principles are, in what ways they are important 
to independent auditors and external users (investors or creditors), and where they come from.
Required:
1. What are generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP)?
2. Why is GAAP important to independent auditors and to external users?
3. Describe the FASB organization and how it establishes new accounting rules.
4. Describe the IASB organization and its role in establishing new accounting standards.
5. How does the Securities Exchange Commission (SEC) influence the financial reporting 
practices of U.S. companies?
P1-6
Relevant versus faithful 
 representation (LO 1)
You have decided to buy a new automobile and have been gathering information about the 
purchase price. The manufacturer’s website shows a “list price” of $24,500, which includes 
your preferred options: leather trim and digital audio player. You have also consulted the 
“Blue Book” guide to car prices and found that the average price paid for a similar new vehi-
cle is $19,500. However, the guide also indicates that recent selling prices have ranged from 
$18,000 up to $22,000.
Required:
1. Which price quote, the “list price” or the “Blue Book” average price, is the more relevant 
for your decision? Why?
2. Which price quote is more representationally faithful? Why?
P1-7
Accounting information 
 characteristics (LO 1)
Farmers State Bank is considering a $500,000 loan to Willard Manufacturing. Three items 
appearing on Willard’s balance sheet are:
a. Cash on hand and in the bank, $20,000.
b. Accounts receivable of $60,000, less an allowance for uncollectibles of $15,000.
c. Accumulated depreciation of $36,000.
Required:
1. Which of the balance sheet items—cash, net accounts receivable, or accumulated 
 depreciation—is the most relevant for the bank’s loan decision? Why?
2. Which of the balance sheet items is the most representationally faithful? Why?
P1-8
Accounting conservatism 
(LO 1)
Suppose your company purchased land and a warehouse for $5 million. The price was steep, 
but you were told that a new interstate highway was going to be built nearby. Two months 
later, the highway project is canceled and your property is now worth only $3 million.
Required:
1. How does the concept of accounting conservatism apply to this situation?
2. Suppose instead that you paid $3 million and later learned that the property is worth 
$5 million because a new highway is going to be built nearby. How does the conservatism 
concept apply to this new situation? Why?

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
45
P1-9
Your position on the issues 
(LO 4)
Required:
Provide a two- or three-sentence response that argues for or against (indicate which) each of 
these statements:
1. Accounting is an exact science.
2. Managers choose accounting procedures that produce the most accurate picture of the 
company’s operating performance and financial condition.
3. U.S. accounting standards are influenced more by politics than by science or economics.
4. If the FASB and SEC were not around to require and enforce minimum levels of financial 
disclosure, most companies would provide little (if any) information to outsiders.
5. When managers possess good news about the company (that is, information that will in-
crease the stock price), they have an incentive to disclose the information as soon as possible.
6. When managers possess bad news about the company (that is, information that will 
 decrease the stock price), they have an incentive to delay disclosure as long as possible.
7. Managers who disclose only the minimum information required to meet FASB and SEC 
requirements may be doing a disservice to shareholders.
P1-10
Economic consequences of 
accounting standards 
(LO 3)
In the early 1990s, the FASB issued new rules that dramatically altered the way in which many 
companies recorded their obligations for postretirement health care benefits. The Board found 
that most companies used “cash basis” accounting and waited until expenditures for benefits 
were actually made before recording any expense. This meant that no liability to pay future 
benefits appeared on the companies’ balance sheets even though an obligation to pay future 
health care benefits clearly existed. The FASB concluded that this approach was inappropriate 
and instead required companies to record the cost of future health care benefits as incurred.
 
The affected companies and their trade organizations argued that having to record a liabil-
ity and an expense equal to the extremely large dollar amounts of these health care benefit 
commitments would cause employers to substantially reduce their promised benefits to em-
ployees and perhaps curtail the benefits entirely.
Required:
1. Why were companies concerned about suddenly reporting a large liability (and corre-
sponding expense) for postretirement health care benefits? What economic consequences 
might this accounting change have on the affected companies?
2. Some affected companies said they would reduce or eliminate promised benefits to avoid 
recording the liability and expense. This action harms employees who will then have to 
bear the burden of future health care costs. Should the FASB consider economic conse-
quences of this sort when updating accounting standards? Why or why not?
P1-11
Two sets of books (LO 1)
“It’s time for the government to stop enabling accounting fraud. The Internal Revenue Service 
and the SEC let companies keep two sets of books, one for tax reporting and the other for fi-
nancial reporting. There should be no difference in the figures corporations report to the IRS 
and the SEC. The combined surveillance and enforcement by these agencies of one set of 
books and identical tax and financial reports should give the investing public a clearer picture 
of corporate performance.” Letter to the Editor, BusinessWeek, August 12, 2002.
Required:
1. Why do companies keep two sets of accounting books, one for tax reporting and the other 
for shareholder financial reports?
2. Why might it not be a good idea to force companies to issue the same financial statements 
for both IRS and SEC purposes?

46 
CHAPTER 1
The Economic and Institutional Setting for Financial Reporting
P1-12
Accounting quality and the 
audit committee (LO 4)
The New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) and the National Association of Securities Dealers 
(NASD) require that listed firms have audit committees of independent (that is, outside) com-
pany directors. Audit committees review the firm’s audited financial statements with manage-
ment and with the outside auditor and recommend to the full board of directors that the 
statements be included in the company’s annual report. As a committee member, you might 
ask management about the following:
1. What are the key business and financial risks the company has to deal with in its financial 
reporting?
2. What financial reporting areas involved subjective judgments or estimates, and how are 
those judgments made and estimates determined?
3. Are there significant areas where the company’s accounting policies were difficult to 
determine?
4. How do the company’s accounting practices compare with those of others in the industry?
5. Are the financial statements and underlying accounting methods consistent with those 
used last year?
6. Are alternative accounting practices being proposed or considered that should be brought 
to the committee’s attention?
7. Were there serious problems in preparing the financial statements?
8. Have outside parties including the SEC, major investors, analysts, and the news media 
voiced concern about the company’s accounting practices?
9. Were there disagreements between management and the auditor regarding accounting 
practices and, if so, how were they resolved?
Source: Audit Committee Update 2000, PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP.
Required:
Explain for each question why the audit committee and investors might be interested in the 
answer.
P1-13
Worldwide convergence of 
accounting standards (LO 6)
The IASB and its predecessor organization have as a stated objective to narrow worldwide 
differences in accounting practices and the presentation of financial information. In February 
2006 at a ceremony in Beijing, People’s Republic of China, the Chinese Ministry of Finance 
announced the adoption of new Chinese accounting standards that bring about substantial 
convergence between them and the IASB’s IFRS. These are excerpts from a statement made 
during the ceremony by Sir David Tweedie, chairman of the IASB:
I am honoured to be here today to mark what I believe is an important step for the development 
of the Chinese economy and its place in the world’s increasingly integrated capital markets. The 
adoption of the new Chinese accounting standards system brings about substantial convergence 
between Chinese standards and International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRSs), as set by 
the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB). Like the United States and Japan, China 
is committed to convergence with IFRS. . . .
 
The benefits of these accounting reforms for China are clear. The new Chinese standards that 
incorporate accounting principles familiar to investors worldwide will encourage investor confidence 
in China’s capital markets and financial reporting and will be an additional spur for investment 
from both domestic and foreign sources of capital. For Chinese companies that are increasingly 
playing a global role, the acceptance of the new standards should also reduce the cost of complying 
with the accounting regimes of the different jurisdictions in which they operate. . . .
Required:
1. Why might it be beneficial to narrow worldwide differences in accounting practices? Are 
there any disadvantages associated with convergence?

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
47
2. Explain how the convergence of Chinese accounting standards and IFRS can benefit the 
Chinese investor who invests only in Chinese companies.
3. Explain how the convergence of Chinese accounting standards and IFRS can benefit the 
U.S. investor who sometimes invests in Chinese companies.
P1-14
Debt covenants and 
 aggressive accounting 
 practices (LO 4)
Friedman’s Inc. is a leading fine jewelry retailer. In November 2004, the company said that it 
might default on certain of the financial covenants contained in one of the company loan 
agreements. Here is an excerpt from the company’s press release:
In particular, Friedman’s expects that it will fail to meet cumulative EBITDA requirements for 
the period ending October 30, 2004, constituting a default under its term loan, and it will fail to 
meet a minimum ratio of Accounts Payable to Inventory as of October 30, 2004, constituting a 
default under both its term loan and its revolving loan. Friedman’s is currently in discussions 
with its senior lenders under the credit facility regarding the amendment of its covenants to 
eliminate the default.
EBITDA stands for earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization. Appar-
ently, Friedman’s term loan contained a provision that required the company to maintain a 
minimum level of profitability (measured using EBITDA) over several periods (hence, the use 
of “cumulative,” meaning summed over the periods in question).
Required:
1. What will happen to the company if it violates these two covenants and is unsuccessful in 
obtaining a waiver or amendment from senior lenders?
2. Explain how the EBITDA covenant creates an incentive for Friedman’s to engage in ag-
gressive accounting practices. Provide one or more examples of aggressive accounting 
that Friedman’s might use to avoid violating the EBITDA covenant.
3. Explain how the accounts payable to inventory covenant also creates an incentive for 
Friedman’s to engage in aggressive accounting practices.
P1-15
Rules versus Principles in 
Lease Accounting (LO 6)
Both U.S. GAAP and International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) require firms to 
record lease contracts as the purchase of a leased asset and the incurrence of a liability when 
the contract terms meet certain established characteristics.
 
Among other things, U.S. GAAP currently requires this “capital lease” treatment when:
“(t)he lease term . . . is equal to 75 percent or more of the estimated economic life of the leased 
property” or where “(t)he present value at the beginning of the lease term of the minimum lease 
payments . . . equals or exceeds 90 percent of the . . . fair value of the leased property.” (ASC 
Topic 840)
IFRS currently requires this treatment when:
“the lease term is for the major part of the economic life of the asset” or where “at the inception 
of the lease the present value of the minimum lease payments amounts to at least substantially 
all of the fair value of the leased asset.” (IAS 17)
Required:
1. Which lease standard—U.S. GAAP or IFRS—is more rules-based? Which is more 
 principles-based? What specific language identifies the distinction?
2. As the Chief Financial Officer (CFO) of an airline company that leases air frames and jet 
engines, which standard would you prefer? Why?
3. As an outside auditor who is legally and professionally responsible for attesting to the validity 
of the choices made by the airline company CFO, which standard would you prefer? Why?

48 
CHAPTER 1
The Economic and Institutional Setting for Financial Reporting
P1-16
Toshiba Corporation (LO 6)
Locate the most recent annual report of Toshiba Corporation, the large Japanese electronics 
company, on the company’s website: www.toshiba.co.jp. You will find an electronic copy of 
the annual report in the “Investor Relations” section of the website.
Required:
1. Besides the financial statements and related notes, what other types of information are 
contained in the annual report?
2. What types of financial statements are included in the annual report?
3. What country’s GAAP rules does Toshiba follow in preparing its annual report?
4. Toshiba’s common stock is traded on the New York Stock Exchange. How can you deter-
mine if there are differences between Toshiba’s reported net income and the net income 
that would have been reported under U.S. GAAP?
P1-17
Carrefour Group (LO 5)
Locate the most recent annual report of Carrefour Group, the French retail company and the second 
largest retailer in the world, on the company’s website: www.carrefour.com. You will find an  electronic 
copy of the annual report in the “Finance: Publications and Presentations” section of the website. 
The report is in two parts: a summary “annual” report, and the more detailed “financial” report.
Required:
1. What types of financial information are contained in the “annual” report?
2. Besides the financial statements and related notes, what other types of information are 
contained in the “financial” report?
3. What types of financial statements are included in the “financial” report?
4. What country’s GAAP rules does Carrefour’s follow in preparing its financial statements?
5. How does the Carrefour’s statement of financial position (balance sheet) differ from those 
of U.S. companies?
CASES
Novartis AG is a Swiss company that develops, manufactures, and markets pharmaceuticals 
and vaccines. As of January 2005, European firms, including Novartis, were required to com-
pile their financial reports in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards 
(IFRS). In 2006, Novartis filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission a Form 
20-F that, among other things, included a reconciliation of “net income from continuing opera-
tions under IFRS” to “net income under U.S. GAAP.” A copy of that reconciliation follows.
C1-1
Novartis AG: Form 20-F 
 Reconciliation (LO 6)
 
 
2006 
2005 
2004
 
 
($ millions) 
($ millions) 
($ millions)
Net income from continuing operations under IFRS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
7,019 
6,072 
5,365
US GAAP adjustments:
Available-for-sale securities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
(114) 
278 
(183)
Inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
103 
20 
(43)
Associated companies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
 
(6) 
179
Intangible assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
(1,743) 
(1,238) 
(590)
Property, plant and equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
58 
53 
77
Pensions and other post-employment benefits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
(198) 
(181) 
(82)
Deferred taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
125 
178 
423
Share-based compensation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
(5) 
(44) 
(61)
Currency translation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
 
 
(301)
Minority interests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
(27) 
(11) 
(15)
Others . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
(68) 
 
9
Net income from continuing operations under US GAAP . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
5,150 
5,121 
4,778
Net income from discontinuing operations under US GAAP . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
114 
69 
15
Net income under US GAAP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
5,264 
5,190 
4,793

 
Cases 
49
Required:
1. What is the magnitude (in $ millions) of the difference between IFRS net income and 
U.S. GAAP net income?
2. Which net income number would Novartis managers prefer to report to stakeholders? 
Why?
3. As an investor who is considering buying shares of a pharmaceutical company, how 
would your decision be influenced if a candidate company reported $7,019 million of 
net  income rather than $5,264 million?
4. Why are Form 20-F reconciliations helpful to investors who plan to buy or sell shares of a 
foreign company traded on a U.S. stock exchange?
5. Why might Form 20-F reconciliations also be helpful to investors who plan to buy or sell 
shares of a foreign company traded on a foreign stock exchange?
As your first week at Henley Manufacturing Inc. draws to a close, you find a memorandum on 
your desk from the company’s CEO. The memo outlines sales and earnings goals for next 
year: Sales are expected to increase 15% with net income growing by 20%.
 
The memo says that these goals are ambitious in light of the company’s performance over 
the past two years—ambitious but attainable if “everyone remains focused and committed to 
our business strategy.”
 
As you finish the memo, your boss, the vice president of finance, steps into your office. 
She asks you what you think about the memo. You reply that it is important to have clear fi-
nancial goals but that you would need to know more before making any comments on whether 
the goals will be easy or difficult to achieve. As she leaves your office, you ask if the CEO will 
be announcing these goals at next week’s annual shareholders’ meeting. Your boss answers, 
“We’ve never disclosed our sales and earning goals in the past.” When you ask why, she says, 
“We aren’t required to under U.S. securities regulations.”
 
Two days later, your boss stops by again and tells you that she raised the issue of disclosing 
to shareholders the firm’s net income and sales goals at this morning’s executive committee 
meeting. The CEO was intrigued but requested that someone identify the costs and benefits of 
doing so. As she leaves your office, your boss asks you to prepare a briefing document for 
presentation at the next executive committee meeting.
Required A:
1. What are the potential costs and benefits to Henley Manufacturing of announcing its sales 
and earnings goals at the shareholders’ meeting?
2. Would you recommend that the CEO announce both, one, or neither goal? Why?
3. If the company’s sales and earnings goals covered three years rather than just next year, 
would your recommendation change? Why or why not?
Required B:
Suppose the memo was more detailed and described the following financial goals for next 
year: annual sales growth of 15%; annual earnings growth of 20%; a return on net tangible 
assets of 16%; a return on common equity of 20%; a minimum current ratio of 2.4; a mini-
mum interest coverage ratio of 7.0; a minimum profit margin of 5%; a dividend payout ratio 
(dividends/net income) of 35% to 40%; a maximum long-term debt to common equity ratio of 
40% to 45%; a minimum increase of 15% in annual capital expenditures; and a minimum in-
ventory turnover ratio of 4.5.
 
Would you recommend that the CEO disclose all, some, or none of these goals at the share-
holders’ meeting? Which ones and why?
C1-2
Henley Manufacturing Inc.: 
Announcing sales and 
 earnings goals (LO 3)

50 
CHAPTER 1
The Economic and Institutional Setting for Financial Reporting
The following excerpt is from Fortress International Group’s 2012 10-K report filed with the 
SEC and is a required disclosure:
[W]e earned approximately 46% of our total revenue from two customers for the year ended 
 December 31, 2012, and 43% from three customers for the year ended December 31, 2011.
Required:
1. Why does the SEC require companies like Fortress International to alert financial 
 statement readers to the existence of major customers?
2. How might this information be of use to a financial analyst?
3. Why might these two substantial customers want to monitor the financial performance and 
health of Fortress? What specific information about Fortress would be of most interest to 
the customers?
4. Why might Fortress want to monitor the financial performance and health of these two 
customers? What information about the customers would be of most interest to Fortress?
C1-3
Fortress International: 
Disclosing major customers 
(LO 2)
It is often alleged that the value of financial statement information is compromised by the 
latitude that GAAP gives to management. Companies can use different accounting meth-
ods to summarize and report the outcome of otherwise similar transactions. Inventory val-
uation and depreciation are examples in which GAAP allows several alternative accounting 
methods.
 
At one extreme, the FASB and the SEC could limit accounting flexibility by establishing a 
single set of accounting methods and procedures that all companies would apply. At the other 
extreme, the FASB and the SEC could simply require companies to provide relevant and reli-
able financial information to outsiders without placing any restrictions on the accounting 
methods used.
Required:
1. Why should managers be allowed some flexibility in their financial accounting and 
 reporting choices?
2. Of the two approaches to accounting standards setting that are mentioned, which better 
describes the current financial reporting environment in the United States?
3. Describe the advantages and disadvantages of these two approaches to accounting stan-
dards setting, and tell how these advantages and disadvantages vary across different 
groups of financial statement users.
C1-4
The gap in GAAP (LO 4)
Returning home from your job as a financial analyst covering the airline industry, you 
find a message from your father, a retired Federal Express (FedEx) pilot. He will be in 
town this evening and would like you to join him for dinner. He needs your investment 
advice. Having been with FedEx, he is ecstatic over an article he spotted on Business-
Week Online.
 
FedEx announced first quarter net income of $1.53 per share, up 39% from the $1.10 per 
share the company earned in the same quarter last year. FedEx also raised its forecasted earn-
ings for the year from $6.30 to $6.65 per share. Despite this good earnings news, the stock 
price fell nearly 2%.
Required:
Explain to your father why the price of FedEx shares might have fallen on the earnings an-
nouncement date.
C1-5
Federal Express: Making 
sense of an earnings 
 announcement (LO 1)

 
Collaborative Learning Cases 
51
FEDEX DIPS AFTER REPORTING STRONGER 
EARNINGS
FedEx Corp. (NYSE: FDX) on Sept. 21 reported stronger than 
expected quarterly earnings results, while expressing confi-
dence in both its own and the U.S. economy’s growth pros-
pects. However, its stock fell after the company issued 
guidance that was below consensus analyst forecasts.
 
The Memphis (Tenn.) package deliverer earned $1.53 per 
diluted share for the first quarter ended Aug. 31, compared to 
$1.10 per diluted share a year ago. The company, which is seen 
as a bellwether for the U.S. economy, said revenue surged 11% 
to $8.54 billion year over year.
 
“We remain confident in our ability to achieve solid prof-
itable growth by taking advantage of strong international 
trade trends, increased demand for fast-cycle logistics and 
the expansion of online purchasing,” said Frederick W. 
Smith, chairman, president and chief executive officer, in a 
press release. “The global economy is growing at a healthy 
pace with the U.S. economy growing at a moderate, sustain-
able rate.”
 
The company also revised its earnings forecasts after reach-
ing a tentative agreement on a new labor contract with its pi-
lots. The agreement, which is between FedEx Express and the 
Air Line Pilots Association, Int’l (ALPA), the collective bar-
gaining representative for FedEx Express pilots, will be sub-
ject to ratification vote during the fiscal second quarter.
 
FedEx now expects second quarter earnings to be $1.45 to 
$1.60 per diluted share, and earnings for the year to be $6.30 
to $6.65 per diluted share, reflecting a 20-cents charge for 
costs related to the new pilot contract if ratified. Excluding the 
impact of the up-front pilot compensation, the fiscal 2007 
earnings guidance range was increased by 5 cents per share 
from the company’s initial guidance.
 
FedEx’s stock price fell 1.7% to $105.70, erasing early gains.
 
Standard & Poor’s Corp. analyst Jim Corridore said FedEx 
beat his expectations for August quarter earnings per share by 
a penny. In a research note Sept. 21, he reiterated a strong buy 
on the stock. But he also slashed his fiscal year 2007 EPS esti-
mate to $6.65 from $6.80., noting an expected slowing of the 
U.S. economy.
Source: BusinessWeek Online (September 22, 2006).
You have been asked to attend a hastily called meeting of Landfil’s senior executives. The 
meeting was called to formulate a strategy for responding to questions from shareholders, 
analysts, and the media about Landfil’s accounting for site development costs. A major com-
petitor, Chambers Development, announced yesterday that it would no longer capitalize site 
development costs but instead would expense those costs as they were incurred. Stock market 
reaction to the Chambers announcement was swift and negative, with the stock down 57% at 
this morning’s opening of the NYSE.
 
Landfil Inc. acquires, operates, and develops nonhazardous solid waste disposal facili-
ties. Landfil is the third largest waste management company of its type in the United States 
with 37 disposal sites. Sales have been growing at the rate of 30% annually for the last five 
years, and the company has established a solid record of earnings and operating cash flow 
performance.
Accounting Policy
Landfil capitalizes site development costs in much the same way that Chambers Development 
did prior to its announcement yesterday. Under the old accounting method at Chambers 
 Development, when the firm spent $20 million on landfill site development, it would book the 
entire amount as a deferred asset. Then Chambers would spread the cost over 10 years by 
charging $2 million to earnings each year. Under the new accounting method, all $20 million 
is expensed in the first year.
C1-6
Landfil’s accounting change 
(LO 4)
COLLABORATIVE LEARNING CASES

52 
CHAPTER 1
The Economic and Institutional Setting for Financial Reporting
 
Landfil has included the following description of its site development accounting in all an-
nual reports issued during the last five years:
The Company capitalizes landfill acquisition costs, including out-of-pocket incremental 
 expenses incurred in connection with the preacquisition phase of a specific project (for 
 example, engineering, legal, and accounting due-diligence fees); the acquisition purchase price, 
including future guaranteed payments to sellers; and commissions. If an acquisition is not 
 consummated, or a development project is abandoned, all of such costs are expensed. Salaries, 
office expenses, and similar administrative costs are not capitalized. Landfill development 
and permitting costs, including the cost of property, engineering, legal, and other professional 
fees, and interest are capitalized and amortized over the estimated useful life of the property 
upon commencement of operations.
The Meeting
Discussion at the meeting became rather heated as several different points of view emerged. 
Some members of the executive team argued that Landfil should do nothing but reaffirm its 
capitalization policy, informing shareholders and others who contacted the company that this 
policy was consistent with GAAP and disclosed fully in the annual report. Other members of 
the team argued for a more proactive response involving both direct communication with 
shareholders and analysts as well as press releases to the media. These communications would 
also reaffirm the company’s capitalization policy but in a more strident manner. Still other 
members of the executive team argued that Landfil should immediately announce that it too 
was discontinuing capitalization in favor of immediate expensing. No clear consensus 
emerged as the meeting progressed, and the group decided to take a 10-minute break before 
resuming discussion.
 
As the meeting was about to reconvene, the CEO stopped by your chair and said, “I’ve 
been handed a phone message indicating that our largest shareholder has just called. She 
wants to know our reaction to the events at Chambers Development. I have to call her back in 
15 minutes with an answer. When the meeting starts, I’d like you to summarize the major 
 issues we face and to state how you think we should proceed.”
Required:
Prepare your summary.
.mhhe.com/revsine6e
www
Remember to check the book’s companion website 
for additional study material.

2
T
his chapter describes the key concepts and practices that govern the measurement 
of annual or quarterly income (or earnings) for financial reporting purposes. 
Income is the difference between revenues and expenses.1 The cornerstone of 
income measurement is accrual accounting. Under accrual accounting, revenues are 
recorded (recognized) in the period when they are “earned” and become “realized or 
realizable”—that is, when the seller has performed a service or conveyed an asset to a 
buyer, which entitles the seller to the benefits represented by the revenues, and the value to 
be received for that service or asset is reasonably assured and can be measured with a high 
degree of reliability.2 Revenues are considered realizable when the related assets received or 
held are readily convertible to known amounts of cash or claims to cash.3 Expenses are the 
expired costs or assets that are used up in producing those revenues. Expense recognition 
is tied to revenue recognition. Therefore, expenses are recorded in the same accounting 
period in which the revenues are recognized. The approach of tying expense recognition 
to revenue recognition is commonly referred to as the “matching principle.”
 
A natural consequence of accrual accounting is the decoupling of measured earnings 
from operating cash inflows and outflows. Reported revenues under accrual accounting 
generally do not correspond to cash receipts for the period; also, reported expenses gen-
erally do not correspond to cash outlays of the period. In fact, accrual accounting can 
produce large differences between the firm’s reported profit performance and the 
amount of cash generated from operations. Frequently, however, accrual accounting 
earnings provide a more accurate measure of the economic value added during the 
period than do operating cash flows.4
2
Accrual Accounting and 
Income Determination
1 In this text, we use the terms profit, earnings, and income interchangeably.
2 In “Elements of Financial Statements,” Statement of Financial Accounting Concepts (SFAC) No. 6, the Financial 
 Accounting Standards Board (FASB) defines revenues as “inflows or other enhancements of assets of an entity or settle-
ments of its liabilities (or a combination of both) from delivering or producing goods, rendering services, or other 
activities that constitute the entity’s ongoing major or central operations” (para. 78). Expenses are defined as “outflows or 
other using up of assets or incurrences of liabilities (or a combination of both) from delivering or producing goods, ren-
dering services, or carrying out other activities that constitute the entity’s ongoing major or central operations” (para. 80).
3 “Recognition and Measurement in Financial Statements of Business Enterprises,” Statement of Financial Accounting 
Concepts No. 5 (Stamford, CT: FASB, 1984), para. 83. Assets that are readily convertible to cash have both the follow-
ing characteristics: (a) interchangeable (fungible) units, and (b) quoted prices available in an active market that can 
rapidly absorb the quantity held by the entity without significantly affecting the price.
4 Economic value added represents the increase in the value of a product or service as a consequence of operating activi-
ties. To illustrate, the value of an assembled automobile far exceeds the value of its separate steel, glass, plastic, rubber, 
and electronics components. The difference between the aggregate cost of the various parts utilized in manufacturing the 
automobile and the price at which the car is sold to the dealer represents economic value added (or lost) by production.
53
Chapter
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you 
will understand:
 1. The distinction between cash-basis 
versus accrual income and why 
 accrual-basis income generally is 
a better measure of operating 
performance.
 2. The criteria for revenue recognition 
under accrual accounting and how 
they are used in selected industries.
 3. The matching principle and how it is 
applied to recognize expenses under 
accrual accounting.
 4. The difference between product 
and period costs.
 5. The format and classifications for a 
multiple-step income statement and 
how the statement format is de-
signed to differentiate earnings com-
ponents that are more sustainable 
from those that are more transitory.
 6. The distinction between special and 
unusual items, discontinued opera-
tions, and extraordinary items.
 7. How to report a change in account-
ing principle, accounting estimate, 
and accounting entity.
 8. The distinction between basic and 
diluted earnings per share (EPS) and 
required EPS disclosures.
 9. What comprises comprehensive 
 income and how it is displayed in 
 financial statements.
 10. Other comprehensive income differ-
ences between IFRS and U.S. GAAP.
 11. The procedures for preparing 
 financial statements and how to 
 analyze T-accounts.

54 
CHAPTER 2
Accrual Accounting and Income Determination
 
The following example illustrates this point; it highlights the basic distinction between 
cash and accrual accounting measures of performance.
EXAMPLE: CASH VERSUS ACCRUAL 
INCOME MEASUREMENT
In January 2014, Canterbury Publishing sells three-year subscriptions to its quarterly publication, 
Windy City Living, to 1,000 subscribers. The subscription plan requires prepayment by the cus-
tomers, so Canterbury received the full subscription price of $300 (12 issues 3 $25 per issue) 
from each of the subscribers ($300 3 1,000 5 $300,000) at the beginning of 2014. To help fi-
nance the purchase of newsprint and other printing supplies, Canterbury takes out a $100,000 
three-year loan from a local bank on January 1, 2014. The loan calls for interest of 10% of the 
face amount of the loan each year (10% 3 $100,000 5 $10,000), but the interest is not payable 
until the loan matures on December 31, 2016. The cost of publishing and distributing the maga-
zine amounts to $60,000 each year ($60 per subscriber), which is paid in cash at the time of 
publication. The entries to record the cash-basis revenues and expenses for each year follow:
Cash-basis entries for 2014
DR Cash   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$300,000
   CR Subscription revenue   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$300,000
To record collection of 1,000 three-year subscriptions at $300 each
for Windy City Living.
DR Publishing and distribution expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 60,000
   CR Cash   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$ 60,000
To record publishing and distribution expenses paid in cash.
Cash-basis entries for 2015
DR Publishing and distribution expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 60,000
   CR Cash   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$ 60,000
To record publishing and distribution expenses paid in cash.
Cash-basis entries for 2016
DR Publishing and distribution expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 60,000
   CR Cash   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$ 60,000
To record publishing and distribution expenses paid in cash.
DR Interest expense   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 30,000
   CR Cash   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$ 30,000
To record interest expense paid on the three-year loan 
($100,000 3 0.10 3 3 years 5 $30,000).
Throughout this book, DR 
represents the debit side and 
CR represents the credit side 
of the accounting entry to 
record the transaction being 
discussed. See the appendix 
to this chapter for a review 
of how these transactions are 
recorded.
 
A schedule of operating cash inflows and outflows and cash-basis income would look 
as follows:
Cash-Basis Income Determination
($000 omitted) 
2014 
2015 
2016
Cash inflows 
$300 
$ — 
$ —
Cash outflows for production and distribution 
(60) 
(60) 
(60)
Cash outflow for interest on loan 
— 
— 
(30)
Net income (loss)—cash basis 
$240 
$(60) 
$(90)
The entries to record the 
 initial borrowing and repay-
ment of the loan principal 
are ignored  because they are 
financing activities that do 
not affect the determination 
of cash-basis income.

 
Example: Cash Versus Accrual Income Measurement  
55
 
Publishing the magazine and servicing the subscriptions require economic effort in each of 
the years 2014 through 2016, as indicated by the $60,000 of operating cash outflows each 
period. However, under cash-basis accounting, the entire $300,000 of cash inflow from sub-
scription receipts would be treated as revenue in 2014, the year in which the subscriptions are 
sold and cash is collected with no revenue recognized in the remaining two years of the sub-
scription period. Likewise, the $30,000 of interest ($10,000 per year 3 3 years) paid on 
 December 31, 2016, would be recorded as an expense in year 2016 under the cash basis of 
accounting with no interest expense recognized in the first two years. Consequently, on a cash 
basis, Canterbury Publishing would report a relatively high “profit” of $240,000 in 2014 when 
the subscriptions are sold and collected, and this 2014 profit would be followed by operating 
“losses” of $60,000 in 2015 and $90,000 in 2016 when the costs associated with publishing 
the remaining issues and financing the operations are paid.
 
Clearly, cash-basis accounting distorts our view of Canterbury’s operating performance on 
a year-by-year basis. Moreover, none of the annual cash-basis profit figures provide a reliable 
benchmark for predicting future operating results. This distortion is due to differences in the 
timing of when cash inflows and outflows occur. Recognizing cash inflows as 
revenue and cash outflows as expenses results in a cash-basis income number 
that fails to properly match effort and accomplishment.
 
The principles that govern revenue and expense recognition under accrual 
accounting are designed to alleviate the mismatching problems that exist un-
der cash-basis accounting, making accrual earnings a more useful measure of 
a firm’s performance. Accrual accounting allocates $100,000 of subscription 
revenue to each of the years 2014, 2015, and 2016 as the magazine is delivered 
to subscribers and the revenues are “earned.” Likewise, accrual accounting recognizes $10,000 of 
interest expense in each year the bank loan is outstanding, not just in year 2016 when the interest 
is paid. These modifications to the cash-basis results to obtain accrual earnings are accomplished 
by means of the following series of “deferral” and “accrual” adjusting entries, which are made 
at the end of each year under accrual accounting (see the appendix for details).
Revenues are “earned” as a consequence of pub-
lishing magazines and servicing subscriptions—
economic activities that span a three-year period. 
Canterbury’s obligation to subscribers is fulfilled 
gradually over these three years as each issue is 
delivered, not just in 2014 when cash is collected.
Adjusting entries on December 31, 2014
DR Subscription revenue   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$200,000
   CR Deferred subscription revenue   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$200,000
To adjust the Subscription revenue account for subscriptions received but not yet earned. 
($300,000 was initially credited to Subscription revenue. Only $100,000 was earned in 2014. 
Therefore, Subscription revenue must be debited for $200,000.) Deferred subscription revenue 
is a liability account reflecting Canterbury’s obligation to provide subscribers with future issues 
of Windy City Living.
DR Interest expense   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 10,000
   CR Accrued interest payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$ 10,000
To adjust for interest expense incurred but not yet paid, and to set up a liability for interest 
 accrued during the period that will be paid on December 31, 2016.
Adjusting entries on December 31, 2015
DR Deferred subscription revenue   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$100,000
   CR Subscription revenue   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$100,000
To adjust Deferred subscription revenue and Subscription revenue for subscriptions earned during 
the year by providing customers four issues of Windy City Living.
DR Interest expense   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 10,000
   CR Accrued interest payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$ 10,000
To adjust for interest expense incurred but not yet paid, and to set up a liability for interest 
 accrued during the period that will be paid on December 31, 2016.

56 
CHAPTER 2
Accrual Accounting and Income Determination
 
After these adjustments, the diagram of accrual-basis income looks like this:
Adjusting entries on December 31, 2016
DR Deferred subscription revenue   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$100,000
   CR Subscription revenue   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$100,000
To adjust Deferred subscription revenue and Subscription revenue for subscriptions earned during 
the year by providing customers with four issues of Windy City Living.
DR Interest expense   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 10,000
   CR Accrued interest payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$ 10,000
To adjust for interest expense incurred during the year. After this adjusting entry, the Accrued 
 interest payable account will have a balance of $30,000.
On December 31, 2016, the 
accrued interest is paid and 
the following entry made:
DR  Accrued interest
 payable . . . $30,000
 
CR Cash  . . . $30,000 
Accrual-Basis Income Determination
($000 omitted) 
2014 
2015 
2016 
Cash received 
$300 
 
 
Deferred to future years 
−$200
Revenue recognized as earned each year 
$100 
$100 
$100
Expenses
 Publication and distribution (paid in cash) 
(60) 
(60) 
(60) 
 
 
 
(30)
Interest accrued 
(10) 
(10) 
20
 Net income—accrual basis 
$ 30 
$ 30 
$ 30
Interest paid in cash 
Add: Amounts accrued 
in prior years
 
From this example, note that accrual accounting revenue for a period does not correspond to 
cash receipts for the same period ($100,000 of accrual-basis revenue in 2014 does not correspond 
to the $300,000 of cash received in that year, nor does the $100,000 of recorded accrual revenue 
in 2015 and 2016 correspond to $0 cash received in those years). Likewise, the reported accrual-
basis expenses in a period do not correspond to cash outflows in that period ($10,000 of interest 
expense recorded under accrual accounting in 2014 and 2015 does not correspond to the $0 of 
interest paid in those periods, and the $10,000 of interest expense in 2016 does not correspond to 
the $30,000 of interest paid in cash in that year). As you can see, accrual accounting decouples 
earnings measurement from operating cash flows. Indeed, accrual accounting can result in large 
differences between the firm’s reported accrual-basis earnings and the amount of cash generated 
from operations (cash-basis earnings) year by year, as shown in Figure 2.1.
 
As this example illustrates, accrual accounting better matches economic benefit (revenue 
from subscriptions) with economic effort (magazine publication and distribution expenses and 
interest costs), thereby producing a measure of operating performance—accrual earnings—that 
provides a more realistic picture of past economic activities. Many believe that accrual accounting 
numbers also provide a better basis for predicting future performance of an enterprise.
 
The view that accrual earnings dominate cash flow measures of performance is asserted in 
Statement of Financial Accounting Concepts No. 1 issued by the Financial Accounting Stan-
dards Board (FASB) in 1978. It stated:
Information about enterprise earnings and its components measured by accrual accounting gen-
erally provides a better indication of enterprise performance than does information about current 
cash receipts and payments.5
5 “Objectives of Financial Reporting by Business Enterprises,” Statement of Financial Accounting Concepts No. 1 (Stamford, 
CT: FASB, 1978), para. 44.

 
Measurement of  Profit Performance: Revenues and Expenses 
57
 
Despite the assertions of the FASB and others regarding the superiority of accrual earnings 
over net cash flows as a measure of a firm’s performance, it is important to recognize that re-
ported accrual accounting income for a given period may not always provide an accurate 
picture of underlying economic performance for that period. One of our objectives is to help 
you, as a user of accounting information, understand not only the benefits of accrual account-
ing numbers but also their limitations. Throughout the book, we contrast accounting measure-
ments and their earnings impact with the underlying economic circumstances, highlighting 
those situations in which the two may diverge.
MEASUREMENT OF PROFIT PERFORMANCE: 
REVENUES AND EXPENSES
We have introduced the concept of accrual accounting income and contrasted 
it with cash-basis earnings in a simplified setting. Now, in more realistic (and 
complex) settings, we review some of the mechanics associated with measur-
ing accrual accounting revenues and expenses.
 
For virtually all firms, income is not earned as a result of just one activity. 
A manufacturing firm, for example, earns income as a result of these separate 
and diverse activities:
1. Marketing the product.
2. Receiving customers’ orders.
3. Negotiating and signing production contracts.
4. Ordering materials.
5. Manufacturing the product.
6. Delivering the product.
7. Collecting the cash from customers.
 
Because income is earned as a result of complex, multiple-stage processes, some guidelines 
are needed to determine at which stage income is to be recognized in the financial statements. 
The key issue is the timing of income recognition: When, under generally accepted accounting 
principles (GAAP), are revenues and expenses—and thus income—to be recognized?
Figure 2.1
CANTERBURY PUBLISHING
Comparison of Accrual- and 
Cash-Basis Income
2150
2014
Year
2015
2016
Cash-basis income
Accrual-basis income
 2100
250
0
Net loss ($)
Net income ($)
50
100
150
250
(Amounts in $000)
200
The sequence of activities comprising the oper-
ating cycle that is presented here is only one of 
several possible sequences. The activities com-
prising the operating cycle can vary across firms 
or even across products for a given firm. Some 
companies manufacture the product for inven-
tory prior to identifying a particular buyer and 
perhaps even in advance of launching a market-
ing campaign intended to stimulate product 
 demand (for example, Apple manufacturing a 
new model of laptop computer). In other cases, 
the product is manufactured to customer order 
(for example, Boeing manufacturing a new air-
plane for one of the airlines).

58 
CHAPTER 2
Accrual Accounting and Income Determination
 
The accounting process of recognizing income comprises two distinct steps. First, reve-
nues must be recorded. This process of revenue recognition establishes the numbers that 
appear at the top of the income statement. The recognition of revenue then triggers the second 
step: the matching against revenue of the costs that expired (were used up) in generating the 
revenue. The difference between revenues and expired costs (expenses) is the net income that 
is recognized for the period.
 
This two-step process is illustrated in the following journal entries:
  
Accounting entry 
Effect on income (1 or 2)
(Step 1)
Revenue recognition
(Step 2)
Matching of expense
Income recognition
DR Cash or accounts receivable
 
CR Sales revenue
DR Cost of goods sold
 
CR Inventory
Sales revenues (1)
Cost of goods sold (2)
Net income
Income recognition is a by-product of revenue 
recognition and expense matching. It is not a 
separate step that is independent of the other 
two steps. Once revenue has been recognized 
and expenses have been matched against the 
revenue, net income is simply the net difference 
that results.
ABC Company
INITIAL BALANCE SHEET
 
Assets 
Liabilities 1 Owners’ equity
 
Inventory
$100 
Initial equity
$100
The process of revenue recognition and matching expenses against revenue 
has an obvious effect on the income statement: The excess of recognized rev-
enues over expired costs increases the bottom-line net income number. But 
accrual accounting affects more than income statement accounts. Due to the 
double-entry, self-balancing nature of accounting, important changes also 
 occur in net assets (that is, assets minus liabilities) on the balance sheet. To 
understand the effect that accrual accounting has on net assets, consider the 
following example.
 
ABC Company has only one asset, inventory, with a $100 cost. Its balance sheet 
 appears as:
Assume that all of the inventory is sold for $130, which is immediately received in cash. 
Clearly, income should be recognized as a result of this transaction. We focus on the balance 
sheet effects and analyze the transaction using the basic accounting equation:
 
Assets 
5 
Liabilities 
1 
Owners’ equity
Assets 
1$130 Cash
  5  Liabilities  1  
Owners’ equity
1$130 Sales revenue
 
First, we record the inflow of the asset (cash) and the source of the inflow (sales 
revenue):
Step 1: Revenue recognition

 
Measurement of  Profit Performance: Revenues and Expenses 
59
Next, we record the outflow of the asset (inventory) and match this expired cost against rec-
ognized revenue:
Step 2: Expense matching
Assets
2$100 Inventory
  5  Liabilities  
1  
Owners’ equity
2$100 Cost of goods sold
6 Notice that the accounting concept of income recognition is really a specific application of the economic concept of 
value added.
Book value or carrying 
value refers to the amount at 
which an account (or set of 
related accounts) is reported 
on a company’s financial 
statements. For example, the 
cost of property, plant, and 
equipment may be reported 
at $1,000,000 with accumu-
lated depreciation of 
$300,000. The net book value 
or carrying value of property, 
plant, and equipment is the 
cost minus accumulated de-
preciation, or $700,000.
ABC Company
SUBSEQUENT BALANCE SHEET
 
Assets 
Liabilities 1 Owners’ equity
 
Cash 
$130 
Liabilities 
$ —
 
Inventory 
— 
Initial equity 
$100
 
 
 
1 increase in equity: 
 
 
 
Income (1$130 2 $100) 
30
 
 
$130 
 
$130
 
After recording these transactions, the balance sheet shows:
 
Comparing the initial and subsequent balance sheets shows that equity has increased by 
$30, the amount of income recognized from the transaction. Equally important, net assets 
have also increased by $30 (that is, $130 of cash inflow minus $100 of inventory outflow 5 
net asset increase of $30). The point of this example is that when income is recognized in the 
financial statements, two things happen:
1. Owners’ equity increases by the amount of the income.
2. Net assets (that is, gross assets minus gross liabilities) increase by an identical amount.
 
Thus, there are two equivalent ways of thinking about the financial statement effects of 
income recognition. One perspective is that when income is recognized, the bottom-line net 
income number (and thus, owners’ equity) increases. The other is that when net income is 
recognized, net assets are increased.
 
The two approaches to thinking about income recognition merely focus on different as-
pects of the same transaction. The approach that focuses on the net asset effect on the balance 
sheet provides a means for understanding the total financial statement effects of net income 
recognition. This approach reminds us that net income recognition simultaneously triggers an 
increase in the book value (carrying value) of net assets; that is, net asset valuation and net 
income determination are inextricably intertwined. When income is recognized in the finan-
cial statements, the accountant is acknowledging that the company’s net assets have increased 
in value.6 The real issue in net income recognition is this: At what point in the cycle of operat-
ing activities is it appropriate to recognize that a firm’s net assets have increased in value? The 
next section addresses this.
 
As noted, net income recognition has two separate steps:
1. Revenue recognition
2. Recognition of expired costs associated with revenue that is recognized (Expense matching).
 
Let’s consider each step separately.

60 
CHAPTER 2
Accrual Accounting and Income Determination
Criteria for Revenue Recognition
According to GAAP, revenue is recognized at the earliest moment in time that both of the following 
conditions are satisfied:
Condition 1: The critical event in the process of earning the revenue has taken place.
Condition 2:  The amount of revenue that will be collected is reasonably assured and is 
measurable with a reasonable degree of reliability.
U.S. GAAP Revenue Recognition Criteria
U.S. GAAP uses different words to describe these two revenue recogni-
tion conditions. Condition 1, rephrased using the FASB’s terminology, 
says revenues are not recognized until earned. The Board defines 
earned as:
“. . . [R]evenues are considered to have been earned when the en-
tity has substantially accomplished what it must do to be entitled 
to the benefits represented by the revenues.”*
The FASB’s terminology for Condition 2 says revenues must also be 
 realizable. The Board defines realizable as (para. 83):
Revenues and gains are realizable when related assets received or 
held are readily convertible to known amounts of cash or claims 
to cash. Readily convertible assets have (i) interchangeable (fun-
gible) units and (ii) quoted prices available in an active market 
that can rapidly absorb the quantity held by the entity without 
significantly affecting the price.
While the concepts embodied in “earned” and “realizable” are identical 
to “critical event” and “measurable,” we believe that the latter terms are 
more easily understood and accordingly use them throughout this book.
* “Recognition and Measurement in Financial Statements of Business Enterprises,” 
 Statement of Financial Accounting Concepts No. 5 (Stamford, CT: FASB, 1984), para. 83.
IASB Revenue Recognition Criteria
The International Accounting Standards Board 
(IASB) uses the following criteria to determine when 
an entity should recognize revenue.
1. Significant risks and rewards of ownership have 
been transferred from the seller to the buyer.
2. Managerial involvement and control over the asset 
being transferred has passed from the seller to the 
buyer.
3. The seller can reliably measure the amount of reve-
nue or consideration received in the exchange.
4. It is probable that the seller will receive economic 
benefits.
5. The seller can reliably measure the costs (both past 
and future) of the transaction.*
* “Revenue,” IAS 18,
Revised and Reissued 
1993 (London: 
IASB, 1993).
International
Condition 1: The Critical Event (Revenue has been “earned”) 
While 
the earnings process is the result of many separate activities, it is generally acknowledged that 
there is usually one critical event or key stage considered to be absolutely essential to the ulti-
mate increase in the firm’s net asset value. The exact nature of this critical event varies from 
industry to industry, as we show in subsequent examples. Unless the critical event takes place, 
no increase in value is added to the firm’s net assets. Thus, the occurrence of the critical event 
is a first step that must be satisfied before revenue can be recognized. It is a necessary, but not 
sufficient, condition for revenue to be recognized.
Condition 2: Measurability (Amounts to be received are readily 
convertible into known amounts of cash) 
Accountants do not immediately 
recognize revenue just because the critical event has taken place. There must be something 
else: It must be possible to measure the amount of revenue that has been earned with a reason-
able degree of assurance. Condition 2 indicates that revenue cannot be recognized merely on 
the basis of an intuitive “feel” that certain events have added value to the firm’s assets. Objec-
tive, verifiable evidence as to the amount of value that has been added must exist. Unless the 
amount of value added can be reliably quantified, GAAP does not allow an increase in asset 
values to be recorded. Generally, this translates into having a readily determinable price for 
the goods or service, a price established in the marketplace where buyers and sellers are free 
to negotiate the terms of trade. So-called “list prices” assigned to the good or service by the 

 
Measurement of  Profit Performance: Revenues and Expenses 
61
seller often do not satisfy the measurability condition because they can deviate from the 
 market-clearing price paid by the buyer.
 
Only after Conditions 1 and 2 are both met can revenue be recognized under GAAP. To 
illustrate how these revenue recognition conditions are applied, let’s return to the example of 
the three-year subscriptions sold by Canterbury Publishing in January 2014. Recall that ac-
crual accounting would not recognize the $300,000 as revenue when the cash is received be-
cause the subscriptions revenue will be earned only as each magazine issue is published and 
delivered to the customers. If the publisher were to discontinue the magazine before all 12 
issues were published, a refund would be owed to subscribers. In this magazine example, the 
critical event in earning subscription revenue is actually providing the product to the cus-
tomers. Thus, $100,000 of revenue will be recorded in each of the three years as the magazine 
is published and sent to subscribers. Stated somewhat differently, while revenue recognition 
Condition 2 is met in this example on initial receipt of the subscription order (that is, the 
amount of ultimate revenue, $300,000, is measurable with a high degree of assurance and reli-
ability), Condition 1 is not met at that time and, therefore, no revenue is recognized because 
the critical event has not yet occurred. Canterbury has not earned the revenue that has been 
collected because the company has not delivered the magazines promised to subscribers.
 
To further illustrate how the revenue recognition conditions are applied, let’s consider an-
other example. On January 2, 2014, Gigantic Motors Corporation assembles 1,000 automo-
biles, each with a sticker price of $18,000. These cars have not yet been sold to dealers, so they 
are parked in a lot adjacent to the plant. Let’s examine how revenue recognition Conditions 1 
and 2 operate in this setting.
 
Most observers would agree that the critical event in adding value in automobile manufac-
turing is production itself.7 Accordingly, the critical event occurred as the automobiles rolled 
off the production line. However, no revenue would be recognized at that time. Although 
revenue recognition Condition 1 is satisfied, Condition 2 is not satisfied merely on completion 
of production. This revenue recognition condition is not satisfied because the ultimate sale 
price of the automobiles is still unknown. While Gigantic Motors has established a suggested 
list price of $18,000 per vehicle, the ultimate amount of cash to actually be received in the 
future depends on general economic conditions, consumer tastes and preferences, and the 
availability and asking price of competing automobile models. Thus, the specific amount of 
value that has been added by production is not yet measurable with a reasonable degree of 
assurance. Revenue is recognized only when the cars are sold to dealers at a known price (i.e., 
amount becomes realizable). Only then is revenue recognition Condition 2 satisfied.
 
The magazine subscription and automobile production examples illustrate that revenue 
recognition takes place only when revenue recognition Conditions 1 and 2 are both met. When 
Canterbury Publishing receives the cash subscriptions to the magazine, Condition 2 (measur-
ability) is satisfied but not Condition 1: No revenue is recognized until Canterbury provides 
the magazines to the customers and earns the revenue. When automobile production takes 
place at Gigantic Motors, Condition 1 (critical event) is satisfied but not Condition 2: No rev-
enue is recognized until the sale takes place, which determines with reasonable assurance the 
amount that Gigantic will receive from the customer.
 
The financial reporting rules governing revenue recognition are often misunderstood. Be-
cause revenue is usually recognized at the time of sale in most industries, some observers 
 erroneously conclude that the sale is itself the sole criterion for recognizing revenue, but this is 
not correct. The financial reporting rule for recognizing revenue is more complicated and sub-
tle. Specifically, revenue is recognized as soon as Condition 1 (critical event) and Condition 2 
7 Automobile manufacturers eventually sell all units produced, although not always immediately following production or 
 always at the sticker price.

62 
CHAPTER 2
Accrual Accounting and Income Determination
(measurability) are both satisfied. In most instances the time of sale turns out to be the earli-
est moment at which both Conditions 1 and 2 are satisfied, which is why revenue is most 
frequently recognized at the time of sale of the product or service.
 
However, Conditions 1 and 2 are occasionally satisfied even before a legal sale (that is, transfer 
of title) occurs. The following example illustrates when revenue can be recognized prior to sale:
Weld Shipyards has been building oceangoing oil tankers since 1981. In January 2014, Weld 
signs a contract to build a standard-design tanker for Humco Oil. The contract price is 
$60  million, and construction costs are estimated to total approximately $45 million. The 
tanker is expected to be completed by December 31, 2015. Weld intends to account for the 
project using the percentage-of-completion method.
 
Under the percentage-of-completion method (discussed in Chapter 3), revenue and expenses 
are recognized as production takes place rather than at the time of completion (the sale). For 
example, if the tanker is 40% complete at the end of 2014 and finished in 2015, revenue and 
expenses would be recognized according to the following percentage-of-completion schedule:
($ in millions) 
2014 
2015 
Two-Year Total
Percentage 
40% 
60% 
100%
Revenue 
$24 
$36 
$60
Expenses 
(18) 
(27) 
(45)
 Net income 
$ 6 
$ 9 
$15
 
GAAP permits this method when certain conditions—as in the Weld Shipyards example—
are met. Condition 1 (critical event) is satisfied over time as the tanker is built, just as it was in 
the Gigantic automotive production example. Unlike the Gigantic Motors example, however, 
revenue recognition Condition 2 is satisfied for Weld Shipyards because a firm contract with a 
known buyer at a set price of $60 million exists. Thus, the tanker example satisfies both of the 
two conditions necessary for revenue to be recognized. Additionally, expenses are measurable 
with a reasonable degree of assurance because the tanker is of a standard design that Weld has 
built repeatedly in past years. This example provides an overview of why the percentage-of-
completion method, when used properly, meets revenue recognition Conditions 1 and 2.
 
In other circumstances, Conditions 1 and 2 may not both be satisfied until after the time of 
sale—for instance, until the cash is collected. In these cases, it would be inappropriate to rec-
ognize income when the sale is made; instead, income recognition is deferred and is ulti-
mately recognized in proportion to cash collections. Chapter 3 discusses the installment-sales 
method, an example in which revenue and expenses are recognized at the time of cash collec-
tion rather than at the time of sale.
 
Figure 2.2 is a time-line diagram depicting the activities comprising the revenue recogni-
tion process for some selected industries.
 
To justify recognizing revenue during the production phase, the following conditions 
must be met:
1. A specific customer must be identified and an exchange price agreed on. In most cases, a 
formal contract must be signed.
2. A significant portion of the services to be performed has been performed, and the expected 
costs of future services can be reliably estimated.
3. An assessment of the customer’s credit standing permits a reasonably accurate estimate of 
the amount of cash that will be collected.

 
Measurement of  Profit Performance: Revenues and Expenses 
63
 
Situations in which these conditions may be satisfied include long-term contracts for the 
construction of ships, bridges, and office buildings as well as, for example, special-order gov-
ernment contracts for the production of military equipment.
 
As depicted in Figure 2.2, in some industries revenue may be recognized on completion of 
production. This is justified under the following conditions:
1. The product is immediately saleable at quoted market prices.
2. Units are homogeneous.
3. No significant uncertainty exists regarding the costs of distributing the product.
Examples where these circumstances exist include mining of natural resources and harvesting 
agricultural crops. These commodities are traded in active, organized markets, and thus a reli-
able market price can be determined at production even though the eventual buyer’s identity 
is unknown at that time. Although GAAP permits mining and other natural resource compa-
nies to recognize revenue at completion of production, few actually do so. Instead, most delay 
revenue recognition until the time of sale.
 
Revenue recognition at the time of sale is the dominant practice in most retail and manu-
facturing industries. Occasionally, revenue is not recognized until after the time of sale. To 
justify postponing recognition of revenues, one or more of the following conditions must 
generally be present:
1. Extreme uncertainty exists regarding the amount of cash to be collected from customers. 
This uncertainty may be attributable to various factors:
 
• The customer’s precarious financial condition.
 
• Contingencies in the sales agreement that allow the buyer or seller to terminate the 
exchange.
 
• Customers have the right to return the product and this right is frequently exercised.
2. Future services to be provided are substantial, and their costs cannot be estimated with 
reasonable precision.
These conditions exist in circumstances such as real estate sales, when collection of the sale 
price occurs in protracted installments, and in sales of franchises for new or unproved con-
cepts or products.
 
Regardless of which basis of revenue recognition is used, the recognition of expenses gen-
erally adheres to the matching principle: That is, all costs incurred in generating the revenue 
Figure 2.2
THE REVENUE 
 RECOGNITION PROCESS
Industries Recognizing 
 Revenue at Indicated Phases
Acquisition of
assets used 
in production
• Long-term 
  construction
   industry
   (shipbuilding,
  highway 
  construction,
  etc.)
Completion of
 production
Sale of good
 or service
Cash
collection
Time
line
Time
line
• Natural resources
   (oil, mining)
• Most retail
  and manufacturing
   industries
• Real estate
   development
• Start-up phase
   franchisors
• Agricultural
  products
Production phase
Inventory holding
Receivable holding

64 
CHAPTER 2
Accrual Accounting and Income Determination
are recorded as expenses in the same period the related revenue is recognized. Determining 
the costs that have expired (or the liabilities incurred) in generating the revenue recorded in the 
period is the second step of the income recognition process and is discussed next.
Recognizing Expenses Associated with the 
Revenue Earned (Matching)
Once gross revenue for the period has been determined, the next step in determining income 
is to accumulate and record the costs associated with generating the revenue. Some costs are 
easily traced to the revenue earned. These traceable costs, also called product costs, are de-
scribed as being matched with revenue. Other costs are also clearly important in generating 
revenue, but their contribution to a specific sale or to revenue of a particular period is more 
difficult to quantify. Such costs are expensed in the time periods benefited, which is why they 
are called period costs. Let’s see how the matching principle is applied to traceable or prod-
uct costs and to period costs.
Traceable or Product Costs 
This next example illustrates how product costs are 
matched with revenue under GAAP income measurement rules.
Cory TV and Appliance, a retailer, sells one 50-inch color television set on the last day of 
February for $500 cash. The TV set was purchased from the manufacturer for $240 cash in 
January of that same year. Cory provides a 60-day parts and labor warranty to the customer. 
A typical 50-inch color TV requires $10 of warranty service during the first month following 
the sale and another $15 of service in the second month.
Figure 2.4
REVENUE RECOGNITION 
AND EXPENSE MATCHING
$(240)
$0
$0
$500
$235
500
(265)
$(10)
$(15)
January
Cash flows
Revenue
2 Expense
5 Income
February
March
April
Warranty
$0
Time
Purchase TV
Sell TV
$(240)
$500
$(10)
January
February
March
April
Warranty
$(15)
Time
Service TV
Figure 2.3
CASH FLOW DIAGRAM
The expected (as well as the actually experienced) cash flows associated with this single 
transaction are depicted in Figure 2.3.
 
GAAP revenue recognition criteria are satisfied by the cash sale in February, so $500 of 
revenue is recorded in that month. The current and expected future costs of generating that 
revenue are $265 ($240 1 $10 1 $15), and these costs are recorded as expenses in the same 
month (February) that the revenue is recognized. Thus, accrual accounting transforms the 
cash flow diagram of Figure 2.3 into the revenue recognition and expense matching diagram 
shown in Figure 2.4.

 
Income Statement Format and Classification 
65
Period Costs 
Cory TV and Appliance incurs other types of costs that also are crucial in 
generating revenue. However, the linkage between these costs and individual sales is difficult 
to establish. One example of costs of this nature is advertising expenditure.
 
Assume that Cory TV buys five minutes of advertising time on a local radio station each 
month for a cost of $700. Obviously, the purpose of advertising is to generate sales. How-
ever, it is virtually impossible to associate any month’s advertising expenditure with any 
specific sale because consumer behavior is the result of diverse influences and repeated 
advertising exposure. Consequently, GAAP does not try to match advertising expenditures 
with specific sales. Instead, the cost of advertising is charged as an expense in the period in 
which the ads run. Such costs are called period costs. No effort is made to link any particu-
lar advertising campaign with particular sales because no objective means for establishing 
this linkage exists.
 
The distinction between traceable (product) costs and period costs is discussed further 
in Chapter 9. At this point, it is important to understand that in applying the matching con-
cept, some costs are directly matched against revenue while others are associated with 
time periods.
INCOME STATEMENT FORMAT 
AND CLASSIFICATION
Virtually all decision models in modern corporate finance are based on future cash flows. 
Recognizing this, the FASB stated:
Thus, financial reporting should provide information to help investors, creditors, and others assess 
the amounts, timing, and uncertainty of prospective net cash inflows to the related enterprise.8
 
One way to provide users with information about prospective future cash flows is to pre-
sent them with cash flow forecasts prepared by management. Traditional financial reporting 
rejects presenting forecasted cash flow information because such numbers are considered to 
be too “soft”—that is, too speculative or manipulable.
 
Another way to satisfy users’ needs for assessing future cash flows is to provide financial 
information based on past and current events in a format that gives statement users reliable 
and representative baseline numbers for generating their own (user) forecasts of future cash 
flows. To accomplish this, an income statement format that segregates components of income 
has evolved. The intent of this format is to classify separately income components that are 
“transitory” and to clearly differentiate them from income components believed to be “sus-
tainable” or likely to be repeated in future reporting periods.
 
As we survey the existing format and classification rules, you will see that the rationale be-
hind the rules for multiple-step income statements is intended to subdivide income in a manner 
that facilitates forecasting. Our discussion is based on the comparative income statements of 
RECAP
Revenue is recognized at the point when it is (1) earned and (2) realized or realizable. 
These two conditions can be satisfied at different points in time in different industries. 
Matching associates expired costs (expenses) with the revenues recognized in a period or 
with the passage of time. Costs directly matched against revenues are called product 
costs; costs matched with the passage of time are called period costs.
Valuation
8 Statement of Financial Accounting Concepts No. 1, op. cit., para. 37.

66 
CHAPTER 2
Accrual Accounting and Income Determination
Mythical Corporation for 2012–2014, presented in Exhibit 2.1. This exhibit illustrates how 
existing disclosure rules are designed to help users predict future events.
 
The top line of Mythical’s income statement is Net sales. This line represents the revenue 
generated from sales of products earned during the period less any discounts, provisions for 
uncollectible accounts, and returns of damaged or defective goods. The next line is Cost of 
goods sold. This line represents the costs (both direct and indirect) of producing the goods or 
services that were sold during the period. Examples of the direct costs would be the material 
and direct labor costs of manufacturing a product. An example of an indirect cost would be 
manufacturing overhead such as the depreciation charges on the plant used to manufacture the 
product.9 The Gross profit (or Gross margin) line is a key number for assessing the perfor-
mance of an enterprise and for predicting future profitability. Because this number is the dif-
ference between the revenue from selling a product or service and the related costs of 
producing that product or service (product costs), it is a useful number for understanding how 
competitive pressures affect profit margins. Selling, general, and administrative expenses in-
clude marketing costs like advertising and sales commissions, accounting and legal costs, 
depreciation on corporate offices, and salaries of corporate management.
 
Mythical’s income statement isolates a key figure called Income from continuing opera-
tions. (See ➀ in Exhibit 2.1.) This component of income should include only the normal, 
 recurring, (presumably) more sustainable, ongoing operating activities of the organization. 
EXHIBIT 2.1
Mythical Corporation
Income Statements for the Years Ended December 31,
($ in millions) 
2014 
2013 
2012
Net sales 
$3,957 
$3,478 
$3,241
Costs of goods sold 
(1,364) 
(1,189) 
(1,096)
 Gross profit 
2,593 
2,289 
2,145
Selling, general and administrative expenses 
(1,093) 
(949) 
(922)
➁ Special or unusual charges (Note 1) 
(251) 
— 
—
Income from continuing operations before income taxes 
1,249 
1,340 
1,223
Income tax expense 
(406) 
(436) 
(411)
➀ Income from continuing operations 
843 
904 
812
➂ Discontinued operations (Note 2) 
 
 
 Income from operation of discontinued
  business segment, net of tax 
203 
393 
528
 Gain on disposal of discontinued 
  business segment, net of tax 
98 
— 
—
 Income before extraordinary item 
1,144 
1,297 
1,340
➃ Extraordinary loss, net of income tax effect (Note 3) 
— 
(170) 
—
Net income 
$1,144 
$1,127 
$1,340
Note 1: Special or Unusual Charges—A strike closed operations in the Pleasant Grove manufacturing facility for 
five months in mid-2014. The fixed costs incurred at the idle plant totaled $251 million.
Note 2: Discontinued Operations—The Company discontinued a business segment in 2014. The 2014 operating 
 income and gain on disposal of this segment, net of tax, were $203 million and $98 million, respectively.
Note 3: Extraordinary Loss—The extraordinary loss arose as a consequence of a fire that partially destroyed the 
 chemical plant in River City. The Company had no insurance coverage for such losses due to its long-standing 
policy of self-insurance.
9 See Chapter 9 for further discussion of direct and indirect product costs associated with the production of manufactured 
goods.

 
Income Statement Format and Classification  
67
As we discuss shortly, this intermediate income number can sometimes include gains and 
losses that occur infrequently—which we refer to as Special or unusual items (item ➁ in 
Exhibit 2.1)—but nevertheless arise from a firm’s ongoing, continuing operations. With the 
possible exception of some of these special or unusual items, Income from continuing opera-
tions summarizes the wealth effects of recurring transactions or activities that are expected to 
continue into the future. Therefore, this figure is intended to serve as the anchor or jumping-
off point for forecasting  future profits.
 
There are other components of income that are not recurring and, hence, do not form a 
good basis for projecting future income. These other, more transitory components of income 
are isolated and disclosed separately so that statement users can place less weight on these 
earnings components when forecasting the future profitability of an enterprise (see discussion 
in Chapter 6). These transitory earnings components fall into three categories:
• Special or unusual items (item ➁).
• Discontinued operations (item ➂).
• Extraordinary items (item ➃).
 
The rules governing the classification and placement of these three categories of transitory 
items within the income statement are discussed in the following sections. These classification 
rules provide detailed guidance regarding what qualifies for inclusion in each statement cate-
gory. As you will see, the rules standardize the format of disclosures as well as 
prevent certain abuses or distortions that might occur if firms were allowed to 
commingle these nonrecurring components of earnings with more sustainable, 
recurring revenue and expense items.
Special or Unusual Items (Item ➁)
Material events that arise from a firm’s ongoing, continuing activities but that are 
either unusual in nature or infrequent in occurrence, but not both, must be disclosed as a separate 
line item as part of income from continuing operations (or in notes to the financial statements). 
For example, the Mythical Corporation income statement presented in Exhibit 2.1 includes spe-
cial or unusual charges for losses incurred in conjunction with a labor strike, which is disclosed as 
a separate line item and discussed in a statement note (see item ➁ and Note 1 in Exhibit 2.1).
 
Other examples of special or unusual items include:10
1. Write-downs or write-offs of receivables, inventories, equipment leased to others, and 
intangibles.
2. Gains or losses from the exchange or translation of foreign currencies.
3. Gains or losses from the sale or abandonment of property, plant, or equipment.
4. Special one-time charges resulting from corporate restructurings.
5. Gains or losses from the sale of investments.
 
Including special or unusual items as a component of income from continuing opera-
tions complicates financial forecasting and analysis. These special items are treated as a 
part of income from continuing operations because collectively they represent events that 
arise repeatedly as a normal part of ongoing business activities.11 However, some special 
items occur often while others recur sporadically. For example, some firms are continuously 
“Special” is a street term 
 often used to refer to any 
type of nonrecurring item 
reported as part of income 
from continuing operations.
As used in the authoritative accounting literature, 
an item is considered material if it is of sufficient 
magnitude or importance to make a difference in 
a statement user’s decision.
Some companies tend to 
 designate as “special” items 
that are in fact nonrecurring 
but are reported on a regular 
basis, perhaps hoping that 
investors will discount or 
 ignore these frequent large 
charges to earnings. For 
 example, Motorola was 
cited for reporting special, 
nonrecurring items for 
15 consecutive quarters.*
* J. Drucker, “Motorola’s Profit: 
‘Special’ Again?” The Wall Street 
Journal, October 15, 2002.
10 FASB Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) Paragraph 225-20-45-4: Income Statement—Extraordinary and Unusual 
Items—Other Presentation Matters—Criteria for Presentation as Extraordinary Items and FASB ASC Paragraph 420-10-45-3 
Exit or Disposal Cost Obligations—Overall—Other Presentation Matters—Income from Continuing Operations.
11 Evidence that special items are likely to recur in the aggregate is provided by P. M. Fairfield, R. J. Sweeney, and T. L. Yohn, 
“Accounting Classification and the Predictive Content of Earnings,” The Accounting Review, July 1996, pp. 337–55.

68 
CHAPTER 2
Accrual Accounting and Income Determination
selling or disposing of obsolete manufacturing assets as well as taking write-downs on 
 inventory or selling investment securities. However, other special items such as strikes 
and reorganizations occur less frequently. Consequently, the persistence of special or 
 unusual items is likely to vary from period to period and from item to item. As a result, 
separate disclosure is provided for these items to assist users in forecasting future results. 
Because these items are included as part of income from continuing operations before tax 
(sometimes referred to as being reported “above the line”), they are not disclosed net of 
tax effects.
Discontinued Operations (Item ➂)
Because a primary objective of financial reporting is to assist users in generating estimates of 
 future cash flows, transactions related to operations that the firm intends to discontinue or 
has already discontinued must be separated from other income items.12 The reason is straight-
forward because, by definition, discontinued operations will not generate future operating 
cash flows.
 
In Exhibit 2.1, Mythical Corporation discontinued a component of its business in 2014 
(item ➂). Notice that the operating results of this recently discontinued business segment 
are not included in income from continuing operations in the current period (2014) when the 
decision to discontinue was made; nor are they included in any of the prior years (2013 and 
2012) for which comparative data are provided.13 That is, the revenue and expenses of this 
component of Mythical Corporation that was disposed of in 2014 are removed from the cor-
responding numbers reflecting 2013 and 2012 results (highlighted). This makes the Income 
from continuing operations number of $843 million in 2014, the year of the discontinued op-
erations, truly comparable with the Income from continuing operations num-
bers of $904 million and $812 million in 2013 and 2012, respectively. 
Restating the 2013 and 2012 results to make them comparable to the 2014 
results means that all the numbers from the Net sales line through the Income 
from continuing operations line reported in the 2013 and 2012 columns of the 
2014 annual report will be different from the corresponding numbers origi-
nally reported in the 2013 and 2012 statements. While initially confusing to 
analysts who wish to review the past sequence of earnings numbers to detect 
trends in a company’s financial performance (often referred to as time-series 
analysis), this adjustment to the numbers is essential for valid year-to-year 
comparisons.
Under U.S. GAAP, a discontinued operation is a component of an en-
tity,14 which comprises operations and cash flows that can be clearly distin-
guished, operationally and for financial reporting purposes, from the rest of 
the entity. A component of an entity may be a reportable segment or operating 
segment, a reporting unit, a subsidiary, or an asset group. An asset group represents the lowest 
level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other 
groups of assets and liabilities within the entity.
12 FASB ASC Paragraph 205-20-45-3: Presentation of Financial Statements—Discontinued Operations—Other Presentation 
Matters—Reporting Discontinued Operations.
13 Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) rules (Regulation S-X, Article 3) require that comparative income statement 
data for at least three years and comparative balance sheet data for two years be provided in filings with the Commission. For 
this reason, most publicly held corporations provide these comparative income statement and balance sheet data in their an-
nual report to shareholders.
14 FASB ASC Master Glossary.
International
IFRS rules use the notion of a disposal group for 
identifying discontinued operations. A disposal 
group is a group of assets (and liabilities directly 
associated with those assets) that a firm will dis-
pose of in a single transaction. The group includes 
goodwill acquired in a business combination if the 
group is a cash-generating unit of the firm to 
which goodwill has been a llocated. The disposal 
group notion under IFRS rules envisions a larger 
unit than the com ponent of an entity notion under 
U.S. GAAP. [See “Non-current Assets Held for 
Sale and Discontinued Operations,” IFRS 5 
 (London, UK: International Accounting Standards 
Board [IASB]), 2004.]

 
Income Statement Format and Classification  
69
 
If a component of an entity has either been sold during the period or is classified as held 
for sale, its results of operations are to be reported as discontinued operations (“below the 
line”) if the following two conditions are met:
1. The operations and cash flows of the component have been (or will be) eliminated from 
the firm’s ongoing operations.
2. The firm will not have any significant continuing involvement in the operations of the 
component after the disposal transaction.
If either of these two conditions is not met, then the component’s operating results are re-
ported as part of income from continuing operations and prior years’ results are not restated 
for comparative purposes.
Amounts Reported When Assets (Disposal Group) Have Been 
Sold 
When the discontinued component is sold before the end of the reporting period, 
companies are required to report two elements as part of discontinued operations:
1. Operating income or loss (that is, revenue minus expenses) from operating the component 
from the beginning of the reporting period to the disposal date, net of related tax effects.
2. Gain or loss on disposal computed as the net sale price minus book value of net assets 
disposed of, net of related tax effects.
 
Panel (a) of Exhibit 2.2 illustrates a typical income statement disclosure for this situation 
whose disposal date is September 5, 2014.
Current U.S. GAAP, sets 
forth six conditions for an 
 asset group to be considered 
“held for sale.” The most 
 important of these are:
• Management has adopted 
a formal plan to sell the 
asset group.
• An active program to 
 locate a buyer has been 
initiated.
• The sale of the asset group 
is probable and the sale is 
expected to be completed 
within one year.
Source: FASB ASC Paragraph 
360-10-45-9: Property, Plant, and 
Equipment—Overall—Other Pre-
sentation Matters—Initial Criteria 
for Classification as Held for Sale.
EXHIBIT 2.2
Alternative Disclosure for Discontinued Operations
Partial Income Statement Format for Discontinued Operations
Panel (a): When Assets Have Been Sold on September 5, 2014
Income from continuing operations 
$800,000
Income tax expense 
(280,000)
Income from continuing operations after tax 
520,000
Discontinued operations
 Operating income (net of taxes of $35,000) from 
  January 1, 2014, through September 5, 2014 
65,000
 Loss on disposal of discontinued operations
  (net of $21,000 tax benefit) 
(39,000)
  Net income 
$546,000
Panel (b): When Assets Are “Held for Sale” at Year-End
Income from continuing operations 
$800,000
Income tax expense 
(280,000)
Income from continuing operations after tax 
520,000
Discontinued operations 
 Operating income (net of taxes of $42,000) from 
  January 1, 2014, through December 31, 2014 
78,000
 Impairment loss (net of $17,500 tax benefit)
  on assets held for sale 
(32,500)
  Net income 
$565,500

70 
CHAPTER 2
Accrual Accounting and Income Determination
Amounts Reported When Assets (Disposal Group) Are Considered 
“Held for Sale” 
If a company has decided to discontinue a component of its business 
but has not sold it by the end of the reporting period, the income effects of the discontinued 
operations are reported in two elements:
1. Operating income or loss (that is, revenue minus expenses) from operating the compo-
nent from the beginning of the reporting period to the end of the reporting period, net of 
tax effects.
2. An impairment loss15 (net of tax effects) if the book value of the net assets in the disposal 
group is more than the net assets’ fair value minus cost to sell.
 
Panel (b) of Exhibit 2.2 illustrates a typical income statement disclosure for this situation 
with an after-tax impairment loss on assets “held for sale” of $32,500.
 
It is important to note that both the income (loss) from operating the discontinued com-
ponent and any gain (loss) from disposal or impairment are reported net of tax effects. This 
“net of tax” treatment is called intraperiod income tax allocation. The reason for this net of 
tax treatment is the belief that the income tax burden or benefit should be matched with the 
item giving rise to it. The allocation of the tax burden or benefit across components of income 
is believed to make the income figures more informative to users.
 
Here’s why: If income tax were not matched with the item giving rise to it, total reported 
income tax expense would combine taxes arising both from items that were transitory as well 
as from other items that were more sustainable. Mixing together the tax effect of continuing 
activities with the tax effect of single occurrence events would make it difficult for statement 
readers to forecast future tax outflows arising from ongoing events. Under intraperiod income 
tax allocation, the income tax associated with the (presumably) transitory items ➂ and ➃ are 
not included in Mythical’s $406 million income tax expense figure for 2014 (Exhibit 2.1) 
 related to income from continuing operations, thus facilitating forecasts of expected future 
flows after tax.
Proposed Changes for Reporting 
Discontinued Operations
The FASB recently issued a new Exposure Draft on reporting of discontinued operations that 
would make it harder for a disposition of a major business component to qualify as a discon-
tinued operation.16 The revised definition of a discontinued operation is a component of a 
business that has either been disposed of, or is classified as held for sale, and
• represents a separate major line of business or major geographical area of operations,
• is part of a single coordinated plan to dispose of a separate major line of business or 
 geographical area of operations, or
• is a business that meets the criteria for classification as held for sale upon acquisition.
 
The proposal would no longer preclude presentation as a discontinued operation if (a) there 
are operations and cash flows that have not been eliminated from the entities’ ongoing opera-
tions, or (b) there is continuing significant involvement with the component after the disposal 
transaction.
15 See Chapter 10 for further details on determining whether an asset has become impaired and, if so, the amount of the loss.
16 FASB, Proposed Accounting Standards Update, Presentation of Financial Statements (Topic 205): Reporting Discontinued 
Operations, April 2, 2013, Norwalk, CT.

 
Income Statement Format and Classification  
71
 
Because the proposed accounting standards update would raise the bar for reporting a dis-
posal as a discontinued operation, the board decided to require additional disclosures about 
disposals of individual material business components that are not classified as discontinued 
operations. The new disclosures would include:
• Pre-tax profit or loss attributable to the disposed component for the current and prior 
periods.
• If there is a noncontrolling interest (see Chapter 16), the profit or loss attributable to the 
parent.
• In notes to the financial statements, the firm must report a reconciliation of the component’s 
major classes of assets and liabilities classified as held for sale to the amounts presented on 
the face of the balance sheet for the current period.
 
Under the proposal, for those dispositions that are treated as a discontinued operation, the 
firm would be required to disclose in notes to the financial statements a reconciliations of a 
component’s major income and expense items to the after-tax income or loss from the discon-
tinued operations on the face of the income statement, as well as a reconciliation of the major 
classes of assets and liabilities to the amounts that are presented on the face of the balance 
sheet. These proposed new disclosure requirements are aimed at enhancing the interperiod 
comparability of financial statement amounts and to enhance the predictive usefulness of cur-
rent period numbers with respect the future ongoing activities of an entity. The proposed new 
standard would also better align the threshold for determining whether a component should be 
presented as a discontinued operation with the guidance in IFRS 5 (Noncurrent Assets Held 
for Sale and Discontinued Operations).
Extraordinary Items (Item ➃)
Another category of transitory items reported separately on the income statement is extraordi-
nary items (item ➃ in Exhibit 2.1). To be treated as an extraordinary item, the event or 
 transaction must meet both of the following criteria:17
1. Unusual nature: The underlying event or transaction possesses a high degree of abnor-
mality, and considering the environment in which the company operates, that event or 
transaction is unrelated to the business’s ordinary activities.
2. Infrequent occurrence: The underlying event or transaction is a type that would not rea-
sonably be expected to recur in the foreseeable future, again considering the environment 
in which the business operates.18
 
The justification for defining extraordinary items so precisely and for requiring separate 
disclosure of special or unusual items is to prevent statement manipulation. Without such re-
quirements, management might, in a “down” earnings year, be tempted to treat nonrecurring 
gains as part of income from continuing operations and nonrecurring losses as extraordinary. 
Precise guidelines preclude this.
International
17 FASB ASC Section 225-20-45: Income Statement—Extraordinary and Unusual Items—Other Presentation Matters: Criteria 
for Presentation as Extraordinary Items.
18 The business environment in which an enterprise operates is a primary consideration in determining whether an underlying 
event or transaction is unusual in nature and infrequent in occurrence. The environment of an enterprise includes such factors 
as the characteristics of the industry or industries in which it operates, the geographical location of its operations, and the 
nature and extent of government regulation. For example, a plant explosion that results in uninsured losses would be consid-
ered an extraordinary loss by most businesses. But for a company that manufactures explosive materials (for example, dyna-
mite), losses from such an event may not be considered unusual in nature or infrequent in occurrence given the environment 
in which the entity conducts its operations.
IFRS rules require separate 
disclosure of gains (losses) 
resulting from unusual or 
infrequent events but does 
not permit the use of the 
 label extraordinary.
International

72 
CHAPTER 2
Accrual Accounting and Income Determination
 
Like discontinued operations, extraordinary items are reported net of tax. Given the 
stringency of the criteria, few events qualify as extraordinary items. Examples of qualify-
ing items include losses resulting from catastrophic events (for example, an oil rig explo-
sion resulting in large cleanup costs) or losses arising from new laws or edicts (for 
example, an expropriation by a foreign government), and in some cases, gains and losses 
on early debt retirement.
 
Current GAAP calls for gains and losses from early debt retirement to be classified as 
extraordinary only if they meet the two criteria enumerated above.19 Accordingly, firms 
that use early debt retirement on a recurring basis as part of their ongoing risk manage-
ment practices report the associated gains and losses as part of income from continuing 
operations with separate line-item disclosure. Other firms, for which early debt retirement 
is an unusual and infrequent occurrence, are required to report associated gains and losses 
as an extraordinary item.
19 FASB ASC Paragraph 470-50-45-1: Debt—Modifications and Extinguishments—Other Presentation Matters.
20 For evidence that predictive ability is improved when transitory components of earnings are identified, see P.M. Fairfield, 
R.J. Sweeney, and T.L. Yohn, “Accounting Classification and the Predictive Content of Earnings,” The Accounting Review, 
July 1996, pp. 337–55.
RECAP
To be categorized as extraordinary and to appear below the Income from continuing op-
erations line, an item must be unusual in nature and occur infrequently. Special or unusual 
items that do not meet both criteria, but are considered material, must be disclosed sepa-
rately as part of pre-tax income from continuing operations.
Frequency and Magnitude of Various Categories 
of Transitory Income Statement Items
As Exhibit 2.1 illustrates, financial reporting rules for presenting operating results are de-
signed to isolate transitory and nonsustainable components of earnings to assist users in pre-
dicting future earnings and cash flows. Research evidence confirms that the GAAP income 
statement classification framework we have discussed is useful to statement users. Specifi-
cally, subdividing earnings into three transitory components—special or unusual items, dis-
continued operations, and extraordinary items—and disclosing these amounts separately so 
that they are distinguished from the income that comes from continuing operations improves 
forecasts of future earnings.20
 
Figure 2.5(a) reveals that the proportion of firms reporting one or more of the types of 
transitory earnings components highlighted in the previous discussion has hovered around 
60% for the 10-year period from 2002 to 2011. Clearly, material, separately disclosed gains 
and losses are quite common elements of firms’ earnings statements in recent years.
 
Figure 2.5(b) displays the proportion of firms reporting (1) Special or unusual items, 
(2) Discontinued operations, or (3) Extraordinary items on their income statement from 
2002–2011. The most common category of separately disclosed earnings components is 
special or unusual items reported as part of income from continuing operations. Roughly 
57% of the sample firms reported such items in 2011, compared to 52.5% in 2002. Discon-
tinued operations is the next most common separately disclosed item, appearing on ap-
proximately 13.5% of the earnings statements of firms in 2011 compared to 12% in 2002. 
The proportion of firms disclosing extraordinary items decreased from 13% in 2002 to less 
than 0.2% in 2011.

 
Income Statement Format and Classification 
73
 
Exhibit 2.3 shows that over the 2002–2011 period, the majority of special or unusual items 
and extraordinary items were losses (for example, 75.9% of special items in 2011 as high-
lighted). The preponderance of losses for special or unusual items reflects two things:
1. The conservative bias of accrual accounting rules encourages early recognition of declines 
in asset values below cost or book value but tends to delay recognition of increases in 
value until the asset is sold.
Figure 2.5
PROPORTION OF 
FIRMS  REPORTING 
NONRECURRING 
ITEMS (2002–2011)
Source: Standard and Poor’s Compustat® 
Annual Industrial File as data source; 
methodology not verified or controlled 
by Standard & Poor’s.
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Year
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
Percentage of firms
Panel (a) 
Non-recurring item
Special or unusual items
Discontinued operations
Extraordinary items
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
Year
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
10
0
20
30
40
50
60
Percentage of firms
Panel (b) 
EXHIBIT 2.3
Percentage of Nonrecurring Items That Are Losses (2002–2011)
 
2002 
2003 
2004 
2005 
2006 
2007 
2008 
2009 
2010 
2011
Special or unusual items 
76.8% 
71.4% 
72.6% 
72.3% 
69.9% 
73.0% 
78.6% 
74.4% 
74.5% 
75.9%
Discontinued operations 
56.0 
51.0 
47.3 
44.2 
43.5 
43.1 
51.1 
54.9 
50.5 
48.3 
Extraordinary items 
80.3 
64.4 
53.5 
71.4 
33.7 
38.9 
17.8 
21.4 
33.3 
9.1
Any nonrecurring item (net) 
78.7 
72.3 
72.1 
71.8 
69.3 
72.1 
78.3 
75.3 
75.1 
76.0
Source: Compustat Annual Industrial File.

74 
CHAPTER 2
Accrual Accounting and Income Determination
2. Firms have a stronger incentive to separately disclose and clearly label losses than they do 
gains. To include (undisclosed) nonrecurring losses as part of the income from continuing 
operations line would cause statement users to underestimate future income. To avoid this 
understatement firms opt for separate line-item disclosure of losses.
REPORTING ACCOUNTING CHANGES
Consistency, as the term is used in accounting, is using the same accounting methods to 
describe similar economic events from period to period. It enhances accounting’s decision 
usefulness by allowing users to identify trends or turning points in a company’s perfor-
mance over time. However, because we live in a dynamic and ever-changing business envi-
ronment, consistency in application of accounting standards over time is not always 
possible. Firms sometimes voluntarily switch methods of accounting or revise estimates 
used in computing net income because they believe that the alternative method or estimate 
better reflects the firm’s underlying economics. Also, accounting standards-setting bodies, 
such as the FASB, frequently issue new standards in response to changes in the business 
environment that require companies to change accounting methods. When firms use differ-
ent accounting principles to account for similar business transactions or events in adjacent 
periods, the period-to-period consistency of the reported numbers can be compromised. 
Below we describe how accounting method changes are recorded and disclosed under cur-
rent U.S. GAAP.21 These disclosures are designed to enhance the comparability and consis-
tency of the numbers over time and to alert statement users about the effects of the change 
on the current period results.
 
Accounting changes fall into one of three categories as shown in Exhibit 2.4: change in 
accounting principle, change in accounting estimate, and change in reporting entity. Correc-
tion of an accounting error is not considered a true accounting change but is treated like a 
change in accounting principle. We discuss and illustrate the accounting and disclosure re-
quirements for accounting error corrections in Chapter 3.
 
GAAP specifies two approaches for reporting accounting changes depending on the type 
of change. Under the retrospective approach, which is used for a change in accounting prin-
ciple and change in reporting entity, numbers presented in financial statements that represent 
amounts in previous years are revised to reflect the impact of the change. The advantage of 
this approach is that all financial statement numbers—those for the change year and those for 
years prior to the change—are presented on the same basis of accounting. This enhances the 
comparability and consistency of the accounting numbers over time. The downside of this ap-
proach is that firms may use an aggressive accounting method in earlier years that overstates 
income and asset values in an effort to lower new debt or equity financing costs and subse-
quently change to a more appropriate (conservative) method. In such instances, public confi-
dence in the integrity of accounting data may suffer when numbers previously reported and 
relied on for decision making are later revised.
 
A second approach to account for accounting changes is the prospective approach, which 
is used for changes in accounting estimates. This approach requires no adjusting entry to 
modify prior years’ financial statements, and prior years’ numbers presented for comparative 
purposes are not restated. Instead, the new estimate is used in determining the income for the 
year of the change (i.e., the current year) and is applied to all future years. The effect of using 
the new estimate versus the old estimate on the current period income is disclosed in the note 
to the financial statements that explains the change in estimate.
21 FASB ASC Topic 250: Accounting Changes and Error Corrections.

 
Reporting Accounting Changes
75
 
We now provide a more detailed discussion of these two approaches that are selectively 
applied to the three types of accounting changes that are summarized in Exhibit 2.4.
Change in Accounting Principle 
A change in an accounting principle occurs 
when (1) a firm voluntarily changes from one generally accepted accounting principle to an-
other generally accepted accounting principle or (2) when the accounting principle that was 
formerly used is made obsolete because the accounting standards-setting body (FASB) revises 
GAAP to require firms to follow a new approach or method (mandatory change). An example 
of a voluntary change is a firm switching from using the completed-contract to percentage-of-
completion method of accounting for long-term construction contracts or switching from the 
first-in, first-out (FIFO) to last-in, first out (LIFO) method for valuing inventories. A manda-
tory accounting change is illustrated by a GAAP change that requires firms to expense em-
ployee stock option grants on the income statement rather than just disclosing the value of 
such grants only in financial statements notes as was previously allowed.22
 
As indicated, GAAP requires firms to use the retrospective approach to account for 
changes in accounting principles unless it is impracticable to do so.23 Under this approach, 
prior years’ financial statements (balance sheet, income statement, cash flow statement, and 
statement of stockholders’ equity) that are presented for comparative purposes are revised in 
EXHIBIT 2.4
Types of Accounting Changes
Type of Change 
Description 
Examples
Change in accounting principle 
Change from one generally accepted accounting 
Voluntary
 
  principle to another. This change can be  
• Change in methods of inventory costing
voluntary (initiated by the firm) or mandatory 
• Change from completed-contract to
(required by a standards-setting body such 
  percentage-of-completion method
as the FASB). 
  for recognizing revenue and profits
 
 
  on long-term construction contracts
 
 
Mandatory
 
 
• Adoption of a new FASB standard
Change in accounting estimate 
Revision of an estimate because of new 
• Change in estimated percentage
 
 information or new experience. 
  of uncollectible accounts (bad debts)
 
 
•  Change in depreciation method (e.g.,
straight line to accelerated method)*
 
 
•  Change in estimated service life or 
salvage value of depreciable assets
Change in accounting entity 
Change in the economic units that comprise 
• Reporting consolidated financial
 
 the reporting entity. 
  statements in place of financial
 
 
  statements for individual entities
 
 
•  Adding a subsidiary not previously
included in prior years’ consolidated 
financial statements
* Under U.S. GAAP, a change in depreciation methods is treated as a change in estimate that is achieved by a change in accounting principle.
22 FASB ASC Topic 718: Compensation—Stock Compensation.
23 Changes in principles that are deemed to be impracticable to apply retrospectively occur when information needed to do so 
is not available or would require assumptions about management’s intent in a prior period that cannot be independently verified 
[FASB ASC Paragraph 250-10-45-9: Accounting Changes—Overall—Other Presentation Matters—Impracticability].

76 
CHAPTER 2
Accrual Accounting and Income Determination
the year of the change to reflect the impact of the accounting principle change. This means 
that for each year in the comparative statements reported, the revised balance of each account 
shows what that balance would have been under the new principle. The income statement, 
cash flow statement, and balance sheet amounts for the year of the change are based on the 
application of the new accounting principle.
 
Besides reporting revised amounts in the comparative financial statements, a journal 
entry is made to adjust all account balances to reflect what those amounts would have been 
under the new method as of the beginning of the current year (i.e., the change year). In ad-
dition to adjusting existing asset or liability accounts, the entry to record the accounting 
principle change typically requires an adjustment to the firm’s beginning Retained earn-
ings balance to reflect the cumulative effect of the accounting principle change on all 
prior periods’ reported income. This cumulative effect is the difference be-
tween what reported earnings would have been in prior years if the new 
method had always been used versus the earnings previously reported un-
der the old method.24
Exhibit 2.5 illustrates how apparel retailer Abercrombie & Fitch Co. used 
the retrospective approach for its change from the lower of cost or market 
(LCM) utilizing the retail method to the weighted average cost method to 
 account for its inventories that was made effective February 3, 2013. Panel (a) provides an 
explanation for why the change was made. Panel (b) shows the effect of the change on various 
income statement line items for the 2011 and 2010 fiscal years (ended January 28, 2012 and 
January 29, 2011, respectively), the two years for which Abercrombie & Fitch provided com-
parative income statement data in its 2012 10-K report. Because the 2012 fiscal year income 
statement is based on the newly adopted average cost method, having the restated income 
statement line items for 2011 and 2010 fiscal years allows statement users to compare operat-
ing results over these three years using a consistent basis of inventory accounting. Panel (c) 
shows the effect of the change on the ending balance sheet values for fiscal 2011, the only 
year for which comparative balance sheet information was provided in Abercrombie & Fitch’s 
2012 fiscal year annual report. Note that the $68.879 million (net of deferred tax effects) 
 increase in the  January 28, 2012 (fiscal 2011 year-end) inventory values is offset by a 
$69.043 million  increase in Retained earnings. This offset arises because prior years’ income 
would have been higher if Abercrombie & Fitch had been using the weighted average cost 
method rather than the LCM retail method in those years (Chapter 9 explains why).
Retroactive Effect Indeterminable 
In some cases, it is impracticable to deter-
mine the cumulative effect of applying a change in accounting principle to prior periods. For 
example, a firm may switch its method of determining inventory costs from the average cost 
method to the LIFO method (see Chapter 9) and may not have the detailed records to retroac-
tively restate prior periods’ results under the new method of inventory accounting. Exhibit 2.6 on 
pg. 78 illustrates the disclosure of a change in the method of determining inventory costs imple-
mented by Big Lots Inc. in January of 2012 for which the retroactive effect was indeterminable.
Change in Accounting Estimate 
Estimates are used extensively in accounting. 
Examples of items for which estimates are necessary include percentage-of-completion 
 accounting for long-term contracts, uncollectible receivables, inventory obsolescence, service 
lives and salvage values of depreciable assets, and warranty obligations. Changes in accounting 
Like many retailers, Abercrombie & Fitch’s 
 fiscal year-end is the end of January. So the 
2012 fiscal year ends on February 2, 2013. 
 Abercrombie & Fitch’s 2012 10-K report was 
filed with the SEC on April 4, 2013, which is 
 after the effective date of this accounting change.
24 The cumulative effect on beginning retained earnings reflects only the direct effects on earnings, which includes related tax 
effects. Indirect effects (e.g., profit sharing or royalty payments based on reported income) are not included under the retro-
spective application [FASB ASC Paragraph 250-10-45-8: Accounting Changes—Overall—Other Presentation Matters—
Change in Accounting Principle].

 
Reporting Accounting Changes
77
EXHIBIT 2.5
Abercrombie & Fitch Co.
Disclosures for Change in Accounting Principle (Retrospective Method)
Abercrombie & Fitch Co. 2012 10-K
4. Change in Accounting Principle
Panel (a):
The Company elected to change its method of accounting for inventory from the lower of cost or 
market utilizing the retail method to the weighted average cost method effective February 2, 2013. 
In accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, all periods have been retroactively 
 adjusted to reflect the period-specific effects of the change to the weighted average cost method. The 
Company believes that accounting under the weighted average cost method is preferable as it better 
aligns with the Company’s focus on realized selling margin and improves the comparability of the 
Company’s financial results with those of its competitors. Additionally, it will improve the matching 
of cost of goods sold with the related net sales and reflect the acquisition cost of inventory outstand-
ing at each balance sheet date. The cumulative adjustment as of January 30, 2010, was an increase in 
its inventory of $73.6 million and an increase in retained earnings of $47.3 million.
Panel (b):
As a result of the retroactive application of the change in accounting for inventory, the following 
items in the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Operations have been restated:
 
Fiscal Year Ended January 28, 2012 
($ in thousands, except per share data) 
As Reported 
Effect of Change 
As Restated
Cost of goods sold 
$1,639,188 
$(31,354) 
$1,607,834
Tax expense from continuing operations 
59,591 
15,078 
74,669
Net income 
127,658 
16,276 
143,934
 
Fiscal Year Ended January 29, 2011
($ in thousands, except per share data) 
As Reported 
Effect of Change 
As Restated
Cost of goods sold 
$1,256,596 
$(5,248) 
$1,251,348
Tax expense from continuing operations 
78,287 
(178) 
78,109
Net income 
150,283 
5,426 
155,709
Panel (c):
As a result of the retroactive application of the change in accounting for inventories, the follow-
ing items in the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheets have been restated:
 
January 28, 2012
($ in thousands) 
As Reported 
Effect of Change 
As Restated
Inventories 
$  569,818 
$110,117 
$  679,935
Deferred income taxes 
77,120 
(41,238) 
35,882
Total assets 
3,048,153 
68,879 
$3,117,032
Retained earnings 
2,320,571 
69,043 
2,389,614
Total stockholders’ equity 
1,862,456 
68,879 
1,931,335
Total liabilities and stockholders’ equity 
3,048,153 
68,879 
3,117,032
estimates come about because new information indicates the previous estimate is no longer 
valid. In some cases, a change in accounting estimate results from a change in accounting 
principle. For example, a change from using straight-line depreciation to an accelerated de-
preciation method may occur because management concludes that the pattern of consumption 
of an asset’s expected benefits has changed and that a new depreciation method better reflects 

78 
CHAPTER 2
Accrual Accounting and Income Determination
that new pattern. Changes in accounting estimates that result from a change in accounting 
principle are accounted for as a change in estimate.
When accounting estimates are changed, prior year income is never adjusted; instead, 
the income effects of the changed estimate are accounted for in the period of the change and 
in future periods if the change affects both. This is called the prospective approach to report-
ing an accounting change.25 If the change in estimate has a material effect on current and fu-
ture income, the dollar amount of the effect must be disclosed. Exhibit 2.7 shows Computer 
Sciences Corporation’s disclosure for handling of changes in estimates related to contract 
revenue recognized under its fixed-price software development contracts.
 
We use another example to illustrate how current and future period numbers are ad-
justed when a change in an accounting estimate is made. Miles Corporation purchases a 
production machine on January 1, 2012, for $6 million. The machine has no salvage value, 
an expected useful life of 10 years, and is being depreciated on a straight-line basis. On 
January 1, 2014, the machine’s book value is $4.8 million (that is, $6 million of original 
EXHIBIT 2.6
Big Lots Inc.
Accounting Change—Retroactive Effect Indeterminable (Prospective Method)
Big Lots Inc.—Accounting Change—Retroactive Effect Indeterminable
Excerpt from 2012 10-K report
Merchandise Inventories
Merchandise inventories are valued at the lower of cost or market using the average cost retail in-
ventory method. Under our previous inventory management system, which was used through the 
end of 2011, we calculated average cost at the department level, which constituted 50 inventory 
cost pools. On January 29, 2012, the first day of 2012, we completed the implementation of our 
new inventory management systems, which has allowed us to more precisely determine our in-
ventory cost under the average cost retail inventory method. We now calculate average cost at the 
class level, which constitutes approximately 350 inventory cost pools.
 
This change in accounting principle, to include approximately 350 class inventory cost pools 
in the retail method calculation instead of approximately 50 departments in the calculation’s in-
ventory cost pools, is preferable as it provides us with a more precise estimate of the average cost 
of our merchandise inventories.
 
Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 250, “Accounting Changes and Error Correc-
tions” requires that unless it is impracticable to do so, the voluntary adoption of a new accounting 
principle should be done retrospectively. Prior to January 29, 2012, the date we completed our 
implementation of SAP® for Retail, our accounting systems did not capture merchandise inven-
tory costs with class level detail needed for us to recognize, measure, and disclose amounts for 
prior periods under the retrospective application. In particular, the previous inventory system did 
not track or reconcile stock ledger information by class, but rather by department. Specifically, 
key items such as freight and shrink costs were aggregated at the department level, with no data 
identifier to the class, which made it impractical to retrospectively account for the change. There-
fore, we have adopted this change in accounting principle prospectively from the beginning of the 
current year, as we can determine the cumulative effect in inventory cost as of that date.
 
As the impact of the accounting change in the beginning of the current year inventory is im-
material, we have recognized the cumulative effect of the change in accounting principle as a cur-
rent year expense by recording a reduction in inventory and a corresponding increase to cost of 
sales of approximately $5.6 million in the first quarter of 2012. This non-cash charge reduced the 
2012 income from continuing operations and net income by approximately $3.4 million.
25 FASB ASC Paragraphs 250-10-45-17 to 20: Accounting Changes—Overall—Other Presentation Matters—Change in 
 Accounting Estimate.

 
Reporting Accounting Changes
79
cost minus two years of accumulated depreciation at $0.6 million per year). At that date, it 
becomes evident that due to changes in demand for the machine’s output, its remaining
useful life is six years, not eight years. If Miles Corporation had perfect foresight, the an-
nual depreciation charge should have been $0.75 million ($6 million divided by eight 
years), amounting to $1.5 million over the first two years. Consequently, there is $0.3 mil-
lion too little accumulated depreciation ($1.5 million minus $1.2 million) as of January 1, 
2014, and pre-tax income for the previous two years is overstated by $0.3 million. Rather 
than forcing Miles to retroactively adjust reported prior year income, the GAAP disclosure 
rules require the change in estimate to be reflected in higher depreciation charges over the 
new remaining life of the asset; in this case, from 2014 to 2019. Depreciation in those 
years will be $0.8 million per year (that is, the remaining book value of $4.8 million 
 divided by the remaining useful life of six years). Over the eight-year life of the asset, 
depreciation will appear as follows:
2012–2013 
2 years 3 $0.6 million per year 5 
$1.2 million
2014–2019 
6 years 3 $0.8 million per year 5 
4.8 million
 Total cost of the asset 
 
 
$6.0 million
From the perspective of perfect foresight in which depreciation would have been $0.75 mil-
lion per year, depreciation in the first two years is understated by $0.15 million annually. In 
each of the last six years, it is overstated by $0.05 million annually. Obviously, over the asset’s 
eight-year life, depreciation totals $6.0 million.
 
Why are changes in estimates “corrected” in this peculiar fashion? The reason is that ac-
crual accounting requires many estimates; because the future is highly uncertain, a high pro-
portion of actual results turn out to be different from estimated amounts. If prior years’ income 
were corrected for each misestimate, income statements would be cluttered with numerous 
retroactive adjustments. The approach illustrated by this example provides an expedient way 
to deal with the uncertainty in financial statements by just going forward with a new estimate, 
without generating burdensome corrections.
EXHIBIT 2.7
Computer Sciences Corporation
Change in Accounting Estimate (Prospective Method)
Excerpt from 2012 10-K Report
Under the percentage-of-completion method, progress toward completion is measured based on 
either achievement of specified contract milestones, costs incurred as a proportion of estimated 
total costs, or other measures of progress when available. Profit in a given period is reported at 
the estimated profit margin to be achieved on the overall contract. This method can result in the 
recognition of unbilled receivables, the deferral of costs as work in process, or deferral of profit 
on these contracts. Contracts that require estimates at completion using the percentage-of- 
completion method accounted for approximately 17.9% of the Company’s revenues for fiscal 
2013. Management regularly reviews project profitability and underlying estimates. Revisions to 
the estimates at completion are reflected in results of operations as a change in accounting esti-
mate in the period in which the facts that give rise to the revision become known by management. 
Provisions for estimated losses at completion, if any, are recognized in the period in which the 
loss becomes evident. The provision includes estimated costs in excess of estimated revenue and 
any profit margin previously recognized.

80 
CHAPTER 2
Accrual Accounting and Income Determination
Change in Reporting Entity 
A different type of accounting change arises when a 
company acquires another company. In such circumstances, the newly combined entity pre-
sents consolidated financial statements in place of the previously separate statements of each 
party to the merger. Such combinations result in what is called a change in reporting entity.
 
When a change in a reporting entity occurs, comparative financial statements for prior 
years must be restated for comparative purposes to reflect the new reporting entity as if it had 
been in existence during all the years presented.26 In addition, the effect of the change on in-
come before extraordinary items, net income, other comprehensive income, and any related 
per share amounts are disclosed for all periods presented.
 
Comparative financial statements represent an important resource for analysts because they 
provide potentially valuable data for assessing trends and turning points. However, under cur-
rent GAAP, not all business combinations or spin-offs result in a change in the reporting en-
tity. Consequently, analysts must understand the circumstances under which retroactive 
restatement takes place (and when it does not) to ensure that the data being used are indeed 
comparable. These matters are discussed in more detail in Chapter 16.
26 FASB ASC Paragraph 250-10-45-21; Accounting Changes and Error Corrections—Overall—Other Presentation Matters—
Change in Reporting Entity.
27 FASB ASC Topic 260: Earning per Share.
RECAP
Accounting changes can dramatically affect reported earnings and distort year-to-year 
comparisons. For these reasons, GAAP requires special disclosures to improve interpe-
riod comparability and to help statement users understand what effect the accounting 
change has had on the current period’s reported profits.
EARNINGS PER SHARE
One of the most commonly reported measures of a company’s operating performance is earn-
ings per share (EPS). All publicly traded companies must report EPS numbers on the face of 
their income statement.27 Exhibit 2.8 illustrates the EPS disclosures for Enpro Industries. 
Note that two sets of numbers are reported: one set for basic EPS and another set for diluted 
EPS. Basic EPS is computed by dividing income available to common shareholders (that is, 
net income minus dividends to preferred shareholders) by the weighted average common 
shares outstanding for the period. Diluted EPS reflects the EPS that would result if all poten-
tially dilutive securities were converted into common shares. It is reported for firms with 
complex capital structures; that is, firms with convertible debt, convertible preferred stock, 
options, or warrants outstanding. The calculations involved for diluted EPS are complex and 
are covered in detail in Chapter 15. Here we simply illustrate the financial statement presenta-
tion of EPS.
 
Note that each set of EPS numbers includes separately reported numbers for income 
from continuing operations, discontinued operations, extraordinary items, and bottom-line 
net income. Therefore, it is important for the statement user to be aware of how the num-
ber being reported in companies’ earnings announcements is defined. This caution applies 
both to announcements in the financial press and to analysts’ forecasts of firms’ 
performance.
Thompson Financial (First 
Call) is a leading provider of 
analyst EPS forecasts in the 
United States. The EPS fore-
casts reported by Thompson 
are typically basic EPS for 
income from continuing 
 operations excluding the 
 effects of special, nonrecur-
ring gains or losses. These 
items are excluded because 
they are nonrecurring and 
difficult to forecast. Some-
times analysts also exclude 
from forecasted  basic EPS 
certain other noncash charges 
(for example, depreciation 
and goodwill amortization). 
Such earnings are frequently 
referred to as pro forma or 
“Street” earnings because they 
do not strictly correspond to 
a GAAP earnings number.

 
Comprehensive Income and Other Comprehensive Income 
81
COMPREHENSIVE INCOME AND 
OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
GAAP defines comprehensive income as a change in equity (net assets) of a business entity 
that occurs during a reporting period from transactions or events from nonowner sources.28 So 
it includes all changes in equity during a period except those resulting from investments by 
owners (e.g., purchase of common stock) and distributions to owners (e.g., dividend pay-
ments). Obviously, a major source of change in equity is net income, determined by the gen-
eral rules outlined earlier in this chapter. Therefore, net income is part of comprehensive 
income. Recollect that income recognition automatically triggers a corresponding change in 
EXHIBIT 2.8
Enpro Industries, Inc.—EPS Presentation
Consolidated Statements of Operations
Years Ended December 31,
($ in millions, except per share data) 
Year 3 
Year 2 
Year 1
Net sales 
$ 803.0 
$993.8 
$873.8
Cost of sales 
523.8 
635.4 
560.2
Gross profit 
279.2 
358.4 
313.6
Operating expenses:
 Selling, general and administrative expenses 
224.3 
241.6 
209.1
 Asbestos-related expenses 
135.5 
52.1 
68.4
 Goodwill impairment charge 
113.1 
— 
—
 Other operating expense (income), net 
10.5 
(0.3) 
6.0
 
483.4 
293.4 
283.5
Operating income (loss) 
(204.2) 
65.0 
30.1
 Interest expense 
(12.3) 
(12.7) 
(12.5)
 Interest income 
0.9 
2.7 
8.3
 Other income (expense), net 
17.4 
(5.4) 
0.6
Income (loss) from continuing operations before income taxes 
(198.2) 
49.6 
26.5
Income tax benefit (expense) 
54.6 
(16.8) 
(9.3)
Income (loss) from continuing operations 
(143.6) 
32.8 
17.2
Income from discontinued operations, net of taxes 
4.3 
17.8 
17.9
Income (loss) before extraordinary item 
(139.3) 
50.6 
35.1
Extraordinary item, net of taxes 
— 
— 
2.5
Net income (loss) 
$(139.3) 
$ 50.6 
$ 37.6
Basic earnings (loss) per share:
 Continuing operations 
$  (7.19) 
$  1.62 
$  0.81
 Discontinued operations 
0.22 
0.88 
0.84
 Extraordinary item 
— 
— 
0.12
 Net income (loss) per share 
$  (6.97) 
$  2.50 
$  1.77
Diluted earnings (loss) per share:
 Continuing operations 
$  (7.19) 
$  1.56 
$  0.77
 Discontinued operations 
0.22 
0.84 
0.80
 Extraordinary item 
— 
— 
0.11
 Net income (loss) per share 
$  (6.97) 
$  2.40 
$  1.68
28 FASB ASC Topic 220: Comprehensive Income.

82 
CHAPTER 2
Accrual Accounting and Income Determination
the carrying amount of net assets (equity). Generally, items included in net income result from 
completed or closed transactions with outside parties. A closed transaction is one whose 
ultimate payoff results from events (1) that have already occurred and (2) whose dollar flows 
can be predicted fairly accurately.
Sometimes the carrying amounts of net assets on a firm’s balance sheet 
change even though the transaction is not yet completed or closed and, there-
fore, is not reported as part of net income. These types of events or transac-
tions give rise to other comprehensive income (OCI).29 OCI comprises 
revenues, expenses, gains, and losses that, under GAAP, are included in com-
prehensive income (thus, that cause changes in equity) but are excluded from 
net income. Other comprehensive income components frequently arise from using fair value 
measurements for selected assets or liabilities reported on firms’ balance sheets. This section 
provides an overview of the major items that constitute other comprehensive income (which 
are described in greater detail in later chapters of the book) and the alternative ways that firms 
can report comprehensive income under current GAAP.
Let’s consider a specific example of an other comprehensive income com-
ponent that affects equity but is not reported as part of net income. Banks and 
other financial institutions (e.g., insurance companies) often hold investments 
in stocks or bonds of other entities with readily determinable fair values. As-
sume that these securities are held in the firm’s available-for-sale portfolio and that the fair 
values have increased over the current reporting period. To recognize the fair value increases, 
GAAP requires that the following accounting entry be made:
DR Marketable securities—Available-for-sale securities   . . . . . . . . . . . .  
XXX
   CR Other comprehensive income (OCI)—unrealized 
       holding gain on available-for-sale securities . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
XXX
At fiscal year-end, the OCI account would be closed out to Accumulated other comprehensive 
income (AOCI), which is a separate account shown in the stockholders’ equity section of the 
balance sheet. The closing entry would be as follows:
DR OCI—unrealized holding gain on available-for-sale securities . . . . .  
XXX
   CR Accumulated other comprehensive income 
       (AOCI)—stockholders’ equity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
XXX
Note that through this series of entries, equity (net assets) is increased without an effect on net 
income. Comprehensive income is increased through an OCI component.
 
Under current GAAP, other comprehensive income components fall into the following 
general categories (see FASB ASC paragraph 220-10-55-2):
1. Foreign currency translation adjustments and gains and losses on intra-entity foreign 
 currency transactions that are of a long-term-investment nature (see Chapter 16).
2. Gains and losses on foreign currency transactions that are designated as, and are effective 
as, economic hedges of a net investment in a foreign entity.
Fair value is the price that would be received to 
sell an asset or the price paid to transfer or settle 
a liability in an orderly transaction between mar-
ket participants at the settlement date (FASB 
ASC Master Glossary).
See Chapter 16 for a more complete discussion 
of using fair value measurements for marketable 
securities held in an available-for-sale portfolio.
29 FASB ASC Section 220-10-20: Comprehensive Income—Overall—Glossary.

 
Comprehensive Income and Other Comprehensive Income 
83
3. Unrealized holding gains and losses on available-for-sale securities and on a debt security 
being transferred into the available-for-sale category from the held-to-maturity category 
(see Chapter 16).
4. Amounts recognized in other comprehensive income for debt securities classified as 
available-for-sale and held-to-maturity related to an other-than-temporary impairment 
if a portion of the impairment was not recognized in earnings (see Chapter 16).
5. Subsequent decreases (if not an other-than-temporary impairment) or increases in the 
fair value of available-for-sale securities previously written down as impaired (see 
Chapter 16).
6. Gains or losses associated with pension or other postretirement benefits (that are 
not recognized immediately as a component of net periodic benefit cost) (see 
Chapter 14).
7. Prior service costs or credits associated with pension or other postretirement benefits (see 
Chapter 14).
8. Transition assets or obligations associated with pension or other postretirement benefits 
(that are not recognized immediately as a component of net periodic benefit cost) (see 
Chapter 14).
 
Current GAAP requires firms to report comprehensive income in a statement that is 
displayed with equal prominence as other financial statements. Firms are permitted to dis-
play the components of other comprehensive income in one of two formats:30
1. In a single-statement format, one in which net income and other comprehensive income 
are added to disclose total comprehensive income.
2. In a two-statement format, one in which the components of net income constitute one 
statement and a second statement of comprehensive income that begins with net income 
and shows the individual other comprehensive income components.
 
Exhibit 2.9 from Arden Group’s 2012 annual report illustrates the single-statement format. 
Exhibit 2.10 shows the two-statement approach for Exxon Mobil.
30 FASB ASC Section 220-10-65-1: Comprehensive Income-Overall-Transition and Open Effective Date Information 
 (Transition Related to Accounting Standards Update No. 2011-05—Presentation of Comprehensive Income).
RECAP
Comprehensive income measures a company’s change in equity (net assets) that results 
from all nonowner transactions and events. It is composed of both bottom-line accrual 
income that is reported on the income statement and other comprehensive income 
components. Other comprehensive income comprises selected unrealized gains and 
losses on incomplete (or open) transactions that bypass the income statement and that 
are reported as direct increases or decreases to stockholders’ equity. Firms are required 
to report comprehensive income in a statement that is displayed with the same promi-
nence as other financial statements. But firms are free to choose the presentation for-
mat, either as a separate statement or as part of a statement that is combined with the 
income statement.

84 
CHAPTER 2
Accrual Accounting and Income Determination
EXHIBIT 2.10
Exxon Mobil Corporation—Two-Statement Approach
Consolidated Statement of Income
($ in millions) 
 
2012 
2011 
2010
Revenues and other income
 Sales and other operating revenue 
 
$453,123 
$467,029 
$370,125
 Income from equity affiliates 
 
15,010 
15,289 
10,677
 Other income 
 
14,162 
4,111 
2,419
  Total revenues and other income 
 
482,295 
486,429 
383,221
Costs and other deductions
 Crude oil and product purchases 
 
265,149 
266,534 
197,959
 Production and manufacturing expenses 
 
38,521 
40,268 
35,792
 Selling, general and administrative expenses 
 
13,877 
14,983 
14,760
 Depreciation and depletion 
 
15,888 
15,583 
14,760
 Exploration expenses, including dry holes 
 
1,840 
2,081 
2,144
 Interest expense 
 
327 
247 
259
 Sales-based taxes 
 
32,409 
33,503 
28,547
 Other taxes and duties 
 
35,558 
39,973 
36,118
  Total costs and other deductions 
 
403,569 
413,172 
330,262
Income before income taxes 
 
78,726 
73,257 
52,959
 Income taxes 
 
31,045 
31,051 
21,561
Net income including noncontrolling interests 
 
47,681 
42,206 
31,398
 Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests 
 
2,801 
1,146 
938
Net income attributable to ExxonMobil 
 
$ 44,880 
$ 41,060 
$ 30,460
(continued)
EXHIBIT 2.9
Arden Group—Comprehensive Income Disclosure: Single-Statement Approach
Arden Group, Inc. and Consolidated Subsidiaries
Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income
 
Fifty-Two 
Fifty-Two 
Fifty-Two
 
Weeks Ended 
Weeks Ended 
Weeks Ended
($ in Thousands, Except Share and Per Share Date) 
December 29, 2012 
December 31, 2011 
January 1, 2011
Sales 
$439,038 
$429,483 
$417,066
Cost of sales 
271,164 
268,544 
257,506
 Gross profit 
167,874 
160,939 
159,560
Selling, general and administrative expense 
134,387 
134,817 
129,416
Loss from exitactivity 
1,912 
0 
0
 Operating income 
31,575 
26,122 
30,144
Interest and dividend income 
167 
134 
338
Other income (expense), net 
0 
2,243 
(66)
Interest expense 
(83) 
(76) 
(84)
 Income before income taxes 
31,659 
28,423 
30,332
Income tax provision 
12,740 
11,418 
12,245
 Net income 
$ 18,919 
$ 17,005 
$ 18,087
Other comprehensive gain (loss), net of tax: 
 
 
 Unrealized gain (loss) from available-for-sale securities: 
 
 
  Net unrealized holding gain (loss) arising during the period 
7 
5 
(45)
  Reclassification adjustment for realized loss included in 
   net income 
0 
0 
38
   Net unrealized gain (loss), net of income tax expense (benefit)
    of $5 for 2012, $3 for 2011 and ($4) for 2010 
7 
5 
(7)
Comprehensive income 
$ 18,926 
$ 17,010 
$ 18,080

 
Global Vantage Point
85
GLOBAL VANTAGE POINT
The previous section discusses the concept of other comprehensive income (OCI) and notes 
that OCI often arises from changes to the carrying amounts of net assets on the firm’s balance 
sheet even though transactions have not actually occurred. Because the firm has not yet sold 
or unwound its positions in these balance sheet items, carrying amount value fluctuations re-
main unrealized and are therefore frequently reported as a component of OCI.
 
U.S. GAAP financial reporting standards and IFRS still differ in many respects. One can 
look more carefully at the components within OCI to see at least some examples of where these 
two reporting standards still differ considerably. IFRS allows, in some cases, more opportuni-
ties for managers to change the balance sheet valuation of certain assets even when managers 
have no intention to sell or dispose of these assets. Because this practice generates unrealized 
gains or losses, the effect will typically be found as a component of OCI. As we discuss further 
in Chapter 10, for example, IFRS allows (but U.S. GAAP does not allow) managers to choose 
to periodically revalue property, plant, and equipment assets at an appraised fair value. This 
might enable a company that owns land to adjust the carrying value of the land on its balance 
sheet as changes occur to the land’s appraised fair value. This IFRS-specific option seems to 
provide more relevant and timely information with regard to asset values reported on the bal-
ance sheet. It also, however, introduces unrealized gains and losses (assuming the land is not 
sold or transferred) that are typically reported in OCI. As discussed in more detail in Chapters 
4 and 10, increases (or decreases) in the appraised value of property, plant, and equipment un-
der this particular rule are often reflected in stockholders’ equity account called Revaluation 
surplus. Exhibit 2.11 shows such revaluations for WorkCover Queensland, a government- 
related provider of workers’ compensation insurance in Queensland, Australia, from its 2010–
2011 Annual Report. Note 26 from WorkCover Queensland’s annual report shows the changes 
in OCI (i.e., changes in the Revaluation surplus account) associated with “annual valuations 
(for land and buildings) by an external independent valuer.” You will not observe a similar note 
from any company that files its financial statements under U.S. GAAP.
 
IFRS also differs considerably from U.S. GAAP with respect to how firms report their 
periodic expense associated with defined benefit pension obligations. Recent changes to 
IAS 19, which became effective in January 2013, could introduce differences in OCI 
 between  entities that file their reports under IFRS relative to entities that file under U.S. 
EXHIBIT 2.10
Exxon Mobil Corporation—Two-Statement Approach (continued)
Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income
($ in millions) 
 
2012 
2011 
2010
Net income including noncontrolling interests 
 
$47,681 
$42,206 
$31,398
Other comprehensive income (net of income taxes) 
 
 
 Foreign exchange translation adjustment 
 
920 
(867) 
1,034
 Adjustment for foreign exchange translation (gain)/loss included in net income 
 
(4,352) 
— 
25
 Postretirement benefits reserves adjustment (excluding amortization) 
 
(3,574) 
(4,907) 
(1,161)
 Amortization and settlement of postretirement benefits reserves adjustment 
  included in net periodic benefit costs 
 
2,395 
1,217 
1,040
 Change in fair value of cash flow hedges 
 
— 
28 
184
 Realized (gain)/loss from settled cash flow hedges included in net income 
 
— 
(83) 
(129)
  Total other comprehensive income 
 
(4,611) 
(4,612) 
993
Comprehensive income including noncontrolling interests 
 
43,070 
37,594 
32,391
 Comprehensive income attributable to noncontrolling interests 
 
1,251 
834 
1,293
Comprehensive income attributable to Exxon Mobil 
 
$41,819 
$36,760 
$31,098
International

86 
CHAPTER 2
Accrual Accounting and Income Determination
GAAP. Chapter 14 discusses, in detail, current reporting guidance for U.S. firms that offer 
employees defined benefit pension plans. Because defined benefit pensions typically guar-
antee retirement payments to employees until their death, both U.S. GAAP and IFRS re-
quire firms to hire actuaries (i.e., statisticians often employed in the insurance industry) to 
make estimates regarding elements that could materially affect the magnitude of the com-
pany’s expected liability to its retired employees. Actuarial estimates, such as employee 
life expectancy, are often adjusted each period, which directly affects the reported balance 
sheet value of the net pension obligation. Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require companies to 
report these valuation changes in OCI each period. However, as of January 2013, U.S. 
GAAP is now alone in requiring some firms to periodically recategorize a portion of these 
OCI changes into periodic net income. Exhibit 2.12 shows such a recategorization for Boe-
ing Company, a company that reports under U.S. GAAP. Exhibit 2.12 shows that Boeing 
recategorized $2.272 billion of actuarial adjustment losses relating to pensions from OCI 
into net income (by including it as a “net periodic benefit cost” in the income statement). 
After January 2013, you will not observe a similar note for companies that file financial 
statements under IFRS.
 
Recently, both the FASB (through Accounting Standards Update 2011-05) and the IASB 
(through an amendment to IAS 1 Presentation of Financial Statements) enacted changes 
EXHIBIT 2.11
WorkCover Queensland
26. Asset revaluation surplus by class
(Amounts reported in $000 Australian) 
 
Land 
Building 
Total
Carrying amount at the beginning of the prior year 
 
$8,820 
$13,931 
$22,751
Movements for the prior year revaluation:
 Revaluation of land and building 
 
(3,000) 
(2,285) 
(5,285)
 Income tax effect on revaluation of land and building 
 
900 
686 
1,586
 
 
(2,100) 
(1,599) 
(3,699)
Carrying amount at the end of the prior year 
 
6,720 
12,332 
19,052
Carrying amount at the beginning of the current year 
 
6,720 
12,332 
19,052
Movements for the current year revaluation:
 Revaluation of land and building 
 
— 
(898) 
(898)
 Income tax effect on revaluation of land and building 
 
— 
269 
269
 
 
— 
(629) 
(629)
Carrying amount at the end of the current year 
 
$6,720 
$11,703 
$18,423
The asset revaluation surplus is used to record increments and decrements on the revaluation of land and building to fair value.
EXHIBIT 2.12
Boeing Company
Excerpt from 2012 annual report—pension note
The estimated amount that will be amortized from Accumulated other comprehensive loss into 
net periodic benefit cost during the year ended December 31, 2013 is as follows:
 
 
Other 
 
 
Postretirement 
($ in millions) 
Pensions 
Benefits
Recognized net actuarial loss 
$2,272 
$102
Amortization of prior service costs/(credits) 
195 
(180)
Total 
$2,467 
($78)

 
Summary 
87
 regarding the presentation of comprehensive income to improve consistency and clarity. IAS 1 
allows firms to present a single statement of comprehensive income or alternatively present 
separately a net income statement and a statement of comprehensive income. If two separate 
statements are presented, IAS 1 requires the net income statement to immediately precede the 
statement of comprehensive income. The main change within the amendment to IAS 1 is that 
entities are now required to group items within OCI based on whether they will not be reclas-
sified subsequently into net income (e.g., actuarial estimate changes to defined benefit pension 
plans) or they will be reclassified subsequently to net income when specific conditions are met 
(e.g., when cash flows are realized, fair value changes to derivatives assigned as cash flow 
hedge instruments are reclassified from OCI to net income, as discussed further in Chapter 11). 
The main changes under U.S. GAAP are the elimination of the option to report components of 
OCI as part of the statement of changes in stockholders’ equity, and a  requirement for entities 
to show reclassification adjustments from OCI to net income on the face of the financial state-
ments that are associated with OCI. 31 The first of the two main U.S. GAAP changes would 
likely make the presentation of OCI more consistent with the presentation required by IFRS.
SUMMARY
• This chapter highlights the key differences between cash and accrual income 
measurement.
• In most instances, accrual-basis revenues do not equal cash receipts and accrual expenses 
do not equal cash disbursements.
• The principles that govern revenue and expense recognition under accrual accounting are 
designed to alleviate the mismatching of effort and accomplishment that occurs under 
cash-basis accounting.
• Revenue is recognized when both the critical event and measurability conditions are 
satisfied.
• The critical event establishes when the entity has done something to earn the asset being 
received, and measurability is established when the revenue can be measured with a 
 reasonable degree of assurance.
• The critical event and measurability conditions may be satisfied before or after the point 
of sale.
• The matching principle determines how and when the assets that are used up in generat-
ing the revenue or that expire with the passage of time are expensed.
• Relative to current operating cash flows, accrual earnings generally provide a more useful 
measure of firm performance and serve as a more useful benchmark for predicting future 
cash flows.
• Predicting future cash flows and earnings is critical to assessing the value of a firm’s 
shares and its creditworthiness.
• Multiple-step income statements are designed to facilitate this forecasting process by 
 isolating the more recurring or sustainable components of earnings from the nonrecurring 
or transitory earnings components.
31 FASB Accounting Standards Update 2011-12 delayed the implementation of the second requirement to show reclassifica-
tion adjustments from OCI to net income on the face of the statements that are associated with OCI. To support the decision 
to delay implementation, the FASB noted stakeholder concerns that the net income statement, for example, would become 
overly cluttered and therefore more difficult to understand with these disclosures (BC11b.). Stakeholders also noted that they 
did not have processes and controls in place to collect and summarize the level of detailed information required (BC11a.).

88 
CHAPTER 2
Accrual Accounting and Income Determination
• GAAP disclosure requirements for various types of accounting changes also facilitate the 
analysis of company performance over time.
• All publicly traded companies must report EPS numbers on the face of their income state-
ment. All firms are required to report basic EPS based on the weighted average number of 
shares actually outstanding during the period, while firms with complex capital structures 
are required to disclose diluted EPS, which reflects the EPS that would result if all poten-
tially dilutive securities were converted into common shares.
• Occasionally, changes in assets and liabilities resulting from incomplete or open transac-
tions bypass the income statement and are reported as direct adjustments to stockholders’ 
equity. These direct adjustments are called other comprehensive income components. 
 Under U.S. GAAP, firms are required to report the components of other comprehensive 
income in either a single-statement format or a two-statement format.
APPENDIX
REVIEW OF ACCOUNTING PROCEDURES 
AND T-ACCOUNT ANALYSIS
The basic accounting equation is the foundation of financial reporting:
A 5 L 1 OE
The basic accounting equation says that at all times, the dollar sum of a firm’s assets (A) must 
be equal to the dollar sum of the firm’s liabilities (L) plus its owners’ equity (OE). To under-
stand why this equality must always hold, keep two things in mind:
1. Assets don’t materialize out of thin air; they have to be financed from somewhere.
2. Only two parties can provide financing for a firm’s assets:
 
a. Creditors of the company—for example, when a supplier ships inventory to a firm on 
credit (an asset—inventory—is received).
 
b. Owners of the company—for example, when owners buy newly issued shares directly 
from the firm (an asset—cash—is received).
Putting these two things together explains why the two sides of the basic ac-
counting equation must be equal. The equation says the total resources a firm 
owns or controls (its assets) must, by definition, be equal to the total of the 
financial claims against those assets held by either creditors or owners.
 We’ll now use the basic accounting equation to show how various transac-
tions affect its components. Notice that each transaction maintains the basic equality; for 
 example, any increase in an asset must be offset by (1) a corresponding increase in a liability 
or owners’ equity account or (2) a decrease in some other asset.
 
Assume that Chicago Corporation sells office furniture and provides office design consulting 
services. It is incorporated on January 1, 2014, and issues $1 million of stock to investors for 
cash. Here’s how this and subsequent transactions will affect the basic accounting equation:
Transaction 1
For simplicity, we ignore nuances of the par 
value of the stock, etc., and simply treat the entire 
amount as “common stock.” The details of stock 
transactions are explored further in Chapter 15.
Assets
1$1,000,000 Cash
 5 
Liabilities
 1 
Owners’ equity
1$1,000,000 Common stock

 
Appendix 
89
On the next day, Chicago Corporation buys a combination office building and warehouse for 
$330,000, paying $30,000 in cash and taking out a $300,000 loan at 8% interest per year.
Suppliers ship a wide assortment of inventory costing $97,000 to the firm on credit on 
January 11.
On January 15, Chicago Corporation sells a portion of its inventory costing $50,000 to several 
customers for $76,000 on account.
 
A sale causes assets to flow into the company. Who benefits from this inflow of assets? The 
owners do. That’s why owners’ equity is increased by $76,000 in Transaction 4. The source of 
this increase is labeled; in this case, the source of the increase is Sales revenue. But in making 
a sale, the firm must relinquish an asset, Inventory. Whose claims are reduced as a result of 
this outflow of assets? The owners’. That’s why owners’ equity is decreased by $50,000 in the 
second part of Transaction 4. Again, the reason for the decrease in owners’ equity is labeled; 
in this case, the need to deliver inventory to the customer reduces owners’ equity claims on 
the firm’s assets by $50,000, the Cost of goods sold.
 
In addition to the balance sheet (which follows the balancing format of the basic accounting 
equation), there is another financial statement called the income statement. Recollect that Sales 
revenue is the top line of the income statement and that Cost of goods sold is deducted from 
revenues. So Transaction 4, which was illustrated in a basic accounting equation (that is, bal-
ance sheet) format, really includes income statement accounts. Another way to say the same 
thing is that the revenue and expense accounts that appear on the income statement are re-
ally owners’ equity accounts. Revenues are owners’ equity increases; expenses are owners’ 
equity decreases. (Later in this appendix, we’ll show how these accounts are closed into 
 Retained earnings, a component of owners’ equity, as part of the adjusting and closing process.)
Assets
2$30,000 Cash
1$330,000 Building
 5 
Liabilities
1$300,000  Loan 
payable
 1 
Owners’ equity
Transaction 2
Assets
1$97,000 Inventory
 5 
Liabilities
1$97,000  Accounts 
payable
 1 
Owners’ equity
Transaction 3
Assets
1$76,000  Accounts 
receivable
2$50,000 Inventory
 5 
Liabilities
 1 
Owners’ equity
1$76,000 Sales revenue
2$50,000 Cost of goods sold
Transaction 4

90 
CHAPTER 2
Accrual Accounting and Income Determination
Understanding Debits and Credits
Keeping track of transactions using the basic accounting equation as we did in Transaction 
1–4 is cumbersome. For this reason, a streamlined approach is used to record how transac-
tions either increase or decrease financial statement accounts. Increases and decreases in 
 accounts are based on the convention of debits and credits. Debit (abbreviated DR) means left 
side of accounts, and credit (abbreviated CR) means right side of accounts.
 
We now depict the basic accounting equation in T-account form and show the rules for how 
debits and credits operate to reflect increases or decreases to various accounts.
 
 
 
 
 
Owners’ equity
 
Asset accounts 5 
Liability accounts 
1 
accounts
 Debits 
Credits 
Debits 
Credits 
Debits 
Credits
 
(DR) 
(CR) 
(DR) 
(CR) 
(DR) 
(CR)
increase 
decrease 
decrease 
increase 
decrease 
increase
the account 
the account 
the account 
the account 
the account 
the account
balance 
balance 
balance 
balance 
balance 
balance
Because Transaction 4 showed us that revenue accounts increase owners’ equity and expense 
accounts decrease it, the DR and CR rules treat revenue and expense accounts just like any 
other owners’ equity accounts. The rules can be summarized as follows:
 
Revenues 
 
Expenses
 (that is, OE increases)  
(that is, OE decreases)
 
Debits 
Credits 
Debits 
Credits
 
(DR) 
(CR) 
(DR) 
(CR)
decrease 
increase 
increase 
decrease
the account 
the account 
the account 
the account
balance 
balance 
balance 
balance
Let’s elaborate on the debit and credit rules for expense accounts. Expense accounts are in-
creased by debits. An increase in an expense decreases owners’ equity. Owners’ equity is de-
creased by debits. That’s why increases in an expense account (which decrease owners’ 
equity) are debits.
 
The basic accounting equation must always be “in balance”—that is, the total of the assets 
must always equal the total of the liabilities plus owners’ equity. Similarly, for each transac-
tion, the dollar total of the debits must equal the dollar total of the credits. Adherence to the 
debit and credit rules for each transaction automatically keeps the basic accounting equation 
in balance. To help you visualize how this happens, we redo Transactions 1–4 in debit and 
credit format and show (in brackets to the right of the account name) what happens to the 
basic accounting equation:
DR Cash [1A] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $1,000,000
   CR Common stock [1OE] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$1,000,000
Transaction 1: 
Stock issued for cash

 
Appendix 
91
As the pluses and minuses to the right of the account names show, adherence to the DR/CR 
rules automatically maintains the balance of the basic accounting equation.
 
We next introduce four additional transactions for Chicago Corporation. Assume that the 
company purchases a one-year fire and theft insurance policy on the building and its contents on 
January 15, 2014, for $6,000. It makes the following journal entry upon purchasing the policy:
Transaction 2: 
Purchase of building
DR Building [1A] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$330,000
   CR Cash [2A]   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$ 30,000
   CR Loan payable [1L]   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
300,000
Transaction 3: 
Purchase of inventory on credit 
DR Inventory [1A]   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$97,000
   CR Accounts payable [1L]   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$97,000
Transaction 4: 
Sale of inventory on account
DR Accounts receivable [1A] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$76,000
DR Cost of goods sold [2OE] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
50,000
   CR Sales revenue [1OE] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$76,000
   CR Inventory [2A]   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
50,000
 DR  Prepaid insurance [1A] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$6,000 
    CR  Cash [2A]   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
 $6,000 
Transaction 5: 
Purchase of prepaid insurance
 DR  Cash [1A]  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $10,000 
    CR  Fee received in advance [1L] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
 $10,000 
 Transaction 6: 
 
 Receipt of consulting fees in advance 
Prepaid insurance is an asset account because the policy provides a valuable benefit to the 
company: insurance coverage for the ensuing 12 months.
 
Next, assume that the company receives a $10,000 fee in advance from a law firm to help 
the firm design its new office space. The fee is received on January 17, and the consulting/
design services are to be provided over the next month. Chicago Corporation makes the fol-
lowing journal entry:
The credit is to the liability account, Fee received in advance, because the firm has an obliga-
tion to provide the consulting services (or return the fee). Until the critical event of providing 
those services occurs, no revenue can be recognized.

92 
CHAPTER 2
Accrual Accounting and Income Determination
 
Further assume that Chicago pays certain suppliers $37,000 for inventory recorded in 
Transaction 3. Other suppliers will be paid in ensuing periods.
 DR  Accounts payable [2L] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $37,000 
 
    CR  Cash [2A] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
 $37,000  
 Transaction 7: 
 Payment on account 
 DR  Cash [1A]  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $30,000 
    CR  Accounts receivable [2A]  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
 $30,000  
 Transaction 8: 
 Collections on account 
Finally, $30,000 is received from one of the customers to whom inventory was sold in 
Transaction 4.
Adjusting Entries
Before financial statements are prepared (either monthly, quarterly, or annually), a firm’s 
 financial accounts must be reviewed to determine whether all economic events that have 
 occurred are reflected in the accounts. It is usually the case that certain readily identifiable 
types of events will not be reflected in the accounts. To include these events in the accounts, 
adjusting entries must be made. These adjusting entries fall into four categories:
1. Adjustments for prepayments.
2. Adjustments for unearned revenues.
3. Adjustments for accrued expenses.
4. Adjustments for accrued revenues.
We now assume that Chicago is preparing financial statements for the month ended January 31, 
2014. Adjusting entries in each of the four categories are necessary and discussed next.
Adjustments for Prepayments 
The insurance policy acquired for $6,000 on 
January 15 in Transaction 5 has partially expired. One-half of one month’s coverage has now 
elapsed; consequently, 1y24 of the original annual premium payment is no longer an asset. 
The passage of time means that past insurance coverage has no future value. So, the following 
adjusting entry is made:
Adjusting Entry A1:
DR Insurance expense [2OE]   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$250
 
 
 
 
CR Prepaid insurance [2A]   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$250
       ($6,000y12 months 5 $500; $500 3 1y2 month 5 $250)
After this entry is made, the balance in the Prepaid insurance account is $5,750; this is the 
original $6,000 balance minus the $250 credit in Adjusting Entry A1. The $5,750 represents 

 
Appendix 
93
the remaining asset, insurance coverage for the ensuing 11½ months. The adjusting entry has 
simultaneously accomplished two things:
1. The DR recognizes that portion of the premium that has expired, that is, the portion that 
is a January expense. This is the matching principle in action because the expense is 
matched against January revenues.
2. The CR reduces the carrying amount in the asset account by $250. As a result of this 
 reduction, the Prepaid insurance account is shown at $5,750; this is the portion of the 
original $6,000 insurance premium that has not yet expired.
 
The building acquired in Transaction 2 also represents a prepayment. Chicago paid for the 
building in early January 2014, and this building is expected to be used in operations over a 
series of future years. As the building is used, a portion of its future service potential declines. 
This decline in service potential value is an expense of the period called depreciation. 
 Assume that Chicago estimates building depreciation for January totaled $1,250. The follow-
ing adjusting entry is then made:
A contra account is an ac-
count that is subtracted from 
another account to which it 
relates. Contra-asset accounts 
carry credit balances because 
they are subtracted from 
 asset accounts that carry 
debit balances.
We will discuss the various 
methods for estimating 
 depreciation in Chapter 10.
 Adjusting Entry A2: 
 DR  Depreciation expense [2OE] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 $1,250 
    CR  Accumulated depreciation [2A] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
 $1,250 
(The Accumulated depreciation account represents a contra-asset account that is deducted 
from the cost of the building, as we shall see later.)
Adjustments for Unearned Revenues 
By the end of January, let’s assume 
that 60% of the design work for the law firm has been completed. Consequently, the following 
adjusting entry is made:
 Adjusting Entry A3:  
 DR  Fee received in advance [2L]   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 $6,000 
    CR  Consulting fees revenue [1OE]  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
 $6,000 
Notice that this entry also accomplishes two things. First, the debit lowers the balance in the li-
ability account, Fee received in advance, to $4,000 (that is, the original $10,000 minus the 
$6,000 liability reduction arising from the debit). Second, the credit properly recognizes that 
60% of the $10,000 advance has been earned in January and thereby increases owners’ equity.
Adjustments for Accrued Expenses 
Salaries and wages for the month of January 
totaled $16,000. The paychecks will not be issued to employees until Monday, February 3. 
 Because the expense arose in January, a liability exists for money owed to the employees and the 
following entry must be made:
 Adjusting Entry A4: 
 DR  Salary and wages expense [2OE]   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   $16,000 
    
 CR  Salary and wages payable [1L]   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
 $16,000 
Adjusting entries such as this one must be made for a wide range of expenses that accrue over 
the reporting period. Accrual accounting recognizes expenses as the underlying real 

94 
CHAPTER 2
Accrual Accounting and Income Determination
 economic event occurs, not necessarily when the cash flows out. Consequently, adjusting 
entries for accrued expenses must be made not only for accrued wages payable but also for 
items such as heat, light, and power used during the month and for interest on amounts bor-
rowed that has accumulated during the period but has not yet been paid. Assume that the util-
ity bill arrives on January 31 but will not be paid until February 9, its due date. If the utility 
bill for January totaled $9,000, the following additional adjusting entry is necessary:
 Adjusting Entry A5: 
 DR  Heat, light, and power expense [2OE]   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 $9,000 
 
    
 CR  Accounts payable [1L] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
 $9,000 
 Adjusting Entry A6: 
 DR  Interest expense [2OE]   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 $2,000 
    
 CR  Accrued interest payable [1L]   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
 $2,000 
 Adjusting Entry A7: 
 DR  Accounts receivable [1A]   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 $2,100 
   
  CR  Consulting fees revenue [1OE]   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
 $2,100 
Furthermore, interest of $2,000 has accrued on the loan principal that was used to buy the 
building. (The accrued interest is determined as follows: $300,000 3 8% per year 5 $24,000 3 
1y12 of year 5 $2,000.) The following entry is made:
Adjustments for Accrued Revenues 
During the last week in January, Chicago 
Corporation provides design consulting services to a physician who is remodeling her office. 
The physician is billed for the $2,100 due. The adjusting entry is:
Again, the adjusting entry simultaneously accomplishes two things:
1. The DR reflects the asset that the firm expects to collect as a result of consulting services 
rendered in January.
2. The CR shows the corresponding increase in owners’ equity that arises when the asset 
(Accounts receivable) is recognized.
Posting Journal Entries to Accounts and Preparing Financial 
S tatements 
Throughout this book, we use journal entries as a streamlined mechanism 
for showing you how economic events affect financial statement accounts. In this section of 
the appendix, we provide a terse overview of how professional accountants use journal entries 
as the building blocks for preparing financial statements. We use T-accounts to demonstrate 
this. We also show how analysis of T-accounts can be used to infer what transactions (and 
 dollar amounts) a firm entered into between two balance sheet dates.
 
The DRs and CRs in each journal entry that is made are posted to T-accounts. Posting 
means the DR or CR is entered in the appropriate left (or right) side of the affected T-account. 
A separate T-account is maintained for each asset, liability, and owners’ equity account. 
 (Remember: Revenue and expense accounts are effectively owners’ equity accounts, too. The 
balances accumulated in these accounts for a particular reporting period will be closed out, or 
transferred to owners’ equity at the end of the period.)

 
Appendix 
95
 
Exhibit 2.13 shows all T-accounts that arise from Chicago’s transactions during January 
2014. The journal entry DR or CR that gave rise to the amount posted in the T-account is indi-
cated by a number to the left of each item. For example, in the Cash T-account, the (1) to the 
left of the DR of $1,000,000 indicates that this item arose from the $1,000,000 DR in Transac-
tion 1. The (1) to the left of the $1,000,000 credit to common stock indicates that this item 
 resulted from the balancing CR in Transaction 1. Posting both the DR and CR to the T-accounts 
reflected in the original entry maintains the equality of the basic accounting equation.
 
The adjusting entries are also posted to the T-accounts shown in those entries. For example, 
in Exhibit 2.13, the (A1) to the left of the $250 DR to the Insurance expense T-account tells us 
that this item arose from adjusting entry A1. (Notice the CR from that entry was posted as a 
credit to the Prepaid insurance account, with the A1 designation to the left of the posting.)
 
The accountant preparing the financial statements would use the balances in the revenue 
and expense accounts (highlighted in Exhibit 2.13) to prepare the January 2014 income state-
ment. As shown in Exhibit 2.14, income for January (ignoring taxes) is $5,600. This amount 
represents the net increase in owners’ equity for the month arising from operations. Conse-
quently, the $5,600 appears again in the balance sheet as an owners’ equity increase labeled 
Retained earnings (shown by the arrows). The asset, liability, and common stock T-accounts 
(entered in black) compose the other balance sheet accounts. (Notice that the credit balance in 
Accumulated depreciation is deducted from the Building account. That’s why this is a contra-
asset account.)
 
Assets 
5 
Liabilities 
1 
Owners’ equity
Retained earnings
(Revenue and expense account 
balances will be closed out to 
this account at end of the 
accounting period.)
Cash
(1) $1,000,000 (2) 
$30,000
(6) 
10,000 (5) 
6,000
(8) 
30,000 (7) 
37,000
Bal. $967,000
Accounts receivable
(4) 
$76,000 (8) 
$30,000
(A7) 
2,100
Bal. $48,100
Accounts payable
(7) 
$37,000 (3) 
$97,000 
 
 (A5) 
9,000
 
 Bal. $69,000
Common stock
 
 (1) $1,000,000
 
 Bal. $1,000,000
Salary and wages payable
 
 (A4) $16,000
 
 Bal. $16,000
Consulting fees revenue
 
 (A3) 
$6,000
 
 (A7) 
2,100
 
 Bal. 
$8,100
Sales revenue
 
 (4) 
$76,000
 
 Bal. $76,000
Inventory
(3) 
$97,000 (4) 
$50,000
Bal. $47,000
Accrued interest payable
 
 (A6) 
$2,000
 
 Bal. 
$2,000
Cost of goods sold
(4) 
$50,000
Bal. $50,000
Insurance expense
(A1) 
$250
Bal. 
$250
Prepaid insurance
(5) 
$6,000 (A1) 
$250
Bal. 
$5,750
Loan payable
 
 (2) $300,000
 
 Bal. $300,000
Depreciation expense
(A2) 
$1,250
Bal. 
$1,250
Salary and wages expense
(A4) $16,000
Bal. $16,000
Building 
(2) $330,000
Bal. $330,000
Fee received in advance
(A3) 
$6,000 (6) 
$10,000
 
 Bal. 
$4,000
Heat, light, and power expense
(A5) 
$9,000
Bal. 
$9,000
Interest expense
(A6) 
$2,000
Bal. 
$2,000
Accumulated depreciation
 
 (A2) 
$1,250
 
 Bal. 
$1,250
EXHIBIT 2.13
Posting to T-accounts
This is true because revenues 
increase owners’ equity and 
expenses decrease owners’ 
equity (review Transaction 4). 
So, the excess of revenues 
over expenses represents 
the net increase in owners’ 
equity.

96 
CHAPTER 2
Accrual Accounting and Income Determination
Closing Entries
After the income statement for the month of January 2014 has been prepared, the revenue 
and expense accounts have served their purpose. So, balances in these accounts are “zeroed 
out” (or closed) to get them ready to reflect February transactions. To get the revenue and 
expense account balances to zero, a closing journal entry is made. All revenue account 
balances (which are credits) are debited (to get them to zero); all expense account balances 
(which are debits) are credited (to get them to zero). The difference between the closing 
entry debits and credits—in this case, a credit of $5,600—is made to Retained earnings. 
Here’s the entry:
EXHIBIT 2.14
Chicago Corporation
Income Statement for the Month Ended January 31, 2014
Revenues
 Sales revenue 
 
$76,000
 Consulting fees revenue 
 
8,100
  Total revenue 
 
84,100
Expenses 
 
 Cost of goods sold 
$  50,000 
 Salary and wages expense 
16,000 
 Heat, light, and power expense 
9,000 
 Depreciation expense 
1,250 
 Insurance expense 
250 
 Interest expense 
2,000 
  Total expense 
 
78,500
Pretax income 
 
$ 5,600
Statement of Financial Position, January 31, 2014
Assets 
 
 
Liabilities and Equity
 Cash 
 
$ 967,000 
Liabilities 
 Accounts receivable 
 
48,100 
 Accounts payable 
$  69,000
 Inventory 
 
47,000 
 Fees received in advance 
4,000
 Prepaid insurance 
 
5,750 
 Salary and wages payable 
16,000
 Building 
$330,000 
 
 Accrued interest payable 
2,000
 Less: Accumulated 
 
 
 Loan payable 
300,000
  depreciation 
(1,250) 
328,750 
Equity
 
 
 
 Common stock 
1,000,000
 
 
 
 Retained earnings 
5,600
Total assets 
 
$1,396,600 
Total liabilities and equity 
$1,396,600
DR  Sales revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $76,000 
DR  Consulting fees revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 8,100 
CR  Cost of goods sold   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
 $50,000 
CR  Salary and wages expense   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
 16,000 
CR  Heat, light, and power expense   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
 9,000 
CR  Depreciation expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
 1,250 
CR  Insurance expense   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
 250 
CR  Interest expense   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
 2,000 
CR  Retained earnings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
 5,600 

 
Appendix 
97
After this entry has been posted to the accounts, all revenue and expense accounts will have 
zero balances. The accounts are now clear to receive February income statement transactions.
T-accounts Analysis as an Analytical Technique 
Understanding the various 
events or transactions that affect individual account balances is critical to analyzing financial 
statements. Users of financial statements can’t “see” the individual transactions that underlie 
various account balances and changes in account balances in comparative balance sheets. 
 Nevertheless, it’s often possible to “get behind the numbers” and deduce the aggregate amount 
of certain common events or transactions that have taken place during the reporting period. 
Armed with the following knowledge, one can reconstruct transactions that have occurred 
 during a given reporting period.
• Start with beginning and ending balances in various balance sheet T-accounts (which are 
always available from comparative balance sheets).
• Know the major types of transactions or events that cause increases or decreases in indi-
vidual T-accounts.
• Know how various accounts and financial statement items articulate with one another.
T-account analysis also can be used to gain insights into why accrual-basis earnings and cash-
basis earnings (that is, cash flows from operations) differ.
 
Let’s use a new example, Trevian Corporation, to illustrate how T-account analysis can be 
used to infer or deduce unknown or unobservable transactions. Consider the following analy-
sis of Accounts receivable (net of the Allowance for doubtful accounts):
A comparative balance 
sheet reflects the asset, lia-
bility, and owners’ equity 
account balances as of the 
end of the current reporting 
period (typically a quarter 
or year) and for one previ-
ous reporting period. Firms 
are required by the SEC to 
show two years of compara-
tive balance sheet data and 
three years of comparative 
income statement data in 
annual 10-K reports.
Accounts receivable—net
Beginning Balance 
$1,000,000
 
 
Collections on account 
(B) 
Sales on account 
(A) 
Ending Balance 
$1,200,000 
Note that the major transaction that increases Accounts receivable (debits to this account) is 
sales on account, and the major transaction causing a decrease in Accounts receivable (credits 
to this account) is the collections on account. Assuming that these are the only events that 
 affected Accounts receivable during the period, we can infer from the $200,000 increase in 
Trevian’s Accounts receivable that sales on account exceeded collections on account during 
the period by $200,000. Can we go a step further and deduce the aggregate amounts of the 
debits (A) and credits (B) to this account? Yes, we can. However, to do so, we need to under-
stand how parts of the income statement and balance sheet articulate with one another.
 
Recall that the first line of the income statements of most companies is Sales revenue. 
Typically, when one business sells a product or service to another company, the sale is a credit 
sale, meaning that the sale is “on account” and will be collected within 30, 60, or 90 days, 
depending on industry credit terms. Suppose Trevian’s sales revenue was $3,500,000 and all 
sales were credit sales. We can re-create the following entry that summarizes the credit sales 
for the period and shows directly how income statement and balance sheet accounts reflect 
opposite sides of the same transaction and, thus, articulate with one another.
Other transactions that can 
affect the Accounts receiv-
able account include write-
offs of specific accounts 
determined to be uncollect-
ible, sales returns and 
 allowances, and customers 
that take advantage of sales 
discounts by paying off 
their account balance within 
the discount period. Typi-
cally, these events have a 
minimal effect on the 
 Accounts receivable balance 
for the period.
 DR  Accounts receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 $3,500,000 
    CR  Sales revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
 $3,500,000 

98 
CHAPTER 2
Accrual Accounting and Income Determination
Knowing that all sales on account are reflected in an offsetting debit to Accounts receivable 
allows us to deduce the amount (A) 5 $3,500,000 in the Accounts receivable T-account just 
presented. Next, we can combine this information with the fact that the net increase in 
 Accounts receivable was $200,000 to deduce that the collections on account during the 
 period—unknown amount (B)—must have been $3,300,000. In other words,
Beginning accounts receivable balance 
$1,000,000
1 Sales on account 
3,500,000
2 Collections on account 
(3,300,000) d (Plug to balance 5 B)
5 Ending accounts receivable balance 
$1,200,000 
 
Analysis of the Accounts receivable T-account also provides information for understanding 
differences between accrual-basis income and cash from operations. The important insight 
from the analysis of the Accounts receivable T-account is that sales on account (reflected as 
revenue in accrual-basis income) are recorded on the debit side of this account while collec-
tions on account (reflected as revenue in cash-basis income measurement—that is, cash flow 
from operations) are recorded on the credit side of this account. Knowing that Trevian’s Ac-
counts receivable has increased by $200,000 tells us that accrual-basis revenue exceeded 
cash-basis revenue for the period by $200,000. Therefore, we would need to subtract this in-
crease in Accounts receivable from the accrual-basis income number to convert accrual earn-
ings to cash flow from operations. Conversely, if collections on account had exceeded sales on 
account by $200,000, this decrease in Accounts receivable would have to be added to accrual-
basis net income to arrive at cash flow from operations.
 
Analogous reasoning can be used to gain insights into transactions that affect Accounts 
payable and the differences between accrual-basis expenses and cash-basis expenses. The fol-
lowing T-account summarizes the key events that cause changes in Trevian’s Accounts pay-
able for a period:
Accounts payable
 
 
Beginning balance 
$2,000,000
Payments on account 
(B) 
 
 
Purchases of inventory
 
 
 on account 
(A)
 
 
Ending balance 
$1,500,000
 
Here we can see that payments on account exceeded purchases of inventory on account by 
$500,000, resulting in a decrease in the Accounts payable T-account for the period. We can 
deduce the amount of purchases on account by again referring to the income statement and 
recalling the components that constitute the cost of goods sold computation for a merchandis-
ing firm. For purposes of this illustration, assume that Trevian’s cost of goods sold is 
$2,100,000, and the beginning and ending inventory from its comparative balance sheets are 
$1,500,000 and $1,800,000, respectively. Purchases of inventory for the period can be de-
duced as follows:
Beginning inventory 
$1,500,000 
1 Purchases of inventory 
2,400,000 d (Plug to balance 5 A)
2 Ending inventory 
(1,800,000) 
5 Cost of goods sold 
$2,100,000 

 
Appendix 
99
 
Assuming that all purchases of merchandise inventory were purchased on credit (generally 
the case for most businesses), we can determine through T-account analysis that payments on 
account must have been $2,900,000 determined as follows:
Beginning accounts payable balance 
$2,000,000
1 Purchases on account (see above) 
2,400,000
2 Payments on account 
(2,900,000) d (Plug to balance 5 B)
5 Ending accounts payable balance 
$1,500,000
 
Changes in the Accounts payable and Inventory T-accounts help us understand the differ-
ences between accrual accounting’s cost of goods sold expense and the cash-basis expense for 
inventory purchases. We’ll use the preceding schedules for Trevian’s cost of goods sold and 
accounts payable to demonstrate this point:
 
As shown, two adjustments are required to convert accrual-basis cost of goods sold 
($2,100,000) to cash-basis expense for inventory purchases ($2,900,000). The first adjustment 
for the inventory increase is because beginning inventory is a noncash addition to cost of 
goods sold, while ending inventory is a noncash deduction in arriving at cost of goods sold 
(see cost of goods sold schedule above). Therefore, to remove the net noncash effects of be-
ginning and ending inventory from cost of goods sold, we must add the increase in inventory. 
(If inventory had declined, we would subtract the decrease.) Making this adjustment to cost of 
goods sold gives us the total inventory purchased in 2014. (We’ve assumed that all inventory 
purchases are on account. Consequently, all inventory purchases during the year would be 
credited to Accounts payable.)
 
The second adjustment, for the decrease in Accounts payable, is made because Trevian’s 
cash payments for inventory purchased on account exceeded new inventory purchases on ac-
count in the current period (see Accounts payable schedule on page 98). Thus, Trevian’s cash 
payments for inventory actually exceeded the credit purchases of inventory that are included 
in the accrual-basis cost of goods sold number. Accordingly, to convert the accrual-basis cost 
of goods sold expense to a cash-basis expense, the decrease in Accounts payable must be 
added. (If Accounts payable had increased, this change would have been subtracted.)
 
Note that in the previous discussion, the adjustments made are to convert accrual-basis 
expense to cash-basis expense. To adjust accrual-basis income to obtain cash-basis income 
(cash flow from operations), the adjustment for the changes in Inventory and Accounts pay-
able would be in the opposite direction. That is, the increase in Inventory and the decrease in 
Accounts payable would be subtracted from accrual income to obtain cash flow from opera-
tions. This is so because adjustments to expense have the opposite effect on income.
 
In general, analyses similar to that used for Accounts receivable and Accounts payable can 
be carried out for Accrued revenue, Accrued expense, Deferred (unearned) revenue, and De-
ferred (prepaid) expense accounts to deduce other differences between accrual-basis income 
and cash-basis income. Understanding that differences between accrual-basis and cash-basis 
income can be gleaned from most working capital accounts (that is, current asset and current 
liability accounts reported on the balance sheet) is one of the key lessons in financial state-
ment analysis that we will return to repeatedly throughout later chapters in this book.
Accrual accounting cost of goods sold deduction 
 included in determining income 
$2,100,000
1 Inventory increase 
300,000
5 Total inventory purchases in 2014 
2,400,000
1 Accounts payable decrease 
500,000
5 Cash basis expense for inventory purchases 
$2,900,000

100 
CHAPTER 2
Accrual Accounting and Income Determination
EXERCISES
In November and December 2014, Gee Company, a newly organized magazine publisher, re-
ceived $36,000 for 1,000 three-year subscriptions at $12 per year, starting with the January 
2015 issue of the magazine.
Required:
How much should Gee report in its 2014 income statement for subscriptions revenue on an 
accrual basis? How much revenue would be reported in 2014 on a cash basis?
E2-1
Determining accrual- and 
cash-basis revenue (LO 1)
AICPA
ADAPTED
E2-2
Determining unearned 
 subscription revenue (LO 2)
AICPA
ADAPTED
 
2013 
2014
Sales 
$520,000 
$650,000
Less cancellations 
(10,000) 
(30,000)
Net sales 
$510,000 
$620,000
Subscription expirations
 2013 
$230,000
 2014 
195,000 
$190,000
 2015 
85,000 
250,000
 2016 
 
180,000
 
$510,000 
$620,000
Required:
What amount of unearned subscription revenue should Jerry’s Jellies report on its December 31, 
2014, balance sheet?
Jerry’s Jellies sells one- and two-year mail-order subscriptions for its jelly-of-the-month busi-
ness. Subscriptions are collected in advance and credited to sales. An analysis of the recorded 
sales activity revealed the following:
E2-3
Determining unearned 
 revenue (LO 2)
AICPA
ADAPTED
Unredeemed at 12/31/13 
$ 75,000
2014 sales 
250,000
2014 redemptions of prior year sales 
25,000
2014 redemptions of current year sales 
175,000
Regal’s experience indicates that 10% of gift certificates sold will not be redeemed.
Required:
In its December 31, 2014, balance sheet, what amount should Regal report as unearned 
revenue?
Regal Department Store sells gift certificates redeemable for store merchandise that expire 
one year after their issuance. Regal has the following information pertaining to its gift certifi-
cates sales and redemptions:
E2-4
Determining when to 
 recognize revenue (LO 2)
AICPA
ADAPTED
On October 1, 2014. Bullseye Company sold 250,000 gallons of diesel fuel to Schmidt Co. at 
$3 per gallon. On November 8, 2014, 150,000 gallons were delivered; on December 27, 2014. 
another 50,000 gallons were delivered; and on January 15, 2015, the remaining 50,000 gal-
lons were delivered. Payment terms are: 10% due on October 1, 2014, 50% due on first deliv-
ery; 20% due on the next delivery; and the remaining 20% due on final delivery.
Required:
What amount of revenue should Bullseye recognize from this sale during 2014 on an accrual 
basis?

 
Exercises 
101
In its accrual-basis income statement for the year ended December 31, 2014, Dart Company 
reported revenue of $1,750,000. Additional information follows:
E2-5
Converting from accrual- to 
cash-basis revenue (LO 1)
AICPA
ADAPTED
Accounts receivable 12/31/13 
$375,000
Uncollectible accounts written off during 2014 
20,000
Accounts receivable 12/31/14 
505,000
Required:
Under the cash basis of income determination, how much should Dart report as revenue 
for 2014?
Joel Hamilton, D.D.S., keeps his accounting records on the cash basis. During 2014, he col-
lected $200,000 in fees from his patients. At December 31, 2013, Dr. Hamilton had accounts 
receivable of $18,000. At December 31, 2014, he had accounts receivable of $25,000 and 
unearned fees of $8,000.
Required:
On the accrual basis, what was Dr. Hamilton’s patient service revenue for 2014?
E2-6
Converting from cash- to 
 accrual-basis revenue (LO 1)
AICPA
ADAPTED
Under Hart Company’s accounting system, all insurance premiums paid are debited to Pre-
paid insurance. For interim financial reports, Hart makes monthly estimated charges to Insur-
ance expense with credits to Prepaid insurance. Additional information for the year ended 
December 31, 2014, follows:
Prepaid insurance at December 31, 2013 
$210,000
Charges to Insurance expense during 2014, including 
 a year-end adjustment of $35,000 
875,000
Unexpired insurance premiums at December 31, 2014 
245,000
Required:
What was the total amount of insurance premiums Hart paid during 2014?
E2-7
Converting from accrual- 
to cash-basis expense  
(LO 1, 3)
AICPA
ADAPTED
Munnster Corporation’s income statements for the years ended December 31, 2014, and 2013 
included the following information before adjustments:
E2-8
Determining gain (loss) 
from discontinued 
 operations (LO 5, 6)
AICPA
ADAPTED
 
2014 
2013
Operating income 
$  900,000 
$750,000
Gain on sale of division 
350,000 
—
 
$1,250,000 
$750,000
Provision for income taxes 
(375,000) 
(225,000)
Net income 
$  875,000 
$525,000
On January 1, 2014, Munnster Corporation agreed to sell the assets and product line of one 
of its operating divisions for $2,000,000. The sale was consummated on December 31, 
2014, and it resulted in a gain on disposition of $350,000. This division’s pre-tax net losses 
were $505,000 in 2014 and $170,000 in 2013. The income tax rate for both years 
was 30%.
Required:
Starting with operating income (before tax), prepare revised comparative income state-
ments for 2014 and 2013 showing appropriate details for gain (loss) from discontinued 
operations.

102 
CHAPTER 2
Accrual Accounting and Income Determination
E2-9
Determining loss on 
 discontinued operations  
(LO 6)
On September 1, 2014, Revsine Co. approved a plan to dispose of a segment of its business. 
Revsine expected that the sale would occur on March 31, 2014, at an estimated gain of 
$350,000. The segment had actual and estimated operating profits (losses) as follows:
Realized loss from 8/1/14 to 8/31/14 
$(300,000)
Realized loss from 9/1/14 to 12/31/14 
(200,000)
Expected profit from 1/1/15 to 3/30/15 
400,000
Assume that the marginal tax rate is 30%.
Required:
In its 2014 income statement, what should Revsine report as profit or loss from discontinued 
operations (net of tax effects)?
E2-11
Converting from cash to 
 accrual basis (LO 1, 3)
The following information is provided for Kelly Plumbing Supply.
Cash received from customers during December 2014 
$387,000
Cash paid to suppliers for inventory during December 2014 
131,000
Cash received from customers includes November accounts receivables of $139,000. Sales 
totaling $141,000 were made on account during December and are expected to be collected in 
January 2015. Cash paid to suppliers in December included payments of $19,000 for inven-
tory purchased and used in November. All inventory purchased in December and $39,000 of 
inventory purchased in November was used in December.
Required:
What is gross profit for the month of December under accrual accounting?
E2-12
Determining effect of 
 omitting year-end adjusting 
entries (LO 1, 2, 3, 11)
Hentzel Landscaping commenced its business on January 1, 2014.
1. During the first year of its operations, Hentzel purchased supplies in the amount of 
$12,000 (debited to Supplies inventory), and of this amount, $3,000 were unused as of 
December 31, 2014.
2. On March 1, 2014, Hentzel received $18,000 for landscaping services to be rendered for 
18 months (beginning July 1, 2014). This amount was credited to Unearned landscaping 
revenue.
3. The company’s gasoline bill for $2,500 for the month of December 2014 was not received 
until January 15, 2015.
E2-10
Determining period versus 
product costs (LO 4)
Required:
Classify the following costs as period or product costs. If a product cost, indicate which will be 
matched with sales as part of cost of goods sold and which will be shown as a direct deduction 
from sales.
Depreciation on office building 
Depreciation on factory
Insurance expense for factory building 
Bonus to factory workers
Product liability insurance premium 
Salary to marketing staff
Transportation charges for raw materials 
Administrative expenses
Factory repairs and maintenance 
Bad debt expense
Rent for inventory warehouse 
Advertising expenses
Cost of raw materials 
Research and development
Factory wages 
Warranty expense
Salary to chief executive officer 
Electricity for plant

 
Exercises 
103
4. The company had borrowed $50,000 from HomeTown Financing on April 1, 2014, at a 12% 
interest rate per annum. The principal, along with all the interest, is due on April 1, 2015.
5. On January 1, 2014, the company purchased 10 lawnmowers at $3,000 per unit. They are 
expected to last for three years with no salvage value.
 
On December 31, 2014, Hentzel did not record any adjusting entries with respect to these 
transactions.
Required:
Using the following table format, show the effect of the omission of each year-end adjusting 
entry on the following. (Indicate both the amount and the direction of the effect.) Use OS for 
overstated, US for understated, and NE for no effect.
Item Number 
Assets 
Liabilities 
Net Income
Direction of effect
Dollar amount of effect
Presented below is a combined single-step income and retained earnings statement for 
Hardrock Mining Co. for 2014.
E2-13
Preparing a multiple-step 
 income statement  
(LO 5, 6)
Statement of Income and Retained Earnings for the Year Ended 
December 31, 2014
($ in 000)
Net sales 
$5,281,954
Costs and expenses
 Cost of products sold 
4,765,505
 Marketing, administrative, and other expenses 
193,147
 Interest expense 
17,143
 Other, net 
54,529
  Total expenses before taxes 
5,030,324
Earnings before income taxes 
251,630
Provision for income taxes 
(75,489)
Net income 
176,141
Retained earnings at 1/1/14 
3,046,660
Dividends on common stock 
(100,000)
 Retained earnings at 12/31/14 
$3,122,801
Additional facts gleaned from notes to Hardrock’s financial statement follow (amounts 
in $000):
a. Other, net for 2014 included a corporate restructuring charge of $8,777 and a gain of 
$12,000 resulting from compensation paid by the U.S. government for company property 
taken under the right of eminent domain. The remainder of the category is composed of 
investment losses.
b. Marketing, administrative, and other expenses for 2014 included a loss on currency trans-
lation of $55.
c. All of these transactions were subject to Hardrock’s income tax rate of 30%.
d. Hardrock disclosed earnings per share data only in the notes to the financial statements. 
The company had 10,000,000 shares of common stock outstanding throughout 2014.
Required:
Recast this single-step combined income statement and retained earnings statement as a 
 multiple-step income statement in appropriate form. Include appropriate per share amounts.

104 
CHAPTER 2
Accrual Accounting and Income Determination
E2-14
Preparing an income 
 statement with irregular 
items (LO 5, 6)
KEW Corp. has 500,000 shares of common stock outstanding. In 2014, KEW reports income 
from continuing operations before taxes of $4,350,000. Additional transactions from 2014—
and not considered in the $4,350,000—are as follows:
1. The company reviewed its notes receivable and discovered that a note carried at $16,000 
was 18 months past due. The note was not likely to be collected.
2. KEW sold machinery for $85,000 that originally cost $300,000. Accumulated deprecia-
tion at the time of the sale amounted to $225,000. KEW sells unneeded machinery occa-
sionally when retooling one of its production processes.
3. KEW sold a division during 2014 resulting in a pre-tax loss of $890,000. The operating 
loss incurred by the discontinued division prior to its sale was $650,000; the loss from its 
disposal was $240,000. This transaction meets the criteria for discontinued operations.
4. KEW lost $395,000 (pre-tax) when a plant it operated in a third-world country was ex-
propriated following a revolution. There was no prior history of the government expropri-
ating assets of companies operating in that country.
Required:
Based on this information, prepare an income statement for the year ended December 31, 
2014, starting with income from continuing operations before income taxes; include proper 
earnings per share disclosures. KEW’s total effective tax rate on all items was 35%.
E2-15
Change in inventory 
 methods (LO 7)
Jones Corporation switched from the LIFO method of costing inventories to the FIFO method 
at the beginning of 2014. The LIFO inventory at the end of 2013 would have been $80,000 
higher using FIFO. Reported retained earnings at the end of 2013 were $1,750,000. Jones’s 
tax rate is 30%.
Required:
1. Calculate the balance in retained earnings at the time of the change (beginning of 2014) 
as it would have been reported had FIFO been previously used.
2. Prepare the journal entry to record the change in accounting principle at the beginning 
of 2014.
E2-16
Income statement 
 presentation (LO 5, 6, 7)
Krewatch, Inc., is a vertically integrated manufacturer and retailer of golf clubs and accesso-
ries (gloves, shoes, bags, etc.). Krewatch maintains separate financial reporting systems for 
each of its facilities. The company experienced the following events in 2014:
1. After several years of production problems at the accessories manufacturing plant, 
 Krewatch sold the plant to an investor group headed by a former manager at the plant.
2. Krewatch incurred restructuring costs of $12,562,990 when it eliminated a layer of middle 
management.
3. Krewatch extinguished $200 million in 30-year bonds issued 18 years ago. These bonds were 
the only ones issued in the company’s history. Krewatch recognized a gain on this transaction.
4. Krewatch changed its method of accounting for inventory from FIFO to the average cost 
method. Sufficient information was available to determine the effect of this change on 
prior years’ earnings numbers.
5. Due to technological advances in golf club manufacturing, management determined that 
production equipment would need to be upgraded more frequently than in the past. 
 Consequently, the useful lives of equipment for depreciation purposes were reduced.
6. The company wrote off inventory that was not salable.
7. Equipment was sold at a loss.

 
Exercises 
105
Required:
For each event, (1) identify the appropriate reporting treatment from the following list (con-
sider each event to be material), and (2) indicate whether it would be included in income from 
continuing operations, would appear on the income statement below that subtotal, or would 
require retrospective application.
a. Change in accounting estimate.
b. Change in accounting principle.
c. Discontinued operation.
d. Special or unusual item.
e. Extraordinary item.
JDW Corporation reported the following for 2014: net sales $2,929,500; cost of goods sold 
$1,786,995; selling and administrative expenses $585,900; an unrealized holding loss on 
available-for-sale securities $22,000; a gain from foreign currency translation $26,250 (no tax 
effect); and an unrealized loss from pension adjustment $7,000. JDW’s tax rate was 30%.
Required:
Prepare a multiple-step income statement and a statement of comprehensive income using the 
two-statement format. Ignore earnings per share.
E2-17
Preparing comprehensive 
 income statement  
(LO 5, 9)
Wellington International Airport Limited is a for-profit company domiciled in New Zealand 
that manages the Wellington Airport and files its financial statements in compliance with 
IFRS. For the period ending September 30, 2012, Wellington reported the following data:
E2-18
Wellington International 
 Airport Limited—Reporting 
of asset revaluations in 
OCI (LO 10)
WELLINGTON INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT LIMITED 
STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
FOR THE PERIOD ENDED 30 SEPTEMBER 2012
 
 
 
Consolidated
 
 6 months 
6 months 
12 months
 
 30 Sep 
30 Sep 
31 Mar
 
 
2012 
2011 
2012
($ in 000) 
 Unaudited 
Unaudited 
Unaudited
Net (loss)/surplus for the period 
 $(5,571) 
$(6,650) 
$ 8,981
Other comprehensive income
Revaluation of land 
 
— 
— 
74,270
Revaluation of property, plant, and equipment 
 
— 
— 
9,338
Amortisation of fair value of ineffective 
 hedges transferred to profit or loss 
 
626 
2,736 
4,380
Income tax relating to components of other 
 comprehensive income 
 
(175) 
(766) 
(3,840)
Other comprehensive income, net of tax 
 
451 
1,970 
84,148
Total comprehensive income 
 $(5,120) 
$(4,680) 
$93,129
Required:
1. Why do you think the revaluations of both land and property, plant, and equipment are 
 reported in other comprehensive income instead of in net income?
2. Over the 12 months ending March 31, 2012, did the values of land and property, plant, 
and equipment go up or down?
3. If Wellington International Airport Limited were located in the United States or if the 
company chose to file its financial reports under U.S. GAAP, how much revaluation 
would the company report for both land and property, plant, and equipment?

106 
CHAPTER 2
Accrual Accounting and Income Determination
E2-19
Calculating EPS (LO 8)
An analyst gathered the following information about a company whose fiscal year-end is De-
cember 31:
• Net income for the year was $10.5 million.
• Preferred stock dividends for $2 million were declared and paid for the year.
• Common stock dividends of $3.5 million were paid for the year.
• There were 20 million shares of common stock outstanding on January 1, 2014.
• The company issued 6 million new shares of common stock on April 1, 2014.
• The capital structure does not include any potentially dilutive convertible securities, 
 options, warrants, or other contingent securities.
Required:
What would be the company’s basic earnings per share for 2014?
PROBLEMS / DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
Foremost Company owns a royalty interest in an oil well. The contract stipulates that Fore-
most will receive royalty payments semiannually on January 31 and July 31. The January 31 
payment will be for 30% of the oil sold to jobbers between the previous June 1 and November 
30, and the July 31 payment will be for oil sold between the previous December 1 and May 
31. Royalty receipts for 2014 amounted to $150,000 and $240,000 on January 31 and July 31, 
respectively. On December 31, 2013, accrued royalty revenue receivable amounted to 
$40,000. Production reports show the following oil sales:
P2-1
Determining royalty 
 revenue (LO 2)
AICPA
ADAPTED
June 1, 2013–November 30, 2013 
$500,000
December 1, 2013–May 31, 2014 
800,000
June 1, 2014–November 30, 2014 
600,000
December 1, 2014–December 31, 2014 
100,000
Required:
What amount should Foremost report as royalty revenue for 2014?
P2-2
Preparing journal entries and 
statement (LO 3, 11)
a. On January 1, 2014, Frances Corporation started doing business and the owners contrib-
uted $200,000 capital in cash.
b. The company paid $24,000 to cover the rent for the office space for the 24-month period 
from January 1, 2014, to December 31, 2015.
c. On March 1, 2014, MSK Inc. entered into a consulting contract under which Frances 
Corporation promised to provide consulting to MSK Inc. for the 10-month period from 
March 1, 2014, to December 31, 2014. In return, MSK promised to pay a monthly con-
sulting fee of $15,000, which was to be paid in January 2015. Frances fulfilled its con-
tractual obligation during 2014.
d. On July 1, 2014, Frances purchased office equipment for $100,000 cash. The equipment 
has an estimated useful life of five years and no salvage value. The equipment was imme-
diately placed into use. Frances uses the straight-line method of depreciation. It records 
depreciation expense in proportion to the number of months’ usage.
e. Through November 30, 2014, the company had paid $66,000 to its employees for 11 months 
of salaries. Accrued salaries on December 31, 2014, were $6,000.
f. On December 31, 2014, Norbert Corporation advanced $20,000 to Frances Corporation 
for consulting services to be provided during 2015.

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
107
Required:
1. Provide journal entries for each of these transactions.
2. Provide adjusting entries at the end of the year.
3. Prepare an income statement for the year ended December 31, 2014.
4. Prepare a balance sheet as of December 31, 2014.
P2-3
Converting accounting 
 records from cash basis to 
 accrual basis (LO 1, 11)
The following information pertains to Stein Flowers, a calendar-year sole proprietorship, 
which maintained its books on the cash basis during the year.
AICPA
ADAPTED
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
Unadjusted Trial Balance as of December 31, 2014
 
DR 
CR
Cash 
$ 23,200 
Accounts receivable 12/31/13 
16,200 
Inventory 12/31/13 
58,000 
Furniture and fixtures 
128,500 
Land improvements 
50,000 
Accumulated depreciation 12/31/13 
 
$ 32,400
Accounts payable 12/31/13 
 
21,000
Stein, drawings 
 
–0–
Stein, capital 12/31/13 
 
124,900
Sales 
 
660,000
Purchases 
307,300 
Salaries 
174,000 
Payroll taxes 
12,400 
Insurance 
9,000 
Rent 
34,200 
Utilities 
12,500 
Living expenses 
13,000 
 
$838,300 
$838,300 
The Stein, drawings account is used to record any distributions to Mark Stein. The Stein capi-
tal account is used to record any capital contributions that Stein makes to the business and any 
profits or losses retained in the business.
 
Stein has developed plans to expand into the wholesale flower market and is in the process of 
negotiating a bank loan to finance the expansion. The bank is requesting 2014 financial state-
ments prepared on the accrual basis of accounting from Stein. During the course of a review 
engagement, Sue Crook, Stein’s accountant, obtained the following additional information:
1. Amounts due from customers totaled $27,500 at December 31, 2014.
2. An analysis of the receivables revealed that an allowance for uncollectible accounts of 
$2,800 should be provided.
3. Unpaid invoices for flower purchases totaled $33,500 and $21,000 at December 31, 2014, 
and December 31, 2013, respectively.
4. A physical count of the goods at December 31, 2014, determined that the inventory 
 totaled $71,900. The inventory was priced at cost, which approximates market value.
5. On May 1, 2014, Stein paid $9,000 to renew its comprehensive insurance coverage for one 
year. The premium on the previous policy, which expired on April 30, 2014, was $8,700.
6. On January 2, 2014, Stein entered into a 25-year operating lease for the vacant lot adjacent to 
his retail store, which was to be used as a parking lot. As agreed to in the lease, Stein paved 
and fenced in the lot at a cost of $50,000. The improvements were completed on April 1, 
2014, and have an estimated useful life of 20 years. No provision for depreciation or amorti-
zation has been recorded. Depreciation on furniture and fixtures was $13,000 for 2014.

108 
CHAPTER 2
Accrual Accounting and Income Determination
P2-4
Making adjusting entries 
and statement 
preparation (LO 11)
The following is the preclosing trial balance of Ralph Retailers, Inc.:
Preclosing Trial Balance as of December 31, 2014
 
DR 
CR
Cash 
$ 38,700
Accounts receivable 
71,600
Prepaid rent 
12,000
Inventory 
125,000
Equipment 
50,000
Building 
125,000
Allowance for doubtful accounts 
 
$  3,000
Accumulated depreciation—equipment 
 
40,000
Accumulated depreciation—building 
 
12,000
Advance from customers 
 
18,000
Accounts payable 
 
26,000
Salaries payable 
 
5,500
Capital stock 
 
70,000
Retained earnings 1/1/14 
 
264,850
Sales revenue 
 
425,000
Cost of goods sold 
275,250
Salaries expense 
60,000
Bad debt expense 
18,300
Rent expense 
40,000
Insurance expense 
15,000
Depreciation expense—building 
6,000
Depreciation expense—equipment 
3,000
Dividends 
23,500
 Totals 
$864,350 
$864,350
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
The following additional information is provided:
a. The company paid a salary advance of $5,000 to one of its employees, a total that was 
debited to the Salaries expense account. This was an advance against the employee’s sal-
ary for the year 2015.
7. Accrued expenses at December 31, 2013 and 2014, follow:
8. Stein was notified late in the year of a lawsuit filed against his business for an injury 
to a customer. His attorney believes that an unfavorable outcome is probable and that 
a reasonable estimate of the settlement exclusive of amounts covered by insurance 
is $40,000.
9. The Salaries account includes $5,000 per month paid to the proprietor. He also receives 
$250 per week for living expenses. These amounts should have been charged to Stein’s 
drawing account.
Required:
1. Determine the adjustments required to convert Stein Flowers’ unadjusted trial balance to 
the correct accrual basis of accounting for the year ended December 31, 2014. Prepare 
formal journal entries to support your adjustments.
2. Write a brief memo to Stein explaining why the bank would require financial statements 
prepared on the accrual basis instead of the cash basis.
 
2013 
2014
Utilities 
$  900 
$1,500
Payroll taxes 
1,100 
1,600
 
$2,000 
$3,100

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
109
b. On January 1, 2014, the company paid an insurance premium of $15,000, which was 
 debited to the Insurance expense account. The premium provided insurance coverage for 
18 months beginning on January 1, 2014.
c. The company decided to revise its estimate of bad debts expense by calculating it at 5% 
of its sales revenue.
d. On January 1, 2015, the company’s board of directors declared an additional dividend of 
$20,000 for the year 2014.
Required:
1. Prepare the necessary adjusting entries for the year ended December 31, 2014.
2. Prepare an income statement for the year ended December 31, 2014.
3. Prepare a balance sheet as of December 31, 2014.
P2-5
Understanding the accounting 
equation (LO 11)
Required:
Following is selected information from the balance sheet for Flaps Inc. Solve for the missing 
amounts for each of the five years.
 
Year
 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017
Total liabilities and stockholders’ equity 
$13,765 
F 
K 
P 
U
Current liabilities 
A 
$3,420 
$3,467 
$3,517 
V
Common stock 
   138 
   139 
L 
  142 
$ 144
Contributed capital 
  2,340 
G 
 2,387 
 2,422 
W
Noncurrent assets 
  8,667 
 8,721 
M 
 8,968 
X
Retained earnings 
  2,795 
 2,813 
 2,851 
Q 
Y
Total assets 
B 
H 
14,040 
R 
14,351
Noncurrent liabilities 
  5,231 
I 
 5,335 
S 
 5,454
Additional paid-in capital 
C 
 2,216 
 2,247 
T 
 2,296
Current assets 
D 
J 
 5,200 
 5,275 
 5,315
Total liabilities 
  8,630 
 8,683 
N 
 8,929 
Z
Total stockholders’ equity 
E 
 5,168 
O 
 5,314 
 5,354
P2-6
Understanding the accounting 
equation (LO 11)
The following is selected information from Bob Touret, Inc.’s financial statements. Solve for 
the missing amounts for each of the five years. You may have to use some numbers from the 
year before or the year after to solve for certain current year numbers. (NA 5 not available.)
 
Year
 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017
Current assets (CA) 
A 
$2,736 
L 
$2,778 
X
Noncurrent assets 
$4,002 
F 
$3,900 
R 
$4,805
Total assets 
 6,748 
G 
M 
 7,008 
Y
Current liabilities (CL) 
 1,536 
H 
N 
S 
1,463
Noncurrent liabilities 
B 
 2,345 
O 
 2,206 
2,252
Contributed capital 
 1,250 
I 
P 
 1,300 
Z
Retained earnings (ending) 
 1,750 
J 
 1,756 
T 
1,924
Total stockholders’ equity 
C 
 3,091 
 3,056 
U 
AA
Total liabilities and stockholders’ equity 
D 
K 
 6,916 
 7,008 
BB
Working capital (CA 2 CL) 
E 
  935 
 1,331 
V 
771
Net income (loss) 
NA 
  105 
Q 
   55 
135
Dividends 
NA 
   14 
    9 
W 
12

110 
CHAPTER 2
Accrual Accounting and Income Determination
Assume all sales and purchases are on account.
Required:
1. Determine sales for August 2014.
2. Determine salary expense for August 2014.
3. Determine cost of goods sold for August 2014.
P2-7
Converting from cash to 
 accrual basis (LO 1)
During August 2014, Packer Manufacturing had the following cash receipts and disbursements:
Cash received from customers 
$319,000
Cash received from selling equipment 
11,200
Cash paid for salaries 
47,000
Cash paid to suppliers for inventory purchases 
130,000
 
July 31 
August 31
Accounts receivable 
$128,000 
$135,000
Inventory 
33,000 
25,000
Accounts payable 
21,000 
25,000
Salaries payable 
8,000 
5,000
In addition, the following balance sheet account balances were shown on Packer’s books:
P2-8
Journal entries and statement 
preparation (LO 11)
Bob’s Chocolate Chips and More, a bakery specializing in gourmet pizza and chocolate chip 
cookies, started business October 1, 2014. The following transactions occurred during the month.
a. Common stock of $90,000 was sold at par to start the business.
b. Equipment consisting of mixers and ovens was acquired October 1 for $30,000 cash. The 
equipment is expected to last five years and can be sold at that time for $5,000. Manage-
ment uses the straight-line method to calculate depreciation expense.
c. Ingredients costing $15,000 were purchased on account during the month and all but 
$5,000 was paid for by the end of the month.
d. Rent is $500 a month. October, November, and December’s rent was paid October 5.
e. A payment of $800 for utilities was made during the month.
f. Sixty percent of the ingredients purchased in part c were prepared and sold for $35,000 
on account; $26,000 was collected on accounts receivable during the month.
g. Wages of $5,200 were paid during the month. Moreover, wages for the last three days of 
the month amounted to $400 and will be paid during the first week of November.
h. Borrowed $12,000 from the bank for additional working capital requirements, and $3,000 
was repaid by month-end. Interest on the unpaid loan balance amounted to $450 at the 
end of October and was paid on November 5.
Required:
Prepare the required journal entries and adjusting entries as well as an income statement and 
a balance sheet for Bob’s Chocolate Chips and More as of October 31, 2014. (Hint: You may 
want to consider using T-accounts to classify and accumulate the preceding transactions 
 before preparing the statements.)
P2-9
Determining missing amounts 
on income statement 
(LO 5, 6)
The following information was taken from the income statement of AJAX Corporation for the 
year ended December 31, 2014.
AJAX is a holding company with subsidiaries providing research, development, manufactur-
ing, and marketing of brand name household products.

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
111
Required:
1. Recast AJAX’s income statement and present it in good form. Fill in the missing data.
2. Consider the item called Restructuring costs and asset write-downs. What impact did this 
charge have on AJAX’s cash flows?
3. AJAX’s income statements over the last three years report research and development 
 expenses averaging $51.3 million per year. AJAX incurred these expenses to enhance 
 current products and to develop new products in the hope of generating higher future 
sales. GAAP requires that all such costs be expensed in the year incurred. Consider the 
following statement:
Research and development expenditures are really assets because they will benefit the future 
operations of the firm (that is, lead to higher sales).
 
 If you agree, suggest an alternative way to account for research and development expenditures 
rather than expensing them in the year incurred. If you disagree, what are your reasons?
4. Assume that you are a financial analyst for AJAX. Your boss has asked you to project 
next year’s net earnings. What earnings number from the information provided here 
would you use as the basis for your projection? Why?
T  R  E   T   C    H
S
 
($ in 000)
Amortization of intangible assets 
$   ?
Cost of goods sold 
?
 Extraordinary gain on extinguishment of debt, net of taxes 
2,242
 General and administrative expenses 
176,868
 Gross profit 
482,342
 Net income 
149,284
 Income before extraordinary item 
?
Income from continuing operations 
?
Income from continuing operations before income taxes 
69,328
Income from discontinued operations, net of taxes 
97,808
Interest expense 
?
Interest income 
23,944
Net revenues 
?
Operating income 
?
Other income, net 
41,660
Provision for income taxes 
20,094
Research and development 
97,230
Restructuring costs and asset write-downs 
24,444
Selling expenses 
159,016
Gross profit as percent of sales 
37.81%
 Total operating expenses 
$464,904
P2-10
Determining income from 
continuing operations and 
gain (loss) from discontinued 
operations (LO 5, 6)
The following condensed statement of income of Helen Corporation, a diversified company, 
is presented for the two years ended December 31, 2014 and 2013:
AICPA
ADAPTED
 
2014 
2013
Net sales 
$10,000,000 
$9,600,000
Cost of sales 
(6,200,000) 
(6,000,000)
Gross profit 
3,800,000 
3,600,000
Operating expenses 
(2,200,000) 
(2,400,000)
Operating income 
1,600,000 
1,200,000
Gain on sale of division 
900,000 
—
Net income before taxes 
2,500,000 
1,200,000
Provision for income taxes 
(1,250,000) 
(600,000)
 Net income 
$ 1,250,000 
$  600,000

112 
CHAPTER 2
Accrual Accounting and Income Determination
On January 1, 2014, Helen entered into an agreement to sell for $3,200,000 the assets and 
product line of one of its separate operating divisions. The sale was consummated on Decem-
ber 31, 2014, and resulted in a gain on disposition of $900,000. This division’s contribution to 
Helen’s reported income before taxes for each year was as follows:
2014 
$640,000 loss
2013 
$500,000 loss
Assume an income tax rate of 50%.
Required:
1. In preparing a revised comparative statement of income, Helen should report income 
from continuing operations after income taxes for 2014 and 2013, respectively, amount-
ing to how much?
2. Starting with the revised income from continuing operations numbers you obtained in 
 requirement 1, prepare the revised comparative income statements for 2014 and 2013 
showing appropriate details for gain (loss) from discontinued operations.
P2-11
Preparing an income 
 statement with irregular 
items (LO 5, 6)
Jordan Wing, Inc., a sporting goods retailer, began operations on January 2, 2012. It reported 
net income of $3,091,660 during 2014. Additional information about transactions occurring in 
2014 follows:
1. Jordan Wing realized $175,000 from settling a trademark infringement lawsuit.
2. The corporation disposed of its catalog sales component at a pre-tax loss of $345,000. 
This transaction meets the criteria for discontinued operations.
3. Sale of 10,000 shares of Xerox stock held as a short-term investment resulted in a gain of 
$23,450.
4. The firm changed its method of depreciating fixed assets from the straight-line method to 
the declining balance method, which was used to determine income in 2014.
5. Jordan Wing suffered a $23,000 impairment loss in 2013, which it failed to record.
6. The firm experienced an (extraordinary) uninsured tornado pre-tax loss in the amount 
of $83,500.
Required:
Prepare an income statement for the year ended December 31, 2014, starting with income from 
continuing operations before taxes; include proper earnings per share disclosures. Jordan Wing 
had 150,000 common shares outstanding for the year. Assume a 35% tax rate on all items.
P2-12
Discontinued operations 
components held for 
sale (LO 5, 6, 8)
For 2014, Silvertip Construction, Inc., reported income from continuing operations (after tax) 
of $1,650,000 before considering the following information. On November 15, 2014, the 
company adopted a plan to dispose of a component of the business. This component qualifies 
for discontinued operations treatment. During 2014, the component had pre-tax operating 
losses of $95,000. The component’s assets have a book value of $760,000 on December 31, 
2014. A recent market value analysis of these assets placed their estimated selling price at 
$735,000, less a 6% brokerage commission. Management appropriately determines that these 
assets are impaired and expects to find a buyer for the component and complete the sale early 
in 2015.
Required:
Prepare a partial income statement for Silvertip including EPS disclosures for the year ended 
December 31, 2014. Begin at income from continuing operations. Assume a 35% income tax 
rate and 1,000,000 shares of outstanding common stock.

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
113
Required:
Prepare a single-step income statement and statement of comprehensive income for 2014 
 using a single-statement format.
P2-13
Preparing comprehensive 
 income under single-step 
 format (LO 9)
The following information was taken from the records of Liz’s Theatrical Supplies for 2014. 
In addition to selling theatrical supplies, Liz owned and operated a theater until October 15, 
2014, when Liz sold this component of the business. All listed amounts are pre-tax, but are 
subject to a 38% income tax rate.
Cost of goods sold 
$490,823
Extraordinary loss 
50,000
Income from discontinued operations 
70,000
Interest income 
4,650
Loss from disposal of discontinued component 
95,000
Loss on write-off of obsolete inventory 
23,500
Net sales 
791,650
Rent revenue 
16,000
Selling and administrative expenses 
158,330
Unrealized holding loss on available-for-sale securities 
15,000
P2-15
Reporting discontinued 
 operations (LO 5, 6)
Roger’s Plumbing, Inc., operates two segments: (1) a division that installs residential and 
commercial plumbing in buildings being constructed and (2) a service division that has both 
residential and commercial components. A recent construction boom has kept Roger’s so busy 
that it has been unable to handle all of the service work on a timely basis. Growing tired of 
phone messages from irritated customers who wanted their leak fixed yesterday (and unable 
to hire additional qualified employees), management decides in October to sell the service 
business, begins to advertise its availability, and has the division’s assets appraised. Ted Roger, 
CEO, believes the service business will be easier to sell if it is split into residential and com-
mercial components. The appraisal results in the following information. Goodwill is the ap-
praiser’s estimate of the value of the company’s customer base as Roger’s Plumbing plans to 
forward all service calls for a period of three years to whoever buys each component of the 
Required:
Discuss any modifications to Smithfield’s income statement necessitated by this gain under each 
of the following independent assumptions (do not produce “corrected” income statements):
1. Such early debt retirements are part of Smithfield’s risk management strategy.
2. Smithfield has been in business for 65 years. The company occasionally issues term 
bonds, but has not previously retired bonds prior to normal maturity.
P2-14
Extinguishing debt 
early (LO 6)
The income statement of Smithfield Beverage, Inc., that follows does not include any required 
reporting related to a $62,000 pre-tax gain that was realized in 2014 when Smithfield repur-
chased and retired $1 million of its 8% term bonds (scheduled to mature in 2018). Smithfield’s 
income tax rate is 35%; 250,000 shares of common stock were outstanding during 2014.
Income Statement for the Year Ended December 31, 2014
Sales 
$3,512,000
Cost of goods sold 
(2,177,440)
Gross profit 
1,334,560
Selling and administrative expenses 
(772,640)
Income from operations, before income taxes 
561,920
Income taxes 
(196,672)
 Net income 
$ 365,248
Earnings per share 
$    1.46

114 
CHAPTER 2
Accrual Accounting and Income Determination
service business. Roger’s Plumbing has income before taxes of $2,756,000 for 2014 (the year 
management decides to sell the service division). This amount includes $185,400 residential 
service income and $215,000 commercial service income. Roger’s Plumbing is subject to an 
income tax rate of 35%.
Assets 
Book Value 
Fair Value
Residential service component:
 Service vehicles 
$ 40,000 
$ 45,000
 Repair parts inventory 
25,000 
22,000
 Tool and equipment 
9,500 
8,000
 Goodwill 
— 
20,000
  Total—Residential service 
$ 74,500 
$ 95,000
Commercial service component:
 Service vehicles 
55,000 
53,500
 Repair parts inventory 
21,000 
21,000
 Tool and equipment 
14,500 
12,000
 Goodwill 
— 
25,000
  Total—Commercial service 
$ 90,500 
$111,500
Total for service division 
$165,000 
$206,500
Required:
Assume that Roger’s Plumbing sells the residential service component on December 5, 2014, 
for $99,500 (less disposal costs of $2,000). By year-end, the company has received three firm 
offers for the commercial service component that ranged from $82,500 to $87,000. Manage-
ment is still actively seeking a better offer, but if none is obtained plans to sell the component 
to the highest bidder before the end of January 2015. The company’s auditors tell manage-
ment that the consistency of the bids to date indicates an error in the appraisal and that an 
impairment loss should be recognized. Assume estimated costs of $2,500 to sell the commer-
cial service component. Prepare an income statement for Roger’s Plumbing, Inc. (for 2014), 
beginning with income from continuing operations. For purposes of working this problem, 
report the various components of the gains/losses for discontinued operations separately for 
actual sales versus assets held for sale. Ignore per share disclosures.
P2-16
Reporting a change in 
 accounting principle (LO 7)
Barden, Inc., operates a retail chain that specializes in baby clothes and accessories that are 
made to its specifications by a number of overseas manufacturers. Barden began operations in 
2005 and has always employed the FIFO method to value its inventory. Since 2005, prices 
have generally declined as a result of intense competition among Barden’s suppliers. In 2013, 
however, prices began to rise significantly as these suppliers succumbed to international pres-
sure and addressed sweatshop conditions in their factories. The improved working conditions 
and benefits led to increased costs that are being passed on to Barden. In turn, Barden’s man-
agement believes that FIFO no longer is the best method to value its inventories and thus 
switched to LIFO on January 1, 2014. This accounting change was justified because of LIFO’s 
better matching of current costs with current revenues. Barden judges it impractical to apply 
the LIFO method on a retrospective basis because the company never maintained records on 
a LIFO basis. As a result of this change, ending inventory was reported at $275,000 instead of 
its $345,000 FIFO value. Barden reported 2014 net income of $825,000; the company’s in-
come tax rate is 35%. Barden has 10,000 shares of stock outstanding.
Required:
1. How should Barden’s 2014 comparative financial statements reflect this change in 
 accounting principle?
2. Prepare whatever disclosure is required under current GAAP as a result of this change.

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
115
P2-17
Disclosures for change in 
 accounting principle (LO 7)
During the fourth quarter of 2014, ABBA Fabrics, Inc., elected to change its method of valu-
ing inventory to the weighted average cost (“WAC”) method, whereas in all prior years inven-
tory was valued using the last-in, first-out (LIFO) method. The company determined that the 
WAC method of accounting for inventory is preferable as the method better reflects ABBA’s 
inventory at current costs and enhances the comparability of its financial statements by chang-
ing to the predominant method utilized in its industry. Condensed financial statements for 
2014 (using WAC) and 2013 (as originally reported) appear below. Inventory as originally 
reported at December 31, 2013 ($77,907), and December 31, 2012 ($127,574), increases by 
$36,382 and $37,432 respectively under WAC.
ABBA Fabrics, Inc., Balance Sheets December 31, (in thousands)
 
2014 
2013
 
(Under WAC) 
(Under LIFO)
Current assets:
Cash and cash equivalents 
$  2,338 
$  2,280
Receivables, less allowance for doubtful accounts 
3,380 
4,453
Inventories, net 
104,156 
77,907
Other current assets 
1,735 
9,866
Total current assets 
111,609 
94,506
Long-term assets 
53,065 
56,438
 Total assets 
164,674 
150,944
Total liabilities 
117,325 
123,888
Common stock 
88,348 
75,650
Retained earnings 
124,907 
100,953
Treasury stock 
(153,684) 
(153,622)
Other comprehensive income 
(12,222) 
4,075
 Total liabilities and shareholders’ equity 
$ 164,674 
$ 150,944
ABBE Fabrics, Inc., Statements of Operations 
Years Ended December 31, (in thousands)
 
2014 
2013
 
(Under WAC) 
(Under LIFO)
Sales 
$ 276,381 
$ 276,247
Cost of goods sold 
156,802 
157,617
Gross profit 
119,579 
118,630
Selling, general, and administrative expenses 
112,106 
117,815
Depreciation and amortization 
4,409 
3,815
Operating income (loss) 
$  3,064 
$  (3,000)
Required:
1. Restate the 2013 financial statements as they should appear for comparative purposes in 
the 2014 annual report.
2. Draft the disclosures required by current GAAP related to this restatement.
P2-18
Isolating OCI components 
from normal income 
 components (LO 9, 10)
Other comprehensive income (OCI) is an account that recognizes items that accounting stan-
dard-setters believe should not be accrued in Net income. Some examples of items that are 
typically reported in OCI include:
• Changes in the value of equity investments in other companies that are held for interme-
diate periods of time (under both U.S. GAAP and IFRS).
• Changes in the value of property, plant, and equipment holdings if the company chooses 
to have regular appraisals (under IFRS only).
• Changes in pension obligation estimates made by an actuary (under both U.S. GAAP and 
IFRS).

116 
CHAPTER 2
Accrual Accounting and Income Determination
Assume you are analyzing an automobile dealer business that has car sales lots located in mul-
tiple geographic locations. Revenue earned on car sales for the year ending December 31, 2014, 
is $1,200,000. Cost of automobiles sold is $750,000. Sales support and administrative expense 
for the year is $150,000. Also assume the company holds a temporary investment in the shares 
of Apple Inc. that it plans to sell in six months to pay for a new car sales lot. The value of the 
Apple Inc. investment increased by $50,000 during 2014. Assume that the appraised value of the 
land on which all the car dealerships are located increased by $300,000 during 2014. Finally, 
assume that an actuary has determined that the company’s retired employees will likely live 
longer, thereby increasing the company’s estimated pension liability (a loss) by $100,000.
Required:
1. How much is income from operations during 2014?
2. How much would the company report for income if it were to include the change in the 
value of the Apple Inc. investment (instead of reporting this value in OCI)?
3. How much would the company report for income if it were to include the change in the 
appraised value of the land (instead of reporting this value in OCI)?
4. How much would the company report for income if it were to include the change in actu-
arial estimates regarding the pension obligation (instead of reporting this value in OCI)?
5. How much would the company report for income if it were to include all of the value 
changes?
6. Which of the income computations above best represent the fundamental operational 
 performance of the automobile sales business?
7. Why do you think standards-setters require some items to be included in OCI instead of 
in Net income?
P2-19
Change in accounting 
 policy (LO 7)
In its 2012 annual report, UPS, a global package delivery company, reported the following 
performance data:
Financial Highlights
 
2012 
2011 
2010
Revenue 
$54,127 
$53,105 
$49,545
Operating expenses 
52,784 
47,025 
43,904
Net income 
807 
3,804 
3,338
As an analyst, you are trying to determine whether the significant drop in Net income between 
the end of 2011 and the end of 2012 is due to fundamental changes in business operations or 
the business environment.
 
At the beginning of 2012, UPS reported it was changing its accounting relating to its em-
ployee pension plans.
 
Historically, UPS would:
• Accrue losses that relate to underperforming pension plan investments into Accumulated 
other comprehensive income (AOCI).
• When accrued losses in AOCI became too high, UPS would spread a portion of these 
losses into net income over a period of several years. 
 
Under the new policy, UPS would:
• Accrue losses that relate to underperforming pension plan investments into Accumulated 
other comprehensive income (AOCI).
• When accrued losses in AOCI become too high, UPS would recognize a portion of these 
losses all in the current period.

 
Cases 
117
Required:
1. What are the implications of UPS’ change in accounting policy on its reported Net 
income?
2. Why might an analyst care about this change in accounting policy if she is trying 
to assess potential fundamental changes in business operations or the business 
environment?
CASES
Corrpro Companies, Inc., founded in 1984, provides corrosion control–related services, 
systems, equipment, and materials to the infrastructure, environmental, and energy mar-
kets.  Corrpro’s products and services include (a) corrosion control engineering services, 
systems, and equipment, (b) coatings services, and (c) pipeline integrity and risk assess-
ment services. The following information was abridged from the company’s March 31, 
Year 3, Form 10-K.
Assets and Liabilities Held for Sale
In July Year 2, the Company’s Board of Directors approved a formal business restructuring 
plan. The multi-year plan includes a series of initiatives to improve operating income and 
 reduce debt. The Company intends to sell non-core business units and use the proceeds to 
 reduce debt. The Company has engaged outside professionals to assist in the disposition of the 
domestic and international non-core business units. Prior to the quarter ended September 30, 
Year 2, the Company’s non-core domestic and international units were reported as the Other 
Operations and International Operations reporting segments. Effective for the quarter ended 
September 30, Year 2, the Other Operations and the International Operations reporting seg-
ments have been eliminated and the non-core domestic and international units are reported as 
Discontinued operations. Prior year financial statements have been reclassified to reflect these 
non-core units as Discontinued operations, which are also referred to as “assets and liabilities 
held for sale.”
C2-1
Conducting financial reporting 
research: Discontinued 
 operations (LO 6)
Corrpro, Inc.
Consolidated Statements of Operations for the Years 
Ended March 31,
($ in 000s) 
Year 3 
Year 2 
Year 1
Revenues 
$104,220 
$123,058 
$120,489
Operating costs and expenses
 Cost of sales 
71,607 
87,326 
85,325
 Selling, general, and administrative 
29,788 
32,327 
35,535
 Operating income (loss) 
2,825 
3,405 
(371)
Interest expense 
5,907 
5,055 
4,401
Loss from continuing operations
 before income taxes 
(3,082) 
(1,650) 
(4,772)
Provision (benefit) for income taxes 
(331) 
10,669 
(934)
Loss from continuing operations 
(2,751) 
(12,319) 
(3,838)
Discontinued operations 
 Loss from operations, net of taxes 
(9,931) 
(5,898) 
(4,443)
 Gain on disposals, net of taxes 
2,095 
— 
—
 Net loss 
$ (10,587) 
$(18,217) 
$ (8,281)

118 
CHAPTER 2
Accrual Accounting and Income Determination
Required:
1. What criteria must be met to warrant reclassifying the noncore business units as discon-
tinued operations effective with the quarter ending September 30, Year 2?
2. Suppose that in March Year 3 a buyer signed a purchase commitment for Corrpro’s 
 Rohrback Cosasco Systems division. This sale requires regulatory approval that is 
 expected to take at least 18 months to obtain. Should Corrpro’s Year 3 financial state-
ments include this division in assets and liabilities held for sale? Explain.
3. Assume that in February Year 3 a potential buyer of another of the domestic noncore 
 business units insisted on a site assessment prior to signing a purchase commitment. The 
assessment’s purpose was to determine whether the site was environmentally impaired. 
Unfortunately for Corrpro, trace amounts of a suspected carcinogen were discovered, 
causing the buyer to terminate the purchase. The buyer is willing to reconsider its deci-
sion if the site is remediated. While the site can be remediated using existing technology, 
doing so will be costly enough to negate the purpose of the sale, which is to raise funds 
to reduce debt. Management believes that employing new remediation methods currently 
being tested will make this sale economically feasible and thus places the sale of this 
business unit on hold. Should Corrpro’s Year 3 financial statements include this division 
in Assets and liabilities held for sale?
4. Is there any reason for management to prefer discontinued operations treatment for these 
noncore business units?
C2-2
McDonald’s Corporation: 
Identifying critical events for 
revenue recognition (LO 2)
The following information is taken from the Year 2 10-K statement of McDonald’s 
Corporation.
 
The Company franchises and operates McDonald’s restaurants. Of the 32,478 restaurants 
in 117 countries at year-end Year 2, 26,216 were operated by franchisees [including 19,020 
operated by conventional franchisees, 3,160 operated by developmental licensees, and 4,036 
operated by foreign affiliated markets (affiliates)—primarily in Japan] and 6,262 were oper-
ated by the Company. Under our conventional franchise arrangement, franchisees provide a 
portion of the capital required by initially investing in the equipment, signs, seating and décor 
of their restaurant businesses, and by reinvesting in the business over time. The Company 
owns the land and building or secures long-term leases for both Company-operated and con-
ventional franchised restaurant sites. This maintains long-term occupancy rights, helps control 
related costs, and assists in alignment with franchisees. In certain circumstances, the Com-
pany participates in reinvestment for conventional franchised restaurants. Under our develop-
mental license arrangement, licensees provide capital for the entire business, including the 
real estate interest, and the Company has no capital invested. In addition, the Company has an 
equity investment in a limited number of affiliates that invest in real estate and operate or 
franchise restaurants within a market.
 
The Company’s revenues consist of sales by Company-operated restaurants and fees from 
franchised restaurants operated by conventional franchisees, developmental licensees and af-
filiates. Sales by Company-operated restaurants are recognized on a cash basis. The Company 
presents sales net of sales tax and other sales-related taxes. Revenues from conventional fran-
chised restaurants include rent and royalties based on a percent of sales with minimum rent 
payments, and initial fees. Revenues from restaurants licensed to affiliates and developmental 
licensees include a royalty based on a percent of sales, and may include initial fees. Continu-
ing rent and royalties are recognized in the period earned. Initial fees are recognized upon 
opening of a restaurant or granting of a new franchise term, which is when the Company has 
performed substantially all initial services required by the franchise arrangement.

 
Cases 
119
Required:
1. McDonald’s uses different critical events to recognize revenue for its different business 
activities. Identify the critical events and rank them from the most to the least conserva-
tive policy based on your judgment of the circumstances. For each source of revenue, 
does the chosen revenue recognition method satisfy both the critical event and the mea-
surability criteria? If you don’t have enough information, discuss what additional infor-
mation is needed to form a judgment on this issue.
2. McDonald’s believes that locally owned and operated restaurants help the Company 
 maximize brand performance and are at the core of its competitive advantage, making 
McDonald’s not just a global brand but also a locally relevant one. To that end, for Year 1 
and Year 2 combined, the Company refranchised (i.e., sold company-owned stores to 
franchisees) about 1,100 restaurants, increasing the percent of restaurants franchised 
worldwide to 81%. Briefly discuss the expected impacts of refranchising on McDonald’s 
financial statements.
C2-3
Retrospectively applying a 
change in accounting 
 principle (LO 7)
Neville Company decides at the beginning of 2014 to adopt the FIFO method of inventory 
valuation. It had used the LIFO method for financial and tax reporting since its inception on 
January 1, 2012, and had maintained records that are sufficient to retrospectively apply the 
FIFO method. Neville concluded that the FIFO method is the preferable inventory valuation 
method for its inventory (it was the lone member of its industry that used LIFO; its competi-
tors all valued inventory using FIFO).
 
The effects of the change in accounting principle on inventory and cost of sales are pre-
sented in the following table:
 
Inventory Determined By 
Cost of Sales Determined By
Date 
LIFO Method 
FIFO Method 
LIFO Method 
FIFO Method
1/1/2012 
$ — 
$ — 
$  — 
$  —
12/31/2012 
200 
160 
1,600 
1,640
12/31/2013 
400 
480 
2,000 
1,880
12/31/2014 
640 
780 
2,260 
2,200
For each year presented, assume that sales are $6,000 and selling, general, and administrative 
expenses are $1,800. Neville Company’s effective income tax rate for all years is 35% (there 
are no permanent or temporary differences under FASB ASC Section 740—Income Taxes prior 
to the change). Neville’s annual report provides two years of financial results. The company’s 
income statements as originally reported under the LIFO method follow.
Income Statements 
2013 
2012
Sales 
$6,000 
$6,000
Cost of goods sold 
2,000 
1,600
Selling, general, & administrative expenses 
1,800 
1,800
Income before income taxes 
2,200 
2,600
Income taxes 
770 
910
 Net income 
$1,430 
$1,690
Required:
1. Prepare Neville Company’s 2014 and 2013 income statements reflecting the retrospective 
application of the accounting change from the LIFO method to the FIFO method.
2. Prepare Neville Company’s disclosure related to the accounting change; limit disclosure 
of financial statement line items affected by the change in accounting principle to those 
appearing on the company’s income statements for the years presented.

120 
CHAPTER 2
Accrual Accounting and Income Determination
COLLABORATIVE LEARNING CASE
Consider the following information provided from the annual report and 10-K statement of 
Baldwin Piano and Organ Company.
C2-4
Baldwin Piano and Organ 
 Analyzing and interpreting the 
income statement (LO 5, 6)
Income Statements for the Years Ended December 31,
 
Year 3 
Year 2 
Year 1
Net sales 
$120,657,455 
$110,076,904 
$103,230,431
Cost of goods sold 
(89,970,702) 
(79,637,060) 
(74,038,724)
Gross profit 
30,686,753 
30,439,844 
29,191,707
Income on the sale of installment
 receivables 
5,746,125 
5,256,583 
4,023,525
Interest income on installment receivables 
443,431 
308,220 
350,058
Other operating income, net 
3,530,761 
3,803,228 
3,768,760
 
40,407,070 
39,807,875 
37,334,050
Operating expenses
Selling, general, and administrative
 expense 
(26,187,629) 
(25,118,465) 
(23,970,568)
Provision for doubtful accounts 
(1,702,234) 
(2,053,189) 
(2,131,644)
Operating profit 
12,517,207 
12,636,221 
11,231,838
Interest expense 
(2,232,258) 
(2,610,521) 
(3,932,830)
Income before income taxes 
10,284,949 
10,025,700 
7,299,008
Income taxes 
(4,120,000) 
(4,090,000) 
(2,884,000)
 Net income 
$ 6,164,949 
$ 5,935,700 
$ 4,415,008
Interest income on installment receivables represents interest on receivables not sold to the 
independent financial institution.
 
The following summary table was prepared on the basis of the business segment data 
 reported by Baldwin:
 
Segment Revenue as a 
Segment Profit as a
 
Percentage of Total Revenue 
Percentage of Segment Revenue
Business 
Year 3 
Year 2 
Year 3 
Year 2
Musical products 
72.70% 
81.50% 
5.00% 
7.60%
Electronic 
22.20 
13.30 
14.80 
13.90
Financing services 
5.20 
5.10 
52.80 
49.20
The cash flow statement indicates that the company has repaid long-term debt of about 
$8.6 million, $5.6 million, and $8.3 million during Year 1, Year 2, and Year 3, respectively. 
The balance sheet indicates that the book value of the company’s finished goods inventory 
decreased by about 8% from Year 2 to Year 3.
 
In March Year 3, the contents of one of the company’s finished goods warehouses were 
damaged by exposure to smoke from a fire adjacent to the warehouse. The company has 
received insurance proceeds equal to the wholesale value of the destroyed inventory. 
 Accordingly, a gain of approximately $1,412,000 on the insurance settlement is included 
in the Year 3 consolidated statements of earnings in the component labeled Other operating 
income, net.
 
On January 27, Year 3, the company entered into an agreement in principle whereby Peri-
dot Associates, Inc. (Peridot), would acquire all outstanding shares of the company’s common 
Collaborative

 
Collaborative Learning Case 
121
stock at a per share price of $18.25, subject to certain contingencies. The agreement expired 
on May 16, Year 3. Under the agreement, the company was obligated to reimburse Peridot 
$800,000 for certain expenses incurred by Peridot. Additionally, the company incurred other 
expenses of approximately $305,000 related to the proposed acquisition. These combined 
expenses are included in the Year 3 consolidated statements of earnings as the component 
 labeled Other operating income, net.
Required:
Identify and explain the sources of the change in Baldwin’s profitability from Year 2 to Year 3 
with a view to evaluating its current earnings quality and future prospects. To what extent can 
this change be attributed to changes in the management’s estimates?
 
(Hint: Preparing a common-size income statement and/or year-to-year percentage change 
analysis of income statement items will help you formulate your response.)
.mhhe.com/revsine6e
www
Remember to check the book’s companion website 
for additional study material.

This page intentionally left blank

3
T
his chapter covers special topics in income determination. The first part of the 
chapter outlines the conditions and describes the accounting procedures for rec-
ognizing revenue and profit either before a sale occurs or after a sale occurs. We 
also discuss selected transactions or circumstances when the timing and amount of rev-
enue recognition presents significant challenges. The second part of the chapter looks at 
earnings management and how firms can sometimes exploit the flexibility in GAAP to 
manage annual earnings up or down. We next discuss accounting errors and irregulari-
ties and how these are corrected and reported once they are discovered. We conclude 
this chapter with a discussion of key differences between IFRS and U.S. GAAP for 
recognizing revenues and how revenue recognition would change under a recent joint 
IASB/FASB exposure draft on revenue recognition.
 
Because revenue is usually recognized at the time of sale in most industries, some 
people erroneously conclude that the sale is itself the sole criterion in recognizing rev-
enue. This is not correct! The correct rule for recognizing revenue is more complicated 
and subtle. As noted in Chapter 2, revenue is recognized at the earliest moment in time 
that Condition 1 (the “critical event” or being earned) and Condition 2 (“measurability” 
or being realized or realizable) are both satisfied. That is, at what point in the earnings 
process is the revenue earned and when do the benefits received become realized or re-
alizable? The earliest moment at which Conditions 1 and 2 are both satisfied is usu-
ally the time of sale. That is why revenue is usually recognized when the sale is made.
 
In some cases Conditions 1 and 2 are satisfied before the sale, for example, as pro-
duction takes place on a long-term construction contract. When this happens and when 
expenses are also measurable with a reasonable degree of assurance, GAAP allows in-
come to be recognized before the sale.
 
In other circumstances, Conditions 1 and 2 may not both be satisfied until after the 
time of sale, for instance, not until the cash is received on installment sales when con-
siderable uncertainty exists regarding ultimate collection. In these cases, GAAP disal-
lows revenue recognition when the sale occurs; instead, revenue (and profit) recognition 
is deferred until cash is received.
3
Additional Topics in 
Income Determination
123
Chapter
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you 
will understand:
1. The conditions under which it is 
 appropriate to recognize revenues 
and profits either before or after 
the point of sale.
2. The procedures for recognizing 
 revenue and adjusting associated 
 asset values in three specific settings: 
long-term construction contracts, 
 agricultural commodities, and 
 installment sales.
3. Specialized application of revenue 
recognition principles for franchise 
sales, sales with right of return, and 
“bundled” sales with multiple 
 deliverable elements.
4. How the flexibility in GAAP for 
 income determination invites 
 managers to manipulate or 
manage earnings.
5. The various techniques used to 
 manage earnings.
6. SEC guidance on revenue 
 recognition designed to curb 
earnings management.
7. How error corrections and 
 restatements of prior period 
 financial statements are reported.
8. Key differences between IFRS 
and U.S. GAAP rules for 
revenue recognition.
9. Proposed changes that IASB 
and FASB are considering for 
 contract-based revenue 
recognition.

124 
CHAPTER 3
Additional Topics in Income Determination
REVENUE RECOGNITION PRIOR TO SALE
Percentage-of-Completion Method
Long-term construction projects—such as roads and bridges, military hardware, and costly 
items such as oil tankers—frequently satisfy both revenue recognition conditions prior to the 
time of sale.
 
These types of projects are usually begun only after a formal contract with a purchaser has 
been signed. Because a buyer for the completed project is assured, the critical event in the 
earning of revenue is the actual construction; that is, revenue recognition Condition 1 is satis-
fied as construction progresses. Furthermore, because the contract price is specified, the 
amount of the revenue that has been earned is measurable with a reasonable degree of assur-
ance, thus satisfying revenue recognition Condition 2.
 
In many construction projects, it is also possible to estimate with reasonable accuracy the 
cost of the project and to measure its stage of completion. Furthermore, construction contracts 
usually require purchasers to make progress payments to the contractor as construction pro-
gresses. These interim payment requirements help ensure that the contractor will receive pay-
ment for the work performed.
 
When long-term construction contracts possess all of these attributes, revenue recognition 
Conditions 1 and 2 are both satisfied as construction progresses, and expenses can be matched 
against revenues to determine income. This is called the percentage-of-completion method.1 
Here’s how it works.
 
Solid Construction Corporation signs a contract with the City of Springfield on January 1, 
2014, to build a highway bridge over Stony Creek. The contract price is $1,000,000; construc-
tion costs are estimated to be $800,000, and the project is scheduled to be completed by 
 December 31, 2016. Periodic cash payments are to be made by the City of Springfield as 
construction progresses. Here is a summary of the Stony Creek project’s progress each year:
1 FASB Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) Section 910-605: Contractors—Construction—Revenue Recognition.
 
Actual Experience on the Project
 
as of December 31,
 
2014 
2015 
2016
Costs incurred to date 
$240,000 
$544,000 
$ 850,000
Estimated future costs 
560,000 
306,000 
—
Billings to date 
280,000 
650,000 
1,000,000
Cash collections to date 
210,000 
600,000 
1,000,000 
In this example, we use 
costs incurred to date di-
vided by the total estimated 
cost of the project to esti-
mate the percentage of com-
pletion. Output measures 
are sometimes used as we 
discuss below.
$240,000
$800,000 5 0.30 or 30%
 
Under the percentage-of-completion method, the profit to be recognized in any year is 
based on the ratio of incurred contract costs divided by estimated total contract costs. Using 
the data in the example, we compute the profit for 2014 using the following steps:
Step 1: Compute the percentage-of-completion ratio by dividing costs incurred to 
date by estimated total costs.
 
This is done to estimate the percentage of completion at any given point during the proj-
ect. At the end of 2014, estimated total costs on the project are $800,000, comprising 
$240,000 of costs incurred in 2014 plus $560,000 of estimated future costs. The cost ratio is:

 
Revenue Recognition Prior to Sale 
125
Step 2: Determine the estimated total profit on the contract by comparing the con-
tract price with the estimated total costs.
 
At the end of 2014, the estimated profit on the contract is still $200,000, that is, the dif-
ference between the contract price of $1,000,000 and estimated total costs of $800,000.
Step 3: Compute the estimated profit earned to date.
 
The estimated profit earned to date is the cost ratio (or percentage of completion) 
 computed in Step 1 multiplied by the estimated profit computed in Step 2, that is, 0.30 3 
$200,000 5 $60,000.
Notice that 30% of the total estimated costs of $800,000 has been incurred by the end of 2014, 
so 30% of the total estimated profit of $200,000 can be recognized in that same year. That is, 
profit is recognized in proportion to costs incurred. Because no profit has been recognized 
prior to 2014, all of the $60,000 is recognizable in 2014.
 
Because cost estimates and completion stages change, these computations must be re-
peated in each subsequent year. Furthermore, the profit computation for each subsequent con-
tract year must incorporate an additional step. The computation for 2015 illustrates this.
Step 1: Compute the percentage-of-completion ratio, determined by dividing in-
curred costs to date by estimated total costs.
 
At the end of 2015, estimated total costs on this contract have risen to $850,000: 
$544,000 of costs incurred through 2015 plus $306,000 of estimated future costs. The cost 
ratio (or percentage of completion) is:
$544,000
$850,000 5 0.64 or 64%
Step 2: Determine the estimated profit on the contract.
 
The estimated profit on the contract has now dropped to $150,000—the difference be-
tween the contract price of $1,000,000 and the newly estimated total costs of $850,000 as 
of the end of 2015:
Step 3: Compute the estimated profit earned to date.
 
Because 64% of the total estimated costs has already been incurred (Step 1), 64% of the 
revised estimated profit of $150,000 (Step 2), or $96,000, has been earned through Decem-
ber 31, 2015.
 
Be sure to notice that a portion of the profit on this contract—$60,000—has already been 
recognized in 2014. Therefore, only the incremental profit earned in 2015 should be recog-
nized. This requires an additional computation.
Step 4: Compute the incremental profit earned in the current year.
 
The estimated total profit earned through December 31, 2015, is $96,000 (Step 3). Be-
cause $60,000 of the estimated profit was recognized on this contract in 2014, only $36,000 
($96,000 2 $60,000) of additional profit can be recognized in 2015.
 
These four steps can be expressed succinctly using the following profit computation formula:
c Cost incurred to date
Estimated total costs 3 Estimated
total profitd 2 Profit recognized
in previous years 5 Profit recognized
in current year  
(3.1)
 
Profit earned to date 
Previously recognized
 
 
profit
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
⎧⎪⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪⎪⎪
⎩

126 
CHAPTER 3
Additional Topics in Income Determination
 
The previously recognized profit is the sum of all profits (or losses) recognized on the con-
tract in prior years, that is, the sum of all profits (or losses) that were determined by multiply-
ing the cost-completion ratio by the total profit estimated at those earlier dates. Again, the 
reason for subtracting this amount from the profit-earned-to-date figure is to avoid double 
counting profits recognized in prior years.
 
Repeating the computations for 2014 and 2015 using the formula in equation (3.1) gives 
the following results:
Of course, these results are identical to those derived using the multiple-step approach illus-
trated previously. The computation for 2016 would be:
2016: 
c $850,000
$850,000 3 $150,000d  2  
$96,000 
5  
$54,000
 
Profit earned to date 
Previously recognized  Profit recognized
 
 
profit 
 
in 2016
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩
 
Using the percentage-of-completion method, the cumulative profit recognized over the 
three years totals $150,000 ($60,000 1 $36,000 1 $54,000). This total equals the difference 
between the contract price of $1,000,000 and the actual costs of $850,000.
 
The journal entries shown in Exhibit 3.1 would be used to record these events on the books 
of Solid Construction Corporation.
 
Entries (2) and (3) of Exhibit 3.1 require elaboration. In entry (2), the amount debited to the 
Construction expense account each period is for the actual construction costs incurred in that pe-
riod. The credit to Construction revenue is determined by multiplying the total contract price by 
the completion percentage and then subtracting any revenue recognized in prior periods. For ex-
ample, the revenue recognized in 2015 is determined by multiplying the contract price of 
$1,000,000 times the completion percentage as of the end of 2015 (64%), giving total revenue 
earned to date of $640,000. Subtracting the $300,000 of revenue recognized in 2014 yields 
 Construction revenue of $340,000 recognized in 2015. An alternative to entry (2) is to recognize 
income (profit) on the construction project as a net amount without showing the revenue and ex-
pense amounts separately. This net amount is determined by using the formula in equation (3.1).
 
Consistent with linking asset valuation and income determination together, as discussed in 
Chapter 2, the carrying value of net assets is increased as income is recognized. This is why 
the entry (2) debit increases the Inventory: Construction in progress account, which is a part 
of inventory. Thus, entry (2) reflects the dual financial statement impact of income recognition: 
both net assets and income increase.
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩
Profit Computation
2014: 
c $240,000
$800,000 3 $200,000d  2  
0 
5  
$60,000
 
Profit earned to date 
Previously recognized  Profit recognized
 
 
profit 
 
in 2014
2015: 
c $544,000
$850,000 3 $150,000d  2  
$60,000 
5  
$36,000
 
Profit earned to date 
Previously recognized  Profit recognized
 
 
profit 
 
in 2015

 
Revenue Recognition Prior to Sale 
127
EXHIBIT 3.1
Solid Construction Corporation
Journal Entries
Percentage-of-Completion Method
 
2014 
2015 
2016
(1) To record costs incurred 
DR Inventory: Construction 
 
 
in progress   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $240,000 
 
$304,000 
 
$  306,000
CR Accounts payable, 
 
 
 
cash, etc.   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$240,000 
 
$304,000 
 
$  306,000
(2) To record revenue and expense separately 
DR  Inventory: Construction 
 
 
in progress   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $ 60,000a 
 
$ 36,000a 
 
$  54,000a
DR Construction expense   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
240,000b 
 
304,000b 
 
306,000b
 
CR Construction revenue   . . . . . . . . . 
 
$300,000c 
 
$340,000c 
 
$  360,000c
Alternative entry: To record income as a 
 net amount
DR Inventory: Construction
 
 
in progress   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $ 60,000 
 
$ 36,000 
 
$  54,000
CR  Income on long-term 
 
 
 
construction contract . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$ 60,000 
 
$ 36,000 
 
$  54,000
(3) To record customer billings
DR Accounts receivable   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $280,000 
 
$370,000 
 
$  350,000
CR  Billings on construction 
 
 
 
in progress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$280,000 
 
$370,000 
 
$  350,000
(4) To record cash received
DR Cash   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $210,000 
 
$390,000 
 
$  400,000
CR Accounts receivable   . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$210,000 
 
$390,000 
 
$  400,000
(5)  To record completion and 
acceptance of the project
DR  Billings on construction 
 
 
 in progress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
 
 
 
$1,000,000
CR Inventory: Construction
 
 
 
in progress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
 
 
 
 
$1,000,000
a Gross profit earned in current period 
30% 3 ($1,000,000 2 
64% 3 ($1,000,000 2 
($1,000,000 2 $850,000) 2
 
$800,000) 
$850,000) 2 $60,000 
$96,000
b Actual construction costs incurred in current period 
$240,000 
$544,000 2 $240,000 
$850,000 2 $544,000
c Revenues earned in current period 
30% 3 $1,000,000 
(64% 3 $1,000,000) 2 
$1,000,000 2 $300,000 2
 
 
$300,000 
$340,000

128 
CHAPTER 3
Additional Topics in Income Determination
 
In entry (3), Billings on construction in progress is a contra account, which is subtracted 
from the account Inventory: Construction in progress. The net of these two accounts is shown 
as a current asset (if there is a debit balance) or as a current liability (if there is a credit bal-
ance). In our example, the balance sheet presentation for Solid Construction Corporation 
would be as follows for 2014 and 2015:
The reason Billings on construction in progress is treated as a contra-inventory account (that 
is, shown as a deduction from inventory) is to avoid balance sheet double counting. Here’s 
why. Typically, a sale results in an asset (Accounts receivable) being increased for the selling 
price of the goods with a simultaneous decrease in another asset, Inventory, for the cost of 
goods sold. However, inventory is not reduced at the time the receivable is recorded under 
long-term construction accounting. Rather, the Inventory: Construction in progress account 
remains on the company’s books until the project is complete and the sale is finalized. Treat-
ing the Billings on construction in progress account as an offset (contra) to the Inventory: 
Construction in progress account avoids including certain costs and profits twice on the bal-
ance sheet—once in Inventory: Construction in progress and a second time in the Accounts 
receivable account.
 
In our example, cumulative income to date is determined by using the ratio of incurred 
costs to date divided by estimated total costs. This cost ratio is widely used because it pro-
vides a simple index of progress toward completion, that is, work done to date. However, 
there are situations in which this cost ratio may not accurately reflect construction progress. 
For example, consider a case in which raw materials to be used in construction are stockpiled 
in advance of use. In such situations, costs are being incurred as the raw materials are received 
and recorded on the books, yet these costs do not increase the stage of completion until the 
raw materials are actually used. In projects in which this stockpiling is significant, some other 
means for measuring progress toward completion would be preferable. Possibilities include 
labor hours worked or various output measures (such as miles of roadway completed).
 
Finally, although profits are recognized in proportion to percentage of completion as con-
struction progresses, estimated losses on a contract are recognized in their entirety as soon 
as it becomes known that a loss will ensue. To illustrate, suppose that in the Solid Construc-
tion example above it becomes known in 2015 that total contract costs will be $1,050,000, 
implying a loss of $50,000. The entries and supporting calculations to report the expected loss 
in 2015 and the entries for 2016 would be as follows:2
2015
Current Assets
 Accounts receivable 
 
$50,000
Current Liabilities
 Inventory: Construction in progress 
$(640,000)
 Less: Billings on construction in progress 
650,000
 Contract billings in excess of inventory 
 
$10,000
2 We thank Steve Zeff for suggesting this example to us.
2014
Current Assets
 Accounts receivable 
 
$70,000
 Inventory: Construction in progress 
$300,000
 Less: Billings on construction in progress 
(280,000)
 Inventory in excess of contract billings 
 
20,000

 
Revenue Recognition Prior to Sale 
129
Completed-Contract Method3
In some cases, it is not possible to determine expected costs with a high degree of reliability 
under long-term construction contracts (for example, building underground street tunnels in 
Boston), making the use of the percentage-of-completion method inappropriate. In these situ-
ations, the completed-contract method is used instead.
 
The completed-contract method postpones recognition of income until the project is 
 completed. Journal entries under the completed-contract method are identical to the journal 
entries illustrated previously for the percentage-of-completion method except that entry (2) in 
3 We discuss the completed-contract method here for convenience although it is not a method that recognizes revenue and 
profits prior to sale.
2015(a)
DR Inventory: Construction in progress   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$304,000
   CR Cash (Accounts payable) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$304,000
DR Accounts receivable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$370,000
   CR Billings on construction in progress   . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$370,000
DR Construction expense   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$328,100
   CR Inventory: Construction in progress (loss recognized) . .  
 
$110,000
   CR Construction revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
218,100
2016(b)
DR Inventory: Construction in progress   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$506,000
   CR Cash (Accounts payable) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$506,000
DR Accounts receivable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$350,000
   CR Billings on construction in progress   . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$350,000
DR Construction expense   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$481,900
   CR Construction revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$481,900
(a) Supporting calculations:
Costs to date (12/31/15) ($240,000 1 $304,000) 
 
$  544,000
Estimated costs to complete 
 
506,000
 Estimated total costs 
 
$1,050,000
Percent complete ($544,000 4 $1,050,000) 
 
51.81%
Revenue recognized in 2015
 ($1,000,000 3 51.81% 5 $518,100 2 $300,000) 
 
$  218,100
Costs recognized in 2015 (see schedule below)* 
 
(328,100)
 Loss recognized in 2015 
 
$ (110,000)
* Loss on contract (estimated) 
 
$   50,000
Add:
 Remaining total project cost, not including loss
  ($1,050,000 2 $50,000) 
$1,000,000
 Multiplied by percent complete (see above) 
51.81%
 
 
518,100
Total 
 
568,100
Less: Cost of construction recognized in 2014 
 
(240,000)
  
Cost of construction recognized in 2015 
 
$  328,100
(b) Supporting calculations:
Total revenue recognized 
 
$1,000,000
Less: Revenue recognized in 2014 and 2015 
  
($300,000 1 $218,100) 
 
(518,100)
Revenue recognized in 2016 
 
481,900
Costs of construction ($1,050,000 2 $240,000 2 $328,100) 
 
(481,900)
Loss on contract (full loss was recognized in 2015) 
 
$  –0–

130 
CHAPTER 3
Additional Topics in Income Determination
 Exhibit 3.1, which records income as construction progresses, is omitted. Instead, all of the 
income on the contract is recognized when the contract is completed. The entry for recogniz-
ing income under the completed-contract method in 2016 follows:
EXHIBIT 3.2
Yearly Income Comparison of  Two Long-Term 
Contract Accounting Methods
 
Completed-Contract 
Percentage-of-Completion
Year 
Method 
Method
2014 
–0– 
$ 60,000
2015 
–0– 
36,000
2016 
$150,000 
54,000
 Total income 
$150,000 
$150,000
EXHIBIT 3.3
Comparative Account Balances
Percentage-of-Completion versus Completed-Contract Method
December 31, Year-End Account Balances
 
Completed-Contract Method 
Percentage-of-Completion Method
 
 
 
(c) 
 
 
(f) 
(g)
 
(a) 
 
Net Asset 
(d) 
 
Net Asset 
Difference in Net
 
Inventory: 
 
(Liability) 
Inventory:  
 
(Liability) 
Asset Balances
 
Construction 
(b) 
Balance 
Construction 
(e) 
Balance 
Between Methods
 
in Progress 
Billings 
Col. (a) 2 Col. (b) 
in Progress 
Billings 
Col. (d) 2 Col. (e) 
Col. (f) 2 Col. (c)
2014 
$240,000 
$280,000 
$ (40,000) 
$300,000 
$280,000 
$ 20,000 
$60,000*
2015 
544,000 
650,000 
(106,000) 
640,000 
650,000 
(10,000) 
96,000†
2016 
–0– 
–0– 
–0– 
–0– 
–0– 
–0– 
–0–
* Also equals difference between cumulative profit on percentage-of-completion method ($60,000) and the completed-contract method ($0) from Exhibit 3.2.
† Also equals difference between cumulative profit on percentage-of-completion method ($60,000 1 $36,000 5 $96,000) and the completed-contract method 
($0 1 $0) from Exhibit 3.2.
DR Billings on construction in progress   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$1,000,000
CR Inventory: Construction in progress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$850,000
CR Income on long-term construction contract . . . . . . . . .  
 
150,000
 
Although income is recognized only on completion, losses are recognized in their entirety 
as soon as their probable existence is known.
 
Exhibit 3.2 illustrates that total income for the three years is the same under both the 
completed-contract method and the percentage-of-completion method ($150,000). However, 
the timing of income recognition differs considerably.
 
The net asset balance at intermediate construction stages will also differ with the two meth-
ods. As shown in column (g) of Exhibit 3.3, the amount of this net asset balance difference 
in any year is precisely equal to the difference in cumulative profit recognized on each 
 basis. This difference in net asset balances exists because the recognition of income has a 
 corresponding effect on net asset balances.
Revenue Recognition on Commodities
The timing of revenue recognition for producers of agricultural and mining commodities 
raises some interesting issues. There is general agreement that in both mining and farming, 

 
Revenue Recognition Prior to Sale 
131
A farmer harvests 110,000 bushels of corn on September 30, 2014. On this date, the posted 
market price per bushel was $3.50. The total cost of growing the crop was $220,000, or 
$2.00 per bushel. The farmer decides to sell 100,000 bushels for cash on September 30 
at the posted price of $3.50 and stores the remaining 10,000 bushels. On January 2, 2015, 
the market price drops to $3.00. Fearing further price declines, the farmer immediately sells 
the bushels in storage at a price of $3.00 per bushel.
Completed-Transaction (Sales) Method 
The timing of revenue recognition 
on the 100,000 bushels of corn that were sold on September 30 is straightforward. Revenue 
recognition Conditions 1 and 2 are both satisfied at September 30, and income would be rec-
ognized at the time of sale. The income statement would show:
 
Under the traditional view, which we call the completed-transaction (sales) method, no 
income would be recognized at September 30 on the 10,000 bushels that were harvested but 
not sold. For these 10,000 bushels, revenue recognition Condition 2 is considered not to have 
been met because the eventual selling price is unknown: That is, the sale transaction is not yet 
completed. The bushels in storage would be reflected on the farmer’s balance sheet at their cost 
of $20,000 ($2.00 per bushel 3 10,000 bushels).
 
When the bushels in storage are sold in 2015, the income statement would show the profit 
on the sale of the 10,000 bushels:
As costs are incurred during 
the year, the direct costs of 
crop production—things 
such as seed, fertilizer, 
fuel, and depreciation on 
machinery—are charged to 
a Production in process or 
Crop inventory account 
with offsetting credits to 
Cash, Accounts payable, or 
Accumulated depreciation.
 
Note that the traditional approach avoids recognizing any income on the 10,000 unsold 
bushels until the sales transaction is completed in 2015.
2014 Income Statement
Completed-transaction (sales) method
Revenues (sale of 100,000 bushels at a 
 market price of $3.50 per bushel) 
$350,000
Expenses (costs of $2.00 per bushel for 
 100,000 bushels sold) 
(200,000)
Income from sale 
$150,000 
2015 Income Statement
Completed-transaction (sales) method
Revenues (sale of 10,000 bushels at a 
 market price of $3.00 per bushel) 
$30,000
Expenses (costs of $2.00 per bushel for 
 10,000 bushels sold) 
(20,000)
Income from sale 
$10,000
the critical event in adding value usually comes before the actual sale. The critical event in 
mining is extracting the resource from the ground. In agriculture, the critical event is harvest-
ing the crop. (The critical event is harvest because prior to harvest, the crop may still be lost 
because of drought, hail, insects, or disease. Only after the crop is safely out of the field have 
these  income-threatening possibilities been avoided.) Thus, revenue recognition Condition 1 
is satisfied prior to the sale itself.
 
However, the precise time at which revenue recognition Condition 2 (measurability) is satisfied 
for commodities producers is open to some dispute. The following example explores the issues.

132 
CHAPTER 3
Additional Topics in Income Determination
Market Price (Production) Method 
There is another way for 
measuring income in the previous example. This alternative recognizes that well-
organized liquid markets exist for most agricultural and many mining commodi-
ties. In addition, the quantities offered for sale by any individual producer are 
usually very small in relation to the total size of the market. Producers face an 
established price for as many units as they choose to sell. These factors mean that 
a readily determinable market price at which output could be sold is continu-
ously available. In this view, revenue recognition Condition 2 (measurability) is 
 satisfied prior to the actual sale of actively traded commodities.
Because revenue recognition Condition 1 (critical event) occurs at harvest, 
both conditions necessary to recognize revenue are satisfied as soon as the 
crop is safely out of the field (that is, at the point of production or harvest). 
Thus, farming income on all 110,000 bushels is recognized under this ap-
proach on September 30 (when grain is harvested):
The International Accounting Standards Board 
(IASB) requires agricultural produce harvested 
by an enterprise to be measured at its fair value 
at time of harvest less estimated cost to transport 
the grain to the local elevator. The difference is 
referred to as net realizable value. Any gain or 
loss arising from initial recognition of harvested 
assets and from the change in fair value less esti-
mated transportation costs of harvested assets are 
to be included in net profit or loss for the  period 
in which it arises. See “Agriculture,” IAS 41 
 (London: International Accounting Standards 
Board [IASB], 2002).
This market price (production) method recognizes farming income on 
the 10,000 unsold bushels as well as on the 100,000 bushels sold. This view 
emphasizes the fact that the farmer could have sold these 10,000 bushels at 
the time of harvest for a readily determinable price of $3.50 per bushel. Be-
cause the critical event in farming is harvest and the potential sales price at the 
time of harvest is known, both revenue recognition conditions relating to 
farming are deemed to be satisfied on September 30. Therefore, farming in-
come of $165,000 is immediately determinable.
 
Under the market price method, the farmer’s balance sheet reflects the bushels in storage at 
$35,000 ($3.50 market price at harvest times 10,000 bushels). If the corn was initially carried 
at its cost of $20,000 ($2.00 per bushel times 10,000 bushels), the entry necessary to reflect 
the value added by farming is:
The market price used in this calculation is the 
net realizable value—that is, the market price at 
point of delivery less any delivery costs. Thus, if it 
costs the farmer $0.10 per bushel to transport the 
grain from the farm to the local elevator, the net 
realizable value would be $3.40 ($3.50 − $0.10). 
This would be the price used to compute the gain 
on the unsold inventory.
DR Crop inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $15,000
 
CR Market gain on unsold inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$15,000
The credit would appear as shown on the income statement for 2014.
 
After the corn is harvested, the activity called farming has ended. However, the farmer is 
actually engaged in another business in addition to farming. By withholding 10,000 bushels 
from the market, the farmer is also pursuing a separate (nonfarming) activity called specula-
tion. This speculation is undertaken in the hope that prices will rise above their September 30 
level of $3.50 per bushel. Subsequent changes in the market price of corn will thus give rise to 
speculative gains or losses—also called inventory holding gains and losses.
 
To illustrate, recollect that at the start of 2015, the market price of corn drops from $3.50 
to $3.00 per bushel. This decline in price gives rise to a speculative (holding) loss in 2015 of 
International
2014 Income Statement
Market price (production) method
Revenues (100,000 bushels sold at a market price of $3.50) 
$350,000
Expenses (costs of $2.00 per bushel for 100,000 bushels sold) 
(200,000)
Market gain on unsold inventory (10,000 bushels times the 
 difference between the $3.50 market price at the date of 
 harvest and the $2.00 cost per bushel) 
15,000
Total income from farming activities 
$165,000

 
Revenue Recognition Prior to Sale 
133
$5,000 (a decline of $0.50 per bushel times 10,000 bushels). The inventory is marked-to-
market, and the journal entry to reflect the loss is:
DR Inventory (holding) loss on speculation   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$5,000
 
CR Crop inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$5,000 
After this entry is posted, the inventory’s carrying value is now reduced to $30,000 (10,000 
bushels times $3.00 per bushel).
 
Fearing further price declines, the farmer immediately sells the remaining 10,000 bushels 
at $3 on January 2. The entry is:
DR Cost of goods sold   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $30,000
 
CR Crop inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$30,000
DR Cash 
  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $30,000 
 
CR Crop revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$30,000 
Comparison: Completed-Transaction (Sales) and Market Price 
(Production) Methods 
Although total income over the two periods is the same un-
der each approach, the income recognized in each period is not the same, and the activities to 
which the income is attributed also differ:
 
Completed-Transaction 
Market Price
 
(Sales) Method 
(Production) Method
Income from sales 
$150,000 
2014 
Income from farming activities 
$165,000
Income from sales 
10,000 
2015 
Holding loss on speculation 
(5,000)
 Total income 
$160,000 
 
 Total income 
$160,000
The completed-transaction (sales) method avoids recognizing any income on the 10,000 un-
sold bushels until the transaction is completed (when the grain is sold). However, in empha-
sizing completed transactions, this traditional approach—the completed-transaction 
method—merges the results of the farmer’s speculative and farming (operating) activities and 
does not reflect the separate results of either.
 
This example illustrates why income recognition can be controversial: Should the farmer rec-
ognize market-price changes on agricultural commodities prior to sale? In practice, the 
 completed-transaction method is far more prevalent. However, the market price method is deemed 
to be in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles when readily determinable 
 market values are continuously available. The market price method has the dual advantages of:
1. Explicitly recognizing the separate results arising from the farming and speculative activi-
ties that the farmer is engaged in.
2. Conforming more closely to the income recognition conditions introduced in Chapter 2.
RECAP
For long-term construction contracts and commodities (natural resources and agricultural 
products), the two conditions for revenue recognition—critical event (being earned) and 
measurability (being realized or realizable)—are frequently satisfied prior to sale. The 
percentage-of-completion method recognizes revenue and profits (losses) on long-term 
construction contracts as work progresses. The market price (production) method recog-
nizes the difference between the cost of the natural resource or agricultural commodity 
and its prevailing market price as income at the time of production or harvest. In both 
cases, an inventory account—Inventory: Construction in progress (for long-term construc-
tion contracts) and Crop inventory (for commodities)—is debited to reflect the increase 
in value recognized on the income statement, thereby maintaining the linkage between 
income determination and asset valuation.

134 
CHAPTER 3
Additional Topics in Income Determination
 
2014 
2015
Installment sales 
$1,200,000 
$1,300,000
Cost of installment goods sold 
840,000 
  884,000
 Gross profit 
$  360,000 
$  416,000
Gross-profit percentage 
30% 
32%
Cash collections 
 
 On 2014 installment sales 
$  300,000 
$  600,000
 On 2015 installment sales 
 
340,000
 
During 2014, installment sales of $1,200,000 were made. The potential gross profit on 
these sales is $360,000. The installment contracts call for cash payments over each of the next 
four years. Because of the extreme uncertainties regarding ultimate collectibility, this gross 
profit will be recognized only as customers pay on their accounts. Because $300,000 of cash 
is collected in 2014, the gross profit recognized in 2014 will be $90,000—that is, $300,000 
multiplied by 30%, the gross-profit percentage (gross profit/sales) on 2014 installment sales. 
This $90,000 is shown on the 2014 income statement. The difference between the total poten-
tial gross profit of $360,000 and the $90,000 of recognized gross profit, or $270,000, is de-
ferred gross profit (see entries [4] and [5] in Exhibit 3.4).
REVENUE RECOGNITION SUBSEQUENT TO SALE
Installment Sales Method
Sometimes revenue is not recognized at the point of sale even though a valid sale has taken 
place. This accounting treatment is acceptable only under highly unusual circumstances. One 
instance in which revenue recognition might be delayed beyond the point of sale is when sales 
are made under very extended cash collection terms. Examples include installment sales of 
consumer durables and retail land sales of vacation or retirement property. A lengthy collec-
tion period considerably increases the risk of nonpayment. When the risk of noncollection is 
unusually high and when there is no reasonable basis for estimating the proportion of in-
stallment accounts likely to prove uncollectible, then revenue recognition may be deferred.
 
When these extreme risk situations exist, neither of the two revenue recognition conditions 
is satisfied. Specifically, when it’s highly uncertain whether customers will make the cash pay-
ments called for in the contract, then the sale itself is not the critical event in creating value. In 
such circumstances, the actual cash collection is the critical event, and revenue recognition 
Condition 1 is satisfied only as the amounts due from customers are received. Similarly, reve-
nue recognition Condition 2 is not satisfied because the amount ultimately collectible from 
customers is not measurable with a reasonable degree of assurance at the time of sale.
 
Because Conditions 1 and 2 are both satisfied only over time as cash collections take place, 
a revenue recognition method tied to cash collections has been devised to deal with such situ-
ations. This revenue recognition approach is called the installment sales method.
Installment Sales Method Illustrated 
The installment sales method recog-
nizes revenue and gross profit proportionately as cash is collected. The amount recognized in 
any period is based on two factors:
1. The installment sales gross-profit percentage (gross profit/sales).
2. The amount of cash collected on installment accounts receivable.
Here’s an example of revenue and gross profit recognition under the installment sales method:

 
Revenue Recognition Subsequent to Sale 
135
EXHIBIT 3.4
Installment Sales Method
Journal Entries
 
2014 
2015
(1) To record installment sales
DR Accounts receivable—2014 installment sales . . . . . . . .  $1,200,000
DR Accounts receivable—2015 installment sales . . . . . . . .  
 
 
$1,300,000
CR Installment sales revenue. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$1,200,000 
 
$1,300,000
(2) To record cost of goods sold
DR Cost of installment goods sold. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $  840,000 
 
$  884,000
CR Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$  840,000 
 
$  884,000
(3) To record cash collections
DR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $  300,000 
 
$  940,000
CR Accounts receivable—2014 installment sales  . . .  
 
$  300,000 
 
$  600,000
CR Accounts receivable—2015 installment sales  . . .  
 
 
 
340,000
(4) To defer gross profit on portion of current-period 
  sales that are not yet collected
DR Deferred gross profit (income statement)  . . . . . . . . . . .  $  270,000 
 
$  307,200
CR Deferred gross profit—Adjustment to
 
 
 
accounts receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$  270,000 
 
$  307,200
(5) To recognize realized gross profit on installment
  sales of prior periods
DR Deferred gross profit—Adjustment to accounts
 
 
receivable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
 
$  180,000
CR Recognized gross profit on installment
 
 
 
sales—prior year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
 
 
$  180,000 
 
The gross profit recognized in 2015 from installment sales is comprised of two components:
1. A component relating to 2015 cash collections on 2014 installment sales.
2. A component relating to 2015 cash collections on 2015 installment sales.
The computation for installment sales gross profit recognized in 2015 is:
Total Gross Profit Recognized in 2015—Installment Sales Method
 
Gross Profit
 
Recognized
Component relating to 2014 sales:
Cash collections in 2015 from 2014 sales 
$600,000
 Multiplied by 2014 gross-profit percentage 
30%
 
$180,000
Component relating to 2015 sales:
Cash collections in 2015 from 2015 sales 
$340,000
Multiplied by 2015 gross-profit percentage 
32%
 
$108,800
 Total installment sales gross profit recognized in 2015 
$288,800
See Exhibit 3.4 for journal entries to record these facts for years 2014 and 2015.

136 
CHAPTER 3
Additional Topics in Income Determination
The income statement would appear as follows:
 
2014 
2015
Installment sales 
$1,200,000 
$1,300,000
Cost of installment goods sold 
(840,000) 
(884,000)
Gross profit 
360,000 
416,000
Less: Deferred gross profit on installment
 sales of current year 
(270,000) 
(307,200)
Gross profit recognized on current year’s
 sales 
90,000 
108,800
Plus: Gross profit recognized on installment
 sales of prior years 
— 
180,000
Total gross profit recognized this year 
$  90,000 
$  288,800 
 
Some additional internal recordkeeping is necessary when applying the installment sales 
method. Installment sales and the related cost of goods sold must be tracked by individual year in 
order to compute the gross-profit percentage that applies to each year. In addition, the accounting 
system must match cash collections with the specific sales year to which the cash collections 
 relate. This matching is needed to apply the correct gross-profit percentage to cash receipts.
 
On the balance sheet, the Accounts receivable—installment sales components are classified as 
current assets if they are due within 12 months of the balance sheet date. Amounts not expected 
to be collected within the next year may also be classified as current assets if installment sales are 
a normal part of the company’s operations because the company’s operating cycle would include 
the installment collection period. Existing practice typically classifies the Deferred gross-profit 
account as a contra-asset, which is shown as a reduction to Accounts receivable.
 
Selling, general, and administrative expenses relating to installment sales are treated as 
period costs—that is, as costs that are expensed in the period in which they are incurred— 
because they provide no future benefits. This treatment is consistent with the manner in which 
period costs are handled for normal (noninstallment) sales.
Interest on Installment Contracts 
The essence of an installment sales contract 
is that the cash payments arising from the sale are spread over multiple periods. Because of 
this delay in receiving the sales proceeds, sellers charge interest on installment sales contracts. 
Consequently, the required monthly or quarterly installment payments include both interest 
and principal. This complication was omitted from the example we just illustrated. GAAP 
requires that the interest component of the periodic cash proceeds must be recorded separately 
as interest revenue. This means that interest payments are not considered when computing the 
recognized gross profit on installment sales. Chapter 8 outlines the procedures for differentiat-
ing between principal and interest payments on customer receivables.
Cost Recovery Method
When collections on installment sales occur over an extended period and there is no reason-
able basis for estimating collectibility, GAAP allows companies to use the cost recovery 
method for recognizing profits on such sales.4 This method is commonly used when a high 
degree of uncertainty exists regarding the collection of receivables (for example, for retail 
land development sales). Under this method, no profit is recognized until cash payments re-
ceived from the buyer exceed the seller’s cost of goods sold. After the cost of the merchandise 
4 FASB ASC Section 605-10-25: Revenue Recognition—Overall—Recognition.

 
Revenue Recognition Subsequent to Sale 
137
has been recovered, any cash collected in excess of this amount is recorded as recognized 
gross profit on the seller’s income statement.
 
The following example illustrates the accounting treatment under the cost recovery method.
In 2014, Florida Swamp Land Development Company sells 100 one-acre lots for $12,000 each. 
One-third of the sales price, $4,000 per lot, or $400,000 total, is collected when the contract 
is signed and the remainder is to be collected in two equal installments in the following two 
years. The cost of acquiring and developing the land was $600,000. Because most of the sales 
are made to individuals who reside outside the State of Florida, there tends to be a high rate 
of default on collections, which is difficult to estimate.
 
If the cost recovery method is applied to these sales and the cash is collected on schedule, 
the accounting entries would be as follows:
2014
 
DR Installment receivables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $1,200,000
 
CR Land inventory   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$600,000
 
CR Deferred gross profit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
600,000
To record sale of 100 lots at $12,000 each.
 
DR Cash   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $   400,000
 
CR Installment receivables   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$400,000
To record collections on account.
2015
 
DR Cash   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $   400,000
 
CR Installment receivables   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$400,000
To record collections on account.
 
DR Deferred gross profit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $   200,000
 
CR Realized gross profit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$200,000
To record realized gross profit equal to cumulative cash collections 
in excess of cost of land sold 5 $800,000 2 $600,000 5 $200,000.
2016
 
DR Cash   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $   400,000
 
CR Installment receivables   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$400,000
To record collections on account.
 
DR Deferred gross profit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $   400,000
 
CR Realized gross profit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$400,000a
a To record realized gross profit determined as follows:
Cumulative cash collections 
$1,200,000
Cost of land sold 
(600,000)
Gross profit recognized in prior periods 
(200,000)
 Amount recognized in 2016 
$  400,000
Note that the cost recovery method is more conservative than the regular installment sales 
method because the regular installment method recognizes gross profit on each dollar col-
lected while the cost recovery method recognizes profit only when the cumulative cash collec-
tions exceed the total cost of land sold.

138 
CHAPTER 3
Additional Topics in Income Determination
REVENUE RECOGNITION FOR SPECIALIZED 
SALES TRANSACTIONS
In this section, we briefly review accounting requirements for industries or transactions that 
have specialized applications of revenue recognition principles. Specifically, we consider the 
unique revenue recognition issues for the following areas:
• Franchise sales.
• Sales with right of return.
• Bundled (multiple-element) sales.
Franchise Sales
Franchising is a popular way to expand sales of products and services in a variety of indus-
tries. In 2012, franchise operations accounted for more than $1.25 trillion of sales in the 
United States. Exhibit 3.5 identifies the 10 fastest growing franchise operations for 2013 and 
the industries in which they operate.
 
In franchise arrangements, the franchisor (seller) gives the franchisee (buyer) the exclusive 
right to sell a product or service in a given locale or area and use the franchisor’s name for a 
specified period of time. Typically, franchise agreements call for both of the following two 
types of payments:
1. An initial franchise fee, all or part of which is paid to the franchisor when the franchise 
agreement is signed, with the remainder due in installments (with interest) over a specified 
period; and
2. Continuing or periodic fees generally based on a percentage of sales generated by the 
franchisee.
RECAP
The installment sales method of revenue recognition is used when the risk of noncollec-
tion is high or when it is impractical to estimate the amount of uncollectibles. Under the 
installment sales method, the gross profit on sales is deferred and recognized as income 
in subsequent periods, that is, when the installment receivables are collected in cash. The 
linkage between income determination and asset valuation is maintained by showing 
Deferred gross profit as a contra account (reduction) to Installment accounts 
receivable.
EXHIBIT 3.5
Ten Fastest Growing Franchise Operations for 2013
Franchise 
Industry
Hampton Hotels 
Midprice hotels
Subway 
Restaurants/Fast food
Jiffy Lube International, Inc. 
Auto servicing (service)
7-Eleven Inc. 
Convenience store
Supercuts 
Hair salon (service)
Anytime Fitness 
Personal fitness (service)
Servpro 
Insurance/Disaster restoration and cleaning
Denny’s Inc. 
Restaurants
McDonald’s 
Restaurants/Fast food
Pizza Hut Inc. 
Restaurants/Fast food
Source: www.entreprenuer.com/franchise500.

 
Revenue Recognition for Specialized Sales Transactions 
139
 
Accounting for continuing periodic fees received by the franchisor poses little difficulty. 
These fees are recorded as revenue in the period they are earned and received. Accounting for 
the initial franchise fee, however, raises some challenging revenue recognition issues as you 
will see.
 
The initial franchise fee typically comprises two elements:
1. Payment for the right to operate a franchise in a given area.
2. Payment for services to be performed by the franchisor.
 
Examples of initial services include:
• Finding and securing a site for the franchise.
• Overseeing construction of the facilities.
• Training employees.
• Setting up and maintaining a recordkeeping system.
• Sales promotion and advertising.
Occasionally, initial franchise fees may also include payment for tangible property such as 
signs, equipment, inventory, land, and buildings. Fees received for tangible assets are recog-
nized when title to the property passes to the franchisee.
 
The key issue in franchise fee accounting centers on when and how much of the initial 
franchise fee should be recognized up front as revenue by the franchisor. GAAP specifies that 
revenue from initial franchise fees should be recognized when all material services or condi-
tions relating to the sale have been substantially performed or satisfied by the franchisor.5 
Essentially, the question is—when are the initial franchise fees earned by the franchisor? The 
answer is not always easily discernable, opening the way for possible abuses from recogniz-
ing revenue before it is earned.
 
The following example illustrates the key measurement and recognition issues related to 
franchise fee revenue.
5 FASB ASC Section 952-605-25: Franchisors—Revenue Recognition—Recognition.
On January 1, 2014, Diet Right sells a dieting/weight loss franchise for an initial fee of 
$25,000 with $10,000 due at the signing of the franchise agreement and the remainder 
due in three annual installments (due December 31) of $5,000 each plus interest at 8% 
on the unpaid balance. The $10,000 up-front payment gives the franchisee the right to 
use Diet Right’s name and sell prepackaged healthy meals prepared at Diet Right’s 
 corporate headquarters. In return for the initial franchise fee, Diet Right agrees to train 
employees, set up a recordkeeping system, maintain a website with online dietary 
 counseling by a registered dietician, and provide advertising and various promotional 
materials. In addition to the initial franchise fee, Diet Right will receive 2% of the fran-
chise’s annual sales for allowing the franchisee to purchase prepackaged meals at below 
market prices.
Recording Initial Franchise Fees 
Assuming that the deferred payments under 
the franchise agreement are for services not yet performed (for example, training employees, 
maintaining the website, and advertising), Diet Right would record the following entry for the 
initial franchise fee when the franchise agreement is signed.

140 
CHAPTER 3
Additional Topics in Income Determination
The unearned franchise fees will be recognized as earned when the initial services are per-
formed. These services could be performed evenly over time or at one point in time.
 
Assuming that one-half of the deferred payment ($7,500) is for employee training and 
 recordkeeping system installation completed by Diet Right before the franchise opens, the 
following entry would be made on Diet Right’s books when the franchise commences opera-
tions on March 1, 2014.
January 1, 2014:
DR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$10,000
DR Note receivable   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
15,000a
CR Earned franchise fee revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$10,000b
CR Unearned franchise fees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
15,000
a Initial fee of $25,000 minus $10,000 received at signing of franchise agreement
b Amount received for right to use Diet Right name and to sell Diet Right’s prepackaged meals
March 1, 2014:
DR Unearned franchise fees  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$7,500
 
 
CR Earned franchise fees   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$7,500
Note that this portion of the initial franchise fee is recognized even though the amount has not 
been received in cash. This treatment is appropriate assuming that the collectibility of the note 
receivable from the franchisee is reasonably assured.
 
If the remaining $7,500 of the initial franchise fee is for services provided by Diet Right on 
an ongoing basis over the term of the note (for example, maintenance of the website and ad-
vertising), the following adjusting entry would be made at the end of each year to record 
franchise fee revenue earned during the period.
December 31, 2014 (2015 and 2016):
DR Unearned franchise fees  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$2,500
 
CR Earned franchise fee revenue   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$2,500
In addition, the entry to record the receipt of payment on the note receivable and interest 
earned at 8% on the outstanding note balance would be as follows at December 31:
 
2014 
2015 
2016
DR Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $5,000 
 
$5,000 
 
$5,000
   CR Notes receivable  
 
$5,000 
 
$5,000 
 
$5,000
DR Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $1,200a 
 
$   800b 
 
$   400c
   CR Interest revenue  
 
$1,200 
 
$   800 
 
$   400
a 0.08 × $15,000 = $1,200 
b 0.08 × $10,000 = $800 
c 0.08 × $5,000 = $400

 
Revenue Recognition for Specialized Sales Transactions 
141
Costs incurred by the franchisor to provide initial and continuing services (for 
example, counseling by a registered dietician or advertising) are expensed in 
the same periods as the franchise revenue following the matching principle.
Sales with Right of Return
Due to the nature of their products, certain companies such as book publishers, packaged soft-
ware companies, and semiconductor manufacturers experience high rates of return of their prod-
ucts. For example, book publishers commonly have rates of return in excess of 25% for hardcover 
books. Because of rapid obsolescence of their product, semiconductor manufacturers such as 
Motorola Solutions and Intel grant distributors the right to return semiconductors they are unable 
to sell.
 
When the frequency and magnitude of returns are high, a question arises as to whether an 
entity should recognize revenue at the time of sale or defer recognition until the uncertainty 
regarding product returns is resolved. GAAP specifies that for a seller to record revenue at 
time of sale when right of return exists, all the following criteria must be met:6
• The seller’s price to the buyer is substantially fixed or determinable at the date of sale.
• The buyer has paid the seller or the buyer is obligated to pay the seller and the obligation 
is not contingent on the resale of the product.
• The buyer’s obligation to the seller does not change in the event of theft or physical de-
struction or damage of the product.
• The buyer acquiring the product for resale has economic substance and exists separate 
and distinct from the seller. That is, the buyer cannot be a special purpose entity estab-
lished by the seller for the sole purpose of buying and reselling the seller’s product and 
thus allowing the seller to recognize revenue.
• The seller does not have significant obligations for future performance to directly bring 
about resale of the product to the buyer.
• The amount of future returns can be reasonably estimated.
 
When all six of these conditions are met, an entity will debit Sales returns 
and credit Allowance for sales returns for the estimated returns from sales 
made during the period. The Sales returns account is netted against (shown 
contra to) the gross sales figure for the period to avoid overstatement of sales 
revenue, and the Allowance for sales returns account is shown contra to Ac-
counts receivable to avoid overstating this asset account.
 
When any of these conditions is not met, then sales revenue and the related 
cost of sales are deferred and recognized either when the return privilege has 
substantially expired or when the conditions listed above are met, whichever 
comes first.
Recording Continuing Franchise Fees 
If the franchisee sales were $100,000 
in 2014, the entry for the continuing or periodic fee (0.02 3 $100,000 5 $2,000) would be:
DR Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$2,000
   CR Earned franchise fee revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$2,000
These returns may be made by the ultimate cus-
tomer or by a party who resells the product to 
the final customer (that is, a distributor).
6 FASB ASC Section 605-15-25: Revenue Recognition—Products—Recognition.
This is perhaps the most important of these cri-
teria and the one subject to greatest uncertainty. 
Because estimation of future product returns 
 entails considerable judgment, it can lead to 
 manipulation and revenue overstatement. State-
ment users need to be particularly wary of 
 unusual patterns in return provisions for those 
entities that operate in industries with high 
 levels and variability of product returns.

142 
CHAPTER 3
Additional Topics in Income Determination
Bundled (Multiple-Element) Sales
Software vendors such as Microsoft and Oracle often package their products in “bundles” of 
more than one product or service (“multiple deliverables”) that are sold for a lump-sum  contract 
price. In addition to the software itself (or the license to use the software), other deliverables 
include items that are not essential to the principal functionality of the product such as training 
in the use of the software, upgrades and enhancements, and postcontract customer support. The 
key accounting issue related to bundled sales transactions is the timing of revenue recognition. 
That is, how much of the lump-sum contract price should be recognized up front when the 
product is delivered to the customer, and how much should be deferred and recognized as the 
seller satisfies its commitment for other deliverables specified in the contract?
 
Authoritative guidance states that if a software sales arrangement includes multiple, dis-
tinct elements, the revenue from the arrangement should be allocated to the various elements 
based on vendor-specific objective evidence (VSOE) of the elements’ relative fair value.7 As 
a practical matter, vendor-specific objective evidence is obtained from observed prices 
charged when the elements are sold separately.
 
To illustrate how revenue is allocated with multiple deliverables, assume that Oracle 
sells its database management software system to a corporate client for $1 million. The 
contract stipulates that in addition to the software, Oracle will provide staff training on the 
use of the software, a free upgrade on a when-and-if-available basis, and customer support 
over the five years of the licensing agreement. Objective evidence of relative fair values, 
based on what Oracle would charge for these individual elements if sold separately, is as 
follows:
7 FASB ASC Section 985-605-25: Software—Revenue Recognition—Recognition.
8 FASB ASC Section 605-25: Revenue Recognition—Multiple-Element Arrangements.
 
 
Percentage of
 
Fair Value 
Total Fair Value
Database management software 
$   600,000 
40%
Training 
450,000 
30
Upgrades 
300,000 
20
Customer support 
150,000 
10
 Total estimated fair values if sold separately 
$1,500,000 
100%
 
In this example, Oracle would recognize $400,000 (0.40 3 $1 million) of revenue when 
the software is delivered and installed for the client, $300,000 (0.30 3 $1 million) when the 
training is complete, $200,000 (0.20 3 $1 million) when upgrades are installed and $100,000 
(0.10 3 $1 million) recognized evenly over the five years of the contract as the customer ser-
vice is provided.
 
Exhibit 3.6 is an excerpt from Oracle’s note on significant accounting policies that explains 
its revenue recognition policies for software licensing revenues and service revenues. The 
amount of sales revenue that Oracle deferred and reported as unearned revenue amounted to 
$7.331 billion as of May 31, 2012.
 
For multiple-element sales that lack vendor-specific or objective third-party evidence for 
one of more elements in the contract, companies are allowed to estimate the selling price of 
those elements. The overall arrangement fee (selling price) is allocated to each element based 
on their relative selling prices regardless of how those estimated selling prices are determined 
and revenue is recognized as each element is delivered.8

 
Revenue Recognition for Specialized Sales Transactions 
143
EXHIBIT 3.6
Oracle Corporation Excerpts from 
Significant Accounting Policies 
Note—Fiscal Year 2012 10-K Report
Revenue Recognition
Our sources of revenues include: (1) software, which includes new software license revenues 
earned from granting licenses to use our software products and fees from cloud software sub-
scription offerings, and software license updates and product support revenues; (2) hardware 
systems, which includes the sale of hardware systems products including computer servers and 
storage products, and hardware systems support revenues; and (3) services, which includes 
software and hardware related services including consulting, managed cloud services and 
 education revenues.
 
For software license arrangements that do not require significant modification or customiza-
tion of the underlying software, we recognize new software license revenues when: (1) we enter 
into a legally binding arrangement with a customer for the license of software; (2) we deliver 
the products; (3) the sale price is fixed or determinable and free of contingencies or significant 
uncertainties; and (4) collection is probable. Revenues that are not recognized at the time of sale 
because the foregoing conditions are not met, are recognized when those conditions are subse-
quently met.
 
The vast majority of our software license arrangements include software license updates and 
product support contracts, which are entered into at the customer’s option and are recognized 
 ratably over the term of the arrangement, typically one year.
 
We often enter into arrangements with customers that purchase both software related prod-
ucts and software related services from us at the same time, or within close proximity of one 
another (referred to as software related multiple-element arrangements). Such software related 
multiple-element arrangements include the sale of our software products, software license 
 updates and product support contracts and other software related services whereby software 
 license delivery is followed by the subsequent or contemporaneous delivery of the other ele-
ments. For those software related multiple-element arrangements, we have applied the residual 
method to determine the amount of software license revenues to be recognized pursuant to 
ASC 985-605. Under the residual method, if fair value exists for undelivered elements in a 
multiple-element arrangement, such fair value of the undelivered elements is deferred with the 
remaining portion of the arrangement consideration recognized upon delivery of the software 
license or services arrangement. We allocate the fair value of each element of a software 
 related multiple-element arrangement based upon its fair value as determined by our vendor 
specific objective evidence (VSOE—described further below), with any remaining amount 
 allocated to the software license.
 
Revenues from the sales of our nonsoftware elements are recognized when: (1) persuasive evi-
dence of an arrangement exists; (2) we deliver the products and passage of the title to the buyer 
occurs; (3) the sale price is fixed or determinable; and (4) collection is reasonably assured. Rev-
enues that are not recognized at the time of sale because the foregoing conditions are not met are 
recognized when those conditions are subsequently met. When applicable, we reduce revenues 
for estimated returns or certain other incentive programs where we have the ability to sufficiently 
estimate the effects of these items.
 
We establish VSOE of selling price for deliverables in nonsoftware multiple-element arrange-
ments using the price charged for a deliverable when sold separately and for software license 
 updates and product support and hardware systems support, based on the renewal rates offered 
to customers.
Source: 2012 Oracle 10-K Report.
 
Because the determination of relative fair values of multiple deliverables requires consider-
able judgment on the part of companies’ management, there is potential for premature reve-
nue recognition and/or arbitrary income shifting from period to period. Accordingly, statement 
users need to be particularly vigilant when assessing companies’ revenue and profits with 
significant amounts of bundled or multiple-element sales arrangements.

144 
CHAPTER 3
Additional Topics in Income Determination
EARNINGS MANAGEMENT
“Executives rarely have to violate the law to put a gloss on dreary earnings. 
Accepted accounting principles leave ample room for those who want to 
fudge the numbers.”9
The criteria for revenue and expense recognition outlined in Chapter 2 provide general guide-
lines for accrual accounting income determination. Applying these rules in specific settings 
still leaves room, however, for considerable latitude and judgment. For example, determining 
when revenue has been earned (critical event) and is realizable (measurability)—the two con-
ditions for revenue recognition—are often judgment calls. Managers can sometimes exploit 
the flexibility in GAAP to manipulate reported earnings in ways that mask the company’s 
underlying performance. Some managers have even resorted to outright financial fraud to in-
flate reported earnings, but this is relatively rare.
 
The increasing propensity of managers to bolster earnings by exploiting the flexibility in 
GAAP or by resorting to financial fraud led former SEC Chairman Arthur Levitt to warn:
Increasingly, I have become concerned that the motivation to meet Wall Street earnings expecta-
tions may be overriding commonsense business practices. Too many corporate managers, audi-
tors, and analysts are participating in a game of nods and winks. In the zeal to satisfy consensus 
earnings estimates and project a smooth earnings path, wishful thinking may be winning the day 
over faithful representation. As a result, I fear that we are witnessing an erosion in the quality 
of earnings, and therefore, the quality of financial reporting. Managing may be giving way to 
manipulation; integrity may be losing to illusion.10
 
Earnings management is not new. But the perception is that it has become increasingly 
common in today’s marketplace because of pressure to meet analysts’ earnings forecasts. 
Companies that miss analysts’ earnings per share estimates by even a few pennies frequently 
experience significant stock price declines. Several highly publicized examples of alleged ac-
counting “irregularities”11 and several research studies12 lend support to Chairman Levitt’s 
concerns about earnings management.
 
One way to avoid a decline in stock price for reporting a loss is to make sure to report 
an accounting profit. Ideally, this should be accomplished through real economic events 
that are accounted for correctly. When all else fails, however, managers sometimes resort 
to various sorts of accounting “tricks” (described more fully later) to artificially inflate 
earnings. Results from a recent research study suggest that artificially inflating earnings 
9 F. S. Worthy, “Manipulating Profits: How It’s Done,” Fortune, June 25, 1984, pp. 50–54.
10 Statements made by Arthur Levitt, chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, in a speech entitled, “The Num-
bers Game,” delivered at the New York University Center for Law and Business, September 28, 1998.
11 D. Bank, “Informix Says Accounting Problems Were More Serious Than First Disclosed,” The Wall Street Journal, Sep-
tember 23, 1997; T. O’Brien, “KnowledgeWare Accounting Practices Are Questioned,” The Wall Street Journal, September 
7, 1994; M. Maremont, “Anatomy of a Fraud: How Kurzweil’s Straight-Arrow CEO Went Awry,” BusinessWeek, September 
16, 1996, pp. 90–93; S. Lipin, “How Telxon Corp. Came to Restate Earnings,” The Wall Street Journal, December 23, 1998; 
J. Laing, “Dangerous Games: Did ‘Chainsaw Al’ Dunlap Manufacture Sunbeam’s Earnings Last Year?” Barron’s Online, 
June 8, 1998, pp. 1–8; and E. Nelson and J. Lublin, “Whistle-Blowers Set Off Cendant Probe,” The Wall Street Journal, 
 August 13, 1998.
12 D. Burgstahler and I. Dichev, “Earnings Management to Avoid Earnings Decreases and Losses,” Journal of Accounting 
and Economics, December 1997, pp. 99–126; F. Degeorge, J. Patel, and R. Zeckhauser, “Earnings Management to 
 Exceed Thresholds,” Journal of Business, January 1999, pp. 1–33; and P. Dechow, S. Richardson, and A. Tuna, “Why 
Are Earnings Kinky? A Reexamination of the Earnings Management Explanation,” Review of Accounting Studies, 
vol. 8, 2003, pp. 335–84.

 
Earnings Management 
145
is a common occurrence, especially for firms that would otherwise report 
small losses.13 Figure 3.1 is a frequency distribution of annual reported 
earnings for a large number of firms over a 20-year period. The horizontal 
axis represents groupings of individual firms’ reported earnings stated as 
a percentage of their beginning-of-year market value of equity. The inter-
val width of each grouping (that is, the interval width for each bar on the 
graph) is 0.5%, or half of 1 percent. Thus, the grouping labeled 21 in-
cludes firms whose earnings stated as a percentage of beginning-of-year 
market value of equity falls in the range from 20.5% to just less than the negative side of 
0.00%. Grouping 0 contains values from 0.00% to just less than 10.5% while grouping 
11 contains values from 10.5% to just less than 1.0%. The vertical axis measures the 
number of firms whose reported earnings fall into the various categories.
 
The striking feature of this graph is the discontinuity in the number of firms reporting 
slightly negative earnings versus slightly positive earnings. Substantially fewer firms fall 
just below zero (grouping 21) while a substantially higher number of firms report earn-
ings at or just above zero (groupings 0 and 11). What appears to be happening is that 
managers of firms that would otherwise report small losses (group 21) are finding ways to 
prop up earnings to move the firm’s reported profits into the group 0 or group 1 range (that 
is, slightly positive range). One way of doing so, even in troubled times, is to exploit the 
flexibility in GAAP or to resort to a variety accounting gimmicks to push earnings into the 
positive range.
 
As has been noted, investors often penalize companies that fail to meet analysts’ earnings 
expectations. Figure 3.2 provides indirect evidence on the strong incentive managers have to 
meet or beat analysts’ earnings estimates. This graph shows the distribution of analysts’ annual 
earnings per share (EPS) forecast errors, that is, actual EPS minus analysts’ consensus EPS 
Number of firms
2000
1500
1000
500
0
230
227
224 221
218
215
212
29
*Earnings intervals are based on annual net income stated as a percentage of beginning-of-year market value of equity. 
The interval width is 0.5% (one-half percent), for example, interval 21 includes values from 20.5% to just less than 0.0% 
while interval 11 includes values from 10.5% to just less than 11.0%. 
26
21
11
23
0
3
6
9
12
15
18
21
24
27
Earnings interval*
Figure 3.1 DISTRIBUTION OF ANNUAL NET INCOME
Source: P. Dechow, S. Richardson, and A. Tuna, “Why Are Earnings Kinky? A Reexamination of the Earnings Management Explanation,” Review of Accounting Studies, Vol. 8, 2003, 
pp. 335–84.
13 Dechow et al., Ibid.
Let’s use a numerical example for clarity. As-
sume Hong Company reports 2014 earnings of 
$500,000 and the market value of its equity on 
January 1, 2014, was $62,500,000. Thus, 
$500,000/$62,500,000 5 .008 or 0.8%. Since 
0.8% is within the interval of 0.5% to 1.0%, 
Hong Company would appear in interval 11.

146 
CHAPTER 3
Additional Topics in Income Determination
estimate. The interval width of each bar is 1 cent. Thus, the forecast error bar labeled 21 cent 
(11 cent) reflects the number of firm-years when actual earnings per share falls below 
(above) the analysts’ consensus forecasts by 1 cent. Note the large number of 
observations clustered in the zero forecast error interval where actual EPS 
equals the consensus estimate. Also note the much smaller number of fore-
cast errors that fall in the bar just below zero (21 cent) compared to the 
number that fall just above zero (11 cent). One explanation of this result 
is that some companies are managing earnings upward to “meet or beat” 
 analysts’ earnings projections.
 
A survey of more than 400 chief financial officers (CFOs) and treasurers of major U.S. 
companies provides evidence that corroborates the data displayed in Figures 3.1 and 3.2.14 
More than 65% of the financial executives surveyed indicated that reporting a 
profit was an important earnings benchmark while approximately 74% indi-
cated that meeting or beating analysts’ consensus EPS forecasts for the cur-
rent quarter was an important benchmark.
When asked why their company tries to meet earnings benchmarks, more 
than 86% of the financial executives surveyed indicated that they did so to 
help build credibility with the capital market. In addition, 82% indicated that 
benchmark beating was important to maintain or increase stock price while 
74% indicated that beating benchmarks helped to convey future growth pros-
pects to investors. Managers say they willingly sacrifice firm value to appease 
Wall Street analysts: more than 80% of the CFOs surveyed indicted that they 
would delay research and development, advertising, and maintenance spend-
ing; 55% acknowledged that they would delay the start of positive net present 
value projects to achieve earnings targets. Earnings can also be managed with 
Number of firms
6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
230 227 224 221
218
215 212
29
26
23
0
3
0 cents
6
9
12
15
18
21
24
27
30
21 cent
11 cent
Difference between reported earnings and analyst consensus forecasts (in cents)*
*Consensus EPS forecasts of analysts as reported by Institutional Brokers Estimate System (IBES). The interval width is 1 cent
(e.g., interval 21 includes all firm-years where actual EPS fell below the consensus forecast by 1 cent while interval 11 includes 
cases where actual EPS exceeded the consensus forecast by 1 cent).
Figure 3.2 DISTRIBUTION OF ANNUAL FORECAST ERRORS (IN CENTS) AS REPORTED BY I/B/E/S
Source: P. Dechow, S. Richardson, and I. Tuna, “Are Benchmark Beaters Doing Anything Wrong?” Working Paper. Copyright © 2000 Irem Tuna. Reprinted by permission of the 
author. July 2000.
14 J. Graham, C. Harvey, and S. Rajgopal, “The Economic Implications of Corporate Financial Reporting,” Journal of  Accounting 
& Economics, December 2005, pp. 3–73.
The analysts’ consensus EPS estimates come 
from Institutional Brokers Estimate System (I/B/
E/S) which provides analyst earnings per share 
forecasts (both annual and quarterly) for more 
than 18,000 companies in more than 50 countries.
“For years, Wall Street has known that compa-
nies manage earnings. Academic studies have 
found that actual earnings do not fall randomly 
around the consensus estimate. Instead, they 
tend to come in at or above the forecast. Some 
companies . . . almost always seem to beat esti-
mates by a penny or two a share, no matter what 
the economic conditions. . . . Managements try 
to give investors what they want, and companies 
whose earnings are predictable are prized on 
Wall Street, which does not like unhappy 
surprises.”
Source: A. Berenson, “Tweaking Numbers to Meet Goals 
Comes Back to Haunt Executives,” The New York Times, 
June 29, 2002.

 
Earnings Management 
147
a variety of accrual estimates and year-end adjustments. Clearly, real transaction management 
or accrual management seems more consistent with managing earnings to disguise the firm’s 
true underlying economic performance than with managing earnings to convey value-relevant 
private information to investors about the firm’s future growth prospects.
 
Overvaluation of a firm’s stock price provides a strong incentive for managers to use ac-
counting gimmicks to meet or beat analysts’ earnings forecasts. A highly regarded financial 
economist explains why:
Because compensation is tied to budgets and targets, people are paid not for what they do but for 
what they do relative to some target. And this leads people to game the system by manipulating 
both the setting of the targets and how they meet their targets. These counterproductive target-
based budget and compensation systems provide the fertile foundation for the damaging effects 
of the earnings management game with the capital markets. Corporate managers and the finan-
cial markets have been playing a game similar to the budgeting game. Just as managers’ com-
pensation suffers if they miss their internal targets, CEOs and CFOs know that capital markets 
will punish the entire firm if they miss analysts’ [earnings] forecasts by as much as a penny. And 
just as managers who meet or exceed their internal targets receive a bonus, the capital markets 
reward a firm with a premium for meeting or beating analysts’ [earnings] expectations during 
the quarter. . . . Generally, the only way for managers to meet those expectations year in and 
year out is to cook their numbers to mask the inherent uncertainty in their business. And that 
cannot be done without sacrificing value.15
 
Collectively, the survey results and the conjectures in the preceding quote suggest that 
when capital market-based incentives to manage earnings to meet or beat analysts’ fore-
casts are present, the representational faithfulness and predictive usefulness of the resultant 
accounting numbers may be compromised.16 As a user of financial statements, you should 
be aware of managements’ incentives to distort reported earnings and the ways in which 
this is done, a subject to which we turn in the next section and throughout the remainder of 
the book.
Popular Earnings Management Devices
What are some of the more popular techniques firms use to manage earnings? Former 
Chairman Levitt singled out the following areas that are particularly troublesome and 
pervasive.17
• “Big Bath” restructuring charges: To remain competitive and become more efficient, 
hundreds of companies have closed plants, consolidated operations, reduced their labor 
force, and sold off noncore business units. Once a decision to restructure is made, 
GAAP requires companies to estimate the future costs they expect to incur to carry out 
the restructuring for such things as employee severance payments and plant closings.18 
These estimated restructuring costs are then charged to an expense account with an 
 offsetting credit to a liability account (Restructuring reserve) in the current period. In 
15 M. Jensen, “Agency Costs of Overvalued Equity,” Financial Management, Spring 2005, p. 5–19. Copyright © 2005 Wiley-
Blackwell. Used with permission.
16 For empirical evidence consistent with this concern, see B. Badertscher, “Overvaluation and the Choice of Alternative 
Earnings Management Mechanisms,” The Accounting Review, September 2011, pp. 1491–1518; B. Badertscher, C. Collins, 
and T. Lys, “Discretionary Accounting Choices and the Predictive Ability of Accruals with Respect to Future Cash Flows,” 
Journal of Accounting & Economics, February-April, 2012, pp. 330–52; and J. Efendi, A. Srivastava, and E. Swanson, 
“Why Do Corporate Managers Misstate Financial Statements? The Role of In-the-Money Options and Other Incentives,” 
Journal of Financial Economics, September 2007, pp. 667–708.
17 Levitt, “The Numbers Game,” op. cit.
18 FASB ASC Section 420: Exit or Disposal Cost Obligations.

148 
CHAPTER 3
Additional Topics in Income Determination
 
 an effort to “clean up” company balance sheets, managers 
have often taken excessive  restructuring write-offs and over-
stated estimated charges for future expenditures. Examples of 
questionable items that the SEC has found in restructuring 
charges include services to be provided in some future pe-
riod by lawyers, accountants, and investment bankers; special 
bonuses for officers; and expenses for retraining and relocat-
ing people. Amazingly, some companies even took charges 
for training people not yet hired!
 
Why are companies tempted to overstate restructuring 
charges? The conventional wisdom is that investors look be-
yond one-time special charges and write-offs and, instead, 
value a company’s stock based on sustainable operating earn-
ings (see Chapter 6). So, many believe that taking “big bath” 
charges does not adversely affect stock price.19 Moreover, 
these restructuring charges and associated liability reserves 
are sometimes reversed in future years when earnings fall 
short of targets, thereby providing a boost to the bottom line 
at opportune times.
•
 Miscellaneous “cookie jar reserves”: Accrual accounting 
 allows companies to estimate and accrue for obligations that 
will be paid in future periods as a result of transactions or 
events in the current period. Similar reserves are allowed for
A report prepared by outside investigators for the Board 
of Freddie Mac, a big mortgage financier, highlights how 
management used a variety of cookie jar reserves to 
 artificially smooth earnings.
Freddie Mac, which for most of the last few years has 
faced the uncommon problem of having profits that 
substantially exceeded Wall Street forecasts, did not 
want to deviate too much from those expectations, the 
report said. So it used techniques to make its underly-
ing business of insuring and buying mortgages seem 
less profitable and to create a reserve of earnings for 
later years. . . . Freddie Mac said it had understated its 
pre-tax profits by as much as $6.9 billion in 2002 and 
previous years as a result of serious accounting prob-
lems, and the company ousted its three top executives. 
The report offers more evidence of what regulators and 
many investors say is a culture of earnings manage-
ment in corporate America. Like many other big pub-
licly traded companies, Freddie Mac put a premium on 
meeting analysts’ forecasts of its profits and providing 
consistent growth in reported earnings.
Source: A. Berenson, “Report Says Freddie Mac Misled Investors,” The 
New York Times, July 24, 2003. Copyright © 2003. Used by permission 
of The New York Times Co., Inc.
19 J. Elliott and D. Hanna, “Repeated Accounting Write-Offs and the Information Content of Earnings,” Journal of Account-
ing Research, Supplement, 1996, pp. 135–55.
 
estimated declines in asset values. Examples include provisions for bad debts and loan 
losses, warranty costs, sales  returns, and reserves for various future expenditures related 
to corporate restructuring. Some companies use unrealistic  assumptions to arrive at these 
estimated charges. They overreserve in good times and cut back on estimated charges, or 
even reverse previous charges, in bad times. As a result, these “cookie jar reserves” become 
a convenient income smoothing device. One critique of IFRS is that it might offer more 
opportunities for “cookie jar reserves” accrual accounting than U.S. GAAP. As discussed 
in Chapter 10, IFRS allows companies to reverse prior period asset impairments. This 
might allow a company to impair assets in good times and reverse these impairments later.
• Intentional errors deemed to be “immaterial” and intentional bias in estimates: Material-
ity thresholds are another way of using financial reporting flexibility to inflate earnings. 
Sometimes, companies intentionally misapply GAAP, for example, capitalizing an expen-
diture that should be expensed. If the auditor subsequently catches this incorrect treat-
ment, management might justify the error by arguing that the earnings effect is “immaterial” 
and, therefore, not worth correcting. The problem, of course, is that a series of these “imma-
terial” errors spread across several accounts can, in the aggregate, have a material effect on 
bottom-line earnings.
Intentional misstatement of estimates is another area of abuse. Estimates abound in 
 accrual accounting. Examples include estimated useful lives and salvage values for fixed 
assets, estimates of bad debts, and the amount of write-down for obsolete inventory. 
 Management can often shade these estimates in one direction or the other to achieve a 
 desired earnings target. As long as these estimates fall within “acceptable” ranges, the 
 biased estimate is unlikely to draw attention from the external auditor.

 
Earnings Management 
149
• Premature or aggressive revenue recognition: Another common abuse is to recognize 
 revenues before they have been “earned” (the critical event criterion) or become “real-
ized” (the measurability criterion). The next section discusses this important earnings 
management device.
Revenue Recognition Abuses 
The SEC says that revenue is earned (critical 
event) and is realized or realizable (measurability)—and, therefore, can be recognized—when 
all of the following criteria are met:
1. Persuasive evidence of an exchange arrangement exists.
2. Delivery has occurred or services have been rendered.
3. The seller’s price to the buyer is fixed or determinable.
4. Collectibility is reasonably assured.
 
The following scenarios taken from SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin (SAB) No. 104 illustrate 
some troublesome areas of revenue recognition as well as the SEC’s recommendation regard-
ing the appropriate treatment.20
• Scenario 1—Goods shipped on consignment: A software manufacturer (seller) ships 
100,000 copies of a new video game to distributors, charging $50 per copy. Under terms 
of the signed agreement, distributors have the right (a) to return unsold copies of the 
video game and (b) not to pay the seller until they resell the product to final customers 
through their retail outlets. The software manufacturer wants to recognize $5,000,000 of 
revenue upon delivery of the video games to the distributors. Can the company do this?
SEC interpretive response: No revenue can be recognized on delivery. The reason is that 
the seller retains the risks and rewards of ownership of the product. Title does not pass to the 
distributor when the goods are shipped. Also, under criterion 4 in the preceding list, there is 
considerable uncertainty as to ultimate collectibility of the sales price on the goods shipped.
• Scenario 2—Sales with delayed delivery: Prior to the close of its September 30 fiscal quarter, 
a manufacturer (seller) completes production of 50,000 specialized gas valves. The valves 
sell for $60 each and were ordered by customers that assemble and sell gas fireplaces. The 
customers are unable to take delivery by September 30 for reasons that include (1) lack of 
available storage space, (2) having ample inventory on hand to cover production for the next 
month, and (3) delayed production schedules. The seller segregates the valves awaiting ship-
ment from other unsold products in its own warehouse and wishes to recognize $3,000,000 
of revenue in the current quarter from these goods produced but not shipped.
SEC interpretive response: Without evidence of an exchange being spelled out in the 
sales agreement (criterion 1), the seller cannot recognize revenue until delivery has taken 
place (criterion 2). Generally, delivery is not considered to have occurred unless the customer 
(1) takes title and (2) assumes the risks and rewards of ownership of the products. Typically, 
these conditions are met when a product is received at the customer’s place of business or 
when the product is shipped to the customer and the customer assumes responsibility for the 
product once it leaves the seller’s premises. If the buyer requests in the sales agreement that 
the transaction be on a “bill and hold” basis and has a substantial business purpose for doing 
so, the seller may recognize revenue when the production of the goods is complete.
• Scenario 3—Goods sold on layaway: Company R, a retailer, offers layaway sales to its 
customers. It collects an initial cash deposit from the customer but retains the merchandise 
20 FASB ASC Section 605-10-S25: Revenue Recognition—Overall—(SEC) Revenue Recognition [also located in “Revenue 
Recognition,” Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 104 (Washington, DC: SEC, December 17, 2003)].
“Arrangement” means there 
is a final understanding 
 between the parties as to the 
specific nature and terms of 
the agreed-upon transaction.

150 
CHAPTER 3
Additional Topics in Income Determination
and sets it aside in its inventory. Although a date may be specified within which the 
 customer must finalize the purchase, Company R does not require the customer to sign a 
fixed payment agreement. The merchandise is not released to the customer until full 
 payment is received. Company R wants to recognize revenue equal to a pro rata portion 
of the merchandise sales price as cash is collected.
SEC interpretive response: Company R should postpone recognizing revenue until 
merchandise is delivered to the customer (criterion 2 delivery has not occurred). Until 
then, the cash received to date should be recognized as a liability such as Deposits from 
layaway customers. Because Company R retains the risks of ownership, receives only 
 deposits, and does not have an enforceable right to the remainder of the purchase price, 
it is not entitled to recognize revenue until the sales price is received in full.
• Scenario 4—Nonrefundable up-front fees: Increasingly, service providers negotiate agree-
ments with customers that require the customer to pay a nonrefundable up-front “initiation” 
or service “activation” fee. For example, companies that provide telecommunications ser-
vices typically charge each new customer a nonrefundable activation fee. Once enrolled for 
service, customers then pay monthly usage fees that just cover the company’s operating 
costs. The costs to activate the telecommunications service are minimal. Thus, the up-front 
fee customers pay more than covers these costs. The key question here involves when 
 revenue from nonrefundable up-front activation fees should be recognized.
SEC interpretive response: Unless the up-front fee is in exchange for products deliv-
ered or services performed that represent the culmination of a separate earnings process, 
deferral of revenue is appropriate because service has not been rendered (criterion 2, 
 delivery). In such circumstances, the up-front fees, even if nonrefundable, are deemed 
to be earned as the services are delivered over the service agreement’s full term. This 
means that the up-front fees should be deferred and recognized pro rata over the periods 
when services are provided because that’s when the fees are earned.
• Scenario 5—Gross versus net basis for Internet resellers: Another troublesome area is the 
method used to record sales by certain Internet companies that simply act as an agent or 
broker in a transaction. For example, assume that Dot-com Company operates an Internet 
site from which it sells airline tickets. Customers place orders by selecting a specific flight 
from Dot-com’s website and providing a credit card number for payment. Dot-com receives 
the order and credit card authorization and passes this information along to the airline. The 
airline sends the tickets directly to the customer. Dot-com does not take title to the tickets 
and, therefore, has no ownership risk or other responsibility for the tickets. The airline is 
fully responsible for all returned tickets and disputed credit card charges. (So, Dot-com is 
just an agent or broker that facilitates the transaction between the customer and the airline.) 
The average ticket price is $500, of which Dot-com receives a $25 commission. In the event 
a credit card sale is rejected, Dot-com loses its $25 commission on sale. Because its man-
agement believes that revenue growth is what drives its share price, it seeks to report the 
revenue from this transaction on a “gross” basis at $500, along with cost of sales of $475.
SEC interpretive response: Dot-com should report the revenue from this transaction 
on a “net” basis: $25 as commission revenue and $0 for cost of sales. In determining 
whether revenue should be reported gross (with separate display of cost of sales) or on a 
net basis, the SEC stipulates that the following factors be considered:
1. Is Dot-com acting as a principal or as an agent/broker in the transaction?
2. Does Dot-com take title to the ticket?
3. Does Dot-com assume the risks of ownership such as possible losses from bad debts or 
returns?

 
Earnings Management 
151
If Dot-com acts as a principal in the transaction, takes title to the tickets or assumes the 
ownership risks, then the gross method is deemed appropriate. Otherwise, the net method 
must be used.
• Scenario 6—Capacity swaps: Over the past decade, revenue growth has been a major 
factor that affects the value of telecommunications companies. In an effort to bolster 
quarter-over-quarter revenue growth and build capacity for future expected customer 
demand, several telecommunication companies entered into a series of “capacity 
swap” transactions exchanging access to each other’s networks. As an example, 
 assume that on January 1, 2014, San Francisco Telecom agrees to exchange $150 mil-
lion worth of capacity over its fiber optic network between San Francisco and Asia for 
$175 million of capacity on Boston Telecom’s communications network between New 
York and Europe. Company engineers estimate that current customer demand would 
have to increase five-fold (not a likely outcome for the foreseeable future) before the 
capacity being acquired would be needed. On signing the agreement, each company 
seeks to book revenue equal to the capacity rights being sold while booking the capac-
ity bought as a capital expenditure that will be written off on a straight-line basis over 
the 10-year term of the swap agreement. As a consequence, San Francisco Telecom 
plans to book $150 million of revenue and $17.5 million per year ($175 million/10 years) 
of expenses resulting in increased pre-tax profits of $132.5 million in the year the 
swap agreement is signed. Boston Telecom would book $175 million of revenue, 
$15 million of expenses, and $160 million in pre-tax profits. Thus, both companies 
stand to report substantially higher revenues and profits in the current period despite 
the fact that none, or very little, of the capacity exchanged is likely to be used by 
 paying customers in the current period.
SEC interpretive response:21 The SEC position is that rather than recognize the en-
tire amount of the swapped capacity as revenue up front when the contract is signed, 
revenues should be deferred and recognized over the term of the swap agreement as 
the capacity is brought on line and used by the acquiring firm’s customers. Capacity 
acquired is to be charged against earnings over the life of the swap agreement as indi-
cated earlier.
It is important to note that SAB 104 was not meant to change GAAP. Instead, it is 
intended to close some loopholes and eliminate gray areas in how GAAP is being 
 applied in practice. A survey of annual reports indicates that the SEC guidelines have 
diminished abuses.22 However, aggressive revenue recognition still occurs, so analysts 
must be vigilant for firms that overstate true earnings performance by bending revenue 
recognition rules.
21 This interpretative response was issued subsequent to SAB 104 (FASB ASC Section 605-10-S25, op.cit.) as part of enforce-
ment actions brought against companies deemed to have violated GAAP. The SEC publishes details of major enforcement 
actions against firms with accounting irregularities in a series called Accounting and Auditing Enforcement Releases.
22 P. McConnell, J. Pegg, and D. Zion, “Revenue Recognition 101,” Accounting Issues (New York: Bear, Stearns & Co. Inc., 
March 10, 2000).
RECAP
The criteria for revenue and expense recognition are intended to provide general guid-
ance for accrual accounting income determination. However, these general criteria leave 
ample room for judgment and interpretation that create flexibility in GAAP. Analysts and 
investors must be alert for management’s attempts to exploit this flexibility in ways that 
push the boundaries of acceptable revenue and expense recognition.

152 
CHAPTER 3
Additional Topics in Income Determination
ACCOUNTING ERRORS, EARNINGS RESTATEMENTS, 
AND PRIOR PERIOD ADJUSTMENTS
Accounting errors or irregularities23 can occur for a variety of reasons. Sometimes they occur 
because of simple oversight. For example, a buyer may fail to include in its ending inventory 
the cost of merchandise in transit for which title transfers at the time goods are shipped by the 
seller (see Chapter 9). Errors can also occur because different parties disagree on how to ac-
count for a given transaction, resulting in misapplication of GAAP. For example, practicing 
accountants looking at a given set of facts can sometimes disagree on when the critical event 
and measurability conditions have been satisfied for revenue recognition. Finally, errors 
sometimes occur because management attempts to exploit the flexibility in GAAP or commits 
outright financial fraud to inflate earnings and overstate net assets. The Enron and WorldCom 
restatements in 2001 and 2002 that led to the largest corporate failures in U.S. history provide 
examples.
 
Several different parties are charged with the responsibility for discovering accounting 
 errors and irregularities:
• The company’s internal audit staff and audit committee of the board of directors are 
charged with the responsibility for evaluating internal controls, overseeing the prepara-
tion of the financial statements, and ensuring that their content fully and accurately 
 depicts the company’s financial condition and results of operations. As part of their 
 ongoing review of control systems and financial reporting process, the audit committee 
and the company’s internal audit staff provide the first-line defense against accounting 
errors/irregularities.
• External auditors provide an additional safeguard in identifying and correcting account-
ing errors and irregularities. Although the company’s management is responsible for the 
preparation and content of the published financial statements, the independent external 
auditor is charged with the responsibility for auditing the financial statements to ensure 
that they are fairly presented in all material respects in accordance with GAAP. As part 
of the interim review and year-end audit, the external auditor will occasionally uncover 
accounting errors and irregularities that require correction of current period results or 
 restatement of prior period financial statements.
• The Securities Act of 1933 and the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 require companies 
that sell securities in the United States to register with the SEC and make periodic finan-
cial filings with the Commission. As part of its oversight of the registration and filing 
 process, the SEC staff reviews selected issuers’ filings to ensure compliance with SEC 
accounting and disclosure requirements. Through this process, the SEC staff sometimes 
identifies accounting irregularities that require correction.
 
A report issued by the U.S. Department of Treasury demonstrates a dramatic increase in the 
incidence of accounting irregularities leading to earnings restatements over the decade from 
1997 to 2006.24 Figure 3.3 shows that the number of financial statement restatements grew 
nearly eighteen-fold from 90 in 1997 to 1,577 in 2006. Companies listed on the major ex-
changes (NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ) accounted for 3,310 of the restatement, or nearly half 
23 Some characterize an accounting error as an unintentional mistake in applying GAAP, while an accounting irregularity is 
an accounting choice that management knowingly makes that is subsequently determined to have gone beyond the bound-
aries of acceptable GAAP. In this section, we use the terms accounting error and irregularity without making a distinction 
because they both have the same reporting consequence in terms of required restatements.
24 “The Changing Nature and Consequences of Public Company Financial Restatements: 1997–2006,” by Susan Scholz 
(Washington, DC, U.S. Department of the Treasury, April 2008).

 
Accounting Errors, Earnings Restatements, and Prior Period Adjustments 
153
of the 6,633 total restatements during this 10-year period. Restatements began to accelerate in 
2001 prior to high profile corporate accounting scandals like Enron and Worldcom and the 
passage of the Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) Act in 2002. The implementation of the internal control 
reporting provisions under SOX Section 404, which took effect in 2005 for most firms, ap-
pears to be associated with the big jump in restatements beginning in 2005, particularly 
among larger companies. In addition, two specific accounting issues—leases in 2005 and 
stock options backdating in 2006—contribute to the rather large jump in restatements that 
took place in 2005 and 2006.
 
Figure 3.4 on the following page summarizes the major reasons for the re-
statements. Revenue recognition accounts for 1,314 (roughly 20%) of the 
 restatements. Restatements due to revenue recognition irregularities include 
recognizing revenue sooner or later than is allowed under GAAP, or recogniz-
ing questionable or fictitious revenue. Restatements related to core expense 
issues account for 2,639 (roughly 40%) of the restatements. This category in-
cludes improper recognition of costs or expenses and improperly capitalizing 
as assets expenditures that should be expensed on the income statement. 
These restatements involve cost of sales, compensation (including stock-
based grants), lease and depreciation costs, selling, general, and administrative costs, and re-
search and development costs. Non-core expense issues account for 2,202 (33.5%) of the 
restatements. This category includes misstatements of asset impairment charges, improper 
restructuring charges, tax expense issues, improper accounting for interest on convertible 
debt, and improper accounting for acquisitions and mergers including under- or overstatement 
of gains/losses related to acquisitions, and improper valuations of in-process R&D at acquisi-
tion. Reclassification and disclosure issues account for the remaining 478 (7.2%) of the re-
statements. Most of these do not affect net income but involve repositioning balance sheet, 
income statement, or cash flow statement line items.
1997
1998
119
99
1999
200
224
2000
154
205
2001
Year
Number of restatements: 1997–2006
239
484
2002
309
640
2003
386
847
2004
507
979
2006
2005
1577
594
753
1468
Number of restatements
1600
1800
1000
1200
1400
800
600
400
200
0
69
90
Total restatements by exchange-listed companies  3310
Total restatements announced  6633
Figure 3.3 
TOTAL NUMBER OF FINAN-
CIAL STATEMENT RESTATE-
MENTS FROM 1997 TO 2006.
Source: U.S. Department of Treasury, 
“The Changing Nature and Conse-
quences of Public Company Financial 
 Restatements: 1997–2006,” by Susan 
Scholz, 2008.
WorldCom provides an example of this type of 
accounting irregularity. During 2001 and the 
first quarter of 2002, it improperly capitalized 
more than $3.8 billion of operating line costs. 
After announcing this improper accounting 
treatment, WorldCom’s market value plum-
meted nearly $29 billion, and the company 
was forced into bankruptcy.

154 
CHAPTER 3
Additional Topics in Income Determination
 
Once discovered, accounting errors and irregularities must be corrected and disclosed. 
 Material errors discovered after the year in which the error is made are corrected through a 
prior period adjustment.25 This adjustment results in an addition to, or subtraction from, the 
company’s beginning Retained earnings balance (for the year the error is detected) and cor-
rection of related asset or liability balances. In addition to making the prior period adjustment 
to Retained earnings, previous years’ financial statements that are presented for comparative 
purposes are retroactively restated to reflect the specific accounts that are corrected, and the 
impact of the error on current and prior period reported net income is disclosed in the notes to 
the financial statements.
 
Studies find that firms forced to restate earnings suffer a dramatic decline in stock prices.26 
Figure 3.5 on the following page plots the average and median two-day market-adjusted ab-
normal return estimated over the restatement announcement date and the following day for the 
6,633 restatements summarized in Figure 3.3. The average market-adjusted returns are nega-
tive each year and statistically less than zero in every year except 2003. Clearly, earnings re-
statements are important events. Firms caught manipulating their accounting numbers suffer a 
significant loss in market value, and lawsuits against firms’ management and their auditors 
often ensue. That’s why it’s so important you understand the rules for proper revenue and ex-
pense recognition and the various methods that management sometimes uses to circumvent 
these rules to manipulate earnings.
25 FASB ASC Paragraphs 250-10-45-23 and -24: Accounting Changes and Error Corrections—Overall—Other Presentation 
Matters—Correction of an Error in Previously Issued Financial Statements.
26 S. Richardson, I. Tuna, and M. Wu, “Predicting Earnings Management: The Case of Earnings Restatements,” Working 
Paper, University of Pennsylvania, 2002; Z. Palmrose, V. Richardson, and S. Scholz, “Determinants of Market Reactions to 
Restatement Announcements,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, February 2004, pp. 59–90.
 
Restatements can also affect the share prices of nonrestating firms as well. See C. Gleason, N. Jenkins, and B. Johnson, 
“The Contagion Effects of Accounting Restatements,” The Accounting Review, January 2008, pp. 83–110.
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
Year
2002
2003
2004
2006
2005
Number of restatements
1600
1000
1200
1400
800
600
400
200
0
Accounting issues associated with restatements
Core expenses total = 2639
Revenue total = 1314
Reclass and disclosure total = 478
Non-core expenses total = 2202
Figure 3.4
ACCOUNTING ISSUES 
 ASSOCIATED WITH 
 RESTATEMENTS 1997–2006
Source: U.S. Department of Treasury, 
“The Changing Nature and Consequences 
of Public Company Financial Restatements: 
1997–2006,” by Susan Scholz, 2008.

 
Accounting Errors, Earnings Restatements, and Prior Period Adjustments 
155
 
Exhibit 3.7 provides an example of a restatement disclosure for Universal Hospital Ser-
vices, Inc. (UHS), a provider of medical equipment outsourcing, technical services, and medi-
cal equipment sales and remarketing. UHS’s restatement was prompted by discovery of 
certain accounting irregularities related to improper recording of gains from both nonmone-
tary and cash refunds received on recalled infusion pumps. These irregularities led to an over-
statement of revenues and an understatement of cost of sales. The company also corrected 
certain deferred tax asset and liability items and goodwill recorded in conjunction with a 2011 
acquisition of another company. As explained in Exhibit 3.7, most of these adjustments in-
volve reclassifications of amounts across line items on UHS’s 2011 and 2010 fiscal year 
 financial statements.
 
Panel (a) of Exhibit 3.7 describes the nature of the accounting irregularities leading to the 
restatement. Panel (b) shows the effect of the restatement on the company’s consolidated bal-
ance sheet as of December 31, 2011. Panel (c) shows the restatements to various revenue and 
expense line items on Universal Hospital Services’s consolidated income statement for 2011 
and 2010. The 2011 balance sheet adjustments include a $1.339 million adjustment to the 
ending Accumulated deficit (think retained earnings). As shown in Panel (b), this entire ad-
justment to the Accumulated deficit resulted from understatement of the net loss in fiscal 2011 
due to the overstatement of the tax benefit from the reported loss for the year. The entry that 
Universal Hospital Services made in 2012 to correct the 2011 ending balance sheet accounts 
is as follows ($ in thousands):
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
Year
28.2
24.6
212.1
26.7
210.8
27.2
21.3
20.7
20.7 20.420.6
20.8
20.4
21.1
20.4
21.0
22.3
2002
2003
2004
2006
2005
Market-adjusted abnormal return
Average  2.6%
Median  9%
24%
22%
26%
28%
210%
212%
214%
0%
21.5
23.7
27.7
Figure 3.5
AVERAGE AND MEDIAN 
TWO-DAY ANNOUNCE-
MENT PERIOD RETURNS 
FOR RESTATEMENTS FROM 
1997–2006
Source: Scholz, op. cit.
DR Accumulated deficit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$1,339
DR Deferred income tax liability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,368
   CR Deferred income tax asset   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$2,368
   CR Goodwill   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
707
   CR Other accrued expense liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
632

156 
CHAPTER 3
Additional Topics in Income Determination
EXHIBIT 3.7
Universal Hospital Services, Inc.
Accounting Restatement Disclosure
Panel (a)
For the years ended December 31, 2011 and 2010, the Company recorded $15.8 million and $5.3 million, respectively, of gains from 
both nonmonetary and cash refunds on recalled infusion pumps within revenues. Noncash gains result from receiving a replacement 
pump for a recalled pump. The gains are a result of the fair market value of the replacement pump less the net book value of the re-
called pump. The infusion pump recall program began in 2010 and ended in July 2012. The Company has determined that the gains 
should have been presented as a reduction of cost of sales. As a result, the Company is restating its consolidated financial statements 
and related disclosures to recognize a reduction of both revenue and costs of sales for the years ended December 31, 2011 and 2010, 
for this item. In addition, the Company also chose to correct certain tax items that were immaterial individually and in the aggregate. 
These other tax corrections related to a $1.0 million adjustment to deferred taxes recorded in connection with a 2011 acquisition and 
the corresponding impact on the goodwill and valuation allowance balances; a $0.3 million increase to taxes payable and the provision 
for income taxes; and a $2.4 million reclassification between the deferred income tax asset and deferred income tax liability.
Panel (b)
 
As of December 31, 2011
 
Previously 
 
Reported 
Adjustments 
Restated
Assets
Deferred income taxes 
$   12,328 
$(2,368) 
$     9,960
 Total current assets 
94,496 
(2.368) 
92.128
Goodwill 
326,618 
(707) 
325,911
 Total assets 
940,007 
(3,075) 
936,932
Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity
Other accrued expenses 
9,720 
632 
10,352
 Total current liabilities 
72,354 
632 
72.986
Deferred income taxes 
75,657 
(2,368) 
73,289
Accumulated deficit 
(108,327) 
(1,339) 
(109,666)
 Total Universal Hospital Services, Inc. equity 
94,140 
(1,339) 
92,801
Total equity 
94,526 
(1,339) 
93,187
Total liabilities and equity 
940,007 
(3,075) 
936,932
Panel (c)
The following table presents the impact of the restatement adjustments on the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Operations for 
the years ended December 31, 2011 and 2010:
 
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2011
 
Previously 
 
Reported 
Adjustments 
Restated
Revenue
Medical equipment outsourcing 
$291,753 
$(15,843) 
$275,910
Technical and professional services 
54,058 
— 
54,058
Medical equipment sales and remarketing 
25,188 
— 
25,188
 Total revenues 
370,999 
(15,843) 
355,156
Cost of Sales
Cost of medical equipment outsourcing 
113,546 
(15,843) 
97,703
Cost of technical and professional services 
40,518 
— 
40,518
Cost of medical equipment sales and remarketing 
19,734 
— 
19,734 
Medical equipment depreciation 
68,032 
— 
68,032
 Total costs of medical equipment outsourcing, technical and professional 
  services, and medical equipment sales and remarketing 
241,830 
(15,843) 
225,987
Gross margin 
129,169 
— 
129,169
Provision (benefit) for income taxes 
(9,682) 
(1,339) 
(8,343)
Consolidated net loss 
(20,600) 
(1,339) 
(21,939)
Net loss attributable to Universal Hospital Services, Inc. 
(21,051) 
(1,339) 
(22,390)
(continued)

 
Global Vantage Point
157
EXHIBIT 3.7
Universal Hospital Services, Inc. (continued)
 
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2010
 
Previously 
 
Reported 
Adjustments 
Restated
Revenue
Medical equipment outsourcing 
$250,455 
$ (5,310) 
$245,145
Technical and professional services 
44,426 
— 
44,426
Medical equipment sales and remarketing 
22,541 
— 
22,541
 Total revenues 
317,422 
(5,310) 
312,112
Cost of Sales
Cost of medical equipment outsourcing 
91,520 
(5,310) 
86,210
Cost of technical and professional services 
31,690 
— 
31,690
Cost of medical equipment sales and remarketing 
16,342 
— 
16,342
Medical equipment depreciation 
69,496 
— 
69,496
 Total costs of medical equipment outsourcing, technical 
  and professional services, and medical equipment sales and 
  remarketing 
209,048 
(5,310) 
203,738
Gross margin 
$108,374 
— 
$108,374
Source: Universal Hospital Services revised 10-K for 2011.
GLOBAL VANTAGE POINT
IFRS and U.S. GAAP for revenue recognition and measurement largely overlap, although 
U.S. GAAP is much more voluminous and detailed. There are, however, important areas of 
difference. This section provides a brief overview of revenue recognition and measurement 
under IFRS rules and highlights important differences between IFRS and U.S. GAAP in two 
areas: (1) long-term construction contracts, and (2) installment sales. We also briefly discuss 
a recent exposure draft on revenue recognition jointly issued by the IASB and FASB. Key 
changes in revenue recognition that are being considered by the Boards in this joint project 
are highlighted.
IFRS Revenue Recognition and Measurement
International Accounting Standard (IAS) 18, “Revenue,” prescribes the general requirements 
for recognizing and measuring revenue from the sale of goods, rendering of services, and use 
of an entity’s assets that yield interest, dividends, or royalties.27 IAS 18 requires that the fol-
lowing five conditions be met before an entity can recognize revenue on the sale of goods:
1. The seller has transferred significant risks and rewards of ownership of the goods to the 
buyer.
2. The seller retains neither continuing management involvement associated with ownership 
nor effective control over the goods being sold.
3. The amount of revenue can be measured reliably.
4. It is probable that the entity will obtain economic benefits associated with the transaction.
5. The costs incurred for the transaction can be measured reliably.
 
With respect to revenue generated by providing services (like a long-term service contract), 
IAS 18 prescribes that revenue should be recognized using the percentage-of-completion 
International
27 “Revenue,” International Accounting Standards (IAS) 18, (London: IASC, 1993).

158 
CHAPTER 3
Additional Topics in Income Determination
method. That is, revenue is recognized when it is probable that future economic benefits will be 
received and the entity can reliably measure all of the following:
• Amount of revenue
• Stage of completion
• Cost incurred
• Costs to complete the project
The IFRS rules allow surveys of work performed, services performed to date, and the percent-
age of costs incurred over total estimated costs as acceptable methodologies for measuring the 
stage of completion. When the outcome of a transaction for services cannot be reliably mea-
sured, IFRS rules call for entities to recognize revenue only up to the amount of recoverable 
costs incurred to that point. Examples of the cost-recovery method of revenue recognition are 
illustrated in the next two sections. Unlike IFRS accounting, U.S. GAAP does 
not require use of the percentage-of-completion method for service 
contracts.
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS call for revenue to be measured at the fair 
value of the consideration received or receivable. The fair value should take 
into account any trade discounts or volume rebates. When a transaction is effectively a financ-
ing arrangement, IAS 18 requires an entity to determine the fair value by discounting future 
cash flows using an imputed interest rate, which is either the prevailing rate on similar instru-
ments issued by firms with similar credit ratings or the rate that discounts the nominal amount 
of the cash flows to be received to the cash sales price of the goods or services provided. This 
is the same approach used under U.S. GAAP.
Long-Term Construction Accounting
IFRS rules for revenue recognition on long-term construction contracts distinguish two types 
of contracts: cost-plus and fixed-price.28 Cost-plus contracts are those for which the contrac-
tor is reimbursed for allowable or otherwise defined costs plus a profit mark-up. A fixed-price 
contract is one in which the contractor agrees to a fixed contract price or fixed rate per unit of 
output, which in some cases may be subject to cost escalation clauses. The examples provided 
earlier in the chapter are for fixed-price contracts. Like U.S. GAAP, when the outcome of a 
contract can be reliably estimated, IFRS rules allow firms to recognize contract revenue and 
expenses using the percentage-of-completion method with reference to the stage of comple-
tion at the end of each reporting period.29 For fixed-price contracts, a firm is deemed to be 
able to reliably estimate a contract outcome when it can measure: (1) total contract revenue; 
(2) costs to complete the contract; (3) and the stage of completion at the end of the reporting 
period. For a cost-plus contract, a contractor can reliably estimate the contract outcome when 
it is probable that future economic benefits will flow to the contractor from the construction 
contract and contract costs can be clearly identified and reliably measured so that accrued 
costs can be compared to prior estimates.
 
When the contract outcome cannot be reliably estimated, IFRS rules do not permit firms 
to use the completed contract method. (Recall that under this method, revenue and expense 
An example of when the outcome for services 
cannot be reliably measured is when the cost of 
completing the contracted work is highly 
uncertain.
28 The IFRS rules for long-term construction contract accounting are set forth in “Construction Contracts,” International 
 Accounting Standard (IAS) 11 (London: IASC, 1993), and in “Agreements for the Construction of Real Estate,” International 
Financial Reporting Interpretive Comment (IFRIC) 15 (London: IASB, 2008).
29 As is the case for U.S. GAAP, when it is probable that total contract costs will exceed total contract revenue, IFRS rules 
require firms to recognize the expected loss immediately.

 
Global Vantage Point 
159
 recognition is postponed until the contract is completed.) Rather, IFRS calls for firms to 
recognize contract costs as an expense in the period incurred and recognize contract reve-
nue only to the extent that contract costs have been incurred and cost recovery is probable. 
Thus, this is a variant of the cost recovery method illustrated earlier in the chapter. To il-
lustrate the application of this method, assume that Bridge Builders, Ltd., agrees to build a 
bridge for a highway construction project in Iceland for €10 million (Euros). The contract 
is a fixed-price contract over a three-year period beginning in 2014. The cost of construct-
ing the bridge is expected to range between €6.5 million and €8.5 million, depending on the 
weather conditions. Because of uncertainty about weather conditions, the estimated future 
costs to complete the project at any point in time prior to completion are deemed too uncer-
tain to reliably estimate (assume collection of all billings and recovery of costs are proba-
ble, however):
Actual Experience on the Project
As of December 31,
(€ in 000) 
2014 
2015 
2016
Cost incurred to date 
€2,800 
€5,400 
€ 8,300
Estimated future costs 
Too uncertain to reliably estimate 
–0–
Billings to date 
2,700 
6,500 
10,000
Cash collections to date 
2,200 
6,200 
10,000
 
Under the cost recovery method of revenue recognition for long-term contracts, IFRS rules 
would result in the following revenues, expenses, and profits being recognized over the three-
year contract period:
(€ in 000) 
2014 
2015 
2016
Expenses recognized equal to costs incurred in year 
€2,800 
€2,600(a) 
€2,900(b)
Revenues recognized 
 2,800* 
 2,600* 
 4,600(c)
Profit recognized 
–0– 
–0– 
 1,700(d)
* Revenues recognized equal to costs incurred in year
(a) €5,400 (costs incurred to date) 2 €2,800 (costs incurred in prior periods)
(b) €8,300 (costs incurred to date) 2 €5,400 (costs incurred in prior periods)
(c) €10,000 (contract price) 2 [€2,800 1 €2,600] (revenue previously recognized)
(d) €10,000 2 €8,300 or €4,600 2 €2,900
 
Exhibit 3.8 shows disclosures provided by Brookfield Multiplex Group, Ltd., related to its 
long-term construction contracts for the six months ended December 31, Year 1. Brookfield 
follows IFRS reporting rules and is one of Australia’s largest integrated diversified property 
construction and management companies. Panel (a) summarizes Brookfield’s significant rev-
enue and expense recognition policies related to its long-term construction contracts for fixed-
price contracts, cost-plus contracts, and contracts for which fees are charged for managing the 
project (fee-generating contracts). Note that when the outcome of a contract cannot be reli-
ably estimated, costs are expensed as incurred and contract revenue is recognized on a cost-
recovery basis. Panel (b) provides Brookfield’s note detailing the amount of consolidated 
revenue from construction projects (highlighted) recognized in each reporting period. Panel 
(c) shows details on the costs and profits (losses) that constitute Brookfield’s Contract work in 
progress inventory account.

160 
CHAPTER 3
Additional Topics in Income Determination
EXHIBIT 3.8
Brookfield Multiplex Group, Ltd.
Illustration of IFRS Disclosures for Long-Term 
Construction Contracts
Excerpts from Notes to the Financial Statements
Panel (a)
1. Summary of significant accounting policies
Revenue and expenses are recognised for the major business activities as follows:
Construction contracts
For fixed price contracts, construction contract revenues and expenses are recognised on an 
 individual contract basis using the percentage of completion method. Once the outcome of a 
 construction contract can be estimated reliably, contract revenues and expenses are recognised 
in the Income Statement in proportion to the stage of completion of the contract. The stage of 
completion is measured by reference to actual costs incurred to date as a percentage of estimated 
total costs for each contract. Where the outcome of a contract cannot be reliably determined, 
contract costs are expensed as incurred. Where it is probable that the costs will be recovered, 
 revenue is recognised to the extent of costs incurred. Where it is probable that a loss will arise 
from a construction contract the excess of  total expected costs over revenue is recognised as 
an expense immediately.
 
For cost plus contracts, construction contract revenue is recognised by reference to the recov-
erable costs incurred during the reporting period plus the margin entitled to be charged on those 
 recoverable costs.
 
For fee generating contracts, construction contract revenue is measured by the proportion that 
cost incurred to date compare to the estimated total cost of the contract multiplied by the 
 expected total fee to be earned on the contract. Early completion bonuses are recognised only 
when construction projects are substantially complete.
Contract costs comprise:
• costs that relate directly to the contract;
• costs that are related to construction activities in general and can be allocated to the contract 
on a reasonable basis (such as insurance, costs of design and technical assistance);
• other costs that are specifically chargeable to a customer in accordance with the terms of a 
 contract; and
• costs expected to be incurred under penalty clauses and rectification provisions are also 
included.
Panel (b)
2a. Revenue and expenses, Continuing operations
(continued)
 
 
 
 
Consolidated
 
 
 
6 Months Ended 
12 Months Ended
($ in millions) 
 
31 Dec Year 1 
30 Jun Year 1
1 Revenues
Revenue from the sale of 
 development properties 
 
$   248.9 
$  407.0
Construction revenue 
 
895.3 
1,684.8
Property rental revenue 
 
153.7 
272.6
Property funds management revenue 
 
57.9 
104.5
Infrastructure revenue 
 
0.3 
1.1
Interest revenue—loans and receivable 
 
8.6 
32.3
Total revenues 
 
$1,364.7 
$2,502.3

 
Global Vantage Point
161
Installment Sales
Earlier in the chapter, we illustrated the installment sales method of revenue recognition, which 
U.S. GAAP allows when the risk of noncollection is high or when there is no reasonable basis 
for estimating the uncollectibles. The installment sales method allowed by U.S. GAAP is not 
permitted by IFRS. Rather, the cost recovery method is required. Because the majority of the 
costs related to an installment sale have been incurred prior to or at the time of sale, the only 
uncertainty is whether the cash received from the customer will be sufficient to cover the seller’s 
costs. As installment receivables are collected, cost recovery takes place. The cost recovery 
method recognizes revenues and expenses equal to the amount of cash collected each period up 
to the point where costs have been fully recovered.30 Only after the cumulative amount of cash 
collected exceeds the cost of the installment sale will the entity recognize any profits.
 
The following example illustrates the differences between the amount of revenue and profit 
recognized under U.S. GAAP using the installment sales method and under IFRS accounting 
using the cost recovery method.
In 2014, Alpine Land Development Company sells 100 lots in the French Alps for €120,000 
each or €12,000,000 total. The cost of acquiring the land and building the infrastructure is 
€9,000,000. (Thus, the gross margin percentage is 1 2 9/12 5 25%.) The sales price is to be 
30 Notice that the illustration here differs somewhat from how the cost recovery method was illustrated in the previous section 
for long-term construction contracts. In that example, the major uncertainty related to the amount of costs to be incurred
rather than to the amount of costs that would be recovered by collection from the customer. So in the previous example, 
revenues are recognized equal to the costs incurred each period up to the point where all costs have been recovered.
EXHIBIT 3.8
Brookfield Multiplex Group, Ltd.
Illustration of IFRS Disclosures for Long-Term 
Construction Contracts (continued)
Panel (c)
24. Contract work in progress (balance sheet asset)
 
 
 
Consolidated
($ in millions) 
31 Dec Year 1 
30 Jun Year 1
24 Contract work in progress
Contract costs incurred to date 
$6,693.7 
$9,257.6
Profit/(losses) recognised to date (less recognised losses) 
395.4 
(57.2)
 
 
7,089.1 
9,200.4
Less: Progress billings 
(7,353.1) 
(9,419.4)
Net contract work in progress 
$ (264.0) 
$  (219.0)
Net contract work in progress comprises:
Amounts due to customers—contract work in progress1 
$  (339.3) 
$  (390.2)
Amounts due from customers—inventories2 
75.3 
171.2
 
 
$ (264.0) 
$  (219.0)
Advances on construction projects in progress included
 in trade creditors 
$  (66.7) 
$   (44.7)
Retentions on construction projects in progress included
 in progress billings 
$   124.1 
$  114.1
1 Represents billings raised to clients in excess of costs and profits recognised on these projects.
2 Represents construction costs incurred on projects in excess of that billed to clients.

162 
CHAPTER 3
Additional Topics in Income Determination
collected in equal installments over a three-year period, with the first payment made at the time 
of sale. There is considerable uncertainty as to the future collectability of the installment receivable. 
Actual payments collected over the ensuing three years are: 2014—€4 million; 2015—€3 million; 
2016—€3 million.
 
The amount of revenue, expenses, and profits recognized each year under the installment 
sales method (U.S. GAAP) and under the cost recovery (IFRS) would be as follows:
(in € millions) 
2014 
2015 
2016
Installment sales method (U.S. GAAP):
Revenues recognized(1) 
€4.0 
€ 3.0 
€ 3.0
Costs recognized as expenses(2) 
 3.0 
 2.25 
 2.25
Profits recognized(3) 
 1.0 
 0.75 
 0.75
Cost recovery method (IFRS):
Revenues recognized(1) 
€4.0 
€ 3.0 
€ 3.0
Costs recognized as expenses(4) 
 4.0 
  3.0 
  2.0
Profits recognized 
  0 
   0 
  1.0
(1) Revenues recognized equal to cash collections.
(2) Expenses recognized 5 9/12 3 revenues recognized.
(3) Gross margin percentage (25%) times cash collected.
(4) Costs recognized as expenses to extent recovered through cash collections.
 
Note that the cost recovery method prescribed by IFRS rules is more conservative than the 
installment sales method allowed under U.S. GAAP. This is because the cost recovery method 
recognizes profit only when cumulative cash collections exceed the total cost of the goods 
sold on an installment basis, while the installment method recognizes profit on each dollar 
collected equal to the gross margin percentage.
Joint IASB/FASB Project on Revenue Recognition
In December 2008, the IASB and FASB jointly issued a discussion paper on revenue recogni-
tion.31 The aim of this project is to create a joint revenue recognition standard for IFRS and 
U.S. GAAP that companies can apply consistently across various industries and transactions 
rather than the piecemeal and sometimes disjointed rules that currently apply. By developing 
a common standard that clarifies the principles for recognizing revenue, the two standards 
setting boards hope to:
• Remove inconsistencies and weaknesses in existing revenue recognition standards and 
practices.
• Provide a more robust and coherent framework for addressing revenue recognition issues 
that may arise going forward.
• Simplify the preparation of financial statements by reducing the number of standards to 
which companies must refer.
• Improve comparability of revenue across companies and across geographical boundaries.
 
As we go to press, the two Boards have jointly issued a once-revised exposure document 
and staff papers that address when and how much revenue should be recognized in contracts to 
31 “Preliminary Views on Revenue Recognition in Contracts with Customers,” Financial Accounting Series Discussion Paper 
(Norwalk, CT: FASB, 2008).

 
Global Vantage Point 
163
provide goods or services to customers.32 When an entity enters into a contract with a customer, 
it obtains rights to payment from the customer and it assumes obligations to provide goods or 
services to the customer—otherwise known as performance obligations. The combination of 
rights and obligations arising out of a contract give rise to a net contract position that can be 
a net asset, net liability, or net nil position for the company selling the good or service. Reve-
nues arise from increases in that net contract position over the life of the contract.
 
The revenue recognition model proposed in the ED reflects this performance obligation 
viewpoint. Five steps that entities would apply to determine the appropriate timing and 
amount of revenue recognition are:
1. Identify the contract(s) with the customer. The proposed guidance indicates that the con-
tracts may be written, oral, or implied.
2. Identify the separate performance obligations in the contract.
3. Determine the transaction price.
4. Allocate the transaction price to the separate performance obligations.
5. Recognize revenue when each performance obligation is satisfied.
Addressing the “When” Question 
The ED proposes that a company should 
recognize revenue when it satisfies the performance obligation in the contract; that is, when it 
fulfills the promise to provide a good or service to the customer. This is accomplished when 
the selling company has transferred the promised good or service to the customer. For a good, 
like the construction of a building, the transfer typically takes place when the customer takes 
physical possession of the property. For a service, transfer occurs when the customer has re-
ceived the promised service. If a company promises to transfer more than one good or service, 
as in a multiple-element (bundled) sales arrangement, the ED proposed that revenue be recog-
nized as each promised good or service is transferred to the customer.
 
Companies following current authoritative guidance for recognizing revenue under multiple-
element arrangements will likely not see a significant change in the timing of revenue recogni-
tion. However, companies that use the percentage-of-completion method for construction or 
production-based contracts may see a significant change in the timing of revenue recognition. 
The percentage of completion method is considered an “Input method” in the ED for measuring 
progress toward complete satisfaction of a performance obligation. The ED notes that “a short-
coming of input methods is that there may not be a direct relationship between the entity’s inputs 
and the transfer of control of goods or services to the customer.” Currently, these entities fre-
quently identify the entire contract as a single unit of accounting. Under the proposed new rev-
enue recognition model, this could result in delaying revenue recognition until all of the 
performance obligations are satisfied and the product (e.g., the building being constructed) is 
transferred to the buyer. Essentially, this means that revenue would be recognized under the 
completed-contract method outlined earlier in the chapter. Under the proposed model, firms 
would need to identify more than one performance obligation (for example, separate obligations 
for completing the foundation and each floor of a multistory building) within a contract in order 
to recognize revenue on a percentage-of-completion basis. To address concerns from the build-
ing and construction industries about the potential loss of the percentage-of-completion method, 
32 “Revenue Recognition (Topic 605)—Revenue Contracts with Customers,” Exposure Draft of Proposed Accounting Stan-
dards Update (Norwalk, CT: FASB, June 2010, revised November 14, 2011). As of February 2013, the boards have com-
pleted their substantive redeliberations of the 2011 Exposure Draft. The staff is now planning to begin drafting the final 
revenue standard. (FASB and IASB Staff Paper, “Effects of joint IASB and FASB redeliberations on the November 2011 
Exposure Draft Revenue from Contracts with Customers”, February 2013.)

164 
CHAPTER 3
Additional Topics in Income Determination
the revised ED (paragraph BC 90) notes that a performance obligation is satisfied over time as 
the entity creates or enhances an asset that the customer controls throughout. This revised guid-
ance may allow for the continued use of the percentage-of-completion method.
What Amount to Recognize 
The ED proposes that the amount of revenue that 
a company should recognize is the payment (consideration) received from the customer in 
exchange for transferring the good or service. In some instances, a customer pays for a bun-
dle of goods and services. In this case, a determination must be made as to how much of the 
total consideration should be allocated to each performance obligation. The ED proposes 
that a company should allocate the consideration received in proportion to the company’s 
stand-alone selling price for the promised good or service underlying each performance ob-
ligation. If the stand-alone selling price cannot be observed, then it must be estimated. As 
each performance obligation is satisfied (i.e., as each good or service is transferred to the 
customer), the amount allocated to that performance obligation is then recognized as reve-
nue. This is the approach illustrated in the Oracle bundled sales example provided earlier in 
the chapter (pp. 142–143).
Remeasurement of Performance Obligations 
The ED discusses how the 
measurement of performance obligations affects not only how much revenue to recognize 
each reporting period, but also how the company’s net contract position is depicted in the 
statement of financial position each period. Because circumstances may change significantly 
after the start of a contract, companies may need to update (i.e., remeasure) the carrying 
amount of a performance obligation in order to accurately reflect its net contract position. The 
ED provides guidance on when and how the remeasurement should occur, but this guidance is 
beyond the scope of the current discussion.
Product Warranties and Contingent Consideration 
The accounting for 
common components of revenue transactions will also be affected by the proposed guidance 
in the ED, including product warranties and contingent consideration. All product warranties 
will result in a portion of the product selling being deferred and recognized over the warranty 
period. Additionally, the amount of revenue recorded will include any contingent consider-
ation that an entity expects to receive, even if the company does not yet have the right to col-
lect that contingent consideration.
RECAP
IFRS and U.S. GAAP rules for revenue recognition and measurement largely overlap. 
However, important differences exist for long-term construction contracts and install-
ment sales contracts. IFRS rules call for the use of alternative versions of the cost  recovery 
method when the outcome of these contracts, either in terms of the amount of contract 
costs or the recovery of those costs, cannot be reliably determined.  Generally, this results 
in IFRS revenue recognition being more conservative than U.S. GAAP.
 
As an outgrowth of their joint project on revenue recognition, the IASB and FASB have 
recently issued an exposure draft calling for a contract-based approach to determining 
the timing and amount of revenue recognition. The proposals made in this document may 
substantially change how many companies currently recognize revenue, particularly un-
der long-term construction contracts treated as single unit of accounting. The proposed 
changes appear intended to constrain management discretion over the timing and per-
haps amount of revenue to be recognized. Unfortunately, some of the proposed changes 
raise the possibility that financial statements will provide less timely information about a 
firm’s economic performance, which we view as a negative unintended consequence of 
the new proposal.

 
Exercises 
165
SUMMARY
• This chapter outlines the special accounting procedures used when revenue recognition 
doesn’t occur at the point of sale.
• The “critical event” and “measurability” conditions for revenue recognition are typically 
satisfied at point of sale.
• In some circumstances—long-term construction contracts, production of natural  resources 
and agricultural commodities—it is appropriate to recognize revenue prior to sale.
• Revenue recognition may also be delayed until after the sale, specifically, when cash is 
collected. The installment sales method or cost recovery method is used when consider-
able uncertainty exists about the collectibility of the sales price or when significant costs 
that are difficult to predict will be incurred after the sale.
• Franchise sales, sales with right of return, and multiple-element sales pose particularly 
challenging revenue recognition issues and statement users need to be aware of potential 
accounting abuses.
• The broad criteria for revenue and expense recognition leave room for considerable latitude 
and judgment. This flexibility in GAAP can sometimes be exploited by management to 
hide or misrepresent the underlying economic performance of a company.
• This chapter outlines some of the more common ways to manage earnings that have come 
under SEC scrutiny. Later chapters provide further examples of how earnings can be 
manipulated.
• Auditors and financial statement users must be aware of management’s incentives to man-
age earnings and the ways in which this is accomplished. Armed with this knowledge, you 
will be in a much better position to spot potential “accounting irregularities” and to avoid 
their unpleasant consequences.
• Once discovered, accounting errors or irregularities must be corrected and disclosed. 
 Errors discovered after the year in which they occur are corrected through a prior period 
adjustment to Retained earnings.
• IFRS and U.S. GAAP rules for revenue recognition and measurement largely overlap. But 
important differences do exist for long-term construction contracts and the installment 
method of revenue recognition.
• The IASB and FASB have recently issued an exposure draft on revenue recognition. If 
adopted, certain proposals made in this document would substantially change current 
 revenue recognition practices, particularly percentage-of-completion for long-term 
 construction contracts and multiple-element sales arrangements.
EXERCISES
In 2014, Keefer Construction began construction work under a three-year contract. The con-
tract price was $500,000. Keefer Construction uses the percentage-of-completion method for 
financial reporting purposes and applies it by basing recognized income each year on the 
proportion of cost incurred to date to total estimated costs for the contract. Trial balance infor-
mation related to this contract at December 31, 2014, was as follows:
 
DR 
CR
Accounts receivable 
$  7,500
Inventory: Construction in progress 
 125,000
Billings on construction contract 
 
$110,000
Construction revenue 
 
 125,000
Construction expenses 
 100,000
E3-1
Percentage of completion 
method (LO 1, 2)
AICPA
ADAPTED

166 
CHAPTER 3
Additional Topics in Income Determination
Required:
1. What was the initial estimated total profit before tax on this contract?
2. How much cash was collected on this contract in 2014?
E3-2
Determining gross profit 
 under percentage of 
 completion (LO 1, 2)
AICPA
ADAPTED
Gross profit recognized at 12/31/14 
$ 300,000
Costs incurred 1/01/14 through 12/31/15 
1,800,000
Estimated cost to complete at 12/31/15 
600,000
Required:
In its income statement for the year ended December 31, 2015, what amount of gross profit 
should Haft report?
Haft Construction Company has consistently applied the percentage-of-completion method. 
On January 10, 2014, Haft began work on a $3,000,000 construction contract. At the inception 
date, the estimated cost of construction was $2,250,000. The following data relate to the 
 progress of the contract:
E3-3
Determining gross profit 
 using the installment sales 
method and cost recovery 
method (LO 1, 2)
AICPA
ADAPTED
Required:
1. Calculate the amount of gross profit that would be recognized each year under the install-
ment sales method.
2. Calculate the amount of gross profit that would be recognized each year under the cost 
 recovery method.
KC Music Corporation sells pipe organs on a deferred-payment plan. Summary information 
appears below:
 
2014 
2015 
2016
Sales 
$160,000 
$220,000 
$300,000
Cost of goods sold 
(112,000) 
(165,000) 
(219,000)
Gross profit 
$ 48,000 
$ 55,000 
$ 81,000
Customer collections on: 
 
 
 2014 sales 
$ 60,000 
$ 80,000 
$ 20,000
 2015 sales 
 
100,000 
80,000
 2016 sales 
 
 
140,000
E3-4
Determining realized gross 
profit using the installment 
method (LO 1, 2)
On January 2, 2014, Yardley Company sold a plant to Ivory Inc. for $1,500,000. On that date, 
the plant’s carrying cost was $1,000,000. Ivory gave Yardley $300,000 cash and a $1,200,000 
note, payable in four annual installments of $300,000 cash plus 12% interest. Ivory made the 
first principal and interest payment of $444,000 on December 31, 2014. Yardley uses the 
 installment method of revenue recognition.
Required:
In its 2014 income statement, what amount of realized gross profit should Yardley report?
AICPA
ADAPTED
 
2014 
2015
Balance of deferred gross profit
 on sales on account for:
 2014 
$300,000 
$120,000
 2015 
 
 440,000
Gross profit on sales 
30%  
40%
Taft Corporation, which began business on January 1, 2014, appropriately uses the installment 
sales method of accounting. The following data are available for December 31, 2014 and 2015:
E3-5
Determining installment 
 accounts receivable (LO 2)
AICPA
ADAPTED

 
Exercises 
167
Required:
The Installment accounts receivable balances at December 31, 2014 and 2015 would be 
how much?
On December 31, 2014, Simmons, Inc., authorized Jensen to operate a franchise for an initial 
franchise fee of $300,000. Of this amount, $50,000 was received upon signing the agreement and 
the balance, represented by a note, is due in five annual payments of $50,000 each, beginning 
December 31, 2015. The present value on December 31, 2014, of the five annual payments 
 appropriately discounted is $190,000. According to the agreement, the nonrefundable down 
 payment represents the fair value of the services already performed by Simmons; however, sub-
stantial future services are required of Simmons. Collectibility of the note is reasonably certain.
Required:
In Simmons’s December 31, 2014, balance sheet, at what amount should the unearned fran-
chise fees from Jensen’s franchise be reported?
E3-6
Determining deferred 
 franchise fee revenue 
(LO 3)
AICPA
ADAPTED
For $50 a month, Rawl Company visits its customers’ premises and performs insect control 
services. If customers experience problems between regularly scheduled visits, Rawl makes 
service calls at no additional charge. Instead of paying monthly, customers may pay an annual 
fee of $540 in advance.
Required:
For a customer who pays the annual fee in advance, Rawl should recognize the related revenue 
in what amounts and when?
E3-7
Determining revenue 
 recognized with advanced 
fees (LO 1)
AICPA
ADAPTED
Each of Potter Pie Co.’s 21 new franchisees contracted to pay an initial franchise fee of 
$30,000. By December 31, 2014, each franchisee had paid a nonrefundable $10,000 fee and 
signed a note to pay $10,000 principal plus the market rate of interest on December 31, 2015, 
and December 31, 2016. Experience indicates that one franchisee will default on the addi-
tional payments. Services for the initial fee will be performed in 2015.
Required:
What amount of net unearned franchise fees would Potter report at December 31, 2014?
E3-9
Determining unearned 
 franchise fees (LO 3)
AICPA
ADAPTED
Baker Company is a real estate developer that began operations on January 2, 2014. It appro-
priately uses the installment method of revenue recognition. Baker’s sales are made on the 
basis of a 10% down payment with the balance payable over 30 years. Baker’s gross profit 
percentage is 40%. Relevant information for Baker’s first two years of operations follows:
E3-8
Determining gross profit and 
deferred gross profit under 
the installment method 
(LO 1, 2)
AICPA
ADAPTED
 
 2015  
  2014 
 Sales 
 $16,000,000 
 $14,000,000 
 Cash collections 
 2,020,000 
 1,400,000 
Required:
1. At December 31, 2014, Baker’s deferred gross profit was how much?
2. Baker’s realized gross profit for 2015 was how much?

168 
CHAPTER 3
Additional Topics in Income Determination
E3-11
Income determination for 
various methods of revenue 
recognition (LO 1, 2)
AICPA
ADAPTED
The following information relates to a three-year period for Fulda Corporation, a manufac-
turer and distributor of satellite phones made to sell for $1,000 each.
2014  Produced 2,000 phones and incurred costs of $600 per phone. Sold 800 phones on 
account; collected $650,000 in cash from customers.
2015  Sold 600 phones on account; collected cash from customers as follows: on 2014 sales, 
$150,000; on 2015 sales, $450,000.
2016  Sold the remaining 600 phones for cash; collected the remaining cash due on previous 
years’ sales.
Required:
Calculate the amount of gross profit to be recognized each year under each of the following 
methods of revenue recognition:
1. Gross profit recognized when production is complete.
2. Gross profit recognized at point of sale.
3. Gross profit recognized using the installment sales method.
4. Gross profit recognized using the cost recovery method.
E3-10
Cost recovery method 
(LO 1, 2)
AICPA
ADAPTED
 
 12/31/13  
  12/31/14 
 Sales 
 $10,000 
 $15,000 
 Cost of sales 
 8,000 
 9,000 
 Cash collections 
  on 2013 sales 
 7,000 
 3,000 
  on 2014 sales 
 — 
 12,000 
Required:
If the cost recovery method is used, what amount would Fox report as gross profit from sales 
for the year ended December 31, 2014?
Several of Fox, Inc.’s, customers are having cash flow problems. Information pertaining to 
these customers for the year ended December 31, 2013 and 2014, follows:
E3-12
Franchise sales: Revenue 
 recognition (LO 3)
On April 1, 2014, Oversized Burrito Company entered into a 10-year franchise agreement with a 
group of individuals. The company receives a $300,000 initial franchise fee and agrees to assist in 
the design of the building, help secure financing, and provide management advice over the first 
half of the franchise agreement. A down payment of 20% of the franchise fee is due on April 1, 
2014. The remaining 80% is to be payable in eight equal installments beginning on April 1, 2015. 
With each installment, the franchisee also remits interest of 7% of the unpaid note balance.
 
Assume that services to be performed by Oversized Burrito between April 1, 2014, and 
August 15, 2015, the date that the franchise opened, are substantial and that the installment 
receivable is reasonably collectible. Also assume that substantial performance of the initial 
services has occurred as of August 15, 2014.
Required:
1. Prepare the necessary journal entries for Oversized Burrito for April 1, 2014, when the 
franchise agreement is signed.
2. Prepare the necessary journal entries for August 15, 2014 (ignore any interest accruals).
E3-13
Franchise sales (LO 3)
Indoor Golf Centers, Inc., sells franchises. The initial franchise fee is $50,000, payable 20% 
down with the balance in five equal annual installments plus interest at 10% on the unpaid 
balance. In return for the initial fee, the corporation agrees to assist in designing and 

 
Exercises 
169
 constructing an indoor golf driving range, help the franchisee obtain financing, help train a 
club pro, and provide management advice to the franchisee over a five-year period.
Required:
Prepare the franchisor’s entry to record the initial franchise fee, the first annual installment, 
and interest revenue under each of the following independent assumptions:
1. At the time the franchise is signed, none of the services promised have been provided; 
however, at least 80 percent of the services have been provided on the date of the first 
 installment. Collectibility of the franchise fee is reasonably assured.
2. Same scenario as requirement 1, except that collectibility of the remaining installments 
cannot be estimated.
3. At the time the franchise is signed, the value of the services rendered is estimated to be 
at least $10,000. The remaining services are performed equally over the five-year period, 
and collectibility of the franchise fee is assured.
4. At the time the franchise is signed, all the services promised have been provided, and 
 collection of the franchise fee is assured.
5. Same scenario as requirement 4, except that collectibility of the remaining installments 
cannot be estimated.
Megabyte Software Developers shipped its tax return preparation product to a customer on 
September 15, 2014. In addition to the software, Megabyte’s contract requires the company to 
provide (1) training to the customer’s accounting staff during October of 2014, (2) technical 
product support for one year starting October 1, 2014, and (3) an upgrade early in 2015 to the 
software that reflects last-minute changes in tax laws affecting tax returns for 2014. The cus-
tomer paid the total contract price of $85,000 prior to product shipment. Megabyte would 
charge the following if these individual contract elements were sold separately:
E3-14
Revenue recognition: 
Bundled sales (LO 3)
Required:
1. Prepare a journal entry to record receipt of the cash payment.
2. Determine the amount of revenue to be recognized in 2014 and prepare the necessary 
journal entry.
 
Fair Value
Tax return preparation software 
$ 70,000
Training customer’s staff 
10,000
Customer support 
15,000
Software upgrade 
5,000
 Total fair value 
$100,000
York’s Rustic Furniture began operations on January 1, 2014. To build its customer base, the 
company permitted customers, regardless of their credit history, to pay in installments when 
they made a major purchase. Installment sales amounted to $750,000 in 2014; these items cost 
York’s Rustic Furniture $400,000. Given the questionable credit histories of many of its cus-
tomers and its inability to use past history to estimate collection rates, the company adopted 
the cost recovery method and accordingly recognized $75,000 in gross profit.
Required:
1. How much cash did the company collect on installment sales in 2014?
2. Assume that York’s Rustic Furniture had instead used the installment sales method. What 
amount of gross profit would it have deferred in 2014?
E3-15
Installment sales and cost 
 recovery methods 
(LO 1, 2)
AICPA
ADAPTED

170 
CHAPTER 3
Additional Topics in Income Determination
E3-18
Correction of errors/Prior 
period adjustment (LO 7)
Krafty Kris, Inc., discovered the following errors after the 2014 financial statements were issued:
a. A major supplier shipped inventory valued at $8,550 to Krafty Kris on consignment. This 
merchandise was mistakenly included in the inventory taken by Krafty Kris on December 
31, 2013. (Goods shipped on consignment are the property of the consignor and should 
be included in its inventory.)
b. Krafty Kris renewed its liability insurance policy on October 1, 2013, paying a $36,000 
premium and debiting Insurance expense. No further entries have been made. The premium 
purchased insurance coverage for a period of 36 months.
c. Repair expense was debited at the time equipment was purchased for $100,000 on January 
8, 2014. The equipment has a life of five years; its salvage value is considered immaterial. 
Krafty uses straight-line depreciation method.
Required:
1. Prepare journal entries to correct these errors. Ignore income taxes.
2. Assuming that these errors remain uncorrected, explain their effects on the 2015 financial 
statements issued by Krafty Kris, Inc.
E3-17
Error correction/Prior period 
adjustment (LO 7)
Tack, Inc., reported a Retained earnings balance of $150,000 at December 31, 2013. In June 
2014, Tack’s internal audit staff discovered two errors that were made in preparing the 2013 
financial statements that are considered material:
a. Merchandise costing $40,000 was mistakenly omitted from the 2013 ending inventory.
b. Equipment purchased on July 1, 2013, for $70,000 was mistakenly charged to a repairs 
expense account. The equipment should have been capitalized and depreciated using 
straight-line depreciation, a 10-year useful life, and $10,000 salvage value.
Required:
1. What amount should Tack report as a prior period adjustment to beginning Retained earn-
ings at January 1, 2014? (Ignore taxes.)
2. Prepare the journal entries that Tack would make in June 2014 to correct the errors 
made in 2013. Assume that depreciation for 2014 is made as a year-end adjusting 
 entry. (Ignore taxes.)
E3-16
Error correction/Prior 
period adjustment (LO 7)
 
Ending 
Depreciation
Year 
Inventory 
Expense
2012 
$12,000 overstated 
$22,300 overstated
2013 
8,000 understated 
6,000 understated
Assume that purchases were recorded correctly and that no correcting entries were made at 
December 31, 2012, or December 31, 2013.
Required:
1. Ignoring income taxes, what amount should Bettner report as a prior period adjustment to 
the beginning retained earnings in its statement of retained earnings at January 1, 2014?
2. Prepare the journal entries that Bettner would make in 2014 to correct the errors.
Bettner, Inc., is a calendar year corporation whose financial statements for 2012 and 2013 
included errors as follows:

 
Exercises 
171
32 http://www.fasb.org/cs/BlobServer?blobkey5id&blobwhere51175823808224&blobheader5application%2Fpdf&blobcol5
urldata&blobtable5MungoBlobs.
Boeing Corporation is one of the world’s largest airplane manufacturing companies 
that often builds airplanes for military use. On March 13, 2012, Diana L. Sands, Boeing’s 
vice president of finance and corporate controller, wrote a comment letter addressed to 
the FASB that raised concerns about some of the proposed guidance written in the joint 
revised IASB/FASB Exposure Draft for Revenue Recognition.32 Specifically, she wrote 
that Boeing
“recommend(s) further clarity around when a bundle of goods or services should be  considered 
a single performance obligation versus multiple performance obligations. We understand that 
there are conflicting interpretations of the proposed criteria of highly interrelated, significant 
 integration services and significantly modified or customized (contracts). Generally we believe 
that  production units such as military airplanes that are bid, negotiated and managed as a single 
 arrangement should be accounted for as a single performance obligation rather than considering 
each airplane to represent a separate performance obligation. We recommend providing 
 additional indicators to help determine when to bundle goods or services into a single  performance 
obligation and providing examples of common goods and services that would be expected to 
represent single versus multiple performance obligations.”
Required:
1. Why would the controller for Boeing care whether military contracts are considered a 
single performance obligation (where delivery of the entire set of aircraft is considered 
the performance obligation) or a multiple performance obligation (where delivery of 
each individual aircraft is considered a performance obligation)? What are the revenue 
recognition implications for each of these criteria under the joint IASB/FASB Revised 
Exposure Draft for Revenue Recognition?
2. Further assume the following set of data applies to an order from the U.S. Armed Forces 
for 20 Boeing aircraft.
 
Total contract price: $200,000,000
 
Actual experience on the project as of December 31,
E3-19
Accounting for single versus 
multiple performance 
 obligations (LO 9)
 
2013 
2014 
2015
Costs incurred to date 
$ 30,000,000 
$120,000,000 
$183,000,000
Estimated future costs 
$150,000,000 
$ 62,000,000 
$         0
Aircraft delivered 
0 
5 
15
How much revenue would Boeing report for 2013, 2014, and 2015 if it complies with the ED 
guidance under the following scenarios?
a. Completed contract method, where the contract is considered a single performance obligation
b. Completed contract method, where the contract is considered to include multiple perfor-
mance obligations (i.e., where delivery of each individual aircraft is considered a perfor-
mance obligation)
c. Percentage of completion method, where the contract is considered a single performance 
obligation

172 
CHAPTER 3
Additional Topics in Income Determination
PROBLEMS / DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
On January 1, 2014, Heinkel Corporation’s balance sheet consisted of $900,000 in cash and 
$900,000 in equity. On this date, Heinkel began production of an electronic device for 
 improving the sound quality of CDs. During 2014, Heinkel produced 100,000 devices at a unit 
cost of $12. These devices had a selling price of $20 each and were to be sold on account to 
various dealers in the northeastern United States. Commissions and other selling costs  incurred 
at the time of sale were $1.00 per unit. During 2014, 2015, and 2016, the 100,000 units pro-
duced were sold and cash was collected as follows:
P3-1
Income determination under 
alternative revenue 
 recognition rules (LO 1, 2)
 
2014 
2015 
2016
Units sold 
60,000 
40,000 
0
Cash collections 
$1,000,000 
$800,000 
$200,000
Required:
1. Calculate the amount of Heinkel’s net income each year, assuming that revenue and gross 
profit are recognized:
 
a. At the completion of production.
 
b. At the point of sale.
 
c. As cash is collected (installment method).
2. Prepare Heinkel’s journal entries for 2014 under each of the methods in requirement 1.
P3-3
Determining pre-tax income, 
inventory carrying value, and 
accounts receivable under 
sales and production 
 basis (LO 1, 2)
Howe, Inc., a Texas crude oil producer, started business on May 1, 2014. It sells all of 
its production to a single customer at the current spot price for West Texas crude. The cus-
tomer pays Howe 60% of the selling price on delivery with the remainder to be paid in 
10 months. Throughout 2014, the oil spot market price was $28 per barrel; however, on 
December 31, 2014, the market price jumped to $31 per barrel, where it is expected to  remain. 
Howe’s direct production costs are $12 per barrel, drilling  equipment depreciation expense 
P3-2
Income determination under 
alternative bases of revenue 
recognition (LO 1, 2)
AgriPro, a farm corporation, produced 20,000 bushels of corn in its first year of operations. 
During the year, it sold 15,000 bushels of the corn produced for $3.00 per bushel and col-
lected 80% of the selling price on the corn sold; the balance is to be collected in equal amounts 
during each of the two following years. The local feed mill is quoting a year-end market price 
of $3.50 per bushel. Additional data for the first year are as follows:
Depreciation on equipment 
$ 5,000
Other production costs (cash)—per bushel 
0.60
Miscellaneous administrative costs (cash) 
3,000
Selling and delivery costs (incurred and paid at time of sale), per bushel 
0.15
Dividends paid to stockholders during year 
10,000
Interest on borrowed money (1/2 paid in cash) 
8,000
AgriPro is enthusiastic about the accountant’s concept of matching product costs with revenues.
Required:
Compute net income under each of the following methods and determine the carrying (book) 
value of inventory and accounts receivable at the end of the first year of operation for each of 
these methods.
1. Recognize revenue when production is complete.
2. Recognize revenue at point of sale.
3. Recognize revenue on an installment (cash collection) basis.

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
173
totaled $180,000 for the eight-month period ending  December 31, and property taxes of 
$75,000 were paid during the year. Howe produced 30,000 barrels of oil of which 6,000 
barrels were included in January 1, 2015, opening inventory.
Required:
Compute Howe’s 2014 pre-tax income and determine its inventory carrying value and 
 Accounts receivable balance at December 31, 2014, under the following:
1. Production basis.
2. Sales (completed transaction) basis.
3. Installment (cash collection) basis.
P3-4
Income recognition on 
long-term contracts 
(LO 1, 2)
Cornwell Construction Company has been operating in Pennsylvania for a number of 
years. During 2014, the firm contracted with the Borough of Lewisburg to build a domed 
sports complex. Cornwell estimated that it would take three years to complete the facility 
at a total cost of $25 million. The total contract price was $30 million. During 2014, con-
struction costs of $8.5 million were incurred related to the sports complex, including 
$500,000 in materials purchased in 2014 but not yet used; estimated additional costs to 
complete the project were $15.5 million as of December 31, 2014. Contract billings 
through December 31, 2014, were $9 million of which the Borough of Lewisburg had paid 
$7.5 million.
Required:
1. Prepare schedules to calculate the amount of income to be recognized by Cornwell Con-
struction on the sports complex for the year ended December 31, 2014, using each of the 
following methods:
 
a. Completed-contract method.
 
b. Percentage-of-completion method.
2. Prepare all necessary journal entries related to the project for 2014 assuming:
 
a. The percentage-of-completion method is appropriate.
 
b. The completed-contract method is appropriate.
AICPA
ADAPTED
P3-5
Long-term construction 
 contract accounting 
(LO 1, 2)
MSK Construction Company contracted to construct a factory building for $525,000. 
 Construction started during 2014 and was completed in 2015. Information relating to the 
contract follows:
 
2014 
2015
Costs incurred during the year 
$290,000 
$150,000
Estimated additional cost to complete 
145,000 
—
Billings during the year 
260,000 
265,000
Cash collections during the year 
240,000 
285,000
Required:
Record the preceding transactions in MSK’s books under the completed-contract and the 
 percentage-of-completion methods. Determine amounts that will be reported on the balance 
sheet at the end of 2014.

174 
CHAPTER 3
Additional Topics in Income Determination
P3-6
Determining income under 
 installment sales 
method (LO 1, 2)
Maple Corporation sells farm machinery on the installment plan. On July 1, 2014, it entered 
into an installment sale contract with Agriculture, Inc., for an eight-year period. Equal annual 
payments under the installment sale are $100,000 and are due on July 1. The first payment 
was made on July 1, 2014. Additional information follows:
• The amount that would be realized on an outright sale of similar farm machinery is 
$556,000.
• The cost of the farm machinery sold to Agriculture is $417,000.
• The finance charges relating to the installment period are $244,000 based on a stated 
 interest rate of 12%, which is appropriate.
•  Circumstances are such that the collection of the installments due under the contract is 
reasonably assured.
Required:
What income or loss before income taxes should Maple record for the year ended December 
31, 2014, as a result of this transaction? Show supporting computations in good form.
AICPA
ADAPTED
P3-7
Construction accounting 
 under both U.S. GAAP and 
IFRS (LO 8, 9)
At the beginning of 2014, the Jensen Construction Company signed a contract with the state 
of Florida to build a highway for $6 million. The project is estimated to be completed by the 
end of 2016. Jensen will bill the state in installments over the construction period per a sched-
ule in the contract. Information related to the contract is as follows:
 
2014 
2015 
2016
Actual construction costs incurred during the year 
$1,800,000 
$1,255,000 
$1,945,000
Actual construction costs incurred in prior years 
 
1,800,000 
3,055,000
Cumulative actual construction costs 
1,800,000 
3,055,000 
5,000,000
Estimated costs to complete at end of year 
2,700,000 
1,645,000 
   —
Total construction costs 
$4,500,000 
$4,700,000 
$5,000,000
Billings made over the course of the year 
$1,750,000 
$1,800,000 
$2,450,000
Cash collections during the year 
$1,700,000 
$1,600,000 
$2,700,000
For each of the following independent requirements, assume collection of all billings and 
r ecovery of costs are probable.
Required:
1. Because the highway is being built in an area with very stable soils, Jensen believes it is 
able to reasonably estimate the contract’s completion costs and thus uses the percentage-
of-completion method of accounting for this contract. Prepare the journal entry that 
 Jensen would make at the end of each year to appropriately recognize the revenue, expense, 
and profit on the project for that year.
2. Because the highway is being built in an area with very unstable soils, Jensen believes it is 
not able to reasonably estimate the contract’s completion costs and thus uses the completed-
contract method of accounting (U.S. GAAP) for this contract. Prepare the journal entry that 
Jensen would make at the end of each year to appropriately recognize the revenue, expense, 
and profit on the project for that year.
3. Because the highway is being built in an area with very unstable soils, Jensen believes it 
is not able to reasonably estimate the contract’s completion costs and thus uses the cost- 
recovery method of accounting (IFRS) for this contract. Prepare the journal entry that 
Jensen would make at the end of each year to appropriately recognize revenue, expense, 
and profit on the project for that year.

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
175
4. How would the solution to the three requirements above change if the contract-based  revenue 
recognition principles proposed in the recent IASB/FASB exposure draft on  revenue recogni-
tion are adopted? Assume that the entire contract is viewed as a single unit of accounting.
P3-8
Construction accounting 
 under both U.S. GAAP and 
IFRS when a contract loss 
 occurs (LO 2, 8)
Refer to the data in problem P3-7 for Jensen Construction Company. Assume Jensen uses the 
percentage-of-completion method of accounting for this project.
Required:
Prepare the journal entry that Jensen would make at the end of 2015 and 2016 to appropriately 
recognize the revenue, expense, and profit (loss) on the project for these two years if the esti-
mated costs to complete the project were $3,045,000 instead of $1,645,000 as of the end of 
2015 as previously estimated. Assume that during 2016 actual costs incurred were as previ-
ously estimated (i.e., $3,045,000) at the end of 2015.
T  R  E   T   C    H
S
P3-10
Alternative bases of revenue 
recognition (LO 1, 2)
On July 1, 2014, Quincy Company sold a piece of industrial equipment to Tana Company for 
$200,000. The equipment cost Quincy $80,000 to manufacture. Per the sales agreement, Tana 
made a 20% down payment and paid the remaining balance in four equal quarterly install-
ments plus 10% on the unpaid balance, starting October 1, 2014.
Required:
1. Identify and explain three alternative methods for revenue and cost recognition available 
to Quincy in this scenario.
2. Calculate the amount of gross profit recognized in 2014 under each of the alternatives 
identified in requirement 1.
3. Elaborate on what circumstances would have to exist for each alternative to be employed.
P3-11
Bundled services (LO 3)
Founded in 1989, Brio Software, Inc., helps Global 3000 companies improve business perfor-
mance by creating new value from existing information systems and, ultimately, aligning ev-
eryone in the enterprise with key corporate goals. Brio’s business intelligence software lets 
companies access, analyze, and share information, offering users relevant, accurate, and 
timely insight into the variables that impact their business. With this insight, companies can 
make superior business decisions.
P3-9
Accounting for installment 
sales under U.S. GAAP 
and IFRS (LO 2, 8)
On July 1, 2014, the Miller Company held an inventory clearance sale to rid itself of a size-
able amount of rapidly obsolescing inventory. To ensure the success of the sale, Miller offered 
generous credit terms: customers—with no minimum credit score required—could purchase 
up to $5,000 worth of Miller’s products, paying 25% down with the balance due in three equal 
annual installments. Interest at a market rate of 10% of the unpaid balance was to be remitted 
with each installment. Miller was quite pleased with the event as the company sold inventory 
costing $300,000 for $500,000. Assume that installment payments occur on July 1 each year 
and the following principal amounts are collected after the initial down payment: 2015, $125,000; 
2016, $100,000; 2017, $75,000. Due to the generally poor credit scores of the purchasers of this 
merchandise, Miller believes it appropriate to not recognize revenue at the time of sale.
Required:
1. Prepare Miller’s journal entries each year if Miller adopts the installment sales accounting 
method under U.S. GAAP. (Ignore any presumed interest collections.)
2. Prepare Miller’s journal entries each year if Miller adopts the cost-recovery accounting 
method under IFRS. (Ignore any presumed interest collections.)
3. Prepare Miller’s journal entry under each method at December 31, 2017, if the company 
believes it will not collect any more of these installment receivables.
T  R  E   T   C    H
S

176 
CHAPTER 3
Additional Topics in Income Determination
 
The following information appears in Brio Software’s 10-K report regarding its revenue 
recognition policies:
Revenue Recognition
Brio derives revenues from two sources, perpetual license fees and services. Services include software 
maintenance and support, training and consulting, and system implementation services. Maintenance 
and support consist of technical support and software upgrades and enhancements. Significant manage-
ment judgments and estimates are made and used to determine the revenue recognized in any accounting 
period. Material differences may result in the amount and timing of Brio’s revenue for any period if 
different conditions were to prevail.
 
Brio applies the provisions of FASB ASC Section 985-605-25: Software—Revenue Recognition—
Recognition to account for software revenue and FASB ASC Section 605-25: Revenue recognition—
Multiple-element arrangements.
 
Brio recognizes product revenue when persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, the product has 
been delivered, the fee is fixed or determinable, and collection of the resulting receivable is probable. In 
software arrangements that include rights to multiple elements, such as software products and services, 
Brio uses the residual method under which revenue is allocated to the undelivered elements based on 
vendor-specific objective evidence (VSOE) of the fair value of such undelivered elements. VSOE of the 
undelivered elements is determined based on the price charged when such elements are sold separately. 
The residual amount of revenue is allocated to delivered elements and recognized as revenue. Such 
 undelivered elements in these arrangements typically consist of services.
 
Brio uses a purchase order or a signed contract as persuasive evidence of an arrangement for sales of 
software, maintenance renewals, and training. Sales through Brio’s value added resellers, private label 
partners, resellers, system integrators, and distributors (collectively “resellers”) are evidenced by a mas-
ter agreement governing the relationship with binding purchase orders on a transaction-by-transaction 
basis. Brio uses a signed statement of work to evidence an arrangement for consulting and system imple-
mentation services.
 
Software is delivered to customers electronically or on a CD-ROM. Brio assesses whether the fee is 
fixed or determinable based on the payment terms associated with the transaction. Brio’s standard pay-
ment terms are generally less than 90 days. When payments are subject to extended payment terms, 
revenue is deferred until payments become due, which is generally when the payment is received. Brio 
assesses collectibility based on a number of factors, including the customer’s past payment history and 
its current creditworthiness. If Brio determines that collection of a fee is not probable, it defers the rev-
enue and recognizes it when collection becomes probable, which is generally on receipt of cash pay-
ment. If an acceptance period is other than in accordance with standard user documentation, revenue is 
recognized on the earlier of customer acceptance or the expiration of the acceptance period.
 
When licenses are sold with consulting and system implementation services, license fees are recognized 
upon shipment provided that (1) the preceding criteria have been met, (2) payment of the license fees does not 
depend on the performance of the consulting and system implementation services, (3) the services are not 
essential to the functionality of the software, and (4) VSOE exists for the undelivered elements. For arrange-
ments that do not meet these criteria, both the product license revenues and services revenues are recognized 
in accordance with the provisions of FASB ASC Section 985-605-25. Brio accounts for the arrange-
ments under the completed-contract method pursuant to FASB ASC Section 605-35: Revenue 
 recognition-Construction-type and production-type contracts because reliable estimates are typically not 
available for the costs and efforts necessary to complete the consulting and system implementation services.
 
The majority of Brio’s consulting and system implementation services qualify for separate account-
ing. Brio uses VSOE of fair value for the services and maintenance to account for the arrangement using 
the residual method, regardless of any separate prices stated within the contract for each element. Brio’s 
consulting and system implementation service contracts are bid either on a fixed-fee basis or on a time-
and-materials basis. For a fixed-fee contract, Brio recognizes revenue using the completed-contract 
method. For time-and-materials contracts, Brio recognizes revenue as services are performed.

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
177
 
Maintenance and support revenue is recognized ratably over the term of the maintenance contract, 
which is typically one year. Training revenue is recognized when the training is provided.
 
Assume that Brio enters into a contract with a customer for deliverable software and 
 services as follows. The prices listed are those quoted in the contract.
Perpetual license fee 
$  650,000
Elements undelivered at contract signing:
 Technical support 
120,000
 Training 
80,000
 System implementation services 
100,000
 Software upgrades and enhancements 
50,000
Total contract price 
$1,000,000
 These contract elements, if purchased separately, would be priced as follows:
Perpetual license fee 
$  840,000
Elements undelivered at contract signing:
 Technical support 
120,000
 Training 
72,000
 System implementation services 
108,000
 Software upgrades and enhancements 
60,000
Total contract price 
$1,200,000 
Required:
1. Following Brio’s stated revenue recognition policies, how much revenue would it recognize 
on this contract?
2. Prepare the journal entry to record receipt of the signed contract and electronic delivery 
of the software. Assume that the sale conforms to Brio’s normal billing terms and that 
collectibility is not an issue.
3. How much revenue would Brio recognize on this contract if the various elements 
 included in the contract were not sold separately?
P3-12
Sales with right of 
 return (LO 3, 4, 5)
Roxio, Inc., is a leading provider of digital media software and services for the consumer 
market. The company provides software that enables individuals to record digital content onto 
CDs and DVDs and offers photo and video editing products. Roxio’s Form 10-K for the year 
ended March 31, Year 3, reported the following information:
Roxio, Inc.
 
Selected Financial Data
 
for the Years Ended March 31
($ in 000s) 
YR1 
YR2 
YR3
Net revenues 
$121,908 
$142,521 
$120,408
Net income 
3,570 
2,349 
(9,944)
Allowance for sales returns and certain sales incentives: 
 
 
Balance at beginning of period 
2,186 
4,602 
5,492
Additions 
8,351 
16,286 
18,333
Deductions 
5,935 
15,396 
16,749
Balance at the end of period 
4,602 
5,492 
7,076
Business Risks
We rely on distributors and retailers to sell our products. If our distributors attempt to reduce their levels 
of inventory or if they do not maintain sufficient levels to meet customer demand, our sales could be 

178 
CHAPTER 3
Additional Topics in Income Determination
negatively impacted. If we reduce the prices of our products to our distributors, we may have to compen-
sate them for the difference between the higher price they paid to buy their inventory and the new lower 
prices. In addition, we are exposed to the risk of product returns from distributors through their exercise 
of contractual return rights.
Revenue Recognition
For software product sales to distributors, revenues are recognized on product shipment to the distribu-
tors or receipt of the products by the distributor, depending on the shipping terms, provided that all fees 
are fixed or determinable, evidence of an arrangement exists, and collectibility is probable. Our distribu-
tor arrangements provide distributors certain product rotation rights. Additionally, we permit our dis-
tributors to return products in certain circumstances, generally during periods of product transition. End 
users additionally have the right to return their product within 30 days of the purchase. We establish 
 allowances for expected product returns in accordance with FASB ASC Section 605-15-25. These allow-
ances are recorded as a direct reduction of revenues and accounts receivable. Management applies 
significant judgment and relies on historical experience in establishing these allowances. If future return 
patterns differ from past return patterns due to reduced demand for our product or other factors beyond 
our control, we may be  required to increase these allowances in the future and may be required to reduce 
future revenues. If at any point in the future we become unable to estimate returns reliably, we could be 
required to defer recognizing revenues until the distributor notifies us that the product has been sold to 
an end user. We provide for  estimated product returns and pricing adjustments in the period in which the 
revenues are recognized.
Required:
1. Re-create (in summary form) the journal entries Roxio made in the Allowance for sales 
returns and certain sales incentives account for fiscal years Year 1–Year 3. Explain the 
 rising balance in this account.
2. Are opportunities for “earnings management” present in Roxio’s stated accounting poli-
cies for expected product returns? Is there any evidence in the data presented that Roxio’s 
management has availed themselves of any of the opportunities you identify?
3. Determine Roxio’s gross revenues for fiscal years Year 1–Year 3.
P3-13
Manipulation of receivables 
(LO 4, 5)
Holman Electronics manufactures audio equipment, selling it through various distributors. 
 Holman’s days sales outstanding (Accounts receivable / Average daily credit sales) figures 
increased steadily in 2014 and then spiked dramatically in 2015, peaking at 120 days in the 
second quarter. In the third quarter of 2015, Holman’s days sales outstanding figure dropped 
to 90 days. Its chief financial officer engineered this drop by artificially reducing the amount 
of outstanding accounts receivable. Channel partners with large outstanding receivables were 
pressured into signing notes for those amounts. Once sales personnel secured the notes, the 
CFO directed a reclassification entry to the general ledger converting more than $30 million 
in trade receivables into notes receivable, which are not included in the days sales outstanding 
calculation. This  reclassification was not disclosed in the Form 10-Q that Holman filed for 
that quarter.
Required:
What might be the motive for the CFO’s actions? Explain your answer.
P3-14
Correction of errors and 
worksheet preparation 
(LO 7)
KEW Enterprises began operations in January 2012 to manufacture a hand sanitizer that 
promised to be more effective and gentler on the skin than existing products. Family mem-
bers, one of whom was delegated to be the office manager and bookkeeper, staffed the com-
pany. Although conscientious, the office manager lacked formal accounting training, which 
became apparent when the growing company was forced in March 2015 to hire a CPA as 

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
179
controller. Although ostensibly brought in to relieve some of the office manager’s stress, 
 management made it clear to the new controller that they had some concerns about the quality 
of information they were receiving. Accordingly, the controller made it a priority to review the 
records of prior years, looking for ways to improve the accounting system. From this review, 
the following errors were uncovered.
1. The office manager expensed rent on equipment and facilities when paid. Amounts paid 
in 2012, 2013, and 2014 that represent prepaid rent are $5,000, $4,500, and $4,900, 
respectively.
2. No adjusting entries were ever made to reflect accrued salaries. The amounts $12,000, 
$13,500, and $8,300 should have been accrued in each of the three prior years, 
respectively.
3. Errors occurred in the depreciation calculations that resulted in depreciation expense 
 being overstated by $3,500 in 2012, understated by $7,000 in 2013, and understated by 
$6,000 in 2014.
4. In February 2015 some surplus production equipment that originally had cost $14,000 
was sold for $4,000; $12,000 in depreciation had correctly been taken on this equipment. 
The office manager made this entry to record the sale:
 
To record sale of surplus equipment
DR Cash   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $ 4,000
DR Accumulated depreciation   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
10,000
 
CR Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$14,000
5. Supplies expenses in the amount of $2,400 were incorrectly classified as administrative 
expenses in 2014.
Required:
Complete the worksheet shown below to assist in preparing the correcting entry. (By way of 
example, the first required entry on the worksheet has been made.)
Error Corrections Worksheet
 
Effect on Income 
Accounts to be Adjusted
Description 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 
Dr. 
Cr.
Reported income 
$(24,000) 
$43,000 
$40,000 
N/A
Item 1:
Prepaid rent—2012 
5,000 
(5,000) 
 
 
Counterbalancing error
Prepaid rent—2013
Prepaid rent—2014
Item 2:
Accrued wages—2012
Accrued wages—2013
Accrued wages—2014
Item 3:
Depreciation
Item 4:
Gain on machinery
Item 5:
Classification
Adjusted income

180 
CHAPTER 3
Additional Topics in Income Determination
P3-15
Correcting errors/Prior 
 period adjustment (LO 7)
In 2014, the new CEO of Watsontown Electric Supply became concerned about the compa-
ny’s apparently deteriorating financial position. Wishing to make certain that the grim monthly 
reports he was receiving from the company’s bookkeeper were accurate, the CEO engaged a 
CPA firm to examine the company’s financial records. The CPA firm discovered the following 
facts during the course of the engagement, which was completed prior to any adjusting or 
closing entries being prepared for 2014.
1. A new digital imaging system was acquired on January 5, 2013, at a cost of $5,000. Although 
this asset was expected to be in use for the next four years, the purchase was inadvertently 
charged to office expense. Per the company’s accounting manual, office equipment of this 
type should be depreciated using the straight-line method with no salvage value assumed.
2. A used truck, purchased on November 18, 2014, was recorded with this entry:
 
To record truck expenditure:
DR Vehicle Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $18,000
 
CR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$18,000
 
Management plans to use this truck for three years and then trade it in on a new one. 
 Salvage is estimated at $3,000. Watsontown has always used straight-line depreciation 
for fixed assets, recording a half-year of depreciation in the year the asset is acquired.
3. On July 1, 2014, the company rented a warehouse for three years. The lease agreement 
specified that each year’s rent be paid in advance, so a check for the first year’s rent of 
$18,000 was issued and recorded as an addition to the Buildings account.
4. Late in 2013, Watsontown collected $23,500 from a customer in full payment of his account. 
The cash receipt was credited to revenue. Two months before the audit, Watsontown’s book-
keeper was reviewing outstanding receivables and noticed the outstanding balance. Knowing 
the customer in question had recently died, she wrote off the account. Because Watsontown 
seldom has bad debts, the company uses the direct write-off method whereby it charges Bad 
debts expense and credits Accounts receivable when an account is deemed uncollectible.
5. A three-year property and casualty insurance policy was purchased in January 2013 for 
$30,000. The entire amount was recorded as an insurance expense at the time.
6. On October 1, 2013, Watsontown borrowed $100,000 from a local bank. The loan terms 
specified annual interest payments of $8,000 on the anniversary date of the loan. The first 
interest payment was made on October 1, 2014, and expensed in its entirety.
Required:
Prepare any journal entry necessary to correct each error as well as any year-end adjusting 
entry for 2014 related to the described situation. Ignore income tax effects.
P3-16
General Motors restatement 
(LO 7)
General Motors (GM) disclosed in a Form 8-K filed in November Year 2, that it would restate 
its financial statements to correct the accounting for credits and other lump-sum payments 
from suppliers. Typically, suppliers offer an up-front payment in exchange for the customer’s 
promise to purchase certain quantities of merchandise over time. Per GAAP, such “rebates” 
cannot be recognized until after the promised purchases occur.
 
As GM noted,
GM erroneously recorded as a reduction to cost of sales certain payments and credits received 
from suppliers prior to completion of the earnings process. GM concluded that the payments and 

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
181
credits received were associated with agreements for the award of future services or products 
or other rights and privileges and should be recognized when subsequently earned.
 
Assume that GM signed a procurement contract on January 2, Year 1, that obligated it to 
purchase 1 million tires each year for the next three years from one of its suppliers. As part of 
this agreement, GM received a cash payment of $75 million on January 5, Year 1.
Required:
1. Given GM’s past accounting practices for such rebates, what journal entry did the com-
pany make when it received the payment?
2. Had GM followed GAAP, what would the appropriate journal entry have been? Where 
would the account credited be shown on GM’s financial statements?
3. Assume that GM made the entry you suggested in requirement 2. What adjusting entry, if 
any, would have been required at December 31, Year 1? (Assume that GM reports on a 
calendar year basis and makes annual adjusting entries.)
4. Assume that GM “discovered” the error in its approach to recording supplier rebates on 
November 1, Year 2. What entry would be necessary to restate GM’s Year 1 balance 
sheet? (Ignore income tax effects.)
5. What impact did GM’s past accounting practices related to supplier credits and rebates 
have on reported net income in the year in which the rebate was received and in subse-
quent years?
P3-17
Onerous performance 
obligations (LO 9)
The joint revised IASB/FASB Exposure Document (ED) for Revenue Recognition includes 
guidance for reporting “onerous performance obligations.” Specifically, the ED proposes that
“an entity shall recognize a liability and a corresponding expense if the performance obligation 
is onerous” when the performance obligation is satisfied over time and the entity expects, at 
contract inception, that the time to complete the obligation is greater than one year. “A perfor-
mance obligation is onerous if the lowest cost of settling the performance obligation exceeds the 
amount of the transaction price allocated to that performance obligation.”
Assume Software Developer LTD shipped its product to a customer on September 1, 2013. In 
addition to the software, the contract requires the company to provide service support through 
December 31, 2015, for the software. The customer paid the total contract price of $85,000 
prior to product shipment. The company would charge the following if these individual con-
tract elements were sold separately:
Software 
$  80,000
Support 
$  20,000
Total Fair Value 
$100,000
To settle the service support performance obligation, the company estimates it will cost 
 between $17,500 and $20,000 in development and labor costs.
Required:
1. Prepare a journal entry to record receipt of the cash payment on September 1, 2013.
2. Determine the amount of revenue to be recognized in 2013 and prepare any necessary end 
of year adjusting journal entries.
3. If the company had to follow the proposed guidance from the ED, show the journal entry 
on September 1, 2013, to recognize any “onerous performance obligation” liability and 
expense.

182 
CHAPTER 3
Additional Topics in Income Determination
CASES
Bill Criswell owns and operates a farm in Pennsylvania. During 2014, he produced and har-
vested 60,000 bushels of soybeans. He had no inventory of soybeans at the start of the year. 
Immediately after harvesting the soybeans in fall of 2014, Criswell sold 45,000 bushels to a 
local grain elevator operator. As of December 31, 2014, he had received payment for 30,000 
bushels. Additional information relating to the farm follows:
Price:
 Market price per bushel at the time of harvest
  and sale to the grain elevator operator 
$  3.60
 Market price per bushel at December 31, 2014 
3.60
Costs:
 Variable production costs per bushel 
0.50
 Delivery costs per bushel 
0.20
 Annual fixed cost of operating the farm that are
  unrelated to the volume of production 
$50,000
Required:
1. Prepare a 2014 income statement for Criswell’s farm under each of the following 
 assumptions regarding what constitutes the “critical event” in the process of recog-
nizing income:
 
a. Assuming that production is the critical event.
 
b. Assuming that the sale is the critical event.
 
c. Assuming that cash collection is the critical event.
 
(For simplicity, treat the fixed operating costs as period rather than product costs.)
2. Determine the December 31, 2014, balances for Soybeans inventory and Accounts receiv-
able under each of the three income recognition methods in requirement 1.
3. Assume that the farm is left idle during 2015. With no harvest, Criswell’s only transaction 
consists of an October 2015 sale of the 15,000 bushels in inventory at $2.80 per bushel. 
Further assume that no fixed costs are incurred while the farm is idle. Compute income 
during 2015 on both the sale and production basis. Discuss the causes for any profit or 
loss reported under each income determination alternative.
C3-1
Criswell’s Farm: Alternative 
bases of income 
 determination (LO 1, 2)
 
Beta 
Gamma
As of September 30, 2015:
Costs incurred to date 
$360,000 
$410,000
Estimated costs to complete 
40,000 
410,000
Billings 
315,000 
440,000
Cash collections 
275,000 
365,000
As of September 30, 2016:
Cost incurred to date 
450,000 
720,000
Estimated costs to complete 
— 
180,000
Billings 
560,000 
710,000
Cash collections 
560,000 
625,000
C3-2
London, Inc.: Determining 
gross profit under the 
 percentage-of-completion 
method (LO 1, 2)
London, Inc., began operation of its construction division on October 1, 2014, and entered 
into contracts for two separate projects. The Beta project contract price was $600,000 and 
provided for penalties of $10,000 per week for late completion. Although during 2015 the 
Beta project had been on schedule for timely completion, it was completed four weeks late in 
August 2016. The Gamma project’s original contract price was $800,000. Change orders dur-
ing 2016 added $40,000 to the original contract price. The following data pertain to the sepa-
rate long-term construction projects in progress:
AICPA
ADAPTED

 
Cases 
183
C3-3
Channel stuffing (LO 5)
ClearOne Communications, Inc., is a provider of end-to-end video and audio conferencing 
services, including the manufacture and sale of video and audio conferencing products. From 
its inception as a manufacturer of this equipment through 2001, ClearOne sold its products 
through a nationwide network of manufacturer’s representatives. Sometime in early 2001, 
ClearOne decided to alter its business model and instead of utilizing manufacturer’s representa-
tives, began selling its products through a nationwide network of distributors complemented by 
a direct sales force. Through early 2001, ClearOne experienced robust growth and increased 
product sales every quarter. From the selected financial data extracted from ClearOne’s Form 
10-Ks that follow, this growth appeared to continue through fiscal 2002. However, a complaint 
filed by the SEC against ClearOne alleges that things may not be as rosy as they seem.
Additional Information
London accounts for its long-term construction contracts using the percentage-of-completion 
method for financial reporting purposes and the completed-contract method for income tax 
purposes.
Required:
1. Prepare a schedule showing London’s gross profit (loss) recognized for the years ended 
September 30, 2015 and 2016, under the percentage-of-completion method.
2. Prepare a schedule showing London’s balances in the following accounts at September 
30, 2015, under the percentage-of-completion method:
 
• Accounts receivable
 
• Costs and estimated earnings in excess of billings
 
• Billings in excess of costs and estimated earnings
3. Determine how much income would be recognized if London used the completed- 
 contract method for the 2015 and 2016 fiscal years.
 ClearOne Communications 
 
Selected Financial Data
 
 Years Ended June 30, 
 
  2002  
  2001  
  2000 
 Product sales 
 $37,215,161 
 $28,189,612 
 $22,226,504 
 Service sales 
 17,327,525 
 11,688,793 
 5,891,909 
 Cost of goods sold—products 
 15,057,167 
 10,633,956 
 8,033,867 
 Cost of goods sold—services 
 7,942,952 
 5,869,106 
 2,974,456 
 Operating expenses 
 20,809,281 
 14,904,460 
 10,568,861 
 Pre-tax operating income 
 10,733,286 
 8,470,883 
 6,541,229 
 Income from continuing operations 
 7,410,752 
 5,525,185 
 4,301,742 
 Net accounts receivable at June 30 
 $20,316,730 
 $ 7,212,970 
 $ 4,153,677 
 Cost of goods sold %—products 
 40.5% 
 37.7% 
 36.1% 
Required:
1. Retrieve the SEC’s complaint against ClearOne Communications, Inc. (www.sec.gov/ 
 litigation/litreleases/lr17934.htm). Describe management’s scheme for inflating revenue.
2. The SEC alleges that by the end of fiscal 2002, ClearOne had stuffed approximately 
$11.5 million of inventory into the distribution channel. On the basis of this assertion, 
what was the approximate amount of its alleged revenue overstatement by the end of 2002?
3. Does the financial statement data presented support your estimate? Why, or why not?

184 
CHAPTER 3
Additional Topics in Income Determination
C3-4
Financial reporting case: 
 Revenue recognition— 
 Software sales (LO 3)
Indus International, Inc. (the Company), develops, markets, implements, and supports a 
 proprietary line of Enterprise Asset Management (EAM) software and service solutions for 
capital-intensive industries (for example, the utilities and energy industry) worldwide. 
The following was extracted from Forms 10-Q and 10-K filed by the company for Year 1.
Revenue Recognition
The Company provides its software to customers under contracts, which provide for both software 
license fees and system implementation services. Revenues from system implementation services, 
which generally are time and material-based, are recognized as direct contract costs are incurred. 
The revenues from software license fees have been recognized as earned revenue in accordance with 
FASB ASC Section 985-605-25: Software—Revenue Recognition relating to software revenue rec-
ognition, when persuasive evidence of arrangement exists, delivery has occurred, the license fee is 
fixed and determinable, and collection is probable. Prior to Year 0, the Company began to report 
applicable new license fees on standard software products not requiring substantial modification or 
customization as earned revenue upon shipment to customers. Previously, because substantial modi-
fication and customization of software products was expected by customers, The Indus Group, Inc., 
had deferred the applicable license fees initially and recognized those fees as earned over the period 
of modification, customization and other installation services. Maintenance and support services are 
subject to separate contracts for which revenue is recognized ratably over the contract period. 
 Unbilled accounts receivable represent amounts related to revenue which has been recorded either as 
deferred revenue or earned revenue but which has not been billed. Generally, unbilled amounts are 
billed within 60 to 90 days of the sale of product or performance of services. Deferred revenue rep-
resents primarily unearned maintenance and support fees and unearned license fees, for which future 
performance obligations remain.
Indus International, Inc.
Condensed Consolidated Statements of Operations
 
Three Months Ended
 
September 30
($ in 000s, except per share amounts) 
Year 1 
Year 0
Revenues: 
 
 Software license fees 
$ 9,935 
$13,042
 Service and maintenance 
40,945 
37,291
  Total revenues 
50,880 
50,333
Cost of revenues 
25,292 
25,994
Gross profit 
25,588 
24,339
Operating expenses: 
 
 Research and development 
8,874 
8,171
 Sales and marketing 
7,232 
8,778
 General administrative 
4,930 
4,379
  Total operating expenses 
21,036 
21,328
Income from operations 
4,552 
3,011
Interest and other income (expense), net 
1,126 
(206)
Income before income taxes 
5,678 
2,805
Income taxes 
2,158 
—
Net income 
$ 3,520 
$ 2,805
EPS (basic) 
$ 0.11 
$ 0.09
EPS (diluted) 
$ 0.10 
$ 0.08
Shares used in computing EPS (basic) 
32,196 
30,990
Shares used in computing EPS (diluted) 
34,750 
34,739

 
Cases 
185
Required:
1. Reported third quarter income includes more than $2 million in revenue from two con-
tracts for which the CEO had “side letters” written to the customers giving each a right to 
cancel its contracts. Should this revenue have been recognized at that time? Cite appropri-
ate authoritative literature in support of your answer.
2. On October 28, Year 1, Indus issued a press release announcing its third quarter Year 1 
 financial results. The company reported that it had met quarterly targets with revenues of 
$50.88 million and earnings of $3.52 million, or 10 cents per share on a diluted basis. 
What would be the approximate effect on reported EPS of not including revenue from the 
two contracts referred to in requirement 1?
C3-5
Ethical issues: Earnings 
 management (LO 4, 5)
Mystery Technologies, Inc., a hypothetical company, is a leading manufacturer of bar code 
scanners and related information technology whose stock is traded on the New York Stock 
Exchange. In Year 3, the SEC filed allegations that during the previous five-year period, the 
company manipulated millions of dollars in revenue, net income, and other measures of finan-
cial performance. These manipulations were designed to meet financial projections driven by 
Wall Street expectations and were allegedly engineered and/or facilitated by the company’s 
chief accounting officer (a CPA).
 
An example of the various ploys used by Mystery Technologies occurred in Year 1 when an 
officer and other employees created an excessive reserve of $10 million for obsolete inven-
tory. This $10 million cushion was a “cookie jar” reserve designed for use when the company 
failed to meet its quarterly forecast, and it exceeded any reasonable estimate of the company’s 
exposure for obsolete inventory. This reserve was released into earnings in the fourth quarter 
of Year 1. By making this and other adjustments that quarter, Mystery Technologies reported 
net income of $13.4 million rather than a $2.4 million loss and hit the quarterly forecast right 
on the nose. The reversal of this “cookie jar” inventory reserve and the favorable impact on 
reported earnings were not disclosed to the public.
Required:
Identify the ethical issues involved with the “cookie jar” reserves and the economic conse-
quences for parties affected by the chief accounting officer’s actions. (Hint: Reference the 
AICPA’s Code of Professional Conduct for CPAs.)
C3-6
Franchise sales (LO 3)
Big Daddy’s BBQ, Inc. (Big Daddy’s), franchises restaurants. The company currently has ap-
proximately 215 franchisees operating Big Daddy’s restaurants in 22 states.
 
Big Daddy’s standard franchise agreement has a 10-year term, with one 10-year renewal 
option. It provides for a one-time payment of an initial franchise fee and a continuing royalty 
fee based on gross sales. Sales reports and financial statements are regularly collected from 
franchisees.
 
Each franchisee is responsible for selecting the location for its restaurant, subject to Big 
 Daddy’s approval (based on demographics, competition, traffic volume, etc.). Each franchised 
restaurant must have a designated manager and assistant manager who have completed Big 
 Daddy’s six-week manager training program or who have been otherwise approved by the com-
pany. For the opening of a restaurant, Big Daddy’s provides consultation and makes company 
personnel generally available to a franchisee. In addition, the company sends a team of personnel 
to the restaurant for up to two weeks to assist the franchisee and its managers in the opening, the 
initial marketing and training effort, as well as the overall operation of the restaurant.
 
Initial franchise fees are recognized when the company has substantially performed all 
material services and the restaurant has opened for business. Franchise royalties, which are 

186 
CHAPTER 3
Additional Topics in Income Determination
based on a percentage of monthly sales, are recognized as income on the accrual basis. Costs 
associated with franchise operations are recognized on the accrual basis.
 
Assume that:
1. Big Daddy’s entered into a standard franchise agreement on July 1, 2014, with Linda 
Bundy to open a Big Daddy’s BBQ in Lewisburg, PA.
2. The agreement called for an initial franchise fee of $300,000 and a 2.0% royalty. $75,000 
of the fee is payable immediately; the remainder is to be paid in equal annual installments 
each July 1 over the life of the franchise agreement.
3. Interest of 5% on the unpaid franchise fee balance is also payable each July 1.
4. Royalty payments are to be submitted with accompanying financial statements 15 days 
after the end of each quarter.
5. The restaurant opened on September 30, 2014. Big Daddy’s management sent a team to 
assist with the opening. Because Bundy felt that this assistance would be more valuable if 
rendered primarily after the restaurant opened, the team scheduled its arrival in Lewisburg 
for September 26, 2014, and was on site until October 10. Management estimated that 
$28,000 in costs was incurred to provide the entire package of “restaurant opening” 
services.
6. In keeping with the agreement, the restaurant reported the following gross sales in 2014 
and 2015 and made the required payments:
 
Quarter
 
First 
Second 
Third 
Fourth
2014 
 
 
 
$215,000
2015 
$245,000 
$210,000 
$218,000 
 263,000
Required:
1. Should Big Daddy’s recognize revenue from the initial franchise fee in their quarter 
 ending September 30, 2014? Explain.
2. For Big Daddy’s, prepare summary journal entries for 2014 and 2015 necessitated by this 
franchise agreement.
.mhhe.com/revsine6e
www
Remember to check the book’s companion website 
for additional study material.

4
T
he balance sheet—sometimes called the statement of financial position— 
 contains a summation of the assets owned by the firm, the liabilities incurred to 
finance these assets, and the shareholders’ equity representing the amount of 
financing provided by owners at a specific date.
 
The Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) defines the three basic elements 
of the balance sheet:1
1. Assets: Probable future economic benefits obtained or controlled by an entity as a 
result of past transactions or events.
2. Liabilities: Probable future sacrifices of economic benefits arising from an entity’s 
present obligations to transfer assets or provide services to other entities in the 
 future as a result of past transactions or events.
3. Equity: The residual interest in an entity’s assets that remains after deducting its 
 liabilities. For a corporate form of organization, this interest is referred to as share-
holders’ or stockholders’ equity.
The balance sheet tells us how management has invested the firm’s assets and where 
the financing for those assets came from. It provides information for assessing rates 
of return, capital structure, liquidity, solvency, and financial flexibility of an 
enterprise.
 
Two rate of return measures for evaluating operating efficiency and profitability of 
an enterprise are return on assets (ROA) and return on common equity (ROCE). (The 
precise calculation of these two performance measures is detailed in Chapter 5.) By 
comparing ROA to ROCE, statement users can see whether the use of debt financing 
enhances the return earned by shareholders.
 
The balance sheet provides critical information for understanding an entity’s cap-
ital structure (debt/equity ratio), which refers to how much of an entity’s assets are 
financed from debt versus equity sources. An important decision in corporate finance 
is determining the proper mix of debt and equity financing. Management must weigh 
the benefits of using debt financing (with tax-deductible interest) against the dangers 
of becoming overleveraged (that is, having too much debt) and the possibility of 
4
Structure of the Balance Sheet and 
Statement of Cash Flows
187
Chapter
1 “Elements of Financial Statements of Business Enterprises,” Statement of Financial Accounting Concepts No. 6 
(Stamford, CT: Financial Accounting Standards Board [FASB] 1985), para. 25, 35, 49.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you 
will understand:
1. How the various asset, liability, and 
stockholders’ equity accounts on a 
typical corporate balance sheet are 
measured and classified.
2. How to use balance sheet informa-
tion to understand key differences in 
the nature of firms’ operations and 
how those operations are financed.
3. Differences in balance sheet termi-
nology and presentation format in 
countries outside the United States.
4. The information provided in notes to 
the financial statements on significant 
accounting policies, subsequent 
events, and related-party transactions.
5. How successive balance sheets and 
the income statement can be used to 
determine cash inflows and outflows 
for a period.
6. How information provided in the 
cash flow statement can be used to 
explain changes in noncash accounts 
on the balance sheet.
7. The distinction between operating, 
investing, and financing sources and 
uses of cash.
8. How changes in current asset and 
current liability accounts can be used 
to adjust accrual earnings to obtain 
cash flows from operations.
9. Subtle differences between IFRS and 
U.S. GAAP regarding where certain 
items are shown on the statement of 
cash flows.

188 
CHAPTER 4
Structure of the Balance Sheet and Statement of Cash Flows
defaulting on required interest and principal payments (see Chapter 5 for further discus-
sion of capital structure ratios).
 
In addition to assessing the mix of debt versus equity financing, the balance sheet and 
 related notes to the financial statements provide information for evaluating the maturity 
structure of the various obligations within the liability section. This information is 
 critical to assessing the liquidity of an entity. Liquidity measures how readily assets can 
be converted to cash relative to how soon liabilities will have to be paid in cash. The bal-
ance sheet is the source of information for a variety of liquidity measures (detailed in 
Chapter 5) used by analysts and commercial loan officers to assess an entity’s 
creditworthiness.
 
In addition to the liquidity measures that focus on short-term cash inflows and cash needs, 
balance sheets provide information for assessing long-term solvency—a company’s ability to 
generate sufficient cash flows to maintain its productive capacity and still meet interest and 
principal payments on long-term debt. A company that cannot make debt payments when due 
is technically insolvent and may be forced to reorganize or liquidate.
 
Operating and financial flexibility refers to an entity’s ability to adjust to unexpected 
downturns in the economic environment in which it operates or to take advantage of profitable 
investment opportunities as they arise. Balance sheets provide information for making these 
assessments. A firm that has most of its assets invested in specialized manufacturing facilities 
(for example, a foundry) has limited ability to adjust to economic downturns and, thus, has 
limited operating flexibility. Similarly, a firm with minimal cash reserves and large amounts 
of high interest debt will have limited ability to take advantage of profitable investment op-
portunities that may arise.
 
Now that we have outlined the information contained in balance sheets and how it is used, 
we turn our attention to how various balance sheet accounts are measured and classified.
CLASSIFICATION CRITERIA AND MEASUREMENT 
CONVENTIONS FOR BALANCE SHEET ACCOUNTS
We will use Motorola Solutions’s financial statements to illustrate the classification criteria 
and measurement methods used in a typical balance sheet. While many people characterize 
generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) balance sheet carrying amounts as histori-
cal costs, what they really represent is more complicated. In fact, carrying amounts in a 
GAAP balance sheet are a mixture of historical costs, current replacement costs, fair value, 
net realizable value, and discounted present values.
 
Exhibit 4.1 shows Motorola Solutions’s consolidated balance sheet, which uses a typical 
U.S. disclosure format. In the Assets section, cash and any other assets expected to be con-
verted into cash within the next 12 months (or within the operating cycle, if the operating 
cycle is longer than 12 months) are classified as current assets. Assets not ex-
pected to be converted into cash within this period are categorized separately. 
Within the current assets category, items are disclosed in descending order of 
liquidity—how quickly the items will be converted into cash through the nor-
mal course of business. In the Liabilities section of the balance sheet, items 
expected to be settled from current assets within the next 12 months (or within 
the operating cycle, if longer) are categorized as current liabilities. All other liabilities appear 
in a separate section as noncurrent or long-term obligations. Equity claims also appear in their 
own separate section of the balance sheet, which is often referred to as the Stockholders’ eq-
uity section.
Maturity structure refers to 
how far into the future the 
obligations will come due.
As part of a joint effort with 
the IASB, the FASB re-
cently worked on a project 
on financial statement pre-
sentation that would require 
firms to use the term “state-
ment of financial position” 
in place of “balance sheet” 
and to report selected line 
items and subtotals that are 
typically not currently pro-
vided. Further details on 
proposed changes to the 
 format of the statement of 
financial position (balance 
sheet) are not discussed here, 
because the project has been 
tabled indefinitely by both 
standard setting agencies.
A firm’s operating cycle is the elapsed time 
 beginning with the initiation of production and 
ending with the cash collection of the receiv-
ables from the sale of the product.

 
Classification Criteria and Measurement Conventions for Balance Sheet Accounts 
189
EXHIBIT 4.1
Motorola Solutions, Inc. Consolidated 
Balance Sheets
 
December 31
(In millions, except per share amounts) 
2012 
2011
Assets
Cash and cash equivalents 
$ 1,468 
$ 1,881
Sigma Fund and short-term investments 
2,135 
3,210
Accounts receivable, net 
1,881 
1,866
Inventories, net 
513 
512
Deferred income taxes 
604 
613
Other current assets 
800 
686
 Total current assets 
7,401 
8,768
Property, plant, and equipment, net 
839 
896
Investments 
144 
166
Deferred income taxes 
2,416 
2,375
Goodwill 
1,510 
1,428
Other assets 
369 
296
 Total assets 
$12,679 
$13,929
Liabilities and Stockholders’ Equity
Current portion of long-term debt 
$         4 
$     405
Accounts payable 
705 
677
Accrued liabilities 
2,626 
2,733
 Total current liabilities 
3,335 
3,815
Long-term debt 
1,859 
1,130
Other liabilities 
4,195 
3,710
Stockholders ’ Equity
Preferred stock, $100 par value 
— 
—
Common stock: 12/31/12—$.01 par value; 12/31/11—$.01 par value 
3 
3
 Authorized shares: 12/31/12—600.0; 12/31/11—600.0
 Issued shares: 12/31/12—277.3; 12/31/11—320.0
 Outstanding shares: 12/31/12—276.1; 12/31/11—318.8
Additional paid-in capital 
4,937 
7,071
Retained earnings 
1,625 
1,016
Accumulated other comprehensive loss 
(3,300) 
(2,876)
 Total Motorola Solutions, Inc. stockholders’ equity 
3,265 
5,214
Noncontrolling interests 
25 
60
 Total stockholders’ equity 
3,290 
5,274
 Total liabilities and stockholders’ equity 
$12,679 
$13,929
 
To convey a feeling for the diversity of the measurement bases used in a typical balance 
sheet, we will discuss selected accounts from Motorola Solutions’s 2012 comparative balance 
sheet (see Exhibit 4.1). Many of the measurement issues discussed below are explored in 
greater depth in subsequent chapters.
Cash and Cash Equivalents 
The balance sheet carrying amount for this account 
reflects the amount of money or currency the firm has on hand in bank accounts or in certifi-
cates of deposit. If cash consists exclusively of U.S. dollar amounts, the balance sheet Cash 
account reflects the historical amount of net dollar units arising from past transactions. Due to 
the unique liquidity of cash, however, this historical amount of net dollar units is identical to 
the current market value of the cash.

190 
CHAPTER 4
Structure of the Balance Sheet and Statement of Cash Flows
If some of the cash amounts are denomi-
nated in foreign currency units (likely for 
 Motorola Solutions, a multinational firm), those 
amounts in foreign currency units must be 
translated into U.S. dollar equivalents. For 
monetary assets such as cash, accounts re-
ceivable, and notes receivable, the current rate 
of exchange in effect at the balance sheet date 
is used to translate foreign currency units into dollars. As a consequence of using the cur-
rent rate of exchange (rather than the historical rate of exchange that was in effect at the 
time of the foreign currency cash inflows), this portion of the Cash account is carried at its 
current market price, not at its historical transaction amount. For these foreign currency 
deposits, current market exchange values are used regardless of whether 
they are higher or lower than the historical rate. Consequently, the GAAP 
measurement convention for cash is, in reality, current market price rather 
than historical cost.
Sigma Fund 
As described in Motorola Solutions’s notes, this ac-
count represents a portfolio of investments in certificates of deposit, 
 commercial paper, government bonds, and high-quality corporate debt 
 obligations that are carried at fair value on Motorola Solutions’s balance 
sheet. The portion of these investments that Motorola Solutions does not intend to convert 
to cash within the next year is reported in the noncurrent asset section of the balance 
sheet.
Short-Term Investments 
This category of as-
sets comprises items such as U.S. Treasury bills, notes, eq-
uity securities, or other financial assets that companies use 
to earn a return on funds not currently needed in operations. 
The GAAP measurement rules for investments in debt and 
equity securities distinguish between debt securities, which 
the reporting company intends to hold to maturity, and all 
other securities (both debt and equity), which an entity in-
tends to hold only for short periods of time.2
 
The rules are:
1. Debt securities the company intends to hold to maturity are carried at amortized cost. 
(When debt securities are sold at a premium or discount, the premium or discount is am-
ortized over time, hence, the term amortized cost.)
2. Debt and equity securities held for short-range investment purposes are carried at fair 
value at each balance sheet date (generally, the price at which these securities can be 
bought and sold), regardless of whether that price is above or below cost.
How long the company intends to hold the debt securities determines how they are mea-
sured on the balance sheet. Some will be carried at amortized cost and others at fair value. 
Equity securities held for the short term are always measured at fair value.
Monetary assets are fixed in dollar amounts regardless of price changes. A 
$300,000 cash deposit remains fixed at $300,000 even if the general level of prices 
goes up and the purchasing power of that $300,000 declines. Nonmonetary assets 
such as inventory and buildings are not fixed in dollar amounts; that is, inventory 
purchased for $300,000 can conceivably increase in value if prices go up. While not 
assured, this potential for changing value is the distinguishing characteristic of non-
monetary items—their value is not measured in a fixed number of monetary units.
A U.S. company with 1 million pesos in the 
bank account of its Mexican manufacturing sub-
sidiary would value the cash at $58,501 U.S. 
dollars on December 31, 2012, when the ex-
change rate was 17.0936 pesos to the dollar. 
This same bank account (with 1 million pesos) 
would have been valued at $55,326 U.S. dollars 
on December 31, 2011, when the exchange rate 
was 18.0748 pesos to the dollar.
When the balance sheet carrying amount of the securities investment 
is written up or down to current fair value, the offsetting gain or loss 
appears on the income statement if the securities are trading 
 securities for which the intent is to generate profits on short-term 
differences in price. When less actively traded securities (termed 
available-for-sale securities) are marked to fair value, the offsetting 
gain or loss goes directly to Other comprehensive income rather than 
being part of Net income. (These accounting rules are discussed 
 further in Chapter 16.)
2 FASB Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) Section 320-10-25: Investments—Debt and Equity Securities—Overall—
Recognition.

 
Classification Criteria and Measurement Conventions for Balance Sheet Accounts 
191
Accounts Receivable, Net 
This account reflects credit sales that have not yet been 
collected. The balance sheet carrying amount for gross accounts receivable equals the face 
amount due that arises from past credit sales transactions. Thus, if a company sold goods with 
a $100,000 sales price on November 15, 2014, the following entry would be made:
DR Accounts receivable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $100,000
   CR Sales revenue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$100,000
If the receivable is still outstanding at December 31, 2014, it would be shown on the balance 
sheet at $100,000. However, accrual accounting requires that any future costs be matched 
against the revenues recognized in the period of sale. When sales are made for credit (on ac-
count), some sales may unknowingly be made to customers who will be incapable of making 
the required payment. The expense associated with these uncollectible accounts must be 
 recognized—on an estimated basis—in the pe-
riod in which the sales arise. This compels 
companies to prepare an estimate of the propor-
tion of existing accounts receivable balances 
that they reasonably believe will ultimately not 
be collected. In Motorola Solutions’s case, the 
2012 accounts receivable note disclosure shows 
the details behind the Accounts receivable, net 
balance shown on its balance sheet as follows:
The accounting entry to recognize estimated uncollectible accounts is:
DR Bad debt expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $XXX
 
CR Allowance for doubtful accounts  . . . . . .  
 
$XXX
The debited account reduces income in the current period, but the account credited 
appears as a deduction from gross accounts receivable. Such deductions from asset 
accounts are called contra-asset accounts. (Estimating and recognizing bad debt 
expense is discussed in Chapter 8.)
($ in millions)
Gross accounts receivable 
$1,932
Less: Allowance for doubtful accounts 
(51)
 Net accounts receivable reported on balance sheet 
$1,881
Notice that as a consequence of this “netting” of accounts, the total for net accounts receivable 
$1,881 million) is carried at expected net realizable value as of the balance sheet date, not at 
original historical cost ($1,932 million).
Inventories 
The inventory account for a manufacturing firm such as Motorola Solu-
tions comprises three components: (1) raw materials, (2) work-in-process, and (3) finished 
goods. In the notes to its financial statements, Motorola Solutions discloses that inventories 
are carried at lower of cost or market, where cost is computed using the weighted average 
method (discussed in Chapter 9). Therefore, the measurement basis for inventories depends 
on the comparison between historical cost and current market price.
• When costs are lower than market price, the carrying amounts for inventory conform to 
the historical cost convention.
• When cost exceeds market, inventories on the balance sheet are carried at current market 
price, where that market price is the cost to replace the item (subject to GAAP rules de-
scribed in Chapter 9).
Deferred Income Taxes 
In the United States, and many other industrialized coun-
tries, the rules used to determine income for financial reporting purposes (called book in-
come) frequently do not conform to the rules used to determine income for taxation purposes 
(called taxable income). Income determination rules for financial reporting differ from rules 
for determining income for taxation purposes because of the very different objectives of the 
For a wholesale or retail 
 company, this account reflects 
only finished goods, that is, 
merchandise held for resale.

192 
CHAPTER 4
Structure of the Balance Sheet and Statement of Cash Flows
two computations. The objective in measuring book income is to reflect a firm’s underlying 
economic success: Was the firm profitable during the period? The objective in measuring tax-
able income is to conform to laws designed to provide a basis for funding government opera-
tions. Because the rules that govern income determination for tax purposes result from a 
national political process, these rules do not necessarily measure changes in firms’ underlying 
economic condition.
 
Because the rules for determining book income differ from the rules used to determine 
taxable income, revenues or expenses are frequently reported in a different period for book 
 purposes than for tax purposes. These differences are referred to as temporary or timing 
differences. The amount of the difference in the revenue or expense item times the marginal 
tax rate (currently 35% in the United States) determines the amount of deferred tax. Deferred 
tax assets arise when a revenue (expense) is reported in an earlier (later) period for tax pur-
poses than for book purposes. Deferred tax liabilities arise when the opposite occurs—that 
is, when a revenue (expense) is reported in a later (earlier) period for tax purposes than for 
book purposes. (The measurement and reporting rules for deferred taxes are covered in 
Chapter 13.)
 
Notice that Motorola Solutions reports Deferred income taxes in both the current and 
noncurrent portion of the asset section of its balance sheet. This is because U.S. GAAP re-
quires firms to classify net deferred tax assets (or liabilities) according to whether the asset 
or liability giving rise to the temporary difference is classified as current or noncurrent. For 
example, a deferred tax asset for a temporary difference related to the allowance for doubtful 
accounts on accounts receivable (a current asset) would be classified in the current asset sec-
tion of the balance sheet, while a deferred tax asset for temporary differences on employee 
pension benefits (a noncurrent liability) would be reported in the noncurrent section of the 
balance sheet.
 
The current amount of Deferred income taxes ($604 million) and the noncurrent amount 
($2,416 million) reported on Motorola Solutions’s balance sheet are due to temporary differ-
ences that caused taxable income to exceed book income in the current or prior years. Be-
cause the temporary differences giving rise to these net deferred tax assets will reverse in 
subsequent years, book income will exceed taxable income in future years. Even though these 
reversals may be expected to take place several years into the future, GAAP reports the related 
tax effects at their undiscounted amounts. In other words, GAAP ignores the time value of 
money in reporting deferred tax assets or liabilities and treats expected reversals one year into 
the future the same as reversals ten years into the future.
Property, Plant, and Equipment—Net 
This account reflects the tangible 
long-lived assets that Motorola Solutions uses in its operations. This item appears on the bal-
ance sheet at its net amount: historical cost minus accumulated depreciation. Motorola Solu-
tions, like most companies, provides information about the components of this figure in the 
financial statement notes.
There are other reasons why 
book income may differ 
from taxable income—called 
permanent differences—
but they do not give rise to 
deferred taxes. For example, 
U.S. income tax law does 
not tax interest on state and 
municipal bonds. Conse-
quently, if a firm owns mu-
nicipal bonds and receives 
interest income from these 
bonds, the interest is tax 
free. Book income will 
 include the interest income, 
but taxable income will not.
 
December 31,
($ in millions) 
2012 
2011
Land 
$     38 
$     69
Buildings 
739 
774
Machinery and equipment 
1,932 
2,052
 
2,709 
2,895
Less: Accumulated depreciation 
(1,870) 
(1,999)
Property, plant, and equipment—net 
$    839 
$    896

 
Classification Criteria and Measurement Conventions for Balance Sheet Accounts 
193
 
When a long-lived asset becomes impaired—that is, when its carrying amount may no 
longer be recoverable—the fixed asset account is reduced to its lower fair value.3 If avail-
able, quoted current market prices represent the best measure of fair value. However, mar-
ket prices for long-lived assets are not always readily available. So, fair value may need to 
be estimated by discounting expected future net operating cash flows. (This topic is covered 
in Chapter 10.)
Investments 
This account consists of U.S. government and agency obligations and 
corporate debt and equity securities that are held in Motorola Solutions’s available-for-sale 
portfolio (see Chapter 16), which are not expected to be sold in the near term. These securities 
are reported at fair value at the balance sheet date.
Goodwill 
This is an intangible asset recognized as part of a business combination. It is 
initially measured as the difference between the consideration given by Motorola Solutions to 
acquire another business entity and the fair value of the identifiable net assets (assets minus 
liabilities) of that entity on the date of acquisition. The amount reported on Motorola Solu-
tions’s balance sheet is adjusted for any amounts that have been written off since acquisition 
due to impairment (see Chapter 16 for further discussion of measurement of goodwill and 
Chapter 10 for discussion of asset impairments).
Other Assets 
A note to Motorola Solutions’s financial statements indicates that this 
account is composed primarily of intangible assets, net of accumulated amortization, and 
royalty licensing agreements. Thus, the assets in this account are carried at historical cost less 
amounts amortized to date (see Chapter 10).
Current Portion of Long-Term Debt 
The current portion of long-term debt 
represents the portion of long-term borrowings that fall due within one year of the balance 
sheet date. Because these amounts will be paid within a relatively short period of time (within 
one year), they are reported at their (undiscounted) face amount, that is, the amount due at the 
payment date.
Accounts Payable and Accrued Liabilities 
Accounts payable represent 
amounts owed to suppliers of merchandise or services purchased on open account (that is, for 
credit). Payment is typically due within 30 to 90 days. Accrued liabilities represent expenses 
that have been incurred, but not yet paid. Examples include accrued wages and accrued inter-
est expense. These items are reflected on the balance sheet at the amount of the original liabil-
ity, that is, at the amount arising at the transaction’s inception. Consequently, the numbers are 
shown at historical cost.
Long-Term Debt 
This account represents obligations that fall due beyond one year 
from the balance sheet date. Examples include notes, bonds, and lease obligations. When 
long-term debt (typically, notes or bonds) is issued, the initial balance sheet carrying amount 
is determined by computing the discounted present value of the sum of (1) the future princi-
pal repayment plus (2) the periodic interest payments. The rate used for discounting these 
3 FASB ASC Paragraph 360-10-35-17: Property, Plant, and Equipment—Overall—Subsequent Measurement—Measurement 
of Impairment Loss.
The FASB defines fair value 
of an asset as “the amount at 
which the asset could be 
bought or sold in a current 
transaction between willing 
parties, that is, other than a 
forced or liquidation sale.” 
(ASC 820-10-20 Glossary.)

194 
CHAPTER 4
Structure of the Balance Sheet and Statement of Cash Flows
amounts is the effective yield on the notes or bonds at the date they were issued. Here, we’ll 
simply provide a brief overview of the general measurement rules for long-term debt. More 
on bonds and other long-term debt instruments is presented in Chapter 11.
 
When bonds are sold at par, the amount received equals the recorded face amount of the 
debt. For example, if Motorola Solutions sells $100,000,000 of 15-year, 10% bonds for 
$100,000,000, the accounting entry is:
DR Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $100,000,000
 
CR Bonds payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$100,000,000
The $100,000,000 carrying amount equals the present value of the principal and interest payments 
over the life of the bond discounted at 10%, the effective yield at the time of issue. The effective 
yield is 10% because the effective yield on bonds sold at par equals the rate stated on the face of the 
bond (referred to as “stated rate”). (We’ll show why in Chapter 11.) When bonds are sold at a pre-
mium (say, $105 million) or at a discount (say, $95 million), the initial carrying amount is again 
equal to the present value of the future interest and principal payments discounted at the effective 
yield on the bonds. In general, at balance sheet dates after the bonds’ issuance date, the subsequent 
carrying amount of all bonds outstanding equals the present value of the future principal and inter-
est flows discounted at the original effective yield rate. This carrying amount will differ from the 
bonds’ current market price whenever interest rates have changed subsequent to issuance.
Other Liabilities 
Notes to Motorola Solutions’s financial statements indicate this ac-
count is composed primarily of obligations to employees arising from Motorola Solutions’s 
defined benefit pension and postretirement health care plans (see Chapter 14 for discussion of 
how these obligations are measured).
Common Stock 
This account represents the par value of shares issued and outstand-
ing. The par value is determined by the company’s articles of incorporation. Par values were 
originally established to ensure that a corporation would maintain a minimum level of invest-
ment by shareholders to protect the interests of creditors. For example, some states preclude 
companies from paying dividends to shareholders that would result in a reduction of stockhold-
ers’ equity below the par value of shares issued and outstanding. As a practical matter, debt 
covenant provisions in the borrower’s lending agreements generally place restrictions on firms’ 
distributions to shareholders that are more stringent than the statutory par-value restrictions. 
Therefore, the par value of shares has limited economic significance, as discussed in Chapter 15. 
Additional Paid-in Capital 
This account reflects the amounts in excess of par or 
stated value that the corporation received when the shares were originally issued. For exam-
ple, if Motorola Solutions issued 100,000 shares of $3 par-value stock for $15 per share, the 
Additional paid-in capital component would be credited for
($15 2 $3) 3 100,000 5 $1,200,000
Thus, additional paid-in capital is also shown at historical cost (that is, the amount above par 
value paid to the firm when the shares were originally issued).
Retained Earnings 
This account measures the net of cumulative earnings less cumulative 
dividend distributions of the company since inception. Therefore, it represents the cumulative 
earnings that have been reinvested in the business. The Retained earnings account is increased 
(decreased) by the net income (net loss) for the period and is decreased for dividends that are 

 
Classification Criteria and Measurement Conventions for Balance Sheet Accounts 
195
declared in the period. For many firms, like Motorola Solutions, retained earnings represents 
the major portion of stockholders’ equity. Thus, the book value of equity is largely determined 
by the past earnings that have been retained and reinvested in the business. As we will see in 
Chapters 5 and 6, book value of equity is a key element of many performance measures—such 
as return on common equity (ROCE)—and it plays an important role in equity valuation.
 
Different measurement bases pervade the balance sheet, and since these different measure-
ments impact related revenue or expense amounts that at some time will appear on the income 
statement, income is a mixture of historical costs, current values, and present values. This means 
that retained earnings is also a mixture of many different measurement bases.
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income 
This account measures the 
cumulative unrealized gains and losses from components of comprehensive income (see 
Chapter 2) recognized in current and prior years. As noted in Chapter 2, the most common 
components of other comprehensive income are:
1. Fair value adjustments made to securities classified as “available-for-sale” (see Chapter 16).
2. Fair value changes on derivatives that meet certain conditions for hedge accounting (see 
Chapter 11).
3. Foreign currency translation adjustments (see Chapter 16).
4. Unrealized actuarial gains and losses on pension assets and liabilities and increases 
 (decreases) in pension obligations due to prior service cost adjustments (see Chapter 14).
5. Losses on certain investments that are other than temporary (see Chapter 16).
Unrealized gains are credited to this account and unrealized losses are debited to this account. 
All amounts included in this account are net of tax effects. Because the balance in this account 
is shown in parentheses on Motorola Solutions’s balance sheet, it represents a cumulative loss 
(debit balance). For Motorola Solutions the balance in this account increased from a $2,876 mil-
lion debit balance at the end of 2011 to a $3,300 million debit balance at the end of 2012, repre-
senting an additional unrealized loss of $424 million for 2012. Motorola Solutions’s consolidated 
statement of stockholders’ equity (not shown) explains the components of this change (all shown 
net of tax effects), which are the components of other comprehensive income for 2012:
 
Unrealized
($ in millions) 
Gain (Loss)
1. Unrealized gain on available-for-sale securities 
$    1 
CR
2. Foreign currency translation adjustment gain 
14 
CR
3. Pension and retirement-related adjustments 
(443) 
DR
4. Unrealized gain on derivative instruments 
4 
CR
 
Net unrealized loss for period 
$(424) 
DR
Noncontrolling Interests 
The consolidated balance sheet includes the assets and 
liabilities (net assets) of Motorola Solutions and all of its subsidiaries. Subsidiaries are com-
panies that Motorola Solutions controls by owning more than 50 percent of the outstanding 
voting stock of those companies. If Motorola Solutions owns less than 100 percent of one (or 
more) of its subsidiaries, then a noncontrolling interest in the net assets of the subsidiary is 
held by investors other than Motorola Solutions. The noncontrolling interest reported in the 
stockholders’ equity section of Motorola Solutions’s consolidated balance sheet is measured 
at the fair value of the subsidiary at the time that Motorola Solutions acquired its controlling 
interest plus (minus) the noncontrolling interest in subsidiary earnings (losses) subsequent to 
Motorola Solutions’s acquisition (see Chapter 16 for further discussion of noncontrolling in-
terests and how they are measured).

196 
CHAPTER 4
Structure of the Balance Sheet and Statement of Cash Flows
Analytical Insights: Understanding the 
Nature of a Firm’s Business
One tool for gaining insights into the nature of a company’s operations and for analyzing its asset 
and financial structure is to prepare a common-size balance sheet. In it, each balance sheet ac-
count is expressed as a percentage of total assets or, equivalently, as a percentage of total liabilities 
plus shareholders’ equity. Exhibit 4.2 presents common-size balance sheets for four companies 
operating in four distinctly different industries: E-Trade Group, an Internet company specializing in 
online investing services; Deere & Company, a manufacturer of agricultural and heavy construction 
equipment with a large finance subsidiary; Wal-Mart, a well-known discount retailer; and  Potomac 
Electric Power Company, an electrical utility providing service to Washington, D.C., and the sur-
rounding area. Can you match up the common-size statements with each of these companies? 
Think about the industry in which each firm operates and about the economic activities the firms 
might engage in. Then try to figure out how these activities might impact a typical balance sheet.
 
Note that Company C has a very large proportion of its assets in cash, marketable securities, 
and accounts receivable with no inventory, and a relatively small amount of property, plant, and 
equipment (PP&E). Most of Company C’s debt financing comes from short-term liabilities, be-
cause the company carries no long-term debt. Finally, note that Retained earnings is negative (a 
deficit), indicating that the company has suffered cumulative losses since it was formed. The lack 
of inventory rules out Deere and Wal-Mart as the source of Company C’s data because both would 
hold significant inventories. Also, the relatively low amount of PP&E further rules out these two 
firms as well as Potomac Power because all three need significant amounts of fixed assets to con-
duct business. This leaves E-Trade Group as the obvious match. A corroborating piece of evidence 
is the deficit in retained earnings. Because of heavy start-up costs, many of the relatively young 
Internet companies such as E-Trade fail to turn a profit in the early years of their existence.
 
Both Company A and Company B have relatively high amounts of current assets, but the mix 
of current assets is quite different. For Company A, current receivables represent nearly 57% of 
total assets while Company B has no current receivables, but 27% of its assets are in inventory. 
Because many of Deere’s agricultural and heavy construction equipment products sell for well in 
excess of $100,000, dealers and customers often need to finance their purchases. Deere offers this 
financing through its wholly owned finance subsidiary whose operations are included in the con-
solidated numbers. Thus, the large receivables balance for Company A coupled with significant 
amounts invested in inventories and PP&E provide strong clues that Deere is Company A.
 
Like most national discount retailers, Wal-Mart would be expected to have large amounts 
of inventory. Because most sales are for cash or paid through bank credit cards (for example, 
Visa or MasterCard), Wal-Mart would likely have little or no current receivables on its bal-
ance sheet. Moreover, with a large number of store facilities either purchased or leased under 
capital lease arrangements, we would expect to see relatively large investments in PP&E. This 
profile seems to match up well with Company B’s data.
 
This leaves Potomac Power as Company D. Note the relatively low amount of current as-
sets and the large investment in PP&E to generate electricity. The large amount of long-term 
debt financing is also quite common for utilities. Regulated utilities are allowed to build a 
“reasonable and fair return” to stockholders into the energy rates charged customers. There-
fore, they have a relatively steady and predictable earnings and cash flow stream. This allows 
utilities such as Potomac Power to use proportionately more long-term debt to finance their 
operations relative to companies with more volatile earnings patterns.
 
The preceding exercise demonstrates how statement readers can extract useful information 
from common-size balance sheets to learn about the underlying economics of an industry and 
the nature of the firm’s operations. Chapter 5 will introduce additional analytical tools for 
conducting in-depth analyses of companies.
Analysis

197
EXHIBIT 4.2
Common-Size Balance Sheet Comparison
 
Company A 
Company B 
Company C 
Company D
 
$ in Millions 
% 
$ in Millions 
% 
$ in Millions 
% 
$ in Millions 
%
Assets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Current assets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cash and marketable securities 
$  1,206.2 
5.3 
$  2,161.0 
2.6 
$  5,157.5 
28.4 
$   676.7 
12.8
 Current receivables 
12,826.9 
56.6 
2,000.0 
2.4 
10,149.7 
55.8 
401.2 
7.6
 Inventories 
1,505.7 
6.6 
22,614.0 
27.1 
— 
— 
37.8 
0.7
 Other current assets 
1,939.3 
8.6 
1,471.0 
1.8 
— 
— 
24.2 
0.5
 Total current assets 
17,478.1 
77.1 
28,246.0 
33.9 
15,307.2 
84.2 
1,139.9 
21.6
Noncurrent assets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Property, plant, and equipment, net 
2,052.3 
9.0 
45,750.0 
54.8 
331.7 
1.8 
2,753.4 
52.1
 Goodwill and intangibles, net 
874.0 
3.9 
8,595.0 
10.3 
684.4 
3.8 
— 
—
 Other assets, net 
2,258.7 
10.0 
860.0 
1.0 
1,849.1 
10.2 
1,392.6 
26.3
 Total assets 
$22,663.1 
100.0% 
$83,451.0 
100.0% 
$18,172.4 
100.0% 
$5,285.9 
100.0%
Liabilities and Stockholders’ Equity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Current liabilities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Total current liabilities 
$  9,456.6 
41.7 
$27,282.0 
32.7 
$16,532.0 
91.0 
$   965.4 
18.2
Long-term liabilities 
9,214.3 
40.7 
21,067.0 
25.2 
— 
— 
2,287.5 
43.3
 Total liabilities 
18,670.9 
82.4 
48,349.0 
57.9 
16,532.0 
91.0 
3,252.9 
61.5
Redeemable preferred stock 
— 
— 
— 
— 
69.5 
0.4 
209.8 
4.0
Stockholders’ equity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contributed capital and other equity items 
157.4 
0.7 
661.0 
0.8 
1,818.0 
10.0 
849.1 
16.1
 Retained earnings (deficit) 
3,834.8 
16.9 
34,441.0 
41.3 
(247.1) 
(1.4) 
974.1 
18.4
  Total liabilities and stockholders’ equity 
$22,663.1 
100.0% 
$83,451.0 
100.0% 
$18,172.4 
100.0% 
$5,285.9 
100.0%

198 
CHAPTER 4
Structure of the Balance Sheet and Statement of Cash Flows
International Differences in Balance Sheet Presentation
The account titles and format of balance sheets prepared in other countries can sometimes 
differ rather dramatically from those prepared under U.S. GAAP.4 U.S. firms’ balance sheets 
list assets from most liquid to least liquid, where liquid refers to the ease of converting the 
asset into cash. Similarly, current liabilities are reported before noncurrent or long-term liabil-
ities. Firms that use International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) are allowed, but not 
required, to reverse the ordering of assets from least liquid to most liquid, with the same or-
dering for displaying liabilities.5 This format is illustrated in Exhibit 4.3, which presents the 
fiscal 2011 balance sheet of Burberry PLC, a British company that designs, manufactures, and 
distributes luxury apparel throughout the world.
 
Note that the noncurrent assets are presented first followed by the current assets. Within 
the noncurrent assets category, Intangible assets are presented first followed by tangible assets 
(that is, Property, plant, and equipment), Investment properties, Deferred tax assets, and finally 
Trade and other receivables and Derivative financial assets. Burberry’s balance sheet format is 
presented in a way that emphasizes the firm’s liquidity by placing current assets and current 
liabilities in close proximity to one another.
 
Balance sheets prepared in the United Kingdom also introduce some account titles that 
can be confusing to the unwary. For example, inventory is sometimes referred to using the 
account title, Stocks. Although Burberry uses familiar terminology for Trade and other re-
ceivables, some British companies use the term Debtors for this account. The Equity section 
of Burberry’s balance sheet contains several account titles that reflect unique British termi-
nology in applying IFRS. Exhibit 4.4 on pg. 200 shows the accounts under U.S. GAAP that 
correspond to these British accounts. One of the British equity accounts that requires brief 
elaboration since it has no U.S. counterpart is the Capital reserve. In the United Kingdom, 
when a company repurchases its own shares, these shares are canceled. When the repur-
chase is paid for from profits, an amount equivalent to the par or stated value of the shares 
repurchased is transferred from the Ordinary share capital account to a Capital reserve ac-
count, which is not available for dividend distribution. The Hedging reserve and Foreign 
currency translation reserve are equivalent to Other comprehensive income accounts under 
U.S. GAAP. Although not shown on Burberry’s balance sheet, some British companies re-
port a Revaluation reserve as part of shareholders’ equity. IFRS rules allow companies to 
periodically revalue both tangible and intangible long-lived assets upward. The offsetting 
credit when assets are written up to fair value is the Revaluation reserve (see Chapter 10 for 
further details).6
 
Finally, note that Burberry reports the numbers on its balance sheet for the “Group.” The 
Group numbers reflect the financial position of Burberry and all of its subsidiaries. This is 
equivalent to the “consolidated” financial statement numbers of a parent and its subsidiaries 
under U.S. GAAP.
 
This example provides a brief glimpse of how balance sheet format and terminology used 
in other countries differ from those used under U.S. GAAP. Examples of differences in U.S. 
versus IFRS accounting appear elsewhere throughout the book.
International
4 In addition, the measurement bases used for various accounts can sometimes be quite different from country to country. 
Throughout the book, we will alert you to these important differences as we discuss the recognition, measurement, and dis-
closure rules that govern financial reporting.
5 “Presentation of Financial Statements,” International Accounting Standard (IAS) 1 (revised 2005) (London: IASB, 2005).
6 “Property, Plant and Equipment,” IAS 16 (London: International Accounting Standards Board [IASB], revised 2003). “In-
tangible Assets,” IAS 38 (London: IASB, 2004).

 
Classification Criteria and Measurement Conventions for Balance Sheet Accounts 
199
EXHIBIT 4.3
Burberry Group Balance Sheet Fiscal 2011/2012
 
As at 31 March 
As at 31 March
(Amounts reported in millions of  BritishSterling) 
2012 £m 
2011 £m
Assets
Noncurrent assets
Intangible assets 
133.1 
114.7
Property, plant, and equipment 
328.8 
281.8
Investment properties 
2.8 
3.0
Deferred tax assets 
84.1 
70.4
Trade and other receivables 
22.3 
15.2
Derivative financial assets 
14.7 
9.2
 
585.8 
494.3
Current assets
Inventories 
311.1 
247.9
Trade and other receivables 
145.2 
132.5
Derivative financial assets 
3.2 
1.6
Income tax receivables 
10.1 
8.3
Cash and cash equivalents 
546.9 
466.3
 
1,016.5 
856.6
Assets classified as held for sale 
8.3 
13.5
 
1,024.8 
870.1
 Total assets 
1,610.6 
1,364.4
Liabilities
Noncurrent liabilities
Trade and other payables 
(104.9) 
(84.4)
Deferred tax liabilities 
(1.4) 
(1.8)
Derivative financial liabilities 
(0.2) 
—
Retirement benefit obligations 
(0.8) 
(0.6)
Provisions for other liabilities and charges 
(15.1) 
(9.6)
 
(122.4) 
(96.4)
Current liabilities
Bank overdrafts and borrowings 
(208.6) 
(168.4)
Derivative financial liabilities 
(1.9) 
(3.9)
Trade and other payables 
(324.4) 
(283.4)
Provisions for other liabilities and charges 
(8.2) 
(18.6)
Income tax liabilities 
(53.7) 
(60.0)
 
(596.8) 
(534.3)
 Total liabilities 
(719.2) 
(630.7)
Net assets 
891.4 
733.7
Equity
Capital and reserves attributable to the Company’s 
 equity holders
Ordinary share capital 
0.2 
0.2
Share premium account 
202.6 
192.5
Capital reserve 
33.9 
28.9
Hedging reserve 
4.9 
2.4
Foreign currency translation reserve 
118.6 
123.2
Retained earnings 
507.1 
366.4
 
867.3 
713.6
Noncontrolling interest in equity 
24.1 
20.1
Total equity 
891.4 
733.7
Source: Burberry Group Annual Report 2011/2012

200 
CHAPTER 4
Structure of the Balance Sheet and Statement of Cash Flows
EXHIBIT 4.4
Comparison of U.K. and U.S. Account Titles
U.K. Equity Accounts 
Equivalent U.S. Accounts
Ordinary share capital 
Common stock—par
Share premium 
Capital in excess of par
Capital reserve 
No equivalent in U.S. GAAP
Hedging reserve 
Accumulated other comprehensive income account
Foreign currency translation reserve 
Accumulated other comprehensive income account
Revaluation reserve 
No equivalent in U.S. GAAP
RECAP
The balance sheet provides a snapshot of a company’s financial position at a given point in 
time. It shows the various types of assets held at the balance sheet date and the claims 
against those assets (that is, how those assets have been financed).
 
Balance sheet accounts reflect a variety of measurement bases, including historical cost, 
current costs (also called fair value), net realizable value, and discounted present value. There-
fore, users of balance sheet information must be careful to recognize the effects that these 
different measurement bases can have both when aggregating numbers across accounts as 
well as when computing ratios that are used in making intercompany comparisons.
 
With the tremendous growth in international business and the increased frequency of 
cross-border financing, it is likely that you will encounter financial statements prepared 
under non–U.S. GAAP sometime during your career. When you do, you must be aware of 
differences in recognition and measurement criteria, statement format, and terminology 
to properly interpret and analyze those statements.
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Notes are an integral part of companies’ financial reports. Financial statement notes provide a 
wealth of information that allows statement users to better understand and interpret the num-
bers presented in the body of the financial statements. In some instances, notes contain impor-
tant information not found in the financial statements themselves. For example, the lease note 
shows a firm’s future commitments under noncapitalized operating leases, which is useful in 
assessing a firm’s future cash flow needs and creditworthiness. Throughout the remainder of 
the book, we illustrate the type of information typically found in notes, which includes vari-
ous disclosures required by GAAP. We discuss how this information can be used to evaluate a 
company’s future prospects and creditworthiness.
 
Here we briefly discuss and illustrate three important notes typically found in companies’ 
financial reports:
1. Summary of significant accounting policies.
2. Disclosure of important subsequent events.
3. Related-party transactions.
Summary of Significant Accounting Policies 
As you will see in later chap-
ters, in many areas of accounting, management is free to choose from equally acceptable alter-
native accounting methods. Examples include different cost flow assumptions for valuing 
inventory (FIFO versus LIFO), different methods for determining depreciation expense (straight-
line versus accelerated), and different methods of accounting for long-term construction con-
tracts (percentage-of-completion versus completed contract). To make valid intercompany 
comparisons, it is important for statement users to recognize and understand the alternative ac-
counting methods that a reporting entity has selected to account for its economic activities.
FASB Accounting Standards 
Codification uses the term, 
notes to financial state-
ments. We sometimes use 
the term footnotes because it 
is a common term used in 
practice, and many firms 
still refer to their financial 
statement notes as footnotes.

 
Notes to Financial Statements 
201
 
The Summary of Significant Accounting Policies explains the important accounting choices 
that the reporting entity uses to account for selected transactions and accounts.7  Exhibit 4.5 shows 
excerpts from the accounting policy note in Motorola Solutions’s 2012 annual report explaining 
how it accounts for Investments; Inventories; and Property, plant, and equipment.
Subsequent Events 
Events or transactions that have a significant effect on a com-
pany’s financial position or results of operations sometimes occur after the close of its fiscal 
year-end but before the financial statements are issued. Disclosure of these subsequent events 
is required if they are material and are likely to influence investors’ appraisal of the risk and 
return prospects of the reporting entity.8 Examples of such events include loss of a major 
 customer, a business combination, issuance of debt or equity securities, or a catastrophic loss. 
Exhibit 4.6 illustrates a subsequent event disclosure provided by Pfizer Inc. in its 2012 annual 
7 FASB ASC Topic 235: Notes to Financial Statements.
8 FASB ASC Topic 855: Subsequent Events.
EXHIBIT 4.5
Motorola Solutions, Inc. and Subsidiaries
Excerpts from 2012 Accounting Policies Note
1. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
Investments: Investments in equity and debt securities classified as available-for-sale are carried 
at fair value. Debt securities classified as held-to-maturity are carried at amortized cost. Equity 
securities that are restricted for more than one year or that are not publicly traded are carried 
at cost. Certain investments are accounted for using the equity method if the Company has 
 significant influence over the issuing entity. The Company assesses declines in the fair value of 
investments to determine whether such declines are other-than-temporary. This assessment is made 
considering all available evidence, including changes in general market conditions,  specific 
 industry and individual company data, the length of time and the extent to which the fair value 
has been less than cost, the financial condition and the near-term prospects of the entity issuing 
the security, and the Company’s ability and intent to hold the investment until recovery. Other-
than-temporary impairments of investments are recorded to Other within Other income (expense) 
in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations in the period in which they become 
impaired.
 
Inventories: Inventories are valued at the lower of average cost (which approximates cost on 
a first-in, first-out basis) or market (net realizable value or replacement cost).
 
Property, Plant, and Equipment: Property, plant, and equipment are stated at cost less accu-
mulated depreciation. Depreciation is recorded using straight-line, based on the estimated useful 
lives of the assets (buildings and building equipment, 5 to 40 years; machinery and equipment, 
2 to 10 years) and commences once the assets are ready for their intended use.
EXHIBIT 4.6
Pfizer Inc.
2012 Annual Report
Note 19: Subsequent Event
Also on January 28, 2013, we transferred to Zoetis substantially all of the assets and liabilities 
of our Animal Health business in exchange for all of the Class A and Class B common stock of 
Zoetis, $1.0 billion of the $3.65 billion senior notes and an amount of cash equal to substantially 
all of the cash proceeds received by Zoetis from the remaining $2.65 billion senior notes issued. 
The $1.0 billion of senior notes received by Pfizer were exchanged by Pfizer for the retirement 
of Pfizer commercial paper issued in December 2012, and the cash proceeds received by Pfizer 
of approximately $2.5 billion are restricted to debt repayment, dividends, and/or stock buybacks, 
in all cases to be completed by mid-2014.

202 
CHAPTER 4
Structure of the Balance Sheet and Statement of Cash Flows
report related to its transfer of substantially all of the assets and liabilities of its Animal Health 
business to Zoetis Corp., a wholly owned subsidiary of Pfizer. Note that the transfer took 
place on January 28, 2013, after Pfizer’s fiscal year-end closing date of December 31, but 
before the 2012 financial statements were issued.
Related-Party Transactions 
A related-party transaction occurs when a com-
pany enters into a transaction with individuals or other businesses that are in some way 
connected with it or its management or board of directors. Examples include transactions 
between:
1. The reporting entity and its principal owners, management or members of their immediate 
families, and members of the board of directors.
2. Subsidiaries of a common parent.
3. The reporting entity and nonconsolidated affiliates in which it holds a significant owner-
ship stake.
 
Because related-party transactions are not entered into at arm’s length, these events pose 
greater risks. Therefore, companies are required to disclose in a financial statement note any 
related-party transactions, including the nature of the relationship, a description of the trans-
action, and any dollar amounts involved.9 Exhibit 4.7 illustrates a related-party note disclosure 
from Independent Film Development Corporation’s March 31, 2013, quarterly report detail-
ing transactions that the company entered into with its CEO and CFO.
STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
The balance sheet shows a firm’s investment (assets) and financial structure (liabilities and 
stockholders’ equity) at a given point in time. By contrast, the statement of cash flows shows 
the user why a firm’s investments and financial structure have changed between two balance 
sheet dates. The connection between successive balance sheet positions and the statement of 
Enron’s dealings with several 
special purpose entities set 
up as limited partnerships 
that were headed up by 
 Andrew Fastow, Enron’s 
chief financial officer, pro-
vide an example of this type 
of related-party transaction.
9 FASB ASC Topic 850: Related Party Disclosures.
EXHIBIT 4.7
Independent Film Development Corporation
Note 7: Related Party Transaction (Excerpts)
As of March 31, 2013, the Company owed its CEO $9,209. The money was advanced to the company 
to cover certain operating expenses. Amount is due on demand and accrues interest at 8% per year.
 
During the year ended September 30, 2012, the Company authorized the issuance of 75,000 
common shares to Rachel Boulds, the Company’s CFO, for compensation of services. The shares 
were issued based on the value of the common stock on the date of authorization for total com-
pensation expense of $25,713.
 
On or about February 4, 2013, the Company authorized the issuance of 75,000 common 
shares to Rachel Boulds, the Company’s CFO, for compensation of services. The shares were 
 issued at $0.0369 based on the value of the common stock on the date of authorization for total 
compensation expense of $2,767. The shares were not issued by the transfer agent as of March 
31, 2013, so therefore have been recorded as a stock payable.

 
Statement of  Cash Flows 
203
cash flows can be demonstrated through simple algebraic manipulation of the basic account-
ing equation:
 
Assets 5 Liabilities 1 Stockholders’ equity 
(4.1)
Partitioning the assets into cash and all other assets yields:
 
Cash 1 Noncash assets 5 Liabilities 1 Stockholders’ equity 
(4.2)
Rearranging yields:
 
Cash 5 Liabilities 2 Noncash assets 1 Stockholders’ equity 
(4.3)
From basic algebra, we know that an equality like this must also hold for the algebraic sum of 
the changes on both sides of the equation. Representing equation (4.3) in the form of the 
change (D) in each term results in
 
DCash 5 DLiabilities 2 DNoncash assets 1 DStockholders’ equity 
(4.4)
 
Thus, the cash flow statement, which provides an explanation of why a firm’s cash position 
has changed between successive balance sheet dates, simultaneously explains the changes that 
have taken place in the firm’s noncash asset, liability, and stockholders’ equity accounts over 
the same time period.
 
The change in a firm’s cash position between successive balance sheet dates will not equal 
the reported earnings for that period for three reasons:
1. Reported net income usually will not equal cash flow from operating activities because 
under accrual accounting (a) noncash revenues and expenses are often recognized as part 
of net income, and (b) certain operating cash inflows and outflows are not recorded as 
revenues or expenses in the same period the cash flows occur.
2. Changes in cash are also caused by nonoperating investing activities such as the purchase 
or sale of fixed assets.
3. Additional changes in cash are caused by financing activities such as the issuance of 
stock or bonds, the repayment of a bank loan, or dividends paid to stockholders.
 
Cash flows are critical to assessing a company’s liquidity and creditworthiness. Firms 
with cash flows that are insufficient to cover currently maturing obligations can be forced 
into bankruptcy or liquidation. Because cash flows and accrual earnings can differ dra-
matically, current reporting standards mandate that firms prepare a statement of cash flows 
as well as an income statement and balance sheet. The cash flow statement is designed to 
explain the causes for year-to-year changes in the balance of cash and cash equivalents.10 
We provide a brief introduction to the statement of cash flows here, focusing on the format 
of the statement and on the nature of some of the basic adjustments that are 
needed to convert accrual earnings to cash flow from operations. Later, af-
ter you have reviewed the accrual and cash flow effects of the transactions 
that affect various balance sheet and income statement accounts in the in-
tervening chapters, you will find a more detailed explanation of the cash 
flow statement in Chapter 17.
Cash equivalents include short-term, highly 
liquid investments that are readily convertible to 
cash such as demand deposits, savings accounts, 
certificates of deposit, money market funds, and 
U.S. treasury bills.
10 The format for preparing the cash flow statement is specified in FASB ASC Topic 230: Statement of Cash Flows.

204 
CHAPTER 4
Structure of the Balance Sheet and Statement of Cash Flows
 
The cash flow statement summarizes the cash inflows and outflows of a company broken 
down into its three principal activities:
• Operating activities: Cash flows from operating activities result from the cash effects of 
transactions and events that affect operating income at some point: both production and 
delivery of goods and services.
• Investing activities: Cash flows from investing activities include making and collecting 
loans; investing in and disposing of debt or equity securities of other companies; and 
 purchasing and disposing of assets, such as equipment, that are used by a company in 
the production of goods or services.
• Financing activities: Cash flows from financing activities include obtaining cash from 
new issues of stock or bonds, paying dividends or buying back a company’s own shares 
(treasury stock), borrowing money, and repaying amounts borrowed.
 
Companies that are able to satisfy most of their cash needs from operating cash flows 
are generally considered to be in stronger financial health and better credit risks.
 
Exhibit 4.8 presents Wal-Mart Stores’ 2012 fiscal year (ended January 31, 2013) cash flow 
statement segregated into operating, investing, and financing activities. Note that operating 
activities generated $25.591 billion in cash flows, investing activities used $12.611 billion, 
and financing activities used $11.972 billion of cash, resulting in a net cash increase of 
$1.231 billion after adjusting for a $223 million foreign currency exchange rate change on 
cash. Wal-Mart uses the indirect method to calculate cash flows from operations by adjusting 
accrual-basis earnings for differences between accrual revenues and expenses and cash inflows 
and outflows related to operating activities during the period.11 The rationale for the deprecia-
tion and amortization adjustment and why changes in various working capital accounts capture 
the differences between accrual earnings and operating cash flows is explained with a simpli-
fied example in the following section.
 
Wal-Mart’s major investing cash outflow ($12.611 billion) was for purchase of property 
and equipment. In the financing section, short-term borrowings provided $2.754 billion of 
cash. Major financing cash outflows were used for repayment of long-term debt ($1.478 bil-
lion), dividend payments ($5.361 billion), and purchase of company stock ($7.6 billion).
Cash Flows versus Accrual Earnings
The following example illustrates the major differences between cash flows and accrual earn-
ings, why a cash flow statement is needed to fully understand the distinction between the two, 
and why certain adjustments are made to accrual earnings to obtain cash flows from 
operations.
 
HRB Advertising Company opened for business on April 1, 2014. The corporation’s activi-
ties and transactions for the remainder of 2014 are summarized as follows:
 1. Herb Wilson, Robin Hansen, and Barbara Reynolds each contributed $3,500 cash on 
April 1 for shares of the company’s common stock.
 2. HRB rented office space beginning April 1, and paid the full year’s rental of $2,000 per 
month, or $24,000, in advance.
11 An alternative for preparing cash flows from operations is called the direct method. Under this approach, individual 
sources of operating cash inflows (e.g., collections from customers) and cash outflows (e.g., payments to suppliers and em-
ployees) are reported. See Chapter 17 for further discussion of the direct method.

 
Statement of  Cash Flows 
205
EXHIBIT 4.8
Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
Fiscal Years Ended January 31,
(Amounts in millions) 
2013 
2012 
2011
Cash flows from operating activities:
 Consolidated net income 
$17,756 
$16,387 
$16,993
 Loss from discontinued operations, net of income taxes 
— 
67 
(1,034)
 Income from continuing operations 
17,756 
16,454 
15,959
 Adjustments to reconcile income from continuing operations to net 
  cash provided by operating activities:
 Depreciation and amortization 
8,501 
8,130 
7,641
 Deferred income taxes 
(133) 
1,050 
651
 Other operating activities 
527 
398 
1,087
 Changes in certain assets and liabilities, net of effects of acquisitions:
 Receivables, net 
(614) 
(796) 
(733)
 Inventories 
(2,759) 
(3,727) 
(3,205)
 Accounts payable 
1,061 
2,687 
2,676
 Accrued liabilities 
271 
(935) 
(280)
 Accrued income taxes 
981 
994 
(153)
 Net cash provided by operating activities 
25,591 
24,255 
23,643
Cash flows from investing activities:
 Payments for property and equipment 
(12,898) 
(13,510) 
(12,699)
 Proceeds from the disposal of property and equipment 
532 
580 
489
 Investments and business acquisitions, net of cash acquired 
(316) 
(3,548) 
(202)
 Other investing activities 
71 
(131) 
219
 Net cash used in investing activities 
(12,611) 
(16,609) 
(12,193)
Cash flows from financing activities:
 Net change in short-term borrowings 
2,754 
3,019 
503
 Proceeds from issuance of long-term debt 
211 
5,050 
11,396
 Payments of long-term debt 
(1,478) 
(4,584) 
(4,080)
 Dividends paid 
(5,361) 
(5,048) 
(4,437)
 Purchase of Company stock 
(7,600) 
(6,298) 
(14,776)
 Other financing activities 
(498) 
(597) 
(634)
 Net cash used in financing activities 
(11,972) 
(8,458) 
(12,028)
 Effect of exchange rates on cash and cash equivalents 
223 
(33) 
66
 Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents 
1,231 
(845) 
(512)
 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year 
6,550 
7,395 
7,907
 Cash and cash equivalents at end of year 
$ 7,781 
$ 6,550 
$ 7,395
Supplemental disclosure of cash flow information:
 Income taxes paid 
$ 7,304 
$ 5,899 
$ 6,984
 Interest paid 
2,262 
2,346 
2,163
Source: Wal-Mart Stores 2012 Annual Report.
 3. The company borrowed $10,000 from a bank on April 1. The principal plus accrued 
 interest is payable January 1, 2015, with interest at the rate of 12% per year.
 4. HRB purchased office equipment with a five-year life for $15,000 cash on April 1. 
 Salvage value is zero and the equipment is being depreciated using the straight-line 
method.
 5. HRB sold and billed customers for $65,000 of advertising services rendered between 
April 1 and December 31. Of this amount, $20,000 was still uncollected by year-end.

206 
CHAPTER 4
Structure of the Balance Sheet and Statement of Cash Flows
 6. By year-end, the company incurred and paid the following operating costs: (a) utilities, 
$650; (b) salaries, $36,250; and (c) supplies, $800.
 7. The company had accrued (unpaid) expenses at year-end as follows: (a) utilities, $75; 
(b) salaries, $2,400; and (c) interest, $900.
 8. Supplies purchased on account and unpaid at year-end amounted to $50. When supplies 
are purchased, they are charged to an asset account.
 9. Supplies inventory on hand at year-end amounted to $100.
10. Annual depreciation on office equipment is $15,000/5 5 $3,000. Because the equipment 
was acquired on April 1, the depreciation expense for 2014 is $3,000 3 9/12 5 $2,250.
 
Herb, Robin, and Barbara were delighted to discover that the company earned a profit (be-
fore taxes) of $3,725 in 2014. However, they were shocked to learn that the company’s check-
ing account was overdrawn by $11,200 at year-end. This overdraft was particularly 
disconcerting because the bank loan had come due.
 
Is HRB Advertising Company profitable, or is it about to go bankrupt? What are its pros-
pects for the future? Exhibit 4.9 helps us examine these issues.
 
While HRB Advertising generated positive accrual accounting earnings of $3,725 during 
2014, its operating cash flow was a negative $16,700. Columns (b) and (c) show the causes for 
the divergence between the components of accrual income (Column [a]) and operating cash 
flows (Column [d]). Because of a net infusion of cash from financing activities (Column [d]), 
the net change in cash (a negative $11,200) was much smaller than the negative cash flow of 
$16,700 from operating activities.
EXHIBIT 4.9
HRB Advertising Company
Analysis of Accrual Income versus Change in Cash
 
For Year Ended December 31, 2014
 
 
 
 
(d)
 
 
(b) 
(c) 
a 1 b 1 c
 
(a) 
Noncash Accruals: 
Prepayments 
Cash Received
 
Accrual 
Revenue Earned (or 
and Supplies 
(or Paid)
Item 
Income 
Expenses Incurred) 
Buildup 
During 2014
Operating activities
 Advertising revenues 
$65,000 
2$20,000(5) 
 
$45,000
 Salaries 
238,650 
12,400(7b) 
 
236,250
 Rent 
218,000 
 
2$6,000(2) 
224,000
 Utilities 
2725 
175(7a) 
 
2650
 Supplies 
2750 
150(8) 
2100(9) 
2800
 Interest 
2900 
1900(7c) 
 
–0–
 Depreciation 
22,250 
12,250(10) 
 
–0–
Operating cash flow 
 
 
 
2$16,700
 Net income 
$ 3,725
Investing activities
 Equipment purchase 
 
 
 
2$15,000(4)
Financing activities
 Stock issuance 
 
 
 
$10,500(1)
 Bank borrowing 
 
 
 
10,000(3)
 
 
 
 
$20,500
  Change in cash 
 
 
 
2$11,200
Note: Numbers in parentheses refer to numbered transactions on pages 204–206.

 
Statement of  Cash Flows 
207
 
We now discuss the rationale behind the adjustments in Columns (b) and (c). We examine 
each adjustment in terms of how it affects bottom-line accrual-basis net income, not how the 
adjustment affects revenues or expenses that compose net income. Because expenses are 
treated as negative amounts in computing net income, an adjustment that reduces (increases) 
an expense is treated as a plus (negative) amount in Columns (b) and (c). This way of desig-
nating positive and negative amounts will facilitate our discussion of the adjustments to 
 accrual-basis income needed to arrive at operating cash flows.
• Advertising revenues recognized under accrual accounting totaled $65,000. However, 
$20,000 of this remains as uncollected accounts receivable at year-end. Thus, the ending 
balance in the Accounts receivable account must be subtracted from the accrual-basis 
 revenues to derive the cash received during the year for advertising services.
• The salaries expense of $38,650 for the year includes the $36,250 of salaries incurred and 
paid in cash plus the $2,400 of salary expense accrued at year-end. Therefore, the accrued 
(unpaid) salaries, which is the ending balance in the Accrued salaries payable (liability) 
account, must be added back to total salaries expense to derive the salaries paid in cash.
• HRB recognized rent expense of $2,000 3 9 months 5 $18,000 in 2014. The difference 
between the amount paid out in cash and the amount recognized as expense under accrual 
accounting ($24,000 − $18,000, or $6,000) would be the ending balance in the Prepaid 
rent (asset) account. This amount is shown as a negative adjustment (subtraction) in 
 Column (c) because the cash outflow for rent was higher than the amount of rent expense 
recognized.
• The utilities expense of $725 for the year includes the $650 of utilities paid in cash plus 
$75 of utilities expense accrued at year-end. The utilities expense incurred but not yet 
paid, which is the ending balance in the Accrued utilities payable (liability) account, 
must be added back to the total utilities expense to obtain the cash payments for utilities 
in 2014.
• Total supplies purchased during the year included $800 paid in cash and $50 purchased 
on account (Accounts payable). Of the amount purchased, $100 of supplies remains on 
hand in the Supplies inventory account at year-end. So, supplies expense under accrual 
accounting is $800 1 $50 2 $100 5 $750. To adjust the accrual-basis expense to 
 derive the cash outflow for supplies requires that we add back the ending balance in 
Accounts payable (which was a noncash increase to the supplies expense) and subtract 
the $100 ending balance in Supplies inventory (which was a noncash decrease to the 
supplies expense).
• Accrued interest expense for the year is $10,000 3 12% 3 9/12 5 $900. Because none 
of this has been paid in cash, the ending balance in the Accrued interest payable (liability) 
account must be added back to the Interest expense account to obtain the cash paid out 
for interest in 2014.
• Depreciation is a noncash expense under accrual accounting. So this amount, which is 
 reflected in the increase in the Accumulated depreciation (contra-asset) account, must be 
added back to depreciation expense.
 
Except for depreciation, each of the adjustments we just outlined uses the ending balance 
(which is also the change in the account balance in the first year of a company’s life) of a 
current asset account (for example, Accounts receivable, Supplies inventory, or Prepaid 
rent) or a current liability account (for example, Accounts payable, Salaries payable, Utili-
ties payable, or Interest payable) to adjust accrual-basis revenues or expenses to derive cash 
flows from operations. The adjustments to accrual-basis income (revenues 2 expenses) for 
Remember, for a start-up 
company, beginning account 
balances are zero.

208 
CHAPTER 4
Structure of the Balance Sheet and Statement of Cash Flows
changes in current asset and current liability accounts that represent accrued revenues, de-
ferred (unearned) revenues, accrued expenses, or deferred (prepaid) expenses are summa-
rized in Figure 4.1.
Exhibit 4.10 on the following page illustrates how the adjustments to ac-
crual earnings due to changes in various current asset and liability accounts 
would be reflected in a GAAP statement of cash flows. The item numbers 
appearing next to each element in the cash flow statement correspond to the 
numbers in Columns (b), (c), and (d) of Exhibit 4.9. The presentation format 
illustrated is the indirect method (described previously) because it does not show the indi-
vidual operating cash inflows and outflows directly. (The direct method, which shows the 
revenues collected in cash and the expenses paid in cash, is shown in Column [d] of 
 Exhibit 4.9.) In Exhibit 4.10, net cash flows from operations is arrived at indirectly by adjust-
ing earnings for the differences between accrual-basis revenues and expenses and cash in-
flows and outflows during the period.
 
The cash flow statement in Exhibit 4.10 will help Herb, Robin, and Barbara understand the 
causes for their overdrawn checking account. While the business was profitable from an ac-
crual accounting standpoint, total cash flows were negative. This should not be surprising 
since start-up companies often spend a large portion of their available cash on equipment 
purchases, inventory buildup, and the production of goods and services that are frequently 
sold on account—and, therefore, that generate no cash immediately. Although the company is 
profitable, it may be forced into bankruptcy unless quick action is taken to resolve the cash 
flow deficit. To remain in business, the owners must infuse more equity capital, arrange for an 
extension of their bank loan, and/or speed up cash collections from customers.
Current assets
Plus
(1)
Minus
(2)
Decrease in accounts
   receivable
Decrease in accrued
   revenue
Examples:
• Accrued rent 
   revenue
• Accrued interest
  revenue
Increase in accounts
   receivable
Increase in accrued
   revenue
Increase in inventories
Increase in prepaid
   expenses
Decrease in accounts 
   payable
Decrease in accrued
   expenses
Decrease in deferred
    revenues
Decrease in inventories
Decrease in prepaid
   expense
Examples:
• Prepaid rent expense
• Prepaid  insurance
   expense
Increase in accounts
    payable
Increase in accrued
   expenses
Examples:
• Salaries payable
• Interest payable
Current liabilities 
Accrual Basis Income
Cash Flows from Operations
Examples:
• Deferred subscription
   revenue
• Deferred rent
   revenue
Increase in deferred
   revenues
Figure 4.1 
ADJUSTMENTS TO ACCRUAL EARNINGS FOR CHANGES IN WORKING CAPITAL ACCOUNTS TO 
OBTAIN CASH FLOWS FROM OPERATIONS
Only adjustments for changes in working capital 
accounts are summarized in Figure 4.1. Other ad-
justments (such as depreciation and gains/losses 
on asset sales) will be discussed in Chapter 17.

 
Statement of  Cash Flows 
209
Deriving Cash Flow Information
The three owners were able to convince their banker to refinance the loan but only after they 
each agreed to contribute another $2,000 to the company, a total of $6,000. The loan was re-
placed by a three-year note, but the interest rate was increased to 13.50% to reflect the addi-
tional risk associated with the refinanced borrowing. Herb, Robin, and Barbara felt confident 
that with careful attention to both earnings and cash flow, they could successfully grow the 
business and repay the note before its maturity.
 
During 2015, the second year of business, revenues increased and operating cash flows 
were positive, but the company recorded a loss for the year. Exhibit 4.11 contains HRB Ad-
vertising’s comparative balance sheets for 2014 and 2015, and Exhibit 4.12 presents the com-
pany’s income and cash flow statements for the two years.
 
We can see from the balance sheet that the $10,000 bank loan was refinanced as a Note 
payable (Exhibit 4.11) and that additional common stock of $6,000 was issued during 2015. 
Also notice that the company’s Cash account ended the year with a positive balance of $500.
 
Highlights from the income statement [Exhibit 4.12(a)] include substantial growth in ad-
vertising revenues from $65,000 to $92,000, a 41.5% increase. At the same time, the company 
was able to speed up its collection of credit sales and reduce its Accounts receivable balance, 
as shown in Exhibit 4.11. Unfortunately, salary expense increased nearly 63% from $38,650 
to $62,875, which seems to be the major factor contributing to the company’s $1,725 loss for 
the year. From the cash flow statement [see Exhibit 4.12(b)], we see that 2015 cash flows 
from operations totaled a positive $7,200 even though the business sustained a loss for the 
year. The company’s overall cash balance increased by $11,700 during the year with $6,000 
EXHIBIT 4.10
HRB Advertising Company
Statement of Cash Flows
For Year Ended December 31, 2014
Operating cash flows
Net income 
 
$  3,725
Plus 
 
 Depreciation(10) 
$  2,250 
 Increase in salaries payable(7b) 
2,400 
 Increase in accounts payable(8) 
50 
 Increase in utilities payable(7a) 
75 
 Increase in interest payable(7c) 
900 
5,675
Minus 
 
 Increase in receivables(5) 
(20,000) 
 Increase in prepaid rent(2) 
(6,000) 
 Increase in supplies inventory(9) 
(100) 
(26,100)
  Cash flows from operations 
 
$(16,700)
Investing cash flows 
 
Equipment purchase(4) 
 
$(15,000)
Financing cash flows 
 
Stock issuance(1) 
 
$ 10,500
Bank borrowing(3) 
 
10,000
 
 
$ 20,500
 Change in cash 
 
$(11,200)
Note: Numbers in parentheses refer to numbered transactions on pages 204–206.

210 
CHAPTER 4
Structure of the Balance Sheet and Statement of Cash Flows
of that amount representing cash contributed by the owners in exchange for additional com-
mon stock.
 
U.S. companies must include a cash flow statement similar to Exhibit 4.12(b) in their annual 
report to shareholders: Quarterly cash flow statements are not required, although most companies 
voluntarily make them available to shareholders. Companies that don’t provide quarterly cash 
flow statements challenge the analyst. How can cash flow information be derived from a compa-
ny’s balance sheet and income statement when the cash flow statement itself is not available?
 
The answer is not very complicated, as we will see. Deriving information about a company’s 
cash receipts and disbursements from balance sheet and income statement information involves 
little more than a careful and systematic analysis of the changes in individual balance sheet ac-
counts and their corresponding income statement effects. From this analysis, you can deduce 
individual cash flows and construct a summary schedule of cash receipts (inflows) and disburse-
ments (outflows) that closely resembles the cash flow statement presented in Exhibit 4.12(b).
 
The starting point for this analysis is the Cash account itself. Notice from the balance sheet 
(Exhibit 4.11) that the company’s cash position increased by $11,700 during 2015 from the 
$11,200 deficit at the beginning of the year to a $500 positive balance at year-end. Conse-
quently, we know that total cash receipts for the year must have been $11,700 higher than total 
cash payments. Now let’s uncover some individual cash flow items.
 
Exhibit 4.13 illustrates the general T-account analysis that can be used to derive cash flow 
information from selected balance sheet accounts of HRB Advertising for 2015. From the 
comparative balance sheet in Exhibit 4.11, the beginning and ending balances can be obtained 
for each balance sheet account that is affected when a revenue or expense item is recorded. 
The accrual-basis revenue or expense that results in a debit or credit to the related balance 
sheet account can then be entered (see circled items in Exhibit 4.13). The cash received or 
EXHIBIT 4.11
HRB Advertising Company
Comparative Balance Sheets
December 31,
 
2014 
2015
Assets
 Cash 
$(11,200) 
$  500
 Accounts receivable 
20,000 
15,775
 Supplies inventory 
100 
225
 Prepaid rent 
6,000 
6,000
 Office equipment 
15,000 
16,500
 Less: Accumulated depreciation 
(2,250) 
(5,500)
  Total assets 
$ 27,650 
$33,500
Liabilities and Equities 
 
 Utilities payable 
$  75 
$ 
 50
 Interest payable 
900 
675
 Accounts payable (supplies) 
50 
75
 Salaries payable 
2,400 
4,200
 Bank loan 
10,000 
—
 Note payable 
— 
10,000
  Total liabilities 
13,425 
15,000
 Common stock 
10,500 
16,500
 Retained earnings 
3,725 
2,000
  Total liabilities and stockholders’ equity 
$ 27,650 
$33,500

 
Statement of  Cash Flows 
211
cash paid, which results in an offsetting entry to each of these accounts, is the “plug” figure 
(in blue) that is needed to arrive at the ending balance that is given. We now illustrate this 
analysis for selected accounts in Exhibit 4.13.
 
The company’s only source of operating cash inflows is customer receipts, so we begin 
with an analysis of the Accounts receivable account. As shown in Exhibit 4.13, the balance in 
Accounts receivable declined by $4,225 during 2015 from a beginning balance of $20,000 to 
a year-end balance of $15,775. Because billings for advertising services performed during 
2015 totaled $92,000 [that is, Advertising revenues in the income statement of Exhibit 
4.12(a)], HRB must have collected $96,225 from its customers. To see this, note that collec-
tions must have been $4,225 higher than new billings because the Accounts receivable bal-
ance decreased by this amount during the year. Another way to think about this calculation is 
to assume that all customers pay on a timely basis. In this case, HRB would have collected 
EXHIBIT 4.12
HRB Advertising Company 
Comparative Income and Cash Flow Statements
For Years Ended December 31,
 
2014 
2015
Panel (a)
Income Statement
 Revenue from advertising services 
$ 65,000 
$ 92,000
 Less
 Salaries expense 
(38,650) 
(62,875)
 Supplies expense 
(750) 
(1,200)
 Rent expense 
(18,000) 
(24,000)
 Utilities expense 
(725) 
(1,050)
 Interest expense 
(900) 
(1,350)
 Depreciation 
(2,250) 
(3,250)
 Net income 
$  3,725 
$ (1,725)
Panel (b)
Cash Flow Statement
 Net income 
$  3,725 
$ (1,725)
 Depreciation 
2,250 
3,250
 
5,975 
1,525
 Changes in current assets and liabilities:
  Accounts receivable decrease (increase) 
(20,000) 
4,225
  Supplies inventory (increase) 
(100) 
(125)
  Prepaid rent decrease (increase) 
(6,000) 
—
  Utilities payable increase (decrease) 
75 
(25)
  Accounts payable (supplies) increase 
50 
25
  Interest payable increase (decrease) 
900 
(225)
  Salaries payable increase 
2,400 
1,800
 Cash flow from operating activities 
$(16,700) 
$  7,200
  Equipment purchases 
$(15,000) 
$  (1,500)
 Cash flow from investing activities 
$(15,000) 
$  (1,500)
  Bank loan proceeds (repayment) 
$ 10,000 
$(10,000)
  Note payable issued 
— 
10,000
  Common stock issued 
10,500 
6,000
 Cash flow from financing activities 
$ 20,500 
$  6,000
 Change in cash balance 
$(11,200) 
$ 11,700

212
212
EXHIBIT 4.13
HRB Advertising Company
Analysis of Income Statement and Balance Sheet Accounts for Year Ended December 31, 2015
 
INCOME STATEMENT 
BALANCE SHEET
Accounts receivable
Beginning balance 
$20,000
 
 
$96,225 
Collections (cash basis)
Advertising revenues 
$92,000
(accrual basis)
Ending balance 
$15,775
Salaries payable
 
 
$ 2,400 
Beginning balance
Salaries paid 
 (cash basis) 
$61,075 
$62,875 
Salaries expense
(accrual basis) 
 
$ 4,200 
Ending balance
Prepaid rent
Beginning balance 
$ 6,000
Rent paid in 
 
advance on 4/1/15 
$24,000 
$ 6,000
(cash basis)
(accrual basis) 
 
$18,000
Ending balance 
$ 6,000
Accounts payable (utilities)
 
 
$   75 
Beginning balance
Payments (cash basis) 
$ 1,075
 
 
$ 1,050 
Utilities expense
(accrual basis) 
 
$   50 
Ending balance
Accounts payable (supplies)
Payments (cash basis) 
$ 1,300 
$   50 
Beginning balance
 
 
$ 1,325 
Purchases on accounts
 
 
$   75 
Ending balance
Supplies inventory
Beginning balance 
$   100
Purchases on account 
$ 1,325 
$ 1,200 
Supplies used
(accrual basis)
Ending balance 
$   225
Accrued interest payable
 
 
$   900 
Beginning balance
Payments (cash basis) 
$ 1,575
 
 
$ 1,350 
Accrued expense
(accrual basis) 
 
$   675 
Ending balance
Accumulated depreciation
 
 
$ 2,250 
Beginning balance
 
 
$ 3,250 
Depreciation expense
(accrual basis) 
 
$ 5,500 
Ending balance
Advertising revenues
 
 
$92,000
Salaries expense
 
$62,875
Rent expense
Rent expense 
 from 1/1/15 
 to 3/31/15 
$ 6,000
Rent expense 
 from 4/1/15 
 to 12/31/15 
$18,000
Total expense 
$24,000
Utilities expense
$ 1,050
Supplies expense
 
$ 1,200
Interest expense
 
$ 1,350
Depreciation expense
 
$ 3,250
Expensed from 
 beginning balance
Rent expense from 
 1/1/15 to 3/31/15
g
Expensed from
 4/1/15 payment:
For the period from
 4/1/15 to 12/31/15
g

 
Statement of  Cash Flows 
213
$20,000 cash from customers billed in 2014 and another $76,225 from customers billed in 
2015 (or $92,000 billings minus the $15,775 that was uncollected at year-end).
 
Salary payments represent the company’s largest operating cash outflow. Exhibit 4.13 
shows that Salaries payable increased by $1,800 during the year, from a beginning balance of 
$2,400 to $4,200 at year-end. Consequently, salary payments must have been $61,075 for the 
year, or $1,800 less than the total salaries expense of $62,875 that shows up in the income 
statement in Exhibit 4.12(a).
 
Some cash inflows and outflows involve more than one balance sheet account. Exhibit 4.13 
shows this for supplies. As shown there, Accounts payable (supplies) increased $25 during the 
year, from a beginning balance of $50 to $75 at year-end. This means that payments for sup-
plies must have been $25 less than purchases. But where can we find information about pur-
chases? Certainly not from the income statement [Exhibit 4.12(a)] because it reports the cost 
of supplies used during the year regardless of when they were purchased. Because purchases 
increase the total supplies on hand, we turn our attention to the Supplies inventory account. As 
we see in Exhibit 4.13, Supplies inventory increased by $125 during the year, from $100 at the 
start to $225 at year-end. Purchases must therefore have been $125 more than the amount of 
supplies used during the year [that is, the supplies expense from Exhibit 4.12(a)]. In other 
words, purchases must have totaled $1,325 (or the $1,200 supplies expense plus the $125 
Supplies inventory increase), and consequently, supplier payments must have totaled $1,300 
(or $1,325 purchases minus the $25 Accounts payable increase).
 
The same type of analysis just outlined is illustrated for the Prepaid rent, Accounts payable (utili-
ties), and Accrued interest payable accounts in Exhibit 4.13. The process continues until all balance 
sheet accounts are fully reconciled and the company’s cash receipts and disbursements are identi-
fied. In addition, analysis of changes in the Notes payable, Common stock, and Equipment ac-
counts (not shown) can identify cash inflows and outflows from investing and financing activities.
 
The derived cash inflows and outflows for HRB Advertising are listed in Exhibit 4.14, by 
major sources: operating, investing, and financing activities. This schedule explains why the 
EXHIBIT 4.14
HRB Advertising Company 
Schedule of Cash Receipts and Disbursements
For the Years Ended December 31,
 
2014 
2015
Operating activities
 Advertising services 
$ 45,000 
$ 96,225 
from Accounts receivable
 Salaries 
(36,250) 
(61,075) 
from Salaries payable
 Rent 
(24,000) 
(24,000) 
from Prepaid rent
 Utilities 
(650) 
(1,075) 
from Utilities payable
 Supplies 
(800) 
(1,300) 
from Supplies payable
 Interest 
— 
(1,575) 
from Interest payable
  Operating cash flow 
$(16,700) 
$  7,200
Investing activities
 Equipment purchase 
$(15,000) 
$ (1,500) 
from Office equipment
Financing activities
 Bank borrowing 
$ 10,000 
$(10,000) 
from Notes payable
 Note issuance 
— 
10,000 
from Notes payable
 Stock issuance 
10,500 
6,000 
from Common stock
 
20,500 
6,000
  Change in cash 
$(11,200) 
$ 11,700 
from Cash
These investing and 
 financing activities will be 
discussed in Chapters 10 
and 11.

214 
CHAPTER 4
Structure of the Balance Sheet and Statement of Cash Flows
company’s cash balance increased by $11,700 during the year. Operating activities contrib-
uted $7,200 of cash, $1,500 was spent on new equipment, and financing activities added an-
other $6,000. These are precisely the cash inflows and outflows listed in the company’s cash 
flow statement in Exhibit 4.12(b).
 
The analysis in Exhibit 4.14 has focused on the adjustments to accrual earnings that are 
required as a result of changes in various working capital (current assets minus current li-
abilities) accounts to derive operating cash flows under the indirect method. Obviously, 
many other adjustments are required to fully reconcile accrual earnings and cash flows 
from operations. These will be discussed in Chapter 17 after you have had a chance to 
 review in some detail the accrual accounting entries related to noncurrent asset and liabil-
ity accounts.
RECAP
Accrual earnings and cash flows capture different aspects of a firm’s performance and 
often differ by a wide margin from year to year. Cash flows are critical to assessing a com-
pany’s liquidity and creditworthiness. The cash flow statement provides a detailed sum-
mary of the cash inflows and outflows that are derived from a company’s three primary 
activities: operations, investing, and financing. This section has outlined the basic tech-
niques for deriving operating cash flows from an analysis of comparative balance sheets 
and income statement information. To do this, you must analyze changes in current asset 
and current liability accounts (as well as other noncash revenues and expenses such as 
depreciation) that capture differences between the cash flow effects and accrual earnings 
effects of revenue and expense transactions.
GLOBAL VANTAGE POINT
IFRS (IAS 7) encourages, but does not require, entities to report cash flows from operating 
activities using the direct method. This is because the direct method is believed to provide 
information that may be useful in estimating future cash flows that is not available under the 
indirect method. Both FASB and IASB recently tabled a proposal to mandate the use of 
the  direct method for reporting operating cash flows. Very few companies opt to report under 
the direct method perhaps because companies’ computer information systems are not set up to 
efficiently process the requisite data.12
 
One example of a company that does prepare the cash flow statement using the direct 
method is EMC Corporation, which files under U.S. GAAP. EMC’s Consolidated Cash 
Flow Statement for 2012 is presented in Exhibit 4.15. We can notice here that the direct 
method provides more detail about the sources of cash inflows and cash outflows. EMC 
Corporation’s 2012 Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows provides a nice way to compare 
the two approaches because it shows the direct method approach in the top half of the state-
ment and an indirect method reconciliation of accrual earnings and net cash flows from 
operating activities in the bottom half. Notice that EMC reported almost $22.585 billion of 
cash received from customers in 2012, which contributed to their net cash provided by op-
erating activities of just over $6.26 billion. If one only looks at the indirect method recon-
ciliation, it is likely not plausible to determine how much cash was received from customers. 
It seems clear that analysts who are evaluating EMC Corporation’s financial health would 
International
12 Marie Leone, “Nothing Direct about the Direct Cash-flow Method, CFO.com, November 19, 2009, http://www.cfo.com/
blogs/index.cfm/l_detail/14456437.

 
Global Vantage Point 
215
EXHIBIT 4.15
EMC Corporation Cash Flow Statement
EMC CORPORATION
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
(in thousands)
 
For the Year Ended December 31,
 
2012 
2011 
2010
Cash flows from operating activities:
 Cash received from customers 
$ 22,584,805 
$ 21,144,690 
$ 17,585,447
 Cash paid to suppliers and employees 
(16,018,457) 
(15,218,678) 
(12,830,684)
 Dividends and interest received 
103,174 
135,971 
102,912
 Interest paid 
(32,751) 
(70,071) 
(76,711)
 Income taxes paid 
(374,352) 
(323,097) 
(232,121)
  Net cash provided by operating activities 
6,262,419 
5,668,815 
4,548,843
Cash flows from investing activities:
 Additions to property, plant, and equipment 
(819,159) 
(801,375) 
(745,412)
 Capitalized software development costs 
(419,079) 
(442,341) 
(362,956)
 Purchases of short- and long-term available-for-sale securities 
(6,346,580) 
(7,180,169) 
(6,329,894)
 Sales of short- and long-term available-for-sale securities 
4,982,790 
5,121,454 
3,625,260
 Maturities of short- and long-term available-for-sale securities 
1,048,979 
1,130,321 
437,297
 Business acquisitions, net of cash acquired 
(2,135,758) 
(536,624) 
(3,194,611)
 Purchases of strategic and other related investments 
(117,103) 
(329,483) 
(24,946)
 Sales of strategic and other related investments 
70,623 
29,007 
148,813
 Joint venture funding 
(227,881) 
(383,211) 
(29,600)
 Proceeds from divestiture of business 
58,100 
— 
—
 Purchase of leasehold interest 
— 
(151,083) 
—
  Net cash used in investing activities 
(3,905,068) 
(3,543,504) 
(6,476,049)
Cash flows from financing activities:
 Issuance of EMC’s common stock from the exercise of stock options 
560,275 
673,389 
780,732
 Issuance of VMware’s common stock from the exercise of stock options 
253,159 
337,618 
431,306
 EMC repurchase of EMC’s common stock 
(684,559) 
(1,999,968) 
(999,924)
 EMC purchase of VMware’s common stock 
(290,294) 
(399,984) 
(399,224)
 VMware repurchase of VMware’s common stock 
(467,534) 
(526,203) 
(338,527)
 Excess tax benefits from stock-based compensation 
260,747 
361,632 
281,872
 Payment of short-term and long-term obligations 
(15,629) 
(27,089) 
(4,128)
 Proceeds from short-term and long-term obligations 
4,604 
3,096 
4,066
 Payment of convertible debt 
(1,699,816) 
— 
—
 Interest rate contract settlement 
(69,905) 
(140,993) 
—
 Net cash used in financing activities 
(2,148,952) 
(1,718,502) 
(243,827)
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents 
14,625 
5,089 
(12,328)
Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents 
223,024 
411,898 
(2,183,361)
Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of period 
4,531,036 
4,119,138 
6,302,499
Cash and cash equivalents at end of period 
$   4,754,060 
$   4,531,036 
$   4,119,138
Reconciliation of net income to net cash provided by operating activities:
 Net income 
$   2,886,017 
$   2,608,885 
$   1,969,686
 Adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating activities:
  Depreciation and amortization 
1,527,748 
1,421,598 
1,167,550
  Noncash interest expense on convertible debt 
46,178 
102,907 
105,649
  Noncash restructuring and other special charges 
12,974 
(1,484) 
6,861
  Stock-based compensation expense 
895,384 
822,576 
667,728
  Provision for doubtful accounts 
39,313 
20,255 
18,965
  Deferred income taxes, net 
(117,573) 
(19,423) 
(49,787)
  Excess tax benefits from stock-based compensation 
(260,747) 
(361,632) 
(281,872)
  Gain on XtremIO common stock 
(31,599) 
— 
—
  Other, net 
20,337 
4,573 
(21,250)
(continued)

216 
CHAPTER 4
Structure of the Balance Sheet and Statement of Cash Flows
EXHIBIT 4.15
EMC Corporation Cash Flow Statement (continued)
 
For the Year Ended December 31,
 
2012 
2011 
2010
  Changes in assets and liabilities, net of acquisitions:
   Accounts and notes receivable 
(535,371) 
(391,672) 
(405,758)
   Inventories 
(458,663) 
(393,156) 
(114,111)
   Other assets 
174,386 
(61,830) 
(54,469)
   Accounts payable 
89,299 
34,871 
154,496
   Accrued expenses 
(64,238) 
5,147 
4,162
   Income taxes payable 
660,819 
336,711 
455,964
   Deferred revenue 
1,366,961 
1,508,520 
957,114
   Other liabilities 
11,194 
31,969 
(32,085)
    Net cash provided by operating activities 
$   6,262,419 
$   5,668,815 
$   4,548,843
Noncash investing and financing activity:
find this specific cash flow information much more informative than simply learning that 
the balance of accounts and notes receivable went down over the year by approximately 
$0.535 billion.
 
There are also some subtle but important differences between IFRS and U.S. GAAP re-
garding where certain items are reported in the statement of cash flows. U.S. GAAP, for ex-
ample, requires entities to report cash interest from investments as part of operating cash 
flows. IAS 7 allows the option for entities to report these in-flows as cash flows from investing 
activities. Investment analysts often compare cash flows from operations across two or more 
companies. Therefore, this choice under IFRS may affect the ability to make valid compari-
sons of operating cash flows of firms with large amounts of debt investments, particularly if 
one company reports under U.S. GAAP and another under IFRS. Further differences between 
IFRS and U.S. GAAP regarding where certain items are reported within a cash flow statement 
are discussed in Chapter 17.
• The balance sheet and statement of cash flows are two of the primary financial statements 
required under GAAP.
• The balance sheet shows the assets owned by a company at a given point in time and how 
those assets are financed (debt versus equity). A variety of measurement bases are used 
to report the various asset, liability, and stockholders’ equity accounts.
• When making intercompany comparisons, financial statement users must be careful to 
recognize how the different measurement bases affect key financial ratios and how account 
titles and statement formats vary across countries.
• Financial statement notes are an integral part of companies’ financial reports and provide 
a wealth of information that allows statement users to better understand and interpret the 
numbers presented in the body of the financial statements.
• The statement of cash flows shows the change in cash for a given period broken down into 
operating, investing, and financing activities.
SUMMARY

• Successive balance sheets and the statement of cash flows articulate with one another 
meaning changes in noncash balance sheet accounts can be used to explain changes in 
cash for a period.
• Analysis of changes in selected balance sheet accounts also can be used to explain why 
operating cash flows differ from accrual income.
• Conversely, the statement of cash flows provides information that enables users to 
 understand changes in balance sheet accounts that have occurred over the reporting 
period.
• Understanding the interrelationships between successive balance sheets and the statement 
of cash flows and being able to exploit these interrelationships to derive unknown account 
balances are important skills for analysts and lending officers.
• Understanding the basic differences between the direct and indirect approach to presenting 
cash flows from operations, and differences between where certain items are reported on a 
cash flow statement under IFRS versus U. S. GAAP.
 
Exercises 
217
EXERCISES
The following classification scheme typically is used in the preparation of a balance sheet:
a. Current assets 
f. Current liabilities
b. Investments and funds 
g. Long-term liabilities
c. Property, plant, and equipment 
h. Contributed capital
d. Intangible assets 
i. Retained earnings
e. Other assets
Using the letters above and the format below, indicate the balance sheet category in which an 
entity typically would place each of the following items. Indicate a contra account by placing 
your answer in parentheses.
 
1. 
 Long-term receivables
 
2. 
 Accumulated amortization
 
3. 
 Current maturities of long-term debt
 
4. 
 Notes payable (short term)
 
5. 
 Accrued payroll taxes
 
6. 
 Leasehold improvements
 
7. 
 Retained earnings appropriated for plant expansion
 
8. 
 Machinery
 
9. 
 Donated capital
 
10. 
 Short-term investments
 
11. 
 Deferred tax liability (long term)
 
12. 
 Allowance for uncollectible accounts
 
13. 
 Premium on bonds payable
 
14. 
 Supplies inventory
 
15. 
 Additional paid-in capital
 
16. 
 Work-in-process inventory
 
17. 
 Notes receivable (short-term)
 
18. 
 Copyrights
 
19. 
 Unearned revenue (long-term)
 
20. 
 Inventory
E4-1
Analyzing balance sheet 
 classification (LO 1)

218 
CHAPTER 4
Structure of the Balance Sheet and Statement of Cash Flows
E4-2
Preparing a balance 
sheet (LO 1)
The following balance sheet, which has some weaknesses in terminology and classification, 
has been prepared by an inexperienced accountant and submitted to you for review:
Required:
Prepare a classified balance sheet in proper form. Make any necessary corrections.
E4-3
Making financial disclosures 
(LO 4)
The preliminary draft of the balance sheet at the end of the current fiscal year for Eagle 
Industries follows. The statement will be incorporated into the annual report to stockhold-
ers and will present the dollar amounts at the end of both the current and prior years on a 
comparative basis. The accounts in the statement are properly classified, and the dollar 
amounts have been determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting princi-
ples. The company does not intend to provide any more detailed information in the body of 
the statement.
IMA
ADAPTED
Mikeska Company
Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2014
($ in thousands)
Assets
Fixed assets—tangible
 Land 
$500
 Buildings and equipment 
200
 Less: Reserve for depreciation 
(50) 
$  650
Factory supplies 
 
20
Current assets
 Inventory 
163
 Accounts receivable 
102
 Cash 
68 
333
Fixed assets—intangibles
 Patents 
51
 Goodwill 
49 
100
Deferred charges
 Discount on bonds payable 
12
 Returnable containers 
32 
44
  Total assets 
 
$1,147
Liabilities
Current liabilities
 Accounts payable 
140
 Allowance for doubtful accounts 
7
 Wages payable 
195 
$  342
Long-term liabilities
 Bonds payable 
400
 Reserve for contingencies 
50 
450
Equity
 Capital stock, $10 par, 5,000 shares issued and outstanding 
50
 Capital surplus 
75
 Earned surplus 
270
 Dividends paid 
(40) 
355
  Total liabilities  
 
$1,147

 
Exercises 
219
Eagle Industries
Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2014
($ in millions)
Assets
Current assets
 Cash 
$   13.5
 Short-term investments 
6.8
 Accounts receivable (net) 
113.0
 Inventories 
228.0
 Prepayments and other 
4.8
  Total current assets 
366.0
Investments in equity securities (available for sale) 
55.2
Property, plant, and equipment (net) 
787.1
   Total assets 
$1,208.3
Liabilities and Stockholders’ Equity
Current liabilities
 Current maturities on long-term debt 
$   36.5
 Notes payable 
79.5
 Accounts payable 
139.8
 Accrued taxes 
42.3
 Accrued interest 
11.0
 Other 
4.4
  Total current liabilities 
313.4
Long-term liabilities 
477.2
   Total liabilities 
790.5
Stockholders’ equity
 Preferred stock 
30.0
 Common stock 
77.0
 Additional paid-in capital on common stock 
65.4
 Retained earnings—appropriated 
40.8
 Retained earnings—unappropriated 
204.6
   Total stockholders’ equity 
417.8
   Total liabilities and stockholders’ equity 
$1,208.3
Required:
Identify the accounts that most likely would require further disclosure in the notes to the 
 financial statements and describe what information would have to be disclosed in those notes 
by Eagle Industries before the statement can be included as part of the annual report for pre-
sentation to its stockholders.
E4-4
Balance sheet classification 
(LO 1)
Following is a list of items taken from the December 31, 2014, balance sheet of Reagan  Company 
(amounts omitted):
Accounts payable
Accrued expenses
Accumulated depreciation—buildings
Accumulated depreciation—machinery 
 and equipment
Bonds payable
Buildings
Cash
Common stock
Contributed capital in excess of par
Current portion of long-term debt
Deferred tax liability (noncurrent)
Finished products inventory
Goodwill
Income taxes payable
Land
Machinery and equipment
Notes payable to banks (short term)
Preferred stock
Prepaid expenses
Raw materials
Retained earnings
Short-term investments
Trade accounts receivable
Trademarks
Work-in-process inventory
Required:
Using the above information, prepare a classified balance sheet in good form.

220 
CHAPTER 4
Structure of the Balance Sheet and Statement of Cash Flows
AICPA
ADAPTED
E4-5
Determining collections on 
account (LO 5)
During 2014, Kew Company, a service organization, had $200,000 in cash sales and 
$3,000,000 in credit sales. The accounts receivable balances were $400,000 and $485,000 at 
December 31, 2013 and 2014, respectively.
Required:
What was Kew Company’s cash receipts from sales in 2014?
E4-6
Determining cash from 
 operations (LO 5)
AICPA
ADAPTED
The following information is available from Sand Corporation’s accounting records for the 
year ended December 31, 2014:
Cash received from customers 
$870,000
Rent received 
10,000
Cash paid to suppliers and employees 
510,000
Taxes paid 
110,000
Cash dividends paid 
30,000
Required:
Compute cash flow provided by operations for 2014.
E4-7
Determining cash payments 
to suppliers (LO 5)
Dunnsmore Company reported cost of goods sold of $318,450 on its 2014 income statement. 
Other information for Dunnsmore is as follows:
 
1/1/2014 
12/31/2014
Inventories 
$37,200 
$43,400
Accounts payable 
23,100 
29,900
Required:
Prepare a schedule showing the amount of cash Dunnsmore paid to suppliers in 2014.
E4-8
Determining cash 
disbursements (LO 5)
AICPA
ADAPTED
Serven Corporation has estimated its accrual-basis revenue and expenses for June 2014 and 
would like your help in estimating cash disbursements. Selected data from these estimated 
amounts are as follows:
Sales 
$700,000
Gross profit (based on sales) 
30%
Increase in trade accounts receivable for the month 
$ 20,000
Change in accounts payable during month 
0
Increase in inventory during month 
$ 10,000
Variable selling, general, and administrative expenses include a charge
 for uncollectible accounts of 1% of sales.
Total selling, general, and administrative expenses are $71,000 per month plus 15% of sales.
Depreciation expense of $40,000 per month is included in fixed selling, general, and 
 administrative expense.
Required:
On the basis of the preceding data, what are the estimated cash disbursements from operations 
for June?
E4-9
Determining cash collections 
on account (LO 5)
AICPA
ADAPTED
The following information was taken from the 2014 financial statement of Planet Corporation:
Accounts receivable, January 1, 2014 
$ 21,600
Accounts receivable, December 31, 2014 
30,400
Sales on accounts and cash sales 
438,000
Uncollectible accounts (bad debts) 
1,000
No accounts receivable were written off or recovered during the year.
Required:
Determine the cash collected from customers by Planet Corporation in 2014.

 
Exercises 
221
E4-10
Determining cash from 
 operations and reconciling 
with accrual net income 
(LO 5, 7, 8)
The following information was taken from the 2014 financial statements of Eiger Corpora-
tion, a maker of equipment for mountain and rock climbers:
Net income 
$100,000
Depreciation 
30,000
Increase (decrease) in 
 Accounts receivable 
110,000
 Inventories 
(50,000)
 Prepaid expenses 
15,000
 Accounts payable 
(150,000)
 Salaries payable 
15,000
 Other current liabilities 
(70,000)
Required:
1. Calculate Eiger’s cash flow from operating activities for 2014.
2. Explain the reasons for the difference between the firm’s net income and its cash flow 
from operating activities in 2014.
E4-11
Determining cash from 
operations and reconciling 
with accrual net income 
(LO 5, 8)
The following information was taken from the 2014 financial statements of Zurich Corpora-
tion, a maker of fine Swiss watches:
Net income 
$(200,000)
Depreciation 
50,000
Increase (decrease) in 
 Accounts receivable 
(140,000)
 Inventories 
25,000
 Other current assets 
10,000
 Accounts payable 
120,000
 Accrued payables 
(25,000)
 Interest payable 
50,000
Required:
1. Calculate Zurich’s cash flow from operating activities for 2014.
2. Explain the reasons for the difference between the firm’s net income and its cash flow 
from operating activities in 2014.
E4-12
Cash provided (used) by 
operations (LO 5)
An income statement for the first year of operations for Patti Company appears below:
Sales 
$ 390,000
Dividend revenue 
39,000
Interest revenue 
24,050
Cost of goods sold 
(208,000)
Salary expense 
(26,000)
Depreciation expense 
(70,200)
Income tax expense 
(109,200)
Net income 
$  39,650
Additional information:
a. Accounts payable, end of year, $13,000.
b. Salaries payable, end of year, $8,450.
c. Inventories, end of year, $26,000.
d. Accounts receivable, end of year, $32,500.
e. Customers’ accounts with credit balances (included in item d), end of year, $2,600.
Required:
Use the direct approach to calculate the cash provided (used) by operating activities for Patti 
Company.

222 
CHAPTER 4
Structure of the Balance Sheet and Statement of Cash Flows
PROBLEMS / DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
Ricky Corporation had the following alphabetical account balance listing at December 31, 
2014 (in thousands of dollars).
P4-1
Preparing a balance sheet 
(LO 1)
 
Debit 
Credit
Accounts payable 
 
$ 9,224
Accounts receivable 
$ 3,248 
Accrued liabilities 
 
12,226
Accumulated depreciation—buildings 
 
6,028
Accumulated depreciation—furniture and office equipment 
 
322
Accumulated depreciation—land improvements 
 
862
Accumulated depreciation—machinery and equipment 
 
19,664
Additional paid-in capital 
 
1,584
Allowance for uncollectible accounts 
 
14
Bonds payable 
 
1,358
Buildings 
19,950 
Cash 
354 
Common stock 
 
960
Furniture and office equipment 
634 
Income taxes payable 
 
1,888
Inventories 
15,152 
Investment (noncurrent) 
10,816 
Land 
536 
Land improvements 
1,438 
Leasehold improvements (net of amortization) 
44 
Machinery and equipment 
28,868 
Notes payable (long-term) 
 
600
Notes receivable (Due June 15, 2015) 
8,014 
Preferred stock 
 
566
Prepaid expenses 
1,458 
Retained earnings 
 
?
Short-term investments 
7,754 
Special tools 
1,984 
Unearned revenues (current) 
 
188
Unearned revenues (long-term) 
 
2,768
Required:
Prepare a balance sheet for Ricky Corporation at December 31, 2014.
P4-2
Preparation of a statement 
of cash flows and a balance 
sheet (LO 1, 5, 7)
Kay Wing, Inc.
Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2013
Cash 
$ 65,000
Accounts receivable 
37,000
Inventory 
70,000
Long-term investments 
20,000
Land 
39,000
Plant and equipment (net) 
109,000
 Total assets 
$340,000
Kay Wing, Inc., prepared the following balance sheet at December 31, 2013.
(continued)

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
223
Accounts payable 
$ 33,000
Taxes payable 
4,000
Bonds payable 
80,000
Capital stock 
90,000
Retained earnings 
133,000
 Total liabilities and stockholders’ equity 
$340,000
The following occurred during 2014.
 1. $15,000 in cash and a $35,000 note payable were exchanged for land valued at $50,000.
 2. Bonds payable (maturing in 2018) in the amount of $30,000 were retired by paying 
$28,000 cash.
 3. Capital stock in the amount of $40,000 was issued at par value.
 4. The company sold surplus equipment for $10,000. The equipment had a book value of 
$14,000 at the time of the sale.
 5. Net income was $35,500.
 6. Cash dividends of $5,000 were paid to the stockholders.
 7. 100 shares of stock (considered short-term investments) were purchased for $8,300.
 8. A new building was acquired through the issuance of $75,000 in bonds.
 9. $12,000 of depreciation was recorded on the plant and equipment.
 10. At December 31, 2014, Cash was $93,200, Accounts receivable had a balance of 
$41,500, Inventory had increased to $73,000, and Accounts payable had fallen to 
$25,500. Long-term investments and Taxes payable were unchanged from 2013.
Required:
1. Prepare a statement of cash flows for 2014.
2. Prepare the December 31, 2014, balance sheet for Kay Wing, Inc.
P4-3
Preparing a balance sheet 
(LO 1)
A December 31, 2014, post-closing trial balance for Short Erin Company follows.
Account Title 
Debits 
Credits
Cash 
$    61,500 
Short-term investments 
47,000 
Accounts receivable 
95,600 
Inventory 
175,000 
Prepaid expenses 
13,500 
Land 
241,800 
Buildings 
584,900 
Accumulated depreciation—buildings 
 
$  132,500
Production equipment 
$  477,700
Accumulated depreciation—production equipment 
 
$  239,600
Patents 
50,000 
Leasehold 
7,000 
Accounts payable 
 
38,400
Accrued salaries 
 
3,400
Taxes payable 
 
65,800
Notes payable 
 
200,000
Installment note payable 
 
84,200
Bonds payable 
 
250,000
Common stock 
 
300,000
Retained earnings 
 
440,100
 Totals 
$1,754,000 
$1,754,000

224 
CHAPTER 4
Structure of the Balance Sheet and Statement of Cash Flows
Additional information about Short Erin’s account balances:
1. Cash includes $12,000 in U.S. treasury bills purchased on December 21, 2014, that mature 
in January 2015. The account also includes $8,500 in stock purchased just before year-
end that the company plans to sell in a few days.
2. The Accounts receivable balance consists of:
 
Trade receivables includes $1,400 of customer accounts with credit balances.
3. Notes payable consists of two notes. One, in the amount of $50,000, is due on March 19, 
2015. The other note matures on October 27, 2017.
4. The Taxes payable account contains deferred income taxes amounting to $61,250.
5. The installment note payable bears an annual interest rate of 10%. Semiannual payments 
of $6,756.43 are due each June 30 and December 31 and include principal and accrued 
interest. These payments will reduce the Installment note balance by $5,220 in 2015.
6. Of the 1,000,000 authorized shares of no par common stock, 300,000 shares are issued 
and outstanding.
7. The company recently announced plans to sell its operating facility in Katy, Texas, 
 consisting of land (cost $82,000) and a building (cost $175,000; book value $110,000). 
Production equipment has already been removed from the Katy plant and is being used in 
other company facilities.
Required:
Prepare a classified balance sheet for the Short Erin Company at December 31, 2014.
Trade receivables 
$84,700
Allowance for doubtful trade accounts 
(4,600)
Note receivable from Short Erin’s
 president due in 2015 
15,500
 
$95,600
P4-5
Analyzing common-size 
 financial statements (LO 2)
The common-size balance sheets from four companies follow: Amazon.com, an Internet book 
retailer; Alcoa, a major producer of aluminum products; Wendy’s, a fast-food services organi-
zation; and Delta Air Lines, a major supplier of air transportation.
P4-4
Preparing the income 
 statement and statement 
of cash flows (LO 5, 8)
Consider the following transactions pertaining to Retail Traders Company. Amounts in paren-
theses indicate a decrease in the account.
 
Assets 
5 
Liabilities 
1 
Owners’ Equity
 
 
 
Accounts  
Common  
Retained 
Explanation 
Cash 
Inventory 
Payable 
Stock  
Earnings
Beginning balance 
 
$ 10,000 
$  5,000 
$3,000 
$  2,000
Credit purchases 
 
100,000 
100,000
Cash sales 
$115,000 
 
 
 
115,000
Cost of goods sold 
 
(90,000) 
 
 
(90,000)
Cash paid to suppliers 
(85,000) 
 
(85,000)
Ending balance 
$ 30,000 
$ 20,000 
$ 20,000 
$3,000 
$ 27,000
Required:
1. Based on this information, prepare an income statement and statement of cash flows.
2. Provide an intuitive explanation of how the adjustments made to net income in the cash 
flow statement convert the accrual numbers to cash flow numbers.

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
225
P4-6
Analyzing common-size 
 financial statements (LO 2)
Following are the common-size balance sheets from four companies: Pfizer, Inc., a global 
research-driven pharmaceutical company; JCPenney, a national retailer; TimeWarner, a global 
media and entertainment company; and Duke Energy, a leading energy company focused on 
electric power and gas distribution.
Required:
Based on your general business knowledge, the environments in which the above firms oper-
ate, and information derived from the balance sheet analysis, match the company with its 
 respective balance sheet. Explain the reasoning for the choices that you make.
Required:
Based on your general business knowledge, the economic activities of these four firms, and 
information derived from the following balance sheet analysis, match the company with its 
respective balance sheet. Explain your reasoning for the choices that you make.
Common-Size Balance Sheet Comparisons
 
Company
 
A 
B 
C 
D
Assets
Current assets
 Cash and marketable securities 
1.84% 
6.91% 
28.57% 
11.19%
 Current receivables 
13.85 
3.64 
— 
4.22
 Inventories 
9.48 
— 
8.93 
2.14
 Other current assets 
2.95 
5.60 
3.45 
1.02
  Total current assets 
28.12% 
16.15% 
40.95% 
18.57%
Noncurrent assets
 Property, plant, and equipment, net 
53.52% 
69.32% 
12.85% 
73.76%
 Goodwill and intangibles, net 
7.78 
9.56 
29.55 
2.56
 Other assets, net 
10.58 
4.97 
16.65 
5.11
  Total assets 
100.00% 
100.00% 
100.00% 
100.00%
Liabilities and Stockholders’ Equity
Current liabilities
 Total current liabilities 
17.60% 
32.20% 
29.90% 
15.09%
Long-term liabilities 
36.84 
39.73 
59.33 
17.73
 Total liabilities 
54.44 
71.93 
89.23 
32.82
Minority interest 
8.53 
— 
— 
—
Redeemable preferred stock 
— 
— 
— 
10.62
Stockholders’ Equity 
Contributed capital and other equity items  
1.51 
11.41 
46.46 
(0.18)
Retained earnings (deficit) 
35.52 
16.66 
(35.69) 
56.74
 Total liabilities and stockholders’ equity 
100.00% 
100.00% 
100.00% 
100.00%
Common-Size Balance Sheet Comparisons
 
Company
 
A 
B 
C 
D
Assets
Current assets
 Cash and marketable securities 
23.93% 
12.19% 
2.70% 
7.30%
 Current receivables 
0.00 
6.88 
3.05 
7.78
 Inventories 
24.04 
5.82 
2.66 
2.71
 Other current assets 
4.90 
4.06 
1.70 
2.00
  Total current assets 
52.87% 
28.96% 
10.11% 
19.79%
(continued)

226 
CHAPTER 4
Structure of the Balance Sheet and Statement of Cash Flows
Additional Information:
a. During 2014, Karr sold equipment costing $25,000, with accumulated depreciation of 
$12,000, for a gain of $5,000.
b. In December 2014, Karr purchased equipment costing $50,000, with $20,000 cash and a 
12% note payable of $30,000.
c. Depreciation expense for the year was $52,000.
Required:
1. In Karr’s 2014 statement of cash flows, calculate net cash provided by operating activities.
2. In Karr’s 2014 statement of cash flows, calculate net cash used in investing activities.
P4-7
Determining cash flows from 
operating and investing 
 activities (LO 5, 6, 7)
Karr, Inc., reported net income of $300,000 for 2014. Changes occurred in several balance 
sheet accounts as follows:
AICPA
ADAPTED
Equipment 
$25,000 increase 
Inventories 
$20,000 decrease
Accumulated depreciation 
40,000 increase 
Accounts receivable 
15,000 increase
Note payable 
30,000 increase 
Accounts payable 
5,000 decrease
P4-8
Determining operating cash 
flow components (LO 5)
The following data have been extracted from the financial statements of Prentiss, Inc., a 
 calendar-year merchandising corporation:
AICPA
ADAPTED
 
December 31,
Balance Sheet Data 
2014 
2015
Trade accounts receivable—net 
$ 84,000 
$ 78,000
Inventory 
150,000 
140,000
Accounts payable—merchandise (credit) 
(95,000) 
(98,000)
 
Company
 
A 
B 
C 
D
Noncurrent assets
 Property, plant, and equipment 
42.58% 
10.70% 
66.53% 
6.03%
 Goodwill and intangibles, net 
0.00 
51.84 
8.67 
61.92
 Other assets, net 
4.55 
8.50 
14.69 
12.26
  Total assets 
100.00% 
100.00% 
100.00% 
100.00%
Liabilities and Stockholders’ Equity
Current liabilities
 Total current liabilities 
25.82% 
17.48% 
7.17% 
13.33%
Long-term liabilities 
36.20 
40.05 
54.46 
35.36
  Total liabilities 
62.02 
57.53 
61.63 
48.69
Stockholders’ equity
 Contributed capital and other equity items* 
21.90 
23.49 
35.84 
199.11
 Retained earnings (deficit) 
16.08 
18.98 
2.56 
(147.80)
  Total liabilities and stockholders’ equity 
100.00% 
100.00% 
100.00% 
100.00%
* Net of cost of shares repurchased for treasury and other comprehensive income items.

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
227
• Total sales for 2015 were $1,200,000 and for 2014 were $1,100,000. Cash sales were 
20% of total sales each year.
• Cost of goods sold was $840,000 for 2015.
• Variable general and administrative (G&A) expenses for 2015 were $120,000. These 
expenses have varied in proportion to sales and have been paid at the rate of 50% in the 
year incurred and 50% the following year. Unpaid G&A expenses are not included in 
accounts payable.
• Fixed G&A expenses, including $35,000 depreciation and $5,000 bad debt expense, 
 totaled $100,000 each year. The amount of such expenses involving cash payments was 
paid at the rate of 80% in the year incurred and 20% the following year. In each year, 
there was a $5,000 bad debt estimate and a $5,000 write-off. Unpaid G&A expenses are 
not included in accounts payable.
Required:
Compute the following:
1. The amount of cash collected during 2015 that resulted from total sales in 2014 and 
2015.
2. The amount of cash disbursed during 2015 for purchases of merchandise.
3. The amount of cash disbursed during 2015 for variable and fixed G&A expenses.
P4-9
Understanding the relation 
between the income 
 statement, cash flow 
 statement, and changes in 
 balance sheet accounts 
(LO 5, 6)
The following cash flow information pertains to the 2014 operations of Matterhorn, Inc., a 
maker of ski equipment:
Cash collections from customers 
$ 16,670
Cash payments to suppliers 
19,428
Cash payments for various
 operating expenses 
7,148
Cash payments for current
 income taxes 
200
Cash provided (used) by
 operating activities 
(10,106)
Net income 
$ 609
Depreciation of equipment 
2,256
Amortization of patents 
399
Loss on sale of equipment 
169
Change in accounts receivable 
$ 3,630
Change in inventory 
3,250
Change in accounts payable 
(3,998)
Change in accrued operating expenses 
(2,788)
Change in deferred taxes payable 
127
The following additional information comes from Matterhorn’s 2014 income statement:
The following additional information comes from Matterhorn’s 2013 and 2014 comparative 
balance sheets (decreases are in parentheses):

228 
CHAPTER 4
Structure of the Balance Sheet and Statement of Cash Flows
Required:
1. Use the preceding information to derive Fishmaster’s 2014 income statement.
2. Use the same information to compute Fishmaster’s 2014 cash flow from operating activities 
under the indirect method (that is, derive cash flow from operating activities by making 
the necessary adjustments to net income).
3. Provide a brief explanation for the difference observed between net income and cash 
 provided by operating activities.
P4-10
Understanding the relation 
between income statement, 
cash flow statement, and 
changes in balance sheet 
 accounts (LO 5, 6, 8)
The following cash flow information pertains to the 2014 operations of Fishmaster, Inc., a 
maker of fishing equipment.
Cash collections from customers 
$79,533
Cash payments to suppliers 
64,097
Cash payments for selling and administrative expenses 
11,166
Cash payments for interest 
1,548
Cash payments for current income taxes 
2,350
Cash provided by operating activities 
372
The following additional information comes from Fishmaster’s 2014 income statement:
Net income 
$3,728
Depreciation of equipment 
6,380
Gain on sale of equipment 
1,327
The following additional information comes from Fishmaster’s 2013 and 2014 comparative 
balance sheets (decreases are in parentheses):
Change in accounts receivable 
$ 1,850
Change in inventory 
5,299
Change in accounts payable 
(1,711)
Change in accrued selling and administrative expenses 
910
Change in deferred taxes payable 
(342)
Change in accrued interest payable 
(117)
P4-11
Understanding the relation 
between operating cash flows 
and accrual earnings 
(LO 5, 6, 8)
The following information is taken from the operating section of the statement of cash flows 
(direct method) of Battery Builders, Inc.:
Collections from customers 
$28,000
Payments to suppliers for purchases 
(13,000)
Payments for operating expenses 
(9,000)
Payments for current period income taxes 
(4,000)
Cash provided by operating activities 
2,000
Required:
1. Use the preceding information to derive Matterhorn’s 2014 income statement.
2. Use the same information to compute Matterhorn’s 2014 cash flow from operating 
 activities under the indirect method (that is, derive cash flow from operating activities 
by making the necessary adjustments to net income).
3. Provide a brief explanation for the difference observed between net income and cash 
 provided by operating activities.

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
229
In addition, the following information is obtained from the comparative balance sheets of 
 Battery Builders (decreases in parentheses):
The following information is obtained from the income statement of Battery Builders:
Net income 
$4,000
Depreciation expense 
4,000
Gain on sale of equipment 
2,000
Write-off of intangibles 
1,000
Change in accounts receivable 
$ 3,000
Change in inventory 
3,000
Change in accounts payable 
2,000
Change in accrued payable (related to operating expense) 
(2,000)
Change in deferred income taxes payable 
1,000
Required:
1. Prepare a complete accrual-basis income statement for the current year.
2. Compute the cash flows from operations using the indirect approach (that is, start with 
accrual-basis net income and adjust for various items to obtain cash flows from 
operations).
P4-12
Finding missing values on a 
classified balance sheet and 
analyzing balance sheet 
changes (LO 1, 2)
The following information was taken from Royal Caribbean’s Year 2 balance sheet. Royal 
Caribbean is one of the largest cruise lines in the world.
($ in thousands) 
December 31, Year 2
Accounts payable 
$  264,554
Accrued expenses and other liabilities 
487,764
Accrued interest 
147,547
Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) 
182,733
Cash and cash equivalents 
284,619
Common stock 
2,243
Current portion of long-term debt 
756,215
Customer deposits 
?
Derivative financial instruments 
114,094
Goodwill 
?
Hedged firm commitments 
33,426
Inventories 
107,877
Long-term debt 
7,663,555
Other assets 
1,146,677
Other long-term liabilities 
321,192
Paid-in capital 
?
Preferred stock 
—
Prepaid expenses and other assets 
?
Property and equipment, net 
15,268,053
Retained earnings 
4,754,950
Total assets 
?
Total current assets 
1,026,391
Total current liabilities 
2,749,030
Total liabilities and shareholders’ equity 
18,233,494
Total shareholders’ equity 
?
Trade and other receivables, net 
338,804
Treasury stock 
(413,704)
The following is Royal Caribbean’s Year 1 balance sheet.

230 
CHAPTER 4
Structure of the Balance Sheet and Statement of Cash Flows
Required:
1. Solve for the missing values and present Royal Caribbean’s Year 2 balance sheet in 
good form.
2. Royal Caribbean has recently become a customer of your firm. In fact, its accounts 
 receivable is one of your firm’s largest current assets. The amount is so large that the chief 
executive officer (CEO) of your firm is concerned because if Royal Caribbean doesn’t 
pay in a timely fashion, your firm could experience severe cash flow problems. Use Royal 
Caribbean’s balance sheet to assess Royal Caribbean’s ability to make timely payments of 
its current liabilities.
3. Using your Year 2 and the Year 1 balance sheets provided, compare and contrast the firm’s 
financial position at the end of these two years. For example, were there any changes in 
Royal Caribbean’s financial position from the end of Year 1 to the end of Year 2? In what 
ways did the firm’s financial position improve or deteriorate over this time period?
4. Assume you are a financial analyst. Based on the financial position of Royal Caribbean as 
portrayed in the Year 1 and Year 2 balance sheets, would you advise your clients to invest 
in the firm’s common stock? Why or why not?
5. Before advising your clients about whether or not to purchase the common stock of Royal 
Caribbean, what information beyond the Year 1 and Year 2 balance sheets would you seek?
Consolidated Balance Sheets
($ in thousands) 
December 31,  Year 1
Assets
Current assets
 Cash and cash equivalents 
$    402,878
 Trade and other receivables, net 
271,287
 Inventories 
96,077
 Prepaid expenses and other assets 
125,160
 Derivative financial instruments 
81,935
  Total current assets 
977,337
Property and equipment, net 
13,878,998
Goodwill 
779,246
Other assets 
827,729
Total assets 
$16,463,310
Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity
Current liabilities
 Current portion of long-term debt 
$    471,893
 Accounts payable 
245,225
 Accrued interest 
128,879
 Accrued expenses and other liabilities 
687,369
 Customer deposits 
968,520
 Hedged firm commitments 
172,339
  Total current liabilities 
2,674,225
Long-term debt 
6,539,510
Other long-term liabilities 
446,563
Shareholders’ equity
 Preferred stock 
—
 Common stock 
2,239
 Paid-in capital 
2,952,540
 Retained earnings 
4,592,529
 Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) 
(319,936)
 Treasury stock 
(424,360)
  Total shareholders’ equity 
6,803,012
Total liabilities and shareholders’ equity 
$16,463,310

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
231
Additional data:
a. Bradley’s Dividends receivable account decreased by $2,000 during the year.
b. The Machinery account, net of accumulated depreciation, increased by $100,000 during 
the year. The only other transaction, exclusive of depreciation, was the write-off on May 
15, 2014, of obsolete machinery that had a book value of $8,000.
c. Accounts receivable increased by $40,000 during 2014. The Allowance account increased 
by $4,000. There were no write-offs of uncollectible accounts.
d. Salaries payable at the beginning of the year were $6,000; at the end of the year, $10,000.
e. Inventories decreased $12,000 during 2014.
f. Taxes payable increased $6,000 during the year.
g. The investments that were sold had a book value of $30,000.
Required:
On the basis of the above data, prepare Bradley Corporation’s single-step income statement 
for the year ended December 31, 2014.
P4-13
Conversion of statement of 
cash flows to accrual-basis 
 income statement 
(LO 5, 6, 8)
The statement of cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2014, and other data for Bradley 
Corporation are shown below:
P4-14
Preparing the balance sheet 
and income statement 
(LO 5, 8)
Vanguard Corporation is a distributor of food products. The corporation has approximately 
1,000 stockholders, and its stock, which is traded “over-the-counter,” is sold throughout 2014 
at about $7 a share with little fluctuation. The corporation’s balance sheet at December 31, 
2013, follows.
Cash flows from operating activities:
 Cash collections from customers 
$ 375,000 
 Dividends received 
10,000 
 Cash outflows for: 
 
  Merchandise 
(120,000) 
  Salaries 
(55,000) 
  Taxes 
(25,000) 
  Other operating expenses 
(25,000) 
   Net cash provided by operating activities 
 
$ 160,000
Cash flows from investing activities: 
 
 Sales of investments 
40,000 
 Purchased machinery 
(150,000) 
    Net cash used by investing activities 
 
(110,000)
Cash flows from financing activities: 
 
 Issue of capital stock 
 
50,000
    Net increase in cash 
 
$ 100,000
AICPA
ADAPTED
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2013
Assets
Current assets
 Cash 
 
$  4,386,040
 Accounts receivable 
$ 3,150,000
 Less allowance for doubtful accounts 
(94,500) 
3,055,500
 Inventories—at the lower of cost (FIFO) or market 
 
2,800,000
  Total current assets 
 
10,241,540
Fixed assets—at cost 
3,300,000
 Less accumulated depreciation 
(1,300,000) 
2,000,000
  Total assets 
 
$12,241,540
(continued)

232 
CHAPTER 4
Structure of the Balance Sheet and Statement of Cash Flows
Information concerning the corporation and its activities during 2014 follows:
1. Sales for the year were $15,650,000. The gross profit percentage for the year was 30% of 
sales. Merchandise purchases and freight-in totaled $10,905,000. Depreciation and other 
expenses do not enter into cost of goods sold.
2. Administrative, selling, and general expenses (including provision for state taxes) other 
than interest, depreciation, and provision for doubtful accounts amounted to $2,403,250.
3. The December 31, 2014, accounts receivable amounted to $3,350,000, and the corpora-
tion maintains an allowance for doubtful accounts equal to 3% of the accounts receivable 
outstanding. During the year $50,000 of 2013 receivables were deemed uncollectible and 
charged off to the allowance account.
4. The rate of depreciation of fixed assets is 13% per annum, and the corporation consistently 
follows the policy of taking one-half year’s depreciation in the year of acquisition. The 
depreciation expense for 2014 was $474,500.
5. The notes are payable in 20 equal quarterly installments commencing March 31, 2014, 
with interest at 5% per annum also payable quarterly.
6. Accounts payable and accrued liabilities at December 31, 2014, were $2,221,000.
7. The balance of the 2013 federal income tax paid in 2014 was in exact agreement with the 
amount accrued on the December 31, 2013, balance sheet.
8. The 2014 estimated tax payments made in 2014 totaled $400,000. Income tax expense for 
2014 on an accrual accounting basis was $530,000.
9. During the second month of each quarter of 2014, dividends of $0.10 a share were declared 
and paid. In addition, in July 2014, a 5% stock dividend was declared and paid.
Required:
Prepare the following statements in good form and support them by well-organized and devel-
oped computations for the year ending December 31, 2014:
a. Balance sheet
b. Income statement
Liabilities and Stockholders’ Equity
Current liabilities
 Notes payable due within one year 
 
$  1,000,000
 Accounts payable and accrued liabilities 
 
2,091,500
 Federal income taxes payable 
 
300,000
  Total current liabilities 
 
3,391,500
Notes payable due after one year 
 
4,000,000
Stockholders’ equity
 Capital stock—authorized 2,000,000 shares 
  of $1 par value; issued and outstanding 
  1,000,000 shares 
$1,000,000
 Additional paid-in capital 
1,500,000
 Retained earnings 
2,350,040
  Total stockholders’ equity 
 
4,850,040
  Total liabilities and stockholders’ equity 
 
$12,241,540
P4-15
Positioning of items within 
cash flow statement—IFRS vs. 
U.S. GAAP (LO 9)
Lend Corp. has a primary business model of borrowing funds at low interest rates and lending 
them out at higher interest rates. Lend Corp’s ending balance sheet for December 31, 2014, is 
as follows:

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
233
During 2015, Lend Corp. has the following transactions:
• Received $45,000 in cash interest on notes receivable.
• Paid $16,000 of cash interest on notes payable.
• Collected $10,000 cash from accounts receivable.
• Paid $40,000 cash to reduce accounts payable.
• Owes $3,000 at the end of the year to administrative employees for work performed.
• Building depreciation is an additional $20,000.
Required:
1. Compute Lend Corp’s 2015 net income.
2. Show Lend Corp’s 12/31/2015 balance sheet.
3. Report Lend Corp’s 12/31/2015 statement of cash flows using the indirect method under 
U.S. GAAP.
4. Report Lend Corp’s 12/31/2015 statement of cash flows using the indirect method under 
IFRS. Record cash flows from interest received in the cash flows from investing section. 
Record cash flows from interest paid in the cash flows from financing section.
5. Compare your net cash flows from operations computed from requirement 3 vs. 
 requirement 4. Which do you think better reflects Lend Corp’s fundamental operating 
cash flows?
Assets 
 
Liabilities
Cash 
$300,000 
Accounts payable 
$     40,000
Land 
$300,000 
Notes payable 
$   800,000
Building 
$800,000
Accum depr: Building 
$160,000 
Owner’s Equity
Accounts receivable 
$  20,000 
Retained earnings 
$   320,000
Notes receivable 
$900,000 
Contributed capital 
$1,000,000
Assets 
 
Liabilities
Cash 
$300,000 
Accounts payable 
$     40,000
Land 
$300,000 
Notes payable 
$   800,000
Building 
$800,000
Accum depr: Building 
$160,000
Inventory 
$800,000 
Owner’s Equity
Accounts receivable 
$  20,000 
Retained earnings 
$   320,000
Notes receivable 
$100,000 
Contributed capital 
$1,000,000
P4-16
Positioning of items within 
cash flow statement—IFRS 
vs. U.S. GAAP (LO 9)
Sell Corp. has a primary business model of buying and selling merchandise inventory. Sell 
Corp’s ending balance sheet for December 31, 2014, is as follows:
During 2015, Sell Corp. has the following transactions:
• Received $5,000 in cash interest on notes receivable.
• Paid $16,000 of cash interest on notes payable.
• Collected $10,000 cash from Accounts receivable.
• Paid $40,000 cash to reduce Accounts payable.
• Owes $30,000 at the end of the year to employees for work performed.
• Building depreciation is an additional $20,000.
• Sold $200,000 of inventory at a retail price of $400,000. Received $350,000 in cash but 
$50,000 is still due from customers.

234 
CHAPTER 4
Structure of the Balance Sheet and Statement of Cash Flows
Required:
1. Compute Sell Corp’s 2015 net income.
2. Show Sell Corp’s 12/31/2015 balance sheet.
3. Report Sell Corp’s 12/31/2015 statement of cash flows using the indirect method under 
U.S. GAAP.
4. Report Sell Corp’s 12/31/2015 statement of cash flows using the indirect method under 
IFRS. Record cash flows from interest received in the cash flows from investing section. 
Record cash flows from interest paid in the cash flows from financing section.
5. Compare your net cash flows from operations computed from requirement 3 vs. require-
ment 4. Which do you think better reflects Sell Corp’s fundamental operating cash flows?
CASES
The following events and transactions related to David Company occurred after the balance 
sheet date of December 31, 2014, and before the financial statements were issued in 2015. 
None of the items is reflected in the financial statements as of December 31, 2014.
1. In order to secure a bank loan of $200,000, David pledged as collateral certain fixed assets 
with a net book value of $300,000. David applied for the loan on December 18, 2014, and 
the bank approved the loan on January 8, 2015.
2. On November 21, 2014, David initiated a lawsuit seeking $500,000 in damages from a 
firm that David claims infringed on its trademark. David’s attorneys have stated that the 
chances of winning and of getting the $500,000 are excellent.
3. On March 1, 2015, the IRS assessed David an additional $125,000 for the 2013 tax year. 
However, both the tax attorneys for David and the tax accountants have indicated that it is 
likely that the IRS will settle the government’s claim for $75,000.
4. On February 22, 2015, David issued bonds at an interest rate 2 percentage points above 
the LIBOR (London Interbank Offered Rate). This is the average interest rate estimated 
by leading banks in London that they would be charged if borrowing from other banks.
5. A warehouse containing a significant portion of David’s inventory was destroyed by fire 
on January 30, 2015.
6. A supplier to whom David owes $15,000 declared bankruptcy on February 3, 2015.
Required:
Indicate whether the item would be reported in David Company’s 2014 financial statements or 
in the notes to the financial statements, and what information would be reported. Assume that 
each of these events is considered material.
C4-1
Subsequent events (LO 4)
C4-2
Conducting financial reporting 
research: Related-party 
 matters (LO 4)
John Rigas founded Adelphia Communications Corporation with a $300 license in 1952, took 
the company public in 1986, and built it into the sixth largest cable television operator by ac-
quiring other systems in the 1990s. As the company grew, it also expanded into other fields. It 
operated a telephone business, a sports radio station, a sports cable channel, and many other 
smaller subsidiaries. Despite being a publicly held firm, the company remained a family-run 
business; five of the firm’s nine board members were Rigas family members who also held 
various executive posts. John was the CEO and chairman of the board. His sons, Tim (CFO), 
Michael (VP of operations), and James (VP of strategic planning), made up much of the firm’s 
leadership team. In addition, John Rigas’s son-in-law sat on Adelphia’s board of directors. The 
company filed for bankruptcy in June 2002 after it disclosed $2.3 billion in off-balance-sheet 
debt. The Rigases are among a number of former corporate executives who have faced criminal 
charges since Enron’s fall in 2001 touched off a series of white-collar scandals.

 
Cases 
235
 
At John’s trial, prosecutors said the Rigases used complicated cash management systems 
(CMS) to spread money around to various family-owned entities to cover stealing about $100 mil-
lion for themselves. Rigas Entities consisted of approximately 63 different entities organized as 
partnerships, corporations, or limited liability companies exclusively owned or controlled by 
members of the Rigas family. Adelphia managed and maintained virtually every aspect of the 
approximately 14 companies comprising the Rigas Cable Entities, including maintaining their 
books and records on a general ledger system shared with Adelphia and its subsidiaries.  Adelphia 
and Rigas Entities participated jointly in a CMS operated by Adelphia, which resulted in com-
mingling funds among the participants and greatly facilitating the fraud at Adelphia.
 
A complaint filed by the SEC stated:
The commission charges that Adelphia, at the direction of the individual defendants: (1) fraudu-
lently excluded billions of dollars in liabilities from its consolidated financial statements by hiding 
them in off-balance sheet affiliates; (2) falsified operations statistics and inflated Adelphia’s 
 earnings to meet Wall Street’s expectations; and (3) concealed rampant self-dealing by the Rigas 
Family, including the undisclosed use of corporate funds for Rigas Family stock purchases and the 
acquisition of luxury condominiums in New York and elsewhere. The Commission seeks a final 
judgment ordering the defendants to account for and disgorge all ill-gotten gains including . . . all 
property unlawfully taken from Adelphia through undisclosed related-party transactions.13
The SEC also alleges that since at least 1986, Adelphia improperly netted, or offset, related-
party payables and related-party receivables as of year-end. As a result of this offset, gross 
related-party receivables of $1.351 billion and gross related-party payables of $1.348 billion 
were reported as a mere $3 million net receivable.14
Required:
1. Review FASB ASC Topic 850: Related Party Disclosures (available on the FASB’s web-
site: www.FASB.org).
2. Use EDGAR (www.SEC.gov) to access the 2000 Form 10-K for Adelphia Communications 
Corporation. Examine Adelphia’s balance sheet and locate a line item called Related-party 
receivables—net. Next, look up and read the “related-party” note (note 13). Do you believe 
that this note adequately explains the nature of these related-party receivables or meets the 
disclosure requirement for related-party transactions? Justify your answer.
3. What is the significance of Adelphia’s treatment of related-party receivables and payables 
and the company’s failure to adequately disclose its related-party transactions?
4. Why is it important that companies disclose related-party transactions?
13 Securities and Exchange Commission, Accounting and Auditing Enforcement Release No. 1599, July 24, 2002.
14 Securities and Exchange Commission, Accounting and Auditing Enforcement Release No. 2326, September 30, 2005.
C4-3
Analyzing international 
 reporting (LO 3)
A recent balance sheet for Pittards, PLC, a British company, follows. The company’s principal 
activities are the design, production, and procurement of technically advanced leather. The 
Group financial statements consolidate the accounts of Pittards, PLC, and all its subsidiary un-
dertakings. (References to financial statement notes that appear on the original balance sheet 
have been omitted.)
Required:
1. Examine the Pittards balance sheet and identify at least three differences between balance 
sheets as presented in the United Kingdom and the United States.
2. Compare the Pittards balance sheet with the Burberry Group balance sheet in Exhibit 4.3 
and identify at least three differences between them.
3. Review Pittards’ balance sheet and discuss how its format provides useful information to 
investors and creditors.

236 
CHAPTER 4
Structure of the Balance Sheet and Statement of Cash Flows
C4-4
Bertha’s Bridal Boutique: 
 Determining cash flow 
amounts from comparative 
balance sheets and income 
statements (LO 5, 7, 8)
The balance sheet and income statement for Bertha’s Bridal Boutique are presented along 
with some additional information about the accounts. You are to answer the questions that fol-
low concerning cash flows for the period.
T  R  E   T   C    H
S
AICPA
ADAPTED
Balance Sheet
 
December 31,
 
2014 
2013
Assets
Current assets
 Cash 
$  450,000 
$  364,000
 Accounts receivable—net 
692,000 
625,000
 Inventory 
723,000 
610,000
 Prepaid expenses 
50,000 
70,000
  Total current assets 
1,915,000 
1,669,000
Long-term investments 
150,000 
20,000
Property, plant, and equipment 
1,622,000 
815,000
Less: Accumulated depreciation 
(100,000) 
(75,000)
 
1,522,000 
740,000
Total assets 
$3,587,000 
$2,429,000
(continued)
Pittards, PLC
Balance Sheet as at 31 December Year 1
(£ in 000) 
Group 
Company
Fixed assets 
 
Tangible fixed assets 
£ 6,235 
£    631
Investments 
— 
3,368
 
6,235 
3,999
Current assets 
 
Stocks 
6,086 
—
Debtors 
3,509 
11,943
Cash at bank and in hand 
21 
—
 
9,616 
11,943
Creditors—amounts falling due within one year
Bank loans and overdrafts 
(971) 
(971)
Trade creditors 
(3,137) 
—
Other creditors 
(3,733) 
(13,889)
 
(7,841) 
(14,860)
Net current assets (liabilities) 
1,775 
(2,917)
 Total assets less current liabilities 
8,010 
1,082
Creditors—amounts falling due after more than one year 
(3,004) 
(428)
Provisions for liabilities and charges 
(520) 
(13)
Net assets before pension scheme liability 
4,486 
641
Pension scheme liability 
— 
—
 Net assets (liabilities) after pension scheme liability 
4,486 
641
Capital and reserves 
 
Called up share capital 
2,233 
2,233
Share premium account 
4,214 
4,214
Capital redemption reserve 
8,158 
8,158
Revaluation reserve 
2,335 
—
Capital reserve 
6,475 
—
Profit and loss account 
(18,434) 
(13,469)
Own shares 
(495) 
(495)
Shareholders’ funds 
4,486 
641

 
Cases 
237
a. All accounts receivable and accounts payable are related to trade merchandise. Accounts 
payable are recorded net and always are paid to take all the discounts allowed. The allow-
ance for doubtful accounts at the end of 2014 was the same as at the end of 2013; no 
 receivables were charged against the allowance during 2014.
b. The proceeds from the note payable were used to finance a new warehouse. Capital stock 
was sold to provide additional working capital.
Required:
1. Calculate the cash collected during 2014 from accounts receivable.
2. Calculate the cash payments during 2014 on accounts payable to suppliers.
3. Calculate the cash provided from operations for 2014.
4. Calculate the cash inflows during 2014 from financing activities.
5. Calculate the cash outflows from investing activities during 2014.
 
December 31,
 
2014 
2013
Liabilities and Stockholders’ Equity
Current liabilities
 Accounts payable 
$  399,000 
$  451,000
 Accrued expenses 
185,000 
179,000
 Dividends payable 
50,000 
—
  Total current liabilities 
634,000 
630,000
Notes payable—due 2017 
750,000 
—
Stockholders’ Equity
 Common stock 
1,400,000 
1,300,000
 Retained earnings 
803,000 
499,000
  Total stockholders’ equity 
2,203,000 
1,799,000
Total liabilities and stockholders’ equity 
$3,587,000 
$2,429,000
Income Statements
 
Years Ended December 31,
 
2014 
2013
Net credit sales 
$7,200,000 
$6,500,000
Cost of goods sold 
4,320,000 
3,900,000
Gross profit 
2,880,000 
2,600,000
Operating expenses (including income taxes) 
2,376,000 
2,145,000
Net income 
$  504,000 
$  455,000
Crash Zone Corporation: 
Understanding the relation 
between successive balance 
sheets and the cash flow 
statement (LO 5, 6, 8)
C4-5
Following is Crash Zone Corporation’s balance sheet at the end of 2013 and its cash flow 
statement for 2014. Crash zone manufactures safety equipment for race cars.
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
T  R  E   T   C    H
S
Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2013
Assets
Current assets
 Cash 
$  8,250
 Accounts receivable—net 
7,110
 Inventory 
14,221
 Prepaid assets 
1,850
  Total current assets 
31,431
Land 
30,278
Building and equipment 
222,665
Less: Accumulated depreciation, building and equipment 
(41,115)
Total assets 
$243,259
(continued)

238 
CHAPTER 4
Structure of the Balance Sheet and Statement of Cash Flows
Additional Information:
a. During 2014, 500 shares of common stock were sold to the public.
b. Land was sold during 2014 at an amount equal to its original cost.
Required:
Use the preceding information to derive Crash Zone’s balance sheet at the end of 2014.
Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2013
Liabilities and Stockholders’ Equity
Current liabilities
 Accounts payable 
$ 13,500
 Accrued expenses 
4,888
  Total current liabilities 
18,388
Long-term debt 
31,500
Stockholders’ equity 
 Common stock, $10.00 par value 
21,552
 Paid-in capital 
45,002
 Retained earnings 
146,872
 Less: Treasury stock 
(20,005)
Total liabilities and stockholders’ equity 
$243,259
Statement of Cash Flows for Year Ended December 31, 2014
Operating activities
 Net income 
$ 15,750
 Plus (minus) noncash items 
  1Depreciation expense 
6,210
 Plus (minus) changes in current asset and liability accounts 
  2Increase in inventory 
(350)
  1Decrease in prepaid assets 
102
  2Decrease in accrued expenses 
(655)
  2Increase in accounts receivable 
(3,178)
  2Decrease in accounts payable 
(1,230)
 Cash provided by operating activities 
16,649
Investing activities
 Purchase of equipment 
(27,910)
 Proceeds from the sale of land 
6,555
 Cash used by investing activities 
$(21,355)
Financing activities
 Issuance of long-term debt 
  8,900
 Issuance of common stock 
23,000
 Cash dividends paid 
(12,200)
 Purchase of treasury stock 
(7,513)
 Cash provided by financing activities 
12,187
Net cash flow 
$  7,481
.mhhe.com/revsine6e
www
Remember to check the book’s companion website 
for additional study material.

5
“Investors would be well advised to shut out all the yammering about 
 earnings expectations, consensus forecasts, and whisper numbers and focus 
instead on the financial information reported by companies themselves.”1
A 
firm’s financial statements are like an optical lens. If you know how to look 
through them, you can see more clearly what is going on at the firm. Has prof-
itability improved? Are customers paying their bills promptly? How was the 
new manufacturing plant financed? Financial statements hold the answers to these and 
other questions. They can tell us how the company got to where it is today, and they can 
help us forecast where the company might be tomorrow.
 
This chapter provides an overview of four financial analysis tools—cause-of-change 
analysis, common-size statements, trend statements, and financial ratios. We show 
how to use each tool to analyze profitability and credit risk, and we explain how to in-
terpret the results from each. An important message in this chapter is that all financial 
analysis tools are built around reported accounting data, and no financial analysis is 
better than the data on which it relies. What financial data a company chooses to 
 report and how the data are reported affect not only the financial statements them-
selves but also the ratios and other statistics derived from those statements.
 
Introducing financial analysis tools at this early point prepares you for later chapters 
in which we describe various financial reporting alternatives and their effects on ratios, 
trends, and other comparisons.
BASIC APPROACHES
Analysts use financial statements and financial data in many ways and for many differ-
ent purposes. Two purposes you should know are time-series analysis and cross- 
sectional analysis.
 
Time-series analysis helps identify trends for a single company or business unit. For 
example, an analyst studying Intel might be interested in determining the rate of growth 
in the company’s sales or the degree to which its earnings have fluctuated historically 
5
Essentials of Financial 
Statement Analysis
239
Chapter
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you 
will understand:
1. How cause-of-change analysis and 
common-size and trend statements 
illuminate complex financial statement 
patterns and shed light on business 
activities.
2. How competitive forces and business 
strategies affect a company’s profit-
ability and financial position.
3. How return on assets (ROA) can be 
used to analyze a company’s profit-
ability, and what insights are gained 
from disaggregating ROA into its 
profit margin and asset turnover 
components.
4. How return on common equity 
(ROCE) can be used to assess the 
 effect of financial leverage on 
profitability.
5. How short-term liquidity risk differs 
from long-term solvency risk, and 
what financial ratios are helpful in 
 assessing these two dimensions of 
credit risk.
6. How to use cash flow statement 
 information when assessing credit risk.
7. How to interpret the results of an 
analysis of profitability and risk.
8. How to prepare and analyze business 
segment disclosures.
1 G. Morgenson, “Flying Blind in a Fog of Data,” The New York Times, June 18, 2000.

240 
CHAPTER 5
Essentials of Financial Statement Analysis
with inflation, business cycles, foreign currency exchange rates, or changes in economic 
growth in domestic or foreign markets.
Cross-sectional analysis helps identify similarities and differences across 
companies or business units at a single point in time. The analyst might compare 
the 2014 profitability of one company in an industry to a competitor’s profitabil-
ity in the same year. A related analytic tool—benchmark comparison— 
measures a company’s performance or condition against some predetermined 
standard. For example, commercial lending agreements often require the bor-
rowing company to maintain minimum dollar levels of working capital or tangible net worth. 
Once the loan has been granted, the lender—a bank or insurance company—monitors compli-
ance by comparing the borrower’s reported financial amounts and ratios to those specified in the 
loan agreement.
Financial Statement Analysis and Accounting Quality
Cause-of-change analysis, common-size statements, trend statements, and financial ratios are 
powerful tools for understanding how a company got where it is today and where the company 
might be heading tomorrow. But because these tools are built around reported accounting data, 
they are no better than the data on which they rely. A company that uses aggressive accounting 
methods to appear more profitable will also present a more favorable picture in a financial analy-
sis. Analysts need a thorough understanding of accounting rules and a keen eye for information in 
the financial statement notes so they are aware of how accounting rules and choices have affected 
the reported results. Only then can they use financial analysis tools to their full advantage.
 
Analysts use financial statement information to “get behind the numbers”—that is, to see 
more clearly the economic activities and condition of a company and its prospects (see 
 Figure 5.1). However, financial statements do not always provide a complete and faithful 
 picture of a company’s activities and condition. The raw data needed for a complete and faith-
ful picture do not always reach the financial reports because the information is filtered by 
generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) and by management’s accounting discre-
tion. Both factors can distort the reported information and the analyst’s view of the company.
 
Let’s see how the financial reporting “filter” works with equipment leases. GAAP requires 
each lease to be classified as either a capital lease or an operating lease, and it requires only 
Tangible net worth is usually defined as total 
tangible assets minus total liabilities; tangible 
assets exclude intangibles such as goodwill, 
 patents, and trademarks.
GAAP
accounting rules
and
Management discretion
• Accounting methods
• Accounting estimates
• Transaction structure
  and timing
Raw
financial
data
Analyst’s task:
See what’s behind the numbers!
GAAP
financial
data
Financial
Reports
Business fundamentals:
Economic activities
and conditions
Figure 5.1 THE FINANCIAL REPORTING FILTER AND THE ANALYST’S TASK

 
Basic Approaches 
241
capital leases to be reported in the balance sheet. Operating leases are “off-balance-sheet” 
items—meaning they are not included in the reported asset and liability numbers but are in-
stead disclosed in notes that accompany the financial statements. (We’ll see how and why this 
is so in Chapter 12.) So GAAP requires that capital leases “pass through the filter” to the bal-
ance sheet, but it filters out operating leases, sending them to the notes. Analysts can—and 
do—use these notes to recast the balance sheet so that all equipment leases are treated the 
same way, and the GAAP filter is overcome.
 
Management discretion can cloud financial analysis in several ways. For example, man-
agers who understand GAAP can structure transactions to achieve particular financial report-
ing results. Do you, as a manager, want to keep equipment leases off the balance sheet? If so, 
then structure your company’s lease contracts to meet the GAAP rules for an operating lease. 
Doing so keeps the leases off your balance sheet and lowers reported debt, as well as financial 
ratios intended to measure the degree of financial leverage.
 
Management discretion can also complicate an analyst’s task in areas where GAAP allows 
managers to choose freely from among alternative reporting methods. For example, some 
companies account for inventory using the first-in first-out (FIFO) method; others use last-in 
first-out (LIFO). These alternative methods can produce very different balance sheet and in-
come statement figures and, as a result, numerous financial ratios and comparisons can be 
affected (Chapter 9). Here, too, the analyst can sometimes use information disclosed in the 
notes to recast the reported financial results and thereby eliminate the filtering effect of man-
agement discretion.
 
Management also has discretion over accounting estimates and 
the timing of business transactions. Consider estimated bad debts, 
management’s forecast of the amount of current credit sales that 
will never be collected from customers. A reduction in estimated 
bad debts could mean that customer credit quality has improved—
that is, more credit customers are now expected to pay their bills. 
Or it could mean the bad debt estimate was reduced to meet a 
quarterly earnings goal. Similar questions arise over the timing of 
discretionary expenditures for advertising, research and devel-
opment (R&D), or information technology. Did advertising ex-
pense decline because the current ad program was a resounding success or because 
management curtailed spending this quarter to meet an earnings goal? In other words, have 
business fundamentals improved, or is the appearance of improvement due simply to “earn-
ings management”?
 
Conflicts of interest pose another potential threat to the quality of financial reports. Con-
flicts of interest arise when what is good for one party (for example, management) isn’t neces-
sarily good for another party (say, lenders or outside investors). Take the case of Adelphia 
Communications, a provider of cable entertainment and communication services. In March 
2002, Adelphia revealed for the first time the existence of $2.6 billion in previously unre-
ported off-balance-sheet liabilities. Over the next several months, lenders and investors 
learned that Adelphia’s top executives—including the company’s founder and his family 
members—had deliberately shifted bank loans totaling $2.6 billion from Adelphia’s books 
to the books of unconsolidated affiliates controlled by the family. What happened to the 
$2.6 billion that was originally borrowed? Family members used it to buy Adelphia stock, 
construct a golf course, pay off personal loans, and purchase luxury condominiums in 
 Colorado, Mexico, and New York City—uses unrelated to the original business purpose of the 
bank loans. By June 2002, Adelphia and more than 200 of its subsidiaries and affiliates had 
filed for bankruptcy.
GAAP and management discretion can sometimes make the 
analyst’s task easier by illuminating aspects of the company’s 
activities and condition. For example, GAAP requires com-
panies to disclose sales and operating income by business 
segment—information that few companies would otherwise 
make available. Similarly, management sometimes goes far 
beyond GAAP’s minimum reporting requirements by 
 disclosing financial and nonfinancial operating details that 
are invaluable to analysts.

242 
CHAPTER 5
Essentials of Financial Statement Analysis
Companies have an obligation to disclose 
business transactions that involve potential con-
flicts of interest. Adelphia concealed from lend-
ers and investors that billions of dollars had 
been given to affiliates controlled by the found-
er’s family and how the money was being spent. 
Adelphia violated GAAP by systematically 
hiding the debt on the books of the affiliates. 
The company also violated Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) guidelines by report-
ing misleading information. Lenders and investors were caught unaware.
When related-party transactions occur, GAAP requires companies to disclose the 
nature of the relationship, provide a description of the transactions, and report the 
dollar amount of the transactions and any amounts due to or from related parties. 
A high level of disclosure is required because related-party transactions do not re-
sult from “arm’s-length” negotiations between independent parties in a competi-
tive marketplace. See FASB Accounting Standards Codification Topic 850: 
Related-Party Disclosures.
RECAP
The message here is simply that analysts must always be vigilant about the possibility that 
accounting distortions are present and complicate the interpretation of financial ratios, 
percentage relations, and trend indices. That’s why each chapter of this book alerts you to 
 potential accounting distortions and then shows you how to eliminate those distortions. 
Only then can you reliably assess a company’s profitability and credit risk. So, remember 
that the first step to informed financial statement analysis is a careful evaluation of the 
quality of the company’s reported accounting numbers. No tool of financial statement 
analysis is completely immune to distortions caused by GAAP or by management’s 
 reporting choices.
A CASE IN POINT: GETTING BEHIND THE NUMBERS 
AT WHOLE FOODS MARKET
In 1978, twenty-five year old college dropout John Mackey and twenty-one year old Rene Lawson 
Hardy, borrowed $45,000 from family and friends to open the doors of a small natural foods 
store called SaferWay in Austin, Texas (the name being a spoof of Safeway, which operated 
 grocery stores under their own name in Austin at that time). When the couple got booted out of 
their apartment for storing food products there, they decided to simply live at the store. Since 
it was zoned commercial, there was no shower stall. Instead, they bathed in the Hobart 
 dishwasher, which had an attached water hose.
 
Two years later, John and Rene partnered with Craig Weller and Mark Skiles to merge Safer-
Way with their Clarksville Natural Grocery, resulting in the opening of the original Whole 
Foods Market on September 20, 1980.2
Natural and organic food is one of the fastest growing segments of food retailing today, and 
Whole Foods Market is the dominant player with 335 stores in the United States, Canada, and 
the United Kingdom as of September 30, 2012. The company’s stores offer an extensive selec-
tion of high-quality food products that promote a healthy lifestyle, and high levels of customer 
service. Flagship Whole Foods stores combine an old-fashioned neighborhood grocery with 
an organic farmers’ market, a European bakery, a New York deli, and a modern supermarket.3 
Patrons select from among more than 30,000 natural and organic items that include an exten-
sive selection of fruits, vegetables, cheese, fish, and seafood as well as meat and poultry. 
Perishable foods account for about 67% of sales.
 
Because competition in the grocery business is local, each Whole Foods store offers a cus-
tomized product mix. For example, the Austin, Texas, store carries products from small local 
producers and vendors—from salsas to tofu to tabbouleh to humus, to hundreds of other items 
2 Whole Foods Market, Inc., corporate website.
3 In addition to its signature banner, the company also operates stores under the trade names of Bread & Circus, Fresh Fields, 
Wellspring Grocery, Merchant of Vino, and Wild Oats Markets, among others.

 
A Case in Point: Getting Behind the Numbers at Whole Foods Market 
243
unique to that store. Some stores also offer special services such as massage, valet parking, 
and home delivery. The retail stores are supported by regional offices and distribution centers, 
bake house facilities, commissary kitchens, seafood processing facilities, produce procure-
ment centers, a national meat purchasing office, a confectionary, and a specialty coffee and tea 
procurement and brewing operation.
 
New store openings, acquisitions of competitors, and organic growth—more customers 
spending more dollars at existing stores—have all contributed to the company’s rapid growth. 
Sales increased at a 26% compound annual growth rate between 1991 and 2012. Sales in 2012 
were $11.7 billion, up 15.7% from 2011. Net income in 2012 was $466 million, up almost 
36% from 2011, and operating cash flows were strong at $920 million.
 
Food retailing was once an intensely personalized business. People bought food directly from 
local farmers or neighborhood shops. Owners of the early mom-and-pop stores often lived in the 
same neighborhood where their businesses were located. They were “close to the customer” and 
knew their customers’ names and ages, where they lived and worked, and their grocery likes and 
dislikes. In the 1950s, large numbers of people began to migrate from cities to suburbs.  Merchants 
followed them, leading to explosive growth in shopping centers and, eventually, to the formation 
of giant grocery chains. Large supermarkets came to dominate the retail landscape.
 
Today, retail grocery chains act as intermediaries, bringing producers and consumers to-
gether. They buy products from many suppliers and transport those products to retail stores 
where customers can choose among them. Store hours are often long to suit the varying 
schedules of a complex society.
 
The grocery industry remains one of the most fragmented U.S. retail sectors. According to 
Progressive Grocer, the grocery industry had 2011 sales of $584 billion, up 3.8% from 2010. 
According to Plunkett Research, which also included nontraditional grocery stores such as 
wholesale clubs in its definition of the grocery industry, 2011 sales exceeded $1 trillion. And, 
according to Supermarket News, every company in its 2012 “Top 75” achieved sales in excess 
of $1 billion.
 
According to Natural Foods Merchandiser, 2011 sales within the narrower natural foods 
product category were $73 billion, a 10% increase over 2010. Whole Foods attributes this 
growth to heightened awareness of healthy eating, a better-educated and aging population, 
and increasing concerns for food safety and the environment. However, grocery retailing has 
always been a low-margin business, characterized by intense price competition. As a result, 
cost control is imperative in the industry.
 
Now that you have an understanding of the business and the industry—an essential starting 
point for financial statement analysis—let’s take a look at Whole Foods’ financial statements.
Examining Whole Foods Market’s Financial Statements
Exhibit 5.1 provides comparative income statements for Whole Foods Market. It shows that 
sales increased from $8.0 billion in 2009 to $11.7 billion in 2012, a compound annual growth 
rate of 13.4%. These figures reflect revenue from natural and organic grocery products and 
other items sold at the company’s retail stores. But sales growth is only part of the story at 
Whole Foods. Net income also grew over this period, from $147 million to $466 million.
Cause-of-Change Analysis 
There are many reasons why Whole Foods’ net in-
come grew so much from 2009 to 2012. As we have already seen, sales were up over the pe-
riod. But Whole Foods’ operating margin (operating income divided by sales) was higher as 
well. And, Whole Foods’ effective income tax rate (income tax provision divided by income 
before  income taxes) was lower. To what extent did each of these components account for the 
net income change?

244 
CHAPTER 5
Essentials of Financial Statement Analysis
 
One way to quantify the components of change is with a “cause-of-change analysis.” The 
idea is to show the effects of individual changes on the change in net income. We do this by 
creating a simple model that describes net income and then by changing one component of the 
model at a time from the 2009 value to the 2012 value. With each change, we observe the ef-
fect on net income until we have changed every component of the model from the 2009 value 
to the 2012 value.
 
Here is the model we will use:
EXHIBIT 5.1
Whole Foods Market
Comparative Income Statements
($ in thousands) 
2012 
2011 
2010 
2009
Sales 
$11,698,828 
$10,107,787 
$9,005,794 
$8,031,620
Cost of goods sold and occupancy costs 
7,543,054 
6,571,238 
5,869,519 
5,276,493
 Gross profit 
4,155,774 
3,536,549 
3,136,275 
2,755,127
Direct store expenses 
2,983,419 
2,628,811 
2,376,590 
2,146,626
General and administrative expenses 
372,065 
310,920 
272,449 
243,749
Pre-opening expenses 
46,899 
40,852 
38,044 
49,218
Relocation, store closure and lease 
 termination costs 
9,885 
8,346 
11,217 
31,185
 Operating income 
743,506 
547,620 
437,975 
284,349
Interest expense 
(354) 
(3,882) 
(33,048) 
(36,856)
Investment and other income 
8,892 
7,974 
6,854 
3,449
 Income before income taxes 
752,044 
551,712 
411,781 
250,942
Provision for income taxes 
286,471 
209,100 
165,948 
104,138
 Net income 
$   465,573 
$   342,612 
$  245,833 
$  146,804
EXHIBIT 5.2
Whole Foods Market
Simple Financial Model Representation of Net Income
($ in thousands) 
2009 
2012
Sales 
$8,031,620 
$11,698,828
3 Operating margin % 
3.540369% 
6.355389%
 Operating income 
284,349 
743,506
Interest and investment income (expense), net 
(33,407) 
8,538
 Income before income taxes 
250,942 
752,044
3 [1 2 effective income tax rate] 
0.585012 
0.619077
 Net income 
$  146,804 
$   465,573
 
Operating income 5 Sales 3 Operating margin %
 Income before income taxes 5 Operating income 1  Interest and investment income 
 
(expense), net
 
Net income 5 Income before income taxes 3  (1 2 Effective income 
tax rate)
 
Using this model, we can describe 2009 and 2012 net income as shown in Exhibit 5.2. 
Note that this is not a traditional income statement. Rather, it shows a computation of net in-
come based on the inputs to the model we have developed.

 
A Case in Point: Getting Behind the Numbers at Whole Foods Market 
245
 
Now suppose we were to change sales from the 2009 level to the 2012 level, holding all 
other inputs to the model constant at the 2009 level. As the “Change Sales” column of 
Exhibit 5.3 shows, operating income would be $11,698,828,000 times 3.540369%, or 
$414,182,000. This is not an actual operating income amount for any period. Rather, it is 
the hypothetical operating income that would have been achieved if sales had grown as 
they did, but operating margin percentage remained unchanged. Subtracting 2009 interest 
and investment expense, net, would give $380,775,000 of income before taxes. Multiply-
ing that amount by one minus the 2009 effective tax rate would result in net income of 
$222,758,000. In other words, given Whole Foods’ roughly $3.7 billion increase in sales, 
had the company maintained the same operating margin percentage, the same interest and 
investment income and expense, and the same effective income tax rate, net income would 
have been about $222.8 million. So, the sales increase from 2009 to 2012 accounted for 
$76.0 million ($222.8 million minus $146.8 million) of the increase in net income over 
that period.
 
Continuing with Exhibit 5.3, we next change the operating margin percentage from its 
2009 level to its 2012 level, holding sales constant at the 2012 level of $11.7 billion and all 
other parameters at their 2009 levels. The resulting additional change is attributable to operat-
ing margin expansion. That is, margin expansion accounted for about $193 million of the in-
crease in net income. Then we change the interest and investment income (expense), net and 
finally the effective income tax rate. When we are done, we will have explained the entirety of 
the change in net income from 2009 to 2012.
 
Cause-of-change analysis is a useful tool because it allows us to understand which factors 
most influenced the change in net income. Despite Whole Foods’ excellent sales growth over 
the three-year period, only about 24% of the increase in net income was a direct result of sales 
growth. About 60% of the profit increase was attributable to operating margin expansion, with 
the remainder due to changes in interest and investment income and a decline in the effective 
income tax rate. A forecaster might use this information and, believing that substantial 
Cause-of-Change Analysis
 
 
Change 
Change 
Change 
Change
($ in thousands) 
2009 
Sales 
Margin 
Int./Inv. 
Tax Rate
Sales 
$8,031,620 
$11,698,828 
$11,698,828 
$11,698,828 
$11,698,828
3 Operating margin % 
3.540369% 
3.540369% 
6.355389% 
6.355389% 
6.355389%
 Operating income 
284,349 
414,182 
743,506 
743,506 
743,506
Interest and investment income (expense), net 
(33,407) 
(33,407) 
(33,407) 
8,538 
8,538
 Income before income taxes 
250,942 
380,775 
710,099 
752,044 
752,044
3 [1 2 effective income tax rate] 
0.585012 
0.585012 
0.585012 
0.585012 
0.619077
 Net income 
$  146,804 
$   222,758 
$   415,416 
$   439,955 
$   465,573
Effect of change 
 
$    75,954 
$   192,658 
$    24,538 
$    25,618
Cause-of-Change Analysis:
2009 net income 
$  146,804
Effect of sales growth 
75,954
Effect of margin expansion 
192,658
Effect of change in interest and investment income 
24,539
Effect of decrease in income tax rate 
25,618
 2012 net income 
$  465,573
EXHIBIT 5.3
Whole Foods Market

246 
CHAPTER 5
Essentials of Financial Statement Analysis
 additional margin expansion is unlikely, temper earnings growth forecasts for future years to 
be more in line with growth rates in sales.
 
Note that a cause-of-change analysis is not just a simple line-by-line comparison of income 
statement amounts in two years. We determined the effect of sales growth by considering all 
the other income statement changes that would follow naturally from an increase in sales. 
That is, operating earnings would increase when sales increase, but not dollar-for-dollar due 
to the increased operating costs and income tax provision that would go hand in hand with a 
sales increase.
Common-Size and Trend Analysis Income Statements 
Financial ana-
lysts use common-size and trend statements of net income to help spot changes in a compa-
ny’s cost structure and profit performance. Common-size income statements (top of Exhibit 
5.4) recast each statement item as a percentage of sales. Common-size income statements 
show you how much of each sales dollar the company spent on operating expenses and other 
business costs and how much of each sales dollar hit the bottom line as profit. For example, 
Whole Foods Market’s direct store expenses for 2012 are shown as 25.5% of 2012 sales 
(25.5% 5 $2,983,419 direct store expenses2012/$11,698,828 sales2012) instead of the dollar 
amount. This means 25.5 cents of each 2012 sales dollar was spent on direct store costs. That 
leaves 74.5 cents of each 2012 sales dollar to cover the wholesale cost of grocery products 
sold and other business costs and to provide a profit for the year.
 
The trend statements (bottom of Exhibit 5.4) also recast each statement item in percentage 
terms, but they do so using a base year number rather than sales. Trend statements help you 
spot increases and decreases over time in each income statement item. For instance, the trend 
statements of income show Whole Foods Market’s 2012 net income as 317.1% of base year 
2009 net income. This means net income in 2012 was more than three times what it was in 
2009 ($465.6 million versus $146.8 million). The trend statements of income also show 2012 
sales were 145.7% of base year 2009 sales, which translates into a 45.7% cumulative rate of 
sales growth over three years.
 
The common-size and trend statements of net income reveal several interesting aspects of 
the company’s profit performance:
• The trend statements indicate that sales increased substantially over the three-year period 
and that this growth occurred roughly evenly across the three years.
• The trend statements also indicate that net income growth greatly exceeded sales growth. 
These results are consistent with the margin expansion we quantified in the cause-of-
change analysis.
• According to the common-size statements, over time there were only small fluctuations in 
operating expense items such as direct store expenses, and cost of goods sold and occu-
pancy costs. But in the low margin grocery business, these small fluctuations can have a 
large effect on profit margins. The main reasons net income jumped to 4.0% of sales in 
2012 from 1.8% in 2009 were the 1.2 percentage-point decreases in both cost of goods 
sold and occupancy costs and direct store expenses. While a 2.2 percentage point increase 
in profit margin may seem small, the result was that net income, as a percent of sales, 
more than doubled.
 
The trend statements show that sales increased 45.7% over three years. What factors con-
tributed to this growth? Whole Foods’ Form 10-K discloses information about the number of 
stores open at the beginning and end of each year. We can use this information to understand 

 
A Case in Point: Getting Behind the Numbers at Whole Foods Market 
247
better the extent to which the sales growth has been driven by additional stores or by growth 
in sales per store. Exhibit 5.5 indicates the number of stores open at the beginning and end of 
each year since 2009. Assuming that store openings occur approximately evenly throughout 
the year, we can estimate the average number of stores open during each year by taking a 
simple average of the beginning and ending numbers. We can then compute average sales per 
store. The exhibit shows that both the number of stores and the sales per store were growing 
from 2009 to 2012. From the beginning of 2009 to the end of 2012, Whole Foods added 60 
new stores (3352275), net of closures, a 22% increase in the number of stores open in four 
years. And, sales per store grew 26%, from $28.7 million to $36.2 million. We can also use a 
cause-of-change analysis to quantify each of these effects on sales. Exhibit 5.5 shows that 
$1.25 billion of the increase in sales since 2009 was attributable to new store openings, while 
$2.42 billion was due to growth in sales per store.
EXHIBIT 5.4
Whole Foods Market
Common-Size and Trend Analysis of Income
Common-Size Statements
(% of  sales) 
2012 
2011 
2010 
2009
Sales 
100.0% 
100.0% 
100.0% 
100.0%
Cost of goods sold and occupancy costs 
64.5 
65.0 
65.2 
65.7
 Gross profit 
35.5 
35.0 
34.8 
34.3
Direct store expenses 
25.5 
26.0 
26.4 
26.7
General and administrative expenses 
3.2 
3.1 
3.0 
3.0
Pre-opening expenses 
0.4 
0.4 
0.4 
0.6
Relocation, store closure and lease 
 termination costs 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.4
 Operating income 
6.4 
5.4 
4.9 
3.5
Interest expense 
(0.0) 
(0.0) 
(0.4) 
(0.5)
Investment and other income 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.0
Income before income taxes 
6.4 
5.5 
4.6 
3.1
Provision for income taxes 
2.4 
2.1 
1.8 
1.3
 Net income 
4.0% 
3.4% 
2.7% 
1.8%
Trend Statements (2009 5 100%)
(% of  sales) 
2012 
2011 
2010 
2009
Sales 
145.7% 
125.8% 
112.1% 
100.0%
Cost of goods sold and occupancy costs 
143.0 
124.5 
111.2 
100.0
 Gross profit 
150.8 
128.4 
113.8 
100.0
Direct store expenses 
139.0 
122.5 
110.7 
100.0
General and administrative expenses 
152.6 
127.6 
111.8 
100.0
Pre-opening expenses 
95.3 
83.0 
77.3 
100.0
Relocation, store closure and lease 
 termination costs 
31.7 
26.8 
36.0 
100.0
 Operating income 
261.5 
192.6 
154.0 
100.0
Interest expense 
1.0 
10.5 
89.7 
100.0
Investment and other income 
257.8 
231.2 
198.7 
100.0
 Income before income taxes 
299.7 
219.9 
164.1 
100.0
Provision for income taxes 
275.1 
200.8 
159.4 
100.0
 Net income 
317.1% 
233.4% 
167.5% 
100.0%
Note: Percentages are rounded.

248 
CHAPTER 5
Essentials of Financial Statement Analysis
EXHIBIT 5.5
Whole Foods Market
Store Analysis 
2012 
2011 
2010 
2009
Stores open at beginning of year 
311 
299 
284 
275
Stores open at end of year 
335 
311 
299 
284
Average number of stores open 
 during year 
323.0 
305.0 
291.5 
279.5
($ in thousands)
Sales 
$11,698,828 
$10,107,787 
$9,005,794 
$8,031,620
Sales per store 
$       36,219 
$       33,140 
$     30,895 
$     28,736
Cause-of-change analysis for sales:
2009 sales 
$ 8,031,620
Sales growth due to new store openings 
1,250,002
Sales assuming 2009 sales per store 
 and 2012 number of stores(*) 
9,281,622
Sales growth due to increase 
 in sales per store 
2,417,206
 2012 sales 
$11,698,828
(*) 323.0 x $28,735.671 (unrounded average store sales in 2009)
Common-Size and Trend Analysis Balance Sheets 
Exhibit 5.6 shows 
Whole Foods Market’s comparative balance sheets. Historically, the company’s assets have been 
concentrated in the stores themselves, represented by the Property and equipment, Goodwill, 
and Merchandise inventories accounts. However, due to its strong cash flow in recent years, 
Whole Foods has built up substantial investments in “available-for-sale” securities, which are 
discussed in Chapter 16. By the end of fiscal 2012, Whole Foods had accumulated more than 
$1.3 billion in investments (of which $1.1 billion was classified as current and $0.2 billion was 
classified as noncurrent). To finance its various operating assets, the company has relied on a 
combination of vendor payables (in Accounts payable), long-term debt, and common stock 
along with internally generated resources represented by Retained earnings.
 
The common-size balance sheets and trend analyses provided in Exhibit 5.7 (Assets) and 
Exhibit 5.8 (Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity) highlight changes in asset mix and financial 
structure, respectively. Consider the composition of Whole Foods’ assets in 2012. According 
to the common-size statements in Exhibit 5.7, Property and equipment made up 41.4% of that 
year’s total assets compared to 50.2% in 2009. Exhibit 5.8 provides the liabilities and share-
holders’ equity sections of the common-size balance sheet and trend analysis. It shows a 
substantial reduction in the use of debt by Whole Foods, or a “de-levering” of the company, as 
long-term debt has fallen from 19.5% of total assets in 2009 to 0.4% in 2012. This drop indi-
cates that Whole Foods has paid down debt using its strong operating cash flow. As a result, 
shareholders’ equity has increased from 43.0% of total assets in 2009 to 71.8% in 2012.
 
Why was there such a large decrease in Property and equipment as a percentage of total 
assets? Did the company somehow become less capital intensive? And is the decline in 
Property and equipment somehow related to the de-levering of the company? In a 
 common-size financial statement, all balance sheet items are rescaled so that total assets 
are shown as 100.0. So, a decrease in Property and equipment must correspond to an 
 increase in some other asset. We see that other asset is the available-for-sale securities we 
mentioned earlier, which grew from zero in 2009 to 25.6% of total assets in 2012. The 
company did not really become less capital intensive. In fact, Property and equipment 

 
A Case in Point: Getting Behind the Numbers at Whole Foods Market 
249
Comparative Balance Sheets
($ in thousands) 
2012 
2011 
2010 
2009
Assets
Current assets:
 Cash and cash equivalents 
$     89,016 
$   212,004 
$   131,996 
$   430,130
 Short-term investments—available for sale securities 
1,131,213 
442,320 
329,738
 Restricted cash 
102,873 
91,956 
86,802 
71,023
 Accounts receivable 
196,503 
175,310 
133,346 
104,731
 Merchandise inventories 
374,269 
336,799 
323,487 
310,602
 Prepaid expenses and other current assets 
76,511 
73,579 
54,686 
51,137
 Deferred income taxes 
132,246 
121,176 
101,464 
87,757
  Total current assets 
2,102,631 
1,453,144 
1,161,519 
1,055,380
Property and equipment, net 
2,192,683 
1,997,212 
1,886,130 
1,897,853
Long-term investments—available for sale securities 
221,426 
52,815 
96,146
Goodwill 
662,938 
662,938 
665,224 
658,254
Intangible assets, net 
62,399 
67,234 
69,064 
73,035
Deferred income taxes 
42,834 
50,148 
99,156 
91,000
Other assets 
9,305 
8,584 
9,301 
7,866
  Total assets 
$5,294,216 
$4,292,075 
$3,986,540 
$3,783,388
Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity
Current liabilities:
 Current installments of long-term debt and 
  capital lease obligations 
$       1,012 
$          466 
$          410 
$          389
 Accounts payable 
247,089 
236,913 
213,212 
189,597
 Accrued payroll, bonus and other benefits 
  due team members 
307,164 
281,587 
244,427 
207,983
 Dividends payable 
25,959 
17,827 
 
8,217
 Other current liabilities 
395,964 
342,568 
289,823 
277,838
  Total current liabilities 
977,188 
879,361 
747,872 
684,024
Long-term debt and capital lease obligations, 
 less current installments 
23,110 
17,439 
508,288 
738,848
Deferred lease liabilities 
440,822 
353,776 
294,291 
250,326
Other long-term liabilities 
50,627 
50,194 
62,831 
69,262
  Total liabilities 
1,491,747 
1,300,770 
1,613,282 
1,742,460
Series A redeemable preferred stock 
 
 
 
413,052
Shareholders’ Equity:
 Common stock, no par value 
2,592,369 
2,120,972 
1,773,897 
1,283,028
 Common stock in treasury, at cost 
(28,599)
 Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) 
5,266 
(164) 
791 
(13,367)
 Retained earnings 
1,233,433 
870,497 
598,570 
358,215
  Total shareholders’ equity 
3,802,469 
2,991,305 
2,373,258 
1,627,876
  Total liabilities and shareholders’ equity 
$5,294,216 
$4,292,075 
$3,986,540 
$3,783,388
EXHIBIT 5.6 
Whole Foods Market
grew by 15.5% from 2009 to 2012 (2012 balance is 115.5% of the 2009 balance, from 
Exhibit 5.7 trend analysis). Property and equipment is a smaller portion of total assets be-
cause cash generated by operations has been used to purchase investments rather than 
distributed to shareholders, thus inflating the level of total assets beyond what Whole 
Foods requires to operate its business. Had Whole Foods declared larger dividends or re-
purchased stock rather than making these investments, Property and equipment would 
have been 55.6% of total assets [41.4/(100.0 2 (21.4 1 4.2))], an increase from the 50.2% 

250 
CHAPTER 5
Essentials of Financial Statement Analysis
EXHIBIT 5.7
Whole Foods Market
Common-Size and Trend Analysis of Assets
(% of  total assets) 
2012 
2011 
2010 
2009
Assets
Current assets:
 Cash and cash equivalents 
1.7% 
4.9% 
3.3% 
11.4%
 Short-term investments—available for 
  sale securities 
21.4 
10.3 
8.3 
0.0
 Restricted cash 
1.9 
2.1 
2.2 
1.9
 Accounts receivable 
3.7 
4.1 
3.3 
2.8
 Merchandise inventories 
7.1 
7.8 
8.1 
8.2
 Prepaid expenses and other current assets 
1.4 
1.7 
1.4 
1.4
 Deferred income taxes 
2.5 
2.8 
2.5 
2.3
  Total current assets 
39.7 
33.9 
29.1 
27.9
Property and equipment, net 
41.4 
46.5 
47.3 
50.2
Long-term investments—available for 
 sale securities 
4.2 
1.2 
2.4 
0.0
Goodwill 
12.5 
15.4 
16.7 
17.4
Intangible assets, net 
1.2 
1.6 
1.7 
1.9
Deferred income taxes 
0.8 
1.2 
2.5 
2.4
Other assets 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2
  Total assets 
100.0% 
100.0% 
100.0% 
100.0%
Trend Statements (2009 5 100%)
2012 
2011 
2010 
2009
Assets
Current assets:
 Cash and cash equivalents 
20.7% 
49.3% 
30.7% 
100.0%
 Short-term investments—available for 
  sale securities 
— 
— 
— 
—
 Restricted cash 
144.8 
129.5 
122.2 
100.0
 Accounts receivable 
187.6 
167.4 
127.3 
100.0
 Merchandise inventories 
120.5 
108.4 
104.1 
100.0
 Prepaid expenses and other current assets 
149.6 
143.9 
106.9 
100.0
 Deferred income taxes 
150.7 
138.1 
115.6 
100.0
  Total current assets 
199.2 
137.7 
110.1 
100.0
Property and equipment, net 
115.5 
105.2 
99.4 
100.0
Long-term investments—available for 
 sale securities 
— 
— 
— 
—
Goodwill 
100.7 
100.7 
101.1 
100.0
Intangible assets, net 
85.4 
92.1 
94.6 
100.0
Deferred income taxes 
47.1 
55.1 
109.0 
100.0
Other assets 
118.3 
109.1 
118.2 
100.0
  Total assets 
139.9% 
113.4% 
105.4% 
100.0%
Note: Percentages are rounded. The — denotes a trend percentage that cannot be computed because the 2009 base-
year value is zero.
reported in 2009. In fact, other than the effects of the large increase in investments held, 
Whole Foods’ 2012 asset mix was similar to what it was in 2009.
 
For the reason illustrated above, many analysts think of investments that are not integral to 
the company’s core business operations as “negative debt,” and when such investments are 
substantial, that treatment does give a better sense for how the mix of operating assets might 
have changed over time. This treatment would result in the common-size balance sheets 

EXHIBIT 5.8
Whole Foods Market
Common-Size and Trend Analysis of Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity
Common-Size Statements
(% of  total assets) 
2012 
2011 
2010 
2009
Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity
Current liabilities:
 Current installments of long-term debt 
  and capital lease obligations 
0.0% 
0.0% 
0.0% 
0.0%
 Accounts payable 
4.7 
5.5 
5.3 
5.0
 Accrued payroll, bonus and other 
  benefits due team members 
5.8 
6.6 
6.1 
5.5
 Dividends payable 
0.5 
0.4 
0.0 
0.2
 Other current liabilities 
7.5 
8.0 
7.3 
7.3
  Total current liabilities 
18.5 
20.5 
18.8 
18.1
Long-term debt and capital lease 
 obligations, less current installments 
0.4 
0.4 
12.8 
19.5
Deferred lease liabilities 
8.3 
8.2 
7.4 
6.6
Other long-term liabilities 
1.0 
1.2 
1.6 
1.8
 Total liabilities 
28.2 
30.3 
40.5 
46.1
Series A redeemable preferred stock 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
10.9
Shareholders’ Equity: 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0
 Common stock, no par value 
49.0 
49.4 
44.5 
33.9
 Common stock in treasury, at cost 
(0.5) 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0
 Accumulated other comprehensive 
  income (loss) 
0.1 
(0.0) 
0.0 
(0.4)
 Retained earnings 
23.3 
20.3 
15.0 
9.5
  Total shareholders’ equity 
71.8 
69.7 
59.5 
43.0
  Total liabilities and shareholders’ equity 
100.0% 
100.0% 
100.0% 
100.0%
Trend Statements (2009 5 100%)
2012 
2011 
2010 
2009
Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity
Current liabilities:
 Current installments of long-term debt and 
  capital lease obligations 
260.2% 
119.8% 
105.4% 
100.0%
 Accounts payable 
130.3 
125.0 
112.5 
100.0
 Accrued payroll, bonus and other 
  benefits due team members 
147.7 
135.4 
117.5 
100.0
 Dividends payable 
315.9 
217.0 
0.0 
100.0
 Other current liabilities 
142.5 
123.3 
104.3 
100.0
  Total current liabilities 
142.9 
128.6 
109.3 
100.0
Long-term debt and capital lease 
 obligations, less current installments 
3.1 
2.4 
68.8 
100.0
Deferred lease liabilities 
176.1 
141.3 
117.6 
100.0
Other long-term liabilities 
73.1 
72.5 
90.7 
100.0
  Total liabilities 
85.6 
74.7 
92.6 
100.0
Series A redeemable preferred stock 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
100.0
Shareholders’ Equity:
 Common stock, no par value 
202.1 
165.3 
138.3 
100.0
 Common stock in treasury, at cost 
— 
— 
— 
—
 Accumulated other comprehensive 
  income (loss) 
(39.4) 
1.2 
(5.9) 
100.0
 Retained earnings 
344.3 
243.0 
167.1 
100.0
  Total shareholders’ equity 
233.6 
183.8 
145.8 
100.0
  Total liabilities and shareholders’ equity 
139.9% 
113.4% 
105.4% 
100.0%
Note: Percentages are rounded. The — denotes a trend percentage that cannot be computed because the 2006 base 
year value is zero.

252 
CHAPTER 5
Essentials of Financial Statement Analysis
Common-Size Balance Sheets with Investments Treated as “Negative Debt”
(% of  total assets) 
2012 
2011 
2010 
2009
Assets
Current assets:
 Cash and cash equivalents 
2.3% 
5.6% 
3.7% 
11.4%
 Restricted cash 
2.6 
2.4 
2.4 
1.9
 Accounts receivable 
5.0 
4.6 
3.7 
2.8
 Merchandise inventories 
9.5 
8.9 
9.1 
8.2
 Prepaid expenses and other current assets 
1.9 
1.9 
1.5 
1.4
 Deferred income taxes 
3.4 
3.2 
2.8 
2.3
  Total current assets 
24.6 
26.6 
23.4 
27.9
Property and equipment, net 
55.6 
52.6 
53.0 
50.2
Goodwill 
16.8 
17.5 
18.7 
17.4
Intangible assets, net 
1.6 
1.8 
1.9 
1.9
Deferred income taxes 
1.1 
1.3 
2.8 
2.4
Other assets 
0.2 
0.2 
0.3 
0.2
 Total assets 
100.0% 
100.0% 
100.0% 
100.0%
Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity
Current liabilities:
 Current installments of long-term debt and capital lease obligations 
0.0% 
0.0% 
0.0% 
0.0%
 Accounts payable 
6.3 
6.2 
6.0 
5.0
 Accrued payroll, bonus and other benefits due team members 
7.8 
7.4 
6.9 
5.5
 Dividends payable 
0.7 
0.5 
0.0 
0.2
 Other current liabilities 
10.0 
9.0 
8.1 
7.3
  Total current liabilities 
24.8 
23.2 
21.0 
18.1
Long-term debt and capital lease obligations, less current installments 
0.6 
0.5 
14.3 
19.5
Available for sale securities (negative debt) 
(34.3) 
(13.0) 
(12.0) 
0.0
Deferred lease liabilities 
11.2 
9.3 
8.3 
6.6
Other long-term liabilities 
1.3 
1.3 
1.8 
1.8
 Total liabilities 
3.5 
21.2 
33.3 
46.1
Series A redeemable preferred stock 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
10.9
Shareholders’ Equity:
 Common stock, no par value 
65.8 
55.9 
49.8 
33.9
 Common stock in treasury, at cost 
(0.7) 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0
 Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) 
0.1 
(0.0) 
0.0 
(0.4)
 Retained earnings 
31.3 
22.9 
16.8 
9.5
  Total shareholders’ equity 
96.5 
78.8 
66.7 
43.0
  Total liabilities and shareholders’ equity 
100.0% 
100.0% 
100.0% 
100.0%
EXHIBIT 5.9
Whole Foods Market
 provided in Exhibit 5.9. When we treat the investments as negative debt, we see that Property 
and equipment has actually grown in terms of percentage of assets and most other asset cate-
gories have remained relatively stable. We also see that Whole Foods has greatly de-levered 
since 2009 and it is now in a position where nearly all its liabilities could be satisfied simply 
by liquidating its noncore investments. When viewed this way, virtually all of the company’s 
financing is now coming from equity.
 
Note that no values were shown in the trend analysis for the available-for-sale investments 
 (Exhibit 5.7). Because there were no such investments in 2009, the base year for the analysis, it is 
not possible to compute the trend data for that item. It is also possible that a base year could have a 
nonzero, but very small, amount for a particular item. When that is the case, the values in the trend 
analysis may be unusually large. For example, Whole Foods reported $2.252 million in cash on its 

 
A Case in Point: Getting Behind the Numbers at Whole Foods Market 
253
Comparative Cash Flow Statements
($ in thousands) 
2012 
2011 
2010 
2009
Net income 
$    465,573 
$    342,612 
$    245,833 
$  146,804
Adjustments to reconcile net income to net 
 cash provided by operating activities 
454,142 
412,233 
339,452 
440,917
 Net cash provided by operating activities 
919,715 
754,845 
585,285 
587,721
Development costs of new locations 
(261,710) 
(203,457) 
(171,379) 
(247,999)
Other property and equipment expenditures 
(194,539) 
(161,507) 
(85,414) 
(66,616)
Purchases of available for sale securities 
(3,009,503) 
(1,228,920) 
(1,072,243)
Sales and maturities of available for sale securities 
2,138,221 
1,155,795 
646,594
Increase in restricted cash 
(10,917) 
(5,154) 
(15,779) 
(70,406)
Payment for purchase of acquired entities, 
 net of cash acquired 
 
(1,972) 
(14,470)
Other investing activities 
(2,901) 
(5,509) 
(2,715) 
(1,262)
 Net cash used in investing activities 
(1,341,349) 
(450,724) 
(715,406) 
(386,283)
Common stock dividends paid 
(94,505) 
(52,620)
Preferred stock dividends paid 
 
 
(8,500) 
(19,833)
Issuance of common stock 
370,226 
296,719 
46,962 
4,286
Purchase of treasury stock 
(28,599)
Issuance of redeemable preferred stock 
 
 
 
413,052
Proceeds from long-term borrowing 
 
 
 
123,000
Excess tax benefit related to exercise of team 
 member stock options 
50,349 
22,741 
2,982
Payments on long-term debt and capital lease obligations 
(305) 
(490,394) 
(210,350) 
(318,370)
Other 
 
 
 
(2,680)
 Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities 
297,166 
(223,554) 
(168,906) 
199,455
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents 
1,480 
(559) 
893 
(1,297)
 Net change in cash and cash equivalents 
$   (122,988) 
$      80,008 
$   (298,134) 
$ 399,596
EXHIBIT 5.10
 Whole Foods Market
balance sheet at the end of fiscal 2006, which was an unusually low amount relative to most years. 
In 2009 it reported $430.130 million in cash. A trend analysis using 2006 as a base year would 
report the 2009 value as being 19,099.9% of the base year amount. So, a trend analysis helps you 
spot changes over time, but these changes could be because the base year is an aberration.
Common-Size and Trend Analysis Cash Flow Statements 
 Exhibit 5.10 
provides comparative cash flow statements. Some line items are combined for the sake of 
brevity. Common-size statements and trends for selected line items are in Exhibit 5.11. The 
common-size statements are constructed by dividing each cash flow item by sales for the year. 
For example, Whole Foods Market’s operating activities generated $919.7 million cash (Ex-
hibit 5.10) in 2012, or 7.9% (Exhibit 5.11) of $11.7 billion in sales that year, up from 7.3% in 
2009 (Exhibit 5.11).
 
How does Whole Foods use these operating cash flows? Like most growing retail compa-
nies, it devotes some financial resources to expanding the store base. Therefore, a major use 
of its cash went for new store location development costs and capital expenditures for prop-
erty, plant, and equipment. These two activities used $456.2 million ($261.7 1 $194.5 from 
Exhibit 5.10) in 2012, or 3.9 cents per sales dollar (2.2% 1 1.7% from Exhibit 5.11). Notice 
that the cash generated that year by operating activities (7.9 cents per sales dollar) was more 
than enough to fund retail store expansion. This fact is largely what enabled Whole Foods to 
purchase the available-for-sale securities it built up over the last three years.

254 
CHAPTER 5
Essentials of Financial Statement Analysis
 
But this was not always the situation. Back in 2007, cash generated by operating activities 
was 5.9 cents per sales dollar, which was insufficient to fund retail store expansion of 8.0 cents 
per sales dollar. Also in that year, Whole Foods paid $596 million to acquire Wild Oats Mar-
kets. Where did Whole Foods find the cash in 2007 to fund its retail store expansion, the Wild 
Oats acquisition, and a dividend payment? Some of the funds came from issuing common 
stock ($54.4 million) and some from liquidating short-term investments ($198.3 million), but 
the bulk of it was provided by the issuance of long-term debt ($717.0 million).
 
The years 2012 and 2007 illustrate the nature of the cash flows in various sections of the cash 
flow statement and how they interact. The financing section, as well as purchases and sales of 
noncore investments in the investing section, are largely “facilitating transactions.” These transac-
tions facilitate the needs of the core business operations. A company whose operating cash flow, 
net of reinvestment requirements such as store expansion, is positive, must redeploy its funds, and 
it will do so by some combination of dividends, debt repayments, stock repurchases, and pur-
chases of noncore investments. That is what Whole Foods did in 2012. In contrast, when a firm’s 
cash flow from operations, net of reinvestment requirements, is negative, the firm must obtain the 
necessary funds to offset the negative cash flow. It does so by a combination of debt issuances, 
stock issuances, and sales of noncore investments. That is what Whole Foods did in 2007. The 
end result is often that there is little net change in cash from year to year, despite large amounts of 
cash flow from operations, investing, and  financing, as Exhibits 5.10 and 5.11 illustrate.
EXHIBIT 5.11
Whole Foods Market
Common-Size and Trend Analysis of Selected Cash Flow Items
Common-Size Statements
(% of  sales) 
2012 
2011 
2010 
2009
Selected Items
 Net cash provided by operating activities 
7.9% 
7.5% 
6.5% 
7.3%
 Development costs of new locations 
(2.2) 
(2.0) 
(1.9) 
(3.1)
 Other property and equipment expenditures 
(1.7) 
(1.6) 
(0.9) 
(0.8)
Trend Statements (2009 5 100%)
 
2012 
2011 
2010 
2009
Selected Items
 Net cash provided by operating activities 
156.5% 
128.4% 
99.6% 
100.0%
 Development costs of new store locations 
105.5 
82.0 
69.1 
100.0
 Other property and equipment expenditures 
292.0 
242.4 
128.2 
100.0
RECAP
From our analysis of Whole Foods Market and its financial statements, we can come to 
three conclusions:
• Financial statements help the analyst gain a sharper understanding of the company’s 
economic condition and its prospects for the future.
• Informed financial statement analysis begins with knowledge of the company and its 
industry.
• Cause-of-change analysis helps identify the various reasons a particular quantity, such 
as net income, changed from one period to another.
• Common-size and trend statements provide a convenient way to organize financial 
statement information so that major financial components and changes can be easily 
recognized.

 
Profitability, Competition, and Business Strategy 
255
PROFITABILITY, COMPETITION, 
AND BUSINESS STRATEGY
“The mechanics of running a business are not really very complicated when 
you get down to essentials. You have to make some stuff and sell it to 
 somebody for more than it cost you. That’s about all there is, except for 
a few million details.”
—John L. McCaffey
Financial Ratios and Profitability Analysis
Financial ratios provide other powerful tools analysts use to evaluate profit performance and 
to assess credit risk. Most evaluations of profit performance begin with the return on assets 
(ROA) ratio,
ROA 5 Earnings before interest (EBI)
Average assets
where EBI refers to the company’s earnings before interest for a particular period (such as a 
year), and average assets represents the average book value of total assets over that same time 
period. Before computing ROA, analysts may adjust the company’s reported earnings and 
 asset figures. These adjustments fall into three broad categories:
1. Adjustments aimed at isolating a company’s sustainable profits by removing nonrecurring 
items—analysts sometimes call these “special” items—from reported income.
2. An adjustment that eliminates after-tax interest expense from the profit calculation 
so that profitability comparisons over time or across companies are not affected by 
 differences in financial structure.4
3. Adjustments for distortions related to accounting quality concerns, which involve 
 potential adjustments to both earnings and assets for items such as LIFO liquidations 
and  off-balance-sheet operating leases, which were mentioned earlier.
 
Exhibit 5.12 summarizes the ROA calculations for Whole Foods using the company’s 
 earnings and balance sheet information from Exhibits 5.1 and 5.6. The adjustments made to 
reported earnings each year eliminate interest expense ($354 thousand in 2012) on an after-
tax basis. ROA for 2012 thus becomes:
Analysts sometimes make 
income statement and 
 balance sheet adjustments 
intended to isolate core 
 operating activities—think 
of selling grocery products 
at Whole Foods Market—
from nonoperating activi-
ties. The resulting profit 
performance measure is re-
turn on operating net assets, 
or RONA. Whole Foods 
Market’s short-term invest-
ments and the income pro-
duced by those investments 
would not be included in a 
RONA computation.
Accounting quality adjust-
ments are ignored for brevity 
because the underlying 
 details are not described 
 until later chapters.
 ROA2012 5 Net income 1 Interest expense 3 (1 2 Tax rate)
Average assets
 5
$465,573 1 3$354 3 11 2 0.402]
1$5,294,216 1 $4,292,0752/2
5 0.097 or 9.7%
Whole Foods’ ROA grew from 4.7% in 2009 to 9.7% in 2012. Here’s why:
4 Later in this chapter we illustrate how financial leverage affects profitability measures that do not exclude interest and debt 
as the ROA calculation does.

256 
CHAPTER 5
Essentials of Financial Statement Analysis
 
A company can increase its ROA in two ways:
1. By increasing the profit margin. For example, a large manufacturing company might use 
its bargaining power to negotiate price reductions from raw material suppliers, increasing 
the company’s profit margin.
2. By increasing the intensity of asset utilization. For example, a restaurant that was previ-
ously open only for lunch and dinner might decide to stay open 24 hours a day. Doing so 
would not require substantial additional investment, so the restaurant could generate more 
sales per dollar invested in restaurant assets, thus yielding an increase in asset utilization.
By disaggregating ROA into profit margin and asset turnover, we can see how each of these 
elements affects ROA:
 ROA 5
EBI
Average assets 5 a EBI
Salesb 3 a
Sales
Average assetsb
 5 Profit margin 3 Asset turnover
Consider a company that earns $9 million of EBI on sales of $100 million and has an average 
asset base of $50 million. The ROA for this company is:
 ROA 5 a EBI
Salesb 3 a
Sales
Average assetsb
 5 a $9
$100b 3 a$100
$50 b 5 0.09 3 2 5 0.18, or 18%
 
Suppose the firm could increase its profit margin from 9% to 10% through improved pric-
ing or aggressive expense reductions. Sales are unchanged and asset turnover stays at 2, but 
ROA is now:
 ROA 5 a EBI
Salesb 3 a
Sales
Average assetsb
 5 a $10
$100b 3 a$100
$50 b 5 0.10 3 2 5 0.20, or 20%
EXHIBIT 5.12
Whole Foods Market
Return on Assets
 
2012 
2011 
2010 
2009
Net income as reported 
$   465,573 
$   342,612 
$   245,833 
$   146,804
Interest expense (after tax) 
212 
2,329 
19,829 
22,114
 Earnings before interest (EBI) 
$   465,785 
$   344,941 
$   265,662 
$   168,918
Assets at end of year 
$5,294,216 
$4,292,075 
$3,986,540 
$3,783,388
Assets at beginning of year 
4,292,075 
3,986,540 
3,783,388 
3,380,736
 Average assets 
$4,793,146 
$4,139,308 
$3,884,964 
$3,582,062
Return on assets (EBI/Average assets) 
9.7% 
8.3% 
6.8% 
4.7%
Note: An estimated marginal income tax rate of 40% is used to compute the after-tax effect of interest expense.

 
Profitability, Competition, and Business Strategy 
257
Alternatively, suppose that management is able to reduce average assets to $45 million without 
sacrificing any sales. Asset turnover will increase to 2.22, and ROA will rise to 20%:
 ROA 5 a EBI
Salesb 3 a
Sales
Average assetsb
 5 a $9
$100b 3 a$100
$45 b 5 0.09 3 2.22 5 0.20, or 20%
 
In both cases, the firm increased ROA from 18% to 20%, but in different ways.
 
Exhibit 5.13 extends the ROA analysis of Whole Foods by presenting profit margin 
and asset turnover figures for each of the four years. Here we learn that the company’s 
increased ROA stems mostly from higher profit margins, although asset turnover in-
creased slightly. The profit margin nearly doubled from 2.1% to 4.0%, while asset turn-
over increased about 9%, from 2.24 to 2.44. The result was that ROA more than doubled 
in three years.
 
Part of the explanation for the increase in Whole Foods Market’s profitability over 
our analysis period is the base year we used: 2009. As the economy slid into recession 
in late 2007, some of the company’s customers began to shop at less expensive grocery 
stores. This situation coincided with an increased asset base following Whole Foods’ 
 acquisition of Wild Oats in 2007. So, relative to the base year, 2012 looks much bet-
ter. However, if we used a longer time frame, we would get a  different picture. For exam-
ple, in  2006, ROA was 10.3%. It bottomed at 4.1% in 2008 and has climbed steadily ever 
since. By 2012, Whole Foods’ ROA had returned to roughly its prerecession level.
 
Many analysts find it helpful to decompose ROA further by isolating individual factors that 
contribute to a company’s profit margin and asset turnover. For example, Whole Foods’ profit 
margin can be expressed as:
 Profit margin 5 EBI
Sales
 5 (Sales 2 COGS 2 OpEx 1 Other 2 Taxes)
Sales
 5 aSales
Salesb 2 aCOGS
Sales b 2 aOpEx
Sales b 1 aOther
Sales b 2 aTaxes
Sales b
 5 100%
 2 aCOGS
Sales b 2 aOpEx
Sales b 1 aOther
Sales b 2 aTaxes
Sales b
EXHIBIT 5.13
Whole Foods Market
ROA Decomposition
 
2012 
2011 
2010 
2009
Sales 
$11,698,828 
$10,107,787 
$9,005,794 
$8,031,620
Earnings before interest (Exhibit 5.12) 
465,785 
344,941 
265,662 
168,918
Average assets (Exhibit 5.12) 
4,793,146 
4,139,308 
3,884,964 
3,582,062
Profit margin (EBI/Sales) 
4.0% 
3.4% 
2.9% 
2.1%
Asset turnover (Sales/Average assets) 
2.44 
2.44 
2.32 
2.24
ROA 5 Margin 3 Asset turnover 
9.7% 
8.3% 
6.8% 
4.7%
Note: Amounts are rounded. 9.7% ROA is the product of unrounded profit margin and asset turnover amounts.

258 
CHAPTER 5
Essentials of Financial Statement Analysis
where, from Exhibit 5.1, COGS is the company’s cost of goods sold and occupancy costs; 
OpEx is Whole Foods’ other operating expenses (direct store expenses, general and adminis-
trative expenses, and preopening and relocating costs); Other is nonoperating investment and 
other income, and Taxes is adjusted income tax expense. (Some income statement items are 
combined for brevity.) These margin components (which happen to correspond to the common-
size income statement items we’ve already described) can help the analyst identify areas 
where cost reductions have been achieved or where cost improvements are needed.
 
It is a bit more complicated to decompose the asset turnover component of ROA because 
we must disaggregate the denominator of the ratio:
 Asset turnover 5
Sales
Average assets
 5 a
Sales
Average current assets 1 Average long-term assetsb
 5
1
aAverage current assets
Sales
b 1 aAverage long-term assets
Sales
b
 5
1
a
1
Current asset turnoverb 1 a
1
Long-term asset turnoverb
Exhibit 5.14 shows that Whole Foods’ modest asset turnover improvement is due to gains in 
long-term asset turnover, partially offset by reduced current asset turnover. The current asset 
turnover ratio helps the analyst spot efficiency gains from improved accounts receivable and 
inventory management; the long-term asset turnover ratio captures information about prop-
erty, plant, and equipment utilization. We have much more to say about these and other asset 
utilization ratios later.
ROA and Competitive Advantage
Our analysis of Whole Foods’ profit performance has thus far revealed that the company’s 
ROA for 2012 was 9.7%, up from 4.7% in 2009. This profitability increase was traced to a 
much higher profit margin and a slightly higher asset turnover. Now we want to know how 
Whole Foods’ profit performance compares with that of other firms in the industry.
EXHIBIT 5.14
Whole Foods Market
Asset Turnover Decomposition
 
2012 
2011 
2010 
2009
Sales 
11,698,828 
10,107,787 
9,005,794 
8,031,620
Average current assets 
1,777,887.5 1,307,331.5 1,108,449.5 
838,993.0
Current asset turnover 
6.58 
7.73 
8.12 
9.57
Average long-term assets 
3,015,258.0 2,831,976.0 2,776,514.5 
2,743,069.0
Long-term asset turnover 
3.88 
3.57 
3.24 
2.93
Reciprocal of current asset turnover 
0.1520 
0.1293 
0.1231 
0.1045
Reciprocal of long-term asset turnover 
0.2577 
0.2802 
0.3083 
0.3415
Sum of reciprocals 
0.4097 
0.4095 
0.4314 
0.4460
Reciprocal of sum 5 Asset turnover 
2.44 
2.44 
2.32 
2.24
EBI represents earnings 
 before interest but after 
taxes. Thus, it consists of 
earnings before interest and 
taxes (EBIT) less taxes per-
taining to EBIT. The taxes 
pertaining to EBIT, which 
we call adjusted taxes, are 
the reported income tax 
 expense plus the income 
tax effect of the interest 
 expense. Because we use a 
pretax earnings number that 
excludes interest, we must 
use an income tax expense 
that excludes the tax sav-
ings related to that interest 
expense. Using the infor-
mation in the Whole Foods’ 
2012 income statement to 
illustrate the income tax 
 expense adjustment, we 
find that adjusted taxes 
would be $286,612 instead 
of the reported income tax 
expense of $286,471. The 
$141 adjustment is equal to 
the $354 pretax interest 
 expense that was added back 
to arrive at EBIT times the 
estimated marginal income 
tax rate of 40%.

 
Profitability, Competition, and Business Strategy 
259
 
One of Whole Foods’ most important direct competitors was Wild Oats Market, a company 
Whole Foods acquired in 2007. There are no other natural and organic food grocery chains 
that operate as public companies, so we will instead benchmark Whole Foods’ profit perfor-
mance against that of the traditional grocery chain SUPERVALU.
 
Exhibit 5.15 presents a decomposition of ROA for Whole Foods and SUPERVALU.5 Also 
shown are the average ROA and component values for the industry—grocery stores6—to 
which these two companies belong. Industry data such as these are available from a variety of 
sources, including Standard & Poor’s Industry Survey, Robert Morris and Associates’ Annual 
Statement Studies, and many online financial information services.
 
Whole Foods was more profitable than both SUPERVALU and the average grocery chain 
in 2012, earning an ROA of 9.7% compared to 25.7% for SUPERVALU and 4.6% for the 
industry. The ROA decomposition reveals that the company’s profit margin was 4.0 cents per 
sales dollar—better than the industry average profit margin of 1.9% and far superior to the 
22.0% margin at SUPERVALU. Asset utilization at Whole Foods was, however, only aver-
age. It generated $2.44 in sales per asset dollar compared to $2.80 at SUPERVALU and $2.39 
for the industry. So, the key to the company’s success lay in its profit margin. Whole Foods 
outperformed the competition by earning a higher profit margin on each sales dollar even 
though it generated only average sales per asset dollar. Given Whole Foods’ strategy, a higher 
margin with only average turnover is not surprising.
 
Can Whole Foods maintain this level of performance? This question can be addressed only 
by identifying the company’s competitive advantage—that is, the source of its superior 
ROA—and determining whether that competitive advantage is sustainable. Several factors can 
explain why companies operating in the same industry—and therefore confronting similar 
economic conditions—can earn markedly different rates of return on their assets. Some com-
panies gain a competitive advantage over rivals by developing unique products or services. 
Others do so by providing consistent quality or exceptional customer service and convenience. 
Still others excel because of innovative production technologies, distribution channels, or 
sales and marketing efforts. The sustainability of these advantages, however, varies.
 
Competition in an industry continually works to drive down the rate of return on assets 
toward the competitive floor—that is, the rate of return that would be earned in the econo-
mist’s “perfectly competitive” industry. Companies that consistently earn rates of return above 
the floor are said to have a competitive advantage. However, rates of return that are higher 
than the industry floor stimulate more competition as existing companies innovate and expand 
EXHIBIT 5.15
Whole Foods Market and Benchmarks
2012 ROA Decomposition
 
Whole Foods 
 
Grocery
 
Market 
SUPERVALU 
Industry
Profit margin (EBI/Sales) 
4.0% 
(2.0)% 
1.9%
Asset turnover (Sales/Average assets) 
2.44 
2.80 
2.39
ROA 5 Margin 3 Asset turnover 
9.7% 
(5.7)% 
4.6%
Note: Amounts are rounded. 9.7% ROA is the product of unrounded profit margin and asset turnover amounts.
5 Whole Foods data is for the year ended September 30, 2012, and SUPERVALU data is for the year ended February 25, 
2012.
6 Based on the 4-digit SIC code 5411. Results are for the most recent full year reported by each company.

260 
CHAPTER 5
Essentials of Financial Statement Analysis
their market reach or as new companies enter the industry. These developments lead to an 
eventual erosion of profitability and advantage.
 
To see how these forces work, consider the simplified representation of the grocery indus-
try in Figure 5.2.
 
The average ROA in the grocery industry is 4.6%, a return that could be earned in many 
ways. Any point on the curve in Figure 5.2 represents a 4.6% ROA, but different points on the 
curve achieve that return with a different combination of margin and turnover. For example, 
Harris Teeter Supermarkets (HTSI) and Safeway, Inc. (SWY) both earned approximately the 
average industry return of 4.6%. Harris did it with higher margins and lower turnover than 
Safeway. Whole Foods (WFM) was well above the industry average ROA, while SUPER-
VALU (SVU) was well below it.
 
The competitive advantage Whole Foods now enjoys may not persist. Other groceries 
with similar formats will attempt to take market share from Whole Foods. In addition, 
traditional groceries will stock products that compete with Whole Foods’ most successful 
products, moving into Whole Foods’ “space” where it is attractive to do so. As rivals be-
come more successful, they will attract sales dollars that would otherwise have gone to 
Whole Foods, prompting a reduction in Whole Foods’ asset turnover, shifting Whole 
Foods leftward in Figure 5.2 toward the industry average ROA. Of course, Whole Foods’ 
management is unlikely to ignore its rivals’ actions. Faced with a threatened loss of com-
petitive advantage, Whole Foods could respond by reducing prices, by increasing advertis-
ing expenditures, or by introducing new products, just to name a few possible strategies. 
These responses could stimulate additional sales and increase asset turnover, causing a 
shift back to the right. However, price reductions and increased advertising costs lower the 
company’s profit margin, so there would also be a downward shift. Whether a price-reduction 
strategy was successful would depend on whether the net effect on ROA of the higher turn-
over and lower margin was positive.
 
In contrast to Whole Foods, SUPERVALU’s challenge is to improve its profit margins. 
Obviously, a firm cannot stay in business very long when it is operating at a loss, regardless of 
its asset turnover. The company needs to generate additional sales or contain costs so that it 
can push itself upward in Figure 5.2, above breakeven and hopefully closer to the industry 
average ROA. Unless it is able to rectify its profitability problem, the company will be unable 
1.0
0
2.0
4.0
25
0
5
10
15
20
25
3.0
HTSI
WFM
SWY
SVU
Margin (%)
Turnover
Figure 5.2
ILLUSTRATION OF HOW 
MARGIN AND TURNOVER 
AFFECT RETURN ON 
 ASSETS (ROA)

 
Profitability, Competition, and Business Strategy 
261
to attract additional capital to expand. If the situation continues for an extended period, bank-
ruptcy would also be a possibility.7
 
According to many observers, there are two key strategies for achieving superior perfor-
mance in any business. One strategy is product and service differentiation, the other is low-
cost leadership.8 A differentiation strategy focuses on “unique” products or services to gain 
brand loyalty and attractive margins. The idea is simple: People are willing to pay premium 
prices for things they value and can’t get elsewhere.
 
Differentiation can take several forms. Examples include advanced technology and perfor-
mance capabilities, consistent quality, availability in multiple colors and sizes, prompt deliv-
ery, technical support services, customer financing, distribution channels, or some other 
feature of importance to customers. A restaurant chain, for example, might focus on superior 
taste and nutritional benefits when introducing new menu items. Retailers like Blooming-
dale’s, Neiman Marcus, and Nordstrom achieve differentiation by emphasizing customer 
 service, merchandise quality, and a unique shopping experience.
 
A low-cost leadership strategy focuses on operating efficiencies, which permit the com-
pany to underprice the competition, achieve high sales volumes, and still make a profit on 
each sale. Companies can attain a low-cost position in various ways. Examples include mak-
ing quantity discount purchases, having a lean administrative structure, and using production 
efficiencies from outsourcing or vigorous cost containment. Large retailing companies such 
as Home Depot are able to negotiate steep quantity discounts with manufacturers because 
their size gives them more bargaining power; such discounts allow the retailer to offer mer-
chandise to customers at comparatively low prices.
 
Few companies pursue one strategy to the exclusion of the other. Most companies try to do 
both—developing customer loyalty while controlling costs. Understanding the relative emphasis 
a company places on differentiation versus low-cost leadership can be important for competitive 
analysis. Differences in the business strategies companies adopt give rise to economic differ-
ences, which are reflected as differences in profit margins, asset utilization, and profitability. 
That is why we cannot look at profit margins or asset turnovers alone as a sign of success. In 
Figure 5.2 we saw that Harris Teeter and Safeway had similar ROAs with different strategies and 
therefore different combinations of margin and turnover. Success is measured by distance to the 
“northeast” away from the average ROA curve, which can be achieved with higher margins or 
higher turnover. How management chooses to try to move in that direction is based on its assess-
ment of opportunities in the industry and the company’s competitive advantage.
7 In January 2013, Cerberus Capital Management, a private equity firm, agreed to acquire 30% of SUPERVALU for 
$3.3 billion, which includes the assumption of $3.2 billion of SUPERVALU debt. Under the terms of the deal, Cerberus will 
have 3 of 11 seats on the board of directors and SUPERVALU will appoint a new chairman, the chief executive  officer of 
Albertson’s LLC, which is owned by Cerberus. See “Private-Equity Investors Show Supervalu Who’s the Boss,” The Wall 
Street Journal, January 11, 2013.
8 See W. K. Hall, “Survival Strategies in a Hostile Environment,” Harvard Business Review, September–October 1980, 
pp. 78–85; and M. E. Porter, Competitive Strategy (New York: Free Press, 1980). Porter also describes a “niche” or “focused” 
strategy by which companies achieve uniqueness within a narrowly defined market segment.
RECAP
Not every company in an industry earns the same rate of return on its assets. Some earn 
more than the industry average ROA while others earn less. Companies that fall below the 
industry average ROA strive to grow sales, improve operating efficiency, and better manage 
assets so that they can become competitive again. Those fortunate enough to earn more 
than the industry average ROA struggle to maintain their competitive advantage—through 
differentiation or low-cost leadership—and to stay on top. This ebb and flow of competition 
show up as differences in ROA and in its profit margin and asset turnover components.

262 
CHAPTER 5
Essentials of Financial Statement Analysis
RETURN ON COMMON EQUITY 
AND FINANCIAL LEVERAGE
If you want to gauge a company’s profit performance from its shareholders’ viewpoint, use 
ROCE. ROCE measures a company’s performance in using capital provided by common 
shareholders to generate earnings.9 It explicitly considers how the company finances its as-
sets. Interest charged on loans and dividends on preferred stock are both subtracted in arriving 
at net income available to common shareholders. So too is the portion of earnings attributable 
to noncontrolling interests, the net income earned by consolidated subsidiaries but allocable 
to minority investors, if any, in those subsidiaries. The capital provided by common share-
holders during the period can be computed by averaging total common shareholders’ equity at 
the beginning and end of the period. For example, using the data in Exhibit 5.1 and Exhibit 5.6, 
the ROCE for Whole Foods Market in 2012 was:
 ROCE 5
Net income 2 Preferred dividends
Average common shareholders, equity
 ROCE2012 5
$465,573 2 $0
$3,802,469 1 $2,991,305
2
5 $465,573
$3,396,887 5 .137 or 13.7%
Whole Foods’ ROCE was substantially above the 8.1% ROCE it achieved in 2009.
 
ROCE is affected by both ROA and the degree of financial leverage employed by the com-
pany. These two factors interact in the following way: For firms with more financial leverage, 
the ups and downs in ROA are exaggerated in the ROCE metric. That is, when ROA is low at 
a highly levered firm, ROCE will be very low, perhaps even negative. When ROA is high at a 
highly levered firm, ROCE will be very high. In contrast, for firms that do not employ much 
financial leverage, ROCE is not much more volatile than ROA.10
 
To illustrate the relationship between ROA and ROCE, consider two companies—NoDebt 
and HiDebt—each with $2 million in assets. NoDebt raised all its capital from common 
shareholders; HiDebt borrowed $1 million at 10% interest. Both companies pay income taxes 
at a combined federal and state rate of 40%. The two companies have identical operations, so 
their earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT) and assets employed are always identical.
 
Exhibit 5.16 shows how the two companies compare in different earnings years. Let’s start 
with a good earnings year, one in which both companies earn $400,000 before interest and 
taxes. The numerator in the ROA calculation is earnings before interest but after taxes, so it is 
$400,000 3 (1 2 40% tax rate) 5 $240,000 for both firms. And both firms have $2 million in 
assets, the denominator in the calculation. So, ROA is 12% for both firms, as is ROCE for 
NoDebt Company. HiDebt’s ROCE is 18% because $180,000 of earnings is available to com-
mon shareholders, who have $1 million of equity. Leverage increased the return to HiDebt’s 
shareholders because the capital contributed by lenders earned 12% but required an after-tax 
interest payment of only 6%—that is, a 10% rate of interest 3 (1 2 40% tax rate). The extra 
6% earned on each borrowed asset dollar increased the return to common shareholders.
9 If the analyst’s goal is to isolate sustainable ROCE, Net income available to common shareholders must be purged of non-
operating and nonrecurring items and corrected for accounting quality distortions. These adjustments are discussed in later 
chapters.
10 To learn about alternative approaches to disaggregating ROCE into various components, see K. Palepu and P. Healy, Busi-
ness Analysis and Valuation, 5ed (Mason, OH: Thomson South-Western, 2013) or S. Penman, Financial Statement Analysis 
and Security Valuation, 5ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2013).
Exercise 5.12 explores the 
ROCE performance of 
Whole Foods Markets.

 
Return on Common Equity and Financial Leverage 
263
 
What happens when earnings are low? That situation is illustrated by the bad earnings year 
in Exhibit 5.16. Both companies earn $100,000 before interest and taxes and a 3% ($100,000 3
60%y$2 million) ROA. All of these earnings are available to NoDebt shareholders, so ROCE 
for that company is also 3%. At HiDebt, after-tax interest charges wipe out earnings, and 
ROCE becomes 0% because there’s nothing left for shareholders. HiDebt earns 3% on each 
asset dollar but must pay 6% to lenders for each dollar borrowed. In this case, leverage de-
creases the return to common equity and harms shareholders.
 
In the neutral year, leverage neither helps nor harms shareholders. That’s because the 6% 
return earned on each asset dollar just equals the 6% after-tax cost of borrowing. Figure 5.3 
illustrates the key results from this example.
EXHIBIT 5.16
NoDebt and HiDebt
Profitability and Financial Leverage
 
 
 
Earnings
 
 
 
before 
 
Earnings
 
Total 
Shareholders’ 
Interest and 
Interest 
before 
Net 
 
Assets 
Equity 
Taxes (EBIT) 
Expense 
Taxes (EBT) 
Income 
ROA 
ROCE
Good earnings year
 HiDebt 
$2 million 
$1 million 
$400,000 
$100,000 
$300,000 
$180,000 
12.0% 
18.0%
 NoDebt 
2 million 
2 million 
400,000 
— 
400,000 
240,000 
12.0 
12.0
Neutral earnings year
 HiDebt 
2 million 
1 million 
200,000 
100,000 
100,000 
60,000 
6.0 
6.0
 NoDebt 
2 million 
2 million 
200,000 
— 
200,000 
120,000 
6.0 
6.0
Bad earnings year
 HiDebt 
2 million 
1 million 
100,000 
100,000 
0 
0 
3.0 
0.0
 NoDebt 
2 million 
2 million 
100,000 
— 
100,000 
60,000 
3.0 
3.0
ROCE (%)
21
18
15
12
9
6
3
0
Bad
Neutral
Good
NoDebt Company
Leverage helps
Leverage hurts
HiDebt Company
Type of earnings year
23
Figure 5.3
FINANCIAL LEVERAGE 
AND ROCE
RECAP
Financial leverage works two ways. It makes good years better by increasing the share-
holders’ return, but it also makes bad years worse by decreasing the shareholders’ return. 
Whether a year is “good” or “bad” in this context depends on whether the company 
earns more on each borrowed dollar than it pays out in interest, net of taxes.

264 
CHAPTER 5
Essentials of Financial Statement Analysis
GLOBAL VANTAGE POINT
The previous sections discussed how to compute and interpret ratios that rely on earnings 
measures in the numerator (e.g., ROA, ROCE). However, how earnings are determined may 
be different for firms using U.S. GAAP than for firms that follow IFRS. This only adds to the 
comparability issues that arise because firms, whether they follow U.S. GAAP or IFRS, can 
choose from a menu of acceptable accounting treatments, and their choices can affect materi-
ally how earnings are measured. Firms may even change how they determine earnings, 
 making it difficult to analyze trends through time. Some of those changes may be because 
standards setters (e.g., FASB and IASB) revise standards. A well-trained analyst recognizes 
potential differences across firms and over time in how earnings are calculated, and makes 
adjustments to make comparisons more informative.
 
Novartis, a Swiss company known internationally for its pharmaceutical business, provides 
one example. In its 2012 annual report, Novartis notes that it includes in 2012 net income a 
$3 million (USD) “Reversal of prior year impairment charges” relating to its intangible assets. 
As we discuss in Chapter 10, U.S. GAAP does not permit reversals of impairment charges. 
However, as a Swiss company, Novartis follows IFRS, which allows such reversals. A well-
trained analyst would note that Novartis’s ROA and ROCE would have “head starts” on simi-
lar metrics for their competitors because Novartis availed itself of an income-increasing 
option that is not available under U.S. GAAP.
 
Boeing, a U.S.–based airplane manufacturer, provides another example of how accounting 
choices can materially affect the computation of net income, which influences the interpreta-
tion of ROA and ROCE. A November 13, 2012, Wall Street Journal article notes that Boeing 
was considering changing its accounting for defined benefit pension plans to a method that 
introduces “more volatility in earnings’ reports” by recognizing, each period, certain gains 
and losses that are generally smoothed across periods.11 This option is available under U.S. 
GAAP, but it is not widely used. Note that if Boeing goes forward with this change to its pen-
sion accounting, then the numerator of ROA or ROCE will be determined by the market per-
formance of the firms’ pension plan assets to a larger extent than for its competitors, making 
it more difficult to draw inferences from ROA or ROCE about Boeing’s fundamental opera-
tional performance. The analyst should also expect that Boeing would likely restate its prior 
earnings history as if it had adopted this accounting choice from the beginning. Changing the 
historical trend in Boeing’s ROA and ROCE would provide a different picture of Boeing’s 
earnings performance through time.
 
Finally, U.S. firms’ adoption of SFAS 123R, the pre-Codification standard requiring the 
recognition of compensation expense by firms that grant employee stock compensation, pro-
vides another example of how standards changes can make most reporting firms’ earnings less 
comparable to their own prior history. Morgan Stanley noted in its 2003 amended Form 10-K 
that “the Company will recognize the fair value of stock-based awards granted in fiscal 2003 
over service periods of three and four years, including the year of the grant” as a result of the 
adoption of the new standard. As we discuss in Chapter 15, recognition of this expense was 
generally not required before SFAS 123R was adopted. A well-trained analyst would note that 
this change in standard could materially alter the computation of net income, making it diffi-
cult to compare the values of most firms’ ROA or ROCE before and after the change. In 2003, 
Mark L.  Constant, an analyst for Lehman Brothers, noted “that the increase in our earnings 
estimates primarily reflects the change in accounting for compensation (which is not really an 
economic event, but will both increase reported earnings and slow growth as it is phased-in 
International
11 J. Ostrower, “Boeing Considers Pension Accounting Change,” The Wall Street Journal, November 13, 2012.

 
Liquidity, Solvency, and Credit Analysis 
265
over the next 3–4 years). This change does not, however, affect our estimates of economic 
Return on Invested Capital, nor our resulting valuation, because it is really cosmetic.”
LIQUIDITY, SOLVENCY, AND CREDIT ANALYSIS
Credit risk refers to the risk of nonpayment by the borrower. A borrower’s ability to pay its 
debts affects the likelihood the lender (typically a bank or insurance company) will receive the 
promised principal and interest payments when due. The borrower’s ability to pay is driven by 
its capacity to generate cash from operations, asset sales, or external financial markets.
 
Numerous and interrelated risks influence a company’s ability to generate cash. Multinational 
companies, for example, must cope with possible changes in host government regulations, poten-
tial political unrest, and fluctuating currency exchange rates. Domestic companies are exposed to 
the risks of political or demographic changes, recession, inflation, and interest rate fluctuations. 
Companies within a particular industry confront risks related to technological change, shifting 
competition, regulation, and availability of raw materials and labor. Management competency, 
litigation, and the company’s strategic direction are additional sources of risk. Each of these risks 
ultimately affects a company’s operating performance, net income, and cash flows. In fact, the 
statement of cash flows—which reports the net amount of cash generated or used by operating, 
investing, and financing activities—is an important source of information for analyzing a com-
pany’s credit risk. Figure 5.4 illustrates the components of the cash flow statement.
 
For example, the comparative cash flow statements for Whole Foods Market in Ex-
hibit 5.10 reveal strong and growing operating cash flows. In fact, cash generated by operating 
activities was more than sufficient to fund the company’s store expansion and property and 
equipment purchases. This strong cash flow position allowed the company to purchase nearly 
$1 billion of marketable securities, net of its security sales ($3.0 billion 2 $2.1 billion).
 
What about the company’s debt burden and its credit risk? The comparative balance sheets 
(Exhibit 5.6) reveal that Whole Foods had only $23 million of long-term debt outstanding at 
the end of 2012, having paid off most of its debt in 2011. Its remaining debt is a small fraction 
of its operating cash flow. Moreover, more than $1 billion of cash and short-term investments 
could be tapped if the company needed money. So, Whole Foods is characterized by minimal 
credit risk: annual operating cash flows are substantial relative to the balance owed lenders, 
and other highly liquid assets are available to service the debt.
 
Although cash flow statements contain information enabling a user to assess a compa-
ny’s credit risk, financial ratios are also useful for this purpose. Credit risk analysis using 
 financial ratios typically involves an assessment of liquidity and solvency. Liquidity re-
fers to the  company’s short-term ability to generate cash for working capital needs and 
Sources of cash
Cash needs
Operating:
Investing:
Financing:
Pool
of cash
Cash
 from
operations
Cash 
from
asset sales
Cash from external
financial markets
(debt or equity)
Sustain existing operations
(working capital and plant
capacity)
Growth from new products
and services or plant and
market expansion
Buy back stock or pay
dividends, debt principal,
or interest
Figure 5.4
BALANCING CASH 
SOURCES AND NEEDS

266 
CHAPTER 5
Essentials of Financial Statement Analysis
immediate debt repayment needs. Solvency refers to the long-term ability to generate cash inter-
nally or from external sources to satisfy plant capacity needs, fuel growth, and repay debt when 
due. Our discussion of financial ratios as an analytical tool for assessing credit risk is based on 
the distinction between concerns for short-term liquidity and for long-term solvency.
Short-Term Liquidity 
Short-term liquidity problems can arise when operating cash 
inflows don’t match outflows. To illustrate the mismatching problem, consider the operating 
cycle of a retailer such as Walmart. It acquires merchandise from suppliers on credit, promis-
ing to pay within 30 or 60 days. The merchandise is first shipped to Walmart warehouses. 
Later it is sent on to Walmart stores where it is displayed for purchase and promoted through 
in-store and media advertising. Walmart pays for some transportation, labor, and advertising 
costs immediately and delays payment of other costs. Eventually, Walmart sells the merchan-
dise to customers, who pay by cash or charge card; receivables (if any) are collected some 
time later; and the company then pays the remaining amounts owed to suppliers and others. 
Liquidity problems can arise when cash inflows from customers lag behind the cash outflows 
to employees, suppliers, and others, because the company does not have sufficient funds to 
make the payments on a timely basis.
 
The operating cycle must not only generate sufficient cash to supply working capital needs, 
but also provide cash to service debt as payments become due. For some companies, operat-
ing cash flows are sufficient to cover periodic interest payments, but the need to repay loan 
principal causes a liquidity problem. Companies that are not liquid—and are therefore not 
able to pay obligations as they come due—may be forced into bankruptcy.
 
One index of a company’s short-term liquidity is its current ratio:
Current ratio 5
Current assets
Current liabilities
 
Current assets include cash and “near cash” items. For example, receivables become cash 
as they are collected, so they are only one step removed from cash. Inventories are converted 
into cash in two steps. First they must be sold. Then, if they were sold on credit, the resulting 
receivable must be collected.
 
By including receivables and inventory in current assets, the current ratio reflects existing 
cash as well as amounts to be converted to cash in the normal operating cycle.
 
A more short-run reflection of liquidity is the quick ratio:
Quick ratio 5 Cash 1 Short-term investments 1 Receivables
Current liabilities
Few businesses can instantaneously convert their inventories into cash. By excluding inven-
tory from the numerator, the quick ratio provides a measure of very immediate liquidity.
 
Activity ratios tell us how efficiently the company uses its assets. Activity ratios can high-
light efficiencies in asset management—accounts receivable collections, inventory levels, and 
vendor payment—and help the company spot areas needing improvement. They can also 
highlight causes for operating cash flow mismatches. For example, the accounts receivable 
turnover ratio is an activity ratio that helps analysts determine whether receivables are exces-
sive when compared to existing levels of credit sales:
Accounts receivable turnover 5
Net credit sales
Average accounts receivable

 
Liquidity, Solvency, and Credit Analysis 
267
To illustrate how to interpret this ratio, suppose annual credit sales totaled $10 million and 
customer accounts receivable were $2 million at the beginning of the year and $3 million at 
year-end. The accounts receivable turnover ratio value is then:
$10
1$2 1 $32y2 5 4 times per year
The average annual balance of receivables ($2.5 million) represents one-fourth of yearly 
credit sales ($2.5y$10 5 1y4), so receivables must turn over four times per year.
 
The analyst can also use the accounts receivable turnover ratio to spot changing customer 
payment patterns. For example, if we divide the accounts receivable turnover ratio into 365 days, 
the result tells us the number of days that the average customer receivable is “on the books” 
before it is collected:
 Days accounts receivable outstanding 5
365 days
Accounts receivable turnover
 5 365 days
4
5 91.25 days
In our example, the average account receivable is collected about 91 days after the credit sale 
occurs. This is the same as saying accounts receivable “turn over” four times per year. An 
 accounts receivable turnover ratio of 4 (91 days) is quite acceptable for a company where the 
terms of sale allow customers to delay payment by 90 days or more. This same turnover ratio 
would, however, cause great concern for a business where 
customers are expected to pay within 30 days.
 
Another activity ratio is the inventory turnover ratio, 
which tells us how effectively inventories are managed:
Inventory turnover 5 Cost of goods sold
Average inventory
Assume beginning inventory was $8 million, year-end 
 inventory was $9 million, and cost of goods sold was 
$43.35 million. The inventory turnover is:
$43.35
($8 1 $9)y2 5 5.1 times per year
 
The inventory turnover ratio can be used to determine 
the average days inventory held as follows:
 Days inventory held 5
365 days
Inventory turnover
 5 365 days
5.1
5 71.57 days
In our example, it takes about 72 days for inventory to move 
from the company to its customers. In other words, average 
inventory is sufficient to cover almost 72 days of customer sales. 
Most companies just report 
a single “sales” number that 
is the sum of cash plus credit 
sales. Using total sales in-
stead of “credit sales” in the 
accounts receivable turnover 
calculation produces mis-
leading results if cash sales 
are a substantial portion of 
the total, although cash sales 
are rare in a large number of 
businesses today because of 
credit and debit cards. In 
certain industries such as 
discount retailing (Walmart) 
and groceries (Whole Foods 
Market), however, substan-
tial cash sales are still 
the rule rather than the 
exception.
Calculating inventory turnover and days inventory held for a manu-
facturing firm is more complicated than for the merchandising firm 
illustrated here. That’s because inventory in a manufacturing firm 
must pass through three stages of the operating cycle:
1. As raw material, from purchase to the start of production.
2. As work in process, over the length of the production cycle.
3. As finished goods, from completion of production until it is sold.
To calculate how long inventory is held at each stage, analysts use 
the following activity ratios:
 Raw materials: 
 365 days 3 Average raw materials inventory
Raw materials used
 Work in process:  365 days 3 Average work-in-process inventory
Cost of goods manufactured
 Finished goods:   365 days 3 Average finished goods inventory
Cost of goods sold
Cost of goods sold and the breakdown of inventory into raw materi-
als, work in process, and finished goods is reported in the financial 
statements. Cost of goods manufactured can be calculated as cost of 
goods sold plus ending finished goods inventory minus beginning 
finished goods inventory. However, the amount of raw materials 
used in production is rarely disclosed in financial statements. It may 
be available in the company’s fact book or obtained by contacting 
the company’s investor relations group.

268 
CHAPTER 5
Essentials of Financial Statement Analysis
 
Consider the inventory turnover ratio for Dell Inc., the personal computer manufacturer. 
The business models used by lean manufacturing companies like Dell reduce the need to 
stock inventory at production facilities, distribution warehouses, or retail stores. Dell 
builds its PCs and related equipment “on demand” using component parts delivered “just-
in-time” by vendors. PCs are shipped to customers as soon as they are assembled. As a 
result, inventory turnover is quite high. Dell’s inventory turnover ratio for the fiscal year 
ended February 3, 2012 (29.3) has a large numerator ($39,689 million) relative to the de-
nominator ($1,353 million). Dell’s inventory is held on average for only about 12 days 
(365 days divided by 29.3).
 
The accounts payable turnover ratio—and its days payable outstanding counterpart—
helps analysts understand the company’s pattern of payments to suppliers:
 Accounts payable turnover 5
Inventory purchases
Average accounts payable
 Days accounts payable outstanding 5
365 days
Accounts payable turnover
Suppose trade accounts payable averaged $7.3 million and inventory purchases totaled 
$44.35 million during the year. The accounts payable turnover ratio would be about 6, and 
the days accounts payable outstanding would be about 60 days. (You should verify both 
calculations!) More timely payment of accounts payable would lead to a 
lower average payable balance, a higher turnover ratio, and fewer days 
outstanding.
Let’s piece these activity ratios together to get a picture that will help us 
analyze the financial condition of our company.
• Inventory remains on hand for about 72 days.
• Inventory is sold, and another 91 days elapse before cash is collected from the customer.
• Suppliers are paid about 60 days after inventory is purchased.
Figure 5.5 illustrates the timeline of events beginning with an inventory purchase. It shows 
that cash outflows and inflows are dangerously mismatched. The company’s operating cycle 
spans 163 days—that is how long it takes to sell inventory (72 days) and collect cash from the 
customers (91 days). But the company pays for inventory purchases in just 60 days, so its cash 
conversion cycle is 103 days, meaning suppliers are paid 103 days before the company has 
received cash from product sales. This hypothetical company may face a short-term liquidity 
problem because of the cash flow mismatch. It must rely on other cash sources—for example, 
bank loans—to sustain its operating working capital requirements over the 103-day gap.
 
Exhibit 5.17 reports the operating cycle and cash conversion cycle for three retailers: 
 Amazon.com, Walmart, and Nordstrom. Each company employs a different business model, 
resulting in differences in working capital activity ratios, operating cycles, and cash conver-
sion cycles. Amazon.com is an e-commerce retailer that doesn’t stock inventory on store 
shelves, although its distribution centers do stock inventory. Amazon’s inventories have been 
low historically. However, inventories have grown in recent years, both in absolute terms and 
For retail companies such as Amazon.com and 
Walmart, inventory purchases equal cost of goods 
sold expense plus the year’s inventory increase—
that is, $44.35 5 $43.35 1 ($9 2 $8) in our example.
Purchase
inventory
0
60
72
Days relative to inventory purchase
163
Pay for
inventory
Sell
inventory
Collect
receivable
Figure 5.5
TIMELINE OF EVENTS

 
Liquidity, Solvency, and Credit Analysis 
269
in terms of days inventory held. At December 31, 2011, inventory days stood at 40.1. 
 Amazon’s customers pay by bank credit card so Amazon gets cash (from the customer’s credit 
card company) very quickly after a sale. The operating cycle at Amazon.com is 58 days, but 
the cash conversion cycle is minus 31 days. That’s because Amazon waits 90 days after buy-
ing inventory to pay its suppliers.
 
Walmart and Nordstrom are traditional brick-and-mortar retailers that target different mar-
ket segments. Walmart carries a broad line of merchandise and emphasizes low prices. Most 
of its customers pay cash or use a credit card. Nordstrom is known for its fashion apparel and 
shoes. The company emphasizes product quality and customer service and promotes its in-
store credit card. Walmart has a 47-day operating cycle compared to 129 days at  Nordstrom. 
It takes Nordstrom longer to sell inventory (59 days compared to 42 days at  Walmart) and 
longer to collect cash from customers once the sale has been made (71 days, compared to 
5 days at Walmart). However, Walmart pays suppliers in about 38 days while Nordstom’s sup-
pliers wait 48 days for payment. So, the difference in cash conversion cycles at the two com-
panies—9 days at Walmart compared to 82 days at Nordstrom—can be  attributed to 
Nordstrom’s emphasis on slower-to-sell fashion apparel and its in-store credit card, which 
slows the collection of cash. Both companies must carefully manage their short-term liquidity 
because cash outflows and inflows are mismatched.
 
Let’s return to our analysis of Whole Foods Market. See Exhibit 5.18 for data on the com-
pany’s short-term liquidity ratios. Whole Foods’ current ratio was 2.05 in 2012, up from 1.44 
The cash conversion cycle 
at Dell is 255 days.
EXHIBIT 5.17
Amazon.com, Walmart, and Nordstrom
Comparison of Operating and Cash Conversion Cycles
 
Amazon.com 
Walmart 
Nordstrom
Working capital and activity ratios:
 1. Days inventory held 
40.1 
42.0 
58.8
 2. Days accounts receivable outstanding 
18.1 
4.5 
70.6
 3. Days accounts payable outstanding 
89.6 
37.8 
47.6
Operating cycle (1 1 2) 
58.2 
46.5 
129.4
Cash conversion cycle (1 1 2 2 3) 
(31.5) 
8.8 
81.8
Note: Amounts are rounded.
EXHIBIT 5.18
Whole Foods Market
Credit Risk Analysis: Short-Term Liquidity
 
2012 
2011 
2010 
2009
Current ratio 
2.05 
1.55 
1.44 
1.44
Quick ratio 
1.45 
0.94 
0.80 
0.78
Working capital activity ratios:
 1. Days inventory held 
17.2 
18.3 
19.7 
22.1
 2. Days accounts receivable outstanding 
5.8 
5.6 
4.8 
5.0
 3. Days accounts payable outstanding 
11.7 
12.5 
12.5 
12.9
Operating cycle (1 1 2) 
23.0 
23.9 
24.5 
27.1
Cash conversion cycle (1 1 2 2 3) 
11.4 
11.4 
12.0 
14.1
Note: The current and quick ratio excludes the company’s restricted cash whereas short-term investments are included 
in the quick ratio.
The company’s restricted 
cash is excluded from the 
current and quick ratio com-
putations because these 
 dollars cannot be used to 
pay short-term creditors. 
Of course, that’s why the 
cash is restricted. Similarly, 
the company’s short-term 
investments are included in 
the quick ratio computation 
because these dollars can 
be used to pay creditors. 
Analytical adjustments of 
this type are common in 
credit risk analysis.

270 
CHAPTER 5
Essentials of Financial Statement Analysis
three years earlier. The quick ratio was 1.45, which was also more than the 2009 level of 0.78. 
The quick ratio indicates that Whole Foods’ cash, short-term investments, and accounts re-
ceivable covered more than 100% of the company’s current liabilities at the end of fiscal 
2012. Adding inventories and other current assets further improves the picture—a current 
 ratio of 2.05 means that total current assets (adjusted to exclude restricted cash) cover more 
than double Whole Foods Market’s current liabilities.
 
Inventory levels were down from 22 days in 2009 to 17 days in 2012. Several factors may 
have contributed to this inventory turnover improvement: a more appealing merchandise 
mix, warehouse distribution efficiencies, or reduced inventory levels. There was little change 
in the apparent payment pattern of Whole Foods’ credit customers. Days receivable out-
standing in 2012 was just 5.8 days, compared to 5.0 days in 2009. Of course, this unusually 
prompt payment pattern—credit customers paying their bills within 6 days—is distorted by 
our inability to break out credit sales from cash sales at the company. In effect, we treat cash 
sales as if they were credit sales that were collected immediately. Days payable outstanding 
decreased modestly: 11.7 days in 2012, compared to 12.9 days in 2009.12
 
Some misalignment of operating cash flows exists because payments to suppliers occurred 
about 12 days after inventory was purchased but it took about 23 days (17.2 1 5.8) to generate 
a sale and collect cash from credit customers. In view of the company’s overall level of posi-
tive operating cash flow, this misalignment is unlikely to cause concerns.
Long-Term Solvency 
Solvency refers to a company’s ability to generate a stream of 
cash inflows sufficient to maintain its productive capacity and still meet the interest and prin-
cipal payments on its long-term debt. A company that cannot make timely debt service pay-
ments becomes insolvent and may be compelled to reorganize or liquidate.
 
Debt ratios provide information about the amount of long-term debt in a company’s 
 financial structure. The more a company relies on long-term borrowing to finance its busi-
ness activities, the higher is its debt ratio and the greater is the long-term solvency risk. There 
are several variations in debt ratios. Two commonly used ratios are long-term debt to assets 
and long-term debt to tangible assets:
 Long-term debt to assets 5 Long-term debt
Total assets
 Long-term debt to tangible assets 5
Long-term debt
Total tangible assets
Suppose a company has $20 million of outstanding long-term debt and $100 million of total 
assets, of which $35 million are intangibles such as goodwill or purchased patents, trade-
marks, or copyrights. The two debt ratios would be:
 Long-term debt to assets 5 $20
$100 5 0.200 or 20.0%
 Long-term debt to tangible assets 5
$20
$100 2 $35 5 0.308 or 30.8%
12 As you may recall from Whole Foods Market’s comparative income statement (Exhibit 5.1), the company presents cost of 
goods sold and occupancy costs as a single line item. This creates distortions in both inventory turnover and accounts payable 
turnover in that the resulting figures reflect too few days of actual activity.

 
Liquidity, Solvency, and Credit Analysis 
271
These results tell us that 20 cents of each asset dollar were financed using long-term debt. The 
remaining 80 cents came from other sources—internally generated resources, short-term 
 borrowing, or equity capital in the form of common and preferred stock.
 
Debt ratios vary by industry. For example, a 20% long-term debt-to-assets ratio would be 
high for a discount retailer such as Walmart but unusually low for an electric utility company. 
Retailers use short-term debt and trade credit to finance inventory purchases, and they often 
lease (but don’t own) their retail stores. Electric utilities, on the other hand, rely on long-term 
debt to support their sizable investments in power-generating facilities and transmission lines. 
Electric utilities also have relatively predictable operating cash flows because energy demand 
is reasonably stable and competition is limited by regulators. Companies whose sales fluctu-
ate widely due to changing economic conditions generally employ less debt because the fixed 
interest charges can be difficult to meet during bad times. These cyclical companies tend to 
have smaller debt-to-asset ratios.
 
Analysts devote considerable attention to refining both the numerator and denominator of 
debt ratios. For example, some analysts include in the numerator “hybrid” securities, or obli-
gations that have the cash flow characteristics of balance sheet debt although they may not be 
classified as such on the balance sheet. Operating leases and other 
off-balance-sheet obligations are routinely included as debt 
“equivalents” in the numerator. The exclusion of intangible assets 
from the solvency ratio denominator is also common. This adjust-
ment is intended to remove “soft” assets—those difficult to value 
reliably—from the analysis.
 
Comparative debt ratios for Whole Foods Market are shown in 
Exhibit 5.19. The company’s long-term debt-to-assets ratio was 
0.005 in 2012, meaning that each total asset dollar supported 
0.5 cents of long-term debt. This represented a sharp decline from 
the 0.195 debt-to-assets level in 2009. A similar picture emerges 
when Whole Foods’ solvency is measured using tangible (rather 
than total) assets. The company’s debt-to-tangible-assets ratio was 
0.005 in 2012, down from 0.242 in 2009. These two debt ratios 
moved in the same direction and were consistent with a financially 
sound company that paid off most of its debt, after taking on about 
$700 million of debt in 2007 when it acquired Wild Oat Markets.
 
Although debt ratios are useful for understanding a company’s financial structure, they 
provide no information about its ability to generate a stream of inflows sufficient to make 
Most analysts add the current portion of long-term debt to 
the numerator in long-term debt solvency ratios, although this 
debt is classified as a current liability on the balance sheet. 
Some analysts go so far as to include all short-term interest-
bearing debt (such as notes payable) in their solvency ratio 
calculations. Several arguments favor this approach: 
(1) Long-term debt repayable over several years will always 
have some portion shown as a current liability, and this 
 current portion should not be ignored; (2) long-term debt is 
shown as a current liability when loan covenants have been 
violated, but this does not mean that the firm’s solvency risk 
has improved; (3) a firm with significant short-term debt but 
no long-term debt is not necessarily less risky than one with 
only long-term debt outstanding. Adding short-term debt to 
the ratio numerator overcomes distortions that can affect the 
interpretation of solvency risk. Some analysts will treat the 
company’s redeemable preferred stock as long-term debt. 
Chapter 15 explains why.
EXHIBIT 5.19
Whole Foods Market
Credit Risk Analysis: Long-Term Solvency
 
2012 
2011 
2010 
2009
Long-term debt to assets ratio 
0.005 
0.004 
0.128 
0.195
Long-term debt to tangible assets ratio 
0.005 
0.005 
0.156 
0.242
Interest coverage ratio 
2,100.3 
141.1 
13.3 
7.7
Operating cash flow to total liabilities 
0.970 
0.701 
0.437 
0.389
Note: Current installments are included in long-term debt for purposes of these ratios.

272 
CHAPTER 5
Essentials of Financial Statement Analysis
principal and interest payments. One financial ratio commonly used for this purpose is the 
interest coverage ratio:
Interest coverage 5 Operating income before taxes and interest
Interest expense
This ratio indicates how many times interest expense is covered by operating profits before 
taxes and interest are factored in. It reflects the cushion between operating profit inflows and 
required interest payments. If the company must also make periodic principal payments, the 
analyst could include those amounts in the calculation.
Suppose a company has $200 million of operating income before taxes and 
interest and $50 million of interest expense. The company’s interest coverage 
ratio is $200/$50 5 4. This shows that operating profit is four times larger 
than interest expense—a substantial cushion for the lender. But now suppose 
that the company is also required to make a $100 million debt principal payment. The revised 
interest coverage ratio is $200/($50 1 $100) 5 1.33. When required debt payments are fac-
tored in, the lender’s cushion looks thin.
 
A criticism of the traditional interest coverage ratio is that it uses earnings rather than op-
erating cash flows in the numerator. Some analysts prefer to compute a cash flow coverage 
ratio in which the numerator is operating cash flows before interest payments are factored in. 
When operating profits and cash flows move in tandem, both versions of the ratio will yield 
similar results. However, when the two measures diverge—for example, during a period in 
which the company experiences rapid growth—income may be a poor substitute for cash 
flow. In that case, the cash flow coverage ratio is preferable as a solvency measure. After all, 
real cash (not just operating profits) is what the company needs to make its required interest 
payments.
 
Another useful measure of long-term solvency compares a company’s operating cash 
flow to its total liabilities (excluding deferred taxes):
Operating cash flow
to total liabilities
5
Cash flow from continuing operations
Average current liabilities plus long-term debt
This ratio shows a company’s ability to generate cash from operations to service both short-
term and long-term borrowings.
 
Exhibit 5.19 shows that Whole Foods’ interest coverage ratio was greater than 2,000 in 
2012. When the interest coverage is so high, it usually means debt, and therefore interest ex-
pense, is very close to zero. In 2009, Whole Foods’ interest coverage ratio was 7.7, indicating 
ample cushion at the time.
 
Whole Foods’ operating cash flow to total liabilities ratio clearly demonstrates why most 
analysts view the company as financially sound and a low credit risk. Operating cash flows in 
2012 were alone sufficient to repay nearly all (97%) of the company’s total liabilities.
Cash Flow Analysis
Although a company’s earnings are important, an analysis of its cash flows is central to credit 
evaluations and lending decisions. This is because a company’s earnings and cash flow may 
diverge. Obviously, a company cannot make interest and principal payments with its receiv-
ables or inventories. Rather, the company must pay its lenders with cold, hard cash!
 
Consider the situation confronting your client, G. T. Wilson Company. Wilson has been a 
client of your bank for more than 40 years. The company owns and operates nearly 850 retail 
Many analysts use an adjusted operating income 
figure that removes nonrecurring items and 
 corrects for accounting quality distortions.

 
Liquidity, Solvency, and Credit Analysis 
273
furniture stores throughout the United States and has more than 38,000 employees. Sales and 
earnings growth have exceeded the industry average until recently, and the company has paid 
dividends consistently for almost 100 years. Prior to 2008, Wilson built its reputation on sales 
of moderately priced upholstered furniture, case goods (wooden tables, chairs, and bookcases), 
and decorative accessories. The company’s stores were located in large urban centers where 
occupancy costs were quite low. Increased competition and changing consumer tastes caused 
Wilson to alter its strategy beginning in 2008. One aspect of this strategic shift involved 
 expanding the company’s product line to include higher quality furniture, consumer electron-
ics, and home entertainment systems. To complement its expanded product line, Wilson also 
introduced a credit card system so customers could more easily pay for their purchases. Wilson 
used commercial paper, bank loans, and trade credit to finance the growth of receivables and 
inventories. The company’s strategy also focused on closing unprofitable downtown stores; at 
the same time, it expanded by opening new stores in suburban shopping centers.
 
Your bank has extended two loans to Wilson, a $50 million secured construction loan that 
matures in 2018 and a $200 million revolving credit line that is currently up for renewal. Wil-
son has always complied with the terms of the revolving line of credit, but the company’s 
borrowing has been at or near the maximum amount allowed for the past two years. See Ex-
hibit 5.20 for the company’s comparative cash flow statements and Exhibit 5.21 for selected 
EXHIBIT 5.20
G.  T.  Wilson Company
Comparative Statements of Cash Flow
 
Years Ended January 31,
($ in thousands) 
 
2008 
2009 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014
Operating:
 Net income 
 
$ 38,200 
$ 41,900 
$  36,400 
$  31,600 
$  34,950 
$ 10,900 
$(145,400)
 Depreciation 
 
8,400 
9,000 
9,600 
10,600 
12,000 
13,600 
14,600
 Other adjustments to income 
 
(1,100) 
(1,600) 
(2,500) 
(1,800) 
(1,700) 
(1,350) 
(17,000)
 (Increase) Decrease in receivables 
 
(40,300) 
(55,500) 
(12,000) 
(49,900) 
(60,300) 
(72,200) 
9,600
 (Increase) in inventories 
 
(24,900) 
(13,500) 
(38,400) 
(38,200) 
(100,850) 
(51,100) 
(4,350)
 (Increase) Decrease in prepayments  
(400) 
(650) 
(200) 
(150) 
(1,250) 
(650) 
700
 Increase (Decrease) in accounts payable 
22,400 
2,050 
13,900 
6,900 
(12,100) 
(8,000) 
42,400
 Increase (Decrease) in other current
  liabilities 
 
8,500 
15,400 
(21,900) 
13,900 
14,950 
15,650 
(1,500)
Cash flow from operations 
 
10,800 
(2,900) 
(15,100) 
(27,050) 
(114,300) 
(93,150) 
(100,950)
Investing:
 Acquisition of property, plant, and
  equipment 
 
(10,600) 
(14,400) 
(16,100) 
(25,900) 
(26,250) 
(23,150) 
(15,500)
 Acquisition of investments 
 
— 
— 
(450) 
(6,000) 
(2,200) 
(5,700) 
(5,300)
Cash flow from investing 
 
(10,600) 
(14,400) 
(16,550) 
(31,900) 
(28,450) 
(28,850) 
(20,800)
Financing:
 Increase (Decrease) in short-term
  borrowing 
 
18,900 
64,000 
64,300 
(8,650) 
152,300 
63,050 
147,600
 Increase (Decrease) in long-term
  borrowing 
 
(1,500) 
(1,650) 
(1,500) 
98,450 
(1,600) 
93,900 
(4,000)
 Increase (Decrease) in capital stock  
850 
(17,900) 
(8,900) 
7,400 
(8,200) 
1,800 
850
 Dividends 
 
(17,700) 
(19,700) 
(20,800) 
(21,100) 
(21,150) 
(21,100) 
(4,500)
Cash flow from financing 
 
550 
24,750 
33,100 
76,100 
121,350 
137,650 
139,950
Other 
 
(100) 
— 
(400) 
(1,350) 
2,450 
(650) 
(700)
Change in cash 
 
$    650 
$  7,450 
$   1,050 
$  15,800 
$ (18,950) 
$ 15,000 
$    17,500

274 
CHAPTER 5
Essentials of Financial Statement Analysis
financial statistics. What do these cash flow statements and summary statistics tell us about 
the company’s credit risk?
Cash Flow from Operations 
A company’s cash flow from operations refers to the 
amount of cash it is able to generate from ongoing core business activities. Generating cash 
from operations is essential to any company’s long-term economic viability. However, not 
every company can be expected to produce positive operating cash flows every year. Even fi-
nancially healthy companies must sometimes spend more cash on their operating activities 
than they receive from customers.
 
The comparative cash flow statements in Exhibit 5.20 show that Wilson produced positive 
operating cash flows in 2008. Since then, its operating cash flows have been consistently 
negative and increasing in magnitude, with the average level for the last three years equal to 
about minus $100 million. This view contrasts sharply with the company’s sales and earnings 
performance as shown in Exhibit 5.21. Sales have increased steadily from $1.095 billion in 
2008 to $1.85 billion in 2013 with a small decline in 2014. Net income (Exhibit 5.20) in-
creased from $38.2 million in 2008 to a peak of $41.9 million in 2009 followed by three years 
of relative stability where earnings averaged about $34 million per year. Net income declined 
in 2013 to $10.9 million, and the company reported a $145.4 million loss in 2014.
 
What aspects of Wilson’s operations consumed cash during the company’s profitable 
years? Exhibit 5.20 shows the primary factors contributing to the company’s negative operat-
ing cash flows were increases in accounts receivable and increases in inventories. Some in-
crease in receivables and inventories is to be expected because of the company’s decision to 
expand its product line and introduce a customer credit card. However, increases in receiv-
ables or inventories can sometimes signal unfavorable business conditions. For example, the 
EXHIBIT 5.21
G. T. Wilson Company
Selected Financial Statistics
 
Years Ended January 31,
 
 
2008 
2009 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014
Operations
 Sales ($ millions) 
 
$1,095 
$1,210 
$1,250 
$1,375 
$1,665 
$1,850 
$1,762
 Number of new stores (net of closures) 
 
13 
21 
52 
40 
37 
41 
21
 Gross profit/sales 
 
32.8% 
33.0% 
36.5% 
35.8% 
35.3% 
35.1% 
30.1%
 Selling, general, and administrative/Sales 
 
25.2% 
25.2% 
29.9% 
30.7% 
30.6% 
30.4% 
41.3%
 Net income/Sales 
 
3.5% 
3.5% 
2.9% 
2.3% 
2.1% 
0.6% 
(8.3)%
 Dividends/net income 
 
46.3% 
47.0% 
57.1% 
66.8% 
60.5% 
193.6% 
(3.1)%
Short-Term Liquidity
 Current assets/Current liabilities 
 
3.3 
3.4 
3.7 
4.6 
4.5 
5.0 
6.2
 Operating cash flows as a % of sales 
 
1.0% 
(0.2)% 
(1.2)% 
(2.0)% 
(6.9)% 
(5.0)% 
(5.7)%
 Days receivable 
 
104.1 
115.1 
126.2 
131.1 
130.5 
140.0 
142.5
 Allowance for uncollectibles (%) 
 
3.8% 
4.0% 
3.6% 
3.2% 
2.8% 
3.0% 
3.3%
 Days inventory 
 
102.7 
104.3 
112.8 
117.1 
129.6 
131.2 
130.5
 Days payable 
 
48.6 
45.7 
48.9 
47.1 
33.6 
30.7 
42.6
Long-Term Solvency
 Total debt as a % of assets 
 
25.9% 
30.8% 
37.3% 
41.8% 
49.8% 
56.4% 
75.7%
 Interest coverage 
 
8.7 
6.4 
4.7 
4.5 
3.9 
1.2 
(2.4)
 Short-term debt as a % of total debt 
 
59.4% 
70.8% 
81.6% 
64.0% 
75.8% 
70.0% 
78.3%

 
Liquidity, Solvency, and Credit Analysis 
275
average collection period for customer accounts (days receivables in Exhibit 5.21) increased 
from 104.1 days in 2008 to 142.5 days in 2014. This trend could reflect expanded credit card 
use, more lenient credit policies offered to customers, or a deterioration in customers’ ability 
to pay. Similarly, the increase in days inventory (Exhibit 5.21) from 102.7 in 
2008 to 130.5 in 2014 could be due to product line extensions, escalating mer-
chandise costs, or slack consumer demand. The analyst must evaluate each 
possible explanation to discover what economic forces are responsible for the 
company’s negative operating cash flows and whether positive cash flows 
from operating activities are likely to be generated in the future.
 
A business such as G. T. Wilson that spends more cash on its operating activities than it 
generates must find ways to finance the operating cash flow shortfall. Typically, this means 
using up cash reserves, borrowing additional cash, issuing additional equity, or liquidating 
investments such as real estate and other fixed assets. None of these options can be sustained 
indefinitely. For example, Wilson could finance the company’s operating cash flow deficit by 
selling some retail stores. However, this action might jeopardize the company’s ability to gen-
erate positive operating cash flows in the future. Similarly, creditors are unlikely to keep lend-
ing to a business that continually fails to generate an acceptable level of cash flow from 
operations. In this regard, Wilson’s inability to generate positive operating cash flows in 
 recent years is troublesome.
Investing Activities 
In the investing section of the cash flow statement, companies 
present cash flows related to expansion or contraction of fixed assets, as well as cash flows 
related to nonoperating investments. These cash flows include capital expenditures and asset 
sales, acquisitions and divestitures, and purchases and sales or maturities of securities classi-
fied as available for sale.
 
Wilson Company’s cash flow statements (Exhibit 5.20) show sustained investment in prop-
erty, plant, and equipment that is consistent with the company’s expansion (Exhibit 5.21). 
Analysts should investigate carefully a company’s capital expenditures and fixed asset retire-
ments in light of the company’s business strategy and growth opportunities. For example, 
consider the following scenarios:
• Emerging companies require substantial investments in property, plant, and equipment at 
a stage when operating cash flows are often negative.
• Established growth companies also require substantial fixed asset investments to further 
expand their market presence. Operating cash flows for established growth companies 
can be positive or negative depending on the pace of expansion, the degree to which 
 expansion also requires working capital investment, and the ability of the company to 
generate a positive operating cash flow from markets in which it is established.
• Mature companies’ capital expenditures are limited to the amount needed to sustain 
 current levels of operations, usually at a time when operating cash flows are significantly 
positive.
 
Consequently, changes in a company’s capital expenditures or fixed asset sales over time must 
be analyzed carefully. For example, a sharp reduction in capital expenditures for an emerging 
growth company may indicate that the company is suffering from a temporary cash shortage. De-
creased capital expenditures may also signal a more fundamental change in management’s expec-
tations about the company’s growth opportunities and its competitive environment. Similarly, an 
increase in fixed asset sales could mean that management needs to raise cash quickly or that it is 
eliminating excess production capacity. The analyst needs to evaluate each of these possibilities 
because they have very different implications for the company’s future operating cash flows.
It is interesting to note that Wilson’s allowance 
for uncollectibles actually declined in percent-
age terms after 2009 (Exhibit 5.21) even though 
the average collection period increased. So, bad 
debt expense accruals apparently fell.

276 
CHAPTER 5
Essentials of Financial Statement Analysis
Financing Activities 
The most significant source of external financing for most com-
panies is debt. A large amount of research has been conducted that explores the “optimal” amount 
of debt financing that companies should include in their capital structures. Determining this opti-
mal debt level involves a trade-off between two competing economic forces—taxes and costs of 
financial distress.13 Unlike dividends, interest on debt is tax deductible, creating an advantage for 
debt financing over equity financing. However, highly-levered firms have a greater risk of finan-
cial distress and perhaps even bankruptcy. This risk is costly, not just because investors could lose 
their investments, but because distressed firms’ operations suffer. For example, customers may be 
reluctant to do business with a firm that may not survive and suppliers may not offer trade credit, 
making it more difficult to operate. The precise point at which these two forces counterbalance 
one another varies from company to company and over time. One way analysts can assess the 
optimal debt level is to evaluate the company’s historical and estimated future ability to meet 
scheduled debt payments. In this regard, Wilson Company’s situation appears bleak.
 
The financing section of Wilson’s cash flow statements (Exhibit 5.20) reveals a heavy reli-
ance on short-term debt to finance the company’s capital expenditures and operating cash 
flow deficits. The company issued $98.45 million of long-term debt in 2011 and $93.9 million 
in 2013. But the vast majority of Wilson’s external financing has been in the form of short-
term debt. Total debt as a percentage of assets (Exhibit 5.21) increased from 25.9% in 2008 to 
75.7% in 2014; short-term debt as a percentage of total debt increased from 59.4% in 2008 to 
78.3% in 2014, and over the same period the company’s interest coverage ratio deteriorated 
from 8.7 times to minus 2.4 times.
 
Wilson’s cash flow needs and growing debt burden raise questions about the wisdom of its 
dividend policy. Recall that Wilson has paid cash dividends to shareholders for almost 100 years 
and continued to do so during 2014 when the company reported a $145.4 million loss. Cash divi-
dend payments totaled $17.7 million in 2008, increased to $20.8 million in 2010, and then held 
steady at approximately that level until falling to $4.5 million in 2014. These cash flows could 
instead have been used to finance the company’s operating deficits and capital expenditures—or 
to pay down debt.14
 
Why was management so reluctant to curtail dividends? The payment of a cash dividend is 
viewed as an important signal by many financial analysts and investors. Management presum-
ably “signals” its expectations about the future through its dividend policy. A cash dividend 
increase is viewed as an indication that management expects future operating cash flows to be 
favorable—to the extent it can sustain the higher dividend. A reduction in cash dividends is 
interpreted as an indication that management expects future operating cash flows to decrease 
and remain at this decreased level. Research tends to corroborate dividend signaling. Increases 
and decreases in cash dividend payments are (on average) associated with subsequent earn-
ings and operating cash flow changes in the same direction. Of course, the degree of associa-
tion between dividend changes and future earnings or operating cash flow performance is less 
than perfect. So, financial analysts and investors must carefully evaluate the specific circum-
stances confronting each company.
Recommendation 
Wilson’s use of short-term debt financing coupled with its inability 
to generate positive cash flows from operations places the company in a precarious  position. 
Unless other external financing sources are identified or unless operating activities start to 
13 See Ross, Westerfield, and Jaffe, op. cit. These and other authors identify a third economic force that influences firms’ 
capital structure decisions—that is, agency costs. These costs are considered in more detail in Chapter 7.
14 Some might argue the dividend payments expose failures by creditors. The dividend payments moved assets beyond the 
reach of creditors, who risked being left with debt that could not be repaid. The lenders could have protected themselves with 
appropriate debt covenants. (See Chapter 7 for more on that topic.)

 
Liquidity, Solvency, and Credit Analysis 
277
generate positive cash flows, the company will be 
forced to declare bankruptcy if (and when) short-term 
creditors demand payment on existing loans. Wilson 
Company is a serious credit risk to the bank, and re-
newal of the $200 million revolving credit line is prob-
ably not justified. In fact, the bank may consider taking 
immediate steps to improve the likelihood of loan 
 repayment and to protect its creditor position in the 
event of bankruptcy.
This illustration is based loosely on the financial statements of a real 
company, W. T. Grant, for the years 1969 through 1975. At the time that 
it filed for bankruptcy in late 1975, Grant was the seventeenth largest 
retailer in the United States. The company’s collapse has been traced to 
a failed business strategy that involved rapid store expansion, product 
line extensions, and customer credit terms that contributed to delayed 
payment and increased customer default risk.
Source: J. Largay and C. Stickney, “Cash Flows, Ratio Analysis and the W. T. Grant 
Company Bankruptcy,” Financial Analysts Journal, July–August 1980, pp. 51–84.
RECAP
Timing differences between cash inflows and cash outflows create the need to borrow 
money. Cash flow analysis helps lenders identify why cash flow imbalances occur and 
whether the imbalance is temporary. Commercial banks, insurance companies, 
 pension funds, and other lenders will lend the needed cash only if there is a high prob-
ability that the borrower’s future cash inflows will be sufficient to repay the loan. 
Credit analysts rely on their understanding of the company, its business strategy and 
the competitive environment, and the adequacy of its past cash flows as a basis for 
forecasting future cash flows and assessing the company’s financial flexibility under 
stress.
Financial Ratios and Default Risk
A company is in default when it fails to make a required loan payment on time. Lenders 
can respond to a default in several ways. At one end of the spectrum, lenders may simply 
adjust the loan payment schedule to better suit the company’s anticipated operating cash 
flows. This response is appropriate when the default stems from a temporary cash flow 
shortfall and the borrower is fundamentally sound. If the borrower has a serious cash flow 
problem, lenders may modify the payment schedule in exchange for an increased interest 
rate or additional collateral, such as receivables, inventory, or equipment. If the borrower’s 
cash flow problem is extreme, lenders may petition a court to judge the borrower insol-
vent. The court-appointed trustee may either liquidate or reorganize the business—and 
restructure its loans—in an effort to settle all obligations in an orderly and equitable man-
ner. Insolvency (or bankruptcy, as it is more commonly known) thus becomes the ultimate 
form of default.
 
Credit analysis is intended to help lenders assess a borrower’s default risk or the likeli-
hood of loan default. Financial ratios play two crucial roles in credit analysis. First, they help 
lenders quantify a potential borrower’s default risk before a loan decision is finalized. Second, 
after a loan is granted, financial ratios serve as an early warning device that alerts lenders to 
changes in the borrower’s credit risk. But which specific financial ratios are most useful for 
these purposes? In other words, which particular financial ratios best predict default risk and 
how well do they do so?
 
Figure 5.6 shows the 1-year, 5-year, and 15-year default rates for 1981 to 2008 among 
public companies covered by Standard & Poor’s, a credit-rating agency. S&P assigns a credit 
rating to each of several thousand companies. Because most public companies are financially 
sound and thus earn a relatively high credit rating, there are actually relatively few defaults in 
a given year, and this rarity makes predicting defaults difficult. Although about one in four of 
the firms in the highest risk category (CCC/C) default within a year, a relatively small portion 

278 
CHAPTER 5
Essentials of Financial Statement Analysis
of the population of firms is in this group. Nonetheless, the ability of S&P’s ratings to sort 
companies by default rates is immediately clear from Figure 5.6. Companies assigned the top 
rating (AAA) are very unlikely to default, even over long periods of time, and default rates 
over any time horizon are clearly increasing with lower ratings.
 
Financial ratios also relate to future default rates and, in fact, are generally incorporated in 
the credit analysis that leads to a firm’s credit rating, which we have already seen relates to the 
probability of future default. Figure 5.7 plots default frequency for four common financial 
ratios: return on assets (ROA), debt to tangible assets, interest coverage, and the quick ratio. 
Each curve was estimated using financial data from public companies in Moody’s loan default 
database over the 1980–1999 period. For each variable, the data were divided into 50 groups 
that ranged from very low values of the variable to very high values. The companies in each 
group were examined to determine whether a default occurred within five years of the finan-
cial statement date. Default frequencies were compiled for each group and statistically 
smoothed to aid interpretation.
 
The pattern of default frequencies in Figure 5.7 confirms basic intuition. Default risk de-
creases as ROA, interest coverage, and the quick ratio increase and it increases as the debt to 
tangible assets ratio increases. So, we see that given data about default frequencies, one could 
estimate the probability of default by finding where a firm’s financial ratio falls on a particular 
curve. For example, a firm at the 40th percentile for ROA would appear to have a 5% five-year 
default risk.
 
Of course, these graphs show the relationships between default risk and a single variable at 
a time. If a firm whose ROA suggested a 5% default risk was in the 80th percentile for interest 
coverage, that statistic would suggest the default risk was below 2%. Which value is correct? 
Ideally, we would like to consider the effects of many variables simultaneously. One popular 
approach to doing so is the Altman Z-score. It combines a set of five financial ratios using 
multiple discriminant analysis to estimate a company’s default risk conditional on all five 
variables.15
5-year default rate
1-year default rate
15-year default rate
AAA
AA
A
BBB
BB
B
CCC/C
S&P credit rating
Percentage
50
60
40
30
20
10
0
Figure 5.6
DEFAULT RATES AMONG 
PUBLIC COMPANIES BY S&P 
CREDIT RATING: 1981–2008
Source: Investor Fact Book 2009/2010, 
The McGraw Hill Companies.
15 E. Altman, “Financial Ratios, Discriminant Analysis and the Prediction of Corporate Bankruptcy,” Journal of Finance, 
September 1968, pp. 589–609.

 
Liquidity, Solvency, and Credit Analysis 
279
 
The Z-score model is:
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Probability of default
10%
8%
12%
6%
4%
2%
0%
Highest
percentile
Return on assets
(ROA)
Quick ratio
Lowest
percentile
Interest coverage
Debt to
total assets
(DTA)
Figure 5.7
PROBABILITY OF DEFAULT 
WITHIN FIVE YEARS 
AMONG PUBLIC 
 COMPANIES: 1980–1999
Source: RiskCalc for Private Companies: 
Moody’s Default Model Rating 
 Methodology, Moody’s Investors Service 
(May 2000).
Z-score 5 1.2 3 Working capital/Total assets
 
1 1.4 3 Retained earnings/Total assets
 
1 3.3 3 EBIT/Total assets
 
1 0.6 3 Market value of equity/Book value of debt
 
1 1.0 3 Sales/Total assets
where EBIT is earnings before interest and taxes. Notice how the model combines informa-
tion about a company’s current profitability (EBIT/Total assets), long-term profitability (Re-
tained earnings/Total assets), liquidity (Working capital/Total assets), solvency (Market 
value of equity/Book value of debt), and asset turnover (Sales/Total assets) into a single 
measure of bankruptcy risk. Notice also that the five surviving ratios are not simply added 
together to form the overall Z-score value. Instead, each ratio has its own unique weight in 
the final calculation.
 
Now suppose you applied the Z-score formula to a company and got 2.4 as your answer. 
As you can probably guess by looking carefully at the formula, high Z-scores are good and 
low Z-scores are bad. What does a Z-score of 2.4 mean? Is a value of 2.4 above or below the 
cutoff for predicted bankruptcy? Before we see how Altman answered this question, let’s look 
at some hypothetical data so that we can better understand the problem Altman faced.
 
Suppose your company sells merchandise on credit and that it has only two types of credit 
customers: “deadbeats” who fail to pay their bills and “prompt payers” who always pay the 
full amount on time. Of course, you can’t know for certain which customer types you are 
dealing with until it comes time for them to pay their bills. You can, however, use historical 
information about your customers and their payment patterns to identify characteristics that 
seem to predict whether a customer will be a deadbeat or prompt payer. If your customers are 
companies, financial ratios might do the trick, especially if those ratios are combined accord-
ing to the Z-score formula. Refer to Figure 5.8 for the historical frequency distribution of Z-
score values for the deadbeats and prompt-paying customers. As you might suspect, deadbeats 
tend to have low Z-scores (high default risk) while prompt-paying customers tend to have high 
Z-scores (low default risk).
 
Now suppose that you were to set the cutoff point at Z1, meaning customers with Z-score 
values below that point would be denied credit. Almost all your prompt-paying customers 

280 
CHAPTER 5
Essentials of Financial Statement Analysis
would qualify for credit because the vast majority of these customers have Z-scores above Z1. 
Unfortunately, so do many deadbeats. If you want to deny credit to more deadbeats, you need 
to set the cutoff higher. The value Z2 in Figure 5.8 is one possibility. Using this cutoff, fewer 
deadbeats will qualify for credit, but you will also be denying credit to a larger number of 
prompt-paying customers.
 
The research evidence led Altman to conclude that firms having a Z-score higher than 2.99 
(think Z2) clearly fell into the “prompt payer” category—our label, not his—and were 
 predicted to remain solvent. Firms having a Z-score of less than 1.81 (think Z1) clearly fell 
into the deadbeat category and were predicted to go bankrupt. Firms with Z-scores that fell 
between these two cutoff points landed in a gray area, where classification mistakes can be 
large (because the two distributions overlap) and costly. Altman recommends that these firms 
be given additional, in-depth scrutiny using conventional financial analysis tools and informa-
tion beyond just that contained in the published financial statements.
 
The original Z-score model was designed for publicly traded manufacturing firms. Altman 
has since developed models for private companies and public service–sector firms.16 Credit-rating 
agencies like Dun and Bradstreet have used a similar approach to develop their credit-rating 
scores, although these agencies are often silent about the specific factors they consider and how 
much weight each factor is given in the composite score.
 
Other researchers have developed bankruptcy prediction models as well using other statis-
tical techniques. Two of the more well know models are by Ohlson (1980) and Zmijewski 
(1984).17
Highest
score
Range of Z-score Values
Prompt
payers
Deadbeats
Lowest
score
Z1
Z2
Figure 5.8
FREQUENCY DISTRIBUTION 
OF Z-SCORES FOR TWO 
TYPES OF CREDIT 
CUSTOMER
16 See E. Altman, Corporate Financial Distress and Bankruptcy (New York: Wiley, 1993).
17 See J. Ohlson, “Financial Ratios and the Probabilistic Prediction of Bankruptcy,” Journal of Accounting Research, Spring 
1980, pp. 109–31, and M. Zmijewski, “Methodological Issues Related to the Estimation of Financial Distress Prediction 
Models,” Journal of Accounting Research, Supplement 1984, pp. 59–82.
RECAP
When lenders want to know about a company’s ability to pay debts on time, they assess 
its credit risk. Credit risk assessment often begins with a cash flow statement because it 
shows the company’s operating cash flows along with its financing and investment needs. 
A low credit risk company generates operating cash flows substantially in excess of what 
are required to sustain its business activities. The lender also can use liquidity and  solvency 
ratios to assess credit risk.

 
Appendix 
281
SUMMARY
Financial ratios, along with common-size and trend statements, provide analysts powerful 
tools for tracking a company’s  performance over time, for making comparisons among differ-
ent companies, and for assessing compliance with contractual benchmarks. Here are some 
things to remember about those tools:
• There is no single “correct” way to compute many financial ratios. In this chapter, we 
have shown you how to compute common financial ratios using widely accepted methods. 
But not every analyst calculates these ratios in exactly the same way. Why? Sometimes it’s 
a matter of personal taste or industry practice (for example, operating profit ratios for retail 
companies often exclude depreciation and rent). At other times, it’s because the analyst is 
attempting to make the numbers more comparable across companies or over time.
• Financial ratios don’t provide the answers, but they can help you ask the right ques-
tions. It’s useful to know that a company’s profitability or credit risk has improved (or 
 declined), but it’s even more important to know why the change occurred. Did consumer 
demand increase, or was the company stealing market share from competitors? Were 
 operating costs reduced and, if so, which ones? Use the financial ratios and the other 
tools in this chapter to guide your analysis. They can help you to ask the right questions 
and tell you where to look for answers.
• Is it the economics of the business or is it the accounting? Watch out for accounting dis-
tortions that can complicate your interpretation of financial ratios and other comparisons. 
Remember that the analyst’s task is to “get behind the numbers”—that is, to develop a 
solid understanding of the company’s economic activities and how industry fundamentals 
have shaped where the company is today and where it will be tomorrow.
APPENDIX
SEGMENT REPORTING
Whereas Whole Foods operates in one industry, most public companies have operations in 
multiple industries that may have very different operating characteristics and risks. To inform 
investors and creditors about these differences, U.S. GAAP requires public entities with mul-
tiple business segments to disclose limited financial information for each segment.18 The 2012 
AICPA survey of 2011 annual reports shows that 84% of the 500 companies surveyed report 
separate information for business segments.19
Definition of a Reportable Segment
The standards do not mandate the basis (e.g., product type or geography) for segment disclo-
sure. Instead, they require a management approach where the information is disclosed in the 
same manner that it is organized internally for “making operating decisions and assessing 
18 The guidance is contained under Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 
Topic 280: Segment Reporting. The guidance for segment reporting under International Financial Reporting Standards 
(IFRS) 8—“Operating Segments” is very similar to the FASB guidance discussed in this appendix. The FASB Codification 
defines a public entity as a business or not-for-profit entity that has publicly traded debt or equity securities, is required to 
file financial statements with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), or makes financial statements public in antici-
pation of issuing publicly traded securities (see FASB ASC 280-10-20: Segment Reporting—Overall—Glossary.
19 See R. J. Petrino, D. J. Cohen, A. V. Patel, and K. A. Kraft (eds.), Accounting Trends and Techniques (New York: American 
Institute of Certified Public Accountants, Inc., 2012), p. 45.

282 
CHAPTER 5
Essentials of Financial Statement Analysis
performance.”20 The standards define an operating segment as a component of a public entity 
that earns revenue and incurs expenses within or outside the entity and produces discrete 
 financial information that is reviewed and used by the chief operating decision maker 
(CODM). The CODM may be the chief executive officer (CEO), chief operating officer 
(COO), president, or group of officers responsible for reviewing entity activities and allocat-
ing resources.21
 
An entity could have hundreds of operational units that meet the above definition of an 
operating segment. Disclosing separate financial information for so many segments would be 
onerous for the reporting entity and overly detailed for investors and creditors. Therefore, 
U.S. GAAP provides criteria for aggregating operating segments. An entity may combine 
operating segments into one segment when the segments have similar economic characteris-
tics (e.g., gross margin) and are similar with regard to all of the following:
a. Product and service,
b. Production process,
c. Type or class of customer,
d. Product and service distribution methods, and
e. Regulatory environment.22
 
After the operating segments are aggregated using the above criteria, the firm must dis-
close information for segments meeting any of the following quantitative thresholds:
a. Revenue equals or exceeds 10% of total revenue from internal and external parties.
b. The absolute value of operating profit or loss equals or exceeds 10% of the greater of (in 
absolute value terms) combined segment operating profit of those segments with profits 
and combined segment operating losses of those segments with losses.
c. Assets equal or exceed 10% of total segment assets.
When operating segments do not meet the 10% thresholds, management may disclose in-
formation at lower thresholds if it believes the information meets the objective of the stan-
dard or may further aggregate operating segments if the majority of the five aggregation 
criteria from above are met. Reportable segments (segments for which management pro-
vides separate disclosure) must represent at least 75% of the revenue reported on the in-
come statement. To meet this requirement, a firm may have to report segment information 
for a segment with revenue, profit, or assets that represent less than 10% of the total 
amounts.23
 
To illustrate the interaction of the aggregation and quantitative guidelines, we use the 
following example and focus on revenue.24 A similar approach would be used for operating 
profit and assets to determine whether their magnitude would make the segment 
reportable.
20 See FASB ASC Paragraph 280-10-05-3: Segment Reporting—Overall—Overview and Background—General.
21 See FASB ASC Paragraphs 280-10-50-1 to 9: Segment Reporting—Overall—Disclosure—General.
22 See FASB ASC Paragraphs 280-10-50-10 to 11: Segment Reporting—Overall—Disclosure—General.
23 See FASB ASC Paragraphs 280-10-50-12 to 14: Segment Reporting—Overall—Disclosure—General.
24 We base this example on illustrations contained in FASB ASC Paragraphs 280-10-55-31 to 42: Segment Reporting— 
Overall—Implementation Guidance and Illustrations—General.

 
Appendix 
283
 
Step 1 in determining the reportable segments is to aggregate the segments with similar 
economic environments. Therefore, Castle would aggregate segments A and C to form a com-
bined AC reportable segment. Step 2 is to determine which segments exceed the 10% of rev-
enue threshold. AC $42 ($23 from A 1 $19 from C) and B exceed the 10% threshold. 
Step 3 allows Castle to combine segments with revenue below the 10% threshold if the seg-
ments meet the majority of the aggregation criteria. In this case, segments D and F may be 
combined to form a combined DF reportable segment with revenue of $14 ($9 from D and $5 
from F). The sum of the revenue for the three reportable segments is $87 ($42 from AC 1 $31 
from B 1 $14 from DF), which is greater than 75% of total revenue. Castle would combine 
segments E and G in an “Other” category when reconciling to the revenue reported on the 
income statement.
 
In this case, Castle moved from seven operating segments to three reportable segments. 
Firms with tens or hundreds of segments would follow the same process. The accounting 
standards suggest that a firm would generally limit disclosures to 10 reportable segments. 
Often managers resist identifying additional segments because they fear that competitors 
could use the resulting disclosures.
Required Disclosures
GAAP requires companies to explain how they determine their reportable segments and to 
describe the products or services generating revenue for each segment.25 In addition, it 
 requires for each segment the following income statement data:
a. Revenue from customers outside the company,
b. Revenue from other segments within the company,
c. Interest revenue,
25 See FASB ASC Paragraphs 280-10-50-20 to 42: Segment Reporting—Overall—Disclosure—General.
Castle Company has seven operating segments with the following revenue. All revenue 
amounts represent sales to external customers. In other words, there are no sales between 
segments.
 Operating Segment 
Revenue
 
A 
$ 23
 
B 
31
 
C 
19
 
D 
9
 
E 
7
 
F 
5
 
G 
6
 
Total 
$100
Assume that the economic environments of Segments A and C are similar. Both segments 
have similar products, production processes, customers, distribution methods, and regulatory 
environment. Segments D and F have similar products, production processes, and regulatory 
environments. Segments E and G are not similar to any of the other segments.

284 
CHAPTER 5
Essentials of Financial Statement Analysis
d. Interest expense,
e. Depreciation, depletion, amortization, and other significant noncash expenses,
f. Unusual gains and losses, such as restructuring charges or gains on sales of subsidiaries,
g. Equity method income (see Chapter 16, pages 961–966),
h. Income tax expense,
i. Extraordinary items, and
j. Profit or loss.
A company also must report for each segment the following balance sheet data:
a. Total assets,
b. Equity method investments (see Chapter 16, pages 961–966), and
c. Additions to long-lived assets.
The above segment information must be reconciled to the amounts reported in the financial 
statements for the full company. We discuss the reconciliations in conjunction with the 
 Harley-Davidson example in the next section of the appendix.
 
As mentioned earlier in the appendix, companies report segments according to how they 
are managed internally. To improve comparability, U.S. GAAP requires minimal enterprise-
wide disclosures related to industry and geographic location if it is not included in the disclo-
sures based on the management approach. These requirements also apply to companies that 
have only one business segment. Under these requirements, the company must report reve-
nues from external customers for each group of similar products or services. The geographic 
disclosures include:
a. Revenues from external customers derived from the entity’s country of domicile,
b. Revenues from external customers derived from all foreign sources, with disclosure by 
individual country when the revenues from that country are material,
c. Long-lived assets located in the entity’s country of domicile, and
d. Long-lived assets located in foreign countries, with disclosure by individual country 
when the long-lived assets located in the country are material.
To provide additional information on risk, GAAP requires a public entity to make additional 
disclosures when one external customer accounts for 10% or more of its revenues. This disclo-
sure includes the total amount from each such customer and the segments affected. For example, 
The Boeing Company’s 2012 Form 10-K reported that 33% of its 2012 revenue came from the 
United States government. The Defense, Space & Security segment generated the revenue. 
Actions to reduce the U.S. deficit could threaten this revenue in future years.
Case Study: Harley-Davidson, Inc.
To illustrate and analyze segment disclosures, we use excerpts from Harley-Davidson’s 2012 
Form 10-K (see Exhibit 5.22). We number the schedules to make it easier to follow our expla-
nations. Harley-Davidson (hereafter, HD) operates in two segments, Motorcycles and Finan-
cial Services. Manufacturers of expensive, long-lived equipment often have  finance 
subsidiaries, which can make some ratios similar to banks instead of manufacturing firms.
 
Schedule 1 of Exhibit 5.22 provides income statement information. We can isolate each 
segment’s contribution to total company revenue (a common-size approach), compute an 
 operating profit margin (that is, operating income divided by revenue), and growth for each 
segment. Total revenue for 2012 is $5,580.5 million (Motorcycles net revenue of 

 
Appendix 
285
EXHIBIT 5.22
Harley-Davidson, Inc. Business Segment and 
Geographic Disclosures
Business Segments:
The Company operates in two business segments: Motorcycles and Financial Services. The Com-
pany’s reportable segments are strategic business units that offer different products and services. 
They are managed separately based on the fundamental differences in their operations.
 
The Motorcycles segment designs, manufactures and sells at wholesale heavyweight (engine 
displacement of 6511cc) cruiser and touring motorcycles as well as a line of motorcycle parts, 
accessories, general merchandise and related services.
 
The Financial Services segment provides wholesale and retail financing and provides insurance 
and insurance-related programs primarily to Harley-Davidson dealers and their retail customers. 
HDFS conducts business principally in the United States and Canada.
Schedule 1: Income Statement Information
Information by segment is set forth below for the years ended December 31 (in thousands):
 
2012 
2011 
2010
Motorcycles net revenue 
$4,942,582 
$4,662,264 
$4,176,627
Gross profit 
1,720,188 
1,555,976 
1,427,403
Selling, administrative and engineering expense 
976,224 
926,808 
885,137
Restructuring expense and other impairments 
28,475 
67,992 
163,508
 Operating income from Motorcycles 
$  715,489 
$  561,176 
$  378,758
Financial services revenue 
$  637,924 
$  649,449 
$  682,709
Financial services expense 
353,237 
380,658 
500,836
 Operating income from Financial Services 
$  284,687 
$  268,791 
$  181,873
Schedule 2: Asset Information
Information by industry segment is set forth below as of December 31 (in thousands):
 
 
Financial 
 
Motorcycles 
Services 
Consolidated
2012
Total assets 
$2,751,018 
$6,419,755 
$9,170,773
Depreciation 
$   162,659 
$       6,319 
$   168,978
Capital expenditures 
$   180,416 
$       8,586 
$   189,002
2011
Total assets 
$2,959,333 
$6,714,831 
$9,674,164
Depreciation 
$   173,959 
$       6,449 
$   180,408
Capital expenditures 
$   179,988 
$       9,047 
$   189,035
2010
Total assets 
$2,701,965 
$6,728,775 
$9,430,740
Depreciation 
$   248,246 
$       6,925 
$   255,171
Capital expenditures 
$   167,730 
$       3,115 
$   170,845
(continued)
$4,942.6 million 1 Financial services revenue of $637.9 million). Motorcycles revenue 
 represents 88.6% ($4,942.6 million/$5,580.5 million), and Financial services represents the 
remaining 11.4%. The operating profit margin for each segment is considerably different. 
The 2012 operating profit margin for Motorcycles is 14.5% (Operating income of $715.5 million/
Revenue of $4,942.6 million), whereas the ratio for Financial services is 44.6% (Operating 
 income of $284.7 million/Revenue of $637.9 million).
 
The growth rates for each segment also differ. The 2012 growth rates for Motorcycle rev-
enue and operating profit are 6.0% (2012 Motorcycles revenue of $4,942.6 million/2011 

286 
CHAPTER 5
Essentials of Financial Statement Analysis
 Motorcycles revenue of $4,662.3 million minus 1) and 27.5% (2012 Motorcycles operating 
income of $715.5 million/2011 Motorcycles operating income of $561.2 million minus 1), 
respectively. In contrast, the growth rates for Financial services are much lower. The 2012 
growth rates for Financial services revenue and operating profit are –1.8% (2012 Financial 
services revenue of $637.9 million/2011 Financial services revenue of $649.4 million minus 1) 
and 5.9% (2012 Financial services operating income of $284.7 million/2011 Financial ser-
vices operating income of $268.8 million minus 1), respectively.
 
Segment notes provide three years of income statement data, and analysts can ascertain 
how the segment contributions to revenue and profit change over time. The growth rates and 
margins also provide insights into how well managers are running the various segments. 
When growth rates, margins, or mix of income changes, the analyst should critically examine 
management explanations for the changes found in the Management Discussion and Analysis 
(MD&A) section of Form 10-K. The analyst may have to revise forecasts upward or down-
ward depending on the explanations and the analyst’s view of the future business 
environment.
 
Schedule 2 provides Total assets, Depreciation, and Capital expenditures for both seg-
ments. Note that the Motorcycles segment has most of the Capital expenditures and Deprecia-
tion. However, the Financial services segment has more than twice the total assets. As we 
stated earlier, the Financial services segment financial statements are similar to those of 
banks. Whereas the Motorcycles segment has most of the physical assets, the Financial 
 services segment holds primarily financial assets.
EXHIBIT 5.22
Harley-Davidson, Inc. Business Segment and 
Geographic Disclosures (continued)
Schedule 3: Geographic Information
Included in the consolidated financial statements are the following amounts relating to 
 geographic locations for the years ended December 31 (in thousands):
 
2012 
2011 
2010
Revenue from Motorcycles(a):
 United States 
$3,363,640 
$3,155,608 
$2,818,032
 Europe 
710,861 
781,432 
699,492
 Japan 
244,907 
229,427 
234,247
 Canada 
186,550 
154,314 
157,606
 Australia 
186,674 
141,392 
136,172
 Other foreign countries 
249,950 
200,091 
131,078
 
$4,942,582 
$4,662,264 
$4,176,627
Revenue from Financial Services(a):
 United States 
$  607,909 
$  619,214 
$   652,849
 Europe 
5,483 
4,471 
3,497
 Canada 
24,532 
25,764 
26,363
 
$  637,924 
$  649,449 
$   682,709
Long-lived assets(b):
 United States 
$  825,509 
$  822,089 
$  842,461
 International 
56,143 
59,571 
62,192
 
$  881,652 
$  881,660 
$  904,653
(a) Revenue is attributed to geographic regions based on location of customer.
(b) Long-lived assets include all long-term assets except those specifically excluded under ASC Topic 280, “Segment 
Reporting,” such as deferred income taxes and finance receivables.

 
Appendix 
287
 
Schedule 3 provides geographic information. Both segments derive most of their revenues 
from the United States. However, Motorcycles revenue also is disclosed separately for  Europe, 
Japan, Canada, and Australia. The currency rate changes, business cycles, regulations, and 
risks differ across these geographic areas. The vast majority of Financial services revenue 
comes from the United States, but HD discloses separate amounts for Europe and Canada. 
Finally, most long-lived assets reside in the United States.
 
Usually, companies with finance subsidiaries provide detailed income statement and bal-
ance sheet information for the finance subsidiary and the remainder of the company. These 
schedules also may be used to reconcile the segment amounts to the company’s total (consoli-
dated) financial statement amounts. Exhibit 5.23 provides HD’s detailed income statement 
and balance sheet information for Motorcycles, Financial services, reconciling items (elimi-
nations), and Consolidated (total) amounts.
 
Note that the Motorcycles and Financial services segments have different categories of 
revenue and expense items on its income statement. We also see different captions for the seg-
ments on the balance sheet. As mentioned previously, the Motorcycles segment has most of 
the physical assets, and the Financial services segment has most of the financial assets. This 
additional detail allows an analyst to compute separately most of the ratios discussed earlier 
in the chapter for both the finance and nonfinance segments. In addition, this type of informa-
tion and the segment information presented in Exhibit 5.22 allows more accurate forecasting 
(see Chapter 6, Appendix B, page 347). The Eliminations column removes the effects of 
transactions between the Motorcycles and Financial services segments so that only transac-
tions with external parties are included in the Consolidated column. Chapter 16 (page 972) 
discusses intercompany transactions and their eliminations in detail.
EXHIBIT 5.23
Harley-Davidson, Inc. Supplemental Business Segment Income Statement 
and Balance Sheet Information
 
Year Ended December 31, 2012
 
Motorcycles & Related  
Financial
 
Products Operations 
Services Operations 
Eliminations 
Consolidated
Revenue:
 Motorcycles and related products 
$4,952,748 
$     — 
$ (10,166) 
$4,942,582
 Financial services 
— 
639,482 
(1,558) 
637,924
  Total revenue 
4,952,748 
639,482 
(11,724) 
5,580,506
Costs and expenses:
 Motorcycles and related products cost of goods sold 
3,222,394 
— 
— 
3,222,394
 Financial services interest expense 
— 
195,990 
— 
195,990
 Financial services provision for credit losses 
— 
22,239 
— 
22,239
 Selling, administrative and engineering expense 
977,782 
145,174 
(11,724) 
1,111,232
 Restructuring expense 
28,475 
— 
— 
28,475
  Total costs and expenses 
4,228,651 
363,403 
(11,724) 
4,580,330
Operating income 
724,097 
276,079 
— 
1,000,176
Investment income 
232,369 
— 
(225,000) 
7,369
Interest expense 
46,033 
— 
— 
46,033
Income before provision for income taxes 
910,433 
276,079 
(225,000) 
961,512
Provision for income taxes 
233,385 
104,202 
— 
337,587
Income from continuing operations 
677,048 
171,877 
(225,000) 
623,925
Income from discontinued operations, net of tax 
— 
— 
— 
—
Net income 
$  677,048 
$171,877 
$(225,000) 
$  623,925
(continued)

288 
CHAPTER 5
Essentials of Financial Statement Analysis
EXHIBIT 5.23
Harley-Davidson, Inc. Supplemental Business Segment Income Statement and 
Balance Sheet Information (continued)
 
December 31, 2012
 
Motorcycles & Related  
Financial
 
Products Operations 
Services Operations 
Eliminations 
Consolidated
ASSETS
Current assets:
 Cash and cash equivalents 
$  727,716 
$  340,422 
$    — 
$1,068,138
 Marketable securities 
135,634 
— 
— 
135,634
 Accounts receivable, net 
781,642 
— 
(551,563) 
230,079
 Finance receivables, net 
— 
1,743,045 
— 
1,743,045
 Inventories 
393,524 
— 
— 
393,524
 Restricted cash 
— 
188,008 
— 
188,008
 Deferred income taxes 
84,486 
26,367 
— 
110,853
 Other current assets 
146,419 
31,242 
3,994 
181,655
Total current assets 
2,269,421 
2,329,084 
(547,569) 
4,050,936
Finance receivables, net 
— 
4,038,807 
— 
4,038,807
Property, plant and equipment, net 
783,068 
32,396 
— 
815,464
Goodwill 
29,530 
— 
— 
29,530
Deferred income taxes 
175,839 
— 
(3,994) 
171,845
Other long-term assets 
116,925 
19,468 
(72,202) 
64,191
 
$3,374,783 
$6,419,755 
$(623,765) 
$9,170,773
LIABILITES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Current liabilities:
 Accounts payable 
$   221,064 
$   587,885 
$(551,563) 
$  257,386
 Accrued liabilities 
439,144 
74,447 
— 
513,591
 Short-term debt 
— 
294,943 
— 
294,943
 Current portion of long-term debt 
— 
437,162 
— 
437,162
Total current liabilities 
660,208 
1,394,437 
(551,563) 
1,503,082
Long-term debt 
303,000 
4,067,544 
— 
4,370,544
Pension liability 
330,294 
— 
— 
330,294
Postretirement healthcare liability 
278,062 
— 
— 
278,062
Other long-term liabilities 
114,476 
16,691 
— 
131,167
Commitments and contingencies (Note 16)
Total shareholders’ equity 
1,688,743 
941,083 
(72,202) 
2,557,624
 
$3,374,783 
$6,419,755 
$(623,765) 
$9,170,773
EXERCISES
The following information is from the 2014 annual report of Weber Corporation, a company 
that supplies manufactured parts to the household appliance industry.
E5-1
Calculating Profitability 
Ratios (LO 3)
AICPA
ADAPTED
Average total assets 
$24,500,000
Average interest-bearing debt 
10,000,000
Average other liabilities 
2,250,000
Average shareholders’ equity 
12,250,000
Sales 
49,000,000
Interest expense 
   800,000
Net income 
2,450,000

 
Exercises 
289
Required:
1. Compute Weber Corporation’s return on assets (ROA) for 2014 using a combined federal 
and state income tax rate of 40% where needed.
2. Compute the profit margin and asset turnover components of ROA for 2014.
3. Weber’s management believes that various business initiatives will produce an asset turn-
over rate of 2.25 next year. If the profit margin next year is unchanged from 2014, what 
will be the company’s ROA?
On January 1, 2014, River Company’s inventory was $400,000. During 2014, the company 
purchased $1,900,000 of additional inventory, and on December 31, 2014, its inventory was 
$500,000.
Required:
What is the inventory turnover for 2014?
E5-2
Determining inventory 
 turnover (LO 3)
AICPA
ADAPTED
Utica Company’s net accounts receivable was $250,000 at December 31, 2013, and $300,000 
at December 31, 2014. Net cash sales for 2014 were $100,000. The accounts receivable turn-
over for 2014 was 5.0, which was computed from net credit sales for the year.
Required:
What was Utica’s total net sales for 2014?
E5-3
Determining receivable 
 turnover (LO 3)
AICPA
ADAPTED
Required:
1. What is the accounts receivable turnover for 2014?
2. What is the inventory turnover for 2014?
Selected data of Islander Company follow:
E5-4
Assessing receivable and 
 inventory turnover (LO 3)
AICPA
ADAPTED
 
As of December 31,
Balance Sheet Data 
2014 
2013
Accounts receivable 
$500,000 
$470,000
Allowance for doubtful accounts 
(25,000) 
(20,000)
Net accounts receivable 
$475,000 
$450,000
Inventories—lower of cost or market 
$600,000 
$550,000
 
Year Ended December 31,
Income Statement Data 
2014 
2013
Net credit sales 
$2,500,000 
$2,200,000
Net cash sales 
500,000 
400,000
Net sales 
$3,000,000 
$2,600,000
Cost of goods sold 
$2,000,000 
$1,800,000
Selling, general, and administrative expenses 
300,000 
270,000
Other 
50,000 
30,000
Total operating expenses 
$2,350,000 
$2,100,000

290 
CHAPTER 5
Essentials of Financial Statement Analysis
E5-5
Analyzing current and quick 
ratios (LO 5)
Todd Corporation wrote off $100,000 of obsolete inventory at December 31, 2014.
Required:
What effect did this write-off have on the company’s December 31, 2014, current and quick 
ratios?
AICPA
ADAPTED
E5-6
Analyzing effects on current 
ratio (LO 5)
Gil Corporation has current assets of $90,000 and current liabilities of $180,000.
Required:
Compute the effect of each of the following independent transactions on Gil’s current ratio:
1. Refinancing a $30,000 long-term mortgage with a short-term note.
2. Purchasing $50,000 of merchandise inventory with short-term accounts payable.
3. Paying $20,000 of short-term accounts payable.
4. Collecting $10,000 of short-term accounts receivable.
AICPA
ADAPTED
E5-8
Analyzing why inventory 
turnover increased (LO 7)
A comparison of 2014 to 2013 performance shows that Neir Company’s inventory turnover 
increased substantially although sales and inventory amounts were essentially unchanged.
Required:
Which of the following statements best explains the increased inventory turnover ratio?
1. Cost of goods sold decreased.
2. Accounts receivable turnover increased.
3. Total asset turnover increased.
4. Gross profit percentage decreased.
AICPA
ADAPTED
E5-7
Calculating interest coverage 
(LO 5)
AICPA
ADAPTED
Sales 
$3,600,000
Bond interest expense 
120,000
Income taxes 
600,000
Net income 
800,000
Required:
How many times was bond interest earned in 2014?
The following data were taken from the financial records of Glum Corporation for 2014:
E5-9
Calculating days sales 
outstanding (LO 3)
Selected information taken from the accounting records of Vigor Company follows:
AICPA
ADAPTED
Net accounts receivable at December 31, 2013 
$   900,000
Net accounts receivable at December 31, 2014 
$1,000,000
Accounts receivable turnover 
5 to 1
Inventories at December 31, 2013 
$1,100,000
Inventories at December 31, 2014 
$1,200,000
Inventory turnover 
4 to 1
Required:
1. What was Vigor’s gross profit for 2014?
2. Suppose that there are 360 business days in the year. What were the number of days sales 
outstanding in average receivables and the number of days sales outstanding in average 
inventories, respectively, for 2014?

 
Exercises 
291
The Hershey Co. is famous worldwide for its chocolate confections—the Hershey bar and 
those delightful Hershey Kisses. Tootsie Roll Industries is equally famous for its chewy 
Tootsie Roll and those flavorful Tootsie Roll Pops. Selected financial information about each 
company’s performance in 2011 follows:
E5-10
Hershey Company and 
Tootsie Roll Industries 
(LO 1)
 
Hershey Co. 
Tootsie Roll Indus.
Sales 
$6,080 mil. 
$533 mil.
Net income 
$629 mil. 
$44 mil.
Return on assets (ROA) 
15.8% 
5.1%
Profit margin 
11.3% 
8.3%
Asset turnover 
1.40 
0.62
Required:
1. Why is Tootsie Roll so much less profitable than Hershey?
2. The industry-average ROA for confectioners is around 10%. Which company has the 
more valuable brand?
Mentor Graphics Corporation, a supplier of electronic design automation systems, just an-
nounced its second quarter results. According to the earnings press release, the company re-
ported “revenues of $182.6 million, non-GAAP earnings per share of $0.02, and a GAAP loss 
per share of $0.22.” Elsewhere in the press release the company says that non-GAAP earnings 
excludes the following items incurred during the quarter: equity-based (noncash) employee 
compensation; severance and related employee “rebalancing” costs; fees paid to consultants; 
losses related to the abandonment of excess facility space and to a facility fire; interest ex-
pense; along with other assorted items.
 
There is no standard definition of non-GAAP earnings. Each firm is permitted to construct 
its own definition for press release purposes. As a result, the Securities and Exchange Com-
mission requires firms such as Mentor Graphics to provide a reconciliation of GAAP and 
non-GAAP earnings any time a non-GAAP measure is presented.
Required:
1. Which of the excluded items represent ongoing costs of running the business and which 
are one-time “special” costs?
2. How might analysts and investors benefit when firms call attention to their non-GAAP 
earnings?
3. How might analysts and investors be harmed?
E5-11
Mentor Graphics and its 
 non-GAAP earnings (LO 2)
This exercise is built around Whole Foods Market’s financial statements from the chapter. 
Several items of additional information are needed: there were no dividends on redeemable 
preferred stock in 2012, the preferred stock having been redeemed in 2010; preferred divi-
dends were $19,833 in 2009; average common shareholders’ equity for 2009 was $1,566,950; 
and a 40% income tax rate should be used as needed.
Required:
1. Whole Foods earned an ROA of 4.7% in 2009. What was ROCE that year?
2. ROA at the company grew to 9.7% in 2012. What was ROCE that year?
3. Did financial leverage help or hurt Whole Foods Market in 2012? How can you tell?
E5-12
Calculating ROCE for Whole 
Foods Market (LO 4)

292 
CHAPTER 5
Essentials of Financial Statement Analysis
E5-13
Cause-of-change analysis 
(LO 1)
Following are income statements for Hossa Corporation for 2014 and 2013. Percentage of 
sales amounts are also shown for each operating expense item. Hossa’s income tax rate was 
38% in 2013 and 40% in 2014.
Hossa’s management was pleased that 2014 net income was up 5.8% from the prior year. 
 Although you are also happy with the increase in net income, you are not so sure the news 
is all positive. You have modeled Hossa’s income as follows:
NET INCOME 5 SALES 3 (1 2 COGS% 2 OPEX%) 3 (1 2 TAX RATE)
 
Using this model, net income in 2013 is computed as $5,500 3 (1 2 45% 2 15%) 3 
(1 2 38%) 5 $1,364. Net income in 2014 is computed as $6,500 3 (1 2 47% 2 16%) 3 
(1 2 40%) 5 $1,443.
Required:
1. Prepare a cause-of-change analysis to show the extent to which each of the following 
items contributed to the $79 million increase in Hossa’s net income from 2013 to 2014:
• Increase in sales (SALES)
• Increase in cost of sales as a percent of sales (COGS%)
• Increase in other operating expenses as a percent of sales (OPEX%)
• Increase in income tax rate (TAX RATE)
2. Interpret the results for Hossa’s management.
 
2013 
2014
($ in millions) 
$ in millions 
% of sales 
$ in millions 
% of sales
Sales 
$5,500 
 
$6,500
Cost of sales 
(2,475) 
45% 
(3,055) 
47%
Other operating expenses 
(825) 
15% 
(1,040) 
16%
 Operating income 
2,200 
 
2,405
Provision for income taxes 
(836) 
 
(962)
 Net income 
$1,364 
 
$1,443
Income tax rate 
38% 
 
40%
PROBLEMS / DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
The following table presents ROA calculations for three companies in the retail grocery in-
dustry using earnings before interest (EBI) and balance sheet data for each company. The 
Kroger Company operates more than 2,400 supermarkets and multi-department stores. Publix 
Super Markets operates about 1,000 supermarkets in the Southeastern United States. Stater 
Brothers Holdings operates 167 supermarkets in Southern California.
P5-1
Comparing profitablity 
(LO 3)
The Kroger Co.
Year Ending 
01/31/09 
01/30/10 
01/29/11 
01/28/12
Sales (in millions of dollars) 
$76,063 
$76,609 
$82,049 
$90,374
Profit margin (EBI/sales) 
2.03% 
0.47% 
1.71% 
0.95%
Asset turnover (Sales/Average assets) 
3.27 
3.31 
3.49 
3.85
ROA 5 Margin 3 Asset turnover 
6.62% 
1.55% 
5.96% 
3.65%
(continued)

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
293
Required:
1. Which company has shown the strongest sales growth over the past three years?
2. Which company was the most profitable in its most recent fiscal year? What was the 
source of that superior profitability—a profit margin advantage or better turnover?
P5-3
Analyzing credit risk and 
 long-term solvency (LO 5)
AK Steel Holding Corporation is a fully integrated producer of steel operating seven manufac-
turing and finishing plants in Indiana, Kentucky, Ohio, and Pennsylvania. These plants produce 
cold-rolled and hot-rolled steel products as well as specialty stainless and electrical steels that 
are sold to the domestic automotive, appliance, industrial machinery and equipment, and con-
struction markets. Comparative debt ratios for AK Steel are shown in the following table.
P5-2
Assessing short-term 
 liquidity (LO 5)
The following table reports the operating cycle, cash conversion cycle, and current ratio for 
three apparel retailers all having year-ends at January 28, 2012. Aeropostale, which was origi-
nally owned by Macy’s, is a specialty retailer of casual apparel and accessories targeting 14- 
to 17-year olds. The GAP built its brand name on basic, casual clothing and expanded its 
market by opening Banana Republic and Old Navy Stores. Ross Stores operates over 1,000 
Ross Dress for Less® stores, which primarily target middle-income households.
 
Aeropostale 
GAP 
Ross Stores
Days inventory held 
33.7 
63.7 
64.8
Days accounts receivable outstanding 
0.0 
0.0 
2.0
Days accounts payable outstanding 
21.6 
41.6 
44.4
Operating cycle (1 1 2) 
33.7 
63.7 
66.9
Cash conversion cycle (1 1 2 2 3) 
12.0 
22.0 
22.5
Current ratio 
2.29 
2.02 
1.43
All three companies follow the industry practice of including occupancy costs in cost of goods 
sold.
Required:
1. Do any of these companies appear to have a short-term liquidity problem?
2. How does the industry practice of including occupancy costs in cost of goods sold affect 
the statistics presented in the above table?
3. What is the most likely explanation for Ross Stores’ 2.0 days accounts receivable outstanding?
4. What is the most likely explanation for 0.0 days accounts receivable outstanding at 
 Aeropostale and The GAP?
Publix Super Markets
Year Ending 
12/27/08 
12/26/09 
12/25/10 
12/31/11
Sales (in millions of dollars) 
$23,929 
$24,320 
$25,134 
$26,967
Profit margin (EBI/sales) 
4.55% 
4.78% 
5.32% 
5.53%
Asset turnover (Sales/Average assets) 
2.96 
2.70 
2.47 
2.39
ROA 5 Margin 3 Asset turnover 
13.47% 
12.90% 
13.17% 
13.24%
Stater Brothers Holdings
Year Ending 
09/27/09 
09/26/10 
09/25/11 
09/30/12
Sales (in millions of dollars) 
$3,766 
$3,607 
$3,693 
$3,873
Profit margin (EBI/sales) 
2.01% 
1.82% 
1.61% 
1.72%
Asset turnover (Sales/Average assets) 
2.86 
2.73 
3.00 
3.21
ROA 5 Margin 3 Asset turnover 
5.76% 
4.97% 
4.83% 
5.50%
Note: Amounts are rounded. ROA 5 EBI/Average assets. ROA is also equal to the product of Profit margin and Asset turn-
over computed using the unrounded values for those amounts.

294 
CHAPTER 5
Essentials of Financial Statement Analysis
Required:
1. Does AK Steel appear to be able to make its interest payments? How can you tell?
2. Does AK Steel rely heavily on debt to finance asset purchases? Has the company’s reliance 
on debt changed significantly over the past several years?
3. Does AK Steel have significant amounts of intangible assets? How can you tell?
AK Steel Holding Corporation
 
2008 
2009 
2010 
2011
Long-term debt-to-assets ratio 
0.14 
0.14 
0.16 
0.15
Long-term debt-to-tangible-assets ratio 
0.14 
0.14 
0.16 
0.15
Interest coverage ratio 
0.86 
(1.65) 
(4.29) 
(4.35)
Cash flow coverage ratio 
2.79 
2.59 
(3.01) 
(2.80)
Operating cash flow to total liabilities 
0.02 
0.02 
(0.04) 
(0.05)
P5-4
Decomposing return on 
 common shareholders’ 
equity (ROCE) (LO 4)
The following table provides ROA and ROCE for Best Buy, a retailer of consumer electronics.
Best Buy
 
Year Ended
 
February 27, 2010 
February 26, 2011 
March 3, 2012
ROA 
0.080 
0.074 
(0.068)
ROCE 
0.217 
0.179 
(0.211)
Required:
1. How did Best Buy’s performance change over the period shown?
2. What is the most likely reason the change in ROCE was so much greater than the change 
in ROA?
P5-5
Interpreting accounts 
receivable turnover (LO 7)
Boise, Inc., manufactures packaging and paper products, including corrugated containers, 
protective packaging, and newsprint. KapStone Paper and Packaging Corporation manufac-
tures unbleached kraft paper products and corrugated products. Financial statement data for 
these two companies follow:
Boise, Inc. 
(in thousands of  dollars) 
2008 
2009 
2010 
2011
Sales 
 
$1,935,410 
$2,058,132 
$2,364,024
Accounts receivable at December 31 
$220,204 
185,110 
188,589 
228,838
KapStone Paper and Packaging Corporation
Sales 
 
$632,478 
$782,676 
$906,119
Accounts receivable at December 31 
$71,489 
58,408 
66,640 
108,320
Required:
1. Determine the receivables turnover ratios for both companies for 2009, 2010, and 2011.
2. Which company collected its accounts receivable more quickly in 2011?
3. Which company showed more improvement in accounts receivable collection over the 
 period presented?

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
295
4. What factors might explain why these two companies, which operate in similar markets, 
have different accounts receivable turnover ratios?
5. How does the way we compute average accounts receivable—by averaging the beginning 
and ending balances—potentially distort the accounts receivable turnover ratio? How 
could this potential distortion be mitigated?
P5-6
Analyzing inventories 
(LO 7)
Danaher Corporation manufactures a variety of products, including electronic measurement 
instruments and network communications products, water quality measurement systems, and 
medical and dental instruments. Selected financial statement data and related performance 
indicators follow.
Danaher Corporation
($ in thousands) 
2009 
2010 
2011
Sales 
$11,184,938 
$13,202,602 
$16,090,540
Cost of goods sold 
5,904,718 
6,575,812 
7,913,876
Average inventory 
1,067,663 
1,109,084 
1,473,488
Selected performance measures:
 Gross profit (%) 
47.2% 
50.2% 
50.8%
 Inventory turnover ratio 
5.53 
5.93 
5.37
Required:
How well did Danaher manage its inventories over the three-year period?
P5-7
Analyzing fixed asset 
 turnover (LO 7)
Lennox International Inc. makes air conditioning, heating, and fireplace systems for residen-
tial and commercial uses, as well as commercial refrigeration equipment. Tecumseh Products 
Company manufactures air conditioning and refrigeration compressors, condensing units, 
heat pumps, and complete refrigeration systems. Select financial statement data and asset 
utilization ratios for each company follow.
Lennox International
($ in millions) 
2009 
2010 
2011
Sales 
$2,847.5 
$3,096.4 
$3,303.6
ROA 
0.035 
0.077 
0.058
Current assets turnover 
3.22 
3.48 
3.57
Fixed (long-term) assets turnover 
3.97 
4.26 
4.27
Total assets turnover 
1.78 
1.91 
1.94
Tecumseh Products Company
($ in millions) 
2009 
2010 
2011
Sales 
$735.9 
$933.8 
$864.4
ROA 
(0.111) 
0.083 
(0.101)
Current assets turnover 
1.93 
2.31 
2.24
Fixed (long-term) assets turnover 
1.84 
2.59 
3.13
Total assets turnover 
0.94 
1.22 
1.30
Required:
1. Compare the asset utilization effectiveness of the two companies. Which company seems 
to be doing a better job?
2. How do the companies’ operating profit margins compare?

296 
CHAPTER 5
Essentials of Financial Statement Analysis
P5-8
Determining accounting 
 quality (LO 2)
Electronic Arts develops, markets, publishes, and distributes interactive software games. The 
“lease commitments” section of the Commitments and Contingencies note from the compa-
ny’s annual report for the year ended March 31, 2012, includes the following:
As of March 31, 2012, we leased certain of our current facilities, furniture and equipment under 
non-cancelable operating lease agreements. We were required to pay property taxes, insurance 
and normal maintenance costs for certain of these facilities and any increases over the base year 
of these expenses on the remainder of our facilities.
Operating leases are “off-balance sheet” obligations, meaning that under GAAP the lease 
obligations are not recognized in a company’s balance sheet. Operating lease obligations are 
only disclosed in the financial statement notes. In contrast, capital leases are recognized in the 
balance sheet, resulting in the recording of both an asset (representing “economic ownership” 
of the asset, even though the company does not have legal ownership) and a liability (repre-
senting the obligation to make the promised payments). (Chapter12 provides the details.)
Required:
1. Suppose Electronic Arts had accounted for the leases described in the note as capital 
leases rather than operating leases. Describe qualitatively the effect this change would 
have had on Electronic Arts’ long-term debt-to-assets ratio.
2. Should credit analysts consider operating leases when they evaluate a firm’s creditworthiness?
P5-9
Comparing profitability for 
three companies (LO 1)
The following table shows four ratios derived from the financial statements of three real com-
panies, labeled A, B, and C in the table. (They are not listed in the table in any particular 
 order.) The real companies are:
• Brunswick Corporation, a leader in the leisure products industry that manufactures boats 
and marine engines, bowling and billiard products, as well as fitness equipment.
• Consolidated Edison, an electricity and natural gas company whose nonutility operations 
include energy marketing and fiber-optic telecommunications.
• Foot Locker, a shoe retailer with about 3,400 specialty stores in North America, Australia, 
and Europe. It also operates Champs Sports, an athletic wear retail chain, and a direct-to-
customers business that sells through catalogs, mobile devices, and the Internet.
 
A 
B 
C
Operating profit margin 
0.12 
0.04 
0.04
Asset turnover ratio 
0.47 
1.13 
1.88
ROA 
0.06 
0.04 
0.07
ROCE 
0.12 
0.09 
0.15
Required:
Which company is which? Explain how you identified each company from the data in the table.
P5-10
Determining profitability  
(LO 4)
Nucor Corporation produces steel and steel products at its eight mills and is a major recycler 
of scrap metal. The following data relate to Nucor for four years.
Nucor Corporation
($ in thousands) 
Year 1 
Year 2 
Year 3 
Year 4
Total assets 
$3,729,848 
$3,721,788 
$3,759,348 
$4,381,001
Common stockholders’ equity 
2,262,248 
2,130,952 
2,201,460 
2,322,989
Sales 
 
4,756,521 
4,333,707 
4,801,776
Net income 
 
310,908 
112,961 
162,080
Interest expense 
 
22,449 
22,002 
22,918
Income tax rate 
 
0.37 
0.37 
0.296

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
297
Required:
1. Calculate Nucor’s ROA for Year 2, Year 3, and Year 4. Decompose ROA into operating 
profit margin and asset turnover components.
2. Has Nucor’s profitability changed over the three years? If so, how?
3. Calculate the rate of return on common stockholders’ equity for Year 2, Year 3, and Year 4.
4. What seem to be the reasons for the change in ROCE over the three years?
P5-11
Business strategy and profit 
performance (LO 2)
Tiffany & Company is a luxury jeweler and specialty retailer that sells timepieces, sterling 
silverware, china, crystal, fragrances, and accessories through its retail stores worldwide. 
 Signet Jewelers Ltd. operates a number of well-known retail stores (Belden Jewelers and Kay 
Jewelers, among them) that sell moderately priced jewelry and other items. Selected financial 
information about each company follows:
 
Tiffany & Co. 
Signet Jewelers
Sales 
$2,826 mil. 
$3,338 mil.
Net income 
$305 mil. 
$190 mil.
Return on assets (ROA) 
9.1% 
6.7%
Profit margin 
10.8% 
5.7%
Asset turnover 
0.84 
1.18
Required:
1. The profit margin at Tiffany & Co. is higher than at Signet Jewelers. What is it about each 
company’s strategy and positioning that might explain the profit margin difference? You 
may want to visit each company’s website before answering this question.
2. The asset turnover at Signet Jewelers is higher than at Tiffany & Company. What is it about 
each company’s strategy and positioning that might explain the asset turnover difference?
3. Suppose Tiffany management found a way to increase sales to the point where the compa-
ny’s asset turnover ratio exactly equaled that of Signet Jewelers. Calculate the dollar amount 
of sales and net income that would result if expenses only increased in proportion to sales.
4. At its current asset turnover rate, how high must the profit margin at Signet Jewelers be 
for the company to earn an ROA equal to Tiffany’s 9.1%?
P5-12
Blockbuster Inc. (LO 6)
Blockbuster Inc. provides home movie and game entertainment. At the end of 2009, Blockbuster 
operated more than 5,000 stores and franchisees operated another 1,300. Nine months later the 
company filed for bankruptcy protection. By the end of 2010, Blockbuster had closed nearly 1,000 
company-operated and 300 franchised stores. As part of its bankruptcy reorganization, Blockbuster 
was acquired by Dish Network in 2011. Dish Network continues to downsize Blockbuster’s opera-
tions. Selected financial information about Blockbuster prior to its bankruptcy filing follow.
($ in millions) 
2009 
2008 
2007
Revenue 
$4,062 
$5,065 
$5,314
Operating income (pre-tax) 
(355) 
(304) 
27
Net income 
(558) 
(374) 
(73)
Cash flow provided by operations 
29 
51 
(56)
Cash flow provided by (used in) investing activities 
(75) 
(116) 
77
Cash flow from financing activities:
 Debt repayments 
(864) 
(164) 
(329)
Required:
1. Explain why the amount shown for Cash flow provided by (used in) investing activities in 
2007 is a positive number ($77 million) rather than a negative number. You may need to 
refer back to Chapter 4 and its Statement of Cash Flow discussion.
2. Blockbuster repaid $329 million of debt in 2007. Based only on the information provided, 
what were the likely sources of cash for this debt repayment?

298 
CHAPTER 5
Essentials of Financial Statement Analysis
3. Blockbuster repaid $864 million of debt in 2009 as part of a refinancing completed in 
 October of that year. What were the likely sources of cash for this debt repayment?
4. A financial statement note in the company’s 2009 annual report reveals the following 
scheduled debt payments: $112.5 million in 2010; $90 million in 2011; $390 million in 
2012; $90 million in 2013; and $292 million in 2014. Explain why most observers at the 
time said Blockbuster was characterized by high credit risk.
P5-14
Explaining changes in 
financial ratios (LO 7)
Audit engagement partners were comparing notes about changes in clients’ financial statement 
ratios or amounts from the prior year’s figures. Here is what the partners had discovered.
Client 1.  Inventory turnover increased substantially from the prior year. (Select three 
explanations.)
Client 2.  Accounts receivable turnover decreased substantially from the prior year. (Select 
three explanations.)
Client 3.  Allowance for doubtful accounts increased in dollars from the prior year but de-
creased from the prior year as a percentage of accounts receivable. (Select three 
explanations.)
Client 4.  Long-term debt increased from the prior year, but interest expense increased more 
than the percentage increase in long-term debt. (Select one explanation.)
Client 5.  Operating income increased from the prior year although the company was less 
profitable than in the prior year. (Select two explanations.)
Client 6.  Gross margin percentage was unchanged from the prior year although gross profit 
increased from the prior year. (Select one explanation.)
Required:
Select from the following list the most likely explanation(s) for each audit client.
 
a. Items shipped on consignment during the last month of the year were recorded as sales.
 
b. A significant number of credit memos for returned merchandise issued during the last 
month of the year were not recorded.
AICPA
ADAPTED
P5-13
Analyzing why financial ratios 
change (LO 7)
Daley, Inc., is consistently profitable. Its normal financial statement relationships are as follows:
AICPA
ADAPTED
Current ratio 
3 to 1
Inventory turnover 
4 times
Long-term debt/total assets ratio 
0.5 to 1
Required:
Determine whether each transaction or event that follows increased, decreased, or had no 
 effect on each ratio. Consider each transaction independently of the others.
1. Daley declared but did not pay a cash dividend.
2. Customers returned invoiced goods for which they had not paid.
3. Accounts payable were paid at year-end.
4. Daley recorded both a receivable from an insurance company and a loss from fire damage 
to a factory building.
5. Early in the year, Daley increased the selling price of one of its products because customer 
demand far exceeded production capacity. The number of units sold this year was the same 
as last year.

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
299
 
c. Year-end inventory purchases were overstated because items received in the first 
month of the subsequent year were incorrectly included.
 
d. Year-end inventory purchases were understated because items received before year-end 
were incorrectly excluded.
 
e. A larger percentage of sales occurred during the last month of the year compared to 
the prior year.
 
f. A smaller percentage of sales occurred during the last month of the year compared to 
the prior year.
 
g. The same percentage of sales occurred during the last month of the year compared to 
the prior year.
 
h. Sales increased at the same percentage as cost of goods sold compared to the prior 
year.
 
i. Sales increased at a lower percentage than cost of goods sold increased compared to 
the prior year.
 
j. Sales increased at a higher percentage than cost of goods sold increased compared to 
the prior year.
 
k. Interest expense decreased compared to the prior year.
 
l. The effective income tax rate increased compared to the prior year.
 m. The effective income tax rate decreased compared to the prior year.
 
n. Short-term borrowing was refinanced on a long-term basis at the same interest rate.
 
o. Short-term borrowing was refinanced on a long-term basis at lower interest rates.
 
p. Short-term borrowing was refinanced on a long-term basis at higher interest rates.
P5-15
EBITDA and revenue 
 recognition (LO 7)
Griffin and Lasky, Inc. (G&L), supplies industrial automation equipment and machine tools to 
the automotive industry. G&L uses the percentage of completion method for recognizing rev-
enue on its long-term contracts. Customer orders have long lead times because they involve 
multiyear capital investment programs. Sometimes orders are canceled. Selected items from 
the company’s financial statements follow.
Required:
1. Compute earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization (EBITDA) and 
adjusted EBITDA—after excluding the plant write-down—for each year in the schedule.
2. Are profits at G&L keeping pace with sales?
3. Compute the days receivables outstanding using year-end receivables for each year in the 
schedule.
4. Why might analysts be concerned about earnings quality at G&L?
($ in millions) 
2012 
2013 
2014
Sales 
$571.5 
$619.5 
$730.6
Accounts receivable—billed 
141.6 
94.5 
147.9
Accounts receivable—unbilled 
104.5 
249.4 
202.7
 Total accounts receivable 
246.1 
343.9 
350.6
Inventory 
57.4 
74.8 
102.3
Earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT) 
74.8 
75.8 
38.1
Depreciation and amortization 
14.8 
15.4 
19.3
Plant write-down 
–0– 
–0– 
30.3

300 
CHAPTER 5
Essentials of Financial Statement Analysis
P5-16
Analyzing ratios (LO 5)
Margaret O’Flaherty, a portfolio manager for MCF Investments, is considering investing in 
Alpine Chemical 7% bonds, which mature in 10 years. She asks you to analyze the company 
to determine the riskiness of the bonds.
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
Alpine Chemical Company Financial Statements
 
Years Ended December 31,
($ in millions) 
2009 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014
Assets 
 
 
 
 
 
Cash 
$   190 
$    55 
$     0 
$   157 
$   249 
$     0
Accounts receivable 
1,637 
2,087 
1,394 
2,143 
3,493 
3,451
Inventories 
2,021 
945 
1,258 
1,293 
1,322 
1,643
Other current assets 
17 
27 
55 
393 
33 
171
 Current assets 
3,865 
3,114 
2,707 
3,986 
5,097 
5,265
Gross fixed assets 
4,650 
5,038 
5,619 
5,757 
6,181 
7,187
Less: Accumulated depreciation 
2,177 
2,543 
2,841 
3,138 
3,465 
3,893
  Net fixed assets 
2,473 
2,495 
2,778 
2,619 
2,716 
3,294
Total assets 
$ 6,338 
$ 5,609 
$ 5,485 
$ 6,605 
$ 7,813 
$ 8,559
Liabilities and net worth 
 
 
 
 
Notes payable 
$   525 
$   750 
$     0 
$ 1,300 
$ 1,750 
$ 1,900
Accounts payable 
673 
638 
681 
338 
743 
978
Accrued liabilities 
303 
172 
359 
359 
483 
761
 Current liabilities 
1,501 
1,560 
1,040 
1,997 
2,976 
3,639
Long-term debt 
1,985 
1,044 
1,401 
1,457 
1,542 
1,491
Deferred tax credits 
352 
347 
363 
336 
345 
354
 Total liabilities 
3,838 
2,951 
2,804 
3,790 
4,863 
5,484
Common stock 
50 
50 
100 
100 
100 
100
Capital surplus 
100 
100 
0 
0 
0 
0
Retained earnings 
2,350 
2,508 
2,581 
2,715 
2,850 
2,975
 Net worth 
2,500 
2,658 
2,681 
2,815 
2,950 
3,075
Total liabilities and net worth 
$ 6,338 
$ 5,609 
$ 5,485 
$ 6,605 
$ 7,813 
$ 8,559
Income statement 
2009 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014
Net sales 
$14,100 
$15,508 
$13,875 
$14,750 
$19,133 
$19,460
Cost of goods sold 
10,200 
11,220 
9,366 
10,059 
13,400 
13,117
 Gross profit 
3,900 
4,288 
4,509 
4,691 
5,733 
6,343
Operating expense 
2,065 
2,203 
2,665 
2,685 
3,472 
3,885
 Operating income 
1,835 
2,085 
1,844 
2,006 
2,261 
2,458
Interest expense 
275 
465 
275 
319 
376 
318
Depreciation expense 
475 
477 
479 
478 
495 
511
 Profit before tax 
1,085 
1,143 
1,090 
1,209 
1,390 
1,629
Income taxes 
193 
115 
265 
145 
192 
150
 Net income 
$   892 
$ 1,028 
$   825 
$ 1,064 
$ 1,198 
$ 1,479
Required:
1. Using the data provided in the accompanying financial statements, calculate the following 
ratios for Alpine Chemical for 2014:
 
a. EBIT/Interest expense
 
b. Long-term debt/Total capitalization
 
c. Funds from operations/Total debt
 
d. Operating income/Sales
CFA
ADAPTED

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
301
 
Use the following conventions: EBIT is earnings before interest and taxes; Total capital-
ization is interest-bearing long-term debt plus net worth; Funds from operations means 
net income plus depreciation expense; and Total debt includes interest-bearing short-term 
and long-term debt.
2. Briefly explain the significance of each ratio calculated in requirement 1 to the assess-
ment of Alpine Chemical’s creditworthiness.
3. Insert your answers to requirement 1 into Table 1 that follows. Then from Table 2, select 
an appropriate credit rating for Alpine Chemical.
TABLE 1
Alpine Chemical Company
 
2009 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014
EBIT/Interest expense 
4.95 
3.46 
4.96 
4.79 
4.70  
?
Long-term debt/Total capitalization 
44% 
28% 
34% 
34% 
34% 
?
Funds from operations/Total debt 
54% 
84% 
93% 
56% 
51% 
?
Operating income/Sales 
13% 
13% 
13% 
14% 
12% 
?
TABLE 2
Industry Data
Three-Year Medians (2012–2014) by Credit-Rating Category
 
Aaa 
Aa 
A 
Bbb 
Bb 
B
EBIT/Interest expense 
11.0 
9.5 
4.5 
3.0 
2.0 
1.0
Long-term debt/Total capitalization 
13.0 
16.5 
29.5 
39.0 
45.5 
63.5
Funds from operations/Total debt 
83.0 
74.0 
45.5 
31.5 
18.5 
8.0
Operating income/Sales 
21.5 
16.0 
15.0 
12.0 
11.0 
9.0
Operating Segments
(In millions of  dollars) 
Grant 
Stewart 
Kelly 
Flynn 
Cagney 
Total
Revenue 
2,076.0 
350.0 
304.0 
195.0 
1,375.0 
4,300.0
Cost of goods sold 
(626.8) 
(104.5) 
(174.1) 
(104.5) 
(731.2) 
(1,741.1)
Gross profit 
1,449.2 
245.5 
129.9 
90.5 
643.8 
2,558.9
Depreciation expense 
(193.8) 
(45.9) 
(61.2) 
(25.5) 
(183.6) 
(510.0)
Administrative expense 
(174.3) 
(93.5) 
(34.0) 
(12.8) 
(110.5) 
(425.1)
Operating profit before taxes 
1,081.1 
106.1 
34.7 
52.2 
349.7 
1,623.8
Total assets 
3,000.0 
430.0 
945.0 
325.0 
2,300.0 
7,000.0
The segments do not sell goods or services to one another. The Flynn and Cagney segments 
have similar economic characteristics, products, processes, customers, distribution method, 
and regulatory environments.
Required:
1. Explain why U.S. GAAP requires a company to disclose information about its business 
segments.
2. How does a firm define an operating segment under U.S. GAAP?
3. Identify Bogart’s reportable segments. Aggregate segments where possible. Explain your 
logic for determining the reportable segments.
P5-17
Determining reportable 
 segments (LO 8)
The following income statement and balance sheet information is available for the operating 
segments of Bogart, Inc.
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e

302 
CHAPTER 5
Essentials of Financial Statement Analysis
Required:
1. Determine the amounts of sales revenue per company-owned store and franchise fees per 
franchised store for each year and each company. In these computations, use the average 
number of stores open during the year.
2. Assume that for both companies sales at company-owned stores are the same (on a 
per store basis) as sales for the same company’s franchised stores. Estimate each 
company’s franchise fee rate, which is stated as a percentage of each franchisee’s 
sales revenue.
3. Perform a cause-of-change analysis from 2008 to 2011 for each company to disaggregate 
the increase in revenues from company-owned stores between growth in the average 
 number of average stores open and growth in revenues per store.
4. Perform a similar analysis for franchise fee revenues.
5. What do your analyses from requirements 4 and 5 tell you about the companies’ growth 
strategies?
CASES
McDonald’s Corporation franchises and operates more than 30,000 fast-service restaurants 
in 119 countries. Buffalo Wild Wings franchises and operates more than 500 restaurants in 
the United States. Buffalo Wild Wings features chicken wings and a full bar in its 
restaurants.
 
Financial information for each company follows. EBI denotes after-tax earnings before 
interest expense.
C5-1
McDonald’s and Buffalo Wild 
Wings: Comparing two 
 restaurant chains (LO 1)
Selected Financial Data
 
Buffalo Wild Wings 
McDonald’s
 
2007 
2008 
2009 
2010 
2011 
2007 
2008 
2009 
2010 
2011
Number of stores operating at year-end:
 Company-owned 
161 
197 
232 
259 
319 
6,906 
6,502 
6,262 
6,399 
6,435
 Franchised 
332 
363 
420 
473 
498 
24,471 
25,465 
26,216 
26,338 
27,075
Revenues ($ in millions):
 Company-owned stores 
 
379.7 
488.7 
555.2 
717.4 
 
16,560.9 
15,458.5 
16,233.3 
18,292.8
 Franchise fees 
 
42.7 
50.2 
58.1 
67.1 
 
6,961.5 
7,286.2 
7,841.3 
8,713.2
  Total 
 
422.4 
538.9 
613.3 
784.5 
 
23,522.4 
22,744.7 
24,074.6 
27,006.0
C5-2
Crocs and Deckers Outdoor: 
Comparing footwear 
manufacturers (LO 1)
Crocs designs, develops, and manufactures consumer products from specialty resins. The 
company’s primary product line is Crocs-branded footwear for men, women, and children. It 
sells its products through traditional retail channels, including specialty footwear stores. 
Deckers Outdoor designs and produces sport sandals as well as sheepskin and sustainable 
footwear. The company’s products are marketed under three proprietary brands: Teva, Simple, 
and UGG. It sells its products through domestic retailers and global distributors and directly 
to consumers via the Internet.
 
Financial ratios for each company follow. EBI denotes after-tax earnings before interest 
expense and excluding nonoperating gains or losses.

 
Cases 
303
Required:
1. Which company was the more profitable in 2011?
2. What was the likely source of that company’s superior profit performance in 2011?
3. Which company was the more profitable in 2009? What seems to have been the problem 
at the underperforming company that year?
4. Which company better manages its receivables, inventories, and payables?
Selected Financial Ratios
 
Crocs 
Deckers Outdoor
 
2009 
2010 
2011 
2009 
2010 
2011
Annual growth rate
 Sales 
(10.5%) 
22.3% 
26.7% 
17.9% 
23.1% 
37.6%
 Operating earnings (before taxes) 
(72.8%) 
(258.3%) 
68.5% 
55.0% 
37.4% 
14.4%
 Assets 
(10.1%) 
34.1% 
26.6% 
23.8% 
35.0% 
41.7%
Profitability
 EBI/Sales margin 
(0.064) 
0.086 
0.113 
0.143 
0.158 
0.145
Asset turnover 
1.49 
1.65 
1.61 
1.50 
1.42 
1.41
 Return on Assets (ROA) 
(0.095) 
0.142 
0.182 
0.215 
0.225 
0.204
Selected expense items (% of sales)
 Cost of goods sold 
52.3% 
46.2% 
46.4% 
54.4% 
49.8% 
50.7%
 Selling, general, and administrative 
48.3% 
43.3% 
40.2% 
23.3% 
25.4% 
28.6%
Selected asset utilization ratios
 Days receivables outstanding 
24.2 
26.5 
27.2 
41.4 
35.2 
41.1
 Days inventory held 
127.8 
107.4 
98.5 
73.5 
77.1 
98.9
 Days payables outstanding 
37.1 
27.5 
39.4 
37.9 
38.8 
39.3
C5-3
Argenti Corporation: Evaluat-
ing credit risk (LO 7)
It’s late Tuesday evening, and you’ve just received a phone call from Dennis Whiting, your 
boss at GE Capital. Dennis wants to know your reaction to the Argenti loan request before 
tomorrow’s loan committee meeting. Here’s what he tells you:
We’ve provided seasonal loans to Argenti for the past 20 years, and they’ve always been a first-
rate customer, but I’m troubled by several recent events. For instance, the company just reported 
a $141 million loss for the first quarter of 2014. This loss comes on top of a $237 million loss in 
2013 and a $9 million loss in 2012. What’s worse, Argenti changed inventory accounting meth-
ods last year, and this change reduced the 2013 loss by $22 million. I can’t tell if the company’s 
using other accounting tricks to prop up earnings, but I doubt it.
 
I believe Argenti’s problem lies in its core business—customers just aren’t buying its 
merchandise these days. Management’s aggressive price discount program in the fourth 
 quarter of 2013 helped move inventory, but Argenti doesn’t have the cost structure needed to 
be competitive as a discounter. Take a look at the financials I’m sending over, and let me 
know what you think.
Argenti Corporation operates a national chain of retail stores (Argenti’s) selling appliances 
and electronics, home furnishings, automotive parts, apparel, and jewelry. The company’s first 
store opened in New York City in 1904. Today, the company owns or leases more than 900 
stores located in downtown areas of large cities and in suburban shopping malls. Customer 
purchases are financed in house using ArgentiCredit cards. The company employs more than 
58,000 people.
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e

304 
CHAPTER 5
Essentials of Financial Statement Analysis
 
The Seasonal Credit Agreement with GE Capital—dated October 4, 2013—provides a re-
volving loan facility in the principal amount of $165 million. The purpose of this facility is to 
provide backup liquidity as Argenti reduces its inventory levels. Under the credit agreement, 
Argenti may select among several interest rate options, which are based on market rates. Un-
less GE Capital agrees, loans may be made under the seasonal credit facility only after the 
commitments under the company’s other debt agreements are fully used.
Argenti Corporation
Balance Sheets and Selected Other Data
($ in millions) 
2013 
2012 
2011 
2010 
2009
Assets 
 
 
 
 
 Cash and securities 
$   35 
$   38 
$   36 
$  117 
$   92
 Receivables 
213 
166 
112 
62 
47
 Inventories 
1,545 
1,770 
1,625 
1,242 
1,038
 Other current assets 
13 
22 
6 
4 
312
 
1,806 
1,996 
1,779 
1,425 
1,489
Property, plant, and equipment—net 
1,308 
1,366 
1,396 
1,263 
1,222
Investments 
317 
345 
314 
296 
277
Other assets 
1,448 
1,177 
1,048 
851 
445
 
$4,879 
$4,884 
$4,537 
$3,835 
$3,433
Liabilities and shareholders’ equity 
 
 
 
 Notes payable 
$1,028 
$  160 
$  144 
$ 
 0 
$   0
 Accounts payable 
1,812 
2,040 
1,955 
1,595 
1,399
 Accrued expenses 
1,232 
1,201 
1,248 
1,204 
1,148
 
4,072 
3,401 
3,347 
2,799 
2,547
Long-term debt 
87 
423 
228 
213 
125
Other liabilities 
112 
185 
203 
216 
208
Preferred stock 
175 
175 
75 
0 
0
Common stock 
54 
46 
23 
19 
16
Retained earnings 
518 
768 
750 
661 
583
Less: Treasury stock 
(139) 
(114) 
(89) 
(73) 
(46)
 
$4,879 
$4,884 
$4,537 
$3,835 
$3,433
Selected earnings and cash flow data 
 
 
 
 
Sales 
$6,620 
$7,085 
$7,029 
$6,023 
$5,806
Cost of goods sold 
4,869 
5,211 
5,107 
4,258 
4,047
 Gross margin 
1,751 
1,874 
1,922 
1,765 
1,759
Net income 
(237) 
(9) 
137 
101 
60
Operating cash flow 
(356) 
(182) 
153 
132 
157
Dividends 
9 
4 
24 
23 
19
 
Argenti management has asked GE Capital for a $1.5 billion refinancing package that 
would be used to pay off all or a substantial portion of its outstanding debt. Excerpts from the 
company’s financial statement notes follow.
Management Discussion and Analysis (2013 Annual Report)
The company has obtained waivers under the Long-Term Credit Agreement and the Short-
Term Credit Agreement with respect to compliance for the fiscal quarter ending March 29, 
2013—with covenants requiring maintenance of minimum consolidated shareholders’ equity, 
a maximum ratio of debt to capitalization, and minimum earnings before interest, taxes, de-
preciation, amortization, and rent (EBITDAR). These waivers and amendments reduce the 

 
Cases 
305
 maximum amount of debt permitted to be incurred, and the maturity of the Long-Term Agree-
ment was changed from February 28, 2015, to August 29, 2013.
 
The company is currently in discussions with financing sources with a view toward both 
a longer term solution to its liquidity problems and obtaining refinancing for all or a sub-
stantial portion of its outstanding indebtedness, including a total of $1,008 million, which 
will mature on or about August 29, 2013. This would include repayment of the current 
bank borrowings and amounts outstanding under the Note Purchase Agreements. The com-
pany’s management is highly confident that the indebtedness can be refinanced. Its largest 
shareholder, GE Capital, also expects the company to be able to refinance such indebted-
ness. However, there can be no assurance that such refinancing can be obtained or that 
amendments or waivers required to maintain compliance with the previous agreements can 
be obtained.
Note to Financial Statements (2013 Annual Report)
The company intends to improve its financial condition and reduce its dependence on bor-
rowing by slowing expansion, controlling expenses, closing certain unprofitable stores, 
and continuing to implement its inventory reduction program. Management is in the pro-
cess of reevaluating the company’s merchandising, marketing, store operations, and real 
estate strategies. The company is also considering the sale of certain operating units as a 
means of generating cash. Future cash is also expected to continue to be provided by ongo-
ing operations, sale of receivables under the Accounts Receivable Purchase Agreement 
with GE capital, borrowings under revolving loan facilities, and vendor financing 
programs.
Required:
1. Why did Argenti need to increase its notes payable borrowing to more than $1 billion in 
2013?
2. What recommendation would you make regarding the company’s request for a $1.5 billion 
refinancing package?
Quarterly Income
 
Mar. 14 
Dec. 13 
Sep. 13 
Jun. 13 
Mar. 13
Sales 
$    1,329 
$  2,084 
$  1,567 
$ 1,534 
$  1,435
Cost of goods sold 
997 
1,525 
1,096 
1,210 
1,038
 Gross profit 
332 
559 
471 
324 
397
Net income 
(141) 
(165) 
(35) 
11 
(48)
Gross profit (% sales) 
25.0% 
26.8% 
30.1% 
21.1% 
27.7%
Net income (% sales) 
(10.6)% 
(7.9)% 
(2.2)% 
0.7% 
(3.3)%
C5-4
Analyzing reportable segment 
disclosures (LO 8)
Excerpts from IBM’s 2012 segment disclosures are given below.
Business Segments and Capabilities
The company’s major operations consist of five business segments: Global Technology Ser-
vices and Global Business Services, which the company collectively calls Global Services, 
Software, Systems and Technology and Global Financing. Global Technology Services 
(GTS) primarily provides IT infrastructure and business process services, creating business 
value for clients through unique technology and IP integrated services within its global deliv-
ery model. Global Business Services (GBS) has the mission to deliver predictable business 
outcomes to the company’s clients across two primary business areas: Consulting and 

306 
CHAPTER 5
Essentials of Financial Statement Analysis
 Application Management Services. Software consists primarily of middleware and operating 
systems software. Systems and Technology (STG) provides clients with business solutions 
requiring advanced computing power and storage capabilities. Global Financing facilitates 
clients’ acquisition of IBM systems, software and services. Global Financing invests in 
 financing assets, leverages with debt and manages the associated risks with the objective of 
generating consistently strong returns on equity.
 
The segments represent components of the company for which separate financial informa-
tion is available that is utilized on a regular basis by the chief executive officer in determining 
how to allocate resources and evaluate performance. The segments are determined based on 
several factors, including client base, homogeneity of products, technology, delivery channels 
and similar economic characteristics.
 
Segment revenue and pre-tax income include transactions between the segments that are 
intended to reflect an arm’s-length, market-based transfer price.
 
The following tables reflect the results of operations of the company’s segments consis-
tent with the management and measurement system utilized within the company. Perfor-
mance measurement is based on pre-tax income. These results are used, in part, by senior 
management, both in evaluating the performance of, and in allocating resources to, each of 
the segments.
Management System Segment View
($ in millions)
 
Global Services Segments
 
Global 
Global 
 
 
 
 
Technology 
Business 
 
Systems and 
Global 
Total
For the year ended December 31: 
Services 
Services 
Software 
Technology 
Financing 
Segments
2012
External revenue 
$40,236 
$18,566 
$25,448 
 $17,667 
$2,013 
$103,930
Internal revenue 
1,166 
719 
3,274 
676 
2,060 
7,896
Total revenue 
$41,402 
$19,286 
$28,722 
$18,343 
$4,073 
$111,826
Pre-tax income 
$  6,961 
$  2,983 
$10,810 
$  1,227 
$2,034 
$  24,015
Revenue year-to-year change 
(1.7)% 
(4.0)% 
1.8% 
(7.5)% 
(2.9)% 
(2.3)%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change 
10.8% 
(0.8)% 
8.4% 
(24.9)% 
1.1% 
4.8%
Pre-tax income margin 
16.8% 
15.5% 
37.6% 
6.7% 
49.9% 
21.5%
2011
External revenue 
$40,879 
$19,284 
$24,944 
$18,985 
$2,102 
$106,194
Internal revenue 
1,242 
797 
3,276 
838 
2,092 
8,246
Total revenue 
$42,121 
$20,081 
$28,219 
$19,823 
$4,195 
$114,440
Pre-tax income 
$  6,284 
$  3,006 
$  9,970 
$  1,633 
$2,011 
$  22,904
Revenue year-to-year change 
6.6% 
5.6% 
10.9% 
5.6% 
2.8% 
7.1%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change 
14.3% 
18.1% 
5.3% 
12.2% 
2.8% 
9.5%
Pre-tax income margin 
14.9% 
15.0% 
35.3% 
8.2% 
47.9% 
20.0%
2010
External revenue 
$38,201 
$18,223 
$22,485 
$17,973 
$2,238 
$  99,120
Internal revenue 
1,313 
798 
2,950 
804 
1,842 
7,707
Total revenue 
$39,514 
$19,021 
$25,436 
$18,777 
$4,080 
$106,827
Pre-tax income 
$  5,499 
$  2,546 
$  9,466 
$  1,456 
$1,956 
$  20,923
Revenue year-to-year change 
2.0% 
2.6% 
5.7% 
9.8% 
0.1% 
4.2%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change 
0.3% 
1.8% 
13.8% 
12.1% 
13.5% 
8.3%
Pre-tax income margin 
13.9% 
13.4% 
37.2% 
7.8% 
48.0% 
19.6%

 
Cases 
307
Management System Segment View
($ in millions)
 
Global Services Segments
 
Global 
Global 
 
 
 
 
Technology 
Business 
 
Systems and 
Global 
Total
For the year ended December 31: 
Services 
Services 
Software 
Technology 
Financing 
Segments
2012
Assets 
$15,884 
$8,022 
$26,291 
$8,232 
$38,882 
$97,310
Depreciation/amortization of 
 intangibles* 
1,597 
75 
1,157 
786 
853 
4,470
Capital expenditures/investments 
 in intangibles 
1,760 
42 
618 
1,106 
708 
4,233
Interest income 
— 
— 
— 
— 
1,942 
1,942
Interest expense 
— 
— 
— 
— 
410 
410
2011
Assets 
$15,475 
$8,078 
$23,926 
$7,649 
$36,427 
$91,557
Depreciation/amortization 
 of intangibles* 
1,713 
83 
1,062 
737 
1,145 
4,739
Capital expenditures/investments 
 in intangibles 
1,838 
56 
469 
1,032 
930 
4,325
Interest income 
— 
— 
— 
— 
2,139 
2,139
Interest expense 
— 
— 
— 
— 
538 
538
2010
Assets 
$15,560 
$8,007 
$22,625 
$7,287 
$35,813 
$89,292
Depreciation/amortization 
 of intangibles* 
1,632 
75 
992 
784 
1,417 
4,900
Capital expenditures/investments 
 in intangibles 
1,511 
52 
463 
1,163 
1,246 
4,434
Interest income 
— 
— 
— 
— 
2,116 
2,116
Interest expense 
— 
— 
— 
— 
548 
548
* Segment pre-tax Income does not include the amortization of intangible assets.
Major Clients
No single client represented 10 percent or more of the company’s total revenue in 2012, 2011, 
or 2010.
Geographic Information
The following provides information for those countries that are 10% or more of the specific 
category.
Revenue*
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 
2012 
2011 
2010
United States 
$ 36,270 
$ 37,041 
$35,581
Japan 
10,697 
10,968 
10,701
Other countries 
57,540 
58,906 
53,589
Total IBM consolidated revenue 
$104,507 
$106,916 
$99,870
* Revenues are attributed to countries based on the location of the client.

308 
CHAPTER 5
Essentials of Financial Statement Analysis
.mhhe.com/revsine6e
www
Remember to check the book’s companion website 
for additional study material.
Required:
All questions relate to 2012 unless stated otherwise.
1. IBM refers to its segment reports as the “Management System Segment View.” What does 
IBM mean by this and how does it relate to the disclosure requirements under U.S. GAAP?
2. Which business segment contributes the most (least) external revenue for IBM? Compute 
the percentage of segment external revenue to total segments external revenue for these 
two segments.
3. Which business segment contributes the most (least) pre-tax income for IBM? Compute 
the percentage of segment pre-tax income to total segments pre-tax income for these two 
segments.
4. Which business segment had the highest (lowest) percentage growth (year-to-year change) 
in total revenue from 2011 to 2012? Show how the growth percentage was computed for 
the Software segment.
5. Which business segment had the highest (lowest) percentage growth (year-to-year change) 
in pre-tax income from 2011 to 2012?
6. Which segment had the highest (lowest) pre-tax income margin? Show how IBM computes 
the pre-tax income margin for these segments.
7. How would analysts use the business segment data related to the income statement?
8. Why would the Global Financing segment hold 40% ($38,882/$97,310) of the segment 
assets, but generate only 3.6% ($4,073/$111,826) of total segment revenue?
9. What percentage of IBM’s revenue is earned in the United States?
Plant and Other Property—Net
($ in millions)
At December 31: 
2012 
2011 
2010
United States 
$ 6,555 
$ 6,271 
$ 6,134
Other countries 
6,299 
6,186 
6,298
Total 
$12,854 
$12,457 
$12,432

6
309
Chapter
T
he previous chapter introduced the key financial ratios used to assess a com-
pany’s operating performance, liquidity, and solvency. In this chapter, we 
 examine the role financial accounting information plays in valuation and 
credit risk assessment. We also describe the expanding use of fair value accounting in 
financial statements and explain why accountants and auditors must be skilled at 
 valuation. Along the way, we will build a framework for understanding what aca-
demic and professional research says about the usefulness of accounting numbers to 
investors and creditors.
 
Business valuation involves estimating the worth—or intrinsic value—of a com-
pany, one of its operating units, or its ownership shares. Although several valuation 
methods are used in practice, we focus on the fundamental valuation approach  because 
it is comprehensive and rigorous and uses basic accounting measures (or “fundamen-
tals”) to assess the amount, timing, and uncertainty of a firm’s future operating cash 
flows or earnings. Data from a firm’s financial statements, along with industry and 
economywide data, are used to develop projections of future earnings or cash flows. 
These projected cash flows are discounted at a risk-adjusted cost of capital to arrive at a 
valuation estimate, which becomes the basis for the analyst’s recommendation (buy, 
hold, or sell) and investment decision.
 
Cash flow assessment also plays a central role in gauging a company’s credit 
risk. Lenders and credit analysts use the firm’s financial statements and other infor-
mation to estimate its future cash flows. They compare these cash flow projections to 
the firm’s future debt-service requirements. Companies with projected operating 
cash flows that comfortably exceed required future debt principal and interest pay-
ments are deemed good credit risks. Less favorable operating cash flow prospects 
may suggest the firm is a high credit risk, in which case the firm may be charged 
higher rates of interest, have more stringent conditions placed on its loans, or be 
 refused credit.
6
The Role of Financial
Information in Valuation and
Credit Risk Assessment
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you 
will understand:
1. The basic steps in business valuation 
using free cash flows and abnormal 
earnings.
2. Why current earnings are considered 
more useful than current cash flows 
for assessing future cash flows.
3. The expanding use of fair value 
 measurements in financial 
statements.
4. What factors contribute to variation 
in price-earnings multiples.
5. The notion of earnings quality and 
what factors influence the quality 
of earnings.
6. How stock returns relate to “good 
news” and “bad news” earnings 
surprises.
7. The importance of credit risk assess-
ment in lending decisions and how 
credit ratings are determined.
8. How to forecast a company’s financial 
statements.

310 
CHAPTER 6
The Role of Financial Information in Valuation and Credit Risk Assessment
BUSINESS VALUATION
Valuing an entire company, an operating division of that company, or its ownership shares 
involves three steps:
1. Forecasting future amounts of some financial attribute—what we call a value-relevant 
attribute—that ultimately determine how much a company is worth. Common value- 
 relevant attributes include:
 
• Distributable or free cash flows (defined and discussed in the next section).
 
• Accounting earnings.
 
• Balance sheet book values.
2. Determining the risk or uncertainty associated with the forecasted future amounts.
3. Determining the discounted present value of the expected future amounts using a 
 discount rate that reflects the risk or uncertainty from Step 2.
The Discounted Free Cash Flow Approach to Valuation
The distributable—or free—cash flow valuation approach combines the elements in these 
three steps to express what a stock is worth—its intrinsic value—as the discounted present 
value of expected future distributable cash flows. Free cash flow—a term popular among 
analysts—is often defined as the company’s operating cash flows (before interest) minus cash 
outlays for routine operating capacity replacement such as equipment and furnishings. It’s the 
amount available to finance further expansion of operating capacity, to reduce debt, to pay 
dividends, or to repurchase stock. This is the best way to measure free cash flows if you are 
interested in valuing the company as a whole without regard to its capital structure.
 
But what if you want to value just the company’s common stock? Then you would need to 
refine the free cash flow measure by also subtracting cash interest payments, debt repayments, 
and preferred dividends. What’s left is the free cash flow (denoted CF) that’s available to com-
mon stockholders.1 Of course, CF can be used to pay common dividends, buy back common 
stock, or expand operating capacity. The free cash flow equity valuation model can be written as:2
Dividends are another 
value-relevant attribute 
 discussed in finance texts. 
However, the dividend 
 discount valuation approach 
is of limited practical use 
despite its intuitive appeal 
because dividends represent 
the distribution of wealth. 
The accounting-based attri-
butes considered here focus 
on wealth creation, which 
is what permits dividends 
to be distributed.
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
 
Expected free cash flow each period
 
T 
T 
T
V0 5
E0(C
,F1)
(1 1 r)1 1
E0(C
,F2)
(1 1 r)2 1
E0(C
,F3)
(1 1 r)3 1 p (continuing to infinity) 5 a
q
t51
E0(C
,Ft)
(1 1 r)t (6.1)
 
c 
c 
c
 
Discount factor each period
S
S
`
`
 
The math may look complex, but the intuition is straightforward. The free cash flow valua-
tion model says that today’s (at time t 5 0) estimate of the value (V0) of a company’s stock 
equals the sum (o) of the stream of expected future free cash flows (the various E0[C
,F] terms) 
1 One of the earliest accounting treatments of this concept appeared in L. Revsine, Replacement Cost Accounting (Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1973), pp. 33–35 and 95–100. There, free cash flow was defined as “the portion of net oper-
ating flows that can be distributed as a dividend without reducing the level of future physical operations” (p. 34).
2 See E. F. Fama and M. H. Miller, The Theory of Finance (New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1972); R. Brealey and 
S. Myers, Principles of Corporate Finance (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2006); S. A. Ross, R. W. Westerfield, and J. F. Jaffee, 
Corporate Finance (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2005); as well as the books referenced in footnote 7.

 
Business Valuation 
311
per share of stock discounted back to the present (the [1 1 r]t terms).3 Each periodic expected 
future free cash flow has its own unique discount factor (1y[1 1 r]t), which reflects the risk (r) 
and timing (t) of the free cash flow. The E0 signifies that the expected future cash flows are based 
on investors’ current assessment (at time t 5 0) of the company’s future business activities.
 
The valuation model’s cash flow stream begins one period from now at t 5 1, and it continues 
over an infinite horizon to t 5 `. Each future free cash flow is uncertain.4 Consequently, valuation 
practitioners devote considerable effort to ensuring that the cash flow forecasts used are reliable.
 
The discount rate (r), commonly referred to as the equity cost of capital, is adjusted to 
reflect the uncertainty or riskiness of the expected cash flow stream.5 Streams that are more 
risky are discounted at a higher rate.
 
Simply put, the free cash flow valuation model in equation (6.1) says that today’s intrinsic 
value (and market price) of each common share depends on investors’ current expectations 
about the firm’s future economic prospects as measured by free cash flows available to com-
mon shareholders. These future cash flows are discounted by a factor that reflects the risk (or 
uncertainty) and timing of the anticipated flows.6
 
Here’s an illustration of the discounted free cash flow approach to valuation.
Actual market prices may 
deviate from fundamental 
intrinsic values when mar-
kets are inefficient. This 
possibility is what motivates 
some investors to use intrin-
sic value estimates (V0) as 
the basis for investment 
 decisions. The hope is to 
buy a stock at a price (P0) 
today that is less than the 
stock is currently worth (P0 
, V0), and then sell it later 
at a higher price when the 
stock’s true value is recog-
nized by other investors.
 
Of course, analysts must 
be careful because when 
V0ﬁP0, it is possible the 
 analyst’s valuation, not the 
market price, is incorrect 
due to an unreliable cash 
flow forecast or an errone-
ous  discount rate.
Judy Choi is thinking about starting a truck rental business. She plans to buy four trucks now 
and to add a fifth truck in two years. Each truck will cost $20,000. Judy has carefully evaluated 
the local market for rental trucks and believes that each truck will generate $5,000 of net 
operating cash flows each year. At the end of five years, she believes the trucks can be sold 
for $30,000 in total. How much is the business worth?
 
Exhibit 6.1 shows each step in the valuation process. First, Choi forecasts the expected 
future free cash flows associated with the truck rental business. These forecasted cash flows 
include the expected net operating cash flows of $5,000 per truck or $20,000 in the first two 
years (from four trucks) and $25,000 in the final three years (when the fifth truck is added). 
Then there’s the additional $30,000 cash flow she expects to receive when the trucks are sold 
at the end of Year 5, and the $20,000 she must spend at the end of Year 2 to buy the final truck.
 
Next, Choi must assess the cash flow risk associated with the truck rental business and 
determine the appropriate discount rate. For now, let’s just say it’s 10%.
3 We denote uncertain future amounts with a tilde (,). Thus, E0 (C
,F3) indicates the currently expected but uncertain free cash 
flow for Period 3 in the future. By contrast, the already known past Period 0 cash flow would be shown without the tilde (that 
is, as CF0).
4 An alternative representation of the discounted cash flow valuation model presumes that the future cash flow stream contin-
ues only through some finite terminal period, T, at which point the company is liquidated and a liquidating or terminal cash 
distribution (C
,FT) is paid to stockholders:
V0 5 a
T21
t51
E0(C
,Ft)
(1 1 r)t 1
E0(C
,FT)
(1 1 r)T
5 The most popular approach to estimating the cost of equity is the capital asset pricing model (CAPM), which expresses 
the equity cost of capital as the sum of the return on a riskless asset (rf) plus an equity risk premium (E[rM] 2 rf) multiplied 
by the company’s systematic (beta) risk:
re 5 rf 1 b(E[rM] 2 rf )
See J. Pettit, “Corporate Capital Costs: A Practitioners’ Guide,” Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, Spring 1999, 
pp. 115–20.
6 Some finance textbooks adopt a slightly different cash flow approach to business valuation. This alternative approach uses 
a weighted average cost of capital (WACC) to discount the expected future free cash flows available to all capital  providers—
both lenders and equity investors. The WACC discount rate is a blended rate that combines the equity cost of capital and the 
debt cost of capital. When enterprise value has been determined, it is apportioned into the value of debt and the value of eq-
uity. When equivalent assumptions are used, this alternative approach yields the same intrinsic value estimate as the equity 
cash flow approach in equation (6.1). 
To learn more about present 
values, see the Appendix to 
this book.

312 
CHAPTER 6
The Role of Financial Information in Valuation and Credit Risk Assessment
EXHIBIT 6.1
Illustration of the Discounted Free Cash Flow 
Approach to Valuation
Step 1: Forecast expected future free cash flows
 
Year 1 
Year 2 
Year 3 
Year 4 
Year 5
Net cash flows from operations 
$20,000 
$20,000 
$25,000 
$25,000 
$25,000
Cash flow from selling all trucks 
 
 
 
 
30,000
Capital expenditure in Year 2 for the 
 fifth truck 
 
(20,000)
Future free cash flows 
20,000 
0 
25,000 
25,000 
55,000
Step 2: Determine the discount rate (10%)
Step 3: Determine the discounted present value of future free cash flows 
Future free cash flows 
20,000 
0 
25,000 
25,000 
55,000
3 Present value factor 1y(1.10)t 
0.90909 
0.82645 
0.75131 
0.68301 
0.62092
 Present values 
$18,182 
$         0 
$18,783 
$17,075 
$34,151
Total present value of future free 
 cash flows 
$88,191
Cost to launch business 
(80,000)
 Net present value of business 
  opportunity 
$  8,191
 
The final step is to determine the discounted present value of the future free cash flows. 
The discount factors in Exhibit 6.1 are computed as 1y(1 1 0.10)t and thus capture informa-
tion about the risk of the business opportunity (10%, or 0.10) and about the timing of each 
cash flow (the exponent t). The present value of the entire free cash flow stream (the sum of 
the free cash flow present values for Years 1 through 5) is $88,191. Because Choi must initially 
invest $80,000 in Year 0, the net present value of the venture is $8,191.
 
The above example was simplified in that it involved a finite number of years. In fact, most 
businesses are going concerns; they are expected to operate indefinitely. To apply the discounted 
free cash flow valuation approach represented in equation (6.1) to a going concern, we need 
to estimate free cash flows for every future period forever. Obviously this task would be daunting. 
In practice, some simplifying assumptions are made to facilitate the valuation process.7
 
One simplification for a mature firm with a stable cash flow pattern is to assume the cur-
rent level of cash flows (CF0) will continue unchanged forever—a zero-growth perpetuity. 
This means the expected free cash flows in each future period will equal the known current 
period cash flow so that equation (6.1) becomes:
For example, we assumed 
that Choi sold all the trucks 
at the end of Year 5 and 
ceased doing business.
 
Expected free cash flow in each future year set
 equal to the actual free cash flow realized in Year 0
 
T 
T 
T
V0 5
CF0
(1 1 r)1 1
CF0
(1 1 r)2 1
CF0
(1 1 r)3 1 p (continuing to infinity)   (6.2)
 
c 
c 
c
 
 Discount factor each year
S
S `
`
7 These simplifying assumptions and other detailed aspects of the valuation process are described in T. Koller, M. Goedhart, 
and D. Wessels, Valuation: Measuring and Managing the Value of Companies (New York: Wiley, 2005); A. Damadoran, 
Investment Valuation (New York: Wiley, 2002); S. Penman, Financial Statement Analysis and Security Valuation (New York: 
McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2007); and L. Soffer and R. Soffer, Financial Statement Analysis: A Valuation Approach (Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2003).

 
Business Valuation 
313
The present value of the same dollar cash flow each period over an infinite horizon—called a 
constant perpetuity—simplifies the business valuation model to:8
 
V0 5
CF0
r  
(6.3)
Thus, if a company is currently generating a free cash flow of $5 per share that is expected to 
continue indefinitely, and if the discount rate is 10%, the per share intrinsic value estimate is 
$5y0.10 5 $50.
 
The details of free cash flow valuation are important not only to stock analysts and inves-
tors, but also to accountants. Because of financial reporting practices for goodwill,  accountants 
and auditors must know how to use the discounted cash flow valuation approach. For exam-
ple, here’s an excerpt from News Corporation’s fiscal 2012 annual report to shareholders.
News Corporation operates the FOX Network and publishes The Wall Street Journal.
Note 9: Goodwill and other Intangible Assets
Annual Impairment Review
The Company’s goodwill impairment reviews are determined using a two-step process. The first step of 
the process is to compare the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount, including goodwill. 
In performing the first step, the Company determines the fair value of a reporting unit by primarily using 
a discounted cash flow analysis and market-based valuation approach methodologies. Determining fair 
value requires the exercise of significant judgments, including judgments about appropriate discount 
rates, long-term growth rates, relevant comparable company earnings multiples and the amount and tim-
ing of expected future cash flows. The cash flows employed in the analyses are based on the Company’s 
estimated outlook and various growth rates have been assumed for years beyond the long-term business 
plan period. Discount rate assumptions are based on an assessment of the risk inherent in the future cash 
flows of the respective reporting units. In assessing the reasonableness of its determined fair values, the 
Company evaluates its results against other value indicators, such as comparable public company trading 
values. If the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount, goodwill of the reporting unit is 
not impaired and the second step of the impairment review is not necessary. If the carrying amount of a 
reporting unit exceeds its fair value, the second step of the goodwill impairment review is required to be 
performed to estimate the implied fair value of the reporting unit’s goodwill. The implied fair value of 
goodwill is determined in the same manner as the amount of goodwill recognized in a business combina-
tion. That is, the estimated fair value of the reporting unit is allocated to all of the assets and liabilities of 
that unit (including any unrecognized intangible assets) as if the reporting unit had been acquired in a 
business combination and the estimated fair value of the reporting unit was the purchase price paid. The 
implied fair value of the reporting unit’s goodwill is compared with the carrying amount of that  goodwill. 
If the carrying amount of the reporting unit’s goodwill exceeds the implied fair value of that goodwill, 
an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess.
Fiscal 2012
During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2012, the Company completed its annual impairment review of 
goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets. As a result of the impairment review performed, the 
Company recorded non-cash impairment charges of approximately $2.8 billion ($2.4 billion, net of 
8 A constant perpetuity is a stream of equal, periodic cash flows without end.To see why the present value (V0) of a constant 
perpetuity reduces to V0 5 CF0yr, note that 
V0 5
CF0
11 1 r21 1
CF0
11 1 r22 1 p Multiplying both sides of this equation by (1 1 r) gives 
V0 ? 11 1 r2 5 CF0 1
CF0
11 1 r21 1
CF0
11 1 r22 1 p Now, subtracting the first equation from the second 
gives V0 ? r 5 CF0, so V05CF0yr.

314 
CHAPTER 6
The Role of Financial Information in Valuation and Credit Risk Assessment
tax) for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012. The charges consisted of a write-down of the Company’s 
goodwill of approximately $1.5 billion and a write-down of the indefinite-lived intangible assets (pri-
marily newspaper mastheads and distribution networks) of approximately $1.3 billion. These impair-
ment charges were primarily the result of adverse trends affecting several businesses in the Company’s 
Publishing segment, including secular declines in the economic environment in Australia, a decline in 
in-store advertising spend by consumer packaged goods manufacturers in the U.S. and lower fore-
casted revenues from certain businesses utilizing various trade names owned by the Company’s news-
paper operations. Australia, in particular, has experienced weakness in newspaper advertising reflecting 
a combination of a softening economy and declines in paid circulation. During the fourth quarter, the 
business announced a number of major new initiatives to extend the business into multi-platforms and 
to address these challenges. The charges also reflected the pending sale of certain businesses at values 
below their respective carrying values.
Source: News Corp. Form 10-K for the year ended June 30, 2012. Edited for brevity.
 
Goodwill arises when one company buys another company for more than the acquired 
company’s individual net assets are worth. (You will learn more about goodwill in Chapter 
16.) For example, suppose News Corporation pays $800 million for another publisher. If the 
acquired company’s identifiable net assets (cash, receivables, office supplies, equipment, 
buildings, and so on minus liabilities) have a fair value of only $50 million, then News 
 Corporation must record the $750 million excess as goodwill.
 
Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 350, “Goodwill and other Intangibles,” requires 
companies to “test” for impairment of goodwill at least once a year. That’s what News Corpo-
ration’s accountants and auditors did using the free cash flow valuation approach. Continuing 
our example, suppose that a year later News Corporation estimated the expected future free 
cash flows associated with its reporting unit (the acquired company) to be worth only $400 
million. Why? Because a downturn in demand for newspapers has lowered News Corpora-
tion’s forecast of the acquired company’s future revenues, earnings, and free cash flows from 
what they were when News Corporation bought the unit.
 
If the reporting unit’s fair value of identifiable net assets is still $50 million, then News 
Corporation can show only $350 million of goodwill. The original goodwill ($750 million) 
has become impaired and it must be written down by $400 million—a direct charge to net 
income for the year. (We’ve skipped certain details of ASC 350 but they are described in 
Chapter 10.)
 
How common are goodwill impairments? According to one study, about 300 publicly 
traded U.S. firms recognized a goodwill impairment charge in 2008, and the total amount 
booked that year was $340 billion.9 The very next year, goodwill impairments totaling $92 
billion were recognized by more than 200 U.S. companies.
 
Goodwill impairment accounting can result in dramatic earnings hits—$1.5 billion in fis-
cal 2012 for News Corporation—and impairment tests must be performed each year. That’s 
one reason accountants and auditors must understand discounted cash flow valuation.
The Role of Earnings in Valuation
We have just described a free cash flow approach to valuation. But what role does earnings 
play in valuation? If investors are interested in knowing a company’s future cash flows, why 
do they care about current earnings? The answer hinges on the belief that current accrual 
Fair value is the price that 
would be received on selling 
each asset in an orderly 
market transaction. We will 
have more to say about fair 
value later in this chapter.
9 M. Leone, “Goodwill Charges Sink Like a Rock,” CFO.com, June 8, 2010.

 
Business Valuation 
315
 accounting earnings are more useful than current cash flows in predicting future cash flows. 
The Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB), for example, makes this assertion:
Information about enterprise earnings and its components measured by accrual 
 accounting generally provides a better indication of enterprise performance than 
information about current cash receipts and payments.10
The Board stresses that the primary objective of financial reporting is to pro-
vide information useful to investors and creditors in assessing the amount, 
timing, and uncertainty of future net cash flows.11 The FASB contends that 
users pay attention to firms’ accounting earnings because this accrual measure 
of periodic performance improves their ability to forecast future cash flows.
 
The FASB’s belief that current earnings outperform current cash flows in 
predicting future cash flows stems from the forward-looking nature of accrual 
accounting. To illustrate, consider this example. Under generally accepted ac-
counting principles (GAAP), a $100,000 cash expenditure for production 
equipment is not expensed when purchased. Instead, the expenditure is 
charged to an asset account, and the asset is depreciated over future years as it 
is used in the production process. Both the depreciable life and depreciation 
method are chosen to reflect the expected future benefit pattern that arises 
from the use of the asset. Accrual accounting automatically incorporates this 
long-horizon, multiple-period view for capital expenditure transactions.
 
Consider another example. Under accrual accounting, an up-front cash 
 advance from a customer is recognized as income not when the cash is received but rather 
over a series of future periods as the advance is earned (recall the Canterbury Publishing 
 example from Chapter 2).
 
Cash flows are “lumpy.” But as these examples illustrate, accrual accounting earnings mea-
surement takes a long-horizon perspective that smooths out the “lumpiness” in year-to-year 
cash flows. This explains why the FASB contends that current earnings provide a much better 
measure of long-run expected operating performance than do current cash flows.
 
The FASB’s contention is supported by empirical research that shows two results:
• Current earnings are a better forecast of future cash flows than are current cash flows.12
• Stock returns correlate better with accrual earnings than with realized operating cash 
flows.13
These results imply that investors are better able to predict a company’s future free cash flows 
using the company’s accrual earnings than by using realized cash flows.
The following quote from the “Intrinsic Value” 
column of The Wall Street Journal underscores 
the importance of accrual earnings as an indica-
tor of future free cash flows:
As per usual, this column values stocks by 
their expected future free cash flow, dis-
counted back to the present. Earnings are a 
proxy—imperfect but the best we have—
for free cash flow, which is the spare 
change that the underlying business throws 
off to their owners after paying for sala-
ries, interest, capital maintenance, taxes 
and Danish for their chief executives, in 
addition to their eight-figure bonuses.
Source: R. Lowenstein, “S&P 500: Cheap, Fair, Going, 
Gone. . . . ,” The Wall Street Journal, June 19, 1997. 
Copyright © 1997 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All rights 
reserved worldwide. Reprinted with permission.
10 “Objectives of Financial Reporting by Business Enterprises,” Statement of Financial Accounting Concepts (SFAC) No. 1 
(Stamford, CT: FASB, 1978), para. 44.
11 Ibid., para. 37. The term net cash flows refers to the difference between cash receipts (inflows) and cash payments 
(outflows).
12 See M. Barth, C. Cram, and K. Nelson, “Accruals and the Prediction of Future Cash Flows,” The Accounting Review, Janu-
ary 2001, pp. 27–58; and P. Dechow, S. P. Kothari, and R. Watts, “The Relation between Earnings and Cash Flows,” Journal 
of Accounting and Economics, May 1998, pp. 133–68. Additional evidence on the usefulness of current earnings in predict-
ing future cash flows is provided by R. Greenberg, G. Johnson, and K. Ramesh, “Earnings versus Cash Flow as a Predictor of 
Future Cash Flow,” Journal of Accounting, Auditing and Finance, Fall 1986, pp. 266–77; and C. Finger, “The Ability of 
Earnings to Predict Future Earnings and Cash Flow,” Journal of Accounting Research, Autumn 1994, pp. 210–23.
13 B. Lev and P. Zarowin, “The Boundaries of Financial Reporting and How to Extend Them,” Journal of Accounting Re-
search, Autumn 1999, pp. 353–85; J. Callen and D. Segal, “Do Accruals Drive Stock Returns? A Variance Decomposition 
Analysis,” Journal of Accounting Research, June 2004, pp. 527–60; J. Watson and P. Wells, “The Association between Vari-
ous Earnings and Cash Flow Measures of Firm Performance and Stock Returns: Some Australian Evidence,” Working Paper, 
University of Technology, Sydney, AU, 2005; P. Dechow, “Accounting Earnings and Cash Flows as Measures of Firm Perfor-
mance: The Role of Accounting Accruals,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, July 1994, pp. 3–42.

316 
CHAPTER 6
The Role of Financial Information in Valuation and Credit Risk Assessment
Current earnings
Analyst uses current earnings to
forecast future cash flows
Forecasted future
free cash flows
Current stock price
Analyst uses valuation model to compute 
per share intrinsic value estimate from
cash flow forecast
Figure 6.1
LINKAGE BETWEEN STOCK 
PRICE AND ACCRUAL 
EARNINGS
 
Figure 6.1 illustrates the linkage between a company’s current earnings, future free cash 
flows, and current stock price, as suggested by the FASB and by the empirical evidence.14 As 
Figure 6.1 shows, the analyst combines information about the company’s current earnings, its 
business strategy, and the industry’s competitive dynamics to forecast future free cash flows. 
Through the use of accruals and deferrals, accrual accounting produces an earnings num-
ber that smooths out the unevenness or “lumpiness” in year-to-year cash flows, and it 
 provides an estimate of sustainable long-run future free cash flows.
 
The final step in this process involves using the free cash flow estimate together with the 
risk-adjusted discount rate to arrive at an estimated intrinsic value for the firm’s shares.
 
To appreciate the implications of these linkages, let’s revisit the simplified zero-growth 
perpetuity setting and our free cash flow valuation model. Assuming zero growth means that 
one way to estimate a firm’s equity value (or stock price) is to use its current period’s free 
cash flow (CF0) as our forecast for each future period free cash flow. But according to the 
FASB’s assertion, the current period’s accrual income is a better proxy for sustainable future 
cash flows than is the current period’s free cash flow. So, we replace the current period’s cash 
flow (CF0) in equation (6.3) with the current period’s earnings (denoted X0). In this case, the 
free cash flow valuation equation simplifies to:
 
V0 5
X0
r  
(6.4)
Note that equation (6.4) can be rewritten as 
V0
X0
 5 1
r , indicating that 1yr is the implied price/
earnings (P/E) ratio—also called the earnings multiple—which is a measure of the relation 
between a firm’s current earnings and its intrinsic share value (V0). Under the assumption of 
zero growth, the P/E ratio is the reciprocal of the equity cost of capital (risk-adjusted interest 
rate) used to discount future earnings. If the equity cost of capital is 8%, the earnings multiple 
for a zero-growth firm is 1y0.08 5 12.5, which is the rate at which $1 of current earnings is 
capitalized into share price. If the company reports current earnings of $5 per share and if in-
vestors believe this earnings level will persist forever as a perpetuity of $5 per share, then the 
present value of the future earnings stream implies a share price of $5 3 12.5 5 $62.50.
14 For a slightly different discussion of these linkages, see W. Beaver, Financial Reporting: An Accounting Revolution (Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1981), Ch. 4.
RECAP
In theory, business valuation involves discounting the expected value of some measure of 
wealth creation—such as free cash flow or earnings—over an infinite horizon using a risk-
adjusted discount rate that reflects the equity cost of capital. In practice, simplifying 

 
Business Valuation 
317
 assumptions are made to facilitate the valuation process. One simplification is to assume 
that future periods’ free cash flows will be a perpetuity equal to the current period’s ac-
crual earnings. Accrual accounting produces an earnings number that smooths out the 
unevenness in year-to-year cash flows, thereby providing a measure of firm performance 
that is generally a better indicator of a company’s long-run sustainable free cash flows.
The Abnormal Earnings Approach to Valuation
In the previous section, we found that the role of accounting earnings information in valuation is 
indirect—earnings are useful because they help generate forecasts of future free cash flows. 
These future free cash flow estimates were discounted to arrive at an estimated value for the com-
pany and its shares. Another valuation approach has emerged that uses earnings and equity book 
value numbers themselves as direct inputs in the valuation process. Given equivalent assumptions 
about future performance, this approach leads to valuation estimates that are equivalent to the free 
cash flow approach. So, why is it important to learn about this  approach? Because it helps us 
understand the economic forces that influence share prices over time and across firms.
 
This approach is based on the notion that a company’s value (and its share 
price) is driven not by the level of earnings per se but by the level of earnings 
relative to a fundamental economic benchmark. That benchmark is the cost of 
capital expressed in dollars, and it reflects the level of earnings investors de-
mand from the company as compensation for the risks of investment. Investors 
willingly pay a premium only for those firms that earn more than the cost of 
capital—meaning firms that produce positive abnormal earnings. For firms 
whose earnings are “ordinary” or “normal”—that is, have an earnings rate equal 
to the cost of capital—investors are willing to pay only an amount equal to the underlying book 
value of net assets. Firms that earn less than the cost of capital—that is, that produce negative 
abnormal earnings—sell at a discount to book value. This relationship among share prices, 
book value, and abnormal earnings performance is expressed mathematically as:15
In theory, the abnormal earnings approach and 
the free cash flow approach always produce the 
same valuation estimate. In practice, however, the 
two approaches sometimes produce different val-
uation estimates. When this occurs, it’s because 
the analyst has made assumptions in one model 
that are not equivalent to those in the other.
 
Book value of 
Expected future abnormal
 
equity at Time 0 
earnings
 
T 
T
 
V0 
5 
BV0 
1 
a
q
t51
E0(Abnormal earningst)
(1 1 r)t
 
(6.5)
 
c 
c
 
Share value at 
Discount factors for each
 
Time 0 
future period
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
where BV denotes the book value of the firm’s equity (assets minus liabilities, or net assets) 
per share, E0 denotes the expectation about future abnormal EPS formed at Time 0, and r is 
the equity cost of capital.
15 Several variations of the abnormal earnings valuation model have appeared in the literature. Examples include J. Ohlson, 
“Earnings, Book Values, and Dividends in Equity Valuation,” Contemporary Accounting Research, Spring 1995, pp. 661–87; 
T. Koller, M. Goedhart, and D. Wessels, Valuation: Measuring and Managing the Value of Companies, 5 ed. (New York: Wiley, 
2010); R. Lundholm and R. Sloan, Equity Valuation and Analysis, 3 ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2012); B. Madden, CFROI 
Valuation (Boston, MA: Butterworth-Heinemann, 1999); S. Penman, Financial Statement Analysis and Security Valuation, 5 
ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2013); L. Soffer and R. Soffer, Financial Statement Analysis: A Valuation Approach (Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2003); and G. B. Stewart III, The Quest for Value (New York: Harper Business, 1991).

318 
CHAPTER 6
The Role of Financial Information in Valuation and Credit Risk Assessment
 
The cost of equity capital, r, also corresponds to the risk-adjusted return stockholders require 
from their investment. So, the earnings level the company must generate in period t to satisfy 
stockholders is r 3 BVt21, or stockholders’ required rate of return multiplied by the beginning of 
period (t 2 1) invested capital. Any difference between actual earnings for the period (Xt) and 
stockholders’ required dollar return on invested capital for the period (r 3 BVt21) represents 
abnormal earnings.
 
Actual 
Required
 
earnings 
earnings
 
T 
T 
(6.6)
 
Abnormal earningst 
5 
Xt 
2 
 (r 3 BVt21)
 
To illustrate, suppose a company’s equity book value (BV) at the beginning of the year is 
$100 per share and the cost of equity (r) is 15%. Stockholders therefore require earnings of at 
least $100 3 15%, or $15 per share. If investors expect the company to report earnings equal 
to the benchmark earnings of $15 per share, but the company does even better and earns 
$20 per share—thus exceeding the benchmark—its stock price will increase to reflect its 
 superior performance. If actual earnings are only $10—thus falling short of the benchmark 
expected earnings—the stock price will fall. The amount of the stock price increase (or de-
cline) depends on the degree to which stockholders believe that abnormal earnings (earnings 
above or below the benchmark) are permanent rather than temporary.
 
Exhibit 6.2 shows how the abnormal earnings approach can be used to assign a value to 
Judy Choi’s truck rental business. You remember Choi? Recall that she plans to buy four 
trucks now and to add a fifth truck in two years. Each truck will cost $20,000, and she believes 
each will generate $5,000 of net operating cash flows every year. At the end of five years, she 
believes the trucks can be sold for $30,000 in total.
 
Additional information:
• Choi will put $80,000 cash into the business. This amount represents beginning equity.
• The company will pay out all excess cash as dividends each year. The cash needed to buy 
the last truck in Year 2 will come from operating cash flows that year. No new invest-
ment will be required.
• Truck depreciation is $3,043.48 per truck per year, which results in the trucks having a 
book value of $30,000, the expected salvage value, at the end of Year 5.
 
Step 1 of Exhibit 6.2 shows the computations of forecasted net income, dividends paid (as-
suming no net change in cash), and book value of equity. Equity book value increases by net 
income for the year and decreases when dividends are paid to shareholders. Notice that Choi’s 
company does not pay a dividend in Year 2. Why? Because the entire $20,000 of operating 
cash flows generated that year (4 trucks 3 $5,000 operating cash flow per truck) is needed to 
buy the fifth truck.
 
Step 2 of Exhibit 6.2 illustrates the computation of expected future abnormal earnings. 
Each year the beginning book value of equity is multiplied by the 10% rate of return required 
by investors to arrive at required or “normal” earnings. For example, the required earnings 
threshold in Year 1 is $8,000 ($80,000 of initial equity capital 3 10%). The $8,000 required 
earnings is subtracted from the $7,826 of forecasted earnings for the year to arrive at expected 
abnormal earnings of 2$174.

 
Business Valuation
319
 
Step 3 of Exhibit 6.2 shows the present value of expected future abnormal earnings over 
the life of the business. The discount factors shown are the same ones used in the discounted 
free cash flow approach in Exhibit 6.1. The individual present values are summed, and this 
amount ($8,190) is added to the beginning book value of equity ($80,000) to arrive at the es-
timated value of $88,190. This is the same value estimate (within rounding) we developed 
using the free cash flow approach!
 
Financial statements and related notes provide a wealth of information for assessing the 
relationships expressed by abnormal earnings valuation equations (6.5) and (6.6). The balance 
sheet provides detailed information on the book value of equity (assets minus liabilities). The 
income statement provides detailed information for assessing a firm’s earnings. These finan-
cial statement numbers and their forecasted amounts are the ingredients used in the abnormal 
earnings approach.
EXHIBIT 6.2
Illustration of the Abnormal Earnings Approach 
to Valuation
Step 1: Forecast earnings and equity book value
 
Year 1 
Year 2 
Year 3 
Year 4 
Year 5
Operating cash flows (5 earnings 
 before depreciation) 
$20,000 
$20,000 
$25,000 
$25,000 
$25,000
Depreciaton ($3,043.48 per truck 
 per year) 
(12,174) 
(12,174) 
(15,217) 
(15,218) 
(15,217)
 Net income 
$  7,826 
$  7,826 
$  9,783 
$  9,782 
$  9,783
Operating cash flows 
$20,000 
$20,000 
$25,000 
$25,000 
$25,000
Capital expenditures 
0 
(20,000) 
0 
0 
0
Proceeds on sale of trucks 
 
 
 
 
30,000
 Cash available to pay dividends 
20,000 
0 
25,000 
25,000 
55,000
Dividends 
(20,000) 
0 
(25,000) 
(25,000) 
(55,000)
 Net change in cash 
$         0 
$         0 
$         0 
$         0 
$         0
Beginning book value of equity 
$80,000 
$67,826 
$75,652 
$60,435 
$45,217
Net income 
7,826 
7,826 
9,783 
9,782 
9,783
Dividends 
(20,000) 
0 
(25,000) 
(25,000) 
(55,000)
 Ending book value of equity 
$67,826 
$75,652 
$60,435 
$45,217 
$         0
Step 2: Forecast future abnormal earnings
Net income 
$  7,826 
$  7,826 
$  9,783 
$  9,782 
$  9,783
Beginning book value of equity 
80,000 
67,826 
75,652 
60,435 
45,217
Cost of equity capital 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
10%
 Normal earnings 
8,000 
6,783 
7,565 
6,044 
4,522
Abnormal earnings 
($174) 
$  1,043 
$  2,218 
$  3,738 
$  5,261
Step 3: Determine the present value of expected future abnormal earnings
Abnormal earnings 
($174) 
$  1,043 
$  2,218 
$  3,738 
$  5,261
Present value factor 
0.90909 
0.82645 
0.75131 
0.68301 
0.62092
 Present value of future 
  abnormal earnings 
($158) 
$     862 
$  1,666 
$  2,553 
$  3,267
Sum of all present values 
$  8,190 
 
 
Beginning equity book value 
80,000 
 
 
 Value of business 
$88,190
Difference versus Exhibit 6.1 is 
due to rounding.

320 
CHAPTER 6
The Role of Financial Information in Valuation and Credit Risk Assessment
Abnormal Earnings and ROCE 
ROCE combines information about earnings 
and equity book value—two financial statement items essential to the abnormal earnings valu-
ation approach. A firm’s ROCE can be compared to its required rate of return on common 
equity (cost of equity capital) or to the ROCEs of other companies in the industry to evaluate 
its prospects for generating “abnormal earnings.” Companies with ROCEs that consistently 
exceed the industry average generally have shares that sell for a premium relative to book 
value (that is, a higher market-to-book ratio).
 
Figure 6.2 plots the relationship between the ROCE and the year-end market-to-book ratios 
of 48 restaurant companies. The upward-sloping line represents the estimated regression line 
of market-to-book ratio versus ROCE for these companies. The regression line has an inter-
cept estimate of 1.31 and a slope coefficient estimate of 0.13. According to the regression line, 
a restaurant company that earns an ROCE of 20% should have a market-to-book ratio of 3.91 
(or 1.31 1 [0.13 3 20]). A market-to-book ratio of 3.91 means that the company’s shares sell 
for almost four times their equity book value.
 
In making comparisons across firms, the analyst must gauge the quality and comparability 
of the accounting policies or methods used. For example, does the company being analyzed 
tend to select liberal accounting methods (those that may increase earnings and net asset val-
ues) or more conservative methods (those that may decrease earnings and net asset values)? 
The degree of conservatism associated with a firm’s accounting choices has a direct bearing 
on the relationship among share price, earnings, and equity book value components of equa-
tion (6.5). To see this, consider a company that has a $10 share price and an $8 per share eq-
uity book value. Analysts who understand the accounting complexities described later in this 
book know there are two reasons why this company’s stock may be valued at a $2 premium to 
equity book value. One reason is that shareholders believe the company will be very profitable 
in the future, resulting in abnormal earnings worth—according to equation (6.5)—$2 today. A 
second possibility, however, is that the company’s conservative accounting methods result in 
an unusually low equity book value, and the low book value results in abnormal earnings 
whose present value is $2 per share.16 Note that in this case, a lower book value is associated 
10
0
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Return on common equity (ROCE)
Regression line
with slope 5 0.13
M/B ratio
is 1.31 at 
zero ROCE
Market-to-book ratio (M/B)
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
Figure 6.2
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN 
ROCE PERFORMANCE 
AND MARKET-TO-BOOK 
(M/B) RATIOS FOR 
48 RESTAURANT 
COMPANIES
Regression Result:
 M/B 5 1.31 1 0.13 ROCE
 
R2 5 59.1%
16 For a further discussion of these points and the implications of the abnormal earnings valuation model, see G. Feltham and 
J. Ohlson, “Valuation and Clean Surplus Accounting for Operating and Financial Assets,” Contemporary Accounting Research, 
Spring 1995, pp. 689–731; V. Bernard. “The Feltham-Ohlson Framework: Implications for Empiricists,” Contemporary Account-
ing Research, Spring 1995, pp. 733–47; Lundholm and Sloan, ibid.; Penman, ibid.; Soffer and Soffer, ibid.; and Stewart, ibid.

 
Fair Value Accounting 
321
with greater abnormal earnings, so that more conservative accounting will not reduce a firm’s 
value, which combines the book value and abnormal earnings.
 
Much of the information needed for assessing the quality and value relevance of a com-
pany’s reported accounting numbers appears in notes to its financial statements. These notes 
describe accounting policies for matters such as revenue recognition (completed contract ver-
sus percentage of completion), depreciation (straight line versus accelerated), and inventory 
valuation (LIFO versus FIFO). Later chapters will clarify the important differences in these 
and other accounting methods and their effects on earnings and balance sheet book values. In 
certain instances, we show how you can adjust reported numbers to put firms that use different 
methods on a more equal footing before using those numbers for valuation purposes.
RECAP
The abnormal earnings approach to valuation says a company’s future earnings are deter-
mined by (1) the resources (net assets) available to management and (2) the rate of return 
or profitability earned on those net assets. If a firm can earn a return on net assets (com-
mon equity book value) that exceeds its cost of equity capital, it will generate positive ab-
normal earnings. Its stock will then sell at a premium relative to book value. However, if 
the firm earns a return on net assets that falls below its cost of equity capital, it will gener-
ate negative abnormal earnings. Its stock will then sell at a discount relative to book value. 
A key feature of this valuation approach is that it explicitly takes into account a cost for the 
capital (net assets) provided by the owners of the business. Value is added only if the earn-
ings generated from those net assets exceed the equity cost of capital benchmark. Appen-
dix A to this chapter illustrates how to use this valuation model for a real company.
FAIR VALUE ACCOUNTING
For decades, GAAP balance sheet carrying amounts were based primarily on historical 
cost, or what had been paid for a particular asset. But over the last 25 years, more and more 
fair value measurements have been introduced. As you may recall from Chapter 4, today’s 
balance sheet contains a mixture of historical cost and other measurements, including fair 
value. One example, already mentioned in this chapter, is the requirement that fair value be 
used to assess goodwill impairment. Others are described throughout the book. In some 
ways, the growing use of fair value accounting parallels a shift in the United States from a 
manufacturing to a financial services economy in which financial assets and liabilities are 
increasingly important.
 
Before 2006, accountants and auditors had no consensus on how to determine fair values. 
Consider, for example, an investment in a truck rental firm. Should the fair value of that in-
vestment be measured by the exit price (the amount the firm would receive if it sold its invest-
ment) or by the entry price (the amount the firm would pay if it bought an identical 
investment)? And what if there are no readily ascertainable market prices to determine an 
asset’s fair value? If there is no active market for an asset, then fair value could be determined 
either (a) by using market values for similar, albeit not identical, assets and adjusting for the 
ways in which the reference asset differs from the asset being valued, or (b) by using a valua-
tion model such as those described in the chapter. So, at least three different approaches could 
be used to measure the investment’s exit or entry price, resulting in a total of six (3 3 2) dis-
tinct ways to measure fair value.
 
In September 2006, the FASB issued SFAS No. 157, “Fair Value Measurements,” to in-
crease consistency and comparability in the way fair values are determined for financial re-
porting purposes. ASC Topic 820, “Fair Value Measurement and Disclosures,” which is based 
on SFAS No. 157, defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value, and 
Carrying amounts in a 
GAAP balance sheet are 
measured using historical 
cost, net realizable value, 
discounted present value, 
and fair value.

322 
CHAPTER 6
The Role of Financial Information in Valuation and Credit Risk Assessment
requires expanded disclosures about fair value measurements. However, it does not establish 
any new instances that require fair value measurement.
 
ASC Topic 820 defines fair value as “the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid 
to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement 
date.”17 This means that, for accounting purposes, fair value is an exit price, not an entry price. 
ASC Topic 820 also states that the hypothetical transaction of selling the asset or transferring 
the liability is presumed to occur in the ordinary course of business (i.e., not a forced sale or 
transfer) and in the item’s principal market. Transaction costs do not reduce fair value. ASC 
Topic 820 further states that a nonfinancial asset’s fair value must reflect its “highest and best 
use,” which is not necessarily how the company uses it. This distinction can be important 
when, for example, valuable California ocean-front real estate is used as a company parking 
lot. ASC Topic 820 also states that a liability’s fair value must incorporate the company’s 
credit risk.
 
GAAP provides a hierarchy of approaches to be used in measuring fair values. The hierar-
chy differentiates between assets and liabilities that trade in an active market (e.g., a share of 
stock in Ford Motor) and those that do not (e.g., a grain silo). The hierarchy has three levels 
of fair value estimates:
• A Level 1 estimate uses quoted prices from active markets for identical assets or liabilities 
to determine fair value.
• A Level 2 estimate uses observable inputs other than Level 1 quoted prices. These inputs 
include quoted prices from active markets for similar (but not identical) assets or liabilities, 
quoted prices from less-than-active markets, and observable inputs other than quoted 
prices (such as interest rate yield curves or stock price volatility measures).
• A Level 3 estimate uses a valuation model, together with unobservable inputs such as 
management’s estimates or expected future cash flows or abnormal earnings. Level 3 
 estimates are often referred to as mark-to-model valuation inputs.
 
Firms must use the highest level estimate possible when determining a fair value. That is, 
if a Level 1 estimate is feasible, it must be used. If not, a Level 2 estimate must be used if 
feasible. Level 3 estimates are permitted only when it is not possible to obtain either a Level 
1 or a Level 2 estimate.
 
Firms must disclose at each reporting date the hierarchy level at which the fair values were 
determined, transfers between levels, a reconciliation of beginning Level 3 inputs to ending 
inputs, and the amount of unrealized fair value gains or losses that are included in earnings for 
the period, among other related disclosures. The Level 3 reconciliation alerts financial state-
ment readers to any changes in management forecasts and valuation model assumptions. Re-
search evidence supports the FASB’s emphasis on observable market inputs (Levels 1 and 2) 
and the importance of disclosing the extent to which fair values rely on management judg-
ment and discretion (Level 3).18
 
ASC Topic 820 gives companies, auditors, and investors much needed guidance on how to 
measure fair values. It also reopens the door to potential accounting abuses. The accounting 
irregularities uncovered at Enron in late 2001 led the FASB to ban the use of mark-to-model 
fair value accounting for most energy contracts. Why? Because the use of subjective, internal 
valuation models invited Enron and other energy companies to inflate their earnings through 
17 “Fair Value Measurements,” SFAS No. 157 (Norwalk, CT: FASB, 2006), para. 5. This definition is retained in FASB 
 Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) Master Glossary: Fair Value and in ASC Topic 820-10.
18 See AAA Financial Accounting Standards Committee, “Response to the FASB’s Exposure Draft on Fair Value Measure-
ments,” Accounting Horizons, September 2005, pp. 187–96.

 
Research on Earnings and Equity Valuation  
323
unreasonably optimistic assumptions. Critics then and now claim that mark-to-model fair 
value accounting is “a license for management to invent the financial statements to be what-
ever they want them to be.”19 Level 3 fair values add an additional layer of uncertainty and 
subjectivity as well as risk of material misstatement to financial reports.
 
Fair value accounting poses a significant challenge for auditors who must evaluate how 
companies came up with their numbers. Expanded use of fair value accounting means that 
auditors must have technical knowledge of the valuation tools described in this chapter and 
how the tools are used in practice. That is one reason why valuation is an important compo-
nent of this book.
GLOBAL VANTAGE POINT
Recently, the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) and FASB concluded a joint 
convergence project on fair value measurement and disclosure. The aim was to ensure that 
U.S. GAAP and IFRS reflect a shared view about fundamental principles such as what fair 
value means and how best to measure it. The IASB issued IFRS 13 “Fair Value Measurement” 
in May 2011 (effective for fiscal years that begin after January 1, 2013) that fundamentally 
agrees with U.S. GAAP on the definition of fair value as an exit price, the three-level mea-
surement hierarchy, and most disclosure requirements. As part of the convergence project, 
FASB released Accounting Standards Update No. 2011-04 in May 2011, revising ASC 820-10 
to bring U.S. fair value disclosure rules more in line with recent IFRS.
19 Damon Silvers, associate general counsel for the AFL-CIO, as quoted in D. Reilly, “FASB to Issue Retooled Rule for Valu-
ing Corporate Assets,” The Wall Street Journal, September 15, 2006.
20 For an overview of this research, see B. Lev and J. Ohlson, “Market-Based Empirical Research in Accounting: A Review, 
Interpretation, and Extension,” Journal of Accounting Research, Supplement 1982, pp. 249–322; B. Lev, “On the Usefulness 
of Earnings and Earnings Research: Lessons and Directions from Two Decades of Empirical Research,” Journal of Account-
ing Research, Supplement 1989, pp. 153–92; S. Kothari, “Capital Markets Research in Accounting,” Journal of Accounting 
and Economics, September 2001, pp. 105–232; R. Holthausen and R. Watts, “The Relevance of the Value-Relevance Litera-
ture for Financial Accounting Standard Setting,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, September 2001, pp. 3–76; and A. 
Beyer, D. Cohen, T. Lys, and B. Walther, “The Financial Reporting Environment: Review of the Recent Literature,” Journal 
of Accounting and Economics, December 2010, pp. 296–343.
International
RESEARCH ON EARNINGS 
AND EQUITY VALUATION 
For nearly 40 years, researchers have investigated the value-relevance of financial accounting 
information.20 This research seeks to further our understanding of the relation between stock 
prices and earnings.
 
To illustrate, recall equation (6.4), which says that intrinsic share value (V0) is related to 
current earnings (X0) in the sense that a perpetual earnings stream of $5 per share gives rise to 
an intrinsic share value of $62.50 (when the discount rate is 8%). If stock prices (P0) approximate 
RECAP
A number of people mistakenly believe that GAAP balance sheet carrying amounts are 
based on historical cost, but many of these carrying amounts are now shown at fair value. 
ASC Topic 820 provides fair value guidance for companies, their auditors, and investors. It 
also serves as a wake-up call to accountants and auditors about the need to become more 
skilled in valuing balance sheet assets and liabilities.

324 
CHAPTER 6
The Role of Financial Information in Valuation and Credit Risk Assessment
intrinsic share values (V0), as they will when markets are efficient, then equation (6.4) also 
describes how stock prices and current earnings would be related, assuming all future cash 
flows are perpetuities. It immediately follows that differences in current earnings across firms 
should help explain differences in stock prices across firms. That is, if investors view ac-
counting earnings as an important piece of information for assessing firm value, then 
earnings differences across firms should help explain differences in firms’ stock prices. 
This is just another way of saying that earnings are value-relevant.
 
One way to test whether reported earnings are value-relevant is to examine the statistical 
association between stock prices and earnings across many firms at a given point in time. 
Researchers have explored this statistical association using the following simple valuation 
equation:
 
Pi 5 a 1 bXi 1 ei 
(6.7)
where Pi is the end-of-period closing stock price for firm i, and Xi is the firm’s reported earn-
ings per share for the same period; the intercept (a) and slope (b) terms represent coefficients 
to be estimated using standard regression analysis; ei denotes a random error that reflects the 
variation in stock prices that cannot be explained by earnings.21
 
If accounting earnings are relevant for determining stock prices, then the estimated slope 
coefficient b, which measures the relationship between earnings and prices, should be posi-
tive. A statistically positive b means that differences in earnings across firms explain a signifi-
cant portion of the variation in firms’ share prices.
 
Figure 6.3 plots year-end stock prices (shown on the vertical axis) against annual EPS 
(shown on the horizontal axis) for 48 restaurant companies. The upward-sloping line repre-
sents the estimated price-earnings relation for the regression equation (6.7) for this group of 
For now, earnings per share 
(EPS) can be taken to mean 
a company’s net income 
 divided by its number of 
outstanding common shares. 
As you will discover in 
Chapter 15, EPS calcula-
tions are  actually more 
 complicated than this.
 Figure 6.3
  STOCK PRICE AND ACTUAL 
EPS FOR 48 RESTAURANT 
COMPANIES  
Regression Result:
Pi 5 $9.57 1 14.28Xi
 
R2 5 61.7%
$0.50
$0
$1.00
$1.50
$2.00
$2.50
$3.00
$3.50
$4.00
Actual earnings per share (X ) for same year as Year-end stock price is measured
Regression line
with slope 5 14.28
Stock 
price is 
$9.57 at
zero EPS
Year-end stock price ( P )
$70
$60
$50
$40
$30
$20
$10
21 This specification is not perfect because it implies that stock prices could be negative, given sufficiently negative earnings. 
However, for a wide range of data, the specification is a useful analytical tool.

 
Research on Earnings and Equity Valuation  
325
companies. The regression line has a vertical axis intercept (a) estimate of $9.57 per share 
and a slope (b) coefficient estimate of 14.28—that is:
 
 
 
Intercept 
 
Slope
 
 
 
T 
 
T
 
Pi 
5 
$9.57 
1 
14.28 
3 
($Xi)
 
 
 
c 
 
c 
 
c 
(6.8)
 
 
 Implied stock  
Earnings 
 
EPS
 
 
 
price at 
 
multiple
 
 
 
$0 EPS
A restaurant firm that reported EPS of Xi 5 $1 would be predicted to have a stock price of 
$23.85 5 [$9.57 1 (14.28 3 $1)]. The estimated slope coefficient (b 5 14.28) is positive 
and statistically significant, indicating that reported earnings explains some of the varia-
tion in stock prices of restaurant companies. In fact, the proportion of variation in share 
prices  explained by earnings (the R2 for the regression) is 61.7%. However, some points lie 
well above the average price-earnings relation in Figure 6.3 while others fall far below the 
regression line.22 The next section discusses reasons why current earnings do not explain 
all of the variation in current prices and why some firms’ P/E ratios are well above (or 
below) average.
Sources of Variation in P/E Multiples
Current Earnings, a Poor Forecast of Future Expected Earnings 
Two firms with identical current earnings can have very different stock prices if investors 
believe that the firms’ future earnings will not be the same. Investors care most about 
where a firm is headed (future earnings and free cash flows), not where it has been (past 
earnings and cash flows). To illustrate, suppose that Firms A and B both earn $1.50 per 
share in the current year. However, investors expect Firm A to earn $2.50 per share next 
year (and every year thereafter) whereas they expect Firm B to earn only $1.50 in perpetu-
ity. If the equity cost of capital for both firms is 10% and we apply equation (6.4), Firm A 
will command a stock price of $25 (5 $2.50y0.10), but Firm B will sell for only $15 
(5 $1.50y0.10) per share. Even though both firms earn $1.50 per share this year, Firm A 
has a higher stock price because its expected future earnings are higher. As a result, Firm 
A’s P/E multiple will be 16.7 (5 $25y$1.50) while Firm B’s will be only 10.0 (5 $15y$1.50).
 
What happens when expected future earnings replace current earnings in Figure 6.3? 
The answer can be found in Figure 6.4, which plots the relation between year-end stock 
prices (shown on the vertical axis) and professional stock analysts’ consensus forecasts of 
next year’s EPS (shown on the horizontal axis) for 43 restaurant firms where analysts’ 
forecasts are available. Stock prices and EPS forecasts are both from December. The 
 upward-sloping  regression line in Figure 6.4 now has an intercept (a) estimate of $6.65 
and a slope (b) coefficient estimate of 14.83. This means that a restaurant firm forecasted 
to earn $1 per share next year would be predicted to have a stock price of $21.48 5 [$6.65 
1 (14.83 3 $1)]. Although using expected future earnings still does not explain all of the 
22 The error term (ei) in equation (6.7) does not show up in equation (6.8). That’s because equation (6.8) is the expression for 
the fitted regression line. The vertical distances between the fitted regression line and the data points for individual firms in 
Figure 6.3 are the ei error terms in equation (6.7).
Figure 6.3 dots that are 
above the regression line 
denote firms that seem to be 
“over-valued” by investors—
P/E is too high—whereas 
seemingly “undervalued” 
firms fall below the line.

326 
CHAPTER 6
The Role of Financial Information in Valuation and Credit Risk Assessment
variation in share price, it  explains 74.4% (the regression R2), which is more than actual 
earnings explained (61.7%).
Risk Differences 
Two firms with the same level of current and future expected earn-
ings can sell for different prices because of differences in the risk or uncertainty associated 
with those earnings. Riskier firms have a higher risk-adjusted cost of capital, which means 
that the discount rate for capitalizing their earnings (and free cash flows, for that matter) will 
be higher, resulting in lower share prices.
 
To illustrate, suppose Firm A and Firm B both report current earnings of $10 per share, and 
investors expect these earnings will, on average, persist into the future forever. However, Firm 
A’s earnings exhibit greater volatility over time—and therefore, greater risk—which equates 
to a 15% cost of equity capital for Firm A. Firm B’s earnings are more stable—that is, they 
represent a lower risk—so Firm B’s cost of equity capital is only 10%.
 
The estimated share price for each firm would be:
Firm A 
Firm B
$10
0.15 5 $66.67 
$10
0.10 5 $100
Thus, despite having equal earnings, Firm A’s share price will be one-third less than Firm B’s 
($66.67 versus $100) because Firm A is riskier and its cost of capital is higher.
Growth Opportunities 
Most firms’ P/E ratios range between 10 and 30. However, 
it is not uncommon to find young technology-based companies such as Facebook trading at 
share prices 100 times current EPS or more. What explains these exceptionally high P/E 
ratios?
 
In addition to valuing earnings generated from existing assets, the market values growth 
opportunities—that is, the firm’s potential earnings from reinvesting current earnings in new 
projects that will eventually earn a rate of return in excess of the cost of equity capital. The net 
present value of growth opportunities (NPVGO) adds a positive increment to the firm’s stock 
$0.50
$0
$1.00
$1.50
$2.00
$2.50
$3.00
$3.50
Forecasted earnings per share (Xi) for the next year
Regression line
with slope 5 14.83
Stock 
price is
$6.65 
at zero
EPS
Year-end stock price ( Pi)
$70
$60
$50
$40
$30
$20
$10
 Figure 6.4
 STOCK PRICE AND 
 FORECASTED EPS FOR
43 RESTAURANT 
COMPANIES 
Regression Result:
Pi 5 $6.65 1 14.83 Xi
 
R2 5 74.4%

 
Research on Earnings and Equity Valuation 
327
price, resulting in above average P/E multiples. For a firm with positive growth opportunities, 
the pricing equation (6.4) can be rewritten as:
⎧
⎨
⎩
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
 
P0 5 
X0
r  
1 
NPVGO
 
 
Present value of earnings 
 
Net present value of future 
(6.9)
 
 
from assets in place 
 
growth opportunities
 
The first term is the value of current operations for a firm that has no growth opportuni-
ties. Current earnings (X0) are viewed as a level perpetuity; that is, earnings next year are 
expected also to be X0. The second term (NPVGO) is the future growth value of a firm—the 
additional share value created (or lost) if the firm retains its earnings to fund 
new investment projects. For example, Facebook had a stock price (P0) of 
about $30 per share in early 2013 and trailing 12-month EPS (X0) of only 
$0.19. Using an equity cost of capital (r) of 10%, the present value of earn-
ings from assets in place was $1.90 (5$0.19y0.10). This means that NPVGO 
for Facebook was $28.10. Growth opportunities thus comprise 94% of the 
company’s stock price.
Permanent, Transitory, and Valuation-Irrelevant Components of 
Earnings 
If investors view firms’ current earnings levels as likely to persist in per-
petuity, then the slope coefficient (b) in equation (6.7) should equal the average earnings 
multiple for the particular companies and time period being examined. This prediction 
 follows directly from the equity valuation model in equation (6.4), in which current earn-
ings are translated into share price using an earnings multiple based on the risk-adjusted 
cost of equity capital. For example, if the average cost of capital is 8%, then b should 
be 1y0.08, or 12.5. However, for many firms, the earnings multiple falls well below this 
value.23 Why?
 
One explanation is that reported earnings numbers often contain three distinctly different 
components, each subject to a different earnings capitalization rate:
1. A permanent earnings component, which is expected to persist into the future and 
is therefore valuation-relevant. In theory, the multiple for this component should 
 approach 1yr.
2. A transitory earnings component, which is valuation-relevant but is not expected to 
 persist into the future. Because transitory earnings result from one-time events or transac-
tions, the multiple for this component should approach 1.0.
3. A value-irrelevant earnings (or noise) component, which is unrelated to future free cash 
flows or future earnings and, therefore, is not pertinent to assessing current share price. 
Such earnings components should carry a multiple of zero.24
If on the one hand, investors believe the firm 
will put money into worthwhile projects (that is, 
those with a positive net present value), NPVGO 
will be positive. On the other hand, if investors 
believe the firm will invest in unprofitable 
 projects (that is, those with a negative net 
 present value), NPVGO will be negative.
Equation (6.7) is our simple 
earnings valuation equation: 
Pi 5 a 1 bXi 1 ei where P 
is stock price, X is earnings 
per share, a and b are 
 regression coefficients, and 
e is the error term.
23 Notice that the slope coefficient of 14.28 for restaurants in Figure 6.3 suggests an earnings capitalization rate of about 7% 
because 1/0.07 5 14.29.
24 For a more formal discussion of these three earnings components and their valuation implication, see R. Ramakrishnan and 
J. Thomas, “Valuation of Permanent, Transitory, and Price-Irrelevant Components of Reported Earnings,” Journal of 
 Accounting, Auditing and Finance, Summer 1998, pp. 301–36.

328 
CHAPTER 6
The Role of Financial Information in Valuation and Credit Risk Assessment
 
These three earnings components correspond roughly to elements of the multiple-step 
 income statements described in Chapter 2. For example:
• Income from continuing operations (with the possible exception of certain so-called 
special items) is generally regarded as a recurring, sustainable component of a company’s 
profit performance, and thus it would fall into the permanent earnings 
category.
•  Income (loss) from discontinued operations and extraordinary gains 
and losses are nonrecurring. These items are more likely to be viewed as 
transitory components of earnings and, therefore, to be valued at a much 
lower multiple than those items associated with permanent earnings 
components.
•  The current-year impact of a change in accounting principles, which 
has no future cash flow consequences to shareholders, may be viewed as 
“noise” that is valuation-irrelevant.
To illustrate the importance of distinguishing between permanent, transi-
tory, and value-irrelevant earnings components, let’s suppose that two compa-
nies report identical bottom-line earnings of $10 per share. Would they necessarily sell for the 
same price? Perhaps not, as Exhibit 6.3 illustrates.
 
Exhibit 6.3 disaggregates each firm’s earnings into permanent, transitory, and value- irrelevant 
components. For Firm A, 60% of its earnings is judged to be permanent, 30% is transitory, and 
10% is value-irrelevant.25 For Firm B, 50% is permanent, 20% is transitory, and 30% is 
value-irrelevant.
 
Using a 10% cost of capital, the implied stock prices are $63 and $52 for Firm A and Firm 
B, respectively. Firm A’s stock price is 21% higher, even though the two companies report the 
same EPS. Firm A’s stock sells for a higher multiple because, in the vernacular of the analyst 
community, investors perceive its earnings quality to be superior to that of Firm B.
Investors may view some items that comprise 
income from continuing operations as highly 
transitory and/or value-irrelevant and, accord-
ingly, those items would be capitalized at lower 
multiples. Analysts call these “special” items. 
Examples include inventory holding gains and 
losses embedded in first-in, first-out (FIFO) 
earnings and last-in, first-out (LIFO) liquidation 
profits that result when old LIFO inventory 
 layers are sold. Later chapters discuss the 
 value-relevance of these and other earnings and 
balance sheet items in considerable detail.
EXHIBIT 6.3
Applying P/E Multiples to Earnings Components
 
Firm A 
Firm B
EPS as reported 
$10 
$10
Analyst’s EPS decomposition:
 Permanent component 
60% of $10 5 $6 
50% of $10 5 $5
 Transitory component 
30% of $10 5 $3 
20% of $10 5 $2
 Value-irrelevant component 
10% of $10 5 $1 
30% of $10 5 $3
Earnings multiple (b) applied to each earnings 
component at cost of capital of r 5 10%
 Permanent component (bP 5 10 5 1y0.10) 
10 3 $6 5 $60 
10 3 $5 5 $50
 Transitory component (bT 5 1) 
1 3 $3 5 $3 
1 3 $2 5 $2
 Value-irrelevant component (bVI 5 0) 
0 3 $1 5 $0 
0 3 $3 5 $0
Implied share price 
$63 
$52
Implied total earnings multiple 
 (share price/EPS as reported) 
6.3 
5.2
25 In theory, permanent (sustainable) earnings should have a higher earnings multiple than transitory earnings because we 
expect the former to persist longer into the future. Lipe presents evidence consistent with this conjecture. He finds a greater 
stock price reaction to earnings components that exhibit greater permanence than to those components that are more transi-
tory in nature. See R. Lipe, “The Information Contained in the Components of Earnings,” Journal of Accounting Research,
Supplement 1986, pp. 33–64.

 
Research on Earnings and Equity Valuation  
329
The Concept of Earnings Quality 
A Wall Street Journal article described earn-
ings quality and its implications for stock prices:
Quality of earnings measures how much the profits companies publicly report diverge from their 
true operating earnings. Low quality means the bottom line is padded with paper gains—such as 
the profit-fattening effect of inflation on a company’s reported inventory values, or gains pro-
duced by “underdepreciation,” when a company doesn’t write off plant and equipment as fast as 
their real value is falling.
 
Because a decline in quality means companies’ reported earnings are weaker and less sus-
tainable than they appear, it indicates likely trouble for future earnings—whether or not a reces-
sion arrives. If history is any guide, those lower quality earnings also will come home to roost in 
lower stock prices. . . .26
 
The notion of earnings quality is multifaceted, and there is no consensus on how best to 
 measure it.27 Under the definition illustrated in Exhibit 6.3, earnings are considered to be high 
quality when they are sustainable. For example, earnings that are generated from repeat custom-
ers and from high-quality products that enjoy steady consumer demand would be considered 
high quality. Examples of unsustainable earnings items include gains or losses from debt retire-
ment; asset write-offs from corporate restructuring and plant closings; or profit increases trace-
able to temporary reductions in discretionary expenditures for advertising, research and 
development, or employee training. GAAP treats these discretionary expenditures as expenses, 
so a firm can boost earnings temporarily by cutting back on the amount spent for these activities. 
However, earnings increases of this type are not sustainable because the expenditures are critical 
to creating future demand for the firm’s products and to creating new products or developing 
competent management—all important determinants of long-run sustainable earnings.
 
Some analysts define earnings quality in terms of the accounting methods management 
chooses to describe routine, ongoing business activities (such as using LIFO rather than FIFO 
for inventory accounting) and by the other accounting choices firms make through estimates 
(for example, the allowance for future uncollectibles).
 
Does earnings quality matter? One study finds that when reported earnings are adjusted for 
quality differences—for example, subtracting (or adding back) transitory gains (or losses) or 
adjusting for differences in inventory methods (FIFO versus LIFO)—the “quality-adjusted” 
earnings numbers better explain why firms’ stocks sell for different prices.28 These results 
suggest that differences in earnings quality are associated with differences in the overall earn-
ings capitalization rate (earnings multiple) that investors assign to reported earnings when 
determining share prices. Notice carefully that as transitory or value-irrelevant components 
become a larger part of a firm’s reported earnings:
• The quality of those reported earnings is eroded.
• Reported earnings become a less reliable indicator of the company’s long-run sustainable 
cash flows.
• Hence, earnings are a less reliable indicator of fundamental value.
26 B. Donnelly, “Profits’ ‘Quality’ Erodes, Making Them Less Reliable,” The Wall Street Journal, October 18, 1990.
27 See L. Bernstein and J. Siegel, “The Concept of Earnings Quality,” Financial Analysts Journal, July–August 1979, pp. 72–75; 
and J. Siegel, “The ‘Quality of Earnings’ Concept—A Survey,” Financial Analysts Journal, March–April 1982, pp. 60–68.
28 See B. Lev and R. Thiagarajan, “Fundamental Information Analysis,” Journal of Accounting Research, Autumn 1993, pp. 
190–215. To arrive at “quality-adjusted” earnings the researchers start with reported earnings and then eliminate revenue or 
expense items thought to be transitory or value-irrelevant. Additional research insights about earnings quality can be found in 
P. Dechow, W. Ge, and C. Schrand, “Understanding Earnings Quality: A Review of the Proxies, Their Determinants, and 
Their Consequences,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, December 2010, pp. 344–401; K. Schipper and L. Vincent, 
“Earnings Quality,” Accounting Horizons, Supplement 2003, pp. 97–110; and S. Whisenant and P. Fairfield, “Using Funda-
mental Analysis to Assess Earnings Quality: Evidence from the Center for Financial Research and Analysis,” Journal of 
 Accounting, Auditing and Finance, Fall 2001, pp. 273–95.

330 
CHAPTER 6
The Role of Financial Information in Valuation and Credit Risk Assessment
 
This phenomenon is illustrated in Exhibit 6.3, where we see that Firm B (with a higher 
proportion of transitory or value-irrelevant components of earnings) has an overall earnings 
multiple of 5.2 compared to 6.3 for Firm A. In contrast, the stock of a firm whose entire re-
ported earnings were considered permanent would sell for $10y0.10 5 $100, and the earnings 
multiple would be 10. Low-quality earnings will be assigned a lower overall earnings multiple 
and capitalized at a lower rate.
 
The research to date suggests that the capital market is rather sophisticated—it does not 
react naively to reported earnings, but instead it appears to distinguish among permanent, 
transitory, and value-irrelevant earnings components. Investors recognize differences in 
the quality of reported earnings numbers and consider these differences when assessing 
the implications of earnings reports for share prices. From time to time throughout this 
book, we will come back to this idea as we discuss alternative accounting treatments both 
for ongoing events and for specialized transactions and as we review the academic and 
professional research literature on the valuation-relevance of alternative accounting meth-
ods and financial notes disclosures.
RECAP
Firms’ shares usually sell at prices that differ from multiplying current reported earnings 
by the average earnings multiple for their industry. A variety of factors contribute to 
variation in P/E multiples. These include differences in risk; in growth opportunities; and 
in what proportions of current earnings are considered to be permanent, transitory, and 
value-irrelevant. The persistence of earnings is related to earnings quality—higher quality 
earnings are more persistent and sustainable. Assessing earnings quality involves using 
information from a multiple-step income statement, a balance sheet, a cash flow state-
ment, financial notes, and Management’s Discussion and Analysis (MD&A) to identify 
components of current earnings that are likely to be sustainable in contrast to those that 
are transitory or price irrelevant.
Earnings Surprises
The earnings capitalization model and the abnormal earnings model both require estimates of 
future earnings. But estimates can (and usually do) prove to be incorrect. When this happens, 
an “earnings surprise” results.
 
Two examples follow, both occurring on January 16:
• eBay Inc., the online auction site, reported fourth-quarter EPS of $0.70, one penny more 
than analysts were forecasting. The announcement occurred after the stock market had 
closed for the day. eBay shares rose 2.4% the next day.
• Northern Trust Corporation, the Chicago-based bank, reported fourth-quarter EPS of $0.69 
when analysts had been expecting $0.75. Northern’s announcement came in the morning 
before the market opened and by the end of the day, the company’s stock had fallen 5.7%.
 
If securities markets are rational and efficient in the sense that they fully and correctly 
impound all available information into a company’s stock price, the price will reflect inves-
tors’ unbiased expectations about the company’s future earnings and cash flows. Financial 
reports are an important source of information investors use to form and update their expecta-
tions, but they are only one source. Investors’ expectations take into account a vast array of 
other publicly available information, including information about the company’s earnings and 
cash flow history, product market conditions, competitor actions, and other factors. For ex-
ample, the stock prices of Ford and Toyota incorporate information about unit sales figures 
published weekly in the financial press as well as expectations about changes in interest rates 
Unbiased means that, on 
 average, the market’s earn-
ings expectations will be 
correct—neither too high 
nor too low.

 
Research on Earnings and Equity Valuation  
331
because interest rates influence consumers’ carbuying behavior. Stock prices move up or 
down as investors receive new information and revise their expectations about the future earn-
ings and cash flow prospects of the company.
 
Consider a typical quarterly earnings announcement that is released through major 
 financial wire services. If reported quarterly earnings correspond exactly to the earnings 
investors expected before the announcement, the investors have no reason to alter their 
expectations about future earnings or cash flows. The reported quarterly earnings simply 
confirm the market’s expectations. In other words, although the earnings release may 
 resolve market uncertainty about current earnings, it does not provide new information 
to investors. On the other hand, if reported quarterly earnings deviate from investors’ 
expectations, this earnings surprise represents new information that investors will use 
to revise their expectations about the company’s future earnings and cash flow prospects. 
In turn, this change in investor expectations will cause the company’s stock price 
to  change  following the earnings announcement. That’s what happened at eBay and 
Northern Trust.
 
Figure 6.5 illustrates the typical behavior of stock returns leading up to and following quar-
terly earnings announcements for three different scenarios:
1. Reported earnings are viewed as a good news earnings surprise because they exceed mar-
ket expectations (think eBay).
2. Reported earnings contain no news because they correspond exactly to market 
expectations.
3. Reported earnings are viewed as a bad news earnings surprise because they fall below 
market expectations (think Northern Trust).
 
Companies that report good news earnings (a positive earnings surprise) tend to have an 
upward movement in stock price before the actual earnings announcement date (Day 0 in 
Figure 6.5), followed by another stock price increase on announcement. The stock returns of 
companies reporting bad news earnings surprises exhibit negative returns before the 
250
260
240
230
220
210
0
10
20
30
Bad news
No news
Good news
40
50
60
Cumulative returns (%)
10
2
4
6
8
0
22
24
26
28
210
Earning announcement trading day
Days after
Days before
Figure 6.5
STOCK RETURNS AND 
QUARTERLY EARNINGS 
“SURPRISES”

332 
CHAPTER 6
The Role of Financial Information in Valuation and Credit Risk Assessment
 announcement followed by another decrease in stock price at the announcement date.29 
 Modest postannouncement drifts in stock returns are also not uncommon, especially when the 
earnings surprise is quite large.30 Quarterly earnings announcements that contain “no news” 
lead to stock returns that hover around zero both before and after announcement.
 
It’s easy to explain why stock prices sometimes exhibit a positive or negative movement be-
fore the earnings announcement date. Consider Ford Motor Company. Investors learn about auto-
mobile sales on a weekly basis and therefore can anticipate fairly well the actual quarterly 
earnings number prior to its formal announcement by Ford. The fact that Ford’s stock price some-
times changes at the announcement date indicates that not all of the information contained in the 
earnings release is fully anticipated by investors. Small companies—and those followed by just a 
few securities analysts—tend to exhibit smaller preannouncement stock returns because investors 
often have very limited information about those companies and their earnings prospects for the 
quarter. Large companies, whose performance is tracked by many analysts, are more likely to 
exhibit the preannouncement stock return behavior illustrated in Figure 6.5.
 
You should understand one more feature of quarterly earnings surprises. Sometimes the earn-
ings surprise and its associated stock return are in opposite directions. Here is an example.
• October 23: Coach Inc., the leather goods and accessories company, reported first quarter 
EPS of $0.41, up 21% from the same quarter a year earlier. Sales increased 28%. Coach 
shares fell 12% on the New York Stock Exchange.
 
Why did the stock price fall despite the apparent good news about sales and earnings per-
formance for the quarter? The answer can be found in the company’s earnings press release. 
In addition to reporting strong performance for the quarter, Coach said it was becoming “more 
conservative” in its outlook and thus lowering its sales and earnings forecasts for the rest of 
the fiscal year. Investors revised their expectations accordingly, and the share price fell.
 
How common is this phenomenon? Quarterly earnings surprises and their associated stock 
returns are in the opposite direction roughly 40% of the time, although the reasons why are 
not well understood.31
RECAP
A company’s stock price at any given point in time reflects investors’ aggregate expecta-
tions about the company’s future earnings. Information that changes investors’ expecta-
tions about future earnings will cause the stock price to rise or fall. Research demonstrates 
that quarterly and annual earnings announcements are important information events. 
Stock prices tend to increase (or decrease) when the reported earnings turn out to be 
higher (or lower) than expected. The degree of the surprise conveyed by an earnings an-
nouncement depends on the amount of pre-earnings announcement information avail-
able in the financial press and from other public sources.
29 For early research on the association between earnings surprises and stock returns, see R. Ball and P. Brown, “An Empirical 
Evaluation of Accounting Income Numbers,” Journal of Accounting Research, Autumn 1968, pp. 159–78; and G. Foster, C. 
Olsen, and T. Shevlin, “Earnings Releases, Anomalies, and the Behavior of Security Returns,” The Accounting Review, Octo-
ber 1984, pp. 574–603. Recent research is summarized in S. Kothari, “Capital Market Research in Accounting,” Journal of 
Accounting and Economics, September 2001, pp. 105–232.
30 A number of studies investigate whether postearnings announcement drift is a profit opportunity for investors. For a review 
of this literature, see V. Bernard, “Stock Price Reactions to Earnings Announcements: A Summary of Recent Anomalous Evi-
dence and Possible Explanations,” in R. Thaler (ed.), Advances in Behavioral Finance (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 
1992); and V. Bernard, J. Thomas, and J. Abarbanell, “How Sophisticated Is the Market in Interpreting Earnings News?” 
Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, Summer 1993, pp. 54–63. A comprehensive review of this and related research is 
provided by S. Richardson, I. Tuna, and P. Wysoki, “Accounting Anomalics and Fundamental Analysis: A Review of Recent 
Research Advances,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, December 2010, pp. 410–54.
31 W. Kinney, D. Burgstahler, and R. Martin, “Earnings Surprise Materiality as Measured by Stock Returns,” Journal of Ac-
counting Research, December 2002, pp. 1297–1329; and W. B. Johnson and R. Zhou, “Contrarian Share Price Reactions to 
Earnings Surprises,” Journal of Accounting, Auditing and Finance, April 2012, pp. 236–66.

 
Credit Risk Assessment 
333
CREDIT RISK ASSESSMENT
Equity investors analyze financial statements to determine the value of a firm’s shares. In 
contrast, creditors are concerned primarily with assessing a firm’s ability to meet its debt ob-
ligations through timely payments of principal and interest. Commercial banks, insurance 
companies, pension funds, and other lenders form opinions about a company’s credit risk by 
comparing current and future debt-service requirements to estimates of the company’s current 
and expected future cash flows.
Traditional Lending Products
Commercial bank loans are a common source of financing for many companies. These loans 
can be structured either as short-term or long-term, fixed or floating rate, payable on demand 
or with fixed maturity, and secured or unsecured.
Short-Term Loans 
Loans with maturities of one year or less, called short-term 
loans, comprise more than half of all commercial bank loans. Seasonal lines of credit and 
special purpose loans are the most common short-term borrowing. Short-term loans are used 
primarily to finance working capital needs when inventory or receivables increase temporar-
ily. They may be secured by the inventories or receivables themselves, or they may be unse-
cured. Cash flow to facilitate loan repayment usually comes from the routine generation of 
cash as inventories are sold and receivables are collected.
Long-Term Loans 
Called term lending agreements, long-term 
loans have maturities of more than one year with maturities ranging from two 
to five years being most common. The principal and interest repayment sched-
ule, along with other conditions of the loan, are detailed in a contractual 
agreement between the borrower and the bank. Term loans are often used to 
finance the purchase of fixed assets, the acquisition of another company, the 
refinancing of existing long-term debt, or permanent working capital needs. 
They are frequently secured by pledging the assets acquired with the loan 
proceeds, although lenders rarely look to asset liquidation as the primary source of funds for 
loan repayment. Scheduled principal and interest payments are generally presumed to come 
from the borrower’s future operating cash flows.
Revolving Loans 
Revolving loans are a variation on the seasonal credit line. They allow 
borrowing up to a maximum level at any time over the life (usually more than one year) of the 
loan commitment. Revolving loans are often used to finance cash flow imbalances that arise in 
day-to-day operations, seasonal needs, or permanent working capital needs when normal trade 
credit is inadequate to support a company’s sales volume. Borrowers can prepay the revolving 
loan and later reborrow those funds, but they must comply with the terms and conditions speci-
fied in the loan agreement. The interest rate on the revolving line of credit is usually the bank’s 
prime lending rate plus an additional percentage, and the rate will usually change (or “float”) as 
the prime rate rises or falls over the life of the credit line. In addition to interest, the borrower 
often pays a “commitment fee” that is based on the total amount of the credit extended.
Commercial Paper 
Commercial banks are not the only source of debt financing for 
businesses. Another source of financing is commercial paper—short-term notes sold directly 
to investors by large and financially sound companies. These notes usually mature in 270 days 
Companies with sales cycles that are seasonal 
(e.g., lawn and garden equipment retailers) 
 commonly use seasonal lines of credit. These 
loans provide the cash to support increases in 
current assets during the peak selling period. 
The borrower draws on the seasonal credit line 
as funds are required and later repays as sea-
sonal sales produce net cash inflows.

334 
CHAPTER 6
The Role of Financial Information in Valuation and Credit Risk Assessment
or less and carry a fixed interest rate. Because commercial paper is issued directly to institu-
tional investors (such as insurance companies) and is usually secured by a bank credit line, the 
interest rate the borrowing company pays is often significantly below the rate a bank would 
charge for a comparable direct loan.
Public Debt 
Long-term forms of public (that is, nonbank) debt financing include bonds, 
debentures, and notes. Long-term debt securities are promises the issuing company makes to 
pay principal when due and to make timely interest payments on the unpaid balance. Bonds 
can have numerous special features. For example, secured bonds specify collateral that pro-
tects the bondholder if the borrower defaults. Other bonds contain seniority 
features that specify the order in which bondholders will be paid in the event 
of bankruptcy. Some may contain sinking fund provisions that require the 
borrowing company to make annual payments to a trustee (usually a bank), 
who uses the funds to retire a portion of the debt prior to its maturity. Still oth-
ers may contain call provisions that allow the borrowing company to “call” 
(meaning repurchase) part or all of the debt at stated prices over a specific 
period.
Regardless of the special features attached, virtually all bonds or notes 
contain numerous protective covenants designed to protect the lender’s inter-
ests. These covenants place restrictions on the borrower’s activity and are described in the 
indenture, a written agreement between the borrowing company and its lenders. The role that 
 accounting numbers play in these debt covenants is described in Chapter 7.
Credit Analysis
Before approving a loan to a company, a commercial loan officer evaluates the prospective 
borrower’s ability to repay the proposed loan at maturity. This evaluation typically involves 
financial analysis and includes the preparation of forecasted financial statements, “due dili-
gence” (a qualitative assessment of the business, its customers and suppliers, and manage-
ment’s character and capability), and analysis of credit risk.
Financial analysis of a potential borrower begins with an understanding of the firm, its busi-
ness, its key risks and success factors, and the competitive dynamics of its industry. Next, an 
evaluation of the quality of its accounting earnings and financial reporting choices is made to 
determine whether traditional ratios and statistics derived from the financial statements can be 
relied on to measure the company’s economic performance and financial condition. However, 
lenders and credit analysts frequently adjust a company’s reported financial statement num-
bers. For example, nonrecurring gains and losses are often removed from the reported bottom-
line earnings number to arrive at a measure of operating performance that is more representative 
of a firm’s long-run sustainable profitability. Off-balance-sheet obligations (such as operating 
lease commitments) are frequently added to a firm’s reported debt. Finally, other adjustments 
are made to improve the comparability of the financial data across potential loan candidates.
 
The next step is evaluating the company’s profit performance and balance sheet strength. 
Financial, operating, and leverage ratios (discussed in Chapter 5) as well as trends in revenues 
and expenses are examined and compared to industry averages. This phase of the analysis 
identifies positive and negative changes in the prospective borrower’s profitability, financial 
health, and industry position. However, the historical performance and condition of the bor-
rower is only one indication of creditworthiness. Loan approval is largely determined by the 
borrower’s ability to repay the proposed loan from future operating cash flows. Consequently, 
an estimate of the company’s future financial condition is indispensable to most lending 
The word bond is commonly used to refer to all 
types of secured and unsecured debt although, 
strictly speaking, a bond is a secured debt. A 
 debenture is an unsecured debt, meaning no 
specific pledge of property is made, although 
the debenture holder does have a claim on 
 property not otherwise pledged as collateral or 
security. The term note is generally used for 
 unsecured debt instruments issued with a maturity 
of 10 years or less. 

 
Credit Risk Assessment 
335
decisions. Analysts accomplish this assessment by constructing pro forma financial statement 
projections (forecasts) of borrower cash flows.
 
The credit analyst prepares pro forma or “as if” financial statement projections to assess the 
borrower’s ability to generate sufficient cash flows to make interest and principal payments 
when due. These projections incorporate the analyst’s understanding of the company’s plans 
and business strategy, the likely responses of rival companies, and other factors that shape the 
prospective borrower’s economic environment. The pro forma financial statements and their 
underlying assumptions are then tested to establish the borrower’s vulnerability to changing 
economic circumstances. This testing involves examining plausible “worst-case” scenarios that 
indicate just how poorly the company could perform before it defaults. It enables the analyst to 
gauge the company’s financial flexibility—that is, the degree to which the company could 
satisfy its cash needs during periods of fiscal stress by drawing on existing credit lines, access-
ing financial markets, curtailing discretionary cash expenditures, or selling assets.
 
A due diligence evaluation is like “kicking the tires” of the prospective borrower. The ana-
lyst conducts plant tours, checks for pending litigation and promptness of bill payment, and 
interviews competitors, suppliers, customers, and employees. Comprehensive due diligence 
may also include asset appraisals; reviews of the company’s other debt obligations, internal 
controls, planned capital expenditures, and potential environmental liabilities; and analysis of 
other matters that bear on the company’s future success and ability to repay debt at maturity.
 
The final step of credit analysis is a comprehensive risk assessment that involves evaluat-
ing and summarizing the various individual risks associated with the loan. Some risks are 
unique to the specific borrower (for example, a pharmaceutical company may run the risk that 
a new drug it has developed may ultimately prove ineffective during clinical test trials); other 
risks are associated with potential changes in the economy or industry, new regulations, or 
unanticipated events. The credit analyst evaluates the severity of each risk in terms of (1) its 
probability of occurrence, (2) how it could affect the borrower’s ability to repay, and (3) the 
bank’s estimated costs if the borrower defaults.32
 
If the prospective borrower is judged to be creditworthy, the lender negotiates the terms and 
conditions of the loan with the borrower. Obviously, a lender is compensated for anticipated 
credit risks by the interest rate it charges on the loan. The interest rate must be sufficient to cover 
the lender’s (1) cost of borrowing funds, (2) costs of administering, monitoring, and servicing 
the loan, (3) normal (competitive) return on the capital needed to support the bank’s lending 
operations, and (4) premium for exposure to default risk. Collateralized loans or loans with per-
sonal guarantees lower credit risk and enable lenders to lower the borrower’s cost of debt.
 
Comprehensive credit analysis of the type we have just described is an expensive and time-
consuming activity. Sometimes lenders find it more cost effective to use less rigorous and 
detailed approaches to assessing borrower creditworthiness. For example, manufacturers such 
as Xerox routinely provide equipment lease financing to business customers. Because the dol-
lar amount involved in any one lease is often small (say less than $25,000 per copier) and 
Xerox retains ownership of the equipment during the lease period, the lender (Xerox) has 
minimal risk exposure. Lenders such as Xerox adopt more streamlined approaches to credit 
analysis to avoid costly scrutiny of financial statement details, ratios, and cash flow projec-
tions for each potential business customer. One streamlined approach is to rely on credit 
 reports issued by companies such as Dun & Bradstreet. These third-party reports include fi-
nancial statements for the business along with information about existing loans, payment his-
tories, pending litigation, other pertinent data, and a credit score that predicts future payment 
Appendix B shows how 
you can construct pro 
forma  financial statement 
projections.
32 For additional insights about the tools and techniques of credit analysis, see B. Ganguin and J. Bilardello, Fundamentals of 
Corporate Credit Analysis (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2005).

336 
CHAPTER 6
The Role of Financial Information in Valuation and Credit Risk Assessment
habits and financial stability. Lenders such as Xerox can then use the Dun & Bradstreet credit 
score to set the price, terms, and condition of the equipment lease contract.
Credit-Rating Agencies
Large companies often borrow money by selling commercial paper, notes, bonds, or deben-
tures to individual and institutional investors. Investors’ beliefs about borrower credit risk 
 influence the price paid—and thus the amount borrowed. The riskier the borrower is  perceived 
to be, the less investors are willing to pay for the security. How do these investors assess credit 
risk? One way is to rely on the opinion of a credit-rating agency.
 
In the United States, three agencies (Moody’s Investors Service, Standard & Poor’s Corp., 
and Fitch Inc.) assess and grade the creditworthiness of companies and public entities— 
 individual states, counties, municipalities—that sell debt to investors. Credit ratings are letter-
based grades (e.g., AAA) that express the rating agency’s opinion about default risk or the 
borrower’s capacity and willingness to meet its financial commitments on 
time and in accordance with the terms of the debt security. The higher the 
credit rating, the lower is the default risk as judged by the rating agency.
John Moody invented credit ratings in 1909 when he first published the 
Manual of Railroad Securities, which rated 200 U.S. railroad companies and 
their debt securities. The Standard Company began grading bonds in 1916. Poor’s and Fitch fol-
lowed in the 1920s. Poor’s and Standard merged in 1941. Initially, all rating agencies charged 
investors for their ratings. They began charging borrowers instead in the 1970s because photo-
copiers made it easy for nonpaying investors to obtain the ratings. Credit-rating agencies are 
independent of any investment banking company, commercial bank, and similar organization.
Credit Ratings and Default Risk 
Exhibit 6.4 describes the credit-rating levels 
used by Standard & Poor’s, along with a credit quality description and historical default rate 
Standard & Poor’s, for example, now rates more 
than $32 trillion in bonds and other financial obli-
gations of borrowers in more than 50 countries.
 
 
Historical
Rating 
Credit Quality 
Default Rate (%)
Investment grade
 AAA 
Extremely strong 
0.52%
 AA 
Very strong 
1.13
 A 
Strong 
2.32
 BBB 
Adequate protection 
6.64
Speculative (or “junk”) grade
 BB 
Less vulnerable 
19.52
 B 
More vulnerable 
35.76
 CCC 
Currently vulnerable 
54.38
 CC 
Highly vulnerable
 C 
Currently highly vulnerable
 D 
In default
Note: Historical default rates are the percentages of defaults by issuers rated by Standard & Poor’s during 1987–2002 
based on the rating they were  initially assigned. Defaults on investment grade bonds—those rated BBB or better— 
seldom happen.
Source: See A. Borrus, “The Credit Rates: How They Work and How They Might Work Better,” BusinessWeek, April 8, 
2002; and D. Henry, “Anatomy of a Ratings Downgrade,” BusinessWeek, October 1, 2007.
EXHIBIT 6.4
Standard & Poor’s Credit Ratings

 
Credit Risk Assessment 
337
for each level. The default rates in Exhibit 6.4 refer to the percentage of borrowers that failed 
to make all promised debt payments based on the credit rating initially assigned. If credit rat-
ings predict default risk, borrowers whose debt is highly rated should default less often than 
those with low-rated debt. This is indeed the case.
 
Standard & Poor’s highest rating (AAA), for example, means that the borrower’s capacity to 
meet its financial commitment on the debt is judged to be “extremely strong.” Less than 1% of 
AAA borrowers default. In contrast, a BBB rating means that the debt has “adequate protection” 
against nonpayment but that adverse economic conditions or changing circumstances could 
weaken the borrower’s capacity to meet its debt repayment obligation. In other words, BBB-rated 
debt is presumed to be riskier than AAA debt. And this presumption is correct! The historical 
default rate on BBB debt is more than 6%. Even riskier is debt rated CCC—meaning “currently 
vulnerable” to nonpayment—for which the historical default rate is about 54%.
The Credit-Rating Process 
The ratings process involves much 
more than just a detailed examination of financial statements, notes, and 
ratios:33
Credit ratings often are identified with financial analysis, and especially ratios. 
But it is critical to realize that ratings analysis starts with the assessment of the 
business and competitive profile of the company. Two companies with identical 
 financial metrics are rated very differently, to the extent that their business 
 challenges and prospects differ.34
Each rating agency has teams of analysts who grill corporate executives about 
operating and financial plans, management policies, risk tolerance, and the 
firm’s competitiveness within the industry. They also conduct a thorough 
 review of business fundamentals, including an assessment of industry prospects for growth, 
patterns of business cycles, and vulnerability to technological change, labor unrest, and regu-
latory action.
 
Organizational considerations can also adversely affect credit risk. Standard & Poor’s credit 
analysts, for example, regard the following situations as involving increased default risk:
• The company has a highly aggressive business model and is growing through large acqui-
sitions or expanding into unproven markets.
• The company has made frequent and significant changes to its strategy or has excessive 
management turnover.
• The organization relies significantly on an individual, especially one who may be nearing 
retirement.
• Management compensation is excessive or poorly aligned with stakeholders’ interests.
• The company has an excessively complex legal structure, perhaps employing intricate 
off-balance-sheet structures.
Credit risk also increases when firms are deemed to be aggressive in their application of account-
ing standards or when their financial statements lack transparency to business fundamentals.
 
At Standard & Poor’s, the financial statement analysis phase of the credit-rating process be-
gins with an assessment of accounting quality. The purpose is to determine whether ratios and 
statistics derived from the statements reliably indicate economic performance and financial 
Credit-rating agencies have been criticized for 
their alleged role in the subprime mortgage deba-
cle and global financial crisis. Critics claim that 
flawed rating methodologies caused the agencies 
to assign overly optimistic ratings to residential 
mortgage-backed securities (RMBS) during the 
U.S. housing boom. For example, roughly 90% of 
the RMBS rated AAA at issuance in 2006 and 
2007 were down-graded to “speculative” by 2010. 
See R. Myers, “Rating Disaster,” CFO Magazine, 
June 2010, pp. 50–54. Chapter 7 has more to say 
about the global financial crisis.
33 For a more detailed description of the credit-rating process at Standard & Poor’s, see Corporate Ratings Criteria 2005 
(New York: Standard & Poor’s Corp.).
34 Ibid., p. 19.

338 
CHAPTER 6
The Role of Financial Information in Valuation and Credit Risk Assessment
 condition. High-quality financial statements help credit analysts see what’s really going on at the 
company; low-quality statements mask the company’s performance and condition. Among the 
accounting quality issues that credit analysts at Standard & Poor’s routinely review are revenue 
and expense recognition (Chapters 2 and 3 of this book); receivables and the provision for 
doubtful accounts (Chapter 8); LIFO inventory (Chapter 9); fixed asset depreciation methods 
and asset lives (Chapter 10); operating leases (Chapter 12); environmental liabilities and contin-
gent obligations not yet recognized on the balance sheet (Chapter 11); research and development 
or interest costs that are capitalized rather than expensed (Chapter 10); derivatives and hedges 
(Chapter 11); and nonrecurring items that affect operating cash flow (Chapter 17).
 
To the extent possible, analytical financial statement adjustments are made to portray eco-
nomic reality more faithfully and to eliminate accounting-induced differences among compa-
nies. At Standard & Poor’s, nonrecurring gains and losses are eliminated from earnings. 
Unusual cash flow items similar in origins to nonrecurring gains and losses are also reversed. 
Operating leases are added to the balance sheet so that companies that buy all of their plant 
and equipment are put on a more comparable basis with those that lease part or all of their 
operating assets. Although it is rarely possible to completely recast a company’s financial 
statements, it is important for credit analysts to have at least some notion of the extent to 
which different financial metrics are overstated or understated.
 
The financial statement analysis phase of the credit-rating process then proceeds using the 
tools and techniques described in Chapter 5. When this phase has been completed, analytical 
team members meet with the rating committee to discuss their recommendation and pertinent 
facts supporting the rating. The committee votes on the rating recommendation. The borrower 
is notified of the rating and can appeal. When a final rating is assigned, it is disseminated to 
the public through the news media.
 
All ratings are monitored after they have been assigned. Surveillance is intended to spot 
changes in the borrower’s credit risk. The surveillance process includes continually reviewing 
new financial or economic information and possibly meeting with manage-
ment. When it becomes necessary to reassess a rating, the analytical team 
undertakes an initial review. The borrower may then be placed on Standard & 
Poor’s CreditWatch listing if the likelihood of a rating change is sufficiently 
high. A comprehensive credit rating analysis—including, if warranted, a 
meeting with management—is presented to the rating committee. The com-
mittee then decides whether to confirm the existing rating, or to issue a down-
grade or an upgrade. Rating downgrades and upgrades thus signal changes in 
borrower credit risk.
Financial Ratios and Debt Ratings 
 Exhibit 6.5 describes the key financial 
statement ratios that credit analysts at Standard & Poor’s track, along with each ratio’s median 
value for U.S. corporate borrowers in each rating level. These key financial ratios measure 
profitability (return on capital); the extent to which operating earnings exceed interest costs 
(EBIT interest coverage and EBITDA interest coverage); financial structure (Total debt/ Capi-
tal); and cash flow capacity (Funds from operations/Total debt, Free operating cash flow/Total 
debt, and Total debt/EBITDA). Each ratio has a precise Standard & Poor’s definition so that 
every credit analyst at the rating agency is computationally consistent.
 
Notice how the median ratio values in Exhibit 6.5 rise or fall across credit-rating levels. For 
example, the median borrower assigned a AAA rating is quite profitable (return on capital of 
35.1%) with little debt (Total debt/Capital of 6.2%) and sizeable operating cash flow (Free 
operating cash flow/Total debt of 104.1%). By comparison, the median BB speculative-grade 
borrower is substantially less profitable (return on capital of 10.3%) with much more debt 
In most markets outside the United States, 
 ratings are assigned only on the borrower’s 
 request, so the borrower can choose to make the 
rating public or keep it confidential. In the 
United States, Standard & Poor’s assigns and 
publishes ratings regardless of borrower request 
if the debt security is to be sold publicly. In the 
case of private placements, the borrower retains 
publication rights.

 
Credit Risk Assessment
339
(Total debt/Capital of 57.2%) and significantly less operating cash flow (Free operating cash 
flow/Total debt of only 7.9%). These patterns are consistent with the idea, discussed in Chap-
ter 5, that certain financial statement ratios are quite useful in predicting loan default.35
EXHIBIT 6.5
Standard & Poor’s Key Financial Ratios and Ratings of Corporate Debt
 
Three-Year Medians
 
AAA 
AA 
A 
BBB 
BB 
B 
CCC
EBIT interest coverage 
23.8 
13.6 
6.9 
4.2 
2.3 
0.9 
0.4
EBITDA interest coverage  
25.3 
17.1 
9.4 
5.9 
3.1 
1.6 
0.9
FFO/Total debt (%) 
167.8 
77.5 
43.2 
34.6 
20.0 
10.1 
2.9
Free operating cash flow/Total debt (%) 
104.1 
41.1 
25.4 
16.9 
7.9 
2.6 
(0.9)
Total debt/EBITDA 
0.2 
1.1 
1.7 
2.4 
3.8 
5.6 
7.4
Return on capital (%) 
35.1 
26.9 
16.8 
13.4 
10.3 
6.7 
2.3
Total debt/Capital (%) 
6.2 
34.8 
39.8 
45.6 
57.2 
74.2 
101.2
Formulas
EBIT interest coverage 
 Earnings from continuing operations* before interest and taxes/Gross interest incurred 
 before subtracting capitalized interest and interest income
EBITDA interest coverage 
 Adjusted earnings from continuing operations† before interest, taxes, depreciation, 
 and amortization/Gross interest incurred before subtracting capitalized interest and 
 interest income
Funds from operations (FFO)/Total debt 
 Net income from continuing operations, depreciation, and amortization, deferred  
 income taxes, and other noncash items/Long-term debts 1 Current maturities 1 
 Commercial paper and other short-term borrowings
Free operating cash flow/Total debt 
 FFO 2 Capital expenditures 1(2) increase (decrease) in working capital (excluding 
 changes in cash, marketable securities, and short-term debt)/Long-term debts 1 Current 
 maturities, commercial paper, and other short-term borrowings
Total debt/EBITDA 
 Long-term debt 1 Current maturities, commercial paper, and other short-term  
 borrowings/Adjusted earnings from continuing operations before interest, taxes, 
 and depreciation and amortization
Return on capital 
 EBIT/Average of beginning-of-year and end-of-year capital, including short-term debt, 
 current maturities, long-term debt, noncurrent deferred taxes, minority interest, and 
 equity (common and preferred stock)
Total debt/Capital 
 Long-term debt 1 Current maturities, commercial paper, and other short-term borrowings/
  Long-term debt 1 Current maturities, commercial paper, and other short-term borrow-
ings 1 Shareholder’s equity (including preferred stock) 1 Nonparticipating interests
Note: Standard & Poor’s uses different ratios to rate debt issued by utilities and financial services companies. The universe of rated companies includes about 
1,000 industrial firms. See Corporate Ratings Criteria 2005 (New York: Standard & Poor’s Corp.), pp. 43–44.
* Including interest income and equity earnings; excluding nonrecurring items.
† Excludes interest income, equity earnings, and nonrecurring items; also excludes rental expense that exceeds the interest component of capitalized operating 
leases. Includes amounts for operating lease debt equivalent, and debt associated with accounts receivable sales/securitization programs.
RECAP
Commercial banks, insurance companies, pension funds, and others lend money only if the 
probability of repayment is high. Consequently, the central question facing the credit analyst 
is whether the borrower’s future cash inflows will be sufficient to repay the loan. Credit ana-
lysts rely on their understanding of the company, its business strategy, and the competitive 
environment when they apply the tools and techniques of financial statement analysis and 
cash flow forecasting to assess credit risk and the company’s financial flexibility under stress.
35 To learn more about how accounting information affects bond market activity, see P. Easton, S. Monahan, and F. Vasvari, “Initial 
Evidence on the Role of Accounting Earnings in the Bond Market,” Journal of Accounting Research, June 2009, pp. 721–66.

340 
CHAPTER 6
The Role of Financial Information in Valuation and Credit Risk Assessment
SUMMARY
In Concepts Statement No. 1, the FASB sets forth the primary objectives of financial reporting. 
One of those objectives states:
Financial reporting should provide information to help present and potential investors and creditors 
and others in assessing the amounts, timing and uncertainty of prospective cash receipts from 
dividends or interest and the proceeds from the sale, redemption, or maturity of securities or 
loans. Since investors’ and creditors’ cash flows are related to enterprise cash flows, financial 
reporting should provide information to help investors, creditors, and others assess the 
amounts, timing, and uncertainty of prospective net cash inflows to the related enterprise.36
This chapter provides a framework for understanding how financial reporting meets this 
 important objective. Specifically,
• We show how accounting numbers are used in business valuation and credit risk assessment, 
and then illustrate in Appendix A what it means to “assess the amounts, timing, and 
 uncertainty of prospective net cash inflows” of a business.
• A critical part of understanding the decision-usefulness of accounting information—a 
major focus of this book—is understanding which accounting numbers are used, why they 
are used, and how they are used when making investment and credit decisions.
• Knowing how earnings, book values, and cash flows are used in investment and credit 
 decisions will help you to evaluate the alternative accounting measures discussed in 
 subsequent chapters of this book—not only those recognized directly in the financial 
statements but also those disclosed in the financial statement notes.
36 “Objectives of Financial Reporting by Business Enterprises,” SFAC No. 1 (Stamford, CT: FASB, 1978), CON 1–2.
APPENDIX A
DISCOUNTED CASH FLOW AND ABNORMAL 
EARNINGS VALUATION APPLICATIONS
This appendix illustrates how the discounted free cash flow and abnormal earnings valuation 
methods are used to value a business opportunity and to determine the value of a company’s 
common stock.
Valuing a Business Opportunity
Allen Ford’s passion for coffee motivated him to consider opening a neighborhood coffee 
shop. Ford convinced a colleague who was an expert in market research to look at the eco-
nomic viability of such a shop. His analysis fueled Ford’s enthusiasm: The market demo-
graphics were favorable, and there was little competition. Annual sales were projected 
ultimately to reach $350,000.
 
Ford rejected the idea of opening his own independent coffee shop and instead focused on 
several opportunities. By affiliating with a national or regional company, he would enjoy 
 immediate brand-name recognition, economies of scale in purchasing and advertising, and 
employee training and support programs. After investigating several possibilities, Allen  settled 
on By the Cup, an expanding regional chain of franchised coffee shops specializing in “pour 
over” brewing, whereby each cup is brewed individually. Each store had comfortable seating, 
abundant natural light, and a layout that encouraged patrons to stay and chat (and perhaps 

 
Appendix A 
341
have a second cup). The franchise had a proven record of success in similar communities, and 
it appealed to Ford’s tastes.
 
Ford learned that a By the Cup store could be established for $100,000, which included the 
initial franchise fee of $21,000, store fixtures of $25,000, and an inventory cost of $54,000. 
The inventory and fixtures would be purchased from the corporate parent. Corporate staff 
would conduct a site location study, assist in negotiating lease terms for retail space, help with 
store layout and renovation, train employees on operating policies and procedures, and pro-
vide all grand opening advertising and promotional materials. Once a new By the Cup fran-
chise opened, the corporate parent received royalties (typically as a percentage of sales) 
determined in accordance with a 15-year renewable franchise contract.
 
The prospectus Ford obtained from the parent company contained selected financial data 
for a typical By the Cup franchise store. It indicated that franchise royalties are 5% of sales, 
and other operating expenses, excluding depreciation and amortization, are 85% of sales. The 
original store fixtures are depreciated over 10 years, but after five years, the franchisee should 
expect to make capital expenditures equal to the amount of depreciation to maintain the facil-
ity, resulting in depreciation continuing indefinitely at the same level. The original franchise 
fee of $21,000 is amortized over five years. Finally, the franchisee should expect to increase 
inventories in any year that sales increase. The increase in inventory is to be 10% of the sales 
increase. Income taxes have been ignored because they are owner specific, thus making them 
highly variable across locations.
 
With these financial projections and his understanding of the marketplace, Ford had to 
decide whether to invest $100,000 in a By the Cup franchise. Influencing the decision were 
several nonfinancial considerations, such as his confidence in By the Cup’s corporate staff and 
whether the ambiance of the shop would attract customers. However, viewed through the stark 
lens of economics, Ford’s decision problem simplified to the standard net present value rule—
invest if the estimated value of the franchise (adjusted for the risk of investment) exceeds its 
$100,000 cost. From trade sources, Ford learned that 16% was a reasonable estimate of the 
cost of equity capital for franchised neighborhood coffee shops. He used two different ap-
proaches to estimate the value of the coffee shop, relying on predictions contained in the in-
formation provided by the franchisor whenever possible. The first approach, based on 
expected future free cash flows, is summarized in Exhibit 6.6.
 
Sales are based on the amounts provided by the franchisor and royalties are 5% of that 
amount in each year. Depreciation is computed as $25,000 divided by the 10-year depreciation 
period, or $2,500 per year. Note that depreciation continues indefinitely even after the 10-year 
period ends because additional capital expenditures will also be depreciated. Amortization of 
the franchise fee is $4,200 per year ($21,000/5). As the exhibit shows, pre-tax income grows to 
$32,500 by Year 6. Note that in all years beyond Year 6, pre-tax income will be the same 
amount as in Year 6 because (1) sales are constant; (2) royalties and other operating expenses 
are a percent of sales, so those will be constant; and (3) depreciation is also constant.
 
To determine the amount of free cash flow, we begin with the pre-tax income amount and 
add back depreciation and amortization, which are noncash expenses, and subtract capital 
expenditures and additions to inventory. Because sales are constant after five years, there 
are no inventory additions after that point. And, because pre-tax income is flat and capital 
expenditures are equal to depreciation in every year after Year 5, Year 6 and all subsequent 
years will have the same level of free cash flow: $32,500, which is also equal to the amount 
of pre-tax income.
 
We now take the present value of the free cash flow stream. Note that even though the cash 
flows go on indefinitely, we can still determine the present value without literally summing an 
infinite number of individual present values. The $32,500 per year to be received forever 

342 
CHAPTER 6
The Role of Financial Information in Valuation and Credit Risk Assessment
 beginning in Year 6 has a present value of $32,500/0.16 5 $203,125 as of Year 5. (The perpe-
tuity factor is 6.25 5 1/0.16.) Discounting that value an additional five years gives a present 
value of this perpetuity value, or a terminal value, of $203,125/1.165 5 $96,710. When this 
terminal value is added to the present values of the free cash flows in Years 1 through 5, we 
obtain a total present value of $176,873. As this greatly exceeds the investment of $100,000, 
the project is quite attractive financially.
 
To illustrate that Ford would get exactly the same result using an abnormal earnings ap-
proach, we illustrate that approach in Exhibit 6.7. We take care to ensure that the assumptions 
we make in this exhibit, which are formulated in terms of earnings and book values, are consis-
tent with the cash flows we obtained in Exhibit 6.6. First we determine the investment’s book 
value of equity each year. For each year, we can take beginning book value, add pre-tax income, 
and subtract dividends. We have already determined pre-tax income for each period. Dividends 
are set to the amount of free cash flow generated during the year, because this represents the 
amount of cash that could be taken out of the business without affecting its ability to generate 
the future cash flows in the forecast. So, for example, in Year 1, equity book value declines by 
$6,700 because the dividend exceeds pre-tax income by that amount. The resulting book value 
of $93,700 becomes the beginning book value for the next year, and the  process is repeated.
We multiply the beginning book value in each period by 16% (the cost of 
capital) to determine the level of normal earnings for the year. When we sub-
tract that amount from actual pre-tax income we have abnormal earnings. 
Note that abnormal earnings also settle at a constant level—$19,460— 
allowing us once again to compute the present value of an infinite series. The 
present value of the abnormal earnings is $76,874, resulting in an investment value of 
$176,874. Because we used assumptions that are equivalent in the approaches, the results 
were identical, except for a $1 difference due to rounding.
Another word about valuations is appropriate here. Valuation professionals often treat cash 
flows as if they occur at midyear, in order to approximate more closely cash flows that occur 
The free cash flow valuation approach and 
the abnormal earnings approach will always 
produce the same value estimate when the 
 analyses use equivalent assumptions.
EXHIBIT 6.6
By the Cup Franchise
Valuation of Expected Future Free Cash Flows
 
Year 1 
Year 2 
Year 3 
Year 4 
Year 5 
Year 61
Sales 
$200,000 
$250,000 
$300,000 
$325,000 
$350,000 
$350,000
Royalties 
(10,000) 
(12,500) 
(15,000) 
(16,250) 
(17,500) 
(17,500)
Depreciation 
(2,500) 
(2,500) 
(2,500) 
(2,500) 
(2,500) 
(2,500)
Amortization 
(4,200) 
(4,200) 
(4,200) 
(4,200) 
(4,200)
Other operating expenses 
(170,000) 
(212,500) 
(255,000) 
(276,250) 
(297,500) 
(297,500)
 Pre-tax income 
13,300 
18,300 
23,300 
25,800 
28,300 
32,500 
Pre-tax income 
13,300 
18,300 
23,300 
25,800 
28,300 
32,500 
Depreciation and amortization 
6,700 
6,700 
6,700 
6,700 
6,700 
2,500 
Working capital (inventory additions) 
 
(5,000) 
(5,000) 
(2,500) 
(2,500) 
0 
Capital expenditures 
 
 
 
 
 
(2,500) 
 Free cash flow 
20,000 
20,000 
25,000 
30,000 
32,500 
32,500
Perptuity factor 
 
 
 
 
 
6.25000
 Present value of perpetual flows as of Year 5 
 
 
 
 
 
203,125
Present value factors 
0.86207 
0.74316 
0,64066 
0.55229 
0.47611 
0.47611
 Present value 
17,241 
14,863 
16,016 
16,569 
15,474 
96,710 
Total present value 
$176,873

 
Appendix A 
343
throughout the year. This treatment is  accomplished by discounting cash flows for 0.5 years, 
1.5 years, . . . , or by use of a “midyear adjustment” to the present value as it is computed in 
 Exhibit 6.6. The midyear adjustment is to multiply the present value in the exhibit by the 
square root of one plus the discount rate. In our example, the adjustment results in a present 
value of $176,873 ? 21.16 5 $190,498.
Financing the By the Cup Franchise 
After careful review, 
Allen Ford decided to purchase a By the Cup franchise. The evaluation pro-
cess was lengthy. It included interviews with 10 current franchise owners. 
These interviews helped Ford gain a deeper understanding of the business 
and its key risks and success factors. He was able to identify several proven 
marketing and promotion strategies for launching the franchise. With this 
information and an assessment of local market conditions, Ford refined the 
financial projections supplied by the parent company, performed a valuation 
analysis, and concluded that the franchise was likely to earn an acceptable 
risk-adjusted rate of return. There was still one hurdle—financing a portion 
of the $100,000 franchise purchase price.
 
Ford needed a bank loan for two reasons. First, his personal investment 
portfolio was worth only $50,000. Second, his interviews with other fran-
chise owners revealed that a $100,000 initial investment might not provide an adequate cash 
cushion during the first year of operation.
 
Ford described the business opportunity to a local banker and said his cash needs would be 
in the $50,000 to $100,000 range. The banker said a loan of this size would not be a problem 
because ample funds were currently available at attractive interest rates. Ford had to complete 
a detailed loan application, including a personal credit history and business plan, and to pre-
pare monthly earnings and cash flow projections for the first two years of franchise opera-
tions. Filled with optimism, Ford began assembling the financial and other information 
required and thinking about the kind of loan he would request from the bank.
Before investing, Ford should perform a 
 sensitivity analysis of the free cash flow and 
 abnormal earnings valuation estimates. Sensitiv-
ity analysis involves constructing “best-case” 
and “worst-case” scenarios for the business that 
incorporate alternative assumptions about sales, 
costs, and competitor behavior. Each scenario 
produces  financial forecasts that become the 
 basis for  revised free cash flow and abnormal 
earnings valuation estimates. In this way, Ford 
could learn how alternative economic conditions 
might  affect the coffee shop’s value and his 
 return on investment.
You will learn more about 
Ford’s bank loan in 
Chapter 7.
EXHIBIT 6.7
By the Cup Franchise
Valuation of Expected Abnormal Earnings
 
Year 1 
Year 2 
Year 3 
Year 4 
Year 5 
Year 61
Beginning book value 
$100,000 
$ 93,300 $ 91,600 
$ 89,900 
$ 85,700 
$ 81,500
Pre-tax income 
13,300 
18,300 
23,300 
25,800 
28,300 
32,500
Dividend (5FCF) 
(20,000) 
(20,000) 
(25,000) 
(30,000) 
(32,500) 
(32,500)
 Ending book value 
93,300 
91,600 
89,900 
85,700 
81,500 
81,500 
Pre-tax income 
13,300 
18,300 
23,300 
25,800 
28,300 
32,500
Normal earnings 
16,000 
14,928 
14,656 
14,384 
13,712 
13,040
 Abnormal earnings 
(2,700) 
3,372 
8,644 
11,416 
14,588 
19,460
Perptuity factor 
 
 
 
 
 
6.25000
 Present value of perpetual abnormal earnings as of Year 5 
 
 
 
 
 
121,625 
Present value factors 
0.86207 
0.74316 
0.64066 
0.55229 
0.47611 
0.47611
 Present value of abnormal earnings 
(2,328) 
2,506 
5,538 
6,305 
6,946 
57,907
Total present value of abnormal earnings 
76,874
Initial investment 
100,000 
 
 
 Total value of investment 
$176,874

344 
CHAPTER 6
The Role of Financial Information in Valuation and Credit Risk Assessment
Valuing Whole Foods Market’s Shares
This section illustrates how to use published earnings forecasts along with the abnormal earn-
ings valuation model to produce an intrinsic stock price estimate for a company. We use 
Whole Foods Market, Inc., and rely on the analysts’ earnings forecasts that were available in 
January 2013 when the company’s common stock was trading at $90 per share.
Share Price Valuation 
The five steps to deriving a share price estimate using ana-
lysts’ earnings forecasts and the abnormal earnings valuation model are:
1. Obtain analysts’ EPS forecasts for some finite horizon, say the next five years.
2. Combine the EPS forecasts with projected dividends to forecast common equity book 
value over the horizon.
3. Compute yearly abnormal earnings by subtracting normal earnings (that is, beginning 
 equity book value multiplied by the equity cost of capital) from analysts’ EPS forecasts.
4. Forecast the perpetual (terminal year) abnormal earnings flow that will occur beyond the 
explicit forecast horizon.
5. Add the current book value and the present value of the two abnormal earnings 
 components—the first five years and for years beyond the terminal period—to obtain 
an intrinsic value estimate of the company’s share price.
Each of these steps is illustrated in the Whole Foods Market valuation in Exhibit 6.8.
 
Our forecast horizon—and the one used by analysts covering the company—is the five-
year period from 2013 through 2017. Analysts focus on a short- to intermediate-term fore-
cast horizon in valuing a company for at least three reasons. First, competitive pressures 
make it difficult for the company to sustain growth in sales, profits, and cash flows in the 
long run. Thus, it is unrealistic to forecast a company to maintain high growth rates indefi-
nitely. Second, long-range projections are more uncertain and, therefore, subject to greater 
error. Simply put, projected earnings and dividend payouts become less and less reliable 
the further removed they are from the current forecast date. And third, because of the time 
value of money, the discounted present values of future abnormal earnings (or free cash) 
flows become smaller as the forecast horizon increases. In other words, longer range 
 forecasts often do not matter very much in terms of determining current share price. 
For example, the present value of a dollar received 25 years from now discounted at 15% 
is $1y(1 1 0.15)25 5 $0.03.
 
In January 2013, securities analysts covering Whole Foods were forecasting EPS of $2.89 in 
fiscal 2013 and $3.43 in fiscal 2014, after the company had earned $1.93 and $2.52 in fiscal 
2011 and 2012, respectively. These same analysts were forecasting annual EPS growth of 18.7% 
through 2017. The resulting EPS forecasts through 2017 appear at the top of Exhibit 6.8.
 
Next we need to compute the book value of common equity for each year of the forecast 
horizon. We begin with book value of $20.51 per share at the beginning of 2013. We incorpo-
rate forecasted earnings each year and assume dividends grow in proportion to EPS growth, 
resulting in a constant dividend payout as a percent of EPS. To simplify matters, we assume net 
stock issuances and comprehensive income adjustments are zero over the forecast horizon.
 
The abnormal earnings calculations for each of the five years in our forecast horizon are 
shown in part (c) of Exhibit 6.8. Here, normal earnings are subtracted from the annual EPS 
forecasts. Normal earnings are Whole Foods Market’s common equity book value at the 
 beginning of each year—as computed in part (b)—multiplied by the company’s cost of equity 

 
Appendix A 
345
EXHIBIT 6.8
Whole Foods Market, Inc.
Abnormal Earnings Valuation
Actual Results
 
Forecasted Results
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Beyond
 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2017
(a) Earnings per share 
$1.93 
$2.52 
$2.89 
$3.43 
$4.07 
$4.83 
$5.73
(b)  Equity Book Value (per share amounts) 
 and ROE
  Equity book value at beginning of year 
$13.80 
$16.72 
$20.51 
$22.76 
$25.43 
$28.60 
$32.36
  Earnings per share 
 
 
2.89 
3.43 
4.07 
4.83 
5.73
  Dividends 
 
 
(0.64) 
(0.76) 
(0.90) 
(1.07) 
(1.27)
   Equity book value at end of year 
 
 
$22.76 
$25.43 
$28.60 
$32.36 
$36.82
Return on Equity 
14.0% 
15.1% 
14.1% 
15.1% 
16.0% 
16.9% 
17.7%
(c) Abnormal Earnings 
 
 
 
 
 
 Equity book value at beginning of year 
$13.80 
$16.72 
$20.51 
$22.76 
$25.43 
$28.60 
$32.36
 Equity cost of capital 
0.0845 
0.0845 
0.0845 
0.0845 
0.0845 
0.0845 
0.0845
 Normal earnings 
1.17 
1.41 
1.73 
1.92 
2.15 
2.42 
2.73
Actual or forecasted earnings 
1.93 
2.52 
2.89 
3.43 
4.07 
4.83 
5.73
Less normal earnings 
1.17 
1.41 
1.73 
1.92 
2.15 
2.42 
2.73
 Abnormal earnings 
0.76 
1.11 
1.16 
1.51 
1.92 
2.41 
3.00
(d) Valuation 
 
 
 
 
 
 Future abnormal earnings in forecast 
  horizon 
 
 
1.16 
1.51 
1.92 
2.41 
3.00
 Discount factor at 8.45% 
 
 
0.92208 
0.85024 
0.78399 
0.72291 
0.66658
  Present value of abnormal earnings in 
   forecast horizon 
 
 
1.07 
1.28 
1.51 
1.74 
2.00
Abnormal earnings in 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.00
One plus long-term growth factor 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.045
 Abnormal earnings in 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.14
Divide by discount rate minus long-term 
 growth rate 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.0395
 Present value of abnormal earnings in 
  perpetuity as of 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
79.49
 Present value factor to discount to 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.66658
  Present value of abnormal earnings in 
   perpetuity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
52.99
(e) Estimated share price 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sum of present values of abnormal earnings 
  over forecast horizon 
 
 
7.60 
 
 
 Present value of abnormal earnings in 
  perpetuity 
 
 
52.99 
 
 
  Present value of abnormal earnings 
 
 
60.59 
 
 
 Current equity  book value 
 
 
20.51 
 
 
 Estimated current share price at end of fiscal 2012 
 
 
$81.10 
 
 
Actual share price 
 
 
$90.00

346 
CHAPTER 6
The Role of Financial Information in Valuation and Credit Risk Assessment
capital, which is 8.45%.37 For example, Whole Foods Market’s normal earnings for 2013 
would be calculated by multiplying its equity book value at the beginning of the year, which 
is $20.51, by the equity cost of capital, which is 0.0845. The result is $1.73. These normal 
earnings are subtracted from forecasted earnings of $2.89. The difference of $1.16 is Whole 
Foods Market’s abnormal earnings for 2013.
 
The abnormal earnings forecasts from part (c) become the basic inputs to the valuation 
calculation in part (d), where abnormal earnings are discounted at the company’s equity cost 
of capital. A terminal value calculation intended to represent the value of the company’s ab-
normal earnings flow beyond our five-year forecast horizon is also shown in part (d). To arrive 
at this terminal value estimate, we assume that Whole Foods Market’s abnormal earnings of 
$3.00 in 2017 will continue to grow by 4.5% each year for the foreseeable future. The present 
value of this growing perpetual flow at the end of 2017 is $79.49.38 This quantity is dis-
counted using the present value factor for five periods at 8.45% (0.66658), resulting in a pres-
ent value of $52.99 at the end of fiscal 2012. Part (e) shows that the sum of all discounted 
abnormal earnings flows ($60.59) plus the company’s 2012 year-end equity book value 
($20.51) produces an estimated share price of $81.10; this contrasts with Whole Foods Mar-
ket’s actual $90 share price in January 2013.
 
What does this tell us? For one thing, Whole Foods Market’s $90 per share stock price in 
January 2013 was considerably higher than that implied by securities analysts’ five-year EPS 
forecasts coupled with our own predictions about earnings growth beyond the forecast hori-
zon (2017). In this regard, Whole Foods Market’s stock may appear to be somewhat over-
priced in the marketplace. However, the market may have been anticipating abnormal earnings 
to increase even faster and for a longer time period than our projections would indicate. Or, 
our estimate of the market premium may be incorrect. The rub, of course, is that we cannot 
know at the time which of the forecasts will prove correct in the future.
 
The abnormal earnings valuation model in Exhibit 6.8 can be used to value almost any 
publicly traded company. It’s easy to implement because it requires just a handful of data 
items—earnings forecasts from analysts, a beginning book value of equity, forecasts of divi-
dends and stock repurchases, an equity cost of capital (discount rate), and a long-term growth 
rate for abnormal earnings beyond the terminal year. But how well does it work?
 
This question has several answers. One approach compares the accuracy of stock price 
estimates from several different valuation models—for example, the abnormal earnings model 
versus the free cash flow valuation model. A study did just that using a sample of nearly 3,000 
firm-year observations from 1989 through 1993.39 Earnings, dividends, and cash flow fore-
casts were gathered from Value Line for each sample firm and year. These forecasts were then 
used as inputs to an abnormal earnings valuation model (like the one in Exhibit 6.8) and as 
inputs to a separate free cash flow valuation model. The two value estimates—one based on 
abnormal earnings and the other based on free cash flows—were then compared to actual 
stock prices. Which valuation model was better? Abnormal earnings value estimates were more 
accurate and explained more of the variation in actual stock prices than did free cash flow value 
estimates. Of course, the study must have used different assumptions in the two models 
37 This figure was derived from the CAPM using the then-current risk-free rate of 3.2% for 30-year Treasury bonds, Whole 
Foods Market’s equity beta of 1.05, which was estimated using the most recent five years of daily returns data, and a long-
term market risk premium of 5%. The CAPM formula applied to Whole Foods Market is:
3.2% 1 11.05 3 5%2 5 8.45%
38 This perpetuity discount factor is equal to 1 divided by the difference between the equity cost of capital (8.45%) and the 
abnormal earnings growth rate (4.5%).
39 J. Francis, P. Olsson, and D.R. Oswald, “Comparing the Accuracy and Explainability of Dividends, Free Cash Flow, and 
Abnormal Earnings Equity Value Estimates,” Journal of Accounting Research, Spring 2000, pp. 45–70.

 
Appendix B 
347
 because the models are equivalent. The different assumptions, not the different models per se, 
explain the results.
 
A related study asked if money can be made from the abnormal earnings 
valuation model in Exhibit 6.8.40 Using a sample of nearly 18,000 firm-year 
observations covering 1979 to 1991, the researchers computed valuation esti-
mates for each firm and year. These estimates were then used to construct a 
value index—the estimated value divided by the actual share price—for each 
company and year. (The value index for Whole Foods Market would be 0.901 
($81.10y$90). The simulated trading strategy involved “buying” the most undervalued 
companies (high value index) and “selling short” the most overvalued companies (low value 
index). This strategy produced a three-year portfolio return of 35%, which suggests investors 
can profit from using the abnormal earnings valuation model.
In theory, both valuation models should produce 
the same stock price estimate. But in practice, the 
two valuation models often do not produce the 
same stock price estimate because analysts make 
different assumptions when using the two models.
40 R. Frankel and C. Lee, “Accounting Valuation, Market Expectation, and Cross-Sectional Stock Returns,” Journal of 
 Accounting and Economics, June 1998, pp. 283–320.
41 Techniques for constructing financial statement forecasts are described in T. Koller et al., op. cit.; R. Lundholm and R. 
Sloan, op. cit.; P. Healy and K. Palepu, Business Analysis and Valuation (Cincinnati, OH: South-Western Publishing, 2013); 
L. Soffer and R. Soffer, op. cit.; and C. Stickney and P. Brown, Financial Statement Analysis: A Strategic Perspective (Fort 
Worth, TX: Dryden Press, 1999).
APPENDIX B
FINANCIAL STATEMENT FORECASTS
Financial statement forecasts (or projections) are essential ingredients of business valuation 
and credit risk analyses. This appendix illustrates the construction of comprehensive financial 
statement forecasts.41 Our approach uses information about the company’s complete operat-
ing, investing, and financing activities to yield a forecast of each individual financial state-
ment item. As a result, it ensures that the forecasted financial statements—sometimes called 
pro forma projections—are internally consistent. Nothing is overlooked, and the projected 
financial statements fit together, or articulate, as they should.
 
The starting point for developing comprehensive financial statement fore-
casts is a detailed understanding of the company, its recent financial perfor-
mance, and health. (Chapter 5 shows you how!) Obtaining this detailed 
understanding requires learning about the company and its industry, competi-
tors, customers, and suppliers. Armed with this knowledge, the analyst can 
develop plausible predictions about future economic conditions in the industry 
and about how the company and its competitors will respond to those condi-
tions. The analyst incorporates these predictions into the forecasted financial 
statements.
 
Preparing comprehensive financial statement forecasts involves six steps:
1. Project sales revenue for each period in the forecast horizon (say, two years).
2. Forecast operating expenses such as cost of goods sold (but not depreciation, interest, or 
tax expense, which are handled separately), and derive projected pre-tax operating  income 
before depreciation and amortization. Expense margins—for example, cost of goods sold 
as a percentage of sales—are useful for this purpose.
3. Forecast the level of balance sheet operating assets and liabilities—cash, inventories, 
 accounts receivable, accounts payable, and the like—needed to support the projected 
Sometimes the analyst is interested in forecast-
ing only a single financial statement item, such 
as EPS. Shortcuts that circumvent the need to 
construct comprehensive financial statement 
forecasts are often used in such cases, but the 
resulting single-item forecasts may prove 
highly unreliable.

348 
CHAPTER 6
The Role of Financial Information in Valuation and Credit Risk Assessment
 operations in Steps 1 and 2. Turnover ratios (also called utilization ratios) can help guide 
these projections.
4. Forecast depreciation expense and tax expense each period. These are two of the last three 
items needed to construct projected income statements.
5. Forecast the company’s financial structure (mix of debt and equity financing) and 
 dividend policy each period. Then use this information, along with an estimate of the 
 interest rate charged on debt financing, to project interest expense and complete the 
 income statement.
6. Derive projected cash flow statements from the forecasted income statements and 
balance sheets.
Illustration of Comprehensive Financial 
Statement Forecasts
Veto Equipment Supply Company manufactures original equipment parts for the U.S. auto-
mobile industry. The company has been in business more than 50 years. Although sales rise 
and fall with the ebb and flow of consumer demand for U.S. automobiles, the company has 
remained profitable throughout most of its history. In 2013, Veto reported sales of $25.2 mil-
lion, an increase of 5% from the previous year. Net income that year was $1.056 million, an 
increase of 20% from 2012.
 
The company has a $2.5 million revolving credit loan with Commerce First Bank. At the 
end of 2013, Veto had drawn only $2.077 million of the available credit, but management is 
still concerned about its borrowing needs over the next two years. The reason for this concern 
is that Veto has developed a successful new product that is expected to increase its sales sig-
nificantly. However, the new product will require Veto to expand its operations. Management 
wants to know whether Veto will need a higher credit limit to support the planned expansion.
 
Exhibit 6.9 shows the company’s income statements and balance sheets for the past two years. 
An abbreviated statement of retained earnings is included to provide an explicit link between in-
come statement and balance sheet amounts. Our task is to “fill in the blanks” by preparing fore-
casted financial statements for 2014 and 2015 using the six-step process described above.
 
Although we will be using historical data to guide us, we do not necessarily assume fore-
cast data, such as sales growth, are the same as the historical levels. Our understanding of the 
company and its industry help us to determine when future performance is likely to differ 
from historical results. That part of the analysis is beyond our scope here. Instead, we focus on 
the construction of the projections, given a set of assumptions about future performance. Let’s 
get started!
Step 1: 
Project sales revenue. Management forecasts sales growth of 10% in 2014 and 
another 15% in 2015, versus 4% in 2012 and 5% in 2013. We will use management’s sales 
growth estimates to compute projected sales revenue for the next two years. So, sales in 2014 
are expected to be $27.720 million, or $25.200 million 3 1.10. Similarly, sales in 2015 are 
projected to be $31.878 million, or $27.720 3 1.15.
 
Historical 
Projected
 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015
Sales growth 
4.0% 
5.0% 
10.0% 
15.0%

 
Appendix B 
349
EXHIBIT 6.9
Veto Equipment Supply Company
Historical Financial Statements
 
Historical 
Projected
($ in thousands) 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015
Income Statement
 Sales 
$24,000 
$25,200 
 
 Cost of goods sold 
15,760 
16,380
 Research and development expense 
— 
—
 Selling, general, and administrative 
  expense 
5,600 
5,796
 Depreciation expense 
1,080 
1,147
  Pre-tax operating income 
1,560 
1,877
 Interest expense 
240 
277
 Nonoperating income (loss) 
— 
—
  Pre-tax earnings 
1,320 
1,600
 Tax expense 
440 
544
Net income 
$   880 
$ 1,056
Balance Sheet
 Operating cash and equivalents 
$ 1,160 
$ 1,134
 Accounts receivable 
2,120 
2,016
 Inventories 
3,240 
3,528
 Other current assets 
— 
—
  Current assets 
6,520 
6,678
 Property, plant, and equipment (gross)  
16,600 
17,640
 Accumulated depreciation 
(10,080) 
(11,227)
 Other assets 
600 
756
  Total assets 
$13,640 
$13,847
 Current portion of long-term debt 
$   180 
$   208
 Accounts payable 
2,820 
2,520
 Other payables 
160 
252
  Current liabilities 
3,160 
2,980
 Long-term debt 
1,800 
1,869
 Other liabilities 
800 
504
 Shareholders’ equity 
 
  Contributed capital 
5,000 
5,358
  Retained earnings 
2,880 
3,136
   Total shareholders’ equity 
7,880 
8,494
   Total liabilities and equity 
$13,640 
$13,847
Retained Earnings 
 
 Beginning retained earnings 
$ 2,800 
$ 2,880
1 Net income 
880 
1,056
2 Dividends 
(800) 
(800)
5 Ending retained earnings 
$ 2,880 
$ 3,136
Step 2: 
Forecast operating expenses (except depreciation and interest expense, 
and taxes). A good jumping-off point for this step is to assemble information about the com-
pany’s historical expense margins. These data provide a basis for projecting future expense 
amounts.

350 
CHAPTER 6
The Role of Financial Information in Valuation and Credit Risk Assessment
 
The historical expense margins and our projected margins follow.
 
Historical (%) 
Projected (%)
 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015
Expense margins: 
 Cost of goods sold 
65.7% 
65.0% 
65.0% 
65.0%
 Research and development expense 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0
 Selling, general, and administrative
  expense 
23.3 
23.0 
23.0 
23.0
 Nonoperating income (loss) 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0
 
Cost of goods sold was 65.7% of sales in 2012 but declined to only 65.0% in 2013. We are 
projecting a continuation of this lower margin for the next two years. Consequently, cost of 
goods sold is expected to be $18.018 million in 2014, or 65.0% of the $27.720 million in pro-
jected sales for that year. The 2015 cost of goods sold forecast ($20.721 million) is con-
structed in a similar manner.
 
Research and development expenses are projected to remain at zero for the next two years, 
as are nonoperating items. Selling, general, and administrative expenses are projected to be 
23.0% of sales. In other words, our expense forecasts presume that management will continue 
to operate the business over the next two years in the same manner it did in 2013.
Step 3: 
Forecast the level of balance sheet operating assets and liabilities. Here, too, 
information about the company’s historical asset and liability utilization ratios—for example, 
operating cash or accounts receivable as a percent of sales—is helpful as a starting point. Here 
are the historical (and projected) utilization ratios for each operating asset and liability.
 
Historical (%) 
Projected (%)
 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015
Operating asset and liability utilization:
 Operating cash and equivalents/Sales 
4.8% 
4.5% 
4.5% 
4.5%
 Accounts receivable/Sales 
8.8 
8.0 
8.0 
8.0
 Inventory/Sales 
13.5 
14.0 
17.0 
17.0
 Other current assets/Sales 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0
 Property, plant, and equipment 
  (gross)/Sales 
69.2 
70.0 
65.0 
70.0
 Other assets/Sales 
2.5 
3.0 
3.0 
3.0
 Accounts payable/Sales 
11.8 
10.0 
10.0 
10.0
 Other payables/Sales 
0.7 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0
 Other liabilities/Sales 
3.3 
2.0 
2.0 
2.0
 
For example, accounts receivable at the end of 2012 were 8.8% of sales that year. However, 
accounts receivable were only 8.0% of sales at the end of 2013. We are projecting that receiv-
ables will maintain their current 8.0% level over the next two years. As a result, accounts re-
ceivable are forecasted to be $2.218 million at the end of 2014 (or 8.0% of the $27.720 in 
expected 2014 sales). A similar computation determines the forecasted balance of accounts 
receivable at the end of 2015.
 
Most of the operating assets and liabilities are forecasted to remain at their 2013 utilization 
ratios for the next two years. However, there are two exceptions. Inventory levels are expected 
to increase from 14.0% of sales in 2013 to 17.0% of sales in 2014 and 2015. At the same time, 
To simplify the forecasting 
task, utilization ratios are 
computed using year-end 
balance sheet amounts.

 
Appendix B 
351
Veto’s investment in gross property, plant, and equipment is expected to decline from 70.0% 
of sales in 2013 to 65.0% of sales in 2014 and then rise back again to 70.0% in 2015.
Step 4: 
Forecast Depreciation expense and Tax expense. Historical and projected infor-
mation about Depreciation expense (as a percent of the year-end cost of property, plant, and 
equipment) and Tax expense (as a percent of pre-tax earnings) is shown in the following table.
 
Historical (%) 
Projected (%) 
 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015
Depreciation expense/PP&E gross cost 
6.5% 
6.5% 
6.5% 
6.5%
Tax expense/Pre-tax earnings 
33.3 
34.0 
34.0 
34.0
 
Historical (%) 
Projected (%)
 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015
Financial structure:
 Debt/Assets 
14.5% 
15.0% 
15.0% 
15.0%
 Current portion of long-term debt/Debt 
9.1 
10.0 
10.0 
10.0
 Interest rate on beginning debt 
12.1 
14.0 
14.0 
14.0
 Dividends ($ in thousands) 
$800 
$800 
$800 
$800
 
Depreciation expense has been running at 6.5% of the company’s year-end investment in 
property, plant, and equipment. Depreciation is expected to remain at this level for the next 
two years. So, Depreciation expense is forecasted to be $1.171 million in 2014 (or 6.5% of the 
$18.018 million invested in property, plant, and equipment at the end of that year). This 
amount of Depreciation expense is shown on the company’s 2014 income statement, and as an 
increase to the Accumulated depreciation balance sheet account at December 31, 2014. Tax 
expense is projected to be 34.0% of pre-tax earnings for the next two years, a level equal to 
that in 2013. So, tax expense is forecasted to be $0.634 million in 2014 (or 34% of the $1.864 
million in pre-tax earnings that year including interest expense from Step 5).
Step 5: 
Forecast the company’s financial structure. This forecasting step develops pro-
jections for dividends, debt, and interest expense. Here’s an historical snapshot of each finan-
cial statement component and our projections for 2014 and 2015.
 
The debt (current portion plus long-term portion) to asset ratio at Veto Equipment Supply 
was 14.5% in 2012, and 9.1% of the company’s debt that year was listed as a current liability 
on the balance sheet. The debt to asset ratio increased to 15% in 2013 and is projected to re-
main at that percentage level over the next two years. The current portion of long-term debt is 
projected to stay at 10%. This means that Veto is projected to have debt of $2.194 million in 
2014 (or 15.0% of the $14.629 in forecasted total assets). Of that amount, $0.219 (or 10%) is 
classified as a current liability.
 
Interest expense as a percent of beginning debt was 12.1% in 2012 but then increased to 
14.0% in 2013. We are projecting interest expense to remain at this percentage level over the 
next two years. So, interest expense in 2014 is projected to be $0.291 million (or 14.0% of the 
$2.077 million in beginning debt that year). Dividends have been $0.800 million each year 
and are expected to remain so for the next two years.
 
We have now completed the forecasting steps necessary to construct projected income 
statements and balance sheets for Veto Equipment Supply Company. See Exhibit 6.10 for our 
detailed forecasts.
We did not forecast one 
 financial statement item—
Contributed capital— 
directly. Instead, we used 
the balance sheet equation 
that requires total assets to 
equal total liabilities plus 
shareholders’ equity. The 
projected contributed capital 
figure was set equal to an 
amount that ensured that the 
balance sheet equation held 
for each forecast year. We 
are implicitly assuming that 
Veto issues or repurchases 
stock as necessary.

352 
CHAPTER 6
The Role of Financial Information in Valuation and Credit Risk Assessment
EXHIBIT 6.10
Veto Equipment Supply Company
Historical and Projected Income Statements and Balance Sheets
 
Historical 
Projected
($ in thousands) 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015
Income Statement
 Sales 
$24,000 
$25,200 
$27,720 
$31,878
 Cost of goods sold 
15,760 
16,380 
18,018 
20,721
 Research and development 
  expense 
— 
— 
— 
—
 Selling, general, and 
  administrative expense 
5,600 
5,796 
6,376 
7,332
 Depreciation expense 
1,080 
1,147 
1,171 
1,450
  Pre-tax operating income 
1,560 
1,877 
2,155 
2,375
 Interest expense 
240 
277 
291 
307
 Nonoperating income (loss) 
— 
— 
— 
—
  Pre-tax earnings 
1,320 
1,600 
1,864 
2,068
 Tax expense 
440 
544 
634 
703
Net income 
$   880 
$ 1,056 
$ 1,230 
$ 1,365
Balance Sheet
 Operating cash and 
  equivalents 
$ 1,160 
$ 1,134 
$ 1,247 
$ 1,435
 Accounts receivable 
2,120 
2,016 
2,218 
2,550
 Inventories 
3,240 
3,528 
4,712 
5,419
 Other current assets 
— 
— 
— 
—
  Current assets 
6,520 
6,678 
8,177 
9,404
 Property, plant, and 
  equipment (gross) 
16,600 
17,640 
18,018 
22,315
 Accumulated depreciation 
(10,080) 
(11,227) 
(12,398) 
(13,848)
 Other assets 
600 
756 
832 
956
  Total assets 
$13,640 
$13,847 
$14,629 
$18,827
 Current portion of 
  long-term debt 
$   180 
$   208 
$   219 
$   282
 Accounts payable 
2,820 
2,520 
2,772 
3,188
 Other payables 
160 
252 
277 
319
  Current liabilities 
3,160 
2,980 
3,268 
3,789
 Long-term debt 
1,800 
1,869 
1,975 
2,541
 Other liabilities 
800 
504 
554 
638
 Shareholders’ equity
  Contributed capital 
5,000 
5,358 
5,266 
7,728
  Retained earnings 
2,880 
3,136 
3,566 
4,131
   Total shareholders’ equity 
7,880 
8,494 
8,832 
11,859
   Total liabilities and equity 
$13,640 
$13,847 
$14,629 
$18,827
Retained Earnings
 Beginning retained earnings 
$ 2,800 
$ 2,880 
$ 3,136 
$ 3,566
1 Net income 
880 
1,056 
1,230 
1,365
2 Dividends 
(800) 
(800) 
(800) 
(800)
5 Ending retained earnings 
$ 2,880 
$ 3,136 
$ 3,566 
$ 4,131
 
In 2015, the company is projected to have sales of $31.878 million and net income of 
$1.365 million. However, the revolving credit line needs are expected to reach $2.823 million 
(or $0.282 in current debt plus another $2.541 million in long-term debt). This amount 

 
Appendix B 
353
 exceeds the credit limit on the Commerce First Bank loan. Let’s take a look at Veto’s pro-
jected cash flow statements to learn the reason for this projected increase in borrowing.
Step 6: 
Derive projected cash flow statements. Projected cash flow statements can now 
be derived directly from the company’s projected income statements and balance sheets. See 
Exhibit 6.11 for the company’s historical and projected cash flows.
 
The historical cash flow statements reveal that Veto enjoyed positive free cash flows—
Cash from operations minus Cash used in investing activities—in both 2012 and 2013. The 
statements also indicate the company paid dividends and increased its long-term debt in both 
years, suggesting the company is borrowing money to maintain a stable dividend payout, 
which should concern creditors.
 
The projected cash flow statements indicate Veto will face a significant cash flow problem 
in 2015. Even though operating cash flows that year are projected to be $2.234 million, free 
cash flows are expected to be in a deficit position of $2.187 million (or $2.234 million in op-
erating cash flows minus $4.421 million in required investment). Add the dividend payment 
of $800,000, and the cash flow deficit approaches $3 million.
 
According to our forecasts, Veto will make up this deficit by borrowing $0.629 million, as 
shown by the increase in long-term debt, and by raising another $2.462 million from stock-
holders as the increase in contributed capital shows. But what if stockholders are unwilling to 
buy more shares from the company? Then management must either scale back the company’s 
operating plans to free up more cash or negotiate a substantially larger credit line with Com-
merce First Bank.
EXHIBIT 6.11
Veto Equipment Supply Company
Historical and Projected Cash Flow Statements
 
Historical 
Projected
($ in thousands) 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015
Cash Flow Statement
 Net income 
$  880 
$ 1,056 
$ 1,230 
$ 1,365
 Noncash expense
  Depreciation 
1,080 
1,147 
1,171 
1,450
 Changes in noncash working capital 
   accounts
  Accounts receivable decrease (increase) 
65 
104 
(202) 
(332)
  Inventory decrease (increase) 
(158) 
(288) 
(1,184) 
(707)
  Accounts payable increase (decrease) 
100 
(300) 
252 
416
  Other payables increase (decrease) 
(20) 
92 
25 
42
   Cash from operations 
 1,947 
 1,811 
 1,292 
 2,234
 Increase in property, plant, 
  and equipment 
  (985) 
(1,040) 
 (378) 
(4,297)
 Increase in other assets 
(67) 
(156) 
(76) 
(124)
   Cash used in investing activities 
(1,052) 
(1,196) 
(454) 
(4,421)
 Increase in long-term debt 
  200 
 97 
  117 
  629
 Increase (decrease) in other liabilities 
(50) 
(296) 
50 
84
 Increase (decrease) in contributed capital 
— 
358 
(92) 
2,462
 Dividends paid 
(800) 
(800) 
(800) 
(800)
  Cash from financing activities 
  (650) 
  (641) 
 (725) 
 2,375
Net increase (decrease) in cash 
$  245 
$  (26) 
$  113 
$  188

354 
CHAPTER 6
The Role of Financial Information in Valuation and Credit Risk Assessment
EXERCISES
Required:
1. What are free cash flows?
2. Explain the difference between a company’s operating cash flow and its free cash flow.
3. Briefly describe the key features of the free cash flow approach to valuation.
E6-1
Free cash flow valuation 
(LO 1)
E6-2
Abnormal earnings 
 valuation (LO 1)
Required:
1. What does the phrase sustainable earnings mean? What types of earnings are not 
sustainable?
2. What are abnormal earnings?
3. Briefly describe the key features of the abnormal earnings approach to valuation.
E6-3
Predicting future cash flow 
(LO 2)
Shelter Products sells portable livestock shelters to hog producers in the Central and Midwest 
regions of the United States. The terms of sale require cash payment within 30 days, and most 
customers take full advantage of this payment option. Sales are somewhat seasonal as indi-
cated by the following table of monthly sales, accounts receivable, and cash receipts informa-
tion. Accounts receivable figures are as of the month end, and December credit sales and cash 
collections are omitted for brevity.
 
Dec 
Jan 
Feb 
Mar 
Apr 
May 
June
Credit sales 
 
$38,000 
$24,000 
$45,000 
$56,000 
$63,000 
$42,000
Accounts receivable 
$15,000 
36,000 
23,000 
42,000 
55,500 
61,000 
41,000
Cash collections 
 
17,000 
37,000 
26,000 
42,500 
57,500 
62,000
Required:
1. Which accounting attribute—current month’s credit sales or cash collections—seems to 
do the better job of predicting future (i.e., next month’s) cash collections? Why?
2. Briefly explain why current period accrual earnings may be a better predictor of future 
operating cash flow than is current period operating cash flow.
E6-4
Explaining differences in 
P/E ratios (LO 4)
The price/earnings ratios of four companies from different industries are:
Company 
P/E Ratio
Amazon.com 
2,763
Microsoft 
16
Toyota Motors 
13
Whole Foods Market 
41
Required:
What factors might explain the difference in the P/E ratios of these companies?
E6-5
Why P/E ratios vary (LO 4)
The price/earnings ratios of four companies from the same industry are:
Company 
P/E Ratio
Fresh Market 
49
Kroger 
23
Safeway 
 9
Whole Foods Market 
41
Required:
What factors might explain the difference in the P/E ratios of these companies?

 
Exercises 
355
Required:
1. Why is fair value accounting so important to companies such as News Corporation (men-
tioned in the chapter) that have substantial investments in goodwill recorded on their 
 balance sheets?
2. News Corporation uses a discounted free cash flow valuation approach when assessing 
goodwill impairment. This valuation approach corresponds to which level of the FASB’s 
fair value measurement hierarchy?
3. Why doesn’t News Corporation use a Level 1 fair value measurement to assess goodwill 
impairment?
E6-6
Fair Value Accounting and 
Goodwill (LO 3)
Required:
1. Define the term quality of earnings.
2. List the techniques that management can use to improve a company’s reported earnings 
performance in the short run.
3. Give examples of low-quality earnings components.
E6-7
Earnings quality (LO 5)
In October 2010, Moody’s Investors Services reduced the credit rating assigned to Greece’s 
government bonds from investment grade to a speculative (junk-level) rating. At the time, 
Greece was considered by many to be the epicenter of the European debt crisis. The debt-
laden country had already received financial support packages from the European Union and 
the International Monetary Fund, and had agreed to a three-year austerity and reform program 
intended to help the country meet its debt commitments. However, the Greek economy was 
experiencing a lengthy recession and many economists predicted economic contraction to 
worsen as governmental austerity measures began to take hold.
Required:
1. Why do agencies such as Moody’s assign credit risk ratings to government bonds?
2. Briefly explain how Moody’s analysts might go about the task of assigning a credit risk 
rating to Greek government debt.
3. What message should current and potential investors take from the Greek debt ratings 
downgrade?
E6-9
Moody’s Slashes Greek Bond 
Rating (LO 7)
Halifax Products has a $1 million bank loan that comes due next year. Management has pre-
pared cash flow forecasts for each of the next six quarters as shown in the table below. Planned 
capital expenditures are intended to replace failing manufacturing equipment, upgrade com-
puter systems, and refurbish the company president’s office. These forecasts have been shared 
with the bank loan officer responsible for overseeing the Halifax loan.
E6-8
Cash Flow and Credit Risk 
(LO 7)
 
Y1Q1 
Y1Q2 
Y1Q3 
Y1Q4 
Y2Q1 
Y2Q2
Scheduled loan payments 
 
 
 
 
$500,000 
$500,000
Forecasted cash flows:
 Cash from operations 
$200,000 
$250,000 $300,000 
$240,000 
200,000 
220,000
 Capital expenditures 
(150,000) 
 
(150,000) 
 
(175,000)
 Dividends to owners 
 
 
 
 
(50,000)
Required:
1. Explain why the loan officer might consider the Halifax loan to be of high credit risk.
2. What steps can company management take to reduce the loan’s credit risk?
3. What steps can the bank loan officer take to reduce the loan’s credit risk?

356 
CHAPTER 6
The Role of Financial Information in Valuation and Credit Risk Assessment
E6-10
Credit risk and cash flow 
 volatility (LO 7)
The quarterly cash flows from operations for two software companies are
 
2013 
2014
 
Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
Q4 
Q1
Firm A 
$406.1 
$204.2 
$729.1 
$440.2 
$  587.8
Firm B 
136.7 
243.1 
708.2 
 (87.9) 
(161.4)
Required:
1. Explain why Firm B has more credit risk than Firm A.
2. Suppose that Firm B’s cash flow was $200 higher each quarter (e.g., $336.7 in Q1 of 
2013). Explain why Firm B might still be judged to have higher credit risk than Firm A.
PROBLEMS / DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
On July 10, 2012, Advanced Micro Devices (AMD) announced that it expected its revenues 
for the second quarter to be about $1.4 billion. At the time of the announcement, financial 
analysts expected AMD’s second quarter revenue to be about $1.6 billion.
Required:
1. Would AMD’s announcement cause a change in the company’s stock price on the date of 
the announcement? Explain why or why not. (Assume the announcement was made while 
the market was open.)
2. Consider the following two scenarios:
 
a. The $200 million difference between AMD’s management forecast and analysts’ fore-
cast is completely attributable to a previously reported monthlong labor strike at one 
of AMD’s manufacturing facilities.
 
b. The $200 million difference between AMD’s management forecast and analysts’ fore-
cast is  attributable to AMD’s previously undisclosed decision to cut prices to meet 
those of a competitor.
 
Do you expect the magnitude of the stock price change to be greater under scenario (a) or 
scenario (b)?
P6-1
Interpreting stock price 
changes (LO 6)
P6-2
Assessing credit risk using 
cash flow forecasts (LO 7)
Randall Manufacturing has requested a $2 million, four-year term loan from Farmers State 
Bank. It will use the money to expand its warehouse and to upgrade its assembly line. Randall 
supplied the following cash flow forecasts as part of the loan application.
The forecasts assume that the loan is granted in 2014 and that $2.590 million will be spent 
that year on the expansion and upgrade. Randall plans to spend $50,000 each year to replace 
worn-out manufacturing equipment and $100,000 each year for dividends.
Required:
1. As the bank’s chief loan officer, what is your opinion about the degree of credit risk asso-
ciated with this $2 million loan?
2. How can Randall Manufacturing lower its credit risk?
($ in thousands) 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017
Cash provided by operations 
$ 685 
$715 
$720 
$735
Cash used for investing activities 
(2,590) 
(50) 
(50) 
(50)
Cash used for financing activities 
2,000 
(100) 
(100) 
(100)
 Net change in cash 
$  95 
$565 
$570 
$585

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
357
where P0 is the current stock price, X0 is current reported earnings per share, r is the cost of 
equity capital, and NPVGO is the net present value of future growth opportunities. Recent 
values of P0, X0, and r for several companies are:
P6-3
Valuing growth opportunities 
(LO 4)
As shown in equation (6.9), the price equation for a firm with positive growth opportunities is
P0 5
X0
r 1 NPVGO
 
P0 
X0 
r
Brunswick 
$36.19 
$0.54 
0.121
eBay 
57.21 
1.99 
0.081
Home Depot 
67.30 
2.81 
0.075
Walmart 
70.49 
4.86 
0.055
Walgreen 
40.31 
2.21 
0.063
Required:
1. Why does eBay have a higher cost of equity capital (r) than Wal-Mart?
2. Compute NPVGO for each company.
3. Compute NPVGO as a percent of stock price for each company.
4. Why is eBay’s NPVGO as a percent of stock price greater than Home Depot’s?
5. Why is Walmart’s NPVGO negative?
P6-4
Predicting future cash 
flow (LO 2)
Swiss Valley Veterinary Products distributes animal health care products to commercial live-
stock producers throughout the United States and Europe. Its terms of sale require cash pay-
ment within 30 days, and most customers take full advantage of this payment option. Swiss 
Valley buys health care products on credit from multinational pharmaceutical companies. The 
credit purchase terms require cash payment within 60 days. Sales are somewhat seasonal.
 
The following table shows monthly activities for one of Swiss Valley’s most important 
business segments—swine health care products. Cash collections are from customers and 
cash payments are to suppliers of swine health care products. The figures shown for Accounts 
receivable, Inventories, and Accounts payable represent month-end amounts. Some December 
amounts have been omitted for brevity.
Required:
1. In March, customers purchased $800,000 of swine health care products. Of this amount, 
how much did March customers still owe at month-end?
2. Cash collections totaled $640,000 in March. Explain how this figure was determined.
3. What was the amount of swine health care products purchased in March from pharma-
ceutical suppliers?
4. March cash payments to suppliers totaled $525,000. Explain how this figure was determined.
Dollar amounts in thousands 
Dec 
Jan 
Feb 
Mar 
Apr 
May 
June
Sales 
 
$620 
$ 650 
$ 800 
$ 880 
$ 940 
$ 850
Cost of goods sold 
 
500 
520 
640 
700 
750 
680
 Gross profit 
 
120 
130 
160 
180 
190 
170
Accounts receivable 
$  500 
610 
630 
790 
865 
925 
830
Inventories 
 600 
625 
770 
840 
900 
820 
660
Accounts payable 
1,100 
985 
1,130 
1,315 
1,410 
1,370 
1,113
Cash collections 
 
510 
630 
640 
805 
880 
945
Cash payments 
 
640 
480 
525 
665 
710 
760
 Net cash flow 
 
(130) 
150 
115 
140 
170 
185

358 
CHAPTER 6
The Role of Financial Information in Valuation and Credit Risk Assessment
5. Which accounting attribute—current month’s gross profits or current month’s net cash 
flow—does a better job of predicting future (i.e., the next month’s) net cash flow? Why?
6. Briefly explain why current period accrual earnings may be a better predictor of future 
operating cash flow than is current period operating cash flow.
P6-5
Tail O’ the Dog: Fair Value 
Measurement (LO 3)
Tail O’ the Dog operates a chain of seven gourmet hot dog stands in southern California. The 
firm’s first stand, built in 1948, was shaped like (what else?) a giant hot dog, in a giant hot dog 
bun, and with mustard, of course. Over the years, this humble counter has served the public 
over 5 million hot dogs—everything from the Mexican Ole (with chili, cheese, and onions) to 
the Boston Celtic (with baked beans). The company’s other six outlets maintain the original 
stand’s architectural kitsch.
 
Yesterday, Tail O’ the Dog was acquired by Conover Corporation in a stock-for-stock deal 
valued at $28 million based on the market value of Conover stock. Conover must now deter-
mine the fair value of each identifiable Tail O’ the Dog asset and liability, consistent with the 
requirements of applicable accounting standards.
 
There is a Tail O’ the Dog stand on the edge of Carlsbad, California, just north of San 
 Diego. The stand sits on the east side of the Pacific Coast Highway, the state route that runs 
along the California coastline from Mexico to Oregon. Across the highway is a one-acre, 
paved parking lot also owned by Tail O’ the Dog (and now Conover). The beachfront parcel is 
zoned for commercial or residential use and has majestic coastline views. In attempting to 
determine the fair value of this parcel, Conover has learned that:
• The parking lot is carried on the books of Tail O’ the Dog at its 1962 historical cost of 
$12,000. Improvements made to the parcel over the years are now fully depreciated.
• Tail O’ the Dog allows free use of the parking lot by its customers, other businesses, neigh-
borhood residents, and tourists seeking beach access. A local developer contacted the com-
pany last year and proposed converting the lot into monthly paid parking. According to the 
developer’s estimates, doing so would produce an income stream of $60,000 each year (net 
of improvements and annual operating costs) for Tail O’ the Dog. The developer’s offer 
was declined but Conover has calculated the capitalized value of this potential income 
stream to be $600,000.
• Because Tail O’ the Dog receives no income from the parcel, it is currently assessed for 
property tax purposes as an “unimproved commercial lot” at $200,000.
• A parking lot of similar size but located several blocks east of the highway and closer to 
downtown Carlsbad sold for $500,000 last year.
• An unimproved residential beachfront lot of similar size sold for $1.2 million last year. 
That lot was also located several blocks closer to city center than is the Tail O’ the Dog 
lot. In speaking with several real estate professionals, Conover has learned that property 
values in the area are down slightly from a year ago.
Required:
1. Conover Corporation’s financial reporting problem is to determine the parking lot’s fair 
value in a manner consistent with GAAP. Which of the five measurements is the least rel-
evant for this purpose? Why?
2. Which measurement is the most relevant for determining the parking lot’s fair value? Why?
3. Which of the five measurements (if any) correspond to Level 2 in the fair value measure-
ment hierarchy? Which measurements (if any) correspond to Level 3?
4. Why might auditors be more challenged by a Level 3 fair value measurement than by a 
Level 2 fair value measurement?

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
359
 
Actual
 
J.P. Morgan Forecast
 
2009 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017
Total revenues: 
110.3 
137.4 
234.5 
347.2 
600.5 
690.6 
794.2 
913.4 
1050.4
EBITDA 
6.7 
9.4 
15.9 
31.3 
59.2 
69.1 
87.4 
114.2 
136.5
Capital expenditures 
20.2 
21.7 
21.9 
22.3 
22.9 
23.0 
23.1 
23.3 
23.5
Cash taxes 
22.6 
23.1 
25.6 
211.6 
222.5 
226.4 
233.7 
244.3 
253.2
 Free cash flow 
3.9 
4.6 
8.4 
17.4 
33.8 
39.7 
50.6 
66.6 
79.8
Discount factor: 
 
0.89286 
0.79719 
0.71178 
0.63552 
0.56743 
0.50663 
0.45235 
0.40388
Present value: 
 
4.11 
6.70 
12.38 
21.48 
22.53 
25.64 
30.13 
32.23
Present value beyond 2017 
 
460.43 
Present value 2010–2017 
 
155.19 
 
 
615.61
Less net debt 
 
256.50 
Equity value 
 
672.11
Shares outstanding 
 
51.69 
Share value 
 
$  13.00
P6-6
Sonic Solutions: Discounted 
Cash Flow Valuation (LO 1)
Sonic Solutions develops digital media products, services, and technologies for consumers 
and content development professionals. In June 2010, a team of analysts at J.P. Morgan issued 
a research report that valued Sonic’s stock at $13 per share, compared to the then current mar-
ket price of $8.71. The research report’s discounted cash flow valuation table is reproduced 
below (slightly edited for improved clarity). The 2009 figures are as reported by Sonic but the 
2010 through 2017 figures are J.P. Morgan analysts’ forecasts. Key assumptions include a 
weighted-average cost of capital (WACC) of 12% and a perpetual growth rate of 5%. All dol-
lar amounts are in millions except share value.
Required:
1. Comment on how the Free Cash Flow spreadsheet calculation compares with how 
 accountants and auditors might compute free cash flow directly from the company’s 
 financial statements.
2. Compute the annual rate of growth in forecasted sales and free cash flow for each year 
(2010 through 2017). Comment on the relative rates of sales and free cash flow growth.
3. What role does the 12% weighted average cost of capital assumption play in the 
 discounted cash flow valuation analysis?
4. Write a brief paragraph explaining to someone unfamiliar with present value calculations 
how the figure $155.19 for Present value 2010–2017 is computed.
5. Explain how the figure $460.43 for Present value beyond 2017 is computed.
6. Why does the analyst team subtract an amount for net debt in arriving at Equity value? 
(Note: The term net debt is defined for spreadsheet purposes as financial liabilities (e.g., 
loans) minus any financial assets (e.g., money market investments) and is negative in the 
spreadsheet because Sonic’s financial assets exceed its financial liabilities.)
7. What share value estimate would the J.P. Morgan team have calculated if they had used 
an abnormal earnings value approach rather than a discounted cash flow approach and 
had developed forecasts of abnormal earnings and book values that were consistent with 
the cash flow forecast in the above worksheet? Why?
8. Sometimes analysts’ research reports contain inadvertent computational errors. 
What would the estimated value of Sonic’s stock have been if the J.P. Morgan team 
mistakenly used 34.60 million shares outstanding rather than the correct 51.69 million 
share count?

360 
CHAPTER 6
The Role of Financial Information in Valuation and Credit Risk Assessment
9. Rovi Corporation announced on December 22, 2010, that it had agreed to acquire Sonic 
 Solutions for a combination of cash and stock worth $14 per Sonic share. Sonic shareholders 
could choose between receiving $14 cash for each Sonic share they owned, or Rovi 
shares having a value of $14.
Here is a summary of the trading in Rovi’s stock in the days surrounding the announcement. 
What does this information suggest about how Rovi shareholders viewed the transaction?
 
 
Closing 
S&P 500
Date 
Volume 
Price 
Closing
December 20, 2010 
759,800 
$57.04 
1247.08
December 21, 2010 
444,200 
57.76 
1254.60
December 22, 2010 
664,600 
58.36 
1258.84
December 23, 2010 
3,234,600 
57.26 
1256.77
December 27, 2010 
1,018,800 
57.60 
1257.54
December 28, 2010 
1,844,000 
58.25 
1258.51
December 29, 2010 
1,621,900 
59.84 
1259.78
P6-7
Determining abnormal 
 earnings—Some examples 
(LO 1)
As discussed in the chapter, abnormal earnings (AE) are
AEt 5 Actual earningst 2 Required or “normal” earningst
which may be expressed as
AEt 5 NOPATt 2 (r 3 BVt21)
where NOPAT is the firm’s net operating profit after taxes, r is the cost of equity capital, and 
BVt21 is the book value of equity at time t 2 1.
Required:
Solve the following problems:
1. If NOPAT is $5,000, r 5 15%, and BVt21 is $50,000, what is AE?
2. If NOPAT is $25,000, r 5 18%, and BVt21 is $125,000, what is AE?
3. Assume the firm in requirement 2 can increase NOPAT to $30,000 by instituting some 
cost-cutting measures. What is the new AE?
4. Assume the firm in requirement 2 can divest $25,000 of unproductive capital with 
NOPAT falling by only $2,000. What is the new AE?
5. Assume the firm in requirement 2 can add a new division at a cost of $40,000, which will 
increase NOPAT by $7,600 per year. Would adding the new division increase AE?
6. Assume the firm in requirement 1 can add a new division at a cost of $25,000, which will 
increase NOPAT by $3,500 per year. Would adding the new division increase AE?
P6-8
Assigning credit ratings using 
financial ratios (LO 7)
Exhibit 6.5 describes the key financial ratios Standard & Poor’s analysts use to assess credit 
risk and assign credit ratings to industrial companies. The same financial ratios for three 
firms follow.
 
Firm 1 
Firm 2 
Firm 3
EBIT interest coverage 
2.7 
12.8 
16.7
EBITDA interest coverage 
3.7 
18.7 
24.6
FFO/Total debt 
19.8 
80.2 
135.1
Free operating cash flow/Total debt 
8.2 
40.6 
87.9
Total debt/EBITDA 
4.0 
1.0 
0.3
Return on capital 
9.9 
29.2 
32.7
Total debt/Capital 
54.8 
30.2 
8.1

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
361
Required:
1. What credit rating would be assigned to Firm 1?
2. What credit rating would be assigned to Firm 2?
3. Does Firm 3 have more or less credit risk than Firm 2? How can you tell?
P6-9
Calculating value creation by 
two companies (LO 1)
As discussed in the chapter, abnormal earnings (AE) are
AEt 5 Actual earningst 2 Required earningst
which may be expressed as
AEt 5 NOPATt 2 (r 3 BVt21)
where NOPAT is the firm’s net operating profit after taxes, r is the cost of equity capital, and 
BVt21 is the book value of equity at t 2 1.
 
Following are NOPAT, BVt21, and cost of equity capital for two firms.
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
Company A 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014
NOPAT 
$ 66,920 
$ 79,632 
$ 83,314 
$   89,920 
$  92,690
BVt21 
478,000 
504,000 
541,000 
562,000 
598,000
Cost of equity capital 
0.152 
0.167 
0.159 
0.172 
0.166
Company B 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014
NOPAT 
$192,940 
$176,341 
$227,700 
$ 198,900 
$ 282,964
BVt21 
877,000 
943,000 
989,999 
1,020,000 
1,199,000
Cost of equity capital 
0.188 
0.179 
0.183 
0.175 
0.186
Required:
1. Calculate each firm’s AE each year from 2010 to 2014.
2. Which firm was better managed over the 2010–2014 period? Why?
3. Which firm is likely to be the better stock investment in 2015 and beyond? Why?
P6-10
Making credit-rating changes 
(LO 7)
Exhibit 6.5 describes the key financial ratios Standard & Poor’s analysts use to assess credit 
risk and assign credit ratings to industrial companies. Those same financial ratios for a single 
company over time follow. The company was assigned a AAA credit rating at the beginning 
of 2010.
 
2013 
2014
 
Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
Q4 
Q1 
Q2
EBIT interest coverage 
23.8 
22.1 
21.6 
20.8 
20.6 
12.4
EBITDA interest coverage 
25.3 
26.4 
25.6 
23.2 
22.9 
16.5
FFO/Total debt 
167.8 
150.8 
130.7 
128.4 
80.2 
76.2
Free operating cash flow/Total debt 
104.1 
107.3 
103.7 
98.6 
61.5 
45.3
Total debt/EBITDA 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0
Return on capital 
35.1 
34.3 
30.6 
28.1 
25.9 
24.7
Total debt/Capital 
6.2 
6.8 
7.5 
15.4 
27.2 
35.6
Required:
1. Did the company’s credit risk increase or decrease over these six quarters?
2. What credit rating should be assigned to the company as of Q2 in 2014?
3. In what quarter should the company’s credit rating be downgraded from AAA?

362 
CHAPTER 6
The Role of Financial Information in Valuation and Credit Risk Assessment
P6-11
Enron: Fair Value Accounting 
(LO 3)
In mid-2000, Enron Corporation and Blockbuster (a division of Viacom) set up a pilot project, 
streaming videos to a few dozen apartments in Portland, Oregon, from servers set up in the 
basement of the building. With that tiny beginning, Enron opened up a partnership, called 
Braveheart, which later that year would pump $110 million of fair value accounting profit 
onto Enron’s books. Here’s how the deal worked:
• Enron signed a 20-year exclusive agreement with Blockbuster to provide on-demand vid-
eos over Enron’s broadband network. Enron’s CEO boasted the venture would be a “killer 
app” that would help create demand for Enron’s coast-to-coast fiber-optic network. Enron 
hoped to make millions of dollars off the deal.
• Enron then created a partnership called EBS Content Systems LLC—but known inside the 
company as Braveheart—whose purpose was to get someone to advance Enron the money 
it expected to make on the deal with Blockbuster. To capitalize Braveheart, a small amount 
of money came from outside investors while Enron contributed the Blockbuster agreement 
and lent the partnership some stock. Braveheart thus became one of Enron’s infamous off-
balance-sheet entities: consolidation was not required by GAAP and Enron recorded the 
Braveheart capitalization as a financial asset called “Investment in EBS Content Systems.”
• Next, an outside investment bank gave Braveheart $115 million in return for a promise that 
most of the earnings from the Blockbuster deal would go directly to the bank. In essence, 
Braveheart “securitized” its future earnings from the Enron–Blockbuster venture by selling 
its rights to the future earnings stream to the investment bank. If the earnings were not 
enough for the bank to recoup its investment, Enron promised that it would repay the bank.
• Enron then “marked-to-market” its Braveheart investment—Braveheart now had millions 
in cash from the investment bank—and booked the $110 million fair value increase as 
profit. Enron did not count all $115 million because, under an accounting rule, it had to 
estimate the fair value of its guarantee to pay back the bank and reduce its Braveheart 
 investment fair value estimate by that amount.
In the end, the Blockbuster venture never made it beyond the pilot stage before Enron pulled 
the plug. At its peak, the service was provided to a few thousand households in four cities. 
Enron later reversed the entire $110 million of profits in 2001. Some Enron employees said 
that while the arrangement existed, it helped Enron executives hit earnings targets that served 
both to pump up the value of the company’s stock and to inflate their bonuses.
Required:
1. What features of the Braveheart structure enabled Enron to bolster its 2000 profits using 
fair value accounting?
2. Describe how someone might determine the bank guarantee’s fair value (estimated to be 
$5 million by Enron).
3. Suppose the fair value of the bank guarantee was estimated to be $100 million. What im-
pact would this new fair value estimate have on the amount of profit to be recorded by 
Enron in 2000 on the Braveheart deal?
4. What steps might an auditor take to assess the reliability of Enron’s $5 million fair value 
estimate for the bank guarantee?
P6-12
Calculating sustainable 
 earnings (LO 5)
Colonel Electric Company is one of the largest and most diversified industrial corporations in 
the world. From the time of its incorporation in 1892, the company has engaged in develop-
ing, manufacturing, and marketing a wide variety of products for the generation, transmission, 
distribution, control, and utilization of electricity.

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
363
 
Appearing in the following table are the 2011–2013 income statements of Colonel Electric 
Company.
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
Comparative Income Statement for Years Ended December 31,
($ in millions) 
2013 
2012 
2011
Revenues 
 
 
 Sales of goods 
$54,196 
$53,177 
$52,767
 Sales of services 
11,923 
10,836 
8,863
 Royalties and fees 
1,629 
753 
783
Total revenues 
67,748 
64,766 
62,413
Costs and expenses 
 
 
 Cost of goods sold 
(24,594) 
(24,308) 
(22,775)
 Cost of services sold 
(8,425) 
(6,785) 
(6,274)
 Restructuring (charges) reversals 
1,000 
— 
(2,500)
 Interest charges 
(595) 
(649) 
(410)
 Other costs and expenses 
(6,274) 
(5,743) 
(5,211)
 Litigation charges (income) 
550 
— 
(250)
 (Losses) gains on sales of investments 
(75) 
— 
25
 (Losses) gains on asset sales 
25 
55 
(35)
 Inventory write-offs 
— 
(18) 
—
 Asset impairment write-offs 
— 
— 
(24)
 Special item charges 
(34) 
— 
(8)
 Loss from labor strike 
— 
(20) 
—
   Total costs and expenses 
(38,422) 
(37,468) 
(37,462)
 Earnings from continuing operations before 
  income taxes 
29,326 
27,298 
24,951
 Provision for income taxes (34%) 
(9,971) 
(9,281) 
(8,483)
 Earnings from continuing operations 
19,355 
18,017 
16,468
 Income (loss) from discontinued 
  operations (net of tax) 
— 
(250) 
1,100
 Gain (loss) on sale of discontinued 
  operations (net of tax) 
750 
— 
—
 Extraordinary gain (loss) on early debt 
  retirement (net of tax) 
(50) 
— 
10
  Net earnings 
$20,055 
$17,767 
$17,578
In 2013, the company earned Royalties and fees revenue of $1 billion from a one-time, six-
month contract with the U.S. government. The company does not expect to do any further 
business with the U.S. government in the future.
Required:
1. Calculate Colonel Electric’s sustainable earnings for each year. (Although there is no 
consensus on how best to measure sustainable earnings, one common approach is to start 
with GAAP reported earnings and then eliminate unsustainable earnings items.)
2. How do Colonel Electric’s sustainable earnings compare to its reported net earnings in 
each year?
P6-13
Krispy Kreme Doughnuts: 
Valuing abnormal earnings 
(LO 1)
In August 2003, Krispy Kreme’s common stock was trading at $44 per share. Several analysts 
and investors believed at the time that its shares were worth considerably less. They appear to 
have been right because by November 2007, the stock was trading below $3 per share.
 
This problem illustrates how the abnormal earnings valuation model described in Appen-
dix A of this chapter can be combined with security analysts’ published earnings forecasts and 
used to spot potentially overvalued stocks.

364 
CHAPTER 6
The Role of Financial Information in Valuation and Credit Risk Assessment
Required:
1. Use the abnormal earnings valuation model from Exhibit 6.8 of Appendix A of this chapter 
to derive an estimate of Krispy Kreme’s stock price as of August 2003. A spreadsheet tem-
plate is available on the textbook website. You will need this additional information:
 
• Actual EPS for 2001 and 2002 were $0.49 and $0.70, respectively.
 
• The per share amount of stock issued in 2001 and 2002 was $0.65 and $0.39, respectively. 
No stock was expected to be issued or bought back during the next five years (2003–2007).
 
• Other comprehensive income per share was $0.32 in 2002 and zero in 2001. Analysts 
were forecasting other comprehensive income to be zero each year during the next 
five years.
 
• Krispy Kreme does not pay dividends.
 
• Return on equity, calculated using the beginning-of-year equity book value, was 21.1% 
and 20.2% in 2001 and 2002, respectively.
 
• Analysts were forecasting EPS to be $0.70 and $0.89 in 2003 and 2004, respectively. 
The estimated long-term EPS growth rate was 13.25% for 2005 through 2007.
 
•  Krispy Kreme’s equity cost of capital is 11%, and the long-term growth rate (beyond 
2007) is assumed to be 3%.
2. Why might your value estimate from requirement 1 differ from the company’s $44 stock 
price in August 2003?
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
CASES
As described in the chapter, the abnormal earnings approach for estimating common share 
value is
C6-1
Illinois Tool Works: Valuing 
abnormal earnings (LO 1)
P0 5 BV0 1 a
q
t51
E01Xt 2 r 3 BVt212
11 1 r2t
where P0 is the total value of all outstanding shares, BV0 is the current book value of stock-
holders’ equity, BVt21 is the book value of shareholders’ equity at the beginning of  period t, r 
is the cost of equity capital, E0 is the expectations operator, and Xt is period t net income. 
The model says that share value equals the book value of stockholders’  equity plus the 
present value of future expected abnormal earnings (where abnormal earnings is net in-
come minus the cost of equity capital multiplied by the beginning-of-period book value of 
stockholders’ equity).
 
The model is silent on how one comes up with expected net income for future years (and 
therefore future expected abnormal earnings) and just how many future years should be used. 
Because of the way present value is calculated, abnormal earnings amounts expected for years 
in the distant future have a small present value and are essentially irrelevant to valuation, es-
pecially if abnormal earnings are close to zero in the long run, as many analysts assume. Thus, 
professional analysts rarely use more than 15 years, often fewer than 10.
 
Comparative income statements and retained earnings statements for Illinois Tool Works 
(ITW) for Year 1–Year 3 follow.
Required:
1. Assume a 10-year forecasting horizon. Also assume that ITW’s Year 3 return on begin-
ning stockholders’ equity (net income without extraordinary items divided by beginning 
Year 3 stockholders’ equity) of 9.5% is expected to persist throughout the forecasting 

 
Cases 
365
horizon (that is, that expected net income is always equal to 0.095  multiplied by 
 beginning-of-the-year stockholders’ equity). Also assume that no  additional stock 
 issuances or repurchases are made and that dividends equal 25% of net income in 
each year. (This is ITW’s approximate historical dividend payout ratio.) Given these 
assumptions, the book value of stockholders’ equity at the end of Year 4 equals book 
value at the beginning of Year 4 plus (1 2 0.25) times Year 4 net income. Finally 
 assume that the cost of equity capital is 9%. (This is ITW’s approximate cost of 
 equity capital.) With these relatively simple assumptions, use the abnormal earnings 
model to estimate the total value of Illinois Tool Works’ common shares as of the end 
of Year 3. Ignore terminal values at the end of the 10-year forecast horizon in your 
calculations.
2. As of the end of Year 3, 307 million common shares were outstanding. Convert your 
estimate in requirement 1 to a per share estimate. For purposes of comparison, the 
 actual market value of ITW’s common shares ranged from $56 to $64 during the first 
quarter of Year 4.
3. Now assume that ITW will maintain a 20% return on beginning stockholders’ equity over 
the 10-year forecast horizon. What would the company’s shares then be worth?
Illinois Tool Works
Consolidated Statement of Shareholders’ Equity
($ in millions) 
Year 3 
Year 2 
Year 1
Balance at beginning of year 
$ 9,823 
$9,604 
$9,061
Net income (loss) 
713 
806 
958
Stock issued (repurchased) 
361 
(337) 
(192)
Common stock dividends 
(273) 
(250) 
(223)
 Balance at end of year 
$10,624 
$9,823 
$9,604
C6-2
Sunny Day Stores: Analyzing 
debt covenants and financial 
distress (LO 7)
Sunny Day Stores operates convenience stores throughout much of the United States. The 
industry is highly competitive, with low profit margins. The company’s competition in-
cludes national, regional, and local supermarkets; oil companies; and convenience store 
operators.
Illinois Tool Works
Consolidated Statement of Income
($ in millions) 
Year 3 
Year 2 
Year 1
Sales 
$9,468 
$9,293 
$9,984
Cost of goods sold 
5,936 
5,910 
6,192
Gross profit 
3,532 
3,383 
3,792
Selling and administrative expenses 
1,720 
1,691 
1,814
Depreciation and amortization 
306 
385 
414
Operating profit 
1,506 
1,307 
1,564
Interest expense 
68 
68 
72
Nonoperating income (expense) 
(4) 
(7) 
(13)
Special items 
0 
3 
0
Pre-tax income 
1,434 
1,235 
1,479
Total income taxes 
502 
429 
521
Extraordinary items 
(219) 
0 
0
 Net income 
$  713 
$  806 
$  958

366 
CHAPTER 6
The Role of Financial Information in Valuation and Credit Risk Assessment
 
A note to the 2014 financial statements described the company’s long-term debt:
Note payable to the Prudential Insurance Company of America (“Prudential”) with annual prin-
cipal payments of $900,000, interest at 8.93%. Amount outstanding: $5,700,000 in 2014 and 
$6,600,000 in 2013.
 
Term note payable to First Florida Bank (“First Florida”) maturing in September 2019, with 
quarterly principal payments of $125,000 through June 30, 2015, and $250,000 thereafter, with 
interest at 1% in excess of prime (5.5% at December 26, 2014). Amount outstanding $3,563,956 
in 2014 and $3,000,000 in 2013.
 
Revolving note payable to First Florida with interest at 1% in excess of prime (5.5% at 
 December 26, 2014). Amount outstanding: $7,400,000 in 2014 and 2013.
 
Certain of the Company’s loan agreements pertaining to the borrowings from Prudential and 
First Florida require the Company to maintain minimum interest coverage ratio, working capital, 
and net worth  levels, impose restrictions on additional borrowings, and prohibit the payment of 
dividends. Specifically, at the end of fiscal 2014, Sunny Day must have a net worth of at least 
$22,850,000, working capital (on a FIFO inventory basis) must be at least $1,300,000, and the in-
terest coverage ratio must be at least 1.6.
 
The company’s 2014 financial statements that follow show that Sunny Day Stores was not 
in compliance with these loan covenants at year-end.
Sunny Day Stores, Inc.
Comparative Balance Sheets
 
2014 
2013 
 
2014 
2013
Cash and cash equivalents 
$ 1,451,688 
$ 2,971,457 
Accounts payable
Accounts receivable less 
 
 
 Trade 
$ 9,237,416 
$ 6,208,733
 allowances for doubtful 
 
 
 Money orders 
1,637,255 
1,442,811
 accounts of $82,000 
 
 
 Fuel taxes 
1,106,713 
635,556
 and $63,000 in 2014 
 
 
Accrued liabilities
 and 2013, respectively 
985,987 
705,923 
 Salaries and wages 
774,519 
846,131
Refundable income taxes 
400,000 
135,831 
 Self-insurance reserves 
1,186,613 
966,770
Inventories—FIFO basis 
10,640,125 
8,690,734 
 State and local taxes 
1,136,241 
569,160
 Less: LIFO reserve 
(3,057,715) 
(2,845,703) 
Current portion of long-
Total inventories 
7,582,410 
5,845,031 
 term debt 
1,956,369 
1,082,429
Prepaid expenses and 
 
 
Total current liabilities 
17,035,126 
11,751,590
 other assets 
764,627 
547,705
Refundable deposits 
700,000 
380,522
 Total current assets 
11,884,712 
10,586,469
Property and equipment 
 
 
Deferred income taxes 
400,000 
1,477,323
 Land 
11,016,168 
13,603,304 
Unearned revenue 
111,426 
179,224
 Buildings 
19,673,636 
19,801,221 
 Fixtures and equipment 
32,232,643 
32,749,133 
Long-term debt, less
 Leaseholds and  
 
 
 current portion 
13,969,745 
16,693,772
  improvements 
5,084,679 
4,929,748
 
68,007,126 
71,083,406
 Less: Allowances for 
  depreciation and 
  amortization 
(31,008,778) 
(28,988,173) 
Stockholders’ equity
 
36,998,348 
42,095,233 
 Common stock 
170,165 
170,165
 Other assets 
 
 
 Additional paid-in capital 
5,124,245 
5,124,245
  Land held for sale 
2,641,735 
 
 Retained earnings 
15,171,001 
17,735,240
  Other 
456,913 
449,857 
 
20,465,411 
23,029,650
 
 
 
Total liabilities and 
Total assets 
$51,981,708 
$53,131,559  
 stockholders’ equity 
$51,981,708 
$53,131,559

 
Cases 
367
Sunny Day Stores, Inc.
Statement of Cash Flows
 
2014 
2013 
2012
Cash flows from operating activities
Net income (loss) 
$(2,564,239) 
$(1,042,297) 
$  613,423
Adjustments 
 Depreciation and amortization 
3,980,186 
4,460,529 
3,793,119
 Deferred income taxes 
(1,077,323) 
(512,995) 
577,235
 Gain on sale of property 
(532,570) 
(174,657) 
(100,322)
 Decrease in unearned revenue 
(67,798) 
(83,804) 
(84,235)
Changes in assets and liabilities
 (Increase) in accounts receivable 
(280,064) 
53,121 
(358,982)
 (Increase) in refundable income taxes 
(264,169) 
244,085 
(113,675)
 (Increase) in inventories 
(1,737,379) 
2,908,024 
412,647
 (Increase) in other assets 
(263,981) 
(141,910) 
(241,347)
 Increase in refundable deposits 
(319,478) 
(15,107) 
(145,866)
 Increase in accounts payable and other liabilities 
4,409,596 
(4,304,076) 
3,807,200
Total adjustments 
3,847,020 
2,433,210 
7,545,774
 Net cash flow operations 
1,282,781 
1,390,913 
8,159,197
Cash flows from investing activities
Purchase of property and equipment, net 
(2,390,832) 
(2,871,399) 
(9,593,270)
Sale of property and equipment 
1,428,051 
668,656 
821,641
Collections of notes and loans receivables 
10,318 
(103,610) 
7,775
 Net cash used in investing activities 
  (952,463) 
(2,306,353) 
(8,763,854)
Cash flows from financing activities
Issuance of long-term debt 
82,515 
2,633,454 
4,528,915
Dividends 
–0– 
–0– 
(204,198)
Payment of long-term debt 
(1,932,602) 
(3,108,251) 
(1,588,391)
 Net cash provided by financing activities 
(1,850,087) 
  (474,797) 
2,736,326
Net increase (decrease) in cash 
$(1,519,769) 
$(1,390,237) 
$ 2,131,669
Sunny Day Stores, Inc.
Statement of Operations
 
2014 
2013 
2012
Net revenue 
$217,710,782 
$202,393,136 
$191,243,016
Cost and expenses
 Costs of goods sold 
176,102,027 
158,643,287 
146,652,853
 Selling, general, and administrative 
44,631,749 
43,687,704 
41,805,330
 Interest expense—net 
1,551,138 
1,728,650 
1,658,732
 Net gain from sale of property 
(532,570) 
(174,657) 
(100,322)
 
221,752,344 
203,884,984 
190,016,593
Income (loss) before taxes 
(4,041,562) 
(1,491,848) 
1,226,423
Provision (benefit) for income taxes
 Current 
(400,000) 
63,444 
50,000
 Deferred 
(1,077,323) 
(512,995) 
563,000
 
(1,477,323) 
(449,551) 
613,000
Net income (loss) 
$ (2,564,239) 
$  (1,042,297) 
$    613,423
Earnings per common share 
$(1.51) 
$(0.61) 
$0.36

368 
CHAPTER 6
The Role of Financial Information in Valuation and Credit Risk Assessment
Required:
It’s late January 2015, and Prudential and First Florida have hired you to act on their behalf 
in negotiations with Sunny Day Stores. Both lenders want to restructure their loans to 
 address the company’s current financial problems, and the restructured loans may require 
covenant changes.
 
Prudential and First Florida seek your advice on the type and amount of collateral to be 
required, revised interest rates, and possible changes to the payment schedules. In addition, 
the lenders have asked you to suggest new minimum net worth, working capital, and interest 
coverage ratios for 2015 and 2016. Specifically:
1. What type and amount of collateral do you suggest be required?
2. Should a higher interest rate be charged? Why or why not?
3. What changes would you suggest be made to the payment schedule?
4. What new minimum net worth, working capital, and interest coverage limits would you 
suggest the lenders set?
5. Suppose the company asked permission to resume payment of its $0.12 per share 
 dividend, which was suspended in 2013. What advice would you give Prudential and 
First Florida?
COLLABORATIVE LEARNING CASES
Microsoft develops, manufactures, licenses, sells, and supports a wide range of software 
products for personal computers (PCs) and servers; business and consumer productivity 
 applications; software development tools; and content such as MSN (the Microsoft Network 
online service).
 
The following excerpt is from an article that appeared in The Wall Street Journal.
C6-3
Microsoft Corporation: 
 Unearned revenues and 
 earnings management 
(LO 5)
Collaborative
MICROSOFT’S EARNINGS GROWTH SLOWED 
IN THE LATEST QUARTER
Microsoft Corp.’s growth juggernaut slowed in its fiscal fourth 
quarter, but the numbers masked a surprisingly potent perfor-
mance by the software giant.
 
The Redmond, Wash., company’s earnings barely topped Wall 
Street’s consensus, breaking a pattern of dramatic upside surprises 
for the company. But the company’s profit would have been 
 considerably higher had it not salted away revenue in a special 
 reserve account for use in future quarters. That account, dubbed 
“unearned revenues,” continued to swell and underscore the 
 returns Microsoft is reaping as a near-monopoly supplier of 
 personal computer operating-software and key application 
 programs. The account represents revenues Microsoft has 
 collected but hadn’t yet reported. It was established because the 
company faces future costs to deliver upgrades and customer sup-
port for products that already have been paid for. The policy helps 
smooth out sharp swings in the company’s quarterly results.
 
Microsoft reported net income of $1.06 billion, or 80 cents 
a share, for the quarter ended June 30, an increase of 89% 
from $559 million, or 43 cents a share, a year earlier. Analysts 
had expected per-share earnings of about 79 cents, according 
to First Call Corp. Quarterly revenue was $3.18 billion, up 
41% from $2.26 billion a year earlier.
Source: “Microsoft’s Earnings Growth Slowed in the Latest Quarter,” The 
Wall Street Journal, July 18, 1997. Copyright © 1997 Dow Jones & Com-
pany, Inc. All rights reserved worldwide. Reprinted with permission.

 
Collaborative Learning Cases 
369
Other Information:
1. Appearing in the accompanying tables are the comparative income statements for the 
fourth quarters of fiscal 1996 and 1997 and for the fiscal years 1996 and 1997. Also 
shown are portions of the balance sheets for fiscal 1996 and 1997.
2. The balance in the unearned revenues account on March 31, 1997 (the end of the third 
fiscal quarter of 1997) was $1,285 million.
3. The following description of Microsoft’s unearned revenues account is taken from the 
company’s SEC filings:
The portion of the Company’s revenues that are earned later than billed is reflected in the 
 unearned revenues account. Of the March 31, 1997, balance of $1,285 million, approximately 
$765 million represented the unearned portion of Windows desktop operating systems revenues 
and $150 million represented the unearned portion of Office 97 revenues. Unearned revenues 
associated with upgrade rights for Microsoft Office 97 were $190 million, and the balance 
of unearned revenues was primarily attributable to maintenance and other subscription 
contracts.
Microsoft Corporation
Income Statements
 
Three Months Ended 
Years Ended
($ in millions, except
 
June 30, 
June 30,
earnings per share) 
1996 
1997 
1996 
1997
Net revenues 
$2,255 
$3,175 
$8,671 
$11,358
Cost of revenues 
241 
242 
1,188 
1,085
 Research and development 
453 
516 
1,432 
1,925
 Sales and marketing 
661 
744 
2,657 
2,856
 General and administrative 
90 
94 
316 
362
Total operating expenses 
1,445 
1,596 
5,593 
6,228
Operating income 
810 
1,579 
3,078 
5,130
Interest income 
92 
127 
320 
443
Other expenses 
(42) 
(80) 
(19) 
(259)
Income before income taxes 
860 
1,626 
3,379 
5,314
Provision for income taxes 
301 
569 
1,184 
1,860
 Net income 
  559 
1,057 
2,195 
 3,454
Preferred stock dividends 
–0– 
7 
–0– 
15
 Net income available for 
 common shareholders 
$  559 
$1,050 
$2,195 
$ 3,439
Earnings per share 
$ 0.43 
$ 0.80 
$ 1.71 
$  2.63
Average shares outstanding 
1,290 
1,327 
1,281 
1,312
Balance Sheet (selected accounts)
($ in millions) 
June 30, 1996 
June 30, 1997
Liabilities and Stockholders’ Equity
Current liabilities 
 
 Accounts payable 
$  808 
$  721
 Accrued compensation 
202 
336
 Income taxes payable 
484 
466
 Unearned revenues 
560 
1,418
 Other 
371 
669
Total current liabilities 
$2,425 
$3,610

370 
CHAPTER 6
The Role of Financial Information in Valuation and Credit Risk Assessment
Required:
 1. Calculate Microsoft’s net profit margin for the fourth quarter of 1996 and 1997 and for 
the fiscal years 1996 and 1997. Comment on the results.
 2. Did Microsoft fall short of, meet, or exceed analysts’ expectations for fourth-quarter 
1997 EPS?
 3. If no reductions were made from the Unearned revenues account during the fourth quar-
ter of fiscal 1997, how much did Microsoft add to the account during that quarter?
 4. Continuing requirement 3, how much higher or lower would Microsoft’s fourth-quarter 
income before tax have been (on a per share basis) if this accrual adjustment had not 
been made?
 5. Assume that Microsoft reduced its Unearned revenues account by $188.0 million during 
the first three quarters of fiscal 1997. How much did Microsoft add to the account during 
the fiscal year?
 6. Continuing requirement 5, how much higher or lower would Microsoft’s annual income 
before tax have been (on a per share basis) if this accrual adjustment had not been made?
 7. How much income before tax (on a per share basis) does Microsoft have “stored” in the 
Unearned revenues account at the end of 1997?
 8. How can the Unearned revenues account be used to manage EPS?
 9. How can analysts monitor the extent to which the Unearned revenues account is being 
used to manage EPS?
10. Does the existence of the Unearned revenues account necessarily mean that Microsoft 
intends to manage its reported earnings? Explain.
.mhhe.com/revsine6e
www
Remember to check the book’s companion website 
for additional study material.

7
Chapter
“A verbal contract isn’t worth the paper it’s written on.”
—Sam Goldwyn, film producer
A 
contract is a legally binding exchange of rights and obligations between par-
ties. You enter into contracts every day, for example when you buy coffee or 
park your car in a public lot. In both of these cases, you exchange the obliga-
tion to pay money for the right to receive a good or a service. Like these contracts, most 
contracts are made orally and are relatively simple.
 
Some business contracts, however, are far more complicated. They might involve 
large sums of money and a complex set of rights and obligations that need to be speci-
fied precisely. United Airlines, for example, does not simply order an airplane. The 
purchase contract specifies the model of the plane, the number and types of engines and 
maybe even the engine manufacturer, the seat configurations, any special features 
United wants, and so on. It also specifies United’s maintenance obligations and the 
manufacturer’s warranty and repair obligations, as well as payment schedules and deliv-
ery dates, and penalties for missing them.
 
Complex contracts are made in writing in order to limit the possibilities for 
 misunderstanding about the exact terms of the agreement. In many such contracts, 
the rights and obligations conferred by the contract will depend on data in finan-
cial statements that are issued after the contract is executed. For example, commer-
cial lending agreements often require the borrower to maintain a minimum 
interest  coverage ratio. This requirement protects the lender from a deterioration 
of the  borrower’s creditworthiness. Compliance with the requirement is assessed 
using data from financial statements issued by the borrower over the duration of 
the loan.
 
Why do contracts incorporate financial statement information and what financial 
reporting incentives does this phenomenon create? This chapter addresses the following 
questions:
• How do conflicts of interest arise?
• How are business contracts tailored to mitigate conflicts of interest?
• What role do accounting numbers play in contracts?
• What incentives do accounting-based contracts create for the parties involved?
371
The Role of Financial 
Information in Contracting
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you 
will understand:
1. What conflicts of interest arise 
 between managers and shareholders, 
lenders, or regulators.
2. How and why accounting numbers 
are used in debt agreements, in 
 compensation contracts, and for 
 regulatory purposes.
3. How accounting-based contracts and 
regulations influence managerial 
incentives.
4. What role contracts and regulations 
play in shaping managers’ accounting 
choices.
5. How and why managers cater to 
Wall Street using their accounting 
discretion.
7

372 
CHAPTER 7
The Role of Financial Information in Contracting
• How do these incentives help us to understand why managers make certain accounting 
choices?
• How do these incentives affect how contracts are written?
• How does regulation also create financial reporting incentives?
• How do financial reporting incentives influence when transactions are recorded?
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST 
IN BUSINESS RELATIONSHIPS
Conflicts of interest arise when one party to a business relationship can take actions for his 
or her own benefit that harm other parties in the relationship. Conflicts of interest permeate 
businesses. Will a manager always make decisions that are in the owner’s best interest? Prob-
ably not, because some actions that benefit the owner might not benefit the manager, while 
other actions might benefit the manager at the owner’s expense.
 
Here is a real, albeit extreme, example: In 2005, Dennis Kozlowski and Mark Swartz, Tyco 
International’s CEO and CFO, respectively, were convicted of stealing more than $150 mil-
lion from the company. Among other acts, Kozlowski threw a $2 million birthday party for his 
wife and charged half the cost to the company. But conflicts of interest do not have to mani-
fest themselves in such extreme ways and generally do not involve any illegality. They arise 
any time one party makes a decision that affects another and the decision maker is prone to 
consider his or her own welfare above the other party’s. Suppose Allen Ford, our By the Cup 
owner, hires a store manager and the manager’s longtime friend arrives in town unexpectedly. 
The manager takes a long lunch to reminisce, even though it means closing the shop for sev-
eral hours. Ford, not the manager, absorbs the cost (in terms of lost profits) of closing, while 
the manager receives the benefit of the long lunch.
 
The relationship between Ford and the manager is often called a principal-agent relation-
ship, or simply an agency relationship. The agent is supposed to act on behalf of the principal, 
but because the principal generally cannot monitor the agent’s every action, there is no assur-
ance the agent will always act in the principal’s best interests. The cost that arises because of 
this relationship is called an agency cost, and it is not necessarily borne by the principal alone. 
Without a way to commit never to act out of self-interest, the agent is likely to command a 
smaller salary in the marketplace than he or she could if such a commitment were possible. In 
that sense, the agent bears some of the agency costs that arise from the relationship.
 
Ford’s loan illustrates another common conflict of interest. Once the loan is granted, Ford 
might be tempted to divert the loan proceeds toward other investment opportunities or even to 
personal use, which would increase the default risk. Aware of this possibility, the bank might 
refuse to make the loan or impose a higher interest rate to reflect the greater default risk, thus 
transferring some of the cost created by the conflict of interest back to Ford. Both parties could 
benefit if there were a way to reduce the conflict. Let’s see how that might be accomplished.
DEBT COVENANTS IN LENDING AGREEMENTS
Most companies have some form of debt. When this is the case, debtholders and shareholders 
both have some of their wealth tied to the company’s fortunes. The company’s resources will 
be used to pay interest and principal to debtholders as well as to pay dividends to sharehold-
ers. However, the interests of these two groups often diverge. The conflict of interest between 
them creates incentives for shareholders (or managers acting on their behalf) to take actions 
that benefit shareholders to the detriment of bondholders.

 
Debt Covenants in Lending Agreements 
373
Finalizing the By the Cup Loan
Here is an example that illustrates the conflicting incentives of creditors and borrowers. Allen 
Ford, our By the Cup owner, assembled the monthly cash flow projections and other materials 
requested by the loan officer. Ford’s detailed financial projections revealed that, in addition to 
investing $50,000 of his own money, Ford would need a $75,000 loan, slightly more than he 
originally anticipated. Still, the business’s prospects seemed bright.
 
Several days after Ford submitted the loan application, the loan officer phoned him to indi-
cate preliminary approval of the loan. Ford was elated, but surprised by the interest rate. It 
seemed higher than what other local banks were charging for similar business loans.
 
Why was the interest rate so high? Once the loan is granted, a conflict of interests naturally 
arises between Ford and the bank. This conflict occurs because Ford, not the bank, will decide 
how the loan proceeds are spent. For example, after Ford obtained the loan, nothing would 
stop him from immediately declaring and paying a $75,000 dividend to himself, rather than 
buying inventory and equipment for the store. After all, he owns the business and therefore he 
can declare a dividend at any time. A $75,000 dividend payment would increase Ford’s per-
sonal wealth but surely spell disaster for the By the Cup store because the cash needed to 
launch the business would no longer be available. The bank would have a $75,000 loan out-
standing to a business whose only asset was $50,000 in cash. Ford would have transferred 
wealth from the bank to himself.
 
Creditors know that their interests often conflict with those of borrowers, and one way they 
protect themselves from these conflicts is to charge a higher rate of interest on the loan as 
compensation for the risky actions that owner–managers like Ford might take. Another ap-
proach is to reduce conflicts of interest between lenders and borrowers with contracts that 
restrict—explicitly or implicitly—the borrowers’ ability to harm lenders. For instance, the 
bank could require Ford to guarantee the business loan personally. A personal guarantee 
would require Ford to repay the bank loan from his own funds if the coffee shop failed. This 
guarantee would certainly make the $75,000 dividend payment less attractive. Alternatively, 
the loan agreement might include covenants, such as a prohibition on dividend payments 
without the bank’s approval, or a limitation on dividends to some fraction of net income. In 
fact, the loan officer suggested stricter debt covenants as a way to reduce the conflicts of inter-
est so the bank could accept a lower interest rate.
 
Debt covenants serve three broad purposes:
1. Preservation of repayment capacity: Some covenants place strict limits on new borrow-
ing, prohibit stock repurchases and dividends without prior lender approval, or ensure that 
cash generated both from ongoing operations and from asset sales will not be diverted 
away from servicing debt.
2. Protection against credit-damaging events: All lenders are concerned with the risk of a 
sudden deterioration in repayment ability that can result from a merger, acquisition, take-
over, or recapitalization. Some covenants prevent these adverse events from happening 
unless the debt is first repaid, the interest rate is adjusted upward, or prior lender approval 
is obtained.
3. Signals and triggers: Many covenants are in place to ensure the steady flow of informa-
tion from borrower to lender. This information flow can reveal declining sales and profits, 
diminished operating cash flows, or other facets of the business that signal increased 
 repayment risk. When deterioration occurs, for example because an interest coverage ratio 
falls below the minimum level required, the lender obtains additional rights. These rights 
might include representation on the business’s board of directors, the right to veto certain 

374 
CHAPTER 7
The Role of Financial Information in Contracting
transactions, such as dividends, or even the right to demand repayment. Triggers bring the 
borrower and lender to the negotiating table and place the lender in a position of strength 
because they enable the lender to decide whether it might modify or waive  restrictions or 
assert its rights.
Debt covenants benefit both creditors and borrowers. Creditors benefit because the cove-
nants reduce default risk. Borrowers benefit because the covenants provide a way to commit 
credibly to actions that keep default risk lower, which reduces the interest rates creditors 
demand.
Affirmative Covenants, Negative Covenants, 
and Default Provisions
Debt covenants require the borrower to maintain a certain financial status for the loan’s dura-
tion, and they set minimum standards for the borrower’s future conduct and performance. 
Covenants vary with the borrower’s business characteristics, financial condition, and the 
length of the loan. Covenants are designed to reduce default risk and to provide early warning 
if the borrower’s financial condition deteriorates.
 
Affirmative covenants stipulate actions the borrower must take. Generally, these include:
1. Using the loan for the agreed-upon purpose.
2. Providing periodic, audited financial statements.
3. Complying with financial covenants.
4. Complying with laws.
5. Allowing the lender to inspect business assets and business contracts.
6. Maintaining business records and business properties and carrying insurance on them.
 
For example, a loan agreement involving TCBY Enterprises, “The Country’s Best Yogurt,” 
as the borrower, requires the company to keep the lender informed about the company’s finan-
cial and operating performance by providing annual, audited financial statements.  Importantly, 
loan agreements often do not stipulate the accounting methods to be used when preparing 
 financial statements, except that they must comply with generally accepted accounting prin-
ciples (GAAP):
[The company] will furnish . . . not later than one hundred twenty days (120) after the close of 
each fiscal year . . . consolidated balance sheets, income statements and statements of cash 
flow . . . and such other comments and financial details as are usually included in similar 
 reports. . . . Such reports shall be prepared in accordance with GAAP and shall be audited by 
independent certified public accountants of recognized standing . . . and shall contain unqualified 
 opinions. . . . (para. 5.1 of TCBY term loan agreement)
 
The financial covenants also define certain financial terms and ratios and provide restric-
tions on the values these ratios may have.
 
One of the affirmative covenants in TCBY’s loan agreement requires it to maintain a fixed-
charge coverage ratio greater than 1.0, where the ratio is defined as:
Fixed-charge coverage 5
Net income 1 Noncash charges
Current maturities 1 Dividends 1 Replacement CapEx
 
The fixed-charge coverage ratio requirement limits the company’s ability to pay dividends. 
Suppose, for example, TCBY had net income of $50 million, noncash charges of $35 million, 

 
Debt Covenants in Lending Agreements 
375
current loan maturities of $40 million, and replacement capital expenditures of $30 million. 
TCBY could pay a dividend of no more than $15 million because:
1 The obligation to comply with a financial covenant can be viewed as either an affirmative or a negative covenant. It is af-
firmative because it requires the company to comply with a restriction on a ratio value. It is negative in the sense that it re-
stricts actions that would cause the covenant to be violated.
2 Any covenant breach that existed at the date of the most recent balance sheet and that subsequently has not been cured (that is, 
remedied or corrected) should be disclosed in the notes to the financial statements (Financial Accounting Standards Board [FASB] 
Accounting Standards Codification [ASC] Section 235-10-S99: Notes to Financial Statements—Overall—SEC Materials also 
located in Rule 4–08[c] of Securities and Exchange Commission [SEC] Regulation S-X). When covenants are violated, the related 
debt must be reclassified as current if it is probable that the borrower will not be able to cure the default within the next 12 months. 
See FASB ASC 470-10-45-1: Debt—Overall—Classification of Debt that Includes Covenants.
 Fixed-charge coverage 5
$50 1 $35
$40 1 Dividend 1 $30 5 1.0
 5
$50 1 $35
$40 1 $15 1 $30
 5 1.0
Dividends in excess of $15 million would put TCBY in violation of its fixed-charge coverage 
requirement.1
 
Negative covenants tend to be more significant and more intensely negotiated than affir-
mative covenants because they restrict the borrower’s actions. Negative covenants include 
limits on total indebtedness, investment of funds, capital expenditures, leases, and corporate 
loans as well as restrictions on the payment of cash dividends, share repurchases, mergers, 
asset sales, voluntary prepayment of other indebtedness, and new business ventures. This 
 example is from the TCBY loan agreement:
[Borrower agrees that it will not] sell, lease, transfer, or otherwise dispose of any assets . . . except 
the sale of inventory in the ordinary course of business and disposition of obsolete or worn-out 
equipment upon the replacement thereof . . . [or to] repurchase the stock of TCBY using, directly 
or indirectly, the proceeds of any loan. (paras. 6.6 and 6.12 of TCBY term loan agreement)
 
Covenants restricting the use of funds for dividend payments, share repurchases, capital 
expenditures, and other business purposes assure the creditor that cash will be available to 
make interest and principal payments when due. By limiting the borrower’s ability to sell, 
merge, or transfer operating assets, the creditor ensures the survival of the borrower’s repay-
ment potential.
 
Restrictions on total indebtedness limit the amount of additional debt the company may 
incur over the loan term. These restrictions can be stated as dollar amounts or as ratios (ex-
amples include total debt to assets, to working capital, or to tangible net worth). It is also 
common for a borrower to agree not to use any of its existing property as collateral on future 
loans without the lender’s consent.
 
The events of default section of a loan agreement describes circumstances in which the 
creditor obtains additional rights. Situations commonly leading to default include the failure 
to pay interest or principal when due, inaccuracy in representations, failure to abide by a cov-
enant, failure to pay other debts when due (known as cross default), impairment of collateral, 
change in management or ownership, and bankruptcy. Remedies for an event of default in-
clude renegotiating the debt contract terms such as an increase in the interest rate, seizing 
collateral, accelerating the maturity of the debt, or initiating bankruptcy proceedings.2
 
A common action creditors take in the event of default is to renegotiate the loan agreement. 
All aspects of the loan—payment schedule, interest rate, collateral, affirmative and negative 
covenants—may be renegotiated. When the circumstances of default are insignificant, the 
For example, TCBY would 
be in default if the company 
reported net income of $120 
and had $100 in current 
 maturities of long-term 
debt. These figures would 
equate to a profitability ratio 
(as defined in the loan 
agreement) of 1.2, which is 
less than the 1.5 required 
minimum.

376 
CHAPTER 7
The Role of Financial Information in Contracting
creditor may waive the violation or give the borrower a period of time—a grace period—to 
correct the covenant breach. When the default is severe, the creditor may accelerate loan re-
payment (with interest) and terminate its relationship with the borrower. Although creditors 
rarely accelerate repayment, having this right substantially strengthens a lender’s negotiating 
position with the borrower if problems arise.
RECAP
When it comes to a company’s business decisions, what’s best for managers and sharehold-
ers isn’t always best for creditors. Debt covenants—including those based on accounting 
numbers—help reduce this conflict of interest. Creditors benefit because debt covenants 
reduce default risk, and shareholders benefit from the lowered cost of debt financing.
Mandated Accounting Changes May Trigger Debt 
Covenant Violation
When accounting standards setters such as the FASB or International Accounting Standards 
Board (IASB) issue new reporting standards, their goal is to improve the relevance and repre-
sentational faithfulness of firms’ financial statements. But new reporting standards often have 
unintended consequences. One of these unintended consequences is that adoption may trigger 
a debt covenant violation.
 
Electronic Data Systems Corporation (EDS) was one company with loan covenants potentially 
affected by what was then a proposed change in pension accounting. EDS had a loan covenant 
requiring a minimum amount of shareholders’ equity (called net worth in the loan agreement), 
adjusted for net income and any money raised by selling new shares. A note in the 2005 annual 
report provides details about this covenant and two others with which EDS had to comply:
 
Following is a summary of the financial covenant requirements under our unsecured credit facilities 
and the calculated amount or ratios at December 31, 2005 (dollars in millions):
Pension accounting rules 
are described in Chapter 14.
 
As of and for the
 
Year Ended
 
December 31, 2005
 
Covenant 
Actual
Minimum net worth 
$6,420 
$7,512
Leverage ratio 
2.25 
1.67
Fixed charge coverage ratio 
1.15 
2.37
 
The note shows that EDS was in compliance with all three covenants. Net worth, for 
 example, was $7,512 million at the end of 2005, or 17% above the required minimum. Put 
another way, EDS had a net worth safety margin of $1,092 million (5 $7,512 2 $6,420), the 
dollar amount by which net worth could decline before triggering a covenant violation.
 
What would happen to this safety margin when EDS adopted the newly mandated pension 
accounting rules? According to one analyst, net worth was going to fall by as much as $1,060 
million, eliminating virtually all of the safety margin, and placing EDS in a rather precarious 
position.
 
Borrowers and lenders recognize that covenant compliance can be jeopardized by mandated 
changes in accounting practices even though the real credit risk is unchanged. That is why 
many loan agreements have financial covenants that rely on fixed GAAP, that is, the accounting 
rules in place when the loan is first granted. This approach would allow EDS to continue to use 
old GAAP for covenant compliance tests even though new GAAP would be used in the com-
pany’s audited financial statements. Loan covenants with fixed GAAP insulate the company 
from any adverse effects of mandatory accounting changes. However, fixed GAAP can be 

 
Debt Covenants in Lending Agreements 
377
costly to implement, because it requires firms to operate multiple accounting systems. This 
problem can become even more difficult for a firm with several loan agreements entered into at 
different points in time, each calling for data based on a different version of GAAP.
 
How often is fixed GAAP used in loan agreements? One study found that roughly 75% of 
the loans examined included covenants tied to financial statement amounts. Roughly half of 
those used fixed GAAP and thus were insulated from mandatory accounting changes.3
 
When a loan agreement does not permit fixed GAAP, lenders still have the option to waive 
or renegotiate covenants that are distorted by an accounting standard update. That is what may 
have happened at EDS in 2006. The annual report that year indicated that EDS had renegoti-
ated its unsecured credit facilities midyear, and the new loan no longer contained a minimum 
net worth covenant. Renegotiation thus alleviated the covenant violation problem caused 
when EDS began using the new pension accounting rule. Still, lenders are not required to re-
negotiate in such situations. So, if a borrower has become a less desirable credit risk over the 
years, a lender could use a covenant violation created by a mandated accounting change to 
force early repayment of a loan the lender would prefer not to hold any longer.
 
There may be more to the story, however. Elsewhere in the 2006 annual report, EDS re-
vealed that when the new pension accounting rule took effect, it reduced net worth by only 
$0.566 billion, far less than the analyst had estimated. The covenant safety margin was re-
duced but a substantial margin remained intact. EDS may well have negotiated a new credit 
facility for other reasons such as to obtain a lower interest rate.
Managers’ Responses to Potential Debt 
Covenant Violations
Violating a covenant is costly, so managers have strong incentives to make accounting 
choices that reduce the likelihood of technical default. Accounting choices include not only 
the selection of alternative accounting techniques (for example, LIFO versus FIFO inventory 
methods) but also accruals involving judgment (such as the bad debt provision) 
and decisions about when to initiate transactions that result in accounting gains 
or losses (for example, when assets are sold or the corporation is restructured). 
Readers of financial statements must be able to recognize and understand 
these incentives and their effects on managers’ accounting choices.
 
A number of studies have examined how debt-covenant-related incentives 
affect managers’ accounting choices. One study looked at voluntary account-
ing changes made by 130 companies reporting covenant violations.4 It found that net worth 
and working capital restrictions are the most frequently violated accounting-based covenants 
and that companies approaching default often make accounting choices that increase reported 
earnings. The most common techniques used at these companies to increase earnings are 
changes in pension cost assumptions (discussed in Chapter 14), the liquidation of LIFO lay-
ers, and the adoption of the FIFO inventory method (both discussed in Chapter 9).
 
Another study examined discretionary accounting accruals, noncash transactions that 
 accrue revenues (as when Accounts receivable arising from credit sales are recognized) or 
 expenses (as when Accrued warranties payable is increased by new warranty obligations).5 
This study looked at discretionary accruals by 94 companies reporting covenant violations 
3 M. B. Mohrman, “The Use of Fixed GAAP Provisions in Debt Contracts,” Accounting Horizons, September 1996, pp. 78–91.
4 A. P. Sweeney, “Debt-Covenant Violations and Managers’ Accounting Responses,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 
May 1994, pp. 281–308.
5 M. L. DeFond and J. Jiambalvo, “Debt Covenant Violation and Manipulation of Accruals,” Journal of Accounting and 
Economics, January 1994, pp. 145–76.
A technical default occurs when the borrower 
violates one or more loan covenants but has 
made all interest and principal payments. A 
payment default occurs when the borrower 
is unable to make the scheduled interest or 
 principal payment.

378 
CHAPTER 7
The Role of Financial Information in Contracting
from 1985 to 1988. Accrual adjustments in the year prior to violation significantly increased 
reported earnings by accelerating revenue and postponing expenses. Moreover, these accrual 
adjustments also increased working capital in the year of the covenant violation.6
 
Yet another study provides compelling evidence that borrowers take actions to avoid debt 
covenant violations.7 A detailed examination of roughly 1,600 commercial loans made to 
U.S. companies singled out two accounting-based covenants for analysis: a minimum net 
worth covenant and a minimum current ratio covenant. For each loan and covenant, the 
 researchers calculated the amount of “slack” (or safety margin) available each quarter over 
the life of the loan. The data were then sorted into 19 bins based on the amount of slack 
available each quarter. If managers try to avoid covenant violations, we should see relatively 
few data points just below zero slack and relatively many data points just above zero.
 
Figure 7.1 depicts the results for minimum net worth covenants. As predicted, there are an 
unusually small number of loan/quarters where net worth falls just below the covenant minimum 
(i.e., slack is negative) and an unusually large number of loan/quarters with net worth just above 
the minimum (i.e., slack is zero or positive). A similar pattern was found for minimum current 
ratio covenants. Managers apparently take actions to avoid violating accounting-based covenants 
in commercial loans, but exactly how they sidestep a violation is less clear. As the researchers 
point out, borrowers can achieve the required covenant benchmark through their accounting 
choices, “real” actions such as issuing more stock to increase net worth, or other means.
 
Borrowers appear willing to pay substantially higher interest rates to retain accounting 
flexibility that may help them avoid covenant violations. One study of 206 bank loans found 
that interest rates are 75 basis points higher when the loan agreement allows “floating GAAP,” 
meaning that accounting method changes can be used to increase covenant slack, rather than 
fixed GAAP.8 Of course, these results could be because maintaining multiple sets of books, as 
would be the case under fixed GAAP, is more costly than the additional interest.
6 Two early studies do not find support for the hypothesized influence of debt covenants on managers’ accounting choices. 
See P. M. Healy and K. Palepu, “Effectiveness of Accounting-Based Dividend Covenants,” Journal of Accounting and 
 Economics, January 1990, pp. 97–133; and H. DeAngelo, L. DeAngelo, and D. J. Skinner, “Accounting Choice in Troubled 
Companies,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, January 1994, pp. 113–43.
7 L. D. Dichev and D. J. Skinner, “Large-Sample Evidence on the Debt Covenant Hypothesis,” Journal of Accounting 
 Research, September 2002, pp. 1091–1124.
8 A. Beatty, K. Ramesh, and J. Weber, “The Importance of Accounting Changes in Debt Contracts: The Cost of Flexibility in 
Covenant Calculations,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, June 2002, pp. 173–204.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
100
200
300
400
500
600
0
Covenant slack
Number of observations
Figure 7.1
HISTOGRAM OF NET 
WORTH COVENANT 
SLACK
Each column (bin) shows the 
frequency of loan/quarters 
(N 5 2,339) when the 
 borrowers’ actual net worth 
falls below (negative slack) or 
above (positive slack) the 
 minimum net worth level 
 stipulated in each of 1,600 
commercial loans.
Source: L. D. Dichev and D. J. Skinner, 
“Large-Sample Evidence on the Debt 
Covenant Hypothesis,” Journal of 
 Accounting Research, September 2002, 
pp. 1091–1124. Copyright © 2002. 
Used by permission of Wiley-Blackwell 
Publishing, Ltd.

 
Management Compensation 
379
 
These and other studies suggest that management tends to make accounting method 
changes and/or to manipulate discretionary accruals to avoid violating debt covenants. 
However, accounting maneuvers to avoid covenant violations are unlikely to be sustainable. 
Unsustainable earnings increases that boost net worth, for example, are unlikely to translate 
into permanent cash flow increases. Consequently, these “tenuous” earnings should be inter-
preted with caution.
 
Throughout the remainder of the book, we highlight how alternative accounting methods 
and accrual adjustments affect earnings, the balance sheet, and key financial ratios. We’ll alert 
you to accounting choices that can have substantial implications for debt covenants. Keep 
them in mind as you go about interpreting and using accounting numbers for making eco-
nomic decisions.
 
Although we have seen the important role covenants play in facilitating borrowing by 
 reducing conflicts between lenders and borrowers, a number of so-called covenant-lite loans 
are made as well. These are loans that contain minimal covenants, providing the borrower 
with more freedom and the lender with less protection than an otherwise similar loan that is 
“covenant heavy.” Covenant-lite loans became increasingly popular in 2006 and 2007 but lost 
popularity during the credit crisis. One study found that in 2007, covenant-lite loans ac-
counted for over $140 billion, or about 20% of leveraged-loan9 dollars. In 2008, that figure 
had dropped to about 3%. By 2011 it had grown again to about 18%. The study also found 
that covenant-lite loans are concentrated in high-risk borrowers (S&P ratings of BB and be-
low), which is the opposite of what one might suspect at first. After all, when the borrower is a 
higher risk, the protection a covenant offers is likely to be seen as more valuable. Why have 
covenant-lite loans taken off and why are they concentrated in higher-risk companies? The 
study’s authors  argue that some institutional investors prefer the higher yields on covenant-lite 
loans to the lower yields they could get with covenant-heavy loans. That is, 
those investors value the extra yield more than they value the extra 
protection.10
MANAGEMENT COMPENSATION
Most modern corporations are not run by descendants of the founders but in-
stead by professional managers. The resulting separation of ownership from 
control creates potential conflicts of interest between shareholders and 
managers.11
 
Consider a top executive whose job requires extensive travel and who, for reasons of  “comfort 
and convenience,” prefers the corporate jet to a commercial airline. Who receives the benefits 
of the comfort and convenience? And who pays the cost? If the comfort and convenience that 
comes from using the corporate jet leads to increased managerial productivity, both parties 
stand to gain. Shareholders lose, however, when the benefits of comfort and convenience 
 accrue only to the executive and no productivity improvements result from it. That’s because 
shareholders alone bear the added cost of corporate jet travel.
 
Potential conflicts of interest can be mitigated if managers are given incentives to behave 
as if they were owners. One way to do this is to provide a compensation package that links 
9 A leveraged loan is a loan made to a company that already is highly levered.
10 See M. T. Billett, R. Elkamhi, L. Popov, and R. Pungaliya, “Bank Skin in the Game and Loan Contract Design: Evidence 
from Covenant-Lite Loans,” Working Paper, August 2013. Their statistics are based on data from a proprietary database: S&P 
Leveraged Commentary and Data.
11 To learn more about conflicts of interest between owners and managers see J. Boyd, R. Parrino, and G. Pritsch, 
 “Stockholder-Manager Conflicts and Firm Value,” Financial Analysts Journal, May/June 1998, pp. 14–30.
The corporate jet example illustrates one type 
of conflict between owners and managers: 
managers’ tendency to “overconsume” com-
pany  resources. But there are others. For  example, 
managers who are near retirement age may have 
little incentive to adopt a long-term focus by 
 investing in R&D because doing so  reduces 
 current earnings and thus earnings-based 
 incentive pay.

380 
CHAPTER 7
The Role of Financial Information in Contracting
pay to improvements in firm value.12 If a manager’s compensation goes up as the organiza-
tion’s value increases, he or she has an incentive to take actions that lead to such an increase. 
As a result, both the manager and the owners will benefit.
 
Two ways to align managers’ incentives with owners’ interests are to link compensation to 
stock returns and/or to financial performance measures such as accounting earnings. Both 
 approaches are widely used. Neither is perfect.
 
Consider stock returns. Managerial decisions clearly affect share prices in the long run. 
But in the short run, share prices could rise or fall due to factors that are beyond manage-
ment’s control, such as interest rate changes. And, for a division manager in a company with 
many divisions, most of the change in stock price is due to other managers’ 
efforts and is not within that manager’s control.
Similar problems cloud the linkage between compensation and financial 
performance measures such as earnings. On the positive side, earnings are 
probably less susceptible to the influence of temporary and external economic 
forces and, unlike stock returns, accounting-based financial performance mea-
sures can be tied to a manager’s specific responsibilities, such as the profit-
ability of a single product line, geographical region, or business unit. On the 
other hand, using accounting earnings as a performance measure is frequently 
criticized for its reliance on accruals, deferrals, allocations, and valuations that 
involve varying degrees of subjectivity and judgment. This is especially trou-
blesome when the manager being evaluated can influence those judgments.
 
A good compensation plan must overcome the incentive alignment problems we have dis-
cussed and motivate managers to act like owners.13
How Executives Are Paid
Most compensation packages involve a base salary, an annual incentive, and a long-term 
incentive:
• Base salary is typically dictated by industry norms, the size of the company, and the 
 executive’s experience and specialized skills.
• Annual incentives set yearly financial performance goals that must be achieved if the 
 executive is to earn various bonus awards. For example, a plan may specify that a bonus 
of 50% of annual salary is earned only if the after-tax return on assets for the company 
exceeds 12%. But a 100% bonus can be earned if the return on assets is 15% or more. 
Such plans link pay to performance; because compensation is “at risk,” managers have 
an incentive to achieve plan goals.
• Long-term incentives motivate and reward executives for the company’s long-term 
growth and prosperity (typically three to seven years). Long-term incentives are designed 
to counterbalance the inherently short-term orientation of other incentives.
12 A more complete discussion of compensation incentives and owner-manager conflicts of interest is found in M. Jensen and 
W. Meckling, “Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs and Ownership Structure,” Journal of Financial 
Economics, October 1976, pp. 305–60; P. Milgrom and J. Roberts, Economics, Organization, and Management (Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1992); and R. Watts and J. Zimmerman, Positive Accounting Theory (Upper Saddle River, 
NJ: Prentice Hall, 1986). A summary of research on executive compensation is available in K. Murphy, “Executive Compen-
sation,” in O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3b (Elsevier Science North Holland, 
1999), Chapter 38.
13 Certain features of executive compensation packages are also designed to reduce the combined tax liability of the company 
and its managers. Tax considerations undoubtedly contribute to the popularity of certain pay practices and help explain their 
use by some companies but not others. See C. W. Smith and R. L. Watts, “Incentive and Tax Effects of Executive Compensa-
tion Plans,” in R. Ball and C. W. Smith (eds.), The Economics of Accounting Policy Choice (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1992).
Changes in interest rates affect stock prices for 
two reasons. To see why, consider the effect of a 
decrease in marketwide interest rates. First, no-
tice that an interest rate decrease will reduce the 
company’s cost of equity capital. As you know 
from Chapter 6, this will increase share price. 
Second, as interest rates decrease, the yields on 
fixed-rate bond investments fall, making them 
less attractive to investors. Both factors contrib-
ute to an increase in the demand for stocks and 
an increase in stock prices.

 
Management Compensation 
381
Long-term incentive
Annual incentive
Salary
1985
55%
45%
35%
20% 21%
66%
13%
23%
60%
17%
28%
17%
1995
2000
2008
Year
Percentage
70
50
60
40
30
20
10
0
Figure 7.2
CEO COMPENSATION MIX
Annual incentive is a yearly 
performance-based bonus 
payment. Long-term incentive 
is a yearly award in cash, stock, 
or stock options for multi-year 
performance.
Source: The Conference Board, “Execu-
tive Annual Incentive Plans—1996” 
(New York: 1997); Hewitt Associates, 
“2008 Executive Compensation Pay 
Trends (2000–2008)” (Chicago, IL: 
 November 2008).
14 Hay Group, Inc., 1998 Hay Compensation Report (1998).
 
Figure 7.2 shows the mix of compensation for chief executive officers in 1985, 1995, 2000, 
and 2008 based on annual surveys of pay practices at large U.S. companies. In 1985, base sal-
ary was 55% of the median total pay. Annual bonus payments and long-term incentive awards 
that year comprised 28% and 17%, respectively, of total pay.
 
Figure 7.2 shows that base salary has become a smaller component of total CEO compen-
sation (55% in 1985 versus 23% in 2008), while long-term incentive awards 
have become a larger part of CEO pay (28% in 1985 versus 60% in 2008). 
This shift in compensation mix can be traced to the increased use of stock op-
tions and restricted stock in executive pay packages. As a result, $0.77 of each 
dollar of pay in 2008 came from annual incentives ($0.17) and long-term 
 incentives ($0.60). This “at-risk” pay was substantially greater in 2008  than it 
was in 1985.
 
Within a given organization, the proportion of pay “at risk” falls off steeply 
for executives on lower rungs of the corporate ladder. One compensation sur-
vey found that corporate executives in large industrial companies had 71% of 
their pay at risk, midlevel managers had 20%, and nonmanagerial profession-
als had only 8%.14
Annual (Short-term) Incentives 
The most common financial performance 
measure used in bonus plans is GAAP net income or some variation of it. For example, 
 Exhibit 7.1 shows what Computer Associates International said about its 2003 annual 
 incentive plan.
 
Notice that Computer Associates’ shareholders approved the annual incentive plan (see ➀). 
This means that the basic features of the plan—who participates, how performance is mea-
sured, the maximum payout as a percent of salary, and so on—were submitted to shareholders 
and approved by a formal vote at an annual meeting. Until recently, most companies did not 
One of the earliest annual incentive plans was 
the General Motors Bonus Plan adopted in 
1918. According to a former CEO of the com-
pany, “the interests of the corporation and its 
stockholders are best served by making key em-
ployees parties in the corporation’s prosperity . . . 
each individual should be rewarded in propor-
tion to his [sic] contribution to the profit of his 
[sic] own division and of the corporation as a 
whole.”
Source: Alfred P. Sloan, Jr., My Years with General 
 Motors (New York: Doubleday & Company, 1964), p. 407.
Chapter 1 describes the 
 accounting fraud uncovered 
in 2003 at Computer 
 Associates—now CA 
 Technologies. Case 7-5 
tells you more.

382 
CHAPTER 7
The Role of Financial Information in Contracting
request shareholder approval of their annual incentive plans, although a growing number be-
gan to do so because of shareholder pressure for pay transparency. Then, in 2010, Congress 
passed and President Obama signed the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Pro-
tection Act. Dodd-Frank mandated a nonbinding shareholder vote on executive compensation 
plans at least once every three years.
 
Computer Associates used two accounting-based performance measures, revenue and 
NOPAT, to determine managers’ annual incentive pay (see ➁ and ➂). The bonus formula had 
two components. First, the company must have achieved a minimum revenue goal each year 
before any bonus could be paid. Second, once the revenue goal was achieved, the amount of 
the bonus was determined by corporate profits (NOPAT) compared to a minimum and maxi-
mum profit threshold and a target profit amount.
 
Figure 7.3 illustrates how the NOPAT component of the bonus formula worked. Suppose 
revenue for the year exceeded the minimum required for bonus payments. The minimum 
NOPAT threshold for the year was set at $10 million, the target NOPAT at $20 million, and 
the maximum threshold at $30 million. To complete the illustration, assume the CEO’s target 
bonus is $2 million, or a 10% share of the $20 million NOPAT.
 
As Figure 7.3 shows, no bonus would have been paid if NOPAT for the year were below the 
$10 million threshold. If NOPAT were to fall at the minimum threshold, the CEO would have 
received a bonus of $0.5 million (50% payout 3 10% NOPAT bonus share 3 $10 million 
NOPAT). Between the minimum threshold and the target, the payout rate increases from 50% 
up to 100%. So, if the company reported NOPAT of $20 million, the CEO would have earned 
a bonus of $2 million (100% payout 3 10% NOPAT bonus share 3 $20 million NOPAT).
 
Once NOPAT exceeded the $20 million target level, the payout rate would grow faster 
from 100% up to 200%. For example, the CEO would earn a bonus of $6 million if NOPAT 
reached $30 million ($6 million 5 200% payout 3 10% NOPAT bonus share 3 $30 million 
NOPAT). But there’s a catch! The bonus formula put a cap on the maximum annual incentive 
EXHIBIT 7.1
Computer Associates International
Description of Annual Incentive Compensation Plan
Annual Incentives. [U]nder the Company’s annual incentive plan ➀ previously approved by 
the stockholders, targeted payouts are determined at the beginning of each fiscal year based on 
the Company’s ➁ achievement of (a) a minimum level of revenue and (b) threshold amounts of 
net operating profit after taxes (NOPAT), relative to the performance of the Company’s peers. 
The NOPAT thresholds are derived from the financial forecasts of the Company that are publicly 
disclosed at the beginning of each fiscal year.
 
No payouts are made unless the minimum revenue level is achieved. If the minimum revenue 
level is reached, the payout amount can range from 0% to 200%, based on the percentage of 
NOPAT that is ➂ achieved as compared to the threshold, as follows:
 
% Target Payout
Below threshold 
0%
At threshold 
Up to 50%
Between threshold and target 
Up to 100%
Between target and maximum 
Up to 200%
 
The [Compensation] Committee must certify the achievement of the minimum revenue 
level and the NOPAT thresholds prior to each annual payout under the annual incentive plan. In 
addition, the ➃ Committee has discretion to reduce the amount of any payout if it determines 
that, notwithstanding the achievement of the minimum amounts, a reduction is appropriate.
Source: Computer Associates International, 2003 Proxy Statement. (Emphasis and circled numbers added.)
In the United States, top ex-
ecutive bonus opportunities 
typically range from 50% to 
200% of salary as they did 
at Computer Associates. In 
the United Kingdom and 
other mature economies, 
maximum annual bonus 
 levels have traditionally 
been lower. Short-term 
 bonuses are also common 
in emerging economies.

 
Management Compensation 
383
pay the CEO could earn. No matter how much above $30 million (the maximum threshold) 
NOPAT might be, the CEO’s bonus would remain at $6 million that year.
 
At Computer Associates and most other companies, the compensation committee is 
 responsible for implementing the executive pay plan (see ➃). This committee 
selects the performance metrics to be used and sets the annual or multiyear 
performance goals for each executive. The committee can sometimes override 
the bonus formula when circumstances warrant. Computer Associates’ com-
pensation committee may reduce or eliminate the calculated award, but it may 
not increase the award. As we will see in a moment, compensation committees 
sometimes play an important role in reducing managers’ incentives to meet 
the performance target using accounting “gimmickry.”
 
Compensation committees are comprised of outside directors, ostensibly to 
eliminate the conflict of interest inherent in having executives set their own 
bonus targets. Still, it is never clear how independent outside directors really are from their 
internal peers on the board. Being an outside director can be lucrative, and even outside direc-
tors may not act entirely in the interests of shareholders if they fear that doing 
so could affect their ability to remain on the board.
Long-Term Incentives 
Long-term incentives constitute a large por-
tion of total compensation for most CEOs, although many long-term plans are 
not tied directly to accounting numbers. Figure 7.4 shows the mix of long-
term incentives by type.
 
Stock options give the holder the right, but not the obligation, to buy company shares at a 
stated (exercise) price, typically the market price on the option grant date, for a period of 
years. If the stock price rises, the executive may trade in (or “exercise”) each option plus pay 
the stated exercise price in exchange for a share of company stock. The option can only be 
$6.0
$2.0
Earned bonus (in millions)
$0.5
$0
$10
Minimum
threshold
No bonus in this
NOPAT region
Bonus of 50% to 
100% in this region
Bonus of 100% to 
200% in this region
Bonus is capped
to $6 in this region
$20
Target
Actual NOPAT for the year (in millions)
$30
Maximum
threshold
$40
Figure 7.3
COMPUTER ASSOCIATES 
INTERNATIONAL
How the annual bonus 
 formula worked.
Notice how important one more profit dollar 
can be if it enables the company to report 
NOPAT of $10 million rather than $9,999,999. 
In our example, that one extra profit dollar 
causes the CEO’s bonus to jump from $0 to 
$500,000. Top executive cash bonus awards at 
Computer Associates (now CA Technologies) 
are today still determined by a formula similar 
to the one depicted in Figure 7.3.
Stock options were not widely used by U.S. 
companies until the late 1980s. This form of 
long-term pay is less prevalent in other mature 
economies (e.g., the United Kingdom and 
 Australia) and in emerging economies.

384 
CHAPTER 7
The Role of Financial Information in Contracting
worth exercising if the market price of the underlying stock is above the exercise price. And, 
the option becomes more valuable as the stock price rises. So, the holder has an incentive to 
increase shareholder value as measured by stock price.
 
Stock grants give the executive outright ownership of company shares. Restricted stock 
is typically an award of stock that is nontransferable or subject to forfeiture for a period of 
years. The most prevalent restriction is one of continued employment, although performance-
related conditions are sometimes applied. Dividends can be paid to the executive even when 
the stock is restricted, and some restricted stock awards carry immediate voting rights. 
 Restricted stock grants provide a set of “golden handcuffs” for retaining executives, at least 
during the restriction period.
As Figure 7.4 shows, the use of restricted stock has grown substantially and the use of 
stock options has fallen since the FASB mandated the expensing of stock option costs in 2005. 
That rule change eliminated the financial reporting advantage stock options had over restricted 
stock.
 
Performance-based pay plans require the manager to achieve certain multiyear financial 
performance goals such as a three-year average return on equity (ROE) of at least 20%. The 
payout could be either cash or company shares. From a financial reporting perspective, these 
plans are important because performance goals are often tied to financial targets such as earn-
ings per share growth or return-on-equity hurdles. Occasionally, the performance goals are 
strategic: increasing market share, reducing costs, or improving product quality. Performance 
goals are established at the beginning of the award period, which usually ranges from four to 
seven years, and may be stated in absolute terms or relative to the performance levels achieved 
by peer companies over the award period.
 
Performance plans have been a key element of long-term incentive compensation in many 
companies for a number of years. However, the Tax Reform Act of 1993 provided further 
impetus to link pay plans to specific performance goals. The Act limited to $1 million the 
federal income tax deduction that a public company may claim for nonperformance-based 
compensation paid to any of its top five executives. By linking top executive pay to specific 
Restricted stock
Performance-based pay
Stock options
1995
68%
78%
14%
76%
46%
31%
1999
2002
2006
Year
Percentage
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
19%
8%
13%
12%12%
23%
Figure 7.4
LONG-TERM 
INCENTIVE MIX
Source: Annual survey of 350 large U.S. 
 companies conducted by Mercer 
Human  Resource Consulting.

 
Management Compensation 
385
performance goals, firms gain valuable tax benefits when compensation payouts exceed the 
$1 million threshold.
Proxy Statements and Executive Compensation
Information about a company’s executive compensation practices can be found in the annual 
proxy statement, a notification of the annual shareholders meeting, filed each year with the 
SEC. Among other disclosures, this document describes both the compensation payments and 
awards made to the five highest paid executives of the company and any new executive com-
pensation plans.
 
Although top executive compensation disclosures were mandated in 1933, a year before 
the SEC was created, the information provided was quite sparse. In the late 1980s, as top ex-
ecutive pay routinely began to exceed $1 million, major stockholders and the news media 
expressed outrage over the amounts paid, their questionable link to firm performance, and the 
inadequacy of required disclosures. This outrage was one reason the Tax Reform Act of 1993 
included the $1 million cap on the corporate tax deduction for nonperformance-based top 
executive pay. The SEC also stepped into the fray in 1992 by dramatically expanding the 
 required pay disclosures. 
 
The stock option backdating scandal of 2006 led the SEC to expand the required disclo-
sures for executive compensation even further.15 By July of that year, the SEC was investigat-
ing more than 80 companies for reporting that options were granted at an earlier date than 
they in fact were. Invariably, the reported grant date coincided with a much 
lower stock price than the actual grant date, which allowed companies to set 
exercise prices below the stock price on the actual grant date without report-
ing any compensation expense under the accounting rules in effect at the time. 
More on this in Chapter 15.
 
Firms now provide a compensation discussion and analysis (CD&A) in the 
proxy statement. This disclosure requirement is similar in nature to the long-
standing management’s discussion and analysis (MD&A) for 10-K and 10-Q 
filings, which requires a report on the operations of the business “as seen through 
the eyes of management.” Among other things, the CD&A must describe the 
specific items of corporate performance that are considered in making compen-
sation decisions, how specific forms of compensation are structured and implemented to reflect 
performance, and the impact of accounting and tax treatments of the particular form of 
compensation.
 
In addition to the CD&A, firms now provide detailed disclosure of three broad executive 
pay categories:
1. Compensation currently paid or deferred for the current fiscal year and the two preceding 
years, including stock options, restricted stock, and any other forms of compensation that 
are parts of the executive’s pay plan.
2. Holdings of equity-related interests (stock options and restricted stock) that relate to 
 current or prior period compensation.
3. Retirement and other postemployment compensation, including pensions, health care 
benefits, and benefits payable in the event of a change in control (so-called golden para-
chute payments).
After the first batch of proxies arrived, the SEC 
told 350 companies they hadn’t been specific 
enough. So, one of those companies—Applied 
Materials—expanded by 76% the word count of 
its proxy compensation section the next year. 
The expanded section was twice the length of 
the U.S. Constitution and its 27 amendments.
Source: P. Drorak, “(New Math) 3 (SEC Rules) 1 Proxy 5 
Confusion,” The Wall Street Journal, March 21, 2008. 
15 SEC Release 33-8765, Executive Compensation Disclosure, December 22, 2006; and Release 33-8732a, Executive Com-
pensation and Related Party Disclosure, August 29, 2006. Release 33-8732a is 436 pages in length.

386 
CHAPTER 7
The Role of Financial Information in Contracting
This information must be disclosed for the chief executive offi-
cer and the chief financial officer regardless of their compensation 
and for the next three most highly paid executives serving as corpo-
rate officers if their total compensation is more than $100,000.
Incentives Tied to Accounting Numbers
Today, many companies use performance plans that rely on account-
ing information. Let’s take a closer look at how annual bonus plans 
and long-term compensation are tied to accounting numbers.
The common performance measures used in annual and multiyear 
(long-term) incentive plans for senior corporate executives are shown 
in Figure 7.5. Most plans link incentive pay to one or more accounting-
based performance measures, such as revenue, earnings per share, or 
return on equity. Economic value added (EVA®) is used in 12% of the 
plans, while operating cash flow is used in 10% of the plans.
In addition to accounting-based performance measures, the data in Figure 7.5 indicate 
that most plans also use nonfinancial performance measures to determine incentive pay. 
Financial metrics including last year’s return on assets or earnings per share tell us about 
the past. However, nonfinancial metrics such as sales orders booked are lead indicators of 
future economic performance.16 Many companies today combine nonfinancial perfor-
mance metrics with accounting-based financial metrics (i.e., gross margin, operating in-
come, and revenue) and market-based metrics (such as total shareholder return and stock 
price) to produce a “balanced scorecard” for evaluating managerial performance.17 The 
balanced scorecard is intended to get managers to respond to the many facets of value 
 creation and to recognize the tradeoffs to various actions, rather than to just maximize a 
single performance metric.
Whole Foods Market is one company that links incentive 
pay to economic value added, or EVA®, performance (see 
Case 7-3). EVA® is a performance metric popularized by 
the consulting firm Stern Stewart & Company. In its sim-
plest form, EVA® is net operating profit after taxes (or 
NOPAT) minus a charge for the financial capital lenders 
and investors have put into the business (c* 3 Capital, 
where c* is the company’s weighted average cost of 
 capital). So, a company that earns $150 of NOPAT using 
$1,000 of capital with a c* of 10% will have generated 
$50 of EVA® ($150 2 0.10 3 $1,000). Stern Stewart and 
most other economic value practitioners advocate making 
a variety of adjustments to GAAP income statements and 
balance sheets before performing the EVA® calculation. 
These adjustments are intended to eliminate certain 
 accounting “distortions,” many of which we describe in 
later chapters of this book. 
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90% 100%
0%
71%
35%
29%
29%
12%
10%
8%
8%
84%
Net income or revenues
Earnings per share (EPS)
Return on equity (ROE)
Return on assets (ROA)
Economic value added (EVA®)
Cash flow
Return on capital (ROC)
Other
Nonfinancial performance
Figure 7.5
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
USED IN ANNUAL AND 
MULTIYEAR CASH 
 INCENTIVE PLANS
The individual percentages 
sum to more than 100% 
 because many companies use 
multiple measures of perfor-
mance. The results are based 
on a comprehensive survey 
of 2,700 U.S. companies.
Source: “Executive Annual Incentive 
Plans—1996.” Copyright © 1996. Used 
with permission of  The Conference 
Board. www.conference-board.org
16 To learn more about the use of nonfinancial performance measures in bonus plans, see C. D. Ittner, D. F. Larcker, and 
M. U. Rajan, “The Choice of Performance Measures in Annual Bonus Contracts,” The Accounting Review, April 1997, 
pp. 231–55.
17 See R. S. Kaplan and D. P. Norton, The Balanced Scorecard (Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press, 1996).

 
Management Compensation 
387
The wide use of accounting-based incentives is controversial for at least four reasons:
First, sales and earnings growth does not automatically translate into increased shareholder 
value. Management can grow sales and earnings by expanding the size of the business through 
acquisitions or new investment. This strategy can produce substantial dollar increases in sales 
volume, operating earnings, and perhaps EPS. But these added profits don’t necessarily in-
crease shareholder value. For example, an acquisition at a price above the fair value of a target 
could increase sales and profits, but it will destroy value.
 
Second, the accrual accounting process itself can distort traditional measures of perfor-
mance. Consider return on assets (ROA). Companies that show improving ROA often do so 
because of real profitability gains: higher revenues or lower expenses. However, some ROA 
improvements are due to the mechanics of depreciation accounting. To see this, consider a 
business that generates $150 of net income before depreciation each year and pays that same 
amount out as a dividend. The business opens on January 1, 2014, with total assets of $1,000 
and no debt. Half of those assets ($500) are equipment. The annual depreciation charge for the 
equipment is $50, so net income is $100. The company’s ROA for 2014 is 10% ($100 of net 
income divided by $1,000 of beginning assets). But next year ROA will increase to about 
10.5%. And the year after that, ROA will be 11.1%. Why? Because depreciation accounting 
has reduced the book value of total assets.
 
As a stockholder in the company, you probably don’t want to pay an ROA 
bonus for nothing more than depreciation accounting. It’s better instead to 
reward management for real profitability improvement and to ignore the 
profit growth illusion created by depreciation accounting. That’s why some 
companies prefer return on gross investment (ROGI, or net income divided 
by total gross assets) as a performance metric in their bonus plans.
 
Third, accounting-based incentive plans can encourage managers to adopt a short-term 
focus. Consider the typical bonus plan in Figure 7.6. The executive receives a bonus equal to 
100% of base salary if annual EPS reaches the $3.50 target. The bonus award declines to 50% 
of base salary for EPS performance at the $3.00 level, and it escalates to 150% for EPS at the 
$4.00 level. If EPS falls below $3.00, no bonus is awarded; at EPS above $4.00, the bonus 
remains 150% of base salary.
 
To see how accounting-based incentives might contribute to a short-term focus, consider 
an executive who believes current business conditions will allow the company to earn only 
$2.80 EPS for the year. Despite these unfavorable (no bonus) conditions, the executive can 
ROA for 2015 equals the $100 of net income, 
divided by net assets of $950 (after subtracting 
$50 of accumulated depreciation) or 10.5%. The 
11.1% ROA calculation for 2016 is $100 of net 
income, divided by net assets of $900 (after 
subtracting $100 of accumulated depreciation).
Bonus cap
Target bonus
Performance
 threshold
0
50
Bonus as % of salary
100
150
$3.00
$3.50
Earnings per share (EPS)
$4.00
Figure 7.6
TYPICAL STRUCTURE OF 
ANNUAL PERFORMANCE 
BONUSES

388 
CHAPTER 7
The Role of Financial Information in Contracting
still achieve the $3.00 EPS minimum required for a bonus by cutting back on critical research 
and development. Research expenses go down, reported earnings go up, and bonuses are paid! 
This short-term strategy can prove costly in the long term if a competitor introduces a new 
product based on the technology the company had been researching. Of course, the same un-
sustainable short-term earnings increase can be achieved by delaying essential maintenance 
and repairs or by postponing other key operating expenditures.
 
Executives also have an incentive to “manage down” reported earnings when the account-
ing benchmark (EPS in this example) is above the upper bonus limit. Suppose our executive 
believes that current business conditions will enable the company to earn $4.20 EPS this year. 
Here the executive has an incentive to reduce reported earnings to $4.00, deferring the excess 
to the future. After all, the same bonus is awarded no matter whether EPS is at the $4.00 or 
$4.20 level!
 
How can excess earnings be deferred? It’s easy! Delay some fourth-quarter customer 
shipments until the beginning of next year. Current year’s sales decline and earnings fall 
without affecting this year’s bonus; the delayed sales and earnings count toward next year’s 
bonus. You don’t lose anything this year, and you increase the probability of earning the 
bonus next year.
 
Fourth, executives have some discretion over the company’s accounting policies, and 
they can use that discretion to achieve bonus goals. For example, an executive falling short 
of the $3.00 EPS minimum might deliberately reduce fourth-quarter inventories, report a 
“LIFO liquidation” gain, and boost earnings to a level above the bonus threshold. (LIFO 
liquidations are discussed in Chapter 9.) Or, if earnings performance is so low that reach-
ing the bonus threshold is impossible, the manager has an incentive to reduce earnings 
further. The objective of these deliberate earnings reductions, called big baths, is simple. 
Today’s write-offs reduce future expenses because written-off assets will not be depreci-
ated. The result is to increase future earnings—and future bonuses—with no reduction in 
current bonuses below the zero level they would be at anyway. Examples of big-bath write-
offs include asset impairments and large restructuring charges as described in Chapter 3. 
Accounting discretion also allows managers who believe earnings will exceed the bonus 
ceiling to play bonus “games”: reduce reported earnings down to the bonus ceiling and 
defer the excess.
Research Evidence 
Do managers use accounting flexibility to achieve bonus goals? 
One study, which looked at annual bonus plans like the one in Figure 7.6, revealed two things:
1. When annual earnings already exceeded the bonus ceiling ($4.00 in Figure 7.6), managers 
used discretionary accounting options to reduce earnings.
2. When it was clearly evident that earnings would be below the bonus threshold ($3.00 in 
Figure 7.6), managers used their financial reporting flexibility to reduce earnings further.18
These reductions in earnings had no effect on that year’s bonus but improved managers’ 
chances of receiving bonuses the following year. That’s because taking a larger discretionary 
expense this year often meant a smaller expense next year, and that helped to ensure that next 
year’s earnings would meet or beat the bonus target.19
18 P. Healy, “The Effect of Bonus Schemes on Accounting Decisions,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, April 1985, 
pp. 85–108. Later studies find mixed evidence on managers’ use of accounting discretion around bonus thresholds. See 
T. Fields, T. Lys, and L. Vincent, “Empirical Research on Accounting Choice,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 
 September 2001, pp. 255–308.
19 When current earnings are poor but future earnings are expected to be strong, managers borrow earnings from the future 
for use in the current period. See M. L. DeFond and C. W. Park, “Smoothing Income in Anticipation of Future Earnings,” 
Journal of Accounting and Economics, July 1997, pp. 115–39.

 
Management Compensation 
389
 
Another study examined motivations for controversial debt extinguishment transactions 
called insubstance defeasances.20 These transactions were widely believed to generate artifi-
cial profits, and the FASB subsequently forbade them in 1996.21 The evidence is that some 
firms used these transactions to window-dress earnings and to avoid restrictions in bond cov-
enants. Again, the research findings show that managers sometimes use accounting flexibility 
to evade contract constraints to gain bonus benefits.
 
Several studies show that incoming CEOs have an incentive to decrease earnings in the 
year of the executive change and increase earnings in the next year.22 Doing so presumably 
allows the new CEO to take credit for the company’s apparent improvement.
 
Another study confirmed that R&D expenditures tend to decline during the years immedi-
ately prior to a CEO’s retirement.23 Existing GAAP requires R&D expenditures to be 
 expensed as incurred, thereby reducing income and bonuses.24 By reducing R&D expendi-
tures before they retired, CEOs were able to increase their final bonus payouts.
Protection Against Short-Term Focus 
The abuses just described explain why 
compensation plans typically include long-term, equity-based incentive components that are 
specifically intended to mitigate the short-term focus of executives. Although early research 
findings were mixed, a recent and comprehensive study found no evidence indicating that 
CEO equity incentives contribute to accounting irregularities.25 Stock options (and stock own-
ership) give managers a strong incentive to avoid shortsighted business decisions and instead 
operate the company in ways that create shareholder value. That’s why today stock and stock 
option portfolios rather than cash compensation and other benefits are the major determinants of 
top executives’ wealth.
 
Another factor that can reduce short-term focus is the fact that incentive compensation 
plans are administered by a compensation committee comprised of the company’s outside 
(nonmanagement) directors. The committee can intervene when circumstances warrant modi-
fication of the scheduled incentive award. For example, intervention might arise when a man-
datory change in an accounting principle occurs. In general, the compensation committee can 
adjust the incentive award whenever it believes that current earnings have been unduly influ-
enced by special items or other possible accounting distortions.
 
For example, language of the following sort is typical in many compensation agreements:
At any time prior to the payment of performance awards, the compensation committee may 
 adjust previously established performance targets and other terms and conditions . . . to reflect 
major unforeseen events such as changes in laws, regulations, or accounting practices, mergers, 
acquisitions, divestitures, or extraordinary, unusual, or nonrecurring items or events.26
20 J. R. M. Hand, P. J. Hughes, and S. E. Sefcik, “Insubstance Defeasances: Security Price Reactions and Motivations,” Jour-
nal of Accounting and Economics, May 1990, pp. 47–89. The transaction allowed a company to account for a liability “as if 
extinguished” when cash or other assets were placed irrevocably in a trust that then made all remaining principal and interest 
payments on the debt.
21 See FASB ASC Section 405-20-55-4: Liabilities—Extinguishments of Liabilities—Implementation Guidance and Examples— 
In-Substance Defeasance Transactions.
22 J. Elliott and W. Shaw, “Write-offs as Accounting Procedures to Manage Perceptions,” Journal of Accounting Research, 
Supplement 1988, pp. 91–119; J. Francis, D. Hanna, and L. Vincent, “Causes and Effects of Discretionary Accounting Write-
offs,” Journal of Accounting Research, Supplement 1996, pp. 117–34; S. Pourciau, “Earnings Management and Non-routine 
Executive Changes,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, January–July 1993, pp. 317–36.
23 P. M. Dechow and R. G. Sloan, “Executive Incentives and The Horizon Problem: An Empirical Investigation,” Journal of 
Accounting and Economics, March 1991, pp. 51–89.
24 FASB ASC 730-10-25: Research and Development—Overall—Recognition.
25 C. Armstrong, A. Jagolinzer, and D. Larcker, “Chief Executive Officer Equity Incentives and Accounting Irregularities,” 
Journal of Accounting Research, May 2010, pp. 225–88.
26 J. D. England, “Executive Pay, Incentives and Performance,” in D. E. Logue (ed.), Handbook of Modern Finance (Boston: 
Warren, Gorham & Lamont, 1996), p. E9–18.

390 
CHAPTER 7
The Role of Financial Information in Contracting
Compensation committees can adjust incentive awards for un-
usual or nonrecurring items and events, but do they? One study 
looked at the pay practices of 376 large public companies and found 
that nonrecurring gains tend to flow through to compensation, but 
losses do not.27 Compensation committees apparently shield top 
managers from bonus reductions when net income is decreased by 
nonrecurring losses, but top managers reap higher bonus awards 
when net income is increased by nonrecurring gains.
Some companies have taken the added step of adopting 
formal “compensation recovery” policies. At Krispy 
Kreme Doughnuts, for example, top executives forfeit past 
annual and long-term incentive payments if it is later 
 discovered that they engaged in financial reporting abuses, 
fraud, embezzlement, or other dishonest actions detrimen-
tal to the company.
27 J. J. Gaver and K. M. Gaver, “The Relation Between Nonrecurring Accounting Transactions and CEO Cash Compensa-
tion,” The Accounting Review, April 1998, pp. 235–54.
28 K. Brown, “Tweaking Results Is Hardly a Sometime Thing,” The Wall Street Journal, February 6, 2002.
29 In February 2001, Cisco Systems lost 13% of its market value over the two days after it announced earnings that fell one 
cent short of expectations. For large-sample evidence, see D. Skinner and R. Sloan, “Earnings Surprises, Growth Expecta-
tions, and Stock Returns or Don’t Let an Earnings Torpedo Sink Your Portfolio,” Review of Accounting Studies, June 2002, 
pp. 289–312.
30 M. E. Barth, J. A. Elliott, and M. W. Finn, “Market Rewards Associated with Patterns of Increasing Earnings,” Journal of 
Accounting Research, Autumn 1999, pp. 387–413.
31 A. Berenson, “Tweaking Numbers to Meet Goals Comes Back to Haunt Executives,” The New York Times, June 29, 2002.
RECAP
Compensation plans should align managers’ incentives with shareholders’ objectives. Many 
compensation plans link incentive pay to accounting numbers. This linkage creates an 
 effective management incentive because improved financial performance generally trans-
lates into greater shareholder wealth. Unfortunately, accounting numbers can be 
manipulated. Consequently, compensation plans tied to financial goals sometimes backfire 
because of the short-term, self-interest focus of executives. Multiyear incentive pay plans 
and compensation committee intervention can mitigate executives’ short-term focus.
Catering to Wall Street
Many companies, at one time or another, massage their numbers using creative accounting 
 techniques, and probably do it now more than ever. . . . The issue isn’t so much whether many 
companies are committing fraud—that’s likely confined to a small group of dishonest execu-
tives. For most companies, it isn’t even a matter of stretching the rules to wildly inflate their 
 results. It’s more a question of how many companies, following standard accounting guidelines, 
use loopholes to tweak their earnings numbers here and there just to make the crucial number, 
earnings per share, look better.28
The prevalence of stock options in executive pay packages may actually contribute to, rather 
than moderate, managers’ short-term focus. Penny differences in EPS matter a lot to investors; 
just watch what happens to a company’s share price when quarterly EPS comes in one cent 
below analysts’ expectations.29 And when investors penalize firms that fail to meet analysts’ 
EPS targets, the penalty—a lower stock price—makes executive stock options less valuable. In 
contrast, firms that report continuous growth in annual EPS are priced at a premium relative to 
other firms.30 This price premium translates into more valuable executive stock options.
 
Critics argue that stock options thus encourage managers to cater to Wall Street’s short-
term earnings expectations. And managers appear to do so. As you may recall from Chapter 3, 
actual EPS numbers do not fall randomly around analysts’ consensus EPS estimates. Instead, 
too many firms report EPS numbers that just meet or beat the estimate while too few report 
EPS that falls just short of the estimate (see Figure 3.2). As one commentator notes, “Manage-
ments try to give investors what they want, and companies whose earnings are predictable are 
prized on Wall Street, which does not like unhappy surprises.”31

 
Management Compensation 
391
  A survey of more than 400 financial executives at U.S. companies paints a telling picture 
about why managers cater to Wall Street.32 Figure 7.7 summarizes the findings. When asked 
why it is important to meet earnings benchmarks, an overwhelming 86% said it helps build 
credibility with the capital market. More than 80% agreed that meeting benchmarks helps 
maintain or increase the firm’s stock price. They also believe that meeting earnings bench-
marks enhances their external reputations, conveys favorable information about future growth 
prospects, and reduces stock price volatility. Compensation, credit ratings, and debt covenant 
violations are second-order concerns. Less than half of the financial executives said meeting 
earnings benchmarks helps employees achieve bonuses or the firm to achieve desired credit 
ratings. Fewer still (26%) said meeting earnings benchmarks helps to avoid debt covenant 
violations.
 
How do firms meet their earnings benchmarks? For many companies, the answer lies in opera-
tional excellence: providing customers highly-valued products and services, controlling costs, and 
attending to a myriad of business details. But what if it looks like the company will fall short of 
the desired earnings target? In this case, managers are tempted to take real actions to maintain 
accounting appearances, actions that are costly to shareholders. The evidence is in Figure 7.8.
 
Nearly 80% of the financial executives surveyed said they would decrease discretionary 
spending on items such as research, advertising, and maintenance to meet an earnings target. 
Some said they would put off or do only minimal maintenance to hit benchmarks even if it 
meant equipment would wear out more quickly. More than half reported they would postpone 
a new project even if it meant a sacrifice in long-term firm value.
 
The surveyed executives voiced little support for taking accounting actions to hit earnings 
targets. Less than half said they would borrow revenue from next quarter and use it to bolster 
10%
20%
Percent agree or strongly agree
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90% 100%
0%
Build credibility with capital market
Maintain or increase our stock price
Build external reputation of management
Convey future growth prospects to investors
Reduce stock price volatility
Assure stakeholders business is stable
Increase employee bonus achievement
Achieve desired credit rating
Avoid violating debt covenants
Figure 7.7 WHY MEET EARNINGS BENCHMARKS?
How 401 financial executives at U.S. companies responded to the question: “Meeting earnings benchmarks helps . . .”
Source: J. R. Graham, C. R. Harvey, and S. Rajgopal, “The Economic Implications of Corporate Financial Reporting,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, December 2005, p. 27. 
Copyright © 2005 with permission from Elsevier Ltd.
32 J. R. Graham, C. R. Harvey, and S. Rajgopal, “The Economic Implications of Corporate Financial Reporting,” Journal of 
Accounting and Economics, December 2005, pp. 3–73.

392 
CHAPTER 7
The Role of Financial Information in Contracting
current period revenue. Fewer still said they would draw down accounting reserves (28%), 
postpone taking an accounting charge (21%), or alter accounting assumptions such as those 
relating to the allowance for doubtful accounts (8%). As one executive explained, auditors can 
second-guess the firm’s accounting policies, but they can’t readily challenge real economic 
actions to meet earnings targets that are taken in the ordinary course of business. What the 
executive failed to point out is that these accounting actions—drawing down a reserve, post-
poning a charge, and so on—violate GAAP and U.S. securities laws if the resulting financial 
statements misrepresent firm performance and condition.
10%
20%
Percent agree or strongly agree
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90% 100%
0%
Decrease discretionary spending (e.g., R&D,
    advertising, maintenance)
Delay starting a new project even if this entails a
    small sacrifice in value
Book revenues now rather than next quarter (if justified
    in either quarter)
Provide incentives for customers to buy more product
    this quarter
Draw down on reserves previously set aside
Postpone taking an accounting charge
Sell investments or assets to recognize gains this quarter
Repurchase common shares
Alter accounting assumptions (e.g., allowances, pensions)
Figure 7.8 HOW EARNINGS BENCHMARKS ARE SOMETIMES MET
How 401 financial executives at U.S. companies responded to the question: “Near the end of the quarter, it looks like your 
 company might come in below the desired earnings target. Within what is permitted by GAAP, which of the following choices 
might your company make?”
Source: J. R. Graham, C. R. Harvey, and S. Rajgopal, “The Economic Implications of Corporate Financial Reporting,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, December 2005, p. 35. 
Copyright © 2005 with permission from Elsevier Ltd.
RECAP
Managers have strong incentives to achieve short-term earnings benchmarks. Some do so 
through operational excellence. For others, the path to beating benchmarks involves tak-
ing real actions that may harm shareholders in the long term or using accounting gim-
micks that mask underlying firm performance.
REGULATORY AGENCIES
Financial statements used by creditors and shareholders are prepared under GAAP. But banks, 
insurance companies, public utilities, and many others must also provide financial statements 
to the government agencies that regulate them. Those statements are prepared under regula-
tory accounting principles, or RAP, to satisfy specific regulatory objectives.
 
RAP comprises the methods that must be followed in financial statements for the regula-
tory agency responsible for monitoring firm activities. Regulators may use RAP financial 
reports to set the prices customers may be charged, as a basis for supervisory action, as a 

 
Regulatory Agencies 
393
source of statistical information, or as an early warning signal for monitoring a company’s 
financial health. RAP often deviates from GAAP. Here’s an example of a disclosure related 
to such a deviation:
Under regulatory accounting, the company capitalizes both interest and equity costs during periods 
of construction. (SBC Communications, annual report)
GAAP allows the cost of debt (called interest) to be treated as just another construction proj-
ect cost, but “equity costs” are not capitalized under GAAP (see Chapter 10). So, SBC Com-
munications is telling annual report readers that its treatment of equity cost complies with 
RAP but deviates from GAAP. As a result, the company’s completed construction projects—
its telephone lines and related facilities—are shown at higher book values than would be the 
case if GAAP were used.
 
Why do shareholders, creditors, and other statement readers care about RAP if compa-
nies use it only when preparing financial reports for regulatory agencies? The answer is that 
RAP sometimes shows up in the company’s GAAP financial statements too. Why? Be-
cause GAAP allows rate-regulated companies such as SBC Communications to account for 
and report assets and liabilities consistent with the way in which regulators establish rates 
as long as:
• the rates are designed to recover the costs of providing the regulated service, and
• the competitive environment makes it reasonable to assume that such rates can be charged 
and collected.33
So, SBC Communications not only capitalizes equity costs in its financial reports to industry 
regulators but also does so in its published financial statements for shareholders and 
creditors.
 
Knowing how a company accounts for its business transactions—whether it uses GAAP 
or RAP—is essential to gaining a clear understanding of its financial performance and 
condition.
 
There’s another reason why shareholders and creditors need to understand RAP as well 
as GAAP. Financial reports affect the regulatory process: a rate increase may be denied or a 
regulatory sanction may be imposed based on the reported numbers. This possibility can 
influence both management’s GAAP accounting choices and when transactions are 
recorded.
 
To see how, let’s take a look at banks, savings institutions, and credit unions.
Capital Requirements in the Banking Industry
Federal and state regulatory agencies require banks and other financial institutions to meet 
minimum capital requirements. The purpose of these requirements is to ensure the institu-
tion remains financially sound and can meet its obligations to depositors.
 
The test for capital adequacy involves the following question: Does the amount of investor 
capital (think of “adjusted” stockholders’ equity) or the ratio of investor capital to gross 
 assets—both defined by RAP—exceed the minimum level required? If so, the bank is consid-
ered to have adequate capital. If bank capital falls below the required level, regulatory inter-
vention can be triggered.
 
Suppose that Hometown Bank & Trust has gross assets of $900 million and investor 
capital of $135 million, and suppose the bank’s regulator sets a 10% minimum capital ratio. 
33 FASB ASC 980-10-15: Regulated Operations—Overall—Scope and Scope Exceptions.
The published balance sheets 
of rate-regulated companies 
will also contain regulatory 
assets and liabilities that 
 reflect anticipated future rate 
adjustments, deferred costs, 
and delayed obligations 
 specific to the regulatory 
process.

394 
CHAPTER 7
The Role of Financial Information in Contracting
Hometown is in compliance with the capital requirement because it has a capital adequacy 
ratio of 15%, calculated as:
 Capital adequacy ratio 5 Invested capital (as defined by RAP)
Gross assets (as defined by RAP)
 5 $135 million
$900 million 5 15%
which is above the 10% minimum benchmark.
 
Regulators have a powerful weapon to encourage compliance with minimum capital 
guidelines. They can impose costs on banks and financial institutions found to be in non-
compliance. For example, a noncomplying bank:
• Is required to submit a comprehensive plan describing how and when its capital will be 
increased.
• Can be examined more frequently by the regulator.
• Can be denied a request to merge, open new branches, or expand services.
• Can be prohibited from paying any dividends.
Because regulators can restrict bank operations, a bank with inadequate 
capital incurs greater regulatory costs than does a bank with adequate capital.
Bank managers can avoid the regulatory costs of failing to meet minimum 
capital requirements in several ways. The best approach is to operate profit-
ably and invest wisely so the bank remains financially sound. Another way is 
to choose accounting policies that increase RAP invested capital or decrease 
RAP gross assets so the bank can pass its capital adequacy test. Let’s examine 
this “artificial” approach to regulatory compliance.
The cash banks receive from depositors is used to make loans. These loans 
typically represent the bank’s single largest asset. Uncollected loans are a significant cost in 
the banking industry. But bank managers have some discretion over estimates of uncollect-
ibles and when those estimates are recorded. This discretion can be used to improve the bank’s 
capital adequacy ratio. How? Understate the loan loss provision and loan charge-offs for the 
year. This improves the bank’s capital adequacy ratio and simultaneously increases the net 
income figure reported to shareholders. But these improvements are just an illusion. In reality, 
the bank expects more uncollectibles than the financial reports show. Understating loan loss 
provisions and charge-offs may help avoid noncompliance with bank capital requirements, 
but this strategy hides the bank’s true performance and condition from both regulators and 
shareholders. So, evading RAP guidelines can impede accurate financial analysis.34
Rate Regulation in the Electric Utilities Industry
Public utility commissions are governmental agencies that set prices utility companies may 
charge. Most commissions use accounting-determined costs and asset values in their rate for-
mulas. A typical rate formula for an electric utility looks like this:
Because different types of 
financial assets have differ-
ent credit risk profiles, 
banking regulators use a 
“risk-weighted” asset mea-
sure in the capital adequacy 
ratio. Bank capital require-
ments played an important 
role in the global financial 
meltdown of 2008 as you 
will soon learn from the 
discussion later in this 
chapter.
A bank’s loan loss provision is the estimated 
bad debt expense associated with its loan receiv-
ables. Loan loss provisions are expenses that 
 reduce bank net income but (under RAP) have 
no impact on invested capital. Loan charge-offs 
are loans the bank no longer expects to collect. 
Loan charge-offs decrease bank capital but have 
no impact on bank net income.
34 For more insights about the influence of capital adequacy regulation on banks’ accounting choices, see A. Beatty, S. Cham-
berlain, and J. Magliolo, “Managing Financial Reports of Commercial Banks: The Influence of Taxes, Regulatory Capital, 
and Earnings,” Journal of Accounting Research, Autumn 1995, pp. 231–261; and D. Skinner, “The Rise of Deferred Tax 
Assets in Japan: The Role of Deferred Tax Accounting in the Japanese Banking Crisis,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 
December 2008, pp. 218–39.
Allowed revenue 5 Operating costs 1 Depreciation 1 Taxes 1 (ROA 3 Asset base)

 
Regulatory Agencies 
395
where allowed revenue determines the rates customers are charged and ROA is the return on 
assets allowed by the regulator. The rate formula sets total allowed revenue equal to an amount 
that covers the company’s operating costs and provides a “fair” return on the capital invested 
in operating assets.
 
Suppose Midwest Power & Light has annual operating costs, depreciation, and taxes of 
$300 million, $500 million of capital is invested in operating assets, and the state public 
 service commission sets the allowed ROA at 10%. The annual allowed revenue would be:
 Allowed revenue 5 $300 million 1 (10% 3 $500 million)
 5 $300 million 1 $50 million 5 $350 million
To arrive at a rate per kilowatt-hour of electricity, the $350 million of revenue allowed is di-
vided by the company’s estimate of total kilowatt-hours to be sold during the year.
 
Industry RAP governs what items are included in a regulated utility’s operating costs 
and asset base. The definitions of what is included in operating costs and the asset base are 
important because included items are charged to customers, but disallowed items are 
charged to shareholders. Consider this example: Midwest Power & Light spends $10 mil-
lion on customer safety advertising and $50 million on corporate “image” advertising. 
Customer safety advertising is an allowed operating cost, so it is included in the rate for-
mula. Customers ultimately pay for the $10 million spent on safety advertising through 
higher electricity rates. Corporate image advertising is not an allowed cost in most states, 
so the $50 million Midwest Power & Light spent promoting itself cannot be passed on to 
customers in the form of higher electricity rates. Who pays the bill? Shareholders do. 
Regulators apparently see image advertising as unnecessary. Consequently, they do not 
require customers to pay for it through higher electricity rates.
 
Although industry RAP treats customer safety advertising and corporate image advertising 
differently, GAAP does not. Both types of advertising would be included in operating costs on 
the company’s income statement. Other points of divergence between public utility RAP and 
GAAP are:
• Deferring costs that would otherwise be charged to expense by nonregulated companies: 
Utilities can postpone expensing storm damage costs, for example, as long as it is proba-
ble that those specific deferred costs are subject to recovery in future revenues,
• Capitalizating equity costs on construction projects whereas interest alone can be 
 capitalized by nonregulated companies.
 
Rate regulation creates incentives for public utility managers to increase the reported asset 
base. Suppose Midwest Power & Light signs a $700,000, one-year rental agreement for ser-
vice vehicles. If the rental payment is an allowed operating cost for rate-mak-
ing purposes, customers would pay $700,000 in higher electricity rates. In 
contrast, if the rental is included in the company’s regulatory asset base, cus-
tomers would pay $770,000, or 10% more: $700,000 for depreciation (the full 
cost of the one-year asset) plus another $70,000 so that shareholders receive 
the allowed 10% return on the $700,000 asset.
 
Given the choice, utility company shareholders would prefer to have the 
rental payment treated as an asset for rate-making purposes. The company 
could then charge customers an extra $70,000. One way to make this happen 
is to design the rental contract so that it qualifies for RAP treatment as an asset. (We show you 
how in Chapter 12.) Another approach is to lobby regulators to relax the rules governing when 
a rental contract qualifies for asset treatment. Change the contract or change the accounting 
In 2002, Duke Energy agreed to pay $25 million 
to its customers to settle allegations that the 
company had underreported its net income to 
avoid having to reduce its electricity rates. Prof-
its were underreported by $123 million (pre-tax) 
because the company overstated RAP expenses. 
See Case 7-4.

396 
CHAPTER 7
The Role of Financial Information in Contracting
rules. The result is the same. Adding more dollars to the asset base increases the allowed rev-
enue stream for a rate-regulated company.
Taxation
The Internal Revenue Code (IRC), Internal Revenue Service (IRS) regulations, and court 
cases govern the determination of income for tax purposes. Tax accounting rules can be 
thought of as just another type of RAP. Many tax accounting rules are the same as GAAP 
rules. However, there are situations where tax rules differ from GAAP.
 
A case in point is depreciation expense. GAAP requires companies to spread the cost of 
assets like equipment and buildings over the period of intended use. The amount charged to 
depreciation each year can be computed using one of several methods. Tax rules, however, 
require companies to use a strict schedule called the Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery 
System to determine depreciation. The result is that GAAP depreciation expense will rarely 
(if ever) equal tax depreciation, which means that taxable income will almost always differ 
from GAAP pre-tax income.
In general, U.S. firms are not required to 
use the same accounting methods for their 
 financial statements and on their tax returns. 
Inventory accounting is the sole important 
 exception. Companies that use LIFO for tax 
purposes must also use LIFO in their share-
holder reports. When inventory costs are ris-
ing, companies prefer LIFO for tax purposes 
because it lowers taxable income. But, be-
cause of the “LIFO Conformity Rule,” the tax 
benefits of LIFO can be obtained only when 
LIFO is also used in the GAAP financial 
statements. But doing so lowers GAAP net income when prices are rising. Because LIFO 
is widely used, many corporate managers must believe the tax benefits of LIFO outweigh 
its negative impact on GAAP net income.
 
Taxation and GAAP accounting are related in another way. Companies reporting large 
GAAP earnings sometimes attract the attention of politicians who threaten to impose “wind-
fall profits” taxes. This has been true for big U.S. oil companies during periods of rapidly in-
creasing oil prices and/or during oil shortages.
 
For example, during the 1970s, the federal government controlled the price of gasoline in 
an effort to reduce consumption and to dampen the inflationary impact of escalating oil 
prices. In 1979, the price of gasoline at the pump was decontrolled one week before big oil 
companies announced record third-quarter profits that were labeled by politicians as 
 “obscene.” After the earnings announcements, a windfall profits tax on oil company earnings 
was proposed, and politicians voted to reinstate gasoline price controls. These actions 
 occurred even though part of the reported profit increase was due to an accounting change 
required by the FASB; most of the rest of the increase was due to overseas operations and 
inventory holding gains.35
Chapter 10 explains GAAP 
depreciation expense and the 
straight-line method; depre-
ciation expense under tax law 
is described in Chapter 13.
LIFO means “last-in, first-out,” and here’s how it works. Suppose a start-up bicy-
cle retailer begins the year with no inventory. Ten bicycles are purchased for $150 
each during the first week of operations and another five bicycles are purchased 
midmonth for $180 each: same brand and model, just a higher price from the manu-
facturer. Eight bicycles are sold during the month, leaving seven in inventory. 
 Under LIFO, the retailer would calculate the cost of goods sold to be $1,350 (or 
five bicycles at $180 each plus three more at $150 each). Notice that this calcula-
tion presumes the last bicycles to come into the shop (those bought for $180 each) 
are the first sold. Notice also that with rising inventory costs, LIFO produces a 
larger cost of goods sold expense ($1,350 in our example) than does FIFO, or 
“first-in, first-out” (eight bicycles at $150 each, or $1,200). A higher cost of goods 
sold  expense means a lower taxable income. Chapter 9 tells you more.
35 To learn more about the politics of oil and gas accounting in the 1970s (and 1990s), see J. Han and S. Wang, “Political 
Costs and Earnings Management of Oil Companies during the 1990 Persian Gulf Crisis,” The Accounting Review, January 
1998, pp. 103–18.

 
Fair Value Accounting and the Financial Crisis 
397
 
Sometimes it just doesn’t pay to be seen as “too profitable.” When that’s the case, manag-
ers have incentives to make accounting choices that make the company look less profitable.
RECAP
Government regulatory agencies can write their own accounting rules, and many do. The 
result is that some financial statements for shareholders and creditors contain special 
regulatory items or use regulatory accounting methods that deviate from normal GAAP. 
Accounting-based regulations and tax law also affect the choice of GAAP accounting 
methods for shareholder reports and when transactions are recorded.
FAIR VALUE ACCOUNTING 
AND THE FINANCIAL CRISIS
“The accountants let us down. That is one of the clear lessons of the finan-
cial crisis that drove the world into a deep recession.”
—F. Norris, “Accountants Misled Us into Crisis,” 
The New York Times (September 11, 2009)
Fair value accounting has been around in some form for two decades. It is the practice of 
continually revaluing an asset (or liability) to the price it would bring if sold (or the cost to 
settle) regardless of what was actually paid for the asset (or received for the liability). Banks 
and other financial services firms were content with the fair value rules when markets were 
going up. But those rules came under sharp criticism in late 2008 when the collapse of a 
global housing bubble triggered the failure of large financial institutions, the bailout of banks 
by national governments, and downturns in stock markets around the world.
 
As the crisis unfolded, banks in the United States and Europe were quick to blame the 
credit meltdown on FASB and IASB fair value accounting standards. Why? Because of the 
accounting-based minimum capital requirements that regulators impose on financial services 
firms. The fair value rules forced banks to disclose what their key assets were actually worth 
and revealed that regulatory capital was often woefully inadequate for the risks taken. Politi-
cians were persuaded to intervene and force changes in the fair value rules. Here’s what 
happened.
The Meltdown
A robust economy, low interest rates, and large inflows of foreign investment funds created a 
climate of easy credit in the United States beginning in the mid-1990s. Loans of all types—
mortgages, home equity, credit cards, automobile—were simple to obtain, fueling a housing 
construction boom and encouraging debt-financed consumption. Between 1997 and 2006, the 
price of the typical American house increased by 124%.
 
The use of mortgage-backed securities (MBS) and collateralized debt obligations 
(CDO) greatly increased during the housing and credit booms. Mortgage originators—the 
banks and other financial services firms that loaned money directly to home buyers—turned 
to these financial instruments as a convenient and practical way to raise cash quickly. By 
packaging bundled mortgage loans as MBS and CDO securities for sale to third-party inves-
tors, originators could convert loans into immediate up-front cash rather than waiting for pay-
ments to flow in from borrowers. The cash could then be used to make new loans. (Chapter 8 
tells you more.)

398 
CHAPTER 7
The Role of Financial Information in Contracting
 
Investors around the world put money into the housing market by purchasing MBS and 
CDO securities. By about 2003, the supply of mortgages originated at traditional lending 
standards had been exhausted. Aggressive originators began to offer nontraditional loans to 
high-risk (or subprime) borrowers. Some loans offered low “teaser” interest rates that reset to 
higher market rates after a year or two. Other loans offered extraordinarily low monthly pay-
ments for the first several years, payments that failed even to cover loan interest. And then 
there were the so-called NINJA loans doled out to subprime borrowers with “No Income, No 
Job, and no Assets.” These subprime loans were repackaged and sold to investors to meet 
continued strong demand for MBS and CDO securities.
 
The availability of these new forms of easy mortgage credit further increased housing de-
mand and drove up home prices. Eventually, this speculative bubble proved unsustainable. 
Interest rates edged up in 2007, mortgage defaults rose, and home prices tumbled. Even some 
creditworthy borrowers had a financial incentive to halt loan payments and enter foreclosure 
when they discovered their homes were worth less than the mortgage balance. By year-end, 
nearly 12% of all U.S. mortgages were either delinquent or in foreclosure.
 
As housing prices declined and mortgage default rates escalated, major global financial 
institutions that had invested heavily in subprime MBS and CDO securities began reporting 
sizable investment losses. Although these big mark-to-market losses served to alert investors 
and analysts to the plummeting values of key investment assets, they also depleted regulatory 
capital and pushed several of the nation’s largest financial services firms to the brink of 
 failure. The tipping point occurred in September 2008, when:
• The U.S. government took control of the Federal National Mortgage Association (Fannie 
Mae) and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (Freddie Mac), two financial 
 institutions that owned or guaranteed about 57% of the $12 trillion U.S. mortgage market.
• The global financial services firm Lehman Brothers entered into the largest bankruptcy in 
U.S. history.
• The investment banking firm Merrill Lynch was rescued by Bank of America, and the two 
remaining U.S. investment banks—Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley—converted to 
bank holding companies.
• Washington Mutual, the nation’s largest savings and loan, was seized by the Federal 
 Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), and the nation’s fourth largest bank—Wachovia—
agreed to be acquired by Citigroup.
Credit markets froze even though a vast majority of mortgage borrowers were still making 
loan payments. Banks could no longer raise the cash needed to sustain operations or to satisfy 
regulatory capital requirements. Those banks that lacked sufficient regulatory capital soon 
either ceased to exist or were acquired by healthy financial services firms. In 2008, financial 
services firms in the United States reported mortgage-related fair value accounting losses and 
loan write-downs totaling roughly $175 billion. Merrill Lynch ($22.4 billion) and Citigroup 
($19.9 billion) topped the list.
The Controversy
When credit markets froze in the fall of 2008, they did so in part because investors no longer 
wanted to own MBS and CDO securities, especially those comprising subprime mortgages. 
The associated cash flows—mortgage interest and principal payments from borrowers—had 
become too unpredictable. On the rare occasions when MBS and CDO securities changed 
hands, they did so at distressed prices.

 
Fair Value Accounting and the Financial Crisis 
399
 
Financial services firms complained that fair value accounting rules turned a large problem 
into a humongous one. They argued that, by forcing firms to slash the reported values of their 
mortgage-related assets based on fire-sale prices from illiquid markets, fair value accounting 
contributed to a further depletion of regulatory capital. Fewer new loans could be granted, 
even by healthy institutions, and more banks were pushed toward insolvency. Financial ser-
vices firms sought relief from the fair value rules, arguing that their own estimates of value 
were more realistic than what they—and others—were paying for those securities. Influential 
politicians echoed this sentiment and blamed the accounting rules for rising foreclosure rates, 
unemployment, and the unavailability of bank loans for businesses.
 
Securities regulators and accounting standards setters held a decidedly different view. 
They argued that the primary purpose of accounting is to report the financial condition and 
performance of a company, and that existing fair value rules were essential to achieving 
this goal for financial services firms. Regulatory accounting principles, on the other hand, 
serve a different purpose. As one observer noted, “If the banking regulators want to allow 
banks to use different rules in calculating capital—rules that would not require marking 
down assets, for example—then they can do so without depriving investors of important 
information.”36
 
The battle lines were drawn: change the accounting rules to ease regulatory capital con-
straints or change the regulations themselves. Over the next several months, the politics of 
accounting standards became clearly evident:
• October 2008: The Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 (EESA)—introduced, 
deliberated, passed by the U.S. Congress, and signed into law by President Bush in just 
10 days—contains provisions authorizing the SEC to suspend fair value accounting. It 
also required the SEC to study the effects of fair value accounting for financial services 
firms and to report its conclusions within 90 days. Later that month, the International 
 Accounting Standards Board (IASB) bows to European political pressure by amending its 
mark-to-market rules so that banks reporting under IFRS can avoid using fair values for 
selected financial instruments.
• December 2008: The SEC issues its fair value accounting study and concludes that, while 
improvements are needed, existing fair value rules should not be suspended. Financial 
services firms and their trade groups, along with some politicians, continue to voice 
 opposition to the fair value rules.
• January 2009: FASB amends some asset impairment guidelines, sheltering regulatory 
capital from the adverse impact of impairments in limited situations. FASB also reiterates 
its support for fair value accounting.
• February 2009: Thirty-one U.S. financial services firms and trade groups form the 
Fair Value Coalition and spend $27.6 million over the next two months lobbying. The 
 Coalition’s primary goal is to change fair value accounting rules to dampen their effect 
on regulatory capital.37
• March 2009: Congress introduces legislation to broaden oversight of the FASB beyond 
the SEC to four other federal agencies. Separately, in House Financial Services Subcom-
mittee hearings, Representative Paul Kanjorski (Democrat—Pennsylvania) warns the 
36 F. Norris, “Accountants Misled Us into Crisis,” The New York Times (September 11, 2009). Banking regulators in the 
United States are, however, prohibited by the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act of 1989 and the 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991 from applying regulatory accounting principles that are any 
less rigorous than GAAP.
37 To learn more about this lobbying effort, see S. Pulliam and T. McGinty, “Congress Helped Banks Defang Key Rule,” The 
Wall Street Journal (June 3, 2009).

400 
CHAPTER 7
The Role of Financial Information in Contracting
SEC and FASB that, “If the regulators and standards setters do not act now to improve the 
[fair value accounting] standards, then Congress will have no other option than to act 
itself.”38
• March 2009: Under pressure from politicians, FASB issues a proposed change to the fair 
value rules that would have made it easier for firms to claim that quoted prices in inactive 
markets were from distressed transactions, thereby allowing 
them to ignore those market prices and instead use their own 
valuation models to estimate fair value.
•  April 2009: After significant negative feedback from the 
accounting profession on the proposal, FASB revises the 
proposal and issues a rule that leaves intact most of the 
guidance relating to when firms may use their own valua-
tion models in lieu of market prices to estimate fair value.
As the financial crisis ebbed in 2009, so, too, did political pres-
sure to modify fair value accounting for financial services 
firms. Today, FASB and IASB continue to seek ways to im-
prove the fair value rules. A recently completed FASB/IASB joint project aims to ensure that 
fair value has the same meaning in U.S. GAAP and IFRS, and that GAAP and IFRS guidance 
on fair value measurement is the same. A FASB proposal issued for comment in February 
2013 would extend the scope of fair value accounting to an even broader set of financial assets 
and liabilities than existing rules now cover. Banks, for example, would have to report the fair 
value and amortized cost of all loans (as well as some other financial instruments) on their 
balance sheets under the proposed rules. It remains to be seen if this proposal sparks a new 
round of political intervention into the standards-setting process, although FASB has already 
received more than 100 comment letters suggesting the proposal is in need of changes.
This view was not shared by all members of Congress. Fair value 
proponent Representative Alan Grayson (Democrat—Florida) 
likened changing the fair value rules to some rather outlandish 
ideas: changing the value of pi from 3.14 to 4 so that the 
crowded circular highway around Washington, D.C., would be 
larger and thus less congested; increasing the length of an inch 
so that passengers could be more comfortable on a plane; mak-
ing 98 larger than 109, so that the loss the Washington Wizards 
pro basketball team had just suffered at the hands of the New 
 Orleans Hornets would be recorded as a win.
Source: “Congress Members Fume at Fair Value,” CFO.com, March, 17, 2009.
38 As quoted in “Congress Members Fume at Fair Value,” CFO.com 3/17/2009.
39 A comprehensive and insightful discussion of accounting and the financial crisis can be found in S. Ryan, “Accounting in 
and for the Subprime Crisis,” The Accounting Review, November 2008, pp. 1605–38.
RECAP
Fair value accounting did not cause the financial crisis, but the crisis may have been ag-
gravated by the way in which fair value losses reduce regulatory capital. It is important to 
remember that financial statements are scrutinized by various groups and for different 
purposes. Investors and analysts use GAAP and IFRS statements to assess a firm’s earn-
ings and cash flow performance, and its financial health. Regulators of financial services 
firms use RAP statements to ensure that banks have sufficient capital to withstand losses 
on loans and other key assets. Politicians must recognize that there may be no single best 
accounting measurement rule for both purposes.39
ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS: INCENTIVES 
TO “MANAGE” EARNINGS
The message from this chapter is that managers often have powerful incentives to “manage” 
their companies’ reported profitability and financial condition. These incentives arise from 
loan covenants, compensation contracts, regulatory agency oversight, tax avoidance efforts, 
and a desire to meet or beat analysts’ quarterly earnings forecasts or to increase the company’s 
stock price. Financial statement gimmicks are likely to be most prevalent when these accounting 

 
Exercises 
401
incentives are especially strong, for example, when the company is in danger of violating its 
debt covenants, when a large portion of top management pay comes from bonuses tied to 
earnings per share or sales growth, or when management has a lengthy record of beating “the 
Street’s” earnings forecast by a penny. What’s the penalty for failing to make the numbers? 
Loan default, lost bonuses, and an abrupt stock price decline.
 
So, now you know when to look for potential accounting distortions, but what exactly do 
you look for and where do you look? How do companies “manage” earnings? What accounting 
gimmicks are used? The remaining chapters of this book address these questions in detail.
SUMMARY
• Conflicts of interest among managers, shareholders, lenders, or regulators are natural 
 features of business.
• Contracts and regulations help address these conflicts of interest in ways that are  mutually 
beneficial to the parties involved.
• Accounting numbers often play an important role in contracts and regulations because 
they provide useful information about the company’s performance and financial condition 
as well as about the management team’s accomplishments.
• Accounting-based lending agreements, compensation contracts, and regulations shape 
managers’ incentives; after all, that’s why accounting numbers are included in contracts 
and regulations. They also help to explain the accounting choices managers make.
• Understanding why and how managers exercise their discretion in implementing GAAP 
can be extremely helpful to those who are analyzing and interpreting a company’s 
 financial statements.
EXERCISES
Required:
What is a debt covenant? Why do lenders include them in loan agreements? Why do borrowers 
agree to include covenants in loan agreements?
E7-1
Understanding debt 
covenants (LO 2)
Required:
What are the advantages of loan agreements that contain covenants tied to accounting 
 numbers? Are there any disadvantages? Explain.
E7-2
Tying contracts to accounting 
numbers (LO 3)
The debt covenants in TCBY’s loan agreement do not mention explicitly the accounting meth-
ods the company must use when it prepares financial statements for submission to the lender.
Required:
Why don’t lenders require the use of specific accounting methods rather than letting manage-
ment pick from among GAAP alternatives?
E7-3
Debt covenants and account-
ing methods (LO 2)
Sunshine Groceries operates a rapidly expanding chain of retail grocery stores in Europe. The 
company has grown from 10 stores in 2012 to 50 stores in 2014 and plans to add at least 10 
stores each year for the next three years. Top executives at the company can earn annual cash 
bonuses of up to 200% of salary if board-approved sales growth goals are achieved.
E7-4
Sunshine Groceries Inc.: Sales-
based bonus plan (LO 2)

402 
CHAPTER 7
The Role of Financial Information in Contracting
E7-5
McDonald’s Corporation: Pay 
disclosure lawsuit (LO 4)
McDonald’s, the global fast-food restaurant giant, was sued in 2009 by a former employee 
who said she was dismissed because, as a senior director of executive compensation, she ob-
jected to a complex scheme to keep country club fees paid for a top executive out of the com-
pany’s 2007 proxy statement. The fees amounted to roughly $2,940, a trifling amount when 
compared to the $3.5 million in total compensation paid to the executive that year.
Source: A. Barr, “McDonald’s Suit Illustrates Pay Disclosure Dance,” The Wall Street Journal, June 25, 2009.
Required:
Why might a company want to avoid disclosing in its proxy statements the amounts it pays for 
top executive benefits such as country club memberships?
E7-7
Regulatory accounting 
 principles (LO 3)
Some public service commissions let utilities include construction in progress—construction 
dollars spent for projects not yet completed—in their rate-making asset bases. Other states 
allow only completed projects to be included.
Required:
Which approach favors shareholders? Why?
E7-8
Equipment repairs and rate 
regulation (LO 2)
Illinois Power & Heat just spent $5 million repairing one of its electrical generating stations 
that was damaged by a tornado. The loss was uninsured. Management has asked the public 
service commission for approval to treat the $5 million as an asset for rate-making purposes 
rather than as an allowed expense.
Required:
What difference will this make to customers and shareholders?
E7-9
Maintaining capital adequacy 
(LO 1)
Required:
Why do regulators require banks and insurance companies to maintain minimum levels of 
investor capital? What impact does this type of regulatory requirement have on the financial 
statements that banks and insurance companies prepare for shareholders?
E7-10
Identifying conflicts of interest 
and agency costs (LO 1)
Suppose you and two friends each invested $100,000 in an oil and gas partnership. The gen-
eral partner, Huge Gamble, Inc., invests no cash but makes all operating decisions for the 
partnership, including where and how deep to drill for oil. Drilling costs plus a management 
fee are charged against the $300,000 of cash you and your friends invested. If oil is found, you 
each get 15% of partnership net income with the remaining 55% going to Huge Gamble. But 
if the wells are dry, you get nothing except any cash that remains.
Required:
What is an agency relationship, and what are agency costs? How do these concepts apply to 
your investment in the oil and gas partnership?
E7-6
Regulatory costs (LO 4)
Required:
What are regulatory costs, and why are they important for understanding a company’s finan-
cial reporting choices?
Required:
Explain why it might make sense for this company to award bonuses based on sales growth. 
How might this approach encourage poor business decisions when compared to a bonus plan 
tied to earnings?

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
403
PROBLEMS / DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
A brief description of Krispy Kreme’s annual cash bonus plan for top executives follows.
P7-1
Krispy Kreme’s bonus plan 
(LO 3)
The Compensation Committee chose consolidated EBITDA 
[earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization] 
and revenue as the performance metrics for fiscal 2012, 
weighted at 80% and 20%, respectively. Consolidated 
EBITDA is defined the same way as it is defined in our  secured 
credit facilities. The Compensation Committee assigned three 
levels of performance for consolidated EBITDA and for Rev-
enue: threshold, target, and maximum.
Source: Krispy Kreme Doughnuts, Inc. 2012 Proxy, edited for brevity.
 
The disclosure further indicates that eligible recipients would receive 70%, 100%, or 140% 
of the portion of the target bonus for performance attributable to each performance metric for 
performance at the threshold, target, and maximum levels, respectively. The bonus for perfor-
mance that falls between two of those levels would be prorated.
Required:
1. One way Krispy Kreme executives can achieve the  revenue target is to open new stores as 
fast as possible. Explain why this might alarm shareholders.
2. Why might it be important for the bonus plan to use the same EBITDA definition used in 
Krispy Kreme’s  “secured credit facilities” (loan agreements)?
3. Describe how Krispy Kreme’s executive bonus plan might lead to accounting abuses at 
the company.
P7-2
Krispy Kreme’s compensation 
recovery plan (LO 5)
An unusual feature of top executive pay at Krispy Kreme Doughnuts, Inc., is its compensa-
tion recovery policy. The policy allows Krispy Kreme to take back annual or long-term 
incentive compensation paid to executive officers and certain other management team 
members in the event they are later found to have engaged in conduct “detrimental” to the 
company. Three types of misconduct are specified: (a) financial accounting or reporting 
violations, whether from gross negligence or willful misconduct, that trigger a restatement 
of previously issued financial statements; (b) business actions that result in a material 
negative revision of a financial or operating measure that was the basis for incentive 
awards already paid; and (c) fraud, theft, and similar acts. What is the penalty for detri-
mental conduct? The executive may be required to reimburse the company for all, or a 
portion of, any incentive compensation (including equity-based awards) paid out during 
the previous 36 months as well as any profits realized from the sale of Krispy Kreme stock 
during that same period.
Source: Krispy Kreme Doughnuts, Inc. Compensation Recovery Policy, Effective April 6, 2009, as described in the 2012 
Proxy.

404 
CHAPTER 7
The Role of Financial Information in Contracting
Required:
1. Briefly explain how a typical annual and long-term management compensation plan tied 
to financial accounting numbers may contribute to agency problems within the firm.
2. Provide examples of the accounting abuses that Krispy Kreme’s pay recovery policy is 
 intended to discourage.
3. Explain why you do (or do not) believe the pay recovery policy will be effective in dis-
couraging those accounting abuses.
P7-3
Medical malprofits (LO 1)
Required:
Explain the potential conflict of interest that arises when doctors own the hospitals in which 
they work. The following news article may help.
The executive who became the most visible symbol of profit-
driven medical care stepped down yesterday as the top officer 
of the Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corporation amid a crimi-
nal investigation of whether the company’s pursuit of profits 
has stretched beyond the legal limits. . . . [He] will be replaced 
by Thomas F. Frist, Jr., a surgeon by training, who has made 
his career in the hospital business. . . . Dr. Frist said he was 
ending Columbia’s practice of selling ownership stakes in its 
hospitals to its doctors. That has been a critical piece of the 
strategy that helped propel Columbia’s growth but led to great 
legal and ethical criticism that the company was compromis-
ing the medical independence of its doctors.
Source: The New York Times, July 26, 1997.
P7-4
Foot Locker, Inc.: Anticipating 
covenant violation (LO 4)
Foot Locker, Inc., reported an $18 million loss on sales of $1,283 million for the quarter 
ended August 4, 2007. The quarterly financial filing (10-Q) also contained this warning for 
investors and creditors.
Under the Company’s revolving credit and term loan agree-
ment, the Company is required to satisfy certain financial and 
operating covenants, including a minimum fixed charge cov-
erage ratio. In addition, this agreement restricts the amount 
the Company may expend in any year for dividends to 50 per-
cent of its prior year’s net income. Based upon the Company’s 
second quarter financial results and business uncertainties for 
the second half of the year, the Company may not continue to 
be in compliance with the fixed charge coverage ratio. In ad-
dition, the restricted payment provision may prohibit the 
Company from the payment of the dividend at the current rate 
in 2008.
Source: Foot Locker Inc. Form 10-Q for the quarter ended August 4, 2007.
Required:
1. What is a minimum fixed charge coverage ratio, and what purpose does it serve in the 
company’s loan agreements?
2. Why would Foot Locker agree to restrict dividends to just 50% of its prior year’s net 
income?

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
405
3. In general terms, explain how a company such as Foot Locker alters its accounting 
choices to avoid violating debt covenants tied to financial statement numbers.
4. What is likely to happen if Foot Locker does not satisfy one or more of the loan covenants 
at year-end?
P7-5
Frisby Technologies: Violating 
a covenant (LO 3)
FRISBY IN DEFAULT ON LOAN COVENANTS
Frisby Technologies has received a notice of default from two 
of its secured creditors. DAMAD Holdings AG and Bluwat AG 
have notified the company that it is in default of the tangible 
net worth covenant contained in its respective loan agreements 
with the lenders. The covenant requires the company to main-
tain a tangible net worth of not less than $1,250,000 as of the 
end of each fiscal quarter. A similar covenant is contained in 
the company loan agreements with its other secured lenders, 
MUSI Investments S.A. and Fin.part International S.A. As of 
September 30, 2002, the company’s tangible net worth, calcu-
lated as provided in the respective loan agreements, was a 
negative $663,402.
 
Under the terms of the DAMAD and Bluwat loan agree-
ments, the company has until December 18. . . . The company 
does not currently expect that it will be able to cure the default 
within the prescribed cure period.
 
If the default is not cured prior to the end of the cure period, 
then (i) the entire unpaid balance owed to the lenders, $1.25 
million plus accrued interest, would become due and payable; 
(ii) the interest rate, to the extent permitted by law, could be 
increased by either or both lenders up to the maximum rate 
 allowed by law; (iii) any accrued and unpaid interest, fees or 
charges could be deemed by either or both lenders to be a part 
of the principal balance, with interest to accrue on a daily com-
pounded basis until the entire outstanding principal and ac-
crued interest is paid in full; (iv) either or both lenders could 
foreclose on its security interest in substantially all of the com-
pany’s assets; and (v) each lender would have all rights avail-
able to it at law or in equity.
 
In addition, repayment of the loans is secured by a limited 
guaranty by COB/CEO Gregory Frisby of up to one-third of 
the total amount outstanding under the loans.
 
The company has requested waiver of compliance of the 
tangible net worth covenant from each of the lenders, but no 
such waiver has been granted. The company will continue to 
pursue a waiver or otherwise to seek to negotiate a forbearance 
agreement or other satisfactory resolution with the lenders. If 
the company is unsuccessful, it may voluntarily seek protec-
tion from its creditors under federal bankruptcy laws, which 
would have a material adverse effect on the company’s busi-
ness, financial condition and prospects.
Source: R. Craver, “Default of Credit Agreement Adds to Frisby’s Woes,” 
 Winston-Salem Journal, November 22, 2002. Copyright © 2002 Winston- 
Salem Journal. Used with permission.
Required:
1. What is a minimum tangible net worth covenant, and what purpose does it serve in the 
Frisby loan agreements?
2. Why might lenders be reluctant to waive Frisby’s covenant violation?
3. Among the options available to Frisby’s lenders is foreclosure: shuttering the company 
and selling off all assets. Why might lenders prefer to avoid this action?
P7-6
Tying bonus to EPS 
 performance (LO 3)
John Brincat is the president and chief executive of Mercury Finance, an auto lender special-
izing in high credit-risk customers. The company’s proxy statement contains the following 
description of Brincat’s pay package.

406 
CHAPTER 7
The Role of Financial Information in Contracting
Mr. Brincat is eligible for an annual incentive bonus equal to 1% of Net After-tax Earnings of 
the Company and is eligible for an additional bonus based upon annual increases in Net After-
tax Earnings per share only after earnings exceed 20% over the prior year. The additional 
bonus is determined as follows:
• Earnings per share increases of 0% to 19.99%, no additional bonus is paid.
• Earnings per share increases of 20% to 29.99%, additional bonus will be equal to 2.5% of 
the amount of increase from the prior year.
• Earnings per share increases of 30% to 39.99%, additional bonus will be equal to 3.0% of 
the amount of increase from the prior year.
• Earnings per share increases of 40% or more, additional bonus will be equal to 3.5% of 
the amount of increase from the prior year.
In addition, at the time the employment contract was entered into, Mr. Brincat was issued a 
stock option grant . . . of 2,500,000 shares at a price of $17.375 per share, the fair market 
value on the date of the grant. The options vest equally during the next five years of the con-
tract and are exercisable in increments of 500,000 shares annually only if earnings per share 
each year exceeds the prior year’s earnings per share by 20%. If earnings per share do not in-
crease by 20%, Mr. Brincat forfeits that year’s options and has no further right or claim to that 
year’s options.
Source: Mercury Finance 1995 proxy.
Required:
1. Suppose Mercury Finance had $50 million of net after-tax earnings for the year. How 
much of a bonus would Brincat receive if the EPS increase that year was only 10%?
2. How much of a bonus would Brincat receive if the EPS increase was 30%?
3. As a shareholder, how comfortable would you be if your company’s managers had contracts 
with these types of bonus and stock option incentives? Why?
P7-7
Earnings quality and pay  
(LO 4)
Following your retirement as senior vice president of finance for a large company, you joined 
the board of Cayman Grand Cruises, Inc. You serve on the compensation committee and help 
set the bonuses paid to the company’s top five executives. According to the annual bonus plan, 
each executive can earn a bonus of 1% of annual net income.
 
No bonuses were paid in 2013 because the company reported a net loss of $6,588,000.
 
Shortly after the end of the year, the compensation committee received a letter signed by 
all five executives, indicating that they felt the company had performed well in 2013. The let-
ter identified the following items from the 2013 income statement that the executives felt 
painted a less favorable view of performance than was actually the case:
Proposed Adjustments to 2013 Earnings
($ in thousands)
Loss on early retirement of debt 
$131,474
Restructuring and other nonrecurring charges 
63,000
Loss from discontinued operations 
22,851
The letter asked the compensation committee to add these items back to the reported net loss 
and to then recalculate the bonus awards for 2013. The fiscal year 2013 income statement fol-
lows. Assume the tax rate is 30%.

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
407
Required:
1. As a member of the compensation committee, how would you respond to each suggested 
adjustment? Why?
2. What 2013 net income figure do you suggest be used to determine bonuses for the year?
Cayman Grand Cruises, Inc.
Consolidated Statement of Income
($ in thousands) 
June 30, 2013
Net revenues 
$1,024,467
Cost of sales 
(535,178)
 Gross margin 
489,289
Selling, general, and administrative 
(299,101)
Research, development, and engineering 
(94,172)
Gain on sale of joint venture 
33,000
Loss on early retirement of debt 
(131,474)
Restructuring and other nonrecurring charges 
(63,000)
 Operating income (loss) 
(65,458)
Gain on sale of investment 
40,800
Interest expense 
(7,145)
Interest income 
2,382
Other income (expense)—net 
(2,121)
 Income before income taxes 
(31,542)
Income tax benefit 
9,462
 Income from continuing operations 
(22,080)
Income (loss) from discontinued operations (net of tax effect) 
(22,851)
Gain on disposal of discontinued operations (net of tax effect) 
38,343
  Net income (loss) 
$    (6,588)
P7-8
Avoiding debt covenant 
 violations (LO 4)
Food Lion, Inc., operates a chain of retail supermarkets principally in the southeastern United 
States. The supermarket business is highly competitive, and it is characterized by low profit 
margins. Food Lion competes with national, regional, and local supermarket chains; discount 
food stores; single-unit stores; convenience stores; and warehouse clubs.
 
Food Lion recently entered into a credit agreement with a group of banks. Excerpts taken 
from the loan agreement follow.
Section 5.19. Limitation on Incurrence of Funded Debt
The Borrower will not create, assume or incur or in any manner be or become liable in respect of any 
[additional] Funded Debt . . . [unless] the ratio of Income Available for Fixed Charges for the immedi-
ately preceding four Fiscal Quarters to Pro Forma Fixed Charges for such four Fiscal Quarters shall have 
been at least 2.00 to 1.00.
Section 5.20. Fixed Charges Coverage
At the end of each Fiscal Quarter . . . the ratio of Income Available for Fixed Charges for the immedi-
ately preceding four Fiscal Quarters then ended to Consolidated Fixed Charges for the immediately 
preceding four Fiscal Quarters then ended, shall not be less than . . . 1.75 to 1.0.
Section 5.21. Minimum Consolidated Tangible Net Worth
Consolidated Tangible Net Worth will at no time be less than (i) $706,575,475 plus (ii) 30.0% of the 
cumulative Consolidated Net Income of the Borrower during any period after [the new loan agreement 
is signed], calculated quarterly but excluding from such calculations of Consolidated Net Income for 
purposes of this clause (ii), any quarter in which the Consolidated Net Income of the Borrower and its 
Consolidated Subsidiaries is negative.
Source: Food Lion, Inc., loan agreement.

408 
CHAPTER 7
The Role of Financial Information in Contracting
Required:
1. In two more weeks, the company’s books will be closed for the quarter, and the fixed 
charges coverage might fall below the level required by the loan agreement. How can 
management avoid violating this covenant?
2. The company’s tangible net worth may also fall below the amount specified in the loan 
agreement. How can management avoid violating this covenant?
3. Elsewhere in the loan agreement it says that the company’s ratio of consolidated debt 
to total capitalization must be no more than 0.75 to 1.0. How can management avoid 
 violating this covenant?
4. Suppose you were one of Food Lion’s bankers, and you were thinking about making changes 
to the loan covenants. What management activities would you most want to limit? Why?
P7-9
Accounting in Regulated 
 Industries (LO 4)
Duke Energy Corporation’s 2012 annual report to shareholders contains the following note 
disclosure (edited for brevity):
Cost-based Regulation. Duke Energy accounts for its regulated operations in accordance with 
applicable regulatory accounting guidance . . . Accordingly, Duke Energy records assets and 
 liabilities that result from the regulated ratemaking process that would not be recorded under 
GAAP for non-regulated entities . . .
AFUDC and Interest Capitalized. In accordance with applicable regulatory accounting guid-
ance, Duke Energy records AFUDC, which represents the estimated debt and equity costs of 
capital funds necessary to finance the construction of new regulated facilities. The equity com-
ponent of AFUDC is a non-cash amount . . . AFUDC is capitalized as a component of the cost of 
Property, Plant and Equipment.
Required:
1. Explain why Duke Energy alerts investors and other readers of its GAAP financial 
 statements to the fact that it “records assets and liabilities that result from the regulated 
ratemaking process.”
2. As you will learn in Chapter 10, GAAP does not allow firms to capitalize as a cost of 
construction the “equity costs” of funds needed to finance construction projects. GAAP 
does allow debt interest costs to be capitalized under certain circumstances. Explain why 
Duke Energy alerts investors and other readers of its GAAP financial statements to the 
“capitalization” of AFUDC.
3. Briefly describe the unique accounting-related conflicts of interest that arise in regulated 
electric utility companies such as Duke Energy.
P7-10
Understanding rate regulation 
and accounting choices 
(LO 4)
Alliant Energy just received regulatory approval for its 2014 electricity rate. The company has 
been authorized to charge customers $0.10 per kilowatt-hour (kwh), a rate lower than other 
utilities in the state charge. Details of the rate calculation follow:
Alliant Energy
 
 
 
2014 Rate Authorization
 Allowed operating costs 
 
 
$ 1,120 million
 Assets in service 
$3,200 million 
 
3 Allowed rate of return 
8.75% 
5 
280 million
 
Revenue requirement 
 
 
$ 1,400 million
4 Estimated energy demand 
 
 
14,000 million kwh
 
Rate allowed per kwh 
 
 
$ 0.10

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
409
Shortly after the 2014 rate was set, the company’s financial reporting staff circulated an inter-
nal memo recommending the following accounting changes:
1. Extend plant depreciation life by five years to reflect current utilization forecasts. This 
would add $175 million to the asset base and reduce annual depreciation (an operating 
cost) by $5 million.
2. Increase estimated bad debt expense from 1% to 1.5% of sales to reflect current forecasts 
of customer defaults. This would add $7 million to operating costs and reduce total assets 
by the same amount.
3. Amortize 2013 hostile takeover defense costs of $4.5 million over three years rather than 
take the entire expense in 2013. This would increase 2014 operating costs by $1.5 million 
and add $3 million to the asset base.
4. Write up fuel and materials inventories to their current replacement value. This would 
add $60 million to the asset base, but it would have no impact on 2014 operating costs.
Required:
1. Assess the impact of each proposed change on the company’s 2014 revenue requirement 
and rate per kilowatt-hour, assuming that regulators will approve the accounting changes 
and adjust the allowed rate accordingly.
2. As a member of the state utility commission, comment on the merits of each proposed 
 accounting change.
P7-11
Determining whether citizens 
should have a say in CEO pay: 
Practices in Europe (LO 1)
CEO LEADS SWISS BACKLASH OVER EXECUTIVE PAY
In Switzerland, long a haven for big money, a backlash is 
 developing against outsized executive compensation.
 
The push is being spurred by an unlikely source: a CEO. 
Thomas Minder, a 47-year-old chief executive of small 
 cosmetics manufacturer Trybol AG, is going to shareholder 
meetings at Swiss giants like Novartis SA to challenge their 
CEO pay packages.
 
Mr. Minder has been collecting signatures to call a national 
vote—as permitted under the Swiss constitution—to amend 
Swiss law to force more transparency and accountability on 
executive compensation. He says his goal is to create ways for 
shareholders to veto pay packages and create more “sensible” 
pay practices in Switzerland, a country where wealth has tradi-
tionally been welcomed, rather than frowned upon.
 
Across Europe, growing disenchantment with high execu-
tive pay is increasingly a political issue. In France, the losing 
candidate for the presidency, Ségolène Royal, called on Airbus 
to withdraw its proposed 10,000 job cuts after it disclosed that 
Noël Forgeard, former chief executive of Airbus and its parent, 
European Aeronautic Defence & Space Co., received €6.1 million 
($8.2 million) in an exit pay package. The company said the 
package was provided for in his contract, but Ms. Royal called 
the payment a “scandal.”
 
In Germany, Finance Minister Peer Steinbrück has said Eu-
rope’s social model couldn’t be sustained if the wages of low 
earners fall as company profits rise.
 
Switzerland is set to introduce greater disclosure of execu-
tive compensation for companies listed on the Swiss exchange. 
Starting next year, companies must disclose the salaries of the 
highest paid member of the management board. Previously, 
Swiss companies released only the total salaries of the 
 combined board and the individual salary of the highest paid 
member of the supervisory board, which is akin to a U.S. 
board of directors. . . .
 
Current law allows Swiss companies to disclose less detail 
on executive pay than U.S. companies. They aren’t required to 
disclose individual pay packages for chief executives and often 
don’t have to mention benefits such as personal loans or hous-
ing allowances. . . .
 
Mr. Minder says he pays himself “far less” than 100,000 
Swiss francs, or about $81,000, a year and took on his 
(continued)

410 
CHAPTER 7
The Role of Financial Information in Contracting
Required:
1. Do shareholders vote on the compensation packages paid to top executives of U.S. 
companies?
2. One of Minder’s proposals would ban the use of golden parachutes. How might this ban 
harm shareholders?
3. In the United States, the average big company CEO made $11.6 million in 2005, or 
411 times the typical U.S. worker, according to the Institute for Policy Studies. That same 
year, average CEO compensation for companies with approximately $500 million in 
worldwide annual sales was $2.2 million in the United States, $1.4 million in Switzerland, 
and $1.2 million in France, the United Kingdom, and Germany. With these statistics as a 
backdrop, provide (a) three reasons in support of giving European shareholders the right to 
approve CEO pay packages and (b) three reasons why you are against doing so.
4. Should citizens have the right to approve CEO pay packages? Why or why not?
 campaign because pay levels are so high that “executives don’t 
suffer personal hardships even if their performance at the helm 
of the company is miserable.” . . .
 
Among his 25 proposals: giving shareholders the right to 
block or approve pay packages; a complete ban on “golden 
parachutes” or pay packages given to executives upon leaving a 
company; and measures that would force institutional share-
holders to disclose how they voted on issues such as approving 
bonuses. . . .
 
If Mr. Minder collects 100,000 signatures, his proposals will 
be put to the Swiss Parliament and federal councilors. They can 
come up with a counter-proposal or allow a popular vote on Mr. 
Minder’s proposals, thanks to the Swiss tradition of direct de-
mocracy. Mr. Minder has until May 2008 to hand in the signa-
tures, and he says he is “very well on track,” without being 
specific. A national vote may not follow for at least a year.
 
While the chances of success for a popular vote, known as 
a plebiscite, are very slim, the move to force a vote makes the 
issue part of the mainstream political agenda. . . .
Source: E. Taylor, “CEO Leads Swiss Backlash Over Executive Pay,” The Wall 
Street Journal, May 26, 2007. Copyright © 2007 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. 
All rights reserved worldwide. Reprinted with permission.
CASES
C7-1
Microsoft’s “unearned 
revenue” account (LO 4)
T  R  E   T   C    H
S
in June, has become a lightning rod for more general concerns 
about the price of the company’s shares. . . . Managers of 
 several large funds . . . are shedding part of their Microsoft 
holdings. The immediate trigger was the first quarter-to-quarter 
decline in Microsoft’s unearned revenue account. . . .
 
In the software industry, Microsoft pioneered the practice 
of recording a portion of the revenue from some products as 
“unearned,” starting with the release of Windows 95. The 
SOME SAVVY FANS COOL TO MICROSOFT
Some savvy investors, detecting fissures in Microsoft’s armor, 
are pulling back from the world’s most highly valued company.
 
The concern: the first-ever drop in an arcane but closely 
watched indicator of Microsoft’s future results.
 
The balance in Microsoft’s “unearned revenue” account, 
which declined to $4.13 billion on Sept. 30 from $4.24 billion 

 
Cases 
411
Required:
1. Based on the revenue recognition principles discussed in Chapters 2 and 3, explain why a 
company such as Microsoft would set aside some software sales revenues as “unearned”?
2. How would you determine how much sales revenue to set aside each quarter? Is this num-
ber easy to calculate?
3. Suppose the Unearned revenue account is reduced by $100 million. Where do these dollars 
go? (The Unearned revenue account is reduced by a debit. What account receives the 
 offsetting credit?)
4. Describe how contracting and regulatory incentives might influence how much revenue is 
set aside as unearned. How might these incentives influence when the Unearned revenue 
account is reduced and by how much?
5. Why do analysts and investors pay such close attention to changes in Microsoft’s 
 Unearned revenue account?
 practice is common in some other fields: Many magazine pub-
lishers, for instance, record subscription revenues only when 
issues are shipped.
 
Similarly, Microsoft now holds back a portion of revenues 
from Windows 98, Windows NT and Office until it “earns” the 
revenue by delivering interim upgrades, bug fixes and other cus-
tomer support. The account also includes the value of coupons 
that customers receive, which entitle them to free upgrades when 
they buy a Microsoft product before the next version is ready.
 
A delay in the shipment of Office 2000 earlier this year 
caused the company to add $400 million to the unearned reve-
nue account in the March quarter to cover the coupons issued 
to buyers of Office 97. As copies of Office 2000 were shipped, 
half of that amount flowed into the June quarterly results; an-
other $150 million was transferred in the fiscal quarter ended 
in September.
 
The effect was to bolster earned revenues in those quarters 
and lower unearned revenues. . . .
Q2
1997
Q3
1997
Q4
1997
Q1
1998
Q2
1998
Q3
1998
Q4
1998
Q1
1999
Q2
1999
Q3
1999
($ in billions)
$5
$4
$3
$2
$1
$0
FUTURE OR FALLOUT?
Microsoft’s unearned revenue account 
consists of revenues set aside from 
the sales of Windows 98, Windows 
NT and Office to pay for future 
 improvements. It also includes the 
value of coupons that entitle users 
to upgrade to newer versions of 
 Microsoft software.
Source: “Some Savvy Fans Cool to Microsoft,” The 
Wall Street Journal, October 28, 1999. Copyright © 
1999 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All rights reserved 
worldwide. Reprinted with permission.
C7-2
Maxcor Manufacturing: 
 Compensation and earnings 
quality (LO 4)
Margaret Magee has served both as an outside director to Maxcor Manufacturing since 2007 
and as a member of the company’s compensation committee since 2011. Margaret has been 
reviewing Maxcor’s 2014 preliminary earnings statement in preparation for the February 
2015 board and compensation committee meetings. She is uneasy about the company’s defi-
nition and computation of operating profits for 2014, particularly  because management 
 bonuses at Maxcor are based on achieving specific operating profit goals.

412 
CHAPTER 7
The Role of Financial Information in Contracting
 
The preliminary financial statements also contained the following notes:
 
Research and Engineering Expenses. Research and engineering expenses include both amounts 
charged to Research and development expenses for new product development and charges originally 
made to Cost of goods sold for ongoing product improvements. The amounts (in millions) for 2014 and 
2013 were:
Maxcor Manufacturing
Consolidated Results of Operations
 
Years Ended December 31,
($ in millions) 
2014 
2013
Sales 
$98.4 
$111.2
Operating costs
 Cost of goods sold 
(81.5) 
(92.2)
 Selling, general, and administrative expenses 
(12.5) 
(12.9)
Operating profit 
4.4 
6.1
Research and development expenses (see note) 
(5.7) 
(2.4)
Provision for plant closings (see note) 
(2.6) 
–0–
Interest expense 
(2.9) 
(2.6)
Other income 
0.7 
1.2
Profit (loss) before taxes 
(6.1) 
2.3
Provision (credit) for income taxes 
2.1 
(0.8)
Profit (loss) of consolidated companies 
(4.0) 
1.5
Equity in profit of affiliated companies 
0.2 
0.3
 Profit (loss) 
$(3.8) 
$    1.8
 
2014 
2013
Research and development expenses 
$5.7 
$2.4
Cost of goods sold 
2.9 
6.3
Research and engineering expense 
$8.6 
$8.7
Plant Closing Costs. In 2014, the Company recorded provisions for plant closing and staff consolida-
tion costs totaling $2.62 million. Included in this total are charges related to the probable closing of the 
Company’s York, Pennsylvania, facility ($1.75 million), the consolidation of the North American 
 operations of the Building Construction Products Division ($0.63 million), and charges to reflect 
lower estimates of the market value of previously closed U.K. facilities ($0.24 million). These costs 
include the estimated costs of employee severance benefits, net losses on disposal of land, buildings, 
machinery and equipment, and other costs incidental to the closing and planned consolidation.
 
Maxcor Manufacturing is an established, privately held manufacturer that operates in two 
principal business segments: Building construction products, which involves the design, man-
ufacturing, and marketing of construction and materials-handling machinery, and Engines for 
various off-highway applications. Before 2014, the company had experienced 15 years of 
steadily increasing sales and operating profits.
 
The company was founded in 1938 by Hugh Maxwell, a former Ford Motor Company 
engineer. Neither Maxwell nor any members of his family are currently company officers. 
Maxcor’s common stock is held by the Maxwell Family Trust (35%), the Maxwell Employee 
Stock Ownership Plan (ESOP) Trust (50%), a venture capital firm (13%), and current man-
agement (2%). Magee also serves as an outside trustee for the Maxwell ESOP Trust.
 
Maxcor’s senior management participates in an incentive bonus plan that was first adopted 
in 2004. The bonus formula for 2014 was approved by the compensation committee at its 
February 2014 meeting. According to the plan, each senior manager’s 2014 bonus is to be 
determined as follows:

 
Cases 
413
 
The compensation committee can award a lower amount than that indicated by the plan 
formula if circumstances warrant such action. No bonus reductions have occurred since the 
plan was adopted in 2004.
Required:
Why might Magee feel uneasy about Maxcor’s computation of 2014 operating profits? Should 
she approve the 100% bonus payment for 2014 as specified by the plan formula? What 
changes (if any) would you recommend be made to the bonus formula for next year?
 
Bonus as Percentage  
2014 Operating Profits 
 
of 2014 Salary 
($ in millions)
 
0% 
Below $4.0
 
100 
At least $4.0
 
200 
At least $6.0
 
300 
At least $8.0
C7-3
Whole Foods Market: 
 EVA®-based compensation 
(LO 2)
Whole Foods Market’s Compensation Committee determines a portion of executive bonuses 
qualitatively. For the quantitative portion, the Committee selects from 13 performance  metrics. 
For the fiscal year 2012, the Compensation Committee selected the following six quantitative 
performance criteria, formulas, and relative weightings:
1. Comparable store sales growth 
 $5,000 is earned for every 10 basis points of 
 improvement, and the total is multiplied by 20% to 
weight this portion of the quantitative bonus amount.
2. Year-over-year improvement in 
For every dollar of results, $0.005 (or 0.50%) is 
EBITANCE 
 earned, and the total is multiplied by 20% to weight 
this portion of the quantitative bonus amount.
3. NOPAT ROIC 
 $8,000 is earned for every 10 basis points of return, 
and the total is multiplied by 20% to weight this 
 portion of the quantitative bonus amount.
4. Year-over-year improvement 
For every dollar of results, $0.0175 (or 1.75%) is 
in EVA® 
 earned, and the total is multiplied by 20% to weight 
this portion of the quantitative bonus amount.
5. Positive free cash flow 
 For every dollar of results, $0.0015 (or 0.15%) is 
earned, and the total is multiplied by 10% to weight 
this portion of the quantitative bonus amount.
6. Year-over-year improvement  
$5,000 is earned for every 10 basis points of
in average store development  
improvement, and the total is multiplied by 10% to
cost per square foot 
weight this portion of the quantitative bonus amount.
Source: Whole Foods Market, Proxy Statement, January 25, 2013.
 
Comparable store sales growth represents growth in sales from stores open for the entirety 
of the current period and the comparison period. EBITANCE is earnings before interest, taxes, 
and non-cash expense. Noncash expense includes depreciation, amortization, fixed asset im-
pairment charges, noncash share-based payment expense, deferred rent, and last-in, first-out 
(“LIFO”) charge. NOPAT ROIC is net operating profit after tax divided by total invested capi-
tal. EVA® is economic value added, which is described in this chapter. Positive free cash flow 
is cash flow from operations minus capital expenditures.
 
Whole Foods does not use stock price performance as a factor in determining annual cash 
compensation. However, the company believes a relationship exists between stock price and 
team members’ performance, so that its compensation plan is designed to reward team mem-
bers for positive stock price performance.

414 
CHAPTER 7
The Role of Financial Information in Contracting
Required:
1. Compared to GAAP earnings, what advantage does EVA® provide as a performance met-
ric for incentive compensation purposes? Why might this advantage be particularly impor-
tant for companies such as Whole Foods Market?
2. Explain why Whole Foods Market does not use stock price performance to determine 
 annual compensation for its executives. What mechanisms other than annual compensation 
might the company use to encourage managers to create shareholder value?
3. What impact (if any) does EVA® use have on earnings management? In other words, will 
managers be more likely or less likely to use accounting tricks to achieve EVA® bonus 
 targets than is the case for traditional GAAP earnings targets?
4. Explain how the EVA® pool works and why it might help overcome management’s 
 tendency to focus on the short term.
5. How does using a weighted-average of six performance metrics alter an executive’s 
 behavior relative to if he or she faced a single performance metric?
C7-4
Duke Energy Corp.: Rate 
 regulation and earnings 
 management (LO 4)
Regulated utilities such as Duke Energy are authorized to earn a specific rate of return on their 
capital investments. Energy regulators set a rate that the utility can charge its customers for 
the electricity. If the cost of fuel and other operations decreases and a utility earns more than 
its authorized rate of return, regulators may cut the rate a utility charges its customers.
DUKE ENERGY SETTLES WITH STATES ON 
CHARGES IT UNDERSTATED NET
Duke Energy Corp.’s regulated electric utility, Duke Power, 
agreed to pay $25 million to its customers to settle allegations 
the company had underreported profit in order to avoid having 
to reduce its electricity rates.
 
Energy regulators in North Carolina and South Carolina 
had ordered an audit of Duke Power’s books. The inquiry, con-
ducted by accounting firm Grant Thornton LLP, found the util-
ity had failed to report about $123 million in pre-tax income 
from 1998 to 2000. . . .
 
“They manipulated their earnings in an effort to ensure that 
they didn’t report numbers above the authorized rate of re-
turn,” said Gary Walsh, executive director of the South Carolina 
[Public Service] commission.
 
Grant Thornton concluded that the $123 million in 
 accounting entries were “inconsistent with applicable 
 accounting principles, inconsistent with Duke Power’s past 
practice and without proper justification.” The report says 
there was a coordinated effort by the utility unit’s top 
 management to underreport net income by overreporting 
 expenses, specifically insurance for its nuclear operations.
 
Duke Energy, in a written statement, said it had reached 
 “different professional opinions” than Grant Thornton on the 
 accounting issues but had agreed to change the way it 
 accounts for certain items, specifically nuclear insurance, as 
part of the proposed settlement. Duke Energy, which hasn’t 
admitted to any wrongdoing, said it would take a $19 million 
charge in the fourth quarter in connection with the settlement 
if it is approved. . . .
 
The utility’s underreporting to regulators didn’t affect Duke 
Energy’s report of net income, the Grant Thornton report said. . . .
 
Duke Power’s accounting problems started in late 1998 
when a neighboring utility was ordered to cut rates to its 
customers after it had earned more than the amount allowed 
by state regulators. According to the audit of Duke Power’s 
books, as well as Duke internal documents cited in the re-
port, Duke executives at that point realized their utility 
risked a similar order and decided they had to change the 
handling of certain accounting items to avoid showing too 
high a rate of return.
Source: E. K. Kranhold, “Duke Energy Settles with States on Charges It 
 Understated Net,” The Wall Street Journal, October 23, 2002. Copyright © 
2002 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All rights reserved worldwide. Reprinted 
with permission.
Required:
1. Many earnings management devices are intended to accelerate revenue or delay expenses 
and thus increase current earnings. Explain how electricity rate regulation sometimes cre-
ates incentives for utility executives to overstate expenses and understate earnings.

 
Cases 
415
2. Documents produced by Duke Energy in connection with this matter indicate that some per-
sonnel at the company characterized “above-the-line” expenses as those that Duke’s electric 
customers paid—meaning they were accounted for and included in the electric rates paid by 
customers—while “below-the-line” expenses were characterized as “paid” by Duke’s share-
holders. Suppose Duke Energy spent $10 million hiring a consulting company to develop a 
new logo for the company. Explain why customers and shareholders care whether the cost of 
logo development is classified by the company as “above” or “below” the line.
3. According to the news article, “The utility’s underreporting to regulators didn’t affect 
Duke Energy’s report of [GAAP] net income.” Explain why.
C7-5
Computer Associates 
 International: Compensation 
and accounting irregularities 
(LO 3)
and who worked at CA from 1988 to 2004, became involved 
after prosecutors told the court they planned to introduce evi-
dence that Mr. Kumar had erased the hard drive on his personal 
computer in 2003—after CA had advised employees to pre-
serve all evidence. Mr. Bennett was arrested for approaching a 
former CA technician, who allegedly had helped Mr. Kumar 
erase the drive. . . .
 
Mr. Wang, 60, first spotted the younger Mr. Kumar when Mr. 
Kumar was a poor teenage immigrant. The two immigrants even-
tually became wealthy together, once sharing with another exec-
utive a $1 billion award of shares in the company. . . .
 
CA admitted in 2004 that it had improperly inflated quar-
terly revenue over several years. Four top officers and three fi-
nancial officers of CA have pled guilty in connection with the 
case. CA itself was also charged, but it avoided an indictment 
by reaching a deferred prosecution agreement with the Justice 
Department. Under that agreement, CA has continued to coop-
erate with prosecutors, paid $225 million in restitution to 
shareholders and agreed to have a court-appointed independent 
examiner while restating some $2.2 billion in revenue, which 
was booked in the wrong periods. . . .
 
According to evidence presented by the government and 
described by CA in its restatements, much of the predictability 
of revenue was due to fraudulent accounting. According to 
the government, Mr. Kumar orchestrated “35-day months” at 
the end of each quarter, during which sales executives and 
Mr. Kumar himself frantically cut deals to persuade customers 
to sign needed contracts, which were then backdated to make it 
appear they had been signed in the previous quarter.
Source: W. M. Bulkeley and P. Davies, “CA’s Ex-CEO Pleads Guilty to Securities 
Fraud,” The Wall Street Journal, April 25, 2006. Copyright © 2006 Dow Jones & 
Company, Inc. All rights reserved worldwide. Reprinted with permission.
CA’S EX-CEO PLEADS GUILTY TO SECURITIES FRAUD
Sanjay Kumar, the former chief executive of CA Inc., pleaded 
guilty to securities fraud and obstruction of justice charges 
stemming from a scheme that used backdated contracts to fal-
sify the U.S. company’s quarterly earnings reports.
 
The plea ends the career of a Sri Lankan immigrant who 
climbed to the top of the corporate ladder and made a fortune in 
the U.S. high-technology boom. Mr. Kumar now faces a maxi-
mum 90 years in prison if the eight counts to which he pleaded 
result in consecutive sentences. However, lighter sentencing of 
10 to 30 years might be dictated under federal guidelines.
 
At the software company formerly known as Computer As-
sociates, Mr. Kumar first gained note as the protégé of com-
pany founder Charles Wang. Together, the two built a 
fast-growing enterprise adept at taking over smaller companies 
specializing in software for corporate back offices.
 
But in 2000, when the company abruptly announced a 
change in auditors and accounting methodology, revenue 
started to plummet. The Securities and Exchange Commission 
began investigating in 2002 and eventually referred the case to 
the U.S. Justice Department, which has secured a number of 
guilty pleas of top CA Executives.
 
In September 2004, Mr. Kumar, 44 years old, was indicted with 
former sales chief Stephen Richards, 41, who also pleaded guilty 
yesterday. Mr. Kumar had left the company earlier in the year.
 
The defense decision to plead guilty followed the Friday 
arrest of Tommy Bennett, a former CA executive who recently 
has been working for Mr. Kumar. Mr. Bennett was charged 
with conspiracy to obstruct justice.
 
According to Mr. Bennett’s arrest warrant, Mr. Bennett, who 
was senior vice president in change of business development 

416 
CHAPTER 7
The Role of Financial Information in Contracting
Required:
1. Refer to Exhibit 7.1, which describes the 2003 annual incentive compensation plan for 
top executives at Computer Associates International. (Details of the accounting abuses at 
Computer Associates are described in Chapter 1.) What features of this plan might have 
contributed to the illegal backdating of sales contracts?
2. Stock options and company shares comprised a substantial portion of Kumar’s personal 
wealth. How might these equity-based incentives have contributed to the illegal backdating 
of sales contracts?
3. Why would Computer Associates’ outside auditor have difficulty spotting the contract 
backdating?
.mhhe.com/revsine6e
www
Remember to check the book’s companion website 
for additional study material.

8
R
eceivables are amounts that outsiders owe to a business firm. In U.K. financial 
reports, receivables are called “debtors”—a term clearly connoting the legal 
obligation of outsiders to make payments to a firm. Most receivables arise 
from credit sales and are called trade receivables or accounts receivable. Receivables 
that result from other types of transactions and events (for example, insurance claims 
from casualty losses) are separately disclosed, if significant, on the balance sheet. This 
separate disclosure facilitates informed financial analysis.
ASSESSING THE NET REALIZABLE VALUE 
OF ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE
Accounts receivable are generally1 reflected in the balance sheet at net realizable value.2 
Two things must be estimated to determine the net realizable value of receivables:
1. The amount that will not be collected because customers are unable to pay—called 
uncollectibles.
2. The amount that will not be collected because customers return the merchandise for 
credit or are allowed a reduction in the amount owed—called returns and allowances.
The next sections discuss financial reporting issues relating to uncollectibles, returns, 
and allowances.
Estimating Uncollectibles
Receivables arising from some credit sales are never collected. These losses are an un-
avoidable cost of doing business. Companies could adopt such stringent credit standards 
that “bad debt” losses would be virtually zero. But if they sold only to customers with im-
peccable credit records, they would forgo many otherwise profitable sales opportunities.
 
Most companies establish credit policies by weighing the expected cost of credit 
sales—customer billing and collection costs plus potential bad debt losses—against the 
8
Receivables
417
Chapter
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you 
will understand:
1. How to account for accounts 
 receivable using net realizable value.
2. How to analyze accounts receivable 
under net realizable value accounting.
3. How to evaluate whether or not 
 reported receivables arose from real 
sales and how to spot danger signals.
4. How to impute and record interest 
when notes receivable have either no 
explicit interest or an unrealistically 
low interest rate.
5. How to account for accounts and 
notes receivable using the fair value 
option.
6. How companies use receivables to 
accelerate cash inflows and how the 
accounting treatment affects financial 
statement ratios.
7. Why receivables are securitized and 
how the accounting treatment affects 
financial statement ratios.
8. Why receivables are restructured 
when a customer experiences 
 financial difficulty and how to account 
for the troubled-debt restructuring.
9. The key differences between current 
GAAP and IFRS requirements for 
 receivable accounting and possible 
changes.
1 We say “generally” because firms may elect the fair value option for receivables. See FASB Accounting Standards 
Codification (ASC) Section 825-10-25: Financial Instruments—Overall—Recognition—Fair Value Option. Al-
though all firms have this option, firms in the financial services industry would be the most likely firms to adopt it. 
We discuss briefly the fair value option as it applies to receivables later in the chapter. Chapters 6 and 11 discuss fair 
value measurement and the fair value option in more detail.
2 Net realizable value refers to the selling price of an item minus reasonable further costs both to make the item ready 
to sell and to sell it. When applied to trade receivables, net realizable value refers to the amount of money the business 
can reasonably expect to collect from its credit customers.

418 
CHAPTER 8
Receivables
benefit of increased sales. Companies choose what they believe is a profit-maximizing bal-
ance. This trade-off between increased costs and additional profits from credit sales illustrates 
that bad debts are often unavoidable. Consequently, accrual accounting requires that some 
estimate of uncollectible accounts be offset against current period sales.
 
Traditionally, most firms have referred to losses from uncollectible accounts as bad debt ex-
pense and have treated them as operating expenses. Conceptually, losses associated with uncol-
lectible accounts should be viewed as a reduction of revenue because the revenue should not have 
been recognized originally. The FASB takes this conceptual view in its recent Revenue Recogni-
tion exposure draft.3 It states that revenues should be shown gross, and expected losses related to 
collectibility should be shown as reductions from the gross revenues. To be consistent with ac-
counting theory, and to acknowledge the probable change in revenue recognition, we do not use 
bad debt expense in the remainder of the chapter. Instead, we use bad debt provision or provision 
for doubtful accounts. However, the reader should recognize that most firms will continue to treat 
these provisions as expenses until they adopt the new Revenue Recognition standard.
 
Suppose that Bristol Corporation estimates that, based on current industry trends and the 
company’s experience, bad debt losses arising from first quarter 2014 sales are expected to be 
$30,000. The entry Bristol makes under GAAP is:
3 See FASB Revenue Recognition (Topic 605)—Proposed Accounting Standards Update (Revised), (Norwalk, CT: January 
2012), paragraphs 68 and 69.
The Allowance for uncollectibles (alternatively titled Allowance for doubtful accounts) is a con-
tra-asset account that is subtracted from gross accounts receivable. If Bristol’s Accounts receiv-
able (gross) and Allowance for uncollectibles balance before recording this bad debt entry were 
$1,500,000 and $15,000, respectively, after recording bad debts, its balance sheet shows:
DR Bad debt provision  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $30,000
   CR Allowance for uncollectibles. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$30,000
Accounts receivable (gross) 
$1,500,000
Less: Allowance for uncollectibles 
(45,000)
 Accounts receivable (net) 
$1,455,000
(15,000) Initial balance
(30,000) Addition
⎧
⎨
⎩
 
Companies can use two alternative approaches to estimate uncollectible accounts. One 
multiplies a specific loss percentage by sales revenues; the other multiplies a (usually differ-
ent) loss percentage by gross accounts receivable. Each approach is illustrated as follows.
1. The sales revenue approach. Assume that Bristol Corporation prepares quarterly financial 
statements and must estimate the bad debt provision at the end of each quarter. Analyzing 
past customer payment patterns, Bristol determined that bad debt losses average about 
1% of sales. If first quarter sales in 2014 total $3,000,000, bad debt losses from those 
sales are expected to total $30,000. Bristol then makes the entry previously illustrated to 
record its estimate of bad debt losses arising from current quarter sales.
A third approach, which is 
used only for tax reporting 
purposes, is the direct 
write-off method. Under 
this approach, the bad debt 
provision is recorded at the 
time a specific account is 
written off, with an offset-
ting credit to Accounts 
 receivable. No allowance 
account is used under this 
approach. Because tax 
 reporting rules require the 
direct write-off method for 
recognizing uncollectible 
accounts while GAAP 
 requires one of the two al-
lowance methods described 
here, a temporary or timing 
difference between book 
 income and taxable income 
is created (see Chapter 13 
for further discussion).
Sales Revenue Approach
Estimate the current period bad debt provision as a percentage of current period 
sales. For Bristol Corporation, the estimate is:
0.01 3 $3,000,000 Sales for the quarter 5 $30,000 Bad debt provision
So, the entry is:
DR Bad debt provision  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $30,000 
   CR Allowance for uncollectibles. . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$30,000

 
Assessing the Net Realizable Value of  Accounts Receivable 
419
2. The gross accounts receivable approach. Suppose that instead of estimating bad debts as 
a percentage of sales, Bristol determined that at any given time, approximately 3% of 
gross accounts receivable eventually prove uncollectible. Gross receivables at March 31, 
2014, total $1,500,000, which means that on that date the required allowance for uncol-
lectibles is 3% of this amount, or $45,000. Because the allowance account balance is only 
$15,000, $30,000 must be added to the uncollectibles account at the end of the quarter. 
Doing this brings the allowance for uncollectibles balance up to $45,000.
“Backing into” the $30,000 with the 
use of a T-account is shown as follows:
Allowance for uncollectibles
 
$15,000 
 Current 
balance
 
 30,000 
 Required 
adjustment
 
$45,000 
 Computed 
new 
balance
Gross Receivables Approach
Estimate the required allowance account balance as a percentage of gross receivables 
and then adjust the allowance upward or downward to this figure. For Bristol Corpo-
ration, the required allowance account balance is:
0.03 3 $1,500,000 Outstanding receivables 5 $45,000 Allowance for uncollectibles
The allowance account currently has a $15,000 balance, so $30,000 is added:
DR Bad debt provision  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $30,000 
   CR Allowance for uncollectibles. . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$30,000
Writing Off Bad Debts 
When a specific account receivable is known to be 
definitely uncollectible, the entire account must be removed from the books. For ex-
ample, if Bristol determines that a $750 receivable from Ralph Company cannot be 
collected, it makes the following entry:
DR Allowance for uncollectibles  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $750
   CR Account receivable—Ralph Company . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$750
Notice that this entry has no effect on income. A specific account receivable (Ralph 
Company) is eliminated from the books and the allowance contra-account is reduced, 
but no bad debt provision is recorded. This is consistent with the accrual accounting 
philosophy of recording estimated bad debts when the sale was made rather than at 
some later date when the nonpaying customer is identified. Of course, Bristol Corpora-
tion does not know at the time of each sale which particular customers will be unable to pay. 
That’s why the offsetting credit for the bad debt provision was originally made to the contra-
asset account, Allowance for uncollectibles. Only when the seller knows which specific 
 receivable is uncollectible can the individual account (Ralph Company) be written off. This 
is what the preceding entry accomplishes.
Assessing the Adequacy of the Allowance 
for Uncollectibles Account Balance
No matter which method—percentage of sales or percentage of gross receivables—is used to 
estimate bad debts, management must periodically assess the reasonableness of the allowance 
for uncollectibles balance. Given existing economic conditions and customer circumstances, 
is the balance in the Allowance for uncollectibles account adequate, excessive, or 
insufficient?
 
To make this judgment, management performs an aging of accounts receivable. As the 
name implies, an aging of receivables is simply a determination of how long each receivable 
has been on the books. Receivables that are long past due often exist because customers are 
experiencing financial difficulties and may ultimately be unable to pay. An aging is performed 
by subdividing total accounts receivable into several age categories (see Exhibit 8.1).

420 
CHAPTER 8
Receivables
 
Obviously, considerable judgment goes into evaluating the adequacy of the Allowance for 
uncollectibles balance. Most companies carefully appraise this area because audit guidelines 
are well developed and auditors’ scrutiny is intense.
 
Exhibit 8.2 contains selected financial information from 2007 to 2010 for Krispy Kreme 
Doughnuts, Inc. Accounts receivable arise primarily from franchise royalties, supply and 
equipment sales to franchisees, and off-premise sales by convenience and grocery stores. Part A 
EXHIBIT 8.1
Bristol Corporation: Allowance for Uncollectibles Based on Aging of Receivables
On December 31, 2014, Bristol Corporation’s gross accounts receivable are $1,600,000, and the balance of the Allowance for uncol-
lectibles is $39,000. Bristol’s normal sales terms require payment within 30 days after the sale is made and the goods are received by 
the buyer. Bristol determines that the receivables have the following age distribution:
 
 
31–90 
91–180 
Over 180
 
Current 
days old 
days old 
days old 
Total
Amount 
$1,450,000 
$125,000 
$15,000 
$10,000 
$1,600,000
Once the receivables have been grouped by age category, a separate estimate of uncollectibles by category is developed. Based on past 
experience, Bristol determines the following estimate of expected bad debt losses by category:
Estimated % of bad debt losses 
2.5% 
6% 
20% 
40%
The required balance in the Allowance for uncollectibles account would then be as follows:
Amount 
$1,450,000 
$125,000 
$15,000 
$10,000 
$1,600,000
3 Estimated % of bad debt losses 
2.5% 
6% 
20% 
40%
5 Allowance for uncollectibles 
$   36,250 
$  7,500 
$  3,000 
$  4,000 
$   50,750
Because the balance of the Allowance for uncollectibles is only $39,000 on December 31, 2014, the account must be increased by $11,750. 
This is the difference between the $50,750 required balance (as computed) and the existing $39,000 balance. To bring the balance up to 
the $50,750 figure indicated by the aging, Bristol makes the following adjusting entry:
DR Bad debt provision  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $11,750
   CR Allowance for uncollectibles. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$11,750
EXHIBIT 8.2
Krispy Kreme Doughnuts, Inc.: Analysis of Uncollectible Accounts Receivable
($ in millions) 
Jan. 31, 2010 
Feb. 1, 2009 
Feb. 3, 2008 
Jan 28, 2007
A. Select Reported Amounts
 Revenues 
$346.520 
$385.522 
$430.370 
$461.195
 Pre-tax income 
0.418 
(3.558) 
(64.727) 
(41.025)
 Ending accounts receivables (gross) 
18.714 
22.086 
27.741 
29.514
B. Change in Allowance for doubtful accounts
 Balance at beginning of year 
$    2.857 
$    4.750 
$    2.745 
$  13.656
 Provision for doubtful accounts 
(0.651) 
0.071 
2.150 
1.836
 Chargeoffs 
(0.863) 
(2.064) 
(0.145) 
(12.632)
 Other 
— 
0.100 
— 
(0.115)
 Balance at end of year 
$    1.343 
$    2.857 
$    4.750 
$    2.745
C. Analysis
 Provision for doubtful accounts as a % of sales 
20.19% 
0.02% 
0.50% 
0.40%
 Provision for doubtful accounts as a % of ending receivables 
23.48% 
0.32% 
7.75% 
6.22%
 Allowance as a % of ending receivables 
7.18% 
12.94% 
17.12% 
9.30%
Source: Krispy Kreme Doughnuts, Inc. Form 10-Ks.

 
Assessing the Net Realizable Value of  Accounts Receivable 
421
of Exhibit 8.2 shows that Krispy Kreme’s revenue and accounts receivables declined over the 
four years. It incurred large losses in fiscal 2007 and 2008 and returned to profitability in 2010.
 
Part B shows how the allowance for doubtful accounts changed over the same period. The 
balance was $13.656 million at the beginning of fiscal 2007 but fell to $2.745 million by the 
end of the year. Krispy Kreme had increased its allowance in prior years because franchisees 
and other customers were having difficulties making scheduled payments. Note the large 
 chargeoff of $12.632 million in 2007. These accounts were deemed as uncollectible in 2007 
but had been charged against income in prior years. Expectations about future collections 
 improved substantially after fiscal 2008, and Krispy Kreme actually debited the allowance and 
credited the provision for doubtful accounts for $0.651 million in fiscal 2010. This is very 
unusual! Even more unusual is that the credit to the provision is greater than Krispy Kreme’s 
pre-tax income of 0.418 million.
 
Part C shows the provision as a percentage of sales and receivables. Note how the percent-
ages decline over time as Krispy Kreme’s collection experience improves. The allowance as a 
percentage of receivables in 2007 is 9.30% and rises to 17.12% in 2008. The rise indicates 
that Krispy Kreme was still expecting significant losses on its receivables. However, it began 
decreasing the percentage in fiscal 2009, and reduced the percentage to 7.18% in 2010, which 
is below the fiscal 2007 percentage. This analysis shows that a firm must continually adjust 
its allowance as its collection experience changes.
 
Determining whether the allowance for doubtful accounts is adequate requires judgment. 
Consequently, the temptation to “manage” earnings by using bad debt accruals can be strong. 
Research evidence suggests that companies reduce the bad debt provision when earnings are 
otherwise low and then increase the provision when earnings are high.4 To evaluate whether the 
reduction in Krispy Kreme’s ratio of Allowance for doubtful accounts to gross receivables is 
reasonable, the analyst should compare the ratio to other firms similar to Krispy Kreme, look for 
 additional discussion in Krispy Kreme’s 10-Ks, and listen to the analyst earnings briefings.
Estimating Sales Returns and Allowances
Sometimes a company ships the wrong goods to customers or the correct goods arrive damaged. 
In either case, the customer returns the item or requests a price reduction. When goods are re-
turned or a price allowance granted, the customer’s account receivable must be reduced and an 
income statement charge made. Assume that Bristol Corporation agrees to reduce by $8,000 the 
price of goods that arrived damaged at Bath Company. Bristol records this price adjustment as:
Analysis
4 See M. McNichols and G. P. Wilson, “Evidence of Earnings Management from the Provision for Bad Debts,” Journal of 
Accounting Research, Supplement 1988, pp. 1–31; S. Moyer, “Capital Adequacy Ratio Regulations and Accounting Choices 
in Commercial Banks,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, July 1990, pp. 123–54; M. Scholes, P. Wilson, and M. Wolf-
son, “Tax Planning, Regulatory Capital Planning and Financial Reporting Strategy for Commercial Banks,” Review of Finan-
cial Studies 3, no. 4 (1990), pp. 625–50; J. Collins, D. Shackelford, and J. Wahlen, “Bank Differences in the Coordination of 
Regulatory Capital, Earnings, and Taxes,” Journal of Accounting Research, Autumn 1995, pp. 263–91; and A. Beatty, 
S. Chamberlain, and J. Magliolo, “Managing Financial Reports of Commercial Banks: The Influence of Taxes, Regulatory 
Capital, and Earnings,” Journal of Accounting Research, Autumn 1995, pp. 231–61. As the titles of these studies suggest, 
regulatory capital requirements in commercial banks and financial services companies also influence bad debt accruals.
DR Sales returns and allowances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $8,000
   CR Accounts receivable—Bath Company . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$8,000
Bath now owes $8,000 less than the amount it previously had been billed, as reflected by the 
reduction to Accounts receivable. The account that is debited here is an offset to sales 
 revenues—termed a contra-revenue account. Sales revenues are not reduced directly; the 
contra-revenue account allows Bristol Corporation to keep a running record of the frequency 

422 
CHAPTER 8
Receivables
and amount of returns and price reductions because these events represent potential break-
downs in customer relations.
 
At the end of the reporting period, companies estimate the expected amount of future re-
turns and allowances arising from receivables currently on the books. If the estimated number 
is large in relation to the accounts receivable balance or to earnings, the adjusting entry is:
The debit is to a contra-revenue account that reduces net sales by the estimated amount of 
returns and allowances. Because it is not yet known which specific customer accounts will 
require future returns and allowances, the credit entry must be made to a contra-asset account 
that offsets gross accounts receivable. In practice, estimated sales returns and allowances are 
seldom material in relation to receivables. Consequently, no end-of-period accrual is typically 
made for these items.
 
Ordinary returns and allowances are seldom a major issue in financial reporting. On the 
other hand, companies occasionally adopt “aggressive” revenue recognition practices— 
meaning that they recognize revenue either prematurely or inappropriately. Examples include 
recognizing revenue on goods shipped on consignment or recognizing revenue when delivery 
is delayed, as discussed in Chapter 3. This revenue recognition aggressiveness generates 
 significant returns in later periods. Aggressive revenue recognition overstates both accounts 
receivable and income. Consequently, analysts must understand that a sudden spurt in 
 accounts receivable may be a danger signal, as we see next.
Analytical Insight: Do Existing Receivables 
Represent Real Sales?
When a company’s sales terms, customer creditworthiness, and accounting methods do not 
change from period to period, the growth rates in sales and in accounts receivable are roughly 
equal. If sales increase by 10%, accounts receivable should also increase by about 10%. State-
ment readers who understand this carefully monitor the relationship between sales growth and 
receivables growth. When receivables increase faster than sales, those statement readers see a 
potential “red flag.” Receivables could increase at a higher rate than sales for several reasons. 
One reason is that the disparity in growth rates might reflect something positive such as a de-
liberate change in sales terms designed to attract new customers. Suppose that instead of re-
quiring payment within 30 days of shipment, Hmong Company allows customers to pay in four 
months. Such changes broaden the potential market for the company’s products and services by 
allowing slightly less creditworthy customers to buy the firm’s products. In this case, receiv-
ables growth will far outpace sales growth. To illustrate, consider the following example:
DR Sales returns and allowances  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
XXX
   CR Allowance for sales returns and allowances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
XXX
Ignoring estimated future 
returns and allowances has 
a trivial effect on income 
when the amount of actual 
returns and allowances does 
not vary greatly from year 
to year.
Analysis
Assume that before introducing more lenient credit terms, Hmong Company had annual 
sales of $12 million and customers, on average, paid within 30 days. Outstanding accounts 
receivable, therefore, represent one month’s sales, or $1 million. Under the new credit pro-
gram, customer receivables would represent four months’ sales, or $4 million; this represents 
a 300% increase in receivables even if total sales remain unchanged.
 
Another reason for receivables growth exceeding sales growth could be due to deteriorating 
creditworthiness among existing customers, which could represent an emerging problem. 

 
Assessing the Net Realizable Value of  Accounts Receivable 
423
If customers are unable to pay, receivables will not be collected when due and accounts receivable 
will increase at a faster rate than sales. However, the company’s independent auditor would likely  
uncover this problem in the annual financial statements audit. Accordingly, when the cause for the 
unusual growth in receivables is due to an inability of customers to pay on time, GAAP financial 
statements would ordinarily show a large increase in estimated uncollectibles.
 
So, growth in accounts receivables can outstrip growth in sales 
revenues either because firms allow customers more time to pay 
or because customers are unable to pay due to their own cash flow 
problems.
 
Another reason why receivables growth could exceed sales 
growth is that the firm has changed its financial reporting proce-
dures, which determine when sales are recognized. To illustrate 
this possibility, let’s consider an automobile manufacturer that 
builds cars and ships them to a dealer who ultimately sells them to 
you and other individuals. Assume that the manufacturer in past 
years has recognized revenue from sales only when an automobile 
was sold to the final customer. But if the auto manufacturer in the 
current year suddenly decides to recognize automobile sales rev-
enue when the cars are shipped to the dealer, this represents a 
significant change in financial reporting principles. To see how such a financial reporting 
change affects the relationship between receivables growth and sales growth, we discuss the 
classic case of Bausch & Lomb Inc. Exhibit 8.3 presents selected financial statement data for 
the years 1990–1993.
 
In Exhibit 8.3 net trade accounts receivable increased dramatically in both 1992 and 1993. 
This increase shows up in absolute dollar amounts (an increase of $72,076 in 1992 and 
$107,635 in 1993) as well as in relation to total balance sheet assets (11.8% in 1991 versus 
14.8% in 1992 and 15.3% in 1993). What makes this growth seem “unusual,” however, is the 
disparity in growth rates between sales and receivables. While sales grew 12.43% in 1992 
and 9.54% in 1993, receivables jumped by 35.11% and 38.81% in those same years, respec-
tively (highlighted areas in Exhibit 8.3). Clearly, something unusual was happening in both 
Collectibility of receivables requires forecasts of future condi-
tions. Forecasts are often inaccurate. However, existing auditing 
procedures for accounts receivable are very detailed and strin-
gent, requiring auditors to send confirmations to randomly 
 chosen customers verifying the legitimacy of the recorded re-
ceivables. Aging schedules to uncover payment problems are 
also required. Furthermore, auditors undertake credit checks 
on the company’s largest customers to ascertain the probability 
of eventual collection. As a consequence of these procedures, 
while collectibility requires forecasts that could be wrong, ex-
treme overstatement of net (collectible) receivables is rare. An 
exception to the general rule occurred in 2007 when the default 
rate on subprime loans was much higher than expected. See 
our discussion of subprime loans later in this chapter.
EXHIBIT 8.3
Bausch & Lomb, Inc.: Selected Financial 
Statement Data, 1990–1993
($000 omitted) 
1990 
1991 
1992 
1993
Net sales 
$1,368,580 
$1,520,104 
$1,709,086 
$1,872,184
Net trade accounts receivable 
$202,967 
$205,262 
$277,338 
$384,973
Days sales outstanding* 
54 days* 
49 days 
59 days 
75 days
Receivables as a % of total assets 
12.1% 
11.8% 
14.8% 
15.3%
Year-to-year growth in
 Net sales 
$151,524 
$188,982 
$163,098
 Net trade accounts receivable 
$2,295 
$72,076 
$107,635
 Net sales 
11.07% 
12.43% 
9.54%
 Net trade accounts receivable 
1.13% 
35.11% 
38.81%
* Days sales outstanding is Net trade accounts receivables divided by Net sales per day. For example, the calculation 
for 1990 Days sales outstanding is $202,967 net trade receivables/($1,368,580 net sales/365 days) 5 54 days
Source: Bausch & Lomb Inc. Annual Reports.
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
 ⎨
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
 ⎨
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
 ⎨
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

424 
CHAPTER 8
Receivables
years. A partial explanation was provided one year later in the company’s 1994 annual re-
port, which stated:
In the fourth quarter of 1993, the Company adopted a business strategy to shift responsibility for 
the sale and distribution of a portion of the U.S. traditional contact lens business to optical dis-
tributors. A 1993 fourth quarter marketing program to implement this strategy was developed, 
contributing one-time net income of approximately $10 million. Subsequently, this strategy 
proved unsuccessful.
 
Prior to this change in Bausch & Lomb’s business strategy, revenues and associated 
receivables were recognized when sales were made to retailers or ultimate consumers. In 
the fourth quarter of 1993, however, shipments to distributors appear to have been treated 
as sales. This change in revenue recognition was in keeping with the shift in sales strategy, 
but the worry is that if distributors are unable to sell their inventory, they will return it to 
Bausch & Lomb for credit. This is exactly what happened, as described in the company’s 
1994 annual report:
In October 1994, the Company announced it had implemented a new pricing policy for tradi-
tional contact lenses and agreed on a one-time basis to accept returns from these distributors. 
As a result, the Company recorded sales reserves and pricing adjustments which reduced operat-
ing earnings by approximately $20 million in the third quarter. The new pricing policy sought to 
enhance the Company’s competitive position in a market segment where industry prices had de-
clined since the business strategy was implemented. The returns program allowed U.S. distribu-
tors to send back the excess portion of unsold traditional lenses and balance their overall 
contact lens inventories. [Emphasis added.]
So, we see that like our hypothetical automobile manufacturer, Bausch & 
Lomb began recognizing revenue when output was shipped to distributors 
rather than waiting until units were sold to final consumers.
Although the first 1994 annual report excerpt above suggests that the 
changes in sales strategy and revenue recognition began only in 1993, the data 
in Exhibit 8.3 reveal that a large disparity in sales and receivables growth rates 
occurred earlier. What explains this pre-1993 disparity?
A BusinessWeek article published six months after Bausch & Lomb re-
leased its 1994 annual report suggests several possible explanations.5 The ar-
ticle asserts that top-down pressure to achieve sales and profit goals caused 
Bausch & Lomb managers to loosen revenue recognition standards in the 
early 1990s, an assertion that top Bausch & Lomb executives vehemently de-
nied. Specifically, Bausch & Lomb sales representatives allegedly “gave cus-
tomers extraordinarily long payment terms, knowingly fed gray markets, and 
threatened to cut off distributors unless they took on huge quantities of un-
wanted products. Some also shipped goods before customers ordered them 
and booked the shipments as sales. . . .”6 The article further contends that this type of deal 
making “became frantic” from the last quarter of 1992 through early 1994 and that the U.S. 
contact lens division “had a habit of constantly rolling over unpaid bills so that customers 
wouldn’t return unwanted goods for credit.”7 If BusinessWeek’s interpretations are correct, 
these practices would explain the unusual pre-1993 receivables growth.
 
See Figure 8.1 for the company’s days sales outstanding (DSO) for receivables by quarter 
for March 1989 through the end of 1995. DSO receivables represent just the dollar amount of 
Authoritative accounting literature lists six 
 criteria that must be satisfied before revenue is 
recognized when a sales agreement contains 
conditions that may allow the buyer to return the 
product.* The most important of these criteria 
for Bausch & Lomb are:
1. The return privilege has substantially expired 
because of performance by the seller, or 
other conditions.
2. The amount of future returns can be reason-
ably estimated.
These guidelines are imprecise and abuses of the 
rules have occurred, as discussed in Chapter 3.
* FASB ASC Section 605-15-25: Revenue 
Recognition—Products—Recognition.
5 M. Maremont, “Blind Ambition,” BusinessWeek, October 23, 1995, pp. 78–92.
6 Ibid., pp. 79–80.
7 Ibid., p. 86.

 
Assessing the Net Realizable Value of  Accounts Receivable 
425
outstanding receivables divided by average daily sales. From March 1989 to March 1992, 
Bausch & Lomb’s DSO receivables averaged about 50 days and fluctuated little from quarter 
to quarter. By the end of 1992, however, DSO receivables had increased to 59 days, and by the 
fourth quarter of 1993, it stood at 72 days. This unusual pattern of increase in Bausch & 
Lomb’s DSO receivables undoubtedly caused some financial statement readers to become 
skeptical about the company’s revenue recognition practices.
 
One last point regarding Bausch & Lomb. The BusinessWeek article contends that the re-
ported December 31, 1993, accounts receivable number of $385 million (see Exhibit 8.3) 
understates the real growth of outstanding customer credit. The understatement occurs, ac-
cording to the article, because Bausch & Lomb sold some receivables to a third-party financ-
ing company for cash. Receivable sales of this sort are called factoring: Factoring transactions 
are discussed later in this chapter. Factored receivables are removed from the balance sheet. If 
the receivables had not been factored, the accounts receivable balance would have been higher 
and the disparity in sales and receivables growth rates for 1992 and 1993 would have been 
even larger!
 
Scrutiny of changes in accounts receivable balances is essential. Large increases in ac-
counts receivable relative to sales frequently represent a danger signal. The two most likely 
causes are collection difficulties and sales contingencies or disputes that may lead to potential 
returns. Another possible explanation, however, as you just saw, is a change in revenue recog-
nition methods.
 
Many revenue recognition “irregularities” can be discovered by tracking the relationship 
between changes in sales and changes in receivables. Sunbeam Corporation’s 1997 annual 
report provides an example of how the evaluation of this relationship led to uncovering fraud.
 
Albert J. Dunlap joined Sunbeam Corporation as chairman and chief executive officer in 
July 1996. He had earned a reputation as a “turnaround” specialist because of his aggressive-
ness in restructuring and downsizing companies he had previously run, such as Scott Paper. 
By cutting costs and eliminating waste, Dunlap restored the companies to profitability. Sun-
beam had mediocre performance in the years prior to Dunlap’s arrival. But reported 1997 
quarterly and annual financial results seemed to indicate considerable improvement.
 
At the start of his letter to shareholders in the 1997 annual report, Dunlap stated:
We had an amazing year in 1997! During the past 12 months we set new records in almost every 
facet of the Company’s operations. We experienced significant sales growth and concurrently 
 increased margins and earnings.
March
1990
March
1989
March
1991
March
1992
March
1993
March
1994
March
1995
Quarter
Fourth quarter
1992
Fourth quarter
1993
DSO Receivables
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
Figure 8.1
BAUSCH & LOMB, INC.
DSO Receivables* by Quarter
* DSO Receivables is Days sales outstand-
ing for receivables and is defined as Net 
trade accounts receivables divided by Net 
sales per day.

426 
CHAPTER 8
Receivables
The letter concluded:
Stay tuned, the best is yet to come!
 
Soon after the 1997 Sunbeam annual report appeared, some analysts raised questions about 
the quality of the reported earnings and the economic validity of the results.8 Sales for 1997 
and 1996 and year-end receivables were:
($000 omitted) 
1997 
1996
Net sales 
$1,168,182 
$984,236
Gross trade accounts receivable 
313,013 
229,455
8 See Jonathan R. Laing, “Dangerous Games,” Barron’s, June 8, 1998.
Sales grew by 18.69% ([$1,168,182 2 $984,236]y$984,236) while receivables grew by 
36.42% ([$313,013 2 $229,455]y$229,455). The disparity in growth rates is a clue that there 
may be a problem. Investigation is warranted because the following notes to the 1997 annual 
report in Exhibit 8.4 disclose “bill and hold sales” and disposal of receivables—events that 
affect both sales and receivables.
 
We first mentioned bill and hold sales in Chapter 3 in our discussion of revenue recogni-
tion abuses (see page 149). In a bill and hold sale, the company recognizes revenue and the 
associated account receivable but does not ship the product to the customer until later. One 
issue is whether these are real sales. The annual report note states that these bill and hold 
terms were at the customer’s request and legal title to the inventory had passed. So, it’s rea-
sonable to conclude that the sales were legitimate even though the inventory hadn’t been 
shipped. But the other issue is whether these are really sales of 1997 or instead 1998 sales that 
have been pulled into 1997 by the bill and hold terms. The amount in question isn’t  trivial—3% 
of Sunbeam’s 1997 sales ($1,168,182,000) is $35,045,460. This represents 19.05% of the 
 reported $183,946,000 sales increase between 1996 and 1997.
 
Furthermore, the true growth in receivables is understated by the amount of receivables sold 
at the end of 1997. The $59 million cash received is the book value of the receivables minus a 
financing charge. So, $59 million roughly approximates the amount of receivables removed 
from the books.
Analysis
EXHIBIT 8.4
Sunbeam Corporation Notes
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenues from product sales principally at the time of shipment to cus-
tomers. In limited circumstances, at the customer’s request the Company may sell seasonal  product 
on a bill and hold basis provided that the goods are completed, packaged and ready for shipment, 
such goods are segregated, and the risks of ownership and legal title have passed to the customer. 
The amount of such bill and hold sales at December 29, 1997, was approximately 3% of consoli-
dated revenues.
Credit Facilities
In December 1997, the Company entered into a revolving trade accounts receivable securitization 
program to sell without recourse, through a wholly-owned subsidiary, certain trade accounts re-
ceivable. The maximum amount of receivables that can be sold through this program is $70 million. 
At December 28, 1997, the Company had received approximately $59 million from the sale of trade 
 accounts receivable.
Source: Sunbeam Corporation 1997 annual report. [Emphasis and highlighting added.]

 
Imputing Interest on Trade Notes Receivable 
427
 
Let’s summarize the clues that were available to the auditor and/or analyst:
1. Receivables growth greatly exceeded sales growth.
2. Bill and hold sales raise the possibility that some of this disparity is be-
cause sales were booked too early, before delivery, thus generating receiv-
ables that won’t be collected quickly. Worse yet, collection may never 
occur if delivery of “sold” items is ultimately refused.
3. Had Sunbeam not sold approximately $59 million of receivables, the “real” 
growth rate of receivables would have exceeded the reported rate of 36.42%, 
further increasing the disparity between sales and receivables growth rates. 
This even larger disparity increases the likelihood that Sunbeam may have 
engaged in  “channel stuffing”—that is, recognizing revenue on shipped products that exceed 
customer needs and are likely to be returned. 
These, as well as other issues unrelated to receivables, prompted a reaudit of Sunbeam’s fi-
nancial statements from the fourth quarter of 1996 through the first quarter of 1998. The reau-
dit disclosed that 1997 sales had been overstated by $95,092,000 (or 8.1%) with profits of 
$38,301,000 rather than $109,415,000, as reported.9
 
And it was careful scrutiny by informed analysts that led to inquiries that resulted in these 
corrections!
Sunbeam’s board of directors fired Albert J. 
Dunlap on June 15, 1998. He personally paid 
$15 million as part of a $141 million settlement 
of a shareholder class action fraud lawsuit 
against Sunbeam. In addition, he later paid a 
$500,000 penalty to the SEC to settle civil 
allega tions of accounting fraud. As part of the 
settlement, Dunlap agreed to a permanent ban 
on serving as an official of a public company.
Source: Michael Schroeder, “Dunlap Settles Fraud Charges 
with the SEC,” The Wall Street Journal, September 5, 2002.
9 See Dana Canedy, “Sunbeam Restates Results, and ‘Fix’ Shows Significant Warts,” The New York Times, October 21, 1998.
10 This section assumes that you understand present value concepts. Please see the Appendix at the end of the book for a 
 review of the time value of money.
RECAP
Evaluating the net realizable value of accounts receivable requires analyzing the adequacy 
of estimated uncollectibles and provisions for returns and price adjustments. An increase 
in receivables growth exceeding sales growth could indicate aggressive revenue recogni-
tion policies. Statement readers who carefully examine receivables trends and levels can 
discern potential problems as they evolve.
DR Note receivable—Texas Products Company   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $5,000,000
 
CR Sales revenue   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 $5,000,000
Interest income accrues each quarter, and upon receipt of the cash payment, the accrued inter-
est receivable is reduced. These are the entries:
DR Accrued interest receivable   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $125,000
 
CR Interest income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$125,000
To accrue three months’ interest 5 [$5,000,000 3 0.10]y4.
IMPUTING INTEREST ON TRADE 
NOTES RECEIVABLE10
In certain industries, the seller sometimes extends long-term credit to the buyer, who then signs a 
note. If the note bears an interest rate that approximates prevailing borrowing and lending rates, 
the accounting is straightforward. Assume that Michele Corporation manufactures and sells a 
machine to Texas Products Company. The machine’s cash selling price is $5 million. Michele 
accepts a three-year, $5 million interest-bearing note signed by Texas Products with 10% interest 
per annum to be paid in quarterly installments each year. Assume that 10% approximates prevail-
ing borrowing rates for companies as creditworthy as Texas Products. Upon making the sale, 
Michele records:

428 
CHAPTER 8
Receivables
 
Similar to accounts receivable, a firm would have to assess the collectibility of its notes 
and establish an appropriate allowance. Given that we have already discussed this issue with 
accounts receivable, we do not discuss it in this section.
 
A complication arises for a note that does not state an interest rate or when the stated rate 
is lower than prevailing rates for loans of similar risk. Suppose that Monson Corporation sells 
equipment it manufactured to Davenport Products in exchange for a $5 million noninterest-
bearing note due in three years. The note bears no explicit interest. It says only that the entire 
$5 million is to be paid at the end of three years. Monson’s published cash selling price for the 
equipment is $3,756,600, and the current borrowing rate for companies like Davenport is 10%.
 
The present value factor for a payment three years away at a 10% rate is 0.75132 (see 
book Appendix, Table 1). Therefore, the note’s present value is $5 million times 0.75132, or 
$3,756,600—which exactly equals the equipment’s cash selling price. Although the $5 mil-
lion note itself does not contain any mention of interest, Monson will earn a return of 10% 
per year for financing Davenport’s long-term credit purchase. This is demonstrated in 
 Exhibit 8.5.
 
At the end of Year 3, Monson receives a $5 million payment, which consists of the cash 
sales price ($3,756,600) plus interest ($1,243,400 5 $375,660 1 $413,226 1 $454,514).
 
Monson Corporation records the sale to Davenport Products as:
DR Cash   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $125,000
CR Accrued interest receivable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$125,000
To record receipt of the interest payment.
DR Note receivable—Davenport . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $3,756,600
CR Sales revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$3,756,600
DR Note receivable—Davenport . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$375,660
CR Interest income   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$375,660
Over the next three years, the note receivable is increased and interest income recognized. For 
example, at the end of Year 1, the entry is:11
11 For simplicity, we ignore the periodic recording of interest on a monthly or quarterly basis during the year. In reality, if 
quarterly financial statements were prepared, the first year interest income of $375,660 would be apportioned to each 
quarter.
EXHIBIT 8.5
Demonstration That Monson Earns 10% Interest 
for Three Years on Cash Sales Price of $3,756,600
Present value of $5,000,000 payment in 3 years (cash sales price) 
$3,756,600
Plus: Year 1 interest: 10% 3 $3,756,600 
375,660
 Equals: Present value of $5,000,000 payment due in 2 years 
4,132,260
Plus: Year 2 interest: 10% 3 $4,132,260 
413,226
 Equals: Present value of $5,000,000 payment due in 1 year 
4,545,486
Plus: Year 3 interest: 10% 3 $4,545,486 
454,514*
 Equals: Davenport payment at the end of Year 3 
$5,000,000
* Rounded.

 
Imputing Interest on Trade Notes Receivable 
429
Notice that after Monson records interest income of $413,226 in Year 2 and $454,514 in Year 3, 
the carrying amount of the note receivable is exactly $5 million, as shown in Exhibit 8.5. When 
Davenport makes the required payment at the note’s maturity, Monson Corporation records:
DR Cash   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $5,000,000
CR Note receivable—Davenport   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$5,000,000
DR Note receivable—Linda Mfg.   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $3,253,966
CR Sales revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$3,253,966
This process of allocating the $5 million proceeds of the note between sales revenue and inter-
est income is called imputed interest.
 
A complication also arises when the note receivable contains a stated interest rate but the 
stated rate is lower than prevailing borrowing rates at the time of the transaction. When 
this happens, interest must again be imputed. Assume that Quinones Corporation sells a ma-
chine to Linda Manufacturing in exchange for a $4 million, three-year, 2.5% note from 
Linda. There will be three annual payments at the stated 2.5% interest rate and a final pay-
ment of $4 million. However, at the time of the sale, the interest rate normally charged to 
companies with Linda’s credit rating is 10%. Because the note’s stated interest rate is far 
below Linda’s normal borrowing rate, Quinones must determine the machine’s implied sales 
price by computing the note’s present value at the 10% rate. The computation of this implied 
sales price is shown in Exhibit 8.6.
 
This computation shows that the implied selling price of the machine is $3,253,966 be-
cause this amount equals the discounted present value of the note Quinones received in ex-
change for the machine. Quinones makes the following entry:
Because payment is deferred, Quinones will earn 10% over the duration of the note on the 
amount of the credit sale ($3,253,966). The interest payments received consist of three 
$100,000 payments over each of the ensuing years and another imputed interest payment of 
$746,034 ($4,000,000 minus the $3,253,966 implied cash selling price) at maturity. Though 
interest will be collected at these times, the interest income will be recognized using the 10% 
rate. See Exhibit 8.7 for the composition of yearly interest income, and Figure 8.2 for the note 
receivable from the time of sale to maturity.
EXHIBIT 8.6
Computation of Implied Sales Price in Conjunction 
with a Nominal Interest-Bearing Note
Calculation of Present Value at 10% Effective Interest Rate
Present value of $4,000,000 principal repayment in three years at 10%:
 
$4,000,000 
3 
0.75132 
5 
$3,005,280
Present value of three interest payments of $1,000,000 (that is, $4,000,000 3 0.025), each at 10%:
Year 1 
$100,000 
3 
0.90909 
5 
90,909
Year 2 
$100,000 
3 
0.82645 
5 
82,645
Year 3 
$100,000 
3 
0.75132 
5 
75,132
 Implied sales price of machine 
 
 
 
$3,253,966
(Note: All present value factors are from the book Appendix, Table 1, 10% column.)

430 
CHAPTER 8
Receivables
EXHIBIT 8.7
Quinones Corporation: Computation 
of Interest on Note Receivable
 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d)
 
Interest Income— 
Cash 
Increase in Present 
End-of-Year
 
10% of Column (d) 
Interest 
Value of Note 
Present
 
Balance for Prior Year 
Received 
(a) Minus (b) 
Value of Note
Inception 
— 
— 
— 
$3,253,966
Year 1 
$   325,397 
$100,000 
$225,397 
3,479,363
Year 2 
347,936 
100,000 
247,936 
3,727,299
Year 3 
372,701* 
100,000 
272,701 
4,000,000
 Total 
$1,046,034
* Rounded.
Year 1
Inception
Year 2
$3,253,966
$3,479,363
$3,727,299
$4,000,000
Year 3
End of year
Amount ($)
$4,500,000
4,200,000
3,900,000
3,600,000
3,300,000
3,000,000
Figure 8.2
QUINONES 
CORPORATION
Carrying Value of Note 
Receivable
DR Note receivable—Linda Mfg. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$225,397
DR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
100,000
CR Interest income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$325,397
DR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $4,000,000
CR Note receivable—Linda Mfg.   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 $4,000,000
 
As shown in Exhibit 8.7 and Figure 8.2, the present value of the note, and thus its carrying 
value, increases each year (see column [d] of Exhibit 8.7). The increase in the carrying value 
of the note equals the difference between the annual 10% interest income earned—Column 
(a)—and the cash received—Column (b). For example, in Year 1, Quinones records:
Similar entries are made in Years 2 and 3 using the amounts shown in Exhibit 8.7. At the end 
of Year 3, the note’s carrying amount will be $4,000,000. When Linda pays the note on 
 maturity, Quinones records the payment as:

 
The Fair Value Option 
431
RECAP
For long-term credit sales transactions utilizing notes receivable:
• Sales revenue is recorded at the known cash price (Monson Corporation) or at the 
implied cash price (Quinones Corporation) of the item sold. The implied cash price 
is determined by computing the note receivable’s present value using the prevailing 
borrowing rate (that is, the effective market rate of interest).
• Interest income is recorded each period over the note’s term to maturity using the 
prevailing borrowing rate.
This approach achieves a clear separation between the two income sources—credit sales 
and interest earned. Income from the credit sale is recorded when the sale is made. Inter-
est income from financing the customer’s purchase, on the other hand, is recorded over 
time as it is earned. This separation of income sources makes it possible to assess the 
degree to which a company’s overall earnings are due to profitable credit sales versus 
profitable customer financing—a potentially important distinction.
THE FAIR VALUE OPTION
Although most firms record accounts and notes receivable at net realizable value, they have 
the option to record them at fair value under FASB ASC Section 825-10-25.12 Firms may 
choose the fair value option for a single financial instrument or a group of financial instru-
ments. Generally, a financial institution would elect this option for a receivable if it expects 
the fair value of the receivable to move in the opposite direction of the fair value of another 
financial instrument that also is carried at fair value. The fair value option is discussed in de-
tail in Chapter 11. However, we explain briefly how the fair value option would be different 
from the net realizable accounting discussed above.
 
We will first consider the Bristol Corporation accounts receivable example on page 418. 
Bristol Corporation reports a net realizable value of $1,455,000 (gross receivables of 
$1,500,000 minus allowance for uncollectibles of $45,000). As mentioned in Chapter 6 on 
page 314, fair value is “the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a 
 liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date.”13 For 
Bristol Corporation, assume that there is an active market for these types of receivables and 
that the price is 95% of face value, or $1,425,000 (95% 3 $1,500,000). To adjust the receiv-
able’s carrying value to fair value, the difference between the fair value and the face amount 
of the receivable is recognized as an unrealized loss on the income statement as follows:
DR Unrealized loss on receivables  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $75,000
   CR Fair value adjustment—Accounts receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$75,000
 
The Fair value adjustment—Accounts receivable account is an asset valuation account that 
would be adjusted upward or downward as fair values change and as the receivables are col-
lected. In this example, the fair value is less than the net realizable value, but in other cases, 
the fair value could exceed or approximate net realizable value.
 
We will now consider the Quinones example from Exhibit 8.7. The carrying value of $3,479,363 
at the end of year 1 is based on the interest rate in effect at the time of the original sale. If the fair 
value option is elected, the carrying value would reflect general changes in interest rates and 
changes in the  creditworthiness of firms similar to Linda Mfg. Assume that there is an active 
12 FASB ASC Section 825-10-25: Financial Instruments—Overall—Recognition—Fair Value Option.
13 FASB ASC Master Glossary: Fair Value.

432 
CHAPTER 8
Receivables
The Fair value adjustment—note receivable account is a valuation account that increases the 
carrying value of the note in this case. It can carry a debit or credit balance depending on 
whether there is a cumulative gain or a cumulative loss. The Unrealized gain on note receiv-
able is part of net income. Future interest income will be based on the new rate of 9% and will 
be recognized in net income. Subsequent changes to the fair value caused by changes in risk 
or interest rates will also be recorded in net income. See Chapter 7, page 393 for a discussion 
of how subsequent losses would affect bank capital requirements.
 
Exhibit 8.8 summarizes how the value of the note changes under the fair value option. We 
assume that fair values and interest rates are stable throughout Year 1. Consequently, the first 
Year 1 line is identical to the Year 1 line in Exhibit 8.7. The second Year 1 line contains the 
increase in fair value. The market interest rate of 9% is then used to compute interest in-
come in subsequent periods. The rows for Year 2 and Year 3 assume that interest rates remain 
stable after Year 1. Note that the total income recognized over the three years is $1,046,034, 
the same amount that is shown in Exhibit 8.7. The fair value option changes the pattern of 
income recognition but not the total amount recognized.
 
When a firm does not adopt the fair value option, it still must disclose the fair value of its 
long-term notes receivable. The fair value of accounts receivable does not have to be reported 
if the reported value approximates fair value.
 market for these types of notes, and the fair value at the end of Year 1 is $3,542,631, resulting in a 
market yield of 9%.14 To reflect the fair value on its balance sheet, Quinones would increase the 
carrying value by $63,268 (fair value of $3,542,631 minus the carrying value of $3,479,363) with 
the following entry:
DR Fair value adjustment—note receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $63,268
CR Unrealized gain on note receivable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$63,268
EXHIBIT 8.8
Quinones Corporation: Note Receivable 
Recorded at Fair Value
 
Interest Income  
Cash 
Increase (Decrease) 
End of Year
 
or Unrealized 
Interest 
in Present Value 
Present
 
Gain (loss) 
Received 
of Note 
Value of Note
Inception 
— 
— 
— 
$3,253,966
Year 1 
$  325,397* 
$100,000 
$225,397 
3,479,363
Year 1 
63,268† 
 
63,268 
3,542,631
Year 2 
318,837‡ 
100,000 
218,837 
3,761,468
Year 3 
338,532 
100,000 
238,532 
4,000,000
 Total 
$1,046,034
* $3,253,966 3 10%
† Fair value of $3,542,631 minus $3,479,363 prior carrying value
‡ $3,542,631 3 9%
14 If the market yield is 9%, the fair value can be computed as follows:
Present value of $4,000,000 principal repayment in two years at 9%:
$4,000,000 
3 
0.84168 
5 
$3,366,720
Present value of two interest payments of $100,000 using an ordinary annuity of 9%:
$100,000 
3 
1.75911 
5 
175,911
 
 
 
 
$3,542,631

 
Accelerating Cash Collection: Sale of  Receivables and Collateralized Borrowings 
433
ACCELERATING CASH COLLECTION: 
SALE OF RECEIVABLES AND 
COLLATERALIZED BORROWINGS
Companies collect cash from their credit customers according to the payment schedule called 
for in the note or trade receivable. Sometimes companies prefer not to wait until customer 
payments arrive in the normal course of business. Instead, they accelerate cash collection with 
the help of a bank or financing company.
 
There are two ways to accelerate cash collections as depicted in Figure 8.3, factoring and 
collateralized borrowings. In factoring, the company sells its receivables outright to a bank or 
factoring company in exchange for cash. Customer payments flow directly to the factor in most 
cases. Factoring can be without recourse (also called nonrecourse), meaning that the factor 
cannot turn to the company for payment in the event that some customer receivables prove un-
collectible. Factoring can also be with recourse, meaning that the company must buy back any 
bad receivables from the factor.
 
The other way to accelerate cash collection is through a collateralized borrowing, where 
the receivables are the collateral. The company obtains cash from the bank or finance com-
pany and is responsible for repaying the loan.
 
Reasons why companies might accelerate cash collections include:
1. Competitive conditions require credit sales but the company is unwilling to bear the 
cost of processing and collecting receivables. Restaurants are an example of this. Cus-
tomers of upscale restaurants expect to be able to charge meals rather than pay cash, yet 
most restaurants are reluctant to incur the costs of servicing receivables. Consequently, 
restaurants rely on third parties such as VISA, American Express, and Diners’ Club, 
 companies that, in effect, “buy” the customer receivable from the restaurant.
2. There may be an imbalance between the credit terms of the company’s suppliers and 
the time required to collect customer receivables. Suppliers might extend credit on three-
month terms to a company while inventory turnover (cost of goods sold/average inventory) 
plus receivables turnover (net credit sales/average accounts receivable) total six months. 
To pay suppliers within the due date, cash collection must be accelerated.
Credit card companies 
“buy” the receivables at a 
discount—they pay the res-
taurant, say, 97 cents for 
 every dollar of receivables. 
The three-cent “discount” is 
the fee the credit card com-
pany charges for accelerat-
ing cash receipts.
Sale of receivables (factoring)
Company 
makes sale
 to customer 
on credit
If sold “with
recourse,”
company buys
back uncollectible
accounts
Customer
payment
sent to factor
1
4
Company sells
customer
receivable to
factor for cash
2
3
Collateralized borrowings
Company 
makes sale
 to customer 
on credit
Customer
payment sent to
company
1
Company 
borrows cash from 
lender using receivables 
as security
2
Company’s loan 
payment sent to
lender
4
3
Company
Credit
customer
of company
Bank or other 
financial
institution
Company
Credit
customer
of company
Bank or other 
financial
institution
Figure 8.3 SALE OF RECEIVABLES AND COLLATERALIZED BORROWINGS

434 
CHAPTER 8
Receivables
3. The company may have an immediate need for cash but be short of it. Selling receivables to 
a financial institution allows the company to raise cash quickly. Using receivables as collateral 
for a bank loan also represents a way to obtain quick cash (and perhaps low-cost financing).
Let’s look at the accounting issues that arise when receivables are either sold or used in a 
 collateralized borrowing.
Sale of Receivables (Factoring)
To illustrate a factoring transaction without recourse, suppose that Hervey Corporation sells to 
Leslie Financing gross receivables of $80,000 that have a related allowance for doubtful ac-
counts of $2,150. The purchaser (Leslie Financing) is called the factor. Leslie charges a fee of 
5% of gross receivables (0.05% 3 $80,000 5 $4,000) for this service and pays Hervey 
$76,000. In a sale without recourse, if some of Hervey’s customers fail to pay the amount 
owed, Leslie has no recourse against Hervey (hence, the term)—and thus, Leslie bears the 
loss. To record the factoring, Hervey would make the following journal entry:
DR Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $76,000
DR Allowance for doubtful accounts  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
2,150
DR Loss on sale of receivables  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
1,850
   CR Accounts receivable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$80,000
The $1,850 is charged to a loss account because Hervey was willing to accept cash of $76,000 
even though the net book value of the receivable was $77,850 ($80,000 gross amount less 
$2,150 allowance).
 
Next we illustrate the sale of accounts receivable with recourse. Again, assume that Hervey 
Corporation sells $80,000 of trade receivables to Leslie Financing. If any of the receivables 
are not paid, Hervey bears the loss up to a pre-established limit. Leslie’s fee is reduced to 2% 
(0.02 3 $80,000 5 $1,600) with a recourse transaction rather than 5% because the risk to 
Leslie is lower. Assume that Hervey estimates that the fair value of the recourse obligation is 
$2,500. Leslie withholds $5,000 to cover possible late collections and noncollections. The 
entry on Hervey Corporation’s books is:
DR Cash ($80,000 2 $1,600 2 $5,000). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $73,400
DR Allowance for doubtful accounts  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
2,150
DR Due from Leslie Financing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
5,000
DR Loss on sale of receivables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
1,950
   CR Accounts receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$80,000
   CR Recourse obligation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
2,500
DR Recourse obligation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $2,500
DR Cash ($5,000 2 $2,878)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
2,122
DR Loss on sale of receivables   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
378
   CR Due from Leslie Financing   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$5,000
Assume that all but $2,878 of the receivables are collected. Once collections are known, the 
financing company remits the final settlement amount. The entry on Hervey’s books is:
Hervey recognizes an additional loss of $378, which is the excess of the uncollected amounts 
of $2,878 over its Recourse obligation of $2,500.

 
Accelerating Cash Collection: Sale of  Receivables and Collateralized Borrowings 
435
Borrowing Using Receivables as Collateral
If the transaction between Hervey Corporation and Leslie Financing had been a collateral-
ized loan rather than a sale of receivables, the Accounts receivable would not be removed 
from Hervey’s books. Instead, Hervey would create a liability account to reflect the loan. Sup-
pose that $80,000 of receivables was pledged as collateral for a loan; interest is 4% of $80,000. 
Then the entry is:
DR Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $76,800
   CR Loan payable—Leslie Financing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$76,800
DR Loan payable—Leslie Financing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $76,800
DR Interest expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
3,200
   CR Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$80,000
The fact that the receivables have been pledged as collateral for this loan must be disclosed in the 
notes to the financial statements if material.15 Once the loan is due, Hervey makes these entries:
 
Notes receivable can also be assigned or sold. Accelerating cash collection on notes in this 
way is called discounting because the financial institution advances cash to the company 
based on the discounted present value of the notes. For example, suppose Abbott Manufactur-
ing received a $9,000, six-month, 8% per year interest-bearing note from Weaver Company, 
a customer. That same day, Abbott discounted the note at Second State Bank. If the bank 
 discounts the note at 12%, Abbott receives only $8,798. The cash proceeds to Abbott are 
 computed as follows:
DR Cash   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$8,798
DR Loss on sale of notes receivable   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
202
   CR Note receivable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$9,000
Face amount of the note 
$9,000
Interest to maturity ($9,000 3 0.08 3 6y12) 
360
Maturity amount of the note 
9,360
Interest charge by bank 
 ($9,360 3 0.12 3 6y12) 
562
Cash proceeds 
$8,798
Abbott makes the following entry when the note is discounted:
Accelerating cash collection generates a loss of $202, the difference between the note’s book 
value and the cash proceeds.
 
At maturity, the bank will present the note to Weaver Company for payment. Notes can be 
discounted either with or without recourse. If discounted with recourse, Second State Bank would 
collect $9,360 ($9,000 principal 1 $360 interest) from Abbott if Weaver failed to pay the note at 
maturity. When a note is discounted with recourse, the selling firm removes the note from its 
books and records a recourse obligation, as shown in the receivables factoring example.
15 FASB ASC 860-30-50-4: Transfers and Servicing—Secured borrowing and collateral—Disclosure—Public entities, 
Collateral.

436 
CHAPTER 8
Receivables
Ambiguities Abound: Is It a Sale or a Borrowing?
Usually, the nature of a transaction involving receivables is clear. But in some situations, it is not 
obvious whether the receivables have been sold or are instead being used as collateral for a loan. 
The ambiguity arises when certain obligations, duties, or rights regarding the transferred receiv-
ables are retained by the firm undertaking the transfer (which is called the transferor).
 
The FASB has provided guidelines in the Accounting Standards Codification for distin-
guishing between sales and collateralized borrowings involving receivables.16 The guidelines 
hinge on the issue of whether the transferor surrenders control over the 
 receivables. If control is surrendered, the transaction is treated as a sale, and 
any gain or loss is recognized in earnings. However, if the criteria for a sale 
are not met because control has not been surrendered, the transaction is 
 accounted for as a collateralized borrowing.
The issue of sale versus borrowing has assumed great importance with the 
growth of financial asset securitization. Securitization occurs when receiv-
ables (such as mortgages and automobile loans) are bundled together and 
sold or transferred to another organization (securitization entity) that issues 
securities collateralized by the transferred receivables. For example, the fi-
nancing subsidiary of Honda Motor Co. (American Honda Finance Corpora-
tion) bundles large numbers of automobile loans together. It then uses these 
loans as collateral for interest-bearing notes that it sells to outside investors. 
The outside investors often earn a higher return than would otherwise be 
available to them because auto loans usually carry a relatively high rate of 
interest. By bundling large numbers of receivables, Honda creates value be-
cause the portfolio effect of the bundling itself reduces the risk of loss.
Home mortgages, car loans, and credit card debt are just a few of the re-
ceivables that have been securitized and sold to investors. New mortgage 
 securitization issuances grew from under $25 billion (adjusted for inflation) in 1990 to more 
than $500 billion in 2006 before falling to almost zero during the height of the economic crisis 
in the fall of 2008.17 As the securitization market grew, the FASB provided additional guid-
ance on when to treat securitizations as sales and when to treat them as borrowings.
 
Ambiguities arise, for example, when a bank transfers a group of mortgages (which, to the bank, 
are receivables) to some other organization but retains the responsibility for servicing the mort-
gages. The bank often continues to collect the mortgage payments or to handle customer inquiries, 
or it even promises to buy back the mortgages at some future date if certain conditions occur.
 
The accounting treatment of these receivable transactions has important financial reporting 
implications. For example:
1. If the transaction is really a borrowing but is erroneously treated as a sale, both assets 
and liabilities are understated (that is, the loan liability does not appear on the company’s 
balance sheet and neither do the receivables that were transferred). The understatements 
 consequently distort ratios such as debt-to-equity and return-on-assets.
2. If the transaction is really a sale, a gain or loss on the transaction should be recognized. To 
erroneously treat such transactions as borrowings misrepresents the company’s net assets.
16 FASB ASC Paragraph 860-10-40-3: Transfers and Servicing—Overall—Derecognition—General Principles.
17 Government Accountability Office, “Troubled Asset Relief Program—One Year Later, Actions Are Needed to Address 
Remaining Transparency and Accountability Challenges,” GAO-10-16 (Washington, D.C., October 2009, p. 43).
Authoritative accounting literature states 
that the transferor surrenders control over the 
receivables when all of the following condi-
tions are met:*
1. The transferred assets have been isolated 
from the transferor and are beyond the trans-
feror’s creditors.
2. The transferee, or its investors in the case of 
a securitization entity, has the right to pledge 
or exchange the assets.
3. There is no agreement obligating the trans-
feror to repurchase or redeem the transferred 
assets in the future, nor can the transferor 
unilaterally force the holder to return the 
assets.
* FASB ASC Paragraph 860-10-40-5: Transfers and Ser-
vicing—Overall—Derecognition—Criteria for a Sale of 
Financial Assets.
Analysis

 
Accelerating Cash Collection: Sale of  Receivables and Collateralized Borrowings 
437
A Closer Look at Securitizations
Securitizations have been popular for two reasons:
1. During the 2004–2007 peak of the securitization activity, investors had a strong appetite 
for acquiring securitized assets.
2. Firms with large amounts of receivables have powerful incentives to engage in securitizations.
It can be a “win–win” situation for investors and firms; both parties benefit.
 
Investors benefit because they are able to obtain highly liquid financial instruments that diver-
sify their risk. A simple example shows this. Suppose that the prevailing rate of return on debt in-
struments with “moderate” risk is 6% per year. The 6% yield is determined by the credit standing 
of large corporate and government issuers of bonds and other instruments. By contrast, people who 
take out home mortgages with banks do not have the same high credit standing as these bond issu-
ers. Understandably, the rates people pay on their mortgages are higher—let’s say 7% per year.
 
Assume that a bank forms a bundled portfolio of these home mortgages and is prepared to 
sell them at a price that yields the investor a return of 6%. The risk associated with the indi-
vidual mortgages ranges from “low” to “moderately high” but the risk of the bundled portfolio 
in the aggregate is moderate. So, the investors have a new investment option that also pro-
vides a 6% per year yield at the same moderate risk level but responds differently than other 
debt instruments to changes in interest rates and other economic events. This diversifies risk, 
and that’s attractive. Furthermore, the investors could not form a moderate-risk, 6% return 
mortgage portfolio themselves because the costs of identifying potential mortgagees and as-
sessing credit are high and would lower their return below 6%. Even if they could construct 
their own portfolio, they’d have difficulty finding buyers for individual mortgages if investors 
later wanted to liquidate the investment. So, investors benefit from securitizations by gaining 
liquid portfolio diversification opportunities that they could not achieve on their own.
 
A bank may reduce risk further by paying an independent third party, a guarantor, to bear 
some of the default risk. For example, a guarantor may agree to pay security holders interest and 
principal payments for loans that default. Government-sponsored entities, such as Fannie Mae 
and Freddie Mac, are the primary guarantors for mortgage-backed securities. In its 2009 annual 
report, Fannie Mae states that it receives upfront fees and ongoing fees based on the amount and 
risk of the loans. In 2009, its effective fee rate was 0.25% of the amounts guaranteed.
 
Both the investors and the bank benefit from the reduction in risk. If the bank sells the 7% 
mortgages at a price that yields the purchasers a return of 6%, the selling price is higher than 
the carrying value of the mortgages on the bank’s books. So, the bank records a gain on the 
sale of the receivables. This gain exists because the bank has created value. As you just saw, 
the individual investors would never consider lending directly to, say, two or three home pur-
chasers. (It’s too risky. Who knows how many will default?) But the large portfolio is less 
risky. Thus, investors who are unable to duplicate the bank’s return on their own without as-
suming high risks (and costs) are very willing to accept the 6% return.
 
Banks and other firms that engage in securitization transactions do not transact directly 
with the investors. The process of securitization is somewhat convoluted for reasons we’ll 
soon explain. See Figure 8.4 for how a typical securitization is structured.
 
The transferor forms what is called a securitization entity (SE).18 The SE is usually a trust or 
corporation that is legally distinct from the transferor and is created solely for the purpose of 
 undertaking the securitization transaction. The transferor then sells (transfers) the receivables 
When the expected interest 
and principal payments are 
discounted at a rate lower 
than the stated rate, the 
present value exceeds the 
face amount of the loans. 
The computational approach 
is similar to the one given in 
Exhibit 8.6 except that the 
discount rate is lower than 
the stated rate. Consequently, 
the present value is higher 
not lower than the note’s 
face amount. Computational 
issues will be discussed in 
more detail in Chapter 11 in 
conjunction with bond pay-
able premiums.
18 We use the term securitization entity, which replaced special purpose entity (SPE) that had been used in prior  accounting 
guidance. Company financial statements issued prior to 2010 used the SPE terminology.

438 
CHAPTER 8
Receivables
(mortgages in our example) to the SE (➀ in Figure 8.4). Because the receivables were sold to the 
SE, they are beyond the reach of the transferor and its creditors. So, even if the transferor were to 
declare bankruptcy, the collateral underlying the notes is safe from seizure. At the time of the 
transfer, the SE may also obtain guarantees from an outside entity (➁). Before the SE markets the 
new debt securities, it usually obtains a credit rating for the new securities (➂). Because the SE is 
legally separate from the transferor, the SE’s credit rating depends on the quality of the trans-
ferred receivables and can differ from the rating of the transferor’s general debt. The SE pays fees 
to the rating agency for its rating opinion.19 The SE then creates and issues debt securities that it 
sells to outside investors (➃ and ➄). The cash that the SE receives from the investors is then re-
mitted to the transferor (➅). In many situations, the transferor continues to service the assets (that 
is, handle cash collections, recordkeeping, etc.), usually for a fee that the SE pays.
 
The cash flows from the mortgages themselves (that is, principal repayment and interest) 
are later used to make the periodic interest and principal repayments to the investors who 
bought the debt securities.
 
Prior to November 15, 2009, most of these structures were designed to meet the definition 
of a qualifying special purpose entity (QSPE) under pre-Codification SFAS No. 140, and the 
19 The largest credit-rating agencies are Fitch Ratings, Moody’s Investor Service, and Standard & Poor’s. For more informa-
tion on institutional features related to ratings, see Chapter 6 and U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, Report on the 
Role and Function of Credit Rating Agencies in the Operation of the Securities Markets, As Required by Section 702(b) of the 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (Washington, DC, January, 2003).
Mortgage
receivables are 
transferred to
the SE
SE obtains 
default guarantees
from a third party
Cash from the sale of debt
 securities is remitted
 to the transferor
Cash from sale of debt
 securities is received
 by the SE
Mortgage receivables 
are collateral for newly 
created debt securities 
sold to investors
1
2
4
6
Guarantee
Rating
3
SE obtains 
a rating for new 
securities
5
Fees
Fees
Credit-rating agency
Guarantor
Transferor
(the firm undertaking 
the securitization)
Securitization
entity (SE) is 
formed to 
facilitate the
 securitization
Investors
Figure 8.4
STRUCTURE OF A 
SECURITIZATION

 
Accelerating Cash Collection: Sale of  Receivables and Collateralized Borrowings 
439
transferor kept the debt and the assets of the SE off its balance sheet. The transferor received 
cash, removed the receivables, and did not record any of the SE’s debt. QSPEs were supposed 
to be passive legal entities with “significantly limited and entirely specified” activities.20 
However, the FASB became concerned that SEs classified as QSPEs were involved in activi-
ties such as modifying loans, which was not consistent with the SE being a passive holder of 
securities. Consequently, the FASB removed the QSPE exception from the guidance con-
tained in ASC Topic 860—Transfers and Servicing and ASC Topic 810—Consolidation.21 
Under the revised guidance, these SEs are treated as part of the transferor (consolidated) if the 
transferor directs the SE’s activities and participates in the SE’s gains and losses. In these 
cases, the transferor treats the securitization as a collateralized borrowing instead of a sale, 
thereby keeping the receivables on its balance sheet, recording the SE’s debt, and not recog-
nizing any gains on the receivable transfer to the SE.22
 
To illustrate the financial statement effects of treating the securitization as a sale versus a 
collateralized borrowing, consider the following example.
20 See FASB ASC Paragraph 810-10-05-8A: Consolidation—Overall—Overview and background—Variable interest enti-
ties—Consolidation of VIEs. The SE often represents a variable interest entity that must be consolidated by the primary 
beneficiary, in this case, the sponsor. See Chapter 16 for more detailed discussions of consolidations, variable interest entities, 
and primary beneficiaries.
21 The largest credit-rating agencies are Fitch Ratings, Moody’s Investor Service, and Standard & Poor’s. For more informa-
tion on institutional features related to ratings, see Chapter 6 and U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, Report on the 
Role and Function of Credit Rating Agencies in the Operation of the Securities Markets, As Required by Section 702(b) of the 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (Washington, DC, January 2003).
22 Research suggests that the bond market did not reduce credit risk for securitized assets removed from the securitizing 
firms’ balance sheets during the 2001 to 2006 time period. See M. Barth, G. Ormazabal, and D. Taylor, “Asset Securitizations 
and Credit Risk,” The Accounting Review, vol. 87 (March 2012), pp. 423–48.
Analysis
On December 31, 2014, Doyle securitized $1,000,000 of mortgages using a securitization 
entity (SE). The cash received from the SE was exactly $1,000,000, so it recognized no gain 
or loss on the transaction. If the transaction meets the criteria for sale accounting, it will make 
the following entry:
DR Cash. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$1,000,000
 
CR Mortgages receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$1,000,000
The effects of this entry on Doyle’s balance sheet are as follows:
 
 
Change in 
 
 
Balances If
 
Balances 
Transaction 
Balances
 
Prior to 
Is Treated 
After
 
Securitization 
as a Sale 
Securitization
Assets
 Mortgages receivable 
$2,200,000 
$(1,000,000) 
$1,200,000
 All other assets 
800,000 
1,000,000 
1,800,000
Total assets 
$3,000,000 
 
$3,000,000
Liabilities and equity
 Liabilities 
$2,700,000 
 
$2,700,000
 Equity 
300,000 
 
  300,000
 Total liabilities and equity 
$3,000,000 
 
$3,000,000
If the transaction does not meet the criteria for sale accounting, Doyle would treat the trans-
action as a collateralized borrowing and make the following entry:
DR Cash. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$1,000,000
 
CR Loan payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$1,000,000
(continued)

440 
CHAPTER 8
Receivables
The effects of this entry on Doyle’s balance sheet are as follows:
 
 
Change in 
 
 
Balances If
 
Balances 
Transaction Is 
Balances
 
Prior to 
Treated as a 
After
 
Securitization 
Borrowing 
Securitization
Assets
 Mortgages receivable 
$2,200,000 
 
$2,200,000
 All other assets 
800,000 
$1,000,000 
1,800,000
Total assets 
$3,000,000 
 
$4,000,000
Liabilities and equity
 Liabilities 
$2,700,000 
$1,000,000 
$3,700,000
 Equity 
300,000 
 
300,000
 Total liabilities and equity 
$3,000,000 
 
$4,000,000
Doyle’s net income for the year ended December 31, 2014, is $40,000.
 
Doyle National Bank’s return-on-assets ratio and debt-to-equity ratio after completing this 
$1,000,000 transaction are computed in the following table. The left column reflects the ratio 
under sales treatment. The right column shows the ratio balances that would have been re-
flected if the transaction had been treated as a borrowing with the mortgages serving as 
collateral.
23 See Federal National Mortgage Association (Fannie Mae) March 31, 2010, 10-Q, pages 116–20.
 
 
Ratios under
 
Ratios under 
Collateralized 
 
Sale Scenario 
Borrowing Scenario
Return-on-assets ratio 
$40,000
$3,000,000 5 0.013 
$40,000
$4,000,000 5 0.01
Debt-to-equity ratio  
$2,700,000
$300,000 5 9.000 
$3,700,000
$300,000 5 12.33
So, you see that treating the transaction as a sale improves the return-on-assets ratio from 1% 
to 1.3%—a 30% increase. Similarly, the sale treatment improves (reduces) the debt-to-equity 
ratio from 12.33 to 9—a 27% reduction. If a gain had been recognized on the securitization, 
both ratios would have been improved even further.
 
The accounting guidance that became effective for fiscal years beginning after November 
15, 2009, applied to both new and existing securitizations. As a result, firms often had to change 
retrospectively from sale accounting to collateralized borrowing accounting for many of its 
SEs. The differences between the sale scenario and the collateralized borrowing scenario in the 
Doyle National Bank example illustrate the financial statement impact of the accounting 
change. In moving from the sale scenario to the borrowing scenario, Doyle’s return-on-asset 
ratio decreased by 23% (0.01/0.013 minus 1), and its debt-to-equity ratio increased by 37% 
(12.33/9 minus 1). In practice, the effect of the accounting change could be more dramatic. 
When the mortgage securitizer and guarantor, Fannie Mae, adopted the new accounting guid-
ance at the beginning of 2010, its assets increased from $869.1 billion to $3,246.2 billion (a 
274% increase), and its liabilities increased from $884.4 billion to $3,258.2 billion (a 268% 
increase).23
A gain would arise if inves-
tors accept a rate that is 
lower than the face rate on 
the mortgages (e.g., the 
mortgages bear a 7% rate but 
investors accept a 6% rate).

 
Accelerating Cash Collection: Sale of  Receivables and Collateralized Borrowings 
441
Securitization and the 2008 Financial Crisis
In its 2009 Form 10-K (p. 188), Fannie Mae defines a subprime loan as
a mortgage loan made to a borrower with a weaker credit profile than that of a prime borrower. 
As a result of the weaker credit profile, subprime borrowers have a higher likelihood of default 
than prime borrowers. (p. 188)
Subprime loans can be securitized as part of a general portfolio of loans or can be put into a 
pool of subprime loans. Sometimes when loans are securitized, classes of securities with dif-
ferent levels of credit risk may be created. The senior securities receive payments first if there 
are defaults, and the junior securities receive payments last. Each class of security is then 
rated and sold. These senior securities could be rated AAA. The junior securities also could be 
bundled and resecuritized so that a senior class of junior loans could be created. This senior 
class of junior securities could also receive high credit ratings.24
 
Subprime lending increased substantially from 2004 to the first part of 2007. During these 
years, subprime lenders and borrowers counted on increasing home prices. However, home 
prices fell 8.4% in 2007, 18.3% in 2008, and 2.3% in 2009.25 In addition, interest rates on 
adjustable-rate mortgages began to reset to higher rates in 2007. Default rates were much 
higher than expected, and originators, guarantors, and investors lost billions. For example, 
Fannie Mae’s provision for credit losses on guarantees increased from $415 million in 2006 
to $63.1 billion in 2009 (2009 10-K, p. 94). In some instances, money market funds held 
these securities, and investors, who thought that they had highly rated (low-risk) investments, 
suddenly lost money.26 In prior home price declines, the banks incurred most of the losses, but 
because of securitization, many small investors also suffered losses during 2007–2009. De-
faults also resulted in firms such as AIG recognizing losses on credit default swaps.
 
How did everything go so wrong? Figure 8.4 can be used to illustrate where many of the 
problems occurred. First, originators had incentives to make as many loans as possible, and 
they were able to sell the loans. Consequently, many of them were not concerned about the 
underlying risk. Additionally, Fitch Ratings suggests that considerable mortgage application 
fraud took place.27 Second, the originators and rating agencies underestimated substantially 
the risk associated with their guarantees. In addition, securitizers had incentives to “shop” for 
high ratings.28 Third, when the borrowers began to default, some of the complex legal issues 
and structures related to the securitizations made it difficult for the SEs to modify loans. In 
some cases, the servicing firm had incentives to force the borrower into default.
 
Fourth, as the defaults began to occur, it was clear that the originators and guarantors had 
more loss exposure than was evident from their financial statements. Consequently, the FASB 
increased disclosure requirements and revised the criteria for treating a securitization as a 
sale. Fifth, the investors overrelied on the ratings agencies and underestimated the positive 
correlation of defaults across borrowers. This issue also affected firms that wrote credit  default 
swaps. As the number of defaults increased in 2008, firms with large exposures to mortgage-
backed securities (MBS), such as Bear Stearns, Lehman Brothers, and Fannie Mae, were 
24 See S. Ryan, “Accounting in and for the Subprime Crisis,” The Accounting Review, vol. 83 (November, 2008), pp. 1615–1617; 
J. Tiemann, “A Pyramid of Little Golden Crumbs,” Tiemann Investment Advisors, LLC (August 31, 2007), p. 7; and F.  Norris, 
“Market Shock: AAA Rating May Be Junk,” The New York Times (July 20, 2007).
25 Author’s calculation using the S&P/Case-Shiller Non-Seasonally-Adjusted U.S. National Home Price Indices.
26 See D. Evans, “Subprime Infects $300 Billion of Money Market Funds, Hikes Risk,” August 20, 2007, Bloomberg.com.
27 See Fitch Ratings, The Impact of Poor Underwriting Practices and Fraud in Subprime RMBS Performance” (November 2007).
28 See F. Sangiorgi, J. Sokobin, and C. Spatt, “Credit-Rating Shopping, Selection and the Equilibrium Structure of Ratings,” 
unpublished working paper (Stockholm School of Economics, 2009) and A. Ashcraft, P. Goldsmith-Pinkham, and J. Vickery, 
“MBS Ratings and the Mortgage Credit Boom,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report 449, 2010.

442 
CHAPTER 8
Receivables
 acquired or declared bankruptcy. After Lehman Brothers declared bankruptcy, all securitiza-
tion markets became inactive, and the world experienced a liquidity crisis. The inactive mar-
kets also called into question whether it was appropriate to use Level 1 (active market) 
information when determining fair values under ASC Topic 820: Fair Value Measurement.
Some Cautions for Financial Statement Readers
Factoring, assignment, and securitization of receivables raise some issues for those who ana-
lyze financial statements. Earlier in this chapter, you learned that one way to assess whether 
reported receivables arose from legitimate sales was to compare the growth rate of sales and 
the growth rate of receivables. This comparison in Exhibit 8.3 for Bausch & Lomb showed 
that receivables growth far outstripped sales growth between 1991 and 1993. Our conclu-
sion—based on disclosures from the 1994 Bausch & Lomb annual report—was that the leap 
in receivables growth arose from “forcing” inventory on distributors and treating these ship-
ments as sales. The way to recognize these potential trouble areas is to monitor receivables 
growth. But when firms sell receivables, the receivables number reported in the ending 
balance sheet includes only the remaining receivables and thus understates the true growth 
in receivables over the period.
 
Suppose that a company is “aggressively” booking sales to artificially raise current 
earnings. To avoid discovery, the company could factor some of its “good” receivables—
those that don’t arise from the questionable sales—and thus understate the true disparity in 
the growth rates of receivables and sales. So, the receivables remaining on the books are 
the “bad” ones and the factoring has disguised the deterioration in the quality of reported 
receivables. Consequently, statement readers must scrutinize notes and the financing 
 activities section of the cash flow statement for evidence of dispositions of receivables that 
may be masking overly aggressive revenue recognition policies or bad receivables 
management.
 
The transferred receivables “disappear” from the balance sheet. Because receivables are 
lower, certain ratios such as return on assets and receivables turnover improve when compared 
to previous periods. But is the ratio improvement sustainable? Should the analyst “undo” the 
transfer and recompute the ratios with the receivables included? At a minimum, the analyst 
must be aware of the extent of the disruption in the year-to-year ratio pattern and its impact on 
financial forecasts. Other adjustments depend on the circumstances. Also, did the transferor 
“cherry-pick” the best receivables to make the transaction attractive to the purchasers? If it 
did, the analyst must scrutinize the quality of the remaining receivables as well as the ade-
quacy of the allowance for uncollectibles.
 
For material transactions, ASC 860-10-50-3 requires firms to provide financial statement 
users with an understanding of all of the following:
1. A transferor’s continuing involvement, if any, with transferred financial assets.
2. The nature of any restrictions on assets reported by an entity in its statement of financial 
position that relate to a transferred financial asset, including the carrying amounts of 
those assets.
3. How servicing assets and servicing liabilities are reported under ASC Subtopic 860-50.
4. For both of the following, how the transfer of financial assets affects an entity’s financial 
position, financial performance, and cash flows:
 
a. Transfers accounted for as sales, if a transferor has continuing involvement with the 
transferred financial assets.
 
b. Transfers of financial assets accounted for as secured borrowings.

 
Troubled Debt Restructuring
443
It is too early to tell whether the new disclosures make it easier for analysts to evaluate the 
effects of receivable sales.
TROUBLED DEBT RESTRUCTURING
What happens to a lender when a customer is financially unable to make the interest and prin-
cipal payments required by an installment loan or other receivable? Rather than force the 
customer into bankruptcy, lenders frequently agree to restructure the loan receivable, thus 
allowing the customer to remain in business. The restructured loan can differ from the original 
loan in several ways:
• Scheduled interest and principal payments may be reduced or eliminated.
• The repayment schedule may be extended over a longer time period.
• The customer and lender can settle the loan for cash, other assets, or equity interests.
Lenders are willing to restructure a customer’s loan to help the customer resolve present finan-
cial difficulties and stay in business. And lenders often receive more through restructuring than 
they would from foreclosure or bankruptcy.
 
Consider the hypothetical debt restructuring described in Exhibit 8.9. On December 31, 
2014, Bloom Corporation owned and/or managed 47 hotel properties located primarily in the 
northeastern and southeastern United States. It financed these investments using long-term 
debt—a subordinated debenture. During 2014, the company suffered operating losses and 
cash flow difficulties that would not allow it to meet its current obligations. The subordinated 
debenture originally carried an interest rate of 7.5% per year and a maturity date of January 1, 
2016. Because Bloom could not make the required loan payments, the lender (a mutual fund) 
canceled $4.5 million of the debt in exchange for the following:
• An acceleration of the maturity date by 8 1/2 months.
• An increase in the annual interest rate from 7.5% to 18.75%.
 
Obviously, the lender would have preferred that Bloom pay the original debt principal and 
interest on time. Faced with the company’s inability to do so, it chose to restructure the debt 
rather than force the company into bankruptcy. The enormous leap in the interest rate from 
7.5% to 18.75% reflects Bloom’s precarious financial condition and the resulting risk of the 
restructured loan.
 
This example illustrates a key feature of troubled debt restructurings not present in ordi-
nary debt refinancings. Authoritative accounting literature gives this definition:
A restructuring of debt constitutes a troubled debt restructuring . . . if the creditor for economic 
or legal reasons related to the debtor’s financial difficulties grants a concession to the debtor that 
it would not otherwise consider.29
To help you understand this 
financial instrument, we’ll 
define each of the two 
words, in reverse order. 
 Debentures are bonds that 
have no underlying collat-
eral that could be seized if 
Bloom defaulted on the 
debt. It is an unsecured 
 borrowing. Subordinated 
means that Bloom has other 
debt issues that “ranked 
ahead” of this debt in the 
event of liquidation—that 
is, investors in the other 
debt would be paid before 
investors in the subordi-
nated debenture.
EXHIBIT 8.9
Bloom Corporation: Debt Restructuring
In July 2014, the Company replaced its outstanding $7.5 million Subordinated Debenture to Oppen-
heimer Securities Fund with a new Subordinated Debenture bearing the following terms: principal 
balance of $3.0 million; interest rate of 18.75%; maturity date of April 15, 2015. As a result, the 
Company reported a gain from the debt restructuring, net of expenses, of approximately $4 million 
or $0.64 per common share—basic.
29 FASB ASC Paragraph 310-40-15-5: Receivables—Troubled Debt Restructurings by Creditors—Scope and Scope 
 Exceptions—Troubled Debt Restructuring.

444 
CHAPTER 8
Receivables
In other words, for the restructuring to be troubled, the borrower (Bloom) must be unable to 
pay off the original debt and the lender (the mutual fund) must grant a concession to the 
borrower.
 
A lender must evaluate separately whether it has made a concession and whether the 
borrower is in financial difficulty to fall under troubled debt accounting.30 FASB ASC 310-
40-15-13 states that a creditor (lender) has granted a concession when it no longer expects 
to collect everything owed, including interest. The creditor would consider collateral in 
determining the amount expected to be collected. When assessing whether the debtor (bor-
rower) is experiencing financial difficulties, the creditor should consider the following 
indicators:
1. The debtor is currently in default on any of its debt or default is probable,
2. The debtor is in the process of declaring bankruptcy,
3. The debtor is unlikely to remain a going concern,
4. The debtor has securities that are being delisted from an exchange,
5. The creditor forecasts that the debtor’s cash flows are insufficient to pay interest and prin-
cipal on its debt, and
6. Without the current modification, the debtor cannot obtain funds (other than from existing 
creditors) at nontroubled rates (FASB ASC 310-40-15-20).
 
Our Bloom example meets these guidelines. The company was unable to make its interest 
and principal payments because of financial difficulties. The lender then agreed to restructure 
the debt, and in so doing, granted the company a substantial economic concession—the $4.5 
million of debt cancellation.
 
Troubled debt restructurings can be accomplished in two different ways:
• Settlement, which cancels the original loan by a transfer of cash, other assets, or equity 
interests (borrower’s stock) to the lender.
• Continuation with modification of debt term by canceling the original loan and signing 
a new loan agreement.
Some troubled debt restructurings contain elements of both settlement and modification.
 
The accounting issues related to troubled debt restructuring encompass both the measure-
ment of the new (modified) loan and the recognition of any gain or loss. The following 
 example illustrates these issues.
Assume that Harper Companies purchased $75,000 of corn milling equipment from Farm-
ers State Cooperative on January 1, 2011. Harper paid $25,000 cash and signed a five-year, 
10% installment note for the remaining $50,000 of the purchase price.  The note calls for 
 annual payments of $10,000 plus interest on December 31 of each year. Harper made the 
first two installment payments on time but was unable to make the third annual payment on 
December 31, 2013.  After much negotiation, Farmers State agreed to restructure the note 
receivable. At that time, Harper owed $30,000 in unpaid principal plus $3,000 in accrued 
interest. We assume that the restructuring was agreed to on January 1, 2014, and that both 
companies have already recorded interest up to that date.
30 Troubled debt restructurings often involve complexities that are beyond the scope of our discussion here. See FASB ASC 
Subtopic 310-40: Receivables—Troubled Debt Restructuring by Creditors and FASB ASC Subtopic 470-60: Debt—Troubled 
Debt Restructuring by Debtors.

 
Troubled Debt Restructuring 
445
Settlement
Suppose Farmers State agrees to cancel the loan if Harper pays $5,000 cash and turns over a 
company car. The car was purchased 18 months ago for $21,000 cash, has a current fair value of 
$18,000, and is carried on Harper’s books at $16,000 ($21,000 original cost minus $5,000 
 accumulated depreciation). Notice that the combined economic value of the cash ($5,000) and 
automobile ($18,000) is $23,000—or $10,000 less than the $33,000 Harper owes Farmers State.
 
The January 1, 2014, entries made to record settlement of the troubled debt are:
Harper Companies (Borrower)
DR Automobile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $ 2,000
 
CR Gain on disposal of asset   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$ 2,000
To increase the net carrying amount of the automobile ($16,000) to its fair 
value ($18,000).
DR Note payable    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $30,000
DR Interest payable   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
3,000
DR Accumulated depreciation   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
5,000
 
CR Cash   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$ 5,000
 
CR Automobile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    
 
23,000
 
CR Gain on debt restructuring   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
10,000
To record the settlement.
Farmers State Cooperative (Lender)
DR Cash   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $ 5,000
DR Automobile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
18,000
DR Loss on receivable restructuring   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
10,000
 
CR Note receivable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$30,000
 
CR Interest receivable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
3,000
To record the settlement.
What do these entries accomplish? The settle-
ment creates two earnings gains for Harper:
• A gain on asset disposal of $2,000—the 
 difference between the car’s fair value 
($18,000) and its book value ($16,000).
• A debt restructuring gain of $10,000—the 
difference between the note’s book value 
plus accrued interest ($30,000 1 $3,000) and the fair value of assets transferred ($5,000 
cash plus $18,000 automobile).
Farmers State’s has a debt restructuring loss for the same $10,000 figure. Both companies 
record all interest up to the restructuring date and then cancel the note and related interest 
 receivable and payable.
Continuation with Modification of Debt Terms
Instead of reaching a negotiated settlement of the note receivable, Harper and Farmers State 
could have resolved the troubled debt by modifying the terms of the original loan. The possi-
bilities are endless. For accounting purposes, what matters is whether the undiscounted sum 
Farmers State’s settlement loss would not be extraordinary but would instead be 
included in computating income from continuing operations. Because it’s a lender, 
restructurings are a normal part of its business and are likely to recur. So, these 
transactions meet neither of the two criteria for extraordinary items—unusual 
 nature and infrequency of occurrence— discussed in Chapter 2. Harper Companies’ 
gain would be treated as extraordinary only if it met both of these criteria for 
 extraordinary items.

446 
CHAPTER 8
Receivables
of future cash flows under the restructured note is more or less than the note’s carrying 
value (including accrued interest) at the restructuring date.
Sum of Restructured Flows Exceeds Carrying Value of Payable  
Suppose that Farmers State agrees to postpone all principal and interest payments on the 
note receivable to maturity. Harper’s final (and only) payment on December 31, 2015, 
would total $39,000 (the $30,000 principal plus $9,000 representing three years interest at 
10%). Harper and Farmers State have already recorded $3,000 in accrued interest as of 
January 1, 2014. So, the book value of the note plus accrued interest is $33,000 at the 
 restructuring date.
 
Because the sum of future cash flows on the restructured note ($39,000) is greater than 
the carrying value of the original payable ($33,000), Harper will not show a restructuring 
gain. Instead, Harper will compute a new (and 
lower) effective interest rate for the restruc-
tured note and accrue interest at that new rate 
until the loan is fully paid. The new effective 
interest rate is the rate that equates the present 
value of the restructured cash flows to the 
 carrying value of the debt at the date of 
 restructure.31 The new effective interest rate 
for Harper Companies is 8.7% per year.
Farmers State will continue using the 10% 
interest rate on the original note.32 To do so, it 
must value the restructured note payments us-
ing a 10% effective interest rate. Farmers State 
will then show a loss for the difference between 
the present value of the restructured note, which is $32,232, and the carrying value of the 
original note ($33,000). The entries made by both companies are:
The present value factor for 
a single payment due in two 
years at 10% is 0.82645. The 
value of the note is $39,000 3 
0.82645, or $32,232 
(rounded).
Harper Companies (Borrower)
DR Note payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $30,000
DR Interest payable   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
3,000
 
CR Restructured note payable   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$33,000
To record the modified note (when sum of restructured cash flows is 
greater than note carrying value).
Farmers State Cooperative (Lender)
DR Restructured note receivable   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $32,232
DR Loss on receivable restructuring   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
768
 
CR Note receivable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$30,000
 
CR Interest receivable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
3,000
To record the modified note (when sum of restructured cash flows is 
greater than note carrying value).
To see this, notice that the restructured note calls for Harper to make a single 
 payment of $39,000 on December 31, 2015—two years from the January 1, 2014, 
restructuring date. We need to find a discount rate that equates the present value 
of this $39,000 payment with the $33,000 carrying value of the note receivable. 
This means finding the rate r that solves the following equation:
 
Carrying value  5  Present value of future cash flows (in 2 years)
 
$33,000 
5 
$39,000
11 1 r22
The value of r that satisfies this equation is 0.087. To verify this, go to our 
 website—www.mhhe.com/revsine6e—and use the present value calculator to 
see that the present value factor for a single payment due in two periods at 8.7% 
is 0.84615, and $39,000 multiplied by this factor equals $33,000 (rounded).
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
 ⎨
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
 ⎨⎜⎜⎜⎝
31 FASB ASC Paragraph 470-60-35-5: Debt—Troubled Debt Restructuring by Debtors—Subsequent Measurement—
General.
32 FASB ASC Paragraph 310-40-35-12: Receivables—Troubled Debt Restructuring by Creditors—Subsequent Measurement—
Effective Interest Rate for a Restructured Loan.

 
Troubled Debt Restructuring 
447
 
Both companies accrue interest beginning on the debt restructuring date (January 1, 2014) 
and ending on the restructured note’s maturity date (December 31, 2015). But they will not 
use the same interest rate, as you just saw. The borrower, Harper, will record annual interest at 
8.7% of the note’s carrying value at the beginning of each year, whereas Farmers State will 
use a 10% annual rate.
 
The FASB’s choice of two different interest rates, one for the borrower and another for the 
lender, illustrates the role of conservatism in financial reporting. If the lender, Farmers State, 
used the 8.7% rate, it would continue to carry the note at $33,000 (see the present value cal-
culation in the sidebar above) and recognize no loss although the cash inflows have been re-
duced. If the borrower, Harper, used the original 10% rate, this would cause it to reduce the 
note carrying value to $32,232 and recognize an up-front gain. So, to obtain conservative 
outcomes, the FASB required the parties to use different interest rates.
 
The entries for the next two years are:
Harper Companies (Borrower)
DR Interest expense   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $2,871
 
CR Restructured note payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$2,871
($2,871 5 $33,000 3 0.087)
To record interest on December 31, 2014.
DR Interest expense   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $3,121
 
CR Restructured note payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$3,121
($3,121 5 [$33,000 1 $2,871] 3 0.087) 
To record interest on December 31, 2015.
Farmers State Cooperative (Lender)
DR Restructured note receivable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $3,223
 
CR Interest income   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$3,223
($3,223 5 $32,232 3 0.10)
To record interest on December 31, 2014.
DR Restructured note receivable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $3,546
 
CR Interest income   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$3,546
($3,546 5 [$32,232 1 $3,223] 3 0.10)
To record interest on December 31, 2015.
Over time, Harper Companies’ note payable and Farmers State Cooperative’s note receivable 
increase to the final balance of $39,000, the required payment at maturity (see Exhibit 8.10). 
The entry to record the payment is:
Harper Companies (Borrower)
DR Restructured note payable   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $39,000
 
CR Cash   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$39,000
To record payment of balance on December 31, 2015.
Farmers State Cooperative (Lender)
DR Cash   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $39,000
 
CR Restructured note receivable   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$39,000
To record receipt of balance on December 31, 2015.

448 
CHAPTER 8
Receivables
 
This example illustrates a restructured loan in which the total restructured cash flows are 
greater than the carrying value of the troubled debt. Next let’s examine a situation in which 
the sum of the future cash flows is less than the carrying value of the troubled debt.
Sum of Restructured Flows Is Less Than Payable’s Carrying Value 
Suppose that Farmers State waives all interest payments (that is, the $3,000 unpaid accrued 
interest for 2013 as well as the 2014 and 2015 interest) and defers all principal payments until 
December 31, 2015. The restructured cash payments (now only $30,000) are lower than the 
receivable’s carrying value ($33,000). Harper will show a gain on the debt restructuring and 
will treat the subsequent payment as a reduction of the restructured principal. Harper records 
no interest expense. But Farmers State follows the procedures outlined in the previous example. 
It values the restructured note at $24,794 (using the 10% effective interest rate from the origi-
nal note), records a debt restructuring loss, and accrues interest income to maturity. The 
 entries made at the restructuring date are:
The $24,794 is just the 
 present value of $30,000 
 received in two years at 10%, 
or $24,794 5 $30,000 3 
0.82645.
EXHIBIT 8.10
Growth of Note Carrying Amount
 
Harper 
Farmers State
 
Companies 
Cooperative
Restructured note, initial carrying amount 
$33,000 
$32,232
Accrued interest expense, Harper
 2014 
2,871
 2015 
3,121
Accrued interest revenue, Farmers State 
 2014 
 
3,223
 2015 
 
3,546
Note carrying amount, December 31, 2015 
$39,000* 
$39,000*
* Rounded.
Harper Companies (Borrower)
DR Note payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $30,000
DR Interest payable   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
3,000
CR Restructured note payable   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$30,000
CR Gain on debt restructuring   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
3,000
To record the modified note (when the sum of restructured cash flows is less than 
the note carrying value).
Farmers State Cooperative (Lender)
DR Restructured note receivable   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $24,794
DR Loss on receivable restructuring   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
8,206
CR Note receivable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$30,000
CR Interest receivable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
3,000
To record the modified note (when the sum of restructured cash flows is less than 
the note carrying value).

 
Troubled Debt Restructuring 
449
 
Harper would not record any interest over the life of the restructured note. The $30,000 
cash payment on December 31, 2015, would reduce the outstanding balance of Harper’s 
 restructured note payable. Farmers State still records interest income over the life of the note. 
These entries would be:
Evaluating Troubled Debt Restructuring Rules
The GAAP rules for troubled debt restructurings are subject to several criticisms.
 
First, an obvious (and uncomfortable) lack of symmetry exists in the financial reporting of 
the borrower and lender. Different measurement rules are used to value the borrower’s restruc-
tured note payable and the lender’s restructured receivable when there is continuation with 
modification of debt terms. Consequently, the initial book value that GAAP assigns to the 
payable is not the same as the initial book value assigned to the receivable. This also results in 
a difference between the borrower’s restructuring gain and the lender’s restructuring loss. We 
explained this as an instance of the FASB’s opting for a conservative measurement method.
 
Second, the GAAP restructuring gains and losses do not always correspond to real eco-
nomic gains and losses for the companies involved. For one thing, GAAP often assigns the 
gain or loss to the wrong time period. Although the accounting loss in the case of Farmers 
State Cooperative was shown in 2014, most of the economic loss occurred earlier when 
Harper became unable to make the loan payments.
 
Third, it’s possible to question GAAP’s use of the original loan’s effective interest rate 
to value the restructured receivable and the lender’s restructuring loss. Turning again to 
Farmers State, its original 10% loan to Harper used an interest rate that reflected the bor-
rower’s credit risk when the loan was first made. Over the ensuing three years, Harper’s 
credit risk undoubtedly increased to the point where lenders would charge a higher rate of 
interest (say 15%) on new loans to the company. After all, Harper failed to meet its finan-
cial obligations in 2013. A higher effective interest rate on the restructured receivable will 
Harper Companies (Borrower)
DR Restructured note payable   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $30,000
 
CR Cash   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$30,000
(No entries are made until the cash payment at maturity.)
Farmers State Cooperative (Lender)
DR Restructured note receivable   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $ 2,479
 
CR Interest income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$ 2,479
($2,479 5 $24,794 3 0.10)
To record interest on December 31, 2014.
DR Restructured note receivable   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $ 2,727
 
CR Interest income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$ 2,727
($2,727 5 [$24,794 1 $2,479] 3 0.10)
To record interest on December 31, 2015.
The note receivable balance at Farmers State has now increased to $30,000 (that 
is, $24,794 1 $2,479 1 $2,727).
DR Cash   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $30,000
 
CR Restructured note receivable   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$30,000
To record payment of receivable balance on December 31, 2015.

450 
CHAPTER 8
Receivables
produce a lower initial book value and a larger restructuring loss for the lender. The GAAP 
approach is a practical solution because it avoids the sometimes difficult task of estimating 
the borrower’s real effective interest rate at the restructuring date. However, this approach 
also fails to fully reflect the economic realities of troubled debt restructurings and results 
in the conservatism discussed earlier.
EXHIBIT 8.11
Summary of Accounting Procedures for  Troubled Debt Restructurings
 
Restructured Loan Cash Flows Are
 
Settlement Gain 
Lower  Than Current 
Higher  Than Current
 
 or Loss 
Carrying Value of Loan* 
Carrying Value of Loan*
Borrower
 New loan payable 
— 
Total of restructured cash flows 
Current book value
 Gain on debt restructuring 
Ordinary† 
Ordinary† 
None
 Gain (loss) on transfer of assets 
Ordinary 
— 
—
 Future interest expense 
— 
None, all payments  
Based on rate that equates
 
 
applied to principal 
current carrying value and
 
 
 
restructured cash flows
Lender
 New loan receivable 
— 
Present value of new 
Present value of new
 
 
cash flows at original 
cash flows at original
 
 
effective interest rate 
effective interest rate
 Loss on debt restructuring 
Ordinary 
Ordinary 
Ordinary
 Future interest income 
— 
Based on original loan rate 
Based on original loan rate
* Includes unpaid accrued interest.
† Unless it meets both criteria for extraordinary items.
RECAP
Exhibit 8.11 summarizes, in general terms, the accounting illustrated in each of the 
Harper–Farmers State troubled debt restructurings.
GLOBAL VANTAGE POINT
Comparison of IFRS and GAAP Receivable Accounting
The general accounting for accounts and notes receivable under IFRS is similar to the ac-
counting under U.S. GAAP.33 The accounting is called amortized cost, which refers to the 
gross amount of the receivable. An allowance is still established for doubtful accounts. IFRS 
also allows a more limited version of the fair value option. Under IFRS, firms may elect the 
fair value option only in cases where it eliminates an accounting mismatch or because a group 
of assets are managed and evaluated using fair values (IFRS 9, para 4.1.5, B4.1.33). U.S. 
GAAP allows the fair value option for a broader set of transactions.
 
To help financial statement users understand better the value of certain financial instru-
ments, IFRS 7 requires firms to disclose the fair value of short-term trade receivables 
and loans in addition to long-term notes receivables, even when these are accounted for 
International
33 Current guidance is contained in “Financial Instruments,” IFRS 9 (London, 2009).

 
Summary 
451
at  amortized cost in the fundamental financial statements.34 This disclosure provides 
the  reader two different perspectives regarding the economic value of the financial 
instruments.
 
Guidance regarding sales of receivables is similar to the post-2009 U.S. accounting guid-
ance. Under the prior U.S. guidance, QSPEs were off-balance-sheet. Most of these entities 
would now stay on the balance sheet under both IFRS and U.S. guidance.
 
Finally, IFRS for debt restructurings from the lender’s perspective are similar to U.S. 
GAAP (see IAS 39, para. 63). No explicit international standards govern troubled debt restruc-
turing from the borrower’s perspective.
Expected FASB and IASB Actions
In February 2013, the FASB issued a proposed Accounting Standards Update on financial 
instruments.35 Under the proposal, the accounting for short-term receivables would be mea-
sured at amortized cost, which is consistent with the current method in the United States. 
However, long-term receivables are likely to be accounted for at fair value (with changes 
through Other comprehensive income) if managers do not intend to hold these receivables 
until maturity. Long-term liabilities will likely stay at amortized cost.
 
In summary of this section, we do not expect the accounting for short-term receivables to 
change. However, the U.S. accounting for long-term receivables may move toward fair 
value reporting. The degree of convergence between U.S. GAAP and IFRS depends on 
whether these boards continue to work together to revise reporting standards for financial 
instruments.
SUMMARY
• GAAP requires that accounts receivable generally be shown at their net realizable value.
• Companies use one of two methods to estimate uncollectible accounts: (1) the sales reve-
nue approach or (2) the gross accounts receivable approach. Under either approach, firms 
must periodically assess the reasonableness of the uncollectibles balance by performing 
an aging of accounts receivable.
• Analysts should scrutinize the allowance for uncollectibles balance over time. Significant 
increases in the allowance could indicate collection problems while significant decreases 
in the allowance could be a sign of earnings management.
• Receivables growth can exceed sales growth for several reasons, including a change in 
customer mix or credit terms. But a disparity in the growth rate of receivables and sales 
could also indicate that aggressive revenue recognition practices are being used.
• In certain long-term credit sales transactions, interest must be imputed by determining the 
note receivable’s present value.
• Firms may elect the fair value option for accounts and notes receivable. Changes in fair 
value are recognized in net income.
34 See “Financial Instruments: Disclosure,” IFRS 7 (London, amended through 2011).
35 See Financial Instruments—Overall (Subtopic 825): Recognition and Measurement of Financial Assets and Financial Li-
abilities (Norwalk, CT: FASB, February 2013).

• Firms sometimes transfer or dispose of receivables before their due date to accelerate cash 
collection. Sales of receivables—also called factoring—can be with or without recourse.
• Receivables are also used as collateral for a loan.
• In analyzing receivables transactions, it is sometimes not obvious whether the transaction 
to accelerate cash collection represents a sale or a borrowing; however, authoritative ac-
counting literature provides guidelines in Topic 860 Transfers and Servicing of the FASB 
Accounting Standards Codification for distinguishing between sales (when the transferor 
surrenders control over the receivables) and borrowings (when control is not surrendered). 
Sales of receivables change ratios such as receivables turnover as well as  potentially 
 masking the underlying real growth in receivables.
• Subprime loans and securitizations were at the heart of the 2008 economic crisis. Ac-
counting and regulatory reforms are under way to address some of the problems identified 
during the crisis.
• Banks and other holders of receivables frequently restructure the terms of the receivable 
when a customer is unable to make required payments because of financial difficulties. 
These troubled debt restructurings can take one of two forms: (1) settlement or (2) contin-
uation with modification of debt terms.
• When terms are modified, the precise accounting treatment depends on whether the sum 
of future cash flows under the restructured note is more or less than the note’s carrying 
value at the restructuring date. The interest rate used in troubled debt restructurings may 
not reflect the real economic loss suffered by the lender.
• Both the FASB and IASB have projects on financial instruments and derecognition.
452 
CHAPTER 8
Receivables
EXERCISES
For the month of December 2014, Ranger Corporation’s records show the following 
information:
Cash received on accounts receivable 
$35,000
Cash sales 
30,000
Accounts receivable, December 1, 2014 
80,000
Accounts receivable, December 31, 2014 
74,000
Accounts receivable written off as uncollectible 
1,000
Required:
Determine the gross sales for the month of December 2014.
E8-1
Analyzing accounts receivable 
(LO 2)
AICPA
ADAPTED
E8-2
Analyzing accounts receivable 
(LO 2)
AICPA
ADAPTED
At the close of its first year of operations on December 31, 2014, Clemens Company had ac-
counts receivable of $300,000, which were net of the related allowance for doubtful accounts. 
During 2014, the company had charges to the provision for bad debts of $25,000 and wrote 
off accounts receivable of $15,000 that it deemed to be uncollectible.
Required:
What should Clemens Company report on its balance sheet at December 31, 2014, as  accounts 
receivable before the allowance for doubtful accounts?
E8-3
Determining ratio effects of 
write-offs (LO 2)
AICPA
ADAPTED
Echo Corporation had the following balances immediately prior to writing off a $100 uncol-
lectible account:
Current assets 
$30,000
Accounts receivable 
3,300
Allowance for doubtful accounts 
300
Current liabilities 
10,000

 
Exercises 
453
Required:
Calculate the following amounts or ratios and determine the relationship between the amount 
or ratio before the write-off (x) with the amount or ratio after the write-off (y):
Amount or Ratio 
Possibilities
1. Current ratio 
a. x more than y
2. Net accounts receivable balance 
b. x equals y
3. Gross accounts receivable balance 
c. x less than y
 
d. cannot be determined
E8-4
Determining provision for bad 
debts (LO 1)
The following information is available for Fess Company:
Credit sales during 2014 
$150,000
Allowance for doubtful accounts at December 31, 2013 
1,450
Accounts receivable deemed worthless and written off during 2014 
1,800
During 2014, Fess estimated that its provision for bad debts should be 1% of all credit sales.
 
As a result of a review and aging of accounts receivable in early January 2015, it has been 
determined that an allowance for doubtful accounts of $1,600 is needed at December 31, 2014.
Required:
1. What is the total amount that Fess should record as provision for bad debts for the year 
ended December 31, 2014?
2. Show the journal entries affecting the Allowance for doubtful accounts that Fess made 
during 2014.
AICPA
ADAPTED
E8-5
Preparing an amortization 
schedule (LO 4)
Lake Company sold some machinery to View Company on January 1, 2014, for which the 
cash selling price was $758,200. View entered into an installment sales contract with Lake at 
a 10% interest rate. The contract required payments of $200,000 a year over five years with 
the first payment due on December 31, 2014.
Required:
Prepare an amortization schedule that shows what portion of each $200,000 payment will be 
shown as interest income over the period 2014–2018.
AICPA
ADAPTED
E8-6
Discounting a note (LO 6)
Weaver, Inc., received a $60,000, six-month, 12% interest-bearing note from a customer. The 
note was discounted (sold) the same day to Third National Bank at 15%.
Required:
Compute the amount of cash Weaver received from the bank.
AICPA
ADAPTED
E8-7
Recording note receivable 
carrying amount and fair 
value option (LO 4, 5)
On January 1, 2014, Wade Crimbring, Inc., a dealer in used manufacturing equipment, sold a 
CNC milling machine to Fletcher Bros., a new business that plans to fabricate utility trailers. 
To conserve cash, Fletcher paid for the machine by issuing a $200,000 note, payable in five 
years. Interest at 5% is payable annually with the first payment due on December 31, 2014. 
The going rate for loans of this type is 10%.
Required:
1. Record Crimbring’s sale of the machine on January 1, 2014.
2. Prepare the entry that Crimbring would make on December 31, 2014, to record the receipt 
of the first interest payment.
3. What is the nature of the account that arises as a consequence of the difference between 
the 5% cash interest and the effective yield of 10%?
AICPA
ADAPTED

454 
CHAPTER 8
Receivables
4. Assume that Crimbring opted to carry this note at its fair value. What should be the value 
of the note on Crimbring’s December 31, 2014, balance sheet if the market interest rate is 
then 12%? Assume that the December 31, 2014, payment has been made.
5. Prepare the entry that Crimbring would make on December 31, 2014, to record the note at 
its fair value.
E8-8
Aging accounts receivables 
(LO 1)
On December 31, 2014, Vale Company had an unadjusted credit balance of $1,000 in its 
 Allowance for uncollectible accounts. An analysis of Vale’s trade accounts receivable at that 
date revealed the following:
AICPA
ADAPTED
 
 
Estimated
Age 
Amount 
Uncollectible
0–30 days 
$60,000 
5%
31–60 days 
4,000 
10
Over 60 days 
2,000 
70
Required:
What amount should Vale report as Allowance for uncollectible accounts in its December 31, 
2014, balance sheet?
E8-9
Analyzing accounts receivable 
and fair value option (LO 5)
The following information relates to Zulu Company’s accounts receivable for 2014:
Accounts receivable, 1/1/2014 
$  750,000
Credit sales for 2014 
3,100,000
Accounts written off during 2014 
45,000
Collections from customers during 2014 
2,400,000
Estimated uncollectible accounts at 12/31/2014 
95,000
A factor has recently offered to purchase all of Zulu’s outstanding receivables without 
 recourse for 94% of their face amount.
Required:
At what net amount should Zulu report its receivables assuming the company chooses to 
 measure financial assets at fair value?
E8-10
Accounting for a 
securitization (LO 7)
Kendall Corporation designs and manufactures sports cars. During the course of its business, 
Kendall generates substantial receivables from its customers. On July 1, 2014, to improve its 
cash flow, Kendall establishes a securitization entity (SE) and (1) transfers without recourse 
$20.5 million of its receivables to the SE and (2) surrenders control over these receivables. 
The SE then sells securities backed by the cash flows associated with Kendall’s receivables. 
Because the SE is separate from Kendall, and the receivables are diversified across hundreds 
of customers, investors are willing to pay $24 million for the securities. The SE then transfers 
the $24 million to Kendall Corporation.
Required:
1. Prepare Kendall’s entry to record the securitization as a sale.
2. Show how your answer to requirement 1 would change if control over the receivables is 
not surrendered at the time of the transfer (i.e., an agreement exists whereby Kendall 
would be forced to absorb significant losses associated with the SE’s receivables).

 
Exercises 
455
E8-11
Determining whether it’s a 
real sale (LO 3)
Blue, Inc., sells playground equipment to schools and municipalities. It mails invoices at the 
end of each month for all goods shipped during that month; credit terms are net 30 days. Sales 
and accounts receivable data for 2014, 2015, and 2016 follow:
 
Years Ending December 31,
 
2014 
2015 
2016
Sales 
$1,785,980 
$1,839,559 
$1,986,724
Accounts receivable at year-end 
220,189 
227,896 
267,094
Required:
1. Calculate the rates of increase in sales and in receivables during 2015 and 2016.
2. Do your calculations indicate any potential problems with Blue’s receivables?
3. If so, suggest a possible explanation for your findings and indicate what action, if any, 
would then be needed to bring Blue’s financial statements into conformity with GAAP.
E8-12
Calculating imputed interest 
on noninterest-bearing 
note (LO 4)
On December 31, 2014, Fenton Company sold equipment to Denver, Inc., accepting a 
$275,000 noninterest-bearing note receivable in full payment on December 31, 2017. Denver, 
Inc., normally pays 12% for its borrowed funds. The equipment is carried in Fenton’s per-
petual inventory records at 65% of its cash selling price.
Required:
1. Prepare Fenton’s journal entries to record the sale on December 31, 2014.
2. Prepare Fenton’s journal entry on December 31, 2015, necessitated by this transaction. 
(Hint: Prepare an amortization schedule for the loan.)
3. Show Fenton’s balance sheet presentation of Denver’s note at December 31, 2015.
E8-13
Factoring receivables with 
 recourse (LO 6)
Binsford, Inc., sells $175,000 of its accounts receivable ($172,000 net of the allowance for 
doubtful accounts) to Upshaw Finance with recourse. Upshaw immediately remits cash equal 
to 90% of the gross receivable amount and retains the remaining 10% to cover its factoring fee 
(equal to 4% of the gross amount of factored receivables) and any bad debts under the 
agreement’s recourse provisions. Binsford estimates the fair value of the recourse obliga-
tion to be $4,000.
Required:
1. Prepare the journal entry Binsford would make to record the factoring.
2. Prepare Binsford’s journal entry to record any subsequent cash received from Upshaw 
 Finance if Upshaw collects all of the factored receivables except for $2,500 resulting from 
a bad debt.
E8-14
Recording troubled debt 
 settlement (LO 8)
Smithfield Farms purchased a combine from John Deere for $175,000 on January 2, 2014. 
Smithfield paid $25,000 in cash and signed an installment note calling for five annual pay-
ments of $39,569.58 beginning on December 31, 2014. Deere based the payments on a 10% 
rate of interest. Smithfield made the first payment, but a failed harvest in 2015 left it unable to 
make the upcoming payment. Deere agreed to repossess the combine, which had a market 
value of $132,000 on December 31, 2015, and cancel the note. Deere accrued interest on the 
loan for 2015 prior to canceling the note.
Required:
Prepare the journal entry John Deere would make on December 31, 2015, to record the 
settlement.

456 
CHAPTER 8
Receivables
E8-15
Recording troubled debt 
 restructuring (LO 8)
Central Valley Construction (CVC) purchased $80,000 of sheet metal fabricating equipment 
from Buffalo Supply on January 1, 2014. CVC paid $15,000 cash and signed a five-year, 10% 
note for the remaining $65,000 of the purchase price. The note specifies that payments of 
$13,000 plus interest be made each year on the loan’s anniversary date. CVC made the re-
quired January 1, 2015, payment but was unable to make the second payment on January 1, 
2016, because of a downturn in the construction industry. At this time, CVC owed Buffalo 
Supply $52,000 plus $5,200 interest that had been accrued by both companies. Rather than 
write off the note and repossess the equipment, Buffalo Supply agreed to restructure the loan 
as one payment of $50,000 on January 1, 2018, to satisfy the restructured note.
Required:
Prepare the entries CVC and Buffalo Supply would make on January 1, 2016, to record the 
restructuring.
PROBLEMS / DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
Aardvark, Inc., began 2014 with the following receivables-related account balances:
Accounts receivable 
$575,000
Allowance for uncollectibles 
43,250
Aardvark’s transactions during 2014 include the following:
1. On April 1, 2014, Aardvark accepted an 8%, 12-month note from Smith Bros. in settlement 
of a $17,775 past due account.
2. Aardvark finally ceased all efforts to collect $23,200 from various customers and wrote 
off their accounts.
3. Total sales for the year (80% on credit) were $1,765,000. Cash receipts from customers as 
reported on Aardvark’s cash flow statement were $1,925,000.
4. Sales for 2014 as reported included $100,000 of merchandise that Jensen, Inc., ordered 
from Aardvark. Unfortunately, a shipping department error resulted in items valued at 
$150,000 being shipped to Jensen. Because Jensen believed that it could eventually use 
the unordered items, it agreed to keep them in exchange for a 10% reduction in their 
price to cover storage costs. Neither the sales nor the receivable for the extra $50,000 of 
merchandise were recorded.
5. On February 1, 2014, Aardvark borrowed $65,000 from Sun Bank and pledged receiv-
ables in that amount as collateral for the loan. Interest of 5% was deducted from the cash 
proceeds. In June, Aardvark repaid the loan.
6. Aardvark estimates uncollectible accounts using the sales revenue approach. In past years, 
the bad debt provision was estimated at 1% of gross sales revenue, but a weaker economy 
in 2014 led management to increase the estimate to 1.5% of gross sales revenue.
7. On July 1, 2014, Aardvark sold equipment to Zebra Company and received a $100,000 
noninterest-bearing note receivable due in three years. The equipment normally sells for 
$79,383. Assume that the appropriate rate of interest for this transaction is 8%.
Required:
1. Prepare journal entries for each of the preceding events. Also prepare any needed entries 
to accrue interest on the notes at December 31, 2014.
2. Show Aardvark’s balance sheet presentation for accounts and notes receivable at Decem-
ber 31, 2014.
P8-1
Determining balance sheet 
presentation and preparing 
journal entries for various 
 receivables transactions 
(LO 1, 4, 6)

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
457
Transactions for fiscal year 2015 include the following:
1. Due to a product defect, previously sold merchandise totaling $10,500 was returned.
2. Customer accounts totaling $29,750 were written off during the year.
3. On November 1, 2014, Baer sold teleconferencing equipment and received a $75,000 
noninterest-bearing note receivable due in three years. The normal cash selling price for 
the equipment is $56,349. Assume that the appropriate interest rate for this transaction 
is 10%.
4. Credit sales during the year were $395,000; collections totaled $355,000.
5. Baer sold Hartman, Inc., $45,000 of accounts receivable without recourse. Hartman’s fee 
for factoring receivables is 9%.
6. Utilizing the gross receivables approach, Baer determined that the 2015 fiscal year-end 
Allowance for uncollectible accounts should be $35,000.
Required:
1. Prepare journal entries for each of these events. Also prepare the entry to accrue interest 
income on the note.
2. Show Baer’s balance sheet presentation for accounts and notes receivable at October 31, 
2015.
P8-2
P8-3
Determining balance sheet 
presentation and preparing 
journal entries for various 
 receivables transactions 
(LO 1, 4, 6)
Determining allowance for 
uncollectibles (LO 1)
Baer Enterprises’s balance sheet at October 31, 2014 (fiscal year-end) includes the following:
Avillion Corporation had a $45,000 debit balance in Accounts receivable and a $3,500 credit 
balance in Allowance for uncollectibles on December 31, 2014. The company prepared the 
following aging schedule to record the adjusting entry for bad debts on December 31, 2014.
Accounts receivable 
$379,000
Less: Allowance for uncollectible accounts 
(33,000)
 Accounts receivable (net) 
$346,000
 
 
Expected
Age of Receivables 
Amount 
Bad Debts
0–30 days old 
$30,000 
5%
31–90 days old 
10,000 
11
Over 90 days old 
5,000 
30
1. On January 1, 2015, the company learned that one of its customers (Smith Corporation), 
which owed $2,000, had filed for bankruptcy and could be unable to pay the amount due.
2. On March 1, 2015, Smith Corporation’s bankruptcy was finalized and the bankruptcy 
court notified all of its creditors (including Avillion Corporation) that Smith Corporation 
will pay 60 cents on the dollar for the amount owed to its creditors.
3. On May 7, 2015, Avillion Corporation received a check from Smith Corporation for the 
amount indicated by the court.
Required:
1. Provide journal entries to record the preceding transactions in Avillion’s books. In addi-
tion, using the following table format, show the effects of each transaction on the follow-
ing financial statement items. Clearly indicate the amount and the direction of the effects 
(use “1” for increase, “2” for decrease, and “NE” for no effect).

458 
CHAPTER 8
Receivables
During 2014, the company had credit sales of $8,200,000 of which it collected $7,975,000. 
Oettinger employs the sales revenue approach to estimate its bad debt provisions and, continu-
ing to use the same 1% used in previous years, made the normal adjustment at the end of 2014.
 
Although 2014 started off well, the industry experienced a slowdown in the last four 
months of the year, and cash collections consequently dropped off substantially. Moreover, a 
major customer, which owed Oettinger $85,000, unexpectedly filed for bankruptcy and went 
out of business during November, at which time its account was written off. Oettinger’s con-
troller is concerned that some customers are experiencing cash flow problems and that the 
company’s allowance for uncollectible accounts is too low. As a result, she prepared the 
 following schedule:
2. Assume that Avillion had instead prepared the following aging schedule on December 31, 
2014:
 
 
Expected
Age of Receivables 
Amount 
Bad Debts
0–30 days old 
$30,000 
3%
31–90 days old 
10,000 
8
Over 90 days old 
5,000 
22
 
Redo requirement (1) using the revised aging schedule.
 
 
 
Net 
Cash Flow
 
Assets 
Liabilities 
Income 
from Operations
Direction of effect
Dollar amount of effect
P8-4
Preparing journal entries, 
 aging analysis, and balance 
sheet presentation (LO 1)
At December 31, 2013, Oettinger Corporation, a premium kitchen cabinetmaker for the home 
remodeling industry, reported the following accounts receivable information on its year-end 
balance sheet:
Gross accounts receivable 
$850,000
Less: Allowance for uncollectibles 
(25,000)
 Accounts receivable (net) 
$825,000
 
% of Accounts 
Number of 
Estimated %
 
Receivable Balance 
Days Past Due 
Collectible
 
20% 
0–30 
98%
 
40 
31–60 
95
 
35 
61–90 
85
 
3 
91–120 
75
 
2 
Over 120 
50
Required:
1. Determine Oettinger’s accounts receivable balance at December 31, 2014. Prepare a journal 
entry for each transaction affecting the accounts receivable balance for 2014.
2. Prepare an aging analysis to compute the required balance in the Allowance for uncollect-
ible accounts at December 31, 2014.
3. Prepare any other required journal entries affecting the Allowance for uncollectible accounts 
for the year ended December 31, 2014. (Do not duplicate any entries from requirement 1.)
4. Show Oettinger’s balance sheet presentation of accounts receivable at December 31, 2014.

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
459
Also on December 1, 2014, Eva transfers mortgage receivables with a book value of 
$20,000,000 to a securitization entity (SE). The average interest rate on the mortgages is 7%. 
Under the terms of the agreement, the SE is legally separate from Eva. After the transfer, Eva 
securitizes the mortgages and sells them to investors. Because the securities are considered to 
be less risky than the original mortgages, the investors are willing to receive a lower rate of 
return and consequently remit $20,750,000 to the SE. The SE then transfers the $20,750,000 
to Eva Corporation. Eva does not direct the activities of the SE and will not participate in any 
of the SE’s gains or losses.
Required:
1. Explain why this securitization qualifies for accounting treatment as a sale.
2. What entries should Eva make at the time of the securitization?
3. Show how the securitization will affect Eva’s balance sheet at December 1, 2014, 
and compute the new debt/equity ratio.
4. Show the balance sheet effects and how the debt/equity ratio would be different if the 
 securitization did not qualify for accounting treatment as a sale.
P8-5
Accounting for a securitization 
(LO 7)
On December 1, 2014, Eva Corporation, a mortgage bank, has the following amounts on its 
balance sheet (in millions):
P8-6
Analyzing accounts receivable 
(LO 2)
The following information pertains to the financial statements of Buffalo Supply Company, a 
provider of plumbing fixtures to contractors in central Pennsylvania.
Assets
Cash 
$ 10
Mortgage receivables 
58
Investments 
27
Other assets 
13
 Total 
$108
Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity
Notes payable 
$ 50
Common stock 
11
Retained earnings 
47
 Total 
$108
 
Fiscal Years Ended October 31,
 
2014 
2013 
2012
From Income Statements 
 
 
 Revenues 
$3,519,444 
$3,877,135 
$2,969,981
 Provision for bad debts 
45,753 
50,403 
38,610
From Balance Sheets 
 
 
 Gross accounts receivable 
$  345,044 
$  362,349 
$  282,855
 Less: Allowance for doubtful accounts 
(54,654) 
(74,365) 
(47,612)
 Net accounts receivable 
$  290,390 
$  287,984 
$  235,243
Required:
Reconstruct all journal entries pertaining to Gross accounts receivable and Allowance for 
doubtful accounts for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2014. Assume that all revenues are 
from credit sales. (Hint: Begin by doing a T-account analysis of both accounts, starting with 
the allowance account.)

460 
CHAPTER 8
Receivables
Assume that the interest due is paid along with the face value of the receivables at the end of 
each year.
Required:
Provide journal entries to record the interest received and the notes receivable collected in 
each year.
P8-7
Scheduling interest received 
(LO 4)
On December 31, 2008, Sea Containers Ltd., a company located in Hamilton, Bermuda, re-
ported notes receivable of $63,930,000. This amount represents the present value of future 
cash flows (both principal and interest) discounted at a rate of 11.12% per annum. The sched-
ule of collections of the receivables is provided next:
P8-8
Imputing interest on a nominal 
interest-bearing note and fair 
value option (LO 4, 5)
On January 2, 2014, Criswell Acres purchased from Mifflinburg Farm Supply a new tractor 
that had a cash selling price of $109,837. As payment, Criswell gave Mifflinburg Farm Supply 
$25,000 in cash and a $100,000, five-year note that provided for annual interest payments at 
6%. At the time of the sale, the interest rate normally charged to farms with Criswell’s credit 
rating is 10%.
Required:
1. Prepare Mifflinburg Farm Supply’s journal entry to record the sale.
2. Prepare the journal entry to record the first interest payment Mifflinburg Farm Supply 
 received on December 31, 2014.
3. Determine the note receivable balance that Mifflinburg Farm Supply will report on 
 December 31, 2015.
4. Determine Mifflinburg Farm Supply’s note receivable balance on December 31, 2015, 
 assuming that the company reports notes receivable at fair value and the relevant rate of 
interest at that time has fallen to 8%. Assume that the December 31, 2015, interest 
 payment has been made.
P8-9
Recording cash discounts and 
sales returns (LO 1)
On January 1, 2014, Hillock Brewing Company sold 50,000 bottles of beer to various custom-
ers for $45,000 using credit terms of 3y10, ny30. These credit terms mean that customers re-
ceive a cash discount of 3% of invoice price for payments made within 10 days of the sale 
(this is what the 3y10 signifies). If payment is not made within 10 days, the entire invoice price 
is due no later than the 30th day (this is what the ny30 signifies). At the time of sale, Hillock 
expects sales returns of 5%. On January 9, 2014, customers made payment on one-half of the 
total receivables. They returned goods with a selling price of $2,000 on January 15, 2014. 
They paid the balance due on January 28, 2014.
Required:
1. Provide journal entries to record the preceding transactions in Hillock’s books; assume 
that Hillock records expected sales returns at the time of sales.
2. Redo requirement (1) assuming that customers returned goods with a selling price of 
$3,000 on January 15, 2014.
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
($ in thousands) 
Year Ending December 
Collections
 
2009 
$20,724
 
2010 
15,896
 
2011 
11,559
 
2012 
7,179
 
2013 
8,559
 
2014 
13
 
 
$63,930 
T  R  E   T   C    H
S

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
461
3. Provide journal entries to record the preceding transactions in Hillock’s books; assume 
that Hillock records sales returns when customers actually return the goods.
4. Because the net sales revenue is the same under both methods—requirements 1 and 3—
what is the advantage of recording anticipated sales returns rather than waiting to record 
them when the customers actually return the goods?
5. Assuming that the incremental annualized borrowing rate for a customer is 18%, are 
 customers better off paying within 10 days to receive the discount or should they wait 
to pay until the 30th day?
P8-10
Balance sheet effects of 
 collateralized borrowing 
 versus factoring (LO 6)
Needham Corporation has a $200,000 balloon mortgage payment due in early August. To 
meet its obligation, it decided on August 1 to accelerate collection of accounts receivable by 
assigning $260,000 of specified accounts to a commercial lender as collateral for a loan. Un-
der the agreement, Needham guarantees the accounts and will notify its customers to make 
their payments directly to the lender. In return, the lender advances to Needham 85% of the 
accounts assigned. The remaining 15% will be paid to Needham once the commercial lender 
has recovered its fees and related cash advances. The lender receives a fee of 5% of the total 
accounts assigned, which is immediately deducted from the initial cash advance. The lender 
also assesses a monthly finance charge of one-half of 1% on any uncollected balances. Fi-
nance charges are to be deducted from the first payment due Needham after the lender has 
recovered its cash advances. On August 31, Needham received a statement from the lender 
saying it had collected $160,000. On September 30, Needham received a check from the 
lender with a second statement saying it has collected an additional $80,000.
Required:
1. Prepare all necessary journal entries made by Needham.
2. Show the balance sheet presentation of the assigned accounts receivable and any related 
liabilities at August 31.
3. Prepare all necessary journal entries made by Needham assuming these changes in the 
given scenario:
 
a. The transaction qualifies under U.S. GAAP as a sale with recourse.
 
b. The assessed monthly finance charge increases the Loss on sale of receivables account 
and is offset by a credit to Due from factor.
 
c. Although Needham has guaranteed the transferred accounts, their high quality makes 
nonpayment unlikely.
P8-11
Factoring receivables 
(LO 6)
Atherton Manufacturing Company sold $200,000 of accounts receivable to a factor. Pertinent 
facts about this transaction include the following:
1. The factored receivables had a corresponding $4,000 balance in Allowance for uncollectibles.
2. The receivables were factored on a without recourse basis with notification (that is, the 
customers were instructed to mail their checks directly to the factor).
3. Atherton remained responsible for sales returns, and the factor retained a 5% holdback 
for this purpose.
4. The factor charged 1% interest on the gross receivables factored plus a 6% factoring fee, 
both of which the factor deducted from the value of receivables.
5. Customers returned inventory with a $3,000 selling price. All remaining accounts were 
settled, and the factor paid the balance due. Assume that Atherton records sales returns 
only when goods are returned (that is, it does not record an allowance for sales returns).
6. The factor incurred actual bad debts of $7,500.

462 
CHAPTER 8
Receivables
Required:
Provide journal entries to record:
1. The receipt of proceeds from the factor.
2. Treatment of sales returns.
3. Any other items related to the pertinent facts, including the final cash settlement from the 
factor.
P8-12
Reconstructing T-accounts 
(LO 2)
The following information is taken from the financial statements of Ramsay Health Care Inc.:
T  R  E   T   C    H
S
 
Excerpts from Balance Sheets 
 
as of End of
 
Year 3 
Year 2
Gross accounts receivable 
$26,944,000 
$31,651,000
Allowance for doubtful accounts 
(3,925,000) 
(4,955,000)
 Net accounts receivable 
$23,019,000 
$26,696,000
 
Excerpts from Income Statements 
 
for the Years Ended
 
Year 3 
Year 2 
Year 1
Revenue 
$137,002,000 
$136,354,000 
$136,946,000
Provision for doubtful accounts 
5,846,000 
8,148,000 
8,628,000
Operating income before taxes 
6,900,000 
(1,048,000) 
9,321,000
Required:
1. Reconstruct all journal entries relating to Gross accounts receivable and Allowance for 
doubtful accounts (that is, Allowance for uncollectibles) for the year ended December 31, 
Year 3. You may assume that all revenues are from credit sales.
2. Assume that the company computes its provision for doubtful accounts by multiplying 
sales revenues by some percentage (called the sales revenue approach). Recalculate the 
provision for doubtful accounts for Year 3; assume that Ramsay estimated the Year 3 bad 
debts at the same percentage of revenue as it did in Year 2. Based on the revised figure, 
show how to present Gross accounts receivable and Allowance for doubtful accounts as of 
the end of Year 3. Also calculate a revised operating income before taxes using the revised 
figure for the provision for doubtful accounts.
3. In answering this part, assume that the company is using the gross accounts receivable 
approach to estimate its provision for doubtful accounts (that is, assume that Allowance 
for doubtful accounts is fixed as a percentage of gross receivables). Recalculate the 
provision for doubtful accounts for Year 3 and the ending balance in Allowance for 
doubtful accounts at the end of Year 3; assume that Ramsay estimated the expected 
bad debts at the same percentage of receivables as it did in Year 2. Also, calculate the 
revised operating income before taxes using the revised figure for the provision for 
doubtful accounts.
4. Based on your answers to requirements 2 and 3, what inferences can be drawn about 
Ramsay’s accounts receivables management and the adequacy of the Allowance for 
doubtful accounts?

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
463
P8-13
Restructuring a note 
 receivable (LO 8)
Fish Spotters, Inc., purchased a single-engine aircraft from National Aviation on January 1, 
2011. Fish Spotters paid $55,000 cash and signed a three-year, 8% note for the remaining 
$45,000. Terms of the note require Fish Spotters to pay accrued interest annually on Decem-
ber 31 with the remaining $45,000 balance due with the last interest payment on December 
31, 2013. Fish Spotters made the first two interest payments but was unable to make the prin-
cipal and interest payment due December 31, 2013. On January 1, 2014, National Aviation 
agreed to restructure the note receivable.
Required:
Provide the journal entries that National Aviation would record under each of the following 
independent scenarios.
1. It agrees to take the aircraft back in return for the outstanding note. Assume that the 
 aircraft has a market value of $40,000.
2. It agrees to accept a $5,000 cash payment and a new $35,000 note receivable due in five 
years. The note stipulates payment of $4,200 annual interest each December 31. Prepare 
the note receivable amortization table through December 31, 2018, and all entries through 
December 31, 2016.
P8-14
Restructuring a note 
 receivable (LO 8)
Mikeska Companies purchased equipment for $108,000 from Power-line Manufacturing on 
January 1, 2012. Mikeska paid $18,000 in cash and signed a five-year, 5% installment note for 
the remaining $90,000 of the purchase price. The note calls for annual payments of $18,000 
plus interest on December 31 of each year. Mikeska made the first installment payment as 
scheduled, but was not able to make the installment due on December 31, 2013. On January 1, 
2014, Power-line agreed to restructure the note receivable.
Required:
Provide journal entries in the books of both Mikeska Companies and Power-line Manufactur-
ing for the period 2014–2016 under the following independent scenarios:
1. Power-line accepted $30,000 in cash and old equipment (fully depreciated on Mikeska’s 
books) with a market value of $12,000 in exchange for the outstanding note.
2. Power-line Manufacturing agreed to receive a total of $86,400 ($72,000 plus $14,400, rep-
resenting four years’ interest at 5%) on December 31, 2016, in exchange for the outstanding 
note. (Interpolate for Mikeska’s new effective interest rate.)
3. Power-line Manufacturing decides to waive all interest and defers all principle payments 
until December 31, 2016.
P8-15
Accounting for transfer of 
 receivables (LO 6)
The following notes are excerpted from the financial statements of three companies:
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
Ricoh Company Ltd., March 31, Year 2
Note No. 7—Short-term Borrowings and Trade Notes Receivable 
Discounted with Banks
The Company and certain of its domestic subsidiaries regularly discount trade notes receivable on a full 
recourse basis with banks. These trade notes receivable discounted are contingent liabilities. The 
weighted average interest rates on these trade notes receivable discounted were 4.2% and 3.2% as of 
March 31, Year 1 and Year 2, respectively.

464 
CHAPTER 8
Receivables
Crown Crafts Inc., March 31, Year 2
Note No. 4—Financing Arrangements
Factoring Agreement The Company assigns substantially all of its trade accounts receivable to a com-
mercial factor. Under the terms of the factoring agreement, the factor remits invoiced amounts to the 
Company on the approximate due dates of the factored invoices. The Company does not borrow funds 
from its factor or take advances against its factored receivables balances. Accounts are factored without 
recourse as to credit losses but with recourse as to returns, allowances, disputes, and discounts. Factoring 
fees included in marketing and administrative expenses in the consolidated statements of earnings were 
$1,501,000 (Year 2), $1,223,000 (Year 1), and $1,077,000 (Year 0).
Foxmeyer Corporation, March 31, Year 2
Note C—Accounts Receivable Financing
On October 29, Year 1, the Corporation entered into a one-year agreement to sell a percentage ownership 
interest in a defined pool of the Corporation’s trade accounts receivable with limited recourse. Proceeds of 
$125.0 million from the sale were used to reduce amounts outstanding under the Corporation’s revolving 
credit facilities. Generally, an undivided interest in new accounts receivable will be sold daily as existing 
accounts receivable are collected to maintain the participation interest at $125.0 million. Such accounts 
receivable sold are not included in the accompanying consolidated balance sheet at March 31, Year 2. An 
allowance for doubtful accounts has been retained on the participation interest sold based on estimates of 
the Corporation’s risk of credit loss from its obligation under the recourse provisions. The cost of the 
 accounts receivable financing program is based on a 30-day commercial paper rate plus certain fees. The 
total cost of the program in Year 2 was $2.2 million and was charged against Other income in the accom-
panying consolidated statements of income. Under the agreement, the Corporation also acts as agent for 
the purchaser by performing recordkeeping and collection functions on the participation interest sold. The 
agreement contains certain covenants regarding the quality of the accounts receivable portfolio, as well as 
other covenants which are substantially identical to those contained in the Corporation’s credit facilities.
Required:
How do the three companies record the transfer of their receivables—that is, as a sale or borrow-
ing? Is their accounting treatment consistent with the economics of the transactions? Explain.
P8-16
Determining whether 
existing receivables represent 
real sales (LO 3)
Moto-Lite Company is an original equipment manufacturer of high-quality aircraft engines that 
it traditionally has sold directly to aero clubs building their own aircraft. The engine’s selling 
price depends on its size and horsepower; Moto-Lite’s average gross profit per engine is 35%.
 
To expand its sales, Moto-Lite entered into an agreement with Macco Corporation, a British 
manufacturer of light aircraft, to be the sole supplier of its 80 horsepower, 2 stroke engines. Under 
the terms of the agreement, Moto-Lite will stock a minimum of 10 engines at Macco’s production 
facility to service aircraft production requirements. Each engine has a firm selling price of $6,000. 
Title to the engines does not pass until Macco uses the engine in its production process.
 
During its quarter ending October 31, Moto-Lite shipped and billed 19 engines (DR Ac-
counts receivable, CR Sales) to Macco Corporation. As of that date, Macco had used 9 en-
gines in its production process. All but three of the engines used had been paid for prior to 
October 31. The remaining 10 engines will be used in November.
Required:
1. What type of agreement does this appear to be? Was Moto-Lite correct to record all 
19 motors shipped as sales in the quarter ending October 31?
2. How should the transaction be accounted for and by how much, if at all, were Moto-Lite’s 
sales, receivables, and gross profit overstated at October 31?

 
Cases 
465
P8-17
Channel stuffing (LO 3)
The following facts pertain to the year ended December 31, 2014, of Grosse Pointe Corpora-
tion, a manufacturer of power tools.
1. Based on year-to-date sales through early December, management projected 2014 sales to 
be 5% below their forecast target for the year.
2. The 2014 sales forecast included projected sales of a new string trimmer that it introduced 
late in the third quarter of 2014; unfortunately for Grosse Pointe, actual customer orders 
for the new product through early December had been disappointing.
3. Effective December 15, 2014, Grosse Pointe began providing the following incentives 
to boost sales of the new string trimmer: (a) normal 2y10, ny30 payment terms were 
 extended to ny90 and (b) full right of return for 90 days was granted on all trimmers 
 purchased during the last two weeks of December.
4. Grosse Pointe has never before been forced to offer such incentives and thus has no basis 
for estimating return rates or default rates on these sales.
5. Sales of the new trimmer for October 1 to December 15, 2014, were $1,265,000.
6. The marketing department began aggressively promoting the new trimmer by stressing 
the incentives’ “no-risk” nature (“if you can’t sell them, just return them”) and generated 
sales for December 15 to 31, 2014, of $2,391,000. Management included all of this rev-
enue to make the company’s sales target for 2014. Grosse Pointe uses a perpetual inventory 
system and charged $1,650,000 to Cost of goods sold when these sales were made.
Required:
1. Is Grosse Pointe correct to recognize the incentive sales and related accounts receivable 
in 2014? Explain.
2. If Grosse Pointe’s auditors do not concur with management’s desired accounting treatment, 
what correcting entries are needed?
CASES
Appearing next is information pertaining to Garrels Company’s Allowance for doubtful 
 accounts. Examine this information and answer the following questions.
C8-1
Garrels Company: Analyzing 
allowances—Comprehensive 
(LO 2)
 
Years Ended December 31,
($ in thousands) 
2014 
2013 
2012
Allowance for doubtful accounts
 Balance, beginning of year 
? 
? 
$1,324
 Provision charged to expense 
? 
502 
 1,349
 Write-offs, less recoveries 
1 
622 
?
 Balance, end of year 
1,453 
? 
 1,302
Required:
1. Solve for the unknowns in the preceding schedule. (Hint: Use T-accounts.)
2. Make all entries related to the Allowance for doubtful accounts account for 2012–2014.
3. Make all entries for bad debts for 2012–2014 assuming that Garrels did not accrue for 
 estimated bad debt losses but instead recorded its bad debt provisions once receivables 
were determined to be uncollectible. (This is called the direct write-off method.)
4. Why does GAAP require the allowance method over the direct write-off method?
5. Calculate the cumulative difference in reported pre-tax income under the allowance and 
direct write-off methods over the 2012–2014 period.

466 
CHAPTER 8
Receivables
6. Assume that it is the end of 2015 and Garrels management is trying to decide on the 
amount of the bad debt provision for 2015. Based on an aging of accounts receivable, the 
accounting department feels that a $400,000 provision is appropriate. However, the com-
pany just learned that a customer with an outstanding accounts receivable of $300,000 
may have to file for bankruptcy. The decision facing Garrels management is whether to 
increase the initial provision of $400,000 by $300,000, by some lesser amount, or by 
nothing at all. What is your recommendation?
7. Continuing the scenario from requirement 6 now consider the following additional infor-
mation. Assume that you are a member of the company’s compensation committee. As-
sume further that the company’s chief financial officer (CFO) is solely responsible for 
deciding the amount of the bad debt provision to record and that the CFO has a cash bo-
nus plan that is a function of reported earnings before income taxes. Specifically, assume 
that the CFO receives an annual cash bonus of zero if earnings before income taxes is 
 below $17 million and 10.0% of the amount by which earnings before income taxes exceeds 
$17 million and up to a maximum bonus of $1 million (that is, when net income reaches 
$27 million, no further bonus is earned). What adjustment to the initial $400,000 bad debt 
provision might the CFO make in each of the following scenarios? Assume that the follow-
ing earnings before income taxes include the initial $400,000 provision for bad debts.
 
a. $11 million
 
b. $18.2 million
 
c. $38.25 million
 
d. $27.15 million
8. What other scenarios can you identify in which managers might use the provision for bad 
debts to accomplish some contract-related strategy?
9. Identify other items in the financial statements (besides the bad debt provision) that man-
agers have the ability to “manage.”
C8-2
Citigroup, Inc.: Analyzing loan 
losses and securitizations 
(LO 2, 7)
The following information was extracted from Citigroup, Inc.’s 2009 annual report.
 
From letter to shareholders:
Financial Strength
While Citi started the year as a TARP institution receiving “exceptional financial assistance,” by 
the end of the year our capital and liquidity positions were among the strongest in the banking 
world. We repaid TARP and exited the loss-sharing agreement with the U.S. government. Tier 
1 Common rose by nearly $82 billion to more than $104 billion, with a ratio of 9.6%, and we 
had a Tier 1 Capital Ratio36 of 11.7%—one of the highest in the industry. Structural liquidity, at 
73%, was in excellent shape. The allowance for loan loss reserves stood at $36 billion or 6.1% 
of loans. Worldwide, deposits grew by 8% to $836 billion. The other essential component of 
 Citi’s revived financial strength has been a large reduction in our risk exposure. By year end, we 
had reduced assets on our balance sheet by half a trillion dollars, or 21%, from peak levels in the 
third quarter of 2007. This includes a substantial decline in our riskiest assets over those years.
The actions we took restored Citi’s financial strength and therefore were essential. I deeply regret 
that they also resulted in significant dilution for our shareholders. Citi remains committed to pre-
serving our considerable financial strength and remaining one of the strongest banks in the world.
36 Tier 1 capital is a term used to describe the capital adequacy of a bank and is the bank’s equity capital and disclosed re-
serves. The tier 1 capital ratio is the ratio of a bank’s core equity capital to its total assets. To be “well capitalized” under U.S. 
federal bank regulatory agency definitions, a bank holding company must have a Tier 1 capital ratio of at least 6%, a total 
capital ratio of at least 10%, and a leverage ratio of at least 3%, and not be subject to a Federal Reserve Board directive to 
maintain higher capital levels. As of December 31, 2009, Citigroup was “well capitalized,” with a Tier 1 capital ratio of 
11.7%, a total capital ratio of 15.2%, and a leverage ratio of 6.9%, as well as a Tier 1 common ratio of 9.6%.

 
Cases 
467
 
From management’s discussion and analysis:
Allowance for Loan Losses
Allowance for loan losses represents management’s best estimate of probable losses inherent in 
the portfolio, as well as probable losses related to large individually evaluated impaired loans 
and troubled debt restructurings.
Citigroup increased its allowance for loan losses.
During 2009, Citi added a net build of $8.0 billion to its allowance for loan losses. The allow-
ance for loan losses was $36 billion at December 31, 2009, or 6.1% of loans, compared to $29.6 
billion, or 4.3% of loans, at year-end 2008. With the adoption of SFAS 166 and 167 in the first 
quarter of 2010, loan loss reserves would have been $49.4 billion, or 6.6% of loans, each as of 
December 31, 2009, and based on current estimates.
Selected details of Citigroup’s credit loss experience follow:
 
2009 
2008 
2007 
2006 
2005
Allowance for loan losses at January 1 
$29,616 
$16,177 
$ 8,940 
$9,782 
$11,269
Loans charged off 
(32,784) 
(20,760) 
(11,864) 
(8,640) 
(9,168)
Recoveries on loans previously charged off 
2,043 
1,749 
1,938 
1,779 
2,352
 Net loans charged off 
(30,741) 
(19,011) 
(9,926) 
(6,861) 
(6,816)
Other—Net* 
(1,602) 
(1,164) 
271 
(301) 
(1,525)
Provision for loan losses 
38,760 
33,674 
16,832 
6,320 
6,854
Balance at December 31 
$36,033 
$29,616 
$16,117 
$8,940 
$ 9,782
Allowance for loan losses as a percentage of total loans 
6.09% 
4.27% 
2.07% 
1.32% 
1.68%
Net consumer credit losses as a percentage of average
 consumer loans 
5.44% 
3.34% 
1.87% 
1.52% 
1.76%
Net corporate credit losses as a percentage of average
 corporate loans 
3.12% 
0.84% 
0.30% 
0.05% 
NM
* Other—net includes reductions to the loan loss reserve related to securitizations and the sale or transfers to held-for-sale of various loans.
In June 2009, the FASB issued SFAS No. 166, “Accounting for Transfers of Financial Assets, an 
amendment of FASB Statement No. 140,” that will eliminate qualifying special purpose entities 
(QSPEs). This change will have a significant impact on Citigroup’s Consolidated Financial 
Statements. Beginning January 1, 2010, the Company will lose sales treatment for certain future 
asset transfers that would have been considered sales under SFAS 140, and for certain transfers 
of portions of assets that do not meet the definition of participating interests. Simultaneously, 
the FASB issued SFAS No. 167, “Amendments to FASB Interpretation No. 46(R),” which details 
three key changes to the consolidation model. First, former QSPEs will now be included in the 
scope of SFAS 167. In addition, the FASB has changed the method of analyzing which party to a 
variable interest entity (VIE) should consolidate the VIE (known as the primary beneficiary) to a 
qualitative determination of which party to the VIE has “power” combined with potentially sig-
nificant benefits or losses, instead of the current quantitative risks and rewards model.
As a result of implementing these new accounting standards, Citigroup will consolidate certain 
of the VIEs and former QSPEs with which it currently has involvement. The pro forma impact 
on certain of Citigroup’s regulatory capital ratios of adopting these new accounting standards 
(based on financial information as of December 31, 2009), reflecting immediate implementation 
of the recently issued final risk-based capital rules regarding SFAS 166 and SFAS 167, would be 
as follows:
 
As of December 31, 2009
 
As Reported 
Pro Forma
Tier 1 Capital 
11.67% 
10.26%
Total Capital 
15.25% 
13.82%

468 
CHAPTER 8
Receivables
Required:
1. Examine the selected details of Citigroup’s credit loss experience.
 
a. How does the dollar amount of loans charged off in 2009 compare with that of 2008?
 
b. How much was added to the Provision for loan losses in 2009?
 
c. What is the trend in the allowance for loan losses as a percentage of total loans over 
the period 2005–2009?
2. As a consequence of your findings in requirement 1, how (if at all) does this new infor-
mation affect your expectation regarding the future performance of Citigroup’s existing 
loans? To answer this question, it will be helpful to read Citigroup’s Management 
 Discussion and Analysis (available at http://www.citi.com/citi/fin/data/ar09c_en.pdf.), 
particularly pages 10 and 11.
3. What is the effect of having to comply with SFAS 166 and SFAS 167 on Citigroup’s 
 capital ratios? Briefly explain why this effect occurs. Refer to the Doyle National Bank 
discussion on pages 439–440.
.mhhe.com/revsine6e
www
Remember to check the book’s companion website 
for additional study material.

9
Chapter
A 
wholesaler or retailer buys assets such as business suits or shoes that are imme-
diately salable in their current form. Assets held for sale are called inventories. 
A typical wholesaler or retailer will have only one inventory account, called 
Merchandise inventory, on its balance sheet.
 
A manufacturing firm making a final product such as dishwashers uses inputs from 
many different suppliers. Consequently, manufacturers’ balance sheets typically include 
three categories of inventory accounts:
1. Raw materials inventory, which consists of components such as steel that will 
eventually be used in the completed product.
2. Work-in-process inventory, which contains the aggregate cost of units that have 
been started but not completed as of the balance sheet date. Work-in-process inven-
tory includes the cost of the raw materials, direct labor, and overhead that has been 
incurred in the manufacture of the partially completed units.1
3. Finished goods inventory, which represents the total costs incorporated in completed 
but unsold units.
 
For most firms, inventories are a significant asset, both in absolute size and in pro-
portion to all of a company’s other assets. Furthermore, selling inventories for a price 
more than their cost represents the main source of a firm’s sustainable income. For these 
reasons, inventory accounting is exceedingly important.
AN OVERVIEW OF INVENTORY 
ACCOUNTING ISSUES
We will use an example of a retailer who sells refrigerators to illustrate the basic issues 
in inventory accounting. Assume that the retailer starts the year with a beginning inven-
tory of one refrigerator it purchased for $300. During the year, the retailer’s cost of 
identical refrigerators increases to $340, and the retailer purchases another refrigerator 
at this $340 cost. At the end of the year, the retailer sells one of the refrigerators to a 
consumer for $500. Assume also that it is not possible to ascertain which of the two 
 refrigerators was actually sold.
9
Inventories
469
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you 
will understand:
 1. The relationship between inventory 
valuation and cost of goods sold.
 2. The two methods used to deter-
mine inventory quantities: the per-
petual inventory system and the 
periodic inventory system.
 3. What specific items and types of 
costs are included in inventory.
 4. What absorption costing is and how 
it complicates financial analysis.
 5. The difference between various 
 inventory cost flow assumptions: 
weighted average, FIFO, and LIFO.
 6. How to use the LIFO reserve dis-
closure to transform LIFO firms to 
a FIFO basis and improve analytical 
comparability.
 7. How a LIFO liquidation distorts 
costs of goods sold.
 8. How LIFO affects firms’ income 
taxes.
 9. How to eliminate realized holding 
gains from FIFO income.
 10. What research tells us about the 
economic incentives guiding the 
choice of inventory accounting 
methods.
 11. How to apply the lower of cost or 
market method.
 12. The key differences between GAAP 
and IFRS requirements for inventory 
accounting.
 13. How and why the dollar-value LIFO 
method is applied.
1 Manufacturing overhead includes items such as depreciation of production equipment and buildings, power, indirect 
labor, and so on.

470 
CHAPTER 9
Inventories
 
It is easy to determine the total cost of the goods that were available for sale. This total cost 
is determined by adding the cost of the beginning inventory and the cost of any purchases dur-
ing the period, that is:
Beginning inventory
$300
Inventory purchases
$340
1
5
Goods available for sale
$640
Beginning 
inventory
$300
Inventory 
purchases
$340
Needs to be allocated between
1
5
Goods 
available for sale
$640
Ending inventory
$
Cost of goods sold
$
Ending inventory
$320
Cost of goods sold
$320
Goods available for sale
$640
The total cost of the goods available for sale during the period was $640, a total that repre-
sents the aggregate historical cost of the two refrigerators.
 
The cost of the refrigerator that has been sold must be removed from the Inventory account 
and charged to Cost of goods sold, while the cost of the other refrigerator remains in inven-
tory. In other words, the total cost of the goods available for sale ($640) must be allocated 
between ending inventory and cost of goods sold. This allocation process can be represented 
as follows:
The choice of the method for making this allocation between ending inventory and cost of 
goods sold represents the major issue in inventory accounting.
 
Even in this simple case, the total for the goods available for sale ($640) can be allocated 
between ending inventory and cost of goods sold in at least three ways:
1. One way is to assume that the refrigerator that was sold should reflect the average of the 
cost of the two refrigerators ($640y2 5 $320), which makes the allocation:
 
This is called the weighted average inventory costing method.
2. Another possibility is to assume that the refrigerator that was sold was the oldest refrigera-
tor in stock, the $300 unit from the beginning inventory. This means the cost assigned to 
the refrigerator still on hand at the end of the year is the $340 cost of the most recently 
purchase unit. Here, the allocation is:

 
An Overview of  Inventory Accounting Issues 
471
Ending inventory
$340
Cost of goods sold
$300
Goods available for sale
$640
Goods 
Available for Sale
$640
Ending inventory
$300
Cost of goods sold
$340
Goods available for sale
$640
 
Total Historical 
 
Amount 
 
Amount
 
Cost of Goods 
 
Allocated 
 
Allocated
Cost Flow 
Available 
5 
to Ending 
1 
to Cost of
Assumption 
for Sale 
 
Inventory 
 
 Goods Sold
Weighted average 
$640 
5 
$320 
1 
$320
FIFO 
$640 
5 
$340 
1 
$300
LIFO 
$640 
5 
$300 
1 
$340
 
This method assumes that the first unit purchased is the first unit sold. Accountants call 
this first-in, first-out (FIFO).
3. Another alternative is to assume that the refrigerator that was sold was the most recently 
purchased refrigerator, the one costing $340. This means the cost assigned to the refriger-
ator still on hand at the end of the year is the $300 cost of the oldest available unit that 
was in inventory at the start of the year, making the allocation:
 
This method assumes the last unit purchased is the first unit sold. This is called last-in, 
first-out (LIFO).
 
Each of these cost allocations assumes a different flow of inventory costs—
average cost, FIFO, or LIFO—from goods available for sale to the ending 
 Inventory account and to the Cost of goods sold expense account; this is why 
these methods are called cost flow assumptions. Generally accepted accounting 
principles (GAAP) do not require the cost flow assumption to correspond to the 
actual physical flow of inventory. If the cost of inventory never changed, all 
three cost flow assumptions would yield the same financial statement result. 
Also, under historical cost accounting, no matter what cost flow assumption is 
used, the total dollar amount allocated between cost of goods sold and ending 
inventory always equals the historical dollar cost of the goods available for sale ($640 in this 
case). This important point is shown in the following schedule:
Although many firms use the LIFO cost flow 
 accounting assumption, very few examples exist 
in which the real physical flow of units sold is 
also last-in, first-out. To see why, consider 
Kroger, a grocery store that uses LIFO. If it 
 actually sold the most recently acquired items 
first—a LIFO flow—the unsold items that were 
received  earlier would have spoiled!

472 
CHAPTER 9
Inventories
Once an inventory cost flow assumption has been selected, the cost of goods sold can be 
 determined using the following formula:
Beginning inventory
Inventory purchases
1
5
Goods available for sale
Goods available for sale
Ending inventory
2
5
Cost of goods sold
Beginning inventory 
$300
Inventory purchases 
1340
Goods available for sale 
640
Ending FIFO inventory 
2340
 Cost of goods sold 
$300
Inventory
Beginning inventory (units and $s)
Plus: 
 
Minus:
 Cost of units purchased 
 
 Cost of units transferred to
  (units and $s) 
 
  Cost of goods sold (units and $s)
Equals:
 Ending inventory 
  on hand (units and $s)
For example, assume that the FIFO cost flow assumption is selected, so ending inventory is 
$340. Then, cost of goods sold is calculated as:
 
This simple example illustrates basic inventory accounting relationships.2 But actual busi-
ness situations are more complex and encompass issues such as:
• How should physical quantities in inventory be determined?
• What items should be included in ending inventory?
• What costs should be included in inventory purchases (and eventually in ending inventory)?
• What cost flow assumption should be used to allocate goods available for sale between 
cost of goods sold and ending inventory?
• What if the fair value of the inventory declines?
We discuss each of these circumstances next.
DETERMINATION OF INVENTORY QUANTITIES
There are two different methods for determining inventory quantities, perpetual and periodic. 
A perpetual inventory system keeps a running (or “perpetual”) record of the amount of in-
ventory on hand. Purchases are debited to the Inventory account itself, and the cost of units 
sold is removed from the Inventory account as sales are made. Usually, these inventory re-
cords are maintained in both physical units and dollars. The physical amount of inventory on 
hand at any point in time should correspond to the unit balance in the Inventory account.
 
The Inventory T-account for a merchandising firm under a perpetual inventory system 
 contains the following information at any point in time:
2 We don’t discuss the weighted average method in the cost flow assumptions section later in the chapter because it generates 
numbers that are between the LIFO and FIFO approaches, and it introduces no additional issues. However, we do illustrate 
weighted average in more detail in the self-study problem at the end of the chapter.

 
Determination of  Inventory Quantities 
473
 
A periodic inventory system does not keep a running record of the dollar amount of 
 inventory on hand. Purchases are accumulated in a separate income statement account, Inven-
tory purchases (often called Purchases), and no entry is made at the time of sale to reflect cost 
of goods sold. The T-accounts for a periodic inventory system look like this:
 
Inventory (Asset) 
Inventory purchases (Expense)
Beginning 
 
Cost of units
 inventory ($s only) 
 
 purchased ($s only)
1
2
5
Beginning 
inventory
Inventory 
purchases
Ending
inventory
Cost of 
goods sold
$s from the 
ending inventory 
account of the
previous period
$s from the 
inventory 
purchases 
account
Units determined by
physical count and 
multiplied by $s
based on cost flow
assumption
Derived from the 
formula
Sales 
$10,000
Beginning inventory 
1,400
Inventory purchases 
9,100
Ending inventory 
3,500
In a periodic inventory system, ending inventory and cost of goods must be determined by 
physically counting the goods on hand at the end of the period. The computation is:
To illustrate the accounting entries under each system, assume the following data:
The following compares entries under the perpetual and periodic inventory systems.
Comparison of Entries—Perpetual versus Periodic Inventory System
 
Perpetual inventory system 
Periodic inventory system
Entry (1) To Record Purchases:
DR Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $ 9,100 
 
DR Inventory purchases  . . . . . . . . . .  $ 9,100
   CR Accounts payable  . . . . . . . .  
 
 
   CR Accounts payable
      (or Cash)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$ 9,100 
      (or Cash)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$ 9,100
Entry (2) To Record Sales:
DR Cash or Accounts receivable. . . . .  $10,000 
 
DR Cash or Accounts receivable. . . .  $10,000
    CR Sales revenues  . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$10,000 
    CR Sales revenues  . . . . . . . . .  
 
$10,000
DR Cost of goods sold  . . . . . . . . . . . .  $ 7,000
   CR Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$ 7,000 
(NO ENTRY)
Entry (3) To Close the Accounts:
(NO ENTRY) 
 
 
 
DR Inventory (ending)  . . . . . . . . . . .  $ 3,500
 
 
 
 
DR Cost of goods sold  . . . . . . . . . . .  
7,000*
 
 
 
 
    CR Inventory (beginning). . . .  
 
$ 1,400
 
 
 
 
    CR Inventory purchases  . . . . .  
 
9,100
* Computed as Beginning inventory ($1,400) 1 Purchases ($9,100) 2 Ending inventory ($3,500) 5 Cost of goods sold ($7,000). Under a perpetual inventory system, cost 
of goods sold is just the per unit cost of each sold item and is recorded when the item is sold. Over the period in our example, the unit costs of sold items total $7,000.

474 
CHAPTER 9
Inventories
 
The inventory-related accounts appear as follows under each method (entry numbers are 
indicated in parentheses):
In March 2010, thieves broke into an Eli Lilly warehouse and stole $75 million 
worth of prescription drugs (e.g., Prozac and Cymbalta). Eli Lilly knew the 
amount stolen because it used a perpetual system. To account for the theft, Eli 
Lilly would have made the following entry:
DR Loss from inventory shortage/theft 
 
(or Cost of goods sold)   . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$75 million
 
CR Inventory   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$75 million
PERPETUAL INVENTORY SYSTEM
 
Inventory 
Cost of goods sold
Beg. bal. 
$1,400 
 
 
(2) 
$7,000
(1) 
9,100 
(2) 
$7,000
 
Sales
End. bal. 
$3,500 
 
 
 
 
(2) 
$10,000
PERIODIC INVENTORY SYSTEM
 
Inventory 
Inventory purchases
Beg. bal. 
$1,400 
 
 
(1) 
$9,100 
(3) 
$9,100
(3) 
3,500 
(3) 
$1,400
End. bal. 
$3,500 
 
 
End. Bal. 
–0–
 
Cost of goods sold 
Sales
(3) 
$7,000 
 
 
 
 
(2) 
$10,000
 
Periodic inventory systems reduce recordkeeping, making these systems less costly to main-
tain. However, this cost advantage is achieved at the expense of far less management control 
over inventory. For those firms that use a periodic inventory system, there is no running inven-
tory record, and quantities on hand must be determined by physical count. Furthermore, the 
cost of goods sold number under the periodic system is a “plug” figure; that is, the computation 
assumes that goods not on hand when the physical count is taken were sold. But some of the 
goods not on hand may have been stolen or wasted. Under the periodic system, there is no way 
to determine the extent of these potential losses.
A perpetual inventory system is more com-
plicated and usually more expensive. It does 
not eliminate the need to take a physical in-
ventory because the book inventory figures 
must be verified for accuracy at least annu-
ally. But a perpetual system gives management 
greater control over inventories. For example, 
the running balance in inventory allows careful 
monitoring of stock levels. This is useful in avoiding stockouts, particularly in manufacturing 
where just-in-time inventory purchasing is practiced. Furthermore, the comparisons that must 
be made between book inventories and physical count figures reveal discrepancies that may 
be attributable to theft, employee carelessness, or natural shrinkage.
 
Choosing between the two systems depends on weighing their costs and benefits. Perpetual 
inventory systems are typically used where:
• A small number of inventory units, each with a high unit value, exists. An example is 
 vehicles at an automobile dealership.
• Continuous monitoring of inventory levels is essential. An example is a production line 
where raw materials shortages would shut the operation down.
 
Periodic systems are used when inventory volumes are high and per unit costs are low. 
However, the widespread use of computerized optical scanning equipment has led to the 
adoption of perpetual systems in supermarkets and other high-volume settings where such 

 
Costs Included in Inventory 
475
systems were previously not cost effective. Walmart and Costco were among the first compa-
nies to utilize optical scanning and perpetual inventory systems. These firms share the infor-
mation captured by their electronic inventory management systems with suppliers who are 
authorized to automatically ship new merchandise directly to these retailers’ stores when their 
inventory levels fall below prescribed minimum levels. This approach shortens inventory re-
stocking cycles at Walmart and Costco and reduces their need to warehouse inventories.
 
When a firm uses the perpetual method to manage its inventory, it also has the information 
needed to compute inventory and cost of goods sold under the periodic method. Why would a 
company use the periodic method for accounting purposes if it has real-time information? To get 
the most recent prices into costs of goods sold, a LIFO company uses the periodic method to com-
pute its ending inventory and cost of goods sold. A firm may also use Dollar-value LIFO or other 
estimation techniques to convert perpetual FIFO or average cost inventory amounts to LIFO 
amounts. We discuss cost flow issues throughout the chapter and dollar-value LIFO in Appendix B.
 
Errors or intentional overstatements may occur under either type of system. Accounting for 
various types of inventory errors is discussed in detail in Appendix C.
ITEMS INCLUDED IN INVENTORY
All inventory items to which the firm has legal title should be included in the Inventory account. 
However, in day-to-day operations, most firms do not attempt to use the passage of legal title as 
the criterion for including items in their inventory records because this would be a time- 
consuming process. Instead, most firms record inventory only when they physically receive it.
 
This physical-receipt system creates no difficulties except when it comes time to prepare 
financial statements. At that time, the firm must determine whether all goods that were in fact 
legally owned have been included in the Inventory account. Goods in transit are the primary 
concern because legal title to such goods may transfer to the purchaser before the purchaser 
physically receives them. The purchaser determines the legal status of goods in transit by ex-
amining invoices pertaining to goods received during the first few days of the next accounting 
period and then uses this information to determine precisely when title passed.
 
Sometimes a firm may physically possess goods but does not legally own them. One example 
is goods shipped on consignment. Here the firm that holds the goods (the consignee) acts as an 
agent for the owner (the consignor) in selling the goods. The consignee receives a sales commis-
sion and forwards the net sales price (after deducting the commission and any selling expenses) 
to the consignor. Consignment goods should not be included in the consignee’s inventory; but 
they must appear as part of the inventory of the consignor, the legal owner.
COSTS INCLUDED IN INVENTORY
The carrying cost of inventory should include all costs required to obtain physical possession 
of the merchandise and to make it salable. This includes the purchase cost, sales taxes and 
transportation costs paid by the purchaser, insurance costs, and storage costs. For a manufac-
turing firm, inventory costs also include those production costs, such as labor and overhead, 
that are incurred in making a finished salable product.3
 
In principle, inventory costs should also include the costs of the purchasing department and 
other general administrative costs associated with the acquisition and distribution of inven-
tory. As a practical matter, however, such costs are extremely difficult to associate with 
For example, in 2011, the 
Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC) charged 
DHB Industries, a body 
 armor manufacturer, and its 
directors with overstating 
inventory (and consequently 
profits) and falsifying 
 journal entries.
Source: SEC v. DHB Industries, 
Inc., n/k/a Point Blank Solutions, 
Inc. February 28, 2011 (http://
www.sec.gov/litigation/
complaints/2011/comp21867-
dhb.pdf)
Consignment goods also 
raise potential revenue rec-
ognition issues for the con-
signor that analysts must 
consider. For example, man-
ufacturers may ship products 
to their dealers on consign-
ment and nevertheless try to 
treat such shipments as 
sales, thereby recognizing 
income prematurely. Conse-
quently, if “sales” terms pro-
vide the “purchaser” the 
right to return unsold goods 
or if the cash payment terms 
are unusually long, it is pos-
sible that the manufacturer 
has inappropriately treated 
consignment shipments as 
sales, thereby overstating 
both sales revenues and net 
income and understating 
 inventory (see Chapter 3).
3 In certain cases, interest incurred during the time that inventory is being developed for sale can be capitalized, as described in 
Chapter 10. Examples include discrete projects such as shipbuilding or real estate development; that is, cases in which money is 
borrowed to finance construction over several reporting periods. See FASB Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) Paragraph 
835-20-15-5: Interest—Capitalization of Interest—Scope and Scope Exceptions—Assets for Which Interest Shall be Capitalized.
Analysis

476 
CHAPTER 9
Inventories
 individual purchases and would have to be al-
located on some arbitrary basis. From a cost-
benefit perspective, the effort expended in 
trying to assign these indirect inventory costs to 
unit purchases generally exceeds the benefits. 
That’s why inventory costs shown in the ac-
counting records are usually limited to direct 
acquisition and processing costs that can be ob-
jectively associated with specific goods. Costs 
that do not meet this criterion, such as purchas-
ing department costs, are generally expensed in 
the period in which they arise. Furthermore, a 
cash purchase discount that is lost because of a 
late payment is recorded as interest expense 
rather than as a cost of acquiring inventory.
Manufacturing Costs
The inventory costs of a manufacturer include raw material, labor, and certain overhead items. 
Costs of this type are called product costs; they are assigned to inventory and treated as 
 assets until the inventory is sold. When sold, the inventory carrying value is charged to cost of 
goods sold, and at that point all inventoried costs become an expense.
 
A manufacturer also incurs costs not considered to be closely associated with production. 
Examples include general administrative costs (such as the president’s salary) and selling costs 
(say, the commissions earned by the firm’s salespeople). These costs are not inventoried. Instead, 
they are treated as expenses of the period in which they are incurred and are called period costs.
 
The flow of product costs through the inventory accounts and, eventually, to the Cost of 
goods sold account is illustrated in Exhibit 9.1.
Absorption Costing versus Variable Costing
As indicated in Exhibit 9.1, manufacturing overhead costs comprise one element of product 
costs and are accordingly included in inventory. However, there are two views regarding the ap-
propriate treatment of fixed manufacturing overhead costs. One view is called variable costing 
(or direct costing), while the other view is called absorption costing (or full costing).
 
Variable costing includes only the variable costs of production in inventory. Variable costs 
are those that change in proportion to the level of production. Examples include raw materials 
cost, direct labor, and certain overhead items such as electricity used in running production 
equipment. Fixed costs of production are costs that do not change as production levels 
change. Examples include rental of production facilities, depreciation of production equip-
ment, and property taxes. When variable costing is used, these fixed production overhead 
costs are not included as part of inventory cost. Instead, fixed production overhead costs are 
treated as period costs and are expensed in the period in which they are incurred.
 
The logic underlying variable costing is that incurred costs are includable in inventory only 
if they provide future benefits to the firm. Proponents of variable costing argue that fixed pro-
duction overhead costs are not assets because they expire in the period in which they are in-
curred and thus do not provide a future benefit to the firm. For example, factory insurance 
carried in June provides no benefit after June 30; for insurance protection in July, another 
month’s premium must be paid. But future benefits do derive from variable costs such as mate-
rials used in production; once materials have been purchased and used in making an inventory 
To illustrate, assume that on February 9, 2014, Hernandez Company purchased 
inventory with a list price of $1,000 subject to a 2% cash discount if the invoice 
was paid within 10 days. Hernandez, like most companies, records the purchase 
at its net (after discount) cost of $980:
DR Inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$980
 
CR Accounts payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$980
 
Due to an administrative oversight, the invoice is not paid until March 15, 
2014. The entry Hernandez then makes is:
DR Accounts payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$980
DR Interest expense—purchase discount lost  . . . . .  
20
 
CR Cash. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$1,000
So the cost associated with the lost discount is charged to Interest expense. The 
 inventory carrying amount of these goods is $980.

 
Costs Included in Inventory 
477
unit, that cost can be “stored” and will provide a future benefit when the inventory is eventually 
sold. These types of costs are includable in inventory under variable costing.
Under absorption costing, all production costs are inventoried. Fixed production over-
head costs are not written off to expense as incurred. Instead they are treated as product costs 
and carried as assets in the appropriate inventory accounts. The rationale is that both variable 
and fixed production costs are assets because both are needed to produce a salable product. 
The exclusion of fixed costs would understate the carrying value of inventory on the balance 
sheet. In addition, absorption costing facilitates comparability when firms differ in the per-
centage of components that they buy versus manufacture themselves.
 
Both absorption costing and variable costing treat all selling, general, and administrative 
(SG&A) costs as period costs. These SG&A costs are never inventoried under any circum-
stances under either method. Exhibit 9.2 shows the treatment of costs by category under each 
➀ Raw materials are purchased.
➁ Various manufacturing activities occur.
➂ Completed units are placed in finished goods inventory and await sale.
➃ Units of product are sold.
DR  Raw 
materials 
inventory
 
CR  Cash, 
Accounts 
payable
DR  Work-in-process 
inventory
 
CR  Wages payable, 
Cash
DR  Work-in-process 
inventory
 
CR  Accumulated 
depreciation, 
Cash, Indirect 
wages payable, 
and so on
Raw materials 
inventory
 Cost of raw 
Cost of raw
 
materials 
materials
 
purchased 
put into
 
 
production
Work-in-process 
inventory
 
Cost of 
Total
 
raw 
production
 
materials 
costs of
 
put into 
units
 production 
completed
 
Cost of
 
direct
 
labor
 
used in
 production
 
Overhead
 
costs
 
used in
 production
Finished goods 
inventory
 
Total 
Total
 production 
production
 
costs 
costs
 
of units 
of units
 completed 
sold 
Cost of goods sold
 
Total
 production
 
costs
 
of units
 
sold
➀
➁
➂
➁
➁
➃
EXHIBIT 9.1
Flow of Product Costs for Manufacturing Businesses
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
⎧⎪⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎪⎩
EXHIBIT 9.2
Summary of Cost Treatment by Category under 
Variable and Absorption Costing
Cost 
Inventoried under 
Inventoried under
Category 
Variable Costing? 
Absorption Costing?
Production materials 
Yes 
Yes
Production labor 
Yes 
Yes
Variable production overhead 
Yes 
Yes
Fixed production overhead 
No 
Yes
Selling, general, and administrative 
No 
No

478 
CHAPTER 9
Inventories
4 Whether to use variable costing for external reporting was debated vigorously during the late 1950s and early 1960s. The 
issue arose as variable costing became more prevalent for internal purposes, and U.S. companies increased their investments 
in plant and equipment. Further, declining inventory levels caused by a recession in the late 1950s clearly demonstrated how 
absorption costing could distort net income. We discuss this issue in the next few paragraphs. For examples of the articles 
written on the variable costing versus absorption costing debate, see G. Sorter, “Reported Income and Inventory Change,” 
The Journal of Business (January 1959), pp. 47–51; H. Bierman, Jr., “A Way of Using Direct Costing in Financial Reporting,” 
National Association of Accountants. NAA Bulletin (November 1959), pp. 13–20; C. Horngren and G. Sorter, “Direct Costing 
for External Reporting,” The Accounting Review (January 1961), pp. 84–93; J. Fremgen, “The Direct Costing Controversy—
An Identification of the Issues,” The Accounting Review (January 1964), pp. 43–51; and R. Schulte, “One More Time: Direct 
Costing Versus Absorption Costing,” Management Accounting (November 1975), pp. 11–14.
5 FASB ASC Paragraph 330-10-30-1: Inventory—Overall—Initial Measurement—Cost Basis.
EXHIBIT 9.3
Absorption versus Variable Costing Illustration
Selling price and cost data
Selling price 5 $8 per unit in both 2014 and 2015
Variable production costs 5 $3 per unit in both 2014 and 2015
Fixed production costs 5 $400,000 per year in both 2014 and 2015
Beginning inventory (FIFO basis), January 1, 2014 5 50,000 units @ $7
Production and Sales Volume Data 
2014 
2015
Units produced 
100,000 
125,000
Units sold 
110,000 
90,000
Ending inventory (in units)* 
40,000 
75,000
* Computations: 2014: 50,000 1 100,000 2 110,000 5 40,000 units
 
2015: 40,000 1 125,000 2 90,000   5 75,000 units
inventory costing approach. The only cost category treated differently is fixed production 
overhead, which is highlighted in the table.
 
Although variable costing has been widely used since the 1950s for internal purposes (e.g., 
when performing cost-volume-profit analysis or for planning), variable costing is not allowed 
under GAAP.4 GAAP requires that inventory cost include “applicable expenditures and 
charges directly or indirectly incurred in bringing an article to its existing condition and loca-
tion,” which is absorption costing.5 However, absorption costing can make it difficult to inter-
pret year-to-year changes in reported income when inventory levels change significantly 
between one year and the next. We illustrate this issue in the example shown in Exhibit 9.3.
 
Over the two years in the example, selling price, variable production costs per unit, and 
total fixed production costs were constant. Units produced increased in 2015 (125,000 versus 
100,000 in 2014), but units sold in 2015 dropped (90,000 versus 110,000 units in 2014).
 
Exhibit 9.4 shows that the reported GAAP gross margin under FIFO absorption costing 
increases from $110,000 in 2014 to $130,000 in 2015, an 18.2% increase. Income increases
despite the fact that variable production cost and selling price per unit were constant, fixed 
costs did not change in total, and unit sales decreased.
 
Why do we get this strange result? The answer reveals a quirk of absorption cost financial 
statements. Production increased in 2015 to 125,000 units and exceeded sales, which totaled 
90,000 units. Inventory therefore increased by 35,000 units (125,000 minus 90,000) to a year-
end total of 75,000 units. When inventory increases under absorption costing, as in this illus-
tration, the amount of fixed cost assigned to inventory increases. In Exhibit 9.4, the fixed costs 
in inventory at January 1, 2015, totaled $160,000 (that is, 40,000 units times $4 of fixed cost 
per unit). At December 31, 2015, fixed cost included in inventory had increased to $240,000 
Valuation

 
Costs Included in Inventory 
479
(that is, 75,000 units times $3.20 of fixed cost per unit). As inventory absorbs 
more fixed cost, less fixed cost gets charged to the income statement and net 
income goes up. Very large inventory increases produce a favorable absorp-
tion costing income effect that can offset an unfavorable income effect caused, 
say, by a sales decrease. This is what happened in Exhibit 9.4, and it is this 
effect that explains the jump in 2015 income. By contrast, variable costing 
income in Exhibit 9.4 falls from $150,000 in 2014 to $50,000 in 2015.
 
Generalizing from this example, the mechanics of absorption costing can 
lead to year-to-year income changes that may fool the unwary. This can hap-
pen whenever production and sales are not parallel, that is, whenever physi-
cal inventory levels (in units) are either increasing or decreasing. When the 
number of units in inventory is increasing, absorption cost gross margins tend to rise. This 
effect may be so large that it could obscure offsetting unfavorable effects (for example, sales 
decreases or deteriorating efficiency) that are taking place simultaneously. When physical 
EXHIBIT 9.4
Absorption versus Variable Costing Statements: Contrasting the Outcomes
Absorption Costing Income Statements (GAAP)
 
2014 
2015
Sales revenues (110,000 @ $8) 
 $880,000 
Sales revenues (90,000 @ $8) 
 $720,000
Cost of goods sold 
 
 
Cost of goods sold
 From beginning inventory 
 
 
 From beginning inventory 
  (50,000 @ $7) 
$350,000 
 
  (40,000 @ $7) 
$280,000
 From 2014 production (60,000 @ $7*) 
420,000 
 
 From 2015 production (50,000 @ $6.20†) 
310,000
 
 
(770,000) 
 
 (590,000)
GAAP gross margin 
 $110,000 
GAAP gross margin 
 $130,000
Gross margin % 
 
12.50% 
Gross margin % 
 
18.06%
Ending inventory: 40,000 units @ $7* 
 
 
Ending inventory: 75,000 units @ $6.20†
* This cost is determined as follows: 
 
 
† This cost is determined as follows:
Variable productions costs (given) 
 
$3.00/unit 
Variable production costs (given) 
 
$3.00/unit
Fixed production costs, unitized $400,000/100,000 5 
 
4.00/unit 
Fixed production costs, unitized $400,000/125,000 5 
 
3.20/unit
Total production cost for 2014 
 
$7.00/unit 
Total production cost for 2015 
 
$6.20/unit
Variable Costing Income Statements (Not GAAP)
 
2014 
2015
Sales revenues (110,000 @ $8) 
 $880,000 
Sales revenues (90,000 @ $8) 
 $720,000
Variable cost of goods sold 
 
 
Variable cost of goods sold
 From beginning inventory 
 
 
 From beginning inventory
  (50,000 @ $3) 
$150,000 
 
  (40,000 @ $3) 
$120,000
 From 2014 production (60,000 @ $3) 
180,000 
 
 From 2015 production (50,000 @ $3) 
150,000
 
 
(330,000) 
 
 (270,000)
Variable contribution margin 
 
550,000 
Variable contribution margin 
 $450,000
Less: Fixed production  
 
 
Less: Fixed production
 costs treated as a period expense 
 
(400,000) 
 costs treated as a period expense 
 (400,000)
Variable cost gross margin 
 $150,000 
Variable cost gross margin 
 $ 50,000
Gross margin % 
 
17.05% 
Gross margin % 
 
6.94%
Ending inventory: 40,000 units @ $3 
 
 
Ending inventory: 75,000 units @ $3
A research study found that firms in danger of 
producing zero earnings resort to (among other 
things) overproducing inventory to reduce cost 
of goods sold and thereby boost profits. So, 
the evidence suggests that absorption costing 
provides opportunities for firms to manipulate 
profits opportunistically.
Source: S. Roychowdhury, “Earnings Management through 
Real Activities Manipulation,” Journal of Accounting and 
Economics, December 2006, pp. 335–70.
Analysis

480 
CHAPTER 9
Inventories
 inventory levels decrease absorption cost income tends to fall because fixed 
overhead that was previously in inventory is charged against income as part of 
the cost of goods sold.
Here’s an example of how an understanding of absorption costing can 
help careful analysts. In 2001 Intel Corporation’s gross margin was 49.2%. 
According to a New York Times story, Intel management initially predicted 
that gross margins in the second quarter of 2002 would be 53%.6 But one 
analyst warned his clients “that Intel’s impressive margins were mostly a 
result of a buildup in inventory, not sales to end users, and that the margins 
were therefore unsustainable unless demand picked up.”7 Late in the second 
quarter, Intel reduced its profit margin forecast to 49% because of weak 
demand. “They continued to produce at high levels, which improved their gross margins, 
and then talked about efficiencies and productivity when it was only an inventory buildup,” 
the analyst concluded.8
 
To reduce year-to-year fluctuations in fixed manufacturing overhead charged to inventory, 
as in Exhibit 9.4, GAAP specifies how production volume should be defined:
However, the allocation of fixed production overheads to the costs of conversion is based on the 
normal capacity of the production facilities. Normal capacity refers to a range of production levels. 
Normal capacity is the production expected to be achieved over a number of periods or seasons 
under normal circumstances, taking into account the loss of capacity resulting from planned 
maintenance. Some variation in production levels from period to period is expected and estab-
lishes the range of normal capacity.
 
The range of normal capacity will vary based on business- and industry-specific factors. 
Judgment is required to determine when a production level is abnormally low (that is, outside 
the range of expected variation in production).9
So, the basis for allocating fixed overhead should be normal capacity, but the authoritative 
accounting literature definition of normal capacity is very broad and subjective. In practice, 
this guidance might not affect the computation of fixed production overhead in inventory even 
when production volume does fluctuate from period to period. Thus, the potential time-series 
distortions generated by absorption costing will likely persist depending on an entity’s 
 accounting policy.
Vendor Allowances
It is common practice in certain industries such as retail sales for manufacturers of products 
(vendors) to provide cash payments and/or credits to their customers. These arrangements are 
called vendor allowances. A common type of vendor allowance is a slotting fee, which is 
described in the example below:
For example, in its 2010 first quarter 10-Q, P&F 
Industries, Inc. states:
The reduction in gross margin [percentage], 
combined with the decrease in revenue, 
caused Hy-Tech’s gross profit to decrease 
approximately $644,000. The decrease 
in gross margin reported this quarter at 
 Hy-Tech is primarily due to lower overhead 
absorption which in turn was due to lower 
volume through the facility.
6 G. Morgenson, “Far from Wall Street, Intel’s Bad News Was No Surprise,” The New York Times, June 9, 2002.
7 Ibid.
8 Ibid.
9 FASB ASC Paragraphs 330-10-30-3 and -4: Inventory—Overall—Initial Measurement—Cost Basis.
 Competition for shelf space in the supermarket soft drink section is intense. To gain access to 
space, Super Cola signs a contract with Plaid and Stripes, a national supermarket chain, to pay 
$50,000 per month for 20 lineal feet of prominent shelf space in each Plaid and Stripes store 
throughout the country. 

 
Cost Flow Assumptions: The Concepts 
481
 
In this example, the $50,000 per month is a reduction in the cost of the Super Cola pur-
chased by Plaid and Stripes.10 So, the financial statement effect of the slotting fee should be to 
lower Super Cola’s revenues. Equivalently, the $50,000 should be used to reduce Plaid and 
Stripes’ inventory carrying value.
 
Managers at recipient firms have used some vendor arrangements to manage earnings. One 
example occurred at Kmart several years ago. In 2000, a vendor issued Kmart a $2 million 
allowance in exchange for Kmart’s agreement to purchase an additional $15 million worth of 
goods in 2001 and beyond.
 
In an administrative proceeding, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) stated:
A significant number of allowances were recognized prematurely—or “pulled forward”—on the 
basis of incorrect information provided to Kmart’s accounting department, while the correct 
terms of the payments were undisclosed. As a result of these accounting irregularities . . . 
Kmart’s cost of goods sold was understated by $2 million in fiscal year 2000.11
 
So, although the $2 million vendor allowance was given to induce purchases in 2001 and 
beyond, they were recognized in income in 2000, according to the SEC. Other notable earn-
ings management activities using vendor allowances occurred at Ahold, the Dutch supermarket 
operator; Saks Inc.; and CSK Auto Corporation, among others.
RECAP
To analyze comparative income statements, you must understand the mechanics of ab-
sorption costing and bear in mind that any imbalance between units produced and units 
sold may have a pronounced effect on reported income. For example, a sudden, unex-
pected sales jump, clearly a good news event, may cause an inventory depletion. With 
GAAP absorption costing, the inventory reduction forces an additional dose of fixed over-
head through the income statement, thereby masking part of the income benefit arising 
from the sales jump. Additionally, consideration given by a vendor to a customer has 
 specific income statement effects.
COST FLOW ASSUMPTIONS: THE CONCEPTS
For most publicly held firms, inventory is continuously purchased in large quantities. It is dif-
ficult to determine which purchase lots correspond to the units that have been sold, especially 
in firms whose manufacturing alters the form of the raw materials acquired. Consider an auto-
mobile manufacturer. It’s not easy to know what specific steel purchase batch was used in the 
hood of a specific car.
 
In a few industries, however, it is possible to identify which particular units have been 
sold. In retail businesses such as jewelry stores and automobile dealerships, which sell a 
small number of high-value items, cost of goods sold can be measured by reference to the 
known cost of the actual units sold. This inventory accounting method is called specific 
identification. But this method suffers from a serious deficiency because it makes it rela-
tively easy to manipulate income. Consider a large jewelry dealer with three identical 
watches in inventory that were acquired at three different purchase costs. Under the specific 
identification method, the reported profit on a sale can be raised (or lowered) by simply 
delivering the lowest (or highest) cost watch. An inventory method allowing such latitude is 
open to criticism.
10 FASB ASC Section 605-50-45: Revenue Recognition—Customer Payments and Incentives—Other Presentation Matters.
11 SEC, Account and Auditing Enforcement Release No. 2300, August 30, 2005, paras. 1 and 3.

482 
CHAPTER 9
Inventories
 
Specific identification is usually not feasible for most businesses. Even when it is feasible, 
it has some serious drawbacks, as just illustrated. For these reasons, a cost flow assumption 
is usually required to allocate goods available for sale between ending inventory and cost of 
goods sold, that is,
Beginning 
inventory
Ending inventory
Purchases
Cost of goods 
sold
Goods available
for sale
1
5
A cost flow 
assumption
must be utilized 
to make this
allocation
 
It is important to understand that GAAP does not require the cost flow assumption to 
conform to the actual physical flow of the goods.
 
The 2012 American Institute of Certified Public Accounting (AICPA) survey of U.S. com-
pany inventory cost flow assumptions indicates that approximately half of the firms with inven-
tory use FIFO for all or part of their inventories.12 LIFO is the next most popular (mentioned 
24% of the time) and average cost (mentioned 20% of the time). Companies often use multiple 
methods for different types of inventory or inventory located in different countries. For exam-
ple, of the 163 firms using LIFO in 2011, only four firms (2%) exclusively use LIFO for all 
inventories, largely because it is prohibited in most countries outside the United States. Thus, 
U.S.-domiciled multinational companies that use LIFO for domestic inventories would usually 
be required to use some other cost flow assumption for their foreign subsidiary inventories. 
Forty-three percent of the 163 LIFO firms use LIFO for more than half of their inventories.
 
When choosing specific cost flow assumptions, firms consider product type, inventory 
management strategy, taxes, and so on. We explore this choice in detail after we explain the 
mechanics of FIFO and LIFO more fully.
 
Let’s revisit the refrigerator dealer to explore the underlying cost flow concepts. This simple 
example highlights key issues without cluttering the analysis with details that hinder compre-
hension. Recall the facts of the example.
The retailer started the year with a beginning inventory of one refrigerator, which had an 
invoice cost of $300. During the year, the dealer cost of identical refrigerators increased to 
$340. Assume that the retailer purchases another refrigerator at this $340 cost. At the end 
of the year, one of the two refrigerators is sold for $500.
First-In, First-Out (FIFO) Cost Flow
The FIFO method assumes the oldest units available in inventory are the first units that are 
sold. This means that ending inventory on the FIFO basis always consists of the cost of the 
most recently acquired units. In the refrigerator example, the computations are:
Income statement 
Sales revenues 
$500
Cost of goods sold (FIFO) 
300 
(Cost of oldest unit)
Gross profit 
$200
Balance sheet
Ending inventory (FIFO) 
$340 
(Cost of newest unit)
12 See R. J. Petrino, D. J. Cohen, A. V. Patel, and K. A. Kraft (eds.), Accounting Trends and Techniques (New York: American 
Institute of Certified Public Accountants, Inc., 2012), pp. 192–93.

 
Cost Flow Assumptions: The Concepts 
483
 
Figure 9.1 shows a more realistic FIFO cost flow case in which numerous purchases and 
sales are made throughout the year. The FIFO cost flow in this diagram illustrates that sales 
are presumed to have been made from the oldest available goods (in this case, from beginning 
inventory and the goods purchased in January through September) and that ending inventory 
consists of the most recently acquired goods (October through December).
 
FIFO charges the oldest costs against revenues on the income statement. This characteristic 
is often viewed as a deficiency of the FIFO method because the current cost of replacing the 
units sold is not being matched with current revenues. However, on the balance sheet, FIFO 
inventory represents the most recent purchases, and if inventory turnover is reasonably rapid, 
usually approximates current replacement cost.
Last-In, First-Out (LIFO) Cost Flow
The LIFO method presumes that sales were made from the most recently acquired units. In 
the refrigerator example, the computations are:
Total cost of goods available for sale
Dec.
Nov.
Oct.
Aug.
Sep.
July
June
Apr.
May
Mar.
Feb.
Jan.
2014
Cost of 
goods sold
2014
Purchases
1
Beginning
inventory
January 1, 2014
Ending inventory
December 31, 2014
Figure 9.1
FIFO COST FLOW
This method seldom corresponds to the actual physical flow of goods, but remember that 
GAAP does not require conformity between the assumed cost flow and the physical flow 
of units.
 
LIFO matches the most recently incurred costs against revenues. When purchases and sales 
occur continuously, the most recently incurred costs are virtually identical to current replace-
ment cost. So, LIFO provides a good match between current costs and current revenues. On 
the balance sheet, however, LIFO inventory consists of the oldest costs ($300 in the refrigera-
tor example), which usually does not approximate the current replacement cost of inventory.
 
For firms that have used the LIFO method for many years, the LIFO inventory amount may 
reflect only a small fraction of what it would cost to replace this inventory at today’s prices. A dia-
gram of LIFO cost flow in Figure 9.2 shows how old layers can accumulate in ending inventory.
Income statement
Sales revenues 
$500 
Cost of goods sold (LIFO) 
340 
(Cost of newest unit)
Gross profit 
$160 
Balance sheet
Ending inventory (LIFO) 
$300 
(Cost of oldest unit)

484 
CHAPTER 9
Inventories
 
As in Figure 9.2, when purchases exceed sales in any year, a new LIFO layer is formed. 
New inventory layers are valued using the oldest costs incurred during that year. For example, 
the LIFO layer added in 2014 comprises the inventory purchase costs expended from January 
through March 2014. Because sales under LIFO are always presumed to have been made from 
the most recent purchases (a periodic inventory method approach), the 2014 LIFO layer re-
mains on the books at the end of 2015 as long as units sold in 2015 do not exceed units pur-
chased in 2015. As in Figure 9.2, not only did the 2014 LIFO layer remain but also a small 
additional LIFO layer was added in 2015 because unit purchases again exceeded unit sales. A 
firm that has been on LIFO since, say 1964, could still be carrying a portion of its inventory at 
1964 costs, a portion at 1965 costs, and so on. Some U.S. firms began using LIFO for finan-
cial reporting purposes right after the passage of the Revenue Act of 1939, which permitted 
LIFO for tax purposes.13 So, it is not a stretch to think that a company, such as General Elec-
tric, could have a 1964 inventory layer in the inventory that it reports in 2014.
FIFO, LIFO, and Inventory Holding Gains
FIFO and LIFO give different financial statement results because each method treats inven-
tory holding gains and losses in a different way. To understand the differences, we first need 
to understand inventory holding gains and losses.
 
Inventory holding gains and losses are the input cost changes that occur following the 
purchase of inventory. Let’s go back to the refrigerator example. Assume that the replacement 
cost of each refrigerator at the end of the year was $340. However, both FIFO and LIFO are 
historical cost methods, and, therefore, goods available for sale reflect only the historical cost 
that was paid to acquire the two units on hand:
2014
2015
January 1
2016
Beginning 
inventory
January 1,
2014
2014
Purchases
2015
Purchases
2014
Cost of 
goods
sold
2015
Cost of 
goods
sold
Ending 
inventory
December 31,
2014
Ending 
inventory
December 31,
2015
Dec.
Nov.
Oct.
Aug.
Sep.
July
June
Apr.
May
Mar.
Feb.
Jan.
Dec.
Nov.
Oct.
Aug.
Sep.
July
June
Apr.
May
Mar.
Feb.
Jan.
Pre-
2014
layer
Pre-
2014
layer
Pre-
2014
layer
Layer
added
in 2014
Layer
added
in 2014
Layer
added
in 2015
Figure 9.2 LIFO COST FLOW
Beginning inventory (1 unit @ $300) 
$300
Purchases (1 unit @ $340) 
1340
Historical cost of goods available for sale 
$640
13 See R. Mock and A. Simon, “The LIFO, IFRS Conversion: An Explosive Concoction,” Tax Notes (May 11, 2009), p. 741.

 
Cost Flow Assumptions: The Concepts 
485
Notice that historical cost accounting ignores the $40 holding gain that arose on the unit of 
beginning inventory as its replacement cost increased from $300 to $340. Thus, goods avail-
able for sale are shown at their historical cost of $640 rather than at their current replacement 
cost of $680 (that is, to replace the two units would cost $340 each).
 
An accounting method called current cost accounting (also called replacement cost ac-
counting) overcomes the above weakness and records holding gains on financial statements 
as they arise. Because of the large number of estimates needed to implement a current cost 
system, current cost accounting is not permitted in the basic financial statements under 
GAAP. However, the FASB does allow voluntary supplementary disclosure of current cost 
data in the annual report.14
 
In a current cost (non-GAAP) accounting system, the following entry is made at the time 
that inventory replacement cost increases:
DR Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$40
   CR OCI—Unrealized holding gain on inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$40
Whether these holding gains should be treated as a component of net income or included in 
other comprehensive income is a controversial issue. In this chapter, we ignore the contro-
versy and treat holding gains as an element of other comprehensive income.
 
After the holding gains entry has been made, the current cost of goods available for sale is:
The holding gain takes place 
as the replacement cost of 
the inventory increases. But 
because the gain has not yet 
been included in net income, 
it is an unrealized holding 
gain. Once the gain is 
 included in net income (as 
 described in this section), it 
is a realized holding gain.
You may wish to read 
 Chapter 2, pages 81–87, to 
review other comprehensive 
income.
Beginning inventory (1 unit @ $300) 
$300
Increase in the replacement cost of beginning inventory 
140
Purchases (1 unit @ $340) 
1340
 Current cost of goods available for sale (2 units @ $340) 
$680
When the unit is sold for $500, the partial financial statements under current cost account-
ing are:
Income statement
Sales revenues 
$500
Replacement cost of goods sold (1 unit @ $340) 
340
Current cost operating profit 
$160
Balance sheet
Ending inventory 
$340
The current (or replacement) cost operating profit figure is the margin that results from match-
ing current replacement cost against current revenues. It reflects the expected ongoing profit-
ability of current operations at current levels of costs and selling prices.
 
Figure 9.3 contrasts the treatment of goods available for sale under (a) historical cost ac-
counting and (b) current cost accounting. Notice that the total amount to be allocated between 
inventory and cost of goods sold is $40 higher under current costing ($680 versus $640). This 
14 FASB ASC Paragraph 255-10-50-11: Changing Prices—Overall—Disclosure—Additional Disclosures for the Current 
Year.

486 
CHAPTER 9
Inventories
Goods available for sale
$680
LIFO allocation
$640
Goods available for sale
$640
(a) Historical Cost Accounting
(b) Current Cost Accounting
FIFO allocation
$640
Ending inventory
$340
Cost of goods sold
$340
Cost of goods sold
$340
Ending inventory
$340
Cost of goods sold
$300
Ending inventory
$300
Figure 9.3
ALLOCATION OF GOODS 
AVAILABLE FOR SALE: 
 HISTORICAL COSTING 
VERSUS CURRENT 
COSTING
(a) Historical Cost of Goods 
Available for Sale 5 $640 and 
(b) Current Cost of Goods 
Available for Sale 5 $680.
15 In our example, FIFO inventory is shown at exactly current cost because the purchase cost ($340) equals the end-of-year 
replacement cost. In more complicated situations that occur in real organizations, FIFO inventory amounts approximate cur-
rent costs. The faster the inventory turnover (cost of goods sold divided by average inventory), the closer is the correspon-
dence between inventory at FIFO cost and inventory at current (replacement) cost.
difference is attributable to the $40 holding gain that was added to goods available for sale 
under current costing (highlighted in the earlier table). With current costing, the total to be 
allocated is carried at current cost (two units at $340 each, for a total of $680). This means 
that the balance sheet inventory number and the cost of goods sold number are both shown 
at current cost.
 
By contrast, the historical cost figures for goods available for sale under both FIFO and 
LIFO ($640) are $40 less than the total current cost of the two units available ($680). This 
means that under either LIFO or FIFO it is impossible to simultaneously reflect both the bal-
ance sheet inventory and cost of goods sold at current cost: One can be shown at current cost, 
but the other must then be shown at historical cost. The primary difference between FIFO 
and LIFO is that each method makes a different choice regarding 
which financial statement element is shown at the out-of-date cost. 
FIFO shows inventory at approximately current cost but is then 
forced to reflect cost of goods sold at historical cost.15 LIFO shows 
cost of goods sold at approximately current cost but is then forced to 
reflect inventory on the balance sheet at historical cost.
 
When input costs are rising, LIFO income is lower than FIFO income as long as inventory 
quantities remain constant or increase. In the refrigerator example, LIFO income is $160, 
whereas FIFO income is $200 (see pages 482–483). Income is lower under LIFO because 
LIFO charges the new, higher cost units to cost of goods sold.
Inventory quantity decreases—reductions in physical units 
in inventory—can produce a distortion known as a LIFO 
liquidation, discussed later in the chapter.

 
Cost Flow Assumptions: The Concepts 
487
 
The income number under LIFO usually (but not always) closely approximates the income 
number under current costing:
When purchases occur continuously, this near equivalence exists because LIFO charges the 
most recently acquired goods to cost of goods sold.
 
Now let’s reexamine the FIFO income number. By charging the oldest costs to the in-
come statement, FIFO automatically includes in income the holding gain on the unit that 
was sold. This result is seen by comparing the total income figures under FIFO and current 
costing:
LIFO Income 
 
Current Cost Income
Sales revenues 
$500 
Sales revenues 
$500
Cost of goods sold 
340 
Replacement cost of goods sold 
340
 LIFO operating profit 
$160 
 Current cost operating profit 
$160
FIFO Income 
 
Current Cost Income
Sales revenues 
$500 
Sales revenues 
$500
Cost of goods sold 
300 
Replacement cost of goods sold 
340
 FIFO operating profit 
$200 
 Current cost operating profit 
$160
$40 difference
A comparison of the two income numbers shows that FIFO income is $40 higher. This $40 
difference is, of course, the holding gain on the oldest refrigerator, which is the one that the 
FIFO assumption considers to have been sold. Another way to visualize this income differ-
ence is to decompose FIFO income into its component parts.
Components of FIFO Income
Current (replacement) cost operating profit 
$160
Holding gain on unit considered sold 
40
 FIFO operating profit 
$200
This reformulation tells us that FIFO income consists of two components:
• Current (replacement) cost operating profit of $160
• A realized holding gain of $40 on the unit that was sold.
While these components are easy to extract in the simple refrigerator example, in actual finan-
cial statements, the components of FIFO profit are not disclosed and only the total figure is 
reported.
 
Some analysts argue that by merging current cost profit and realized holding gains, FIFO 
gives misleading signals about the company’s sustainable operating profits. For example, 
 operating profit is generally considered to be potentially sustainable if existing conditions 
continue. By contrast, holding gains depend on external prices increases, which may or 
may not be sustainable. But FIFO gives the impression that operating profit is $200, thus 
 suggesting that $200, not $160, is sustainable. Because the higher FIFO income number 
 includes potentially unsustainable gains, that $40 portion of FIFO income is considered to 
represent low-quality earnings.
 
In Chapter 1 we discussed political costs arising from reported profits in certain politi-
cally sensitive industries such as oil. All of us who fill our vehicle gas tanks are painfully 
Remember, “current cost operating profit” represents 
a matching against sales revenue of the then-current 
replacement cost of the inventory at the time of sale.

488 
CHAPTER 9
Inventories
aware of the steady rise in gasoline prices beginning in 2004. This made consumers un-
happy, and human nature being what it is, many looked for a scapegoat. When multina-
tional oil companies soon after began reporting record profits, they were an obvious target. 
Critics made charges (largely unsubstantiated) of price gouging. Some in the U.S. Con-
gress proposed imposition of a “Windfall Profits” tax on oil companies.16 Most U.S. oil 
firms use LIFO in an effort to better match revenues and expenses and thereby keep inven-
tory holding gains out of income.17
 
Whereas most U.S. oil companies use LIFO for much of their inventory, companies 
using IFRS cannot use LIFO (see the Global Vantage Point section later in the chapter). 
This poses a serious political dilemma for a non-U.S. oil company such as BP. Its use of 
FIFO results in realized holding gains included in its net income. In an effort to reflect 
sustainable profits more clearly, BP provides in its annual report a supplemental disclo-
sure of the amount of inventory holding gains included in FIFO historical cost income. 
Here is an excerpt:
Profit attributable to BP shareholders for the year ended 31 December 2011, was $25,700 million 
and included inventory holding gains, net of tax, of $1,800 million and a net credit for non- 
operating items, after tax, of $2,195 million. [Emphasis added.]
Source: BP 2011, Form 20-F, page 56.
 
If LIFO is eliminated under GAAP, U.S. firms may make similar disclosures.
The LIFO Reserve Disclosure
The previous section discussed income statement matching problems under FIFO. Remember, 
however, LIFO is also a historical cost accounting method with its own deficiencies. There 
is only $640 (rather than $680) to allocate between cost of goods sold and inventory in our 
refrigerator example. Because LIFO allocates the most recent cost of $340 to the income 
statement, that leaves only $300—the old historical cost—for allocation to the balance sheet. 
Therefore, the LIFO balance sheet inventory number 
does not reflect current replacement cost. This leads to 
another set of issues that further cloud financial report-
ing. Let’s examine them.
Because LIFO inventory costs on the balance sheet 
frequently include old inventory layers, the LIFO bal-
ance sheet amounts are much lower than FIFO inven-
tory amounts. This can make it very difficult to 
compare LIFO versus FIFO firms meaningfully. To 
remedy this difficulty, the SEC requires LIFO firms to 
disclose the dollar magnitude of the difference between 
LIFO and FIFO (or current replacement cost) inventory 
costs. This disclosure, called the LIFO reserve, must 
be reported at each balance sheet date. Exhibit 9.5 illustrates a typical disclosure of this 
divergence between LIFO and FIFO inventory amounts for Aral Company.
16 K. Phillips and J. Bosman, “Industry Thinks It Has a Message, but It Isn’t Reaching Consumers,” The New York Times, 
May 3, 2006.
17 D. Reilly, “Big Oil’s Accounting Methods Fuel Criticism—LIFO Leaves the Likes of Exxon with Big Balance-Sheet 
 Reserves as Gas-Pump Prices Slam Drivers,” The Wall Street Journal, August 8, 2006.
Technically, the SEC rule requires firms to disclose “the excess of re-
placement cost or current cost over stated LIFO value . . .” [see FASB 
ASC 210-10-S99-1(6): Balance Sheet-Overall-SEC Materials-Balance 
Sheet (Inventories) (also located in Regulation S-X, Rule 5-02)]. In 
practice, most firms do measure the LIFO reserve as the difference 
 between the LIFO inventory carrying amount and the replacement 
cost of the inventory. However, some firms compute the LIFO reserve 
by taking the difference between inventory book value at LIFO and 
 inventory book value at FIFO. Presumably, this is justified if inventory 
turnover is reasonably rapid because FIFO inventory will then approxi-
mate replacement cost. Consequently, both of these alternative 
 computations of the LIFO reserve will usually result in similar amounts 
and thus comply with the SEC directive.

 
Cost Flow Assumptions: The Concepts
489
 
The disclosure in Exhibit 9.5 provides statement readers an important tool. By adding the 
reported LIFO reserve amount at December 31, 2014, to the December 31, 2014, balance 
sheet LIFO inventory number, we can estimate the December 31, 2014, FIFO inventory. Spe-
cifically, the sum of the ending LIFO inventory ($4,980,000) and the year-end LIFO reserve 
($1,720,000) totals $6,700,000. This sum represents an estimate of Aral Company’s Decem-
ber 31, 2014, FIFO ending inventory. Notice that this result immediately follows from the 
definition of the LIFO reserve, which is the difference between FIFO inventory amounts and 
LIFO inventory amounts, that is,
InventoryFIFO 2 InventoryLIFO 5 LIFO reserve
 
$6,700,000 
 2 
$4,980,000 
 5 
$1,720,000
Therefore, rearranging the equation yields the following:
InventoryFIFO 5 InventoryLIFO 1 LIFO reserve
 
$6,700,000 
 5 
$4,980,000 
 1 
$1,720,000
Thus, we can think of the FIFO inventory cost as being composed of LIFO inventory cost plus 
a LIFO reserve adjustment that measures the difference between the current cost of inventory 
units and the historical cost of all LIFO layers. The LIFO reserve disclosure allows the analyst 
to convert reported LIFO inventory amounts to approximate FIFO amounts. This adjustment 
can be performed for all dates for which LIFO reserve amounts are disclosed. For example, 
using the beginning LIFO reserve disclosure in Exhibit 9.5, Aral’s December 31, 2013, FIFO 
inventory can be estimated as:
InventoryFIFO 5 InventoryLIFO 1 LIFO Reserve
 
$6,250,000 
5 
$3,875,000 
1 
$2,375,000
FIFO inventory at December 31, 2013, equals $6,250,000. This number is also, of course, the 
FIFO beginning inventory for January 1, 2014.
 
Using the LIFO reserve disclosure in this way also makes it possible for analysts to convert 
LIFO cost of goods sold to a FIFO basis. This is most easily understood by looking at the 
EXHIBIT 9.5 
Aral Company: Inventory Note Disclosure
 
December 31,
 
2014 
2013
Raw materials 
$   792,000 
$   510,000
Work-in-process 
1,808,000 
1,315,000
Finished goods 
4,100,000 
4,425,000
Inventory at FIFO cost 
6,700,000 
6,250,000
Less: LIFO reserve 
1,720,000 
2,375,000
 Inventory at LIFO cost 
$4,980,000 
$3,875,000
Remember that this conver-
sion to FIFO is an approxi-
mation. As long as inventory 
turns fairly rapidly, the 
 approximation is close.

490 
CHAPTER 9
Inventories
basic cost of goods sold formula in column (1) of Exhibit 9.6. Notice that both the beginning 
and ending inventory and the cost of goods sold amounts in column (1) are measured at LIFO. 
(Inventory purchases represent the actual transactions and events of the period and do not re-
quire a cost flow assumption.) Column (2) shows the addition of the respective LIFO reserves 
to beginning and ending LIFO inventory. As we just saw, the sum that results from this addi-
tion yields FIFO inventory amounts shown in column (3). Using the basic cost of goods sold 
formula on the column (3) FIFO numbers plus actual purchases yields FIFO cost of goods 
sold. Thus, the LIFO reserve disclosures make it possible to convert LIFO cost of goods sold 
to a FIFO basis.
 
We apply this adjustment process to convert Aral Company’s reported LIFO cost of 
goods sold number to a FIFO basis in Exhibit 9.7. Inventory purchases during 2014 are 
$22,165,000. FIFO cost of goods sold is $21,715,000. To make valid comparisons across 
firms that use different inventory accounting methods, you must make the adjustments 
like those in Exhibit 9.7. Because firms using IFRS cannot use LIFO, an analyst should 
always make these adjustments when comparing a LIFO firm to an international competi-
tor using IFRS.
 
A shortcut procedure can be used to convert cost of goods sold from LIFO to FIFO. The 
shortcut focuses on the change in the LIFO reserve between the beginning and end of the year, 
EXHIBIT 9.6
Adjusting Cost of Goods Sold from LIFO to FIFO
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3)
Beginning inventoryLIFO 
1 
Beginning LIFO reserve 
5 
Beginning inventoryFIFO
Plus 
 
 
 
Plus
 Purchases 
 
 
 
 Purchases
Equals 
 
 
 
Equals
 Goods availableLIFO 
 
 
 
 Goods availableFIFO
Minus 
 
 
 
Minus
 Ending inventoryLIFO 
1 
Ending LIFO reserve 
5 
 Ending inventoryFIFO
Equals 
 
 
 
Equals
2 
Increase in LIFO reserve
Cost of goods soldLIFO 
 
or 
5 
Costs of goods soldFIFO
 
1 
Decrease in LIFO reserve
⎧
⎨
⎩
EXHIBIT 9.7
Aral Company: Adjusting from LIFO to FIFO 
Cost of Goods Sold
 
As Reported
 
in Financial
 
Statements 
 
LIFO 
 
Adjusted to
($ in thousands) 
(LIFO) 
 
Reserve 
 
FIFO Basis
Beginning inventory,
 January 1, 2014 
$ 3,875 
1 
$2,375 
5 
$ 6,250
Purchases 
22,165 
 
 
 
22,165
Goods available 
26,040 
 
 
 
28,415
Ending inventory,
 December 31, 2014 
4,980 
1 
1,720 
5 
6,700
Cost of goods sold 
$21,060 
1 
$  655 decrease 
5 
$21,715

 
Cost Flow Assumptions: The Concepts 
491
as reflected in the bracketed area at the bottom of column (2) in Exhibit 9.6. (This shortcut 
avoids the need to successively add the respective LIFO reserve amounts to beginning and 
ending inventory.) Applying this shortcut adjustment to the Aral Company data in Exhibit 9.7, 
we see that the change in the LIFO reserve was a decrease of $655,000 (that is, $2,375,000 at 
the start of the year versus $1,720,000 at the end of the year) and that FIFO cost of goods sold 
exceeds LIFO cost of goods sold by $655,000. So, when the LIFO reserve amount decreases, 
the shortcut conversion procedure is:
Cost of goods soldLIFO 1 Decrease in LIFO reserve 5 Cost of goods soldFIFO
When the LIFO reserve amount increases, the conversion is:
Cost of goods soldLIFO 2 Increase in LIFO reserve 5 Cost of goods soldFIFO
 
Aral uses LIFO for all of its inventory, but most public companies use a combination of 
inventory cost flow assumptions. The disclosures in Exhibit 9.8 illustrate this issue.
 
The LIFO-to-FIFO adjustment for a company such as Whole Foods Market, which uses 
LIFO for less than 100% of its inventory, is identical to the method used in Exhibit 9.7 for 
Aral Company. The beginning and ending LIFO reserves are added, respectively, to beginning 
and ending reported inventory amounts. It doesn’t matter that LIFO was used for only 92.3% 
of the beginning inventory and 92.1% of the ending inventory. By adding the LIFO reserve to 
the reported inventory, the LIFO portion is adjusted, and what results is inventory on a 100% 
FIFO basis. In this case, Whole Foods reports inventory of $374.3 million on its September 30, 
2012 balance sheet (not given in the note). So, its FIFO inventory would be $404.1 million 
($374.3 million LIFO inventory 1 $29.8 million LIFO reserve).
 
There is no standardized GAAP format for disclosing the LIFO reserve. The format shown 
in Exhibit 9.5 for Aral Company is often seen. Other firms disclose the LIFO reserve amount 
in narrative form, as Whole Foods did. In Exhibit 9.8 Panel (a), we highlight Whole Foods 
Market’s description, “excess of estimated current costs over LIFO carrying value, or LIFO 
reserve.” Often companies do not provide the explanatory phrase “or LIFO reserve” and in-
stead limit their description to the oblique phrase, “excess of estimated current costs over 
LIFO carrying value.”
 
The second paragraph of Whole Foods’ note provides additional details on how it calcu-
lates its inventory cost. It notes the importance of physical counts and estimates in its meth-
ods. Inventory cost based on a LIFO cost flow assumption often is estimated from the FIFO or 
average cost inventory values that may be used to manage the inventory. Dollar-value LIFO, a 
frequently used method, is illustrated in this chapter’s Appendix B.
 
Exhibit 9.8 Panel (b) shows another disclosure format, this one from DuPont, a biotechnol-
ogy, chemicals, and materials manufacturing company that uses LIFO for inventory reporting. 
Notice that DuPont, does not use the phrase “LIFO reserve” and instead uses the phrase 
 “adjustment of inventories to a LIFO basis.” The note also states that the average cost method 
(in contrast to FIFO) approximates current costs. In addition, similar to Whole Foods, DuPont 
does not use LIFO to value 100% of its inventory. In 2012, it used LIFO for 85% of its inven-
tory. This percentage will decrease in 2013 as DuPont is changing to the average cost method 
for some of its inventory held in foreign locations (see the second paragraph in its note). The 
note explains that the change is being made to be consistent with how DuPont manages its 
 inventory and to improve comparability.

492 
CHAPTER 9
Inventories
EXHIBIT 9.8
Illustrative LIFO Reserve Disclosure Formats
Panel (a): Whole Foods Market, Inc. 2012 Disclosure
Inventories
The Company values inventories at the lower of cost or market. Cost was determined using the 
dollar value retail last-in, first-out (“LIFO”) method for approximately 92.1% and 92.3% of 
 inventories in fiscal years 2012 and 2011, respectively. Under the LIFO method, the cost assigned 
to items sold is based on the cost of the most recent items purchased. As a result, the costs of the 
first items purchased remain in inventory and are used to value ending inventory. The excess of 
estimated current costs over LIFO carrying value, or LIFO reserve, was approximately $29.8 million 
and $29.7 million at September 30, 2012 and September 25, 2011, respectively. Costs for remaining 
inventories are determined by the first-in, first-out (“FIFO”) method.
 
Cost is determined using the item cost method and the retail method for inventories. 
The item cost method involves counting each item in inventory, assigning costs to each of 
these items based on the actual purchase cost (net of vendor allowances) of each item and 
 recording the actual cost of items sold. The item cost method of accounting enables manage-
ment to more precisely manage inventory and purchasing levels when compared to the retail 
method of accounting. Under the retail method, the valuation of inventories at cost and the 
 resulting gross margins are determined by counting each item in inventory, then applying a 
cost-to-retail ratio for various groupings of similar items to the retail value of inventories. 
 Inherent in the retail inventory method calculations are certain management judgments and 
estimates which could impact the ending inventory valuation at cost as well as the resulting 
gross margins.
Source: Whole Foods Market, Inc. September 30, 2012, Form 10-K.
Panel (b): DuPont (E.I. du Pont de Nemours and Company) 2012 Disclosure
9. INVENTORIES
December 31, 
2012 
2011
Finished products 
$4,519 
$4,541
Semifinished products 
2,407 
2,293
Raw materials, stores and supplies 
1,332 
1,262
 
8,258 
8,096
Adjustment of inventories to a LIFO basis 
(836) 
(901)
 
$7,422 
$7,195
Inventory values, before LIFO adjustment, are generally determined by the average cost method, 
which approximates current cost. Domestic and foreign inventories, excluding seeds, certain food-
ingredients, enzymes, stores and supplies, valued under the LIFO method comprised 85 percent 
and 78 percent of consolidated inventories before LIFO adjustment as of December 31, 2012 and 
2011, respectively. Seed, certain food-ingredient and enzyme inventories of $3,926 and $3,432 
at December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively, were valued under the FIFO method. Stores and 
 supplies inventories of $263 and $258 at December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively, were valued 
under the average cost method.
 
Effective January 1, 2013, the company changed its method of valuing inventory held at 
certain of its foreign and U.S. locations from the LIFO method to the average cost method. 
The company believes that the average cost method is preferable to the LIFO method as it 
more clearly aligns with how the company actually manages its inventory and will improve 
 financial reporting by better matching revenues and expenses. In addition, the change from 
LIFO to  average cost will enhance the comparability of our financial results with our peer 
 companies. The impact of this change on income from continuing operations is $21, $(73), 
and $2 for 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. As described in the accounting guidance for 
 accounting changes and error corrections, beginning with the first quarter 2013, the comparative 
Consolidated Financial Statements of prior periods will be adjusted to apply the new accounting 
method retrospectively.
Source: E. I. du Pont de Nemours and Company December 31, 2012, Form 10-K.

 
LIFO Liquidation 
493
INFLATION AND LIFO RESERVES
Figure 9.4 Panel (a) provides the average dollar value (in millions) of replacement cost 
inventory, balance sheet LIFO inventory, and LIFO reserve for a broad section of New 
York Stock Exchange firms that used LIFO for all or part of their inventories from 2004 to 
2011. The sample size varies from a high of 307 firms in 2004 to a low of 229 firms in 
2011. The decline in sample size is due to mergers, bankruptcies, and firms changing from 
LIFO. The replacement cost inventory (top line) is determined by summing the balance 
sheet inventory (middle line) and LIFO reserve (bottom line) amounts. Note that the aver-
age replacement cost inventory value climbs from approximately $1,223 million in 2004 to 
$1,830 million in 2011. The balance sheet LIFO inventory, which significantly understates 
the replacement cost, grew from $1,056 million in 2004 to $1,343 million. The average 
LIFO reserve grew from $168 million in 2004 to $487 million in 2011 after falling to 
$249 million in 2008.
 
So why did the LIFO reserve decrease in 2008? The LIFO reserve generally reflects 
changes in prices for the specific inventory accounted for under LIFO. As mentioned previ-
ously, most oil companies are on LIFO. Additionally, many steel, auto, and heavy equipment 
manufacturers also are on LIFO and are affected significantly by energy prices. Figure 9.4 
Panel (b) shows that the CPI stayed flat during 2008. However, the price per barrel of Brent 
Crude fell significantly in 2008. At the end of 2004, the price of oil was $40.38 per barrel, but 
by the end of 2007, it was $93.68 before falling to $35.82 by the end of 2008. By 2011, the 
price of oil had risen to $108.09! Because the LIFO reserve is based on specific prices, it is 
understandable that the LIFO reserve pattern may be more consistent with the oil price pattern 
as opposed to the CPI.
 
Because of the downturn in the economy during 2008, some firms may have reduced in-
ventory levels. Reductions in inventory levels (liquidations) also could have contributed to the 
decline in the average LIFO reserve in 2008. We address this issue in the next section.
LIFO LIQUIDATION
When a LIFO firm liquidates old LIFO layers, the net income number under LIFO can be 
seriously distorted. This is because the older (and usually lower) costs in the LIFO layers 
that are liquidated are “matched” against sales dollars that are stated at higher current 
prices. This results in an inflated or illusory profit margin. The following example illus-
trates the point.
RECAP
Under both FIFO and LIFO, the allocation of costs between ending inventory and cost of 
goods sold is limited to the historical costs incurred. As costs change, LIFO puts the “old-
est” costs on the balance sheet while FIFO runs the “oldest” costs through the income 
statement. The LIFO reserve disclosure permits analysts to transform LIFO financial 
statements to a FIFO basis, thus making comparisons between firms more meaningful 
when one firm is using LIFO and the other FIFO. Because LIFO is not allowed under IFRS, 
analysts should adjust a LIFO firm’s financial statements when comparing it to a competi-
tor using IFRS.
 
A self-study problem intended to solidify your understanding of the different inventory 
accounting methods appears at the end of the chapter. You may wish to refer to it now.

494 
CHAPTER 9
Inventories
2004
2005
2006
Year
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
Millions of dollars
Panel (a) 
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
Replacement cost inventory
Balance sheet inventory
LIFO reserve
2004
2005
2006
Year
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
50.0
100.0
200.0
150.0
250.0
Panel (b) 
Brent crude price
CPI index
Figure 9.4  MAGNITUDE OF INVENTORY AND LIFO RESERVE RELATIVE 
TO CPI AND OIL PRICES
(a) Average year-end replacement cost inventory, balance sheet Inventory at replacement cost 
and LIFO reserve amounts and (b) December CPI Values and Brent Crude Oil Prices
Source: (a) Standard and Poor’s Compustat® (b) U.S. Department of Labor (2013 series) and U.S. Department of Energy 
(RBRTEd data series).

 
LIFO Liquidation 
495
The Bernazard Company had the following layers in its LIFO inventory at January 1, 2014, at 
which time the replacement cost of the inventory was $600 per unit.
Year LIFO 
 
 
 
LIFO Reserve
Layer Added 
Units 
Unit Cost 
Total 
as of 1/1/14
2011 
10 
$300 
$ 3,000 
($600 2 $300) 3 10 5 $ 3,000
2012 
20 
400 
8,000 
($600 2 $400) 3 20 5  4,000
2013 
30 
500 
15,000 
($600 2 $500) 3 30 5  3,000
 
60 
 
$26,000 
$10,000
Bernazard sets its selling price by adding a $400 per unit markup to replacement cost at 
the time of sale. As of January 1, 2014, the replacement cost was $600 per unit; this cost 
remained constant throughout 2014. During 2014 the company purchased 45 units at a 
cost of $600 per unit, and it sold 80 units at a price of $1,000 per unit. Pre-tax LIFO 
 income for 2014 is:
Sales revenues, 80 @ $1,000 
 
$80,000
Cost of goods sold
 2014 purchases, 45 @ $600 
$27,000
 2013 purchases, 30 @ $500 
15,000
 2012 purchases,  5 @ $400 
2,000
 
 
44,000
LIFO gross margin 
 
$36,000
Because the number of units sold (80) exceeded the number of units purchased in 2014 (45), 
Bernazard was forced to liquidate its entire 2013 LIFO layer (30 units) and 5 units from its 
2012 LIFO layer. In such situations, LIFO’s income statement matching advantages disap-
pear. Indeed, a “mismatching” occurs because the reported LIFO margin per unit is only 
$36,000y80, or $450; this overstates the “real” current cost operating margin of $400 per unit. 
This $50 per unit overstatement of the margin occurs because some 2012 and 2013 purchase 
costs are being matched against 2014 revenues. If analysts use past margin numbers as a start-
ing point in generating future profit or cash flow estimates, the LIFO income number is mis-
leading when liquidation occurs. That is, the $450 reported LIFO unit margin overstates the 
current cost real margin of $400 used for pricing purposes and thus does not represent a sus-
tainable future per unit margin number. LIFO earnings that include LIFO liquidation profits 
are considered to be lower quality earnings. The illusory profit elements would generally be 
assigned a lower earnings multiple for valuation purposes.
 
To understand better what happens when LIFO liquidations occur, let’s examine the 
 reported current cost operating margin for 2014:
Valuation
The 2014 LIFO gross margin of $36,000 in the example at the top of this page exceeds the 
2014 current cost margin of $32,000. This “extra” LIFO income of $4,000 is the result of 
mismatching. In more technical terms, as LIFO layers are liquidated, some of the inventory 
holding gains of 2013 and 2012 that were ignored under historical cost LIFO in the years 
they occurred suddenly are recognized as income as the old, lower cost inventory layers are 
Sales revenues (80 3 $1,000) 
$80,000
Replacement cost of goods sold (80 3 $600) 
48,000
Current cost operating margin (80 3 $400) 
$32,000

496 
CHAPTER 9
Inventories
matched against current selling prices. This can be seen by examining the December 31, 
2014, LIFO inventory computation:
 
 
 
Ending Inventory
Year LIFO 
Remaining 
Unit 
12/31/14 
LIFO Reserve
Layer Added 
Units 
Cost 
Total 
as of 12/31/14
2011 
10 
$300 
$3,000 
($600 2 $300) 3 10 5 $3,000
2012 
15 
400 
6,000 
($600 2 $400) 3 15 5  3,000
 
25 
 
$9,000  
$6,000
The LIFO reserve was $10,000 at January 1, 2014 (see page 495). Notice that the LIFO liqui-
dation has reduced the LIFO reserve to $6,000 at December 31, 2014. This $4,000 reduction 
in the LIFO reserve represents another way to visualize how LIFO liquidations create a mis-
matching on the income statement. Previously ignored unrealized holding gains are included 
in income as Bernazard liquidates the old LIFO layers. The $4,000 earnings “boost” equals 
the difference between the current cost to replace the liquidated layer of LIFO inventory (at 
date of sale) and the original cost of those units. This is demonstrated in Exhibit 9.9. When old 
LIFO layers are invaded, LIFO income jumps, but the increase is not sustainable.
 
When the income effect of a LIFO liquidation is material, the SEC requires that firms dis-
close the dollar impact of the liquidation on income. Most companies that provide the 10-Q or 
10-K disclosure also disclose the dollar impact of the liquidation in the report. The statement 
user should be alert to the fact that the earnings effect of a LIFO liquidation can be reported 
on either a before-tax or after-tax basis. Exhibit 9.10 shows this disclosure (on both a before- 
and after-tax basis) from Aral Company’s 2014 annual report.
 
The LIFO liquidation disclosure in Exhibit 9.10 indicates that 2014 earnings before in-
come taxes increased by $2,600,000 as a consequence of matching old LIFO layer costs 
against 2014 revenues. This number represents the pre-tax effect of LIFO liquidation, indicat-
ing that the reported LIFO gross margin in 2014 overstated sustainable earnings by 
$2,600,000. Equivalently, the LIFO cost of goods sold number was lower than current cost of 
goods sold by $2,600,000.
EXHIBIT 9.9
Calculation of LIFO Liquidation Profits
 
LIFO Layer Liquidated
 
Units 
 
Current 
 
Historical 
 
Effect
Year Added 
Liquidated 
 
Cost 
 
Cost 
 
on Earnings
2013 
30 
3 
($600 
2 
$500) 
5 
$3,000
2012 
 5 
3 
($600 
2 
$400) 
5 
 1,000
Total increase in pre-tax earnings due to LIFO liquidation 
 
 
$4,000
EXHIBIT 9.10
Aral Company: Disclosure of LIFO Liquidation
During 2014, the Company liquidated certain LIFO inventories that were carried at lower costs 
prevailing in prior years. The effect of this liquidation was to increase earnings before income 
taxes by $2,600,000 ($1,690,000 increase in net earnings, or an increase of $.08 per share).

LIFO Liquidation 
497
Reconciliation of Changes in LIFO Reserve
We are now able to explain more precisely what factors drive the LIFO–FIFO cost of 
goods sold difference computed for Aral in Exhibit 9.7. As we see in that exhibit, FIFO 
cost of goods sold exceeds LIFO cost of goods sold by $655,000, the dollar decrease in the 
LIFO reserve. LIFO liquidations reduce the LIFO reserve because old, lower cost LIFO 
layers are eliminated. But the LIFO reserve increases when input costs increase. So, to 
explain what causes the LIFO versus FIFO cost of goods sold difference, we need to ex-
plain what causes both upward and downward changes in the LIFO reserve. This is done in 
Exhibit 9.11.
 
We know the beginning and ending balance of the reserve as well as the decrease caused 
by the LIFO liquidation. To reconcile to the December 31, 2014, LIFO reserve amount, the 
reserve had to increase by $1,945,000 (the highlighted “plug” figure in Exhibit 9.11). This 
increase is attributable to rising input costs. So, the $655,000 difference between the LIFO 
and FIFO cost of goods sold numbers can be explained as:
1. Rising input costs increased LIFO cost of goods sold by 
$1,945,000
2. The LIFO liquidation undercharged expense and thus 
 
reduced cost of goods sold by 
(2,600,000)
3. Result: FIFO cost of goods sold exceeds LIFO cost 
 
of goods sold by 
$  655,000
 
Reconciling the LIFO reserve as in Exhibit 9.11 provides auditors and analysts information 
about the direction of input costs. When linked to other data, this cost information can be 
valuable. For example, if the auditor/analyst knows that input costs are rising but competition 
limits output price increases, it is likely that the firm’s future margins will suffer. This will 
reduce future operating cash flows, adversely affecting the firm’s value and perhaps even 
 viability as a going concern.
 
We explore the effects of cost increases and LIFO liquidations on the LIFO reserves and 
cost of goods sold in greater detail within the context of dollar-value LIFO in Appendix B.
Improved Trend Analysis
The LIFO to FIFO adjustment is also used in trend analysis as illustrated in Exhibit 9.12, 
where comparative gross profit data for Aral are shown for 2012 to 2014.
 
The Exhibit 9.12(a) data show that the gross profit percentage rose slightly in 2013 and 
more dramatically in 2014. But we have also seen (Exhibit 9.10) that in 2014 there was a 
LIFO liquidation, which increased the reported gross profit in 2014 over what it would have 
been without the liquidation. You might ask what the profit trend looks like after adjusting for 
EXHIBIT 9.11
Aral Company: Change in the LIFO Reserve
Beginning LIFO reserve, January 1, 2014 
$2,375,000
Decrease in LIFO reserve due to LIFO liquidation (Exhibit 9.10) 
(2,600,000)
Increase in LIFO reserve due to increases in input costs during the year (plug) 
1,945,000
Ending LIFO reserve, December 31, 2014 
$1,720,000
Analysis
Valuation

498 
CHAPTER 9
Inventories
the LIFO liquidation. We can extend the previ-
ous analysis to address this question; see Ex-
hibit 9.12(b).
The computations reveal that after remov-
ing the illusory income effect arising from 
the LIFO liquidation, the gross profit per-
centage for Aral shows a sharp decline in 
2014. The adjusted gross profit percentage 
(highlighted in Exhibit 9.12[b]) fell from 
15.0% in 2012 to 9.0% in 2014. This deterio-
ration is not immediately evident in the 
reported gross margin figures. Analysis of 
trend data provides potentially important in-
formation regarding management’s perfor-
mance in adapting to new market conditions. 
Neglecting to adjust the year-to-year data 
for nonsustainable factors (such as the artifi-
cial margin improvement that results from a LIFO liquidation) could easily lead to erro-
neous conclusions.
 
Consider one final point regarding Exhibit 9.12(b). Many analysts believe that the most 
 recent margin percentage provides the least biased estimate of the next year’s margin percent-
age. (This belief is correct when margins follow a random-walk pattern. When they do, the best 
estimate of the next period’s value is generated by simply extrapolating the most recently ob-
served past value.) After eliminating the effects of LIFO liquidations, the  adjusted gross 
margin percentage provides a clearer picture of the underlying real  sustainable gross  margin 
in each year. Analysts trying to estimate Aral Company’s future performance must understand 
EXHIBIT 9.12
Aral Company: Ratio Comparisons
a. Comparative Gross Profit Data as Reported
 
Years Ended December 31,
($ in thousands) 
2014 
2013 
2013
Net sales 
$26,000 
$25,000 
$24,000
Cost of goods sold 
21,060 
21,000 
20,400
Gross profit 
$ 4,940 
$ 4,000 
$ 3,600
Gross profit as a percentage of sales 
19.0% 
16.0% 
15.0% 
b. Gross Profit Data Adjusted for LIFO Liquidation
 
Years Ended December 31,
($ in thousands) 
2014 
2013 
2013
Gross profit as reported 
$ 4,940 
$ 4,000 
$ 3,600
Pre-tax effect of LIFO liquidation on 
 gross profit 
2,600 
— 
—
Gross profit after eliminating LIFO 
 liquidation effect 
$ 2,340 
$ 4,000 
$ 3,600
Net sales (as reported) 
$26,000 
$25,000 
$24,000
Adjusted gross profit percentage 
9.0% 
16.0% 
15.0%
Exhibit 9.13(a) gross profit percentage 
19.0% 
16.0% 
15.0%
Difference 
210% 
N/A 
N/A
The Aral disclosure revealed both the pre-tax and after-tax income effect of a 
LIFO liquidation. Some companies disclose only the increase in net (after-tax) 
earnings. In these instances, analysts can still easily convert the LIFO liquida-
tion effect to a pre-tax basis and evaluate year-to-year changes in gross margin.
 
Here’s how. Assume that a company discloses that a LIFO liquidation increased 
its (after-tax) net income by $1,690,000. Also assume that the income tax rate is 
35%. Then:
 After-tax effect 5 Pre-tax effect 3 11 2 Marginal tax rate2
or
 $1,690,000 5 Pre-tax effect 3 11 2 0.352
or
 $1,690,000
0.65
5 Pre-tax effect of $2,600,000
 
The $2,600,000 pre-tax impact of the LIFO liquidation would then be used to 
undertake an analysis similar to Exhibit 9.12(b).

 
Eliminating LIFO Ratio Distortions 
499
that it is the 9.0% adjusted margin percentage, not the 19.0% unadjusted figure, that represents 
the starting point for estimating the sustainable margin in subsequent periods.
 
To avoid being misled by transitory LIFO liquidation profits, statement users should care-
fully scrutinize the LIFO inventory note. The objective is to determine whether a LIFO liqui-
dation occurred during the period and, if so, what impact it had on reported profits for the 
period. LIFO liquidations are more likely to occur during difficult operating conditions, as we 
saw during the 2008 to 2009 economic crisis.
 
Of course, LIFO liquidations don’t occur only at the end of the year. When liquidations 
occur midyear, both the accounting treatment and accompanying 10-Q disclosure can  differ 
slightly from the Aral Company example. The reason is that management must determine 
whether the midyear inventory reduction will persist to year-end or just be temporary.
 
Here’s what one oil refining company said about its midyear LIFO liquidations (dollar 
amounts are in millions):
During the second quarter of 2006, we incurred a temporary LIFO liquidation gain in our 
 Refinery inventory in the amount of $178. This gain decreased by $19 during the third quarter 
and we expect it to be fully restored by the end of the year. The temporary LIFO liquidation gain 
has been deferred as a component of accrued expenses and other current liabilities in the accom-
panying September 30, 2006, condensed consolidated balance sheet.
 
During the second quarter of 2006, we also incurred a permanent reduction in a LIFO 
layer resulting in a liquidation gain in our Refinery inventory in the amount of $1,026. In the 
third quarter, this gain decreased by $11. This liquidation gain, which represents a reduction of 
approximately 77,000 barrels, was recognized as a component of cost of goods sold in the nine 
month period ended September 30, 2006. [Emphasis added.]
Source: Delek US Holdings, Inc. Form 10-Q filing for the period ended June 30, 2007.
As this example illustrates, midyear LIFO liquidation gains that are deemed to be permanent flow 
directly to cost of goods sold and thereby increase earnings in the quarter when they occur. How-
ever, temporary midyear LIFO liquidation gains don’t flow to cost of goods sold in the quarter 
when they occur. These temporary gains are instead parked on the balance sheet. If inventory 
quantities increase to their former level by year-end, the temporary gain is reversed and eliminated. 
This accounting approach thus eliminates from quarterly earnings any volatility that would other-
wise arise because of seasonal fluctuations in LIFO inventory levels. But what if inventory quanti-
ties remain low at year-end? In this case, the temporary LIFO liquidation gain is now deemed 
permanent and flows from the balance sheet to year-end cost of goods sold. Delayed recognition 
distorts fourth quarter net income, but that’s the trade-off that results from an accounting approach 
that eliminates quarterly earnings volatility when inventory reductions are truly temporary.
RECAP
LIFO liquidations occur frequently and often have a large impact on reported earnings. The 
earnings effect arises from a mismatching since LIFO layers carried at “old” costs are matched 
against current period revenues. Reported margins are distorted and so is the income trend.
ELIMINATING LIFO RATIO DISTORTIONS
LIFO inventory costing can lead to ratio distortions that can be corrected easily. For example, 
on its December 31, 2014, balance sheet, Aral Company reported total current assets of 
$14,460,000 and total current liabilities of $5,784,000. Utilizing these numbers, the current 
ratio at December 31, 2014, is:
Current assets
Current liabilities 5 $14,460,000
$5,784,000 5 2.5

500 
CHAPTER 9
Inventories
However, Exhibit 9.5 disclosed that the LIFO inventory carrying amount understated FIFO 
(and replacement cost) inventory by $1,720,000. This amount is the LIFO reserve that we 
must add to the numerator to reflect the current ratio in truly current terms. The adjusted cur-
rent ratio is ($000 omitted):
$14,460 1 $1,720
$5,784
5 2.80
 
The current ratio improves after making the LIFO adjustment. Most other ratios deteriorate 
once the adjustments for LIFO effects have been included. To illustrate the general deteriora-
tion, consider the inventory turnover ratio:
Cost of goods sold
Average inventory 5 Inventory turnover
 
The inventory turnover ratio is designed to reflect the physical turnover of product, that 
is, how long the typical unit remains in inventory. Most firms have many inventory catego-
ries. This diversity renders unit measures of inventory turnover meaningless because unit 
turnover is difficult to interpret in a diversified firm. That’s why dollar, rather than unit, in-
ventory measures are used to compute the turnover ratio. For Aral, using the inventory 
amounts from Exhibit 9.5 and cost of goods sold from Exhibit 9.7, inventory turnover for 
2014 is ($000 omitted):
$21,060
1$3,875 1 $4,9802y2 5 4.76 times per year
The typical unit turns over 4.76 times per year. Another way to understand what this means is 
to divide 4.76 into 365, the number of days in a year. The result 365y4.76 5 76.7 shows that 
the typical unit remains in inventory for 76.7 days.
 
The inventory turnover ratio is structured to approximate physical unit flow. The nu-
merator is the cumulative dollar cost of units that have been sold; the denominator is the 
average cost of units on hand during the year. Under “normal” circumstances, the quotient 
should reflect the physical unit turnover. Unfortunately, LIFO frequently distorts the rep-
resentation of physical unit flow. To see why, consider the denominator of the Aral ratio; it 
does not reflect the then-current cost of the inventory at either the beginning or end of 
2014 because there was a LIFO reserve at both times: $2,375,000 and $1,720,000, respec-
tively. For a firm using LIFO:
• The numerator of the ratio—cost of goods sold—is predominantly current period costs, 
here, 2014, and
• The denominator—average inventory—consists of old LIFO costs.
The quotient will not capture physical unit turnover unless an adjustment is made to the 
denominator. Furthermore, an adjustment to the numerator is also required here because 
the pre-tax impact of the LIFO liquidation ($2,600,000) causes the cost of goods sold nu-
merator to understate current cost of goods sold by this amount. To correctly gauge physi-
cal turnover, the analyst must always adjust the denominator of LIFO firms’ turnover by 
adding the LIFO reserve amounts to beginning and ending inventory. In addition, the nu-
merator must also be adjusted for LIFO liquidation profits whenever LIFO liquidations 
occur. The Aral 2014 inventory turnover ratio adjusting both the numerator and the de-
nominator is ($000 omitted):
Analysis

 
Tax Implications of  LIFO 
501
(Reported cost of goods sold) 
(Pre-tax effect of LIFO liquidation)
 
 
T 
 
 
 
T
 
 
$21,060 
 
1 
 
$2,600
 
[($3,875 
1 
$2,375) 
1 
($4,980 
1 
$1,720)]y2 5 3.65
 
c 
 
c 
 
c 
 
c
 
Beginning 
 
Beginning LIFO 
 
Ending 
 
Ending
 
inventory 
 
reserve 
 
inventory 
 
LIFO reserve
Dividing this LIFO–adjusted turnover (3.65) into 365 days reveals that the typical unit, in fact, 
remains in inventory for 100 days—considerably longer than the 76.7 days suggested by the 
unadjusted analysis.
TAX IMPLICATIONS OF LIFO
In the United States, the accounting principles that a firm uses in preparing its external finan-
cial statements need not be the same as the principles used in computing income taxes. A no-
table exception to this statement occurs under LIFO. U.S. tax rules specify that if LIFO is 
used for tax purposes, the external financial statements must also use LIFO. This is called the 
LIFO conformity rule.
 
The LIFO conformity rule partially explains the widespread use of LIFO for financial re-
porting purposes. To gain the tax advantage of LIFO, a firm must also use this method for 
recognizing Inventory on its balance sheet and Cost of goods sold in its income statement. 
LIFO’s tax advantage is that it provides a lower income amount than FIFO during periods of 
rising prices and nondecreasing inventory quantities, thus lowering the immediate tax liability. 
However, this effect can be reversed if LIFO layers are liquidated or if future purchase costs fall.
 
The dollar amount of the tax saving provided by LIFO can easily be computed by reference 
to the LIFO reserve number. For example, in Exhibit 9.5 we saw that Aral’s LIFO reserve at 
December 31, 2014, was $1,720,000. This number equals the cumulative ex-
cess of LIFO cost of goods sold over what the cost of goods sold would have 
been had FIFO been used. The $1,720,000 also represents the cumulative un-
realized holding gain on the old LIFO layers. Under FIFO, the old, lower cost 
inventory would have been charged to cost of goods sold, thereby raising cu-
mulative pretax income by this amount. Assuming an average tax rate over the 
past years of 40%. Aral has postponed approximately $688,000 in taxes (that 
is, $1,720,000 3 40%) since it began using LIFO.
 
The amount of taxes that companies can postpone by using LIFO can be substantial; see 
 Exhibit 9.13. This table lists the 20 firms with the largest LIFO reserves as of year-end 2011 with 
their estimated tax savings (based on using a 40% marginal tax rate). Note that oil companies 
dominate the list. Companies that produce or sell products with short shelf-lives, such as Kroger, 
Walgreen Co., and Altria Group, also appear on the list. The LIFO reserves for these companies 
have grown over decades, and old costs remain in inventory though the older physical units have 
been sold. This demonstrates that a cost flow assumption does not have to match the physical flow.
 
The LIFO tax benefit ranges from $10.2 billion for ExxonMobil to $240 million for Altria 
Group. The total amount of taxes postponed by these 20 firms was $29.7 billion in 2011. 
Clearly, these companies have received substantial cumulative cash flow benefits from using 
LIFO rather than FIFO. For the firms used in Figure 9.4 on page 494, the total tax deferral 
was $44.6 billion at the end of 2011. As Figure 9.4 shows, prices and LIFO reserves  increased 
substantially between 2008 and 2011. Consequently, ExxonMobil’s tax savings grew from 
The marginal federal corporate tax rate immedi-
ately prior to 1986 was 46% and from 1986 to 
1992 the rate was 34%. Since 1992 the rate has 
been 35%. With state and local taxes, the overall 
marginal tax rates obviously would be even 
higher. We use a flat 40% rate to simplify the 
calculations.

502 
CHAPTER 9
Inventories
$4 billion in 2008 to $10.2 billion in 2011. In addition to the large public companies shown in 
the exhibit, thousands of small private companies also benefit from being on LIFO.
 
Although clear cash flow benefits result from using LIFO, critics argue that LIFO could 
induce undesirable managerial behavior. This could happen if a firm has depleted its inventory 
quantities toward the end of a year. If inventories are allowed to remain at the depleted level, 
the tax liability could increase considerably because the liquidation of old, low-cost LIFO lay-
ers increases income. However, a manager can avoid this increase in taxes by simply purchas-
ing a large amount of inventory at the end of the year to bring the inventory back up to 
beginning-of-year levels. Doing this to avoid tax increases may cause unwise purchasing 
 behavior: Excessive inventory levels could be carried, or year-end purchases could be made 
despite the fact that future purchase costs are expected to fall.18
ELIMINATING REALIZED HOLDING GAINS 
FOR FIFO FIRMS
LIFO puts realized holding gains into income when old LIFO layers are eliminated. In con-
trast, reported income for FIFO firms always includes some realized holding gains during 
periods of rising inventory costs because FIFO charges the oldest inventory to Cost of goods 
sold. Another way to say the same thing is that FIFO cost of goods sold is understated because 
EXHIBIT 9.13
Estimated Tax Savings for Firms with the Largest 
LIFO Reserves
 
2011 
Estimated Cumulative
($ in millions) 
LIFO Reserve 
Tax Benefit*
Exxon Mobil Corp 
$25,600.0 
$10,240.0
Chevron Corp 
9,025.0 
3,610.0
ConocoPhillips 
8,400.0 
3,360.0
Valero Energy Corp 
6,800.0 
2,720.0
Marathon Petroleum Corp 
5,015.0 
2,006.0
Sunoco Inc. 
2,920.0 
1,168.0
Caterpillar Inc. 
2,422.0 
968.8
Tesoro Corp 
1,700.0 
680.0
Walgreen Co 
1,587.0 
634.8
Deere & Co 
1,486.0 
594.4
Hess Corp 
1,276.0 
510.4
Dow Chemical 
1,105.0 
442.0
United States Steel Corp 
1,100.0 
440.0
Kroger Co 
1,043.0 
417.2
Ford Motor Co 
928.0 
371.2
Du Pont (E I) De Nemours 
901.0 
360.4
Alcoa Inc. 
801.0 
320.4
Nucor Corp 
763.2 
305.3
Berkshire Hathaway 
759.0 
303.6
Altria Group Inc. 
600.0 
240.0
 
$74,231.2 
$29,692.5
* Based on average marginal tax rate of 40%.
Source: Compustat® as data source; methodology not verified or controlled by Standard & Poor’s.
18 Results consistent with the potential for tax-driven inventory management inefficiencies are reported in M. Frankel and 
R. Trezevant, “The Year-End LIFO Inventory Purchasing Decision: An Empirical Test,” The Accounting Review, April 1994, 
pp. 382–98.

 
Analytical Insights: LIFO Dangers 
503
of the inventory holding gains that have occurred during the period. Because holding gains are 
potentially unsustainable, astute analysts try to remove them from reported FIFO income (or, 
equivalently, add them to FIFO costs of goods sold).
 
The size of divergence between FIFO cost of goods sold and replacement cost of goods 
sold depends on two factors:
1. The severity of input cost changes: All other factors being equal, the greater the amount of 
cost change, the larger the divergence between FIFO and replacement cost of goods sold.
2. The rapidity of physical inventory turnover: The slower inventory turnover, the larger the 
divergence.
We illustrate a simple procedure to convert cost of goods sold from FIFO to replacement cost 
and thereby eliminate realized holding gains from FIFO income.19 The procedure requires 
estimating the inventory cost change and assumes rapid inventory turnover. Consider the fol-
lowing example.
 
Ray Department Store experienced the following inventory transactions during 2014.
Analysis
Beginning inventory (FIFO basis) 
$1,000,000
Merchandise purchases 
18,000,000
Goods available for sale 
9,000,000
Ending inventory (FIFO basis) 
21,100,000
Cost of goods sold (FIFO basis) 
$7,900,000
19 See A. Falkenstein and R. L. Weil, “Replacement Cost Accounting: What Will Income Statements Based on the SEC Dis-
closures Show?—Part II,” Financial Analysts Journal, March–April 1977, pp. 48–57. We have altered the Falkenstein and 
Weil procedural description slightly to simplify the exposition.
 
Assume that, on average, Ray’s input costs for inventory increased by 10% during 2014. 
The adjustment procedure comprises three steps:
1. Determine FIFO cost of goods sold. In the example, this is $7,900,000. This amount is 
not adjusted.
2. Adjust the beginning inventory for one full year of specific price change. In the example, 
this is $1,000,000 times 10%, or $100,000.
3. Determine the replacement cost of goods sold, which is the sum of the amount in Step 1 
($7,900,000) and the amount in Step 2 ($100,000), that is, $8,000,000.
The difference between the computed replacement cost of goods sold ($8,000,000) and FIFO 
cost of goods sold ($7,900,000) equals the amount of realized holding gains included in the 
FIFO income figure ($100,000). This simple procedure gives results that accurately approxi-
mate tedious calculation approaches.
 
In Appendix A to this chapter, we provide an intuitive explanation for why this procedure 
for isolating realized holding gains for FIFO firms “works.” We also discuss how analysts can 
use either price indices or competitors’ data to estimate the rate of inventory cost change—10% 
in the Ray Department Store example.
ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS: LIFO DANGERS
LIFO makes it possible to manage earnings. To see how, consider a firm that has an executive 
bonus plan linked to earnings per share (see Figure 7.6). Assume that it is December 15, 2014, 
the firm reports on a calendar year basis, and the managers expect EPS for 2014 to be $4.40. 
(Because the year-end is only two weeks away, this estimate is likely to be very accurate.) As 
Contracting

504 
CHAPTER 9
Inventories
described in Chapter 7, let’s assume the bonus “tops out” at $4.00 per share. From the manag-
ers’ perspective, 40¢ of expected earnings is wasted in the sense that it doesn’t increase bonus 
payouts. So, the executives have an incentive to manage down reported earnings toward $4.00. 
LIFO makes this easy to do when input costs are rising. Here’s why.
 
LIFO is applied using the periodic inventory method. Firms wait until the end of the 
year to compute cost of goods sold. So inventory purchased on December 31, 2014, is the 
“last in” and is considered to be the “first out” when LIFO cost of goods sold is computed. 
Similarly, inventory purchased on December 30 is considered to have been 
sold next, and so on. Because input costs are rising, if the managers buy 
unneeded, higher cost inventory during the last two weeks of 2014, this 
will raise cost of goods sold, lower income, and drive EPS down toward 
$4.00. Lowering earnings in this way doesn’t decrease their bonus so long 
as they don’t let EPS fall below $4.00. But this unneeded inventory does 
increase inventory carrying costs as well as the risk of loss from obsoles-
cence and spoilage. So, managers don’t suffer from the inventory buildup, 
but shareholders do.
But the story isn’t over. In 2015, the firm has too much inventory; remem-
ber that the purchases at the end of 2014 were unneeded. So, in 2015, manag-
ers reduce inventory down to proper levels—a LIFO liquidation occurs. If input costs and 
output prices move together (that’s the norm), then 2015 selling prices are higher than those 
in 2014. The LIFO liquidation in 2015 results in old, lower-cost, early 2014 purchases being 
matched against higher 2015 selling prices. This artificially raises 2015 income. So, it’s a win-
win situation for the managers! Playing this 2014 year-end LIFO game costs the managers no 
2015 bonus and promises to increase 2015 income. At the end of 2014, they can’t accurately 
forecast 2015 income. It might be below $3.00 per share, out of the bonus 
range. But the LIFO liquidation income could be enough to raise 2015 income 
above $3.00 per share, back into the bonus range. The effect of the income 
shift from 2014 into 2015 improves the likelihood that the managers will earn 
a bonus in 2015 as well.
To see the full range of earnings management “dangers” using LIFO, let’s 
go to a totally new scenario. It’s November 15, 2014. Again there’s a bonus 
plan like the one in Figure 7.6 and input costs and output prices have been 
rising. But here, assume that forecasted EPS is only $2.60. At this earnings 
level, the managers won’t qualify for a bonus. But if they deliberately stop normal purchases 
for the last six weeks of the year, LIFO layers will be depleted. Again a mismatching occurs 
as December sales revenues are matched against pre-November 15 costs. When this is done 
aggressively, EPS can be driven into the bonus area above $3.00 per share. Do managers en-
gage in this type of deliberate removal of LIFO layers? Unfortunately, research evidence here 
is sparse. However, if bonus contracts do not subtract out LIFO liquidation “profits,” there is 
an incentive to liquidate deliberately.
EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE ON INVENTORY 
POLICY CHOICE
LIFO provides significant tax benefits when costs are rising. To obtain these tax benefits, 
Congress specified that companies must use LIFO not just for tax purposes but also for finan-
cial reporting. Despite this constraint, as reported earlier in the chapter, 24% of the inventory 
method choices are LIFO. Because costs have tended to rise consistently over most of the past 
60 years, you may ask why more companies do not use LIFO. Are they squandering available 
Using the perpetual method defeats the purpose 
of LIFO. Here’s why. Suppose a calendar year 
firm makes a sale on January 4 and uses the 
 perpetual method; under LIFO, the units sold 
are presumed to come from the most recent 
 purchase, say January 3. But if the firm instead 
uses the periodic method and computes cost 
of goods sold on December 31, those early-in-
the-year January purchases will be the oldest 
 purchases and less likely to be considered sold. 
So, perpetual LIFO would not be used.
Remember that under LIFO, 2014 cost of goods 
sold assumed that December purchases were 
sold first, then November, and so on, working 
backward through the year. The new LIFO in-
ventory layers added during the last two weeks 
of 2014 are costed out at cost levels in effect 
early in 2014, say, costs incurred in January and 
February.

 
Empirical Evidence on Inventory Policy Choice 
505
tax benefits? Why many companies do not use LIFO has been the subject of numerous 
 research studies.20 Conjectures regarding the choice include the following:
1. The estimated tax savings from using LIFO are too small to justify the added complexity 
of the LIFO approach. There are two possible reasons for small tax savings:
 
a. Inventory holding gains are trivial for non-LIFO firms.
 
b. These non-LIFO firms have large tax loss carryforwards and are not currently paying 
taxes.
2. Firms in cyclical industries that are subject to extreme fluctuations in physical inventory 
levels would find LIFO unattractive because of the high probability of LIFO liquidations 
and consequent adverse tax effects.
3. Inventory obsolescence poses difficult issues under LIFO; consequently, firms subject to 
a high rate of inventory obsolescence may be reluctant to adopt LIFO.
4. During periods of generally rising prices, LIFO leads to lower profits. Managers may be 
reluctant to adopt LIFO under these conditions for either one or both of the following 
reasons:
 
a. They believe that lower LIFO earnings will lead to lower stock price.
 
b. They believe that the lower LIFO earnings will lead to lower compensation because 
management bonuses are often linked to reported earnings.
5. In a period of rising prices, LIFO causes certain ratios—such as the leverage ratio—used 
in loan agreements to deteriorate. Firms might be reluctant to adopt LIFO because adop-
tion could result in loan covenant violations.
6. Smaller firms might not adopt LIFO because of the higher costs associated with maintain-
ing the more complicated LIFO accounting records.
Research evidence is consistent with many (but not all) of these conjectures about why some 
firms don’t use LIFO. Much of this work focused on the 1970s, a period of rapid and substan-
tial price increases. Several studies found that the potential inventory holding gains are much 
higher for LIFO firms than for non-LIFO firms.21 Accordingly, the tax saving for LIFO adopt-
ers is much higher than the potential savings for firms not using LIFO. Furthermore, non-
LIFO firms generally have significantly larger tax loss carryforwards than LIFO firms, thereby 
obviating the need to adopt LIFO.22 Research evidence is also generally consistent with the 
fact that LIFO adopters have lower levels of inventory fluctuations23 and lower leverage in 
comparison with non-LIFO adopters.24 In the aggregate, these studies suggest rational eco-
nomic explanations for the decision by some firms to not adopt LIFO.
 
Researchers have also studied whether the stock market differentiates between LIFO earn-
ings and FIFO earnings. In inflationary periods, LIFO firms would on average report lower 
profits than FIFO firms but would have higher after-tax cash flows. From an economic per-
spective, the LIFO firms are better off despite the lower reported earnings. Furthermore, the 
quality of reported LIFO earnings is presumably higher than FIFO earnings because LIFO 
20 See B. E. Cushing and M. J. LeClere, “Evidence on the Determinants of Inventory Accounting Policy Choice,” The 
 Accounting Review, April 1992, pp. 355–66.
21 Two examples of such studies are Cushing and LeClere, ibid., and N. Dopuch and M. Pincus, “Evidence on the Choice of 
Inventory Accounting Methods: LIFO vs. FIFO,” Journal of Accounting Research, Spring 1988, pp. 28–59.
22 Cushing and LeClere, op. cit., and F. W. Lindahl, “Dynamic Analysis of Inventory Accounting Choice,” Journal of 
 Accounting Research, Autumn 1989, pp. 201–26.
23 Examples include Dopuch and Pincus, op. cit., and C. J. Lee and D. A. Hsieh, “Choice of Inventory Accounting Methods: 
Comparative Analysis of Alternative Hypotheses,” Journal of Accounting Research, Autumn 1985, pp. 468–85.
24 Examples include Lindahl, op. cit., and Cushing and LeClere, op. cit.
See the discussion of LIFO 
and the lower of cost or mar-
ket rule in the next section.

506 
CHAPTER 9
Inventories
earnings usually exclude inventory holding gains from net income; accordingly, LIFO earn-
ings are presumably more sustainable than FIFO earnings during inflationary periods. Thus, 
the research question is whether investors differentiate between the quality of LIFO versus 
FIFO earnings or, instead, simply penalize LIFO firms for their lower reported earnings.
 
Many of the studies of market reaction to LIFO versus FIFO examined instances in which 
firms switched from FIFO to LIFO as inflation accelerated. The research question frequently 
posed was:
If the market simply reacts to bottom-line earnings, then stock prices of firms shifting to LIFO 
should, on average, fall. On the other hand, if the market considers earnings quality, then the rel-
atively higher reported (and expected future) after-tax cash flows of new LIFO adopters should 
lead on average to stock price increases as the switch is announced.
Initial research studied the stock price reaction to announcements by firms that switched to 
LIFO as well as to the announcements of the new LIFO earnings numbers. These studies gen-
erated conflicting results, probably because of the failure to control for other factors influenc-
ing stock price behavior during the year of the inventory switch.
 
A later study that included such controls found consistent evidence that the market per-
ceives LIFO earnings to be of higher quality than FIFO earnings.25 This study produced the 
following findings:
1. When reported earnings included highly transitory inventory holding gains (either under 
FIFO or when LIFO liquidation occurs), the market perceives these earnings to be of 
lower quality. Thus, the share price increase is small relative to when high-quality 
 (sustainable) earnings are reported.
2. The market response to earnings news is greater after LIFO adoption. This suggests that 
the market believes that LIFO produces a higher quality earnings signal.
3. Across all firms, there is a higher market response to a given dollar amount of earnings 
surprise under LIFO in comparison to FIFO. Again, this result is consistent with LIFO 
being perceived as the higher quality earnings number.
LOWER OF COST OR MARKET METHOD
This section covers a widely used method in inventory accounting, the lower of cost or market 
method. An asset represents a cost that has been incurred to create future service value for a 
firm. If subsequent events cause the future service value of an asset to drop below its cost, its 
carrying value must be reduced. In inventory accounting, this is called the lower of cost or 
market method.
 
It is more complicated than its name implies, although the reasoning underlying lower of 
cost or market is simple. Whenever the replacement cost of inventory declines below its 
original cost, the presumption is that the inventory’s service value has been impaired and a 
write-down is warranted. If a unit of inventory originally cost $10 but its replacement cost 
falls to $8, a decrease in carrying value of $2 is required. What’s implied here is that inven-
tory replacement cost and eventual selling price move together. The decline in replacement 
cost is presumed to signal that the price at which the inventory can be sold—its future service 
value—has fallen. Thus, a loss has occurred that must be recognized in the accounts.
25 T. Carroll, D. W. Collins, and W. B. Johnson, “The LIFO–FIFO Choice and the Quality of Earnings Signals,” Working 
paper, University of Iowa, August 1997. Additional evidence on how the market values LIFO versus FIFO earnings can be 
found in R. Jennings, P. J. Simko, and R. B. Thompson, II, “Does LIFO Inventory Accounting Improve the Income Statement 
at the Expense of the Balance Sheet?” Journal of Accounting Research, Spring 1996, pp. 85–109.
Valuation

 
Lower of  Cost or Market Method 
507
 
In practice, the relationship between cost decreases and selling price decreases is unlikely 
to be perfect. For this reason, the market value used in applying lower of cost or market is 
subject to two constraints:
1. Ceiling: Market should not exceed the inventory’s net realizable value, that is, the esti-
mated selling price of the inventory in the ordinary course of business less the reasonably 
predictable costs of completing and selling it.
2. Floor: Market should not be less than the inventory’s net realizable value reduced by an 
allowance for an approximately normal profit margin.26
 
The ceiling constraint (that market should not exceed net realizable value) is designed 
to avoid overstating obsolete goods. For example, assume that a motor originally costing 
$80 is now obsolete and has a net realizable value of only $50. Even if its replacement cost 
is $65, the inventory should be valued at its net realizable value of $50. To value the motor 
at its $65 replacement cost fails to recognize the full extent of the expected loss that has 
occurred.
 
The floor constraint covers situations in which declines in input replacement cost do not 
move perfectly with declines in selling price. To illustrate, assume the following:
26 FASB ASC Paragraphs 330-10-35-1 to -5: Inventory—Overall—Subsequent Measurement—Adjustments to Lower of 
Cost or Market.
 
 
 
 
Net Realizable
 
Original 
Replacement 
Net Realizable 
Value Less Normal
 
Cost 
Cost 
Value 
Profit of $11
Inventory item 
$60 
$46 
$70 
$59 
This scenario assumes that the normal per unit profit margin is $11. An inventory write-down 
to $46 would lead to an abnormally high unit profit margin of $24 (net realizable value of $70 
less the $46 replacement cost) when the inventory is sold in a later period. This $24 profit 
exceeds the $11 normal profit margin. A write-down to $59 would still afford the company a 
normal profit margin; any larger write-down would result in excess profits in future periods. 
The floor provides a lower bound for write-downs in situations when input replacement cost 
and selling price do not move together.
 
Together, these two constraints mean that market (the market value used in applying the 
lower of cost or market rule) is the middle value of (1) replacement cost, (2) net realizable 
value, and (3) net realizable value less a normal profit margin. This is depicted in 
Figure 9.5.
 
Applying the lower of cost or market rule is illustrated in Exhibit 9.14 using four scenarios. 
The inventory value used in each scenario is highlighted.
Scenario 1 
The inventory is valued at cost ($20). The reason is that $23 is the middle 
value of the three market values—$23 is between $21 and $27—and cost ($20) is lower 
than market ($23). This illustrates the straightforward lower of cost or market rule for 
 inventory carrying values in historical cost accounting: Inventories are carried at original 
cost unless the item’s future service value has been impaired. Of course, nothing here 
 suggests impairment because the replacement cost of inventory ($23) exceeds the original 
cost ($20).

508 
CHAPTER 9
Inventories
Scenario 2 
The inventory is carried at replacement cost ($19). Market is again defined 
as the middle value of the three market value measures in Figure 9.5. The values are 18, 19, 
and 24; because 19 is between 18 and 24, it is market. Market is less than the original cost of 
$20 so it is presumed that a portion of the inventory’s original service value has been im-
paired. Therefore, the inventory is written down from $20 to $19.
Scenario 3 
The inventory is valued at net realizable value ($18) because net realizable 
value is the middle market value (that is, 18 is between 12 and 19) and is below cost. Here 
we see the operation of the ceiling. This rule is intended to avoid carrying obsolete goods at 
a cost in excess of the net value that will be realized on sale. If the rule were not invoked, 
inventory would be carried at $19 (its replacement cost), which is more than the $18 that it 
is expected to yield.
Scenario 4 
The inventory is valued at net realizable value less a normal profit margin 
($19) because this number is lower than original cost and is the middle value of the market 
price constraints. Scenario 4 illustrates the floor. If the rule were not invoked, inventory 
would be carried at $15 (its replacement cost). This would be an excessive write-down, 
because a $15 carrying cost would result in an above normal margin when the goods were 
later sold.
Replacement
cost
Net realizable
value
Net realizable
value less a 
normal profit
margin
COST
Compare
and use the lower number
MARKET
Market is defined as the middle value of
Figure 9.5
LOWER OF COST OR 
MARKET RULE FOR 
INVENTORIES
EXHIBIT 9.14
Application of Lower of Cost or Market
 
Market
 
 
 
 
Net 
Middle
 
 
 
 
Realizable 
of the
 
 
 
Net 
Value less a 
Three 
Inventory
 
Original 
Replacement 
Realizable 
Normal 
Market 
Value
Scenario 
Cost 
Cost 
Value 
Profit Margin 
Values 
Used
 
1 
$20 
$23 
$27 
$21 
$23 
$20
 
2 
20 
19 
24 
18 
19 
19
 
3 
20 
19 
18 
12 
18 
18
 
4 
20 
15 
25 
19 
19 
19

 
Lower of  Cost or Market Method 
509
 
When a perpetual inventory system is used and inventory is written down from a cost of, 
say, $1,000,000 to a market value of $970,000, the entry is:
DR Loss from decline in market 
   value of inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $30,000
CR Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$30,000
 
The lower of cost or market method can be applied to:
• Individual inventory items.
• Classes of inventory, say, fertilizers versus weed killers.
• The inventory as a whole.
Companies have discretion regarding how inventories are aggregated when applying the lower 
of cost or market rule (see Exhibit 9.15). Depending on whether the aggregation is by item of 
inventory, inventory class, or total inventory, the lower of cost or market value could be 
$27,000, $31,000, or $32,000.
 
Income tax regulations do not permit the use of the lower of cost or market rule in con-
junction with LIFO. The reason for this prohibition is that LIFO provides tax advantages 
when prices are rising; if LIFO firms were permitted to use lower of cost or market, they 
would also gain tax advantages when prices are falling. Congress is unwilling to provide 
LIFO firms with tax savings that would occur regardless of the direction of input cost 
movements.
The Contracting Origins of the Lower 
of Cost or Market Method
The lower of cost or market method for inventories was widely practiced in the United States 
before the 1920s. Presumably, it evolved in the formative years of modern financial reporting 
to satisfy the information needs of what was then the most important external user group: 
commercial lenders. Banking in that era consisted mainly of securitized lending. Loans re-
quired collateral from the borrower, primarily in the form of inventory, accounts receivable, or 
fixed assets. Clearly, lenders wanted to avoid basing their decision on overstated asset values 
because they resulted in inadequate amounts of collateral. The conservatism inherent in lower 
of cost or market represented a mechanism for protecting the then-dominant user group from 
Contracting
EXHIBIT 9.15
Aggregation Alternatives in Applying the Lower 
of Cost or Market Rule
 
Lower of Cost or
 
Market Aggregated by
Inventory item 
Cost 
Market 
Item 
Class 
Total
Class 1
 Item 1 
$10,000 
$ 6,000 
$ 6,000
 Item 2 
3,000 
8,000 
3,000
 
$13,000 
$14,000 
 
$13,000
Class 2
 Item 3 
20,000 
18,000 
18,000 
18,000
 
$33,000 
$32,000 
$27,000 
$31,000 
$32,000
If a periodic inventory sys-
tem is used, this entry would 
not be made. Instead, the 
 inventory’s ending market 
value ($970,000) would be 
used as ending inventory in 
the cost of goods sold 
computation.

510 
CHAPTER 9
Inventories
unpleasant surprise—lower than expected collateral values.27 Thus, the lower of cost or 
 market rule evolved because of the dominant form of lending contracts used years ago.
Evaluation of the Lower of Cost or Market Rule
Individual and institutional equity investors are now important users of financial statements. The 
conservative bias built into the lower of cost or market rule protects lenders, but it may some-
times harm these other statement users. Suppose you own stock in a company whose inventory 
is written down to market. If the write-down was unwarranted (for example, because the decline 
in replacement cost did not portend a decline in the inventory’s eventual selling price), your fi-
nancial position is worsened by lower of cost or market accounting. Why? Because the share 
price you could get if you sold your stock may be lower than the price you could sell the shares 
for if the accounting were less conservative. Clearly, conservative rules designed to systemati-
cally understate asset amounts favor lenders and equity purchasers over borrowers and equity 
sellers. This absence of neutrality that pervades lower of cost or market has troubled numerous 
financial reporting experts and has led to repeated criticisms of the approach.
 
In addition to its bias against those seeking loans and those selling equity securities, the 
lower of cost or market rule has another deficiency. It assumes that input costs and output 
prices generally move together. Therefore, a decline in input cost triggers a loss recognition 
because it is presumed that the cost decrease portends a selling price decrease. But there is 
little empirical evidence to corroborate this assumption. It is indeed possible that input costs 
and selling prices move together, but it is also possible that they do not. When input costs and 
selling prices do not move together, a loss may be recognized when, in fact, no loss has 
 occurred. Consider, for example, the following illustration:
 
 
 
 
Net Realizable
 
 
 
Net 
Value Less
 
Original 
Replacement 
Realizable 
Normal
 
Cost 
Cost 
Value 
Profit Margin
Cost relationships on
 January 1, 2014 
$100  
$100 
$115 
$90
Cost relationships on 
 December 31, 2014 
100 
95 
115 
90 
Strict application of the lower of cost or market rule at year-end would require a write-down 
of the inventory to $95 from its original cost of $100. However, the selling price of the inventory 
27 Evidence about the role that lenders played in the evolution of modern financial reporting and the lower of cost or market 
rule is contained in a proposal from the Federal Reserve Board that was designed to standardize financial reporting (Federal 
Reserve Bulletin, April 1, 1917, p. 270):
Because this matter was clearly of importance to banks and bankers, and especially to the Federal Reserve Banks 
which might be asked to rediscount commercial paper based on borrowers’ statements, the Federal Reserve Board 
has taken an active interest in the consideration of the suggestions which have developed as a result of the Trade 
Commission’s investigation, and now submits in the form of a tentative statement certain proposals in regard to sug-
gested standard forms of statements for merchants and manufacturers. [Emphasis added.]
 
The problem naturally subdivides itself into two parts. (1) The improvement in standardization of the forms of 
statements; (2) the adoption of methods which will insure greater care in compiling the statements and the proper 
verification thereof.
The proposal (which was subsequently adopted) contained a specific reference to the importance of the lower of cost or 
market rule for inventories (p. 275):
. . . The auditor should satisfy himself that inventories are stated at cost or market prices, whichever are the lower at 
the date of the balance sheet. No inventory must be passed which has been marked up to market prices and a profit 
assumed that is not and may never be realized. . . . It may be found that inventories are valued at the average prices 
of raw materials and supplies on hand at the end of the period. In such cases the averages should be compared with 
the latest invoices in order to verify the fact that they are not in excess of the latest prices. . . . [Emphasis added.]

 
Global Vantage Point 
511
has not changed, since its net realizable value is still $115. Therefore, no loss exists but GAAP 
would require a $5 write-down!
 
In summary, the lower of cost or market rule reflects conservatism. But as financial state-
ment users have become more diverse, the rule has been subjected to mounting  criticism. 
First, conservatism is itself an elusive concept. While inventory write-downs may initially be 
conservative, the resulting higher margin in the period following the  write-down provides op-
portunities for earnings management. Second, as the use of  published financial statements has 
broadened over the years, conservatism strikes many observers as a violation of the neutrality 
posture that financial reporting rules are designed to achieve. For example, if downward 
changes in replacement cost are considered to be reliable evidence of a loss, logic suggests 
that upward changes in replacement cost should similarly be considered reliable evidence of a 
gain. Finally, the lower of cost or market rule relies on an implicit relationship between input 
costs and output prices that may not prevail. When the input/output relationship does not ex-
ist, inventory losses may be recognized even though no real loss has occurred. As a conse-
quence of these limitations, the lower of cost or market approach constitutes GAAP but it 
does not hold a secure place in accounting theory.
GLOBAL VANTAGE POINT
Comparison of IFRS and GAAP Inventory Accounting
International Accounting Standard (IAS) 2, “Inventories,” provides the guidance for inventory 
accounting under IFRS.28 Much of the IFRS accounting guidelines for inventory are similar to 
those under U.S. GAAP. The IFRS definition of inventory is similar, absorption costing is re-
quired, there are cost flow assumptions, and inventory is carried at lower of cost or market. 
However, there are important nuances.
 
First, LIFO is not permitted under IAS 2. The IASB rationalizes the prohibition on LIFO 
by stating that this method “is generally not a reliable representation of actual inventory 
flows. . . . The use of LIFO in financial reporting is often tax-driven . . . (and) results in inven-
tories being recognized in the balance sheet at amounts that bear little relationship to recent 
cost levels of inventories.”29 It permits the use of either the FIFO or weighted average cost 
flow assumption (para. 25). In special circumstances, the specific identification method can 
also be used (para. 23). Also related to cost flow, firms must use the same cost flow method 
for similar inventories (para. 25). Recall from our earlier discussion that U.S. firms use 
 multiple methods for similar inventory items.
 
The inability to use LIFO presents a major conflict point that may affect the SEC’s  decision 
whether to eventually transition U.S. firms to IFRS. The SEC has been strongly considering 
this transition for several years and has solicited feedback from constituents regarding the 
potential transition. The SEC has received numerous comment letters from certain constitu-
ents articulating major concerns about potentially losing the LIFO method. The LIFO Coali-
tion, a group of more than 120 businesses and trade associations that employ the LIFO 
method, wrote to the SEC in May 2011 that
any requirement by the SEC that U.S. issuers adopt IFRS . . . means that issuers will be forced 
to violate the Conformity Requirement. Violation of the Conformity Requirement . . . may 
 expose the taxpayer to serious adverse tax consequences immediately and in future years.” 
(http://www.sec.gov/comments/4-600/4600-142.pdf)
International
28 See IAS 2 (revised 2009), “Inventories” (London: International Accounting Standards Board, 2009).
29 See IAS 2, BC10-13.

512 
CHAPTER 9
Inventories
 
Second, lower or cost of market is applied differently. Market is defined as net realisable 
value (para. 28). U.S. GAAP is more complicated in that market considers replacement cost, 
net realizable value, and net realizable value less normal markup. IAS 2 also allows inventory 
reductions to be reversed if the market recovers, but the inventory carrying amount cannot 
exceed the original cost (para. 33). Under U.S. GAAP, once the carrying value of an item is 
reduced, it cannot be increased to its original cost. The amounts of inventory write-downs and 
recoveries must be disclosed in the financial statements.
 
Exhibit 9.16 reproduces a note by Canadian retailer Danier who files under IFRS. Note 
that Danier chooses to use “the lower of cost, using the weighted average cost method, and net 
realizable value.” The “Cost of inventory recognized as an expense” is equivalent to cost of 
goods sold. Also note that Danier reports both write-downs of inventory and also reversals of 
write-downs recognized in previous periods. The latter is not allowed under U.S. GAAP.
Future Directions
Neither the FASB nor the IASB have projects related to inventory on their agendas. How-
ever, because of the LIFO conformity rule, firms would incur large tax liabilities if they 
eventually move to IFRS, which does not allow LIFO. The U.S. Congress could remove the 
conformity rule. However, given the budget deficits, Congress might be more likely to 
EXHIBIT 9.16
Danier Inventory Disclosures
(j) Inventories:
Merchandise inventories are valued at the lower of cost, using the weighted average cost method, 
and net realizable value. For inventories manufactured by the Company, cost includes direct labour, 
raw materials, manufacturing and distribution centre costs related to inventories and transportation 
costs that are directly incurred to bring inventories to their present location and condition. For inven-
tories purchased from third party vendors, cost includes the cost of purchase, duty and brokerage, 
quality assurance costs, distribution centre costs related to inventories and transportation costs that 
are directly incurred to bring inventories to their present location and condition. The Company esti-
mates the net realizable value as the amount at which inventories are expected to be sold, taking into 
account fluctuations in retail prices due to seasonality, age, excess quantities, condition of the inven-
tory, nature of the inventory and the estimated variable costs necessary to make the sale. Inventories 
are written down to net realizable value when the cost of inventories is not estimated to be recover-
able due to obsolescence, damage or declining selling prices. When circumstances that previously 
caused inventories to be written down below cost no longer exist, the amount of the write-down 
 previously recorded is reversed. Storage costs, administrative overheads and selling costs related 
to the inventories are expensed in the period the costs are incurred.
5. INVENTORIES:
 
June 30, 2012 
June 25, 2011 
June 27, 2010
Raw-materials 
$ 2,644 
$ 2,655 
$ 1,451
Work-in-process 
183 
265 
105
Finished goods 
22,064 
26,044 
24,983
 
$24,891 
$28,964 
$26,539
 
 
June 30, 2012 
June 25, 2011
Cost of inventory recognized as an expense 
$70,739 
$70,439
Write-downs of inventory due to net 
 realizable value being lower than cost  
$ 1,746 
$ 1,549
Write-downs recognized in previous periods 
 that were reversed 
 
$   174 
$      5

 
Self-Study Problem 
513
 eliminate LIFO as an option and extend the period over which firms must pay the additional 
tax. Under the current tax law, the gain on the switch from LIFO could be spread over four 
years.30 Also, as mentioned earlier in the chapter, most U.S. oil companies use LIFO. Con-
sequently, a repeal of LIFO would be a way to increase taxes on oil companies, which could 
be popular politically.
SUMMARY
This chapter helps readers understand existing GAAP inventory methods and disclosures. It 
can also help readers compare and analyze profitability and net asset positions across firms 
that use different inventory methods. Here are the important messages from this chapter.
• Absorption costing is required by GAAP but may lead to potentially misleading period-
to-period income changes when inventories increase or decrease sharply.
• Financial reporting rules allow firms latitude in selecting a cost flow assumption for de-
termining the cost of goods sold reported on the income statement and the inventory val-
ues reported on the balance sheet. Firms use FIFO, LIFO, weighted average costing, or a 
combination of these methods.
• This diversity in practice can severely hinder interfirm comparisons when inventory purchase 
costs are changing over time, which is usually the case. Before comparing a LIFO firm to a 
FIFO firm, numbers for the LIFO firms should be transformed to the FIFO basis.
• Reported FIFO income merges sustainable operating profits and potentially unsustainable 
realized holding gains. Analysts must disentangle these elements when preparing earnings 
and cash flow forecasts.
• Similarly, LIFO liquidations distort reported margins because “old” costs are matched 
with current selling prices.
• To address inventory obsolescence, GAAP requires that inventory be carried at lower of 
cost or market.
• IFRS accounting for inventory is similar to the accounting under GAAP. However, LIFO 
is not allowed. In addition, when applying lower of cost or market, market is defined as 
net realizable value and write-downs may be reversed.
• The LIFO conformity rule requires firms to use LIFO for financial reporting if they use it for 
tax reporting. LIFO accounting gives firms significant tax deferrals. These deferrals may go 
away soon because of deficit pressures and conversions to IFRS, which does not allow LIFO.
• Most LIFO firms use some form of dollar-value LIFO. Dollar-value LIFO essentially 
converts FIFO inventory amounts to LIFO inventory amounts.
30 R. Mock and A. Simon, “The LIFO, IFRS Conversion: An Explosive Concoction,” Tax Notes (May 11, 2009), p. 746.
SELF-STUDY PROBLEM
MITSURU CORPORATION
Mitsuru Corporation began business operations on January 1, 2014, as a wholesaler of maca-
damia nuts. Its purchase and sales transactions for 2014 are listed in Exhibit 9.17. Mitsuru 
uses a periodic inventory system.

514 
CHAPTER 9
Inventories
1. Compute 2014 ending inventory and cost of goods sold for Mitsuru Corporation using 
the weighted average cost flow assumption.
 
 Ending inventory totals 4,000 pounds, that is, purchases of 23,000 pounds minus sales of 
19,000 pounds. The average cost per pound (rounded) is:
 Total cost of goods available for sale S
Total pounds available for sale
S  $238,900
23,000
5 $10.39/pound
 
 Ending inventory is 4,000 pounds times $10.39, or $41,560. Cost of goods sold is then 
determined as follows:
EXHIBIT 9.17
Mitsuru Corporation
Inventory Purchases and Sales
 
Purchases 
Sales
Date 
Pounds 
Dollars/Pound 
Total Dollars 
Pounds
January 1 
1,000 
$10.00 
$ 10,000 
February 3 
4,000 
10.20 
40,800 
February 9 
 
 
 
3,600
April 1 
4,000 
10.30 
41,200 
May 29 
 
 
 
3,500
June 28 
5,000 
10.40 
52,000 
July 20 
 
 
 
4,100
September 14 
5,000 
10.50 
52,500
September 17 
 
 
 
4,200
December 18 
4,000 
10.60 
42,400
December 22 
 
 
 
 3,600
 
23,000 
 
$238,900 
19,000
Total cost of goods available for sale 
$238,900
Less: Ending FIFO inventory 
(42,400)
FIFO cost of goods sold 
$196,500
Total cost of goods available for sale 
$238,90031
Less: Ending inventory just computed 
(41,560)
Cost of goods sold (weighted average method) 
$197,340
2. Compute 2014 ending inventory and cost of goods sold for Mitsuru using the FIFO 
cost flow assumption.
 
 Under the first-in, first-out (FIFO) cost flow assumption, the ending inventory consists 
of the 4,000 most recently purchased pounds of macadamia nuts. This ending inventory 
amount consists entirely of the December 18 purchase of 4,000 pounds for $42,400. 
 Accordingly, FIFO cost of goods sold is:
31 In subsequent years, the beginning inventory value also would be included in the goods available for sale amount.

 
Appendix A 
515
3. Compute 2014 ending inventory and cost of goods sold for Mitsuru using the LIFO 
cost flow assumption.
 
 Under last-in, first-out (LIFO), the ending inventory comprises the 4,000 pounds of oldest 
macadamia nut purchases. This 4,000 pounds would consist of two layers:
January 1 
1,000 pounds @ $10.00 5 $10,000
February 3 3,000 pounds @ $10.20 5 
30,600
 
4,000 pounds 
 
 
 
$40,600
Total cost of goods available for sale 
$238,900
Less: Ending LIFO inventory 
(40,600)
LIFO cost of goods sold 
$198,300
 
Thus, LIFO cost of goods sold is:
4. Assume that the December 31, 2014, macadamia nut replacement cost is $10.60 per 
pound. Compute Mitsuru’s LIFO reserve and use the beginning and ending LIFO 
reserve amounts to reconcile between LIFO and FIFO cost of goods sold.
 
 The LIFO reserve at a given point in time is the difference between the LIFO inventory 
book value and its then-current replacement cost. At January 1, 2014, Mitsuru’s LIFO 
 reserve was $0 because the LIFO book value and replacement cost both equaled $10,000. 
At December 31, 2014, the LIFO reserve was $1,800, computed as follows:
December 31, 2014, inventory replacement
 cost; 4,000 pounds @ $10.60 
$42,400
December 31, 2014, LIFO inventory 
(40,600)
December 31, 2014, LIFO reserve 
$ 1,800
 
 Using the formula for converting cost of goods sold (COGS) from a LIFO to FIFO basis in 
conjunction with the answers to Parts 2 and 3 of this self-study problem yields:
COGSLIFO 1 Beginning LIFO reserve 2 Ending LIFO reserve 5 COGSFIFO
 
$198,300 
1 
0 
2 
$1,800 
5 $196,500
 
Notice that $196,500 equals the FIFO cost of goods sold number computed in Part 2.
 
As the text discussed, the reconciliation procedure is an approximation. Adding the LIFO 
reserve to the LIFO inventory equals replacement cost. If the inventory turns quickly, then 
inventory replacement cost approximates FIFO inventory. In this self-study problem, ending 
FIFO inventory at $10.60 per pound exactly equals replacement cost. Hence, the adjustment 
is precise.
APPENDIX A
ELIMINATING REALIZED HOLDING GAINS 
FROM FIFO INCOME
In the chapter, we show a simple way to estimate the amount of realized holding gains in-
cluded in the FIFO income figure. In this appendix, we provide a simple example to illustrate 
why this method works.
 
Consider a firm buying and selling inventory in equal amounts daily as you contemplate 
Figure 9.6. The quantity of inventory purchased during the year is the area denoted P. 

516 
CHAPTER 9
Inventories
 Beginning inventory quantity is the area denoted B, and ending inventory quantity is the 
area denoted E. Let’s assume that B equals E; that is, the firm had exactly as many units in 
inventory at the year-end as it did at the start of the year. Under these conditions the units 
comprising FIFO cost of goods sold consists of the area B 1 (P 2 E). In other words, under 
the FIFO cost flow assumption, cost of goods sold consists of the first, or oldest, units avail-
able, which is beginning inventory plus the earliest purchases. Under LIFO, cost of goods 
sold would comprise the area P, that is, the most recently purchased units. The difference 
between the units comprising the two cost of goods sold (COGS) measures is the area E 
minus B. Expressed in units:
 
COGSLIFO 5 COGSFIFO 1 E 2 B 
(9.1)
Expressed in dollars:
 
$COGSLIFO 5 $COGSFIFO 1 $E 2 $B 
(9.2)
 
Notice that if inventory costs do not change over the year, $E 5 $B and $COGSLIFO 5 
$COGSFIFO. In general, it’s reasonable to expect inventory costs to change from the beginning 
to the end of the year. If we assume that inventory purchase costs changed over the year at the 
rate r, then $E will not equal $B although E units equal B units. Specifically, the dollar amount 
of ending inventory will equal (1 1 r) times the dollar amount of beginning inventory, that is,
 
$E 5 $B 3 11 1 r2 
(9.3)
Substituting the equation (9.3) value of $E into equation (9.2) yields:
 
$COGSLIFO 5 $COGSFIFO 1 $B 3 11 1 r2 2 $B 
(9.4)
or
 
$COGSLIFO 5 $COGSFIFO 1 $B 3 r 
(9.5)
In this example, daily unit purchases and sales are equal. Under these conditions, LIFO cost 
of goods sold equals current cost of goods sold, so equation (9.5) can be rewritten:
 
$COGSCC 5 $COGSFIFO 1 $B 3 r 
(9.6)
where $COGSCC is current cost of goods sold. The difference between FIFO pretax income 
and current cost income (or, equivalently, FIFO cost of goods sold and current cost of goods 
January
December
Time line
FIFO cost of goods sold—in units
LIFO cost of goods sold—in units
Ending
inventory
E
Beginning
inventory
B
Purchases
P
Figure 9.6
FIFO TO LIFO COST 
OF GOODS SOLD 
APPROXIMATION 
TECHNIQUE

 
Appendix B 
517
sold) is the inventory holding gain or loss. Thus, the product $B 3 r provides an estimate of 
the inventory holding gain (or loss) that is embedded in the FIFO earnings number.32
 
Notice that equation (9.6) is equivalent to the simple holding gain estimation procedure 
used in the chapter. This approximation works as long as the total number of inventory units 
on hand does not fluctuate much during the year and as long as inventory purchases and sales 
take place frequently. If these conditions aren’t met for a specific firm, the conversion from 
FIFO cost of goods sold to current cost of goods sold will not be accurate.
 
To eliminate realized holding gains from FIFO income, we must estimate r, the percentage 
change in inventory purchase costs. One means for estimating this rate is to use some input 
cost price index, such as one of the various producer price indices (PPI) prepared by the U.S. 
Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. Another approach is to select a competitor 
that is in the same industry as the FIFO firm being adjusted but that utilizes the LIFO inven-
tory procedure. The rate r can then be estimated using the following ratio computed from the 
LIFO competitor’s disclosures:
Rate of Inventory Input Cost Change (r) 
5 
Change in LIFO reserve
Beginning inventoryLIFO 1 Beginning LIFO reserve
The denominator of the ratio is the initial current cost of the inventory, and the numerator is the 
change in current cost over the period. The quotient is an estimate of the desired rate, r. How-
ever, if the competitor liquidated LIFO layers over the period, the disclosed  decrease in cost of 
goods sold because of the liquidation must be added back to the  numerator. The reason is that 
LIFO liquidation reduces the LIFO reserve. Adding back the liquidation  effect generates a 
more accurate measure of r. But, if the competitor’s year-to-year inventory levels changed sub-
stantially, the derived rate will differ from the true rate of inventory cost increase.
APPENDIX B
DOLLAR-VALUE LIFO
The LIFO inventory method requires data on each separate product or inventory item, and it 
therefore has two drawbacks. First, item-by-item inventory records are costly to maintain; and 
second, when LIFO records are kept by individual item, the likelihood of liquidating a LIFO 
layer is greatly increased.
• Cost: Traditional LIFO systems kept by individual item require considerable clerical 
work. Detailed records for each separate product or item in beginning inventory must be 
kept both in terms of physical units and unit cost. Similar detail must be accumulated for 
all purchases during the period. Finally, ending inventory must also be costed individually 
by item. These data requirements quickly become unwieldy for firms with numerous 
 inventory categories.
• Liquidation: One of the motivations for adopting LIFO is that it tends to keep inventory 
holding gains out of income and thereby lowers taxes. However, when old LIFO layers 
are liquidated, this objective is subverted and both income and income taxes rise. The 
32 Analysts generally perceive such inventory holding gains as low-quality earnings items because they cannot be sustained 
in the future unless inventory costs continue to increase. Consistent with this view, Carroll, Collins, and Johnson, op. cit., find 
that the market price adjustments associated with earnings surprises of firms whose earnings contain relatively large inven-
tory holding gains are substantially smaller than those of firms with relatively smaller FIFO inventory holding gains.

518 
CHAPTER 9
Inventories
possibility of liquidating a LIFO layer is very high when item-by-item LIFO is used. 
Consider the case of stores that sell televisions. As flat-panel televisions became preva-
lent, these stores reduced their inventories of old technology televisions. If LIFO always 
had to be kept on a per item basis, this decrease in the obsolete models would cause a 
 liquidation of old LIFO layers and negate the benefits of LIFO.
 
To overcome both the clerical cost and liquidation problems associated with LIFO, the 
dollar-value LIFO method has been developed in which LIFO cost can be estimated for 
broad categories (pools) of inventory from simple inventory records that are kept in terms of 
end-of-period costs. Most firms on LIFO use some form of dollar-value LIFO.
Dollar-value LIFO avoids much of the detailed recordkeeping required under standard LIFO. 
Ending inventory is determined in terms of year-end prices, just as it is under FIFO. The end-
ing inventory at year-end prices is then adjusted by a price index to estimate LIFO inventory.33 
Essentially, dollar-value LIFO converts FIFO inventory amounts to LIFO amounts. To illus-
trate the procedure in simplified form, let’s assume that Gable Company first adopts LIFO on 
January 1, 2014, and elects to use dollar-value LIFO. The time of initial LIFO adoption is 
termed the base period. The facts of the example are:
33 A price index is simply a ratio that compares prices during the current period with prices during some base period. Separate 
indices are computed for each period. If a price index for a given year is 1.12, this means that prices in that year are 12% 
higher than they were in the base period.
In applying dollar-value LIFO, the index used must reflect price changes for the specific inventory. General price indices 
are not permitted except in unusual situations. One method for computing the index is to determine the following ratio by 
reference to detailed purchase records:
Cost of ending inventory at end-of-period prices
Cost of ending inventory at base-period prices 5 Index for Year
However, this computation can be burdensome when the inventory consists of many different types of items. In such 
 situations, an index can be computed based on a sample of representative purchases. One such approach is:
 
Ending 
 
Inventory  
Base-Period 
Current Period’s 
Total Base- 
End-of-
 
Units  
Cost per Unit  
Cost per Unit 
Period Cost 
Period Cost
 
(1) 
(2) 
 (3) 
 (1) 3 (2) 
 (1) 3 (3)
Item A 
20,000 
$3 
$ 4 
$ 60,000 
$ 80,000
Item B 
5,000 
7 
8 
35,000 
40,000
Item C 
11,000 
9 
10 
99,000 
110,000
 
 
 
 
$194,000 
$230,000
The resulting index is
$230,000
$194,000 5 1.186
and measures the current cost of the purchase basket relative to the base-period cost of that same basket.
Beginning inventory, LIFO, at base-period (1/1/14) costs 
$100,000
Ending inventory at 12/31/14 costs 
$140,000
Inventory price index at base period (1/1/14) 
1.00
Inventory price index at 12/31/14 
1.12
 
Under LIFO, a new LIFO layer is added only when the unit (or physical) quantity of inven-
tory increases. In this example, we cannot compare the ending inventory dollars ($140,000) 
with the beginning inventory dollars ($100,000) to determine whether physical quantities in-
creased. Why? Because the December 31 inventory is stated at year-end costs while the begin-
ning inventory is stated at base-period costs.

 
Appendix B 
519
 
However, we can use the inventory price index to restate ending inventory (expressed in 
year-end costs) to base-period costs by dividing $140,000 by 1.12. The result, $125,000, is the 
December 31, 2014, inventory expressed in base-period (January 1, 2014) costs.
 
Once ending inventory is stated in base-period costs, it is possible to determine whether the 
physical quantity of inventory has increased during 2014:
Ending inventory expressed in base-period costs 
 ($140,000/1.12) 
$125,000
Beginning inventory expressed in base-period costs 
100,000
 Inventory increase expressed in base-period costs 
$ 25,000
Clearly, a new LIFO layer was added in 2014. However, the new LIFO layer must be recorded 
at the cost level that was in effect when the layer was added. Because the inventory increase 
expressed in terms of base-period costs was $25,000—and because costs increased 12% dur-
ing 2014—the new LIFO layer would be computed as $25,000 3 1.12, or $28,000. Therefore, 
the December 31, 2014, ending inventory computed under the dollar-value LIFO method 
would consist of two layers:
 
 
 
Dollar-Value
 
Base-Period 
Adjustment 
LIFO Carrying
 
Costs 
Factor 
Amount
Beginning inventory (1/1/14) 
$100,000 
1.00 
$100,000
2014 layer 
25,000 
1.12 
28,000
Ending inventory, dollar-value LIFO 
 
 
$128,000
 
2014
Inventory at FIFO 
$140,000
Reserve needed to reduce inventory to LIFO 
(12,000)
Inventory at LIFO 
$128,000
How does the LIFO reserve relate to this example? We will assume that the FIFO ending 
inventory value approximates replacement cost. FIFO inventory is $140,000, but we need 
to reflect $128,000 on the balance sheet. Therefore, we need a LIFO reserve of $12,000 
($140,000 2 $128,000). To establish the reserve, Gable Company makes the following 
entry:
As stated above, the balance sheet will reflect the $128,000.
 
To continue the example, let’s assume that the December 31, 2015, inventory price index is 
1.20 and that ending inventory at December 31, 2015, is $146,400 (expressed in year-end 
2015 costs).
Cost of goods sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $12,000
 LIFO reserve  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$12,000
Gable’s 2014 LIFO disclosures will appear as follows:

520 
CHAPTER 9
Inventories
 
As before, it is necessary to determine whether a new LIFO layer was added in 2015. To do 
this, we must restate the December 31, 2015, inventory in terms of base-period costs and 
 compare it to the January 1, 2015, inventory (expressed in base-period costs):
Ending inventory expressed in base-period costs 
 ($146,400/1.20) 
 
$122,000
Beginning inventory expressed in base-period costs
 Base-period layer 
$100,000
 2014 layer ($28,000/1.12) 
25,000
 
 
125,000
Inventory decrease expressed in base-period costs 
 
$  (3,000)
 
Expressed in base-period costs, inventory decreased in 2015. Because the cost flow is 
LIFO, this decrease is assumed to have come from the 2014 layer. At base-period costs, the 
2014 layer would be reduced to $22,000, that is, $25,000 minus the $3,000 inventory 
 decrease. The December 31, 2015, dollar-value LIFO inventory would again consist of two 
layers:
 
 
 
Dollar-Value
 
Base-Period 
Adjustment 
LIFO Carrying
 
Costs 
Factor 
Amount
Beginning inventory 
$100,000 
1.00 
$100,000
2014 layer 
22,000 
1.12 
24,640
Ending inventory, dollar-value LIFO 
 
 
$124,640
 
2015 
2014
Inventory at FIFO 
$146,400 
$140,000
Reserve needed to reduce inventory to LIFO 
(21,760) 
(12,000)
Inventory at LIFO 
$124,640 
$128,000
 
Even though there was a LIFO liquidation, the LIFO reserve will increase because the dif-
ference between FIFO and the remaining LIFO layers has increased. Inventory at FIFO of 
$146,400 less LIFO inventory of $124,640 yields a LIFO reserve of $21,760. The entry to 
obtain this ending balance is:
Cost of goods sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $9,760
 LIFO reserve  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$9,760
 ($21,760 2 $12,000)
 
The effect of the LIFO liquidation on pre-tax income is $240 [($25,000 original 2014 layer 
minus $22,000 remaining 2014 layer) 3 (1.20 2012 index minus 1.12 2014 layer index)]. If 
not for the liquidation, the credit to the LIFO reserve would have been $240 higher. Gable’s 
note would appear as follows:
In 2015, inventory levels declined resulting in old LIFO layers being partially removed. As a 
 result, pretax income increased by $240. Inventory amounts are summarized as follows:
 
Note that the increase in the LIFO reserve indicates that prices increased. The entry to 
 increase the reserve would have been larger if the LIFO liquidation had not occurred. The 

 
Appendix B 
521
change in the reserve can be broken into the price change component and the liquidation com-
ponent as was done for Aral Company on page 497.
1.  Rising input costs increased LIFO cost of goods sold by
  [2015 beginning inventory at base year prices of $125,000 3 
  (ending price index of 1.2 less beginning price index of 1.12)] 
$10,000
2. The LIFO liquidation undercharged expense and thus reduced cost 
   of goods sold by 
(240)
3. Result: FIFO cost of goods sold exceeds LIFO cost of goods sold by 
$  9,760
 
In the case of Aral Company, we had to back into the rising input component. However, in 
this example, where we have the underlying price indices, we can compute the effect directly. 
We hope that this analysis improves your understanding of the underlying economics repre-
sented by changes in the LIFO reserve.
 
Finally, assume that inventory at December 31, 2016, totals $170,100 at year-end costs and 
that the inventory price index at that date is 1.26. To determine whether a new LIFO layer was 
added in 2016, we must restate the December 31, 2016, inventory in terms of base-period 
costs:
Ending inventory expressed in base-period costs 
 ($170,100/1.26) 
 
$135,000
Beginning inventory expressed in base-period costs
 Base-period layer 
$100,000
 2014 layer ($24,640/1.12) 
22,000
 
 
122,000
Inventory increase expressed in base-period costs 
 
$ 13,000
 
 
 
Dollar-Value
 
Base-Period 
Adjustment 
LIFO Carrying
 
Costs 
Factor 
Amount
Beginning inventory 
$100,000 
1.00 
$100,000
2014 layer 
22,000 
1.12 
24,640
2016 layer 
13,000 
1.26 
16,380
 Ending inventory, dollar-value LIFO 
 
 
$141,020
The LIFO reserve will increase because the difference between FIFO and LIFO has increased. 
Inventory at FIFO of $170,100 less LIFO inventory of $141,020 yields a LIFO reserve of 
$29,080. The entry to obtain this ending balance is:
The new 2016 LIFO layer must be added to LIFO inventory using the cost level in effect in 
2016. To do this, we multiply the inventory increase expressed in base-period costs ($13,000) 
by the December 31, 2016, price index, which is 1.26. Thus, the December 31, 2016, dollar-
value LIFO inventory would consist of three layers:
Because there was not a liquidation in 2016, the $7,320 represents the effect of rising input 
prices. We compute the amount directly by multiplying the beginning 2016 base-year inven-
tory of $122,000 by the change in the index for 2016 of 0.06 (1.26 minus 1.20).
Cost of goods sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $7,320
 LIFO reserve   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$7,320
 ($29,080 2 $21,760)

522 
CHAPTER 9
Inventories
The steps required to compute dollar-value LIFO are summarized as 
follows:
1.  Ending inventory is initially computed in terms of year-end costs (FIFO). 
This simplifies recordkeeping.
2.  To determine whether a new LIFO layer had been added (or whether an 
existing layer has been liquidated), the ending inventory must be restated 
to base-period cost and compared to the beginning inventory at base- 
 period cost. This eliminates the effect of input cost changes. After restate-
ment, any difference between beginning and ending inventory is the 
inventory change expressed in base-period cost. It indicates whether 
 inventory quantities have changed.
3. Any inventory change determined from Step 2 must be computed as follows:
 
a. New LIFO layers are valued using costs of the year in which the layer was added.
 
b. Decreases in old LIFO layers are removed using costs that were in effect when the 
layer was originally formed.
4. The LIFO reserve is computed as the difference between FIFO inventory and LIFO in-
ventory. The change in the reserve represents the difference between FIFO and LIFO 
and cost of goods sold. When there are no liquidations, increases (decreases) in the 
LIFO  reserve represent increases (decreases) in input prices.
The procedures for computing new dollar-value 
LIFO layers are technically inconsistent with a 
strict LIFO flow assumption. For example, no-
tice that the 2016 layer added in the example is 
based on 1.26, a figure that represents 2016 
year-end costs. Under traditional LIFO, new 
layers are added using beginning-of-year costs, 
not end-of-year costs. Because dollar-value 
LIFO is a computational convenience, this in-
consistency in computing new layers is usually 
ignored to simplify the computations.
APPENDIX C
INVENTORY ERRORS
Errors in computing inventory are rare and almost always accidental. For example, a com-
puter programming mistake might assign the wrong costs to inventory items. But in occa-
sional instances, companies deliberately (and fraudulently) misstate inventories to manipulate 
reported earnings. You must first understand how inventory errors affect reported results to 
understand why some managers use this misrepresentation technique.
 
To visualize the effect of inventory errors, let’s assume that due to a miscount in the 2014 
year-end physical inventory, Jones Corporation’s ending inventory is overstated by $1 million. 
Also assume there are no other inventory errors. Using the cost of goods sold formula, we see 
that this error understates 2014 cost of goods sold by $1 million:
Effect of
2014 Error on
  Beginning inventory 
No error
1 Purchases 
No error
5 Goods available 
No error
2 Ending inventory 
Overstated by $1 million
5 Cost of goods sold 
Understated by $1 million
Because ending inventory is subtracted in the cost of goods sold computation, an overstate-
ment of ending inventory leads to an understatement of cost of goods sold. Understating cost 
of goods sold by $1 million overstates pre-tax income by $1 million. Furthermore, if the error 
is not detected and corrected in 2014, it will also cause 2015 pre-tax income to be misstated. 
The reason that the error carries over into 2015 is that the December 31, 2014, ending inventory 

 
Appendix C 
523
becomes the January 1, 2015, beginning inventory. So, the carryforward effect (assuming no 
other 2015 inventory errors) is:
Effect of 2014 Error on the
2015 COGS Computation
  Beginning inventory 
Overstated by $1 million
1 Purchases 
No error
5 Goods available 
Overstated by $1 million
2 Ending inventory 
No error
5 Cost of goods sold 
Overstated by $1 million
34 See C. Mulford and E. Comiskey, Financial Warnings (New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1996), pp. 228–33.
35 For a comprehensive discussion of the accounting issues at Comptronix, see J. L. Boockholdt, “Comptronix, Inc.: An Audit 
Case Involving Fraud,” Issues in Accounting Education, February 2000, pp. 105–28.
36 For a discussion of these clues, see Mulford and Comiskey, op. cit.
The 2015 cost of goods sold overstatement results in a $1 million understatement of 2015 
pre-tax income. The carryforward effect in 2015 is equal in amount but in the opposite 
 direction from the 2014 effect. Because the first year’s income is overstated by $1 million 
and the second year’s income is understated by the same amount, by December 31, 2015, 
the end of the two-year cycle, the Retained earnings account (which is cumulative, of 
course) will be correct.
 
If an inventory error is discovered during the reporting year, it is corrected immediately. 
However, if an error is not discovered until a subsequent year (say, 2015 in our example), 
then the Retained earnings balance as of the beginning of the discovery year (2015) is cor-
rected. If the error has a material effect on the company’s financial statements, it must be 
separately disclosed.
 
In recent years, the media have coined the 
phrase “accounting irregularities.” Some of 
these irregularities simply relate to exuberant 
use of the flexibility within GAAP; others in-
volve fraud. Accounting fraud is relatively rare, 
but it does happen. And some of the more spec-
tacular frauds involve inventory misstatement. 
To offset an emerging profit shortfall, a com-
pany could overstate quarter-end inventory. As we just saw, overstating ending inventory 
 decreases cost of goods sold, increases income, and masks the adverse real conditions facing 
a company. But as our numerical example illustrates, the phony earnings boost in the over-
statement year reverses in the following year. So, if the economic adversity that motivated 
the deliberate initial inventory overstatement continues, the inventory overstatements have to 
continue as well.
 
This is exactly what happened at Comptronix Corporation, an electronics manufacturer 
that lost an important customer in 1989.34 After succumbing to the temptation to overstate 
profits by overstating inventory, the practice could not be abandoned without causing a rever-
sal. So, the overstatement continued until late 1992.35 The fraud was eventually discovered at 
both companies. Can auditors and other analysts be successful detectives and uncover these 
situations? For outsiders, fraud is difficult to detect, but sometimes there are clues.36 For ex-
ample, the reduction in cost of goods sold arising from inventory overstatement increases 
gross margins. So, an unexplained increase in gross margins during troubled economic 
times is suspicious and warrants investigation.
If we assume that Jones Corporation’s inventory error was discovered in January 
2015 after the 2014 books were closed and that the income tax rate is 35%, the 
 entry to correct the error is:
DR Retained earnings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $650,000
DR Income tax payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
350,000
   CR Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 $1,000,000
Analysis

524 
CHAPTER 9
Inventories
E9-2
Distinguishing between 
 product and period 
costs (LO 3)
Sperry-New Holland manufactures farm machinery. During 2014, it incurred a variety of 
costs, several of which appear on the following list.
Nature of Incurred Cost
a. Comprehensive liability insurance premium on corporate headquarters
b. Depreciation on production equipment
c. Electricity consumed
d. Property and casualty insurance premiums
e. Raw material used
f. Royalties paid to the designer of one of the company’s products
g. Salaries of corporate legal counsel
h. Travel expenses for sales force
i. Wages of plant maintenance personnel
j. Wages of production workers
k. Workers compensation insurance
Required:
Classify each listed cost as a product or period cost, or both. For costs that are probably allo-
cable to both classifications, suggest a reasonable allocation approach.
E9-3
Computing ending inventory 
and cost of goods sold 
 under different cost flow 
assumptions (LO 2, 5)
Jessica’s Office Supply, Inc., had 300 calculators on hand at January 1, 2014, costing $16 
each. Purchases and sales of calculators during the month of January were as follows:
AICPA
ADAPTED
Date 
Purchases 
Sales
January 12 
 
200 @ $25
 
14 
150 @ $17
 
29 
100 @ $18
 
30 
 
150 @ $30
Jessica does not maintain perpetual inventory records. According to a physical count, 200 cal-
culators were on hand at January 31, 2014.
Required:
1. What is the amount of ending inventory at January 31, 2014, and cost of goods sold for 
the month ended January 31, 2014, under the FIFO method?
2. What is the amount of ending inventory at January 31, 2014, and cost of goods sold for 
the month ended January 31, 2014, under the LIFO method?
3. What is the amount of ending inventory at January 31, 2014, and cost of goods sold for 
the month ended January 31, 2014, under the average cost method?
EXERCISES
On January 1, 2014, Manuel Company’s merchandise inventory was $300,000. During 2014, 
Manuel purchased $1,900,000 of merchandise and recorded sales of $2,000,000. The gross 
profit margin on these sales was 20% of the selling price.
Required:
What is Manuel’s merchandise inventory at December 31, 2014?
E9-1
Computing inventory amount 
from income statement 
data (LO 1)
AICPA
ADAPTED

 
Exercises 
525
E9-4
Computing cost of goods 
sold (LO 1)
The following information is available for Day Company for 2014:
AICPA
ADAPTED
Cash disbursements for purchase of merchandise 
$290,000
Increase in trade accounts payable 
25,000
Decrease in merchandise inventory 
10,000
Required:
What is the cost of goods sold for 2014?
E9-5
Computing sales from inven-
tory information (LO 3, 4)
For the year 2014, Dumas Company’s gross profit was $96,000; the cost of goods manufac-
tured was $340,000; the beginning inventories of goods in process and finished goods were 
$28,000 and $45,000, respectively; and the ending inventories of goods in process and fin-
ished goods were $38,000 and $52,000, respectively.
Required:
What is the dollar amount of Dumas Company sales for 2014?
AICPA
ADAPTED
On December 31, 2014, a physical inventory determined that ending inventory of $600,000 
was in the warehouse. Hestor’s gross profit on sales has remained constant at 30%. Hestor 
suspects some of the inventory may have been taken by some new employees.
Required:
At December 31, 2014, what is the estimated cost of missing inventory?
E9-6
Estimating missing inventory 
(LO 1)
Hestor Company’s records indicate the following information:
AICPA
ADAPTED
Merchandise inventory, January 1, 2014 
$  550,000
Purchases, January 1 through December 31, 2014 
2,250,000
Sales, January 1 through December 31, 2014 
3,000,000
The inventory of January 1, 2014, consisted of the following:
E9-7
Computing work-in-process 
inventory from balance sheet 
and income statement 
 information (LO 1, 4)
On June 30, 2014, a tornado damaged Jensen Corporation’s warehouse and factory, com-
pletely destroying the work-in-process inventory. Neither the raw materials nor finished goods 
inventories were damaged. A physical inventory taken after the tornado revealed the following 
valuations:
AICPA
ADAPTED
Raw materials 
$ 41,000
Work-in-process 
128,000
Finished goods 
173,000
 
$342,000
Raw materials 
$ 87,000
Work-in-process 
0
Finished goods 
151,000
 
$238,000
A review of the books and records disclosed that the gross profit margin historically approxi-
mated 28% of sales. The sales total for the first six months of 2014 was $405,000. Raw mate-
rial purchases totaled $150,000. Direct labor costs for this period were $112,000, and 
manufacturing overhead has historically been applied at 50% of direct labor.

526 
CHAPTER 9
Inventories
Required:
Compute the value of the work-in-process inventory lost at June 30, 2014. Show supporting 
computations.
E9-8
Computing inventory and 
cost of goods sold under 
three flow assumptions 
(LO 2, 5)
Frate Company was formed on January 1, 2014. The following information is available from 
Frate’s inventory records for Product Ply:
AICPA
ADAPTED
 
Units 
Unit Cost
January 1, 2014
 Beginning inventory 
800 
$ 9.00
Purchases:
 January 5, 2014 
1,500 
10.00
 May 25, 2014 
1,200 
10.50
 July 16, 2014 
600 
11.00
 November 26, 2014 
900 
11.50
A physical inventory on December 31, 2014, shows 1,600 units on hand.
Required:
Prepare schedules to compute the ending inventory at December 31, 2014, and cost of goods 
sold for the year ended December 31, 2014 under each of the following inventory methods:
1. FIFO
2. LIFO
3. Weighted average
Show supporting computations in good form.
E9-9
Computing ending inventory 
and cost of sales under direct 
and absorption costing 
(LO 4)
Information from Jacob Perez Company’s records is available as follows for the year ended 
December 31, 2014:
AICPA
ADAPTED
Net sales 
$1,600,000
Cost of goods manufactured:
Variable 
$  800,000
Fixed 
352,000
Operating expenses:
Variable 
$   78,000
Fixed 
150,000
Units manufactured 
80,000
Units sold 
55,000
Finished goods inventory, 1/1/2014 
None
No work-in-process inventories existed at the beginning or end of 2014.
Required:
1. What would be Perez’s finished goods inventory and cost of goods sold under the variable 
(direct) costing method at December 31, 2014?
2. Under the absorption costing method, what would Perez’s operating income be?
3. Calculate Jacob Perez Company’s cost of goods sold and ending inventory under 
 absorption costing.

 
Exercises 
527
No work-in-process inventories existed at the beginning or end of 2014.
Required:
1. What would be Kern’s finished goods inventory cost under the variable (direct) costing 
method at December 31, 2014?
2. Which costing method—absorption or variable costing—would show a higher operating 
income for 2014, and by what amount?
E9-10
Computing ending inventory 
and cost of goods sold under 
absorption and variable 
 costing (LO 4)
Selected information concerning the operation of Kern Company for the year ended Decem-
ber 31, 2014, is available as follows:
AICPA
ADAPTED
Units produced 
10,000
Units sold 
9,000
Direct materials used 
$40,000
Direct labor incurred 
20,000
Fixed factory overhead 
25,000
Variable factory overhead 
12,000
Fixed selling and administrative expenses 
30,000
Variable selling and administrative expenses 
4,500
Finished goods inventory, January 1, 2014 
None
E9-12
Converting LIFO to 
FIFO (LO 6)
KW Steel Corp. uses the LIFO method of inventory valuation. Waretown Steel, KW’s major 
competitor, instead uses the FIFO method. The following are excerpts from each company’s 
2014 financial statements:
 
KW Steel Corp. 
Waretown Steel
($ in millions) 
2014 
2013 
2014 
2013
Balance sheet inventories 
$  797.6 
$  692.7 
$  708.2 
$  688.6
LIFO reserve 
378.0 
334.9
Sales 
4,284.8 
4,029.7 
3,584.2 
3,355.8
Cost of goods sold 
3,427.8 
3,226.5 
2,724.0 
2,617.5
E9-11
Changing to FIFO 
method (LO 5)
Blago Wholesale Company began operations on January 1, 2014, and uses the average cost 
method in costing its inventory. Management is contemplating a change to the FIFO method 
in 2015 and is interested in determining how such a change will affect net income. Accord-
ingly, the following information has been developed:
AICPA
ADAPTED
 
2014 
2015
Final inventory:
Average cost 
$150,000 
$255,000
FIFO 
160,000 
270,000
 
2014 
2015
Sales 
$1,000,000 
$1,200,000
Cost of goods sold 
600,000 
720,000
Gross profit 
400,000 
480,000
Selling, general, and administrative 
250,000 
275,000
Net income 
$  150,000 
$  205,000
Condensed income statements for Blago Wholesale appear below:
Required:
Based on this information, what would 2015 net income be after the change to the FIFO 
method? Ignore any income tax effects of this change in accounting method.

528 
CHAPTER 9
Inventories
Required:
1. Compute each company’s 2014 gross margin percentage and inventory turnover using 
cost of goods sold as reported by each company. (Round answers to one decimal place.) 
For each ratio, how does KW Steel compare to Waretown Steel?
2. Restate KW’s cost of goods sold and inventory balances to the FIFO basis. On the basis 
of its adjusted data, recompute KW’s gross margin percentage and inventory turnover. 
Explain how the revised figures alter your earlier comparisons.
E9-13
Identifying effects of a LIFO 
liquidation (LO 7)
Nathan’s Grills, Inc., imports and sells premium-quality gas grills. The company had the 
 following layers in its LIFO inventory at January 1, 2014, at which time the replacement cost 
of the inventory was $675 per unit.
Year LIFO 
Layer Added 
Units 
Unit Cost
2011 
50 
$450
2012 
40 
500
2013 
60 
600
The replacement cost of grills remained constant throughout 2014. Nathan’s sold 275 units 
during 2014. The company established the selling price of each unit by doubling its replace-
ment cost at the time of sale.
Required:
1. Determine gross margin and the gross margin percentage for 2014 assuming that  Nathan’s 
Grills purchased 280 units during the year.
2. Determine gross margin and the gross margin percentage for 2014 assuming that  Nathan’s 
Grills purchased 180 units during the year.
3. Explain why the assumed number of units purchased makes a difference in your answers.
E9-14
Eliminating FIFO holding 
gains (LO 1, 9)
Watsontown Yacht Sales has been selling large power cruisers for 25 years. On January 1, 
2014, the company had $5,950,000 in inventory (based on a FIFO valuation). While the num-
ber of yachts in Watsontown Yacht Sales’ inventory remained fairly constant throughout 2014, 
by December 31, 2014, yacht prices were 7% higher than at the start of the year. The company 
reported cost of goods sold for 2014 of $23,800,000.
Required:
Calculate the amount of realized holding gains in Watsontown Yacht Sales’ income for 2014.
E9-15
Correcting inventory 
 errors (LO 1)
The following inventory valuation errors have been discovered for Knox Corporation:
• The 2012 year-end inventory was overstated by $23,000.
• The 2013 year-end inventory was understated by $61,000.
• The 2014 year-end inventory was understated by $17,000.
The reported income before taxes for Knox was:
AICPA
ADAPTED
Year 
Income before Taxes
2012 
$138,000
2013 
254,000
2014 
168,000

 
Exercises  
529
Required:
Compute what income before taxes for 2012, 2013, and 2014 should have been after correct-
ing for the errors.
Required:
In pricing its ending inventory using the lower of cost or market rule, what unit values should 
Moore use for products 1 and 2, respectively?
E9-16
Applying lower of cost or 
market (LO 11)
Moore Corporation has two products in its ending inventory; each is accounted for at the 
lower of cost or market. A profit margin of 30% on selling price is considered normal for each 
product. Specific data with respect to each product follows:
AICPA
ADAPTED
 
Product 1 
Product 2
Historical cost 
$17 
$ 45
Replacement cost 
15 
46
Estimated cost to sell 
5 
26
Estimated selling price 
30 
100
Required:
Compute the inventory amounts at December 31, 2012, 2013, and 2014, using the dollar-
value LIFO inventory method for each year.
E9-17
Computing dollar-value 
LIFO (LO 13)
Acute Company manufactures a single product. On December 31, 2011, it adopted the 
dollar-value LIFO inventory method. The inventory on that date using the dollar-value 
LIFO inventory method was determined to be $300,000. Inventory data for succeeding 
years follow:
AICPA
ADAPTED
Year Ended 
Inventory at Respective 
Relevant Price Index 
December 31 
Year-End Prices  
(Base Year 2011)
2012 
$363,000 
1.10
2013 
420,000 
1.20
2014 
430,000 
1.25
E9-18
Computing dollar-value 
LIFO (LO 13)
On December 31, 2013, Fern Company adopted the dollar-value LIFO inventory method. All 
of Fern’s inventories constitute a single pool. The inventory on December 31, 2013, using the 
dollar-value LIFO inventory method was $600,000. Inventory data for 2014 are as follows:
AICPA
ADAPTED
December 31, 2014, inventory at year-end prices 
$780,000
Relevant price index at year-end (base year 2013) 
1.20
Required:
Under the dollar-value LIFO inventory method, what would Fern’s inventory be at Decem-
ber 31, 2014?
E9-19
Evaluating inventory costing 
concepts (LO 5, 10, 11)
Cost for inventory purposes should be determined by the inventory cost flow method most 
clearly reflecting periodic income.
Required:
1. Describe the fundamental cost flow assumptions for the average cost, FIFO, and LIFO 
 inventory cost flow methods.
2. Discuss the reasons for using LIFO in an inflationary economy.
3. Where there is evidence that the utility of inventory will be less than cost, what is the 
proper accounting treatment, and under what concept is that treatment justified?
AICPA
ADAPTED

530 
CHAPTER 9
Inventories
P9-1
PROBLEMS / DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
Keefer, Inc., began business on January 1, 2013. Information on its inventory purchases and 
sales during 2013 and 2014 follow:
Calculating amounts and 
 ratios under FIFO and LIFO  
(LO 2, 5)
Required:
1. Calculate ending inventory, cost of goods sold, and gross margin for 2013 and 2014 under 
the periodic FIFO inventory valuation method.
2. Calculate ending inventory, cost of goods sold, and gross margin for 2013 and 2014 under 
the periodic LIFO inventory valuation method.
3. Discuss the difference in reported results under FIFO versus LIFO for each year.
P9-2
Determining income 
 statement amounts for a 
manufacturer (LO 1, 3, 4)
The following information pertains to Yuji Corporation:
 
January 1, 2014 
December 31, 2014
Raw materials inventory 
$ 34,000 
$ 38,000
Work-in-process inventory 
126,000 
145,000
Finished goods inventory 
76,000 
68,000
 
Inventory Purchases
Date 
Units 
Cost per Unit 
Total
January 1, 2013 
85 
$25 
$ 2,125
March 15, 2013 
100 
27 
2,700
May 15, 2013 
90 
28 
2,520
August 1, 2013 
100 
30 
3,000
September 3, 2013 
125 
31 
3,875
December 5, 2013 
50 
32 
1,600
 Total purchases—2013 
550 
 
$15,820
February 20, 2014 
150 
$31 
$ 4,650
March 29, 2014 
100 
30 
3,000
July 1, 2014 
100 
29 
2,900
August 20, 2014 
100 
28 
2,800
November 3, 2014 
80 
27 
2,160
 Total purchases—2014 
530 
 
$15,510
 
Inventory Sales
 
Units 
Price per Unit 
Total
March 18, 2013 
65 
$50 
$ 3,250
August 15, 2013 
200 
52 
10,400
October 6, 2013 
175 
53 
9,275
 Total sales—2013 
440 
 
$22,925
February 12, 2014 
100 
$53 
$ 5,300
June 2, 2014 
200 
52 
10,400
September 30, 2014 
210 
50 
10,500
 Total sales—2014 
510 
 
$26,200

e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
531
Costs incurred during the year 2014 were as follows:
Raw material purchased 
$116,000
Wages to factory workers 
55,000
Salary to factory supervisors 
25,000
Salary to selling and administrative staff 
40,000
Depreciation on factory building and equipment 
10,000
Depreciation on office building 
12,000
Utilities for factory building 
5,000
Utilities for office building 
7,500
Required:
Sales revenue during 2014 was $300,000. The income tax rate is 40%. Compute the 
following:
1. Cost of raw materials used.
2. Cost of goods manufactured/completed.
3. Cost of goods sold.
4. Gross margin.
5. Net income.
P9-3
Determining cost of sales 
 under different flow 
 assumptions—comprehensive 
(LO 2, 5, 6)
Bravo Wholesalers, Inc., began its business on January 1, 2014. Information on its inventory 
purchases and sales during 2014 follows:
 
Inventory Purchases
 
Units 
Cost per Unit 
Total
January 1 
8,000 
$5.00 
$ 40,000
March 10 
10,000 
5.10 
51,000
April 15 
12,000 
5.30 
63,600
September 11 
10,000 
5.55 
55,500
November 12 
6,000 
5.75 
34,500
December 1 
7,500 
5.85 
43,875
December 29 
6,500 
6.10 
39,650
Units available for sale 
60,000 
 
$328,125
 
Inventory Sales
 
Units 
Price per Unit 
Total
March 3 
6,000 
$9.00 
$ 54,000
September 2 
24,000 
9.50 
228,000
December 5 
10,000 
10.00 
100,000
Units sold 
40,000 
 
$382,000
Assume a tax rate of 40%.
Required:
1. Compute the cost of ending inventory and cost of goods sold under each of the following 
methods: (a) FIFO, (b) Weighted average cost, and (c) LIFO. Assume that Bravo uses the 
periodic inventory method.
2. Assume that Bravo uses the periodic LIFO method.
 
a. Calculate the replacement cost of the ending inventory and the LIFO reserve as of 
year-end. You may assume that year-end purchase cost was still $6.10 per unit.

532 
CHAPTER 9
Inventories
 
b. Estimate Bravo’s cost of goods sold under the periodic FIFO method based only on the 
information that will be publicly available to Bravo’s investors. Explain why your 
 answer differs from FIFO cost of goods sold computed in requirement 1.
 
c. Bravo’s purchasing manager was planning to acquire 10,000 units of inventory on Janu-
ary 5, 2015, at $6.10 per unit. Its accountant suggests that the company will be better 
off if it acquires the inventory instead on December 31, 2014. What are the pros and 
cons of the accountant’s suggestion? Wherever possible, show supporting calculations.
3. Calculate the cost of goods sold assuming that Bravo uses (a) the perpetual FIFO method; 
(b) the perpetual weighted average method.
P9-4
Determining the effects of 
absorption and variable 
 costing (LO 4)
Mastrolia Manufacturing produces pacifiers. The company uses absorption costing for exter-
nal reporting, but management prefers variable costing for evaluating the profitability of each 
model. Bonuses, which make up a significant portion of each manager’s annual compensa-
tion, are based on attaining certain minimum gross margin percentages. Selected data regard-
ing production and sales of the company’s popular “Little Eric” model follow:
 
2014 
2015 
2016
Selling price per unit 
$  10.00 
$  10.00 
$  10.00
Variable production costs per unit 
$   4.00 
$   4.00 
$   4.00
Fixed production costs per year 
$500,000 
$500,000 
$500,000
Beginning inventory 1/1/2014 
30,000 units @$8.00
 (FIFO basis) 
(variable cost 5 $4.00)
Units produced 
125,000 
100,000 
115,000
Units sold 
100,000 
85,000 
140,000
Ending inventory (units) 
55,000 
70,000 
45,000
Required:
1. Calculate Mastrolia’s gross profit percentage each year under generally accepted account-
ing principles. Briefly explain the reasons for any variations in the annual gross profit 
percentage.
2. Calculate Mastrolia’s gross profit percentage each year under variable costing. Briefly 
 explain the reasons for any variations in the annual gross profit percentage.
3. If you were the manager of the “Little Eric” plant and your annual bonus was based on 
the plant achieving a gross profit percentage in excess of 15% each year, which method 
would you prefer and why? (Assume you can significantly influence annual production 
schedules.)
P9-5
Determining items to be 
 included in inventory  
(LO 3)
Diana Gomez Corporation, a manufacturer of cowboy boots, provided the following informa-
tion from its accounting records for the year ended December 31, 2014.
Inventory at December 31, 2014 (based on a physical count 
 of goods on December 31, 2014) 
$1,700,000
Accounts payable at December 31, 2014 
1,150,000
Net sales (sales less returns and allowances) 
9,500,000
Additional information is as follows:
a. Work-in-process inventory costing $30,000 was sent to an outside processor for hand-
tooling on December 30, 2014, and was therefore not included in physical inventory.
b. Goods received from Smith, Inc., a vendor, on December 27, 2014, were included in the 
physical count; however, the invoice from Smith ($43,000) was not included in accounts 
payable at December 31, 2014, because the accounts payable department never received 
its copy of the receiving report.
AICPA
ADAPTED

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
533
c. Goods received from another vendor just before the plant closed on December 31, 2014, 
were reported on a receiving report dated January 2, 2015. The goods, invoiced to Gomez 
at $83,000, were not included in the physical count, but the invoice was included in the 
December 31, 2014, accounts payable balance.
d. Included in the physical count were boots billed to a customer f.o.b. shipping point (title 
transfers when goods are shipped) on December 31, 2014. These boots had a cost of 
$25,000 and were recorded as sales of $35,000. The shipment was on Gomez’s loading 
dock waiting to be picked up by the trucking company.
e. Boots shipped to a customer f.o.b. destination (title transfers when goods are received) 
on December 28, 2014, were in transit at December 31, 2014, and had a cost of $40,000. 
 Gomez issued a sales invoice for $58,000 on January 3, 2015, upon notification of receipt 
by the customer.
f. Boots returned by customers and held on December 31, 2014, in the returned goods area 
pending inspection were not included in the physical count. On January 5, 2015, after 
 inspection, the boots were returned to inventory and credit memos were issued to the 
 customers. The boots, costing $27,000, were originally invoiced for $39,000.
Required:
Using the following format, prepare a schedule of adjustments as of December 31, 2014, to the 
amounts Gomez initially reported in its accounting records. Show separately the effect, if any, 
of each of the six transactions on the December 31, 2014, amounts. Insert a –0– for any trans-
actions that would not affect inventory, accounts payable, or net sales as originally reported.
 
Inventory 
Accounts Payable 
Net Sales
Initial amounts 
$1,700,000 
$1,150,000 
$9,500,000
Adjustments—increase (decrease) 
 
 
a. 
 
 
b. 
 
c. 
 
d. 
 
e. 
 
f. 
 
 
 Total adjustments 
 
 
Adjusted amounts 
 
 
P9-6
Choosing a cost flow 
assumption (LO 5, 8, 10)
Jeanette Corporation’s president is in a dilemma regarding which inventory method (LIFO or 
FIFO) to use. The controller provides the following list of factors that should be considered 
before making a choice.
a. Jeanette has borrowed money during the current month and has entered into a debt con-
tract. The covenants of this contract require Jeanette to achieve a certain amount of net 
 income and maintain a certain amount of working capital.
b. The Jeanette’s board of directors is contemplating a proposal to reward the top corporate 
management with an incentive bonus based on accounting net income.
c. The vice president of finance suggests using the LIFO method for tax purposes and the 
FIFO method for financial reporting purposes. With lower taxable income, Jeanette can 
save on the current tax it pays, and, at the same time, it can show higher income in the 
 financial reports and “look good.”
d. The controller cautions that while the LIFO method could reduce the current period tax 
liability, “it could hit us hard when things are not going so well.” This potential problem 
with the LIFO method could be “avoided if we use FIFO in the first place.”

534 
CHAPTER 9
Inventories
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
e. However, the president would like to adopt the method that provides both a better application 
of the matching principle and a more current measure of inventory on the balance sheet.
f. The controller suggests that Jeanette adopt the FIFO method because higher accounting 
income means a higher stock price.
Required:
Jeanette’s president has asked you to write a report evaluating the pros and cons of each of the 
issues raised. Given her busy schedule, she would like the report to be brief. In answering this 
question, assume that Jeanette Corporation expects an upward trend in inventory prices.
P9-7
Choosing a cost flow 
 assumption (LO 5, 10)
Princess Retail Stores started doing business on January 1, 2014. The following data reflect its 
inventory purchases and sales during the year:
 
Inventory Purchases
 
Units 
Cost per Unit 
Total
January 1 
20,000 
$ 7.00 
$140,000
March 1 
16,000 
9.00 
144,000
June 1 
14,000 
11.00 
154,000
September 1 
10,000 
13.00 
130,000
December 1 
12,000 
15.00 
180,000
 
72,000 
 
$748,000
 
Sales
 
Units 
Price per Unit 
Total
March 2 
24,000 
$14.00 
$336,000
September 2 
18,000 
16.00 
288,000
December 2 
20,000 
18.00 
360,000
 
62,000 
 
$984,000 
Required:
1. Compute gross margin and cost of ending inventory using the periodic FIFO cost flow 
assumption.
2. Compute gross margin and cost of ending inventory using the periodic LIFO cost flow 
 assumption. Compute the dollar amount of the LIFO reserve. Using this additional disclo-
sure, how might an analyst estimate Princess’s cost of goods sold under the FIFO method 
based only on publicly available information? Show supporting calculations.
3. Under historical cost accounting, gross margin is calculated as current output price minus 
historical input price. For analytical convenience, we can break the gross margin into two 
components:
 
 
a. Current cost operating margin 5 Current output price 2 Current input price.
 
 
b. Inventory profits 5 Current input price 2 Historical input price.
 
Provide an estimate of the Current cost operating margin for Princess Retail Stores.
4. The following are excerpts from a recent top management meeting at Princess Retail 
Stores. Your assignment is to clearly provide guidelines to the top management team on 
each issue raised in the meeting. Show calculations when necessary.
 
a. “I am most concerned about appropriately matching revenues and expenses. I suggest 
that we look for an inventory accounting method that achieves this objective both 
 during inflationary and deflationary times.” (Frances Iyer, chairman)

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
535
 
b. “Frances, I think the choice is obvious. What other method can achieve better 
matching of revenues and expenses than the specific identification method? By 
choosing this method, we would send a clear signal to the stock market that we 
are not playing any earnings management games.” (Sandra Kang, VP, Investor 
Relations)
 
c. “I would like to maximize our current profits. What inventory method might help us 
achieve this most important goal and why?” (Antonia Iyer, CEO)
 
d. “Antonia, I know you can’t stop thinking about your earnings-based bonus. My  primary 
objective is to minimize the present value of future income tax outflows.” (Juanita 
Kang, CFO)
 
e. “I would like to have our cake and eat it too. Why don’t we follow Juanita’s suggestion 
for income tax accounting and follow Antonia’s idea for external financial reporting?” 
(B. T. Kang, VP, Operations)
P9-8
Computing dollar-value 
LIFO (LO 13)
Packard, Inc., adopted the dollar-value LIFO inventory method on June 30, 2013, the end of 
its fiscal year. Packard’s inventory records provide the following information:
Date 
Year-End Current Cost 
Relevant Cost Index
June 30, 2013 
$345,000 
1.00
June 30, 2014 
 340,000 
0.96
June 30, 2015 
 385,000 
1.04
June 30, 2016 
 398,000 
1.09
June 30, 2017 
 410,000 
1.10
Required:
Calculate the ending inventory for Packard, Inc., for 2014, 2015, 2016, and 2017 using the 
dollar-value LIFO method.
P9-9
Correcting inventory 
 errors (LO 1)
During your audit of Patti Company’s ending inventory at December 31, 2014, you find the 
following inventory accounting errors:
a. Goods in Patti’s warehouse on consignment from Valley, Inc., were included in Patti’s 
ending inventory.
b. On December 31, 2014, Patti received $4,700 worth of inventory, which was included in 
the 2014 ending inventory. However, the invoice on this merchandise was not received 
by Patti until January 3, 2015, at which time the purchase was recorded. The purchase 
should have been recorded in 2014.
c. Patti purchased merchandise on account on December 30, 2014, but did not include these 
goods in inventory or record the purchase. These goods were shipped by the vendor f.o.b. 
shipping point (title transfers when goods are shipped) and were in transit on December 
31, 2014.
d. Some of Patti’s merchandise, shipped on consignment to Kaitlin Company in mid- 
 December 2014, was excluded from the December 31, 2014, inventory.
e. On December 28, 2014, Patti shipped goods costing $10,000 to Likert, f.o.b. destination 
(title transfers when goods are received). Likert received the goods on January 4, 2015, 
and notified Patti of their arrival. The goods were not included in Patti’s 2014 inventory 
balance.
AICPA
ADAPTED
AICPA
ADAPTED

536 
CHAPTER 9
Inventories
Required:
Assume that Patti uses the periodic inventory system. Indicate the effect (understate, over-
state, or no effect) each of these errors would have on:
1. December 31, 2014, ending inventory
2. December 31, 2015, ending inventory
3. December 31, 2014, cost of goods sold
4. December 31, 2015, cost of goods sold
5. December 31, 2014, accounts payable
6. December 31, 2015, accounts payable
P9-10
Analyzing gross margins and 
cash flow sustainability  
 (LO 9)
Parque Corporation applied to Fairview Bank early in 2014 for a $400,000 five-year loan to 
finance plant modernization. The company proposes that the loan be unsecured and repaid 
from future operating cash flows. In support of the loan application, Parque submitted an in-
come statement for 2013. Prepared using the FIFO inventory cost flow approach, this income 
statement reflected annual profit that was approximately 50% of the principal amount of the 
loan. It was offered as evidence that the loan could easily be repaid within the five-year term.
 
Parque is in the business of recycling yelpin, an industrial lubricant. The company buys 
used yelpin from large salvage companies and, after cleaning and reconditioning it, sells it to 
manufacturing companies. The recycling business is very competitive and has typically gener-
ated small gross margins. The salvage companies set yelpin prices on the first day of each 
quarter, and Parque purchases it at the established price for the entire quarter. Yelpin prices 
fluctuate with business conditions. Prices paid to salvage companies have risen in recent years 
but tend to fall during economic downturns.
 
Parque sells the recycled yelpin at $1 per pound above the currently prevailing price that it 
pays to acquire the used yelpin from salvage companies. December 31, 2012, inventory was 
300,000 pounds at a cost of $7.00 per pound. Purchases and sales in 2013 were:
 
Purchases 
Sales
First quarter 2013 
600,000 lbs. @ $7.20/lb. 
700,000 lbs. @ $8.20/lb.
Second quarter 2013 
700,000 lbs. @ $7.40/lb. 
600,000 lbs. @ $8.40/lb.
Third quarter 2013 
800,000 lbs. @ $7.80/lb. 
700,000 lbs. @ $8.80/lb.
Fourth quarter 2013 
600,000 lbs. @ $8.10/lb. 
650,000 lbs. @ $9.10/lb.
Cash operating costs during 2013 totaled $2,800,000.
Required:
1. Compute 2013 income for Parque Corporation using the FIFO inventory flow assumption. 
Ignore income taxes.
2. Did Parque really earn a profit from its operating activities in 2013?
3. Given the circumstances described, what risks exist that could threaten ultimate repayment 
of the loan?
P9-11
Evaluating inventory cost flow 
changes (LO 5)
The following is an excerpt from the financial statements of Talbot Industries:
Effective September 30, 2013, the Company changed its method of accounting for inventories from the 
LIFO method principally to the Specific Identification method, because, in the opinion of management, 
there is a better matching of revenues and expenses, better correlation of accounting and financial infor-
mation with the method by which the Company is managed, and better presentation of inventories at 
values that more fairly present the inventories’ cost.
 
During 2014, Chaney Technologies changed its inventory cost flow assumption from LIFO 
to the average cost method. The following is an excerpt from Chaney Technologies financial 
statements.

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
537
 
The change to the average cost method will conform all inventories of the Company to the same 
method of valuation. The Company believes that the average cost method of inventory valuation pro-
vides a more meaningful presentation of the financial position of the Company since it reflects more 
recent costs in the balance sheet. Under the current economic environment of low inflation and an ex-
pected reduction in inventories and low production costs, the Company believes that the average cost 
method also results in a better matching of current costs with current revenues.
Required:
1. Evaluate each of the justifications provided by Talbot for changing its inventory cost flow 
assumption.
2. Evaluate each of the justifications provided by Chaney Technologies for changing its 
 inventory cost flow assumption.
P9-12
Assessing managerial 
 opportunism (LO 7, 10)
JKW Corporation has been selling plumbing supplies since 1981. In 2003, the company 
 adopted the LIFO method of valuing its inventory. The company has grown steadily over the 
years and a layer has been added to its LIFO inventory in each of the years the method has 
been used. The company’s inventory turnover ratio has averaged 4.5 in recent years. Manage-
ment attempts to maintain a stable level of inventory at each store; the growth in inventory has 
been due to new stores being opened each year. In 2013, the board of directors approved an 
incentive program that pays managers a sizable bonus in each year that certain performance 
targets are met. For 2014, targeted earnings per share are $2.75. In an effort to track progress 
toward meeting this target, management produced the following income statement for the first 
nine months of 2014.
JKW Corporation
Income Statement 
January 1–September 30, 2014
Sales 
$13,284,000
Cost of goods sold 
7,970,400
Gross margin 
5,313,600
Operating expenses 
2,391,120
Income before taxes 
2,922,480
Income tax expense 
1,022,868
 Net income 
$ 1,899,612
Earnings per share (1,000,000 shares outstanding) 
$      1.90
Based on past history, management expects 30% of the company’s annual sales to take 
place in the fourth quarter. Operating expenses and gross margin are expected to remain 
at 18% and 40% of sales, respectively, for the remainder of the year. The company’s tax 
rate is 35%.
Required:
1. Assuming that management maintains a stable level of inventory, project earnings per 
share for 2014 based on the data provided.
2. Assume that you are JKW’s independent auditor, and your analysis indicates that projected 
earnings per share will fall short of the bonus target. In the past, JKW’s managers have 
used aggressive (and possibly unethical) behavior to achieve salary bonus targets. You 
 suspect that the managers intend to deplete old LIFO layers deliberately in the fourth 
 quarter. To help you detect such behavior, calculate the amount of the LIFO liquidation 
that would be needed in the fourth quarter to hit the EPS target in 2014.

538 
CHAPTER 9
Inventories
T  R  E   T   C    H
S
P9-13
Computing LIFO and ratio 
 effects (LO 1, 6)
Don Facundo Bacardy Maso founded the original Bacardi® rum business in Cuba in 1862. 
The following information is excerpted from Bacardi Corporation’s annual report for the year 
ended December 31, Year 2. Bacardi’s effective tax rate was 17% in Year 2.
The company follows the last-in, first-out (LIFO) method of determining inventory cost. The LIFO 
method is considered by management to be preferable because it more closely matches current costs 
with current revenues in periods of price level changes. Under this method, current costs are charged to 
costs of sales for the year.
 
In Year 2, LIFO liquidation was caused primarily by a substantial reduction during the year in [the 
inventory of] molasses (the major raw material). This LIFO liquidation, which resulted in cost of pro-
ducts sold being charged with higher inventory costs from prior years, caused a decrease in Year 2 net 
income of approximately $1,400,000 or $0.14 per share.
 
LIFO inventories at December 31, Year 2 and Year 1 were $51,892,000 and $53,812,000, respec-
tively, which is approximately $700,000 and $20,800,000 less than replacement cost at those dates.
 
In accordance with generally recognized trade practices, inventories of distilled spirits in bonded ag-
ing warehouses have been included in current assets, although the normal aging period is usually from 
one to three years.
 
Ending inventories consist of the following:
($ in thousands) 
Year 2 
Year 1
Finished goods 
$ 2,684 
$ 2,420
Aging rum in bond 
40,285 
39,921
Raw materials and supplies 
8,923 
11,471
 
$51,892 
$53,812
 
Cost of goods sold and net income (after tax) during Year 2 were $65,374,000 and 
$45,568,000, respectively.
Required:
1. Compute the cost of goods manufactured (fully aged rum) during Year 2. Without using 
the LIFO reserve information, compute the finished goods inventory turnover (the num-
ber of days from inventory completion until its sale) and the work-in-process inventory 
turnover (the number of days the inventory is in the production cycle). Is the difference 
between the two inventory turnover ratios consistent with the nature of Bacardi’s business? 
Explain.
2. On the basis of available information, estimate Bacardi’s net income if the company had 
used FIFO during Year 2. By comparing the reported LIFO income with your estimate of 
FIFO income, what do you learn about the business conditions Bacardi faced during Year 2?
3. Using all available information, compute a total inventory turnover measure (expressed in 
number of days). Does your estimate of inventory turnover capture Bacardi’s “true” phys-
ical turnover (based on what you know about the business)? Explain. If it does not capture 
the true physical turnover, provide possible reasons. Be specific.
P9-14
Determining LIFO 
amounts—comprehensive  
(LO 6, 7, 8)
Sirotka Retail Company began doing business in 2012. The following information pertains to 
its first three years of operation:
 
Purchases 
Sales
Year 
Operating Expenses 
Units 
Unit Cost 
Units 
Unit Price
2012 
$60,000 
15,000 
$20.00 
12,000 
$35
2013 
90,000 
20,000 
25.00 
18,000 
40
2014 
65,000 
5,000 
30.00 
10,000 
40

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
539
 
Assume the following:
• The income tax rate is 40%.
• Purchase and sale prices change only at the beginning of the year.
• Sirotka uses the LIFO cost flow assumption.
• Operating expenses are primarily selling and administrative expenses.
Required:
 1. Compute cost of goods sold and the cost of ending inventory for each of the three years. 
(Identify the number of units and the cost per unit for each LIFO layer in the ending 
inventory.)
 2. Prepare income statements for each of the three years.
 3. Compute the LIFO reserve at the end of 2012, 2013, and 2014.
 4. Compute the effect of LIFO liquidation on the net income of the company for the years 
2013 and 2014.
 5. Compute the inventory turnover ratio for the years 2013 and 2014. Do not make adjust-
ments for any potential biases in LIFO accounting. Comment on the direction of the 
bias (that is, understated/overstated) in the inventory turnover ratio under LIFO. Is the 
ratio in one year more biased than in the other? Explain.
 6. How can the physical turnover of inventory (that is, true inventory turnover) best be approx-
imated using all of the information available in a LIFO financial statement? Illustrate your 
approach by recomputing Sirotka’s inventory turnover ratios for 2013 and 2014.
 7. Compute the gross margin percentages for the years 2013 and 2014. Explain whether 
the difference in the gross margin percentages between 2013 and 2014 reflect the 
change in Sirotka’s economic condition from 2013 and 2014.
 8. Provide an estimate of the FIFO cost of goods sold for the years 2012, 2013, and 2014 
using the information available in the financial statements.
 9. Based on your answers to requirements 1 and 8, estimate Sirotka’s tax savings for 2012, 
2013, and 2014.
 10. Assuming a discount rate of 10%, compute the January 1, 2012, present value of the tax 
savings over the period 2012–2014 (that is, discount the 2012 tax savings one period, 
and so on).
P9-15
Identifying FIFO holding 
gains (LO 6, 9)
Caldwell Corporation operates an ice cream processing plant and uses the FIFO inventory 
cost flow assumption. A partial income statement for the year ended December 31, 2014, 
follows:
Caldwell Corporation
Statement of Income 
For the Year Ended December 31, 2014
Sales revenues 
$680,000,000
Cost of goods sold 
360,000,000
Gross margin 
320,000,000
SG&A expenses 
200,000,000
 Income before taxes 
$120,000,000
 
Caldwell’s physical inventory levels were virtually constant throughout 2014. The FIFO 
dollar amount of inventory at January 1, 2014, was $60,000,000. During 2014, the Consumer 

540 
CHAPTER 9
Inventories
Price Index (an index of overall average purchasing power for typical urban-dwelling 
 consumers) increased by 4%.
 
Caldwell Corporation’s largest competitor, Cohen Confections, uses LIFO for inventory 
accounting. Excerpts from its December 31, 2014, inventory note were:
Required:
Using the preceding information, what is the best estimate of the amount of realized holding 
gains (or inventory profits) included in Caldwell Corporation’s income before taxes?
Cohen Confections
Inventory Note
Inventories are computed using the LIFO cost flow assumption. Comparative amounts were:
 
December 31,
 
2014 
2013
Raw materials 
$ 8,100,000 
$ 8,000,000
Finished goods 
76,000,000 
80,000,000
 
$84,100,000 
$88,000,000
 
The difference between the LIFO inventory amounts and the replacement cost of the inventory at 
December 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively, was $18,000,000 and $12,000,000. A LIFO liquidation 
 occurred in 2014, which increased the reported gross margin by $1,000,000.
P9-16
Applying lower of cost or 
market (LCM) (LO 11)
Ramps by Jake, Inc., manufactures skateboard ramps. The company uses independent 
sales representatives to market its products and pays a commission of 8% on each sale. 
Data regarding the five styles of ramps in the company’s inventory at December 31, 2014, 
follow. The normal profit margin on each style is expressed as a percentage of the item’s 
selling price.
 
 
 
 
Normal
Inventory 
Original 
Replacement 
Selling 
Profit
Item 
Cost 
Cost 
Price 
Margin %
Style A 
$150 
$155 
$210 
35%
Style B 
198 
195 
275 
40
Style C 
83 
77 
130 
30
Style D 
275 
280 
290 
30
Style E 
420 
430 
450 
20
Required:
Determine the appropriate inventory value to use for each item in the company’s December 31, 
2014, inventory under U.S. GAAP.
P9-17
Applying lower of cost or 
market (LCM) under IFRS 
(LO 11, 12)
Refer to the facts in Problem 9-16. Repeat the requirements using IFRS instead of U.S. 
GAAP.

 
Cases 
541
CASES
Presented below are excerpts from the 2009 annual report of Daimler AG, a German company 
that manufactures luxury automobiles.
Inventories. Inventories are measured at the lower of cost and net realizable value. The net realizable 
value is the estimated selling price less any remaining costs to sell. The cost of inventories is based on 
the average cost principle and includes expenditures incurred in acquiring the inventories and bringing 
them to their existing location and condition. In the case of manufactured inventories and work in 
progress, cost also includes production overheads based on normal capacity.
16. Inventories
C9-1
Daimler AG: Identifying 
 differences and similarities 
 between IFRS and GAAP 
(LO 12)
 
At December 31,
(in millions of  €) 
2009 
2008
Raw materials and manufacturing supplies 
1,517 
1,725
Work-in-process 
1,626 
1,880
Finished goods, parts, and products held for resale 
9,666 
13,066
Advance payments to suppliers 
36 
134
 
12,845 
16,805
The amount of write-down of inventories to net realizable value recognized as expense in cost of sales 
was €299 million in 2009 (2008: €245 million; 2007: €111 million). The reversals of write-down on in-
ventories were €7 million in 2009 (2008: €5 million; 2007: €12 million). At December 31, 2009, €1,482 
million (2008: €1,894 million) of the total inventories were carried at net realizable value. Inventories 
that are expected to be turned over after more than 12 months amounted to €634 million at December 31, 
2009 (2008: €583 million), and are primarily spare parts.
 
Based on the requirement to provide collateral for certain vested employee benefits in  Germany, 
the value of company cars included in inventories at Daimler AG in an amount of €457 million (2008: 
€464 million) was pledged as collateral to the Daimler Pension Trust e.V.
 
The carrying amount of inventories recognized during the period by taking possession of collateral 
held as security amounted to €136 million in 2009 (2008: €102 million). The utilization of these assets 
occurs in the context of normal business cycle.
Required:
Using the Daimler note, identify the similarities and differrences between U.S. GAAP and 
IFRS regarding inventory accounting.
C9-2
General Electric: Interpreting 
a LIFO note  (LO 6, 7, 8)
The following inventory note appears in General Electric’s Year 3 annual report.
General Electric Company
Edited Inventory Note
 
December 31
($ in millions) 
Year 3 
Year 2
Raw materials and work in process 
$4,894 
$4,708
Finished goods 
4,379 
3,951
Unbilled shipments 
372 
312
 
9,645 
8,971
Less revaluation to LIFO 
(606) 
(676)
 
$9,039 
$8,295

542 
CHAPTER 9
Inventories
 
LIFO revaluations decreased $70 million in Year 3, compared with decreases of $169 million in 
Year 2 and $82 million in Year 1. Included in these changes were decreases of $21 million, $8 million, 
and $6 million in Year 3, Year 2, and Year 1, respectively, that resulted from lower LIFO inventory 
 levels. There were net cost decreases in each of the last three years.
 
GE’s earnings before income taxes were $18.891 billion in Year 3. Assume a 35% marginal 
tax rate.
Required:
1. What are the total cumulative tax savings as of December 31, Year 3 that GE has realized 
as a result of using the LIFO inventory method?
2. What would GE’s pre-tax earnings have been in Year 3 if it had been using FIFO?
3. What December 31, Year 3 balance sheet figures would be different—and by how much—
if GE had used FIFO to account for its inventories?
4. What were the LIFO liquidation profits reported in Year 3 both pre-tax and after-tax?
5. Explain what factors cause the difference between the LIFO pre-tax income number and 
the FIFO pre-tax income number you estimated in requirement 2. (Hint: Reconcile the 
change in the LIFO reserve for Year 3.)
C9-3
ExxonMobil: Interpreting a 
LIFO note (LO 6, 8)
The following information related to ExxonMobil’s inventories is taken from the company’s 
2009 annual report. You are to use this information in answering the questions that follow.
Inventories. Crude oil, products and merchandise inventories are carried at the lower of current market 
value or cost (generally determined under the last-in, first-out method—LIFO). Inventory costs include 
expenditures and other charges (including depreciation) directly and indirectly incurred in bringing 
the  inventory to its existing condition and location. Selling expenses and general and administrative 
 expenses are reported as period costs and excluded from inventory cost. Inventories of materials and 
supplies are valued at cost or less.
 
In 2009, 2008, and 2007, net income included gains of $207 million, $341 million, and $327 million, 
respectively, attributable to the combined effects of LIFO inventory accumulations and draw-downs. 
The aggregate replacement cost of inventories was estimated to exceed their LIFO carrying values by 
$17.1 billion and $10.0 billion at December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively.
 
Crude oil, products and merchandise as of year-end 2009 and 2008 consist of the following:
(billions of  dollars) 
2009 
2008
Petroleum products 
$3.2 
$3.7
Crude oil 
 3.2 
 3.1
Chemical products 
 2.0 
 2.2
Gas/other 
 0.3 
 0.3
 Total 
$8.7 
$9.3
Required:
1. By how much would net income for 2009 have differed had ExxonMobil used FIFO to 
value those inventory items valued under LIFO? Assume a 35% marginal tax rate. Be sure 
to indicate whether FIFO income would be higher or lower than LIFO income.
2. What would the LIFO reserve have been on December 31, 2009, if no LIFO liquidation 
had occurred in 2009?
3. What was the net difference in 2009 income taxes that ExxonMobil experienced as a result 
of using LIFO rather than FIFO? Assume a 35% tax rate and indicate whether FIFO or 
LIFO would yield the higher tax and by how much.
4. What was the approximate rate of change in input costs in 2009 for ExxonMobil’s 
inventory?

 
Cases 
543
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
C9-4
Baines Corporation: Using 
absorption versus variable 
costing (LO 4)
Baines Corporation manufactures fireplace tools and accessories. It has been prosperous since 
its incorporation in 1980, largely due to a small, exceptionally skilled, and highly motivated 
managerial staff. Baines has been able to attract and retain its excellent management team 
because of a very attractive managerial incentive plan. The plan allocates 23% of total pre-tax 
FIFO-absorption cost profits into a pool that is distributed to managers as a year-end bonus. 
The bonus pool is allocated to individual managers using a point system based on each man-
ager’s performance relative to a budgeted goal.
 
Data relating to 2013 operations follow:
Beginning inventory 
1,500,000 units @ $2.95
Ending inventory 
700,000 units @ $3.325
Production 
3,200,000 units
Sales 
4,000,000 units @ $3.50
Variable production costs 
$1.45/unit
Fixed production costs 
$6,000,000/year
Interest expense 
$100,000/year
 
Early in 2014, interest rates increased, and the company’s president, Ross Eldred, was 
concerned about the rising cost of financing the inventory. After a careful study of the situa-
tion, he became convinced that inventory levels could be reduced considerably without ad-
versely affecting sales or delivery performance provided certain changes in purchasing, 
production, and sales procedures were adopted. Accordingly, Eldred called a meeting of the 
management group in February 2014 and outlined his multifaceted plan for reducing 
inventories.
 
His basic strategy was immediately accepted, and several participants suggested various 
additional efficiencies and other inventory management improvements. The meeting ad-
journed with each manager resolving to do all that was possible to decrease inventory levels 
and thereby reduce interest expense.
 
As the year progressed, Eldred’s proposals and the refinements suggested by the other 
managers were put into practice; as a result, inventory levels were significantly reduced by 
December 31, 2014. The managers were quite pleased with their successful implementation 
of the new strategy, and morale was quite high.
 
Basic facts concerning 2014 performance were as follows:
 
Shortly after the final 2014 profit figures were reported early in 2015, a general manage-
ment meeting was held. As he walked into the room, Eldred was somewhat surprised to see a 
Beginning inventory 
1,500,000 units @ $2.95
Ending inventory 
1,500,000 units @ $2.95
Production 
4,000,000 units
Sales 
4,000,000 units @ $3.50
Variable production costs 
$1.45/unit
Fixed production costs 
$6,000,000/year
Reported pre-tax profit for 2013 was:
Sales revenues 
(4,000,000 @ $3.50) 
 
$14,000,000
Costs of goods sold 
 
 Variable production costs 
(4,000,000 @ $1.45) 
$5,800,000
 Fixed production costs 
(4,000,000 @ $1.50) 
6,000,000
 
 
 
11,800,000
Operating profit 
 
 
2,200,000
 Interest expense 
 
 
200,000
 Pre-tax profit 
 
 
$ 2,000,000

544 
CHAPTER 9
Inventories
rather sullen and dispirited group of managers confronting him. One was heard to mumble, 
“Well, I wonder what this year’s double cross will be!”
Required:
1. What do you think caused the abrupt change in the mood of the management team at 
 Baines Corporation? Cite figures to support your explanation.
2. How might this problem have been prevented? Cite figures to support your explanation.
C9-5
Consequences of IFRS 
 adoption in the U.S. 
(LO 5, 8, 12)
For several years, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) has been considering 
whether to transition U.S. firms to International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) for fil-
ing public financial reports.
 
During 2011, Matthew J. Foehr, the vice president and comptroller for Chevron Corpora-
tion, sent comment letters to both the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and the 
International Accounting Standards Board (IASB), stating, “Chevron would object to any plan 
to incorporate IFRS into U.S. GAAP if it would result in a significant income-tax penalty for 
our company.”37
 
In its 2012 Annual Report, Chevron reports:
Inventories 
Crude oil, petroleum products and chemicals inventories are generally stated at cost, using a last-in, 
first-out method. In the aggregate, these costs are below market. “Materials, supplies and other” inven-
tories generally are stated at average cost.
Required:
1. Why might Mr. Foehr be concerned that IFRS would trigger a “significant income-tax 
penalty” for Chevron?
2. Comment letters and business press articles that discuss LIFO inventory method issues 
with IFRS transition suggest that these potential problems could be addressed or fixed 
by any of the following agencies: U.S. Congress, SEC, or the IASB. Explain what type 
of actions each of these bodies might take to remedy concerns like the one posed by 
Mr. Foehr.
37 Matthew J. Foehr letter to the SEC, dated August 1, 2011 (http://www.sec.gov/comments/4-600/4600-123.pdf) and 
Matthew J. Foehr letter to the IASB, dated November 14, 2011 (http://www.ifrs.org/Current-Projects/IASB-Projects/IASB-
agenda- consultation/agenda-consultation-2011/comment-letters/Documents/ChevronCorporatiionCommentLetterIASBWork
Plan Agenda20122014.pdf).
.mhhe.com/revsine6e
www
Remember to check the book’s companion website 
for additional study material.

10
A 
n asset is something that generates future economic benefits and is under the 
exclusive control of a single entity. Assets can be tangible items such as inven-
tories and buildings or intangible items such as patents and trademarks.
 
The previous two chapters—on receivables and inventories—examined current assets. 
Current assets represent a large part of total assets for many companies. Recall that a cur-
rent asset is expected to be converted into cash within one year or within the operating 
cycle, whichever is longer.
 
This chapter concentrates on operating assets expected to yield their economic ben-
efits (or service potential) over a period longer than one year. Such assets are called 
long-lived assets.
 
Long-lived assets represent a significant percentage of total assets in industries such 
as oil exploration and refining, automobile manufacturing, and steel. Exhibit 10.1 shows 
the asset portion of Exxon Mobil Corporation’s balance 
sheet in both dollar and common-size terms at December 
31, 2012. Notice that long-lived assets (Property, plant, 
and equipment) comprise 68.0% of total assets. Firms 
have latitude in how much detail they provide about sepa-
rate long-lived asset components. ExxonMobil chose to 
provide a note breakdown of the total properties by indus-
try segment (see Exhibit 10.2). Notice that the highlighted 
net properties total from Exhibit 10.1 ($226,949 million) 
appears again in Exhibit 10.2. Statement readers can then 
see the breakdown of gross and net property, plant, and 
equipment across industry segments.
 
Clearly, there’s a high proportion of long-lived assets in some industries. However, 
there are many issues that complicate the accounting for long-lived assets, and we will 
see why next.
10
Long-Lived Assets
545
Chapter
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you 
will understand:
 1. What measurement basis is used in 
accounting for long-lived assets and 
why this base is used.
 2. What specific costs can be capital-
ized and how joint costs are 
 allocated among assets.
 3. How generally accepted accounting 
principles (GAAP) measurement 
rules can complicate both trend 
analysis and cross-company analysis 
and how to avoid misinterpretations.
 4. Why balance sheet carrying amounts 
for internally developed intangibles 
usually differ from their real values.
 5. When long-lived asset impairment 
exists and how it is recorded.
 6. How to account for asset retirement 
obligations and assets held for sale.
 7. How different depreciation methods 
are computed.
 8. How analysts can adjust for different 
depreciation assumptions and 
 improve interfirm comparisons.
 9. How to account for exchanges 
of long-lived assets.
 10. The key differences between GAAP 
and IFRS requirements for long-lived 
asset accounting.
The operating cycle for a 
manufacturer begins with 
the receipt of raw materials 
inventory and ends when 
cash is received for the 
completed product that has 
been sold. If inventory turns 
over every 90 days and if 
the average receivables 
 collection period is 50 days, 
then the operating cycle is 
140 days (that is, 90 1 50).

546 
CHAPTER 10
Long-Lived Assets
MEASUREMENT OF THE CARRYING AMOUNT 
OF LONG-LIVED ASSETS
Long-lived assets could potentially be measured on balance sheets in two ways:
1. Assets could be measured at their estimated value in an output market—a market where 
assets are sold. We call measures that use output market numbers expected benefit 
approaches.
2. Assets could be measured at their estimated cost in an input market—a market where 
 assets are purchased. Measures that use input market costs are called economic sacrifice 
approaches.
 
Expected benefit approaches recognize that assets are valuable because of the future cash 
inflows they are expected to generate. Consequently, these approaches measure various defi-
nitions of future cash inflows that are expected to be generated by the asset. One example of 
an expected benefit approach is discounted present value. Under it, the value of an item of 
manufacturing equipment is measured by estimating the discounted present value of the 
stream of future net operating cash inflows it’s expected to generate over its operating life. 
Another example of an expected benefit approach is the cash inflow that the asset would bring 
if it were sold instead of being used in operations. Under this variant of the expected benefit 
EXHIBIT 10.2
Exxon Mobil Corporation: Property, Plant, and 
Equipment Disclosure—December 31, 2012
($ in millions)  
Cost 
Net
Upstream 
$313,181 
$181,795
Downstream 
53,737 
23,053
Chemical 
29,437 
14,085
Other 
12,959 
8,016
 
$409,314 
$226,949
Source: Exxon Mobil Corporation 2012 annual report.
EXHIBIT 10.1
Exxon Mobil Corporation: Partial Consolidated 
Statement of Financial Position—December 31, 2012
($ in millions) 
Percentage
Assets
 Cash and cash equivalents 
$    9,923
 Accounts and notes receivable, net 
34,987
 Inventories 
14,542
 Other current assets 
5,008
Total current assets 
64,460 
19.3%
Investments, advances, and long-term receivables 
34,718 
10.4
Property, plant, and equipment (net) 
226,949 
68.0
Other assets, including intangibles, net 
7,668 
2.3
 Total 
$333,795 
100.0%
Source: Exxon Mobil Corporation 2012 annual report.

 
Measurement of  the Carrying Amount of  Long-Lived Assets 
547
approach, long-lived assets are reported at their net realizable value—the amount that would 
be received if the assets were sold in the used asset market. Under both approaches, the in-
come statement effect is the change in the value of the asset.
 
Economic sacrifice approaches to asset measurement focus on the amount of resource ex-
penditure necessary to acquire it. One example of an economic sacrifice approach is histori-
cal cost (the dominant GAAP measurement method)—that is, the historical amount spent to 
buy the asset constitutes the past sacrifice incurred to bring the asset into the firm. Another 
example of an economic sacrifice approach involves measuring the current (or replacement) 
cost of the asset. Under a replacement cost (sometimes called current cost) approach, assets 
are carried at their current purchase cost—the expenditure (sacrifice) needed today to buy 
the asset. Under both of these approaches, depreciation expense is recognized on the income 
statement. However, under replacement cost, a firm also recognizes in other comprehensive 
income holding gains (losses) for increases (decreases) in replacement costs. Depreciation 
expense is then based on the revised replacement cost amounts.1
The Approach Used by GAAP
Exhibit 10.3 shows a hypothetical range of long-lived asset carrying amounts as measured 
under each approach—expected benefit versus economic sacrifice. Assume that the fixed as-
set is a truck used by a freight hauler to transport heavy industrial equipment. Let’s say the 
EXHIBIT 10.3
Hypothetical Long-Lived Asset Carrying Amounts
(10-year life, 8 years remaining)
Expected Benefit Approach Examples
1. Discounted present value:
 
Expected net operating cash inflows 5 $16,275 per year (assumed) for eight remaining 
years, discounted at a 10% (assumed) rate
5.33493* 3 $16,275 5 $86,826
2. Net realizable value:
 
Current resale price from an over-the-road equipment listing (Purple Book) for the specific 
vehicle model
$85,000 (assumed)
Economic Sacrifice Approach Examples
3. Replacement cost:
 
Replacement cost of a two-year-old vehicle in equivalent condition
$130,000 (assumed) 2 a$130,000
10 years 3 2 yearsb 5 $104,000
4. Historical cost less accumulated depreciation:
$100,000 2 a$100,000
10 years 3 2 yearsb 5 $80,000
* Discount factor for an ordinary annuity for eight years at 10%. See “Present Value of an Ordinary Annuity of $1” 
 table in end-of-book appendix.
1 This is analogous to the replacement cost discussion for inventory. We discuss replacement cost accounting in detail in the 
web appendix for this chapter. See www.mhhe.com/revsine6e.

548 
CHAPTER 10
Long-Lived Assets
truck originally cost $100,000, is two years old, has a remaining useful life of eight years, is 
being depreciated straight-line, and is expected to have no salvage value (fair value) at the end 
of its useful life.
 
U.S. GAAP uses historical cost—an economic sacrifice approach—to measure long-lived 
assets in most circumstances. The choice of historical cost is not an accident. It results from 
several pragmatic aspects of the existing financial reporting environment.
 
As discussed in Chapter 1, financial reports play a critical role in resource allocation deci-
sions such as equity investing and lending. Accounting numbers are widely used in contracts 
such as loan agreements, incentive compensation plans, and union contracts (see Chapter 7). 
Because of these uses, parties whose transactions are explicitly or implicitly tied to account-
ing numbers expect them to be neutral (unbiased) and free from error (accurate). Recall 
from Chapter 1 that these characteristics are ingredients of faithful representation.2 If the 
numbers are easily manipulated or inaccurate, then cautious decision makers would be reluc-
tant to enter into contracts using such “soft” numbers. The reason is that manipulation by one 
party could circumvent the contract terms. In addition, contracting parties desire timely and 
cost effective accounting so that contracts can be monitored and enforced.
 
Auditors also prefer that financial statement numbers have certain characteristics. One is 
that the numbers be verifiable. Verifiability means the numbers should arise from readily 
observable, corroborative facts rather than from subjective beliefs. Verifiable numbers are 
important to auditors because of the many lawsuits arising from audited financial statements. 
Auditors believe that verifiable data help provide a defense in court, reducing potential 
 litigation losses.
 
As modern financial reporting evolved, neutrality, accuracy, verifiability, timeliness, and 
cost were used as guidelines for selecting acceptable long-lived asset measurement rules. 
Expected benefit approaches, such as discounted present value reporting, were not adopted 
because the resulting numbers were deemed subject to manipulation, inaccurate, and not 
verifiable. The present value computations require inherently subjective forecasts of future 
net cash flows as well as an assumed discount rate. This is illustrated in Exhibit 10.3 
where alternative 1—the discounted present value/expected benefit approach—requires an 
estimate of expected net operating cash inflows ($16,275) and a choice of discount rate 
(10%). Most decision makers would not tie contracts to such numbers be-
cause the other party to the contract could easily evade accounting-based 
contract terms by simply altering the cash flow forecast amounts or the 
discount rate.
Another expected benefit approach—the net realizable value from selling 
the asset (alternative 2)—has also been rejected as a measurement base be-
cause of verifiability, accuracy, and cost concerns. Our example in Exhibit 
10.3 assumes that the long-lived asset had a readily observable market price, 
as some do. However, many long-lived assets such as buildings are immobile, 
and others are highly specialized and therefore traded in thin markets. Conse-
quently, selling prices are often not readily determinable. The current selling 
price for these long-lived assets needs to be estimated using past transaction 
prices or transactions involving similar (but not necessarily identical) assets. 
In addition, one would have to consider how to aggregate the assets. Should each asset be 
priced separately, or should synergies among assets be considered? Estimation procedures 
Contracting
2 For full explanations of the theoretical terms used in this discussion, see FASB Statement of Financial Accounting Concepts 
No. 8, Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting, Chapter 1, The Objective of General Purpose Financial Reporting 
and Chapter 3, Qualitative Characteristics of Useful Financial Information (Norwalk, CT: FASB, 2010).
Although U.S. GAAP does not allow present 
value accounting, Sheraton Corporation of 
America provided pro forma present value 
amounts for long-lived assets as early as 1967. 
Management believed that these values were 
more relevant and representationally faithful 
than the amounts provided under historical cost, 
in part, because of increased land values and 
rental and room rates.
See S. Zeff and T. Keller, Financial Accounting Theory I: 
Issues and Controversies, 2nd Ed. (New York: McGraw-
Hill, 1973).

 
Long-Lived Asset Measurement Rules Illustrated 
549
may be verifiable, but the amounts themselves may not be. Use of independent appraisals 
adds to the cost of financial reporting and reduces the timeliness of the information.
 
The economic sacrifice approach that uses replacement cost—that is, the estimated current 
cost of replacing the asset (alternative 3)—has also been disqualified on the basis of concerns 
similar to those expressed for net realizable values.
 
Because of the practical considerations discussed above, historical cost 
(less accumulated depreciation) has become the primary method for reporting 
long-lived assets in the United States. However, it also can have serious limi-
tations. First, depreciation is an allocation of historical cost to time periods. 
Except by coincidence, the net book value amount at a point in time—original 
cost less accumulated depreciation—does not reflect the expected benefit of 
the asset. Long-lived assets typically last for many years, and the expected 
benefits might increase rather than decrease. U.S. GAAP prohibits upward 
adjustments to long-lived assets. Second, because the financial statements do 
not reflect replacement costs or present values, analysts may have difficulty 
making meaningful comparisons of old firms to new firms in the same indus-
try or comparing firms across industries. This problem is exacerbated if a firm 
does not modernize and innovate. Under historical cost, the return-on-asset 
ratio increases as the book value of the asset declines from depreciation.
 
The analyst must monitor company capital expenditures and the average 
age of assets to determine whether the company is maintaining its productive 
capacity. We discuss these and other limitations throughout the chapter.
 
Although historical cost is the primary method of accounting for long-lived 
assets in the United States, we see the use of the expected benefits approaches in 
some situations. The most common setting is when management suspects that 
the expected benefits of an asset are below its book value. In such situations, because of conser-
vatism, accountants are willing to accept the costs and limitations associated with the present value 
and net realizable value methods. We discuss impairment issues in detail later in the chapter.
One would not have this issue with present value 
accounting. (Though, we would have the practi-
cal problems mentioned above.) Under present 
value accounting, the asset would decrease as 
the present value of the expected cash flows de-
clines. In our example, the depreciation in Year 2 
would have been $6,902, which is the difference 
between the present value at the end of Year 2 of 
$86,826 (item 1 in Exhibit 10.3) and the present 
value at the end of Year 1 of $93,728 ($16,275 3 
the present value of an ordinary annuity for 
9 periods and 10%, or 5.75902). Note that this 
depreciation expense is lower than the $10,000 
straight-line annual depreciation expense. 
 Consequently, the book value of the asset is 
higher than historical cost with straight-line 
depreciation. Traditionally, accountants and 
 regulators have sought conservative accounting, 
which may be another reason that historical cost 
was selected over the expected benefit approaches. 
P10-20 compares the effects of present value and 
straight-line depreciation in detail.
RECAP
Because long-lived assets are predominantly carried at depreciated historical cost, state-
ment users should not expect balance sheet numbers for such assets to necessarily 
 approximate their real economic worth. This is a limitation (with important implications 
for statement users) that we explore throughout the chapter.
LONG-LIVED ASSET MEASUREMENT 
RULES ILLUSTRATED
The initial balance sheet carrying amount of a long-lived asset is governed by two rules:
1. All costs necessary to acquire the asset and make it ready for use are included in the asset 
account. Costs included in the asset account are called capitalized costs. (Expenditures 
excluded from asset categories are “charged-off” to income—that is, expensed.)
2. Joint costs incurred in acquiring more than one asset are apportioned among the acquired 
assets on a relative fair value basis or some other rational basis.
Both rules are illustrated in the Canyon Corporation example that follows in Exhibit 10.4.
 
Capitalized land costs include many items in addition to the $6,000,000 cash payment. For 
example, the cost of demolishing (razing) the existing structure (net of salvaged materials) is 
added to the land account because the land had to be cleared before the new building could be 

550 
CHAPTER 10
Long-Lived Assets
erected. This illustrates initial carrying amount Rule 1—all costs necessary to prepare the as-
set for its intended use are capitalized—here as land costs. The legal fees illustrate Rule 2—
joint costs are apportioned among assets to both the land and building in this case. It is 
important to distinguish the amounts allocated to the land from the amounts 
allocated to the building because land is not depreciated whereas a building is 
depreciated over its expected useful life.
The costs allocated to the building include the interest arising from the 
loan that Canyon negotiated to finance construction. GAAP requires capital-
izing what are called avoidable interest payments. Authoritative accounting 
literature defines this as interest that “could have been avoided . . . if expendi-
tures for the assets had not been made.”3 To qualify as avoidable interest, the 
interest doesn’t have to arise from borrowing that is directly linked to a con-
struction loan. So long as some debt was outstanding during the construction 
period, a portion of the interest was avoidable and qualifies for capitalization. 
Here’s why. Building the asset required spending cash. If the asset had not 
been built, that cash could have been used to retire debt, thereby lowering 
EXHIBIT 10.4
Canyon Corporation: Joint Cost Allocation, 
Fixed Asset Purchase
Canyon Corporation acquired a tract of land on June 1, 2014, by paying $6,000,000 and by 
 assuming an existing mortgage of $1,000,000 on the land. Canyon demolished an empty 
 structure on the property at a cost of $650,000. Bricks and other materials from the demolished 
 building were sold for $10,000. Regrading and clearing the land cost $35,000. Canyon then 
 began constructing a new factory on the site. Architectural fees were $800,000, and the payments 
to contractors for building the factory totaled $12,000,000. Canyon negotiated a bank loan to 
help ease the cash flow crunch during construction. Interest payments over the construction 
 period totaled $715,000. Legal fees incurred in the transaction totaled $57,000, of which 
$17,000 was attributable to both examination of title covering the land purchase and legal issues 
linked to the assumption of the existing mortgage. The remaining $40,000 of legal fees related 
to contracts with the architect and the construction companies. The construction project was 
completed on December 31, 2014.
 
The amounts allocated to the land and building accounts, respectively, are:
Land
Cash payment 
 
$ 6,000,000
Mortgage assumed 
 
1,000,000
Demolition of existing structure 
$650,000
Less: Salvage value of material 
(10,000)
 
 
640,000
Regrading and clearing land 
 
35,000
Legal fees allocated 
 
17,000
Capitalized land costs 
 
$ 7,692,000
Building
Architectural fees 
 
$   800,000
Building costs 
 
12,000,000
Interest capitalized 
 
715,000
Legal fees allocated 
 
40,000
 Capitalized building costs 
 
$13,555,000
Apportionment is also necessary when more 
than one asset is acquired for a lump-sum price. 
Assume that two tracts of land are acquired for 
$1,000,000. For property tax purposes, the land 
tracts are assessed as follows:
 
Assessment 
Percentage
Tract 1 
$240,000 
40%
Tract 2 
360,000 
60%
 Total 
$600,000 
100%
The $1,000,000 purchase price is then apportioned 
between the tracts in proportion to their assessed 
value—40% to Tract 1 and 60% to Tract 2.
3 FASB Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) Paragraph 835-20-30-2: Interest—Capitalization of Interest—Initial 
 Measurement—The Amount of Interest Cost to Be Capitalized.

 
Long-Lived Asset Measurement Rules Illustrated 
551
interest costs. This is why the interest is avoidable, and this is why the capitalized interest 
doesn’t have to arise from a dedicated construction loan. Capitalizing interest is another ap-
plication of Rule 1—interest paid to lenders during the construction period is considered to be 
a cost necessary to prepare the asset for its intended use.
 
Interest can also be capitalized for borrowings that are outstanding when the assets are be-
ing constructed for others—that is, for inventory intended for sale or lease. To qualify for in-
terest capitalization, the inventory being constructed must be an identifiable, discrete project 
(a three-year contract to construct two aircraft carriers for the Navy is an example).
Computing Avoidable Interest 
Avoidable interest is the product of cumulative 
weighted average expenditures on the constructed asset times the interest rate. Let’s first il-
lustrate the computation of cumulative weighted average expenditures. The computation mea-
sures the timing of the dollar expenditures over the construction period. The earlier in the 
period the expenditure takes place, the more days that the expenditure needs to be financed—
and the more interest is incurred. For example, assume that expenditures of $1,000,000 are 
incurred evenly over the 2014 year that construction took place. Here, cumulative weighted 
average expenditures are simply $1,000,000/2 5 $500,000.
 
To illustrate the computation when construction expenditures do not take place evenly, as-
sume the following timing of expenditures in Exhibit 10.4 on Canyon’s construction project 
completed on December 31:
 
 
Cumulative Weighted
Date and Amount 
Portion of Year 
Average Expenditures
June 1 
$10,000,000 
3 
58.630%* 
5 
$5,863,000
August 22 
3,558,788 
3 
36.164%† 
5 
1,287,000
 
 
 
 
 
$7,150,000
* June 1 through December 31 5 214 days, and 214/365 5 58.630% of a year.
† August 22 through December 31 5 132 days, and 132/365 5 36.164% of a year (rounded).
Assuming a 10% interest rate on the outstanding debt, avoidable interest is $715,000 (10% 3 
$7,150,000).4
DR Construction in progress   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$715,000
   CR Interest expense   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$715,000
 
If construction projects extend past one year, then the cumulative expenditures to date are 
assumed to have been made as of the beginning of the second reporting year. For example, if 
Canyon’s project had not been completed by the end of the first year, the second year would 
have begun with cumulative expenditures of $14,273,788 ($10,000,000 1 $3,558,788 1 
$715,000).
 
GAAP limits the amount of interest that can be capitalized to the lower of (1) interest actu-
ally incurred or (2) avoidable interest. If Canyon’s interest actually incurred had been 
4 FASB ASC Paragraph 835-20-30: Interest—Capitalization of Interest—Initial measurement—The Amount of Interest to be 
Capitalized allows firms to use the interest rate on specific debt associated with the construction up to the amount of the 
specific debt. For additional accumulated expenditures, the company would use the average rate of its other debt, computed 
as interest expense on the other interest-bearing debt divided by the average other debt outstanding. A company may use a 
weighted average rate to compute all of its avoidable interest.

552 
CHAPTER 10
Long-Lived Assets
$800,000, the capitalized amount would be limited to avoidable interest, $715,000. If interest 
actually incurred was only $600,000, then just $600,000 would be capitalized.
 
However, capitalization is restricted to interest arising from actual borrowings from 
outsiders. To see the financial statement effect of this restriction, let’s assume that Canyon 
had not borrowed from a bank but had instead issued more common stock and used the 
proceeds to finance construction. Also assume that Canyon had absolutely no interest-
bearing debt outstanding. Equity funds are not “free”—stockholders expect to earn a re-
turn and will replace management if it doesn’t materialize! Despite this, GAAP does not 
allow Canyon to calculate an artificial interest charge on the equity financing and capital-
ize this “imputed interest” as a part of the cost of the building. So, the way the construc-
tion is financed can alter the cost capitalized under GAAP when a company initially has 
no outstanding debt.
 
Treating equity that is issued to finance construction as “free” (when there is no interest-
bearing debt outstanding) is consistent with the traditional accounting model. That is, GAAP 
does not recognize the imputed cost associated with capital provided by stockholders. These 
funds are treated as if they are free. So, the cost of equity capital is ignored under GAAP in 
both income determination and asset costing.
 
Interest capitalization can complicate the analysis of firm performance over time. Because 
of interest capitalization, an increase in capital expenditures can temporarily decrease the 
amount of interest expense shown on the income statement and—all other factors being 
equal—increase income (or partially offset an income decrease). But this change in the in-
come pattern does not result from increased sales, lower costs, or other operating efficiencies. 
Consequently, the year-to-year profit change is partially unrelated to operating activities and 
may not be sustainable. Exhibit 10.5 shows an excerpt from the Management’s Discussion 
As discussed in Chapter 15, 
GAAP utilizes what is 
called the proprietary view 
of the firm. The proprietary 
view deems the firm and its 
owners to be indistinguish-
able. Consequently, funds 
contributed by owners do 
not come from “outsiders.” 
The firm can’t charge itself 
interest on contributed 
ownership capital.
Analysis
EXHIBIT 10.5
MGM Resorts International:
Interest Capitalization
The following table summarizes information related to interest on our long-term debt:
 
Year Ended December 31,
($ in thousands) 
2009 
2008 
2007
Year Ended December 31,
Total interest incurred 
 $ 997,897 
$ 773,662 
$ 930,138
Interest capitalized 
 
(222,466) 
(164,376) 
(215,951)
Interest allocated to discontinued operations 
 
— 
— 
(5,844)
 
$ 775,431 
$ 609,286 
$ 708,343
In 2009, gross interest costs increased compared to 2008 mainly due to higher average debt bal-
ances during 2009, higher interest rates for borrowings under our senior credit facility in 2009, 
higher interest rates for newly issued fixed rate borrowings, as well as breakage fees for voluntary 
repayments of our revolving credit facility. In 2008, gross interest costs decreased compared to 
2007 mainly due to lower interest rates on our variable rate.
 
Capitalized interest increased in 2009 due to higher CityCenter investment balances and 
higher weighted average cost of debt. Capitalized interest decreased in 2008 compared to 2007 
due to less capitalized interest on CityCenter and cessation of capitalized interest related to our 
investment in MGM Grand Macau upon opening in December 2007. The amounts presented 
above  exclude non-cash gross interest and corresponding capitalized interest related to our 
 CityCenter delayed equity contribution.
Source: MGM MIRAGE 2009 annual report.

 
Long-Lived Asset Measurement Rules Illustrated 
553
and Analysis section of the 2009 annual report of MGM Resorts International (formerly 
named MGM MIRAGE), which owns and operates casino resorts. This disclosure will help us 
see how interest capitalization can alter year-to-year profit assessments.
 
Exhibit 10.5 shows that capitalized interest increased from $164.4 million in 2008 to 
$222.5 in 2009, or 35%. The note also states that the amount of capitalized interest increased 
because of the higher cumulative construction costs associated with CityCenter (a new Las 
Vegas resort) and a higher weighted average interest rate. Given that the CityCenter project 
was finished in 2009 (stated elsewhere in the annual report), we would not expect as much 
capitalized interest in 2010, and in fact, there was zero interest capitalized in that year. 
 Because MGM Resorts International will still have a similar amount of debt, we expect 2010 
interest expense to increase and net income to decrease, which they did. By capitalizing inter-
est, relevant costs are assigned to specific long-lived assets, but the practice makes year-to-
year income changes in net income a function of changes in both operating performance and 
levels of capital expenditures. This complicates the analysis of earnings sustainability.
Tax versus Financial Reporting Incentives 
The way incurred costs are allo-
cated between land and building affects the amount of income that will be reported in future 
periods. Land is a permanent or nonwasting asset, so it’s not depreciated. A factory building 
has a finite life and is depreciated over future years. For financial reporting purposes, the 
manner in which costs are allocated between, say, land and building, is guided by which one 
(land or building) generated the cost.
 
For tax purposes, the incentives for allocating costs between land and building asset cate-
gories are completely different because the objective of most firms is to minimize tax pay-
ments, not to “correctly” allocate costs. The higher the costs allocated to land for tax purposes, 
the higher the future taxable income becomes because land cannot be depreciated. Aggressive 
taxpayers seek to minimize the amount of joint expenditures allocated to nondepreciable 
 assets such as land. Similarly, taxpayers would prefer not to capitalize interest payments for 
tax purposes because the benefits of the deduction would be spread over the depreciable life 
of the asset rather than being deductible immediately. However, U.S. income tax rules gener-
ally parallel financial reporting rules and require cost allocations between land and buildings 
that are similar to U.S. GAAP rules. The same is true for interest capitalization—U.S. tax 
rules closely parallel GAAP rules and therefore require avoidable interest to be capitalized for 
tax purposes.
Capitalization Criteria—An Extension 
Businesses frequently upgrade their 
long-lived assets to increase their usefulness. For example, a trucking company might install 
new motors in its older vehicles. GAAP capitalizes such expenditures—that is, increases the 
carrying amount of a long-lived asset—when the expenditure causes any of the following 
conditions:
• The useful life of the asset is extended.
• The capacity of the asset is increased (that is, when attainable units of output increases).
• The efficiency of the asset is increased (that is, when fewer labor hours or raw material 
inputs are required).
• There is any other type of increase in the economic benefits (or future service potential) 
of the asset that results as a consequence of the expenditure.

554 
CHAPTER 10
Long-Lived Assets
 
When the expenditure does not meet any of these conditions, it must be treated as a period 
expense and be charged to income. Routine equipment maintenance is one example.
 
To illustrate how these capitalization criteria work, consider the example in Exhibit 10.6. 
In it, total expenditures that are capitalized—that is, those that are included in the carrying 
amount of the machine—include all of the highlighted costs ($88,500) associated with getting 
the machine ready for production use, not just the invoice cost of $80,000.
 
To further illustrate the capitalization criteria, lets jump forward in time. Suppose that in 
January 2017, Winger spends an additional $8,000 on the machine. The total expenditure 
consisted of:
• $2,000 for ordinary repairs and maintenance, required every several years.
• $6,000 for the installation of a new component that allowed the machine to consume less 
raw material and operate more efficiently.
In this example, the $2,000 would be treated as a period expense while the $6,000 would be 
capitalized in 2017 and added to the carrying amount of the machine because it increases the 
asset’s efficiency.
 
Executives of WorldCom, once the leading telecommunications company in the United 
States, were convicted of deliberately misapplying the asset capitalization rules to boost re-
ported pre-tax income by approximately $3.8 billion over five quarters in 2001 and 2002.5
WorldCom’s method was simple. Normal operating costs of connecting to other firm’s tele-
communications lines—clearly period expenses—were instead capitalized. Because these 
items (called line costs) were debited to balance sheet asset accounts rather than charged to 
income statement expenses, income was overstated. The motive for this misrepresentation 
was to hide WorldCom’s inherent unprofitability due to excess industry capacity. So, a fail-
ure to correctly apply the capitalization criteria resulted in an enormous income misstate-
ment (see Figure 10.1).
EXHIBIT 10.6
Winger Enterprises:  
Determination of Capitalized Costs
On January 1, 2014, Winger Enterprises purchased a machine that will be used in operations. Its 
cash purchase price was $80,000. The freight cost to transport the machine to Winger’s factory 
was $1,200. During the month of January 2014, Winger’s employees spent considerable time 
 calibrating the machine and making adjustments and test runs to get it ready for use. Costs 
 incurred in doing this were:
Allocated portion of production manager’s salary 
 for coordinating machine adjustments 
$2,200
Hourly wages of production workers engaged in 
 test runs of the machine 
3,600
Cost of raw materials that were used in test runs 
 (the output was not salable) 
1,500
Given these facts, on January 1, 2014, the capitalized amount of the machine would be the total 
of all of the costs ($80,000 1 $1,200 1 $2,200 1 $3,600 1 $1,500 5 $88,500).
5 See J. Sandberg, D. Solomon, and R. Blumenstein, “Inside WorldCom’s Unearthing of a Vast Accounting Scandal,” The 
Wall Street Journal, June 27, 2002, and K. Eichenwald and S. Romero, “Inquiry Finds Effort at Delay at WorldCom,” The 
New York Times, July 4, 2002.

 
Intangible Assets 
555
INTANGIBLE ASSETS
Intangible assets are long-lived assets that do not have physical substance. The category 
 includes the following types of assets:
• Patents
• Copyrights
• Trademarks
• Brand names
• Customer lists
• Licenses
• Technology
• Franchises
• Employment contracts
When one firm purchases an intangible asset—for example, a valuable trademark—from an-
other firm, few new accounting or reporting issues arise. The acquired intangible asset is re-
corded at the arm’s-length transaction price. If the intangible asset is purchased with other 
assets, then the purchase price must be allocated among assets based on relative fair values as 
shown on pages 550–551. Most acquired intangible assets are amortized (depreciated) over 
$3.8 billion of 2001–2002
expenditures on “line costs”
GAAP requirements
The
transactions
Accounting
treatment
Financial
statement
effect
The $3.8 billion must be treated 
as operating expenses.
Net result is that the 
misapplication of asset 
capitalization rules increased 
pre-tax income by $3.8 billion 
over the five quarters ended
March 31, 2002.
WorldCom capitalized
these costs.
What WorldCom did instead
2001–2002 income effect according 
to WorldCom: The $3.8 billion
was not deducted as an expense
but was instead put on the
balance sheet (capitalized) to be
amortized over future years.
2001–2002 income effect according 
to GAAP: These expenditures 
should be deducted in computing 
2001–2002 pre-tax income, which
will be reduced by $3.8 billion.
Figure 10.1
IMPACT OF WORLDCOM’S 
MISAPPLICATION OF ASSET 
CAPITALIZATION RULES

556 
CHAPTER 10
Long-Lived Assets
their  expected useful lives (discussed in more detail later in the chapter). We refer to these intan-
gibles as amortizable intangible assets. However, some intangible assets such as brand 
names have indefinite lives and are not amortized. Instead, they are evaluated annually for 
impairment (decline in value). We refer to these types of intangibles as indefinite-lived intan-
gible assets. Goodwill is another type of intangible asset, which represents the difference 
between the total fair value of an acquired business and the fair value of its identifiable net 
assets. We discuss accounting for goodwill in Chapter 16.
 
Difficult financial reporting issues exist when the intangible asset is developed internally 
instead of being purchased from another company. These difficulties arise because the expen-
ditures that ultimately create valuable intangibles such as patents or trademarks are expensed 
as incurred.
 
A patent, for example, is the result of successful research and development expenditures. A 
valuable trademark is the result of successful advertising, a great product, clever packaging, 
or brand loyalty. The recoverability of research and development (R&D) expenditures is 
highly uncertain at the start of a project. Consequently, the GAAP requires that virtually all 
R&D expenditures be charged to expense immediately.6 This mandated 
 financial reporting uniformity is viewed as a practical way to deal with the 
risk of nonrecoverability of R&D expenditures. Similarly, prevailing 
 accounting principles have long required companies to treat advertising and 
creative product development expenditures as period costs, again because of 
the highly uncertain, difficult-to-predict, future benefits. This conservative 
bias is due primarily to the contracting role of accounting. A firm would not 
want to pay bonuses to its managers based on what might happen because of 
an R&D project.
The major types of cash outflows most likely to result in intangibles cre-
ation (R&D, advertising costs, and so forth) are immediately expensed. When 
past outflows successfully create intangible assets, these outflows have al-
ready been expensed and there are usually few remaining future outflows to 
capitalize! Consequently, the balance sheet carrying amount for intangible assets is often far 
below the value of the property right.
 
As software development companies proliferated in the 1980s, authoritative accounting 
guidance was ultimately issued for software development costs.7 This GAAP applies the pre-
viously described R&D rules to the particular circumstances faced by companies developing 
computer software products. Specifically, prior to establishing the techno-
logical feasibility of a computer software product, a company expenses all 
R&D costs incurred to develop it. After technological feasibility is estab-
lished, additional costs incurred to ready the product for general release to 
customers are supposed to be capitalized. Capitalization of additional costs 
ceases when the final product is available for sale. The costs incurred before 
technological feasibility is established can be considerable; because feasibil-
ity may not be ensured until late in the expenditure cycle, there may be few 
costs left to capitalize. Accordingly, the intangible software asset may be re-
corded at an amount far lower than its value to the software development firm, 
just as in other (nonsoftware) R&D settings.
6 FASB ASC Topic 730: Research and Development Costs. The only exception to immediate expensing is when the R&D 
expenditures will be reimbursed by some outside group (FASB ASC Paragraph 730-10-15-4: Research and Development—
Overall—Scope and Scope Exceptions—Transactions).
7 FASB ASC Subtopic 985-20: Software—Costs of Software to Be Sold, Leased, or Marketed.
For example, TiVo’s 2009 annual report indi-
cated that “Purchased technology, capitalized 
software, and intangible assets, net” were valued 
at $9.6 million. However, a disclosure in that 
same annual report reveals that TiVo won court 
judgments in 2008 and 2009 of more than $400 
million from lawsuits alleging that EchoStar 
Communications infringed on TiVo’s patented 
“Multimedia Time Warping System.” The size 
of the judgments indicated that the economic 
value of TiVo’s patents exceeded substantially 
the book value recorded on the balance sheet.
Authoritative accounting literature states that 
technological feasibility is established “when 
the entity has completed all planning, designing, 
coding and testing activities that are necessary 
to establish that the product can be produced 
to meet its design specifications including 
 functions, features, and technical performance 
requirements” (FASB ASC Paragraph 
985-20-25-2: Software—Costs of Software to 
Be Sold, Leased, or Marketed—Research and 
Development Costs of Computer Software).

 
Intangible Assets 
557
 
The GAAP bias that leads to an understatement of internally developed intangible assets 
can fool analysts who are not acquainted with it. The issue has become more important as 
economic activity shifted in the 1980s from heavy manufacturing to high technology. In high-
technology industries such as software development and biotechnology, research has contrib-
uted to large increases in the value of intellectual property rights such as patents and 
trademarks, yet most of it is not on the balance sheet if it has been developed internally.
 
In the pre-Codification document for research and development costs, the FASB justified 
expensing all R&D for three reasons:
1. The future benefits accruing from these expenditures are highly uncertain.
2. A causal relationship between current R&D and future revenue has not been 
demonstrated.
3. Whatever benefits may arise cannot be objectively measured.8
Even though the potential assets associated with R&D expenditures are not recognized under 
GAAP, research indicates that investors treat the expenditures as if they are assets. One study 
examined the relationship between R&D expenditures and both future earnings and share 
values.9 The study found that a $1 increase in R&D expenditures results in a cumulative $2 
profit increase over a seven-year period. Furthermore, a $1 increase in R&D expenditures 
leads to a $5 increase in the market value of a firm’s shares, on average. So, R&D expendi-
tures are related to future benefits, and logic suggests that a causal relationship exists. Another 
study developed statistically reliable estimates of unrecorded R&D asset costs.10 These esti-
mates were then used to adjust reported earnings and book values to reflect capitalization of 
R&D. The adjusted numbers that reflected R&D capitalization (and subsequent amortization) 
were strongly associated with stock prices and returns and, thus, were value-relevant to inves-
tors. So, investors’ behavior suggests that the adjusted numbers are measuring R&D benefits. 
A recent study suggests that not all R&D is created equal. R&D appears to have the most 
impact on future earnings in industries where patents and other legal mechanisms are most 
effective in protecting R&D.11 Given the above academic research, analysts should consider 
carefully R&D expenditures in their evaluations of companies though they are not on the 
 balance sheet.
 
Some (often small) portion of total software development costs is capitalized once techno-
logical feasibility is established. But the proportion of total software development costs that is 
capitalized is subjectively determined and varies across firms. So, one question that arises is 
whether a GAAP standard that conveys such latitude also provides information that is relevant 
to investors. One study found that it does because the capitalization-related variables (annual 
amount capitalized, amount of the software asset, and annual amortization) were significantly 
associated with stock prices, returns, and future earnings.12
 
To summarize, research findings indicate that existing GAAP for both R&D and software de-
velopment is conservative. The expenditures create assets that do not appear on balance sheets, 
8 Pre-Codification SFAS No. 2, paras. 39–46. The FASB considered this material to be nonessential for Codification and 
viewed it as background for the actual accounting principle. Material that the FASB views as nonessential is not found in the 
FASB Accounting Standards Codification but can be accessed at www.fasb.org under pre-Codification Standards.
9 T. Sougiannis, “The Accounting Based Valuation of Corporate R&D,” The Accounting Review, January 1994, pp. 44–68.
10 B. Lev and T. Sougiannis, “The Capitalization, Amortization, and Value-Relevance of R&D,” Journal of Accounting and 
Economics, February 1996, pp. 107–38.
11 See N. Brown and M. Kimbrough, “Intangible Investment and the Importance of Firm-Specific Factors in the Determina-
tion of Earnings,” Review of Accounting Studies, September 2011, pp. 539–73.
12 D. Aboody and B. Lev, “The Value Relevance of Intangibles: The Case of Software Capitalization,” Journal of Accounting 
Research, Supplement 1998, pp. 161–91.
Valuation

558 
CHAPTER 10
Long-Lived Assets
and net income in the current and future years is misstated. Over time the amount of R&D expen-
ditures in a given year may equal the amount of amortization for the year under a full capitaliza-
tion approach, thereby reducing the misstatement of net income. However, the understatement of 
assets and shareholders’ equity will continue as long as a firm invests in R&D. The cumulative 
understatement is similar to what we observed in Chapter 9 for firms on LIFO. Consequently, 
profitability and asset utilization ratios of R&D intensive firms will be higher than similar ratios 
of non-R&D intensive firms. Also, analysts have to watch for decreases in R&D expenditures, 
which could boost income at the expense of future new products and growth.
 
Analysts can recast financial statements using required GAAP disclosures. For example, 
firms are required to disclose separately total expensed R&D costs.13 Similarly, authoritative 
accounting literature requires disclosure of unamortized software assets, amortization and 
write-downs of the assets in each period, and all costs that are expensed prior to technological 
feasibility.14 Analysts can use these disclosures to reconstruct what asset and amortization 
amounts would be if GAAP allowed full capitalization. (Analysts can create their own esti-
mation procedures or use the methods in the article cited in footnote 10.) Unfortunately, dis-
closures of marketing and advertising expenditures are voluntary and therefore do not 
consistently permit a similar adjustment approach for trademarks or brands. So, it’s harder to 
undo the limitations of GAAP for these unrecorded intangible assets.15
P10-13 illustrates this point.
ASSET IMPAIRMENT
Tangible and Amortizable Intangible Assets
As mentioned early in this chapter, due to verifiability concerns, long-lived assets are carried 
at depreciated historical cost instead of net realizable value. However, the concept of faithful 
representation (see Chapter 1, page 18) outweighs verifiability concerns when there is evi-
dence that the carrying value of long-lived asset exceeds the expected future economic bene-
fits. When a long-lived asset is considered to be impaired, the carrying value is reduced to its 
fair value, and the new value is then depreciated over its remaining useful life.
The specific guidelines for addressing impairments are con-
tained in various subtopics of FASB ASC Topic 360: Property, 
Plant, and Equipment.16 We explain these guidelines step-by-
step using the lettered stages in Figure 10.2.
Stage A. Authoritative accounting literature states that an 
 impairment review should be made whenever external events 
raise the possibility that an asset’s carrying amount (book value) may not be  recoverable. 
 Examples of such external events include a significant decrease in the  asset’s fair value, 
 deterioration in the business climate, or forecasted future losses from using the asset.17
Fair value is the price that 
would be received to sell an 
asset or paid to transfer a 
 liability in an orderly transac-
tion between market partici-
pants at the measurement 
date. See FASB ASC Master 
Glossary: Fair Value.
Assets are often used in combination with other assets, not just sin-
gly. When applying the impairment guidelines to groups of assets, 
the unit of accounting should be “the lowest level for which identi-
fiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other 
groups of assets and liabilities.” FASB ASC 360-10-20: Property, 
Plant, and Equipment—Overall—Glossary: Asset Group.
RECAP
Balance sheet carrying amounts for internally developed intangible assets such as patents 
or trademarks are not dependable indicators of their value to the firm. Because the as-
sets are understated, so too is income statement amortization in later years.
13 FASB ASC Section 985-20-50: Software—Costs of Software to Be Sold, Leased, or Marketed—Disclosure.
14 Ibid.
15 Although most research to date supports a link between stock prices and R&D expenditures, the evidence is mixed for 
advertising.
16 FASB ASC Topic 360: Property, Plant, and Equipment, and Subsections titled Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets.
17 See FASB ASC Paragraph 360-10-35-21: Property, Plant, and Equipment—Overall—Subsequent Measurement— 
Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets—When to Test a Long-Lived Asset for Recoverability.

 
Asset Impairment 
559
Stage B. This stage defines the threshold loss level that triggers the write-down.
Stage C. The threshold is triggered whenever the expected future net cash inflow— 
undiscounted total future inflows minus future outflows—is lower than the current 
 carrying amount of the asset.
Stage D. When an impairment loss is recognized, the long-lived asset is written down. 
The income statement charge is included “above the line”—that is, as a component of 
 income from continuing operations before income taxes.
Stage E. This stage defines the amount of the write-down that must be recognized. The 
write-down loss is measured as the difference between the fair value of the asset and the 
current carrying amount of the asset. Firms will often have to use an “expected present 
value technique” to estimate fair value.18
Estimate the future
undiscounted net cash
flows expected from the
use and disposal of 
the asset.
Stage A
Stage B
Stage C
Stage D
Stage E
No impairment 
write-down is
necessary.
The impairment loss is
the difference between
the fair value of the asset
and the carrying amount
of the asset.
Are these future
undiscounted net cash
flows lower than the 
carrying amount of 
the asset?
Have events or changes
in circumstances raised
the possibility that
certain long-lived assets
may be impaired?
Yes
Yes
No
No
The impaired asset must
be written down.
Figure 10.2
LONG-LIVED ASSET 
IMPAIRMENT GUIDELINES
18 See FASB ASC Paragraph 360-10-35-36.

560 
CHAPTER 10
Long-Lived Assets
Once an asset is written down, it cannot later be written back up to the original higher carry-
ing amount if the fair value recovers.19
 
The following example illustrates how these impairment rules are applied.
Solomon Corporation manufactures a variety of computer products. The growing popularity 
of tablets is expected to reduce the demand for Solomon’s notebook computers. The note-
book computers are produced on an assembly line consisting of five special purpose assets 
with a carrying amount (cost of $5,300,000 less accumulated depreciation of $3,300,000) of 
$2,000,000. Solomon’s management believes that this change in the business climate threat-
ens the recoverability of these assets’ carrying amount; accordingly, their answer to the ques-
tion in Stage A of Figure 10.2 is yes. Consequently, to apply Stage B, they prepare the 
following estimate of future undiscounted cash flows over the expected three-year remain-
ing life of the notebook computer assembly line:
Net operating cash flows
 2014 
$ 800,000
 2015 
400,000
 2016 
200,000
Expected salvage value 
100,000
 Total undiscounted cash flows 
$1,500,000
 
A comparison of the $2,000,000 carrying amount to the $1,500,000 undiscounted flows 
(Stage C) indicates that the asset must be written down (Stage D). By reference to used 
asset price lists, Solomon determines that the entire assembly line can be sold for $750,000. 
So, the amount of the impairment loss (Stage E) is $1,250,000 (that is, $2,000,000 2 
$750,000).
 
To record the loss, Solomon would make the following entry:
DR Impairment loss. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$1,250,000
   CR Equipment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$1,250,00020
 
The impairment loss decreases both assets and net income.
The threshold for determining whether an impairment exists (Stage B in Figure 10.2) is the 
undiscounted future net cash flows the asset is expected to generate. When these undis-
counted net cash flows are smaller than the asset’s carrying amount, the GAAP guidance says 
the asset is impaired. By not discounting the future net cash flows, the threshold is higher than 
it would be if the flows were discounted. Obviously, the higher the threshold, the smaller is 
the likelihood that the impairment threshold will be triggered. So, the high threshold lessens 
the probability of recognizing an impairment when none exists.
19 FASB ASC Paragraph 360-10-35-20: Property, Plant, and Equipment—Overall—Subsequent Measurement-Impairment or 
Disposal of Long-Lived Assets—Adjusted Carrying Amount Becomes New Cost Basis.
20 GAAP is silent on which asset accounts to credit. Consequently, the same effect on book value could be accomplished by 
either of the following two entries:
Alternative 2
DR Impairment loss   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$1,250,000
   CR Accumulated depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$1,250,000
Alternative 3
DR Impairment loss   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$1,250,000
DR Accumulative depreciation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
3,300,000 
   CR Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$4,550,000
Alternative 2, credits Accumulated depreciation instead of Equipment. Alternative 3 reduces Equipment to the fair value of 
$750,000 and reduces Accumulated depreciation to zero. Under all three alternatives, the book value of the equipment is 
$750,000.

 
Asset Impairment 
561
Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
The GAAP steps for evaluating indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment are more 
straightforward than the steps discussed above.21 Indefinite-lived intangible assets must be 
evaluated for impairment annually or more frequently if the firm observes events such as 
those discussed in Stage A for tangible assets. U.S. GAAP allows a two-step evaluation pro-
cess where firms first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is necessary to per-
form a quantitative impairment test. If based on this qualitative evaluation, management 
believes that it is more likely than not that an indefinite-lived intangible asset has been im-
paired, then it must go to the second step and perform a quantitative assessment by calculating 
the fair value of the intangible asset. If the book value of the asset exceeds the fair value, then 
the asset is considered impaired. The firm then reduces the book value of the asset to its esti-
mated fair value and records a loss. As is the case with tangible assets and amortizable intan-
gible assets, the book value of the asset cannot be increased later if the fair value recovers.
Case Study of Impairment Recognition 
and Disclosure—Krispy Kreme Doughnuts
We build on our prior discussions by analyzing the excerpts of Krispy Kreme Doughnuts’ 
2011 annual report provided in Exhibit 10.7. During the first part of the last decade, Krispy 
Kreme Doughnuts enjoyed rapid sales growth and expansion. However, subsequently, its 
profits declined, and some stores were no longer profitable.
 
The top schedule summarizes the impairment charges from 2009 to 2011. The schedule 
shows that Krispy Kreme recorded new impairment charges on its long-lived assets of $3,437 
thousand for the year ended January 30, 2011. The paragraph below the schedule describes 
the company’s impairment review and measurement process. Note that this process is consis-
tent with our earlier discussion of the GAAP guidance for impairments.
 
Based on the disclosure in Exhibit 10.7 and other information provided in the annual re-
port, Krispy Kreme made the following aggregate journal entry to record its new 2011 impair-
ment losses (in thousands):
DR  Impairment charges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$3,437
   CR  Property and equipment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$3,437
Impairment charges is equivalent to the Impairment loss account that we used in the Solomon 
example. Also consistent with the Solomon example, Krispy Kreme reduced the asset cost 
when it recorded the impairment loss.
Management Judgments and Impairments
Impairment write-downs present managers another set of potential earnings management op-
portunities. For example, in a very good earnings year, managers might be tempted to take an 
impairment write-down. Some research is consistent with this view.22 The study found that 
Contracting
21 This paragraph relies on FASB ASC Paras. 350-30-35-15 to 20: Intangibles—Goodwill and Other—General Intangibles 
Other than Goodwill—Subsequent Measurement—Recognition and Measurement of an Impairment Loss—Intangible Assets 
not Subject to Amortization.
22 See E. J. Riedl, “An Examination of Long-Lived Asset Impairments,” The Accounting Review, July 2004, pp. 823–52. This 
research was conducted when pre-Codification “Accounting for the Impairment of Long-Lived Assets and for Long-Lived 
Assets to Be Disposed of,” SFAS No. 121 (Norwalk, CT: FASB, 1995) constituted U.S. GAAP for impairment write-offs. The 
impairment guidelines under that now-superseded pronouncement are similar to the current guidelines.

562 
CHAPTER 10
Long-Lived Assets
impairment write-offs occurring after the issuance of revised guidance have a weaker associa-
tion with economic factors that presumably drive impairments than was the case prior to the 
guidance. In other words, the relationship between write-offs and the firm’s underlying eco-
nomic condition was smaller. The author concluded that
the results further indicate that managers are applying greater flexibility in the reporting decisions 
relating to write-offs after adoption of the standard, contrary to the intentions of the FASB. . . . 
Overall, the evidence suggests that the reporting of write-offs under SFAS No. 121 has  decreased 
in quality relative to before the standard.23
 
This suggests that auditors and other financial statement analysts should be alert to the 
potential use of write-offs opportunistically by managers. The author cites “big bath” bunch-
ing of impairment write-off as an example.
EXHIBIT 10.7
Krispy Kreme Doughnuts, Inc.: Asset Impairment Charge
Note 12—Impairment Charges and Lease Termination Costs
The components of impairment charges and lease termination costs are as follows:
 
Year Ended
 
January 30,  
January 31,  
February 1, 
(in thousands) 
2011 
2010 
2009
Impairment charges:
 Impairment of long-lived assets-current period charges 
$3,437 
$3,108 
$1,050
 Impairment of long-lived assets-adjustment to previously recorded estimates 
(173) 
— 
—
 Impairment of reacquired franchise rights 
40 
40 
—
 Recovery from bankruptcy estate of former subsidiary 
— 
(482) 
—
  Total impairment charges 
3,304 
2,666 
1,050
Lease termination costs:
 Provision for termination costs 
1,449 
4,195 
316
 Less—reversal of previously recorded accrued rent expense 
(687) 
(958) 
(818)
  Net provision 
762 
3,237 
(502)
   Total impairment charges and lease termination costs 
$4,066 
$5,903 
$   548
The Company tests long-lived assets for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate that their carrying 
value may not be recoverable. These events and changes in circumstances include store closing and refranchising decisions, the 
effects of changing costs on current results of operations, observed trends in operating results, and evidence of changed circum-
stances observed as a part of periodic reforecasts of future of future operating results and as part of the Company’s annual bud-
geting process. When the Company concludes that the carrying value of long-lived assets is not recoverable (based on future 
projected undiscounted cash flows), the Company records impairment charges to reduce the carrying value of those assets to 
their estimated fair values. Impairment charges related to Company Stores long-lived assets were approximately $3.4 million, 
$3.1 million and $900,000 in fiscal 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. Such charges relate to underperforming stores, including 
both stores closed or likely to be closed and stores which management believes will not generate sufficient future cash flows to 
enable the Company to recover the carrying value of the stores’ assets, but which management has not yet decided to close. The 
impaired store assets include real properties, the fair values of which were estimated based on independent appraisals or, in the 
case of any properties which the Company is negotiating to sell, based on the Company’s negotiations with unrelated third-party 
buyers; leasehold improvements, which are typically abandoned when the leased properties revert to the lessor; and doughnut-
making and other equipment.
Source: Krispy Kreme Doughnuts, Inc., 2011 annual report.
23 Ibid, p. 849.

 
Obligations Arising from Retiring Long-Lived Assets 
563
OBLIGATIONS ARISING FROM RETIRING 
LONG-LIVED ASSETS
When an electric utility builds a nuclear plant or an oil company constructs an 
offshore drilling rig, regulatory authorities require public welfare and safety 
expenditures at the end of the asset’s life. Nuclear plants must be decontami-
nated and drilling rigs must be disassembled. This costs money. And by law, 
these expenditures must take place. So, when certain types of assets are built, 
a liability simultaneously arises for future expenditures. Historically, there 
were not generally accepted accounting principles to guide the accounting for 
these required outflows at the end of an asset’s life, so no liability appeared on 
firms’ books. But current GAAP requires firms to record a liability when cer-
tain assets are placed into service.24
 
Here’s how the rules work. Firms are required to estimate the expected 
present value of the outflows that will occur when assets are eventually 
 retired. These outflows are discounted using a credit-adjusted risk-free 
rate. The liability’s discounted present value is recorded along with an in-
crease in the carrying amount of the related long-lived asset. Consider the 
following example.
Sometimes the liability arises after the asset is 
placed into service. For example, suppose a new 
law is passed requiring removal of gasoline stor-
age tanks at the end of their useful lives. For 
firms utilizing these tanks, the liability arises 
when the law is passed, not when the tank was 
first placed into service. Also, liabilities may 
arise over time as the asset is used. If a coal 
strip mine must be reclaimed, the liability arises 
proportionately as mining occurs.
This is the risk-free rate of interest on U.S. 
Treasury instruments plus an adjustment for the 
credit standing of the firm. So, if the risk-free 
rate is 5% and the firm’s credit standing allows 
it to borrow at 3% over the risk-free rate, the 
credit adjusted risk-free rate is 8%.
Kalai Oil Corporation constructs on oil drilling rig off the Texas coast, which is placed into 
service on January 1, 2014. The rig cost $300 million to build. Texas law requires that the rig 
be removed at the end of its estimated useful life of five years. Kalai estimates that the cost 
of dismantling the rig will be $12 million and its credit-adjusted risk-free rate is 8%. The liabil-
ity’s discounted present value is $8,167,000. Assume that Kalai has already capitalized the 
$300 million cost of the rig in the account Drilling rig.
The present value factor for 
a payment five years away at 
8% is 0.68058. So rounded 
to the nearest thousand, the 
present value is $12 million 3 
0.68058 5 $8,167,000.
When the asset is placed into service, Kalai records the asset retirement obligation (ARO) as:
The $8,167,000 debit to the asset account is allocated to expense using some systematic 
method. Assuming straight-line depreciation over the expected useful life of five years, the 
entry is:
DR Drilling rig (asset retirement cost)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$8,167,000
   CR ARO liability   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 $8,167,000
DR Depreciation expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $1,633,400*
   CR Accumulated depreciation—drilling rig   . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 $1,633,400
* $8,167,000/5 yrs. 5 $1,633,400.
The liability is initially recorded at its present value but increases over time as retirement 
nears. The liability’s present value will increase by 8% per year, as the following schedule 
shows.
24 FASB ASC Subtopic 410-20: Asset Retirement and Environmental Obligations—Asset Retirement Obligations.

564 
CHAPTER 10
Long-Lived Assets
The entry to record the increase in the liability in 2014 is:
 
 
 
(c)
 
(a)  
(b) 
Present Value of the
 
Present Value of the  
Accretion Expense 
Liability at Year-End
 
Liability at Start of Year 
 [8% 3 Column (a) Amount] 
 [Column (a) 1 Column (b)]
2014 
$ 8,167,000 
$653,360 
$ 8,820,360
2015 
8,820,360 
705,629 
9,525,989
2016 
9,525,989 
762,079 
10,288,068
2017 
10,288,068 
823,045 
11,111,113
2018 
11,111,113 
888,887* 
12,000,000
* Rounded
DR Accretion expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $653,360
   CR ARO liability. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$653,36
 
Accretion expense is classified as an operating expense (above the line) in the income 
statement. It reflects the current period’s increase, or accretion, of the liability.25 Account ti-
tles other than Accretion expense can be used so long as the nature of the expense is clearly 
conveyed.
 
To complete the illustration, assume that an outside contractor dismantles the rig early in 
January 2019 at a cost of $11,750,000. The journal entry is:
DR ARO liability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $12,000,000
   CR Cash. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 $11,750,000
   CR Gain on settlement of ARO liability. . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
250,000
ASSETS HELD FOR SALE
Firms constantly experience changing market conditions such as the emergence of new com-
peting products or the development of more efficient distribution systems. In responding to 
these innovations, firms often seek to dispose of groups of assets that are no longer suited to 
the new environment they face. When firms actively try to sell some of the assets they cur-
rently own, these asset groups generally should be classified in the balance sheet as “held for 
sale” if they are expected to be sold within one year.26 When assets are held for sale, they are 
reported at the lower of book value or fair value less costs to sell.27 To illustrate, assume the 
following facts regarding Nebozenko Corporation’s assets held for sale:
• Book value of assets (cost minus accumulated depreciation) 
$2,500,000
• Fair value of assets 
2,350,000
• Expected legal fees associated with sale 
46,000
25 FASB ASC Paragraph 410-20-35-5: Asset Retirement and Environmental Obligations—Asset Retirement Obligations— 
Subsequent Measurement—Allocation of Asset Retirement Cost.
26 FASB ASC Paragraphs 360-10-45-9 to -11: Property, Plant, and Equipment—Overall—Other Presentation Matters-Impairment 
or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets—Initial Criteria for Classification as Held for Sale.
27 FASB ASC Paragraph 360-10-45-43: Property, Plant, and Equipment—Overall—Other Presentation Matters-Impairment 
or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets—Accounting While Held for Sale.

 
Depreciation 
565
So, these assets would be shown on the balance sheet at $2,304,000, that is, at fair value mi-
nus expected legal fees ($2,350,000 2 $46,000). The operating results of asset components 
classified as “held for sale” are reported in the discontinued operations section of the income 
statement in the period(s) in which they occur even if the assets have not yet been sold as of 
the financial statement date.28 Once the asset group has been sold, the assets are removed from 
the balance sheet and the income statement disclosure policies for discontinued operations 
discussed in Chapter 2 are applied. That is, the firm will separately disclose “below the line” 
the gain or loss (net of taxes) from utilizing these assets during the period covered as well as 
any gain or loss on disposal of the assets themselves.
 
Segregating the assets held for sale on the balance sheet and separately disclosing their 
operating results on the income statement are designed to help analysts better understand 
past firm performance and assess future prospects. For example, in evaluating the efficiency 
of past asset utilization using the return-on-assets ratio, assets that are destined for sale 
should be excluded from the rate-of-return denominator and their profit or loss contribution 
should be excluded from the numerator. This exclusion provides a better measure of ex-
pected future performance based on assets expected to remain in the firm. The disclosure 
rules provide guidance on when certain assets should be segregated on the balance sheet, 
which alerts analysts to items that should be omitted from rate-of-return calculations.29 Simi-
larly, income forecasts are enhanced insofar as the income or loss from the asset groups that 
have been or are about to be sold are isolated “below the line” and are no longer factored into 
the analysts’ forecast.
DEPRECIATION
Productive assets such as buildings, equipment, and machinery eventually wear out. Assets 
including patents, which have a finite economic life, ultimately expire. Consequently, the cost 
of these assets must be apportioned to the periods in which they provide benefits. The system-
atic expensing and write-down of a tangible long-lived asset is called depreciation. For intan-
gible assets, the allocation of costs to periods is referred to as amortization. For mineral 
deposits and other wasting assets, the assignment of expired costs to periods is called deple-
tion. For simplicity, we refer collectively to any of these allocations of costs to periods as the 
depreciation process.
 
In financial reporting, the cost to be allocated to periods through the depreciation process 
is the asset’s original historical cost minus its expected salvage value. The objective is to 
spread the original cost over the period of asset use; depreciation is not intended to track the 
asset’s declining market value. Realistically, the asset’s end-of-period book value (its original 
cost minus cumulative depreciation) would approximate its market value only by sheer coin-
cidence. We stress this absence of correspondence between accounting measures of deprecia-
tion and value decrement because GAAP accounting depreciation, as we have said, is a 
process of cost allocation, not asset valuation.
 
Computing depreciation requires the reporting entity to estimate three things:
1. The expected useful life (in years or units) of the asset.
2. The depreciation pattern that will reflect the asset’s declining service potential.
3. The expected salvage value that will exist at the time the asset is retired.
Assets that are eligible to be 
separately classified must 
comprise “operations and 
cash flows that can be clearly 
distinguished, operationally 
and for financial reporting 
purposes, from the rest of the 
entity” (FASB ASC Master 
Glossary: Component of 
an Entity). This is the same 
 criterion that was used in 
Chapter 2 to identify ele-
ments that must be reflected 
in the discontinued opera-
tions section of the income 
statement.
28 FASB ASC Paragraph 205-20-45-3: Presentation of Financial Statements—Discontinued Operations—Other Presentation 
Matters—Reporting Discontinued Operations.
29 FASB ASC Paragraph 205-20-45-10: Presentation of Financial Statements—Discontinued Operations—Other Presentation 
Matters—Disposal Group Classified as Held for Sale.
Analysis

566 
CHAPTER 10
Long-Lived Assets
Each of these items requires estimates of future events, especially the pace of technological 
change and shifts in consumer tastes and preferences. Assets whose economic benefits expire 
evenly over time are depreciated on a straight-line basis while those that provide more valu-
able services in the early years are depreciated on an accelerated basis. The example in 
 Exhibit 10.8 illustrates the procedures.
 
The straight-line (SL) depreciation method simply allocates cost minus salvage value 
evenly over the asset’s expected useful life. The units-of-production (UP) depreciation 
method is similar to SL but allocates cost minus salvage over the expected units to be pro-
duced instead of the expected useful life. We compute a per unit rate instead of an annual rate 
of depreciation. To illustrate the method, we assume that 20,000 units are expected to be 
produced, and actual production follows the pattern given in Exhibit 10.8. Note that the 
amount of SL depreciation is constant, but UP depreciation does not follow a consistent pat-
tern. In both cases, total depreciation expense equals $10,000 over the five-year period. The 
units-of-production method is often used in extractive industries. For example, the cost 
of exploring and drilling for oil would be capitalized and then depreciated on the basis of 
expected barrels of oil.
 
The depreciation rate for the double-declining balance (DDB) method is double the 
straight-line rate (in Exhibit 10.8, 20% per year for SL, 40% per year for DDB). Applying a 
constant DDB depreciation percentage to a declining balance will produce a book value at the 
end of the asset’s economic life that is above or below the salvage value. To depreciate down 
to an asset’s expected salvage value using DDB, two steps can be employed. First, apply the 
Facts
Cost of the asset 
$ 10,500
Expected salvage value 
$   500
Expected useful life 
5 years
Expected units 
20,000
Straight-Line Depreciation (SL)
 (Constant rate 3 Constant base) 5
1
Estimated life 3 (Cost 2 Salvage value)
 a1
5b 3 ($10,500 2 $500) 5 $2,000 per year for all 5 years
Units-of-Production (UP)
(Changing number of annual units 3 Unit rate) 5 Annual units 3 (Cost 2 Salvage value)
Expected units
 
 
Unit Rate  
Units 
 
 
($10,500 2 $500) 
Produced 
 Year  
20,000 
(Assumed) 
Depreciation
 1 
$0.50 
 4,200 
$ 2,100
 2 
 0.50 
 3,400 
1,700
 3 
 0.50 
 6,000 
3,000
 4 
 0.50 
 3,300 
1,650
 5 
 0.50 
 3,100 
1,550
 Total 
 
20,000 
$10,000
EXHIBIT 10.8
Depreciation Example
(continued)

 
Depreciation
567
40% rate to the book value of the assets without subtracting the salvage value. Second, once 
the DDB depreciation amount falls below what it would be with straight-line depreciation, as 
in Year 3 of the exhibit, a firm might use the straight-line method for the remaining years. In 
Year 3, DDB depreciation would have been $1,512 ($3,780 3 40%), which is less than the 
straight-line depreciation of $2,000. Therefore, straight-line depreciation could be used begin-
ning in Year 3. The $1,093.33 SL amount is determined by taking the end of Year 2 remaining 
DDB book value of $3,780, subtracting the salvage value of $500, and dividing the result, 
$3,280, by 3. Companies may use alternative policies for the DDB method. They can shift 
from the double-declining rate to the straight-line method as described above, or may use the 
DDB method until they reach the salvage value or the end of the useful life. In this case, the last 
year of depreciation expense would be the difference between the salvage value and the begin-
ning of the year book value.
EXHIBIT 10.8
Depreciation Example (continued)
Double-Declining Balance Depreciation (DDB)
 
(Constant rate 3 Changing base) 
5  Double the straight-line
  rate 3 Book value at beginning 
of each period 
 
Straight-line rate 
5 20% (that is, 5-year life)
 
Double straight-line rate 
5 20% 3 2 5 40%
 
Beginning-of- 
Depreciation (40% of 
Year-End
Year  
Year Book Value 
Beginning-of-Year Book Value) 
Book Value
1 
$10,500.00 
$4,200.00 
$6,300.00
2 
6,300.00 
2,520.00 
3,780.00
3 
3,780.00 
1,093.33* 
2,686.67
4 
2,686.67 
1,093.33 
1,593.34
5 
1,593.34 
1,093.34 
500.00
* Year 3: Switch to straight-line method (as explained in the text).
$3,780 2 $500 5 $3,280; $3,280y3 5 $1,093.33
Sum-of-the-Years’ Digits Depreciation (SYD)
aChanging
rate
3 Constant
base
b 5 Years remaining in life
Sum-of-the-years’ digits† 3 (Cost 2 Salvage)
 
Sum-of-the-years’ digits 5 5 1 4 1 3 1 2 1 1 5 15
 
Depreciable Basis  
Applicable
Year  
($10,500 2 $500) 
Fraction 
Depreciation
1 
$10,000 
5/15 
$ 3,333.33
2 
10,000 
4/15 
2,666.67
3 
10,000 
3/15 
2,000.00
4 
10,000 
2/15 
1,333.33
5 
10,000 
1/15 
666.67
Total 
 
15/15 
$10,000.00
† The formula for determining the sum-of-the-years’ digits is n(n 1 1)y2 where n equals the estimated life of the asset. 
In our example: 5(5 1 1)y2 5 15. This, of course, is the answer we get by tediously summing the years’ digits—that 
is, 5 1 4 1 3 1 2 1 1 5 15.

568 
CHAPTER 10
Long-Lived Assets
 
Sum-of-the-years’ digits (SYD) is another accelerated depreciation method. It depreciates 
an asset to precisely its salvage value.
 
Figure 10.3(a) shows the annual depreciation charges under the alternative depreciation 
methods; Figure 10.3(b) shows the resulting net book value at each year-end. Note that the 
methods with the higher depreciation in the early years also result in lower book values in 
the early years. However, all the methods yield the same total depreciation expense of 
$10,000 over the five years and the same book value of $500 at the end of five years. We 
raise this point here to help you understand better how different accounting approaches 
 affect the income statement and balance sheet over time.
 
In preparing external financial reports, companies are free to select the depreciation method 
they believe best reflects both the pattern of an asset’s use and the services it provides. Within 
500
5
4
Year
3
2
1
Depreciation expense ($)
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
4,500
4,000
3,500
Straight line
Double-declining balance
Sum-of-the-years’ digits
Units-of-production
(a) 
1,000
5
4
Straight line
Double- 
declining 
balance
Sum-of-the-years’ digits
End of year
3
2
1
Book value ($)
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
6,000
9,000
8,000
7,000
Units-of-production
(b) 
Figure 10.3
ALTERNATIVE DEPRECIA-
TION METHODS
(a) Annual Depreciation 
Charges and (b) Net Book 
Value

 
Depreciation 
569
the same industry, different companies may use different methods. Even within the same com-
pany, different types of assets may be depreciated using different methods. For example, 
buildings might be depreciated using the SL method while trucks might be depreciated using 
the SYD method.
 
The 2012 AICPA survey of 2011 annual reports shows that the straight-line method is 
by far the favored method for financial reporting; 94% of the firms use the straight-line 
method for at least some of their long-lived assets.30 The survey also reports that 4% of the 
firms use an accelerated depreciation method for some assets and 2% use the units-of-
production method for some assets. Whereas most U.S. firms use the straight-line method 
for financial reporting purposes, they generally use MACRS (Modified Accelerated Cost 
Recovery System), an approach based on the DDB method, for tax purposes. We discuss 
how to handle different depreciation methods for financial reporting and tax purposes in 
Chapter 13.
Disposition of Long-Lived Assets
When individual long-lived assets are disposed of before their useful lives are completed, any 
difference between the net book value of the asset and the disposition proceeds is treated as a 
gain or loss. Assume that the asset in the Exhibit 10.8 example is being depreciated using the 
DDB method and is sold at the end of Year 2 for $5,000 when its book value is $3,780. The 
following entry is made:
DR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $5,000
DR Accumulated depreciation   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6,720
 
CR Long-lived asset   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$10,500
 
CR Gain on sale of asset   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,220
Dispositions of individual assets occur frequently as firms respond to changing production 
and consumer-demand conditions. For this reason, gains and losses from asset sales do not 
satisfy the criteria for the extraordinary item treatment described in Chapter 2. Accordingly, 
such items are included in the income statement “above the line” as an element of pre-tax 
 income from continuing operations.
Financial Analysis and Depreciation Differences
As noted previously, most U.S. firms use straight-line depreciation for financial reporting 
purposes. Nevertheless, making valid comparisons across firms is often hindered by other 
depreciation assumptions, especially differences in useful lives. Two firms in the same indus-
try often depreciate their otherwise similar assets over different estimated lives. When this 
happens potentially significant income differences arise.
 
We now illustrate this issue and discuss ways to adjust depreciation to achieve greater com-
parability across firms. Exhibit 10.9 shows information extracted from the 2012 annual report 
of Whole Foods Market. Whole Foods depreciates its long-lived assets using the straight-line 
method. In Note (2), Whole Foods gives general information about the assumed lives of the 
Gains or losses on sales of 
assets comprising a clearly 
distinguishable component 
of an entity, as described in 
the earlier section “Assets 
Held for Sale,” are shown in 
the discontinued operations 
section.
Analysis
30 See R. Petrino, D. Cohen, A. Patel, and K. Kraft (eds.), Accounting Trends and Techniques, U.S. GAAP Financial State-
ments (New York: American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, Inc., 2012).

570 
CHAPTER 10
Long-Lived Assets
main categories of its assets (see highlighted statements). Although other firms may use 
straight-line depreciation, they may assume different age ranges or disclose different catego-
ries. Typically, the descriptive information is too general to know whether there are compara-
bility issues. Despite this drawback, by making reasonable assumptions, we can estimate 
income effects arising from differences in assumed asset lives.
 
When a company uses straight-line depreciation, the ratio of average gross property, plant, 
and equipment divided by depreciation expense gives us a rough approximation of the esti-
mated useful (depreciable) life of the average asset. Here’s why. Straight-line depreciation 
expense (SL) is computed as:
SL 5 Gross depreciable property, plant, and equipment
Average useful life
 
(10.1)
EXHIBIT 10.9
Whole Foods Market: Fixed Asset Information
(2) Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment is stated at cost, net of accumulated depreciation and amortization. The Com-
pany provides depreciation of equipment over the estimated useful lives (generally 3 to 15 years) 
 using the straight-line method, and provides amortization of leasehold improvements and real 
 estate assets under capital leases on a straight-line basis over the shorter of the estimated useful 
lives of the improvements or the expected terms of the related leases. The Company provides 
 depreciation of buildings over the estimated useful lives (generally 20 to 50 years) using the 
straight-line method. Costs related to a projected site determined to be unsatisfactory and general 
site selection costs that cannot be identified with a specific store location are charged to opera-
tions currently. The Company recognizes a liability for the fair value of a conditional asset retire-
ment obligation when the obligation is incurred. Repair and maintenance costs are expensed as 
incurred. Interest costs on significant projects constructed or developed for the Company’s own 
use are capitalized as a separate component of the asset. Upon retirement or disposal of assets, 
the cost and related accumulated depreciation are removed from the balance sheet and any gain 
or loss is reflected in earnings.
(5) Property and Equipment
Balance of major classes of property and equipment are as follows (in thousands):
 
2012 
2011
Land 
$      76,592 
$      48,928
Buildings and leasehold improvements 
2,219,763 
1,958,612
Capitalized real estate leases 
24,876 
24,262
Fixtures and equipment 
1,674,089 
1,398,778
Construction in progress and equipment not yet in service 
53,328 
188,844
 
4,048,648 
3,619,424
Less accumulated depreciation and amortization 
(1,855,965) 
(1,622,212)
 
$ 2,192,683 
$ 1,997,212
Selected Income Statement Information
 
Fiscal year
($ in millions) 
2012 
2011
Depreciation 
$296.8 
$274.4
Income before incomes taxes 
$752.0 
$551.7
Source: Whole Foods Market 2012 annual report.

 
Depreciation
571
We omit salvage value from our analysis because companies usually do not disclose salvage 
values, and there is not a good way to estimate them. Rearranging terms:
SL 3 1Average useful life2 5 Gross depreciable property, plant, and equipment 
(10.2)
Further rearranging yields:
Average useful life5Gross depreciable property, plant, and equipment
SL
 
(10.3)
The computation of average useful life using the equation (10.3) approximation is shown in Ex-
hibit 10.10. The company’s end-of-year and start-of-year gross depreciable property are summed 
in Exhibit 10.10 and then divided by 2 to estimate its average gross depreciable property for 2012. 
Applying the equation (10.3) approach yields an average useful life of 12.3 years.31
 
To improve comparisons of profitability between Whole Foods and other firms in the indus-
try or the industry average, an analyst could standardize the average useful life used to compute 
depreciation expense. If we assume an industry average of 15 years, we can adjust Whole Foods 
Market’s depreciation expense to the industry average useful life by dividing the average gross 
depreciable property, plant, and equipment by the industry average depreciable life as follows:
$3,650.3
15.0 years 5 $243.4
The quotient, $243.4 billion, is the approximate annual Whole Foods depreciation expense 
number that would result from using the industry’s estimated useful life assumption. If these 
EXHIBIT 10.10
Computing Approximate Average Useful Life for 
Whole Foods Market
($ in millions) 
 Average gross property, 
plant, and equipment*
Depreciation expense
* Excludes Land and Construction in progress. For example, the 2012 numbers were computed as follows using 
 Exhibit 10.9 data for Whole Foods (in millions): $2,219.8 for Buildings and leasehold improvements 1 $24.9 for 
Capitalized real estate leases 1 $1,674.1 for Fixtures and equipment 5 $3,918.8.
($3,918.8 1 $3,381.7)y2
$296.8
$3,650.3
$296.8 5 12.3 years
31 To understand why the Exhibit 10.10 answer is in years (that is, 12.3 years), let’s express average gross depreciable prop-
erty divided by depreciation expense in terms of the underlying measurement dimensions:
Average gross depreciable property, plant, and equipment
Depreciation expense
 d The underlying measurement dimension is $s
d The underlying measurement dimension is $s per year
Expressing the computation in underlying measurement dimensions, the division in Exhibit 10.10 becomes:
$s
$s/Years
Following algebraic rules for division by fractions, we invert the denominator and multiply it by the numerator:
$s 3 Years
$s
The $s cancel, and the answer is expressed dimensionally in years (for example, 12.3 years).

572 
CHAPTER 10
Long-Lived Assets
rough approximations are correct, Whole Foods’ fiscal year 2012 depreciation would decline 
by $53.4 million—that is, the $243.4 million just computed minus the $296.8 million reported 
in Exhibit 10.9—and income before income taxes would increase by the same amount. This 
represents a pre-tax earnings increase of approximately 7.1% ($53.4 difference divided by 
$752.0 income before income taxes). The income effect could be larger or smaller depending 
on the company and the industry. Consequently, an analyst should take the time to make the 
calculations and evaluate whether there is a comparability issue. In addition, an analyst 
should watch for significant changes in the estimated depreciable life for the same firm 
over time. Changes could signal that management has changed depreciation assumptions or 
the rate at which it replaces equipment.
This adjustment process relies on several assumptions. First, 
the adjustment assumes that the useful life differences are artifi-
cial and do not reflect real differences in expected asset longevity. 
Second, it assumes that the salvage value proportions are roughly 
equivalent for all firms in the industry, and third, the dollar break-
down within the asset categories (e.g., buildings versus leasehold 
improvements) are similar across the firms being compared. If 
these assumptions are incorrect, the average age computation for 
one firm cannot legitimately be applied to the other’s asset base to estimate “adjusted” depre-
ciation. However, if these assumptions hold, the adjusted numbers should make a comparison 
between Whole Foods and other firms in the industry more accurate.
 
In Chapter 13, we illustrate another adjustment approach for depreciation differences that 
uses data from the deferred income tax footnote.
EXCHANGES OF NONMONETARY ASSETS
Occasionally firms will exchange one nonmonetary asset such as inventory or equipment for 
another nonmonetary asset. Unless certain exceptions in the following discussion apply, the 
recorded cost of a nonmonetary asset acquired in exchange for some other nonmonetary asset 
is the fair value of the asset that was given up. Any resulting gain or loss on the transaction is 
recognized.32 To illustrate how the cost of a nonmonetary asset acquired in an exchange is 
determined, consider the following example.
It is possible that the useful life differences reflect real eco-
nomic differences rather than accounting choices. For exam-
ple, Whole Foods’ gross depreciable property, and equipment 
might be less durable and, on average, have shorter useful 
lives. If the useful lives differences are “real,” then analysts’ 
attempts to “undo” the differences may impede, rather than 
improve, profit comparisons.
When the fair value of the 
asset received is more 
clearly evident than the fair 
value of the asset given up, 
the fair value of the asset 
 received is used as the new 
cost base. See FASB ASC 
Paragraph 845-10-30-1: 
Nonmonetary Transactions—
Overall—Initial Measurement—
Basic Principle.
Rohan Department Store exchanges a delivery truck with a fair value of $70,000 for 10 
checkout scanners from Electronic Giant Warehouse, Inc. The truck’s book value is 
$60,000—original cost of $80,000 minus accumulated depreciation of $20,000. In addition 
to the truck, Rohan pays Electronic Giant $15,000.
The cost of the acquired assets (scanners) is the fair value of the assets (truck and cash) that 
were given in the exchange. So, in this example, the cost of the scanners is:
Fair value of the truck 
$70,000
Cash payment 
15,000
 Cost of acquired assets 
$85,000
32 FASB ASC Paragraph 845-10-30-1: Nonmonetary Transactions—Overall—Initial Measurement—Basic Principle.

 
Exchanges of  Nonmonetary Assets 
573
Rohan’s entry is
Notice that the amount in the Gain on exchange account is simply the difference between the 
truck’s fair value ($70,000) and its book value ($60,000).
 
For many years, asset exchanges occurred infrequently, so the rule we just illustrated was 
seldom an important part of firms’ financial statements. But that all changed during the boom 
years of the 1990s and beyond. Asset exchanges—or swaps—proliferated. One article stated:
When the business history of the past decade is written, perhaps nothing will sum up the outra-
geous financial scheming of the era as well as the frenzied swapping that marked its final years. 
Internet companies . . . milked revenue from complex advertising exchanges with other dot-
coms in ultimately worthless deals. In Houston, equal amounts of energy were pushed back and 
forth between companies. . . .
 
But the swaps rage turned out to be no bargain for investors. The bad deals contributed to an 
epidemic of artificially inflated revenue. In many cases, swaps slipped through legal loopholes 
left in place by regulators who had failed to keep pace with the ever-changing deal-making of 
ever-changing industries. The unraveling of those back-scratching arrangements helped usher in 
the market collapse and led to the realization by investors that the highest-flying industries of the 
boom era—telecom, energy, the Internet—were built in part on a combustible mix of wishful 
thinking and deceit.33
 
Here’s an example of the manipulation of these asset exchange rules to overstate revenues 
and income. Telecom companies would sign agreements with other telecom companies to 
exchange access to each other’s fiber-optic network. These deals were termed “capacity 
swaps”34 and were generally structured as leases. That is, Company One would agree to lease 
capacity to Asia on Company Two’s network for 20 years and simultaneously Company Two 
would agree to lease capacity to Europe on Company One’s network for 20 years. Each com-
pany would promise to pay the other $5 million per year under the two separate leases.
 
Each company received cash, and the stage was therefore set for potentially recognizing rev-
enues and income on these deals. These deals sometimes generated upfront income. Even if they 
didn’t generate income, they did increase revenues—an important factor “since investors 
 focused on revenue in new industries that often had little earnings to show for themselves.”35
 
To prevent a repeat of these abuses, the FASB issued rules that now require companies to 
record certain exchanges of nonmonetary assets at the existing book value of the relinquished 
asset if any of the following conditions apply:36
1. The fair value of neither the asset(s) received nor the asset(s) relinquished is determinable 
within reasonable limits.
2. The transaction lacks commercial substance.
DR Store equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $85,000
DR Accumulated depreciation—delivery truck  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
20,000
   CR Delivery truck . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$80,000
   CR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
15,000
   CR Gain on exchange . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
10,000
33 D. K. Berman, J. Angwin, and C. Cummins, “As the Bubble Neared Its End, Bogus Swaps Padded the Books,” The Wall 
Street Journal, December 23, 2002. Copyright © 2002 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All rights reserved worldwide. Reprinted 
with permission.
34 Ibid. Also see K. Brown, “Creative Accounting: How to Buff a Company,” The Wall Street Journal, February 21, 2002.
35 Op. cit.
36 FASB ASC 845-10-30-3: Nonmonetary Transactions—Overall—Initial Measurement—Modifications of the Basic 
Principle.
For a further discussion of 
this earnings management 
scheme, see Chapter 3.

574 
CHAPTER 10
Long-Lived Assets
3. The exchange transaction is made to facilitate sales to customers. Specifically, the trans-
action is an exchange of inventory or property held for sale in the ordinary course of 
 business for other inventory or property to be sold in the same line of business.
 
In the next section, we illustrate these three circumstances under which exchanges of non-
monetary assets must be recorded at book value.
Exchanges Recorded at Book Value
Fair Value Not Determinable 
To illustrate the accounting for exchanges of non-
monetary assets when the fair value of the exchanged assets cannot be determined, consider 
the following example.
Denver Construction Corporation agrees to swap with Cody Company one type of crane 
in exchange for a slightly different model whose features are better suited for a highway 
bridge project it is currently engaged in. The old crane Denver is exchanging has a book 
value of $600,000 at the time of the transaction. Its original cost was $700,000, and accumu-
lated depreciation is $100,000. Denver also pays Cody $40,000 to complete the transaction. 
It is not possible to measure the fair value of either crane within reasonable limits.
 
Because neither crane’s fair value is known, the new crane is recorded at the sum of the 
book value of the old crane ($600,000) plus the cash given ($40,000). The entry is:
The Commercial Substance Criterion 
Booking exchange transactions at fair 
value introduces the possibility of gains (or losses) on the transaction. To preclude firms from 
engaging in “sham” exchanges to generate artificial gains, GAAP requires that the transaction 
must possess commercial substance. An exchange transaction has commercial substance when 
the firm’s future cash flows are expected to change significantly as a result of the exchange.
 
A significant cash flow change exists if either:
1. The configuration (risk, timing, and amount) of the future cash flows of the asset(s) 
 received differs significantly from the configuration of the future cash flows of the 
asset(s) transferred.
2. The entity-specific value of the asset(s) received differs from the entity-specific value of 
the asset(s) transferred, and the difference is significant in relation to the fair values of the 
assets exchanged.37
If both conditions are not met, the transaction must be recorded using the book value of the 
asset(s) relinquished, using the procedure in the previous illustration. This precludes any 
gain recognition.
DR Construction crane (new) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$640,000
DR Accumulated depreciation—
   construction crane (old)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
100,000
   CR Construction crane (old) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$700,000
   CR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
40,000
37 FASB ASC 845-10-30-4: Nonmonetary Transactions—Overall—Initial Measurement—Commercial Substance.

 
Exchanges of  Nonmonetary Assets 
575
Exchange Transaction to Facilitate Sales to Customers 
Sometimes 
firms exchange assets with other firms—even competitors—to balance inventories, as in the 
following example.
Lee Electronics faces a shortage of plasma television sets but has an excess of liquid crystal 
display (LCD) sets. It agrees to swap LCDs with a fair value of $50,000 and a book value of 
$40,000 for plasma sets with a fair value of $52,000 from Bonnie Enterprises.
Here, the assets being exchanged (plasma and LCD sets) are both stocked for sale to custom-
ers. The exchange does not culminate an earning process. One asset is merely traded for 
 another that serves a similar purpose. For this reason, Lee Electronics does not report a gain 
but instead records the plasma sets at $40,000—the book value of the LCDs that were 
 relinquished in the transaction. The entry is simply:
DR Inventory—plasma sets   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $40,000 
 
CR Inventory—LCDs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$40,000
DR Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $ 5,778
DR Inventory—plasma sets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
36,000
   CR  Inventory—LCDs   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$40,000
   CR Recognized gain on exchange. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,778
38 FASB ASC 845-10-30-6: Nonmonetary Transactions—Overall—Initial Measurement—Commercial Substance.
The apparent $12,000 gain on the swap ($52,000 fair value minus $40,000 
book value) will be recognized only when the plasma sets are ultimately sold 
to customers.
Cash Received—A Special Case 
Let’s continue the previous ex-
ample with one difference. We still assume that the fair value of the plasma 
sets is $52,000, but we now assume that Lee Electronics also receives $5,778 
from Bonnie Enterprises.
 
This transaction is more complicated because Lee received both cash and 
the plasma television sets. Indeed, cash represents 10% of the total proceeds:
Cash received
Total proceeds 5
$5,778
$5,778 1 $52,000 5 0.10
 
Because 10% of the proceeds were received in cash, 10% of the LCD assets are considered 
to be sold, and that portion of the earning process is complete. So, 10% of the $17,778 gain on 
the transaction will be recognized.38 The entry is:
This gain is determined as follows:
 Fair value of plasma 
  television sets 
$52,000
1 Cash received 
5,778
  Total consideration received 
$57,778
2 Book value of LCDs 
 relinquished 
(40,000)
  Gain on transaction 
$17,778
The carrying amount of the inventory of plasma sets is computed as follows:
Fair value of plasma sets 
 
$52,000
Less: Portion of gain deferred: 
 
  Total gain 
$17,778 
  Gain recognized 
(1,778) 
  Gain deferred 
 
(16,000)
Inventory—plasma sets 
 
$36,000
Notice that the $16,000 deferred gain will ultimately be recognized when the 
plasma sets are sold because the inventory carrying amount has been reduced by 
the amount of the deferred gain.

576 
CHAPTER 10
Long-Lived Assets
GLOBAL VANTAGE POINT
Comparison of IFRS and GAAP Long-Lived 
Asset Accounting
Although there are many similarities between U.S. GAAP and IFRS, numerous important dif-
ferences exist. IFRS allows more choice in valuation models and has different specific guid-
ance for issues such as depreciation and impairments. Some of the key differences are 
discussed below.
Tangible Long-Lived Assets 
The general accounting for tangible long-lived assets 
is contained in International Accounting Standard (IAS) 16, “Property, Plant, and Equip-
ment.”39 IAS 16 allows two different models for accounting for long-lived tangible assets:
1. Cost method: The asset is carried at cost less accumulated depreciation as under U.S. 
GAAP.
2. Revaluation method: The asset is carried at a revalued amount reflecting its fair value at 
the revaluation date. Subsequent depreciation should be based on the fair value, not origi-
nal cost. The difference between depreciation based on the revalued carrying amount of 
the asset and depreciation based on the asset’s original cost is transferred from the Revalu-
ation surplus account to Retained earnings as the asset is depreciated.
 
For firms to use the revaluation method, they need reliable measurements, which often require 
the help of professional appraisers. When firms have reliable measurements and elect the revalu-
ation method, the Accumulated depreciation account is typically removed and the revalued 
amount becomes the new book value.40 If the asset is originally written-up, the amount of the 
write-up is credited to an owners’ equity account called Revaluation surplus (equivalent to Ac-
cumulated other comprehensive income in U.S. GAAP). Subsequent write-downs are debited to 
this account until it is depleted. Any additional write-downs are debited as revaluation losses. If 
assets are originally written-down, the amount of the write-down is debited as a revaluation loss. 
Subsequent write-ups are credited as revaluation loss reversals through net income to the degree 
they reverse prior write-downs. Any additional write-ups are credited to Revaluation surplus.
 
Assume that a building that originally cost €20,000,000 and has an accumulated deprecia-
tion balance of €10,000,000 is appraised at €35,000,000 and accordingly written up, as per-
mitted by IAS 16. The accounting entry is:
International
 
Net Book Value  
 
Net Book Value
 
prior to Revaluation 
Revaluation 
after Revaluation
Building 
€20,000,000 
DR €15,000,000 
€35,000,000
Less: Accumulated 
 depreciation 
(10,000,000) 
DR €10,000,000 
—
Net book value 
€10,000,000 
 
€35,000,000
DR Building  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€15,000,000
DR Accumulated depreciation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
10,000,000
   CR Revaluation surplus   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
€25,000,000
The new net book value becomes €35,000,000 after this entry is made, as follows:
39 “Property, Plant, and Equipment,” IAS 16 (London: IASB, 2008).
40 IAS 16, paragraph 35 (a) alternatively allows firms to restate accumulated depreciation proportionately with the change in 
the gross carrying amount of the asset so that the carrying amount of the asset after revaluation equals its revalued amount.

 
Global Vantage Point
577
 
Depreciation in subsequent periods is based on the revaluation net book value 
(€35,000,000). If the building has an expected remaining useful life of 20 years at the time of 
the revaluation, annual depreciation on the income statement will be €1,750,000 (that is, 
€35,000,000y20).
 
While revaluations are not mandatory, if a company 
does voluntarily revalue assets, all assets of a similar 
class (nature or function) must be revalued. Further-
more, once assets are revalued, regular reassessments 
are required to keep the valuations up to date.
 
Most firms do not choose the revaluation method for 
their tangible assets. This is not surprising given the 
cost of appraisals and estimating fair values. However, 
some firms use it for specific classes of assets with sig-
nificant amounts of land. Given that firms can use the 
revaluation method for all, some, or none of its tangible 
assets, comparability across firms can be an issue.
 
We use LVMH Group, a French company that specializes in luxury brands (e.g., Veuve 
Clicquot, Louis Vuitton, and TAG Heuer), to illustrate the revaluation method disclosure. 
 Excerpts from its 2012 annual report appear in Exhibit 10.11.
 
The note states that Vineyard land is revalued, but all other Property, plant, and equipment 
is carried at amortized cost. The note also describes how the revaluations affect shareholders’ 
equity. The second part of the exhibit highlights that Vineyard land was increased by €86 million. 
This increase also increased equity by €86 million (pretax). The gross value of Vineyard land 
and producing vineyards of €2,051 million represents 14% of LVMH’s total Property, plant 
and equipment gross value. In addition, the Vineyard land and producing vineyards represent 
The amount in the owners’ equity Revaluation surplus account would 
be transferred year-by-year to Retained earnings as the revalued asset is 
depreciated. For example, if we assume that the asset is not subsequently 
revalued over the ensuing 20 years, €1,250,000 (that is, €25,000,000y20) 
would be reclassified each year. The entry is:
DR Revaluation surplus. . . . . . . . . .  
€1,250,000
   CR Retained earnings  . . . . . .  
 
€1,250,000
This reclassification entry is made to reduce the Revaluation surplus as 
the asset ages. If no entry were made, there would still be a Revaluation 
surplus amount on the books even after the asset is removed from service. 
The year-by-year transfer ultimately reduces the surplus to zero.
EXHIBIT 10.11
LVMH Group: Property, Plant and Equipment
1.11. Property, plant and equipment
With the exception of vineyard land, the gross value of property, plant and equipment is stated at 
acquisition cost. Any borrowing costs incurred prior to the placed-in-service date or during the 
construction period of assets are capitalized.
 
Vineyard land is recognized at the market value at the balance sheet date. This valuation is based 
on official published data for recent transactions in the same region, or on independent appraisals. Any 
difference compared to historical cost is recognized within equity in “Revaluation reserves.” If market 
value falls below acquisition cost the resulting impairment is charged to the income statement.
Note 6: Property, plant and equipment
Movements in property, plant and eqipment during 2012 break down as follows:
 
Vineyard Land 
Gross Value  
and Producing 
(EUR millions)  
Vineyards
As of December 31, 2011 
1,965
Acquisitions 
14
Change in the market value of vineyard land 
(86)
Disposals and retirements 
(25)
Changes in the scope of consolidation 
—
Translation adjustment 
(5)
Other movements, including transfers 
16
As of December 31, 2012 
2,051
Source: LVMH Group 2012 annual report.

578 
CHAPTER 10
Long-Lived Assets
22% of net Property, plant, and equipment. These calculations show that the revaluation 
method could be used for a substantial portion of a firm’s tangible assets.
 
As stated in prior paragraphs, under either the cost method or the revaluation method, assets 
with finite lives will be depreciated. The depreciation guidelines under IFRS also are different 
from U.S. GAAP guidelines. IAS 16 requires companies to depreciate significant components of 
assets separately if they have different lives. Consider the example of a building. The lives may 
be different for the main structure, the windows, doors, and heating systems. Under IFRS, each 
of these items would be depreciated separately, whereas under U.S. GAAP, these items would be 
depreciated as one item. The same requirements apply to machines and equipment.
 
In addition, the cost of major required inspections (such as those associated with aircraft or 
ships) should be isolated from the total cost of the asset and depreciated from the purchase date to 
the inspection date. At the time of the inspection, companies would capitalize the cost of the in-
spection as part of the asset and depreciate this component over time until the next inspection.
 
To adopt the components approach, most U.S. companies would incur substantial costs 
to value the individual components, revise their depreciation policies, and modify their ac-
counting systems.
 
Another area in which U.S. GAAP and IFRS rules for tangible long-lived assets potentially 
diverge is accounting for investment property.41 Long-lived investment property consists of 
assets such as land, buildings, and equipment that are held to earn rentals, for capital apprecia-
tion, or for both. To understand how these differ from other long-lived assets under IFRS, in-
vestment properties are assets that are not used to produce or supply goods or services, nor are 
they held for sale in the ordinary course of business (as inventories are). They are distinct 
from the company’s operating assets.42
 
When investment properties are initially acquired, they are measured at cost. Subsequently, 
however, firms have the choice under IAS 40 to carry investment properties at either amor-
tized historical cost or fair value. The method selected must be applied to all investment 
properties. So, a firm would not be allowed to use the fair value method for investment land 
while simultaneously measuring buildings held for investment at cost.
 
However, comparability across firms will still be affected because firms have the choice of 
cost or fair value. Firms choosing the cost method still have to disclose fair values, and this 
disclosure would allow analysts to adjust historical cost method financial statements.
 
If the fair value method is chosen, any gain or loss arising from a change in fair value is 
recognized in net income in the period of the change. Notice that this differs from the treatment 
accorded revaluations of operating assets under IAS 16, as discussed earlier. Revaluations of 
operating long-lived assets are often debited or credited to Revaluation surplus and not in-
cluded in net income. The reason for the different treatment is straightforward. Firms hold 
 investment properties for the express purpose of generating market-driven gains. So, it is 
 appropriate that these gains (or losses) be recognized in net income as they occur. In contrast, 
operating assets are held to generate future returns, not for short-term liquidation. Accordingly, 
revaluation increases or decreases typically go directly to the Revaluation surplus account.
Intangible Long-Lived Assets 
The accounting under IAS 38, “Intangible Assets,” 
is very similar to the accounting under U.S. GAAP.43 Generally, acquired assets are carried 
at amortized cost. A revaluation method is allowed, but an active market must be available 
for the intangible. There is a difference regarding internally developed intangibles. IAS 38 
distinguishes between research and development in determining when expenditures may be 
41 “Investment Property,” IAS 40 (London: IASB, 2008).
42 For example, IAS 40 treats assets held under capital leases by lessees and used exclusively for rental to others under operat-
ing leases as investment properties. See Chapter 12.
43 “Intangible Assets,” IAS 38 (London: IASB, 2008).
Recall our Sheraton Corpo-
ration example early in the 
chapter. Hotel and real 
 estate holding companies 
would be expected to clas-
sify a large portion of their 
assets as investment prop-
erty. Unfortunately, the 
FASB has removed an in-
vestment property project 
from its active agenda.

 
Global Vantage Point 
579
capitalized. Research is defined as “original and planned investigation undertaken with the 
prospect of gaining new scientific or technical knowledge and understanding.” Development 
is defined as “the application of research findings or other knowledge to a plan or design for 
the production of new or substantially improved materials, devices, products, processes, 
 systems or services before the start of commercial production or use.”44
 
Research must be expensed, but some development expenditures may be capitalized. To 
capitalize development expenditures, firms must demonstrate all of the following:
1. Technical feasibility.
2. Intention to complete and use or sell the asset.
3. Ability to use or sell the asset.
4. How the intangible asset will generate probable future economic benefits.
5. The technical and financial resources necessary to complete development.
6. Ability to measure reliably expenditures related to the intangible asset during development.45
This IFRS rule that allows firms to capitalize some development expenditures is similar to 
U.S. GAAP per ASC 985-20-25, which allows computer software development costs to be 
capitalized after firms establish the “technological feasibility”. The difference, however, is 
that the U.S. GAAP rule applies only to software development while the IFRS rule applies 
more broadly and applies to firms in other industries.
 
Despite the broader application, many companies often have difficulty meeting the 
technological feasibility hurdle for most costs because of required regulatory approvals. 
For example, a pharmaceutical company may not be able to demonstrate technological 
feasibility until an agency such as the U.S. Food and Drug Administration has approved 
the proposed drug. An analyst must still be alert for material capitalized development costs 
when comparing a company on IFRS to a U.S. firm. To make the IFRS firm comparable, 
the analyst would remove the net book value of the capitalized costs from assets, add back 
the current year’s after-tax amortization, and treat the current year’s capitalized amount as 
an expense.
Impairments 
IAS 36, “Impairment of Assets,” provides the guidelines for impair-
ments of long-lived tangible and intangible assets other than investment property mea-
sured at fair value.46 For tangible assets and amortizable intangible assets, events that 
require an impairment review are similar to the U.S. GAAP events mentioned in Stage A 
on page 558. However, Stage C differs in that an impairment loss occurs if the carrying 
value exceeds the recoverable amount, defined as the higher of the asset’s fair value (less 
costs to sell) and its value in use, which is the discounted net cash flows identified in 
Stage B. Because of the use of discounted instead of undiscounted net cash flows, IFRS 
guidelines could trigger an impairment loss that would not be triggered by GAAP. In addi-
tion, in the event of a write-down, IFRS guidance would reduce the carrying value to the 
higher of the discounted cash flows or fair value less selling costs, whereas GAAP would 
reduce the carrying value to fair value (see Stage E on page 559). Consequently, we would 
expect to see more frequent, but smaller, impairments under IFRS than under GAAP. 
IFRS rules also permit reversals of previously recognized impairment losses when there 
has been a change in the estimates that were previously used to measure the loss. The re-
versal increases net income.
44 Ibid., para. 8.
45 Ibid., para. 57.
46 “Impairment of Assets,” IAS 36 (London: IASB, 2008).

580 
CHAPTER 10
Long-Lived Assets
 
To illustrate the differences between GAAP and IFRS, we use our prior example of Solomon 
Corporation from page 560 and add a discount rate assumption of 10%. The undiscounted and 
discounted cash flows appear below.
 
 
Net Cash  
 
Present
Year  
Flows 
PV Factor 
Value
2014 
$  800,000 
0.90909 
$  727,272
2015 
400,000 
0.82645 
330,580
2016 
300,000 
0.75131 
225,393
 Total 
$1,500,000 
 
$1,283,245
Note: The PV factor for 2014 is the present value of $1 discounted for 1 period, 10%. The 2015 and 2016 factors are based 
on two and three periods, respectively.
The net cash flow column is identical to the amounts presented on page 560 except that we 
have combined the 2016 cash flow with the expected salvage value given that both cash flows 
are occurring in 2016. Under GAAP, the threshold is $1,500,000, whereas the threshold for 
IFRS is $1,283,245 [the higher of value in use of $1,283,245 and fair value less selling costs 
(assumed to be $0) of $750,000]. Net book values below $1,500,000 and above $1,283,245 
would not be considered impaired under GAAP but would be under IFRS.
 
In this case, the carrying value of $2,000,000 is above both thresholds. However, the loss 
to be recognized is different. Under GAAP, the loss is $1,250,000 ($2,000,000 carrying value 
less $750,000 fair value), but under IFRS, the loss is only $716,755 ($2,000,000 carrying 
value less $1,283,245 recoverable amount). In addition, under IFRS, if the recoverable amount 
increases in subsequent years, some of the impairment loss can be reversed. So, differences in 
impairment accounting can significantly affect comparisons of IFRS and GAAP firms.
 
IFRS accounting for indefinite-lived intangible assets is similar to GAAP. These intan-
gibles should be reviewed at least annually for impairment. However, carrying values are 
compared to the recoverable amount instead of fair value to ascertain if a write-down is 
needed. Also, as is the case with tangible asset impairments under IFRS, impairment losses 
may be reversed if circumstances change.
Summary 
In summary of this section, there are significant differences between GAAP 
and IFRS of which an analyst should be aware. The IASB appears to be more comfortable with 
using expected benefits approaches (present value and net realizable values) than is the FASB. 
IFRS allows extensive use of fair values and gains in addition to losses are recognized in net 
income or other comprehensive income. We have described some of the major differences that 
relate to revaluation, depreciation, investment property, capitalization of intangible develop-
ment costs, and impairment losses.
• U.S. GAAP for long-lived assets is far from perfect. The need for unbiased, accurate, 
cost-effective, and verifiable numbers causes these assets to be measured in terms of the 
economic sacrifice incurred to obtain them—their historical cost—rather than in terms 
of their current expected benefit—or economic worth—to the firm.
• Because it is uncertain whether future benefits result from research and brand development 
costs, these costs are generally expensed in the period incurred. Consequently, balance sheet 
carrying amounts for intangible assets often differ from their real value to the firm. Analysts 
must scrutinize disclosures of R&D expenses to undo the overly conservative accounting.
SUMMARY

• Changes in the amount of capitalized interest from one period to the next can distort earnings 
trends. A thorough understanding of how the GAAP measurement rules are applied allows 
statement readers to avoid pitfalls in trend analysis when investment in new assets is sporadic.
• When comparing return on assets (ROA) ratios across firms, one must remember that 
 historical cost leads to an upward drift in reported ROA as assets age. So, analysts must 
determine whether the average age of the long-lived assets for firms being analyzed is 
stable or rising. Inflation also injects an upward bias into reported ROA.
• Asset impairment write-downs depend on subjective forecasts and could be used to 
 manage earnings.
• An understanding of differences in depreciation choices across firms permits better inter-
firm comparisons. When making interfirm comparisons, analysts should use note disclo-
sures to overcome differences in the long-lived asset useful lives chosen by each firm and, 
when possible, in their depreciation patterns.
• International practices for long-lived assets are sometimes very different from those in 
the United States. Statement users who make cross-country comparisons must exercise 
caution. IFRS allows much greater use of fair value than does U.S. GAAP.
• Some of the key differences between IFRS and U.S. GAAP relate to the revaluation of 
tangible assets, investment property, capitalization of intangible development costs, and 
 impairment losses.
 
Exercises 
581
EXERCISES
Phoenix Co. acquired a large piece of specialized machinery used in its manufacturing 
 process. The following costs were incurred in connection with the acquisition:
E10-1
Capitalizing costs (LO 2)
Finder’s fee 
$  2,000
List price 
230,000
Transportation fee 
4,000
Speeding ticket during transportation 
65
Installation fee 
2,500
Cost to repair a door damaged during installation 
1,200
Required:
Which of the costs incurred by Phoenix Co. should be capitalized to the machinery account?
E10-2
Determining depreciation 
expense—multiple methods 
(LO 7)
Union Company acquired machinery on January 2, 2014, for $315,000. The machinery’s esti-
mated useful life is 10 years, and the estimated residual value is $15,000. Union estimates that 
the machine will produce 15,000 units of product and that 20,000 direct labor hours will be 
utilized over the useful life of the machine. During 2014, Union produced 1,200 units of prod-
uct and used 2,100 direct labor hours.
Required:
Calculate depreciation expense for 2014 under each of the following methods:
1. Straight-line method.
2. Production method (units of output).
3. Use method (units of input—direct labor hours).
4. Sum-of-the-years’ digits method.
5. Double-declining balance method.

582 
CHAPTER 10
Long-Lived Assets
E10-4
Determining depreciation 
 expense—multiple methods  
(LO 7)
On April 1, 2014, Mills Company acquired equipment for $125,000. The estimated useful life 
is six years, and the estimated residual value is $5,000. Mills estimates that the equipment can 
produce 25,000 units of product. During 2014 and 2015, respectively, 3,000 and 4,200 units 
were produced. Mills reports on a calendar year basis.
Required:
Calculate depreciation expense for 2014 and 2015 under each of the following methods 
 (assume that Mills calculates depreciation to the nearest month in the year of acquisition):
1. Straight-line method.
2. Production method (units of output).
3. Double-declining balance method.
4. Sum-of-the-years’ digits method.
E10-6
Accounting for asset 
 exchanges (LO 9)
The Williamsport Crosscutters baseball team had a player contract with Clemens (a promising 
young catcher) that was recorded in its accounting records at $500,000. The Reading Phillies had a 
player contract with Ruiz (a veteran outfielder) that was recorded in its accounting records at 
$800,000. The Crosscutters traded Clemens to Reading for Ruiz by exchanging contracts. At the 
time of the trade, the estimated fair value of each contract was $1,000,000. Both teams were in the 
midst of pennant races and believed that the trade addressed weaknesses in their respective rosters.
Required:
Prepare the journal entries to record the player trade for both Williamsport and Reading.
Required:
1. Which of the costs incurred by Gonzo Co. should be capitalized to the building account?
2. What is the subsequent carrying amount of the building prior to recording 2014 deprecia-
tion expense?
E10-3
Capitalizing costs subsequent 
to acquisition (LO 2)
Gonzo Co. owns a building in Georgia. The building’s historical cost is $970,000, and 
$440,000 of accumulated depreciation has been recorded to date. During 2014, Gonzo in-
curred the following expenses related to the building:
Repainted the building 
$ 48,000
Major improvement to the plumbing 
109,000
Replaced carpet in the plant’s accounting offices 
47,600
Added a 7,000-square-foot lobby 
234,600
Repaired a broken water main 
155,800
Apex Company purchased a tooling machine on January 3, 2004, for $30,000. The machine 
was being depreciated on the straight-line method over an estimated useful life of 20 years, 
with no salvage value.
 
At the beginning of 2014, when the machine had been in use for 10 years, the company 
paid $5,000 to overhaul it. As a result of this improvement, the company estimated that the 
remaining useful life of the machine was now 15 years.
Required:
What should be the depreciation expense recorded for this machine in 2014?
E10-5
Determining depreciation 
base—straight-line 
depreciation (LO 2, 7)
AICPA
ADAPTED
E10-7
Determining asset cost and 
depreciation expense—
straight-line (LO 2, 7)
Samson Manufacturing Company, a calendar year company, purchased a machine for $65,000 
on January 1, 2012. At the date of purchase, Samson incurred the following additional costs:
Loss on sale of old machinery 
$1,000
Freight-in 
500
Installation cost 
2,000
Testing costs prior to regular operation 
300
AICPA
ADAPTED

 
Exercises 
583
The machine’s estimated salvage value was $5,000, and Samson estimated it would have a use-
ful life of 20 years with depreciation being computed on the straight-line method. In January 
2014, accessories costing $3,600 were added to the machine to reduce its operating costs. These 
accessories neither prolonged the machine’s life nor provided any additional salvage value.
Required:
What should Samson record as depreciation expense for 2014?
E10-8
Buying assets with a note 
(LO 2)
On January 1, 2014, Hardy, Inc., purchased certain plant assets under a deferred payment 
contract. The agreement called for making annual payments of $10,000 for five years. The 
first payment is due on January 1, 2014, and the remaining payments are due on January 1 of 
each of the next four years. Assume an imputed interest rate of 10%.
Required:
What entry should be made to record the purchase of these plant assets on January 1, 2014?
E10-11
Capitalized interest (LO 2)
Kobe Company began constructing a building for its own use in February 2014. During 2014, 
Kobe incurred interest of $70,000 on specific construction debt and $15,000 on other borrow-
ings. Interest computed on the weighted-average amount of accumulated expenditures for the 
building during 2014 was $60,000.
Required:
1. What amount of interest should Kobe capitalize? Prepare the journal entry to record pay-
ment of the interest.
2. If interest computed on the weighted-average  amount of accumulated expenditures for the 
building during 2014 was instead $90,000, what amount of interest should Kobe capitalize?
E10-9
Determining retirement 
 obligation (LO 6)
For $20 million, Ross Adams Mining acquired a tract of land containing a large deposit of 
anthracite coal. Ross Adams believes the most economical way to extract the coal is to strip-
mine the site. The company is required by environmental regulations to restore the land after 
it has extracted the coal to a condition suitable for recreational use and—given the intended 
mining method—estimates restoration costs to be $6 million. Ross Adams’ mining engineers 
estimate that the site contains 4 million tons of recoverable coal and that it will take approxi-
mately four years to complete mining activities. Once restored, the estimated value of the land 
amounts to $1 million. Ross Adams Mining’s credit-adjusted risk free interest rate is 7%.
Required:
What should be the depletion rate per ton of coal extracted from this mine?
AICPA
ADAPTED
E10-10
Capitalizing interest (LO 2)
Clay Company started construction on a new office building on January 1, 2014, and it moved 
into the finished building on July 1, 2015. Of the building’s $2,500,000 total cost, $2,000,000 
was incurred in 2014 evenly throughout the year. Clay’s incremental borrowing rate was 12% 
throughout 2014, and the total amount of interest incurred by Clay during 2014 was $102,000.
Required:
What amount should Clay report as capitalized interest at December 31, 2014?
AICPA
ADAPTED
E10-12
Analyzing changes in asset 
 account balances—straight 
line (LO 3, 7)
Weir Company uses straight-line depreciation for its property, plant, and equipment, which, 
stated at cost, consisted of the following:
AICPA
ADAPTED
 
December 31,
 
2014 
2013
Land 
$ 25,000 
$ 25,000
Buildings 
195,000 
195,000
Machinery and equipment 
695,000 
650,000
 
915,000 
870,000
Less accumulated depreciation 
(400,000) 
(370,000)
 
$515,000 
$500,000

584 
CHAPTER 10
Long-Lived Assets
Weir’s depreciation expense for 2014 and 2013 was $55,000 and $50,000, respectively.
Required:
What amount was debited to accumulated depreciation during 2014 because of property, 
plant, and equipment retirements?
AICPA
ADAPTED
E10-14
Amortizing intangibles 
(LO 4)
On January 1, 2010, Vick Company purchased a trademark for $400,000, which had an esti-
mated useful life of 16 years. In January 2014, Vick paid $60,000 for legal fees in a successful 
defense of the trademark.
Required:
How much should Vick record as trademark amortization expense for 2014?
E10-15
Determining amount of 
 intangibles expensed  
(LO 4)
AICPA
ADAPTED
On January 2, 2011, Lava, Inc., purchased a patent for a new consumer product for $90,000. 
At the time of purchase, the patent was valid for 15 years; however, its useful life was esti-
mated to be only 10 years due to the product’s competitive nature. On December 31, 2014, the 
product was permanently withdrawn from sale under governmental order because of a poten-
tial health hazard in the product.
Required:
What should the total charge against income on this patent be in 2014?
E10-13
Identifying depreciation 
 expense patterns—SL, 
DDB, SYO (LO 7)
AICPA
ADAPTED
The following graph depicts three depreciation expense patterns over time.
Time
I
II
III
Depreciation expense ($)
Required:
Pattern I, of course, is straight-line depreciation. Which depreciation expense pattern corre-
sponds to the sum-of-the-years’ digits method and which corresponds to the double-declining 
balance method? Explain why the shape of the Pattern II and Pattern III lines differs.
E10-16
Accounting for R&D cost 
(LO 4)
AICPA
ADAPTED
During 2014, Orr Company incurred the following costs:
Research and development services performed by Key Corporation for Orr 
$150,000
Design, construction, and testing of preproduction prototypes and models 
200,000
Testing in search for new products or process alternatives 
175,000
Required:
How much research and development expense should Orr report in 2014?

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
585
E10-17
Accounting for R&D cost 
(LO 4)
In 2014, Ball Labs incurred the following costs:
AICPA
ADAPTED
Required:
What was Ball’s total research and development expense in 2014?
Research and development costs not included above were:
Depreciation 
$300,000
Salaries 
700,000
Indirect costs appropriately allocated 
200,000
Materials 
180,000
Direct costs of doing contract research and development 
 work for the government to be reimbursed by a 
 governmental unit 
$400,000
E10-18
Accounting for software 
 development costs (LO 4)
Pearl, Inc., develops and markets computer software. During 2013, one of Pearl’s engineers 
began developing a new and very innovative software product. On July 1, 2014, a team of 
Pearl engineers determined that the software product was technologically feasible. Pearl engi-
neers continued to ready the software for general release and in January 2015, the first product 
sales were made. Total costs incurred follow:
2013 
$3,200,000
2014 
$3,600,000 (evenly throughout the year)
Required:
1. How should Pearl account for the costs incurred during 2013, and what is the rationale 
for your answer?
2. How should Pearl account for the costs incurred during 2014? If your answer differs from 
your answer in requirement 1, explain why.
AICPA
ADAPTED
E10-19
Determining depletion 
 expense with asset retire-
ment obligation—units of 
production (LO 6, 7)
In January 2014, Vorst Company purchased a mineral mine for $2,640,000. Removable ore 
was estimated at 1,200,000 tons. After it has extracted all the ore, Vorst will be required by 
law to restore the land to its original condition. The expected present value of this obligation 
is $180,000. Vorst believes it will be able to sell the property after restoration for $300,000. 
During 2014, Vorst incurred $360,000 of development costs to prepare the mine for produc-
tion, and it removed and sold 60,000 tons of ore.
Required:
In its 2014 income statement, what amount should Vorst report as depletion expense?
PROBLEMS / DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
On January 2, 2013, Half, Inc., purchased a manufacturing machine for $864,000. The machine 
has an eight-year estimated life and a $144,000 estimated salvage value. Half expects to manu-
facture 1,800,000 units over the machine’s life. During 2014, Half manufactured 300,000 units.
Required:
For each item, calculate depreciation expense for 2014 (the second year of ownership) for the 
machine just described under each method listed below:
1. Straight-line
2. Double-declining balance
3. Sum-of-the-years’ digits
4. Units-of-production
P10-1
Computing depreciation 
 expense—SL, DDB, SYD, 
and UP (LO 7)
AICPA
ADAPTED

586 
CHAPTER 10
Long-Lived Assets
P10-2
Recording lump-sum 
 purchases (LO 2)
On June 30, 2014, Macrosoft Company acquired a 10-acre tract of land. On the tract was a 
warehouse that Macrosoft intended to use as a distribution center. At the time of purchase, the 
land had an assessed tax value of $6,300,000, and the building had an assessed tax value of 
$11,200,000. Macrosoft paid $15,000,000 for the land and building. After the purchase, the 
company paid $1,000,000 to have various modifications made to the building.
Required:
1. At what amount should Macrosoft record the land and building?
2. For financial reporting purposes, why might Macrosoft managers prefer to assign a larger 
portion of the $15,000,000 to the land rather than to the building?
P10-3
Determining asset cost when 
purchased with a note  
(LO 2)
Cayman Diving, Inc., needs to acquire a new dive boat. The seller will accept a noninterest-
bearing note for $400,000 due in four years or $250,000 in cash. The company’s incremental 
cost of borrowing is 10%.
Required:
Which option should Cayman Diving select? Would your answer change if Cayman’s incre-
mental borrowing rate was 13%? Why?
P10-5
Exchanging assets (LO 9)
Hoyle Company owns a manufacturing plant with a fair value of $4,600,000, a recorded cost 
of $8,500,000, and accumulated depreciation of $3,650,000. Patterson Company owns a 
warehouse with a fair value of $4,400,000, a recorded cost of $6,900,000, and accumulated 
depreciation of $2,800,000. Hoyle and Patterson exchange assets with Hoyle also receiving 
cash of $200,000 from Patterson. The exchange is considered to have commercial substance.
P10-4
Allocating acquisition costs 
among asset accounts and 
 interest capitalization (LO 2)
On April 23, 2014, Starlight Department Stores, Inc., acquired a 75-acre tract of land by paying 
$25,000,000 in cash and by issuing a six-month note payable for $5,000,000 and 1,000,000 
shares of its common stock. On April 23, 2014, Starlight’s common stock was selling for $80.00 
a share and had a $2.50 par value. The land had two existing buildings, one that Starlight intended 
to renovate and use as a warehouse, and another that Starlight intended to demolish to make way 
for the construction of a new department store. At the time of the purchase, the assessed values for 
property tax purposes of the land and the building to be renovated were $105,000,000 and 
$20,000,000, respectively. To complete the purchase, Starlight incurred legal fees of $25,000. The 
cost of demolishing the unneeded building was $50,000. Starlight paid $250,000 to have the land 
graded so that the new store could be built. Starlight paid a total of $100,000,000 to have the new 
department store built and another $25,000,000 to renovate the old building. To fund the work on 
the renovation and the new store, Starlight obtained a loan from Gotham City Bank. During the 
construction period, Starlight incurred avoidable interest of $2,000,000 related to the warehouse 
renovation and $8,000,000 related to the new department store building. Because parking would 
be needed for both the new department store and the warehouse, Starlight had a portion of the 
land covered with asphalt at a cost of $450,000. Starlight also paid $200,000 to install lighting for 
the parking lots and $75,000 to install decorative fencing and a parking access gate. During 2014, 
Starlight paid $150,000 to new employees who will work at the new department store. The pay-
ments were made while the employees were being trained. All work was completed by Decem-
ber 31, 2014, and the new store and warehouse were placed in service on January 1, 2015.
Required:
Determine what costs should be assigned to the (1) land, (2) warehouse, (3) department store, 
and (4) land improvements asset accounts. (Hint: The allocation of the original purchase price 
between the land and warehouse should be made in proportion to the relative assessed values 
of the land and warehouse at the time of the purchase.)

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
587
Required:
Record the exchange on the books of:
1. Hoyle
2. Patterson
P10-6
Capitalizing or expensing 
 various costs (LO 2)
Fly-by-Night is an international airline company. Its fleet includes Boeing 757s, 747s, 727s, 
Lockheed L-1011s, and McDonnell Douglas MD-83s, MD-80s, and DC-9s. Assume that Fly-
by-Night made the following expenditures related to these aircraft in 2014:
1. New jet engines were installed on some of the MD-80s and MD-83s at a cost of $25.0 million.
2. The company paid $2.0 million to paint one-eighth of the fleet with the firm’s new colors 
to create a new public image. It intends to paint the remainder of the fleet over the next 
seven years.
3. Routine maintenance and repairs on various aircraft cost $8.0 million.
4. Noise abatement equipment (“hush kits”) was installed on the fleet of DC-9s to meet FAA 
maximum allowable noise levels on takeoff. Equipment and installation cost $7.5 million.
5. The avionics systems were replaced on the Lockheed L-1011s. This will allow the aircraft 
to be used four more years than originally expected.
6. The existing seats on all 747s were replaced with new, more comfortable seats at a cost of 
$0.5 million.
7. The jet engines on 50% of the Boeing 727s received a major overhaul at a cost of 
$5.0 million. As a result, the aircraft should be more fuel efficient.
Required:
1. Which of these expenditures should Fly-by-Night capitalize? Why?
2. How might Fly-by-Night use expenditures like these to manage its earnings?
P10-7
Determining asset impairment 
(LO 5)
Four years ago Omega Technology, Inc., acquired a machine to use in its computer chip manu-
facturing operations at a cost of $35,000,000. The firm expected the machine to have a seven-
year useful life and a zero salvage value. The company has been using straight-line 
depreciation for the asset. Due to the rapid rate of technological change in the industry, at the 
end of Year 4, Omega estimates that the machine is capable of generating (undiscounted) fu-
ture cash flows of $11,000,000. Based on the quoted market prices of similar assets, Omega 
estimates the machine to have a fair value of $9,500,000.
Required:
1. What is the machine’s book value at the end of Year 4?
2. Should Omega recognize an impairment of this asset? Why or why not? If so, what 
amount of the impairment loss should be recognized?
3. At the end of Year 4, at what amount should the machine appear in Omega’s balance sheet?
P10-8
Determining asset impairment 
(LO 5)
Yachting in Paradise, Inc., was founded late in 2007 by retired Admiral Andy Willits to pro-
vide executive retreats aboard a luxury yacht with ports of call scattered around the South 
Pacific. Yachting in Paradise is a U.S. firm and follows U.S. GAAP. On January 2, 2008, the 
company purchased the Sarah Mitcheltree, an Azimut 116 super yacht, for $15 million. Yacht-
ing in Paradise expects the Sarah Mitcheltree to have a life of 15 years and a $3 million re-
sidual value; the company uses straight-line depreciation. Charters, which can be arranged for 

588 
CHAPTER 10
Long-Lived Assets
periods lasting up to a month, are expected to generate annual net cash flows of $2.7 million. 
Business met expectations for the first few years, but by early 2014 the company faced a sig-
nificant reduction in its future cash flows. The worldwide recession was depressing charters 
as client companies slashed discretionary spending, but what was really impacting Yachting in 
Paradise’s prospects was a new—and rapidly gaining attention—phenomenon: Sick Yacht 
Syndrome. Norwalk Virus, bilge odors, flesh eating bacteria, mould, yeast, holding tank 
odors, VOC’s, stale air, and diesel bacteria are all indoor air problems on a yacht. While 
Yachting in Paradise has yet to experience any of these symptoms on its yacht, a rash of 
highly publicized incidents on a larger competitor’s fleet was having a ripple effect. Using 
probability-weighted cash flow forecasts, Yachting in Paradise now estimates that its annual 
net cash flows will be a disappointing $1.05 million for the next nine years and have $0 sal-
vage value. Knowing that times were tough in the charter yacht business, a yacht broker that 
specializes in purchasing used luxury yachts recently offered the company $6 million for the 
Sarah Mitcheltree. Willits takes some comfort in knowing that at least the present value of the 
revised cash flows is $6.6 million, so the company will be better off by “sailing on.”
Required:
1. What circumstances should prompt Yachting in Paradise, Inc., to perform an asset impair-
ment test?
2. Is the Sarah Mitcheltree impaired? Why or why not? If the asset is impaired, how much 
loss should be recognized?
3. Prepare any journal entry necessary based on your answer in requirement 2.
4. If by early 2016 an economic recovery and a widely publicized cure for Sick Yacht 
 Syndrome restore demand for executive yachting retreats, will this impact any entry made 
in requirement 3? Assume the recoverable amount at this time equals $8 million and that 
the original residual value remains unchanged.
5. Would your answer to requirement 4 be different if the recoverable amount equaled 
$10 million?
P10-9
Determining asset impairment 
under IFRS (LO 5, 10)
Required:
Refer to the facts in Problem 10-8. Repeat requirements 2 through 5 using the cost model (as 
opposed to the revaluation model) under IFRS.
P10-10
Accounting for computer 
software costs (LO 4)
In its Year 2 balance sheet, IBM reported the following account:
($ in millions) 
Year 2 
Year 1
Software, less accumulated amortization 
 (Year 2: $11,276; Year 1: $10,793) 
$2,419 
$2,963
In the notes to its financial statements, IBM reported that it spent $2,997 million on computer 
software–related activities. Assume that these expenditures were related to projects in which 
technological feasibility has been proved.
Required:
1. How is IBM required to account for computer software–related expenditures?
2. As of the end of Year 2, how much has IBM spent on existing computer software–related 
activities in past years?
3. As of the end of Year 2, how much of its computer software–related expenditures has 
IBM capitalized?
4. Based on the information given, estimate IBM’s amortization of computer software costs 
in Year 2.

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
589
5. Assume that IBM amortizes its capitalized software costs using the straight-line method. 
Estimate the average useful life of the software products developed as of the end of Year 2.
6. How might firms use the accounting for computer software costs to manage their earnings?
P10-12
Capitalizing interest 
(LO 2)
To meet the increasing demand for its microprocessors, Intelligent Micro Devices began con-
struction of a new manufacturing facility on January 1, 2014. Construction costs were incurred 
uniformly throughout 2014 and were recorded in the firm’s Construction-in-progress account. 
The average balance in the Construction-in-progress account during 2014 was $150 million.
P10-11
Recognizing asset 
 impairment (LO 5)
National Sweetener Company owns the patent to the artificial sweetener known as Super-
sweet. Assume that National Sweetener acquired the patent on January 1, 2008, at a cost of 
$300 million dollars, expected the patent to have an economic useful life of 12 years, and has 
been amortizing the patent on a straight-line basis. Assume that when the patent was acquired, 
National Sweetener expected that the process would generate future net cash flows of $30 mil-
lion the first year of its useful life and that the cash flows would increase at a 10% rate each 
year over the remainder of its useful life. By the year 2020, that is, after 12 years, National 
Sweetener expected that several other artificial sweeteners would be on the market and there-
fore that it would sell the Supersweet patent then for about $60.0 million.
 
Expected Future Cash Flows  
 
Expected Future Cash Flows
Year 
($ in millions) 
Year 
($ in millions)
2008 
$30.0 
2015 
$ 58.7
2009 
33.0 
2016 
64.3
2010 
36.3 
2017 
70.7
2011 
39.9 
2018 
77.8
2012 
43.9 
2019 
85.6
2013 
48.3 
 Total 
$641.6
2014 
53.1
On December 31, 2014, when the patent’s book value was $160.0 million ($300.0 2 $140.0), 
National Sweetener learned that one of its competitors had developed a revolutionary new 
sweetener that could be produced much more economically than Supersweet. National Sweet-
ener expects that the introduction of this product on January 1, 2015, will substantially reduce 
the cash flows from its Supersweet patent process.
 
Consider the following two independent scenarios:
Scenario I: National Sweetener expects that the cash flows from Supersweet over the period 
2015–2019 will be only 50% of those originally projected and that the sale of the Supersweet 
patent will bring only $25 million when sold. When discounted at a rate of 15% (which National 
Sweetener feels is appropriate), these amounts yield a present value of $129.0 million. National 
Sweetener estimates that the market value of the Supersweet patent on December 31, 2014, is 
$160.0 million.
Scenario II: National Sweetener expects that the cash flows from Supersweet over the period 
2015–2019 will be only 25% of those originally projected and that the sale of the Supersweet 
patent will bring only $25 million when sold. When discounted at a rate of 15%, these amounts 
yield a present value of $70.7 million. National Sweetener estimates that the market value of the 
Supersweet patent on December 31, 2014, is $68.0 million.
Required:
1. Should National Sweetener recognize an impairment of its Supersweet patent in 
 Scenario I? If so, what is the amount of the loss and at what amount should the patent 
be reported in National Sweetener’s 2014 ending balance sheet?
2. Repeat requirement 1 for the second scenario.

590 
CHAPTER 10
Long-Lived Assets
 
To facilitate the facility’s construction, the firm arranged for an $80 million construction 
loan on January 1 at a rate of 13%. The firm also issued $40 million of common stock to help 
finance the project. Management estimates that the firm’s cost of equity capital is 16%. On 
January 1, 2014, the firm also issued bonds in the amount of $200 million carrying a weighted-
average interest rate of 11.5%. Earnings before interest and taxes for 2014 is $50 million.
Required:
1. What is the total amount of interest the firm incurred in 2014?
2. Assume that the firm bases the amount of capitalized interest on the average balance in 
the Construction-in-progress account. How much of the interest in requirement 1 should 
be capitalized?
3. How much of the amount in requirement 2 will be related to the firm’s common stock 
 issue? Why?
4. Where will the amount in requirement 2 appear in the firm’s 2014 financial statements?
5. What amount of interest expense will appear in the firm’s 2014 income statement?
6. Assume that the facility is completed on December 31, 2014, and that it is placed in 
 service on January 1, 2015. How, if at all, will the amount in requirement 2 affect the 
 future income of the firm?
7. Calculate the firm’s interest coverage ratio (income before interest and taxes divided by 
interest expense) with and without the interest capitalization. Which coverage ratio would 
be more useful to a creditor in the evaluation of the firm’s risk of insolvency?
P10-13
Accounting for internally 
 developed patents versus 
purchased patents and making 
intercompany comparisons 
(LO 3, 4)
Consider the following two scenarios:
Scenario I: Over the 2011–2015 period, Micro Systems, Inc., spends $10 million a year to de-
velop patents on new computer hardware manufacturing technology. While some of its projects 
failed, the firm did develop several new patents each year during the period.
Scenario II: Over the 2011–2015 period, Macro Systems, Inc., a competitor of Micro Systems, 
Inc., paid $10 million each year to acquire patent rights from other firms. The firm assigned a 
five-year useful life to all of the patents.
1. Each firm had sales of $200 million, $242 million, $290 million, $350 million, and 
$400 million, respectively, over the 2011–2015 period.
2. Each firm’s operating expenses (excluding the preceding patent-related information) were 
$140 million, $170 million, $205 million, $245 million, and $265 million, respectively, 
over the 2011–2015 period.
3. Assume that a 34% income tax rate applies to both firms.
Required:
1. How would the two firms account for their patent-related expenditure?
2. Calculate each firm’s net income and net income as a percent of sales (that is, profit 
 margin) for the 2011–2015 period. Contrast the reported profitability of the two firms.
3. Assume that the firms continue to spend $10 million per year in the way just described. 
How would the comparability of their income statements and balance sheets be affected?
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
P10-14
Determining earnings effects 
of changes in useful lives and 
salvage values—SL (LO 7)
Assume that Major Motors Corporation, a large automobile manufacturer, reported in a recent 
annual report to shareholders that its buildings had an original cost of $4,694,000,000.
1. Major Motors uses the straight-line depreciation method to depreciate the buildings over 
a useful life of 34 years.

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
591
2. Assume that the ratio of end-of-year accumulated depreciation on the buildings to their de-
preciable cost is 35.3%. This implies that the buildings, on average, are about 12 years old. 
Assume that Major Motors depreciates them to a salvage value of 5% of their original cost.
3. Assume that Major Motors’ management is considering both extending the original useful 
lives of the buildings to 40 years from 34 years and increasing the salvage value to 10% of 
the buildings’ original cost.
4. Assume a tax rate of 34%.
Required:
1. What is the book value of the buildings at the end of the current year (that is, before 
 adjusting for any change in useful lives or salvage values)?
2. What would be the dollar amount and direction of the effect on Major Motors’ net income 
if the proposed changes to the useful lives and salvage values were implemented at the 
start of the next fiscal year?
P10-15
Identifying straight-line versus 
accelerated depreciation ratio 
effects—SL and SYD  
(LO 7, 8)
The 2013 income statement and other information for Mallard Corporation, which is about to 
purchase a new machine at a cost of $500 and a new computer system at a cost of $300, follows.
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
T  R  E   T   C    H
S
Sales 
$1,000
Cost of goods sold 
600
Gross profit 
400
Operating expenses 
150
Income before tax 
250
Income taxes 
85
 Net income 
$ 165
Additional Information:
• The two new assets are expected to generate a 25% annual rate of growth in the firm’s sales.
• The firm will include the machine’s depreciation expense as part of cost of goods sold 
and the depreciation expense on the computer system as part of operating expenses.
• Excluding the new machine’s depreciation, the firm’s cost of goods sold is expected to 
 increase at an annual rate of 7.5%.
• Excluding the new computer system’s depreciation, the firm’s operating expenses are 
 expected to increase at an annual rate of 4.0%.
• The firm’s gross total assets (net of asset retirements) are expected to increase at a rate of 
20% per year. Average gross total assets in 2013 were $1,000. Assume that asset retirements 
generate no gains or losses.
• Both the machine and the computer system have a three-year useful life and a zero salvage 
value.
• Assume an income tax rate of 34%.
Required:
1. Assume that the assets are purchased on January 1, 2014. Prepare pro forma income 
statements for 2014 through 2016. Assume the firm elects to use the straight-line depre-
ciation method for depreciating the new assets.
2. Repeat requirement 1 assuming instead that the firm elects to use the sum-of-the-years’ 
digits method for depreciating the new assets.
3. For both requirements 1 and 2, calculate the firm’s gross profit rate (gross profit divided 
by sales), NOPAT margin (net operating profit after tax divided by sales), and return on 
assets (NOPAT divided by average total assets). How does the use of the different deprecia-
tion methods affect the behavior of the ratios over the 2014–2016 period?

592 
CHAPTER 10
Long-Lived Assets
P10-16
Making asset age and 
 intercompany comparisons  
(LO 3)
Gardenia Co. and Lantana Co. both operate in the same industry. Gardenia began its opera-
tions in 2014 with a $20 million initial investment in plant and equipment with an expected 
life of 10 years. Lantana’s net asset base is also $20 million, but its assets are, on average, 
5 years old with 10-year expected useful lives on January 1, 2014. Lantana replaces 10% of its 
assets each year at year-end, while Gardenia, having just entered the industry, does not have 
immediate plans to replace any assets.
 
Per year pre-tax net operating cash flow generated $3 million for Gardenia, and $5 million 
for Lantana. Inflation is expected to be 2% per year, and each company expects to keep pace 
by increasing its pre-tax net operating cash flow by 2% per year. The cost of Lantana’s 
planned asset replacements will also increase at 2% per year. (Note: For simplicity, assume 
that prior to 2014, the replacement cost of Lantana’s assets remained constant.)
Required:
1. Compute return on assets for Gardenia Co. for 2014 through 2018.
2. Compute return on assets for Lantana Co. for 2014 through 2018.
3. Discuss the differences between your answers to requirement 1 and requirement 2.
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
P10-17
Accounting for asset 
 retirement obligations  
(LO 6)
Coyote Co. is building a waste landfill in the desert between Arizona and California. Coyote 
estimates that this landfill will be in operation for five years, will cost $250 million to build, 
and will generate $800 million in revenues during its useful life. Federal law requires that 
Coyote decommission and decontaminate the site at the end of its useful life. A team of engi-
neers has studied the decontamination procedure and has estimated that Coyote will have to 
spend $15 million on the decommissioning process when the landfill is shut down in five 
years. Coyote’s credit-adjusted rate of interest is 10%.
Required:
1. In accordance with GAAP, how should Coyote Co. account for the costs associated with 
the decommissioning process? Prepare the journal entry required and prepare an amorti-
zation table.
2. How are the costs associated with the decommissioning process reflected on the income 
statement? Explain how this accounting treatment improves the matching process.
P10-18
Accounting for assets held 
for sale (LO 6)
Prescott Co. management has committed to a plan to dispose of a group of assets associated 
with the manufacture of railroad cars. This group of assets qualifies as a component of an 
entity for financial reporting purposes. As of December 31, 2014, management has located a 
likely purchaser and is in negotiations to complete the sale. It’s expected that the component 
will be sold in late 2015 for $5,900,000 and that the following costs will be incurred in con-
junction with the sale:
Brokers’ fees 
$360,000
Legal fees 
246,000
Closing costs 
67,000
The railroad manufacturing assets have a historical cost of $12,000,000 and accumulated 
depreciation of $5,500,000 computed using the straight-line method. These assets generated a 
net loss during 2014 of $475,000 on sales of $1,800,000 and are expected to generate a loss of 
$525,000 during 2015.
 
During 2014, Prescott had operating income, including the railroad component, of 
$7,400,000 and total productive assets, including the railroad component, of $94,500,000 (net 
of cumulative straight-line depreciation). Sales for the company as a whole for the year ended 
December 31, 2014, were $20,000,000.

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
593
Required:
1. Compute the carrying value at December 31, 2014, of the railroad assets held for sale. 
How are these assets reported on the December 31, 2014, balance sheet?
2. Prepare a partial income statement including the discontinued operations section for 
Prescott Co. for the year ended December 31, 2014. Ignore income taxes.
3. Ignoring income taxes, compute return on continuing operating assets and operating margin 
for Prescott Co. for 2014. Now, assuming that the asset group did not qualify for discontin-
ued operations treatment, compute return on continuing operating assets and operating 
 margin for Prescott for 2014. Contrast the two sets of ratios and comment on your results.
4. How will the group of railroad assets be accounted for during 2015?
P10-19
Evaluating approaches to 
long-lived asset valuation  
(LO 1)
Required:
1. Contrast the economic sacrifice and expected benefit approaches to long-lived asset valuation.
2. GAAP requires firms to use historical cost (in most cases) to report the value of long-lived 
assets. As a statement reader, do you think that firms should be encouraged to voluntarily 
report their asset values under alternative valuation approaches? Why or why not?
3. As the manager of a publicly held company, what costs and benefits do you see associated 
with the voluntary disclosure of asset values using approaches other than historical cost?
P10-21
IFRS impairment and 
 revaluation (LO 10)
IceCap Hotels operates a series of northern European hotels and reports under IFRS. On 
June 30, 2013, IceCap purchased land for €3,000,000. IceCap reports land values on the 
 balance sheet under Property, plant, and equipment. The appraisal value for the land (which 
you can  assume is the same as the recoverable amount) was reported as:
Appraisal Date 
Land Value
12/31/2013 
€3,150,000
12/31/2014 
€2,750,000
12/31/2015 
€2,850,000
P10-20
Weakness of the straight-line 
depreciation method 
(LO 1, 7)
Zeff Company purchases a delivery van on January 1, Year 1, at a cost of $15,849. It has a useful 
life of four years and no estimated salvage value. When making the purchase decision, the  company 
anticipated that the use of the van would generate a revenue (cash) inflow of $5,000 each year, as-
sumed to occur at the end of the year. The discount rate that equates the purchase price to the ex-
pected cash inflows is 10%. Assume that depreciation is the company’s only expense for the year.
Requirements:
1. Using straight-line depreciation, do the following for each of the four years:
 
a. Compute accumulated depreciation and the net book value of the van.
 
b. Prepare Zeff’s income statement assuming that the $5,000 expected inflows occur.
 
c. Compute the return on beginning net fixed assets.
2. Repeat requirements 1.a. through 1.c. using the discounted present value method of 
depreciation.
3. Which depreciation method provides the most useful information?
4. Why do you think that GAAP does not permit the discounted present value method of 
depreciation?
Required:
1. Prepare the journal entries at the end of 2013, 2014, and 2015 to record any changes in 
value to this land asset if IceCap chooses the IFRS cost model to value this property.
2. Prepare the journal entries at the end of 2013, 2014, and 2015 to record any changes in 
value to this land asset if IceCap chooses the IFRS revaluation model to value this property.

594 
CHAPTER 10
Long-Lived Assets
P10-22
IFRS impairment and 
 revaluation (LO 10)
IceCap Hotels operates a series of northern European hotels and reports under IFRS. On June 30, 
2013, IceCap purchased a hotel for €2,100,000. IceCap reports hotel values on the balance sheet 
under property, plant, and equipment. The estimated useful life of the hotel is 30 years from the 
date of purchase. The company uses straight-line depreciation for its hotels. The appraisal value 
for the hotel (which you can assume is the same as the recoverable amount) was reported as:
Appraisal Date 
Hotel Value
12/31/2013 
€2,200,000
12/31/2014 
€1,400,000
12/31/2015 
€1,700,000
Required:
1. Prepare the journal entries at the end of 2013, 2014, and 2015 to record any changes in 
value to this hotel asset if IceCap chooses the IFRS cost model to value this property.
2. Prepare the journal entries at the end of 2013, 2014, and 2015 to record any changes in 
value to this hotel asset if IceCap chooses the IFRS revaluation model to value this property.
CASES
Target Corporation operates as two reportable segments: Retail and Credit Card. The Retail 
Segment includes merchandising operations, including large-format general merchandise and 
food discount stores in the United States and a fully integrated online business. Target offers 
both everyday essentials and fashionable, differentiated merchandise at discounted prices. 
The Credit Card Segment offers credit to qualified guests through branded proprietary credit 
cards, the Target Visa and the Target Card.
 
Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., is engaged in the operations of retail stores located in all 50 states of 
the United States; has wholly owned subsidiaries in Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Japan, Puerto 
Rico, and the United Kingdom; majority-owned subsidiaries in Central America, Chile, and 
Mexico; and joint ventures in India and China. The company’s merchandising operations 
serve its customers primarily through the operations of three segments: the Walmart Stores 
U.S. segment includes the company’s mass merchant concept in the United States operating 
under the “Walmart” brand, as well as walmart.com; the International segment consists of the 
company’s operations outside of the 50 United States; the Sam’s Club segment includes the 
warehouse membership clubs in the United States, as well as samsclub.com.
 
Information taken from both firms’ 2009 annual reports to shareholders follows.
C10-1
Target Corporation and 
 Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.: 
 Identifying depreciation 
 differences and performing 
 financial statement analysis  
(LO 8)
Target Corporation
Property and Equipment
 
January 30, 
January 31, 
($ in millions) 
2010 
2009
Land 
$ 5,793 
$ 5,767
Buildings and improvements 
22,152 
20,430
Fixtures and equipment 
4,743 
4,270
Computer hardware and software 
2,575 
2,586
Construction in progress 
502 
1,763
Accumulated depreciation 
(10,485) 
(9,060)
Property and equipment—net 
$25,280 
$25,756
Property and equipment are recorded at cost, less accumulated depreciation. Depreciation is 
computed using the straight-line method over estimated useful lives. Accelerated depreciation 
methods are generally used for income tax purposes.

 
Cases 
595
 
Estimated useful lives by major asset category are as follows:
Asset 
Life (in Years)
Buildings and improvements 
8–39
Fixtures and equipment 
3–15
Computer hardware and software 
4–7
Selected Income Statement Information
 
Years Ended
 
January 30,  
January 31, 
($ in millions) 
2010 
2009
Depreciation and amortization 
$2,023 
$1,826
Earnings before income taxes 
3,872 
3,536
Net earnings 
2,488 
2,214
Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.
Property and Equipment
 
January 31,  
January 31, 
($ in millions) 
2010 
2009
Land 
$ 22,591 
$19,852
Buildings and improvements 
77,452 
73,810
Fixtures and equipment 
35,450 
29,851
Transportation equipment 
2,355 
2,307
Property under capital lease 
5,669 
5,341
Less accumulated depreciation 
 and amortization:
 Property owned 
(38,304) 
(32,964)
 Property under capital leases 
(2,906) 
(2,544)
Total 
$102,307 
$95,653
Depreciation and amortization for financial statement purposes are provided on the straight-
line method over the estimated useful lives of the various assets. For income tax purposes, 
accelerated methods are used with recognition of deferred income taxes for the resulting tem-
porary differences.
 
Estimated useful lives for financial statement purposes are as follows:
Asset 
Life (in Years)
Buildings and improvements 
5–40
Fixtures and equipment 
3–20
Transportation equipment 
4–15
Selected Income Statement Information
 
Years Ended
 
January 31,  
January 31, 
($ in millions) 
2010 
2009
Depreciation and amortization 
$ 7,157 
$ 6,739
Income from continuing operations 
 before income taxes 
22,066 
20,898
Net income 
14,335 
13,400
Required:
Assume a 35% tax rate.
1. Estimate the average useful life of each firm’s long-lived assets.

596 
CHAPTER 10
Long-Lived Assets
2. Calculate a revised estimate of Walmart’s 2009 depreciation expense using the estimated 
average useful life of Target’s assets. Use this amount to recalculate Wal-Mart’s income 
before taxes and net income.
3. Calculate a revised estimate of Target’s 2009 depreciation expense using the estimated 
average useful life of Walmart’s assets. Use this amount to recalculate Target’s 2009 
 income before taxes and net income.
4. Why might a financial analyst want to make adjustments in requirements 2 and 3?
5. What factors will affect the reliability and accuracy of the adjustments performed in 
 requirements 2 and 3?
C10-3
National Coal Corporation: 
Analyzing financial statement 
effects of depreciation policy 
changes (LO 3, 7)
National Coal Corporation mines, processes, and sells high-quality bituminous steam coal 
from mines located in Tennessee and southeastern Kentucky. The company owns the coal 
mineral rights to approximately 74,600 acres of land and leases the rights to approximately 
40,900 additional acres. National Coal has expanded its operations considerably since com-
mencing operations at a single surface mine in Tennessee in July 2003.
 
The following information is excerpted from National Coal Corporation’s 2005 annual 
 report to shareholders.
C10-2
Granite Construction: 
 Analyzing financial statement 
effects of capitalized interest  
(LO 2)
Granite Construction is one of the largest heavy civil construction contractors in the United 
States. Granite operates nationwide, serving both public and private sector clients. Within the 
public sector, the company primarily concentrates on infrastructure projects, including the 
construction of roads, highways, bridges, dams, tunnels, canals, mass transit facilities, and 
airport infrastructure.
 
The following information was taken from Granite’s annual report to shareholders.
Granite Construction Incorporated
Consolidated Statement of Income
 
Years Ended December 31,
($ in millions) 
2012 
2011 
2010
Interest expense 
$10.6 
$10.4 
$  9.7
Capitalized interest 
(2.3) 
(7.4) 
(8.1)
Income before income taxes 
81.0 
89.4 
(106.4)
Net income 
$59.9 
$66.1 
$(62.4)
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
Cash paid during the year for interest 
$11.5 
$16.2 
$ 15.7
Required:
1. What is the underlying rationale for the capitalization of interest?
2. Assume that none of the assets to which 2012 capitalized interest applies have been 
 completed and placed into service. Calculate the firm’s 2012 income before income taxes, 
assuming that no interest was capitalized in 2012. What is the percentage change from the 
reported amount?
3. Starting with net income of $59.9 million as reported in 2012, assume the same facts as in 
requirement 2 and recalculate Granite’s net income.
4. Briefly discuss the impact of capitalized interest on a firm’s future reported earnings.

 
Cases 
597
Property, Plant, Equipment and Mine Development
Property and equipment are stated at cost. Maintenance and repairs that do not improve efficiency or 
extend economic life are expensed as incurred. Plant and equipment are depreciated using the straight-
line method over the estimated useful lives of assets which generally range from seven to thirty years 
for building and plant and one to five years for equipment. On sale or retirement, asset cost and re-
lated accumulated depreciation are removed from the accounts and any related gain or loss is reflected 
in income.
 
The Company periodically reviews the estimated useful lives of its fixed assets. During the second 
quarter of 2005, this review indicated that the estimated useful lives for certain asset categories were gener-
ally determined to be less than those employed in calculating depreciation expense. As a result, the Com-
pany revised the estimated useful lives of mining equipment as of the beginning of the second quarter.
Depreciation, Depletion, Accretion and Amortization Expense
The increase in depreciation, depletion, accretion and amortization expense in the twelve-month period 
ended December 31, 2005, compared to the twelve-month period ended December 31, 2004, is primarily 
attributable to a 493.3% increase in depreciation. This change was due to the acquisition of $19.3 mil-
lion of fixed assets, primarily mining equipment, and a change in the estimated useful lives of our min-
ing equipment. On April 1, 2005, we changed our policy for the depreciable life of mining equipment to 
three to five years from seven years. Subsequently, most of our equipment was estimated to have a three-
year useful life. This had the impact of increasing depreciation on mining equipment by approximately 
$3.6 million during 2005. This adjustment was treated as a change in accounting estimate and deprecia-
tion expense was adjusted on a prospective basis.
Required:
1. Calculate the impact of the depreciation policy change on National Coal’s 2005 net i ncome 
(loss). Consider the effects of income taxes in your answer.
2. How will the change affect National Coal’s reported earnings over the next few years?
3. How might a financial analyst determine whether the change National Coal made is 
 reasonable in light of industry conditions?
4. How might firms use depreciation policy changes to manage their earnings? Is there anything 
to prevent rampant use of depreciation policy changes as a tool to manage reported earnings?
5. In light of contracting issues discussed in Chapter 7, speculate as to the possible reasons 
National Coal made the change in its depreciation policy.
National Coal Corporation
Consolidated Statements of Operations
 
 
Eleven Months
 
Year Ended  
Ended
 
December 31, 
December 31,
 
2005 
2004 
2003
Total revenues 
$65,872,634 
$ 16,998,912 
$ 1,190,643
Expenses:
 Cost of sales 
51,115,116 
16,322,632 
1,737,937
 Depreciation, depletion, and amortization 
10,107,723 
2,473,369 
617,155
 General and administrative 
7,213,346 
5,242,437 
1,871,414
  Total operating expenses 
68,436,185 
24,038,438 
4,226,506
Operating loss 
(2,563,551) 
(7,039,526) 
(3,035,863)
Total other income (expense) 
(4,227,620) 
(3,389,604) 
(297,022)
Net (loss) 
$(6,791,171) 
$(10,429,130) 
$(3,332,885)

598 
CHAPTER 10
Long-Lived Assets
C10-4
Royal Dutch Shell plc: 
 Identifying differences and 
similarities between IFRS 
and GAAP (LO 10)
Presented below are excerpts from the 2012 annual report of Royal Dutch Shell, a Dutch com-
pany that finds, extracts, processes, and sells oil and gas.
B—Depreciation, Depletion and Amortisation
Property, plant and equipment related to hydrocarbon production activities are depreciated on a unit-of-
production basis over the proved developed reserves of the field concerned, except in the case of assets 
whose useful lives differ from the lifetime of the field, in which cases the straight-line method is ap-
plied. Rights and concessions in respect of proved properties are depleted on the unit-of-production 
 basis over the total proved reserves of the relevant area. Where individually insignificant, unproved 
properties may be grouped and depreciated based on factors such as the average concession term and 
past experience of recognising proved reserves.
 
Other property, plant and equipment and intangible assets are depreciated and amortised on a 
straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives, except for goodwill, which is not amortised. They 
include major inspection costs, which are depreciated over the estimated period before the next 
planned major inspection (three to five years), and the following:
2012 
 
 
 
$ million 
Upstream 
Downstream 
Corporate 
Total
Impairment losses 
980 
138 
3 
1,121
Impairment reversals 
— 
 24 
— 
  24
Asset type 
Useful life
Upgraders 
30 years
Refineries and chemical plants 
20 years
Retail service stations 
15 years
Property, plant and equipment held under finance leases 
lease term
Software 
 5 years
Trademarks 
40 years
Estimates of the useful lives and residual values of property, plant and equipment and intan-
gible assets are reviewed annually and adjusted if appropriate.
C—Impairment
The carrying amount of goodwill is tested for impairment annually; in addition, assets other than un-
proved properties (see “Exploration costs”) are tested for impairment whenever events or changes in 
circumstances indicate that the carrying amounts for those assets may not be recoverable. If assets are 
determined to be impaired, the carrying amounts of those assets are written down to their recoverable 
amount, which is the higher of fair value less costs to sell and value-in-use.
 
Value-in-use is determined as the amount of estimated risk-adjusted discounted future cash 
flows. For this purpose, assets are grouped into cash generating units based on separately 
 identifiable and largely independent cash inflows. Estimates of future cash flows used in the 
 evaluation of impairment of assets are made using management’s forecasts of commodity prices, 
market supply and demand, product margins and, in the case of exploration and production 
assets, expected production volumes. The latter takes into account assessments of field and 
 reservoir performance and includes expectations about both proved reserves and volumes that 
are expected to constitute proved reserves in the future (unproved volumes), which are risk-
weighted utilising geological, production, recovery and economic projections. Cash flow esti-
mates are risk-adjusted to reflect local conditions as appropriate and discounted at a rate based 
on Shell’s marginal cost of debt.
 
Impairments, except those related to goodwill, are reversed as applicable to the extent that the 
events or circumstances that triggered the original impairment have changed.
 
Impairment charges and reversals are reported within depreciation, depletion and amortisation.
 
On reclassification as held for sale, the carrying amounts of intangible assets and property, plant 
and equipment are also reviewed and, where appropriate, written down to their fair value less costs to 
sell. No further provision for depreciation, depletion or amortisation is charged.

 
Cases 
599
($ in millions) 
 
2012 
2011 
2010
Impairment losses
 Exploration and production assets  
940 
317 
1,620
 Manufacturing and distribution  
49 
1,134 
1,140
 Other 
 
93 
36 
33
Total 
 
1,082 
1,487 
2,793
Impairment reversals
 Exploration and production assets  
— 
— 
40
 Manufacturing and distribution  
23 
4 
7
 Other 
 
1 
— 
1
Total 
 
24 
4 
48
Impairment losses and reversals have been recognised in the year in respect of a number of cash- 
generating units, although no single instance is individually significant. Impairment chares were driven 
generally by changes in development and production plans in Upstream and, in 2011 and 2010, by 
lower refining margins in Downstream. Information on the segments affected is presented in Note 4.
Required:
Using the Royal Dutch Shell excerpts, identify the similarities and differences between U.S. 
GAAP and IFRS regarding accounting for property, plant, and equipment.
C10-5
Marston’s PLC: Identifying 
 differences and similarities 
 between IFRS and 
GAAP (LO 10)
Presented below are excerpts from the 2012 annual report of Marston’s PLC, a UK-based 
company that operates pubs.
 
Note 
29 September 2012 £m 
1 October 2011 £m
Shareholders’ equity
Equity share capital 
27 
44.3 
44.3
Share premium account 
 
332.8 
332.6
Merger reserve 
28 
— 
41.5
Revaluation reserve 
 
560.4 
411.4
Capital redemption reserve 
28 
6.8 
6.8
Hedging reserve 
 
(129.6) 
(101.4)
Own shares 
28 
(130.9) 
(130.9)
Retained earnings 
 
78.2 
213.3
Total equity 
 
762.0 
817.6
Property, plant and equipment
• Freehold and leasehold properties are initially stated at cost and subsequently at valuation. 
Plant and machinery and fixtures, fittings, tools and equipment are stated at cost.
• Depreciation is charged to the income statement on a straight-line basis to provide for the 
cost of the assets less residual value over their useful lives.
• Freehold and long leasehold buildings are depreciated to residual value over 50 years.
• Short leasehold properties are depreciated over the life of the lease.
• Plant and machinery and fixtures, fittings, tools and equipment are depreciated over 
 periods ranging from 3 to 15 years.
• Own labour and interest costs directly attributable to capital projects are capitalised.
• Land is not depreciated.
 
Residual values and useful lives are reviewed and adjusted if appropriate at each balance 
sheet date.
 
Properties are revalued by qualified valuers on a sufficiently regular basis using open market 
value so that the carrying value of an asset does not differ significantly from its fair value at the 
balance sheet date. Substantially all of the Group’s properties have been externally valued in 
accordance with the Royal institution of Chartered Surveyors’ Red Book. These valuations are 

600 
CHAPTER 10
Long-Lived Assets
performed directly by reference to observable prices in an active market or recent market trans-
actions on arm’s length terms. Internal valuations are performed on the same basis.
 
The estate is reviewed for indication of impairment at each reporting date, using a process 
focusing on areas of risk and business performance throughout the portfolio to identify any 
exposure.
 
Impairment losses are charged to the revaluation reserve to the extent that a previous gain 
has been recorded, and thereafter to the income statement. Surpluses on revaluation are recog-
nised in the revaluation reserve, except to the extent that they reverse previously charged 
 impairment losses, in which case the reversal is recorded in the income statement.
Disposals of property, plant and equipment
Profit/loss on disposal of property, plant and equipment represents net sale proceeds less the 
carrying value of the assets. Any element of the revaluation reserve relating to the property 
disposed of is transferred to retained earnings at the date of sale.
Impairment
If there are indications of impairment or reversal of impairment, an assessment is made of the 
recoverable amount. An impairment loss is recognised where the recoverable amount is lower 
that the carrying value of assets, including goodwill. The recoverable amount is the higher of 
value in use and fair market value less costs to sell.
.mhhe.com/revsine6e
www
Remember to check the book’s companion website 
for additional study material.
12. Property, Plant and Equipment
 
 
 
Fixtures, fittings.  
 
Land and 
Plant and 
tools and
 
buildings £m machinery £m 
equipment £m 
Total £m
Cost or valuation
At 2 October 2011 
1,819.5 
40.4 
351.6 
2,211.5
Additions 
91.3 
3.9 
36.3 
131.5
Net transfers to assets held for 
 sale and disposals 
(58.8) 
(2.3) 
(35.6) 
(96.7)
Revaluation 
(32.6) 
— 
— 
(32.6)
At 29 September 2012 
1,819.4 
42.0 
352.3 
2,213.7
Depreciation
At 2 October 2011 
13.5 
22.5 
186.1 
222.1
Charge for the period 
2.0 
3.2 
34.5 
39.7
Net transfers to assets held for 
 sale and disposals 
— 
(2.3) 
(28.4) 
(30.7)
Revaluation/impairment 
(15.2) 
— 
2.2 
(13.0)
At 29 September 2012 
0.3 
23.4 
194.4 
218.1
Net book amount at 1 October 2011 
1,806.0 
17.9 
165.5 
1,989.4
Net book amount at 29 September 2012 
1,819.1 
18.6 
157.9 
1,995.6
Required:
Using the Marston’s excerpts, identify the similarities and differences between U.S. GAAP 
and IFRS regarding accounting for property, plant, and equipment.

11
The Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) says:
Liabilities are probable future sacrifices of economic benefits arising from present obliga-
tions of a particular entity to transfer assets or to provide services to other entities in the 
future as a result of past transactions or events.1
Simply, this means that a financial statement liability is
1. An existing obligation arising from past events, which calls for
2. Payment of cash or provision of goods and services (say, delivery of a product 
for which a deposit has already been received) to some other entity at some 
 future date.
 
Liabilities help businesses conduct their affairs by permitting delay—delay in 
payment or performance. But because “time is money,” interest is a common feature 
of delayed payment liabilities. Interest is the price charged for delaying payment.
 
Most liabilities are monetary liabilities because they are payable in a future amount 
of cash. There are nonmonetary liabilities that are satisfied by the delivery of items 
other than cash, such as goods or services. An example of a nonmonetary liability is a 
product warranty. If the product fails during the warranty period, the warranty liability 
is satisfied by providing nonmonetary assets—labor and replacement parts from inven-
tory or a new product—but not cash.
BALANCE SHEET PRESENTATION
Conceptually, monetary liabilities should be shown in the financial statements at the 
discounted present value of the future cash outflows required to satisfy the obligation. 
This discounted present value approach allows interest to accumulate over time through 
accounting entries that assign interest expense—the cost of delay—to the time period(s) 
over which payment is delayed. In practice, this is what is done with long-term mone-
tary liabilities.
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
601
Chapter
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you 
will understand:
 1. How liabilities are shown on the 
 balance sheet.
 2. How debt instruments are struc-
tured and how the amortized cost 
method is used to account for them.
 3. How and when floating-rate debt 
protects lenders, and why interest 
must sometimes be imputed.
 4. How debt extinguishment gains and 
losses arise, and what they mean.
 5. How the fair value accounting 
 option can reduce earnings volatility.
 6. How to find the future cash 
 payments for a company’s debt.
 7. Why statement readers need 
to  beware of off-balance-sheet 
 financing arrangements and loss 
contingencies.
 8. How futures, swaps, and options 
contracts are used as speculative 
 investments or to hedge risk.
 9. When hedge accounting can be 
used, and how it reduces earnings 
volatility.
 10. How IFRS guidance for long-term 
debt, loss contingencies, and hedge 
accounting differs from U.S. GAAP.
1 “Elements of Financial Statements,” Statement of Financial Accounting Concepts No. 6 (Stamford, CT: FASB, 
1985), para. 35.
11

602 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
 
However, current liabilities—obligations due within a year or within the company’s oper-
ating cycle, whichever is longer—are rarely discounted. Current liabilities are rarely dis-
counted because their short maturity makes immaterial the difference between the amount due 
at maturity and the present value of that maturity amount. So, current liabilities are shown at 
the undiscounted amount due.2 This treatment of current liabilities departs from the concep-
tual “ideal” solely on pragmatic grounds—the dollar difference between the maturity amount 
and present value amount is quite small.
 
Noncurrent monetary liabilities are initially recorded at their present value when in-
curred. There are occasional exceptions, which we discuss in Chapter 13, but the general rule 
is that noncurrent monetary liabilities are first recorded at their present value.
 
To help you visualize how these liability valuation concepts apply in practice, refer to 
Exhibit 11.1, which reproduces the liabilities section of Oracle Corporation’s balance sheet. 
Oracle is one of the world’s leading suppliers of software for information management.
 
Listed among the company’s current liabilities you will find:
• Accounts payable that represent amounts owed to suppliers.
• Accrued compensation and related benefits that represent amounts owed to Oracle 
employees for services already rendered.
• Other current liabilities that represent amounts owed to various parties such as insurance 
providers, electric utility and telecommunication companies, and state and federal tax 
agencies.
Because these accounts are shown as current liabilities, you can be sure of two things:
1. The obligations are due within a year or within the company’s operating cycle, whichever 
is longer—at Oracle, “current” means “due within one year.”
2. These current liabilities are shown at the undiscounted amount due even though some 
may remain unpaid for a full year.
EXHIBIT 11.1
Oracle Corporation
Liabilities Section of Consolidated Balance Sheets
($ in millions) 
2012 
2011
Current liabilities:
 Notes payable, current and other current borrowings 
$ 2,950 
$ 1,150
 Accounts payable 
438 
494
 Accrued compensation and related benefits 
2,002 
2,320
 Deferred revenues 
7,035 
6,802
 Other current liabilities 
2,963 
3,426
  Total current liabilities 
$15,388 
$14,192
Noncurrent liabilities:
 Notes payable and other noncurrent borrowings 
13,524 
14,772
 Income taxes payable 
3,759 
3,169
 Other noncurrent liabilities 
1,569 
1,157
  Total noncurrent liabilities 
$18,852 
$19,098
Commitments and contingencies
2 An exception is the current portion of long-term debt.

 
Debt or Equity? 
603
 
Oracle’s current liabilities also include deferred revenues that arise when customers pay for 
the company’s software upgrades or consulting services in advance of actual delivery. Be-
cause Oracle is obligated to provide software products or consulting services—but not cash—
in the future, this account is a nonmonetary liability and the amount shown represents a 
portion of the cash payments received from these customers. (Chapter 3 describes how the 
deferred revenue amount is determined.)
 
Oracle’s long-term debt is shown in two places on the balance sheet:
• The amount due within one year is listed among current liabilities 
as Notes payable, current, and other current borrowings.
• Amounts due after one year are shown separately as Notes payable 
and other noncurrent borrowings.
This classification helps analysts and investors spot any large debt payments that may come 
due next year—for Oracle, the amount of short-term borrowings and long-term debt due in 
2013 (that is, the next year) is $2,950 million. Long-term debt is a noncurrent monetary liabil-
ity and is shown at the discounted present value of the amount due.
GLOBAL VANTAGE POINT
If you were to examine the liabilities section of a balance sheet prepared under international 
financial reporting rules, you would most likely find the format strikingly similar to the one 
shown in Exhibit 11.1 for Oracle, a U.S. company. That’s because most foreign firms that use 
IFRS prepare classified balance sheets where current liabilities are listed first, long-term lia-
bilities are listed second, and shareholders’ equity accounts third. But there are exceptions.
 
Aixtron Aktiengesellschaft, the German semiconductor equipment manufacturer, presents 
its liabilities in reverse order. Those to be paid in the distant future (think long-term debt 
maturing in 30 years) are listed first whereas obligations to be paid near term (e.g., wages 
payable due in two weeks) are listed last. To further complicate the presentation format, 
Aixtron shows stockholders’ equity accounts above (not below) its liabilities. Pick up a copy of 
Aixtron’s balance sheet and you will find the accounts grouped in the following order: stock-
holders’ equity, noncurrent liabilities, and finally current liabilities. This unusual presentation 
pattern is allowed under International Accounting Standard 1, “Presentation of Financial 
Statements” (International Accounting Standards Board, London, UK; revised January 2009).
DEBT OR EQUITY?
Suppose a start-up Internet company, Yellowbird.com, buys $100,000 of computers from a 
manufacturer, say Dell Inc. Instead of paying cash, Yellowbird promises to pay Dell $100,000 
worth of Yellowbird stock when the company goes public (in about six months). Yellowbird is 
using its stock as “currency” for the transaction because it lacks cash. Should the promised 
payment be classified as a liability or as equity on Yellowbird’s books?
 
Financial instruments with characteristics of both liabilities and equity are not easily 
assigned to either balance sheet category. In this example, the financial instrument is Yellow-
bird’s payment promise. The promise does indeed constitute an existing obligation (to pay 
Dell $100,000) arising from past events, and these two characteristics meet the definition 
of an accounting liability as described earlier. However, cash is not the form of payment. 
Dell will instead receive shares of Yellowbird stock. This characteristic makes the transac-
tion appear to be an equity investment by Dell. How then should Yellowbird classify its 
obligation to Dell?
The deferred tax liabilities listed among noncurrent 
 liabilities on Oracle’s balance sheet are  described in 
Chapter 13. Other long-term liabilities, which arise 
 primarily from  employee pension and health care 
 benefits, are described in Chapter 14.
International

604 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
 
GAAP guidance resolves the dilemma.3 Notice that a fixed amount of value ($100,000), not 
a fixed number of Yellowbird shares, must be conveyed to Dell. GAAP says that this feature of 
the promise makes the relationship more like that of a debtor–creditor. Unlike an owner, Dell 
cannot benefit from increases or suffer from decreases in share value from the time of the 
promise to the time of payment because Yellowbird is obligated to deliver stock worth exactly 
$100,000. So, Yellowbird must record the payment obligation as a $100,000 liability.
 
Here is another financial instrument with characteristics of both debt and equity. Wilbourne 
Corporation issues $250,000 of 10% preferred stock to investors who pay cash for the shares. 
The “10%” means that investors can expect to receive a preferred dividend payment 
of $25,000 (or 10% of the $250,000 issue price) each year. Under normal circumstances, 
Wilbourne classifies the financial instrument (preferred stock) as equity on its balance sheet. 
But suppose the preferred shares are issued with a mandatory redemption feature that 
requires Wilbourne to buy back the stock in five years for $250,000. This unconditional 
obligation to repurchase makes the instrument much more like debt than equity. Notice that 
the preferred stock cash flow stream is identical to that for a five-year loan of $250,000 with 
annual interest payments set at 10% of the loan balance. So, even though the instrument’s 
legal form is preferred stock, FASB Accounting Standards Codificationtm (ASC) Topic 480 
says Wilbourne must classify the payment obligation as a liability.
 
Financial instruments with both liability and equity characteristics are common today, 
and instruments with new characteristics are created every year. They pose significant chal-
lenges for accountants, who must determine the proper balance sheet classification for each 
instrument, and for analysts, who must unravel its implications for enterprise valuation and 
credit risk.
BONDS PAYABLE
Firms issue bonds to raise cash. A bond is a financial instrument that represents a formal 
promise to repay both the amount borrowed as well as the interest on the amount borrowed. 
Debentures, the most common type of corporate bond, are backed only by the company’s 
general credit. Mortgage bonds use real estate as collateral for repayment of the loan. Serial 
bonds require periodic payment of interest and a portion of the principal (for example, an 
equal amount each year to maturity). Despite these and other differences, the accounting for 
these debt instruments follows the general approach described here.
 
The precise terms of the borrowing are specified in the bond indenture agreement—the 
contract between the bond’s issuer (that is, the borrower) and the bond’s investors (lenders). 
In this section, we look at how companies account for this debt instrument and how to inter-
pret debt disclosures in financial statements.
Characteristics of Bond Cash Flows
Bond certificates are usually issued with a principal amount of $1,000. The principal 
amount—also called the par value, maturity value, or face value—represents the amount that 
will be repaid to the investor at the maturity date specified in the indenture agreement. The 
bond certificate also displays the stated interest rate—sometimes called the nominal rate.
3 FASB ASC Topic 480: Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity. The FASB and its global counterpart, the International Account-
ing Standards Board (IASB), are working jointly to clarify and converge the reporting requirements for financial instruments 
with equity characteristics. The project timeline calls for some conclusions to be reached in 2014, so stay tuned in.
Convertible bonds give 
 investors the opportunity—
but not the obligation—to 
exchange a company’s debt 
for common stock. Chapter 
15 describes the accounting 
complexities that arise with 
convertible bonds.

 
Bonds Payable 
605
Investors must be careful to read the details of a bond’s interest payment 
terms. For example, investors who own a bond that pays “9% interest an-
nually”  receive a single payment of $90 (per $1,000 of face value) each 
year. A bond that pays “9% interest semiannually” yields two payments 
of $45 each year (9%y2 5 4.5% each payment period). Although the total 
dollar interest payment is $90 per year in both cases, the semiannual 
bond is slightly more valuable because investors receive half of the cash 
earlier each year than in the case of the annual payment bond. 
 Semiannual bonds are quite common, and the accounting for them is 
 explored in  Problems 11-2 and 11-3.
The cash interest payments on the Huff bonds are an annuity, which means a 
 series of payments in the same amount made at equally spaced time intervals. 
If the first payment is made at the start of Period 1, then it’s an annuity due. 
Apartment leases often have this feature—the first month’s payment is due when 
the lease is signed. The cash interest payments on Huff’s bonds are an ordinary 
 annuity (in arrears) because the first payment is due at the end of period 1 
 (December 31, 2014).
 
The annual cash interest payments on the bond are 
computed by multiplying the principal (face) amount 
by the stated interest rate. A bond with $1,000 prin-
cipal and a 9% per year stated interest rate will have 
annual cash interest payments of $90. Typically, the 
 total annual cash interest is paid in installments, either 
quarterly or semiannually.
 
While the face value is typically $1,000 per bond, 
the price at which it is issued can be equal to, less, or 
more than the face value.
• When the issue price exactly equals the face value, the bond is sold at par.
• If the issue price is less than face value, the bond is sold at a discount.
• If the issue price is more than face value, the bond is sold at a premium.
Market conditions and the borrower’s credit risk dictate the relationship between what inves-
tors are willing to pay—the issue price—and the bond’s face value.
Bonds Issued at Par
A bond’s issue price determines its effective yield—or true rate of return. When the bond’s 
issue price equals its par value, the effective yield to investors exactly equals the stated (or 
nominal) rate. Consider this example:
On January 1, 2014, Huff Corporation issued $1,000,000 face value of 10% per year bonds at 
par—that is, Huff obtained $1,000,000 cash from investors and promised to make interest and 
principal payments in the future. Because the cash interest payments on the bonds always equal 
the stated interest rate (10%) times the bond principal amount ($1,000,000), cash interest will 
total $100,000 per year. The bonds mature in 10 years (on December 31, 2023), and interest is 
paid annually on December 31 of each year.
 
The accounting entry to record issuance of these bonds on Huff’s books is:
DR Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$1,000,000
   CR Bonds payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 $1,000,000
The bonds are recorded at the issue price—the $1,000,000 cash Huff received.
 
To show that the effective yield equals 10% in this example, we list the cash payments and 
compute their present value as of the issue date—January 1, 2014—in Exhibit 11.2. The effective 
yield is precisely 10% because the present value 
of the 10 annual interest payments ($614,456) 
plus the present value of the principal repay-
ment ($385,544) equals the issue proceeds 
 received on January 1, 2014 ($1,000,000), when 
discounted at a 10% rate.
 
For bonds issued at par, the stated interest 
rate on the bond equals the effective yield 
earned by bond investors. Furthermore, record-
ing the bonds at par on the issuer’s books automatically records them at their discounted 
present value.

606 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
EXHIBIT 11.2
Huff Corporation
Demonstration that the Yield on Bonds Issued at Par Equals the Stated Interest Rate (here 10%)
 
Type of  
Amount 
10% 
Discounted
Date of Payment 
Payment 
of Payment 
Present Value Factor 
Present Value
12/31/14 
Interest 
$   100,000 
0.90909 
$    90,909
12/31/15 
Interest 
100,000 
0.82645 
82,645
12/31/16 
Interest 
100,000 
0.75131 
75,131
12/31/17 
Interest 
100,000 
0.68301 
68,301
12/31/18 
Interest 
100,000 
0.62092 
62,092
12/31/19 
Interest 
100,000 
0.56447 
56,447
12/31/20 
Interest 
100,000 
0.51316 
51,316
12/31/21 
Interest 
100,000 
0.46651 
46,651
12/31/22 
Interest 
100,000 
0.42410 
42,410
12/31/23 
Interest 
100,000 
0.38554 
38,554
 Total present value of interest payments 
 
 
 
$   614,456
12/31/23 
Principal 
$1,000,000 
0.385544 
385,544
 Total issue price on January 1, 2014 
 
 
 
$1,000,000
 
In the example, the amount received for the bonds ($1,000,000) exactly equals the present 
value of the future debt-related cash outflows (interest and principal payments) discounted at 
the 10% effective yield on the bonds.
 
Subsequent accounting for bonds issued at par is straightforward. Let’s say that Huff pre-
pares monthly financial statements; the monthly journal entry to record interest expense and 
Huff’s liability for unpaid (“accrued”) interest is:
DR Interest expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $8,333
CR Accrued interest payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$8,333
This (rounded) amount represents 1y12 of the $100,000 annual interest. At the end of the year, 
the accrued (unpaid) interest will be $100,000; upon Huff’s payment of the interest, the entry is:
DR Accrued interest payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $100,000
CR Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$100,000
Bonds Issued at a Discount
Arranging for the sale of bonds can take considerable time. The terms of the indenture—the bond 
contract—must be drafted, the bond certificates themselves must be engraved and printed, and an 
investment banker must be found. Time is also consumed in 
waiting for the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) 
to review and accept the security-offering prospectus. Market 
interest rates may change during the time it takes to do this 
and before the bonds are ready to be issued.
 Assume that the Huff bonds are printed during late 2013 
and carry a 10% stated interest rate. The stated rate immedi-
ately establishes the yearly cash interest payout of $100,000 
(10% multiplied by the $1,000,000 face amount of the bonds).
The issuing company seldom sells bonds directly to investors. Instead, 
the bonds are most often sold through a financial intermediary—an 
investment bank. In those cases, the investment bank purchases the 
bonds and resells them to institutional investors (for example, pension 
funds) at whatever price the market will bear. The investment bank’s 
profit (or loss) is the difference between the price it pays to buy the 
bonds from the issuing company and the price it receives from 
investors, plus any fees paid by the company.

 
Bonds Payable
607
EXHIBIT 11.3
Huff Corporation
Determining the Issue Price for 10% Stated Interest Rate Bonds When the Market Rate Is 11%
 
Type of 
Amount 
11% 
Discounted
Date of Payment 
Payment 
of Payment 
Present Value Factor 
Present Value
12/31/14 
Interest 
$   100,000 
0.90090 
$  90,090
12/31/15 
Interest 
100,000 
0.81162 
81,162
12/31/16 
Interest 
100,000 
0.73119 
73,119
12/31/17 
Interest 
100,000 
0.65873 
65,873
12/31/18 
Interest 
100,000 
0.59345 
59,345
12/31/19 
Interest 
100,000 
0.53464 
53,464
12/31/20 
Interest 
100,000 
0.48166 
48,166
12/31/21 
Interest 
100,000 
0.43393 
43,393
12/31/22 
Interest 
100,000 
0.39093 
39,093
12/31/23 
Interest 
100,000 
0.35218 
35,218
 Total present value of interest payments 
 
 
5.88923 
$588,923
12/31/23 
Principal 
$1,000,000 
0.352185 
352,185
 Total issue price on January 1, 2014 
 
 
 
$941,108
Equivalently
December 31 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023
Cash interest payments 
 
$100k 
$100k 
$100k 
$100k 
$100k 
$100k 
$100k 
$100k 
$100k 
$100k
Cash principal payment 
 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
$1 m
 
Present value of single payment at 11%: $1 million 3 0.352185 5 $352,185
 
Present value of 10-period ordinary annuity at 11%: $100,000 3 5.88923 5 $588,923
 
But let’s say there’s a sudden increase in the anticipated rate of inflation, causing investors 
to demand an 11% return on the Huff bonds as of the January 1, 2014, issue date. To provide 
the 11% return that investors now demand, Huff must sell the bonds at a discount relative to 
face value. Here’s why. The annual cash interest and maturity payments are fixed by the in-
denture agreement at $100,000 and $1,000,000, respectively. If investors pay the full face 
amount ($1,000,000) for the bonds, they will just earn a 10% return on their investment. To 
attract investors who expect to earn an 11% return, Huff must be willing to issue the bonds at 
a price lower than the $1,000,000 face amount. How much lower than $1,000,000 must the 
issue price be? It must be reduced to a level that gives prospective investors exactly the 11% 
return they require. The bond’s price is determined by discounting the contractual cash 
flows at 11%, as shown in Exhibit 11.3. Lowering the issue price gives investors the higher 
return they demand.
 
The price that yields the required 11% return, given the stipulated $100,000 annual con-
tractual interest payments, is $941,108 (Exhibit 11.3). Investors seeking an 11% return will 
not be willing to pay more than $941,108 for 10-year bonds that have a $1,000,000 face value 
and a 10% stated interest rate. Why? Because if they pay more than $941,108, they will earn 
less than 11% on the bond’s fixed cash flow stream. And Huff will not be willing to issue the 
bonds for less than $941,108 because to do so would mean paying more than 11% to inves-
tors. Market forces will thus set the issue price at $941,108.

608 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
Cumulative interest expense 
can also be thought of as 
 follows. Investors will 
 ultimately be paid total cash 
flows of $2,000,000 in prin-
cipal plus cash interest; 
that is, $1,000,000 paid at 
maturity, and 10 annual 
payments of $100,000. Huff 
received only $941,108 when 
the bonds were issued. The 
difference between total cash 
payments and cash received 
at issuance ($2,000,000 2 
$941,108) is $1,058,892. 
This figure is the cumulative 
total interest expense over 
the life of the bond.
EXHIBIT 11.4
Huff Corporation
Bond Discount Amortization Schedule
 
(a)  
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e)
 
Bond Net Carrying  
Interest 
Bond Discount 
Bond Discount 
Bond Net Carrying Amount
 
Amount at  
Expense 
Amortized 
Balance 
at End of  Year
Year 
Start of  Year 
 (Column [a] 3 11%) 
(Column [b] 2 $100,000) 
 at End of  Year 
(Column [a] 1 Column [c])
2014 
$941,108 
$  103,522 
$ 3,522 
$55,370 
$  944,630
2015 
944,630 
103,909 
3,909 
51,461 
948,539
2016 
948,539 
104,339 
4,339 
47,122 
952,878
2017 
952,878 
104,817 
4,817 
42,305 
957,695
2018 
957,695 
105,346 
5,346 
36,959 
963,041
2019 
963,041 
105,935 
5,935 
31,024 
968,976
2020 
968,976 
106,587 
6,587 
24,437 
975,563
2021 
975,563 
107,312 
7,312 
17,125 
982,875
2022 
982,875 
108,116 
8,116 
9,009 
990,991
2023 
990,991 
109,009 
9,009 
— 
$1,000,000
 
 
$1,058,892 
$58,892
Amounts rounded to nearest dollar.
But it’s an unusual “recommendation” because 
GAAP allows other methods only if their results 
are not much different from the effective interest 
method.
 
The accounting entry made on issuance of the 10% bonds at a price that yields an 11% 
return to investors is:
DR Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $941,108
DR Bond discount. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
58,892
   CR Bonds payable—par  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 $1,000,000
 
The Bond discount is a liability valuation account that is deducted from the Bonds pay-
able account for financial reporting purposes. The net balance sheet (or carrying) value of the 
bonds when they are issued is $941,108 ($1,000,000 minus $58,892)—the amount of cash 
Huff received. This again illustrates the basic principle that newly issued bonds are recorded 
at the issue price, which exactly equals the present value of the contractual cash outflows for 
interest and principal repayment when those cash outflows are discounted at the effective 
yield on the bonds at the issuance date (here 11%).
 
When bonds are not sold at par, the calculation of annual interest expense and the ac-
counting entry to record that expense are slightly more complicated. Consider the nature of 
the bond discount of $58,892. The discount amount is the difference between the cash Huff 
received from investors and the $1,000,000 principal amount Huff promised to repay them 
on December 31, 2023. This $58,892 is really just additional interest—over and above the 
contractual cash interest of $100,000 per year—that will be earned over the term of the loan, 
but it will not be paid until maturity. Cumulative interest expense over the 10 years will total 
$1,058,892—the stated interest of $1,000,000 paid out over the life of the bond plus the issue 
discount of $58,892 paid at maturity.
 
How should this “extra” interest of $58,892 be allocated across the 10 years? Generally ac-
cepted accounting principles (GAAP) recommend that the bond discount be allocated to interest 
expense on an effective interest basis. This requires the use of an amortization 
schedule, as shown in Exhibit 11.4. In Column (a), Huff received $941,108 on 
January 1, 2014, in exchange for issuing the bond certificates. Bondholders re-
quire an 11% return on the amount invested. Therefore, their interest income—
and Huff’s interest expense—in 2014 must be 11% of $941,108 or $103,522, as 

 
Bonds Payable
609
shown in Column (b). The difference between Huff’s $103,522 interest expense and the cash 
interest of $100,000 is the portion of “extra” interest allocated to 2014. This “extra” interest re-
duces the bond discount amount. If interest is recorded annually, the 2014 entry is:
DR Interest expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $103,522
CR Accrued interest payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$100,000
CR Bond discount  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
3,522
 
The process of “spreading” the discount on bonds to increase interest expense over the life 
of the bonds is called discount amortization. The yearly amortization amount is shown in 
Column (c) of Exhibit 11.4. After the amortization is recorded, the year-end balance in the 
Bond discount account—shown in Column (d)—will be $55,370 (the original discount of 
$58,892 minus the 2014 amortization of $3,522). Notice that the smaller the balance in the 
Bond discount account, shown in Column (d), the higher the net carrying value (book value) 
of the bond liability in Column (e). The balance sheet carrying value of the bonds increases 
toward the final maturity payment of $1 million as the discount is amortized.
 
The bond amortization schedule illustrates that annual interest expense, Column (b), al-
ways equals the effective interest rate (here 11%) multiplied by the start-of-the-year borrowing 
balance, Column (a). The difference between the accrual accounting interest expense, Column 
(b), and the $100,000 cash interest paid each year is the discount amortization, Column (c). 
This effective interest amortization process is represented in Exhibit 11.5.
Bonds Issued at a Premium
Recording bonds issued at a premium is similar to accounting for bonds issued at a discount. As-
sume that immediately after Huff Corporation bonds were printed late in 2013, interest rates fell
to 9%. If these newly issued bonds were sold at par, Huff would be paying investors 10%—the 
stated interest rate as printed. But why should Huff pay 10% when investors are willing to accept 
9% interest? Here’s how Huff pays 9% instead of 10% despite the contractual 10% specified. 
Rather than selling the bonds at par, Huff will issue the bonds at a premium—that is, at an amount 
sufficiently higher than the $1,000,000 face value so that investors will receive only a 9% return. 
The exact amount is determined, as in the previous discount example, by taking the bond-related 
cash flows and discounting them at the effective yield rate (here 9%), as shown in Exhibit 11.6.
 
Market forces dictate that the bonds would be issued for $1,064,177—the present value 
of the contractual principal and interest payments at a discount rate of 9% as shown in 
Exhibit 11.6. Buying the bonds at this price will give investors a 9% effective yield.
 
The entry to record the bond issuance is:
DR Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $1,064,177
CR Bond premium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$  64,177
CR Bonds payable—par. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
1,000,000
EXHIBIT 11.5
Determining the Amortization Amount
 
Interest expense 
Cash interest payment
Amortization
amount
£
§
Beginning-of-period  Effective
carrying amount 
3 yield at
of bond 
 issuance
£
§
Principal 
 Stated
amount of 3 interest
bond 
 rate
Amortization
amount
 2 
 5 
 2 
 5 

610 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
EXHIBIT 11.6
Huff Corporation
Determining the Issue Price for 10% Stated Interest Rate Bonds When the Market Rate Is 9%
 
Type of 
Amount 
9% 
Discounted
Date of Payment 
Payment 
of Payment 
Present Value Factor 
 Present Value
12/31/14 
Interest 
$ 100,000 
0.91743 
$   91,743
12/31/15 
Interest 
100,000 
0.84168 
84,168
12/31/16 
Interest 
100,000 
0.77218 
77,218
12/31/17 
Interest 
100,000 
0.70843 
70,843
12/31/18 
Interest 
100,000 
0.64993 
64,993
12/31/19 
Interest 
100,000 
0.59627 
59,627
12/31/20 
Interest 
100,000 
0.54703 
54,703
12/31/21 
Interest 
100,000 
0.50187 
50,187
12/31/22 
Interest 
100,000 
0.46043 
46,043
12/31/23 
Interest 
100,000 
0.42241 
42,241
 Total present value of interest payments 
 
 
6.41766 
$  641,766
12/31/23 
Principal 
$1,000,000 
0.422411 
422,411
 Total issue price on January 1, 2014 
 
 
 
$1,064,177
Equivalently
December 31 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023
Cash interest payments 
 
$100k 
$100k 
$100k 
$100k 
$100k 
$100k 
$100k 
$100k 
$100k 
$100k
Cash principal payment 
 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
$1 m
 
Present value of single payment at 9%: $1 million 3 0.422411 5 $422,411
 
Present value of 10-period ordinary annuity at 9%: $100 thousand 3 6.41766 5 $641,766
The Bond premium (like the Bond discount) is also a liability valuation account; the premium 
balance, $64,177 in this example, is added to the Bonds payable account to increase the bal-
ance sheet carrying value of the bonds. The Huff bonds will initially have a carrying value of 
$1,064,177. When bonds are sold at a premium, interest expense will always be less than 
the cash interest payment. The extra cash paid represents the amount of the premium being 
returned to bondholders. Exhibit 11.7 shows the amortization schedule. For example, the 2014 
interest expense entry shows interest expense (from Column [b]) equal to $95,776, or the 
$100,000 cash interest payment minus the $4,224 premium amortization (from Column [c])—
that is:
DR Interest expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $95,776
DR Bond premium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,224
CR Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 $100,000
Interest expense each year is less than the $100,000 annual cash interest payment. To see 
why, notice that Huff initially received more cash than it promised to pay back at the end of 
10 years—that is, Huff received $1,064,177 but agreed to pay back $1,000,000. The difference—
or premium—is returned to bondholders gradually over the entire period of the borrowing. 
For example, $4,224 of the premium is returned in 2014 (as shown in Column [c]), and a dif-
ferent amount ($4,604) is returned in 2015.

 
Bonds Payable
611
Graphic Look at Bonds
The bar graphs in Figure 11.1 depict the components of issue price for Huff bonds when the 
interest rate is 10% (from Exhibit 11.2), 11% (from Exhibit 11.3), and 9% (from Exhibit 11.6). 
These bar graphs illustrate that the issue price is determined by discounting the contractual 
principal and interest flows at the market yield rate.
EXHIBIT 11.7
Huff Corporation
Bond Premium Amortization Schedule
 
(a)  
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e)
 
Bond Net Carrying  
Interest 
Bond Premium 
Bond Premium 
Bond Net Carrying Amount
 
Amount at  
Expense 
Amortized 
Balance 
at End of Year
Year 
Start of Year 
 (Column [a] 3 9%) 
($100,000 2 Column [b]) 
 at End of Year 
(Column [a] 2 Column [c])
2014  
$1,064,177 
$ 95,776 
$ 4,224 
$59,953 
$1,059,953
2015 
1,059,953 
95,396 
4,604 
55,349 
1,055,349
2016 
1,055,349 
94,981 
5,019 
50,330 
1,050,330
2017 
1,050,330 
94,530 
5,470 
44,860 
1,044,860
2018 
1,044,860 
94,037 
5,963 
38,897 
1,038,897
2019 
1,038,897 
93,501 
6,499 
32,398 
1,032,398
2020 
1,032,398 
92,916 
7,084 
25,314 
1,025,314
2021 
1,025,314 
92,278 
7,722 
17,592 
1,017,592
2022 
1,017,592 
91,583 
8,417 
9,175 
1,009,175
2023 
1,009,175 
90,825 
9,175 
— 
1,000,000
 
 
$935,823 
$64,177
Amounts rounded to nearest dollar.
9%
10%
11%
Annual effective yield
Present value of cash flows ($000 omitted)
1,200
600
700
800
900
1,000
1,100
500
400
300
200
100
$641,766
Present
value
of 
interest
$614,456
Present
value
of 
interest
$588,923
Present
value
of 
interest
$385,544
Present
value
of 
principal
$352,185
Present
value
of 
principal
$422,411
Present
value
of 
principal
$1,064,177
$1,000,000
Premium
$64,177
Discount
$58,892
Face (par) value
Selling prices
$941,108
Figure 11.1
SELLING PRICES OF 10% 
STATED INTEREST RATE 
BONDS AT DIFFERENT 
MARKET (EFFECTIVE) 
YIELDS

612 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
 
Figure 11.2 is based on the amortization schedule numbers from Exhibit 11.4, where the 
Huff bonds sold at a discount because the market interest rate was 11%. Figure 11.2(a) shows 
the interest expense and cash interest payments for each year of the term of the bond, and the 
difference between the two amounts is the discount amortization. For example, the discount 
amortized in 2014 ($3,522) is the amount from Column (c) of Exhibit 11.4. The second chart 
(Figure 11.2 [b]) shows that the carrying value of the bonds increases as the discount is amor-
tized each year, and the carrying value equals face value at the maturity date.
 
If the bond sells at a premium due to a 9% market interest rate, then interest expense each 
year is less than the coupon cash payment of $100,000, and the carrying value of the bond 
declines toward face value as the premium is amortized.
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Interest expense ($000)
115
110
105
100
95
90
Interest 
expense 
is cash 
payment 
plus discount
amortized
Year
Panel (a)
Cash interest payment of 
$100,000 each year
Discount amortized 
(e.g. $3,522 in 2014)
Figure 11.2(a)
CASH INTEREST PAYMENT 
AND INTEREST EXPENSE
Market yield 11%
Carrying value of bond
Unamortized discount
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Carrying value at year-end ($000)
Start
of 2014
1,150
1,100
1,050
1,000
950
900
850
Face 
amount 
of bond is 
$1,000,000
Year-End
Panel (b)
Figure 11.2(b)
CARRYING VALUE FOR 
10% STATED INTEREST 
RATE BONDS SOLD AT 
DISCOUNT
Market yield 11%
RECAP
The cash interest and principal payments on a bond are set before the bond is issued, but 
market forces determine the issue price and thus the effective yield to investors. All 
bonds are first recorded on the borrower’s books at the issue price. The issue price 

 
Bonds Payable 
613
Book Value versus Market Value after Issuance
Although bonds payable are recorded at their market value—meaning their present value—
when first issued, their balance sheet carrying value will not necessarily equal their market 
value later. After issuance, the market value may not equal the balance sheet value when 
bonds payable are carried on the books at amortized historical cost. Because market interest 
rates often change, so do bond prices. Thus, after issuance, the reported book value of bonds 
payable and their market value will likely differ.
 
To see this, let’s return to the Huff Corporation example with 10% stated interest rate bonds 
issued at par on January 1, 2014. Because the bonds were issued at par, there is no discount or 
premium to amortize. Hence, the amortized historical cost carrying (book) value of the bonds 
will always equal the principal amount of $1,000,000 each year the bonds are outstanding. 
Bonds payable would be shown on the balance sheet at $1,000,000 at December 31, 2014, one 
year after being issued.
 
Now it’s January 1, 2015, one year after the bonds were first issued, and the market interest 
rate suddenly jumps to 11%. Remember that prevailing interest rates last year “set” the price 
at which the bonds were originally issued. It’s no different after the bonds have been issued—
prevailing interest rates still set the market price. So, the market price of Huff bonds after inter-
est rates jump on January 1, 2015, equals the remaining cash interest and principal payments 
discounted at the new 11% effective yield that investors now require. The market price on Janu-
ary 1, 2015, would be $944,630 (see Exhibit 11.8). However, under GAAP, the bonds payable 
would still be shown on Huff’s books at the original $1,000,000 amount. In general then, 
 reported book values after issuance will not necessarily equal the market value of the bonds 
because market interest rates fluctuate over time.
Floating-Rate Debt 
Exhibit 11.8 illustrates that fluctuations in market interest rates 
change the value of financial instruments such as Huff’s 10% stated interest rate bonds. In our 
example, a one percentage point increase in the market rate of interest (from 10% to 11%) at 
the beginning of 2015 would cause the value of Huff’s bonds to fall by $55,370 (from 
$1,000,000 to $944,630). Investors who buy Huff bonds are exposed to market value losses 
because the stated interest rate is fixed at 10% per year for the term of the bonds. When mar-
ket interest rates increase, Huff bonds continue to pay only the fixed rate of 10% even though 
investors could do better elsewhere.
 
Investors can protect themselves from such losses in several ways; the most common is 
investing in floating-rate debt. In contrast to Huff’s fixed-rate bond, floating-rate debt has a 
stated interest rate that fluctuates in tandem with some interest rate benchmark such as the 
London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR). This widely used benchmark for floating-rate 
debt is the base interest rate paid on deposits between European banks.
 
Suppose that the contractual interest rate on Huff’s bonds is “LIBOR plus 4%, reset annu-
ally” and that the bonds are issued on January 1, 2014, when the LIBOR is 6%. Investors will 
 exactly equals the present value of the cash payment obligation (interest payments plus 
principal payment) discounted at the effective interest rate. The effective interest rate is 
then used to compute interest expense and the carrying value of the bond in subsequent 
periods. When bonds are sold at a discount, the effective interest rate is higher than the 
stated interest rate. Amortization of the discount increases interest expense and adds to 
the bond’s carrying value. When bonds are sold at a premium, the effective interest rate 
is lower than the stated interest rate. Amortizing the premium decreases interest ex-
pense and reduces the bond’s carrying value. A liability valuation account is used to re-
flect the unamortized discount or premium.
Market interest rates change 
up or down almost on a 
daily basis and, thus, so do 
bond prices. Changes in a 
company’s credit risk also 
influence bond prices. 
These changes are less fre-
quent but no less important.
As we describe later in the 
chapter, firms now have 
the option to use fair value 
 accounting rather than 
 amortized historical cost 
 accounting for bonds 
payable.

614 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
receive a cash interest payment of $100,000 during 2014 because the contractual interest rate 
is 10% (LIBOR of 6% plus another 4%). If the LIBOR increases to 7% by January 1, 2015, 
investors will receive a cash interest payment of $110,000 (or 11%) that year because of the 
annual “reset” provision. The new rate equals the LIBOR of 7% plus 4% by contract. The ad-
ditional $10,000 cash payment, if maintained over the bond’s life, will exactly offset in pres-
ent value terms the $55,370 value decline ($1,000,000 2 $944,630) we computed in Exhibit 
11.8. The market value of Huff’s floating-rate debt would remain $1,000,000, and investors 
would be protected from losses such as those associated with Huff’s fixed-rate debt.
 
Floating-rate debt can also benefit the issuing company. If the LIBOR falls to 5%, Huff 
will be able to reduce its cash interest payments to $90,000 because the contractual interest 
rate would be reset to 9% (LIBOR of 5% plus another 4% by contract).
 
Investors benefit from floating-rate debt when market interest rates rise, and issuing corpo-
rations benefit when market rates fall. Floating-rate debt allows investors and issuing com-
panies to share in the risks and rewards of changing market interest rates. Risk sharing lowers 
the company’s overall borrowing costs, and this translates into floating-rate debt that has a 
lower (expected) interest rate than would be charged on comparable fixed-rate debt.
 
Because virtually all floating-rate debt is issued at par, the accounting entries required are 
simple. Interest expense and accrued interest payable are recorded using the contractual inter-
est rate in effect during the period. Huff would make these entries if it had issued the “LIBOR 
plus 4%, reset annually” bonds on January 1, 2014:
  1/1/14:  DR Cash   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $1,000,000
CR Bonds payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$1,000,000
12/31/14:  DR Interest expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$100,000
 
   CR Accrued interest payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$100,000
 
2014 interest rate set at 10% (LIBOR of 6% plus 4%).
12/31/15:  DR Interest expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$110,000
 
   CR Accrued interest payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$110,000
 
2015 interest rate reset to 11% (LIBOR of 7% plus 4%).
EXHIBIT 11.8
Huff Corporation
Calculation of Bond Price after an Interest Rate Increase from 10% to 11%
 
Type of 
Amount 
11% 
Discounted
Date of Payment 
Payment 
 of Payment 
Present Value Factor 
 Present Value
12/31/15 
Interest 
$  100,000 
0.90090 
$ 90,090
12/31/16 
Interest 
100,000 
0.81162 
81,162
12/31/17 
Interest 
100,000 
0.73119 
73,119
12/31/18 
Interest 
100,000 
0.65873 
65,873
12/31/19 
Interest 
100,000 
0.59345 
59,345
12/31/20 
Interest 
100,000 
0.53464 
53,464
12/31/21 
Interest 
100,000 
0.48166 
48,166
12/31/22 
Interest 
100,000 
0.43393 
43,393
12/31/23 
Interest 
100,000 
0.39093 
39,093
 Total present value of interest payments 
 
 
5.53705 
$553,705
12/31/23 
Principal 
$1,000,000 
0.390925 
390,925
 Total market price on January 1, 2015 
 
 
 
$944,630

 
Bonds Payable 
615
Book value equals market value on the maturity 
date because the principal payment is then due 
immediately and, consequently, is not discounted 
for time or risk.
When bonds are sold at a premium or discount, 
the initial carrying value equals the face value 
plus the premium or minus the discount. The pre-
mium or discount account must also be brought 
to zero when debt is retired. Remember that in-
terest  expense and accrued interest payable may 
need to be brought up to date before recording 
the  extinguishment itself.
The balance sheet would continue to show bonds payable at $1,000,000, which also equals the 
market value of the floating-rate debt.
Extinguishment of Debt 
Interest rates constantly adjust to changes in levels of 
economic activity and changes in expected inflation rates among many other factors. When 
interest rates change, the market price of fixed-rate debt changes but in the 
opposite direction—as interest rates rise, the market price of debt falls; as 
interest rates fall, the market price of debt rises. However, as you just saw, 
most GAAP accounting for debt is at the original transaction price using the 
original effective interest rate. Subsequent market price changes are not re-
corded. Because market price changes of debt are not recorded, the balance sheet value of 
debt and its market value will differ (nearly always—unless the firm elects the fair value 
option described later). This divergence creates no accounting gain or loss for debt that is 
not retired before maturity—remember that book (carrying) value and debt market value are 
always equal on the maturity date.
 
However, when debt is retired before maturity, amortized historical cost 
book value and market value are not typically equal at the retirement date, 
generating an accounting gain or loss.
 
To see this, let’s go back to Huff’s $1,000,000 of 10% fixed-rate debt. On 
January 1, 2015, immediately after interest rates jump to 11%, Huff repur-
chases the 10% coupon bonds issued one year earlier. At the repurchase date, 
the bonds’ market value is $944,630, as in Exhibit 11.8. The book value is 
$1,000,000 because the bonds were issued at par. The entry to record the 
 repurchase (ignoring possible income taxes) is:
DR Bonds payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $1,000,000
   CR Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$944,630
   CR Gain on debt extinguishment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
55,370
 
The accounting gain (or loss) at retirement—more commonly called extinguishment—
is the difference between the cash paid to extinguish the debt and the debt’s book value. 
Gains and losses from debt extinguishment are subject to the same criteria used to deter-
mine whether other gains and losses qualify for extraordinary item treatment.4 From 
 Chapter 2, remember that to qualify as an extraordinary item under GAAP, the event 
must be both unusual and infrequent. For many firms, debt extinguishment is neither 
 unusual nor infrequent because early retirement is part of an ongoing interest rate risk 
management strategy.
 
One more thing! Where did Huff obtain the $944,630 cash needed to retire the old 10% 
fixed-rate bonds? The cash may have come from selling assets such as marketable securities, 
from operating cash flows, or a combination of the two, or Huff may have borrowed the 
money by issuing new nine-year, 10% fixed-rate bonds with a face value of $1,000,000. Per 
Exhibit 11.8, Huff would have received cash proceeds of $944,630 by issuing the new 10% 
bonds at a price that yields an 11% return to investors. The cash raised from selling the new 
4 FASB ASC Paragraph 470-50-45-1: Debt—Modifications and Extinguishments—Other Presentation Matters.

616 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
bonds could then be used to retire the old 10% fixed-rate debt. The entries to record this 
 two-step process for retiring the 10% bonds are:
DR Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$944,630
   CR Bonds payable (new 10%) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$944,630
To record the issuance of nine-year, 10% fixed-rate bonds with a face 
value of $1,000,000.
DR Bonds payable (old 10%) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $1,000,000
   CR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$944,630
   CR Gain on debt extinguishment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
55,370
To record the retirement of the 10% fixed-rate bonds.
 
The two-step process removes a $1,000,000 liability from Huff’s balance sheet but adds 
another $944,630 liability. Huff still reports a gain on debt retirement even though the com-
pany just replaced one debt instrument (the old 10% bonds) with another debt instrument (the 
new 10% bonds) of equal market value and the contractual cash flows for both bonds are the 
same. This is an odd accounting result—Huff records a GAAP extinguishment gain (and 
higher net income) yet its future cash flow obligation to bond investors is unchanged.
Option to Use Fair Value Accounting
Some U.S. firms have recognized as profit the falling value of their own debt without going 
through the effort and expense of an actual debt retirement. The reason why is that GAAP 
now allows firms to elect the fair value option for existing debt.5
 
Fair value option accounting works this way. Suppose that Elena Corporation issued 
$1,000,000 of bonds at par in 2004. By December 2007, the bonds had fallen in value to 
$950,000 because market interest rates had increased, Elena’s creditworthiness had deterio-
rated, or both. Yet the bonds were carried on the balance sheet at $1,000,000 amortized his-
torical cost. Under fair value option accounting (which became GAAP in 2007), Elena could 
elect in 2007 to use fair value rather than amortized historical cost as this liability’s carrying 
value. Doing so would reduce the reported 2007 book value of Elena’s balance sheet liability 
by $50,000, the difference between the bonds’ fair value ($950,000) and the original carrying 
value ($1,000,000). The $50,000 difference would also appear on the 2007 income statement 
as a gain that boosts reported profits.
Is this profit boost real or just illusory? Suppose that Elena was not planning 
to retire the bonds until they mature in 2013—10 years after they were first 
 issued. As you already know from our previous discussion, the bonds will have a 
fair value of $1,000,000 at maturity. This means that any profit boost from tem-
porary value declines in the early years will be offset by losses in later years when 
bond value recovers. In other words, Elena’s $50,000 gain in 2007 is an illusion because fair value 
losses of $50,000 will eventually be booked in later periods as the bonds approach maturity.
 
This feature of the fair value option—that firms can record a profit when their own liabilities 
fall in value—is controversial. Critics claim it opens a new door for firms to dress up their balance 
sheets and massage earnings. Proponents, on the other hand, say that the fair value option elimi-
nates accounting-induced volatility and improves financial statement transparency. Before we 
evaluate these opposing viewpoints, let’s take a closer look at the fair value option guidelines.
5 FASB ASC Topic 825: Financial Instruments, and Fair Value Subsections.
What if the bonds had gained in value? In that 
case, the fair value option election would trigger 
an increase to Elena’s reported balance sheet 
 liabilities and an income statement loss.

 
Bonds Payable 
617
The Guidelines 
Firms may choose to measure certain eligible financial instruments at 
fair value rather than historical cost. This option is available for most basic financial assets— 
accounts and notes receivable, investments in debt and equity securities—as well as most 
 financial liabilities including accounts and notes payable plus long-term debt such as bonds 
payable.6 In addition, firms may elect the fair value option on equity method investments 
(discussed in Chapter 16), debt and equity investments not traded in organized markets, and 
certain other obligations.
 
When must firms elect the fair value option? During the transition to this new GAAP, the 
choice for then existing financial instruments was made when the new accounting standard 
was first adopted in either 2007 or 2008. After transition, the election is made when a new fi-
nancial asset or liability is first recognized on the company’s books or later when some event 
(e.g., a business acquisition) triggers a new basis of accounting for that instrument. Once the 
choice has been made, it is irrevocable. If a firm elects the fair value option for a particular 
financial instrument, it must continue to use fair value measurement for that instrument until 
the asset is sold or liability extinguished. Similarly, once a firm elects to forgo the fair value 
option for an instrument, it may not later use fair value measurement on that specific instru-
ment (unless a triggering event occurs). Special financial statement disclosures are required so 
that investors and analysts can understand:
• Management’s rationale for electing the fair value option.
• The impact of changes in fair values on earnings for the period.
• The difference between fair values and contractual cash flows for certain items.
How the Fair Value Accounting Option Mutes Earnings Volatility 
The chief benefit of the fair value option is that it reduces the volatility in reported earn-
ings caused when  certain financial instruments are measured using fair value while others 
are measured at cost. For some firms, this mismatch in measurement bases produces artifi-
cial earnings volatility. Before we illustrate how the fair value option 
dampens this artificial volatility, let’s first take a look at how fair value ac-
counting applies to financial assets.
 
Suppose Bluff bought for investment purposes some bonds issued by 
Apex Corp. The borrower (Apex) issued the bonds and the investor (Bluff) 
purchased them on January 1, 2014. Assume further that the bonds have a $1 
million face value, pay 10% interest annually, and mature in 10 years on 
 December 31, 2023. If the effective yield on the bonds at issuance is also 
10%, Bluff pays Apex $1,000,000 and records the January 1, 2014, investment 
at cost:
DR Investment in Apex bonds  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$1,000,000
   CR Cash. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$1,000,000
Bluff elects to use fair value accounting for its Apex bonds investment.
6 There are exceptions. The fair value option is not available for leasing assets and liabilities (Chapter 12), deferred income 
tax assets and liabilities (Chapter 13), pension assets and liabilities (Chapter 14), and items eliminated upon consolidation 
(Chapter 16). Nor does the fair value option apply to nonfinancial assets and liabilities such as inventory; property, plant, and 
equipment; intangible assets; warranty service obligations; and deferred revenues.
7 “Financial Instruments: Recognition and Measurement,” International Accounting Standards (IAS) No. 39 [London: Inter-
national Accounting Standards Board (IASB), 1998] as later revised.
There are other benefits. It reduces the need 
for companies to comply with the complex 
and voluminous rules for hedge accounting 
 described later in this chapter. It also contributes 
to the convergence of U.S. GAAP with interna-
tional financial reporting standards by providing 
a fair value option that is similar, but not identi-
cal, to that found in IAS No. 39.7

618 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
 
At year-end, the market interest rate suddenly jumps to 11%, and the fair value of Apex 
bonds falls to $944,630. (The details are in Exhibit 11.8 because the Apex bonds are identical 
to those issued by Huff Corporation in our earlier example.) Bluff has a $55,370 unrealized 
holding loss on the investment. This unrealized loss is the difference between the initial fair 
value ($1,000,000) of the bonds and their fair value ($944,630) as of December 31, 2014. 
Having opted for fair value accounting, Bluff must recognize the unrealized loss and reduce 
the carrying value of its Apex investment:
DR Unrealized holding loss on Apex bonds  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $55,370
   CR Fair value adjustment—Apex bonds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$55,370
The unrealized holding loss flows to the 2014 income statement. Bluff deducts the fair value 
adjustment (a credit amount) from the original $1,000,000 cost of the Apex bonds to arrive at 
the $944,630 fair value to be reported on the year-end balance sheet.
 
What if the investment’s fair value changes again next year? In that case, Bluff would recog-
nize an unrealized holding loss (if fair value declines in 2015) or gain (if fair value increases) 
equal to the fair value change that year. A corresponding dollar amount would 
be added to (if a loss) or subtracted from (if a gain) the Fair value adjustment 
account so that the year-end balance sheet would report Bluff’s investment in 
Apex bonds at the new fair value.
Now that you understand how the fair value option works, let’s see how 
it can reduce artificial earnings volatility. We need to make two important 
modifications to our example. First, suppose that existing GAAP rules 
 already require Bluff to use fair value accounting for its Apex investment (described in 
Chapter 16).8 Second, suppose that instead of using cash on hand, Bluff borrows the money 
it needs to buy Apex bonds by issuing at par $1,000,000 of 10-year, 10% bonds on January 1, 
2014. Exhibit 11.9 illustrates the journal entries needed to record the borrowing and subse-
quent purchase of Apex bonds.
 
When the market interest rate suddenly jumps to 11% at year-end, the fair value of the 
Apex investments falls to $944,630. So does the fair value of the bonds payable liability. As 
proponents of the fair value accounting option are quick to point out, one fair value change 
offsets the other in real terms. But this is not what happens under prior GAAP! 
Without the fair value accounting option, Bluff must recognize the unrealized 
holding loss on the Apex investment as required but not the offsetting unreal-
ized gain from its own bonds payable. Instead, bonds payable were carried on 
the books at amortized historical cost ($1,000,000 in this example). The re-
sulting mismatch of measurement bases—fair value for the financial asset (In-
vestment in Apex bonds) but amortized historical cost for the financial liability 
(Bonds payable)—induced artificial earnings volatility as shown in Panel (a) 
of  Exhibit 11.9.
 
The fair value accounting option can eliminate this artificial volatility. Panel (b) of Exhibit 11.9 
illustrates how. In this case, Bluff elects to use fair value accounting for the bond liability and, 
therefore, must also record an unrealized holding gain at year-end. This gain just offsets the 
unrealized loss on the Apex investment. Earnings volatility is eliminated when fair value 
 measurement is used for both the financial asset and its related financial liability.
If Bluff does not elect to use the fair value 
 accounting it would record no unrealized hold-
ing loss in 2014, and the year-end carrying value 
of the Apex investment would remain at 
$1,000,000 (historical cost).
8 See FASB ASC Topic 320: Investments—Debt and Equity Securities.
To see this economic offset, notice that Bluff 
could unwind the investment by selling Apex 
bonds for $944,630 and then using the cash to 
extinguish its own bonds payable. The resulting 
realized loss ($55,370) on the sale of the Apex 
investment would then be offset by a corre-
sponding realized gain (also $55,370) on early 
debt retirement.

 
Bonds Payable
619
Opposing Views on the Fair Value Accounting Option 
Companies are 
allowed to adopt fair value measurement selectively so that they can report financial assets 
and financial liabilities that are related to one another using the same measurement base. 
But GAAP does not limit the use of the fair value option to situations in which the financial 
assets and liabilities are related. For example, Bluff Corporation could use fair value 
 accounting for its bonds payable liability—and boost 2014 earnings by $55,370—even 
though the cash received from issuing the bonds was used for general business purposes 
rather than to invest in Apex bonds. Critics assert that this creates the worrisome opportu-
nity for companies to use fair value accounting to dress up their balance sheets and manage 
reported earnings.
 
It is easy to see why critics are concerned. Suppose that 2015 is an extremely difficult year 
for Bluff: Customers begin shopping elsewhere in large numbers, the company incurs a 
$200,000 operating loss, and its credit rating falls precipitously. The fair value of Bluff’s debt 
goes down as well, say to $600,000, because creditors now fear that Bluff will be unable to 
make the bond interest and principal payments as required. Despite the company’s obvious 
financial distress, Bluff would record a $344,630 ($944,630 2 $600,000) unrealized holding 
gain that year and reduce its balance sheet debt by the same amount. An otherwise disastrous 
year is transformed into a seemingly profitable one—the unrealized holding gain more than 
EXHIBIT 11.9
Bluff Corporation
How the Fair Value Accounting Option Reduces Earnings Volatility
Panel (a) Without the Fair Value Accounting Option
January 1, 2014: To record Bluff’s bond issuance and the purchase of Apex debt securities. 
DR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $1,000,000
CR Bonds payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$1,000,000
DR Investment in Apex bonds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $1,000,000
CR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$1,000,000
December 31, 2014: To record the year-end fair value adjustment required by GAAP.
DR Unrealized holding loss—Apex investment  . . .  $   55,370
CR Fair value adjustment—Apex bonds  . . .  
$   55,370
Panel (b) With the Fair Value Accounting Option
January 1, 2014:  To record Bluff’s bond issuance and the purchase of Apex debt securities. 
Bluff also elects to use the fair value accounting option for bonds payable
DR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $1,000,000
CR Bonds payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$1,000,000
DR Investment in Apex bonds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $1,000,000
CR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$1,000,000
December 31, 2014: To record the year-end fair value adjustments required by GAAP.
DR Unrealized holding loss—Apex investment  . . .  $   55,370
CR Fair value adjustment—Apex bonds  . . .  
$   55,370
DR Fair value adjustment—Bonds payable . . . . . .  $   55,370
CR Unrealized holding gain—Bonds payable.  
$   55,370
Gain 
 offsets 
the 
loss.

620 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
offsets the operating loss—and less debt is reported on the balance sheet. The financial state-
ment effects are counterintuitive and misleading. The earnings boost is not sustainable, and 
Bluff remains contractually obligated to repay the full amount borrowed ($1,000,000 plus 
interest), not just debt carrying value ($600,000).
 
Analysts and investors must also rethink how they evaluate a company’s debt-to-equity 
ratio. Conventional wisdom holds that firms in financial distress have higher debt-to-equity 
ratios than do healthy firms (recall the discussion in Chapter 5). But fair value accounting for 
debt can produce the opposite result. Bluff Corporation’s debt-to-equity ratio might actually 
decline rather than increase as the company slides into financial distress. Under fair value 
 accounting, Bluff’s debt-to-equity ratio numerator (debt) is reduced by $344,630 and the 
 denominator (equity) is increased by this same amount. The combined effect is a smaller, not 
larger, debt-to-equity ratio in 2015.
GLOBAL VANTAGE POINT
How does IFRS accounting for long-term debt differ from the U.S. GAAP guidelines we have 
described? When it comes to the most important elements of long-term debt accounting, IFRS 
and U.S. GAAP are quite similar in approach. For instance, fixed-rate bonds are initially re-
corded at the issue price (proceeds received) under both IFRS and U.S. GAAP rules. The 
subsequent balance sheet carrying value is amortized cost determined using the effective 
interest rate at the issue date. Periodic interest expense is computed using the issue date effec-
tive (not contractual) interest rate. Changes in interest rates occurring after the issue date do 
not alter the bond’s carrying value unless fair value accounting is being used.
 
There are, however, several areas where U.S. GAAP and IFRS rules diverge. Here are two:
1. Debt issue costs. Under U.S. GAAP these costs—fees paid to underwriters, investment 
bankers, lawyers, and accountants who help with the bond documents and issuance 
 transaction—are recorded separately as an asset and then amortized over the life of the 
bond. The IFRS approach is to reduce the recorded amount of the debt, thus treating issue 
costs as a reduction in the proceeds received. The result under IFRS is a slightly higher 
effective interest rate—fewer dollars are recorded as being received but the contractual 
repayment obligation is the same.
2. Fair value option. IAS 39 permits companies to opt for fair value accounting for liabili-
ties only under two specific circumstances: (1) the liabilities are actively managed on a 
fair value basis as part of the company’s documented risk management or investment 
strategy; or (2) use of fair value accounting eliminates or significantly reduces the 
 “mismatch” that arises when different measurement bases are used for related financial 
instruments. (This potential “mismatch” and its impact on earnings volatility is illustrated 
in Exhibit 11.9.). U.S. GAAP guidance is less restrictive in that it does not require that 
these two specific circumstances actually exist.
In May 2010, the FASB issued a controversial proposed accounting standards update that 
would, among other things, require nearly all financial instruments—including bonds and 
other forms of long-term debt—to be measured at fair value in the statement of financial 
position rather than at amortized cost.9 Amortized cost information would be displayed 
Analysis
International
9 Proposed Accounting Standards Update, “Accounting for Financial Instruments and Revisions to the Accounting for 
Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities, Financial Instruments” (Topic 825) and “Derivatives and Hedging” (Topic 815) 
(Norwalk, CT: FASB, 2010).

 
Managerial Incentives and Financial Reporting for Debt 
621
on the balance sheet as supplemental data. This dual presentation presumably allows 
 investors to
. . . more easily incorporate either or both in their analyses of an entity. Fair value would provide 
users with the best available information about the market’s assessment of an entity’s expectation 
of its future cash flows . . . Amortized cost would provide users with information about the instru-
ment’s contractual cash flows. (Proposed ASU, p. 4)
The proposed Update was controversial for two reasons. First, many observers argued that lia-
bility fair values are of little relevance because the borrowing firm remains obligated to the 
contractual cash payments specified by the bond agreement regardless of market interest rates 
or the market’s assessment of borrower cash-flow risk. According to those observers, amor-
tized cost provides a more representative depiction of the borrowing firm’s true financial condi-
tion under most circumstances. Second, the IASB had tentatively decided to retain existing 
guidance for financial liabilities such as bonds—meaning that it favored continued use of am-
ortized cost accounting for long-term debt with a limited fair value option. For many observers, 
the FASB’s proposal represented a troublesome departure from the path toward U.S. GAAP 
and IFRS convergence.
 
Responding to these and other concerns, the FASB has now altered its view in ways con-
sistent with the IASB.10
RECAP
When interest rates change after a bond has been issued, the bond’s reported book value 
and market value are no longer the same. That’s because GAAP requires bonds to be car-
ried on the issuer’s books at amortized historical cost (unless fair value accounting has 
been elected) using the effective yield to investors when the bonds were first issued. So, 
when interest rates have risen and bonds are retired before maturity, market value will 
be less than book value, generating an accounting gain. If interest rates have fallen, mar-
ket value would be lower than book value, resulting in an accounting loss. Gains and losses 
from early debt retirement are sometimes treated as extraordinary items on the income 
statement if they qualify as such under GAAP.
 
GAAP allows firms to use fair value accounting for debt rather than amortized histori-
cal cost. This fair value accounting option can dampen artificial earnings volatility, but it 
may also open new doors for firms to dress up their balance sheets.
MANAGERIAL INCENTIVES AND FINANCIAL 
REPORTING FOR DEBT
In Chapters 1 and 7, we explained that accounting numbers are widely used to enforce con-
tracts. One example involves debt covenants, which could motivate managers to manipulate 
accounting numbers to evade contract restrictions. Critics suggest that GAAP accounting for 
long-term debt makes it possible to “manage” accounting numbers to achieve this evasion.
Debt Carried at Amortized Historical Cost
Some analysts contend that reporting debt at amortized historical cost (the $1,000,000 bond 
shown on Huff Corporation’s books)—rather than at current fair value (or $944,630 in the Huff 
example)—makes it easier to manipulate accounting numbers. Debt-for-debt swaps and debt-
for-equity swaps illustrate the types of transactions that may be driven more by the financial 
statement effects they elicit than by any underlying economic benefits. In a debt-for-debt swap, 
10 Proposed Accounting Standards Update, “Financial Instruments—Overall” (Subtopic 825-10) (Norwalk, CT: FASB, 2013).
Contracting

622 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
12% Debt issued
10% Debt retired
New 12% debt
    $982,146 fair value
Old 10% debt
     $982,146 fair value
Bondholders
New 12% debt
    $982,146 book value
Old 10% debt
    $1,000,000 book value
Shifty Corporation
Figure 11.3
SHIFTY CORPORATION
Debt-for-Debt Swap
the company offers investors the opportunity to exchange existing (old) debt for new debt is-
sued by the company. Debt-for-equity swaps give investors the opportunity to exchange old 
debt for the company’s common stock.
 
To illustrate, suppose that Shifty Corporation has $1 million of outstanding 10% fixed-rate 
debt originally issued at par. This debt matures in exactly one year. Because the debt was sold 
at par, its book value is $1 million. Assume that the current market rate for bonds of similar 
risk is 12%, which means that Shifty’s bonds have a fair value of $982,146. Shifty offers 
bondholders the opportunity to swap their old 10% bonds for new 12% bonds that also mature 
in exactly one year. Just to keep things simple, let’s assume that bondholders are 
willing to swap as long as they receive 12% bonds worth $982,146, or the fair 
value of the old 10% bonds that will be given back to the company. If the market 
interest rate is 12%, the new 12% bonds will be issued at par, and the face value 
will be $982,146. This debt-for-debt swap is illustrated in Figure 11.3.
Bondholders will be presumably indifferent between the old 10% bonds and 
the new 12% bonds because the fair values are identical. (To induce real-world 
bondholders to exchange the 10% bonds for 12% bonds, some “sweetener”—a slightly higher 
interest rate or a slightly higher face value—would need to be included.) The fair values are 
identical precisely because the present values of the two cash flow streams are identical when 
discounted at the prevailing 12% market interest rate:
 
Old 10% Bonds 
New 12% Bonds
 
at 12% Market Interest Rate 
at 12% Market Interest Rate
Principal Repayment 
Principal Repayment
  $1,000,000 3 0.89286 5 $892,860 
  $   982,146 3 0.89286   5 $876,919*
Interest Payment  
Interest Payment
  $   100,000 3 0.89286 5     89,286 
  $   117,854* 3 0.89286 5   105,227*
  $1,100,000       $982,146 
  $1,100,000       $982,146
Interest Computation 
Interest Computation
  $1,000,000 3 10%       5 $100,000 
  $   982,146 3 12%         5 $117,858*
Note: The present value of $1 due in one year at 12% is 0.89286.
* Rounded.
This $982,146 fair value corresponds exactly 
to the present value of the principal payment 
($1,000,000y1.12 5 $892,860 rounded) plus 
the present value of the final interest payment 
($100,000y1.12 5 $89,286 rounded), both 
 discounted at the market rate of 12%.

 
Managerial Incentives and Financial Reporting for Debt 
623
As the computation reveals, even the undiscounted cash flows are identical because the prin-
cipal payment plus interest payment is $1,100,000 in both cases. A debt-for-debt swap such as 
this has no real economic benefit to Shifty (there may be income tax effects). However, if the 
swap was consummated, the entry on Shifty’s books would be:
DR Bonds payable (old 10%) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $1,000,000
   CR Bonds payable (new 12%) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$982,146
   CR Gain on debt extinguishment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
17,854
Despite the absence of real economic substance, an accounting “gain” would still be reported.11 
The gain really arose in earlier periods as unanticipated inflation or other factors caused the 
market interest rate on the bonds to rise above 
the stated interest rate. Because Shifty was pay-
ing interest at 10% when prevailing rates were 
higher, a year-by-year wealth transfer from the 
pockets of the original bondholders into the 
pockets of Shifty’s shareholders was taking 
place. Historical cost accounting ignores this wealth transfer until the “artificial” swap transaction 
triggers recognition of the gain.
 
This example demonstrates the potential incentive for managerial oppor-
tunism that historical cost accounting for debt introduces.12 Critics of histori-
cal cost accounting raise the possibility that managers whose bonuses are 
tied to reported earnings might use swap gains to boost their firm’s earnings 
(and thus their bonuses) in years of poor operating performance. Also, a 
 reduction in the book value of debt (from $1,000,000 to $982,146 in our 
 example) would improve the debt-to-equity ratio—thus providing “opportu-
nistic” motivations for companies in danger of violating covenant restrictions 
tied to this ratio.
 
Now that you can visualize the problem, let’s make the example more realistic.
 
To induce bondholders to swap, they must be offered some sweeteners to do so. One in-
ducement is to offer a higher principal amount of new bonds—say, $990,000. This change 
makes the net present value of the swap negative for Shifty because it is retiring debt with 
a market value of $982,146 by giving bondholders something worth $990,000. Despite this 
real economic loss to Shifty, if the swap went through on these altered terms, Shifty would 
still report an accounting gain of $10,000—the difference between the $1 million book value 
of the old bonds and the $990,000 market value of the new bonds. Extinguishment gains are 
generally taxable, and fees must be paid to investment bankers who orchestrate the transac-
tion. These added costs further increase the potential disparity between the reported account-
ing gain and the economic effects of the swap.
This same financial statement result would occur if Shifty first issued the new 
12% bonds for cash and then used the cash proceeds to retire old 10% bonds. 
(See the Huff Corporation two-step debt retirement mentioned earlier in the 
 chapter.) Income tax considerations and transaction costs may favor a debt-for-
debt swap rather than a two-step debt extinguishment.
The wealth transfer gain from bondholders to 
stockholders is reflected obliquely in historical 
cost statements because historical cost interest 
expense is lower than interest expense would be 
at current market rates. Accordingly, net income 
is higher than it would have been at current 
 interest rates.
11 FASB ASC Topic 470-50-40 Debt—Modifications and Extinguishments—Derecognition says that any difference between 
the price paid to reacquire (and thus retire) debt and the net carrying amount of the extinguished debt is to be recognized 
currently in income as a loss or gain and identified as a separate item. This means it doesn’t matter whether Shifty uses cash 
or the new bonds to retire the old bonds. In either case, GAAP requires Shifty to record an accounting gain on the debt 
extinguishment.
12 Shifty’s debt-for-debt swap would not produce an accounting gain under IFRS. Why? Because IAS 39 says an exchange of 
financial instruments—as when Shifty’s new 12% bonds are exchanged for the old 10% bonds—qualifies as an extinguish-
ment of debt only if the terms of the instruments are substantially different. They are not different in the Shifty example, so 
the swap would instead be treated as a modification of the original bond terms (IAS 39 describes the details). No IFRS extin-
guishment, and thus no IFRS accounting gain on extinguishment for Shifty.

624 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
 
On the other hand, sometimes real economic benefits are associated with debt-for-debt 
exchanges. In the real world, debt-for-debt swaps are rarely designed to be a “wash” in 
which debt instruments with identical maturities and market values are exchanged. Typical 
swaps are structured to extend debt maturity, postpone cash outflows by altering the mix of 
interest and principal payments, or take advantage of expiring operating loss carryfor-
wards, thus making the swap tax free. On balance, therefore, it is entirely possible that 
some debt-for-debt exchanges generate real economic benefits even after factoring in 
transaction costs.
 
Differences between book profits and real profits have aroused curiosity about the motives 
underlying another—somewhat similar—debt extinguishment transaction: debt-for-equity 
swaps.
 
The conditions for a debt-for-equity swap exist when a company has low stated interest 
rate (say, 4½%) debt outstanding and market rates are much higher (say, 12%). The 
 market value of that debt is much lower than its book value. As Figure 11.4 shows, Com-
pany X retires its low stated-rate debt by issuing common stock of equal market value. 
The difference between the book value of the debt and the market value of the stock that 
is issued is recorded as an accounting gain. The convoluted nature of the transaction, as 
well as the investment bank’s involvement, is required to make the gain on debt extin-
guishment tax free.
 
The accounting entry on the books of Company X is:
DR Bonds payable (and discount or premium)   . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ Book value
 
CR Common stock   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$ Market value
 
CR Gain on debt extinguishment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$ Difference
Sell low-coupon bonds
issued by Company X
to investment bank
Bondholders
Investment bank
Buys bonds from bondholders and delivers
them to Company X in exchange for
common stock of equal market value.
This stock is then sold, usually by way
of a registered secondary offering
Company X
Buys back its low-coupon bonds and 
issues new common stock in return.
Transaction generates a one-time
earnings gain for the fiscal quarter 
of the swap
Stock investors
Buy newly issued shares 
made available by the
investment bank
Figure 11.4
THE SEQUENCE OF 
EVENTS IN A DEBT-FOR-
EQUITY SWAP
Source: From J. R. M. Hand, “Did Firms 
Undertake Debt–Equity Swaps for an 
Accounting Paper Profit or True Financial 
Gain?” The Accounting Review, October 
1989, pp. 587–623. Reprinted with 
permission. 

 
Imputed Interest on Notes Payable 
625
Debt book value is higher than the market value of stock issued because the debt has a low 
stated interest rate but the market interest rate is high.
 
Debt-for-equity swaps alter the company’s capital structure and undoubtedly precipitate 
real economic effects. However, companies also can use debt-for-equity swaps to smooth 
otherwise unexpected and transitory decreases in quarterly earnings per share or to relax oth-
erwise binding covenant constraints.13
 
Debt-for-debt swaps, debt-for-equity swaps, and other similar transac-
tions may serve valid economic purposes in certain instances. Neverthe-
less, some analysts still believe that the dominant motivation for these 
transactions is to increase reported  income. But no matter what motivates 
management to swap old debt, the result is the same: an earnings boost that 
may not reflect economic reality but instead represents the difference 
between the book value and market value of the liabilities.
 
In response to this and other criticisms of accounting for liabilities, the FASB requires 
note disclosure of the fair value of all financial instruments—both financial liabilities and 
assets.14 However, disclosure alone is unlikely to eliminate “accounting-driven” liability 
transactions. While the fair value disclosures appear in a note to the financial statements, 
the carrying amount of liabilities on the balance sheet itself is not altered. Consequently, 
the swap transactions described here still generate income statement gains and favorable 
financial ratio effects. Managers can still use these transactions as mechanisms for influ-
encing bonus payouts as well as for evading loan covenant restrictions or other contracting 
effects when the contracts are tied to the financial numbers reported in the body of the 
statement.
As you will discover in Chapter 15, no gain (or 
loss) is recognized when debtholders simply 
 exercise a traditional conversion option and 
 exchange their bonds for shares of common 
stock in the company.
RECAP
GAAP for long-term debt creates opportunities for managing reported earnings and bal-
ance sheet numbers using debt-for-debt or debt-for-equity swaps. So, statement readers 
must be alert to the possibility that reported swap gains (and losses) are just window 
dressing. How can you tell? Look behind the accounting numbers and see whether the 
swap offers real economic benefits.
IMPUTED INTEREST ON NOTES PAYABLE
Salton, Inc. (known today as Russell Hobbs, a division of Spectrum Brands), designs and 
markets a variety of popular household appliances including the George Foreman Grill, 
the BreadMan bread machine, and Toastmaster toaster ovens. At one time, the company 
paid Foreman a royalty equal to 60% of the gross profit on sales of George Foreman 
Grills. (It’s a hefty sum, but then Foreman—a past heavyweight boxing champion—is 
undoubtedly a tough negotiator.) At the beginning of 2000, the company purchased the 
rights to use the George Foreman name in perpetuity in exchange for shares of Salton 
stock valued at $23.750 million and a $113.750 million note payable in five annual in-
stallments of $22.750 million each. Foreman received a check for the first installment the 
13 J.R.M. Hand, “Did Firms Undertake Debt–Equity Swaps for an Accounting Paper Profit or True Financial Gain?” The 
 Accounting Review, October 1989, pp. 587–623.
14 FASB ASC Section 820-10-50: Financial Instruments—Overall—Disclosure.

626 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
same day the deal was inked. Here is how Salton recorded its purchase of the George 
Foreman name (amounts in millions):
DR Intangible asset (George Foreman name)   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $121.020
 
CR Common stock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$23.750
 
CR Note payable   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$97.270
To record the purchase of the rights to use the George Foreman name in perpetuity.
DR Note payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $ 22.750
 
CR Cash   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$22.750
To record the immediate payment to Mr. Foreman of the first installment on the note.
 
Payment in Millions at the Beginning of the Year
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total
 
2000 
2001 
2002 
2003 
2004 
payments
 
$22.750 
$22.750 
$22.750 
$22.750 
$22.750 
$113.750
Present value of 2001 payment 
20.968
Present value of 2002 payment 
19.325
Present value of 2003 payment 
17.811
Present value of 2004 payment 
16.416
 Present value of note 
$97.270
 Imputed rate of interest 
8.50%
0.92166
0.84946
0.78291
0.72157 5 Present 
value factor for 4 years 
at 8.5%
Salton amortizes the intangi-
ble asset over 15 years, so the 
$8.1 million of amortization 
is computed as $121.020y15 
with slight rounding. Imputed 
interest on notes receivable is 
discussed in Chapter 8.
And here’s what Salton had to say about the transaction in its 2000 financial statements: 
“The effect of the acquisition of the George Foreman name related to fiscal 2000 was the 
elimination of royalty payments partially offset by amortization of $8.1 million and imputed 
interest of $6.3 million.”
 
Several aspects of this accounting treatment may at first seem perplexing. For example, 
why did Salton record the $113.750 million note payable at a value of only $97.270 million? 
What is “imputed interest,” how is it calculated, and when is it recorded? The answers to these 
questions illustrate once again that noncurrent monetary liabilities are recorded initially at 
their present value.
 
Let’s start with the value assigned to the note itself and assume that both Salton and Fore-
man agree that the note is worth $97.270 million at the signing date. Why isn’t the note worth 
the full $113.750 million contractual payment amount? Because the installment payments are 
spread over five years, and the extra $16.480 million is interest that Foreman will receive as 
compensation for delayed payment.
 
What is the rate of interest on the note payable? To answer that question, we need to find 
an interest rate that makes the value of the note ($97.270 million) equal to the present value of 
the installment payments. The actual calculation can be cumbersome, although a financial 
calculator or computer spreadsheet can make the solution easy. The following diagram illus-
trates how to find a note’s imputed rate of interest.
 
Notice that all installment payments occur at the beginning of the year. As a result, the 
present value of the first $22.750 million installment payment is exactly $22.750 million. 
However, the present value of the second installment payment—which occurs at the begin-
ning of 2001—is smaller than $22.750 million. How much smaller depends on the interest 
rate. Let’s take a guess that the correct imputed interest rate is 8.50%. (In a moment, we will 
show you why 8.50% is a reasonable “guestimate” for the imputed interest rate.) In this case, 

 
Analytical Insights: Future Cash Flow Effects of  Debt 
627
the second installment payment needs to be discounted for one year at 8.50% and the discount 
factor is 0.92166 [or 1y(1 1 0.085)]. The present value of the 2001 payment is $20.968 mil-
lion, which equals the $22.750 million cash payment multiplied by the 0.92166 discount fac-
tor. A similar process is used to compute the present value for each remaining installment 
payment. When all five present value amounts are summed, they total $97.270 million. And 
that’s the key step: 8.50% is the imputed rate of interest on the note precisely because it is the 
interest rate that makes the value of the note ($97.270) equal to the present value of the install-
ment payments (also $97.270 million).
 
Was our 8.50% interest rate estimate just a lucky guess? Not exactly. Salton’s financial 
statement indicates that interest expense on the note payable was $6.3 million in 2000. 
Because interest is a charge for delayed payment and the first installment payment 
was  made immediately, the $6.3 million in interest must represent a charge for the 
$74.520 million unpaid balance of the note ($74.520 5 $97.270 initial note value 2 
$22.750 first payment). We can now derive an estimate of the note’s true imputed interest 
rate using the ratio of interest expense to the unpaid balance of the note. The result is 
($6.3y$74.520) 5 0.08454, or 8.45%. Why doesn’t this process yield the correct 
8.50% imputed interest rate? Because the $6.3 million interest expense figure Salton men-
tions is rounded slightly. The actual interest expense on the note that year was $6.3342 
million (or $74.520 3 8.50%).
 
If Salton records interest expense only once a year, it makes the following entry at the end 
of 2000 (dollars in millions):
DR Interest expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $6.3342
 
CR Note payable   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$6.3342
To record interest expense on the unpaid balance of the Foreman note payable.
The unpaid interest is added to the note payable balance. This means that the note payable, a 
noncurrent monetary liability, will be shown on the 2000 year-end balance sheet at an amount 
($80.8542) that corresponds to its present value (using the 8.5% imputed interest rate) as of 
the balance sheet date. We leave the task of verifying this fact to you.
RECAP
Noncurrent monetary liabilities are initially recorded at their present value when in-
curred. This is true even for installment notes that make no mention of an interest rate. 
In such cases, an interest rate must be imputed.
ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS: FUTURE CASH FLOW 
EFFECTS OF DEBT
See Exhibit 11.10 for excerpts from Dentsply International’s 2009 financial statement note for 
long-term debt. Dentsply develops, manufactures, and markets medical instruments and sup-
plies for the global dental market. This example illustrates the type of information about a 
company’s long-term debt that is available in corporate annual reports. Problem 11-22 gives 
you an opportunity to apply the analytical tools illustrated in this example to the company’s 
2012 financial statement note for long-term debt.
 
Among the company’s long-term debt items, notice the 57 million Swiss francs-denominated 
revolving credit agreement shown next to ➀. The U.S. dollar-equivalent amount of this loan 
was $53.507 million at the end of 2008 but zero at the end of 2009. Where did Dentsply 
Analysis

628 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
EXHIBIT 11.10
Dentsply International
Long-Term Debt
 
December 31,
($ in millions) 
2009 
2008
Multicurrency revolving credit agreement expiring May 2010:
 Swiss francs 65 million at 0.60% 
$  62,844 
$  60,809
 Swiss francs 57 million 
— 
53,507 ➀
Private placement notes:
 U.S. dollar denominated expiring March 2010 at 0.55% 
150,000 
150,000
Term loan agreement:
 Japanese yen denominated expiring March 2012 at 1.00% 
134,775 
138,247
U.S. dollar commercial paper:
 Facility rated A/2-P/2 U.S. dollar borrowings at 0.30% 
85,200 
—
Other borrowings various currencies and rates 
20,911 
25,095
 
$453,731 
$427,659
Less: Current portion (included in notes payable and 
 current portion of long-term debt) 
66,580 
3,980 ➂
Long-term portion 
$387,151 
$423,679
The Company has a $500 million revolving credit agreement with participation from thirteen ➁ 
banks, which expires in May 2010. The revolving credit agreements contain a number of covenants 
and two financial ratios that the Company is required to satisfy. The most restrictive of these cov-
enants pertain to asset dispositions and prescribed ratios of indebtedness to total capital and operat-
ing income plus depreciation and amortization to interest expense. Any breach of any such covenant 
would result in a default . . . [and] permit the lenders to declare all borrowings . . . immediately due 
and payable and, through cross-default provisions, would entitle the Company’s other lenders to ac-
celerate their loans. At December 31, 2009, the Company was in compliance with these covenants.
The table below reflects the contractual maturity dates of the various borrowings at Decem-
ber 31, 2009. The borrowings under the U.S. Private Placement Note and the commercial paper 
program are considered contractually due in 2014 and 2015 and beyond.
(in thousands)
2010 
$ 66,580 ➃
2011 
5,299
2012 
139,470
2013 
1,215
2014 
75,682
2015 and beyond 
165,485
 
$453,731
Source: Dentsply International 2009 Annual Report.
get the cash needed to pay off this debt? By comparing the 
amounts in the table for each major class of long-term debt, 
we can see that Dentsply raised $85.200 million that year by 
issuing commercial paper. It is reasonable to presume that the 
cash from this new source was used to pay off the revolving 
credit loan.
 
Dentsply provides details about interest rates and maturity 
dates for each major class of long-term debt. However, the 
company provides only general information about the cove-
nants contained in its various borrowing agreements (see the 
Commercial paper refers to debt obligations with maturities rang-
ing from 2 to 270 days issued by banks, corporations (for example, 
Dentsply), and other borrowers to investors. Why does Dentsply 
 report its commercial paper borrowing as part of long-term (rather 
than short-term) debt? Even though the contractual maturity of 
commercial paper is less than one year, Dentsply intends to refinance 
the paper as it becomes due thus extending the effective maturity 
date of the loan to beyond one year. In such circumstances, firms 
alert financial statement readers to the intended refinancing by 
 presenting the otherwise short-term debt as a long-term liability.

 
Analytical Insights: Future Cash Flow Effects of  Debt 
629
paragraph next to ➁). This nondisclosure is typical and imposes a burden on the financial ana-
lyst who must search through the lending agreements themselves to discover covenant details.
 
Dentsply’s note provides a wealth of information useful for determining the future cash-flow 
implications of the company’s long-term debt. For example, the table reveals current maturities 
(that is, the “Current portion” of long-term debt) of $66.580 million at the end of 2009 (see high-
lighted figure next to ➂). This is the debt principal amount that Dentsply must repay in 2010.
 
Like all U.S. companies today, Dentsply is required to disclose scheduled debt payments 
for each of the five years after the balance sheet date. From the table adjacent to ➃, we can 
see that these repayments are particularly large in 2012 ($139.470 million). Analysts study-
ing the company will want to estimate whether Dentsply’s operating cash flows that year will 
be sufficient when combined with cash on hand to meet this scheduled debt principal pay-
ment. Any anticipated shortfall could necessitate asset sales or additional financing.
 
Elsewhere in the annual report, we learn that Dentsply paid $23.231 million in interest during 
2009. (Interest expense that year was $21.896 million, but this figure excludes some interest capi-
talized as part of plant assets.) The cash amount represents interest Dentsply paid on the long-
term debt shown in Exhibit 11.10 plus any short-term interest-bearing debt reported elsewhere on 
the company’s balance sheet. Dividing this cash interest payment by the average book value of 
outstanding long-term debt—or ($453.731 1 $427.659)y2 5 $440.695—plus the average 
short-term debt from the balance sheet—or ($15.600 1 $21.800)y2 5 $18.700 not shown in 
Exhibit 11.10—suggests that the company’s “cash” interest rate for 2009 was about 4.8%, or 
$21.896y($440.695 1 $18.700). Using this imputed interest rate as the basis for forecasting 
2010 interest payments, we discover that Dentsply will likely spend about $22.528 million 
(4.8% 3 $469.331 million of interest-bearing debt outstanding) for interest that year. This fore-
casted cash outflow is in addition to the $65.580 million principal repayment scheduled for 
2010. Cash flow forecasts of this type can be constructed for each year from 2010 through 2014.
 
Will Dentsply have the cash needed to make the forecasted $88.108 interest and principal 
payments in 2010? The company’s cash flow statement reveals operating cash flows in excess of 
$300 million in each of the past two years, coupled with minimal capital expenditures. It seems 
safe to presume that Dentsply will generate a similar level of operating cash flow in 2010. But 
even if 2010 operating cash flows fall short of this projected amount, the company has over $450 
million in cash (and cash equivalents) on hand at the end of 2009. The availability of ample cash 
from these two sources—operations and existing cash balances—means that Dentsply should 
have little difficulty meeting its interest and principal repayment obligations in 2010.
 
Here is what Dentsply tells us about the fair value of its long-term debt in a separate annual 
report note:
The fair value of financial instruments is determined by reference to various market data and 
other valuation techniques as appropriate . . . The Company estimates the fair value and carrying 
value of its total long-term debt, including current portion of long-term debt, was $453.7 million 
and $427.7 million as of December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively. The fair value of the Com-
pany’s long-term debt equaled its carrying value [because] the Company’s debt is variable rate 
and reflects current market rates.
The fair value of Dentsply’s long-term debt equals its balance sheet carrying value. Why? As 
the company points out, most of Dentsply’s debt has variable (floating not fixed) interest rates 
that approximate current market rates. As we have already discussed, this loan feature insu-
lates debt fair values from changes in market interest rates, and so it is not at all surprising to 
learn that debt fair value and carrying value are the same.
 
The situation is quite different at Blockbuster Inc., the movie and video game rental 
 company that at the time had customers in over 17 countries. According to the company’s 
Elsewhere in the note on 
debt, Dentsply provides a 
forecast of 2010 interest 
payments ($19.181 million). 
The $469.331 outstanding 
amount comprises 
$453.731 in long-term 
debt (Exhibit 10.11) plus 
$15.600 million in short-
term debt.

630 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
quarterly financial statement note (Exhibit 11.11), the fair value of Blockbuster’s fixed-rate 
long-term debt is less than the balance sheet carrying value (amortized historical cost) of the 
debt. There are two reasons this might happen:
1. Blockbuster is a worse credit risk in 2010 than it was several years earlier when the notes 
were first issued. As a company’s creditworthiness deteriorates, the fair value of its debt 
decreases even though the carrying value of the debt is unchanged.
2. Interest rates have increased since the notes were first issued for reasons unrelated to the 
company itself (for example, higher expected inflation or a weakening economy). From 
our earlier discussion, you know that an interest rate increase—whether due to company-
specific factors or to macroeconomic forces—will cause the fair value of fixed-rate debt 
to decrease. Of course, amortized historical cost accounting for long-term debt relies only 
on the effective interest rate prevailing when the fixed-rate debt is first issued. Subsequent 
interest rate changes do not alter the carrying value of fixed-rate debt.
 
Which of these two explanations is the most plausible in Blockbuster’s case? Notice that 
the notes carry relatively hefty fixed interest rates (9% and 11.75%) at a time when overall 
market rates in the United States were historically low. Notice also that the note fair values 
fell substantially between January and April 2010, a period when market rates were stable. 
Macroeconomic forces are thus an unlikely explanation for why the fair value of Blockbust-
er’s debt is less than the balance sheet carrying value.
 
So, the answer must lie in Blockbuster’s worsening credit risk. In April 2010, the company 
was struggling to address a variety of thorny operational issues that limited its ability to gen-
erate the cash needed for scheduled debt payments. Investors priced those cash flow concerns 
into their assessment of debt fair value, and the price discount was steep! Notice that investors 
were saying they anticipate receiving only 20 cents of each $1 borrowed under the senior 
subordinated notes because the debt fair value ($60.8 million) is just 20.2% of the principal 
amount ($300 million). Blockbuster filed for bankruptcy in September 2010 and in April 2011 
was bought by satellite television provider Dish Network for $233 million and the assumption 
of $87 million in liabilities and other obligations. Dish Network was unable to revive the 
company and all Blockbuster stores owned by Dish were closed in 2014.
EXHIBIT 11.11
Blockbuster Inc.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
At April 4, 2010, our carrying value of financial instruments approximated fair value except for 
our $300.0 million aggregate principal amount of 9% senior subordinated notes due 2012 (the 
“Senior Subordinated Notes”) and our 11.75% Senior Secured Notes due 2014. The estimated 
fair values of our Senior Subordinated Notes and Senior Secured Notes at April 4, 2010, and 
 January 3, 2010, are based on trading activity.
A summary of the carrying values and the fair values of our Senior Secured Notes and our 
Senior Subordinated Notes is as follows:
 
April 4, 2010 
January 3, 2010
 
Principal 
Carrying 
Fair 
Principal 
Carrying 
Fair
 
Amount 
Value 
Value 
Amount 
Value 
Value
Senior Secured Notes 
$630.0 
$595.4 
$459.9 
$675.0 
$637.6 
$641.3
Senior Subordinated Notes 
300.0 
300.0 
60.8 
300.0 
300.0 
168.0
Source: Blockbuster Inc. 10-Q filing for the quarter ended April 4, 2010.

 
Incentives for Off-Balance-Sheet Liabilities 
631
INCENTIVES FOR OFF-BALANCE-SHEET LIABILITIES
In Chapters 1 and 7, we described business contracts linked to (among other things) the 
amount of liabilities on a company’s balance sheet. Examples include loan covenants and 
bond indentures. These contracts usually contain terms and conditions designed to protect the 
lender against loss. The protection is in the form of contract terms (covenant triggers) tied to 
the borrower’s debt-to-equity ratio, debt-to-tangible-asset ratio, or some other financial ratio 
that includes reported liabilities. Accounting-related covenants typically contain language 
such as “the debt-to-equity ratio may not exceed 1.7 in any quarter.” The intent of such cove-
nants is to provide an early warning signal regarding deteriorating creditworthiness. In prin-
ciple, the early warning allows the lender to require repayment of the loan before the 
borrower’s condition worsens further.
 
Such loan contract terms create incentives for managers of borrowing companies to mini-
mize reported financial statement liabilities. Reducing the total amount of reportable liabili-
ties in the contractual ratio makes covenant violations less likely.
 
Consider one example of the way these in-
centives influence business behavior: Uncon-
solidated subsidiaries are sometimes 
established to finance specialized projects or 
joint ventures. Critics say these separately in-
corporated entities have sometimes been used 
to evade loan covenants linked to reported lia-
bilities and to misrepresent the firm’s total lia-
bilities. This strategy exploits a loophole in the rules governing when subsidiaries need to be 
consolidated.
 
When one company owns more than 50% of the stock of another affiliated company, the 
owner (parent) is deemed to “control” the other company (subsidiary). The financial state-
ments of subsidiaries that are under the control of a parent must be consolidated with those of 
the parent. But when one company owns 50% or less of another company’s stock, consolida-
tion is not required except under special circumstances described in Chapter 16. Instead, the 
owner’s net investment in the subsidiary is reported as an asset in the owner’s balance sheet 
using what is called the equity method of accounting.
 
The equity method is described in Chapter 16. Here’s an example illustrating all you need 
to know about it now.
 
Assume that Blue Company and Black Company both use an identically 
manufactured input, T-spanners, in their respective production processes. 
Manufacturing T-spanners requires a large investment in plant and equipment 
that must be financed by borrowing. Both Blue Company and Black Company 
wish to avoid adding more debt to their balance sheets, so they agree to form 
a separate jointly owned venture called Gray Company.
 
Each venture partner contributes $25 million cash to establish Gray Com-
pany and receives common stock representing a 50% ownership interest in it. A bank then 
loans Gray $300 million to purchase the plant and equipment needed to produce T-spanners. 
This loan is collateralized by Gray’s factory and guaranteed by both Blue Company and Black 
Company. Immediately after these transactions take place, Gray Company’s balance sheet 
would appear as shown in Figure 11.5.
 
The balance sheets of Blue Company and Black Company would each show that com-
pany’s $25 million investment in the asset account Investment in joint venture. Under the 
equity method, this account balance would increase if further investments were made in 
the joint venture or if Gray earned a profit. Because Blue and Black own Gray equally, 
As explained in Chapter 16, consolidation essentially means that the separate 
 financial statements of the parent and subsidiary are added together line-by-line to 
form a single combined (“consolidated”) set of financial statements. For example, 
the consolidated balance sheet would report as Cash the sum of the parent’s cash 
plus the subsidiary’s cash. Similarly, total consolidated liabilities would consist of 
the sum of the parent’s liabilities plus those of the subsidiary. Chapter 16 provides 
the details and describes the accounting rules for unconsolidated subsidiaries.
Contracting
In real-world joint ventures, the debt is often 
guaranteed by the parent companies because the 
joint venture (Gray Company) is usually thinly 
capitalized and lenders accordingly look to the 
parents (Blue Company and Black Company) 
for added assurance that the loan will be repaid.

632 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
each would add 50% of Gray’s profit to the balance in its Investment in joint venture 
account.
 
The partners’ balance sheets do not report any of the joint venture’s $300 million bank 
loan! Neither Blue nor Black owns more than 50% of Gray, so neither needs to consolidate it. 
Consequently, the borrowing necessary to fund the venture appears on neither partner’s finan-
cial statements under the equity method. The Investment in joint venture account on each 
company’s books would continue to show $25 million, yet Blue and Black have effectively 
each borrowed $150 million “off balance sheet”!15 Proportionate consoli-
dation, the benchmark accounting treatment under IFRS and required by 
Canadian GAAP, would solve this problem (see Chapter 16).
So-called special purpose entities (SPEs) represent a variation of the 
simple joint venture arrangement between Blue Company and Black Com-
pany. One common type of SPE involves assets with more or less predict-
able cash flows such as credit card receivables. Without going into all of 
the details, suppose a retailer such as Neiman Marcus (the luxury depart-
ment store chain) needs to borrow money and wants to do so at the best available interest 
rate. Instead of obtaining a traditional bank loan, Neiman Marcus decides to create an SPE 
(called NM Receivables Trust) and then transfers a portion of its customer credit card re-
ceivables to the new entity. The trust next obtains a low-interest loan to be repaid from the 
future cash flows associated with the credit card receivables, sending the borrowed money 
to Neiman Marcus as payment for the transferred receivables. Although the transaction 
may seem unduly complex, the structure allows Neiman Marcus to isolate assets with pre-
dictable cash flows (in this case, the credit card receivables) from its other assets with less 
predictable cash flows. Isolating the credit card receivables in this way reduces the lend-
er’s credit risk, which in turn reduces the interest rate that Neiman Marcus must pay on the 
loan. Entities of this type were often not required to be consolidated on the financial state-
ments of the parent company (that is, Neiman Marcus), so the loan was another example of 
“off-balance-sheet” debt.
 
Special purpose entities became notorious following the collapse of Enron. In November 
2001, Enron announced that it would restate earnings for 1997 through 2001 downward by 
Investment in joint venture $25
Blue Company
Loan $300
Bank
Assets
    Cash 
$  50
    Plant and equipment 
300
Liabilities and equity
    Loan payable 
300
    Owners’ equity 
50
Gray Company
Investment in joint venture $25
Black Company
Figure 11.5
JOINT VENTURE 
FINANCING
($ in millions)
The Investment in joint venture account is un-
changed because each partner’s investment in the 
net assets (that is, assets minus liabilities) of the 
joint venture is unchanged by the borrowing. Gray 
Company’s assets increased by $300 million but 
so did its liabilities. Consequently. Gray’s net as-
sets remained at $50 million after the borrowing.
15 Prior to the issuance of pre-Codification “Consolidation of All Majority-Owned Subsidiaries,” SFAS No. 94 (Stamford, CT: 
FASB, 1987), incorporated in FASB ASC Topic 810, even 100% wholly owned subsidiaries were accounted for in many cases 
under the equity method. This kept the subsidiaries’ debt off the balance sheet in much the same manner as joint-venture debt. 
Here’s how: In many industries, companies help customers finance the purchase of their products. One example is the automo-
bile industry. If no financing subsidiary were to be formed, the cash necessary to finance the credit extended to dealers and 
consumers would come from bank loans or other borrowing by the parent. As a consequence, the parent’s debt-to-equity ratio 
would be worsened. However, if a separate finance subsidiary were to be formed and this subsidiary borrowed the funds di-
rectly in its own name, the borrowing would be effectively kept off the parent’s balance sheet. The trick here was accomplished 
by using equity method accounting for subsidiaries, as will be discussed in Chapter 16. This is no longer permitted.

 
Hedges 
633
$1.2 billion because the company and its auditors had determined that three unconsolidated 
SPEs should have been consolidated. As part of the restatement, Enron increased its balance 
sheet debt by $628 million in 2000. Over the course of the next several months, investors and 
creditors learned that Enron’s off-balance-sheet SPEs were used to hide the company’s mount-
ing losses and cash flow problems. Several former Enron senior officials were later charged 
with violating the antifraud provisions of the federal securities laws.
 
The FASB has tightened the rules governing the consolidation of special purpose entities, 
which are now called variable interest entities (VIEs), in an effort to avoid future Enron 
debacles. Chapter 16 tells you more.
RECAP
The motivation for off-balance-sheet financing transactions is strong. Managers continue 
to develop innovative strategies to understate reported liabilities and to ensure that cer-
tain items remain “off the balance sheet.” Financial analysts and auditors must remem-
ber the motivations behind off-balance-sheet financing, know how to identify peculiar and 
contorted borrowing arrangements, and adjust the reported financial statement numbers 
to better reflect economic reality.
HEDGES
Businesses are exposed to market risks from many sources—changes in interest rates, for-
eign currency exchange rates, and commodity prices.16 Suppose a bank makes numerous five-
year term loans at an annual interest rate of 8%. The earnings from those loans generate the 
cash needed to pay interest to “money market” account depositors. The loans expose the bank 
to interest rate risk: If money market interest rates rise, the 8% fixed return from the loans 
may not be adequate to pay the new higher rates promised to depositors.
 
Similar risks confront manufacturers. Consider Ridge Development, a real estate company 
that simultaneously constructs many single-family homes. Buyers make a down payment and 
agree to a fixed contract price to be paid when the home is completed. The typical home is 
completed in four months or less, and lumber comprises the bulk of construction costs. Be-
cause lumber prices are volatile, the developer is at risk that profits could erode (or disappear 
entirely) if lumber prices were to soar during the four-month construction cycle.
 
Or consider Southwest Airlines. It sells airline transportation services to passengers, many 
of whom pay a month or more in advance of the actual flight. Fuel is a major cost component 
in the airline industry, and fuel prices fluctuate on almost a daily basis. Because the passenger 
ticket price is set prior to the flight, Southwest Airlines is at risk that escalating fuel prices 
could turn an otherwise profitable flight into a loss.
 
Managing market risk is essential to the overall business strategies of most companies to-
day. This trend has been driven by the need to reduce cash flow volatility that arises from 
factors beyond management’s control—the exchange rate of U.S. dollars to Japanese yen, the 
LIBOR interest rate (the benchmark interbank interest rate for European banks), or the price 
of natural gas to run a factory. In response to these and other market risks, many companies 
today engage in hedging—business transactions designed to insulate them from commodity 
price, interest rate, or exchange rate risk. Derivative securities, which we explain next, are 
often used to accomplish this insulation.
Commodities are bulk 
goods such as wheat, corn, 
lumber, jet fuel, and copper.
Businesses are also exposed 
to operating risks from 
severe weather conditions, 
industrial accidents, raw 
material shortages, labor 
strikes, and so on. Insurance 
contracts, financial guaran-
tees, and other business 
arrangements are used to 
hedge operating risks—but 
these risks (and arrange-
ments) do not qualify for 
the special hedge account-
ing rules described later in 
this section. Only certain 
financial risks qualify for 
hedge accounting.
16 We gratefully acknowledge the substantial contribution of Professor Thomas Linsmeier, now serving as an FASB member, 
to the material in this section.

634 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
Typical Derivative Instruments 
and the Benefits of Hedging
Derivative instruments are so named because they are securities that have no inherent value 
but instead represent a claim against some other asset—their value is derived from the value 
of the asset underlying that claim.17
 
A forward contract is one example of a derivative instrument. In a forward contract, two 
parties agree to the sale of some asset on some future date—called the settlement date—at a 
price specified today. You have been dealing with forward contracts for much of your life, 
perhaps without knowing it. Suppose you walk into a bookstore on October 5 to buy the best-
selling Seven Unbeatable Strategies for Social Media Marketing. The book is sold out, but 
the clerk offers to reorder it for you and call you when it arrives. The clerk says that the book 
should arrive in about 15 days and will cost $39.95. If you agree on October 5 to pick up and 
pay for the book when called, you and the clerk have agreed to a forward contract. Three ele-
ments of this contract are key: the agreed upon price ($39.95) to be paid in the future; the 
delivery date (“in about 15 days”); and that you will “take delivery” by paying for the book 
and picking it up when notified. The clerk has “sold” you a forward contract for the 
best seller.
Futures Contracts 
A variation of a forward contract takes place on financial ex-
changes such as the New York Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX) where futures contracts are 
traded daily in a market with many buyers and sellers. Futures contracts exist for commodities 
such as corn, wheat, live hogs and cattle, cotton, copper, crude oil, lumber, and even electric-
ity. Here is how they work.
 
Suppose on October 5 you “write” (meaning sell) a futures contract for 10 million pounds 
of February copper at 95 cents per pound—we’ll show why you might want to do so in just a 
moment. By selling the contract, you are obligated to deliver the copper at the agreed-upon 
price in February. The buyer (or contract counterparty) is obliged to pay the fixed price per 
pound and take delivery of the copper. So far this looks like a forward contract because both 
parties have an obligation to perform in the future (February).
 
But there’s more! Futures contracts do not have a predetermined settlement date—you (the 
seller) can choose to deliver the copper on any day during the delivery month (February). This 
gives sellers additional flexibility in settling the contract. When you decide to deliver the cop-
per, you notify the exchange clearinghouse, which then notifies an individual—let’s call her 
Anne Smythe—who bought February copper contracts. (The clearinghouse selected Smythe 
at random from among all individuals who hold February copper contracts.) Smythe is then 
told to be ready to accept delivery within the next several days.
 
But wait a moment! Suppose she bought the contract as a speculative investment, has no 
real use for the copper, and doesn’t want delivery? Futures contracts have an added advantage 
over forward contracts because futures are actively traded on an exchange. This means Smythe 
can avoid delivery by immediately selling a February copper contract for 10 million pounds, 
thus creating a zero net position. The first contract obligates Smythe to accept delivery of 
10 million pounds of copper, but the second contract obligates her to turn over 10 million pounds 
to someone else. One contract cancels the other, and Smythe avoids the embarrassment of 
having all of that copper dumped on her garage floor.
What happens if you pay for 
the book on October 5? 
Then it’s a simple cash sales 
transaction (with a promised 
future delivery date). As 
long as both parties are ob-
ligated to perform at some 
future date under the agree-
ment, it’s a forward contract. 
Here this means the clerk is 
required to obtain a copy of 
the best seller and deliver it 
to you within the specified 
time. And you are required 
to pay the agreed upon price 
and to take delivery if and 
when the book arrives.
How can you (the seller) 
avoid having to deliver the 
copper? Form a zero net po-
sition of your own by pur-
chasing a February copper 
contract from someone 
else—perhaps even from 
Anne Smythe.
17 For an overview of the characteristics and uses of derivative securities, see S. A. Ross, R. W. Westerfield, and B. D. Jordan, 
Fundamentals of Corporate Finance, 8th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2008); S. Ryan, Financial Instruments and Institu-
tions (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley & Sons, 2007); and C. W. Smithson, C. W. Smith, and D. S. Wilford, Managing Financial Risk 
(Homewood, IL; Irwin, 1995).

 
Hedges 
635
 
Now that you understand how futures contracts work, let’s see how they can be used to 
hedge financial risk.
 
Consider the opportunities confronting Rombaurer Metals, a copper mining company. On 
October 1, 2014, Rombaurer has 10 million pounds of copper inventory on hand at an average 
cost of 65 cents per pound. The “spot” (current delivery) price for copper on October 1 is 
90 cents a pound. Rombaurer could receive $9 million (10 million pounds 3 $0.90 per pound) 
by selling its entire copper inventory today. This would yield a $2.5 million gross profit 
($0.90 selling price 2 $0.65 average cost per pound 3 10 million pounds). However, Rom-
baurer has decided to hold on to its copper until February 2015 when management believes 
the price will return to a normal level of 95 cents a pound. The commodities market seems to 
agree because February copper futures are priced as though copper will sell for 95 cents in 
February. The decision not to sell copper in October exposes Rombaurer to commodity price 
risk from a possible future decline in copper prices.
 
Figure 11.6(a) illustrates the company’s commodity price risk exposure. If copper prices 
increase to 95 cents by February as expected, Rombaurer will receive $9.5 million for its cop-
per and earn $3 million ($0.95 selling price 2 $0.65 average cost per pound 3 10 million 
pounds). That’s $0.5 million more than Rombaurer would earn by selling the copper on Octo-
ber 1. But what if the February price of copper falls to 85 cents? The cash received from sell-
ing copper would then be only $8.5 million, and the gross profit would be only $2 million. 
Each 10-cent decline in the February copper price lowers the company’s cash flows and ex-
pected gross profits by $1 million. At 65 cents per pound, Rombaurer just breaks even (zero 
gross profit) and, at any price below 65 cents, the company has a loss. These potential cash 
flow and gross profit declines represent the downside risk associated with the uncertain 
February price of copper.
 
There is upside potential as well. Each 10-cent increase in the February copper price will 
produce a $1 million increase in the company’s cash flow and gross profit.
 
One way Rombaurer can protect itself from a decline in the price of copper is to hedge 
its position with futures contracts. Suppose that Rombaurer sells 400 copper contracts—each 
contract is for 25,000 pounds—at 95 cents a pound for February delivery. The delivery month 
is chosen to coincide with the company’s expected physical sale of the copper. The ultimate 
value of these contracts depends on the February price of copper as shown in Figure 11.6(b).
$0.65
$0.90 $0.95
Possible February 
copper price per
pound
Gross profit
0.0
Gross profit or loss from selling copper 
($ in millions)
2.5
3.0
Downside risk of price
decline below $0.90
(Gross profit , $2.5 million)
Upside potential of price
increase above $0.90
(Gross profit . $2.5 million)
Figure 11.6(a)
ROMBAURER METALS
Using Futures Contracts to 
Hedge Copper Inventory: 
Before the Hedge
Potential gross profit or loss from the sale of 
copper in February

636 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
 
For example, if the February copper price is 85 cents, the contracts will have provided 
$1 million of cash flow and profit protection ($0.95 contract price 2 $0.85 February spot 
market price 3 the 10 million pounds of copper). If the February spot price is 65 cents, the 
contracts will have provided $3 million of protection.
 
The futures contracts “lock in” a February price of 95 cents and eliminate the company’s 
downside exposure to a decline in copper prices. February cash receipts will be $9.5 million, and 
profits will total $3.0 million, no matter what the February spot price for copper turns out to be.
Of course, there is another side to the story. By hedging its original expo-
sure to commodity price risk with futures contracts, Rombaurer has given up 
the cash flow and gross profit increases that could result if the February spot 
price is above $0.95. Figure 11.6(c) shows how the company’s hedging strat-
egy eliminates downside risk (and upside potential) and results in predictable 
cash flows and gross profits.
Figure 11.6(c)
ROMBAURER METALS
Using Futures Contracts to 
Hedge Copper Inventory: 
After the Hedge
Gross profit from hedged position: 
 Combination of unhedged copper inventory 
and futures contract
$0.65
$0.90 $0.95
0.0
Gross profit or loss ($ in millions)
2.5
3.0
Downside risk
eliminated
(price , $0.90)
Upside potential
forgone
(price . $0.95)
Locked-in profit of the
net (hedged) position
at $0.95 price
Potential February 
copper price per
pound
Futures contract
$0.65
$0.95
Potential February 
copper price per
pound
Futures contract value
0.0
Profit or loss on futures contract  
($ in millions)
3.0
Profit region
(February price , $0.95)
Loss region
 (February price . $0.95)
Figure 11.6(b)
ROMBAURER METALS
Using Futures Contracts to 
Hedge Copper Inventory: 
The Hedging Instrument
Potential value of futures contract for 
February copper
Indeed, the futures contracts provide an immedi-
ate 5 cent per pound benefit (ignoring present 
value considerations, inventory holding costs, and 
fees and commissions of the contracts) because 
the October 1 price of copper is only 90 cents.

 
Hedges 
637
Swap Contracts 
Another common derivative instrument is a swap contract. This 
contract is a popular way to hedge interest rate or foreign currency exchange rate risk. Let’s 
say that Kistler Manufacturing has issued $100 million of long-term 8% fixed-rate debt and 
wants to protect itself against a decline in market interest rates. The company could reduce its 
exposure in several ways. We mentioned one approach earlier in this chapter, using a debt-for-
debt exchange offer to replace fixed-rate debt with a floating-rate loan. A second and perhaps 
less costly way that Kistler can reduce its interest rate risk exposure is to create synthetic 
floating-rate debt using an interest rate swap.
 
This form of hedging is accomplished with a “swap dealer.” Swap dealers are typically 
banks that locate another company—called a counterparty—who is willing to make fixed-rate 
interest payments in exchange for floating-rate interest receipts. (Recall that Kistler wants to 
make floating-rate interest payments.) The swap transaction in Figure 11.7 includes Kistler 
with fixed-rate debt outstanding, the swap dealer, and the swap counterparty—a company 
with floating-rate debt and interest payments linked to the one-year LIBOR benchmark inter-
est rate. This is exactly the type of interest payment Kistler seeks.
 
Kistler and the counterparty agree to swap interest payments on $100 million of debt for 
the next three years with settlement every year. At each settlement date, the counterparty gives 
Kistler the fixed-rate payment of $8 million, which is then passed on to Kistler’s lender. At the 
same time, Kistler gives the counterparty cash equal to the counterparty’s payment (say 
$7 million based on a LIBOR-linked rate of 7%), and this too is passed on to the counterparty’s 
lender. In reality, only the $1 million difference in interest payments would be exchanged 
between Kistler and the swap counterparty.
 
The swap transforms Kistler’s fixed-rate debt into floating rate because the money Kistler 
receives from the counterparty offsets the fixed payment Kistler is obligated to make to the 
lender. Figure 11.8 shows how the swap transaction eliminates Kistler’s downside exposure to 
interest rate risk. If the LIBOR rate falls to 7%, Kistler will receive a net cash inflow of $1 mil-
lion from the swap counterparty; that is, the difference between Kistler’s $8 million fixed-rate 
payment and the counterparty’s $7 million floating-rate payment. Kistler then pays its lender 
$8 million as required with $1 million of the payment coming from the swap  counterparty. 
One reason protection might 
be needed is that Kistler’s 
operating cash flows are 
positively correlated with 
interest rates. A decline in 
market rates would then be 
accompanied by a decrease 
in operating cash flows, and 
the company might lack the 
cash flow needed to meet its 
fixed-rate payment.
What does the counterparty 
gain? By replacing floating-
rate interest payments with 
synthetic fixed-rate pay-
ments, the counterparty has 
reduced its exposure to cash 
flow volatility from interest 
rate changes.
Interest
$7 million 
Floating-rate payment
$8 million 
Fixed-rate payment
Loan
Swap dealer
(bank)
Floating-rate
lender
Counterparty
floating-rate debt
Loan
Interest
Fixed-rate
lender
Kistler Manufacturing
8% fixed-rate debt
Figure 11.7 KISTLER MANUFACTURING
An Interest Rate Swap That Creates Synthetic Floating-Rate Debt

638 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
Kistler’s out-of-pocket interest cost is just $7 million, the amount it would have been required 
to pay if it had issued floating-rate debt in the first place.18
 
Kistler ends up with floating-rate debt that it could perhaps not otherwise obtain at attrac-
tive rates. The result is that the counterparty has fixed interest payments, and the bank earns a 
fee for arranging the swap transaction. Everybody wins—as long as all parties fulfill their 
payment obligations.
 
A foreign exchange (currency) swap has the same structural features as those outlined in 
Exhibits 11.7 and 11.8 except that the loans are denominated in different currencies. Suppose 
that St. Jean Inc. manufactures products in France but sells them exclusively in the United 
States. The company borrows euros to finance construction of a manufacturing plant in France, 
and it wants to hedge its foreign exchange exposure on the loan. The company’s exposure arises 
because its operating cash flows are in U.S. dollars but its loan payments are in euros. With 
the aid of a swap dealer, the company can identify a counterparty willing to exchange euro-
denominated payments for dollar-denominated payments. The pattern of swapped cash flows 
is identical to the flows depicted in Figure 11.7. St. Jean ends up with synthetic U.S. dollar-
denominated debt and eliminates its exposure to fluctuations in the euro-dollar exchange rate.
Options Contract 
Futures and swaps are derivatives that require each party to the 
contract to complete the agreed-upon transaction. But other types of derivative instruments 
exist. One is an option contract, which gives the holder an “option”—the right but not the 
obligation—to do something. To illustrate how options work, let’s revisit our homebuilder 
discussed at the beginning of this section.
 
Suppose it’s now January and Ridge Development needs 10 million board feet of lumber 
on hand in three months (April) when construction begins on homes that have been presold to 
residential buyers. Lumber currently sells for $250 per 1,000 board feet (kbf), so Ridge must 
purchase $2.5 million of lumber at the current (January) price to meet its April construction 
7.0%
8.0%
Floating-rate
payment to 
counterparty
Fixed-rate
payment
from counterparty
Kistler’s required
$8 million payment
LIBOR rate
Swap contract
net cash flows
0.0
4.0
2.0
Interest payment ($ in millions)
6.0
8.0
Downside risk eliminated
(interest rate , 8%) 
Net cash receipts 
from swap
Figure 11.8
KISTLER MANUFACTURING
Using a Swap to Hedge 
 Interest Rate Risk
18 An interest rate “collar” may be part of the swap agreement as well—for example, the two parties could agree that the 
swap remains in force as long as the LIBOR-linked rate is less than 8.5% and more than 6%. What if the LIBOR rises to 9%? 
Kistler then pays $8 million to its lender and another $1 million to the swap counterparty. The swap benefits Kistler when 
LIBOR rates fall but not when LIBOR rises.

 
Hedges 
639
commitment. But Ridge has no place to store the lumber, and lumber prices are expected to 
increase over the next few months. How can the company eliminate its commodity price risk 
from its anticipated lumber purchase three months from now?
 
One approach is to buy a futures contract for April lumber. Ridge can “lock in” the profit 
margin on unbuilt homes it has sold by agreeing to pay a set price now (in January) for lumber 
to be delivered in April. But if lumber prices fall over the next three months, the builder—now 
locked into higher lumber prices by the futures contract—would forgo the increased profits 
from lower lumber prices.
 
By using options instead of futures, Ridge can protect against lumber cost increases 
without sacrificing potential gains if lumber prices decline. This can be accomplished by 
purchasing a call option on lumber—an option to buy lumber at a specified price over the 
 option period. The call option protects the builder against lumber cost increases. But because 
it is an option, Ridge is not obligated to exercise the option should lumber prices fall. Options 
enable Ridge to hedge unfavorable price movements and still participate in the upside possi-
bility of increased profit margins if lumber prices fall. Figure 11.9 shows how.
 
Without hedging its anticipated lumber purchase, Ridge is exposed to commodity price 
risk if lumber prices rise above the current $250 level over the next three months. To eliminate 
this exposure, Ridge buys a call option for 10 million board feet of April lumber at $250 per 
1,000 board feet. If the April price of lumber is more than $250 per 1,000 board feet, Ridge 
will exercise the option and pay just the $250 contract price. But if the April price is, say, 
$200, Ridge will let the option expire and instead buy lumber in the open market—saving 
$500,000 in lumber costs ($50 per 1,000 board feet). The net result of the option hedge is a 
“hockey stick” shape (see Figure 11.9)—the downside risk of a lumber price increase is elimi-
nated but the upside potential of a lumber price decrease is retained.
 
When options are used in this way, they do not necessarily “lock in” a specified profit margin 
or price. Instead, they provide a hedge that resembles insurance. Options allow companies to 
hedge against downside risk—value losses—while retaining the opportunity to benefit from 
favorable price movements. Insurance does the same thing. It provides protection against losses.
Some option contracts give 
the holder the right to buy a 
specific underlying asset at 
a specified price during a 
specified time. These are 
known as call options. 
Other option contracts give 
the holder the option to sell 
an asset at a specified price 
during a specified time pe-
riod. These are put options.
$200
$250
0
Cost of 10 million board feet of lumber
 ($ in millions)
200
250
Profit potential from lower
lumber prices retained
Note: The market convention is to quote lumber prices per 1,000 board feet (kbf).
Risk from higher lumber
prices eliminated
April lumber
price (kbf)
Value of 
option
Hockey stick
Net (hedged) 
cost of lumber
Unhedged
cost of lumber
Figure 11.9
RIDGE DEVELOPMENT 
COMPANY
Using an Option to Hedge 
Commodity Price Risk

640 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
Financial Reporting for Derivative Instruments
Before we turn our attention to hedge accounting, let’s consider how GAAP treats stand-alone 
derivatives in the absence of a hedging transaction. Here’s a quick synopsis:
• All derivatives must be carried on the balance sheet at fair value—no exceptions. Fair 
value is the derivative’s market price at the balance sheet date (except when other levels 
of the fair value measurement hierarchy apply).
• Generally, changes in the fair value of derivatives must be recognized in income when they 
occur. The only GAAP exception is for derivatives that qualify as hedges (explained later).
This example illustrates the basic accounting treatment for derivatives that do not qualify for 
special hedge accounting rules:
On March 1, 2014, Heitz Metals buys call options (that is, options to purchase) for 10 million 
board feet of June lumber. Each call option gives Heitz the opportunity to purchase 1,000 board 
feet of lumber, so the firm bought a total of 10,000 option contracts (10 million board feet 
divided by 1,000 per contract). Heitz has no use for the lumber, nor is the company hedging a 
financial risk. Instead, Heitz is just speculating that lumber prices will increase during the 
next several months. The settlement price is $240 per 1,000 board feet, the current spot price 
is $240, and Heitz pays $50,000 for the contracts.
 
Over the next 30 days, a series of winter storms dump several feet of snow in the mountains 
of the Pacific Northwest. This late snowfall delays the timber-harvesting season and creates 
a lumber shortage. By March 31, the spot price for lumber is $245, and June contracts for 
10 million board feet are trading for $75,000 at the commodities exchange. Lumber prices have 
increased to $245, but Heitz owns an option to buy lumber at $240, so the value of the option 
has increased along with lumber prices. On April 15, Heitz decides to liquidate its position. It 
sells the June lumber contracts for $13 each (or $130,000 in total) when the spot price for 
 lumber is $252.
 
The value of an option contract can be broken into two components: intrinsic value and 
timing value. The option contract’s intrinsic value is the difference between the settlement 
price, which is specified in the contract and does not change over time, and the spot price, 
which can change on a daily basis. The Heitz option has an intrinsic value of zero on March 1 
because the settlement price ($240) equals the spot price ($240) that day. Why is Heitz willing 
to pay $5 per contract on March 1 for an option that has zero intrinsic value? It is because of 
the option’s timing value. This $5 timing value reflects the possibility that lumber spot prices 
(and thus, intrinsic value) may rise above the current $240 level between March 1 and the 
option’s expiration date. Timing value is zero at the option expiration date.
RECAP
Derivative instruments are extremely useful tools for managing financial risk. New and 
more complicated hedging instruments and transactions are created each year, and they 
sometimes have unintended consequences. That is what the soap company Procter & 
Gamble learned in 1994 when it had to liquidate two contracts for interest rate swaps. 
The lesson cost the company $157 million, one of the largest derivative losses suffered by 
a U.S. company at the time. William J. McDonough, president of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York, said at the time, “People of my generation who are not astrophysicists 
have to strain to understand these products [hedging instruments and transactions]. To 
put it simply and directly, if the bosses do not or cannot understand both the risks and the 
rewards in their products, their firm should not be in the business.”19
19 Quoted in L. Malkin, “Procter & Gamble’s Tale of Derivatives Woe,” International Herald Tribune, April 14, 1994.

 
Hedges 
641
 
The accounting entry to record Heitz Metals’ speculative purchase—remember that Heitz 
has no real use for lumber—of June lumber contracts is:
DR Marketable securities—lumber options . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $50,000
 
CR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$50,000
The derivative contracts (call options) are recorded as an asset at fair value—the purchase 
price paid. At the end of March, the call option price has increased to $7.50 per contract. Heitz 
records the derivative’s change in fair value for the month ($75,000 fair value at the end of 
March 2 $50,000 fair value at the start of March, or $25,000):
DR Market adjustment—lumber options   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $25,000
 
CR Unrealized holding gain on lumber options (to income) . . . . . .  
 
$25,000
The $25,000 Market adjustment is added to the $50,000 balance in Marketable securities. The 
contracts are now carried on the balance sheet at $75,000—which is their fair value as of the 
end of March—and a $25,000 unrealized gain has been recorded in March 
income. (If the options had declined in value, Heitz would have recorded an 
unrealized holding loss along with a downward adjustment in the carrying 
value of the options.) Heitz then liquidates the options contracts on April 15:
DR Cash   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $130,000
 
CR Marketable securities—lumber options  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$50,000
 
CR Market adjustment—lumber options  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
25,000
 
CR Realized holding gain on lumber options (to income)  . . . .  
 
55,000
 
These accounting entries are used for all types of derivatives—forwards, futures, swaps, 
and options—unless the special hedge accounting rules described next should apply. Three 
key points about derivatives that do not qualify for special hedge accounting treatment should 
be remembered:
1. Derivative contracts represent balance sheet assets and liabilities.
2. The carrying value of the derivative is adjusted to fair value at each balance sheet date.
3. The amount of the adjustment—the change in fair value—flows to the income statement 
as a holding gain (or loss).
As a result of these GAAP rules, speculative investments in derivative contracts can increase 
the volatility of reported earnings. But the earnings volatility that results from this accounting 
treatment perfectly reflects the derivative’s inherent economic risk.
Hedge Accounting
When a company successfully hedges its exposure to market risk, any economic loss on the 
hedged item (for example, copper inventory) will be offset by an economic gain on the deriva-
tive (for example, copper futures contracts). To accurately reflect the underlying economics 
of the hedge, the company should match the loss on the hedged item with the derivative’s 
offsetting gain in the income statement of the same period. This matching is what the GAAP 
rules governing hedge accounting try to accomplish.20 The special hedge accounting rules 
eliminate or reduce the earnings volatility that would otherwise result from reporting the 
change in the derivative’s fair value in income each period.
The unrealized gain (or loss) would be included 
in Income from continuing operations on the 
Heitz income statement.
The matching process works 
like this. If an economic 
gain (or loss) on the hedged 
item flows to accounting in-
come in the current period, 
so does the offsetting loss 
(or gain) on the derivative. 
But if the hedged item’s 
economic gain (or loss) 
flows to accounting income 
some time later, then in-
come statement recognition 
of the derivative’s offsetting 
loss (or gain) is also post-
poned to that later period.
20 FASB ASC Topic 815: Derivatives and Hedging. To learn more about hedge accounting, see S. Ryan, Financial Instru-
ments and Institutions (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley & Sons, 2007) and M. Trombley, Accounting for Derivatives and Hedging (New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 2003).

642 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
 
The type of special hedge accounting to be applied varies depending on the nature of the 
exposure being hedged. In some cases, changes in the derivative’s fair value are reported in 
income as they occur, but the earnings impact is then offset by a corresponding charge (or 
credit) from adjusting the carrying value of the asset or liability being hedged. In other cases, 
earnings volatility is avoided by recording changes in the fair value of the derivative directly 
in Other comprehensive income.
 
When can hedge accounting be used? The answer depends on four considerations:
• Hedged item
• Hedging instrument
• Risk being hedged
• Effectiveness of hedge
Stringent GAAP criteria must be met to qualify for hedge accounting. To fulfill the criteria, 
management must do three things: designate the derivative as a hedging instrument; describe 
the hedging strategy; and document its effectiveness in eliminating a specific market risk for 
a specific hedged item. The details are voluminous and complex, so we cannot possibly cover 
all bases here. What we can do is provide an overview of the most common hedging situations 
and how hedge accounting works. The basics are outlined in Figure 11.10.
 
The hedged item can be either (1) an existing asset or liability on the company’s books, (2) a 
firm commitment, or (3) an anticipated (forecasted) future transaction. Inventories of commodities 
such as copper and lumber, receivables and loans, and debt obligations are examples of existing 
assets and liabilities that qualify as hedged items. If Hess Company agrees in June to buy network 
storage equipment from another company at a specific price with delivery in the future (say, 
August), that’s a firm commitment. If, on the other hand, Hess just knows in June that it must buy 
the equipment by August but has signed no purchase agreement, it’s an anticipated transaction.
 
The hedging instrument is commonly a derivative instrument, although not all derivatives 
meet the strict GAAP rules and some qualifying hedges (for example, the call provision of a 
callable bond) do not involve derivatives as the term is commonly used. Qualifying hedging 
instruments include options to purchase or sell an exchange-traded security, futures and for-
ward contracts, and interest rate and currency swaps. Insurance contracts, options to pur-
chase real estate, traditional equity and debt securities, and financial guarantee contracts 
do not qualify as hedging instruments.
 
The risk being hedged must meet certain GAAP criteria. The eligible market risks are 
limited to risks arising from overall changes in the fair value or cash flow of the hedged item 
or risks from changes in benchmark interest rates (for example, LIBOR), commodity prices 
(such as copper), foreign currency exchange rates (for example, Japanese yen to U.S. dollar), 
and the creditworthiness of the party (a company, institution, or government agency) that 
issued a financial security. Other financial and operating risks (such as risks from weather 
conditions, industrial accidents, or labor strikes) do not qualify for hedge accounting. (We 
discuss hedge effectiveness later.)
 
GAAP groups the risks being hedged into three categories:
1. A fair value hedge is a hedge of the exposure to changes in the fair value of an existing 
asset or liability, or a firm commitment. Common examples of a fair value hedge include:
• An interest rate swap that synthetically converts fixed-rate debt into floating-rate debt 
(interest rate risk exposure of an existing liability).
• A gold futures contract that “unlocks” a gold mining company’s contractual agreement 
to sell refined gold to a jewelry manufacturer next year at a fixed price (commodity 
price risk exposure of a firm commitment).
You may want to review 
Chapter 2 for a discussion 
of other comprehensive 
income and the income 
statement.
Derivatives that fail to meet 
the GAAP rules for hedge 
accounting—because either 
the hedged item, the deriva-
tive itself, or the hedged risk 
doesn’t qualify—are treated 
as though they were specu-
lative investments.

 
Hedges 
643
2. A cash flow hedge is a hedge of the exposure to changes in cash flows of an existing 
asset or liability, or an anticipated transaction. Common examples of a cash flow hedge 
include:
• An interest rate swap that synthetically converts floating-rate debt into fixed-rate debt 
(interest rate risk exposure of an existing liability).
• A lumber futures contract that “locks in” the price a building contractor will pay 
in two months for lumber (commodity price risk exposure for an anticipated 
transaction).
3. A foreign currency exposure hedge is a hedge of the ex-
posure to changes in currency exchange rates of an exist-
ing asset or liability, a firm commitment, a forecasted 
transaction, or a multinational company’s net investment in 
a foreign operation. Here, GAAP applies the fair value and 
cash flow hedge accounting rules to foreign currency ex-
change exposure. The unique element of this exposure is a 
net investment in foreign operations. In Chapter 16, we de-
scribe the accounting and reporting issues unique to for-
eign subsidiaries.
 
Figure 11.10 describes the accounting procedures for (Panel 
[a]) derivatives that qualify for hedge accounting and (Panel 
[b]) derivatives that do not qualify for hedge accounting. 
GAAP requires all derivative instruments—whether held for trading and speculation or as 
financial hedges—to be marked-to-market, meaning that they are carried at fair value on the 
balance sheet as assets or liabilities. The offsetting debit or credit that results from marked-to-
market accounting then flows either to current income (for fair value hedges, certain foreign 
currency hedges, and derivatives that do not qualify for hedge accounting) or to Other com-
prehensive income (for cash flow hedges and most other foreign currency hedges).
Fair Value Hedge Accounting
Hedge accounting makes it possible for companies engaged in financial risk management 
to recognize the gain (or loss) on the hedged item in the same period as the offsetting loss 
(or gain) on the derivative. To see how this is done, let’s return to Rombaurer Metals and its 
copper inventory hedge:
On October 1, 2014, Rombaurer has 10 million pounds of copper inventory on hand at an 
average cost of $0.65 a pound. The spot price for copper is $0.90 a pound. Instead of selling 
copper now, Rombaurer decides to hold the inventory until February 2015 when management 
believes the price will return to a normal level of $0.95 a pound. To hedge its position, Rombaurer 
sells futures contracts for 10 million pounds at $0.95 for February delivery. The margin deposit 
on the contracts is $280,000—the amount the commodities broker requires as a good-faith 
cash deposit on the contracts. The market’s spot and futures prices over the next several 
months are:
How can an interest rate swap qualify as both a fair value hedge 
and a cash flow hedge? The answer lies in understanding how in-
terest rate changes affect the market values and cash flows of debt 
obligations. For fixed-rate debt, interest rate changes produce mar-
ket value changes in the opposite direction but debt cash flows are 
“fixed” (meaning unchanged). So, an interest rate swap that con-
verts fixed-rate debt into floating-rate debt eliminates fluctuations 
in market values and thus is a fair value hedge. For floating-rate 
debt, interest rate changes produce changes in debt cash flows—if 
rates increase, the borrower must make additional cash interest 
payments—but debt market value is unaffected. So, an interest rate 
swap that converts floating-rate debt into fixed-rate debt eliminates 
fluctuations in cash flows and thus is a cash flow hedge.
 
NYMEX Copper Prices
 
 
February 2015
 
Spot Price 
Futures Price
October 1, 2014 
$0.90 
$0.95
December 31, 2014 
0.85 
0.91
February 26, 2015 
0.94 
0.94

Hedged item
Existing (recognized) asset 
or liability, a firm commitment, 
or a forecasted transaction
Fair value hedge
Exposure to changes in the
fair value of existing asset
or liability or firm commitment
Gain (loss) on  hedging instrument
recognized in Other comprehensive
income (outside of earnings) and
later recognized in earnings when
the future transaction occurs 
Net investment in foreign operations:
Gain (loss) on hedging instrument
recognized in Other comprehensive
income (outside of earnings) as 
part of the cumulative translation
adjustment
Cash flow hedge
Exposure to variability in cash
flows of an existing asset or
liability or a forecasted
transaction (e.g., planned sale)
Hedging instrument
Derivative instrument (e.g., 
futures, swaps, options)
Foreign-Currency hedge
Exposure to changes in currency
exchange rates of:
• Unrecognized firm commitment
   or an available-for-sale security (FV)
• Forecasted transaction (CF)
• Net investment in a foreign operation
Gain (loss) on derivative
recognized in earnings
Derivative held for trading 
or speculation
Derivative held as economic hedge
but excluded from special hedge 
accounting because:
• Hedged item does not qualify
• Hedging instrument does not qualify
• Financial risk does not qualify
• Hedge is not “highly effective”
Eligible
market risks
Changes in overall fair
value or cash flows 
of the hedged item, 
or changes due 
to fluctuations in:
• Benchmark interest
   rate (e.g., LIBOR)
• Commodity prices
• Foreign currency 
   exchange rates
• Issuer credit- 
   worthiness
Gain (loss) on hedging instrument
recognized in earnings along with
offsetting loss (gain) on hedged item
Panel (a) Derivatives That Qualify for Hedge Accounting
Panel (b) Derivatives That Do Not Qualify for Hedge Accounting
Figure 11.10 FINANCIAL REPORTING FOR DERIVATIVE INSTRUMENTS
644

 
Hedges 
645
 
Rombaurer has successfully hedged its exposure to commodity price risk—and the fair 
value of its existing copper inventory—by selling futures contracts. Rombaurer then desig-
nates the futures contracts (the hedging instrument) as a fair value hedge of its exposure to 
February 2015 market price fluctuations (the hedged risk) for existing copper inventory (the 
hedged item). As long as the futures contracts pass the GAAP test for hedge effectiveness—
and they do, as you will later see—Rombaurer can use the special fair value hedge account-
ing rules. Here are the accounting entries.
 
On October 1, 2014, Rombaurer records the initial margin deposit on its fair value hedge:
DR Amount due from broker (a receivable)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $280,000
   CR Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$280,000
No entry is made that day for the futures contracts themselves because they have zero value at 
inception—the February contract price ($0.95) equals the current $0.95 market price of Feb-
ruary copper (and we are ignoring any timing value).
 
The spot price and the February futures price of copper both decline over the next several 
months. Rombaurer makes two journal entries at year-end, December 31. The first entry 
records the fair value increase for the hedging instrument:
DR Amount due from broker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $400,000
   CR Gain on hedge activity (to income). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$400,000
The futures contracts are worth $400,000 on December 31, 2014. This amount is the differ-
ence between the copper price guaranteed by the contracts ($0.95) and the current futures 
price of February copper ($0.91) multiplied by the 10 million pounds of copper being hedged. 
Copper prices have fallen, but the hedge has provided $400,000 of commodity price protec-
tion. Notice too that the broker receivable now has a balance of $680,000 representing the 
initial margin deposit ($280,000) plus the fair value of the futures contracts ($400,000).
 
The second year-end entry adjusts the carrying value of the hedged item—copper inventory—
for the change in fair value ($0.91 2 $0.95, a $0.04 loss, 3 10 million pounds):
DR Loss on hedge activity (to income) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $400,000
   CR Copper inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$400,000
The carrying value of the copper inventory is now $6.1 million; that’s the inventory’s $6.5 mil-
lion historical cost minus the $400,000 decline in the February fair value since October 1, 
2014. (Note that GAAP measures this fair value decline using the October 1 $0.95 futures 
contract price as the benchmark. The October 1 spot price of $0.90 does not enter into the 
GAAP calculation of the fair value decline.)
 
In the first December 31 entry, the derivative is marked-to-market and Rombaurer records 
a gain on the hedging instrument to income. But the gain from the futures contracts is fully 
offset by the loss on copper inventory in the second entry. (In practice, only one Gain or loss 
on hedge activity account is used to record the gain and the loss.) These offsetting gains and 
losses eliminate earnings volatility.
 
On February 26, 2015, Rombaurer sells the copper on the spot market for $0.94 a pound 
and cancels the futures contracts. It makes three journal entries at this time.
 
The first entry records the fair value change for the hedging instrument ($0.91 2 $0.94, a $0.03 
loss, 3 10 million pounds), the cash returned by the broker, and eliminates the broker receivable:
DR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $380,000
DR Loss on hedge activity (to income)   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
300,000
   CR Amount due from broker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$680,000

646 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
February copper prices have increased $0.03 a pound since December, and the futures contracts 
are now worth only $100,000 ($0.95 2 $0.94 3 10 million pounds), so Rombaurer records a 
$300,000 loss. This $300,000 loss is the fair value change in the futures contracts since Decem-
ber 31. Rombaurer also receives $380,000 from the broker. This amount is the sum of the re-
turned margin deposit ($280,000) and the settlement value of the contracts ($100,000).
 
The second entry adjusts the carrying value of the hedged copper inventory for the fair 
value change ($0.94 2 $0.91 3 10 million pounds):
DR Copper inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $300,000
   CR Gain on hedge activity (to income)   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$300,000
In this case, the loss from the futures contracts (the first entry) is offset by a gain on copper 
inventory (the second entry).
 
The third and final entry records the credit sale of copper inventory at the spot market price:
DR Accounts receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $9,400,000
DR Cost of goods sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
6,400,000
   CR Sales revenue. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 $9,400,000
   CR Copper inventory   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
6,400,000
Rombaurer’s gross profit from selling copper is $3 million 
(the $9.4 million selling price 2 the $6.4 million adjusted car-
rying value of the inventory sold). This is exactly the gross 
profit Rombaurer would have reported if it had sold the inven-
tory—originally carried on the books at $6.5 million—at the 
anticipated February price of $0.95 a pound, or $9.5 million. 
By selling futures contracts, Rombaurer “locked in” the Febru-
ary price of $0.95 a pound and eliminated its exposure to commodity price risk.
 
That’s the economics behind Rombaurer’s hedging activities, and that’s what the account-
ing statements report.
 
What if Rombaurer did not (or could not) use hedge accounting rules for the copper futures 
contracts? In that case, GAAP still requires the derivative to be marked-to-market. So, 
Rombaurer would record a $400,000 gain on December 31, 2014, followed by a $300,000 loss 
on February 26, 2015—the change in fair value of the futures contracts. But GAAP would not 
allow an offsetting loss (on December 31, 2014) or gain (on February 26, 2015) to be recorded 
on the copper inventory itself. Instead, the inventory would continue to be carried at its histori-
cal cost of $6,500,000 until sold. The net result is increased earnings volatility: Net income for 
2014 would include a $400,000 gain, while net income for 2015 would include a $300,000 loss 
and a $100,000 gross margin reduction due to the higher carrying value of inventory ($0.65 per 
pound original cost rather than $0.64 per pound adjusted carrying value).
Cash Flow Hedge Accounting
Exhibit 11.12 illustrates the accounting for a cash flow hedge. Chalk Hill Inc. issues a 
$10 million, three-year floating-rate note with interest equal to the LIBOR rate, reset annually. 
To hedge its exposure to cash flow variability from changes in the LIBOR, Chalk Hill enters 
into an interest rate swap with a bank. The bank agrees to make the required floating-rate 
interest payments, and Chalk Hill agrees to pay the bank 7.5% fixed-rate interest annually for 
the entire three years. The interest rate swap allows Chalk Hill to “lock in” the 7.5% fixed-rate 
cash payment for interest even though the actual interest rate charged on the note will rise or 
fall with changes in the LIBOR rate.
The $6.4 million adjusted carrying value ($0.64 per pound) is 
determined as:
10/1/14 
cost at $0.65 per pound 
$6.5  million
12/31/14 adjustment for $0.04 decline 
(0.4) million
2/26/15 
adjustment for $0.03 increase 
0.3  million
2/26/15 
adjusted carrying value 
$6.4  million
You may recall Dentsply’s 
floating-rate Swiss francs- 
denominated debt shown in 
Exhibit 11.10. Dentsply uses 
interest rate swaps to elimi-
nate its exposure to cash flow 
volatility from interest rate 
changes by agreeing to pay 
fixed-rate interest to the swap 
counterparty. Dentsply uses 
cash flow hedge accounting 
for the interest rate swaps.

 
Hedges
647
EXHIBIT 11.12
Chalk Hill’s Cash Flow Hedge
Using an Interest Rate Swap to Hedge Variable Rate Debt
On January 1, 2014, Chalk Hill borrows $10 million by signing a three-year note with interest equal to the LIBOR (currently at 7.5%), 
reset annually on December 31. To hedge its exposure to the variability in cash flows associated with the floating-rate note, Chalk Hill 
enters into a three-year interest rate swap with Beringer Bank. Under the swap contract, Chalk Hill pays interest to the bank at the fixed 
7.5% rate and receives interest payments from the bank at a variable rate equal to the LIBOR, based on a notional amount of $10 million. 
Both the note and swap require that payments be made or received annually on December 31 of each year.
 
Chalk Hill designates the swap (hedging instrument) as a cash flow hedge of its exposure to variability in the cash flows of the 
floating-rate note (hedged item) with the specific risk being changes in cash flows due to changes in the LIBOR rate. This hedge is 
fully effective because the key terms of the note and swap are identical. The LIBOR rates, cash payments made and received, and the 
fair value of the swap contract (based on dealer quotes) are:
 
Gross Cash Flow 
Swap Fair Value
 
LIBOR 
To Beringer 
From Beringer 
Net 
Asset (Liability)
 
Rate 
 Bank 
Bank 
Cash Flow 
from Dealer Quotes
January 1, 2014 
7.50% 
$750,000 
$750,000 
— 
—
December 31, 2014 
8.50 
750,000 
850,000 
$100,000 
$323,000
December 31, 2015 
7.00 
750,000 
700,000 
(50,000) 
(55,000)
Interest rate swap contracts are not traded in an organized exchange (such as the NYMEX where copper futures contracts are traded), so 
contract fair values can be difficult to determine. Chalk Hill’s fair value estimates (“quotes”) are from knowledgeable “dealers” (usually 
 investment banks) who are actively involved in structuring swap transactions.*
Chalk Hill makes the following entries over the life of the swap contract and note (OCI denotes Other comprehensive income):
January 1, 2014
DR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $10,000,000
CR Note payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$10,000,000
To record the company’s initial borrowing. There is no entry for the swap contract because it has no initial value—the “pay” 
and “receive” rates for both parties are the same, 7.5% times $10 million.
December 31, 2014
DR Interest expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$750,000
CR Interest payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$750,000
To accrue annual interest at a 7.5% variable rate—the LIBOR rate on January 1, 2014.
DR Interest payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$750,000
CR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$750,000
To record the annual interest payment on the note. There is no entry for the swap settlement this year because the “pay” and 
“receive” amounts are the same, $750,000.
DR Swap contract  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$323,000
CR OCI—Unrealized gain on swap contract. . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$323,000
To record the change in fair value of the swap based on dealer quotes.
December 31, 2015
DR Interest expense   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$850,000
CR Interest payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$850,000
To accrue annual interest at an 8.5% variable rate—the LIBOR rate on December 31, 2015.
DR Interest payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$850,000
CR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$850,000
To record the annual interest payment on the note.
(continued)
* To learn more about how practitioners value swaps and other derivatives, see C. W. Smithson, Managing Financial Risk (Homewood, IL: Irwin, 1998).

648 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
 
As you work through the journal entries in Exhibit 11.12, notice that the hedging instru-
ment (swap contract) shows up as a balance sheet asset or liability. (If the account has a 
debit balance, it’s an asset; if the balance is a credit, it’s a liability.) The swap’s carrying 
value is its fair value at each balance sheet date. This means that changes in the swap’s fair 
value are recorded when they occur—but they do not flow directly to the income statement.
Instead, swap contract gains and losses flow to Other comprehensive income and sharehold-
ers’ equity as in Figure 11.10. What’s the reason for this accounting treatment? Changes in 
the LIBOR rate do not affect the underlying economic value of the floating-rate note—as 
interest rates on a floating-rate liability change, the liability’s market price remains con-
stant. So, we are unable to offset fair value changes in the hedging instrument with changes 
in the hedged item’s fair value. The only way earnings volatility can be avoided is to keep 
swap gains and losses off the income statement by allowing them to flow to Other compre-
hensive income.
 
You need to observe one more feature of the Chalk Hill example. Interest expense is 
$750,000 each year, or the 7.5% fixed-rate of interest multiplied by the $10 million note prin-
cipal amount. This may at first seem surprising because Chalk Hill makes a floating-rate inter-
est payment each year, and the amount paid varies from $700,000 to $850,000 over the three 
years. But the interest rate swap insulates Chalk Hill from this cash flow volatility. For ex-
ample, in 2015, Chalk Hill pays $850,000 in interest on the note but receives $100,000 from 
EXHIBIT 11.12
Chalk Hill’s Cash Flow Hedge (continued)
DR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$100,000
CR Interest expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$100,000
To record the swap settlement net receipt from Beringer Bank.
DR OCI—Unrealized loss on swap contract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$378,000
CR Swap contract  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$378,000
To record the change in fair value of the swap based on dealer quotes. The Swap contract account now has a $55,000 
credit balance.
December 31, 2016
DR Interest expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$700,000
CR Interest payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$700,000
To accrue annual interest at a 7.0% variable rate—the LIBOR rate on December 31, 2016.
DR Interest payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$700,000
CR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$700,000
To record the annual interest payment on the note.
DR Interest expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$50,000
CR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$50,000
To record the swap settlement net payment to Beringer Bank.
DR Swap contract  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$55,000
CR OCI—Unrealized gain on swap contract. . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$55,000
To record the change in fair value of the swap. The swap agreement has now been concluded, and the contract has no 
further value to either party. (You should confirm that the swap contract account now has a zero balance.)
DR Note payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $10,000,000
CR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$10,000,000
To record payment of the note principal.

 
Hedges 
649
the swap counterparty. Chalk Hill’s net cash payment for interest that year is $750,000, which 
is also the amount of interest expense reported.
Hedge Accounting for a Forecasted Transaction
Now let’s see how hedge accounting for a forecasted transaction works. In this example, 
Vintage Construction uses lumber options contracts as a cash flow hedge for its projected 
lumber needs during the year:
Vintage Construction Corporation builds residential homes in the far northern United States 
from April through November. It builds no homes on speculation. Building begins only after the 
home buyer and Vintage sign a firm contract. Construction takes about four months. Because 
contract prices with home purchasers are fixed, Vintage is vulnerable to lumber price increases 
during construction. To protect its margins, Vintage buys 20 lumber futures contracts on April 1, 
2014. The expiration dates on these contracts are staggered over the April–November building 
season to approximate the monthly level of construction activity.
 
Lumber prices rise during the 2014 season. These unanticipated higher costs reduce gross 
profits from home construction by $600,000. However, Vintage realized a $580,000 gain on the 
futures contracts due to the lumber price increase. How did the company’s financial statements 
reflect this gain?
 
Vintage designates the lumber contracts as a cash flow hedge of forecasted lumber pur-
chases with commodity price volatility being the source of market risk. At inception, it re-
cords the futures contracts as an asset at the purchase price. At each monthly balance sheet 
date, the contracts are marked-to-market with the change in fair value flowing to Other com-
prehensive income and then shareholders’ equity. As homes are completed each month, Vin-
tage records the revenues and expenses from the construction business. At the same time, the 
cumulative gain and loss on the lumber contracts for completed homes is transferred out of 
Other comprehensive income to the income statement.
 
This accounting treatment offsets changes in the gross profit from construction due to 
lumber price fluctuations (the hedged item) with realized gains and losses from lumber 
futures contracts (the hedging instrument). Earnings volatility is avoided by allowing the 
futures contracts gains and losses to initially flow to shareholders’ equity. These gains and 
losses eventually flow to earnings, but only when the forecasted transaction is completed. 
For Vintage Construction, that means when the homes are finished and the buyer takes 
possession—not earlier when lumber is purchased.
 
Because all of the futures contracts were realized in 2014, the $580,000 gain is included in 
income and largely offsets the $600,000 gross margin reduction reflected in income that same 
period. This income statement result corresponds to the almost perfect hedging strategy 
followed by Vintage Construction. A “perfect” hedge would have exactly offset the $600,000 
margin shortfall.
Hedge Effectiveness
Few hedges are perfect. When they are not—as here—notice that reported income corre-
sponds to the underlying economics. That is, while Vintage insulated itself from most of the 
lumber price increase, it did experience a $20,000 earnings reduction. This is precisely the 
reported income statement effect (that is, a $580,000 futures contracts gain and a $600,000 
gross margin reduction).
 
Hedge effectiveness—the derivative’s ability to generate offsetting changes in the fair 
value or cash flows of the hedged item—is a key qualifying criterion for hedge accounting. If 
Problem 11-9 illustrates the 
accounting for Chalk Hill’s 
swap when it does not qual-
ify for hedge accounting.
Because Vintage doesn’t yet 
own the lumber, the futures 
contracts cannot qualify as 
a fair value hedge of an 
existing asset.

650 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
critical terms of the hedging instrument and hedged item are the same, 
changes in the derivative’s fair value or cash flow (for example, a $1 gain) 
completely offset changes in the fair value or cash flow of the hedged item 
(a $1 loss). In this case, the hedge is “fully effective.” Except for Vintage 
Construction, all of our examples have involved fully effective hedges.
But what if the hedge is not fully effective? Does that disqualify the deriva-
tive from special hedge accounting rules? It does not necessarily because 
GAAP requires only that the hedge be “highly effective”—as defined by GAAP—in offset-
ting changes in those fair values or cash flows that are due to the hedged risk. This require-
ment must be met both at the inception of the hedge and on an ongoing basis. GAAP provides 
general guidelines but does not say exactly how effectiveness should be determined.
 
How effective is “highly effective”? The hedging instrument should offset somewhere be-
tween 80% and 125% of the hedged item’s fair value or cash flow changes attributable to the 
hedged risk. For Vintage Construction, this means that the company 
must purchase enough staggered lumber futures contracts to hedge 
at least 80% of its exposure to lumber price fluctuations. Purchase 
less than this amount and the futures contracts are an “ineffective” 
hedge according to GAAP. On the other hand, if Vintage buys too 
many contracts, the hedge is also considered ineffective. That’s be-
cause the futures contracts are excessive and more like a specula-
tive investment than a true hedge of underlying market risk.
The GAAP distinction between highly effective and ineffective 
hedges determines when gains and losses on the hedging instrument 
flow to current income.21 A highly effective hedge qualifies for spe-
cial hedge accounting treatment; an ineffective hedge does not. Even 
if the highly effective test is met, some ineffectiveness may occur. 
And when it does, the ineffective portion of the hedge must flow directly to income. So, if Vintage 
Construction buys futures contracts that hedge just 50% of its full exposure, all of the gains and 
losses from this ineffective hedge flow directly to current income. 
That’s because the contracts are ineffective and do not qualify for 
hedge accounting. And if the company buys futures contracts to 
hedge 110% of its exposure, the gains and losses on the ineffective 
portion of the hedge (the portion over 100% coverage) also flow 
 directly to current income. Gains and losses on the remaining effec-
tive portion (equal to 100% coverage) of the hedge flow to Other 
comprehensive income because the contracts qualify as a “highly 
effective” hedge and hedge accounting rules apply.
Critics of hedge accounting claim that additional income state-
ment and balance sheet volatility is created when the gains and 
losses on the hedging instrument exceed the losses and gains on 
the hedged item. This added volatility may force managers to 
choose between achieving sound economic results—meaning hedges that effectively 
address real financial risks—or minimizing accounting volatility  using risk management 
approaches that are less efficient or simply not prudent.
In a letter to the FASB, Al Wargo of Eastman Chemical said 
that hedge accounting could cause his company’s quarterly 
earnings per share (EPS) to fluctuate by roughly 100% in 
either direction—from a $0.12 loss to a $2.24 profit based 
on Eastman’s $1.12 EPS for the second quarter of 2000. The 
only way Eastman can eliminate this EPS volatility is to 
change how it hedges financial risk. But this means replacing 
a sound economic hedging transaction with a less effective 
hedge. EPS would then be less volatile, but the company may 
be more exposed to financial risks.
Source: P. A. McKay and J. Niedzielski, “New Accounting Standard Gets 
Mixed Reviews,” The Wall Street Journal, October 23, 2000.
For interest rate swaps such as the one described 
in Exhibit 11.12, the critical terms include the 
notional (that is, principal) amount, contract 
term and loan maturity date, “pay” and “receive” 
rates on the benchmark interest rate, and the 
interest rate reset dates.
21 In 2010 the FASB proposed changes to the way in which hedge effectiveness is assessed, with an emphasis on qualitative 
rather than quantitative considerations and a relaxation of the threshold from “highly effective” to “reasonably effective.” 
As before, no bright line definition of “reasonably effective” is contained in the proposed ASU. See Proposed Accounting 
Standards Update, “Accounting for Financial Instruments and Revisions to the Accounting for Derivative Instruments and 
Hedging Activities,” Financial Instruments (Topic 825) and Hedging (Topic 815) (Norwalk, CT: FASB, 2010). As this book 
goes to press, the FASB has yet to resume deliberations on this proposal.
The guidelines in ASC Topic 815: Derivatives and Hedging 
do not provide a bright line that defines “highly effective,” so 
interpretation of this phrase is a matter of professional judg-
ment. The range of 80% to 125% is becoming an accepted 
threshold for high effectiveness, but the FASB has not sanc-
tioned it. You should know about one more feature of hedge 
effectiveness. Vintage Construction can instead purchase 
10 lumber futures contracts and still have a “highly effective” 
hedge if (1) it designates the contracts as a “partial hedge” of 
its risk exposure (for example, 50% of its lumber purchases) 
and (2) the contracts are “highly effective” in hedging that 
partial exposure.

 
Global Vantage Point 
651
GLOBAL VANTAGE POINT
As you no doubt now realize, the U.S. GAAP rules for derivatives and hedge accounting are 
quite complex. The same can be said for IFRS guidance (IAS 39). Despite some important 
differences in the details, there are striking similarities between IFRS and U.S. GAAP for 
derivatives and hedge accounting.
 
When it comes to freestanding derivative contracts—those that do not qualify for special 
hedge accounting treatment—IFRS and U.S. GAAP are in agreement. A derivative contract 
represents a balance sheet asset or liability; the carrying value of the derivative is adjusted to 
fair value at each balance sheet date; and the amount of the adjustment—the change in fair 
value—flows to the income statement as an unrealized gain (or loss).
 
IFRS and U.S. GAAP guidelines are also in agreement on most key elements of the ap-
proaches used for derivative contracts that qualify for special hedge accounting treatment. 
Like U.S. GAAP, IFRS recognizes two broad types of hedging relationships: a fair value 
hedge and a cash flow hedge. Also like U.S. GAAP, IFRS require that derivatives—the 
hedging instrument or hedged item—be marked-to-market at each balance sheet date with 
the fair value change flowing either to current earnings (for fair value hedges) or to Other 
comprehensive income (for cash flow hedges). Arrangements that hedge foreign currency 
exposure risk also fall into one of these two hedge accounting buckets—fair value hedge 
or cash flow hedge.
 
In late 2013 the IASB published an amendment to IFRS 9 “Financial Instruments” in-
tended to improve and simplify its hedge accounting requirements.22 The amendment con-
tains two key provisions. One major change is the elimination of the requirement that a 
hedging transaction must be “highly effective”—a bright line threshold for 80 to 125 per-
cent. Under the IASB’s new approach, hedge accounting will be permitted where there is 
an “economic relationship” between the hedging instrument and the hedged item such that 
the values of the two items generally move in opposite directions. This change will likely 
expand the range of transactions and instruments that qualify for special hedge accounting 
treatment under IFRS. The amendment also will allow companies to designate a specified 
portion of an nonfinancial item as the hedged risk as long as that risk is separately identifi-
able and measurable. 
 
As this book goes to press, the IASB has yet to establish a mandatory adoption date for 
these new hedge accounting rules but voluntary adoption is encouraged.
International
There are subtle differences 
between IFRS and U.S. 
GAAP guidance as to the 
particular characteristics a 
derivative contract must 
possess, but these (and 
other) differences are unim-
portant for our broad-brush 
discussion.
RECAP
Derivatives, when used properly, allow companies to stabilize their operating cash 
flows by eliminating specific sources of volatility such as fluctuations in interest rates, 
exchange rates, and commodity prices. The GAAP rules for derivatives are detailed 
and complex, but the essential points are simple. Derivative contracts represent bal-
ance sheet assets and liabilities that must be marked-to-market at each balance sheet 
date. The resulting mark-to-market adjustment—the change in fair value—then flows 
either to current earnings (for fair value hedges, certain foreign currency hedges, and 
derivatives held for trading and speculation) or to Other comprehensive income (for 
cash flow hedges and most other foreign currency hedges). Other aspects of hedge ac-
counting then match gains (or losses) on the derivative with offsetting losses (or gains) 
on the hedged item. This allows the financial statements to reflect accurately the un-
derlying economics of the hedge.
22 See International Financial Reporting Standards, IFRS 9 Financial Instruments—Hedge Accounting and amendments to 
IFRS 9, IFRS 7, and IAS 39 (IASB: November 2013).

652 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
CONTINGENT LIABILITIES
Contingent liabilities differ in one important way from the liabilities described elsewhere in 
this chapter—contingent liabilities are shrouded in uncertainty as to whether or not an obliga-
tion actually exists. And the uncertainty will be resolved only at some future date when an 
event does or does not occur. For example, suppose that Whiffle Toy is being sued for 
$10 million in alleged damages related to its Whamo lawn dart game. If the court rules against 
Whiffle, an obligation exists because the company then owes plaintiffs the $10 million in 
damages. But if the court rules for Whiffle, no obligation exists. Loss contingencies of this 
type arise from factors such as litigation, industrial accidents, debt guarantees, and product 
warranties. For financial reporting purposes, two questions about contingent liabilities must 
be resolved: (1) When do loss contingencies need to be measured and recognized in the finan-
cial statements? (2) Under what circumstances do these contingencies need to be disclosed in 
notes, even when no liability is recorded on the balance sheet itself?
Measuring and Recognizing Loss Contingencies
The rules for measuring and recognizing loss contingencies in the financial statements are 
similar to the rules governing revenue recognition. GAAP states that a loss contingency shall 
be accrued by a charge to income if both of the following conditions exist:
1. Information available before the financial statements are issued indicates that it is probable 
that an asset has been impaired or a liability has been incurred at the date of the financial 
statements.
2. The amount of loss can be reasonably estimated.23
Here’s an example of an accrued loss contingency disclosure taken from the financial state-
ments of Stanley Inc., the hardware and tool manufacturer:
The Company’s policy is to accrue environmental investigatory and remediation costs for identified sites 
when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. . . . 
As of January 2, 2010, the Company had reserves of $30 million for remediation activities associated with 
Company-owned properties, as well as for Superfund sites, for losses that are probable and estimable.
Source: Stanley Inc., 2009 annual report.
Stanley has recorded a $30 million loss contingency for environmental cleanup at some of its 
current and former manufacturing sites. A corresponding $30 million contingent liability is 
shown on the company’s balance sheet. Stanley also explains why it has already accrued the 
loss: The company believes that it is probable that an obligation to clean up these sites exists, 
and the amounts involved can be reasonably estimated. Under these circumstances, GAAP 
requires that a contingent loss and corresponding liability be recorded.
 
Loss contingency disclosures are also sometimes made even when no loss has been recog-
nized in the income statement itself. For example, if the loss probability is only “reasonably pos-
sible” or “remote” (refer to Figure 11.11), then no loss accrual needs to be made in the financial 
statements. Nevertheless, note disclosure of loss contingencies is necessary when the loss is 
both reasonably possible and can be estimated. Furthermore, even contingencies arising from 
remote possibilities must be disclosed in certain circumstances, such as when one company guar-
antees another company’s debt—that is, it agrees to repay a loan if the borrower cannot.
 
Here’s an example of a loss contingency disclosure when no loss has been recognized on 
the income statement. An individual named Avraham Wellman has sued Hansen Natural 
23 FASB ASC Paragraph 450-20-25-2: Contingencies—Loss Contingencies—Recognition—General Rule.
When companies accrue a 
loss contingency, they also 
usually disclose other infor-
mation regarding the loss 
separately in notes to the 
financial statements. GAAP 
requires this disclosure 
when a failure to provide 
additional supplemental 
data could lead to mislead-
ing inferences. To learn 
more about contingent envi-
ronmental liabilities and 
why the true cost of clean-
up may be understated, see 
M. Leone and T. Reason, 
“Dirty Secrets,” CFO Mag-
azine, September 2009, 
pp. 50–57.

 
Contingent Liabilities 
653
 Corporation, the beverage company known for its Monster Energy drink, for reasons de-
scribed in the company’s financial statement note:
In May 2009, Avraham Wellman, purporting to act on behalf of himself and a class of consumers in 
Canada, filed a putative class action in the Ontario Superior Court of Justice, in the City of Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada, against the Company and its former Canadian distributor, Pepsi-Cola Canada Ltd., as 
defendants. The plaintiff alleges that the defendants misleadingly packaged and labeled Monster Energy® 
products in Canada by not including sufficiently specific statements with respect to contra-indications and/
or adverse reactions associated with the consumption of the energy drink products. The plaintiff’s claims 
against the defendants are for negligence, unjust enrichment, and making misleading/false representations 
in violation of the Competition Act (Canada), the Food and Drugs Act (Canada) and the Consumer Protec-
tion Act, 2002 (Ontario). The plaintiff claims general damages on behalf of the putative class in the amount 
of CDN$20 million, together with punitive damages of CDN$5 million, plus legal costs and interest . . . 
The Company believes that the plaintiff’s complaint is without merit and plans a vigorous defense.
Source: Hansen Natural Corporation 2009 annual report.
 
Hansen Natural mentions the specific dollar amount of damages sought by the plaintiff (Well-
man) but does not reveal its internal assessment of the probability that the court will find in favor 
of the plaintiff. The language Hansen Natural uses—“complaint is without merit” and “vigorous 
defense”—suggests management believes the court will decide the matter in Hansen’s favor. 
 Accordingly, the company has not yet accrued a contingent loss for the ongoing litigation.
 
FASB ASC Topic 450 Contingencies establishes a range representing the likelihood of 
losses occurring, which is depicted in Figure 11.11, where “probable” indicates the highest 
likelihood. GAAP requires contingent loss recognition if the future event is probable and the 
amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated.24 Notice that the two loss contingency recog-
nition conditions correspond to the two income recognition conditions—“critical event” and 
“measurability”—discussed in Chapter 2. Specifically, the critical event for loss recognition is 
that it is probable that a loss has occurred or will occur; similarly, the measurability criterion 
corresponds closely to how well the loss can be estimated. In this sense, the criteria that trig-
ger income and loss recognition are roughly parallel.
 
For certain categories of events, applying the loss contingency rules has become routine. 
One example of a routine loss contingency is the expense for estimated uncollectible receiv-
ables described in Chapter 8. Uncollectibles represent a normal cost of business when compa-
nies sell goods or services on credit, but the amount of the uncollectible loss is unknown at the 
time of sale. Because some loss is probable and the amount can be estimated, an expense 
(estimated uncollectible loss) is recorded in the same period that the sale occurs.
 
In other situations, the issue of whether to recognize a loss contingency is highly subjective 
and complicated by the fact that recognizing and disclosing the loss could itself cause further 
harm. Consider a company that is being sued for actions that allegedly harmed others.
Wren Corporation manufactures a wide range of chemical food additives sold to numerous food 
processors throughout the country. Due to a serious production error, Wren produced and sold a 
highly toxic batch of a flavor enhancer in October 2014. Thousands of consumers were made 
seriously ill; some died. A class action lawsuit seeking $10 billion in damages has been filed.
Less likely
More likely
Probable
The future event
is likely to occur
Remote
The chance of the
future event is slight
Reasonably possible
The chance of occurrence is more
than remote but less than likely
Figure 11.11
FASB ASC TOPIC 450 LOSS 
PROBABILITY CONTINUUM
24 FASB ASC Topic 450 defines “probable” as “likely to occur”; “remote” as a “slight” chance of occurring; and “reasonably 
possible” as being “more than slight but less than likely.”

654 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
 
The fictitious Wren scenario illustrates a setting in which a straightforward application of 
the loss contingency recognition rules could prove harmful to the company. Let’s say that 
Wren’s management was indeed negligent and expects to negotiate an approximately $2 bil-
lion out-of-court settlement. If Wren accrued a charge for this expected payout, its negotiating 
position could be seriously weakened by a disclosure to the plaintiffs that it is prepared to pay 
at least $2 billion. Because the plaintiffs might be willing to settle for less than $2 billion, 
candid disclosure of the minimum estimated loss by Wren could raise the ultimate loss pay-
out. Companies like Wren have strong incentives to either:
1. Accrue a loss that is significantly smaller than the real estimated loss.
2. Disclose that while a loss may have occurred, its amount is not yet measurable.
Consequently, the GAAP guidelines for loss contingencies arising from litigation are difficult 
to enforce. Statement readers must be aware of the potential understatement of litigation 
losses and liabilities.
Recording Gain Contingencies
While the defendant in a lawsuit (for example, Hansen Natural) faces a contingent loss, the other 
side—the plaintiff—has a contingent gain reflecting the possibility that the court will decide that 
monetary damages must be paid to the plaintiff. As you now know, loss contingencies are ac-
crued when the event confirming the obligation is probable and the amount can be reasonably 
estimated. Gain contingencies, on the other hand, are not recorded until the event actually oc-
curs and the payment obligation is confirmed. This differing treatment of loss contingencies and 
gain contingencies illustrates accounting conservatism—the notion that it’s desirable to antici-
pate losses, but recognizing gains should wait until their confirmation and realization.
Loan Guarantees
Companies sometimes provide loan guarantees that require them to make payments to a 
lender on behalf of a borrower based on some future event. Krispy Kreme Doughnuts, for 
example, sells its famous Original Glazed doughnuts and coffee in 748 company-owned and 
franchised stores located in 22 countries around the world. When a franchise store in which 
Krispy Kreme has a partial ownership interest borrows money from a local bank, Krispy 
Kreme may agree to repay the loan if and when the franchisee fails to do so. By providing this 
guaranty, Krispy Kreme helps the franchisee borrow money at a lower rate of interest than 
would otherwise be the case.
 
Here is what Krispy Kreme says about its loan guarantees:
The Company has guaranteed a portion of certain loan obligations of certain franchisees in 
which the Company owns an interest. The Company assesses the likelihood of making any 
payments under the guarantees and records estimated liabilities for anticipated payments when 
the Company believes that an obligation to perform under the guarantees is probable and the 
amount can be reasonably estimated. No liabilities for the guarantees were recorded at the time 
they were issued because the Company believed the value of the guarantees was immaterial. As 
of February 3, 2013, the Company has recorded liabilities of approximately $1.6 million related 
to such loan guarantees. The aggregate outstanding principal balance that was guaranteed by the 
Company was approximately $2.1 million at that date. (Source: Krispy Kreme Doughnuts, Inc. 
Form 10-K filing for the fiscal year ended February 3, 2013)
 
FASB ASC Topic 460 Guarantees views this sort of arrangement as having two compo-
nents that may affect the financial statements of Krispy Kreme (the guarantor): (1) a certain 
“stand ready obligation” to meet the terms of the guarantee, and (2) the uncertain contingent 
When they are recorded, the 
gain flows to income, and a 
corresponding contingent 
receivable is shown on the 
balance sheet.

 
Global Vantage Point 
655
obligation to make future payments depending on future events (e.g., the failure of the 
franchisee to repay the bank loan in full). The “stand ready obligation” is recorded initially 
at fair value, while the contingent obligation is handled as an ordinary contingent loss as 
provided by FASB ASC Topic 450.
 
To illustrate the guarantor’s accounting issues, suppose Mason Mechanical Toys agrees to 
guarantee a $2,000,000 loan made by Continental Bank to Mia Fabrications, an unrelated 
party that supplies essential subcomponents used by Mason. Mia will use the borrowed funds 
to expand its production line so that it can more efficiently provide the higher volume of sub-
components that Mason requires each month. Mia also agrees to pay a $50,000 fee to Mason 
for providing the loan guarantee.
 
Should Mason recognize a liability for the guarantee at inception of the Mia Fabrications 
loan? The answer according to FASB ASC Topic 460 is “Yes.” The standard allows Mason to 
use the fee amount as a practical expedient for the fair value of the guarantee. The journal 
entry to record Mason’s “stand ready obligation” at loan inception is:
DR Accounts receivable (or Cash)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$50,000
   CR Guarantee liability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$50,000
The Guarantee liability account represents deferred revenue associated with the “stand ready” 
fee. This revenue is earned (and the Guarantee liability account decreased) over the life of the 
loan as Mason is released from the risk of repaying Mia’s loan.
 
No entry is made by Mason at loan inception for its contingent obligation to pay Continental 
Bank unless it is deemed probable that payments under the guarantee will be required and the 
amount of those payments can be reasonably estimated. These are recognition criteria used in 
ASC 450.
 
Krispy Kreme says it did not record a “stand ready obligation” at the time the bank loans 
were issued to franchisees because the fair value of the guarantees was deemed immaterial by 
management. However, a $1.6 million contingent obligation for the loan guarantees was re-
corded sometime later as a contingent loss:
DR Guarantee loss  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$1,600,000
   CR Guarantee liability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$1,600,000
When this entry was made, Krispy Kreme management had determined that partial repayment 
of the franchisee bank loans was now probable. Notice that the amount of the contingent loss 
is less than the total $2.1 million owed by franchisees.
GLOBAL VANTAGE POINT
IFRS guidance on accounting for contingencies is found in IAS 37.25 It is quite similar to the 
U.S. GAAP approach just outlined except that IFRS guidance is built around a balance sheet 
perspective where contingent liability and asset recognition takes the center stage. U.S. GAAP 
relies on an income statement perspective (contingent loss and gain recognition). Like U.S. 
GAAP, IFRS requires recognition of a contingent liability, called a provision—and the associ-
ated contingent loss—when it is both probable and can be reasonably estimated. However, 
probable is interpreted under IFRS to mean “more likely than not” and thus represents a lower 
recognition threshold than is the case for U.S. GAAP (see Figure 11.11). Contingent assets 
and their associated gains are not recognized.
International
25 IAS 37, “Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets” (London UK: IFRS, July 1999 as revised).

656 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
 
U.S. GAAP and IFRS also differ when it comes to determining the dollar amount of con-
tingent loss to be recognized. Suppose the probable loss is estimated by management to range 
between $450,000 and $650,000. Management further believes that no amount within this 
range is a better estimate than any other amount. What dollar amount should be recorded? 
U.S. GAAP solves this problem by using the low end of the estimated range ($450,000) 
whereas IFRS uses the midpoint of the range ($550,000).
 
There is one other point that can be a source of confusion. The IFRS phrase contingent li-
ability refers to possible (but unrecognized) contingent obligations perhaps disclosed in the 
financial statement notes. U.S. GAAP uses this same term to refer to both recognized and 
unrecognized contingent loss obligations.
• An astounding variety of financial instruments and nontraditional financing arrangements 
is now used to fund corporate activities and to manage risk. Statement readers face a 
daunting task when trying to grasp the economic implications of some financial 
innovations.
• Off-balance-sheet obligations and loss contingencies are difficult to evaluate because the 
information needed for that evaluation is often not disclosed.
• Derivatives—whether used for hedging or speculation—pose special problems because of 
both their complexity and the involved details of hedge accounting.
• For many companies, the most important long-term obligation is still traditional debt fi-
nancing. IFRS and U.S. GAAP guidance in this area is quite clear. Noncurrent monetary 
liabilities are initially recorded at the discounted present value of the contractual cash 
flows—that is, the amount borrowed. The effective interest method is then used to com-
pute interest expense and net carrying value in each period. Interest rate changes occur-
ring after the debt has been issued are ignored. Of course, firms may instead opt for fair 
value accounting for their long-term debt.
• Long-term debt accounting makes it possible to “manage” reported income statement and 
balance sheet numbers when debt is retired before maturity. The opportunity to “manage” 
those numbers comes from the difference between debt book value and market value 
when interest rates have changed.
• The incentives for “managing” income statement and balance sheet numbers may be re-
lated to debt covenants, compensation, regulation, or just the desire to paint a favorable 
picture of the company’s performance and health.
• Extinguishment gains and losses from early debt retirement and swaps require careful 
scrutiny. Statement readers need to know whether real economic benefits for the company 
and its shareholders are produced—or if the gains or losses are just window dressing.
SUMMARY
SELF-STUDY PROBLEM
MALLARD CORPORATION
Mallard Corporation constructs and operates private waterfowl hunting facilities throughout the 
western United States. On July 1, 2014, the company issued $5 million of par value, 10-year bonds 
to finance construction of a guest lodge at its newest site in Klamath, Oregon. The bonds pay inter-
est semiannually (on December 31 and June 30) at an annual rate of 8% and are callable by Mal-
lard at 102% of par value. The bonds were issued at a price that yields 10% annually to maturity.

 
Self-Study Problem 
657
1. Compute the issue price of the bonds. The bond cash flows include a semiannual interest 
payment of $200,000 (or $5 million at 4%) plus the principal payment of $5 million at 
maturity. With an effective (market) interest rate of 5% for each six-month interval, the 
present value factors are:
20-period ordinary annuity at 5% 5 12.46221
 
20-period single payment 5   0.37689
 
Multiplying each factor by the corresponding cash flow gives the issue price as:
 
$200,000 3 12.46221 5 $2,492,442
 
1 5,000,000 3   0.37689 5   1,884,450
 
$4,376,892
 
The bonds were thus issued at a discount of $623,108 (or $5,000,000 2 $4,376,892).
2. Compute the amount of interest expense on the bonds for 2014. Mallard Corpora-
tion uses the effective interest method for amortizing bond discounts and premiums. 
Because the bonds were issued on July 1, 2014, only six months of interest need be recorded 
for the year. Interest expense is computed at the effective interest rate of 5%. This rate is 
multiplied by the amount borrowed (beginning book value) to find interest expense:
$4,376,892 3 5% 5 $218,845 (rounded)
 
 Computed interest expense is more than the required $200,000 cash payment. The $18,845 
difference represents amortization of the bond discount—that is, an increase to the bond’s 
book value. Mallard Corporation’s year-end financial statements would show the bond at 
$4,395,737 ($4,376,892 1 $18,845).
3. Mallard uses the indirect method of computing cash flows from operations on its cash 
flow statement. Indicate how much will be added to (or subtracted from) the 2014 
accrual-basis net income figure that is related to the bonds to obtain cash flows from 
operations. The accrual income figure contains interest expense of $218,845, but the cash 
interest payment is only $200,000. The additional $18,845 interest expense does not represent 
an operating cash outflow for the year, and so it is added back to net income to arrive at cash 
flows from operations. Notice that this amount equals the discount amortization for the year.
4. Assume that the market yield on the bonds had fallen to 9% by July 1, 2016, and 
that Mallard decided to retire the debt on that date either by purchasing the bonds 
on the open market or by exercising its 102% call option. Which method of debt re-
tirement is the least expensive for Mallard? Under the terms of the call option, Mallard 
can retire the debt by paying bond holders 102% of par value, or:
 
However, the bonds’ current market value at an annual yield of 9% is:
 
$200,000 3 11.23402 5 $2,246,804
 
1 5,000,000 3   0.49447 5   2,472,350
 
$4,719,154
 
 The open-market purchase is the least expensive way for Mallard to retire its debt. (Notice 
that the present value factors used to compute the current market price are based on a 4.5% 
semiannual yield and 16 six-month periods to July 1, 2024.)
$5,000,000 3 1.02 5 $5,100,000

658 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
5. Prepare the journal entry that Mallard Corporation recorded on July 1, 2016, when 
it retired the bonds through an open market purchase. Assume that all interest 
expense and cash interest payments have been recorded. Then the bonds’ book value on 
July 1, 2016, is $4,458,115, as shown in the amortization table.
 
Period
 
(six- 
Liability 
Effective 
Stated 
Increase in 
Liability
 
month  
at Start 
Interest: 5% 
Rate: 
Recorded 
at End
 
interval) 
of Period 
per Period 
4% of Par 
Book Value 
of Period
7/1/14 
0 
 
 
 
 
$4,376,892
1/1/15 
1 
$4,376,892 
$218,845 
$200,000 
$18,845 
4,395,737
7/1/15 
2 
4,395,737 
219,787 
200,000 
19,787 
4,415,524
1/1/16 
3 
4,415,523 
220,776 
200,000 
20,776 
4,436,300
7/1/16 
4 
4,436,300 
221,815 
200,000 
21,815 
4,458,115
 
 Based on our previous calculation, we find that Mallard would pay $4,719,154 to retire the 
bonds on that date, so the entry is:
 
 where $541,885 represents the remaining (unamortized) balance of the original issue dis-
count ($5,000,000 face value 2 $4,458,115 book value).
DR Bonds payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$5,000,000
DR Loss on debt retirement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
261,039
   CR Discount on bonds  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$   541,885
   CR Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
4,719,154
SELF-STUDY PROBLEM
SNAP-ON, INC.
Exhibit 11.13 is taken from the 2012 Shareholder Report of Snap-On, Inc., a manufacturer and 
marketer of high-quality professional automotive and industrial tools. The exhibit typifies the 
required disclosures for long-term debt, although Snap-On also devotes a portion of this foot-
note to a discussion of its short-term debt. The exhibit also identifies the various debt categories 
and describes the major debt instruments’ key characteristics—such as covenants tied to finan-
cial statement ratios. An enumeration of scheduled principal repayments over the ensuing five 
years is also provided. The intent of the disclosure is to provide data on future cash outflows 
and credit risk; these data help analysts and others generate cash flow forecasts.
1. The financial statement note contains a table indicating that $970.4 million in short-
term and long-term debt was outstanding at the end of 2012. What are the individ-
ual components that make up this total debt amount? The company’s short-term and 
long-term debt at 2012 year-end consists of several fixed-rate unsecured notes ($950 million) 
and unspecified “other” debt ($25.6 million). The company classifies $5.2 million of 
notes payable as short-term debt.
2. Since 2009 Snap-On has issued only one several new fixed-rate unsecured note: the 
$250 million of unsecured notes due in 2018. What can you learn about the company’s 
credit risk from the interest rate on these recently issued notes? The company’s older 
unsecured notes carry interest rates that range from 5.50% to 6.70%. The rate of  interest 
charged on the new notes would be lower (higher) than this if the company was now 

 
Self-Study Problem 
659
viewed as a lesser (greater) credit risk than when the older notes were first issued. The 
recently issued unsecured notes have a 4.25% interest rate, a decrease from the older 
notes. This decrease may reflect an improvement in the company’s credit risk. Alterna-
tively, 2009 may have been a period when low interest rates prevailed throughout the U.S. 
economy because of general macroeconomic forces.
3. How much cash did the company receive when it issued the 6.70% unsecured 
notes due in 2019? Notice from the table that the carrying value of the notes is 
$200 million in both 2012 and 2011, and that there is no mention of either a note 
discount or an effective interest rate that is different from the contractual fixed-rate 
of 6.70%. Apparently, Snap-On issued the notes at face value (or par) and thus 
received $200 million of cash. Had the notes been issued at a discount (premium) 
from face value, the carrying value of the notes would have increased (decreased) 
from 2011 to 2012.
EXHIBIT 11.13
Snap-On, Inc.
Note 9: Short-term and Long-term Debt
Short-term and long-term debt as of 2012 and 2011 year-end consisted of the following:
(Amounts in millions) 
2012 
2011
5.85% unsecured notes due March 2014 
$100.0 
$100.0
5.50% unsecured notes due 2017 
150.0 
150.0
4.25% unsecured notes due 2018 
250.0 
250.0
6.70% unsecured notes due 2019 
200.0 
200.0
6.125% unsecured notes due 2021 
250.0 
250.0
Other debt* 
25.6 
34.1
 
975.6 
984.1
Less: Short-term notes payable 
(5.2) 
(16.2)
 Total long-term debt 
$970.4 
$967.9
*Includes fair value adjustments related to interest rate swaps.
The annual maturities of Snap-On’s long-term debt and notes payable over the next five years are $5.2 million in 2013, $100.0 million 
in 2014, no maturities in 2015 or 2016, and $150.0 million in 2017.
 
Average notes payable outstanding were $14.1 million in 2012 and $15.8 million in 2011. The weighted-average interest rate on 
notes payable was 6.34% in 2012 and 6.14% in 2011. As of 2012 and 2011 year-end, the weighted-average interest rate on outstanding 
notes payable was 6.36% and 6.57%, respectively. No commercial paper was outstanding as of 2012 or 2011 year-end.
 
Snap-On has a five-year, $500 million multi-currency revolving credit facility that terminates on December 8, 2016; as of 2012 year-
end, no amounts were outstanding under this facility. Borrowings under the $500 million revolving credit facility bear interest at vary-
ing rates based on Snap-On’s then-current, long-term debt ratings. The $500 million revolving credit facility’s financial covenant 
requires that Snap-On maintain, as of each fiscal quarter end, either (i) a ratio of total debt to the sum of total debt plus equity (includ-
ing noncontrolling interests) of not greater than 0.60 to 1.00; or (ii) a ratio of total debt to the sum of net income plus interest expense, 
income taxes, depreciation, amortization, and other non-cash or extraordinary charges for the preceding four fiscal quarters then ended 
of not greater than 3.50 to 1.00. As of 2012 year-end the company’s actual ratios of 0.35 and 1.55, respectively, were both within the 
permitted ranges set forth in this financial covenant.
 
Snap-On also has a 364-day loan and servicing agreement that allows Snap-On to borrow up to $200 million (subject to borrowing 
base requirements) through the pledging of finance receivables under an asset-backed commercial paper conduit facility; the loan and 
servicing agreement expires on September 27, 2013 (unless earlier terminated or subsequently extended pursuant to the terms of the 
agreement). As of 2012 year-end, no amounts were outstanding under the loan and servicing agreement.
 
In addition to the financial covenant required by the $500 million multi-currency revolving credit facility discussed above, Snap-
On’s debt agreements and credit facilities, including the $200 million loan and servicing agreement, also contain certain usual and 
customary borrowing, affirmative, negative, and maintenance covenants. As of 2012 year-end, Snap-On was in compliance with all 
covenants of its debt agreements and credit facilities.

660 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
4. How much interest expense will be recorded in 2012 on the 6.70% unsecured notes 
due in 2019? Interest expense will be $13.4 million; that is, the 0.067 effective (and 
contractual) interest rate multiplied by the $200 million borrowed.
5. Does the company face any near-term cash flow problems as a consequence of its 
current borrowings? Snap-On faces debt principal payments of just $5.2 million in 2013. 
As indicated in the first paragraph of the note, another $100 million comes due in 2014 
(the 5.85% unsecured notes) but no principal payments are required in 2015 or 2016.
6. Does Snap-On have any untapped access to cash that could be used to help meet the 
2014 debt payment? The company has a $500 million multi-currency revolving credit 
facility, and none of this potential borrowing capacity has been tapped at 2012 year-end. 
In addition, Snap-On has another $200 million in unused debt capacity under a renewable 
loan and servicing commitment. In short, the company has substantial financial flexibility 
to address any cash flow shortages over the next two years.
7. Is Snap-On close to violating any debt covenants? Apparently not. The third paragraph of 
the financial statement note outlines a financial covenant contained in the revolving credit 
facility that specifies a maximum debt-to-capital (debt plus shareholders’ equity) ratio and 
a maximum debt-to-adjusted net income ratio. The company’s actual ratios were below the 
allowed maximums and thus within the permitted range of values. There is little mention of 
covenants for the company’s other debt instruments—and there surely are some—but they 
may be less restrictive than are those of its revolving credit line. Snap-On does say that it was 
in compliance at 2012 year-end with all covenants of its debt agreements and credit facilities.
EXERCISES
Akers Company sold bonds on July 1, 2014, with a face value of $100,000. These bonds 
are due in 10 years. The stated annual interest rate is 6% per year, payable semiannually on 
June 30 and December 31. These bonds were sold to yield 8%.
Required:
How much did these bonds sell for on July 1, 2014?
E11-1
Finding the issue price 
(LO 2)
AICPA
ADAPTED
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
E11-2
Determining market price 
 following a change in interest 
rates (LO 2)
By July 1, 2015, the market yield on the Akers Company bonds described in E11–1 had risen 
to 10%.
Required:
What was the bonds’ market price on July 1, 2015?
E11-3
Finding the discount 
at  issuance (LO 2)
On January 1, 2014, when the market interest rate was 14%, Luba Corporation issued bonds 
in the face amount of $500,000 with interest at 12% payable semiannually. The bonds mature 
on December 31, 2023.
Required:
Calculate the bond discount at issuance. How much of the discount should be amortized by 
the effective interest method on July 1, 2014?
AICPA
ADAPTED

 
Exercises 
661
On January 2, 2014, West Company issued 9% bonds in the amount of $500,000 that mature 
on December 31, 2023. The bonds were issued for $469,500 to yield 10%. Interest is payable 
annually on December 31. West uses the effective interest method of amortizing bond 
discounts.
Required:
In its June 30, 2014, balance sheet, what net amount should West report as bonds payable?
E11-4
Determining a bond’s balance 
sheet value (LO 2)
AICPA
ADAPTED
On February 1, 2012, Davis Corporation issued 12%, $1,000,000 par, 10-year bonds for 
$1,117,000. Davis reacquired all of these bonds at 102% of par, plus accrued interest, on May 1, 
2015, and retired them. The unamortized bond premium on that date was $78,000.
Required:
Before income taxes, what was Davis’s gain or loss on the bond extinguishment?
E11-5
Calculating gain or loss at 
early retirement (LO 4)
AICPA
ADAPTED
Webb Company has outstanding a 7% annual, 10-year, $100,000 face value bond that it had 
issued several years ago. It originally sold the bond to yield 6% annual interest. Webb uses the 
effective interest rate method to amortize the bond premium. On June 30, 2014, the outstand-
ing bond’s carrying amount was $105,000.
Required:
What amount of unamortized premium on the bond should Webb report in its June 30, 2015, 
balance sheet?
E11-6
Amortizing a premium 
(LO 2)
AICPA
ADAPTED
On January 1, 2014, 3Way Energy issued $200 million of 15-year, floating-rate debentures at 
par value. The debentures pay interest on June 30 and December 31 of each year. The floating 
interest rate is set equal to “LIBOR plus 6%” on January 1 of each year. The LIBOR was 6% 
when the bonds were issued and 8% on January 1, 2015.
Required:
1. How much cash interest did 3Way Energy pay on the debentures in 2014? How much 
will it pay in 2015?
2. How much interest expense did the company record on the debentures in 2014? How 
much will it record in 2015?
E11-9
Floating-rate debt (LO 3)
Brower Corporation owns a manufacturing plant in the country of Oust. On December 31, 
2014, the plant had a book value of $5,000,000 and an estimated fair value of $8,000,000. 
Oust’s government has clearly indicated that it will expropriate the plant during the coming 
year and will reimburse Brower for only 40% of the plant’s estimated fair value.
Required:
What journal entry (if any) should Brower make on December 31, 2014, to record the 
intended expropriation?
E11-7
Recording loss contingencies 
(LO 7)
AICPA
ADAPTED
Zero coupon bonds pay no interest—the only cash investors receive is the lump-sum principal 
payment at maturity. On January 1, 2014, The Ledge Inc. issued $250 million of zero coupon 
bonds at a market yield rate of 12%. The bonds mature in 20 years.
Required:
1. What was the January 1, 2014, issue price of these zero coupon bonds?
2. How much interest expense will The Ledge record on the bonds in 2014?
3. How much interest expense will The Ledge record on the bonds in 2015?
E11-8
Zero coupon bonds (LO 2)
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e

662 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
E11-10
Identifying incentives for early 
debt retirement  (LO 4)
On January 1, 2013, Roland Inc. issued $125 million of 8% bonds at par. The bonds pay inter-
est semiannually on June 30 and December 31 of each year, and they mature in 15 years. On 
December 31, 2014 (one day before the next interest payment is to be made), the bonds are 
trading at a market yield of 12% plus accrued interest.
Required:
1. Suppose that Roland repurchased the entire $125 million bonds for cash at the market 
price on December 31, 2014. Using a 40% corporate tax rate, how much gain or loss 
would the company record on this transaction?
2. Why might the company want to retire the debt early?
E11-11
Off-balance-sheet debt  
(LO 7)
Wood Company and Willie Inc. form a joint venture—Woodlie Partners—to manufacture and 
distribute agricultural pesticides. Wood and Willie each contribute $20 million cash and re-
ceive 50% of Woodlie’s common stock. Woodlie then borrows $200 million from a consor-
tium of banks and uses the money to build its manufacturing and distribution facilities. The 
loan is made on December 31, 2014, and is fully guaranteed by both Wood and Willie.
Required:
How much of the $200 million debt shows up on the December 31, 2014, balance sheet of 
Wood Company? Why? Would the same be true for Willie Inc.? Why or why not?
E11-12
Noninterest-bearing loan  
(LO 3)
McClelland Corporation agreed to purchase some landscaping equipment from Agri-Products 
for a cash price of $500,000. Before accepting delivery of the equipment, McClelland learned 
that the same equipment could be purchased from another dealer for $460,000. To avoid losing 
the sale, Agri-Products has offered McClelland a “no interest” payment plan—McClelland 
would pay $100,000 at delivery, $200,000 one year later, and the final $200,000 in two years.
Required:
1. McClelland would usually pay 9% annual interest on a loan of this type. What is the 
present value of the Agri-Products loan at the delivery date?
2. What journal entry would McClelland make if it accepts the deal and buys from 
Agri-Products?
3. What should McClelland do?
E11-13
Understanding GAAP 
hedges (LO 9)
Required:
1. Which of the following qualifies as a hedged item?
 
a. A company’s work-in-process inventory of unfinished washers, dryers, and refrigerators.
 
b. Credit card receivables at JCPenney.
 
c. Bushels of corn owned by the Farmers’ Cooperative.
 
d. Salaries payable to employees of Ford Motor Company.
 
e. A three-year note issued by General Motors and payable in U.S. dollars.
 
f. A three-year note issued by Chrysler and payable in euros.
2. Which of the following qualifies as a hedging instrument?
 
a. An electricity futures contract purchased by Alliant Energy, an electrical power company.
 
b. A crop insurance contract purchased by Farmers’ Cooperative that pays the co-op for 
crop losses from drought or flood.
 
c. An option to buy shares of common stock in Ford Motor Company.
 
d. An option to sell shares of common stock in General Motors.
 
e. A four-year lease for office space in downtown Toronto.

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
663
3. Which of the following qualifies as an eligible risk for hedge accounting?
 
a. Alliant Energy’s risk that summer demand for electricity may exceed the company’s 
power-generating capacity.
 
b. Ford Motor Company’s risk that not enough steel will be available in six months when 
the company must purchase steel to produce a new sports utility vehicle.
 
c. The risk to American Express that its members won’t pay their credit card bills.
 
d. The risk to Farmers’ Cooperative that corn mold will destroy its inventory of corn held 
in silos for sale next year.
 
e. The possibility of changes in the exchange rate of U.S. dollars for Mexican pesos for 
Coca-Cola Company, which has a major foreign investment in Mexico.
PROBLEMS / DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
Greg Miller wants to buy a new automobile. The dealer has the exact car Miller wants and has 
given him two payment options: pay (1) the full cash price of $19,326 today or (2) only $2,000 
down today and then make four more annual payments of $5,000 beginning one year from to-
day. Miller doesn’t have the cash needed to pay the car’s full price, but he does have enough for 
the down payment. He can also obtain an automobile loan from his bank at 5% interest per year.
Required:
1. Verify that the imputed interest rate on the dealer’s loan is 6%. That is, show that the 
present value of Miller’s payments equal $19,326 (rounded to the nearest dollar) when 
discounted at 6%.
2. Which payment option should Miller accept?
P11-1
Imputing interest (LO 3)
P11-2
Reporting bonds issued 
at a discount (LO 2)
On July 1, 2014, McVay Corporation issued $15 million of 10-year bonds with an 8% stated 
interest rate. The bonds pay interest semiannually on June 30 and December 31 of each year. 
The market rate of interest on July 1, 2014, for bonds of this type was 10%. McVay closes its 
books on December 31.
Required:
1. At what price were the bonds issued?
2. Using the effective interest method, prepare an amortization schedule showing interest 
expense, discount or premium amortization, and bond carrying value for each of the first 
four semiannual interest payment periods.
3. Prepare journal entries to record the first four semiannual interest payments.
4. How should the bonds be shown on McVay’s December 31, 2014, balance sheet and on 
its December 31, 2015, balance sheet?
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
P11-3
Reporting bonds issued 
at a premium (LO 2)
On January 1, 2014, Fleetwood Inc. issued bonds with a face amount of $25 million and a 
stated interest rate of 8%. The bonds mature in 10 years and pay interest semiannually on June 
30 and December 31 of each year. The market rate of interest on January 1, 2014, for bonds of 
this type was 6%. Fleetwood closes its books on December 31.
Required:
1. At what price were the bonds issued?
2. Using the effective interest method, prepare an amortization schedule showing interest 
expense, amortization, and bond carrying value for each of the first four semiannual 
interest payment periods.
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
(Continued on next page.)

664 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
3. Prepare journal entries to record the first four semiannual interest payments.
4. How would the bonds be shown on Fleetwood’s December 31, 2014, balance sheet and 
on its December 31, 2015, balance sheet?
P11-4
Analyzing installment note 
and imputed interest  
(LO 3)
On January 1, 2014, Newell Manufacturing purchased a new drill press that had a cash pur-
chase price of $6,340. Newell decided instead to pay on an installment basis. The installment 
contract calls for four annual payments of $2,000 each beginning in one year. Newell was not 
required to make an initial down payment for the drill press.
Required:
1. Verify that the imputed interest rate on the installment loan is 10%. That is, show that the 
present value of the payments Newell must make is $6,340 (rounded to the nearest dollar) 
when discounted at a 10% rate of interest.
2. What journal entry would Newell make on January 1, 2014, to record the drill press purchase?
3. How much interest expense would Newell record in 2014 for the installment loan? What 
would the loan balance be on January 1, 2015, after Newell made the first loan payment?
4. How much interest expense would Newell record in 2015 for the installment loan? What 
would the loan balance be on December 31, 2015—one day before Newell makes the 
second loan payment?
P11-6
Call options as investments  
(LO 8)
On July 1, 2014, Stan Getz, Inc., bought call option contracts for 500 shares of Selmer Manu-
facturing common stock. The contracts cost $200, expire on September 15, and have an exer-
cise price of $40 per share. The market price of Selmer’s stock that day was also $40 a share. 
On July 31, 2014, Selmer stock was trading at $38 a share, and the option contracts’ fair value 
was $125—that is, Getz could buy the identical $40 strike price contracts on July 31 for $125. 
P11-5
Understanding the fair value 
option (LO 5)
On January 1, 2014, Mason Manufacturing borrows $500,000 and uses the money to purchase 
corporate bonds for investment purposes. Interest rates were quite volatile that year and so 
were the fair values of Mason’s bond investment (an asset) and loan (a liability):
 
Fair Value
2014 
Bond Investment 
Loan
January 1 
$500,000 
$500,000
March 31 
450,000 
465,000
June 30 
480,000 
493,000
September 30 
510,000 
504,000
December 31 
485,000 
495,000
Required:
1. Mason is required to use fair value accounting for the bond investment. Prepare the journal 
entry to record the investment purchase on January 1, 2014, and the fair value adjustments 
required at the end of each quarter: March 31, June 30, September 30, and December 31.
2. Suppose that Mason uses conventional amortized cost accounting for the loan. The loan 
principal is due in five years. Ignore interest on the loan to simplify the problem. What 
will be the loan’s carrying value at the end of each quarter?
3. Suppose that instead Mason elects to use the GAAP fair value option permitted by FASB 
ASC Topic 825 for the loan. What dollar impact will this change have on reported profits 
each quarter?
4. Which accounting approach—amortized cost or fair value—do you believe Mason should 
use for the loan? Why?

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
665
On August 31, 2014, the market price of Selmer stock was $44 a share, and the fair value of the 
options contracts was $2,075.
Required:
1. Prepare the journal entry to record Getz’s purchase of call option contracts on July 1, 2014.
2. Prepare the journal entry to record the change in fair value of the option contracts on July 
31, 2014.
3. Prepare the journal entry to record the change in fair value of the option contracts on 
August 31, 2014.
4. Why are the option contracts worth so much more on August 31 ($2,075) than they were 
worth on July 31 ($125)?
5. What entry would Getz make to record exercising the options on September 15, 2014, 
when Selmer’s shares were trading at $46?
6. Suppose instead that Getz allowed the option contracts to expire on September 15, 2014, 
without exercising them. What entry would Getz then make?
P11-8
Sharp Pencil Lets Citigroup 
Declare a Profit (LO 4)
After more than a year of crippling losses and three bailouts 
from Washington, Citigroup, a troubled giant of American 
banking, said Friday that it had done something extraordinary: 
it made money.
 
But the headline number—a net profit of $1.6 billion for 
the first quarter—was not quite what it seemed. Behind that 
figure was some fuzzy math.
 
Like several other banks that reported surprisingly strong 
results this week, Citigroup used some creative accounting, all 
of it legal, to bolster its bottom line at a pivotal moment . . .
 
Citigroup posted its first profitable quarter in 18 months, 
in part because of unusually strong results from its trading 
operations. It also made progress in reducing expenses and 
improving its profit margins.
 
But the long-struggling company also employed several 
common accounting tactics—gimmicks, critics call them—to 
increase its reported earnings.
 
One of the maneuvers, widely used since the financial crisis 
erupted last spring, involves the way Citigroup accounted for 
the decline in the value of its own debt . . . This strategy added 
$2.7 billion to the company’s bottom line during the quarter, a 
figure that dwarfed Citigroup’s reported net income . . .
Source: Excerpt from E. Dash, “Sharp Pencil Lets Citigroup Declare a Profit,” 
The New York Times, April 18, 2009.
P11-7
Retiring debt early (LO 4)
On January 1, 2014, Tango-In-The-Night, Inc., issued $75 million of bonds with a 9% coupon 
interest rate. The bonds mature in 10 years and pay interest semiannually on June 30 and 
December 31 of each year. The market rate of interest on January 1, 2014, for bonds of this 
type was 11%. The company closes its books on December 31.
Required:
1. At what price were the bonds issued?
2. What is the book value of the bonds on January 1, 2016?
3. On January 1, 2016, the market interest rate for bonds of this type is 10%. What is the 
market value of the bonds on this date?
4. Suppose that the bonds were repurchased for cash on January 1, 2016, at the market price. If 
you ignore taxes, what journal entry would the company make to record the debt retirement?
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e

666 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
Required:
1. Suppose Citigroup had issued at par on January 1, 2005, $500 million of 10-year bonds 
with a fixed annual interest rate of 6% reflecting the company’s financial soundness at the 
time. Calculate the proceeds received by Citigroup, the interest expense recorded in 2005, 
and the bond carrying value on January 1, 2009. Assume cash interest payments are made 
on December 31 of each year.
2. Suppose the market interest rate had increased to 12% by January 1, 2009. Compute the 
market value of the bonds on that date.
3. At the time the news article above was published, Citigroup’s debt had lost value in the 
bond market because of investors’ concerns about the company’s ability to meet the 
required debt payments when due. Explain how this perceived increase in Citigroup’s 
credit risk translates into a decline in the market value of its bonds.
4. How did Citigroup account for the $2.7 billion decline in the value of its own debt?
5. Explain why the accounting treatment used by Citigroup and other banks was so 
controversial.
P11-9
Chalk Hill: Using an interest 
rate swap as a speculative 
 investment (LO 9)
Exhibit 11.12 describes Chalk Hill’s use of an interest rate swap to hedge its cash flow expo-
sure to interest rate risk from variable rate debt. The journal entries in the exhibit illustrate 
how special “hedge accounting” rules apply to the swap. Suppose instead that the swap did 
not qualify for special hedge accounting—but that all other aspects of the transaction remain 
as described in the exhibit.
Required:
Prepare the journal entries needed to account for the variable rate debt and swap transaction 
for January 1, 2014, through December 31, 2016.
P11-10
Hedging raw material price 
swings (LO 8)
SMALL FIRMS LOOK TO DERIVATIVES TRADING TO 
MANAGE COSTS
Karl Fowler isn’t a traditional publisher. His books, which 
chronicle major sporting events and teams, can weigh more 
than 90 pounds and go for as much as $4,000. So to control the 
costs of the raw materials Mr. Fowler needs to produce these 
hefty tomes, the entrepreneur is using an equally untraditional 
approach for small businesses: derivatives trading.
 
These sophisticated financial instruments—which allow 
investors to hedge risks and bet on fluctuations in anything 
from the weather to orange-juice prices—might not seem 
relevant to a small book publisher. But Mr. Fowler cut his 
teeth as a derivatives trader. So when he left the finance 
world in 2002 for book publishing, it was only natural for 
him to apply his specialty to help insulate his British firm, 
Kraken Group, from rising prices for raw materials like 
paper, ink, and silk. . . .
Source: Excerpt from “Small Firms Look to Derivatives Trading to Manage 
Costs,” The Wall Street Journal, May 29, 2007. Copyright ©2007 Dow Jones & 
Company, Inc. All rights reserved worldwide. Reprinted with permission.

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
667
Required:
1. One strategy used by Kraken Group is to buy pulp-paper futures on commodities exchanges. 
Paper prices can go up and down by more than 10% in a short period. When paper prices 
increase, Kraken’s operating profits fall. Explain how pulp-paper futures can be used to 
protect Kraken’s profits from harmful paper price increases.
2. How will the pulp-paper futures affect profits if paper prices instead decline?
3. Ink prices tend to be even more volatile than paper prices but cannot be hedged by 
exchange-traded futures. So, Mr. Fowler asked an ink supplier to set up a forward con-
tract for about half of the amount purchased each year. Explain how a forward contract 
can be used to protect Kraken’s profits from harmful ink price increases.
4. How will the forward contract affect profits if ink prices instead decline?
P11-11
Discount and premium 
 amortization (LO 2)
The following information appeared in the 2011 annual report of Rumours, Inc.:
Long-Term Debt
[Rumours, Inc. issued] $10 million, 10% coupon bonds on January 1, 2008, due on December 31, 2012. 
The prevailing market interest rate on January 1, 2008, was 12%, and the bonds pay interest on June 30 
and December 31 of each year.
 
On January 1, 2009, [Rumours issued] $10 million, 10% coupon bonds due on December 31, 2013. 
The prevailing market interest rate on January 1, 2009, was 8%, and the bonds pay interest on June 30 
and December 31 of each year. 
Required:
1. See the following (incomplete) table for each bond’s carrying value. Calculate the missing 
values.
 
Carrying Value
 
December 31, 2010 
December 31, 2011
10% bonds due in 2012 
$9,653,550 
?
10% bonds due in 2013 
? 
$10,362,950 
2. How much interest expense did Rumours record in 2011 on the bonds due in 2012?
3. How much interest expense did Rumours record in 2011 on the bonds due in 2013?
P11-12
Sears: Reading the financials  
(LO 1)
Information taken from a Sears, Roebuck and Company annual report follows.
 
December 31
Long-Term Debt ($ in millions) 
Year 2 
Year 1
7% debentures, $300 million face value, due Year 11, 
 effective rate $14.6% 
$   188.6 
$   182.7
Zero coupon bonds, $500 million face value, due 
 Year 8, effective rate 12.0% 
267.9 
239.2
Participating mortgages, $850 million face value, 
 due Year 5, effective rate 8.7%, collateralized by 
 Sears Tower and related properties 
834.5 
833.9
Various other long-term debt 
12,444.2 
16,329.2
 Total long-term debt 
$13,735.2 
$17,585.0

668 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
Required:
1. How much interest expense did the company record during Year 2 on the 7% debentures? 
How much of the original issue discount was amortized during Year 2?
2. How much interest expense did the company record during Year 2 on the zero coupon 
bonds?
3. Suppose that interest payments on the participating mortgages are made on December 31 
of each year. What journal entry did the company make in Year 2 to recognize interest 
expense on this debt?
4. How much cash interest did the company pay out during Year 2 on the 7% debentures and 
the zero coupon bonds?
P11-13
Hedging (LO 8)
There following excerpts are from the financial statement note on Derivative Instruments and 
Hedging Activities in Molson Coors Brewing Company’s 2009 annual report:
Cross Currency Swaps
Simultaneous with the September 22, 2005, U.S. private debt placement, we entered into a cross currency 
swap transaction for the entire USD $300 million issue amount and for the same maturity of September 
2010. In this transaction we exchanged our USD $300 million for a CAD $355.5 million obligation with 
a third party. The swaps also call for an exchange of fixed CAD interest payments for fixed USD interest 
receipts. We have designated this transaction as a hedge of the variability of the cash flows associated 
with the payment of interest and principal on the USD securities. Changes in the value of the transaction 
due to foreign exchange are recorded in earnings and are offset by a revaluation of the associated debt 
instrument. Changes in the value of the transaction due to interest rates are recorded to OCI.
Commodity Swaps
As of period end, we had financial commodity swap contracts in place to hedge certain future expected 
purchases of natural gas. Essentially, these contracts allow us to swap our floating exposure to natural gas 
prices for a fixed rate. These contracts have been designated as cash flow hedges of forecasted natural gas 
purchases. . . . These swaps [are used] to hedge forecasted purchases up to twenty-four months in advance.
MillerCoor’s LLC, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Molson Coors Brewing Company, said this 
about its derivative instruments and hedging activities:
The Company’s objective in managing its exposure to fluctuations in commodity prices is to reduce the 
volatility in its cash flows and earnings caused by unexpected adverse fluctuations in the commodity 
markets. To achieve this objective, the Company enters into futures contracts, swaps and purchased op-
tion collars. In general, maturity dates of the contracts coincide with market purchases of the commod-
ity. As of December 31, 2009, the Company had financial commodity swap and futures contracts in 
place to hedge certain future expected purchases of aluminum can sheet, aluminum cans, natural gas, 
and electricity. The Company also hedges the diesel fuel surcharge exposure that it subsidizes for its 
distributors. These contracts are either marked-to-market, with changes in fair value recognized in cost 
of goods sold, or have been designated as cash flow hedges of forecasted purchases, and recognized in 
other comprehensive income (loss).
Required:
1. What did Molson Coors accomplish by swapping its $300 million U.S. dollar-denominated 
debt for a $355.5 million Canadian-dollar obligation?
2. Why was the cross-currency swap designated as a cash flow hedge rather than a fair value 
hedge?
T  R  E   T   C    H
S

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
669
3. Why do some cross-currency swap’s fair value changes flow to earnings (through Cost of 
goods sold) while other fair value changes bypass earnings and flow to Other comprehen-
sive income?
4. What did the company accomplish with its financial commodity swap contract for 
natural gas?
5. Why was the natural gas commodity swap designated as a cash flow hedge rather than a 
fair value hedge?
6. What did the company accomplish with its commodity swaps and futures contracts for 
aluminum, natural gas, electricity, and diesel fuel surcharges?
7. Why do some fair value changes associated with these commodity swaps and futures 
contracts flow to earnings (through Cost of goods sold) while other fair value changes 
bypass earnings and flow to Other comprehensive income?
P11-14
Contingent losses and debt 
covenants (LO 7)
TROUBLE LOOMS FOR CHECKPOINT SYSTEMS
Shares of Checkpoint Systems, which makes electronic anti-
theft tags used by retailers, have dropped from 18 in April to 
12.50 lately, in part because of an unseasonably warm winter, 
which dampened apparel sales. But don’t expect the stock to 
rebound soon, say some pros: The stock may well keep tum-
bling because of an antitrust lawsuit that Checkpoint lost. . . .
 
In late May, a U.S. District Court in Pennsylvania as-
sessed damages of $26 million. . . . The verdict could put 
Checkpoint in violation of bank covenants on 1999 bank 
loans. Even if Checkpoint appeals and puts off paying dam-
ages, accountants may require it to acknowledge the potential 
damages in its financial statement. Therein lies the problem: 
It had borrowed $273.9 million from banks. Those loans have 
covenants that might be violated by putting new debt on its 
balance sheet. The covenants also require Checkpoint to have 
a net worth of $200 million. Its current net worth is $240 mil-
lion, and the damages it will have to pay will bring it below 
required levels.
Source: “Trouble Looms for Checkpoint Systems,” BusinessWeek, June 17, 2002.
Required:
1. When must U.S. firms record contingent losses and the related balance sheet liability?
2. What does IFRS say about when firms must record contingent provisions?
3. Here is what Checkpoint Systems said about its litigation loss contingency in a note to 
the 2001 financial statements released on March 28, 2002:
The Company is involved in certain legal and regulatory actions, all of which have arisen in the ordinary 
course of business. . . . Management does not believe that the ultimate resolution of such matters will 
have a material adverse effect on its consolidated results of operations or financial condition.
 
The Company is a defendant in a Civil Action No. 99-CV-577, served February 10,1999, in the 
United States District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania filed by Plaintiff, ID Security Sys-
tems Canada Inc. The suit alleges a variety of antitrust claims; claims related to unfair competition, in-
terference with a contract, and related matters. Plaintiff seeks damages of up to $90 million, before 
trebling, if an antitrust violation were to be determined. This matter is scheduled for a jury trial com-
mencing April 22, 2002. Management is of the opinion that the claims are baseless both in fact and in 

670 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
law, and intends to vigorously defend the suit. If, however, the final outcome of this litigation results in 
certain of the Plaintiff’s claims being upheld, the potential damages could be material to the Company’s 
consolidated results of operations or financial condition.
 
Based on the information provided in this note, does it appear as though Checkpoint Sys-
tems has already recognized a loss contingency related to this lawsuit? Why or why not?
4. How does the district court decision influence whether Checkpoint’s litigation contingency 
must be recorded?
5. Explain how recognition of the contingent liability will cause Checkpoint to violate its 
net worth covenant.
6. Is it likely that the banks will just waive the covenant violation if it occurs? (Hint: You 
may want to review the covenant violation discussion in Chapter 7.)
P11-15
Working backward from an 
amortization table (LO 2)
Clovis Company recently issued $500,000 (face value) bonds to finance a new construction 
project. The company’s chief accountant prepared the following bond amortization schedule:
 
Interest 
Semiannual 
Premium 
Net
Date 
Expense 
Payment 
Amortization 
Liability
 7/1/14 
 
 
 
$540,554
 12/31/14 
$21,622 
$25,000 
$(3,378) 
537,176
 6/30/15 
21,487 
25,000 
(3,513) 
533,663
 12/31/15 
21,347 
25,000 
(3,653) 
530,010
 6/30/16 
21,200 
25,000 
(3,800) 
526,210
 12/31/16 
21,048 
25,000 
(3,952) 
522,258
 6/30/17 
20,890 
25,000 
(4,110) 
518,148
 12/31/17 
20,726 
25,000 
(4,274) 
513,874
 6/30/18 
20,555 
25,000 
(4,445) 
509,429
 12/31/18 
20,377 
25,000 
(4,623) 
504,806
 6/30/19 
20,194 
25,000 
(4,806) 
500,000
Required:
1. Compute the discount or premium on the sale of the bonds, the semiannual coupon interest 
rate, and the semiannual effective interest rate.
2. The company’s vice president of finance wants any discount (or premium) at issuance of 
the bonds to be recorded immediately as a loss (or gain) at the issue date. Do you agree 
with this approach? Why or why not?
3. On December 31, 2016, the bonds’ net carrying value is $522,258. In present value terms, 
what does this amount represent?
4. Suppose that market interest rates were 6% semiannually on January 1, 2017, or 12.36% 
annually. [This 12.36% annual rate of interest is equal to the 6% semiannual rate, com-
pounded: 0.1236 5 (1.06 3 1.06) 2 1.00.] What is the bond’s market price on that date? 
Is the company better or worse off because of the interest rate change? Explain.
P11-16
Recording floating-rate 
debt (LO 3)
On January 1, 2014, Nicks Corporation issued $250 million of floating-rate debt. The debt 
carries a contractual interest rate of “LIBOR plus 5.5%,” which is reset annually on January 1 
of each year. The LIBOR rates on January 1, 2014, 2015, and 2016, were 6.5%, 7.0%, and 
5.5%, respectively.
Required:
1. Prepare a journal entry to record the issuance of the bonds on January 1, 2014, at par. 
What was the effective (or market) interest rate when the bonds were issued?

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
671
2. Prepare a journal entry to record interest expense for 2014, 2015, and 2016. Assume that 
interest is paid annually on December 31.
3. What is the market value of the debt at December 31, 2016, assuming Nicks Corporation’s 
credit risk has not changed.
P11-17
Unconditional purchase 
 obligations (LO 7)
The following information appeared in the 2002 annual report of Lyondell Petrochemical 
Company, a manufacturer of petrochemicals and refined petroleum products such as gasoline, 
heating oil, jet fuel, aromatics, and lubricants:
The Company is party to various unconditional purchase obligation contracts as a purchaser for products 
and services, principally for steam and power. At December 31, 2002, future minimum payments under 
these contracts with noncancelable contract terms in excess of one year and fixed minimum payments 
were as follows ($ in millions):
 
2003 
$  164
 
2004 
168
 
2005 
169
 
2006 
157
 
2007 
151
 
Thereafter 
1,749
Total minimum payments 
$2,558
Required:
1. Suppose that the company is obligated to purchase $349.8 million per year in 2008 
and each of the next four years for a total of $1,749. If Lyondell’s normal rate of inter-
est for a 10-year loan is 8%, what is the present value of the company’s purchase 
commitments?
2. The company’s 2002 balance sheet shows long-term debt of $3,926 million and share-
holders’ equity of $1,179 million. The unconditional purchase obligation is not shown 
on the balance sheet. What impact would including the present value of unconditional 
purchase obligations as part of long-term debt have on the company’s 2002 ratio of 
long-term debt to shareholders’ equity?
3. Why are unconditional purchase obligations an off-balance-sheet liability? Why might 
some companies prefer to keep the purchase commitment off the balance sheet?
P11-18
Loss contingencies (LO 7)
The following information appeared in the annual reports of Borden, Inc., Exxon Corporation, 
and Visa Inc.
Borden, Inc.
Accruals for environmental matters are recorded when it is probable that a liability has been in-
curred and the amount of the liability can be reasonably estimated. Environmental accruals are 
routinely reviewed on an interim basis as events and developments warrant and are subjected to a 
comprehensive review annually during the fiscal fourth quarter. The Company and the Combined 
Companies have each accrued approximately $26 million (including those costs related to legal 
proceedings) at December 31, 2000 and 1999, for probable environmental remediation and restora-
tion liabilities. This is management’s best estimate of these liabilities. Based on currently available 
information and analysis, the Company believes that it is reasonably possible that costs associated 
with such liabilities may exceed current reserves by amounts that may prove insignificant, or by 
amounts, in the aggregate, of up to approximately $16 million. [Excerpt from the company’s 2000 
annual report.]
T  R  E   T   C    H
S

672 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
Exxon Corporation
A number of lawsuits, including class actions, have been brought in various courts against Exxon Cor-
poration and certain of its subsidiaries relating to the release of crude oil from the tanker Exxon Valdez 
in 1989. Most of these lawsuits seek unspecified compensatory and punitive damages; several lawsuits 
seek damages in varying specified amounts. Certain of the lawsuits seek injunctive relief. The claims of 
many individuals have been dismissed or settled. Most of the remaining actions are scheduled for trial in 
federal court commencing May 2, 1994. Other actions will likely be tried in state court later in 1994. 
The cost to the corporation from these lawsuits is not possible to predict; however, it is believed that the 
final outcome will not have a materially adverse effect upon the corporation’s operations or financial 
condition. [Excerpt from the company’s 1993 annual report.]
Visa Inc.
Accrued litigation. The Company evaluates the likelihood of an unfavorable outcome in legal or regula-
tory proceedings to which it is a party and records a loss contingency when it is probable that a liability 
has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. These judgments are subjec-
tive, based on the status of such legal or regulatory proceedings, the merits of the Company’s defenses 
and consultation with corporate and external legal counsel. Actual outcomes of these legal and regulatory 
proceedings may differ materially from the Company’s estimates. Litigation accruals associated with 
settled obligations to be paid over periods longer than one year are recorded at the present value of future 
payment obligations. The obligation is accreted to its full payment value with the corresponding accretion 
charge included in interest expense on the consolidated statements of operations. The Company expenses 
legal costs as incurred in professional fees.
 
The Company recorded litigation provisions of $4.1 billion and $7 million in fiscal 2012 and 2011, 
respectively. The litigation accrual is an estimate and is based on management’s understanding of its 
 litigation profile, the specifics of each case, advice of counsel to the extent appropriate and management’s 
best estimate of incurred loss at the balance sheet date.
 
The following table summarizes the activity related to accrued litigation for the years ended Septem-
ber 30, 2012 and 2011:
(in millions) 
2012 
2011
Balance at October 1 
$   425 
$ 697
Provision for unsettled legal matters 
4,100 
—
Provision for settled legal matters 
— 
7
Reclassification of settled matters(1) 
— 
12
Interest accretion on settled matters 
1 
11
Payments on settled matters 
(140) 
(302)
Balance at September 30 
$4,386 
$ 425
(1) Reclassification of amount previously recorded in accrued liabilities.
 
For the quarter ended June 30, 2012, the Company recorded a litigation provision of $4.1 billion, 
which increased its total reserve for the covered litigation from $285 million to $4.4 billion, to reflect the 
class plaintiffs’ Settlement Agreement and the resolution of the Individual Plaintiffs’ claims. [Excerpt 
from the company’s 2012 annual report. Author Note: The Court granted preliminary approval of the 
Settlement Agreement on November 9, 2012.]
Required:
1. What is a loss contingency, and why is it disclosed in financial statements? Which of the 
preceding examples represents a recognized loss contingency?
2. Borden has a $26 million liability on its 2000 balance sheet for “probable environmental 
remediation and restoration.” But the company says actual remediation and restoration 

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
673
costs could be up to $16 million more than this amount. Why doesn’t Borden’s balance 
sheet liability include the additional $16 million?
3. Why doesn’t Exxon report a dollar amount for its litigation cases? Does the lack of a 
specific dollar amount in Exxon’s cases mean that stock analysts will just ignore the 
litigation when valuing the company? Why or why not?
4. In its 2002 annual report, Exxon (now ExxonMobil) had more to say about the Exxon 
Valdez incident:
[O]n September 24, 1996, the United States District Court for the District of Alaska entered a judg-
ment in the amount of $5.058 billion. The District Court awarded approximately $19.6 million in 
compensatory damages to plaintiffs, $38 million in prejudgment interest on the compensatory dam-
ages, and $5 billion in punitive damages. . . . The District Court stayed execution on the judgment 
pending appeal. . . . ExxonMobil appealed the judgment. On November 7, 2001, the United States 
Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit vacated the punitive damage award as being excessive under 
the Constitution and remanded the case to the District Court for it to determine the amount of the 
punitive damage award. . . . On December 6, 2002, the District Court reduced the punitive damages 
from $5 billion to $4 billion. . . .
 
Based on the information provided, when did Exxon first report a balance sheet liability 
for the Exxon Valdez litigation? What was the amount of that liability?
5. In October 2007, the U.S. Supreme Court agreed to decide whether Exxon should be 
required to pay $2.5 billion in punitive damages to oil spill victims. Explain how the 
Court’s willingness to hear the Exxon appeal affects the company’s accounting for this 
contingent liability.
6. Why does Visa Inc. sometimes record litigation accruals (loss contingency provisions) at 
the present value rather than the full amount to be paid? Explain the accounting purpose 
behind the $11 million item labeled “Interest accretion on settled matters” recorded in 2011.
7. Explain why Visa Inc. increased its accrued litigation liability $425 million to $4,386 mil-
lion in 2012.
P11-19
Debt-for-debt swaps 
(LO 10)
On January 1, 2004, Chain Corporation issued $5 million of 7% coupon bonds at par. The 
bonds mature in 20 years and pay interest semiannually on June 30 and December 31 of each 
year. On December 31, 2014, the market interest rate for bonds of similar risk was 14%, and 
the market value of Chain Corporation bonds (after the December 31 interest payment) was 
$3,146,052.
 
Although the company’s books are not yet closed for the year, a preliminary estimate 
shows net income to be $500,000. This amount is substantially below the $3 million manage-
ment had expected the company to earn. The company has long-term debt totaling $7.5 mil-
lion (including the $5 million bond issue) and shareholders’ equity of $12.5 million (including 
the $500,000 of estimated net income). This means the company’s long-term debt-to-equity 
ratio is 60%.
 
Unfortunately, a covenant in one of the company’s loan agreements requires a long-term debt-
to-equity ratio of 55% or less. Violating this covenant gives lenders the right to demand immedi-
ate repayment of the loan principal. Worse yet, a “cross default” provision in the $5 million bond 
makes it immediately due and payable if the company violates any of its lending agreements.
 
Because the company does not have the cash needed to repurchase the bonds, management 
is considering a debt-for-debt exchange in which the outstanding 7% bonds would be replaced 
by new 14% bonds with a face amount of $3.2 million. The interest rate on the new bonds is 
equal to the market interest rate.
T  R  E   T   C    H
S

674 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
Required:
1. Prepare a journal entry to record the swap on December 31, 2014. (Any gain or loss to the 
company would be taxed at 35%, and the tax should be included in your entry.)
2. What would the company’s debt-to-equity ratio be after the swap?
3. What impact would the transaction have on net income for the year?
4. How else could management have avoided violation of the loan covenant?
5. IFRS guidance on the recognition of extinguishment gains in debt-for-debt swap transac-
tions is more restrictive than U.S. GAAP. What additional factors must be considered in 
determining if Chain Corporation should recognize the swap gain under IFRS?
P11-20
Zero coupon bonds (LO 2)
The following information was taken from the financial statements of ALZA Corporation.
Note 6: Borrowings
On July 28, 2000, ALZA completed a private offering of the 3% Zero Coupon Convertible Subordinated 
Debentures, which were issued at a price of $551.26 per $1,000 principal amount at maturity. At Decem-
ber 29, 2002, the outstanding 3% Debentures had a total principal amount at maturity of $1.0 billion with 
a yield to maturity of 3% per annum, computed on a semiannual bond equivalent basis. . . . At December 
29, 2002, the fair value based on quoted market value of the 3% Debentures was $813 million. . . .
Required:
1. ALZA issued zero coupon debentures with a total maturity value of $1.0 billion at a price 
of $551.26 per $1,000 principal amount at maturity. How much cash did the company 
receive when it issued these debentures?
2. The debentures mature in 20 years from the date of issuance, but no interest payments 
are made until maturity. Show that the issue price of $551.26 gives investors a 3% yield 
to maturity.
3. Suppose that the debentures were issued on January 1, 2000, instead of July 28, 2000. 
Reproduce the journal entries ALZA would record in 2000 for the debentures. For each 
cash entry, indicate whether the cash increase or decrease represents an operating, invest-
ing, or financing activity.
4. Explain why the debentures have a market value of $813 million at the end of 2002, 
almost $300 million more than the 2000 issue price.
T  R  E   T   C    H
S
P11-21
Comprehensive problem on 
bond premium (LO 2)
On July 1, 2014, LekTech Corporation issued $20 million of 12%, 20-year bonds. Interest on 
the bonds is paid semiannually on December 31 and June 30 of each year, and the bonds were 
issued at a market interest rate of 8%.
Required:
1. Compute the bonds’ issue price on July 1, 2014.
2. Prepare an amortization schedule that shows interest expense, premium or discount amor-
tization, bond carrying value, and cash interest payment for each interest payment period 
through June 30, 2019.
3. Prepare the journal entries to record all interest expense and all cash interest payments for 
2015.
4. A new employee in the accounting group at LekTech has asked you to explain why interest 
expense on the bonds changes each year. Write a two-paragraph memo that helps the 
employee understand interest recognition for these bonds.
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
675
5. LekTech used the bonds’ proceeds to construct a new manufacturing facility near Water-
loo, Iowa. The company will make taillight lenses for tractors manufactured by Deere & 
Company at its Waterloo plant. In fact, Deere has signed a letter guaranteeing payment of 
the LekTech bonds. How is the guarantee shown in Deere’s financial statements?
6. On July 1, 2019, the company exercised a call provision in the debenture agreement and 
redeemed 40% of the bonds at 105% of par. What journal entry did the company make to 
record this partial redemption?
7. The market yield for the bonds on July 1, 2019, was 10%. How much less did the com-
pany pay to retire bonds using the call provision than it would have paid using an open 
market purchase?
P11-22
Comprehensive problem on 
long-term debt disclosures 
(LO 1)
The following information was taken from the 2012 financial statements of Dentsply Interna-
tional, a company that develops, manufactures, and markets medical equipment and supplies 
for the global dental market.
 
The Company has a $500.0 million five-year revolving credit agreement with participation from 16 
banks, which expires in July 2016. The revolving credit agreement contains a number of covenants and 
two financial ratios, which the Company is required to satisfy. The most restrictive of these covenants 
pertain to asset dispositions and prescribed ratios of indebtedness to total capital and operating income 
excluding depreciation and amortization to interest expense. Any breach of any such covenants or restric-
tions would result in a default under the existing borrowing documentation that would permit the lenders 
to declare all borrowings under such documentation to be immediately due and payable and, through 
cross default provisions, would entitle the Company’s other lenders to accelerate their loans. At December 
31, 2012, the Company was in compliance with these covenants.
Long-Term Debt
Long-term debt consisted of the following
 
December 31,
 
2012 
2011
 
Principal 
Interest 
Principal 
Interest
(in thousands) 
Balance 
Rate 
Balance 
Rate
Floating rate senior notes $250 million 
 due August 2013 
$  250,000 
1.8% 
$  250,000 
2.0%
Term loan Japanese yen denominated 
 expiring September 2014 
144,681 
1.1% 
162,956 
1.1%
Private placement notes $250 million 
 expiring March 2016 
254,560 
4.1% 
254,512 
4.1%
Fixed rate senior notes $300 million 
 due August 2016 
299,689 
2.8% 
299,603 
2.8%
Term loan Swiss francs denominated 
 expiring September 2016 
71,027 
1.2% 
69,197 
1.2%
Fixed rate senior notes $450 million 
 due August 2021 
448,653 
4.1% 
448,497 
4.1%
Other borrowings, various currencies 
 and rates 
4,303 
 
6,654
 
$1,472,913 
 
$1,491,419
Less: Current portion
(included in notes payable and current 
 portion of long-term debt) 
250,878 
 
1,409
Long-term portion 
$1,222,035 
 
$1,490,010

676 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
 
The term loans and private placement notes (“PPN”) contain certain affirmative and negative cove-
nants relating to the Company’s operations and financial condition. At December 31, 2012, the Company 
was in compliance with all debt covenants.
 
At December 31, 2012, the Company had total unused lines of credit, including lines available under 
its short-term arrangements and revolving credit agreement, of $527.4 million.
 
The table below reflects the contractual maturity dates of the various borrowings at December 31, 
2012 (in thousands):
Required:
1. Exhibit 11.10 in this chapter reproduces excerpts from Dentsply’s 2009 financial state-
ment note for long-term debt. How has the amount and composition of the company’s 
long-term borrowing changed between 2009 and 2012?
2. How have the interest rates charged on Dentsply’s long-term debt changed between 2009 
and 2012? Explain why (or why not) these changes are indicative of Dentsply’s decreased 
credit risk.
3. Comment on the future cash flow implications of the change between 2009 and 2012 in 
the contractual maturity dates of Dentsply’s various borrowings.
4. Calculate the weighted-average rate of interest on the company’s long-term debt as of 
December 31, 2012. You should ignore “Other borrowings, various currencies and rates.”
5. Based on your answer to requirement 4, estimate the amount of interest expense Dentsply 
will record in 2013.
6. How much cash will the company pay out to debt holders in 2013?
2013 
$   250,878
2014 
221,865
2015 
102,230
2016 
448,440
2017 
442
2018 and Beyond 
449,058
 
$1,472,913
P11-23
Hedging a purchase 
 commitment (LO 9)
Silverado Inc. buys titanium from a supplier that requires a six-month firm commitment on all 
purchases. On January 1, 2014, Silverado signs a contract with the supplier to purchase 10,000 
pounds of titanium at the current forward rate of $310 per pound with settlement on June 30, 
2014. However, Silverado wants to actually pay the June 30 market price for titanium. To 
achieve this goal, the company enters into a forward contract to sell 10,000 pounds of titanium 
at the current forward price of $310 per unit. The firm commitment contract and the forward 
contract both have zero value at inception. Titanium spot prices and the contract fair values are:
 
Contract Fair Value
 
 
Forward
 
Spot Price 
Price (June 30) 
Forward 
Firm Commitment
January 1, 2014 
$300 
$310 
–0– 
–0–
March 31, 2014 
292 
297 
$128,079 
($128,079)
June 30, 2014 
285 
N.A. 
250,000 
(250,000)
Required:
1. Why did Silverado hedge its firm commitment with the supplier? After the fact, was it a 
good idea to do so?
2. What journal entries were made when the two contracts are signed on January 1, 2014?

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
677
3. Silverado designated the forward contract as a fair value hedge of its future titanium 
purchase. What journal entries were made on March 31, 2014?
4. What journal entries were made on June 30, 2014, when the contracts are settled and 
Silverado pays for the titanium?
P11-24
Hedging a planned sale 
(LO 9)
Newton Grains plans to sell 100,000 bushels of corn from its current inventory in March 
2015. The company paid $1 million for the corn during the fall 2014 harvest season. On 
October 1, 2014, Newton writes a forward contract to sell 100,000 bushels of corn on March 
15, 2015, for $1,100,000. The forward contract has zero value at inception. On December 31, 
2014, the March forward price for corn is $1,050,000 and the forward contract has a fair value 
of $95,000. On March 15, 2015, Newton sells the corn for $1,075,000 and settles the forward 
contract (now valued at $25,000).
Required:
1. Why did Newton hedge its planned sale of corn? Was it a good idea to do so?
2. Newton designated the forward contract as a cash flow hedge of its exposure to corn price 
fluctuations. What journal entries were made when the forward contract was signed on 
October 1, 2014?
3. What journal entries were made on December 31, 2014?
4. What journal entries were made on March 15, 2015, when the forward contract was 
settled and Newton sold the corn?
5. How would your original journal entries change if the forward contract covered only 
50,000 bushels of corn? (Contract fair values would then have been $47,500 on 
December 31, 2014, and $12,500 on March 15, 2015.)
P11-25
Using interest rate swap as a 
cash flow hedge (LO 9)
Basie Business Forms borrowed $5 million on July 1, 2014, from First Kansas City Bank. The 
loan required annual interest payments at the LIBOR rate, reset annually each June 30. The 
loan principal is due in five years. The LIBOR rate for the first year is 6.0%.
 
Basie decided to swap its variable interest payments for fixed interest payments of 6.0%. 
Basie will pay 6.0% interest to the swap counterparty—Quincy Bank & Trust—and receive 
LIBOR payments based on a $5 million notional amount for the entire five-year term of the 
original loan. The swap has no value at its inception on July 1, 2014.
 
Basie designates the swap as a hedge of its cash flow exposure to interest rate risk on its 
variable rate debt. The hedge is fully effective because the key terms of the loan and swap are 
identical. The variable rate was reset to 6.25% on June 30, 2015, and to 5.75% on June 30, 
2016. Basie uses a June 30 fiscal year-end and records interest expense annually.
Required:
1. How much net cash settlement will Basie pay to (or receive from) Quincy Bank & Trust 
on July 1, 2015? On July 1, 2016?
2. How much cash will Basie pay to First Kansas City Bank on July 1, 2015? On July 1, 2016?
3. On June 30, 2015, the swap has a fair value of $40,000 based on dealer quotes. Prepare 
journal entries to record Basie’s cash interest payments and receipts as well as interest 
expense for the year ended June 30, 2015.
4. On June 30, 2016, the swap has a fair value of $(28,000), a negative amount. Prepare 
journal entries to record Basie’s cash interest payments and receipts as well as interest 
expense for the year ended June 30, 2016.
T  R  E   T   C    H
S

678 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
P11-26
Using interest rate swap as a 
fair value hedge (LO 9)
On January 1, 2014, Four Brothers Manufacturing borrowed $10 million from Guiffrie Bank 
by signing a three-year, 8.0% fixed-rate note. The note calls for interest to be paid annually on 
December 31. The company then entered into an interest rate swap agreement with Herman 
Bank. The agreement is that Four Brothers will receive from Herman a fixed-rate interest pay-
ment of 8.0% based on a $10 million notional amount each December 31 for three years. Four 
Brothers will pay Herman a variable LIBOR rate reset every December 31. The LIBOR rate 
for the first year is 8.0%.
 
Four Brothers designates the swap as a hedge of its fair value exposure to interest rate risk 
on its fixed-rate note. The hedge is fully effective because the key terms of the note and swap 
are identical. The variable rate was reset to 8.25% on December 31, 2014, and to 7.75% on 
December 31, 2015. Four Brothers uses a December 31 year-end and records interest expense 
annually.
Required:
1. How much net cash settlement will Four Brothers pay to (or receive from) Herman Bank 
on December 31, 2014? On December 31, 2015?
2. How much cash will Four Brothers pay to Guiffrie Bank on December 31, 2014? On 
December 31, 2015?
3. On December 31, 2014, the swap has a fair value of $(45,000), a negative amount, and 
the fair value of the $10 million note was $9,955,000. Prepare journal entries to record 
Four Brothers’ cash interest payments and receipts as well as interest expense for the year 
ended December 31, 2014.
4. On December 31, 2015, the swap has a fair value of $23,000, and the fair value of the 
$10 million note was $10,023,000. Prepare journal entries to record Four Brothers’ 
cash interest payments and receipts as well as interest expense for the year ended 
December 31, 2015.
T  R  E   T   C    H
S
P11-27
Determining hedge 
 effectiveness (LO 9)
Recall the Rombaurer Metals example in the chapter: On October 5, 2014, Rombaurer has 
10 million pounds of copper inventory on hand at an average cost of $0.65 a pound. The 
spot price for copper is $0.90 a pound. Instead of selling copper now, Rombaurer decides 
to hold the inventory until February 2015 when management believes the price will return 
to a normal level of $0.95 a pound. To hedge its position, Rombaurer sells futures con-
tracts at $0.95 for February delivery. Spot and futures prices over the next several months 
are as follows:
T  R  E   T   C    H
S
On February 26, 2015, Rombaurer sells its copper on the spot market for $0.94 a pound and 
cancels the futures contracts.
 
The chapter described how “hedge accounting” rules are used when Rombaurer hedges its 
entire 10 million pounds of copper inventory.
 
NYMEX Copper Prices
 
 
February 2012
 
Spot Price 
Futures Price
October 5, 2014 
$0.90 
$0.95
December 31, 2014 
0.85 
0.91
February 26, 2015 
0.94 
0.94

 
Cases 
679
Required:
1. Suppose that Rombaurer sells futures contracts for only 5 million pounds of copper. 
(Management had decided that it is prudent to hedge only half of the company’s economic 
exposure.) The margin requirement on these contracts is $140,000. Because the futures 
contracts are now “ineffective” in hedging the company’s entire fair value exposure to 
copper price fluctuations, Rombaurer cannot use hedge accounting. Prepare all journal 
entries needed to account for the futures contracts and sale of copper from October 5, 
2014, through February 26, 2015.
2. Now assume that Rombaurer designates these futures contracts as a “fully effective” 
hedge of its risk exposure for 5 million pounds of copper inventory. (The remaining 
5 million pounds of inventory is not being hedged.) Rombaurer can now use hedge 
accounting for the futures contracts. Prepare all journal entries needed to account 
for the futures contracts and sale of copper from October 5, 2014, through February 26, 
2015.
3. What impact does changing the definition of the hedged item (10 million pounds of 
copper inventory versus 5 million pounds) have on the company’s financial statements 
for 2014 and 2015?
CASES
As a senior partner at one of the nation’s largest public accounting firms, you serve as chair-
person of the firm’s financial reporting policy committee. You are also the firm’s chief spokes-
person on financial reporting matters that come before the FASB and the Securities and 
Exchange Commission. The year is 1997.
 
Two new debt securities have caught the attention of your committee, the FASB, the SEC, 
and the Treasury Department. Dresser Industries recently completed a $200 million offering 
of so-called century bonds that mature in 2096, or in 100 years. Safra Republic Holdings an-
nounced that in October it will issue $250 million of millennium bonds that mature in 2997, 
or in 1,000 years. Neither company is a client of your firm.
C11-1
Century and beyond bonds 
(LO 1, 2)
SAFRA REPUBLIC $250 MILLION 1000-YEAR 
SUBORDINATED DEBENTURES RATED 
‘AA-’ BY FITCH
Safra Republic Holdings S.A.’s (SRH) $250 million issue of 
7.125% subordinated debentures, due October 15, 2997, is 
rated ‘AA-’ by Fitch. The rating reflects superior risk-based 
capital ratios, indicative of the modest amount of assets repre-
sented by loans; sizable liquidity; comfortable funding from a 
growing client base; and a management organization seasoned 
in relationships with high net worth clients in over 80 coun-
tries. SRH’s 49% ownership by the Republic National Bank of 
New York provides important support by a risk averse U.S. 
banking institution, whose fundamentals garner a ‘AA1’ se-
nior debt rating.
 
SRH is a Luxembourg-based holding company, operated 
through six wholly owned banking subsidiaries. These units 
provide international private banking, asset management and 
other related investment services to over 22,000 high net worth 
individuals, partnerships and closely held corporations. Client 
assets at SRH, both on- and off-balance sheet, stood at $29 bil-
lion at the end of September, compared to $20.8 billion at the 
like date in 1996.
Source: “Safra Republic $250 Million 1000-Year Subordinated Debentures 
Rated ‘AA–’ by Fitch,” PR Newswire, October 16, 1997.

680 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
Required:
1. Suppose that Dresser Industries issued its $200 million century bonds on January 1, 1996, 
at a market yield of 7.5%, the same as the stated interest rate. To keep things easy, also 
assume that the bonds pay interest just once a year, on December 31. Compute the bonds’ 
issue price. How much of that price comes from the present value of the interest payments, 
and how much comes from the promised principal payment?
2. In present value terms, how much of a tax savings does the company obtain from its 
century bond? (Use a 40% effective tax rate.) How much of a tax savings would be lost 
if only the first 40 years of interest deductions were allowed?
3. Suppose that Dresser Industries’ century bonds were issued with a stated rate of 7.5% 
when the market yield rate was 8.5%. What would the issue price be? How about if the 
market yield were 6.5%?
4. In October 2011, The Ohio State University sold $500 million worth of 100-year bonds, 
becoming the first public university to issue a so-called “century” bond. The bonds were 
priced to yield 4.849% which was 1.70 percentage points over 30-year Treasury rates. 
Ohio State was established in 1870, has 64,077 enrolled students, and a campus of more 
than 1,700 acres with 457 buildings. Two private universities, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology (MIT) and the University of Southern California, had issued century bonds 
earlier that year. Typically, universities such as Ohio State issue 30-year tax-free bonds 
with fixed or floating interest rates. Public and private universities are tax-exempt institu-
tions but the income from century bonds is taxable to the buyer. What are the likely eco-
nomic advantages to Ohio State of issuing century bonds?
5. Suppose that Safra Republic issued its $250 million of millennium bonds on January 1, 
1998, at a market yield of 7.125%, the same as the stated interest rate. Assume that the 
bonds pay interest just once a year, on December 31. What is the issue price of these 
bonds, and how much of that price comes from the present value of interest payments?
6. Suppose that Safra Republic were a U.S. company paying taxes at a 40% rate. In present 
value terms, how much of a tax savings does the company receive from its millennium 
bonds? How much of a tax savings would be lost if only the first 40 years of interest 
deductions were allowed?
7. Suppose that the millennium bonds were issued with a 7.125% stated interest rate when 
the market yield rate was 8.125%. What would the issue price be? How about if the 
 market yield were 6.125%?
FIRM TO ISSUE $200 MILLION IN BONDS AS 
100-YEAR PAPER
Dresser Industries Inc. said it will join the ranks of the small 
number of companies that have century bonds with the sale of 
$200 million of debentures due 2096. The oil-field services 
company said the sale, with Salomon Brothers Inc. as lead un-
derwriter, is expected to occur this week. Proceeds will be 
used for general corporate purposes, including repayment of 
commercial paper outstanding and share repurchases.
 
The issue hasn’t been priced, but analysts expect the rate to 
be about 7.5%. Only nine companies have issued 100-year pa-
per since 1993, when Walt Disney Co. began the modern trend; 
no such bonds had been sold for more than 20 years. Earlier this 
year, the U.S. Treasury Department proposed that companies be 
prohibited from deducting interest on bonds with a maturity of 
more than 40 years, but Congress hasn’t voted on the matter.
Source: “Firm to Issue $200 Million in Bonds as 100-Year Paper,” The Wall 
Street Journal, August 7, 1996. Copyright ©1996 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. 
All rights reserved worldwide. Reprinted with permission.

 
Cases 
681
8. In early 1997, the U.S. Treasury Department proposed eliminating the corporate tax de-
duction for interest paid on the last 60 years of century bonds (see “Is the Party Over for 
100-Year Bonds?” The Wall Street Journal, February 4, 1997). The Treasury argued that 
100-year debt should be treated the same as equity because the bonds are more like per-
manent capital. Since stock dividend payments can’t be deducted from taxable corporate 
earnings, the Treasury said, interest payments on the last 60 years of 100-year debt 
shouldn’t be deducted either. Why would the Treasury department be opposed to unlim-
ited interest deductions on century and millennium bonds? According to U.S. GAAP, are 
these securities debt or equity?
C11-2
Tuesday Morning Corpora-
tion: Interpreting long-term 
debt disclosures (LO 6)
Tuesday Morning Corporation operates a chain of discount retail stores. The company pur-
chases closeout merchandise at prices generally ranging from 10% to 50% of the normal 
wholesale price and sells the merchandise at prices that are 50% to 80% lower than retail 
prices generally charged by department and specialty stores.
 
The following is information taken from a recent Tuesday Morning annual report.
Note 5: Mortgages on Property, Plant, and Equipment
($ in thousands) 
Year 2 
Year 1
Industrial development bond, payable in quarterly 
 installments of $108 plus interest at 91.656% of 
 prime (not to exceed 15%), maturing March 31, Year 6 
$1,401 
$1,834
Payable to bank, payable in quarterly installments of $104 
 plus interest at LIBOR plus 2.50%, maturing September 30,
 Year 5, with remaining principal due at that time 
4,504 
4,920
Payable to bank, payable in quarterly installments of $112
 plus interest at LIBOR plus 2.50% through October 15,
 Year 2, with the remaining principal and interest due
 April 30, Year 3 
1,794 
2,243
In connection with these mortgages, the Company is required to maintain minimum net worth and com-
ply with other financial covenants, including a restriction limiting loans to officers to less than 
$2,000,000. At December 31, Year 2, the Company is in compliance with these covenants.
 
The $1,794,000 note payable to bank due on April 30, Year 3, is classified as a current liability at 
December 31, Year 2. The aggregate maturities of mortgages are as follows ($ in thousands):
Year 
Amount
Year 3 
$2,747
Year 4 
849
Year 5 
4,003
Year 6 
100
Consolidated Balance Sheet
($ in thousands) 
Year 2 
Year 1
Current liabilities: 
 
 Current installments on mortgages 
$ 2,747 
$ 1,402
 Current installments on capital lease obligation 
607 
–0–
 Accounts payable 
12,916 
15,859
 Accrued sales tax 
1,574 
1,760
 Other accrued expenses 
1,945 
3,118
 Deferred income taxes 
303 
146
 Due to officer 
–0– 
599
 Income taxes payable 
988 
–0–
  Total current liabilities 
$21,080 
$22,884

682 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
Required:
1. What was the current portion of Tuesday Morning’s mortgage payable at the end of Year 1?
2. How much did Tuesday Morning pay in cash to reduce its mortgage payable during Year 2?
3. Explain the difference between your answer to requirement 1 and your answer to require-
ment 2.
4. What are the components of the current portion of the mortgage payable as of the end of 
Year 2?
5. Assume that the next quarterly installment on the industrial development bond is due on 
March 31, Year 3. Prepare a journal entry to record the installment payment and any 
interest. Assume that the effective interest rate for the bond is 14% per year.
6. The company has a mortgage note payable for $1,794,000 that comes due on April 30, 
Year 3. Suppose that this note is paid by the signing of a new 14% note for the amount 
due. Prepare the April 30, Year 3, journal entry to record this refinancing of the old note.
7. Instead of refinancing the note, suppose the company pays the principal along with any 
remaining interest on April 30, Year 3. Prepare a journal entry to record this cash payment.
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
($ in thousands) 
Year 2 
Year 1
Cash flows from financing activities: 
 
 Net increase (decrease) in notes payable 
$   –0– 
$(3,500)
 Principal payments on mortgages 
(1,298) 
(1,194)
 Principal payments under capital lease obligation 
(214) 
–0–
 Proceeds from common stock offering 
–0– 
–0–
 Proceeds from exercise of common stock options 
255 
145
 Repurchase of common stock 
–0– 
(3,383)
  Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities 
$(1,257) 
$(7,932)
C11-3
Groupe Casino: Determining 
whether it is debt or  equity 
(LO 10)
Groupe Casino is a French multinational company that operates more than 9,000 multiformat 
retail stores—hypermarkets, supermarkets, discount stores, convenience stores, and restaurants—
throughout the world. In January 2005, Casino issued €600 million of undated deeply subor-
dinated fixed-to-CMS-floating-rate notes at a price of 101. The offering circular described 
certain aspects of the notes as follows:
Deeply Subordinated Obligations
The Notes are deeply subordinated obligations of the Issuer and are the most junior debt instruments of 
the Issuer, subordinated to and ranking behind the claims of all other unsubordinated and subordinated 
creditors of the Issuer.
Undated Securities
The Notes are undated securities, with no specified maturity date. The Issuer is under no obligation 
to redeem the Notes at any time. The Noteholders have no right to require redemption of the Notes, 
 except if a judgment is issued for the judicial liquidation (liquidation judiciaire) of the Issuer or, 
 following an order of redressement judiciaire, the sale of the whole of the business (cession totale 
de l’enterprise) of the Issuer, or in the event of the voluntary dissolution of the Issuer or if the Issuer 
is liquidated for any other reason.
Interest Interruption
The Issuer has the option to decide not to pay interest on the Notes on any Interest Payment Date if, 
during the 12-months period preceding such Interest Payment Date, it has not paid or declared any div-
idend on its Equity Securities and provided it has not made, during any such period, any payments on 
(including inter alia by way of redemption, purchase or redemption of) any Equity Securities. The 
interest payment provisions of the Notes are non-cumulative. Accordingly, any interest not paid on 

 
Cases 
683
the Notes as a result of the valid exercise by the Issuer of such option will be forfeited and accordingly 
will no longer be due and payable by the Issuer.
No Voting Rights
The Notes are nonvoting.
No Prior Market for the Notes; Resale Restrictions
There is no existing market for the Notes, and there can be no assurance that any market will develop 
for the Notes or that holders of the Notes will be able to sell their Notes in the secondary market.
Interest Rate
The coupon on the Notes for each Floating Rate Interest Period is linked to the 10-year Constant Matu-
rity Swap (CMS 10), the annual rate for euro interest rate swap transactions with a maturity of 10 years. 
The CMS 10 is a variable rate and as such is not pre-defined for the lifespan of the Notes; conversely it 
allows investors to follow market changes with an instrument reflecting changes in the levels of yields. 
Higher rates mean a higher coupon and lower rates mean a lower coupon.
 
In summary, the floating-rate notes:
• Are Casino’s undated perpetual obligations in that they have no maturity date and the 
lender (investor) cannot force redemption.
• Pay interest at fixed and floating rates, but Casino may “interrupt” interest payments at 
any time and for any reason and the lender has no claim to interrupted interest payments.
• Do not confer voting rights to the investor, nor are they convertible into shares of common 
or preferred stock of Casino or any other company.
Required:
1. Casino management intends to treat the notes as equity instruments for financial reporting 
purposes in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). What 
specific IFRS guidance helps accountants and auditors distinguish between liabilities and 
equities?
2. Do you concur with management’s decision to treat the notes as equity instruments? Why?
3. Suppose the notes are issued on January 1, 2005, that the first year’s interest rate is 5%, 
and that interest is paid on December 31 of each year. Prepare the journal entries Casino 
would use to record (a) issuance of the notes on January 1, 2005, (b) interest expense for 
the year, and (c) the cash interest payment on December 31, 2005. Income tax consider-
ations may be ignored. Use an 8% interest rate for these journal entries.
4. The notes were issued at a price of 101, which is a slight premium over the face value. 
What “red flags” does this issue price raise?
C11-4
Kellogg Company’s organic 
corn hedge (LO 9)
The cereal division of Kellogg Company intends to test market next year an organic corn-
based cereal to be called NutriFlakesTR. The business plan calls for production to begin in late 
May 2015, with retail store delivery starting in early June. Annie Gleason, the marketing 
brand manager with overall responsibility for the product, has identified 15 metropolitan areas 
in the upper Midwest of the United States where organic foods already capture a large share 
of the consumer wallet.
 
NutriFlakesTR will be manufactured and distributed using existing technologies and facili-
ties. Kellogg’s has entered into long-term contracts for organic corn with producers located in 
close proximity to these manufacturing sites. The contracts specify the amount (in bushels) of 
organic corn to be delivered at each site monthly from May through December 2015, when 
the market test ends. The price to be paid by Kellogg’s is not contractually specified, but will 
instead be determined by market conditions at the time of delivery.

684 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
 
Kellogg’s is not the first company to offer consumers an organic corn-based breakfast ce-
real. Organic corn flake cereals available currently in the designated test markets sell at the 
retail level for between $10 and $14 per 11 oz. box. The NutriFlakesTR business plan calls for 
the retailer to pay Kellogg’s $9 for each 11 oz. box. The retailer then adds a $5 markup and 
the consumer pays $14 per box. Gleason believes that Kellogg’s strong brand awareness and 
reputation for high-quality, nutritional breakfast products justifies the high-end price point for 
NutriFlakesTR. Gleason’s business plan calls for the wholesale price to remain constant for the 
duration of the test market.
 
Two features of the NutriFlakesTR business plan expose Kellogg’s to the financial risk that 
organic corn prices might increase substantially during the test market production run: 
(1) Kellogg’s will receive a fixed dollar amount ($9) for each box of NutriFlakesTR sold, but 
(2) must pay the corn grower a price that is only determined upon delivery. There is no 
organized market for organic corn—buyers such as Kellogg’s must negotiate price and other 
contract terms directly with each local grower. There is, however, an active market for traditional 
(nonorganic) corn at the Chicago Board of Trade (CBT) where standardized futures contracts for 
common corn are traded on a daily basis. Briefly, each corn futures contract entails:
• The right to take delivery of 5,000 bushels (<127 metric tons) of common corn at a pre-
designated location. To put this amount in perspective, a typical railroad grain car can 
hold between 3,200 and 3,500 U.S. bushels depending on the kernel size and weight.
• Delivery occurs on the second business day following the last trading day of the delivery 
month. This means that the buyer of a December 2014 contract either must accept delivery 
of the 5,000 bushels on Thursday, January 3, 2015, or sell (cancel) the contract before the 
close of trading on December 31, 2014.
• Costs of transporting the corn from the designated delivery location to the buyer’s  facilities 
are not included in the quoted CBT contract price and are the responsibility of the buyer.
• The price of a contract is quoted in cents per bushel; e.g., a price of say “743” is under-
stood to mean $7.43 per bushel or $37,150 per contract.
Large fluctuations in common corn production can occur from one year to the next. Conse-
quently, corn futures contract prices on the CBT tend to be quite volatile during the growing 
and harvesting season, which for the upper Midwest is May through October. One important 
factor contributing to this volatility is the unpredictability of weather during the growing and 
harvesting season and its impact on corn production.
 
The corporate finance group at Kellogg’s has decided to hedge its exposure to fluctuations 
in the price of organic corn needed for NutriFlakesTR by purchasing several common corn 
futures contracts on the CBT. These futures contracts are “matched” in bushel amount and 
delivery month to the amount and timing of organic corn required for the NutriFlakesTR test 
market production run. The following table provides information about several transactions 
related to the company’s purchase of organic corn and to this hedge:
Date 
Description 
Dollar amount
3/31/2015 
“Matched” contracts purchased on CBT exchange 
$3,200,000
4/30/2015 
Fair value of “matched” contracts 
$3,500,000
5/31/2015 
Accepted delivery of 50,000 bushels of organic corn at the 
 
 prevailing (negotiated) market price 
$  445,000
 
Sold the May 2015 delivery futures contract* 
$  420,000
 
Fair value of remaining “matched” contracts 
$3,800,000
*The May 2015 contract was purchased on March 31 for $371,500. The contract’s fair value on April 30 was $420,000.

 
Cases 
685
Required:
1. Explain why Kellogg’s corn price hedge is only partially effective?
2. Explain why the Kellogg hedge qualifies for special GAAP “hedge accounting” treatment 
by describing the eligible market risk being hedged, the required accounting approach 
(fair value hedge, cash flow hedge, or foreign-currency hedge), and why that accounting 
treatment is appropriate. You should assume that the hedge is sufficiently effective to 
qualify for GAAP hedge accounting treatment.
3. Prepare general journal entries to reflect the purchase of the “matched” CBT corn futures 
contracts on March 31, 2015, and the fair value of those contracts on April 30.
4. Prepare general journal entries to reflect the May 31 transactions and events.
5. Explain in words and numbers the economic benefit (if any) of the hedge to Kellogg over 
the period from March 31 through May 31.
6. Suppose corn futures prices (and thus the hedge fair value) had moved in the direction 
opposite to that shown in the table. Explain in words the economic cost (if any) of the 
hedge to Kellogg over the same period.
C11-5
Cardinal Health: Contingent 
receivables (LO 7)
The following article raises questions about Cardinal Health’s accounting for an expected le-
gal settlement. Management responded to the accusations by sending a letter to all sharehold-
ers and to analysts who covered the firm.
CARDINAL HEALTH’S ACCOUNTING RAISES 
SOME QUESTIONS
It’s a cardinal rule of accounting: Don’t count your chickens 
 before they hatch. Yet new disclosures in Cardinal Health Inc.’s 
latest annual report suggest that is what the drug wholesaler 
has done not just once, but twice, independent accounting 
 specialists say.
 
As the disclosures show, Cardinal recorded $22 million of 
an expected legal settlement with certain vitamin manufactur-
ers that it had accused of overcharging for products—in 
advance of an actual settlement. Specifically, Cardinal recorded 
a $10 million pre-tax gain, as well as a corresponding receiv-
able on its balance sheet, during its December 2000 quarter. It 
 recorded a further $12 million gain during the quarter ended 
Sept. 30, 2001, after concluding that its minimum future 
recovery would be that much bigger.
 
Cardinal, which says it has done nothing improper, did reach 
a $35.3 million settlement in the vitamin antitrust  litigation last 
spring. The company recorded the remaining $13.3 million dur-
ing the final quarter of its past fiscal year, ended June 30.
 
To those unfamiliar with accounting rules, the posting of 
the two initial sums might not raise obvious questions. Yet 
even first-year accounting students are taught this: Under 
generally accepted accounting principles, companies aren’t 
supposed to record expected gains as current income until they 
are certain the gains will be realized. When it comes to litiga-
tion settlements, that means waiting until an actual settlement 
agreement has been reached with a party that is able to pay, 
independent accounting specialists say.
 
Now consider this twist: Had Cardinal not recorded the two 
initial gains when it did, it would have fallen short of Wall 
Street analysts’ earnings targets by two cents a share for both 
the December 2000 and September 2001 quarters; Cardinal’s 
earnings met analysts’ targets for each of the quarters. Cardi-
nal didn’t disclose the size of the gains until September 2002, 
when it filed its latest annual report.
 
“That’s abracadabra accounting,” says Walter Schuetze, a 
former chief accountant for the Securities and Exchange Com-
mission. “Cardinal should not have recognized a receivable 
and a gain until June 2002.” Before then, “it was all a matter of 
speculation,” he says, adding, “Cardinal’s actions explain what 
is meant by the term earnings management. This is diddling 
the numbers.” . . .
 
“Cardinal Health is absolutely confident in our accounting 
and report practices and our adherence to high ethical stan-
dards,” Mr. Miller [Cardinal’s chief financial officer] says. 
“With regard to GAAP and SEC regulations, we are in full 
compliance in all material respects.” . . .
Source: “Cardinal Health’s Accounting Raises Some Questions,” The Wall 
Street Journal, April 2, 2003. Copyright ©2003 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. 
All rights reserved worldwide. Reprinted with permission.

686 
CHAPTER 11
Financial Instruments as Liabilities
Required:
1. Are the GAAP rules for recognizing contingent gains (and  a corresponding receivable) 
the same or different from those for recognizing contingent losses (and a corresponding 
liability)? Consult FASB ASC Topic 450 Contingencies.
2. In view of the details outlined in Cardinal Health’s letter to analysts and investors, do you 
believe the company fully complied with FASB ASC Topic 450 as it pertains to recognizing 
contingent gains? Why or why not?
3. If asked, how might management respond to questions about the timing of the gain 
recognition in 2001 and 2002?
4. Suppose that management was intent on informing analysts and investors about an 
 expected litigation settlement amount. How might this be done in situations where 
GAAP precludes recognizing the gain on the financial statements?
CARDINAL HEALTH
A Note from Steve Fischbach, 
VP Investor Relations
I wanted to make sure all of our investors and analysts received 
some information that responds to today’s Wall Street Journal 
Heard on the Street article titled “Cardinal Health’s Account-
ing Raises a Number of Questions.” . . .
Here are the facts:
As we have explained to the reporter, this item was not a 
recording of a contingent gain under SFAS 5. The recover-
ies that Cardinal Health recorded related to vendor overcharges 
in our vitamin business were based on the virtual certainty of 
the recovery as supported by numerous external factors.
 
The reporter questioned the timing of two items recorded 
by the company ($10 million in the second quarter of fiscal 
year 2001 and $12 million in the first quarter of fiscal year 
2002) related to the vitamin overcharge situation. This event 
was the recognition of an asset related to recoveries for vendor 
overcharges, based on the following five factors:
1. Vendors had admitted overcharging and plead guilty in a 
criminal proceeding. In prior periods Cardinal Health was in 
fact overcharged by those vendors and those charges were 
 reflected in prior periods as higher cost of sales.
2. Vendors had settled with a number of plaintiffs, based on their 
admission of guilt.
3. Vendors were all major pharmaceutical companies with a 
clear ability to pay.
4. Issue was not “if” we would recover, but “how much.”
5. Quantification of the amount of recovery that was virtually 
certain was supported by written legal opinions from indepen-
dent outside legal counsel that served as substantial  audit 
evidence.
 
As it turned out, Cardinal Health received over $120 mil-
lion from the defendants in the case which exceeded what was 
actually recorded by over $100 million. That is a very impor-
tant point because it demonstrates the conservatism with which 
Cardinal Health dealt with the issue. . . .
Source: Cardinal Health Letter to Shareholders (April 2, 2003).
.mhhe.com/revsine6e
www
Remember to check the book’s companion website 
for additional study material.

12
Chapter
“Humans have three basic needs: food, shelter, and . . . keeping debt off 
the balance sheet.”
—Author unknown
A 
lease is a contract in which the owner of an asset—the lessor—conveys to an-
other party—the lessee—the right to use that asset. This right is granted in 
exchange for a fee—the lease payment—that is usually paid in installments. 
The lessor typically retains legal title to the asset, which reverts to the lessor at the end 
of the lease term. The asset’s expected fair value at the end of the lease is the residual 
value. The duration of a lease may be short, such as a one-week car rental agreement, or 
long, such as a 20-year lease for retail space in a shopping center.
 
At its inception, a lease is a mutually unperformed contract. This means that nei-
ther party to the lease arrangement has yet performed all of the duties called for in the 
contract. For example, the lessor has an obligation to provide the lessee with the right to 
use the asset for the entire duration of the lease; in exchange, the lessee has an obliga-
tion to pay the stipulated periodic fee to the lessor during the lease term. When the lease 
contract is first signed, the right to use the asset has not been provided, nor have the re-
quired periodic contract payments been made. As you will see, the accounting for these 
unperformed contracts is controversial.
EVOLUTION OF LEASE ACCOUNTING
Before the issuance of pre-Codification Statement of Financial Accounting Standards 
(SFAS) No. 13, virtually all leases were accounted for using the operating lease 
approach.1
 
The following example illustrates the operating lease approach.
687
12
Financial Reporting for Leases
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you 
will understand:
 1. The structure of a lease.
 2. Lessees’ incentives to keep leases 
off the balance sheet.
 3. The criteria used to classify leases 
on the lessee’s books.
 4. The financial statement effects of 
 executory costs, residual values, 
 purchase options, and other aspects 
of lease contracts.
 5. The effects of capital lease versus 
 operating lease treatment on 
lessees’ financial statements.
 6. That lessors also classify leases ei-
ther as capital leases or as operating 
leases, but that their reporting 
incentives are very different from 
those of lessees.
 7. The difference among sales-type, 
 direct financing, and operating lease 
treatment by lessors and the criteria 
for choosing the accounting 
treatment.
 8. How the different lessor accounting 
treatments can affect income and 
net asset balances.
 9. Sale/leaseback arrangements and 
other special leasing considerations.
 10. The key differences between cur-
rent GAAP and IFRS requirements 
for lease accounting and the changes 
proposed by the FASB and the IASB.
 11. How to use financial statement 
disclosures to estimate the financial 
statement effects of treating oper-
ating leases as capital leases.
1 “Accounting for Leases,” SFAS No. 13 (Stamford, CT: Financial Accounting Standards Board [FASB], 1976). This 
standard as amended by subsequent literature is contained under the FASB Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 
Topic 840.
Crest Company owns a building with a $200,000 book value. It leases this building to 
Iris Company under a five-year lease for a monthly rental of $2,000, which is to be 
paid at the end of each month.

688 
CHAPTER 12
Financial Reporting for Leases
 
Upon signing the lease, Iris Company, the lessee, makes no entry on its books. The 
 accounting here conforms to the legal structure of lease arrangements. Because lease contracts 
typically do not convey title, the asset remains on the lessor’s books and no asset is reflected 
on the lessee’s books. Furthermore, under the operating lease approach, the lessee does not 
immediately record as a liability the stream of future payments specified in the contract. No 
liability is recorded because the lessee is not legally obligated to make the payments until the 
lessor performs the duties specified in the contract. Because these are mutually unperformed 
contracts—sometimes called executory contracts—accounting entries are made over time in 
piecemeal fashion only as partial performance under the contract takes place. As each party 
performs its respective duties, that portion of the contract that has been performed is no 
longer considered executory and is accordingly recognized in the financial records.
 
Each month, as Crest performs its part of the agreement by making the premises available 
to Iris Company, Iris accrues a liability for that portion of the contract that has been 
performed:
DR Rent expense   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$2,000
   CR Lease liability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$2,000
DR Lease liability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$2,000
   CR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$2,000
DR Depreciation expense—leased building  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$XXX
   CR Accumulated depreciation—leased building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$XXX
DR Cash   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$2,000
   CR Rental revenue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$2,000
 
Upon payment of the stipulated rental fee at month-end, Iris makes the following entry:
Iris records no liability on its books for future rental payments—neither at the 
signing of the lease nor afterward. The reason is that these future rental pay-
ments are contingent upon future performance by Crest, the lessor. The stipu-
lated payments do not become a liability to Iris under the operating lease 
approach until time passes and performance takes place.
Similarly, Crest, the lessor, would make no entry on its books at the time 
this operating lease was signed. However, as piecemeal performance takes 
place month-by-month and it receives payment, Crest makes the following entry on its 
books:
In practice, the accrual for the lease liability is 
seldom made. Instead, only one entry is made at 
the time of cash payment:
DR Rent expense  . .  $2,000
   CR Cash  . . . .  
 
$2,000
Because the building remains an asset on Crest’s books, periodic depreciation is also 
recorded:
RECAP
 The operating lease approach conforms to the legal structure of lease arrangements. 
Journal entries are made piecemeal over time as partial performance takes place. 

 
Evolution of  Lease Accounting 
689
Why Lessees Like the Operating Lease Method
Lessees prefer the operating lease approach for lease accounting. One obvious reason is that 
this method doesn’t reflect the cumulative liability for all future lease payments on the les-
see’s balance sheet. Instead, only a portion of the obligation gets accrued piecemeal as partial 
performance takes place under the lease. The phrase off-balance sheet financing is used to 
reflect the fact that the lessee has financed the acquisition of asset services without recogniz-
ing a liability on the financial statement.
 
As we will show you, GAAP requires note disclosure of the lessee’s future cash outflows 
arising from operating leases. And because reasonably informed financial decision makers do 
read financial statement disclosures, the liability isn’t really “hidden.” Nevertheless, it is easy 
to envision circumstances in which lessees would be better off by using the operating lease 
method. To see how they are made better off, recall that many contracts are linked to financial 
statement numbers. One example is bank lending agreements that contain covenants—safety 
measures to protect banks against the borrower’s financial deterioration. Because most 
covenants are based on financial statement numbers—not on note numbers—keeping liabili-
ties off the balance sheet may convey benefits to borrowers even if the liabilities aren’t 
 hidden in a real sense. For example, the numerator of the lessee’s debt-to-equity ratio is unaf-
fected at the inception of an operating lease because no liability is recorded on signing. 
Keeping the liability off the balance sheet strengthens the debt-to-equity ratio. The off-balance-
sheet liability reduces the likelihood that the lessee-borrower will violate a debt-to-equity loan 
covenant.
 
Furthermore, some lessees believe that omitting the lease liability improves their ability to 
obtain future credit. Keeping the lease liability off the books lowers reported leverage. Lend-
ers use leverage ratios as a rule of thumb in assessing borrowing capacity—that means the 
amount that can safely be borrowed. Supposedly, the lower the firm’s reported leverage, the 
greater is that firm’s perceived borrowing capacity.
 
Lessees also like the operating lease accounting method because it keeps the leased asset 
off the balance sheet. Certain long-term leases give lessees the exclusive right to use assets for 
most of their economic life. Nevertheless, despite the “ownershiplike” property rights con-
veyed to the lessee, there is no balance sheet asset recorded with operating leases.
 
Keeping leased assets off the books produces a favorable impact on the lessee’s financial 
statements that is just as substantial as the benefit that arises from omitting lease liabilities. 
Consider an airline that leases a portion of its aircraft fleet and accounts for the leases using 
the operating lease method. The leased aircraft generate gross revenues and net profits just as 
the owned aircraft do. However, not reporting the leased aircraft as assets under the operating 
lease approach understates assets in some profitability and turnover ratios. Sales generated by 
the leased assets will appear in the numerator of the total asset turnover ratio, but the leased 
assets will not appear in the denominator. The net effect increases the ratio.
 
Investors and others use asset-based ratios to evaluate a firm’s performance. The operating 
lease method makes the leverage and turnover ratios for companies that lease a significant 
portion of their assets appear to be more favorable than the corresponding ratios for com-
panies that own their assets outright. (See the example illustrated in the appendix to this 
chapter.)
The Securities and Exchange Commission’s Initiative
Throughout the 1960s, leasing became an important financing vehicle for three reasons. First, 
leasing provided firms the opportunity to use assets without expending the entire cash 
 purchase price. Second, if the leased asset became technologically obsolete, the lessee could 
Contracting
Analysis

690 
CHAPTER 12
Financial Reporting for Leases
simply lease a newer model. Third, leasing allowed the lessor and lessee to optimize tax in-
centives and subsidies for capital investments.2 But the virtually exclusive use of the operating 
lease approach was criticized, especially by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) 
because it believed that this accounting approach did not portray the economics of many leas-
ing transactions.
 
The SEC issued Accounting Series Release (ASR) No. 147 in 1973 to improve financial 
reporting for leases.3 The SEC took what is called a property rights approach to lease ac-
counting. This approach views leases as conveying property rights in the asset to the lessee 
and the payment stream as representing the lessee’s liability. Following this accounting 
method, the lessee records both an asset and a liability on its books equal to the present value 
of future lease payments when a lease is signed:
DR Leased asset (to reflect the property right the lessee now has 
 
in the asset)   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $XXX
   CR Lease obligation (to reflect the liability arising from the 
 
 
future lease payments) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$XXX
This is called the capital lease approach because the lessee capitalizes the lease (i.e., puts it 
on the balance sheet). However, ASR No. 147 emphasized disclosure and thus stopped short of 
requiring balance sheet recognition of leases that conveyed property rights. The FASB soon 
extended and embellished the SEC property rights approach, as we discuss next.
 
Figure 12.1 provides an overview of the two different lease accounting approaches.
LESSEE ACCOUNTING
Under FASB Accounting Standards Codification Topic 840 (ASC 840), leases that transfer 
substantially all of the benefits and risks of ownership must be treated as capital leases. Con-
sequently, a lease asset and a lease liability appear on the lessee’s balance sheet. ASC 840 
provides specific criteria for assessing “substantially all.” Leases not meeting the criteria can-
not be capitalized. Noncapitalized leases are called operating leases and are accounted for 
using the procedures we described earlier.
FASB ASC 840 Criteria for Capital Lease Treatment
If, at its inception, a lease satisfies any one or more of the following criteria, it must be treated 
as a capital lease on the lessee’s books.
1. The lease transfers ownership of the asset to the lessee by the end of the lease term.
2. The lease contains a bargain purchase option.
3. The noncancelable lease term is 75% or more of the estimated economic life of the 
leased asset.
4. The present value of the minimum lease payments equals or exceeds 90% of the current 
fair value of the leased asset.
 
Each criterion represents a situation under which property rights in the leased asset have 
been transferred to the lessee. The transfer of property rights is easily seen in criterion (1). If a 
2 See M. H. Miller and C. W. Upton, “Leasing, Buying, and the Cost of Capital Services,” The Journal of Finance, June 1976, 
pp. 761–86.
3 “Notice of Adoption of Amendments to Regulations S-X Requiring Improved Disclosure of Leases,” ASR No. 147 
 (Washington, DC: SEC, 1973).

 
Lessee Accounting 
691
 Figure 12.1
 DIFFERENCES BETWEEN 
OPERATING AND CAPITAL 
LEASES 
When is this
method used?
Operating leases
Capital leases
Whose books
is the leased
asset on?
What entries
are made?
Used when property rights in the
asset have not been transferred
to the lessee (for example, a
“short-term” rental).
Used when property rights in the
asset have been transferred to the 
lessee (for example, the lease
spans most of the asset’s life).
The leased asset is treated as being
sold and is removed from the
lessor’s books. (Details described
later in the chapter.)
Lessee puts both the leased asset
and the liability for future payments
on its books.
The accounting for both the leased
asset and the lease liability are
described in detail later in the
chapter.
The leased asset remains on the
lessor’s books.
No asset or liability appears on the
lessee’s books because the lease is
considered to be an unperformed
contract.
As time passes–and as partial
performance takes place–the 
lessee makes the following entry:
DR Rent expense               $XX
      CR Cash 
 
   $XX
To reflect the portion of the
contract that has now been
performed.
At the same time, the lessor makes
the following entries:
DR Cash  
           $XX
      CR Rental revenue               $XX
To reflect revenue on the 
performed portion of the contract.
DR Depreciation expense  $XX
       CR Accumulated 
 
            Depreciation 
   $XX
To depreciate the leased asset
that is on the lessor’s books.
lease transfers ownership, title to the asset will eventually pass to the lessee, and the FASB 
requires that the accounting method conform to the substance of the transaction—an install-
ment purchase—rather than to its legal form—a long-term rental agreement. Similarly, in 
lease arrangements in which a bargain purchase option4 exists—criterion (2)—there is a 
strong probability the lessee will exercise the option and obtain ownership. These two criteria 
represent instances in which ownership will likely transfer, thus conveying significant prop-
erty rights in the leased asset. This is the reason GAAP requires that such leases be treated as 
capital leases.
4 FASB ASC 840-10-20 (Glossary, Bargain Purchase Option) defines bargain as a price that is low enough that the  purchase 
is “reasonably assured.” For example, the lessee may have a purchase option of $1,000 for an asset that is expected to be 
worth $10,000 at the end of the lease term. The lessor and the lessee determine whether a purchase option is a bargain at the 
beginning of the lease. Subsequent price changes do not change the initial determination.

692 
CHAPTER 12
Financial Reporting for Leases
 
The philosophy underlying the third criterion—economic life—is different because legal 
ownership of the asset does not pass to the lessee. Nevertheless, GAAP indicates that criterion 
(3) also conveys significant property rights. The reason is that the right to use a leased asset for 
75% or more of its expected economic life is itself an asset—a valuable property right repre-
senting an exclusive claim to the asset’s services for the preponderance of its benefit period.
 
Criterion (4), sometimes called the recovery of investment criterion, is the most techni-
cally complicated but easy to understand in principle. A good indication that the lessor is 
 recovering virtually all of the investment in the asset occurs when the present value of the 
minimum lease payments is equal to or greater than 90% of the fair value of the asset itself. 
The relative magnitude of the payment schedule and the willingness of the lessee to engage in 
the transaction are both considered evidence that substantial property rights have been 
 transferred to the lessee.
These four criteria for capital leases suggest that the FASB has moved part of 
the way toward the property rights approach. Nevertheless, it is not a “pure” 
property rights approach because these criteria do not consider all leases to 
 convey property rights. Only leases that satisfy certain arbitrary conditions 
(for example, the “bright-line” rules of 75% and 90%) qualify. So current 
 authoritative accounting literature presents a compromise between the oper-
ating lease approach, for which no leases appear on the lessee’s balance sheet, and a strict 
property rights approach, for which all leases would be shown as assets and liabilities.
 
To summarize, leases that satisfy at least one of the four criteria are treated as capital 
leases, and the following entry is made on the lessee’s books at the inception of the lease:
DR Leased asset—capital lease  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $XXX
   CR Obligation under capital lease   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$XXX
Leases that do not satisfy any of the previously discussed criteria must be accounted for as 
operating leases.
Capital Lease Treatment Illustrated
To illustrate the accounting for leases that qualify as capital leases, consider the following 
example.
 For example, criterion (4) is triggered if a lessee 
leases an asset with a fair value of $100,000 and 
agrees to a payment stream whose present value 
is $93,000 because $93,000 is more than 90% of 
$100,000. 
Lessee Company signs a five-year noncancelable lease with Lessor Company on January 1, 
2014, when the lease begins. Several other facts pertain to the lease:
1. The lease calls for five payments of $79,139.18 to be made at the end of each year.5
2. The leased asset has a fair value of $315,041.60 on January 1, 2014.
3. The lease has no renewal option, and possession of the asset reverts to the lessor on 
January 1, 2019.
4. Lessee Company regularly uses the straight-line method to depreciate assets of this type 
that it owns.
5. The leased asset has an expected economic life of six years.
 5  Lessees often make  monthly  rental payments at the  beginning  of the period instead of annually at the end of the period as 
is the case in this example. We use end of period annual payments in many of our examples to build on discussions of amor-
tization schedules contained in Chapters 8 and 11 and to facilitate discussions of financial statement effects by year. In a later 
section, we discuss how to modify amortization tables for beginning of period payments. The end of chapter materials use 
both beginning of period and end of period payments. 

 
Lessee Accounting 
693
 
Because the five-year lease term covers 
more than 75% of the asset’s six-year expected 
economic life (5/6 5 83.3%), this lease must be 
treated as a capital lease, following criterion (3). 
Thus, Lessee Company must recognize both an 
asset and a liability on its books.
 
But what is the asset and liability dollar 
amount that should be recorded? ASC 840 
 requires that the dollar amount be equal to the 
discounted present value of the minimum lease 
payments specified in the lease. Contingent 
rentals are ignored. The discount rate used to 
determine the present value is the lower of the lessee’s incremental borrowing rate6 or the 
 lessor’s rate of return implicit in the lease.7 If the lessee can’t determine the lessor’s rate of 
return, the lessee uses the incremental borrowing rate.
 
Assume that Lessee Company’s incremental borrowing rate is 10% and the lessee can’t 
determine the lessor’s implicit rate of return on the lease. The discount rate is accordingly 
10%, and the present value of the minimum lease payments in our example is:
Minimum lease payments are defined as the noncontingent, fixed payments speci-
fied in the lease agreement. For example, if the payment schedule called for a 
fixed fee of $79,139.18 per year plus an additional fee of five cents per unit for 
each unit manufactured using the leased asset, only the $79,139.18 would be in-
cluded in the computation of minimum lease payments. The five cents per unit 
for each unit manufactured is a contingent rental that is ignored in the calcula-
tion. In more  complicated leases, the minimum lease payments also include:
1. The amount of any residual value guarantee by the lessee (as discussed later).
2. Any penalties that must be paid if the lessee chooses not to renew the lease.
3. The amount of any bargain purchase option payment if the lease contains a 
bargain  purchase option.
6 FASB ASC 840-10-20 (Glossary) defines the lessee’s incremental borrowing rate as the rate that the lessee “would have 
 incurred to borrow over a similar term the funds necessary to purchase the leased asset.”
7 The interest rate implicit in the lease is the pre-tax internal yield on the lease contract (that is, the rate that equates the fair 
value of the asset and the present value of the payments). See FASB ASC 840-20-10 (Glossary, Interest rate implicit in the 
lease).
 
Present value of minimum 
 
Minimum 
 
Present value factor
 
lease payments 
5 
lease 
3 
for an ordinary annuity
 
 
 
payment 
 
for five years at 10% 
 
$300,000 
5 $79,139.18 3 3.79079 (from this book’s Appendix,
 
 
 
 
 
Present Value Tables, Table 2)
On January 1, 2014, at the inception of the lease, Lessee Company makes the following entry:
DR Leased asset—capital lease  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $300,000
   CR Obligation under capital lease   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$300,000
 
It is important to understand that the amount shown for the asset and the 
amount shown for the related liability ($300,000) are equal only at the incep-
tion of the lease. Thereafter, as the term of the lease progresses, the amount 
in the asset account will equal the amount in the liability account only by 
sheer coincidence. The reason that the two amounts will differ subsequently 
is that the asset account will be reduced in accordance with Lessee Company’s depreciation 
schedule for assets of this type, whereas the liability account is reduced in accordance with 
the payment schedule contained in the lease. The asset account and liability account are 
reduced at independent—and usually different—rates over the life of the lease. (A later 
 section illustrates the effect of these different reduction rates on the carrying value of the 
lease asset and liability.)
 
Each lease payment of $79,139.18 consists of two elements. One represents interest on the 
present value of the obligation that was outstanding during the year. The other represents a 
The lease also meets criterion (4) because 90% of 
the asset’s $315,041.60 fair value equals $283,537, 
and the present value of the minimum lease 
 payments ($300,000) is greater than $283,537.

694 
CHAPTER 12
Financial Reporting for Leases
If a lease meets either the first or second capital lease 
criterion, the leased asset is depreciated over the asset’s 
life because the asset’s legal title ultimately passes to 
the lessee. If the lease is a capital lease because it 
meets either the third or fourth criterion but not the 
first or second criterion, it is depreciated over the 
lease’s life because the asset reverts to the lessor at 
lease-end. In Exhibit 12.1, the asset is depreciated over 
five years because it qualified under both the third and 
fourth criteria but not the first or second criterion.
repayment of a portion of the principal amount of the obligation. FASB ASC 840 requires that 
the interest and principal repayment portions of each $79,139.18 outflow be measured using 
the effective interest method. The amortization schedule in Exhibit 12.1 shows this break-
down in Column (b), Interest Expense, and Column (c), Principal Reduction. For example, the 
$79,139.18 payment made on December 31, 2014, consists of a $30,000 interest component 
and a $49,139.18 principal payment component. The schedule is similar to the ones used for 
notes receivable (Chapter 8) and bonds (Chapter 11).
 
On December 31, 2014, Lessee Company records both the $79,139.18 cash payment (Col-
umn [a]) and the depreciation of the capitalized leased asset (Column [e]). Based on the 
 figures in Exhibit 12.1, the entries are:
DR Obligation under capital lease  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$49,139.18
DR Interest expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
30,000.00
CR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$79,139.18
DR Depreciation expense—capital lease  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$60,000.00
CR Accumulated depreciation—capital lease   . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$60,000.00
The amount of interest expense recognized each year equals 10% (the 
discount rate) times the present value of the obligation outstanding at 
the start of the year. Because the present value of the lease obligation at 
the start of the lease on January 1, 2014, was $300,000 (Column [d]), the 
interest expense for 2014 is $300,000 times 10%, or $30,000. The differ-
ence between the $79,139.18 cash payment and the $30,000 interest ex-
pense represents repayment of principal. This 2014 difference—$49,139.18 
(Column [c])—reduces the remaining principal balance of the lease at 
December 31, 2014, to $250,860.82 ($300,000 2 $49,139.18) as shown in 
Column (d). The $49,139.18 would be classified as a current liability at 
EXHIBIT 12.1
Lessee Company: Amortization Schedule—Effective Interest Method
 
 
 
 
 
 
(f)
 
 
 
 
(d)  
 
Total Annual 
 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Lease 
(e)  
Capital Lease 
 
Total 
Interest 
Principal 
Obligation 
Depreciation 
Expense 
Date 
Payment 
Expense* 
Reduction† 
Balance 
of Asset 
(Col. [b] 1 Col. [e])
 1/1/14 
 
 
 
$300,000.00
12/31/14 
$  79,139.18 
$30,000.00 
$  49,139.18 
250,860.82 
$  60,000.00 
$  90,000.00
12/31/15 
79,139.18 
25,086.08 
54,053.10 
196,807.72 
60,000.00 
85,086.08
12/31/16 
79,139.18 
19,680.77 
59,458.41 
137,349.31 
60,000.00 
79,680.77
12/31/17 
79,139.18 
13,734.93 
65,404.25 
71,945.06 
60,000.00 
73,734.93
12/31/18 
79,139.18 
7,194.12‡ 
71,945.06 
— 
60,000.00 
67,194.12
 
$395,695.90 
$95,695.90 
$300,000.00 
$     –0– 
$300,000.00 
$395,695.90
* Column (d) for preceding year times 10%.
† Column (a) minus Column (b).
‡ Rounded.

 
Lessee Accounting 
695
January 1, 2014, because it is due within one year. Interest expense for 2015 would then be 
$250,860.82 times 10%, or $25,086.08. The 2015 journal entry for the cash payment is:
DR Obligation under capital lease   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$54,053.10
DR Interest expense   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
25,086.08
   CR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$79,139.18
The 2015 $54,053.10 decrease in lease obligation is classified as a current liability at Decem-
ber 31, 2014, because it is due within one year.
 
The depreciation expense is based on the $300,000 capitalized amount, not the $315,041.60 
fair value. Notice that the entry to record depreciation expense is the same in all years of the 
lease because Lessee Company uses the straight-line depreciation method.
 
Figure 12.2 summarizes lessees’ accounting for capital leases.
Executory Costs
Executory costs represent costs of using assets, such as maintenance, taxes, and insurance. 
Often the lessee pays these costs directly. Sometimes the lessor pays them and passes them 
along to the lessee as an additional lease payment. For example, if executory costs paid by 
Lessor Company total $2,000 per year, Lessor would include an added yearly charge of 
$2,000 in the lease in addition to the basic $79,139.18 rental fee.
 
Because executory costs represent a cost of using assets—rather than a cost of the assets 
themselves—these costs are omitted when determining minimum lease payments, and thus 
they are not a component of the capitalized amount shown in the Leased asset—capital lease 
A capital lease exists when the lease terms convey valuable property rights to
the lessee, that is, any one (or more) of the following:
   1. Ownership of the asset transfers to the lessee.
    2. Lessee can buy the asset by exercising a bargain purchase option.
    3. The noncancelable lease term is 75% or more of the estimated economic
        life of the asset.
    4. The present value of the minimum lease payments equals or exceeds 90%
       of the fair value of the leased asset.
Under a capital lease, the lessee records both an asset and a liability. The
journal entry is:
    DR Leased asset—capital lease 
 
$XXX
          CR Obligation under capital lease  
              $XXX
The capital lease asset is depreciated, just
like other assets possessed by the lessee.
The journal entry is:
    DR Depreciation expense—
          capital lease  
$XXX
          CR Accumulated depreciation—
                capital lease 
           $XXX
Periodic lease cash payments are 
allocated between reducing (repaying) the
liability and interest expense.
The journal entry is:
    DR Obligation under capital 
          lease      
 
   $XXX
    DR Interest expense 
      XXX
          CR Cash 
 
                 $XXX
 Figure 12.2
 LESSEES’ ACCOUNTING 
FOR CAPITAL LEASES 

696 
CHAPTER 12
Financial Reporting for Leases
account. Consider this extension of the previous example. If Lessee Company’s annual rental fee 
totals $81,139.18, which includes a $2,000 per year maintenance contract with the lessor, the 
minimum lease payments to be capitalized would be $79,139.18 (that is, $81,139.18 2 $2,000). 
Under this assumption, the capitalized amount would still total $300,000 and the amortization 
schedule would be identical to that in Exhibit 12.1. Lessee Company would treat the $2,000 of 
executory costs from the maintenance contract as a period cost and charge it to expense when 
paid. For example, the $81,139.18 payment on December 31, 2014, would trigger this entry:
DR Obligation under capital lease . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$49,139.18
DR Interest expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
30,000.00
DR Maintenance expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
2,000.00
   CR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   
 
$81,139.18
Residual Value Guarantees
Lease contracts sometimes contain a provision under which the lessee guarantees that the leased 
asset will have a certain value at the end of the lease. If the actual fair value of the asset is less 
than this residual value guarantee, the lessee must pay the difference to the lessor. Continuing 
the previous example, assume that the lease required Lessee Company to guarantee that the as-
set’s residual value would be no lower than $20,000 when the lease ends on January 1, 2019. If 
the asset’s fair value on that date is $20,000 or higher, Lessee would simply return it to the 
lessor because the residual value guarantee is satisfied. But if the fair value is only $15,000 on 
January 1, 2019, Lessee would return the asset and pay Lessor Company $5,000 cash.
 
Leased assets often revert to the lessor at the end of the lease term. Residual value guaran-
tees protect the lessor against two types of losses:
• Unforeseen technological or marketplace changes erode residual value; the residual value 
guarantee insulates the lessor from these unanticipated changes.
• The lessor is vulnerable to losses if the lessee does not take proper care of the asset over 
the lease period; the residual value guarantee gives lessors protection against lessees who 
abuse leased assets.
 
The lessee must include the amount specified as the residual value guarantee in the compu-
tation of minimum lease payments. The reason is that the lessee potentially owes the full 
amount of the guarantee to the lessor. To illustrate the accounting, return to Lessee Company 
data on page 692 and now assume there is a $20,000 residual value guarantee. The present 
value of the minimum lease payments is:
 
Present value of 
Minimum 
Present value factor
 
minimum lease 
5 
lease 
3 
at 10%
 
payments 
payment
 
$300,000.00   5 $79,139.18 3  3.79079 (Present value factor for five-year
 
 
 
ordinary annuity)
 
 12,418.40  
5 $20,000.00 3 0.62092 (Present value factor for $1 due
 
 
 
in five years, from this book’s
 
 
 
Appendix, Table 1)
 
$312,418.40
The $312,418.40 is less than the $315,041.60 fair value. The difference in the two values im-
plies that the lessor is using a different discount rate or the lessee is not guaranteeing 100% of 

 
Lessee Accounting
697
the expected residual value. With the residual value guarantee, Lessee makes the following 
entry on January 1, 2014, at the inception of the lease:
DR Leased asset—capital lease  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $312,418.40
CR Obligation under capital lease   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$312,418.40
 
Exhibit 12.2 shows the amortization schedule that Lessee uses when this residual value 
guarantee is included in the lease. Lessee treats the guaranteed residual as the salvage value 
and computes the annual depreciation of $58,483.68 ([$312,418.40 present value less $20,000 
guaranteed residual]/5 years). After making the December 31, 2018, cash payment of 
$79,139.18, the lease obligation balance (Column [d]) and the lease asset balance (Column 
[f]) both are $20,000 (see the highlighted numbers). We’re assuming that the asset’s value at 
the end of the lease on January 1, 2019, equals or exceeds $20,000—the amount of the resid-
ual value guarantee. When Lessee returns the asset on that date, it satisfies its obligation to 
Lessor Company, and the following entry results:
DR Obligation under capital lease  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$20,000.00
CR Leased asset—capital lease   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$20,000.00
 
Now let’s alter the example and assume that the asset has a fair value of only $15,000 at 
December 31, 2018. Lessee Company would have to pay $5,000 in addition to relinquishing 
the asset. The entry is:
DR Obligation under capital lease  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$20,000.00
DR Loss on residual value guarantee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
5,000.00
CR Leased asset—capital lease   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$20,000.00
CR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
5,000.00
EXHIBIT 12.2
Lessee Company: Amortization Schedule—Effective Interest Method 
with Guaranteed Residual Value
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(g)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total
 
 
 
 
 
(e) 
 
Annual
 
 
 
 
(d) 
Depreciation 
(f) 
Capital
 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Lease  
of Asset;  
Lease 
Lease
 
Total Cash 
Interest 
Principal 
Obligation 
Residual 
Asset 
Expense
Date 
Payment 
Expense* 
Reduction† 
Balance 
Value Return 
Balance 
(b) 1 (e)
 1/1/14 
— 
— 
— 
$312,418.40 
— 
$312,418.40 
—
12/31/14 
$  79,139.18 
$  31,241.84 
$  47,897.34 
264,521.06 
$  58,483.68‡ 
253,934.72 
$  89,725.52
12/31/15 
79,139.18 
26,452.11 
52,687.07 
211,833.99 
58,483.68 
195,451.04 
84,935.79
12/31/16 
79,139.18 
21,183.40 
57,955.78 
153,878.21 
58,483.68 
136,967.36 
79,667.08
12/31/17 
79,139.18 
15,387.82 
63,751.36 
90,126.85 
58,483.68 
78,483.68 
73,871.50
12/31/18 
79,139.18 
9,012.33§ 
70,126.85 
20,000.00 
58,483.68 
20,000.00 
67,496.01
 1/1/19# 
— 
— 
20,000.00 
— 
20,000.00 
— 
—
 
$395,695.90 
$103,277.50 
$312,418.40 
$     –0– 
$312,418.40 
$     –0– 
$395,695.90
* Column (d) for preceding year times 10%.
† Column (a) minus Column (b).
‡ ($312,418.40 2 $20,000) 4 5.
§ Rounded.
# Asset returned.
Columns (a) through (d) 
would be similar for a lease 
with a bargain purchase 
 option. However, a bargain 
purchase would have re-
quired the lessee to depre-
ciate the asset over the 
economic life of six years, 
resulting in annual deprecia-
tion expense of $52,069.73 
($312,418.40/6), thereby 
making columns (e) through 
(g) different.

698 
CHAPTER 12
Financial Reporting for Leases
Payments in Advance
When lease payments are due at the start of each lease period, the journal entries and amorti-
zation tables differ slightly. We’ll use the original Lessee Company example on page 692 to 
illustrate this. Assume that the annual payment is due at the start of each year and, because the 
payments are received earlier, the lessor lowers the required annual payment to $71,945. 
Under these slightly altered conditions, the present value of the minimum lease payments is:
 
Present value of 
 
Minimum 
 
Present value factor for
 
minimum lease 
5 
lease 
3 
an annuity in advance
 
payments 
 
payment 
 
for five years at 10%
 
 $300,000 
5 
$71,945 
3 4.16987 (from this book’s Appendix, Table 3)
Exhibit 12.3 shows the amortization schedule for this lease with up-front payments. The form 
of the schedule is identical to the form used in Exhibit 12.1. However, we have added the 
shaded second row to reflect that the entire first payment reduces the lease obligation. The 
remainder of the schedule functions the same as Exhibit 12.1. The interest expense associated 
with the January 1, 2015, payment is computed by multiplying the prior balance of $228,055 
by 10%. The January 1, 2015, lease obligation balance is reduced by $49,139.50, the differ-
ence between the lease payment of $71,945 and the interest expense of $22,805.50.
 
Lessee records the following two entries on January 1, 2014, upon signing the lease and 
making the required lease payment:
Notice in both the second journal entry and Exhibit 12.3 that no portion of the January 1, 2014, 
payment represents interest expense; instead, all of the $71,945 payment reduces the principal bal-
ance. The reason is that interest expense ensues only as time passes, not at the lease’s inception.
DR Leased asset—capital lease . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $300,000
CR Obligation under capital lease . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$300,000
DR Obligation under capital lease . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $ 71,945
CR Cash   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$ 71,945
EXHIBIT 12.3
Lessee Company: Amortization Schedule—Effective Interest Method 
with Payments at the Start of Each Period
 
 
 
 
 
 
(f)
 
 
 
 
(d) 
 
Total Annual
 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Lease 
(e) 
Capital Lease
Payment 
Total 
Interest 
Principal  
Obligation 
Depreciation 
Expense
Date 
Payment 
Expense* 
Reduction† 
Balance 
of Asset 
(b) 1 (e)
1/1/2014 
 
 
 
$300,000.00 
 
1/1/2014 
$ 71,945.00 
 
$ 71,945.00 
228,055.00 
 
1/1/2015 
71,945.00 
$22,805.50 
49,139.50 
178,915.50 
$ 60,000.00 
$ 82,805.50
1/1/2016 
71,945.00 
17,891.55 
54,053.45 
124,862.05 
60,000.00 
77,891.55
1/1/2017 
71,945.00 
12,486.21 
59,458.79 
65,403.26 
60,000.00 
72,486.21
1/1/2018 
71,945.00 
6,541.74‡ 
65,403.26 
— 
60,000.00 
66,541.74
1/1/2019 
— 
— 
— 
— 
60,000.00 
60,000.00
 
$359,725.00 
$59,725.00 
$300,000.00 
— 
$300,000.00 
$359,725.00
* Column (d) for preceding year times 10%.
† Column (a) minus Column (b).
‡ Rounded.

 
Lessee Accounting 
699
 
In the case of Exhibit 12.1, the payments are made at the end of the calendar years ended 
December 31, and interest expense for each year is recorded at the time of payment. However, 
in this case, (Exhibit 12.3), the second and all future payments are made after the end of the 
calendar reporting year and, therefore interest expense must be accrued at the end of each 
year. Accordingly, we would make the following entry at December 31, 2014:
DR Interest expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$22,805.50
   CR Obligation under capital lease   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$22,805.50
With this entry, the total lease obligation balance grows to $250,860.50 ($228,055.00 1 
$22,805.50). Both the interest accrual of $22,805.50 and the January 1, 2015, principal reduc-
tion of $49,139.50 would be reclassified as a current liability with the following entry:
DR Obligation under capital lease  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$71,945.00
   CR Obligation under capital lease—current   . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$71,945.00
On January 1, 2015, when the payment is made, we make the following entry:
DR Obligation under capital lease—current   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$71,945.00
   CR Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$71,945.00
This entry removes the increase in the obligation from the interest accrual and reduces the 
lease obligation balance to $178,915.50, the amount shown in the amortization schedule. De-
preciation expense also must be assigned to the appropriate year. In this case, the $60,000 
depreciation expense associated with the January 1, 2015, payment would be recognized in 
2014 net income. These types of entries have to be made any time that the date of the pay-
ments do not align with the end of the accounting year. For example, a lease could begin on 
October 1, and one-quarter year’s interest and depreciation would have to be accrued at De-
cember 31. We have illustrated this issue with payments made at the beginning of the period, 
but the issue also occurs with end of period payments.
 
Before we leave this example, note the end of the Exhibit 12.3 amortization schedule. The 
last lease payment is made on January 1, 2018, but the lessee still has use of the asset for all 
of 2018. During 2018, the lessee will still have depreciation expense, but it will not have inter-
est expense. As we saw in Exhibit 12.1, total lease expense of $359,725.00 is the sum of total 
interest expense and total depreciation expense and equals total cash outflows. The large dif-
ference between the 2018 interest expense of $7,194.12 in Exhibit 12.1 and the 2018 interest 
expense of $0 in Exhibit 12.3 occurs primarily because the final payment is one year apart 
(January 1, 2018, versus December 31, 2018). In a lease contract with monthly payments, an-
nual interest expense would be similar whether the payment is made at the beginning or the 
end of the month.
Financial Statement Effects of Treating a Lease as a 
Capital Lease versus Treating It as an Operating Lease
To understand the financial statement effects of lease capitalization, we need to compare the 
amounts that result from the capital lease approach with the amounts that would have resulted 
had the operating lease method been used instead.
 
As you read this section, keep in mind that in a bankruptcy there is no distinction between 
a capital and operating lease. The lessor has rights similar to a creditor with a loan secured by 

700 
CHAPTER 12
Financial Reporting for Leases
an asset. The creditor can renegotiate the lease terms or take control of the asset. For example, 
in the American Airlines (AMR) Chapter 11 proceedings, lessors took back some aircraft and 
renegotiated leases for other aircraft.8
 
To make that comparison, return to the beginning of the Lessee Company example (page 692) 
in which we assumed that lease payments were due at year-end, executory costs were zero, and 
there was no residual value guarantee. If that lease had been accounted for as an operating lease, 
the following journal entry would have been made in each of the five years of the lease:
DR Rent expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$79,139.18
   CR Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$79,139.18
 
Under the operating lease method, the total lease expense over the life of the lease equals 
the total cash outflow. This total expense number under the operating lease method is 
$395,695.90 and is shown at the bottom of Column (a) of Exhibit 12.1.
 
Under the capital lease method, the total lease expense over the life of the lease comprises 
both (1) the interest payments and (2) the amortization of the capitalized asset amount. The 
sum of these two elements is shown at the bottom of Column (f) of the amortization schedule 
in Exhibit 12.1. This total is also $395,695.90.
 
A comparison of the Exhibit 12.1 Column (a) total (lifetime expense under the operating 
lease method) and the Column (f) total (lifetime expense under the capital lease method) dem-
onstrates that the two methods give rise to identical cumulative total lifetime charges to ex-
pense. Over the life of a lease, total expense is unaffected by the choice of lease accounting 
method. However, a comparison of the year-by-year amounts in Columns (a) and (f) demon-
strates that the timing of the expense charge for the two methods differs. The capital lease 
approach leads to higher expense in the earlier years of the lease and lower lease expense in 
the later years, as shown in Figure 12.3. You can see in the graphical representation that in the 
early lease years, expenses under the capital lease approach exceed lease expenses that would 
be recognized under the operating lease approach. Ultimately, capital lease expense drops 
below operating lease expense.
 
Note in Figure 12.3 that the operating lease expense and capital lease expense are almost 
equal in year 2016, halfway through the life of the lease. Exhibit 12.1 indicates that operating 
lease expense in 2016 is $79,139.18 while capital lease expense is $79,680.77—virtually the 
same. The intuition behind the intersecting operating lease and capital lease lines in Figure 
12.3 extends to comparisons of real companies. For mature firms, the net income effect of 
capital lease versus operating lease treatment is often not significantly different. However, the 
split between operating expense and interest expense is different. Refer to the 2016 expense 
amounts in Exhibit 12.1 once again. Under operating lease treatment, the rent expense of 
$79,139.18 is classified as an operating expense. In contrast, under capital lease treatment, 
only the depreciation expense of $60,000 is deducted in determining operating income. 
The interest expense of $19,680.77 is classified as a financing (other) expense, which is be-
low operating income. The distinction in classification affects ratios based on operating in-
come such as return on assets. This issue is discussed in more detail in the constructive 
capitalization example contained in this chapter’s appendix.
 
This accelerated recognition of lease expenses under the capital lease approach provides 
another reason why many lessees prefer the operating lease method. Consider the incentives 
of a manager whose performance evaluations and bonuses are tied to financial numbers. 
 Because the capital lease accounting method loads the lease expenses at the front end of the 
8 See American Airlines, Inc., Form 10-K, December 31, 2012, p. 69 for a detailed discussion.
Assuming zero executory 
costs is equivalent to assum-
ing that the executory costs 
are paid directly by the lessee 
and are not included in the 
payments due to the lessor.
Contracting

 
Lessee Accounting 
701
65,000
2018
Operating lease
expense
($79,139.18)
Capital lease
expense
2017
Year
2016
2015
2014
Annual lease expense ($)
70,000
75,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
Figure 12.3
LESSEE COMPANY 
PATTERN OF EXPENSE 
RECOGNITION: CAPITAL 
VERSUS OPERATING LEASE 
METHOD
lease term, it lowers income during that front-end period and thus reduces the discounted 
present value of expected bonuses. Worse yet, if managers’ accomplishments are evaluated 
“strictly by the numbers,” the higher expenses and lower profitability could jeopardize their 
continuing employment and advancement. So, managers have a strong incentive to structure 
lease contracts in ways that circumvent the capitalization rules.
 
The higher initial expense under the capital lease method also results in a weaker balance 
sheet. The capital lease method requires the lessee to record additional liabilities, and the 
amount of these liabilities often exceeds the net asset value. This is the case in our initial 
example. Exhibit 12.1 indicates that the liability at December 31, 2014, is $250,860.82. How-
ever, the book value of the Leased asset—capital lease is $240,000 ($300,000 asset less accu-
mulated depreciation of $60,000). The lease obligation exceeds the leased asset by $10,860.82.
 
Figure 12.4(a) graphically represents data from the Lessee Company illustration in Ex-
hibit 12.1. The year-end book value of the capitalized asset (the black line in the graph) starts at 
$300,000 and declines yearly by $60,000—the straight-line depreciation amount from Column 
(e) in Exhibit 12.1—until it reaches zero at the end of 2018. The blue curved line depicts the year-
end lease obligation balance from Column (d) in Exhibit 12.1. While the two balances are obvi-
ously equal at the beginning and end of the lease, for all intermediate periods, the asset amount is 
lower than the liability. This relationship holds in general because the reduction in the lease obli-
gation in the beginning part of the lease term is less than the reduction in the carrying value of the 
leased asset caused by depreciation (for example, compare Columns [c] and [e] of Exhibit 12.1 
for December 31, 2014). Notice that Figure 12.4(a) includes the percentage relationship between 
the capitalized asset and liability balances for all intermediate lease years. For example, at 
December 31, 2014, the asset balance is 95.7% of the obligation balance for the five-year lease.
 
Parts (b) and (c) in the figure show the relationship between the lease asset and lease liabil-
ity balances for the same basic facts as in (a), but in (b) and (c), the lease period is for 10 years 
and 20 years, respectively. The difference between the asset and liability balances increases 
the longer the life of the lease. The reason is that the lease liability balance decreases at a 
lower rate when lease payments are spread over longer periods—that is, a larger portion of 
each early lease payment is for interest, and a correspondingly smaller portion goes toward 
reducing the lease obligation the longer the term of the lease.
Analysis

702 
CHAPTER 12
Financial Reporting for Leases
50,000
0
12/31/16
12/31/17
12/31/18
5-year lease
95.7%
88.3%
83.9%
69.3
56.1
81.0
74.1
91.5
87.4
Year-end book
value of
capitalized
asset
Year-end book
value of
capitalized
asset
Year-end book
value of
capitalized
asset
Year-end
lease obligation
balance
Year-end
lease obligation
balance
83.4
12/31/15
12/31/14
1/1/14
Amount ($)
100,000
150,000
200,000
250,000
300,000
350,000
(a) 
10-year lease
(b) 
12/31/19
12/31/21
12/31/23
12/31/17
12/31/15
1/1/14
20-year lease
(c) 
12/31/25
12/31/29
12/31/33
12/31/21
12/31/17
1/1/14
Year-end
lease obligation
balance
Figure 12.4 LESSEE COMPANY
General Relationship between Capital Lease Asset and Liability When Payments Are at End of Period (a) 5-Year Lease, (b) 10-Year 
Lease, and (c) 20-Year Lease
 
The specific relation between the lease asset and the lease liability depends on the depre-
ciation method, interest rate, timing and frequency of payments, and life of the lease. For ex-
ample, if annual payments are made at the beginning of the year, then the obligation could be 
lower than the depreciated asset for all or part of the life of the lease. However, if beginning of 
the period payments are made monthly, the lease obligation is usually greater than the book 
value of the lease asset within the first year of the lease. For mature firms using straight-line 
depreciation, a general rule-of-thumb is that the depreciated asset is 70% of the obligation.9
 
The capital lease approach invariably worsens certain key ratios on the lessee’s balance 
sheet—thus providing another explanation for lessees’ resistance to lease capitalization. One ratio 
that deteriorates under capital lease accounting is the current ratio. Using numbers in the Lessee 
Company example from Exhibit 12.1, we will demonstrate that the current ratio over the lease 
term will be lower under the capital lease approach than it would be under the operating lease 
approach. To see this, assume that Lessee is preparing a balance sheet on January 1, 2014, im-
mediately after signing the lease. Under the operating lease approach, the first cash payment of 
$79,139.18 due on December 31, 2014, is not considered to be a liability; it will accrue as a liabil-
ity only as time passes and as the lessor performs its duties under the lease. Because no part of the 
year-end 2014 payment of $79,139.18 is recognized as a liability at January 1, 2014, under the 
operating lease approach, the current ratio would be unaffected on signing if Lessee were some-
how able to avoid capitalization and were allowed to treat this as an operating lease.
 
By contrast, at the inception of the lease, the capital lease approach does recognize a 
 liability—called Obligation under capital lease. As shown in Exhibit 12.1, the balance in this 
liability account at January 1, 2014, is $300,000.00. Furthermore, GAAP requires that a portion 
9 See E. A. Imhoff Jr., R. C. Lipe, and D. W. Wright, “Operating Leases: Impact of Constructive Capitalization,” Accounting 
Horizons, March 1991, pp. 51–63. The 70% is derived from an analysis (based on end-of-year payments) of asset-to-liability 
ratios for leases of various duration and interest rates.
Analysis

 
Lessee Accounting 
703
of this $300,000.00 balance be classified as a current liability. As mentioned on page 694, the 
current portion of the Obligation under capital lease is the reduction in the principal balance 
that will take place over the ensuing 12 months of 2014. Exhibit 12.1 shows the current portion 
to be $49,139.18, the expected 2014 reduction in the principal balance. Thus, treating the lease 
as a capital lease rather than as an operating 
lease will increase Lessee’s current liabilities by 
$49,139.18 and thereby lower its January 1, 
2014, current ratio. Exhibit 12.1 illustrates that 
this negative effect on the current ratio increases 
as the lease ages because the portion of each 
$79,139.18 cash outflow that represents princi-
pal reduction increases over time.
 
To protect the lender, many loan agreements require borrowers to maintain a certain pre-
specified current ratio level. It is not surprising, therefore, that lessees resist lease capitaliza-
tion. As the preceding discussion illustrates, treating a lease as a capital lease lowers the current 
ratio; therefore, capitalization could push financially struggling lessees into technical violation 
of their existing loan agreements by lowering their current ratio below the prespecified limit.
 
Two far more obvious cases of ratio deterioration under capital lease accounting relate to 
the leverage ratio and the asset turnover ratio. These effects were discussed at the beginning 
the chapter and will not be repeated here.
 
Lease treatment also has cash flow statement implications. To see this, refer back to 
 Exhibit 12.1, which shows the amortization 
schedule for a capital lease. On the cash flow 
statement, the interest expense component—
Column (b)—of each yearly payment would be 
classified as an operating cash flow while the 
principal reduction component—Column (c)—
would be classified as a financing cash flow. 
Depreciation expense would be an addition in 
an indirect method presentation of operating 
activities and would not be shown at all in a di-
rect method presentation. In contrast, if the lease 
had been treated as an operating lease, the entire 
$79,139.18 annual payment would be classified 
as an operating cash flow. So, when lessees suc-
cessfully keep leases off the balance sheet, 
 reported cash flow from operations is lower than it would be under the capital lease approach.
 
Exhibit 12.4 shows the total amount of scheduled capital lease payments versus operating 
lease payments for five of the largest firms in each of five industries that use leases exten-
sively. Notice that the dollar amount of the minimum lease payments arising from operating 
leases is, on average, 42 times more than the capital lease payments for supermarkets and 
33 times more for airlines. This demonstrates that capital leases arise infrequently even in 
industries that utilize leasing heavily.
 
One possible explanation for the preponderance of operating leases in Exhibit 12.4 is that the 
criteria for capitalizing lease commitments in FASB ASC 840 can be readily circumvented. For 
example, a lessee can simply refuse to sign a lease contract that transfers legal title or contains a 
bargain purchase option. This avoids triggering the first and second capitalization criteria. Crite-
rion (3)—the 75% rule—can also be circumvented by bargaining with the lessor to shorten the 
lease term until it is less than 75% of the asset’s expected economic life. However, criterion (4)—
When lease payments must be paid in advance, there is also a current ratio nu-
merator effect under the capital lease approach. The advance payment  reduces 
cash as well as the liability account Obligation under capital lease, as shown in 
the journal entry on page 698. The net effect is to lower the  numerator of the 
current  ratio. By contrast, if the same lease were treated as an operating lease, 
when cash is credited, the offsetting debit is to Prepaid expense—a current 
 asset account. Accordingly, the current ratio numerator is unchanged.
As an example, several telecom firms artificially increased reported revenues by 
simultaneously leasing line capacity to a competitor (thereby generating revenue) 
while at the same time leasing an equivalent amount of capacity from that same 
competitor. The cash inflows from one lease were exactly equal to the cash out-
flows on the other. These transactions were designed to overstate not just reve-
nues but operating cash flows too. Here’s how it worked. The lease of line 
capacity to the competitor was treated as an operating lease. So, these cash in-
flows were classified as operating cash inflows on the cash flow statement. But 
the lease of line capacity from the competitor was treated as a capital lease. As 
you just saw, the principal payment component of the cash outflow is a financing 
flow on the cash flow statement. So, from a cash flow statement perspective, this 
“round-trip” pair of leases with equal cash inflows and outflows nevertheless 
increased reported operating cash inflows.
Source: K. Brown, “Creative Accounting: How to Buff a Company,” The Wall Street Journal, 
February 21, 2002.
Contracting

704 
CHAPTER 12
Financial Reporting for Leases
EXHIBIT 12.4
Comparison of Undiscounted Dollar Magnitudes 
of Capital and Operating Lease Payments
2012 Fiscal Year
 
 
Total Scheduled Minimum 
 
 
Lease Payments
 
 
Operating 
Capital 
to Capital Lease
($ in millions) 
Leases 
Leases 
Payments
Department/Variety Stores
Wal-Mart 
$16,803 
$6,213 
2.7
Target 
4,029 
4,997 
0.8
Costco Wholesale 
2,747 
328 
8.4
Sears 
4,535 
643 
7.1
Macy’s 
2,714 
67 
40.5
 Average 
 
 
11.9
Supermarkets
Kroger 
5,003 
449 
11.1
Safeway 
4,084 
739 
5.5
Supervalu 
638 
451 
1.4
Publix Super Markets 
4,274 
— 
*
Whole Foods 
6,775 
45 
150.6
 Average 
 
 
42.2
Railroads
Union Pacific Corporation 
4,241 
2,441 
1.7
BNSF Railway 
5,119 
1,275 
4.0
CSX Corp 
689 
— 
*
Norfolk Southern Corporation 
749 
8 
93.6
Kansas City Southern 
716 
26 
27.7
 Average 
 
 
31.8
Airlines
AMR 
9,011 
682 
13.2
UAL 
17,214 
1,454 
11.8
Delta Airlines 
13,846 
914 
15.1
Southwest Airlines 
5,086 
46 
110.6
Jet Blue Airways 
1,492 
96 
15.5
 Average 
 
 
33.3
Communications
Verizon Communications Inc. 
11,841 
407 
29.1
AT&T Inc. 
24,065 
— 
*
Sprint Nextel Corporation 
15,666 
1,603 
9.8
Comcast 
3,217 
113 
28.5
Qwest Communications 
1,221 
244 
5.0
 Average 
 
 
18.1
* Ratio cannot be computed due to immaterial capital leases.
Source: Company SEC filings and annual reports
Ratio of Operating
the 90% rule (or recovery of investment criterion)—is the most difficult to circumvent and un-
doubtedly accounts for many capital leases that ultimately appear on financial statements.
 
We can only infer why companies in these five industries that extensively use leases have 
so few capital leases. A reasonable conjecture is that they have chosen to keep these leases 
“off the balance sheet” to improve ratios such as debt to equity and asset turnover.

 
Lessee Accounting
705
Lessees’ Financial Statement Disclosures
The ratio of operating lease payments to capital lease payments in Exhibit 12.4 is typical of 
other industries as well. Operating leases predominate by a wide margin. However, capital 
leases do exist, and their frequency differs across companies even within the same industry. 
For this reason, analysts try to adjust financial statements to include the effects of off-balance-
sheet operating leases to enhance comparisons between firms in an industry. The note disclo-
sures required by ASC 840 make these adjustments possible. Exhibit 12.5 shows portions of 
the lease disclosure from the 2012 annual report of Whole Foods Market, Inc., one of North 
America’s largest supermarket chains.
 
Exhibit 12.5 contains the disclosures required of all lessees. Notice that a schedule of fu-
ture minimum lease payments must be reported both for capital leases and for operating 
leases. (We used these schedules to develop the data in Exhibit 12.4.) Payments for each of 
the ensuing five years must be separately disclosed, as Whole Foods has done for 2013 
through 2017. Minimum lease payments for all later years may be aggregated (for example, 
$30.7 million for capital leases and $4,922.8 million for operating leases). U.S. GAAP re-
quires the disclosure of the present value of the minimum lease payments only for capital 
leases.10 However, the scheduled payments on operating leases make it possible for analysts 
to estimate the discounted present value of the off-balance-sheet leases. In the appendix to this 
chapter, we use the Whole Foods disclosures to illustrate this computation step-by-step. Once 
the present value of the off-balance-sheet leases is determined, the computed dollar amount 
can be added to both the asset account (Leased asset—capital lease) and the liability account 
(Obligation under capital lease). This adjustment allows analysts to compensate for distor-
tions that can arise from off-balance-sheet leases when making interfirm comparisons.
EXHIBIT 12.5
Whole Foods Market, Inc. Lessee Disclosure
Excerpts from Lease Disclosure, September 30, 2012
Rental expense charged to operations under operating leases for fiscal years 2012, 2011, and 2010 
totaled approximately $353.4 million, $321.6 million and $303.5 million, respectively. Minimum 
rental commitments and sublease rental income required by all noncancelable leases are approxi-
mately as follows (in thousands):
 
Capital 
Operating
Fiscal year 2013 
$ 2,967 
$  309,058
Fiscal year 2014 
2,743 
364,330
Fiscal year 2015 
2,817 
385,540
Fiscal year 2016 
2,644 
396,112
Fiscal year 2017 
2,697 
396,976
Future fiscal years 
30,722 
4,922,823
 
44,590 
$6,774,839
Less amounts representing interest 
20,468
Net present value of capital lease obligations 
24,122
Less current installments 
1,012
Long-term capital lease obligation, less current installments 
$23,110
The present values of future minimum obligations for capital leases shown above are calculated based 
on interest rates determined at the inception of the lease, or upon acquisition of the original lease.
10 ASR No. 147 required the disclosure of the present value of lease payments under long-term leases by property type from 
1973 to 1982. Preparers had previously lobbied the Accounting Principles Board against disclosing present values of off-
balance sheet leases by asserting that the disclosure would be admitting that the leases should be on the balance sheet. See 
S. Zeff, “Lobbying on lessee accounting in 1972–73, and the role of the SEC,” World Accounting Report, August 2, 2012, 
www.worldaccountingreport.com.
Some lenders and analysts 
will use a short-cut 
approach to estimate the 
operating lease liability by 
multiplying the annual rent 
expense by an industry 
multiple, e.g., eight. The 
resulting liability can be 
included in ratios used for 
analysis or debt covenants. 
For example, Whole Foods 
Market multiplies its rent 
expense by eight and adds 
the amount to its invested 
capital when computing 
return on invested capital 
(see Whole Foods Market, 
Inc., September 30, 2012, 
Form 10-K, p. 24).

706 
CHAPTER 12
Financial Reporting for Leases
 
Our discussion for operating leases so far has assumed that payments are constant. Under 
this scenario, the entire operating lease obligation is generally off-balance-sheet. However, 
FASB ASC 840-20-25 requires that rent expense be recognized on a straight-line basis even if 
payments are not the same over time. For example, to make a lease more attractive, the lessor 
may offer a “rent holiday” by suspending rent payments for the first year. Under FASB ASC 
840, firms must determine total rent to be paid over the life of the lease and accrue it evenly 
over the lease term. The form of the accrual and payment entry is:
DR Rent expense   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$XXX
   CR Accrued rent expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$XXX
   CR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
XXX
As a result of this entry, the balance sheet has a liability. This liability is reduced as the rental pay-
ment amounts increase during the lease term. For example, on its September 30, 2012, balance 
sheet, Whole Foods Market had a liability of $440.8 million for expected increases. The liability 
of $440.8 million represents only 6.5% of the off-balance sheet undiscounted operating lease 
 liabilities of $6,774.8 million. Between 2004 and 2006, more than 250 firms had to restate their 
financial statements because of this and other issues related to operating lease accounting.11
RECAP
We have shown that lease capitalization affects financial statement ratios and that the 
FASB ASC 840 capitalization criteria can be circumvented. Because different firms can 
conceivably treat virtually identical leases dissimilarly, financial statements may not be 
immediately comparable across firms. To make comparisons, statement users need to 
adjust for these differences. The appendix to this chapter outlines procedures for using 
financial statement disclosures to capitalize operating leases, thereby increasing interfirm 
statement comparability.
LESSOR ACCOUNTING
In addition to outlining rules for lessees, ASC 840 specifies the treatment of leases on lessors’ 
books. While lessees have been reluctant to treat leases as capital leases, lessors have not. 
Treating a lease as a capital lease on the lessor’s books accelerates the timing of the recogni-
tion of leasing income—thus creating favorable financial statement effects for the lessor, as 
we’ll show in the following sections.
Sales-Type and Direct Financing Leases
From the perspective of the lessor, if a lease arrangement
1. Transfers property rights in the leased asset to the lessee and
2. Allows reasonably accurate estimates regarding the amount and collectibility of the 
eventual net cash flows to the lessor, 
the lessor treats the lease as a capital lease. In a lessor’s capital lease, the leased asset is consid-
ered to be “sold” and is removed from the lessor’s books. Lessors use two types of capital leases:
1. A sales-type lease, which exists when the lessor is a manufacturer or dealer.
2. A direct financing lease, which exists when the lessor is a financial institution (for 
example, an insurance firm, bank, or financing company).
11 For more information on the restatements, see A. A. Acito, J. J. Burks, and W. B. Johnson, “Materiality Decisions and the 
Correction of Accounting Errors,” The Accounting Review, May 2009, pp. 659–688.

 
Lessor Accounting 
707
When both conditions—the transfer of property rights and reasonably accurate estimates of 
net cash flows—are not simultaneously met, the lease must be treated as an operating lease.
 
Figure 12.5 diagrams the various possibilities for lessor accounting, which we are about to 
explain in detail.
Sales-Type Leases 
For manufacturers or dealers, leases can serve as a marketing vehicle 
because leasing arrangements generate “sales” from potential customers who are  unwilling or 
unable to buy the assets outright for cash. For example, Deere & Company manufactures farm 
equipment for sale and leases farm equipment through its wholly owned subsidiary, John Deere 
Credit. A lessor who uses leasing as a means for marketing products earns a profit from two 
sources:
1. One component of the total return on the lease is the manufacturer’s or dealer’s 
profit—the difference between the fair value (cash sales price) of the asset and its cost to 
the manufacturer or dealer.
2. Another component of the lessor’s return is financing profit—the difference between the 
total (undiscounted) minimum lease payments plus unguaranteed residual value and the 
fair value of the leased asset.
The following sales-type lease example illustrates these components.
 Figure 12.5
 DECISION TREE FOR 
LESSOR’S TREATMENT 
OF LEASES  
Yes
No
Does the lease do both of the following?
    1. Transfer property rights to the lessee
    2. Allow reasonably accurate estimates of lease net cash flows 
        and their collectibility
The lease is accounted for as
a direct financing lease
The lease is accounted for as
an operating lease
The lease is accounted for as
 a sales-type lease
If the lessor is a financial
institution (that is, it does not 
earn either a manufacturing
 or resale profit)
If the lessor is either the
manufacturer of the 
leased asset or a dealer 
who sells the asset
ABC Company manufactures tractors. Each tractor has a total production cost of $36,000 
and a cash sales price of $50,000. ABC Company “sells” some of these tractors under five-
year sales-type leases, which call for annual lease payments of $15,000. At the end of the 
fifth year, legal ownership of the tractor transfers to the lessee.
 
ABC Company’s total profit over the five years of the lease is $39,000—that is, the 
 lessee’s payments of $75,000 ($15,000 per year times five years) minus the production cost 
of $36,000. This total profit comprises two components:
Manufacturer’s profit: Cash sales price of $50,000 
 minus production cost of $36,000 
$14,000
Financing profit: The difference between the cash 
 sales price of the tractor ($50,000) and the gross 
 inflows from the lessee ($15,000 3 5 years 5 $75,000) 
25,000
Total profit 
$39,000

708 
CHAPTER 12
Financial Reporting for Leases
Direct Financing Leases 
Some lessors are not manufacturers or dealers; they are 
organizations such as banks, insurance firms, or financing companies that provide lessees 
with a means to finance asset acquisitions. These banks and other organizations acquire assets 
from manufacturers by paying the fair value and then leasing the asset to lessees. Lessors who 
are neither manufacturers nor dealers earn their profit from a single source—the finance fee 
that they charge the lessee for financing the asset acquisition. A direct financing lease example 
follows to illustrate lessor profit arising solely from financing the transaction.
Pleasant City National Bank leases tractors to local farmers. It purchases tractors from ABC 
Company, the manufacturer, at their fair value of $50,000. The Bank then leases the tractors 
under five-year direct financing leases, which call for annual lease payments of $15,000. 
At the end of the fifth year, legal ownership of the tractor transfers to the lessee.
 
The Bank’s total profit (finance fee) on this lease is $25,000, which represents the differ-
ence between the cost of the tractor to the bank ($50,000) and the gross inflows from the 
lessee ($75,000).
Lessors’ Operating Leases
Some lease arrangements do not transfer property rights in the asset to the lessee, or if they do 
transfer property rights, there may be great uncertainty about the ultimate profit or its collect-
ibility. In either case, the leased asset is not considered to be “sold” and remains on the les-
sor’s books. Such leases are called operating leases.
Distinction between Capital and Operating Leases
FASB ASC 840 identifies two types of characteristics that must be met for a lease to be treated 
as a capital lease—either a sales-type lease or a direct financing lease—on the lessor’s books. 
For ease of reference, these will be called Type I and Type II characteristics. A lease meeting at 
least one of the Type I characteristics and both of the Type II characteristics is a capital lease. 
The Type I characteristics are identical to the lessee’s criteria for capital lease treatment.
Type I Characteristics
1. The lease transfers ownership of the asset to the lessee by the end of the lease term.
2. The lease contains a bargain purchase option.
3. The noncancelable lease term is 75% or more of the estimated economic life of the 
leased asset.
4. The present value of the minimum lease payments equals or exceeds 90% of the leased 
asset’s fair value.
Type II Characteristics
1. The collectibility of the minimum lease payments is reasonably predictable.
2. No important uncertainties surround the amount of unreimbursable costs yet to be 
incurred by the lessor under the lease.
 
The purpose of these Type I and Type II characteristics is to establish the appropriate time 
for recognizing revenue and income on the lessor’s books. We already know from Chapter 2 
that revenue should be recognized when both of the following conditions exist:
1. The “critical event” in the process of earning the revenue has taken place.
2. The amount of the revenue that has been earned is measurable with a reasonable degree 
of assurance.

 
Lessor Accounting 
709
Accounting rules for the lessor are directly linked to these two revenue recognition criteria. 
The Type I characteristics dealing with transfer of property rights identify the critical event in 
determining whether a lease is in substance a “sale of assets.” That is, if any one of the four 
Type I characteristics is met, valuable property rights have been transferred to the lessee. This 
transfer of property rights constitutes the “critical event.” The Type II characteristics relate to 
the predictability and risk of cash flows and thus to the measurability of revenue.
 
When at least one of the Type I characteristics and both of the Type II 
characteristics are satisfied by a lease, the criteria for revenue recognition are 
met. This means that manufacturers or dealers can immediately recognize the 
sale, match costs, and reflect manufacturer’s or dealer’s profit. (By contrast, 
under the operating lease treatment, this profit recognition occurs over the life 
of the lease as each party performs its duties.) Furthermore, lessors can begin to 
recognize financing profit using an effective interest approach when the Type I 
and Type II characteristics exist in a lease.
 
When a lease does not meet any of the Type I characteristics, or when it meets at least one 
of the Type I characteristics but not both of the Type II characteristics, that lease must be ac-
counted for on the lessor’s books as an operating lease. Under the operating lease approach, 
the lessor’s recognition of income takes place piecemeal as contractual performance pro-
gresses, as we illustrate later.
 
Figure 12.6 summarizes the rules for how to classify and record leases on the lessor’s 
books. This figure is a more detailed expansion of Figure 12.5.
 
FASB ASC 840 tries to establish symmetry in the accounting for leases by lessors and les-
sees. If a lease qualifies as a “sale” from the lessor’s perspective, the property rights inherent 
in the lease require asset recognition by the lessee. Of course, this symmetry is not perfect 
because a particular lease may meet at least one of the Type I characteristics but not both of 
the Type II characteristics. In such cases, the asset appears on both the lessor’s and the lessee’s 
books. Another factor that inhibits symmetry is that the discount rate used by the lessor and 
the lessee could differ. The lessor is required to use the rate of return that is implicit in 
the lease. If this rate is higher than the lessee’s incremental borrowing rate, the lessor and the 
lessee use different discount rates when accounting for the lease.
Direct Financing Lease Treatment Illustrated
To illustrate the accounting for leases that qualify as direct financing leases, we use a variation 
of our earlier Lessee Company scenario on page 692.
Assume that Lessee Company signs a noncancelable five-year lease on January 1, 2014, with 
Lessor Company. The lease begins on January 1, 2014, and has the following terms:
1. It calls for five payments of $79,139.18 to be made at the end of each year.
2. The leased asset has a cost and fair value of $315,041.60 on January 1, 2014.
3. The lease has no renewal option, and possession of the asset reverts to Lessor Company 
on January 1, 2019.
4. The leased asset has an expected economic life of six years.
5. The collectibility of the lease payments is reasonably predictable.
6. No important uncertainties regarding unreimbursable costs yet to be incurred by  Lessor 
Company exist.
7. The lease contract requires the lessee to guarantee a residual value of $38,000 at the 
end of the fifth year of the lease.
8. The implicit rate in the lease is 11%.
Under the operating lease treatment, the recogni-
tion of financing profit is related to performance 
(that is, passage of time). As we will see, the 
recognition of financing profit is accelerated 
when it is recognized using an effective 
interest approach rather than as a function 
of performance.

710 
CHAPTER 12
Financial Reporting for Leases
Note that differences from the prior Lessee Company example relate to items 7 and 8. In the 
original example, Lessee Company did know the implicit interest rate and did not guarantee a 
residual value of $38,000.
 
Exhibit 12.6 shows how the 11% rate is used to compute the lease payment. The lessor 
begins with the fair value of $315,041.60 and subtracts the $22,551.10 present value of the 
$38,000 guaranteed residual. (The lessor would deduct the present value of a bargain purchase 
option or an unguaranteed residual in the same way that the present value of the guaranteed 
residual is deducted in Exhibit 12.6.) The amount to be recovered through lease payments of 
$292,490.50 is divided by 3.69590 (the present value factor for a five-year ordinary annuity at 
11%) to obtain the annual rent payment of $79,139.18. The bottom of Exhibit 12.6 diagrams 
how the sum of the present value of the rent payments and the present value of the guaranteed 
residual value equals the fair value of $315,041.60.
Figure 12.6 DETAILED EXPANSION OF FIGURE 12.5—DECISION TREE FOR LESSOR’S TREATMENT OF LEASES
Yes
No
Does the lease meet at least one of the Type I 
characteristics and both of the Type II 
characteristics?
If the lessor:
Is a financial institution
The lease is accounted 
for as an operating lease.
The lease is accounted 
for as a direct financing
lease.
The lessor immediately
recognizes a manufacturer’s
profit (or a dealer’s profit)
equal to the difference
between the fair value cash
sales price and the cost of
manufacturing (or—for a
dealer—purchasing) the 
leased asset.
The lessor also begins
recognizing the financing
profit over the period of the
lease using an effective
interest approach.
The lessor recognizes
the financing profit over 
the period of the lease
using an effective interest 
approach.
Profit is recognized
piecemeal, over time, as
partial performance of the
lease terms takes place.
Is the manufacturer of the
leased asset or a dealer
who sells the asset
The lease is accounted 
for as a sales-type lease.
The asset is considered to
be “sold” and is removed
from the lessor’s books.
The asset is considered to
be “sold” and is removed
from the lessor’s books.
The asset remains on
the books of the lessor.

 
Lessor Accounting
711
 
The lease terms satisfy both the third and the fourth Type I characteristics. We will assume that 
the lease also satisfies both Type II characteristics. Therefore, this is a capital lease. Assume that 
Lessor Company is not a manufacturer or dealer, so this lease is a direct financing capital lease.
 
Lessor Company’s amortization schedule for this lease is shown in Exhibit 12.7. Notice 
that the initial amount in Column (d), Remaining Principal Amount, equals the asset’s fair 
value. The lessor’s table always begins with the fair value and uses the implicit rate. The 
 beginning balance of $315,041.60 also represents the present value of the rental payments and 
the expected residual value (see Exhibit 12.6).
EXHIBIT 12.6
Lessor Company: Computation of Lease Payment
Fair value of leased asset at 1/1/14 
$315,041.60
Less 
:  Present value of the guaranteed residual value 
$38,000 3 .59345* 
22,551.10
Amount to be recovered through lease payments 
$292,490.50
Divided by :  Present value factor for a five-year ordinary 
annuity at 11% 
3.69590
Equals 
: Lease payment 
$ 79,139.18
 
1/1/14 
12/31/14 
12/31/15 
12/31/16 
12/31/17 
12/31/18
Rent payments 
 
$79,139.18 $79,139.18 $79,139.18 $79,139.18 $ 79,139.18
Residual value 
 
• 
• 
• 
• 
$ 38,000.00
 
Present value of the residual 
5 
 
$ 22,551.10
 
Present value of the rent payments 
5 
 
 292,490.50
 
Fair value of leased asset 
 
 
$315,041.60
* Present value factor of $1 due in five years at 11%.
EXHIBIT 12.7
Lessor Company: Amortization 
Schedule—Effective Interest Method
 
 
(b) 
 
(d)
 
(a) 
Interest 
(c) 
Remaining
 
Total 
 (Financing)  
Principal 
Principal
Date 
 Receipts 
Income* 
Reduction† 
Amount
 01/01/14 
 
 
 
$315,041.60
 12/31/14 
$79,139.18 
$34,654.58 
$44,484.60 
270,557.00
 12/31/15 
79,139.18 
29,761.27 
49,377.91 
221,179.09
 12/31/16 
79,139.18 
24,329.70 
54,809.48 
166,369.61
 12/31/17 
79,139.18 
18,300.66 
60,838.52 
105,531.09
 12/31/18 
79,139.18 
11,608.09‡ 
67,531.09 
38,000.00
 
 
$395,695.90 
$118,654.30 
$277,041.60
* Column (d) for preceding year times 11%.
† Column (a) minus Column (b).
‡ Rounded.

712 
CHAPTER 12
Financial Reporting for Leases
 
At the lease’s inception, Lessor records in a receivable account, Gross investment in leased 
asset, the undiscounted sum of the minimum rental payments plus the guaranteed residual 
value of the asset at the end of the lease term.
Minimum rental payments over the life of
 the lease ($79,139.18 3 5) 
$395,695.90
Guaranteed residual value at 12/31/18 
38,000.00
 Gross investment in leased asset 
$433,695.90
 
The journal entry on January 1, 2014, is:
DR Gross investment in leased asset   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $433,695.90
   CR Equipment   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$315,041.60
   CR Unearned financing income—leases   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
118,654.30
The credit to Unearned financing income—leases is the difference between the Gross invest-
ment in leased asset and the $315,041.60 cost of the asset. Unearned financing income—
leases, a contra-account to Gross investment in leased asset, is used to arrive at Net investment 
in leased asset. The Net investment in leased asset also equals the present value of the future 
payments and residual value (see Exhibits 12.6 and 12.7). Only the Net investment in leased 
asset appears on the balance sheet, but the lessor’s note disclosure for leases shows:
Gross investment in leased asset 
$433,695.90
Less: Unearned financing income—leases 
(118,654.30)
 Net investment in leased asset 
$315,041.60
This entry removes the asset account representing the equipment being leased and replaces it 
with two accounts that together reflect the net investment in the lease. The dollar amount for 
the equipment removed ($315,041.60) equals the dollar amount for the net investment in 
leased asset ($433,695.90 2 $118,654.30).
 
At December 31, 2014, when the first cash payment is received from the lessee, Lessor 
Company makes the following journal entries:
DR Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$79,139.18
   CR Gross investment in leased asset  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$79,139.18
DR Unearned financing income—leases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$34,654.58
   CR Financing income—leases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$34,654.58
The amount of financing income recognized in each year equals the amounts shown in Col-
umn (b) of Exhibit 12.7, Lessor’s amortization schedule. For example, the $34,654.58 is the 
product of the January 1, 2014, net investment in leased asset ($315,041.60 from Column [d]) 
multiplied by 11%, Lessor’s rate of return on the lease. Lessor records no depreciation be-
cause the equipment itself was removed from its books (see the preceding January 1, 2014, 
journal entry).
 
After the last payment is received at the end of the lease term on December 31, 2018, the 
balance in the Gross investment in leased asset account will be $38,000 (Column [d] of the 
amortization schedule). This amount represents the guaranteed residual value of the asset on 
the date that possession of the asset reverts to Lessor Company. Assume that the asset’s fair 

 
Lessor Accounting 
713
value equals or exceeds $38,000; then the following entry will be made on December 31, 
2018, to reflect the end of the lease and physical repossession of the asset.
DR Equipment—residual value  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$38,000.00
   CR Gross investment in leased asset   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$38,000.00
If the equipment’s residual value is less than $38,000, the lessee must remit the deficiency in 
cash when it returns the asset to Lessor Company. So, if the asset’s residual value is only 
$33,000 on December 31, 2018, the entry is:
DR Cash   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 5,000
DR Equipment—residual value. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
33,000
   CR Gross investment in leased asset. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$38,000
Guaranteed versus Unguaranteed Residual Values
Lease contracts do not usually require the lessee to guarantee that the residual value will exceed a 
certain dollar amount. When no such contract clause exists, the residual value is unguaranteed.
 
If the asset reverts to the lessor at the end of the lease term, the initial entry to record the 
lease is identical regardless of whether the residual value is guaranteed or unguaranteed. To 
see why, return to the example in Exhibit 12.6. It assumed that the residual value would be 
$38,000 and that the lessee would make up any deficiency if the December 31, 2018, value 
were less than $38,000. So, the discounted present value at 11% of the $38,000 residual value 
($22,551.10) belongs to the lessor and is subtracted from the fair value of $315,041.60. If 
we alter the example and assume that the expected asset residual value of $38,000 is unguaran-
teed, the asset still reverts to the lessor at December 31, 2018, and the expected (but now un-
guaranteed) net present value of the residual value ($22,551.10) still belongs to the lessor. So, 
the $22,551.10 is still subtracted from the fair value just as it would be if it were guaranteed.
 
Because the lessor includes unguaranteed residual values in its Net investment in leased as-
set and bears the risk associated with declines in values, it must review the estimated residual 
values annually. If the declines are viewed to be other than temporary, the lessor must reduce 
its Net investment in leased asset and record a loss for that period.12 For example, in 2010, 
Toyota recalled millions of its cars because of accelerator pedal issues. If a lessor held capital 
leases with unguaranteed residuals on some of these cars, then it would have recorded losses 
for declines in the residual values if the lessors viewed the declines to be permanent.
 
From the lessee’s perspective, the initial entry to record the lease is different if the residual 
value is unguaranteed. Only guaranteed residual values are obligations to the lessee and 
thereby included in the computation of minimum lease payments, as discussed on page 696.
Financial Statement Effects of Direct Financing 
versus Operating Leases
Comparing the financial statement effects of direct financing versus operating lease treatment 
allows a more complete understanding of lessor accounting.
 
Had Lessor Company accounted for the previous lease as an operating lease, it would make 
the following journal entry each year:
DR Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$79,139.18
   CR Rental revenue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$79,139.18
12 See FASB ASC 840-30-35-25.

714 
CHAPTER 12
Financial Reporting for Leases
 
Because the leased asset remains on the lessor’s books under the operating lease method, 
annual depreciation must be recognized. Assume that the asset is depreciated down to a 
$38,000 residual value on a straight-line basis; then the annual depreciation expense is 
$55,408.32 ([$315,041.60 2 $38,000.00]y5), and the entry each year is:
DR Depreciation expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$55,408.32
CR Accumulated depreciation   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$55,408.32
 
Exhibit 12.8 shows operating lease method amounts in Columns (a), (b), (c), and (f) and con-
trasts these numbers with direct financing amounts in Columns (d) and (g). Income for the operat-
ing lease method totals $118,654.30 over the life of the lease, as shown in Column (c). This total 
is identical to the income recognized under the direct financing method, as the total in Col-
umn (d) reflects. So, income over the life of the lease is unaffected by which accounting 
method—the operating lease method or the direct financing method—is used. However, the 
timing of income does differ for the two methods, as indicated in the highlighted Column (e) of 
Exhibit 12.8. The direct financing method recognizes income sooner. Notice that the income tim-
ing difference would widen if an accelerated depreciation method were used in conjunction with 
the operating method as opposed to the straight-line method employed in the example.
 
The “front loading” of income under the direct financing method may explain why lessors—
unlike lessees—have never seriously opposed the capital lease approach to lease accounting. 
Furthermore, the direct financing method results in other favorable financial statement effects. 
For example, the lessor’s rate of return on assets ratio usually improves under the direct financing 
method in the early years of a lease. Highlighted Columns (e) and (h) in Exhibit 12.8 illustrate 
this effect. Income and the end-of-year asset balance are both $10,923.72 more under the direct 
financing method in 2014. An equal dollar increase in the numerator and denominator of a ratio 
increases the ratio value as long as the ratio of initial value is less than 100%. Because reported 
rates of return on assets are almost always far less than 100%, the adoption of the direct financing 
method almost always increases the lessor’s reported rate of return in the lease’s early years.
 
Of course, Exhibit 12.8 also illustrates that this effect reverses as the lease ages. In 
2018, for example, income is $12,122.77 less under the direct financing method while the 
EXHIBIT 12.8
Lessor Company: Operating Lease Method versus Direct Financing Method 
Income and Asset Balance Comparison
Net Asset Balance at
 
(h)
Operating Lease Method
 
 
(d) 
(e) 
End of Year
  
Asset
 
(a) 
 
(c) 
Direct 
Income 
 
(g) 
Balance
 
Lease  
 
Operating 
Financing 
Difference 
(f) 
Direct 
Difference
 
Payment  
(b) 
Lease Method 
Method 
between 
Operating 
Financing 
between
Year 
Received 
 Depreciation 
Income* 
Income† 
Methods 
Method‡ 
Method§ 
Methods
2014 
$ 79,139.18 
$ 55,408.32 
$ 23,730.86 
$ 34,654.58 
$10,923.72 
$259,633.28 
$270,557.00 
$10,923.72
2015 
79,139.18 
55,408.32 
23,730.86 
29,761.27 
6,030.41 
204,224.96 
221,179.09 
16,954.13
2016 
79,139.18 
55,408.32 
23,730.86 
24,329.70 
598.84 
148,816.64 
166,369.61 
17,552.97
2017 
79,139.18 
55,408.32 
23,730.86 
18,300.66 
(5,430.20) 
93,408.32 
105,531.09 
12,122.77
2018 
79,139.18 
55,408.32 
23,730.86 
11,608.09 
(12,122.77) 
38,000.00 
38,000.00 
$    0.00
 
$395,695.90 
$277,041.60 
$118,654.30 
$118,654.30 
$     0.00
* Column (a) minus Column (b).
† From Column (b) of Exhibit 12.7.
‡ $315,041.60 minus the period-to-date cumulative depreciation amount from Column (b).
§ From Column (d) of Exhibit 12.7.
Contracting

 
Lessor Accounting 
715
end-of-year asset value equals what it would have been under the operating lease treat-
ment. This would make the 2018 return on the direct financing method less than the return 
that would have been reported on the operating lease approach.13
 
The current ratio of a lessor that uses the direct financing method will also be improved. 
Consider the current ratio at December 31, 2014. Under the operating lease method, the De-
cember 31, 2015, expected lease cash receipt of $79,139.18 would not be shown as an asset on 
Lessor’s books on December 31, 2014, because performance under the lease contract has not 
yet taken place and will not take place until 2015. Under the direct financing method, however, 
the 2015 lease payment would be included as a component of the Net investment in leased as-
sets account. Returning to Exhibit 12.7, look at the December 31, 2014, balance in this account 
(Column [d]), which is $270,557.00; of this amount, $49,377.91 (the principal reduction in the 
next 12 months) is classified as a current asset. This amount shown in Column (c) of Exhibit 
12.7 represents the difference between the gross December 31, 2015, cash receipt of $79,139.18 
from the lessee and the interest income of $29,761.27 that will be recognized in 2015. Thus, 
current assets on the direct financing basis would be higher than they would have been under 
the operating lease approach—and the current ratio is accordingly improved.
Sales-Type Lease Treatment 
Illustrated
Accounting for sales-type leases is a simple 
extension of the direct financing method. A 
sales-type lease includes a manufacturer’s or 
dealer’s profit in addition to financing profit; a 
direct financing lease has only the financing 
profit component.
 
To illustrate the accounting for sales-type 
leases, we now assume that Lessor Company 
manufactures the leased equipment. Prior to the 
start of the lease on January 1, 2014, the 
equipment was carried on Lessor’s books at its 
manufactured cost of $240,000. All other facts 
in the original lessor example (page 709) remain 
unchanged.
 
Lessor records the transaction on January 1, 
2014, as:
DR Gross investment in leased asset  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $433,695.90
DR Cost of goods sold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
240,000.00
   CR Sales revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$315,041.60
   CR Unearned financing income—leases  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
118,654.30
   CR Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
240,000.00
13 The ratio effect described here holds for each lease in isolation. However, most lessors have many leases of various ages 
outstanding. In these situations, the number of leases outstanding over time determines the effect on the return ratio. Assume 
that Lessor Company’s total number of leases is constant over time. Initially, when Lessor uses the direct financing method 
for new leases, its reported rate of return will increase. However, with a constant volume of leases, the average age of the 
leases accounted for on the direct financing method will eventually stabilize. When this happens, the return on assets ratio 
under the direct financing method will essentially equal what it would have been under the operating approach. If Lessor’s 
leasing business expands over time, there will be a constant infusion of new leases, and the average age of the leases in place 
will be falling. When this situation exists, the rate of return on assets will be higher under the direct financing method.
This entry assumes that the residual value is guaranteed. If it is not, the discounted 
present value of the residual value—which at 11% is 0.59345 3 $38,000 5 
$22,551.10—is deducted from both sales revenue and cost of goods sold. The 
reason $22,551.10 is deducted is that if the residual value is unguaranteed, the 
“critical event” in recognizing revenue on the residual value has not yet occurred. 
There is no assurance that the residual value will ultimately be realized. Only a 
portion of the asset has been “sold.” So, both Sales revenue and Cost of goods sold 
are reduced by $22,551.10. The entries with an unguaranteed residual value are:
DR Gross investment in leased asset   . . . . . . $433,695.90
DR Cost of goods sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
217,448.90*
   CR Sales revenue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$292,490.50†
   CR Unearned financing income—leases 
 
118,654.30
   CR Inventory   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
240,000.00
Notice that the amount of Gross investment in leased asset is $433,695.90 regard-
less of whether the residual value is unguaranteed or guaranteed. Similarly, the 
amount of manufacturing profit is $75,041.60 (that is, $292,490.50 2 $217,448.90), 
the same net amount when the residual value is guaranteed (that is, $315,041.60 2 
$240,000.00 5 $75,041.60).
* $240,000 2 $22,551.10
† $315,041.60 2 $22,551.10 5 $292,490.50
Analysis

716 
CHAPTER 12
Financial Reporting for Leases
The net effect of this entry is to recognize $75,041.60 of manufacturing profit ($315,041.60 2 
$240,000.00) immediately. The $118,654.30 of financing profit will be recognized over the 
life of the lease, as shown in Column (b) of the amortization schedule in Exhibit 12.7. The 
entries for recording this financing profit over the life of the lease are identical to the entries 
for the direct financing method on page 712.
 
Let’s extend the example by assuming that Lessor also promises to provide maintenance 
services on the leased asset for an additional annual fee of $2,000. So, Lessee Company’s an-
nual payments now total $81,139.18—that is, the $79,139.18 basic fee plus the $2,000 execu-
tory maintenance costs. But the amount recorded by Lessor as Gross investment in leased 
asset is still $433,695.90; that is:
Annual total payments 
$ 81,139.18
Less: Executory cost 
(2,000.00)
Payments net of executory cost 
79,139.18
Number of years 
3   5
 
$395,695.90
Plus: Residual value 
38,000.00
 Gross investment in leased assets 
$433,695.90
Notice that the executory costs are subtracted in computing the capitalized amount.
 
At December 31, 2014, when the first cash payment is received from Lessee Company, 
Lessor Company makes the following journal entries:
DR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$81,139.18
   CR Gross investment in leased asset  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$79,139.18
   CR Maintenance revenue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
2,000.00
DR Unearned financing income—leases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$34,654.58 
   CR Financing income—leases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$34,654.58
The costs incurred over the year in fulfilling the maintenance contract (not shown) will be 
expensed and deducted from the Maintenance revenue of $2,000.
RECAP
The capital lease versus operating lease dichotomy also exists for lessors. The criteria for 
classifying these leases include the same four criteria that apply to lessees plus two 
additional criteria. Lessors’ incentives regarding how to classify leases are different from 
lessees’ incentives because capital lease treatment accelerates the timing of income 
recognition for lessors. In addition, capital lease treatment improves many ratios for 
 lessors in comparison to the level of these ratios under the operating lease approach.
ADDITIONAL LEASING ASPECTS
Sale and Leaseback
A sale and leaseback occurs when one company sells an asset to another company and imme-
diately leases it back. This is done as a way to finance asset acquisition and/or for tax reasons. 
For example:
First Company sells a manufacturing plant (excluding land) with a book value of $800,000 to 
Second Company for $1,000,000. First Company immediately leases the plant from Second 
Company for 20 years at an annual rental of $120,000.

 
Additional Leasing Aspects 
717
First Company (the seller-lessee) can treat the entire annual rental of $120,000 as a deductible 
expense for tax purposes; if it had continued to own the asset, it could deduct depreciation 
only for the building itself but not for the land on which the building is located. Thus, total tax 
deductions could be higher under sale and leaseback arrangements. Also, the cash infusion of 
$1,000,000 could help meet cash flow needs.
 
No new lease accounting issues arise in sale and leaseback transactions. If the lease satis-
fies any of the four lessees’ criteria on page 690, First Company must account for the lease as 
a capital lease; if none of the criteria is met, it must be treated as an operating lease. If the 
lease satisfies at least one of the lessor’s Type I characteristics and both of the Type II charac-
teristics (page 708), Second Company (the buyer-lessor) treats the lease as a direct financing 
lease; otherwise, it is an operating lease on Second Company’s books.
 
The only complication in sale and leaseback arrangements is the treatment of the differ-
ence between the $1,000,000 sale price and the $800,000 carrying value of the manufacturing 
plant on First Company’s books. Typically, when the assets are sold, this $200,000 will be 
recognized immediately on First Company’s books as a gain on sale.
 
But this is not the way gains are treated in sale and leaseback transactions. Instead, First 
Company must record the $200,000 as a balance sheet credit, called a deferred gain. If the 
lease is a capital lease to First Company, this gain is then amortized into income using the 
same rate and life used to amortize the asset itself. If the lease is an operating lease to First 
Company, the gain is amortized in proportion to rental expense.
 
Assume that the lease qualifies as a capital lease; then First Company’s entries are initially:
DR Cash (or receivable)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$1,000,000
   CR Property  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$800,000
   CR Deferred gain  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
200,000
DR Leased asset—capital lease  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$1,000,000
   CR Obligation under capital lease  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$1,000,000
    [This assumes that the discounted present value of the minimum lease payments equals 
$1,000,000.]
 
The rationale for deferring the gain is simple. Notice that at the time of “sale,” the 
$1,000,000 sales price and the $120,000 annual lease payment schedule are simultaneously 
set, and the transaction will continue for 20 years. It may be that the property is “worth” only 
$800,000 and that Second Company is effectively loaning $200,000 to First Company, which 
will be recovered over time through the $120,000 annual payments on the lease. Recognizing 
a gain in such circumstances allows First Company to initially overstate its income by 
$200,000; this will be offset in later years by overstating its expenses by an identical amount. 
Thus, the GAAP requirement of deferring the gain protects against income manipulation pos-
sibilities such as creating artificial “gains on sale” by overstating the asset’s “sale” price. 
However, the conservatism inherent to GAAP requires that losses in sale and leaseback trans-
actions be recognized immediately on the seller’s books.
 
Notice that if the sale and leaseback terms do not trigger any of the four lessees’ criteria, 
the transaction is an operating lease to First Company (the lessee). So, carefully structured 
transactions allow firms to:
1. Remove existing assets from their books using sale and leaseback accounting.
2. Keep the asset and associated liability from reappearing by treating the lease as an operat-
ing lease.
Analysis

718 
CHAPTER 12
Financial Reporting for Leases
 Sale and leaseback accounting cannot be used when the seller-
lessee (First Company in our example) retains some of the risks and 
rewards of ownership, such as the right to participate in any future 
appreciation in the value of the leased property. Such continuing 
involvement with ownershiplike characteristics is inconsistent with 
a “sale.” That’s why the existence of any such features disqualifies a 
transaction from sale and leaseback treatment.14
Other Special Lease Accounting Rules
ASC 840 also covers a number of highly specialized leasing situations and outlines in detail the 
rules for handling these situations. A real estate lease is an example of a situation requiring spe-
cialized rules in ASC 840.15 A leveraged lease represents another example. In a leveraged lease, 
the lessor obtains nonrecourse financing for the leased asset from a third party, such as a bank. 
The lease is “leveraged” because the lessor borrows to finance the transaction. A leveraged lease 
does not affect the lessee’s accounting. For these leases, lessees use the standard lease classifica-
tion procedures outlined earlier. However, the lessor must account for leveraged leases using the 
direct financing approach, and special details—outlined at length in ASC 840—apply.
Financial Reporting versus Tax Accounting for Leases
The U.S. income tax rules also distinguish between operating leases and capital leases. How-
ever, the tax criteria for differentiating between them are not the same as the GAAP criteria. 
Further, the lessor’s and the lessee’s incentives are reversed for tax purposes. Lessees prefer 
the capital lease approach because it accelerates recognition of expenses and thereby lowers 
the discounted present value of their tax liability. Lessors prefer the operating lease approach 
on the tax return because it delays recognition of revenue and lowers the present value of the 
tax liability. So, book-versus-tax differences are frequent for both lessors and lessees.
 
The divergence between book accounting and tax accounting for lessees widened in recent 
years with the creation of synthetic leases. Synthetic leases result from complicated arrange-
ments that include a lender, outside investors, a SPE, and the lessee. We’ll skip the gory details of 
the legal arrangement and give you the punchline. A synthetic lease was structured to achieve the 
best of both worlds from the lessee’s perspective: operating lease treatment on the books and 
capital lease treatment on the tax return. The lease contract carefully avoided triggering any of the 
four ASC 840 criteria, so it was an operating lease for financial reporting purposes. But for tax 
purposes, the lessee is considered the asset’s owner because the contractual arrangement gives the 
lessee the proceeds of any appreciation in the asset’s value at the end of the lease term.
 
The SPE played a crucial role in keeping the asset and liability off the lessee’s books. How-
ever, after the Enron and subprime market collapses, the FASB tightened the rules for consolidat-
ing SPEs. Under these new rules, when the lessee is the potential beneficiary of the appreciation 
rights, the SPE must be consolidated. This effectively puts the lease asset and liability on the 
lessee’s books, thereby negating the off-balance-sheet treatment of synthetic leases.
Lessors’ Disclosures
Exhibit 12.9 is taken from the notes to the December 31, 2012, financial statements of Boeing 
Corporation, the aircraft manufacturer. The exhibit illustrates ASC 840 disclosure require-
ments for lessors. Capital and operating leases must be disclosed separately, and lessors must 
In the past, the continuing involvement rule was some-
times circumvented through the use of a special purpose 
entity (SPE) that technically received the residual value. 
But the FASB has tried to close such loopholes by requir-
ing that these SPEs be consolidated in many circum-
stances. If the SPE is consolidated, the off-balance-sheet 
treatment of the sale and leaseback is reversed. See FASB 
ASC Topic 810 Subsections for Variable Interest Entities.
14 FASB ASC 840-40: Leases—Sale—Leaseback Transactions.
15 FASB ASC Section 840-10-25: Leases—Overall—Recognition.

 
Global Vantage Point
719
EXHIBIT 12.9
Boeing Corporation: Illustration of Lessor’s 
Financial Statement Note Disclosures
Customer financing at December 31 consisted of the following:
(amounts in millions) 
2012 
2011
Investment in sales-type/finance leases 
$1,850 
$2,037
Operating lease equipment, at cost, less accumulated 
 depreciation of $628 and $765 
 2,038 
 1,991
Gross customer financing 
$3,888 
$4,028
Scheduled receipts on customer financing are as follows:
 
 
 
 
 
 
Beyond
Year 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2017 
Total
Sales-type/finance lease 
 payments receivable 
290 
231 
230 
226 
207 
803 
1,987
Operating lease equipment 
 payments receivable 
474  
172  
162  
97  
55  
104 
1,064
The components of investment in sales-type/financing leases at December 31 were as follows:
 
2012 
2011
Minimum lease payments receivable 
$1,987 
$2,272
Estimated residual value of leased assets 
544 
541
Unearned income 
(681) 
(776)
 Total 
$1,850 
$2,037
Authors’ note: This financial statement note has been edited and a portion of the disclosure format has been modified 
slightly. The unedited note also includes notes receivable from customers.
provide a minimum lease payment schedule—just as lessees must do. Furthermore, the com-
ponents of the net investment in capital leases (minimum lease payments, estimated residual 
values, etc.) are delineated, as are the cost and accumulated depreciation of assets under oper-
ating leases. The proportion of operating leases to capital leases for lessors is frequently less 
than 1—a stark contrast with lessees. The ratio for Boeing in Exhibit 12.9 is $ 1,064 4 $1,987 
(see highlighted numbers), which equals 0.54. If we contrast this value with those in Exhibit 12.4 
(page 704), we see that—unlike the ratio values for lessees—it is below 1.00. This is consistent 
with the fact that lessors like capital lease treatment because it accelerates income recognition 
and improves certain financial statement ratios in comparison to the operating lease 
approach.
GLOBAL VANTAGE POINT
Comparison of IFRS and GAAP Lease Accounting
Accounting requirements under International Accounting Standard (IAS) 17—Leases are simi-
lar to those under FASB ASC 840.16 IFRS differentiate between the concepts of operating leases 
and capital leases (called finance leases in IFRS) and generally follows the approach described 
in the chapter for GAAP. The subsequent paragraphs identify some of the key differences.
16 “Leases,” IAS 17 (Revised 2003) (London: International Accounting Standards Board [IASB], 2009).
International

720 
CHAPTER 12
Financial Reporting for Leases
 
First, the classification criteria for both the lessee and the lessor are different from the FASB 
ASC 840 criteria. Classification is based on which party has the risks and rewards of owner-
ship. Criteria that are similar to the four FASB ASC 840 criteria are cited as examples of situa-
tions in which lease should be classified as a finance lease. The specific criteria of IAS 17 are:
Whether a lease is a finance lease or an operating lease depends on the substance of the transaction 
rather than the form of the contract. Examples of situations that individually or in combination would 
normally lead to a lease being classified as a finance lease are:
a. the lease transfers ownership of the asset to the lessee by the end of the lease term;
b. the lessee has the option to purchase the asset at a price that is expected to be sufficiently 
lower than the fair value at the date the option becomes exercisable for it to be reasonably 
certain, at the inception of the lease, that the option will be exercised;
c. the lease term is for the major part of the economic life of the asset even if title is not transferred;
d. at the inception of the lease the present value of the minimum lease payments amounts to 
at least substantially all of the fair value of the leased asset; and
e. the leased assets are of such a specialised nature that only the lessee can use them without 
major modifications (para. 10).
Indicators of situations that individually or in combination could also lead to a lease being classified 
as a finance lease are:
a.  if the lessee can cancel the lease, the lessor’s losses associated with the cancellation are 
borne by the lessee;
b.  gains or losses from the fluctuation in the fair value of the residual accrue to the lessee (for exam-
ple, in the form of a rent rebate equalling most of the sales proceeds at the end of the lease); and
c.  the lessee has the ability to continue the lease for a secondary period at a rent that is sub-
stantially lower than market rent (para. 11).
 
Instead of using the ASC 840 bright-line of 75% of the economic life, IAS 17 states “major 
part,” and instead of 90% of fair value, IAS 17 states “substantially all.” When computing the 
present value of minimum lease payments, the lessee should use the implicit interest rate if 
known, whereas under FASB ASC 840, the lessee should use the lower of the implicit or the incre-
mental borrowing rate. In addition, IFRS identifies other potential indicators for capitalization. 
For example, finance lease treatment could be required if the leased asset is so specialized that 
significant modifications would be needed for another party to use it. Finance lease treatment may 
also be warranted if the lessee bears the risk associated with changes in residual value fair values 
or the lease contains bargain renewals. These additional criteria could increase the probability of 
classifying a lease as a finance lease. Under IAS 17, the classification criteria for the lessor and 
 lessee are the same; the two additional lessor criteria provided under FASB ASC 840 are absent.
 
A second difference relates to the ability for lessees to classify some assets held under 
leases as investment property.17 Recall that investment property is defined as long-lived as-
sets that are held to earn rentals or for capital appreciation. These assets may be accounted for 
using historical cost or fair value. Lessors would also have the choice between fair value and 
historical cost for investment property provided to lessees under operating leases.
 
The lessee and lessor disclosure requirements are similar to the requirements under GAAP. 
However, the lessee future minimum lease payment disclosures are for the periods: within one 
year, within years two through five, and after five years.18 For finance leases, the standard also 
requires that the present value of minimum lease payments be given for each of the three 
 intervals. In contrast, GAAP requires that “within years two through five” disclosure be given 
for each individual year, and only the present value in total must be disclosed. IAS 17 lessor 
17 “Investment Property” (Revised 2003) (London: IASB, 2009). See Chapter 10, page 578.
18 IAS 17, paras. 31 and 35.

 
Global Vantage Point
721
disclosures also are similar to FASB ASC 840 requirements but combine 
the payments for years two through five, as is done for lessees.
 
Exhibit 12.10 provides selected lessee disclosures from the Decem-
ber 31, 2012, annual report of British Airways. The top schedule presents 
future payments and present values for finance leases and hire purchase 
contracts. These disclosures differ from GAAP in that they use the 
EXHIBIT 12.10
British Airways: Edited Excerpts from Lessee 
Note Disclosures, December 31, 2012
Long-Term Borrowings
Obligations under finance leases and hire purchase contracts
The Group uses finance leases and hire purchase contracts principally to acquire aircraft. These 
leases have both renewal options and purchase options. These are at the option of the Group. 
 Future minimum lease payments under finance leases and hire purchase contracts are as follows:
 
Group
(£ million) 
2012 
2011
Future minimum payments due:
 Within one year 
335 
259
 After more than one year but within five years 
1,146 
1,111
 In five years or more 
1,086 
1,174
 
2,567 
2,544
Less: Finance charges 
247 
317
Present value of minimum lease payments 
2,320 
2,227
The present value of minimum lease payments is analysed as follows:
 Within one year 
281 
193
 After more than one year but within five years 
1,005 
927
 In five years or more 
1,034 
1,107
At 31 December 
2,320 
2,227
Operating Lease Commitments
The Group has entered into commercial leases on certain properties, equipment and aircraft. 
These leases have durations ranging from five years for aircraft to 150 years for ground leases. 
Certain leases contain options for renewal.
Fleet
The aggregate payments, for which there are commitments under operating leases fall due as follows:
 
Group
(£ million) 
2012 
2011
Within one year 
111 
63
Between one and five years 
205 
144
Over five years 
86 
109
At March 31 
402 
316
Property and equipment
The aggregate payments, for which there are commitments under operating leases fall due as follows:
 
Group
(£ million) 
2012 
2011
Within one year 
87 
84
Between one and five years 
274 
251
Over five years, ranging up to the year 2145 
1,689 
1,692
At 31 December 
2,050 
2,027
 IAS 17 defines hire purchase contracts as “contracts 
for the hire of an asset that contain a provision giving 
the hirer an option to acquire title to the asset upon 
the fulfillment of agreed conditions.”  IAS 17 treats 
these types of contracts as leases . See  IAS 17 , para. 6.

722 
CHAPTER 12
Financial Reporting for Leases
 “after more than one year but within 5 years” category and provide a schedule of  present val-
ues for each time interval. The bottom schedule provides a similar breakdown of future pay-
ments for operating leases but does not provide present values.
 
The schedules show total future minimum lease payments of £2,567 million for finance 
leases and hire purchase contracts and £2,452 (£402 for Fleet 1 £2,050 for Property and 
equipment) for operating leases. These amounts result in a ratio of operating lease payments 
to finance lease payments of .96 (£2,452/£2,567). This ratio is significantly lower than the 
Airlines average of 33.3 under GAAP found in Exhibit 12.4. One explanation is that the ad-
ditional “specialized” indicator under IAS 17 may lead to capitalizing most of the plane leases.
FASB and IASB Joint Exposure Draft
Lease accounting has been criticized for years because it allowed significant off-balance-sheet 
financing and lowered comparability by treating economically similar leases differently in 
financial statements (capital versus operating). Because of these and other criticisms, the 
FASB and the IASB have been working together to improve lease accounting. Based on this 
work, in May 2013, the FASB and the IASB issued a jointly developed leasing exposure 
draft.19
 
The FASB and IASB take a property rights approach and would require lessees to record a 
“right-of-use” asset and the associated liability. In essence, all leases would be classified as 
capital leases. To obtain the initial present values of the leased asset and the lease obligation, 
lessees will use the implict rate. If the implicit rate cannot be determined then the lessee will 
use the incremental borrowing rate. Lease terms will include renewal options where the les-
see has significant economic incentives to renew. In addition, lessees also will include vari-
able rental payments tied to an index, such as the Consumer Price Index, in their present value 
calculations. Recall that Exhibit 12.4 shows for several companies the magnitude of undis-
counted minimum lease payments under operating leases. Under the FASB’s proposal, firms 
would discount these payments and place the resulting present values on their balance sheets 
as capital leases.20 The constructive capitalization approach described in the appendix to this 
chapter can be used to estimate the initial balance sheet effects of the exposure draft.
 
Although the initial balance sheet effect is the same for all long-term leases, subsequent 
changes to the balance sheet depend on whether the leased asset is equipment or property (i.e., 
land and buildings). Equipment leases are defined as Type A leases, and property leases are de-
fined as Type B leases. Lessee accounting for a Type A lease is essentially the same as the current 
accounting for a capital lease. The right-of-use asset is normally depreciated using the straight-
line method, and the lease liability is amortized using the effective interest method. Exhibit 12.1 
illustrates the depreciation expense and interest expense calculations and shows that total expense 
declines over time as interest expense declines. For the year ended December 31, 2014, Lessee 
Company reports Interest expense of $30,000 and Depreciation expense of $60,000.
 
In contrast, for a Type B lease, depreciation on the asset would equal the difference be-
tween the lease payment and interest expense for the period. Again, looking at Exhibit 12.1 
for the year ended December 31, 2014, Depreciation expense would equal $49,139.18 (Total 
19 See “Leases (Topic 840),” Proposed Accounting Standards Update (Revised) (Norwalk CT: FASB, 2013) and “Leases,” 
Exposure Draft (London: IASB, 2013). The 2013 exposure drafts reflect revisions made after the FASB and IASB considered 
comments on their 2010 exposure drafts.
20 The exposure draft allows operating lease treatment when the maximum lease term, including renewal options, is less than 
12 months.

 
Summary 
723
SUMMARY
• The treatment of leases under FASB ASC 840 represents a compromise between the 
unperformed-contracts and property-rights approaches.
• FASB ASC 840 adopts a middle-of-the-road position that neither capitalizes all leases nor 
prohibits capitalization.
• GAAP contains criteria for determining the circumstances under which leases are 
capitalized.
• The lease capitalization criteria rely on bright-line rules such as 75% of economic life and 
90% of fair value. Because lease capitalization adversely affects lessees’ financial state-
ments, many lessees structure agreements to avoid lease capitalization.
• The proportion of operating lease commitments to capital lease commitments can vary 
greatly even between firms in the same industry. This complicates financial analysis 
payment of $79,139.18 less Interest expense of $30,000). Consequently, total expense (Inter-
est expense of $30,000 1 Depreciation expense of $49,139.18) for the year equals the amount 
of the lease payment ($79,139.18). In addition, the net lease asset would equal the lease liabil-
ity. Specifically, the net lease asset equals $250,860.82 (Gross asset of $300,000 less Accumu-
lated depreciation of $49,139.18) and the Lease obligation equals $250,860.82 (Initial 
obligation of $300,000 less the Principal reduction of $49,139.18). This depreciation method 
is called interest-based (or, present value) amortization and is not allowed under U.S. 
GAAP for other types of nonfinancial assets (see Chapter 10 discussion on page 549). 
Whereas Type A leases have separate amounts for depreciation expense and interest expense 
on the income statement, Type B leases report total lease expense as a single line item. In 
 addition, the lease expense is shown only in the operating section of the statement of cash 
flows. In summary, the Type B lease is similar to a capital lease on the balance sheet and 
 similar to an operating lease on the income statement and statement of cash flows.
 
Introducing the concept of a Type B lease is controversial from theoretical, complexity, 
and cost-benefit viewpoints. In fact, three of the seven FASB board members have provided 
alternative lease accounting models, largely because of the Type B leases found in the expo-
sure draft.
 
The exposure draft lessor accounting also distinguishes between Type A and Type B leases 
based on whether the lease is equipment or property. Accounting for a Type A lease is similar 
to the accounting for direct financing and sales-type leases. However, the lease payments and 
the residual asset must be accounted for separately. Lessor accounting for a Type B lease is 
essentially operating lease accounting. The underlying asset remains on the lessor’s balance 
sheet, and no receivable is established. Rental income equals total cash expected to be  received 
and is spread evenly over the lease term.
 
The IASB exposure draft is nearly identical to the FASB’s proposal. However, differences 
arise because both lessees and lessors have the ability to classify some types of assets as in-
vestment property (see the discussion in Chapter 10).
 
At the time of this writing, we do not know when or if the most recent exposure draft will 
be passed. Practitioners suggest that a new lease standard may not be effective until 2017.21
21 See KPMG, “FASB and IASB Issue Revised Exposure Drafts on Lease Accounting,” Defining Issues, May 2013, No. 13-24.

724 
CHAPTER 12
Financial Reporting for Leases
 because keeping leases off the balance sheet improves various ratios (e.g., turnover, 
debt-to-equity, and the current ratio). Consequently, analysts must constructively capital-
ize operating leases to make valid comparisons between firms with different proportions 
of capitalized leases.
• Lessors’ use of the capital lease approach accelerates income recognition in contrast to 
the timing of income recognition under the operating lease approach. Lessors’ financial 
statement ratios are also improved. It is perhaps not surprising, therefore, that capital 
leases appear frequently on lessors’ financial statements.
• IFRS also distinguishes between operating and capital (finance) leases. Although the 
rules are similar to the GAAP rules, there are important differences. Key differences 
 relate to classification criteria, investment property, and disclosure.
• The FASB and IASB have issued a jointly developed exposure draft on lease accounting. 
The proposed accounting adopts a “right-of-use” approach and would require lessees 
to treat most leases as capital leases on the balance sheet. However, the exposure draft 
introduces a controversial second method of accounting for real estate leases that is 
essentially capital lease accounting on the balance sheet and operating lease accounting 
on the income statement and statement of cash flows. Lessors also have a different model 
of accounting for real estate leases.
APPENDIX
MAKING FINANCIAL STATEMENT DATA 
COMPARABLE BY ADJUSTING FOR OFF- 
BALANCE-SHEET LEASES
To make their debt burden appear lower, some lessees carefully design their lease contracts to 
evade capital lease criteria, thereby keeping most of their leases off the balance sheet. Other 
companies structure their leases and apply the lease accounting rules less aggressively and 
have a higher proportion of capital leases. This complicates comparisons between companies 
because each may have similar lease contract terms but very dissimilar lease balance sheet 
numbers. Despite this complication, comparisons can still be made.
 
The most straightforward method for making lessees’ balance sheet data comparable is to 
treat all leases as if they were capital leases. That is, analysts should use the disclosed mini-
mum operating lease payment schedule as a basis for approximating what the balance sheet 
numbers would have been had those operating leases been treated instead as capital leases. 
This is constructive capitalization. We use the Whole Foods Market, Inc., 2012 data from 
Exhibit 12.5 to illustrate how this is done. For convenience, these numbers for Whole Foods 
are reproduced in the following table.
 
The liability that would appear on the balance sheet if these operating leases were instead 
treated as capital leases is the discounted present value of the stream of minimum operating 
lease payments. This payment stream (undiscounted) totals $6,774.8 million. Two items must 
be estimated to compute this present value. First, an appropriate discount rate must be deter-
mined. Second, each year’s payments beyond 2017 must be estimated because lease payments 
for all years after 2017 are aggregated under the caption “Future fiscal years,” often called 
“thereafter.”
 Analysis 

 
Appendix 
725
Whole Foods Market, Inc.
Operating Lease Payments from Lease Note, 2012 Annual Report
 
Minimum Operating
($ in millions) 
Lease Payments
Fiscal year 2013 
$  309.1
Fiscal year 2014 
364.3
Fiscal year 2015 
385.5
Fiscal year 2016 
396.1
Fiscal year 2017 
397.0
Future fiscal years 
4,922.8
 
$6,774.8
The schedule of lease pay-
ments found in the lease 
note always provides the 
amount of next year’s lease 
payment. The current por-
tion may be found in the 
lease note, the debt note, or 
the balance sheet.
Determining the Discount Rate 
Two alternatives for determining the discount 
rate for computing the present value of operating lease payments exist:
• The weighted average discount rate implicit in capital leases.
• The weighted average discount rate on interest-bearing long-term debt (including capital 
lease commitments).
 
In some cases, a company discloses the weighted average discount rate used for capital 
leases in its lease footnote. If this rate is not disclosed, it can be estimated provided the cur-
rent portion of capital leases (that is, that portion that represents a current liability) is dis-
closed. This information is often provided either on the balance sheet or in the lease 
footnote.
 
We now turn to how the calculation is made. Recall from the discussion in the chapter that 
each periodic lease payment comprises two elements: (1) interest based on the present value 
of the lease obligation at the beginning of the period and (2) the principal payment on the 
unpaid lease obligation. The current portion of the capital lease obligation represents the sec-
ond component—that is, the amount of next year’s lease payment that reduces the principal 
balance of the lease obligation. Therefore, subtracting this principal reduction amount from 
the total scheduled lease payment for the coming year leaves the interest expense component. 
Dividing the interest expense component by the present value of the capital lease obligation 
shown in the lease note on the current balance sheet date (which is also the present value of 
the lease obligation at the beginning of the next fiscal year) yields the average implicit interest 
rate for capital leases. To summarize:
Interest expense on
capital leases
5
Implicit interest rate
in capital lease contracts 3 Present value of lease obligation
at beginning of year
Rearranging we get:
Interest expense on capital lease
Present value of lease obligation
at beginning of  year
5 Implicit interest rate in
capital lease contracts
 
Whole Foods’ lease note in Exhibit 12.5 reveals that the current portion of capital leases is 
$1.012 million. Subtracting this from the $2.967 million scheduled capital lease payment in 
2013 leaves $1.955 million as the interest expense component of the 2013 lease payment. 
Dividing this number by the September 30, 2012, capital lease obligation of $24.122 million,  

726 
CHAPTER 12
Financial Reporting for Leases
yields an average implicit interest rate of 8.10%. This rate can then be used to compute the 
present value of the scheduled operating lease payments.
 
A second estimate of the discount rate can be derived from the lessee’s financial statement 
note for long-term debt. This note discloses the interest rate on each debt issue. The weighted 
average rate on long-term debt provides an alternative rate for discounting the operating lease 
payments. Another, and somewhat easier, way to approximate the weighted average interest 
rate on long-term debt is to compute the ratio of total interest expense (often shown on the 
income statement or in statement notes) by the average of beginning and end-of-year interest 
bearing long-term debt outstanding (including the long-term portion of capital leases). We 
cannot use this approach for Whole Foods because it does not have any long-term interest-
bearing debt in 2012.
Estimating Payments beyond Five Years 
Procedures for estimating annual 
operating lease payments for periods after 2017 can also be developed. One approach is as fol-
lows. Notice from the prior page that the annual increase in minimum operating lease payments 
between 2015 and 2016 is $10.6 million (that is, $396.1 million 2 $385.5 million); between 2016 
and 2017, the decrease is $0.9 million (that is, $397.0 million 2 $396.1 million). So, the average 
annual increase over the three-year period is $5.8 million (that is [$10.6 million 1 $0.9 mil-
lion]y2). This suggests that the undisclosed minimum operating lease payment for 2018 is prob-
ably in the vicinity of $402.8 million—the $397.0 million 2017 payment plus $5.8 million of 
estimated yearly increase. The simplest approach for estimating a schedule of annual pay-
ments for 2018 and beyond is to assume that all subsequent payments are also somewhere near 
$402.8 million per year. Dividing the future fiscal years minimum operating lease payments of 
$4,922.8 million by $402.8 million yields an initial estimate of how many years beyond 2017 the 
existing operating leases run. The computation is:
Minimum operating
lease payments for
years after 2017
Estimated yearly
lease payment
(assumed to be the
same for all years)
5 $4,922.8 million
$402.8 million
per year
5 12.2 years
The initial estimate is 12.2 years, which we round to 12 years. Based on this estimate, the net 
minimum lease payments will be discounted over a 17-year period—that is, 2013 through 
2017 (5 years) plus the estimated 12 years we just computed.
Our estimate of the amount of additional liability on Whole Foods Market’s balance sheet at 
September 30, 2012, if all operating leases were capitalized is the highlighted amount of $3,569.7 
million shown in Exhibit 12.11.22 A small portion ($23.5 million) would be a 
current liability and $3,546.2 million (total obligation of $3,569.7 million less 
current obligation of $23.5 million) would be a long-term liability.
Because the payments after 
2017 are assumed to be 
spread evenly over a 12-year 
period, we adjust our esti-
mated yearly lease payment 
to be $410.2 million 
($4,922.8 million/12 years) 
in Exhibit 12.11.
The $23.5 million current  liability is determined as 
follows. Interest expense in 2013 on these capital-
ized operating leases would be $3,569.7 million 3 
8%, or approximately $285.6 million. The 2013 
minimum operating lease payment is $309.1 million 
in Exhibit 12.11. Because interest is a liability that 
accrues over time, only the difference  between the 
total 2013 payment of $309.1 million and the as yet 
unaccrued interest of $285.6 million is a current 
 liability as of September 30, 2012.
22 The Exhibit 12.11 present value calculations assume that all lease payments are made at year-end. 
Typically payments are made throughout the year, so a more realistic assumption would be that pay-
ments are made halfway through the year. We can adjust the present value of $3,569.7 million to re-
flect the midyear assumption by multiplying $3,569.7 by 1.04 (1 1 0.08y2) to obtain $3,712.5. 
Subsequent calculations could be done using this amount instead of the $3,569.7. However, given 
that we probably have some measurement error in the timing of the amounts after 2017 and the 
choice of discount rate, analysts may not want to take the time to make the additional adjustment. 
The ratios computed in Exhibit 12.12 are nearly identical under either approach.

 
Appendix 
727
 
When the capitalized operating lease liability has been estimated, the next task is to estimate 
the capitalized operating lease asset amount. Recall from pages 701 and 702 that the lease asset 
book value is often less than the lease obligation. That discussion also notes that a common rule 
of thumb is that the asset is 70% of the obligation. To refine this estimate, one can often use the 
capital lease asset disclosure the company makes for capital leases. One would divide a firm’s net 
capital lease assets by its capital lease obligations to estimate the ratio. It may be reasonable to use 
this same percentage to estimate the operating lease asset to be capitalized. Though Whole Foods 
discloses its total capital lease assets and capital lease obligations, it does not disclose separately 
accumulated depreciation for the capital lease assets. Therefore, we must use the rule of thumb of 
70% to estimate the net asset associated with the constructively capitalized operating leases. Mul-
tiplying 70% by the estimated operating lease liability of $3,569.7 million yields an estimated 
operating lease asset of $2,498.8 million. Note that the lease liability is 10 times the 2012 rent 
expense of $353.4 shown in Exhibit 12.5, and the asset is seven times the rent expense amount. 
Consequently, the multiple of eight that Whole Foods uses in its return on investment calculations 
is reasonable but not as accurate as is the present value approach. In addition, given that the 
amount of rent expense changes each year and lease terms change over time, the short-cut mul-
tiple approach could be less accurate in subsequent years unless the multiplier is updated.
 
Exhibit 12.12 illustrates the estimated ratio effects for 2012 that result from capitalizing oper-
ating leases for Whole Foods. Exhibit 12.12(a) Column (a) shows financial statement amounts as 
reported in Whole Foods’ fiscal year-end September 30, 2012 financial statements. Column 
(b) shows the adjustments for operating lease capitalization. Notice, in addition to the capital lease 
asset and liability adjustments, there is a decrease to liabilities for $440.8 million due to “Deferred 
lease liabilities.” These liabilities represent accruals associated with rent holidays under operating 
leases (see discussion on page 706). These operating lease liabilities must be removed when we 
shift to capital lease accounting and record the $3,569.7 million present value of lease payments. 
In addition, there is a “net debit to balance” of $630.1 million determined as follows:
Lease asset 
$2,498.8
Less: Lease liability 
(3,569.7)
Plus: Removed operating lease liability 
440.8
 
$ (630.1)
EXHIBIT 12.11
Whole Foods Market, Inc.: Estimate of Capitalized 
Operating Lease Liability as of September 30, 2012
⎫
⎬
⎭
 
 
Present 
Discounted
($ in millions) 
Minimum Operating 
Value Factor* 
Present
Fiscal Year 
Lease Payment 
at 8% 
Value
2013 
$309.1 
0.92593 
$   286.2
2014 
364.3 
0.85734 
312.3
2015 
385.5 
0.79383 
306.0
2016 
396.1 
0.73503 
291.1
2017 
397.0 
0.68058 
270.2
2018
2029 
410.2 
5.12893† 
2,103.9
Total 
 
 
$3,569.7
* Present value factors for interest rates not included in this book’s Appendix can be found at the text website: 
www.mhhe.com/revsine6e.
† Present value of an ordinary annuity for 17 years at 8% minus present value of an ordinary annuity for five years 
at 8%, or 9.12164 minus 3.99271.

728 
CHAPTER 12
Financial Reporting for Leases
 
The $630.1 million debit comprises two items: (1) a debit to a deferred tax asset and (2) a 
debit to Retained earnings. A deferred tax asset arises because capitalization accelerates ex-
pense recognition. Accordingly, constructively capitalizing these leases means that expenses 
are recognized earlier on the books than on the tax return, which creates a deferred tax asset. 
The amount of the deferred tax asset can be approximated by multiplying the 
“net debit to balance” of $630.1 by Whole Foods’ effective tax rate of 38% 
(computed in the next paragraph) to obtain $239.4 million. Whether this 
amount is added to assets or deducted from liabilities depends on the amounts 
of Whole Foods’ other deferred tax assets and liabilities. One needs to under-
stand concepts from Chapter 12 to address this issue fully. Therefore, to reduce the complex-
ity of the example, we place the entire $630.1 million debit into Retained earnings and do not 
allocate an amount to a deferred tax asset or deferred tax liability.
 
To compute a revised return on asset (ROA), we must adjust the numerator of the ratio, net 
operating income after taxes (NOPAT). Although, we capitalized the lease asset at 70% of the 
lease liability, we still need to depreciate the remaining balance over the assumed 17-year 
 remaining lease period. Depreciation expense on a straight-line basis for the lease asset is 
EXHIBIT 12.12
Whole Foods Market, Inc.—Constructive Capitalization of Operating Leases
Panel (a): Financial Statement Data
 
(a) 
(b) 
 
(c)
 
September 30, 2012 
Adjustments for 
 
Total after
($ in millions) 
Financial 
Constructive  
 
Constructive
Statement Item 
Statements 
Capitalization 
 
Capitalization
Total assets 
$5,294.2 
Capital lease asset 
1 $2,498.8 
$ 7,793.0
Current portion of lease obligation 
1.0 
Current portion lease obligation 
1        23.5 
24.5
Total long-term obligations 
514.5 
Long-term lease obligation 
1   3,546.2
 
 
Deferred lease liabilities 
2      440.8 
3,619.9
Shareholders’ equity 
3,802.4 
Net debit to balance 
2      630.1 
3,172.3
NOPAT* 
465.7 
After-tax income effect of 
 
 
 capitalizing operating leases 
1      128.0 
593.7
Sales 
11,698.8 
 
1        –0– 
11,698.8
Panel (b): Adjusted Ratios after Capitalization
 
 
Ratio after
 
As Reported in 
Constructive Capitalization
Ratio 
09/30/2012 Financial Statements 
of Operating Leases
Total long-term obligations to equity ratio 
0.14 
1.14†
ROA 
8.8% 
7.62‡
Total asset turnover (Sales/total assets) 
2.21 
1.50§
* NOPAT refers to the company’s net operating profit after taxes. To compute NOPAT, you (1) eliminate nonoperating or nonrecurring items from reported in-
come and (2) add back after-tax interest expense. (See Panel [b].)
† Computed by dividing the adjusted Total long-term obligations amount of $3,619.9 million by the adjusted Shareholders’ equity of $3,172.3 million. This 
 ignores the unknown deferred tax effect and distorts the adjusted ratio slightly.
‡ Computed by dividing the adjusted NOPAT of $593.7 million by the adjusted Total assets of $7,793.0. This ignores the unknown deferred tax effect and distorts 
the adjusted ratio slightly. The ending balance of adjusted total assets was used to compute ROA as follows. The tax rate was assumed to be 38%.
ROA 5
NOPAT
Total assets 5
Net income 1 [Charges and gains 3 (1 2 Tax rate)] 1 [Interest 3 (1 2 Tax rate)]
Total assets
§ Computed by dividing the reported Sales of $11,698.8 million by the adjusted Total assets of $7,793.0 million.
This paragraph assumes that you are comfort-
able with deferred tax concepts. If you are not, 
you can safely skip this paragraph and return to 
Exhibit 12.12 after reading Chapter 13.

 
Exercises 
729
$147.0 million (lease asset of $2,498.8 million 4 17-year life). To adjust pretax NOPAT, we 
subtract the $147.0 million depreciation expense and add back the 2012 rent expense of 
$353.4 million shown in Exhibit 12.5 for a net pretax addition of $206.4 million. No adjust-
ment is made for interest expense because it is not deducted when computing NOPAT. We 
approximate Whole Foods’ effective tax rate by dividing its reported income tax expense of 
$286.5 million by its pre-tax income of $752.0 million to obtain 38%. We then obtain the 
 after-tax NOPAT effect of $128.0 million by multiplying the pretax NOPAT effect of 
$206.4 million by 1 minus the 38% tax rate.
 
The adjusted ratios after capitalization are shown in Exhibit 12.12(b). Notice that the 
 adjustments from capitalizing operating leases alter Whole Foods’ ratios. The total long-term 
obligations to equity ratio increases from 0.14 to 1.14, an increase of approxi-
mately 714%! Return on assets (ROA) decreases from 8.80% to 7.62%, a de-
crease of 13.4%. Although we added a significant amount of assets to the 
denominator, we also increased the numerator for the after-tax difference 
between the prior operating lease rent expense and depreciation expense on 
the new lease assets. Because both the numerator and denominator increase, 
the specific effects will vary by firm. For the total asset turnover ratio, only the 
denominator increases. Consequently, the turnover ratio decreased from 2.21 
to 1.50, a 32.1% decline.
 
It is important to make such adjustments when making financial comparisons across firms. 
While the effect on Whole Foods is significant, some of its competitors could be more or less 
aggressive in keeping leases off the balance sheet. So, interfirm comparisons may be mislead-
ing unless adjustments are also made to the competitors’ statements. The underlying real 
economic differences are revealed only by comparing the adjusted statements for all firms. 
The easiest way to overcome these capitalization differences between firms is to treat all 
leases that convey significant property rights as though they were capital leases.
 
Constructively capitalizing operating leases also gives us a preview of how the FASB/
IASB 2013 proposals will affect lessee financial statements. The above calculations are con-
sistent with Type A lease accounting. However, if Whole Foods’ classifies most of its leases as 
Type B leases, the numerator in the return on assets ratio will remain at $465.7 million, but 
assets will increase to $7,793.0 million. The resulting ratio of 5.98% is even lower than the 
7.62% shown in Exhibit 12.12.
Exhibit 12.4 shows that the other firms in the 
supermarkets industry have lower ratios of oper-
ating to capital lease payments than Whole 
Foods. This difference underscores the impor-
tance of making adjustments to Whole Foods’ 
competitors before undertaking financial 
comparisons.
EXERCISES
Monk Company, a dealer in machinery and equipment, leased equipment with a 10-year 
life to Leland Inc. on July 1, 2014. The lease is appropriately accounted for as a sale by 
Monk and as a purchase by Leland. The lease is for an eight-year period, expiring June 30, 
2022. The first of eight equal payments of $300,000 is due on June 30, 2015. Leland has 
an option to purchase the equipment on June 30, 2022, for $100,000 even though the 
 expected residual value at that time is $600,000. Leland’s incremental borrowing rate is 
7%, and it uses straight-line depreciation. The equipment is expected to have a salvage 
value of zero at June 30, 2024.
Required:
1. At what amount should Leland record the leased equipment on July 1, 2014?
2. Prepare Leland’s amortization table for the leased equipment.
3. What is the amount of depreciation and interest expense that Leland should record for the 
year ended December 31, 2014, and for the year ended December 31, 2015?
E12-1
Accounting for lessee with 
purchase option 
(LO 3, 4, 5)
AICPA
ADAPTED

730 
CHAPTER 12
Financial Reporting for Leases
E12-2
Accounting for lessee with 
purchase option 
(LO 3, 4, 5)
Use the information in E12-1, except that the payments are made at the beginning of the 
 period (July 1, 2014) instead of the end of the rental period (June 30, 2015).
Required:
Repeat the requirements of E12–1.
E12-3
Accounting for lessee: 
 Purchase option 
(LO 3, 4, 5)
East Company leased a new machine from North Company on May 1, 2014, under a lease 
with the following information:
Lease term 
10 years
Annual rental payable at beginning of each lease year 
$40,000
Useful life of machine 
12 years
Implicit interest rate 
15%
East has the option to purchase the machine on May 1, 2024, by paying $50,000, which 
 approximates the expected fair value of the machine on the option exercise date.
Required:
What is the amount of the capitalized leased asset on May 1, 2014?
AICPA
ADAPTED
E12-4
Accounting and reporting for 
lessee (LO 5)
On December 31, 2014, Ball Company leased a machine from Cook for a 10-year period, ex-
piring December 30, 2024. Annual payments of $100,000 are due on December 31. The first 
payment was made on December 31, 2014, and the second payment was made on December 31, 
2015. The present value at the inception of the lease for the 10 lease payments discounted at 
10% was $676,000. The lease is appropriately accounted for as a capital lease by Ball.
Required:
1. Compute the December 31, 2015, amount that Ball should report as a lease liability after 
the first payment has been made.
2. What portion of this total liability should be classified as a current liability?
AICPA
ADAPTED
E12-5
Accounting for lessor 
(LO 4, 6, 7, 8)
Beard Company purchased a machine on January 1, 2014, for $620,000. The machine is  expected 
to have a 10-year life, no residual value, and will be depreciated by the straight-line method. On 
January 1, 2014, it leased the machine to Child Company for a three-year period at an annual 
rental of $125,000. Beard could have sold the machine for $817,298 instead of leasing it. Beard 
incurred maintenance and other executory costs of $5,000 in 2014 under the terms of the lease.
Required:
1. What amount should Beard report as operating profit on this leased asset for the year 
ended December 31, 2014?
2. Assume that the lease term is eight  years instead of three years. What amount should Beard 
report as operating profit on this leased asset for the year ended December 31, 2014?
AICPA
ADAPTED
E12-6
Accounting for a sales-type 
lease (LO 7, 8)
Benedict Company leased equipment to Mark Inc. on January 1, 2014. The lease is for an 
eight-year period, expiring December 31, 2021. The first of eight equal annual payments of 
$600,000 was made on January 1, 2014. Benedict had purchased the equipment on December 29, 
2013, for $3,200,000. The lease is appropriately accounted for as a sales-type lease by 
Benedict. Assume that at January 1, 2014, the present value of all rental payments over the 
lease term discounted at a 10% interest rate was $3,520,000.
Required:
What amount of interest income should Benedict record in 2015 (the second year of the lease 
period) as a result of the lease?
AICPA
ADAPTED

 
Exercises 
731
E12-7
Accounting for a direct 
 financing lease (LO 1, 7, 8)
Glade Company leases computer equipment to customers under direct financing leases. The 
equipment has no residual value at the end of the lease term, and the leases do not contain 
bargain purchase options. Glade wishes to earn 8% interest on a five-year lease of equipment 
with a fair value of $323,400.
Required:
Compute the total amount of interest revenue that Glade will earn over the life of the lease.
AICPA
ADAPTED
E12-8
Determining lease payment 
and depreciation amounts 
(LO 1, 3, 4, 5)
Below are three independent lease scenarios. Payments are made at the end of each year.
 
Case 1 
Case 2 
Case 3
Cost of equipment to lessor 
$50,000 
$64,000 
$100,000
Fair value of equipment 
$70,000 
$80,000 
$100,000
Guaranteed residual value 
$10,000 
 
Unguaranteed residual value 
 
$ 8,000 
Bargain purchase option 
 
 
$ 4,500
Life of lease 
10 years 
15 years 
8 years
Economic life of asset 
12 years 
16 years 
10 years
Rate of return required 
12% 
9% 
7%
Required:
1. Calculate the lease payments for the above three cases.
2. Based on the relation between the lease life and economic life, the lessees will classify 
the leases as capital leases. For each lease, compute the lessee’s depreciation expense for 
the first year of the lease. Assume the use of the straight-line method and no salvage value 
at the end of the economic life.
E12-9
Using the appropriate 
discount rate (LO 3, 5)
On December 31, 2014, Day Company leased a new machine from Parr with the following 
pertinent information:
Lease term 
6 years
Annual rental payable at beginning of each year 
$50,000
Useful life of machine 
8 years
Day’s incremental borrowing rate 
15%
Implicit interest rate in lease (known by Day) 
12%
The lease is not renewable, and the machine reverts to Parr at the termination of the lease. The 
cost of the machine on Parr’s accounting records is $375,500.
Required:
Compute the amount of Day’s lease liability at the beginning of the lease term.
AICPA
ADAPTED
E12-10
Accounting for lessee’s 
 accruals and purchase 
 option (LO 3, 4, 5)
On October 1, 2014, Vaughn, Inc., leased a machine from Fell Leasing Company. The lease 
qualifies as a capital lease and requires nine annual payments of $10,000 beginning Septem-
ber 30, 2015. The lease specifies a purchase option of $10,000 at September 30, 2023, even 
though the machine’s estimated value on that date is $30,000. Vaughn’s incremental borrow-
ing rate is 11% and has a calendar year-end for reporting purposes. The machine has a 12-year 
economic life with zero salvage value.
Required:
1. At what amount should Vaughn record the leased equipment on October 1, 2014?
2. What is the amount of depreciation and interest expense that Vaughn should record for 
the year ended December 31, 2014, and for the year ended December 31, 2015?
3. How much of the lease liability should be classified as current on December 31, 2014, 
and December 31, 2015?
AICPA
ADAPTED

732 
CHAPTER 12
Financial Reporting for Leases
E12-11
Accounting for lessee 
 guaranteed residual 
(LO 4, 5)
On January 1, 2014, Babson, Inc., leased two automobiles for executive use. The lease requires 
Babson to make five annual payments of $13,000, beginning January 1, 2014. At the end of the 
lease term on December 31, 2018, Babson guarantees that the residual value of the automobiles 
will total $10,000. The lease qualifies as a capital lease. The interest rate implicit in the lease is 9%.
Required:
Compute Babson’s recorded capital lease liability immediately after the first required payment.
AICPA
ADAPTED
E12-12
Accounting for executory 
costs (LO 4, 5)
On December 31, 2014, Roe Company leased a machine from Colt for a five-year period. 
Equal annual payments under the lease are $105,000 (including $5,000 annual executory 
costs) and are due on December 31 of each year. The first payment was made on December 
31, 2014, and the second payment was made on December 31, 2015. The five lease payments 
are discounted at 10% over the lease term. The present value of minimum lease payments at 
the inception of the lease and before the first annual payment was $417,000. Roe appropri-
ately accounts for the lease as a capital lease.
Required:
What is the lease liability that Roe should report in its December 31, 2015, balance sheet?
AICPA
ADAPTED
E12-13
Accounting for sale and 
 leaseback (LO 3, 9)
On December 31, 2014, Lane, Inc., sold equipment to Noll and simultaneously leased it back 
for 12 years. Pertinent information at this date is as follows:
Sales price 
$480,000
Carrying amount 
$360,000
Estimated remaining economic life 
15 years
Required:
1. At December 31, 2014, should Lane report a gain from the sale of the equipment?
2. If not, how should it account for the sale and leaseback?
AICPA
ADAPTED
E12-14
Determining cash flow state-
ment effects of capital versus 
operating leases (LO 5)
Mickelson reports on a calendar year basis. On January 1, 2014, Mickelson Corporation enters 
into a three-year lease with annual payments of $30,000. The first payment will be due on 
 December 31, 2014. The present value of the payments at 8% is $77,313. If the lease is classified 
as a capital lease, the following amortization table would be used to record interest expense:
 
 
 
 
Lease
Payment 
 
Interest 
Principal 
Obligation
Date 
Payment 
Expense 
Reduction 
Balance
01/01/14 
 
 
 
$77,313
12/31/14 
$30,000 
$6,185 
$23,815 
53,498
12/31/15 
30,000 
4,280 
25,720 
27,778
12/31/16 
30,000 
2,222 
27,778 
—
Required:
1. If the lease were classified as an operating lease, show for each year the effects on the operat-
ing, investing, and financing activities sections of the statement of cash flows  (direct method).
2. If the lease were classified as a capital lease, show for each year the effects on the operat-
ing, investing, and financing activities sections of the statement of cash flows (direct 
method). Assume that the leased asset is depreciated over three years.
3. If the lease were classified as a Type B lease under the FASB’s 2013 Exposure Draft, 
show for each year the effects on the operating, investing, and financing activities sec-
tions of the statement of cash flows (direct method). Assume that the leased asset is 
 depreciated over three years.

 
Exercises 
733
E12-15
Determining ratio effects 
of capital versus operating 
leases (LO 2, 5)
Sandra Company and Nova Inc. each signed lease agreements on January 1, 2014. Nova’s 
lease qualified for capital lease treatment, but Sandra’s lease did not. All other information 
for both companies is identical. Payments on each lease were due at the end of each year. 
The following information is from each company’s December 31, 2013, financial 
statements:
 
Sandra 
Nova
Current assets 
$ 2,000 
$ 2,000
Total assets 
5,000 
5,000
Current liabilities 
2,000 
2,000
Total liabilities 
2,500 
2,500
Sales 
10,500 
10,500
Required:
1. Based on this information, what will be the impact of the lease transaction on Nova’s current 
ratio and debt-to-equity ratio on January 1, 2014, immediately after signing the lease?
2. What will be the impact on the total asset turnover ratio for 2014?
3. How would Sandra’s ratio effects differ from Nova’s? (Hint: Compute Nova’s ratios 
 before and after the capital lease transaction and assume that the lease liability and asset 
were recorded at $1,000.)
E12-16
Classifying leases under 
GAAP and IFRS (LO 3, 10)
On January 1, 2014, Draper Inc. signed a five-year noncancelable lease with Thornhill 
Company for custom-made equipment. The lease calls for five payments of $161,364.70 to 
be made at the beginning of each year. The leased asset has a fair value of $900,000 on 
January 1, 2014. There is no bargain purchase option, and ownership of the leased asset 
reverts to Thornhill at the lease end. The leased asset has an expected useful life of six 
years, and Draper uses straight-line depreciation for financial reporting purposes. Its incre-
mental borrowing rate is 8%. Draper uses a calendar year for financial reporting 
purposes.
Required:
1. Under U.S. GAAP, would Draper classify this lease as a capital lease or as an operating 
lease? Explain.
2. Under IFRS, would Draper classify this lease as a capital lease or as an operating lease? 
Explain.
E12-17
Lessee accounting under 
FASB 2013 ED (LO 10)
On January 1, 2014, Walker, Inc., signs a 5-year lease for two floors of a 20-floor building. 
The building has an expected remaining life of 20 years. The space is available immediately, 
and Walker agrees to make annual payments $325,000 on December 31 of each year. The 
lease contains no renewal or purchase options. The implicit rate in the lease is 7%.
Required:
1. What journal entry would Walker prepare on January 1, 2014, under U.S. GAAP existing 
in 2014?
2. What journal entry would Walker prepare on January 1, 2014, under the FASB’s 2013 
lease exposure draft?
3. Compute and label the amounts that would be shown on Walker’s income statement, bal-
ance sheet, and statement of cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2014, assuming 
that it uses the FASB’s 2013 lease exposure draft.

734 
CHAPTER 12
Financial Reporting for Leases
P12-1
PROBLEMS / DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
Bunker Company negotiated a lease with Gilbreth Company that begins on January 1, 2014. 
The lease term is three years, and the asset’s economic life is four years. The annual lease pay-
ments are $7,500, payable at the end of the year. The cost and fair value of the asset are 
$23,000. The lessee’s cost of borrowing is 9%.
Required:
1. Determine whether Bunker must treat this lease as an operating lease or a capital lease.
2. Prepare an amortization table for the lease.
3. Prepare Bunker’s journal entries for the first two years of the lease.
4. Assume that all facts remain the same except that the asset’s useful life is six years. Is this an 
operating lease or a capital lease? Prepare journal entries for the first two years of the lease.
5. Compare the financial statement effects of the lease treatment you selected in requirement 3 
with the financial statement effects of the treatment you selected in requirement 4. Specifi-
cally, compare the effects on assets, liabilities, and equity under the two alternative sets of 
assumptions as of December 31, 2014, immediately after the first lease payment is made.
Making computations and 
journal entries for lessee 
(LO 3, 4, 5)
P12-2
Making computations for 
 lessee and lessor 
(LO 1, 4, 5, 8)
Lessor Company has a machine with a cost and fair value of $100,000 that it leases for a 10-
year period to Lessee Company. The machine has a 12-year expected economic life. Payments 
are received at the beginning of each year. The machine is expected to have a $10,000 residual 
value at the end of the lease term. (Lessee is not guaranteeing the residual value.)
Required:
1. What would the lease payments be if Lessor wants to earn a 10% return on its net 
investment?
2. What lease obligation would Lessee report when the lease is signed?
3. What would be the interest revenue reported by Lessor and the interest expense reported 
by Lessee in the first year, assuming they both use the 10% discount rate?
4. How would the answers to requirements 2 and 3 change for Lessee if it guaranteed the 
residual value?
P12-3
Accounting for lessees’ 
capital leases (LO 3, 4, 5)
On January 1, 2014, Seven Wonders Inc. signed a five-year noncancelable lease with Moss 
Company. The lease calls for five payments of $277,409.44 to be made at the end of each 
year. The leased asset has a fair value of $1,200,000 on January 1, 2014. Seven Wonders can-
not renew the lease, there is no bargain purchase option, and ownership of the leased asset 
reverts to Moss at the lease end. The leased asset has an expected useful life of six years, and 
Seven Wonders uses straight-line depreciation for financial reporting purposes. Its incremen-
tal borrowing rate is 12%. Moss’s implicit rate of return on the lease is unknown. Seven 
Wonders uses a calendar year for financial reporting purposes.
Required:
1. Why must Seven Wonders account for the lease as a capital lease?
2. Prepare an amortization schedule for the lease liability. Round the amount of the initial 
lease liability at January 1, 2014, to the nearest dollar. Round all amounts in the amortiza-
tion table to the nearest cent.
3. Prepare the journal entry to record (a) the lease as a capital lease on January 1, 2014; 
(b) the lease payments on December 31, 2014 and 2015; and (c) the leased asset’s depre-
ciation in 2014 and 2015.
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
Continued on next page

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
735
4. What is the total amount of expense reported on Seven Wonders’ 2014 income statement 
from the lease? Is this amount the same as, more than, or less than the amount that would 
have been reported if the lease had been classified as an operating lease? Why?
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
P12-4
Accounting for lessees’ 
capital leases (LO 3, 4, 5)
Required:
1. Repeat requirement 2 of P12–3. Assume that the lease payments are due at the beginning 
rather than at the end of the year. In this case, the first $277,409.44 payment would be 
made on January 1, 2014. Round the amount of the initial lease liability at January 1, 
2014, to the nearest dollar. Round all amounts in the amortization table to the nearest cent.
2. Prepare the journal entry to record the lease as a capital lease on January 1, 2014. Also 
prepare the lessee’s adjusting entries for December 31, 2014 and 2015, as well as the 
 entries to record the lease payments on January 1, 2015 and 2016, and the leased asset’s 
depreciation in 2014 and 2015.
P12-6
Assessing guaranteed and 
 unguaranteed residual values 
for the lessee (LO 3, 4, 5)
On January 1, 2014, Task Co. signs an agreement to lease office equipment from Coleman 
Inc. for three years with payments of $193,357 beginning December 31, 2014. The equip-
ment’s fair value is $500,000 with an expected useful life of four years. At the end of three 
years, the equipment is expected to have a $50,000 residual value, which Task does not guar-
antee. Both Task and Coleman use a 12% rate of return in evaluating this transaction. Task 
uses straight-line depreciation.
Required:
1. What type of a lease is this for Task and why?
2. Prepare a schedule to amortize the lease liability. Round the amount of the initial lease 
liability to the nearest dollar and all amounts in the schedule to the nearest cent.
3. Prepare the journal entries required on Task’s books for 2014 and 2016.
4. Assume now that Task guarantees the residual value. Prepare an amortization table and 
the journal entries necessary on Task’s books for 2014 and 2016. Further assume that the 
equipment’s residual value on December 31, 2016, is $40,000.
P12-5
Accounting for lessees’ capital 
leases including executory 
costs and residual value 
 guarantee (LO 3, 4, 5)
On January 1, 2014, Bare Trees Company signed a three-year noncancelable lease with 
Dreams Inc. The lease calls for three payments of $62,258.09 to be made at each year-end. 
The lease payments include $3,000 of executory costs. The lease is nonrenewable and has no 
bargain purchase option. Ownership of the leased asset reverts to Dreams at the end of the 
lease period, at which time Bare Trees has guaranteed that the leased asset will be worth at 
least $15,000. The leased asset has an expected useful life of four years, and Bare Trees uses 
straight-line depreciation for financial reporting purposes. Bare Trees’ incremental borrowing 
rate is 9%, which is less than Dreams’ implicit rate of return on the lease.
Required:
1. Prepare an amortization schedule for the lease liability. Round the amount of the initial 
lease liability at January 1, 2014, to the nearest dollar. Round all amounts in the amortiza-
tion table to the nearest cent.
2. Make the journal entry to record (a) the lease on January 1, 2014; (b) the lease payments 
on December 31, 2014 and 2015; and (c) the leased asset’s depreciation in 2014 and 2015.
3. Assume that at the end of the lease term, the leased asset will be worth $16,000. Make the 
journal entry to account for the residual value guarantee.
4. Repeat requirement 3, but assume that the leased asset will be worth only $12,000 at the 
end of the lease term.

736 
CHAPTER 12
Financial Reporting for Leases
P12-7
Assessing guaranteed and 
 unguaranteed residual 
values for the lessor 
(LO 3, 4, 5, 8)
Required:
Using the data in P12–6, prepare the journal entries required by Coleman Inc. on January 1, 
2014, assuming that (a) Task does not guarantee the residual value and (b) Task does guaran-
tee it. Coleman paid $500,000 to acquire the office equipment several weeks prior to the leas-
ing transaction.
P12-9
Recording capital lease for 
lessee and comparing to 
 operating lease treatment 
(LO 2, 3, 4, 5)
On July 1, 2014, Burgundy Studios leases camera equipment from Corningstone Corporation. 
The lease covers eight years and requires lease payments of $42,000, beginning on July 1, 
2014. The unguaranteed residual value is $90,000. On July 1, 2014, the equipment has a fair 
value of $278,966 and an estimated life of 10 years. The implicit rate in the lease is 11%. 
 Burgundy’s fiscal year ends on June 30, and the company depreciates its other equipment on 
a straight-line basis.
Required:
Part A
1. Show why this is a capital lease for Burgundy Studios.
2. Prepare an amortization table for the lease.
P12-8
Evaluating effects of lease 
 accounting on ratios and 
 income (LO 2, 5)
On December 31, 2014, Thomas Henley, financial vice president of Kingston Corporation, 
signed a noncancelable three-year lease for an item of manufacturing equipment. The lease 
called for annual payments of $41,635 per year due at the end of each of the next three years. 
The leased equipment’s expected economic life was four years. No cash changed hands 
 because the first payment wasn’t due until December 31, 2015.
 
Henley was talking with his auditor that afternoon and was surprised to learn that the lease 
qualified as a capital lease and would have to be put on the balance sheet. Although his intu-
ition told him that capitalization adversely affected certain ratios, the size of these adverse 
effects was unclear to him. Because similar leases on other equipment were up for renewal in 
2015, he wanted a precise measure of the ratio deterioration. “If these effects are excessive,” 
he said, “I’ll try to get similar leases on the other machinery to qualify as operating leases 
when they come up for renewal next year.”
 
Assume that the appropriate rate for discounting the minimum lease payments is 12%. 
Also assume that the asset Leased equipment under capital leases will be depreciated on a 
straight-line basis.
Required:
1. Prepare an amortization schedule for the lease.
2. The effect of lease capitalization on the current ratio worried Henley. Before factoring in 
the capital lease signed on December 31, 2014, Kingston Corporation’s current ratio at 
December 31, 2014, was:
Current assets $500,000
Current liabilities $294,118 5 1.7
 
Once this lease is capitalized on December 31, 2014, what is the adjusted December 31, 
2014, current ratio?
3. Henley was also concerned about the effect that lease capitalization would have on net 
income. He estimated that if the lease previously described were treated as an operating 
lease, 2015 pre-tax income would be $225,000. Determine the 2015 pre-tax income on a 
capital lease basis if this lease were treated as a capital lease and if the leased equipment 
were depreciated on a straight-line basis over the life of the lease.
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
737
3. Prepare Burgundy’s journal entries from the inception of the lease through June 30, 2015. 
Be sure to make any necessary reclassifications to current liabilities at the end of each 
 reporting period.
Part B
Assume that Burgundy’s reporting year ends on December 31 instead of June 30.
1. Prepare the entries to be made on December 31, 2014, July 1, 2015, and December 31, 2015.
2. Compute and label the amounts to be shown on the balance sheet and income statement 
for the years ended December 31, 2014, and December 31, 2015.
3. Show how the income statement and balance sheet would differ for 2014 and 2015 if the 
lease were treated as an operating lease.
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
P12-10
Recording lessors’ direct 
 financing lease (LO 7, 8)
On January 1, 2014, Railcar Leasing Inc. (the lessor) purchased 10 used boxcars from Rail-
road Equipment Consolidators at a price of $8,345,640. Railcar leased the boxcars to the 
Reading Railroad Company (the lessee) on the same date. The lease calls for eight annual 
payments of $1,500,000 to be made at the beginning of each year (that is, the first payment is 
due at the inception of the lease on January 1, 2014). The boxcars have an eight-year remain-
ing useful life, the lease contains no renewal or bargain purchase option, and possession of the 
boxcars reverts to the lessor at the lease’s end. The lease does not require the lessee to guaran-
tee any residual value for the boxcars. The payment’s collectibility is reasonably certain with 
no important uncertainties regarding unreimbursable costs to be incurred by the lessor. The 
lessor has structured the lease to earn a rate of return of 12.0%.
Required:
1. What method must Railcar Leasing Inc. use to account for the lease?
2. Prepare an amortization schedule for the lease for Railcar. (Round all amounts to the 
nearest cent.)
3. Prepare all journal entries for Railcar for 2014 and 2015. Assume that it reports on a 
calendar-year basis.
P12-11
Recording lessors’ direct 
 financing lease (LO 6, 7, 8)
Refer to the information in P12–10. Assume that collectibility of the payments is not reason-
ably certain and that the lessor uses the straight-line depreciation method.
Required:
1. Prepare the necessary journal entries for Railcar for 2014 and 2015 under the lease.
2. How much total income before tax does the firm expect to recognize over the life of the 
lease in these altered circumstances?
3. Is the amount in requirement 2 the same as, more than, or less than the total amount of 
 income before tax that is recognized in P12–10?
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
P12-12
Accounting for monthly rental 
payments (LO 1, 4, 5, 8)
Moore Company sells and leases its computers. Moore’s cost and sales price per machine are 
$1,200 and $3,000, respectively. At the end of three years, the expected residual value is $400, 
which is guaranteed by the lessee. Moore leases 20 of these machines to Mitchum Co. on 
September 1, 2014. Moore has no additional costs to complete, and Mitchum is creditworthy. 
Both Moore and Mitchum use straight-line depreciation. The economic life of each computer 
is four years. Be sure to use a spreadsheet program for this problem.
1. Compute the monthly rental payment for a three-year lease, assuming that Moore wishes 
to earn 1% per month. Payments are to be made at the beginning of each month.
2. What type of lease is this for Moore? Explain.
Continued on next page

738 
CHAPTER 12
Financial Reporting for Leases
3. What entry(ies) does Moore make at September 1, 2014, related to the lease?
4. Prepare an amortization table using a spreadsheet package for the life of the lease.
5. Show how Moore’s income statement for the year ended December 31, 2014, will be 
affected.
6. What accounts and amounts are on Moore’s balance sheet at December 31, 2014? Be sure 
to address reclassifications between current and noncurrent.
7. Repeat requirements 2 through 6 for Mitchum.
P12-13
Comparing financial state-
ment effects of capital and 
operating leases 
(LO 2, 3, 5)
Assume that on January 1, 2014, Trans Global Airlines leases two used Boeing 737s from 
Aircraft Lessors Inc. The eight-year lease calls for payments of $10,000,000 at each year-end. 
On January 1, 2014, the Boeing 737s have a total fair value of $60,000,000 and a remaining 
useful life of 11 years. Assume that Trans Global’s incremental borrowing rate is 9% and that 
it uses straight-line depreciation for financial reporting purposes. The lease is noncancelable, 
and Trans Global cannot renew it. In addition, there is no bargain purchase option, and owner-
ship of the leased asset reverts to Aircraft Lessors at the end of the lease. Aircraft Lessors’ 
implicit rate of return on the lease is unknown.
Required:
1. Should Trans Global account for the lease as a capital or an operating lease? Why?
2. Based on your answer to requirement 1, make all journal entries that Trans Global 
would make related to the lease for 2014, 2015, 2016, and 2017. Round all amounts to 
the nearest dollar.
3. Assume that Trans Global accounts for the lease using whichever method (capital or 
operating) that you did not select in requirement 1. Make all journal entries related to 
the lease for 2014, 2015, 2016, and 2017.
4. Prepare a schedule of the year-to-year and total (before-tax) income differences that 
would result from accounting for the lease as a capital lease versus an operating lease. 
Round all amounts to the nearest dollar.
5. Why might Trans Global’s managers prefer the lease to be accounted for as an operating 
lease rather than as a capital lease?
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
P12-14
Comparing financial state-
ment effects of direct 
 financing and operating 
leases (LO 7, 8)
On January 1, 2014, Overseas Leasing Inc. (the lessor) purchased five used oil tankers from 
Seven Seas Shipping Company at a price of $99,817,750. Overseas immediately leased the oil 
tankers to Pacific Ocean Oil Company (the lessee) on the same date. The lease calls for five 
annual payments of $25,000,000 to be made at each year-end. The tankers have a remaining 
useful life of five years with no salvage value, and the lease does not require the lessee to 
guarantee any residual value for the tankers. The lessor has structured the lease to earn a rate 
of return of 8.0%.
Required:
Prepare a schedule like the one appearing in Exhibit 12.8 of the text. This schedule should con-
tain the year-to-year income statement and balance sheet differences that would arise depending 
on whether this lease is accounted for as a direct financing lease or as an operating lease.
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
P12-15
Constructively capitalizing 
 operating leases 
(LO 2, 10, 11)
As a loan officer for First Bank, you’re evaluating Newton Co.’s financial statements. Your 
evaluation reveals that Newton has no capital leases recorded on its financial statements while 
most other companies in its industry do have such leases. To effectively evaluate Newton’s 
financial position and compare it to industry standards, you’ve decided to constructively 

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
739
capitalize Newton’s operating leases. The following information is available from Newton’s 
financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2014:
Operating Lease Payments
 
Minimum Operating
Year 
Lease Payments
2015 
$  500
2016 
450
2017 
410
2018 
380
2019 
350
After 2019 
2,880
 Total 
$4,970
Required:
1. Assuming that Newton’s long-term debt rate is 8%, estimate its constructively capitalized 
operating lease liability.
2. How might you estimate the capitalized operating lease asset amount?
3. How will constructive capitalization affect Newton Co.’s debt-to-equity ratio?
P12-16
Evaluating sale and leaseback 
(LO 3, 9)
On January 1, 2014, Merchant Co. sold a tractor to Swanson Inc. and simultaneously leased it 
back for five years. The tractor’s fair value is $250,000, but its carrying value on Merchant’s 
books prior to the transaction was $200,000. The tractor has a six-year remaining estimated 
useful life, and Merchant and Swanson both used 8% interest in evaluating the transaction. 
Merchant has agreed to make five payments of $57,976 beginning January 1, 2014.
Required:
1. What type of a lease is this for Merchant and why?
2. Compute the amount of Merchant’s gain on the transaction and explain how Merchant 
will account for it.
3. Prepare the January 1, 2014, entries on Merchant’s books to account for the sale and 
leaseback.
4. Assume that the tractor’s carrying value on Merchant’s books was $260,000. Explain how 
Merchant would account for the loss.
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
P12-17
Visualizing the asset–liability 
relationship over time for a 
capital lease (LO 1, 5)
This problem is designed to allow you to see how different lease durations and interest rates 
affect the relationship between the capitalized lease asset and lease liability. Of course, these 
same asset–liability relationships apply if you wish to constructively capitalize a lease that the 
lessee has treated as an operating lease.
 
Assume that Cambria Corporation signs a noncancelable lease that obliges it to make 
annual payments of $10,000. This amount excludes all executory costs, and the lease term 
includes no residual value guarantee. The lease will be treated as a capital lease. Cambria uses 
straight-line depreciation for the leased asset.
Required:
1. Assume that the lease payments are made at the beginning of each period.
 
a. If the discount rate is 8% and the lease runs for 20 years, approximately when—if at 
all—does the capitalized lease liability first exceed the depreciated net carrying value 
of the leased asset?
 
b. Repeat this calculation using a 12% discount rate for 20 years.
 
c. Repeat this calculation using a 12% discount rate for 12 years.

740 
CHAPTER 12
Financial Reporting for Leases
2. Assume that the lease payments are made at the end of each period.
 
a. If the discount rate is 8% and the lease runs for 20 years, does the depreciated carrying 
value of the leased asset ever exceed the capitalized lease liability?
 
b. Will this result change if you raise the interest rate and/or shorten the duration of the 
lease?
CASES
C12-1
AMR Corporation: Construc-
tively capitalizing operating 
leases (LO 2, 5, 10, 11)
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
(continued)
AMR Corporation is the parent of American Airlines, one of the largest airline companies in 
the world. Excerpts from its 2009 annual report follow.
 
December 31,
($ in millions) 
2009 
2008
Assets
 Equipment and property under capital leases
  Flight equipment 
$     651 
$     561
  Other equipment and property 
215 
215
 
866 
776
  Less accumulated amortization 
571 
536
 
$     295 
$     240
Total assets 
$25,438 
$25,175
P12-18
Analyzing U.S. GAAP and 
IFRS operating lease 
disclosures (LO 10, 11)
In its 2012 Annual Report, Singapore Airlines, which primarily complies with IFRS, reported 
the following expected future minimum lease payments (in $ million).
35 Capital and Other Commitments (in $ million)
(b) Operating lease commitments
As lessee
Aircraft
Future minimum lease payments under non-cancellable operating leases are as follows:
Not later than one year 
561.5
Later than one year but not later than five years 
1,968.1
Later than five years 
927.0
 
3,456.6
In its 2012 Annual Report filed under U.S. GAAP, United Continental Holdings, which owns 
United Airlines, reported the following expected future minimum lease payments as of 
 December 31, 2012 (in billions):
 
 
 
 
 
 
After
 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2017 
Total
Aircraft operating lease obligations 
1.5 
1.5 
1.2 
1.0 
0.9 
1.4 
7.5
Required:
1. Assume you were interested in estimating the value of each firms’ liability if these oper-
ating leases for aircraft were capitalized. Which of these notes provides more useful 
 information and why?
2. Describe some techniques an analyst could use to determine the annual cash flows for 
Singapore Airlines that comprise “Later than one year but not later than five years.” Why 
do the analyst’s assumptions matter for this?

 
Cases 
741
Liabilities
 Current liabilities
  Current obligation under capital leases 
$      90 
$     107
Obligations under capital leases, less current obligations 
$     599 
$     582
Total liabilities 
$28,927 
$28,110
Note 5. Leases
AMR’s subsidiaries lease various types of equipment and property, primarily aircraft and airport fa-
cilities. The future minimum lease payments required under capital leases, together with the present 
value of such payments, and future minimum lease payments required under operating leases that 
have initial or remaining noncancelable lease terms in excess of one year as of December 31, 2009, 
were (in millions):
Year Ending December 31 
Capital Leases 
Operating Leases
2010 
$181 
$1,057
2011 
184 
1,032
2012 
134 
848
2013 
119 
755
2014 
98 
614
2015 and thereafter 
436 
5,021 (1)
 
    A 
$9,327
Less amount representing interest 
    B 
Present value of net minimum lease payments 
    C 
(1) As of December 31, 2009, included in Accrued liabilities and Other liabilities and deferred credits on the accompanying 
consolidated balance sheet is approximately $1.2 billion relating to rent expense being recorded in advance of future oper-
ating lease payments.
At December 31, 2009, the Company was operating 181 jet aircraft and 39 turboprop aircraft 
under operating leases and 80 jet aircraft under capital leases. The aircraft leases can gener-
ally be renewed at rates based on fair market value at the end of the lease term for one to five 
years. Some aircraft leases have purchase options at or near the end of the lease term at fair 
market value, but generally not to exceed a stated percentage of the defined lessor’s cost of the 
aircraft or a predetermined fixed amount.
Required:
All questions relate to 2009 unless stated otherwise.
1. Solve for the unknowns (A, B, and C).
2. What is the net amount of capital lease assets on the balance sheet?
3. Why is the net amount of capital lease assets on the balance sheet different from the total 
amount of liabilities recorded on the balance sheet?
4. Compute AMR’s Total debt to Total assets.
5. What entry would AMR make in 2010 to record the effects of capital leases existing at 
December 31, 2009? You may omit the depreciation entry.
6. What is the amount of operating lease obligation on the balance sheet?
7. What is the present value of operating lease payments? Assume a 13% discount rate.
8. What entry would be made to constructively capitalize the leases. Assume the net asset to 
liability ratio observed for the capital leases and ignore the effects of taxes.
9. Recompute the Total debt to Total assets ratio after making the entry in requirement 8. 
What is the percentage change from the ratio computed in requirement 4?

742 
CHAPTER 12
Financial Reporting for Leases
C12-2
IFRS and FASB/IASB 
Exposure Draft 
(LO 10, 11)
Refer to the AMR Corporation financial statement information contained in C12-1.
Required:
1. Explain how the financial statements and disclosures would change if AMR were using 
IAS 17 instead of FASB ASC 840. Be as specific as possible.
2. Explain how the financial statements and disclosures would change if AMR were using 
the FASB proposed accounting standards update for leases instead of FASB ASC 840. Be 
as specific as possible.
C12-3
Guaraldi Bank, Inc.: Deter-
mining lease classification and 
the times-interest-earned 
 ratio (LO 2, 3, 5)
The following information is based on an actual annual report. In a recent lending agreement 
(dated March 3, 2014), Guaraldi Bank, Inc., included the following definitions for terms used 
in its loan covenants with a borrower:
Fixed Charges means the sum of, for Borrower and its Subsidiaries, determined in accordance with 
GAAP on a consolidated basis, (a) interest expense (including interest expense pursuant to Capital 
Leases), plus (b) lease expense payable for Operating Leases, determined for the four fiscal quarters 
preceding the date of calculation.
 
Net Earning Available for Fixed Charges means, for Borrower and its Subsidiaries, determined in ac-
cordance with GAAP on a consolidated basis, (a) Net Income before Taxes, plus (b) extraordinary noncash 
charges, plus (c) interest expense (including interest expense pursuant to Capital Leases), plus (d) lease 
 expense pursuant to Operating Leases, determined for the fiscal quarter preceding the date of calculation.
 
Fixed Charges Coverage Ratio means the ratio of Net Earnings Available for Fixed Charges to Fixed 
Charges.
 
Borrower shall not permit the Fixed Charges Coverage Ratio to be less than the following ratios for 
the fiscal quarters ending as follows:
December 31, 2013 
0.70 to 1.00
March 31, 2014 
1.00 to 1.00
June 30, 2014 
1.20 to 1.00
September 30, 2014 
1.50 to 1.00
December 31, 2014 
1.75 to 1.00
 
Notice that the definitions of Fixed charges and Net earnings available for fixed charges both 
add back lease expenses under operating leases. The objective of this case is to allow you to see 
why astute lenders carefully design covenants to protect themselves against borrowers who 
might use the latitude in GAAP lease accounting rules to circumvent covenant restrictions.
 
Assume the following initial conditions for the borrower on June 30, 2014:
Income before interest and taxes 
$120,000
 Interest on capital lease 
$  60,000
Interest on other borrowings 
40,000
 Fixed charges 
$100,000
Fixed charges coverage ratio 
1.20
 
Notice that the fixed charges coverage ratio equals the covenant constraint at June 30, 
2014; even minor adversity might cause a covenant violation in the next quarter. In addition, 
the borrower is required to increase the ratio to 1.50 by September 30, 2014.
Required:
1. Assume that the borrower “somehow” restructures the existing lease to have it qualify as 
an operating lease. What effect will this change in lease classification have on the times- 
interest-earned ratio as typically defined? (See Chapter 5.) What effect will this change 
have on the fixed charges coverage ratio as defined in the lending agreement? What does 
your answer to this part tell you about the vigilance that credit analysts must exert in 
designing and monitoring financial contractual restrictions?

 
Cases 
743
2. Now assume that the initial times-interest-earned ratio was less than 1.00 to 1.00. Would 
changing the capital lease to an operating lease benefit the borrower’s compliance with 
lending covenants?
 
 (Note: In answering both parts, make assumptions when sufficient information is not 
available.)
C12-4
Walgreens: Lessee reporting 
and constructively capitalizing 
operating leases 
(LO 2, 5, 11)
Walgreen Co. (Walgreens) is based in Illinois and was originally incorporated in 1909. As of 
August 31, 2009, it operated 7,496 locations in 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto 
Rico, and Guam. Walgreens’ 2009 net income was $2,006 million, and its interest expense 
was $91 million. The company faced a 37% effective tax rate. At August 31, 2009, the balance 
sheet showed $25,142 million of assets and liabilities of $10,766 million. Excerpts from the 
2009 annual report that relate to leases are reported below:
(3) Leases
The company owns 20.7% of its operating locations; the remaining locations are leased premises. Initial 
terms are typically 20 to 25 years, followed by additional terms containing cancellation options at five-
year intervals, and may include rent escalation clauses. The commencement date of all lease terms is the 
earlier of the date the company becomes legally obligated to make rent payments or the date the com-
pany has the right to control the property. Additionally, the company recognizes rent expense on a 
straight-line basis over the term of the lease. In addition to minimum fixed rentals, most leases provide 
for contingent rentals based upon a portion of sales.
 
Minimum rental commitments at August 31, 2009, under all leases having an initial or remaining 
non-cancelable term of more than one year are shown below (in millions):
 
Capital Lease 
Operating Lease
2010 
$ 5 
$ 2,024
2011 
4 
2,101
2012 
3 
2,085
2013 
4 
2,044
2014 
4 
2,002
Later 
45 
24,696
Total minimum lease payments 
$65 
$34,952
The capital lease amount includes $25 million of executory costs and imputed interest. Total minimum 
lease payments have not been reduced by minimum sublease rentals of approximately $33 million on 
leases due in the future under non-cancelable subleases.
 
The company remains secondarily liable on 20 assigned leases. The maximum potential of undis-
counted future payments is $11 million as of August 31, 2009. Lease option dates vary, with some 
extending to 2014.
 
Rental expense was as follows (in millions):
 
2009 
2008 
2007
Minimum rentals 
$1,973 
$1,784 
$1,614
Contingent rentals 
11 
13 
16
Less: Sublease rental income 
(9) 
(10) 
(11)
 
$1,975 
$1,787 
$1,619
Required:
All questions relate to 2009 unless stated otherwise.
1. Compute Walgreens’ debt-to-equity ratio and return-on-assets ratio using reported numbers 
for fiscal 2009.
2. Assume that the amount of Walgreens’ operating lease payment due each year after 2014 
is equal and is paid at the end of each fiscal year. Assume that all of these leases terminate 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e

744 
CHAPTER 12
Financial Reporting for Leases
at the end of fiscal 2027. Using an interest rate of 7%, calculate the present value of the 
operating lease payments at August 31, 2009.
3. Make the journal entry that would be necessary at August 31, 2009, to put the operating 
leases on the balance sheet. Ignore income taxes and assume that the amount of the 
capitalized asset equals the capitalized liability.
4. Based on your answer to requirement 2, make the necessary journal entries related to the 
income statement for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2010, assuming operating leases 
are accounted for as capital leases. Assume an 18-year useful life, zero salvage value, and 
straight-line depreciation for the capitalized leased assets.
5. Calculate Walgreens’ total debt to shareholders’ equity ratio after treating its operating 
leases as capital leases.
6. Calculate Walgreens’ return on assets. Use the income information that you computed 
for requirement 4.
7. Comment on the differences between the unadjusted ratios in requirement 1 and the 
adjusted ratios in requirements 5 and 6.
.mhhe.com/revsine6e
www
Remember to check the book’s companion website 
for additional study material.

13
Chapter
“I’m proud to be paying taxes to the United States. The only thing is . . . 
I could be just as proud for half the money.”
—Arthur Godfrey, television host 
1940s–1970s
I
n the United States and many other industrialized countries, the rules for determin-
ing income for financial reporting purposes—known as book income—do not cor-
respond to the rules for determining income for taxation purposes—referred to as 
taxable income. This divergence arises because of the different objectives underlying 
book income and taxable income.1 Book income is intended to reflect increases in a 
firm’s “well-offness”; it includes all changes in net assets except those due to transac-
tions with owners (e.g., stock issuances, stock repurchases, and dividends) and those 
recognized in other comprehensive income. Book income includes all earned inflows 
of net assets, even inflows not immediately convertible into cash, and it reflects ex-
penses as they accrue, not just when they are paid.
 
In contrast, taxable income is not determined solely by changes in well-offness. In-
stead, taxable income is governed by the “constructive receipt/ability to pay” doctrine. 
Under this doctrine, when liquid assets enter the firm, they are frequently taxed because 
it is easiest to collect money from the taxpayer at that time. For example, rent received 
in advance is taxed when received even though it is not yet earned from an accounting 
standpoint. Similarly, tax deductions generally are allowed only when expenditures are 
made or when a loss is realized. In addition, Congress may enact tax laws to encourage 
particular activities, rather than in an attempt to measure income. For example, state and 
municipal bond interest income is generally exempt from federal income tax, not be-
cause anyone believes it is not income, but rather to make such bonds more attractive to 
investors and thus lower the borrowing costs of state and local governments. Because of 
different underlying objectives, the rules for determining book income diverge from 
the rules for determining taxable income. This divergence complicates the way in-
come taxes are reflected in financial reports.
 
This chapter describes the major differences between U.S. book income and taxable 
income and how these differences affect the reporting of income tax expense and 
745
13
Income Tax Reporting
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you 
will understand:
 1. The different objectives underlying 
income determination for financial 
reporting (book) purposes versus 
tax purposes.
 2. The distinction between temporary 
(timing) and permanent book/tax 
 differences, the items that cause 
these differences, and how they 
 affect book income versus taxable 
income.
 3. The distortions created when the 
 deferred tax effects of temporary 
differences are ignored.
 4. How income tax expense is deter-
mined with interperiod tax alloca-
tion and the relations among taxes 
payable, changes in deferred taxes, 
and tax expense.
 5. The reporting rules for net operating 
loss carrybacks and carryforwards.
 6. Measuring and reporting valuation 
 allowances for deferred tax assets.
 7. How tax rate changes affect re-
ported income tax expense.
 8. How to read and interpret tax note 
disclosures.
 9. How financial statement disclosures 
reveal information about firms’ 
 uncertain tax positions.
 10. How tax note disclosures can be 
used to improve financial statement 
analysis.
 11. Key differences between IFRS and 
U.S. GAAP rules for reporting of 
 income taxes.
1 Countries in which the rules for determining accounting (book) income and taxable income are essentially the same 
include Germany, Japan, and Switzerland.

746 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
tax obligations. First we outline the major categories of differences between book income and 
taxable income, and we illustrate the distortions that would result in GAAP income state-
ments if income tax expense were set equal to the amount of income taxes 
owed. Next we explain and illustrate the GAAP solution for avoiding these 
distortions— referred to as deferred income tax accounting or interperiod 
tax allocation. We also discuss the accounting for special tax laws that apply 
to unprofitable firms, and we explore what happens when taxing authorities 
change income tax rates.
The chapter also guides you through an analysis of typical income tax 
note disclosures. Our purpose is to explain the wealth of information that 
can be extracted from these disclosures. We demonstrate how analysts can 
use tax note disclosures to glean information not provided elsewhere in the 
financial statements to better understand a firm’s performance and future 
prospects.
UNDERSTANDING INCOME TAX REPORTING
Temporary and Permanent Differences between Book 
Income and Taxable Income
The differences between pre-tax income as reported in external financial statements and tax-
able income fall into two broad categories:
1. Temporary (timing) differences
2. Permanent differences
A temporary difference results when a revenue (gain) or expense 
(loss) enters into the determination of book income in one period but 
affects taxable income in a different (earlier or later) period. A brief 
summary of common temporary differences is provided in Exhibit 
13.1. Temporary differences are so named because they eventually 
reverse. That is, a revenue (or expense) item that causes book income 
to be more (less) than taxable income when it is initially recorded—
called an originating temporary difference—will eventually reverse. These reversals 
cause book income to be less (more) than taxable income in future periods and are called 
reversing temporary differences.
 
In contrast to a temporary difference, a permanent difference does not reverse. 
A permanent difference is caused by items that (1) enter into the determination of ac-
counting income but never affect taxable income, or (2) enter into the  determination of 
taxable income but never affect accounting income. Exhibit 13.2 provides examples of 
permanent differences.
Most accountants use the terms temporary difference 
and timing difference  interchangeably. Timing  difference 
is a term used in an early pre-Codification standard is-
sued by the  Accounting Principles Board and this term 
is still used conversationally. Current  authoritative ac-
counting  literature uses the term  temporary difference.
Interperiod tax allocation refers to the 
 allocation of  income tax expense across periods 
when book and tax  income differ. Intraperiod 
tax  allocation, introduced in Chapter 2, refers 
to the allocation of the tax cost (benefit) across 
various components of book income within a 
given period. For example, the current tax 
 provision (expense) is related to (pre-tax) 
 income from continuing operations while gains 
and losses from  discontinued operations and 
 extraordinary items are  reported net of tax on 
the income statement.
RECAP
A temporary difference occurs when a revenue (gain) or expense (loss) enters into the 
determination of book (GAAP) income and taxable income in different periods. Perma-
nent differences are revenue or expense items that are recognized as part of book  income 
but are never recognized as part of taxable income, or vice versa.

 
Understanding Income Tax Reporting
747
EXHIBIT 13.1
Examples of Temporary Differences between Book Income and Taxable Income
Depreciation Expense
Accelerated depreciation is used for taxable income but straight-line is typically used for book income. Modified Accelerated Cost 
 Recovery System (MACRS) useful lives are employed for taxable income whereas useful economic lives are employed for book 
 income. Both of these items result in larger depreciation deductions for tax purposes than for book purposes in the early years of an 
 asset’s life, and the opposite  effect occurs in later years.
Bad Debts Expense
Bad debts are accrued and recognized under the allowance method for book purposes, but tax rules follow the direct write-off method, 
allowing a deduction only when a particular account is deemed to be uncollectible and written off.
Warranty Expense
Warranty expenses are accrued and recorded in the year the product is sold for book purposes, but for tax purposes, the deduction is 
 allowed when the actual warranty expenditures are made to correct the defect.
Prepaid Expenses
Some business expenses, such as insurance premiums and rent, are paid in advance. For book purposes, these expenditures are initially 
recorded as assets—Prepaid insurance or Prepaid rent—but later are  expensed over the periods when the benefits are received. Tax 
rules allow a current deduction in the period the payment is made, as long as the payment covers a reasonable period.
Pension and Other Post-Retirement Benefits (OPEB) Expenses
For book purposes, the expense is based on the amount of pension or OPEB expense accrued. For pensions, a tax deduction is allowed 
for the amounts funded (that is, contributed to the pension fund) each period, and for OPEB costs, a deduction is allowed for benefit 
payments made during the period.
Acquired Goodwill
Although the Revenue Reconciliation Act of 1993 
 allows firms a deduction for goodwill amortization 
on a 15-year straight-line basis under certain special 
conditions, in most situations goodwill is not 
 deductible. For book purposes, acquired goodwill is 
subject to periodic impairment tests (see Chapter 16). 
If impaired, goodwill is written down to fair value 
with an offsetting charge to earnings.
Installment Sales
Sales are generally recognized for book purposes when 
the goods are delivered to the customer regardless of 
when collections are made. If collections are made over 
an extended period, tax law calls for the sales revenue 
to be recognized as payments are received.
Long-Term Construction Contracts
For long-term construction contracts (Chapter 3), 
firms may generally use either the percentage-of- 
completion method or the completed-contract 
method of  revenue recognition for book purposes. In general, taxpayers may only use the  percentage-of-completion method to 
 account for long-term contracts entered into after July 11, 1989.
Revenues Received in Advance
Revenues received in advance (for example, rent revenue or subscription revenue) are initially recorded as a liability for book purposes 
and are transferred to income as those revenues are “earned.” For tax purposes, these amounts are taxed when received.
Equity in Undistributed Earnings of Investees
If a company (Investor) owns 20% or more of the outstanding voting stock of another corporation (Investee), the equity method of 
 accounting is generally used for book purposes (Chapter 16). Under the equity method, the Investor records as income its share of 
 Investee profits for the period. For tax purposes, income is recognized when Investee dividends are received, but this recognition is 
subject to special dividends-received deduction rules discussed next under permanent differences.
A great deal of confusion surrounds the tax deductibility of goodwill. The 
financial press and even financial analysts often assume that recorded 
goodwill is deductible for tax purposes, but in most cases, it is not.
 
When is goodwill tax deductible? Goodwill is tax deductible when the 
tax basis of the acquired firm’s assets are stepped-up (that is, recorded at 
fair value at date of acquisition). Whether goodwill is deductible for tax 
purposes hinges on whether the acquiring entity is buying the assets of an-
other entity directly (for example, ABC Company buys a division of XYZ 
Company) or whether the acquiring entity gains control over the assets of 
another entity by buying the voting stock of that entity (for example, ABC 
Company acquires 80% of the common stock of XYZ Company). Good-
will that arises from direct asset purchases may be amortized for tax pur-
poses, giving rise to a tax deduction, while it may not be amortized for the 
indirect stock purchase. Because most goodwill on consolidated balance 
sheets arises from stock transactions rather than outright asset purchases, 
it is generally not deductible for tax purposes.
See M. Scholes, M. Wolfson, M. Erickson, E. Maydew, and T. Shevlin, Taxes and Business 
Strategy: A Planning Approach, 4th ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education, 2009).

748 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
Problems Caused by Temporary Differences
To illustrate the issues related to interperiod tax allocation, consider the most common tempo-
rary book/tax difference: depreciation expense. For tax purposes, value-maximizing firms try 
to minimize the discounted present value of their future tax payments. Assuming tax rates do 
not change, each dollar of tax deduction today is more valuable than a dollar of tax deduction 
in the future. This time-value-of-money principle is why most firms use 
 accelerated depreciation for tax purposes. But many of these same firms use 
straight-line depreciation for financial reporting purposes. This creates a tem-
porary difference between book income and taxable income.
Consider this illustration. Assume Mitchell Corporation buys 
new equipment for $10,000 on January 1, 2014. The asset has a five-year 
life and no salvage value. It will be depreciated using the straight-line 
method for book purposes, but the sum-of-the-years’-digits (SYD) method will be used 
for tax purposes. Refer to Exhibit 13.3 and Figure 13.1(a) for the two depreciation 
schedules.
Let’s assume depreciation constitutes Mitchell Corporation’s only book-versus-tax dif-
ference. Income before depreciation and taxes is expected to be $22,000 each year over the 
Examples of Permanent Differences between Book Income and Taxable Income
Items Recognized for Book Purposes but Not for Tax Purposes
• Interest received on state and municipal bonds is not subject to federal tax but it is included in book income.
• If a company pays fines or expenses resulting from violations of the law (for example, environmental damages), these payments are 
not tax deductible but would be an expense in determining book income.
• Goodwill write-offs generally are not deductible for tax purposes unless they meet certain special conditions.* A goodwill write-
down as a result of impairment is a loss in determining book income (see Chapter 16).
• Premiums for life insurance on executives paid for by a company that is the designated benefi-
ciary are not deductible for tax purposes. Similarly, any benefits collected are not taxed. For book 
purposes, both the premiums paid and benefits received are used in determining pre-tax income.
• Compensation expense associated with qualified employee stock options, also known as Incen-
tive Stock Options, is not tax deductible but is an expense in determining book income.
• GAAP allows U.S. parent companies to treat undistributed earnings of a foreign subsidiary or 
foreign joint venture as a permanent difference if the parent company plans to permanently rein-
vest the earnings abroad (i.e., remittance of those earnings back to the U.S. parent is postponed 
indefinitely).
• U.S. tax law allows a deduction from taxable income for 9% of the profit derived from domestic production activities. The effect is 
to exclude a portion of income from taxation, resulting in a permanent difference.
Items Recognized for Tax Purposes but Not for Book Purposes
• Tax laws allow a statutory depletion deduction on certain natural resources that may be in excess of the cost-based depletion 
 recorded for book purposes. This excess statutory depletion is a permanent difference between book and taxable income.
• U.S. corporations that own stock in other U.S. companies are allowed to deduct a portion of the dividends received from these 
 investees, effectively excluding that portion from taxable income, according to the following schedule:
Ownership Portion 
Deductible Portion of Dividends
Less than 20% 
70%
Equal to or greater than 20%, 
 but less than 80% 
80
Equal to or greater than 80% 
100
* See P. McConnell, “Goodwill: The Facts,” Accounting Issues (New York: Bear Stearns & Co., August 26, 1994); and Sections 1060 and 338 of the Internal Revenue Code.
EXHIBIT 13.2
Unless otherwise specified, 
you should assume for pur-
poses of working problems 
in this chapter that a good-
will write-off is treated as a 
permanent difference item—
that is, it is not deductible 
for tax purposes.
Technically, firms are required to use MACRS 
depreciation schedules for tax purposes, and 
these differ by type of asset and useful life. We 
use SYD here to simplify the illustration of 
 depreciation-induced temporary differences.

 
Understanding Income Tax Reporting
749
Figure 13.1(a)
MITCHELL CORPORATION
Comparison of Book-versus-
Tax Depreciation Expense
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
3,500
Depreciation expense ($)
Year
Accelerated depreciation
for tax purposes
Originating
temporary
differences
Reversing
temporary
differences
Straight-line depreciation
for book purposes
EXHIBIT 13.3
Mitchell Corporation
⎫
⎬
⎭
⎫
⎬
⎭
Book-versus-Tax Depreciation
 
 
 
(c)
 
(a) 
(b) 
Excess of Tax
 
Book 
Tax 
Depreciation over
Year 
Depreciation 
Depreciation 
Book Depreciation
2014 
$  2,000 
$  3,333 
$ 1,333 
Originating temporary 
2015 
2,000 
2,667 
667 
differences
2016 
2,000 
2,000 
—
2017 
2,000 
1,333 
(667) 
Reversing temporary
2018 
2,000 
667 
(1,333) 
differences
 
$10,000 
$10,000 
–0–
EXHIBIT 13.4
Mitchell Corporation
Income and Income Tax Payable
 
(a) 
(b) 
(c)
 
Pre-Tax 
Taxable Income 
Income
 
Book Income 
per Tax Return 
Tax Payable
Year 
($22,000 – Book Depreciation) 
($22,000 – Tax Depreciation) 
(Col. [b] 3 35%)
2014 
$ 20,000 
$ 18,667* 
$ 6,533
2015 
20,000 
19,333 
6,767
2016 
20,000 
20,000 
7,000
2017 
20,000 
20,667 
7,233
2018 
20,000 
21,333 
7,467
 Total 
$100,000 
$100,000 
$35,000
* For example, in 2014, $22,000 2 $3,333 (Exhibit 13.3, column [b]) 5 $18,667.
next five years and the statutory tax rate is 35%. Exhibit 13.4 shows pre-tax book income, 
taxable income per Mitchell’s tax return, and taxes payable for the years 2014–2018. Fig-
ure 13.1(b) displays graphically the relation between taxable income and pre-tax book 
 income over the five-year period.
The statutory tax rate for 
corporations is the rate set 
by law—in this case, 35%.

750 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
18,000
18,500
19,500
20,500
21,500
19,000
20,000
21,000
22,000
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Year
.
Income ($)
Accelerated
depreciation
Straight-line
depreciation
,
Accelerated
depreciation
Straight-line
depreciation
Taxable income per
tax return
Pre-tax
book
income
Figure 13.1(b)
MITCHELL CORPORATION
Pre-tax Book Income and 
 Taxable Income
EXHIBIT 13.5
Mitchell Corporation
Result from Treating Actual Taxes Paid as Income Tax Expense
 
 
(b) 
(c)
 
(a) 
Tax Expense 5 
Effective 
(d)
 
Pre-Tax 
Income 
Tax Rate 
After-Tax
Year 
Book Income 
Tax Payable 
(bya) 
Book Income
2014 
$20,000 
$6,533 
32.7% 
$13,467
2015 
20,000 
6,767 
33.8 
13,233
2016 
20,000 
7,000 
35.0 
13,000
2017 
20,000 
7,233 
36.2 
12,767
2018 
20,000 
7,467 
37.3 
12,533
The effective tax rate is 
the tax expense divided 
by pre-tax income as 
 reported in the GAAP 
 income statement.
 
The easiest way to record income tax expense here would be to treat the taxes payable each 
year (Column [c] of Exhibit 13.4) as the reported book income tax expense. Exhibit 13.5 and 
Figure 13.2 show what would happen if this were done.
 
As you can readily see in the exhibit and figure, this approach causes the effective tax rate to 
increase from 32.7% in 2014 to 37.3% in 2018, while after-tax earnings would decline from 
$13,467 in 2014 to $12,533 in 2018 (Column [d] of Exhibit 13.5). This occurs even though pre-
tax book income ($20,000) and the statutory tax rate (35%) are stable over the five-year period.
 
The changing effective tax rate that would result if tax payments were used to measure in-
come tax expense is due to a mismatching of income tax expense and book pre-tax income. 
Recall from Chapter 2 that a general accounting principle is that costs should be recognized 
as expenses in the same period as the related revenue is recognized. When we apply this prin-
ciple to income tax accounting, it suggests that income tax expense should include the tax 
consequences of amounts recognized in current period pre-tax income, regardless of when 
those tax consequences are realized in cash. In other words, it is not the payment of taxes that 
triggers income tax expense, but rather the recognition of pre-tax income that ever has an as-
sociated tax payment.
 
Besides the income statement mismatch, treating actual cash taxes paid as income tax ex-
pense introduces a reporting distortion on the balance sheet. This distortion occurs because 
total tax depreciation deductions on an asset cannot exceed the asset’s cost minus its salvage 
value. Accordingly, “extra” tax depreciation in early years will be offset by lower allowable 

 
Understanding Income Tax Reporting 
751
tax depreciation in later years. As shown in Column (c) of Exhibit 13.3, during 2014 tax 
depreciation exceeds book depreciation by $1,333. So, future years’ tax depreciation must 
be $1,333 lower than future years’ book depreciation. Thus, the extra tax depreciation taken 
in 2014 generates a “liability” for future taxes of $1,333 times 35%, or $467, but this “lia-
bility” goes unrecorded when the tax expense is set equal to actual cash taxes paid or 
payable.
 
There is another way to visualize how the extra tax depreciation creates a liability for fu-
ture taxes. GAAP assumes “the reported amounts of assets . . . will be recovered. . . . Based on 
that assumption, a difference between the tax basis of an asset . . . and its reported amount . . . 
will result in taxable . . . amounts . . . when the reported amounts . . . are settled. . . .”2 In our 
example, at the end of 2014, the reported (book) amount of the asset is $8,000 (that is, $10,000 
2 $2,000 book depreciation), while the tax basis is $6,667 (that is, $10,000 2 $3,333 tax 
depreciation). Notice that if the asset were sold for its $8,000 GAAP net book value, a taxable 
gain of $1,333 would ensue, measured as the difference between the $8,000 cash received and 
the asset’s $6,667 tax basis. Thus, given the GAAP assumption that reported amounts of 
 assets will be recovered, the extra depreciation in 2014 would generate a liability for future 
taxes of $1,333 times 35%, or $467.
2014
Year
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
2015
2016
2017
2018
32.7%
33.8%
35.0%
36.2%
37.3%
Tax expense
Pre-tax income
Effective tax rate =
Pre-tax book income
($ in 000)
Tax expense
Figure 13.2
MITCHELL CORPORATION
Tax Expense without 
 Interperiod Tax Allocation
Deferred Income Tax Accounting: 
Interperiod Tax Allocation
To avoid the drawbacks just illustrated, accounting for income taxes does not simply equate 
income tax expense with current taxes paid (or payable). Instead, income tax expense reflects 
all tax payments related to current period pre-tax income, regardless of when those tax 
2 FASB Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) Paragraph 740-10-25-20: Income Taxes—Overall—Recognition— 
Temporary Differences.
porary Differences.
RECAP
Setting tax expense equal to current taxes payable (as in Column [b] of Exhibit 13.5) 
 ignores the future tax liability that results from temporary differences between book and 
taxable income, and it results in a mismatching of tax expense with the related revenue 
and expense items reported on the GAAP income statement.

752 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
 payments will occur. GAAP accounting for income taxes is specified in Topic 740: Income 
Taxes.3 It calls for recognizing deferred tax liabilities, which  reflect future tax payments 
 related to amounts previously recognized as pre-tax income, and deferred tax assets to reflect 
 reductions to future tax payments related to amounts previously recognized in pre-tax income. To 
illustrate these rules, we continue with the Mitchell Corporation example in Exhibit 13.6.
Deferred Tax Liabilities
Columns (a) and (b) of Exhibit 13.6 repeat information from earlier exhibits. Column (a) 
shows the amount of tax that must be paid each year and column (b) shows the difference 
between book depreciation and tax depreciation each year. Now consider what happens in 
2014. Mitchell must pay $6,533 in taxes, which was determined as taxable income of $18,667 
times the 35% tax rate. But book pre-tax income was $20,000 (Exhibit 13.4). The $1,333 dif-
ference between taxable income and book pre-tax income was because of the different depre-
ciation methods used in the books and in the tax return. So now we ask the question, will there 
ever be a tax payment on the additional $1,333 of book pre-tax income recognized in 2014? 
The answer is yes because tax depreciation will be less than book depreciation in the later 
years of the asset’s life, causing taxable income to exceed pre-tax book income when that hap-
pens. So, in 2014 there is an increase in a deferred tax liability to reflect the future tax pay-
ment on future taxable income corresponding to 2014 pre-tax book income. This increase in 
the deferred tax liability increases 2014 income tax expense accordingly.
 
Column (c) shows that for 2014, the change in the liability for future taxes is an increase of 
$467 ($1,333 depreciation temporary difference 3 35% tax rate). Under GAAP, income tax 
expense equals the sum of the current taxes owed (that is, income taxes payable) and the 
change in the deferred tax liability. This sum represents the income taxes that will ever be 
paid related to current period pre-tax income. The computation is:
EXHIBIT 13.6
Mitchell Corporation
Computation of Income Tax Expense with Interperiod Tax Allocation
 
 
 
 
(d)
 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Total 
(e)
 
Income 
Excess of 
Increase 
Income 
Balance in
 
Tax 
Tax Depreciation 
(Decrease) in 
Tax 
Deferred
 
Payable 
over Book 
Deferred Income 
Expense 
Income Tax
 
(Exhibit 13.4, 
Depreciation 
Tax Liability 
(Col. [a] 
Liability at
Year 
Col. [c]) 
(Exhibit 13.3, Col. [c]) 
(Col. [b] 3 35%) 
 1 Col. [c]) 
Year-End
2014 
$ 6,533 
$1,333 
$467 
$ 7,000 
$467
2015 
6,767 
667 
233 
7,000 
700
2016 
7,000 
–0– 
–0– 
7,000 
700
2017 
7,233 
(667) 
(233) 
7,000 
467
2018 
7,467 
(1,333) 
(467) 
7,000 
–0–
 
$35,000 
–0– 
–0– 
$35,000
Computation of Income Tax Expense for 2014
Current income tax payable ($18,667 3 35%) 
$6,533
Increase in liability for future taxes arising during the year ($1,333 3 35%) 
467
 Income tax expense for 2014 
$7,000
3 Ibid.

 
Understanding Income Tax Reporting 
753
The accounting entries for 2014 income taxes are:
DR Income tax expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $6,533
   CR Income tax payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$6,533
DR Income tax expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$467
   CR Deferred tax liability. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$467
These entries can be combined into a single entry, which we will do for the remainder of the 
chapter.
Figure 13.3
RELATIONS AMONG 
 INCOME TAX EXPENSE, 
TAXES PAYABLE, AND 
CHANGES IN  DEFERRED 
TAX LIABILITIES
Increase in
deferred tax liability
Taxes
payable
Plus
Minus
Computed
Sum
5
Income tax
expense
Decrease in
deferred tax liability
Computed
Computed
Temporary differences that 
result in deferred tax liabili-
ties are called future taxable 
amounts because future tax-
able income will be greater 
that future book income. 
Computation of Income Tax Expense for 2017
Current income tax payable ($20,667 3 35%) 
$7,233
Decrease in liability for future taxes ($667 3 35%) 
(233)
 Income tax expense for 2017 
$7,000
DR Income tax expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $7,000
   CR Income tax payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$6,533
   CR Deferred tax liability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
467
 
As this entry illustrates, the debit to income tax expense represents the combination of cur-
rent taxes payable and any change in the deferred tax liability balance during the year. When 
the deferred tax liability increases, the increase is added to current income tax payable to ar-
rive at income tax expense. When the deferred tax liability decreases, the  decrease is sub-
tracted from current income tax payable to determine income tax expense. Figure 13.3 
summarizes these important relationships.
 
The 2014 accounting entry we just described records an originating book/tax temporary 
difference for depreciation expense that results in an increase in the deferred tax liability. A 
similar entry would be made in 2015. Tax expense in that year would be $7,000, or the current 
tax payable amount ($6,767) plus the increase in the deferred tax liability ($233) shown in 
Exhibit 13.6.
 
To see what happens when book-versus-tax temporary differences reverse, let’s con-
sider the income tax entry in 2017. From Figure 13.3, we see that income tax expense in 
2017 is equal to current income tax payable minus the decrease in deferred tax liability 
during the year. Because book depreciation exceeds tax depreciation by $667 in 2017, the 
deferred tax liability decreases by $667 times 35%, or $233. Therefore, tax expense for 
2017 is:

754 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
The journal entry for 2017 income taxes is:
DR Income tax expense   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $7,000
DR Deferred tax liability   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
233
   CR Income tax payable   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$7,233
 
Return to Mitchell Corporation’s computation of income tax expense for each year using 
interperiod tax allocation in Exhibit 13.6. Notice that in 2014 and 2015, the deferred tax lia-
bility increases and these increases are added to taxes payable to arrive at the tax expense re-
ported on the income statement for those years. In 2017 and 2018, the depreciation temporary 
differences reverse, resulting in decreases in the deferred tax liability (because the additional 
taxes are now being paid), and these decreases are subtracted from taxes payable to arrive at 
tax expense for those years. By the end of 2018, the depreciation book-versus-tax temporary 
differences have totally reversed, and the balance in the deferred tax liability account is zero. 
With constant tax rates of 35% over the entire period, income tax expense (Column [d] in 
Exhibit 13.6) is always 35% times pre-tax book income of $20,000, and the pattern of tax 
expense matches the pattern of pre-tax book income.
 
When tax rates do not change from year to year, the tax entries we have seen simultane-
ously overcome both of the drawbacks that would exist if we measured income tax expense as 
cash taxes paid—the liability for future taxes is explicitly recognized, and the reported tax 
expense (in the Mitchell case) is exactly 35% of pre-tax book income of $20,000 
($7,000/$20,000 5 35%). Thus, tax expense is also “matched” with book income.
 
This constant effective tax rate at exactly the 35% statutory tax rate resulted from a 
combination of factors. First, we applied interperiod tax allocation, or deferred tax ac-
counting, rather than basing income tax expense on the amount of taxes to be paid in a 
given year. Second, we assumed the statutory tax rate itself was constant at 35%. (We have 
already mentioned that if the tax rate changes, the effective tax rate will be affected, and 
we will illustrate how that happens later in the chapter.) Third, we assumed there were no 
permanent differences. Permanent differences cause the effective tax rate to deviate from 
the statutory tax rate because they affect book pre-tax income without a corresponding ef-
fect on income tax expense or vice versa. In either case, when there are permanent differ-
ences and we divide income tax expense by book pre-tax income, we no longer get 35%. 
For example, suppose that in any year we examined, Mitchell also had $5,000 of municipal 
bond interest. This interest is never subject to tax, so there should be no income tax ex-
pense associated with it. Because the income is not subject to tax, currently payable taxes 
are unaffected. And because the municipal bond interest does not create a temporary dif-
ference, there is no change in any deferred tax asset or liability. So there is no effect on 
income tax expense as a result of this income. However, pre-tax book income would be 
$5,000 higher, so the effective tax rate would be $7,000y($20,000 1 $5,000) 5 28%. If 
this level of municipal bond interest were constant across years, the effective tax rate 
would still be constant due to the interperiod tax allocation, but it would be constant at 
28%. If the level of municipal bond interest were changing over time, the effective tax rate 
would change as well.
In any year that tax rates 
change, this matching 
 disappears. The reason is 
that GAAP focuses on the 
liability for future taxes, 
which changes as tax rates 
change. More on this later 
in the chapter.
RECAP
With interperiod tax allocation, tax expense equals current taxes payable plus the in-
crease (minus the decrease) in deferred tax liabilities. This results in a GAAP tax ex-
pense number that is matched with the revenue and expense amounts that are 
recognized for book purposes as shown in Figure 13.4. GAAP income tax expense 

 
Understanding Income Tax Reporting 
755
 properly includes no amounts related to book revenues that are never subject to tax 
(e.g., municipal bond interest) or book expenses that are never tax deductible (e.g., cer-
tain fines and penalties).
Deferred Tax Assets
The Mitchell Corporation example illustrates a situation in which pre-tax 
book income initially exceeds taxable income, creating a deferred tax lia-
bility. But temporary differences can go in the opposite direction as well. 
In many circumstances, taxable income initially exceeds pre-tax book in-
come, thereby giving rise to deferred tax assets.
 
To illustrate how a deferred tax asset arises, let’s assume that in December 2014 Paul Cor-
poration leases an office building it owns to  another company for $100,000. The lease covers 
all of 2015 and specifies that the tenant pay the $100,000 to Paul Corporation immediately on 
signing the lease in 2014. On an accrual basis, rental income will be earned entirely in 2015, 
the period covered by the lease. Accordingly, Paul Corporation makes the following entry on 
receiving the lease payment:
DR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$100,000
   CR Unearned rental income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$100,000
 
The account Unearned rental income is a liability. For GAAP reporting purposes this 
 liability will be reduced monthly by $8,333 (with an offsetting credit to a revenue 
 account) in 2015 as Paul provides the tenant with the use of the facility and earns the 
lease revenue. For tax purposes, the entire $100,000 rent prepayment is included in Paul 
Corporation’s 2014 taxable income, consistent with the “constructive receipt/ability to 
pay” doctrine.
 
Assume the lease receipt represents the only book/tax temporary difference for Paul and 
that 2014 pre-tax book income totals $1,500,000. Accordingly, taxable income will total 
Temporary differences that result in deferred 
tax assets are called future  deductible amounts 
because future taxable  income—all other factors 
being equal—will be lower than future book 
income.
Figure 13.4
MITCHELL CORPORATION
Income Tax Expense with 
 Interperiod Tax Allocation
2014
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
2015
Year
2016
2017
2018
35.0%
35.0%
35.0%
35.0%
35.0%
Pre-tax book income
($ in 000)
Tax expense
Pre-tax book income
Tax expense
Pre-tax income
Effective tax rate =

756 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
$1,600,000 in 2014—$1,500,000 plus the immediately taxable advance lease payment of 
$100,000. In 2015, the $100,000 lease payment that was received in 2014 will be “earned” for 
book purposes and will be included in book income. However, because this amount was in-
cluded in 2014 taxable income, it will not be included in Paul’s 2015 taxable income. The 
temporary difference that originated in 2014 reverses in 2015. Suppose book income is 
$2,000,000 in 2015. Taxable income will be $100,000 lower, or $1,900,000, because it will 
exclude the rental income, and the temporary difference will reverse. These relationships are 
summarized in Exhibit 13.7.
 
When the rent is earned in 2015 for book purposes, accounting income will exceed taxable 
income by $100,000—but no tax will be due on this difference because the tax was already 
paid in 2014. Thus, the temporary difference ($100,000) that originates in 2014 because of 
book/tax differences in lease revenue represents a deferred tax asset at the end of 2014. If we 
assume the income tax rate is 35%, 2014 income tax expense is composed of the current taxes 
payable minus the deferred tax asset increase, as shown in Exhibit 13.8.
 
Paul Corporation makes the following 2014 entry for income taxes:
EXHIBIT 13.7
Paul Corporation
Book-versus-Tax Temporary Differences That Give Rise to a Deferred 
Tax Asset
 
2014 Lease Receipt of $100,000
 
 
Included 
Included
 
 
in Book 
in Taxable
 
Book Income 
Income? 
Income? 
Taxable Income
2014 
$1,500,000 
No 
Yes 
$1,600,000
2015 
2,000,000 
Yes 
No 
1,900,000
DR Income tax expense   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $525,000
DR Deferred tax asset   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
35,000
CR Income tax payable   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$560,000
DR Income tax expense   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $700,000
CR Deferred tax asset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$ 35,000
CR Income tax payable   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
665,000
Book pre-tax income is $2,000,000 in 2015, including the $100,000 of rental income earned
that year, whereas taxable income is $1,900,000. The $100,000 temporary difference that 
originated in 2014 reverses, and the related deferred tax asset of $35,000 created in 2014 
(Exhibit 13.8, Column [e]) is eliminated. As shown in Column (f), the $35,000 decrease in 
deferred tax assets is added to the taxes payable of $665,000 to arrive at income tax expense 
of $700,000. Paul makes the following income tax expense entry in 2015 when the temporary 
difference reverses:

 
Understanding Income Tax Reporting
757
 
Figure 13.5  depicts the relationships for computing income tax expense under interperiod tax 
allocation by adjusting taxes payable for changes in deferred tax assets and liabilities.4
Net Operating Losses: Carrybacks and Carryforwards
Because firms pay taxes during profitable years, denying them some form of tax relief in unprof-
itable years would be inequitable. That is why the U.S. Internal Revenue Code (as well as the tax 
laws of many other countries) provides an opportunity for firms reporting net operating losses to 
offset those losses against either past or future taxable income. When deductible expenses 
 exceed taxable revenues, a net operating loss occurs and firms will:
1. Carry back the incurred loss and carry forward any remaining unused loss, or
2. Elect to forego the carryback and carry forward the incurred loss. 
 
Assume Unfortunato Corporation had a $1,000,000 net operating loss in 2014. Under 
the U.S. Internal Revenue Code, Unfortunato will carry back the net operating loss and 
EXHIBIT 13.8
Paul Corporation
Computation of Tax Expense with Interperiod Tax Allocation
 
 
 
(c) 
 
(e) 
(f) 
 
 
 
Excess 
 
Increase 
Total
 
 
 
of Tax Lease  
(d) 
(Decrease)  
Income Tax
 
(a) 
(b) 
Revenue over  
Taxes 
in Deferred 
Expense
 
Taxable 
Book 
Book Lease  
Payable 
Tax Asset 
(Col. [d] 2
Year 
Income 
Income 
Revenue 
 (Col. [a] 3 35%) 
(Col. [c] 3 35%) 
Col. [e])
2014 
$1,600,000 
$1,500,000 
$100,000 
$560,000 
$35,000 
$525,000
2015 
1,900,000 
2,000,000 
(100,000) 
665,000 
(35,000) 
700,000
Plus
Minus
Taxes
payable
Computed
5
Sum
Income tax
expense
Decrease in
deferred tax asset
Computed
Increase in
deferred tax liability
Computed
Decrease in
deferred tax liability
Computed
Increase in
deferred tax asset
Computed
Figure 13.5
RELATIONS AMONG 
 INCOME TAX EXPENSE, 
TAXES PAYABLE, AND 
CHANGES IN  DEFERRED 
TAX ASSETS AND 
LIABILITIES
4 Later in the chapter, we describe how changes in a tax contingency reserve for uncertain tax positions can also affect the 
determination of tax expense reported on a firm’s income statement.

758 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
offset it against taxable income in the previous two years, 2012 
and 2013. The loss must be offset against the earlier year 
first—in this case, 2012. If the loss exceeds the total taxable 
income for the 2012–2013 period, the remaining portion of the 
loss can be carried forward and offset against future taxable 
income in the ensuing 20 years—2015 through 2034—as 
shown in Figure 13.6, Panel (a).
When a firm carries losses back, it receives a refund of taxes previously paid. In effect, the 
firm amends its tax return(s) for the year(s) to which losses are carried back, as if those losses 
had occurred in those year(s). The government then refunds the overpayment.
Unfortunato has another option. Rather than first carrying the loss back 
and then carrying forward any unused amounts, Unfortunato could elect 
not to carry the loss back and only carry the loss  forward to  reduce tax-
able income in the next 20 years (see Figure 13.6, Panel [b]).
To illustrate the accounting, let’s assume the tax rate in effect from 
2011 to 2014 was 35% and that Unfortunato had the following taxable 
income (loss) in those years, before applying any carryback or carry-
forward of losses.
Year 
Taxable Income (Loss) 
Tax (at 35%)
2011 
$ 300,000 
$105,000
2012 
400,000 
 140,000
2013 
350,000 
 122,500
2014 
(1,000,000) 
—
 
Let’s also assume that Unfortunato decides to carry back the net operating loss, as most 
firms would. The 2014 loss is first offset against 2012 taxable income ($400,000) and then 
against 2013 taxable income ($350,000). This carryback uses $750,000 of the 2014 loss and 
generates a tax refund of $262,500 ($750,000 3 35%). Unfortunato makes the following en-
try in 2014 to reflect the refund due:
DR Income tax refund receivable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $262,500
 
CR Income tax expense (carryback benefit)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$262,500
The Worker, Homeownership, and Business Assistance Act of 2009 
allowed a temporary five-year carryback period for losses arising in 
2008 or 2009 (but not both). Congress occasionally extends tempo-
rarily the carryback period, as it did with this act, generally during 
difficult economic times under the theory that providing additional 
cash to struggling companies will assist them.
Most companies carry back first because that strategy 
usually maximizes the discounted present value of the 
benefit. Why would firms ever elect to carry forward 
only, thereby foregoing an immediate income tax re-
fund? In unusual situations—for  example, a firm expects 
to be profitable in the  future and expects future tax rates 
to be much higher than past rates—the carry forward-
only option may be preferred.
Loss
incurred
2012
Two-year
carryback period
Loss carryback
Loss carryforward
Panel (a)
20-year carryforward period
2013
2014
2015
2016
2034
Figure 13.6
UNFORTUNATO 
CORPORATION
Panel (a): Illustration of Tax 
Loss  Carryback/Carryforward 
Provision
Panel (b): Illustration of Tax 
Loss Carryforward
20-year carryforward period
Entire amount of loss carried forward and offset against
taxable income up to 20 years in the future
Loss
incurred
Panel (b)
2014
2015
2016
2034

 
Understanding Income Tax Reporting 
759
The unused loss ($1,000,000 2 $400,000 2 $350,000 5 $250,000) will result in future tax 
benefits—if Unfortunato becomes profitable again before 2034. If we assume that future tax 
rates will remain at 35%, these future benefits would total $87,500 ($250,000 3 35%). Unfor-
tunato makes an additional entry in 2014:
DR Deferred tax asset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$87,500
 
CR Income tax expense (carryforward benefit) . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$87,500
The Income tax refund receivable account would be shown among current assets on the bal-
ance sheet, and the deferred tax asset would be apportioned between current and noncurrent 
categories in accordance with the expected timing of the future income. If we assume that the 
pre-tax book loss equaled the taxable loss, the credits would be reflected in the accompanying 
income statement for 2014 as:
RECAP
U.S. tax law allows firms to offset operating losses against taxable income. Firms can elect 
to carry back losses up to two years with any unused loss carried forward up to 20 years; 
or they can elect only to carry forward the loss up to 20 years. The tax benefit associated 
with the loss carryback or carryforward is recorded as an adjustment to income tax 
 expense in the year of the loss. Many other countries have similar laws.
Deferred Tax Asset Valuation Allowances
There is no guarantee a firm will be profitable in the future. And, if a firm does not gener-
ate any taxable income, it may not be able to realize the tax benefits represented by the 
deferred tax assets it recorded. That is, those benefits can only be realized through 
 reduced tax payments if there are tax payments to be reduced. For this reason, GAAP 
requires firms to assess the likelihood that deferred tax assets may not be fully realized in 
future periods.
 
If management believes the probability of future taxable income being sufficient to realize 
fully its deferred tax assets is more than 50%, then deferred tax assets can be recognized in 
 
Although it is an uncommon practice, Unfortunato could have elected only to carry forward 
its loss. In that case, it would not have received a refund and it would have created a deferred tax 
asset of $1 million 3 35% 5 $350,000. The entry to record income taxes for 2014 would be:
DR Deferred tax asset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $350,000
 
CR Income tax expense (carryforward benefit)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$350,000
 
Unfortunato would report the same income tax benefit of $350,000 and the same net loss 
of $650,000. However, it would not actually realize any benefit as a reduced income tax pay-
ment until it became profitable again and was able to avoid paying taxes that would otherwise 
be due.
Income (loss) before tax 
$(1,000,000)
Income tax benefit ($262,500 due to 
 operating loss carryback and $87,500 
 due to operating loss carryforward) 
350,000
Net income (loss) 
$  (650,000)

760 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
their entirety. However, if management’s assessment indicates that it is more likely than not 
that some portion of the benefit will not be realized, then a deferred tax asset valuation al-
lowance is required. GAAP states that this valuation allowance “shall be sufficient to reduce 
the  deferred tax asset to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized.”5
 
To illustrate the procedure for establishing a deferred tax asset valuation allowance, let’s 
assume that (1) for book purposes, Norman Corporation reported pre-tax book income of 
$600,000 in 2014, its first year of operations, after accruing $900,000 of estimated warranty 
expenses associated with product sales in 2014 and (2) the actual warranty parts and services 
from these sales are provided in 2015 and beyond. Because the U.S. Internal Revenue Code 
allows companies to deduct warranty expense only when the warranty services are provided, 
there is a temporary difference that gives rise to a deferred tax asset of $315,000 ($900,000 3 
35%) which would be recorded in 2014. The 2014 income tax expense entry is:
DR Income tax expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $210,000
DR Deferred tax asset ($900,000 3 0.35)   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
315,000
   CR Income tax payable ($1,500,000 3 0.35)   . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$525,000
 
Now suppose that prior to completing its 2014 financial statements Norman determines it 
is unlikely to earn enough taxable income in future years to realize more than $200,000 of the 
deferred tax asset. The additional entry made for 2014 is:
DR Income tax expense ($315,000 2 $200,000) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $115,000
   CR  Allowance to reduce deferred tax 
 
 
asset to expected realizable value   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$115,000
The allowance is a contra-account that reduces the net carrying amount of the deferred tax 
asset from $315,000 to $200,000—its estimated realizable value. Income tax expense is in-
creased in the year during which it is determined that a portion of the deferred tax asset is 
unlikely to be realized. If Norman Corporation’s future prospects improve and if in a subse-
quent year it determines that an allowance account is no longer needed, then the allowance 
account would be  reduced to zero and there would be a credit to Income tax expense.
 
Now that we have seen how valuation allowances are recorded, let’s return to the two ex-
amples we considered earlier that involved deferred tax assets—Paul Corporation with its 
leasing income and Unfortunato, which had an operating loss carryforward. Paul recorded a 
$35,000 deferred tax asset after it included the $100,000 lease payment it received in 2014 in 
that year’s taxable income, even though it was not considered income under GAAP until 
2015. In our original example, Paul had $1,900,000 of taxable income in 2015, certainly 
enough to ensure realization of the deferred tax asset. But suppose instead Paul was expected 
to run a loss in 2015 and the loss would be $1,000,000 for tax purposes and therefore $900,000 
under GAAP. (The 2015 GAAP loss is $100,000 lower than the taxable loss because of the 
recognition of lease income in 2015 under GAAP, whereas the lease income was already rec-
ognized in 2014 for tax purposes.) Will Paul realize the deferred tax asset? The answer is yes 
because Paul will carry back the 2015 loss to 2014. Therefore, Paul would not record a valua-
tion allowance at December 31, 2014.
 
The entry to record taxes in 2015 (when the loss is incurred) would be:
DR Income tax receivable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $350,000
   CR Deferred tax asset  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$35,000
   CR Income tax expense (benefit)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
315,000
5 FASB ASC Paragraph 740-10-30-5e: Income Taxes—Overall—Initial Measurement—Deferred Tax Expense (or Benefit). 
Operationally, “more likely than not” means the probability of occurrence is more than 50%.

 
Understanding Income Tax Reporting 
761
 
Paul records a receivable for the $350,000 due from the government as a result of carrying 
back its $1,000,000 tax loss to earlier periods. The deferred tax asset is eliminated with the 
reversal of the temporary difference related to the lease and a credit to income tax expense of 
$315,000 is recorded. This income tax benefit is 35% of the $900,000 pre-tax book loss 
 incurred in 2015.
 
What about Unfortunato (using the more common situation where Unfortunato carries 
back losses as they are incurred to the extent possible)? It recorded a deferred tax asset of 
$87,500 to reflect the $250,000 net operating loss carryforward it had. Unfortunato already 
used its carryback, so whether the company will realize the tax benefit from the carryforward 
depends entirely on its ability to generate taxable income in the future. Suppose there is sub-
stantial doubt about the company’s future viability and the company’s management cannot 
assert it is more likely than not that the company will have any future taxable income. Unfor-
tunato would record a valuation allowance for the entire deferred tax asset of $87,500. It 
would establish a contra-account, bringing the net value of the deferred tax asset to be  reported 
in the balance sheet to zero. It would increase its 2014 income tax expense (reduce the income 
tax benefit) by $87,500, thereby reporting an income tax benefit of only $262,500, the known, 
expected tax refund. So, Unfortunato would record the following entries in 2014. (The first 
two entries are the ones we showed in the original example. The third entry is the additional 
entry the company makes to establish the valuation allowance.)
DR Income tax refund receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$262,500
   CR Income tax expense (carryback benefit)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$262,500
DR Deferred tax asset  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$87,500
   CR Income tax expense (carryback benefit)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$87,500
DR Income tax expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$87,500
   CR Allowance to reduce deferred tax asset to expected 
      realizable value  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$87,500
 
The third entry, establishing the valuation allowance, effectively negates the second 
entry, where Unforunato recorded the deferred tax asset in the balance sheet and the cor-
responding income tax benefit in the income statement. The income tax benefit will there-
fore be reported as just $262,500 (from the first entry, reflecting the carryback) and the 
deferred tax asset will be reported in the balance sheet net of the valuation allowance, for 
a balance of zero.
Assessing the Need for a Valuation Allowance When There Is No 
History of Profitability 
The guidance on how to assess whether a valuation allow-
ance is necessary requires firms to consider all available information, both positive and 
negative. The guidance notes, however, that for start-up companies, the full assortment of 
information normally examined is likely not to be available. In particular, there may not be 
a history of profitable operations to suggest the firm will be profitable in the future. The 
guidance goes on to say that forming a conclusion that a valuation allowance is not neces-
sary would be difficult when there is negative evidence, such as losses in recent periods, 
particularly if there was no taxable income in any prior years to which those losses could be 
carried back.
 
For this reason, it is quite common for start-up companies to record valuation allow-
ances for a large portion, if not all, of the company’s deferred tax assets. The result of this 
approach is that no tax benefit is recognized in the income statement in those firms’ early 

762 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
years, and the net loss is equal to the pre-tax loss. However, once a firm becomes profit-
able and is expected to remain so, the valuation allowance may be eliminated, giving an 
enormous boost to reported net income in the year(s) the allowance is reversed. In fact, the 
reversal is often so large that a firm with positive pre-tax income reports negative income 
tax expense, resulting in net income that exceeds pre-tax income! The resulting effective 
tax rate can be negative and in some cases it can even exceed (in magnitude) minus 100%. 
Exhibit 13.9 presents Amazon.com’s condensed income statements for the three years 
2002–2004. Amazon lost about $150 million in 2002 and, as it did in prior periods, 
 reported income tax expense (benefit) close to zero. The company was building up net 
operating loss carryforwards, but without any history of profitability, there was not suffi-
cient  evidence to assert that a valuation allowance was not necessary, so it also built up a 
valuation allowance, resulting in virtually no income tax benefit reported in its income 
statements. In 2003 Amazon was close to breakeven and reported a small income tax ex-
pense. Then, in 2004, Amazon reported pre-tax income of $355.9 million and it became 
clear Amazon would be profitable in the future. The company reversed more than $600 
million in valuation allowances that year alone, which reduced income tax expense to the 
negative $232.6 million amount it reported. Amazon’s effective tax rate in 2004 was 
265.4% (2$232,581y$355,870).
Valuation Allowances at Profitable Companies 
It is not unusual to see a 
valuation allowance at a profitable company, although this might seem counterintuitive. If a 
firm has deferred tax assets in a particular tax jurisdiction, it will have to generate taxable in-
come in that jurisdiction to realize the value of the deferred tax assets. So if, for example, a 
company has a European subsidiary that has no history of profits, it might need a valuation 
allowance even if the U.S. parent is profitable overall.
Subjectivity of Valuation Allowances 
The decisions to establish a deferred tax 
asset valuation allowance and, if so, what amount to record are subjective assessments. Read-
ily observable criteria do not exist, and the dollar amounts involved can be very large, so the 
potential for abuse is clear. For an example of how large a valuation allowance can be relative 
to the rest of the financial statements, we consider Ford Motor Company’s 2011 valuation 
EXHIBIT 13.9
Amazon.Com
(Dollars in thousands) 
2004 
2003 
2002
Net sales 
$6,921,124 
$5,263,699 
$3,932,936
Cost of sales 
5,319,127 
4,006,531 
2,940,318
 Gross profit 
1,601,997 
1,257,168 
992,618
Operating expenses 
1,161,572 
986,573 
928,494
 Income from operations 
440,425 
270,595 
64,124
Non-operating expenses 
84,555 
231,607 
214,757
 Income (loss) before income taxes 
355,870 
38,988 
(150,633)
Provision (benefit) for income taxes 
(232,581) 
3,706 
(700)
 Income (loss) before change in accounting principle 
588,451 
35,282 
(149,933)
 Cumulative effect of change in accounting principle 
 
 
801
 Net income (loss) 
$  588,451 
$   35,282 
$ (149,132)

 
Understanding Income Tax Reporting
763
 allowance reversal. In January 2012, Ford issued a press release disclosing its earnings results 
for 2011. Two key bullets in the press release were:
• Full year pre-tax operating profit was $8.8 billion, or $1.51 per share, an increase of 
$463 million from a year ago
• Full year net income was $20.2 billion, or $4.94 per share, an increase of $13.7 billion, 
or $3.28 per share, from a year ago. Net income includes a favorable one-time, non-cash 
special item of $12.4 billion from release of almost all of the valuation allowance against 
net deferred tax assets in the fourth quarter
 
Exhibit 13.10 is an abridged version of Ford’s 2012 income statement, showing results for 
2010, 2011, and 2012. The press release and the income statement illustrate the potential 
magnitude of a valuation allowance reversal. Valuation allowances built up over many years 
can be released all at once, possibly even resulting in a negative tax provision in a year when 
the company reports positive pre-tax income. In 2011, Ford reported about $8.7 billion in pre-
tax income. It reported a tax benefit (negative income tax expense) that year, due to elimina-
tion of $12.4 billion of valuation allowance, effectively reinstating the related deferred tax 
assets that had been de-recognized over the years through the application of the valuation 
 allowance. The result was net income substantially in excess of pre-tax income and an effec-
tive tax rate of 2132.9% (2$11,541y$8,681) in 2011. In 2012, Ford’s effective tax rate 
 returned to a more normal 26.6% ($2,056y$7,720).
 
Although we are not suggesting Ford’s actions were inappropriate or constituted any sort 
of accounting abuse, there was certainly some amount of subjectivity in the company’s deci-
sion to release the valuation allowance. It cannot know, with objective certainty, the probabil-
ity of attaining a particular level of income in the future. The inherent subjectivity of the 
valuation allowance means that a company that is so inclined could use the valuation allow-
ance to “manage” earnings. For example, management might decide to establish an allowance 
account in a “good” earnings year when the offsetting charge to earnings is relatively small. 
Once the allowance is established, it can be diminished or even eliminated in subsequent 
“bad” earnings years. Doing so decreases tax expense, thereby partially offsetting the lower 
earnings. The result is that income fluctuations are smoothed across years.
 
Two notable studies investigate whether managers use the valuation allowance to manage 
earnings. One study finds that bank managers appear to use the valuation allowance to manage 
earnings toward consensus analysts’ forecasts and toward average historical earnings.6 Another 
study using a broader sample of manufacturing firms finds that managers use the valuation 
EXHIBIT 13.10
Ford Motor Company
Consolidated Income Statement—Abridged
(Dollars in millions) 
2012 
2011 
2010
Income before income taxes 
$7,720 
$ 8,681 
$7,149
Provision for (benefit from) income taxes 
2,056 
(11,541) 
592
 Net income 
$5,664 
$20,222 
$6,557
Analysis
6 C. Schrand and F. Wong, “Earnings Management Using the Valuation Allowance for Deferred Tax Assets under SFAS No. 
109,” Contemporary Accounting Research, Fall 2003, pp. 579–611.

764 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
 allowance to manage earnings up (down) when analysts’ earnings forecasts are above (below) 
the premanaged earnings number.7 Taken together, these two studies provide compelling evi-
dence that managers take advantage of the discretion associated with setting the deferred tax 
asset valuation allowance to manage earnings in both a positive and a negative direction.
RECAP
When circumstances indicate that it is “more likely than not” that some portion of the 
future tax benefit from a deferred tax asset will not be realized, a deferred tax asset valu-
ation allowance must be established to reduce the deferred tax asset book value to the 
amount expected to be realized. Because the determination of “more likely than not” is 
subjective, the valuation account can be used to manage earnings up or down.
Classification of Deferred Tax Assets 
and Deferred Tax Liabilities
In general, U.S. GAAP requires firms to classify deferred tax assets or deferred tax liabilities 
as current or noncurrent according to how the asset or liability giving rise to the temporary 
difference is classified. For example, a deferred tax asset related to doubtful accounts on ac-
counts receivable (a current asset) would be classified as current, whereas a deferred tax lia-
bility for temporary differences on depreciation of fixed assets would be classified as 
noncurrent. A temporary difference is related to an asset or liability if reduction of that asset 
or liability causes the temporary difference to reverse. The term reduction includes amortiza-
tion, sale, or other realization of an asset and amortization, payment, or other satisfaction of a 
liability. If a deferred tax asset or liability is not related to an asset or liability (e.g., a deferred 
tax asset related to a net operating loss carryforward), it is classified according to the expected 
reversal date of the temporary difference. In the case of Unfortunato’s $87,500 deferred tax 
asset related to its net operating loss carryforward, the portion expected to be realized in the com-
ing year would be classified as current and the remainder would be classified as noncurrent.
 
For tax-paying components of an entity (e.g., subsidiaries) that are within a common tax 
jurisdiction, all current deferred tax assets and liabilities can be netted and presented as a 
single amount and all noncurrent deferred tax assets and liabilities can be netted and presented 
as a single amount. However, firms are not allowed to net deferred tax liabilities and assets 
attributable to different tax-paying components or to different tax jurisdictions.
Deferred Income Tax Accounting When 
Tax Rates Change
Taxing authorities change tax rates periodically. When this happens, the expected tax effects 
of existing deferred tax assets and liabilities change as well. GAAP uses the so-called liability 
approach, whereby deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities are always valued at the 
enacted tax rate expected to be in effect when the related temporary differences reverse. In 
any year that current or future tax rates change, the income tax expense number absorbs 
the full effect of the change, and the usual relationship between that year’s income tax ex-
pense and book income is destroyed.
 
Returning to the Mitchell Corporation example in Exhibit 13.6, assume that on December 
31, 2016, a new income tax law is enacted that raises the income tax rate from 35% to 38% 
beginning January 1, 2017. Just prior to the tax law change on December 31, 2016, the amount 
7 S. Rego and M. Frank, “Do Managers Use the Valuation Allowance Account to Manage Earnings Around Certain Earnings 
Targets?” Journal of the American Taxation Association, vol. 28, 2006, pp. 43–65.

 
Understanding Income Tax Reporting 
765
of deferred tax liability for Mitchell was $700 (Column [e] of Exhibit 13.6). That number 
represents the cumulative excess of tax depreciation over book depreciation in 2014–2016 
(the dollar amount of temporary depreciation differences 5 $1,333 1 $667 1 $0 or $2,000) 
times the original tax rate of 35%. But because future tax rates have  increased, the liability 
for future taxes is actually more than the $700 amount currently  reported. At the new, higher 
income tax rate that will be in effect in 2017 and 2018, the  liability for future taxes becomes 
$760, not $700. This future liability represents the cumulative excess of tax depreciation 
over book depreciation ($2,000) multiplied by the new 38% tax rate that will be in effect 
beginning January 1, 2017.
many firms were required to de-recognize deferred tax assets 
to the extent their deductions would be reduced by the change 
in the law, resulting in an immediate charge against income via 
the income tax provision. Boeing, for example, announced on 
March 31, 2010, that it would take a $150 million charge as a 
result of the act. For the year, Boeing’s income tax provision 
was $1,296 million and the charge increased its effective tax 
rate by 3.3 percentage points.
 
There was extensive publicity about this issue as firms an-
nounced their expected charges due to the act. Predictably, 
those who opposed the act seized upon the charges as evidence 
of the costs the act would impose on corporate America. Just 
as predictably, those who supported the act argued that the 
charges against income were not meaningful numbers—just 
bookkeeping entries. As is the case with most highly politi-
cized topics, the truth lies somewhere between the partisan 
spins. The act does make providing drug benefits more costly 
for firms by eliminating the tax-free nature of the subsidy. 
Some might argue that there was no reason for the subsidy to 
be tax-free in the first place and that the act corrected an ineq-
uity in the law. On the other hand, the government made the 
subsidy tax-free in order to encourage firms to provide the 
benefit, and firms made decisions about what benefits to pro-
vide given the incentives the government had put in place 
through the tax code. They later found themselves facing a dif-
ferent set of rules than they thought would be in place when 
they made their decisions.
 
Although some of the charges were quite large, it was not 
always apparent to those reading articles in the popular press 
that these charges would not be recurring. Boeing’s $150 mil-
lion charge, for example, eliminated the deferred tax assets it 
had built up over many years to the extent they would not be 
realized under the new law. There would, of course, be no such 
charge the following year. Anyone interpreting Boeing’s charge 
as a $150 million increase in annual tax costs would be wrong.
For more information on this topic, see Financial Reporting Alert 10-3, 
 Deloitte, and “Don’t Believe the Writedown Hype” by Secretary of 
 Commerce Gary Locke in the The Wall Street Journal, April 1, 2010.
HEALTH CARE REFORM AND DEFERRED TAX ASSETS
On March 23, 2010, President Obama signed the Patient Pro-
tection and Affordable Care Act, which had passed the House 
two days earlier and the Senate the previous December. In ad-
dition to altering the structure of medical care in the United 
States, the act affected the amounts many firms reported as 
deferred tax assets and affected their income tax provisions in 
the year the act was passed. Here is how that effect arose.
 
Prior to the act, the federal government had put in place a 
subsidy to encourage employers to provide prescription drug 
benefits to retirees. The subsidy partially offset the cost of pro-
viding prescription benefits that exceeded that available from 
Medicare Part D. The subsidy was not taxable and also did not 
reduce the amount a firm could deduct for providing the ben-
efits. That is, even though the cost was partially subsidized by 
the government, the full amount of benefits provided could be 
deducted.
 
Under the accounting rules for other postemployment benefit 
(OPEB) plans (Chapter 14), firms with OPEB plans accrue the 
cost of providing retiree health benefits over employees’ working 
years. However, these firms do not receive a tax deduction until 
they actually provide the benefits to retirees. These disparate 
treatments—GAAP recognition over the employment life; tax 
deduction during retirement—create a temporary difference. As a 
result, firms record a reduction in income tax expense over the 
employment life to reflect the future deductions that will be 
available during retirement, creating a deferred tax asset.
 
Because the subsidy did not reduce the amount that could 
be deducted, when firms recorded on their balance sheets the 
deferred tax assets related to the future tax deductions they 
would receive upon providing the benefits, they did not reduce 
the amounts of the deferred tax assets because of the subsidy. 
After all, those tax deductions were going to be available even 
after the subsidy was received.
 
Although the act did not repeal the subsidy, it did repeal its 
tax-free nature. Tax deductions for providing the benefit must 
be reduced by the amount of the subsidy received. As a result, 

766 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
Under the liability approach of Topic 740: Income Taxes, the full change in the amount 
of future liability for income taxes (in this case, $60) is recognized as an increase or de-
crease in income tax expense in the year the tax rate change is enacted. Accordingly, in-
come tax expense for 2016 is computed as:
Current 2016 income tax payable (35% 3 $20,000 [see Exhibit 13.4]) 
$7,000
Increase in the liability for future taxes arising during 2016 
 ($1,333 1 $667 1 $0) 3 (0.38 2 0.35) 
60
 Income tax expense for 2016 
$7,060
 
The accounting entry for 2016 income taxes is:
DR Income tax expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$7,060
   CR Income tax payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$7,000
   CR Deferred tax liability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
60
DR Income tax expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$7,600
DR Deferred tax liability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
253
   CR Income tax payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$7,853
DR Income tax expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$7,600
DR Deferred tax liability. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
507
CR Income tax payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$8,107
After this entry is made, the balance in Deferred tax liability will total $760, which is the lia-
bility for future taxes at the new 38% rate. Also, because tax rates for future years were 
changed in 2016, the debit to Income tax expense does not equal the $20,000 pre-tax book 
income times the 2016 tax rate of 35%.
 
Exhibit 13.11 shows the revised computation of income tax expense and deferred tax 
 liability for Mitchell Corporation for 2016 through 2018 after reflecting the income tax rate 
increase. The journal entry for income taxes in 2017 is:
 
Similarly, the 2018 entry is:
EXHIBIT 13.11
Mitchell Corporation
Revised Computation of Income Tax Expense
 
 
 
(c)  
(d)  
 
(f)
 
(a) 
(b) 
Excess of 
Increase  
(e)  
Balance
 
Taxable 
Current 
Tax Depreciation over 
(Decrease) in  
Income Tax  
in Deferred
 
Income 
Income Tax 
Book Depreciation 
Deferred Tax 
Expense 5  
Tax
 
(Exhibit 13.4, 
Payable 5 
(Exhibit 13.3, 
Liability 5 
Col. (b) 1 
Liability at
Year 
Col. [b]) 
Col. (a) 3 38% 
Col. [c]) 
Col. (c) 3 38% 
Col. (d) 
Year-End
2016 
$20,000 
$7,000* 
— 
$   60† 
$7,060 
$760
2017 
20,667 
7,853 
$   (667) 
(253) 
7,600 
507
2018 
21,333 
8,107 
(1,333) 
(507) 
7,600 
–0–
* Tax rate is still 35% in 2016 so this is $20,000 3 35%.
† This is the increase that arose in 2016 when the rate went from 35% to 38% (that is, 3% 3 $2,000 cumulative depreciation differences in Column [b] of Exhibit 13.6).
As shown in Column (f) of Exhibit 13.11, the balance in the Deferred tax liability account will 
be zero after the year 2018 entry is made.

 
Understanding Income Tax Reporting
767
 
Because the effects of income tax rate changes are recognized through an adjustment to in-
come tax expense, analysts must be alert to recognize how tax rate changes can inject one-time 
(transitory) shocks to earnings in the year a taxing authority adopts new tax rates. Moreover, it is 
important to recognize that the effect of a tax rate change on bottom-line earnings can vary con-
siderably across companies depending on three factors:
1. Whether the tax rate increased or decreased.
2. Whether the firm has net deferred tax assets or net deferred tax liabilities.
3. The magnitude of the net deferred tax position.
 
Consider how differently a tax rate change can affect firms’ bottom-line earnings: Suppose 
Congress enacts a new tax law in 2014 that raises the statutory corporate tax rate from 35% to 
45% effective in 2015. Also assume that Companies A, B, and C have the following net de-
ferred tax asset (liability) balances on their books when the new tax law is passed:
($ in millions) 
Company A 
Company B 
Company C
Net deferred tax asset 
 (liability) balance at end of 2014 
$100 
$0 
($100)
 
The effect of the change in tax rate on the after-tax earnings of these three companies in 2014—
the year the new tax rate is passed—is shown in Exhibit 13.12. We first divide the net deferred tax 
asset (liability) balance by the old marginal tax rate to get the dollar magnitude of the cumulative 
temporary differences that gave rise to these account balances. Recall that the deferred tax asset 
(liability) account balances equal the cumulative temporary differences giving rise to future de-
ductible (taxable) amounts times the marginal corporate tax rate. Therefore, to derive the cumula-
tive temporary differences, we divide the deferred tax asset and liability balances by 0.35.8
 
In Exhibit 13.12, Company A has $285.71 ($100/0.35) million of future deductible
amounts, Company C has $285.71 of future taxable amounts, and Company B has neither 
future deductible nor taxable amounts. These cumulative temporary differences are multiplied 
by the difference between the new tax rate and the old tax rate (that is, 10%) to obtain the 
 increase in the deferred tax asset (liability) balance and the corresponding increase (decrease) 
in reported after-tax earnings. (Equivalently, we could multiply the cumulative temporary 
A change in tax rates of 
this magnitude is not 
 uncommon. For example, 
the 1986 Tax Reform Act 
lowered the marginal corpo-
rate tax rate for large firms 
from 46% to 34%.
EXHIBIT 13.12
Computation of How Change in Tax Rate Affects Earnings in Year That Rate 
Change Is Enacted
($ in millions) 
Company A 
Company B 
Company C 
Net deferred tax asset (liability) 
 balance at end of 2014 
$       100 
$  0 
$       (100) 
Divide by old marginal tax rate 
435% 
435% 
435% 
Dollar amount of cumulative  
 temporary difference 
$  285.71 
$  0 
$  (285.71)
Multiply by difference between old 
 and new tax rates (45% 2 35%) 
310% 
310% 
310% 
Increase (decrease) to after-tax 
 earnings in year of rate change 
$  28.571 
$  0 
$  (28.571)
Future 
deductible 
amount
Future 
taxable 
amount
8 We use the old tax rate of 35% here because we are inferring the amount of the cumulative temporary difference from the 
deferred tax asset or liability that was determined using the old tax rate.
Analysis

768 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
 difference by the new tax rate to determine the new deferred tax asset or deferred tax liability 
amount. The increase or decrease would be the difference between this amount and the origi-
nal deferred tax asset or deferred tax liability.)
 
As shown, Company A’s 2014 earnings will increase by $28.571 million. This is because each 
dollar of future deductible amounts will yield an additional $0.10 in tax savings under the newly 
enacted tax rates (that is, when these temporary differences reverse). Company C, on the other 
hand, will report a $28.571 million decrease to its after-tax earnings number because each dollar 
of future taxable amounts will generate $0.10 of additional taxes as these temporary differences 
reverse in future years (when the tax rates will be higher). Company B’s 2014 after-tax earnings 
are unaffected by the tax rate change because no cumulative temporary differences exist.
 
If the tax rates had been reduced from 35% to 25%, the earnings effects reported for Com-
panies A and C would have been reversed. As this example demonstrates, tax rate changes can 
have very different effects on firms’ reported earnings depending on their deferred tax status 
and the direction of the tax rate change.
 
Company A’s situation illustrates the counterintuitive result that occurs when a firm is in a 
net deferred tax asset position. In that case, an increase in tax rates increases the value attrib-
uted to the net deferred tax assets, resulting in a reduction in income tax expense and an in-
crease in net income. When the tax rate decreases, the opposite happens and a firm in a net 
deferred tax asset position reports lower net income. The result is counterintuitive because a 
reduced tax rate, which is surely a good thing for a company, causes reported net income to be 
lower, while a higher tax rate results in greater income in the year of the tax rate change.
 
The reason for this counterintuitive result is that deferred tax accounting brings onto the bal-
ance sheet, as deferred tax assets, the firm’s future tax benefits that arose from prior transactions, 
such as past losses. The firm will realize these benefits through lower tax payments in the future. 
As the tax rate increases (decreases), the firm will save more (less) in future tax payments.
 
Consider a company with a $100 million net operating loss carryforward and, as a result, a 
$35 million deferred tax asset (based on a 35% tax rate). The company expects to have $50 mil-
lion of taxable income per year for the foreseeable future. The value of the deferred tax asset 
represents the future taxes the firm will avoid by applying the net operating loss carryforward to 
the next two years of taxable income. If the tax rate were to increase to 36%, the net operating 
loss carryforward would allow the firm to avoid $36 million in tax payments that would other-
wise be due, so the deferred tax asset is more valuable. But the firm is still worse off because, 
beginning three years hence, its tax payments will be $18 million per year ($50 million 3 36%) 
instead of $17.5 million.9
 The effect is analogous to a motorist holding a coupon for a free tank 
of gas. If the price of gas goes up, the coupon is worth more, but the motorist, who will have to 
pay for his or her gas after the next fill-up, would hardly be happy about the situation.
 
Although the U.S. federal corporate income tax rate has not changed that often—most recently 
in 1993—a change in the tax rate in any jurisdiction in which a company operates could affect the 
value of the company’s deferred tax assets and liabilities. For example, deferred tax assets and li-
abilities related to a foreign subsidiary will be revalued if the income tax rate in the country in 
which that subsidiary operates were to change. Similarly, a change in a state income tax rate would 
affect the values of deferred tax assets and liabilities related to items in that state. So, income tax 
rate changes and their corresponding effects on income tax expense are not unusual events.
 
To illustrate the potential magnitude of a tax rate change and how it is reported, we examine 
General Motors’ income statement for 1993, which is provided in Exhibit 13.13. The federal 
corporate income tax rate increased that year from 34% to 35%. GM had a net deferred tax asset 
Analysis
9 For a discussion of this effect, see D. Reilly, “Banks’ Unlikely Hit from Tax Cuts,” The Wall Street Journal, July 27, 
2010; and M. Rapoport, “Tax Twist: At Some Firms, Cutting Corporate Rates May Cost Billions,” The Wall Street Journal, 
November 8, 2012.

 
Understanding Income Tax Reporting
769
position of about $16.4 billion at the time the tax rate changed. That net position would equate to 
roughly $48.2 billion in cumulative temporary differences ($16.4y0.34), which would have been 
revalued to $48.2 billion 3 35% 5 $16.9 billion. The increase in the value of the deferred tax 
assets—about a half billion dollars—reduced GM’s income tax expense in 1993 and accounted 
for much of the reason its effective tax rate in that year was only about 4% ($109.5y$2,575.3). 
That reduction in income tax expense alone was 19.4% ($500 milliony$2,575.3 million) of pre-
tax income, so it reduced the effective tax rate in 1993 by nearly 20%.
RECAP
In general, deferred tax assets and liabilities are classified as current or noncurrent based 
on the classification of the related asset or liability giving rise to the temporary differ-
ence. Under GAAP, when tax rates change, the additional tax benefits or costs are recog-
nized as an adjustment to tax expense in the year that the tax rate changes are enacted,
not when they become effective. These one-time earnings shocks can be difficult to detect 
because they are reported as part of the tax expense line on the income statement. How-
ever, a careful reading of the tax note, which includes a reconciliation of the book-effective 
tax rate with the statutory tax rate (described in detail later in this chapter), can reveal 
the magnitude of earnings increases or decreases due to tax rate changes.
EXHIBIT 13.13
General Motors Corporation
Statement of Consolidated Operations 
(Edited for Brevity) 
1993 
1992 
1991
($ in millions)
Total net sales and revenues 
$138,219.5 
$132,242.2 
$123,108.8
Total costs and expenses 
135,644.2 
135,575.3 
129,001.1
 Income (loss) before income taxes 
2,575.3 
(3,333.1) 
(5,892.3)
Income tax expense (benefit) 
109.5 
(712.5) 
(900.3)
 Income (loss) before cumulative effect of 
  accounting change 
2,465.8 
(2,620.6) 
(4,992.0)
 Cumualtive effect of accounting changes 
 
(20,877.7) 
539.2
Net income 
$  2,465.8 
($23,498.3) 
($4,452.8)
Permanent Differences
We have not said much about permanent differences yet, other than to define them. Permanent dif-
ferences are items (either revenue/gain or expense/loss) that are included in book pre-tax income 
but not taxable income, or vice versa. It is not just a difference in when the item is reported, but 
whether it is reported at all, ever. For example, municipal bond interest income is never included in 
taxable income but it is part of pre-tax book income, so it represents a permanent difference.
 
The reason we have not said much about permanent differences yet is because our ap-
proach to determining income tax expense implicitly deals with permanent differences. In-
come tax expense should include the income tax consequences of any amounts included in 
pre-tax book income, regardless of when those tax consequences are realized in cash through 
higher or lower tax payments. An item included in pre-tax book income that will never be in-
cluded in taxable income has no tax consequences ever and so it should not affect income tax 
expense. By summing the income tax currently payable and the change in deferred tax assets 
and liabilities, we properly incorporate the fact that there are no tax consequences for items 
included in pre-tax income but not taxable income.
 
Recall that earlier we showed how Mitchell Corporation’s income tax expense was unaf-
fected by the addition of municipal bond interest, which reduced the company’s effective tax 

770 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
rate. Similarly, our approach to determining income tax expense works for an item included in 
taxable income or otherwise affecting the amount of tax paid, but not affecting pre-tax book 
income. For example, suppose Mitchell Corporation had been entitled to a $1,000 tax credit 
for operating in an “enterprise zone.” Its currently payable tax would have been $6,000 in-
stead of $7,000. There would again be no change in any deferred tax items. So, the decrease 
in income tax expense would be properly reflected when we sum currently payable tax 
($1,000 lower) with the same change in deferred tax liability as in the original example.
UNDERSTANDING INCOME TAX NOTE DISCLOSURES
Income tax note disclosures provide financial statement users with a wealth of information. If 
you understand these disclosures, you’ll be able to extract useful insights about a firm’s past 
performance, future prospects, and tax planning strategies. To illustrate, let’s look at the in-
come tax note from the annual report of Deere & Company for the year ended October 31, 
2012, shown in Exhibit 13.14. To make the discussion easier to follow, we divided the note 
into Panels (a) through (d) and numbered key lines or sections in these panels.
Current versus Deferred Portion of 
Current Period’s Tax Provision
GAAP requires firms to disclose separately the current and deferred portions of the current 
period’s income tax provision. The components of Deere’s income tax provision are shown in 
Panel (a) of Exhibit 13.14. Notice how Deere differentiates between the portion of tax ex-
pense that is currently payable (denoted Item ➀) and the portion that is deferred (Item ➁). 
Within each category, separate amounts for U.S. federal, state, and foreign taxes are disclosed. 
In the aggregate, the 2012 entry for taxes was ($ in millions):
DR Income tax expense (Item ➂). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $1,659
DR Deferred tax assets and liabilities (Item ➁)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
92
   CR Income tax payable (Item ➀)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$1,751
 
The $92 million debit to deferred tax assets and liabilities arises because of temporary differ-
ences between pre-tax income reported in Deere’s 2012 GAAP income statement and what 
 appeared in its 2012 tax return. In the aggregate, these temporary differences caused book 
 income to be less than taxable income in 2012. The result was either an increase in deferred tax 
assets or a decrease in deferred tax liabilities (both debits), or some combination of the two.
Reconciliation of Statutory and Effective Tax Rates
The reconciliation in Exhibit 13.14(b) is required under GAAP.10 It shows why the debit to income 
tax expense in the 2010–2012 period was different from the U.S. federal statutory corporate tax 
rate of 35% times pre-tax book income. For example, the $1,659 million debit to income tax ex-
pense in the previous entry is not equal to 35% of Deere’s reported 2012  pre-tax income of 
$4,734.4 million 3 35% 5 $1,657.0 million, although in this particular year the difference is quite 
small. The reconciliation [Item ➃ in Exhibit 13.14(b)] explains what caused the divergence.
 
The reconciliation is useful to analysts because it provides information about the firm’s tax 
planning and policies. It is also useful to assess the quality of earnings and for forecasting future 
income tax expense. A large year-to-year decrease in effective tax rates translates into an increase 
10 FASB ASC Section 740-10-50: Income Taxes—Overall—Disclosure.

 
Understanding Income Tax Note Disclosures
771
Panel (a):
The provision for income taxes by taxing jurisdiction and by significant component consisted of 
the following in millions of dollars:
2012 
2011 
2010
Current:
 U.S.:
  Federal 
$1,277 
$928 
$574
  State 
119 
144 
50
 Foreign 
355 
520 
363
  Total current 
1,751 
1,592 
987
Deferred:
 U.S.:
  Federal 
(76) 
(135) 
156
  State 
(7) 
(28) 
11
 Foreign 
(9) 
(5) 
8
  Total deferred 
(92) 
(168) 
175
Provision for income taxes
➂
$1,659 
$1,424 
$1,162
Panel (b):
A comparison of the statutory and effective income tax provision and reasons for related differ-
ences in millions of dollars follow:
 
 
2012 
2011 
2010
U.S. federal income tax provision at a statutory 
 rate of 35% 
$1,657 
$1,478 
$1,059
Increase (decrease) resulting from:
Valuation allowance on foreign deferred taxes 
200 
18 
5
State and local income taxes, net of federal 
 income tax benefit 
73 
75 
40
Nondeductible health care claims* 
 
 
123
Nondeductible goodwill impairment charge 
6 
 
7
Nontaxable foreign partnership earnings 
(172)
Tax rates on foreign earnings 
(69) 
(70) 
(59)
Research and development tax credits 
(10) 
(38) 
(5)
Wind energy production tax credits 
 
 
(30)
Other-net 
(26) 
(39) 
22
Provision for income taxes 
$1,659 
$1,424 
$1,162
At October 31, 2012, accumulated earnings in certain subsidiaries outside the U.S. totaled $3,209 
million for which no provision for U.S. income taxes or foreign withholding taxes has been made, 
because it is expected that such earnings will be reinvested outside the U.S. indefinitely. Determi-
nation of the amount of unrecognized deferred tax liability on these unremitted earnings is not 
practical. At October 31, 2012, the amount of cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities 
held by these foreign subsidiaries was $628 million.
* Cumulative adjustment from change in law. Effect included in state taxes was $7 million.
(continued)
EXHIBIT 13.14
Deere & Company: Excerpts from 2012 10-K 
Note on Income Taxes
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭
➀
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭
➁
➄
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎭
➃

772 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
EXHIBIT 13.14
Deere & Company: Excerpts from 2012 10-K 
Note on Income Taxes (continued)
Panel (c):
Deferred income taxes arise because there are certain items that are treated differently for financial 
accounting than for income tax reporting purposes. An analysis of the deferred income tax assets 
and liabilities at October 31 in millions of dollars follows:
 
2012 
2011
 
Deferred 
Deferred 
Deferred 
Deferred
 
Tax 
Tax 
Tax 
Tax
 
Assets 
Liabilities 
Assets 
Liabilities
Other postretirement benefit 
 liabilities 
$2,136 
 
$1,944
Tax over book depreciation 
 
$  606 
 
$  492
Accrual for sales allowances 
546 
 
438
Pension liabilities—net 
457 
 
279
Lease transactions 
 
317 
 
309
Accrual for employee benefits 
249 
 
189
Tax loss and tax credit carryforwards 
249 
 
121
Share-based compensation 
133 
 
113 
Inventory 
131 
 
152
Goodwill and other intangible assets 
 
110 
 
123
Allowance for credit losses 
92 
 
115
Deferred gains on distributed 
 foreign earnings 
84 
 
83
Deferred compensation 
40 
 
37
Undistributed foreign earnings 
 
11 
 
19
Other items 
443 
115 
348 
112
Less valuation allowances
➇
(285) 
 
(74)
Deferred income tax assets and 
 liabilities
➈
 $4,275 
$1,159 
$3,745 
$1,055
Panel (d):
At October 31, 2012, certain tax loss and tax credit carryforwards for $249 million were available 
with $127 million expiring from 2013 through 2032 and $122 million with an indefinite carryfor-
ward period.
* Deere’s 2012 pre-tax income was $3,582 million. So its effective tax rate for 2012 was $1,659/$4,734 5 35.04%.
⎫
⎪
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪⎪⎪⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎭
➅
⎫⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪
⎭
➆
in bottom-line earnings that may not be sustainable. The divergence  between the statutory tax 
rate (the 35% tax rate set forth in U.S. federal tax laws) and the effective tax rate (measured by 
book tax expense divided by book pre-tax income) arises from a number of sources.
1. Permanent difference items that are not taxed or are not tax deductible but are included in 
book income.
2. State and local taxes.
3. Changes in the valuation allowance.
4. Differential tax rates in foreign jurisdictions in which the firm operates.
5. Various tax credits offered by the federal government.
Permanent Differences 
A frequent cause of differences between statutory and 
 effective tax rates are the permanent differences that arise when tax law treats a GAAP 
 revenue item as nontaxable or a GAAP expense as nondeductible. Permanent difference items 

 
Understanding Income Tax Note Disclosures 
773
that cause book income to be higher but are not taxed (such as interest on municipal bonds) 
cause the effective tax rate to be lower than the statutory tax rate. Conversely, permanent 
 differences that cause book income to be lower but that are not deductible for tax purposes cause 
the effective tax rate to be higher than the statutory rate. The $6 million add-back in Deere’s 
reconciliation schedule for the non deductible goodwill impairment charge is an example.
State and Local Taxes 
Another common source of difference between the federal 
statutory tax rate and the firm’s effective tax rate is state and local income taxes. The $73 million 
addition shown in the reconciliation schedule causes Deere’s effective tax rate to be higher than 
the federal statutory rate of 35%. Note that the caption on this item indicates it is “net of federal 
income tax benefit.” State and local taxes are deductible for federal tax purposes. As a result, the 
net effect of $1 in state and local taxes is to increase the overall income tax expense by $0.65, $1 
minus the $0.35 of federal taxes saved. Exhibit 13.14(a) showed the state tax provision was $112 
million (119–7). Sixty-five percent of that amount is $73 million, the amount shown in the recon-
ciliation in Exhibit 13.14(b).
Changes in Valuation Allowance 
Recall from our earlier discussion of valua-
tion allowances that a change in the valuation allowance is reflected immediately in income 
tax expense, even though there is no corresponding amount in pre-tax book income. There-
fore, changes in the valuation allowance cause the effective tax rate to deviate from the 35% 
statutory tax rate and create a reconciling item in the tax rate reconciliation. Deere’s income 
tax rate reconciliation in Exhibit 13.14(b) shows the company’s income tax expense was $200 
million higher in 2012 than it otherwise would have been because of a change in the valuation 
allowance. This amount is approximately equal to the $211 million difference between the 
valuation allowance reported at  October 31, 2012, and October 31, 2011 (285 2 74, from 
Exhibit 13.4(c), item ➇). The fact that these two amounts are not identical could be explained 
by changes in exchange rates used to translate valuation allowances related to foreign 
operations.
Differential Foreign Tax Rates 
Tax rates differ across countries. When foreign in-
come is taxed at a lower rate than the U.S. tax rate, it causes the effective tax rate to deviate from 
the statutory federal tax rate and creates a reconciling item. In 2012, Deere’s income tax expense 
was $69 million lower than it would have been if its foreign income had been taxed at the U.S. tax 
rate. The United States has one of the highest corporate income tax rates in the world, so most of-
ten the tax rates in other countries in which U.S. firms operate are lower. So, as was the case with 
Deere, the reconciling item is usually negative.
 
The United States imposes tax on worldwide income of U.S. companies, meaning it taxes all of 
a U.S. company’s earnings, regardless of where they are earned. However, foreign earnings are not 
subject to the tax until the earnings are repatriated (i.e., returned to the United States), at which 
time the earnings are subject to the 35% tax, but the firm receives a credit for foreign income taxes 
paid. The net result is that the combined U.S. and foreign taxes are 35% of the foreign earnings in 
the typical situation where the foreign rate is less than 35%. That raises the question of why there 
is a reconciling item. If the foreign earnings are eventually taxed at 35%, then the tax provision 
should be at 35% of the pre-tax amount, resulting in no item in the tax rate reconciliation.
 
For example, suppose Mavrogenes Corporation, a U.S. company, has a Greek subsidiary. 
Greece’s corporate income tax rate is 20%. Suppose further the Greek subsidiary earns $100 
million. The entry to reflect the income tax expense related to the Greek subsidiary would be:
DR Income tax expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $35,000,000
   CR Income tax payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$20,000,000
   CR Deferred tax liability. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
15,000,000

774 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
The subsidiary would owe the Greek government $20 million and it would incur a deferred tax 
liability of $15 million, which will only become payable when the Greek earnings are repatriated 
to the U.S. parent. The effective tax rate on this income would be 35% and there would in fact be 
no item in the tax rate reconciliation. Upon repatriation, the United States would tax the earnings 
at 35% but allow a $20 million foreign tax credit, resulting in a U.S. tax liability of $15 million. 
An income tax payable would be recognized and the deferred tax liability would be eliminated.
 
Of course, delaying repatriation delays the obligation to pay U.S. taxes, so firms have a finan-
cial incentive to do just that. And, if a firm deems its foreign earnings to be “permanently rein-
vested” overseas, the deferred tax liability need not be recorded. After all, if the earnings are 
never going to be repatriated, they will never be taxed in the United States, so it would not be 
appropriate to recognize an income tax expense related to U.S. taxes on the foreign income. In 
that case, only the $20 million of currently payable tax is recognized in income tax expense, no 
deferred tax liability is recognized, and an item does appear in the tax rate reconciliation because 
the tax provision deviates from 35% of pre-tax earnings. So in Deere’s case, income tax expense 
was $69 million lower in 2012 due to the lower tax rates of its foreign operations whose earnings 
are deemed to be permanently reinvested.11 So, in addition to the tax incentive to delay repatria-
tion, there is a financial reporting incentive as well. Having a policy of indefinitely reinvesting 
foreign earnings reduces current period income tax expense.
 
Research confirms that the tax and financial reporting incentives have the expected effect 
and cause firms to delay repatriation.12 A recent study finds that this behavior creates agency 
costs. That is, in an effort to avoid repatriation, firms enter into suboptimal transactions, 
namely acquisitions of foreign companies that are value-destroying transactions.13
Tax Credits 
Finally, federal tax laws provide tax credits (dollar for dollar credit against 
tax burden otherwise owed) for certain types of expenditures. By reducing income tax expense 
without altering pre-tax book income, these tax credits reduce the effective tax rate below the 
statutory rate. Deere’s reconciliation shows adjustments for two tax credits. The company re-
ceived a tax credit for wind energy production in 2010 ($30 million). It also received research 
and development tax credits in all three years presented. The amount of the credits totaled 
$10 million in 2012.
 
The reconciliation between effective and statutory tax rates, such as that shown in Exhibit 
13.14(b) (Item ➃), can reflect important elements of a firm’s tax policy decisions. Effective 
tax rates that are far lower than statutory tax rates might indicate aggressive tax postures. This 
could benefit shareholders. But aggressive tax positions might also generate future tax audits 
and additional tax assessments.14 In addition, the tax rate reconciliation is useful for forecast-
ing subsequent year’s income tax expense amounts and effective tax rates. Because income 
taxes are such a large part of any company’s cost structure, being able to forecast income tax 
11 For an expanded discussion of tax planning with foreign operations, see M. Scholes, M. Wolfson, M. Erickson, E. Maydew, and 
T. Shevlin, Tax and Corporate Financial Strategy: A Global Planning Approach (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2009).
12 See, for example, J. Graham, M. Hanlon, and T. Shevlin, “Real Effects of Accounting Rules: Evidence from Multinational 
Firms’ Investment Location and Profit Repatriation Decisions,” Journal of Accounting Research, March 2011, pp. 137–85; J. 
Blouin, L. Krull, and L. Robinson, “Where In the World Are ‘Permanently Reinvested’ Foreign Earnings?” University of 
Pennsylvania, University of Oregon, and Dartmouth College working paper; J. Blouin, L. Krull, and L. Robinson, “Is U.S. 
Multinational Intra-Firm Dividend Policy Influenced by Capital Market Incentives?” The Accounting Review, September 
2012, pp. 1463–92; and F. Foley, J. Hartzell, S. Titman, and G. Twite, “Why Do Firms Hold So Much Cash? A Tax-Based 
Explanation,” Journal of Financial Economics, December 2007, pp. 579–607.
13 A. Edwards, T. Kravet, and R. Wilson, “Trapped Cash and the Profitability of Foreign Acquisitions” University of Toronto, 
University of Texas at Dallas, and University of Iowa working paper, June 27, 2012.
14 For an analysis of tax note disclosures from the perspective of tax aggressiveness and future tax audit risk, see R. Weber 
and J. Wheeler, “Using Income Tax Disclosures to Explore Significant Economic Transactions,” Accounting Horizons, 
 September 1992, pp. 14–29.
In the next section, we 
 consider disclosures required 
under GAAP for uncertain 
tax positions taken by 
 companies for which the 
taxing authorities may 
 disallow a deduction (or 
 income exclusion) in whole 
or in part.

 
Understanding Income Tax Note Disclosures 
775
expense reliably is essential to a good earnings forecast. For example, seeing that Deere’s in-
come tax expense was $200 million higher because of the change in its valuation allowance 
and given that this change is unlikely to recur, an analyst might estimate the 2013 effective tax 
rate to be ($1,659 2 $200)y$4,734 5 30.8%.
Details on the Sources of Deferred 
Tax Assets and Liabilities
Items ➅ and ➆  of Exhibit 13.14(c) show year-end balances in deferred tax asset and deferred 
tax liability accounts and the sources of those amounts. The amount shown for each of the 
individual line items in this schedule is obtained by multiplying the difference between the 
book basis and tax basis of the related asset or liability by the tax rate related to the item (e.g., 
the 35% federal statutory rate plus a state tax effect for most items). After deducting the valu-
ation allowance of $285 million on deferred tax assets (Item ➇), Deere had a net deferred tax 
asset balance at October 31, 2012, of $3,116 million, or $4,275 million of deferred tax assets 
minus $1,159 million of deferred tax liabilities (Item ➈). One year earlier, Deere had a net 
deferred tax asset balance (after allowance) of $2,690 million ($3,745 2 $1,055). Thus, the 
year-to-year change in net deferred tax assets was an increase of $426 million.
 
Notice that the $426 million increase in Deere’s net deferred tax assets (net debits to these 
accounts) in Exhibit 13.14(c) does not equal the $92 million debit to Deferred tax assets and 
liabilities shown in the journal entry on page 770 to record Deere’s 2012 tax expense, taxes 
payable, and deferred taxes. The discrepancy is partially explained by intraperiod income tax 
allocation, discussed briefly in Chapter 2. Recall that all income statement items shown below 
Income from continuing operations and any direct charges or credits to stockholders’ equity are 
shown net of any related income tax effects. Accordingly, tax effects (including deferred tax 
effects) that arise from discontinued operations, extraordinary items, direct charges or credits 
to stockholders’ equity for prior period adjustments, or other comprehensive income items are 
not included in Deere’s tax journal entry on page 770. This journal entry is limited to income 
tax effects that relate to income from continuing operations. Deere reported no discontinued 
operations and no extraordinary items in 2012. However, Deere’s Statement of Changes in 
Stockholders’ Equity (not shown) reveals four items of Other comprehensive income— 
retirement benefits adjustment, cumulative translation adjustment, unrealized loss on deriva-
tives, and unrealized gain on investments. Generally, all of these items except for the 
translation adjustment would be shown net of deferred tax effect. Deere  reported an increase 
in accumulated other comprehensive loss of $623.8 million in fiscal 2012 related to the three 
items that are shown net of deferred tax effect. We can estimate the pre-tax amount related to 
these items as $623.8 million/(1 2 0.35) 5 $959.7 million and the tax effect to be $959.7 mil-
lion 3 0.35 5 $335.9 million. This tax effect would increase the deferred tax asset during the 
year. So, it explains essentially the entire $334 million difference between the $426 million 
that net deferred tax assets increased and the $92 million  increase in net deferred tax assets 
that is explained by the deferred tax provision. The deferred tax asset also would have been 
affected by any revaluation of foreign deferred tax assets and liabilities for changes in 
 exchange rates,  although we do not have sufficient information to determine those amounts.
 
Another common source of changes in deferred tax assets and liabilities that are not seen 
in the deferred tax provision is acquisitions, although Deere did not have any in 2012. When 
an acquired company holds assets having tax bases that differ from their respective book 
 values, changes occur in deferred tax accounts on the consolidated balance sheet. This situa-
tion further complicates any attempt to reconcile the change in deferred tax assets and liabili-
ties with the deferred tax provision.

776 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
 
Exhibit 13.14(c) also shows the specific items that collectively constitute the deferred tax 
asset (Item ➅) and deferred tax liability (Item ➆) balances at October 31, 2012. The major 
items giving rise to deferred tax assets are other postretirement benefit liabilities and pension 
liabilities (discussed more fully in Chapter 14), accrual for sales allowances and employee 
benefits, and tax loss and tax credit carryforwards. Major items giving rise to deferred tax 
 liabilities are tax versus book depreciation differences and lease transactions.
 
GAAP rules require that the amounts and expiration dates of net operating loss and tax credit 
carryforwards for which tax benefits have not been recognized be disclosed in the income tax 
note. Panel (d) of Exhibit 13.14 illustrates Deere’s compliance with this disclosure requirement.
Why Don’t a Company’s Deferred Tax Assets 
and Liabilities Seem to Reverse?
We have seen that deferred tax assets and liabilities reverse eventually. However, we almost never 
see a deferred tax asset or liability balance of zero in a balance sheet. Why? Because even though 
individual deferred tax assets and liabilities reverse, as they do, they are replaced by new deferred 
tax assets and liabilities that arise. Whether a company’s overall deferred tax position is growing 
or shrinking is likely to be related to whether the company itself is growing or shrinking.
 
Consider once again the Mitchell Company example from earlier in the chapter. Mitchell 
acquired a machine and depreciated it over a five-year period using straight-line depreciation 
for financial reporting and sum-of-the-years-digits for tax purposes. Suppose Mitchell bought 
one of these machines every year and its profits reflected the expanding production capacity 
as Mitchell went from one machine to two to three and so on. But as soon as a machine 
reached five years old, it was no longer usable and Mitchell disposed of it. So, after five years, 
Mitchell would be in a “steady state” with five machines operating. Each year it would 
 acquire a new machine but dispose of an old one. After some years, suppose Mitchell stopped 
replacing machines so that the company would shrink in size.
 
Exhibit 13.15 builds up book and tax depreciation by calendar year, given asset purchases in 
2014 through 2020. For example, the assets acquired in 2014 generate $2,000 of book depre-
ciation per year in 2014 through 2018, as shown in the first line of the book  depreciation sec-
tion of Exhibit 13.15. That same asset purchase generates $3,333 of tax depreciation in 2014, 
$2,667 in 2015, and so on, as shown in the first line of the tax depreciation section. Assets ac-
quired in each subsequent year create depreciation in the acquisition year and the next four.
 
In the calendar years when Mitchell is growing (2014–2017), its total company tax deprecia-
tion exceeds its total company book depreciation. It is creating additional temporary differences 
and its deferred tax liability position grows. Once Mitchell is in steady state (2018–2020), tax 
and book depreciation are equal, even though they are based on different depreciation methods. 
There is no net change in the cumulative temporary difference. Originating temporary differ-
ences exactly offset reversing temporary differences. The deferred tax liability remains constant 
at $6,666 3 35% 5 $2,333. As Mitchell starts to shrink, book depreciation exceeds tax depre-
ciation and the company has net reversals of its deferred tax liabilities (2021–2024).
 
For young companies that are growing, you should expect to see deferred tax positions grow-
ing. Companies in a net deferred tax liability position, which most are, will see their deferred tax 
liabilities increasing each year as production capacity grows and originating temporary differ-
ences outpace reversing temporary differences. Mature companies (e.g., Mitchell in steady state) 
will have only small changes in their deferred tax positions and, as a result, taxes paid will be 
close to income tax expense. Once companies start to shrink, their deferred tax positions reverse. 
For companies with deferred tax liabilities, that means tax payments will begin to exceed  income 
tax expense.

 
Understanding Income Tax Note Disclosures
777
Deferred Taxes and Cash Flow
It is often said that generating deferred tax liabilities increases cash flow. This statement is not 
actually true. Using tax accounting methods that accelerate deductions or delay income recog-
nition increases cash flow, at least in the early years. This strategy may or may not also create 
deferred tax liabilities, but it is the tax strategy, not whether a deferred tax liability is created, 
that affects cash flow.
 
Let’s return to the Mitchell Corporation example yet again. In 2014, Mitchell would have 
reported the income statement and cash flow statement shown in the first column of 
 Exhibit 13.16. Note that in the cash flow statement depreciation and the deferred portion of 
the income tax provision are both added back to net income to derive cash flow from operat-
ing activities. Both of these items are noncash components of net income and therefore must 
be reversed in the operating activities section of the cash flow statement.
 
Now, suppose Mitchell had instead used sum-of-the-years digits depreciation for financial re-
porting, in addition to using it for tax purposes. Its tax payments would remain unchanged so its 
cash flow would be the same as in the original example. But, because net income has changed, 
there must be different addbacks in the cash flow statement. The second column of Exhibit 13.16 
shows that using sum-of-the-years digits for financial reporting would have reduced pre-tax 
Mitchell Company Deferred Taxes assuming Annual Machine 
Purchase 2014–2020
 Book Depreciation 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024
 Asset Acquisition
 
Year
 
2014 
$2,000 $2,000 $2,000 $2,000 
$2,000
 
2015 
 
2,000 
2,000 
2,000 
2,000 
$2,000
 
2016 
 
 
2,000 
2,000 
2,000 
2,000 
$2,000
 
2017 
 
 
 
2,000 
2,000 
2,000 
2,000 
$2,000
 
2018 
 
 
 
 
2,000 
2,000 
2,000 
2,000 
$2,000
 
2019 
 
 
 
 
 
2,000 
2,000 
2,000 
2,000 
$2,000
 
2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2,000 
2,000 
2,000 
2,000 
$2,000
 
Total 
$2,000 $4,000 $6,000 $8,000 $10,000 $10,000 $10,000 
$8,000 
$6,000 
$4,000 
$2,000
 Tax Depreciation 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024
 Asset Acquisition
 
Year
 
2014 
$3,333 $2,667 $2,000 $1,333 $   667
 
2015 
 
3,333 
2,667 
2,000 
1,333 $   667
 
2016 
 
 
3,333 
2,667 
2,000 
1,333 $   667
 
2017 
 
 
 
3,333 
2,667 
2,000 
1,333 
$  667
 
2018 
 
 
 
 
3,333 
2,667 
2,000 
1,333 
$  667
 
2019 
 
 
 
 
 
3,333 
2,667 
2,000 
1,333 
$  667
 
2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3,333 
2,667 
2,000 
1,333 
$  667
 
Total 
$3,333 $6,000 $8,000 $9,333 $10,000 $10,000 $10,000 
$6,667 
$4,000 
$2,000 
$  667
Temporary Differece 
 Originating (Reversing) $1,333 $2,000 $2,000 $1,333 $     0 $     0 $     0 ($1,333) ($2,000) ($2,000) ($1,333)
Cumulative Temporary 
 Difference 
$1,333 $3,333 $5,333 $6,666 $ 6,666 $ 6,666 
$6,666 
$5,333 
$3,333 
$1,333 
$    0
Deferred Tax
 Liability at Year-End $  467 $1,167 $1,867 $2,333 $ 2,333 $ 2,333 $ 2,333 
$1,867 
$1,167 
$  467 
$    0
EXHIBIT 13.15

778 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
 income to $18,667 in 2014. Net income would have been 65% of that amount, or $12,134. The 
depreciation addback would now be $3,333. And, because the book and tax depreciation methods 
now match, there would be no deferred taxes to add back in the cash flow statement. The result is 
the same $15,467 cash flow from operating activities as in the original example. The key insight 
here is that tax choices, not financial reporting choices, affect a firm’s cash flow. A financial 
 reporting choice might affect the cash flow statement because it affects net income and therefore 
other items in the statement as well, but it does not affect the amount of cash flow.
MEASURING AND REPORTING UNCERTAIN 
TAX POSITIONS15
A tax position is “a position in a previously filed tax return or a position expected to be taken 
in a future tax return that is reflected in measuring current (taxes payable) or deferred income 
tax assets and liabilities for interim or annual periods. . . . The term tax position also encom-
passes, but is not limited to:
a. A decision not to file a tax return
b. An allocation or a shift of income between jurisdictions
c. The characterization of income or a decision to exclude reporting taxable income in a 
tax return
d. A decision to classify a transaction, entity, or other position in a tax return as tax exempt
e. An entity’s status, including its status as a pass-through entity or a tax-exempt not-for-
profit entity.”16
 
This definition is a broad one that includes virtually any decision affecting the amount or timing 
of tax payments a firm will ultimately make. A tax position can result in a permanent reduction of 
income taxes payable, a deferral of income taxes otherwise currently payable to future years (creat-
ing a temporary difference), or a change in the expected realizability of a deferred tax asset.
 
Uncertainty abounds in tax law, and whether a tax position will ultimately be upheld often 
is unclear because of ambiguity in the law or conflicting court decisions. An uncertain tax 
position is a tax position that may, as a result of such ambiguity, be challenged by taxing 
EXHIBIT 13.16
Mitchell Company Cash Flow Statement—2014
 
Original Example 
Using SYD for Books
Pre-tax income before depreciation 
$22,000 
$22,000
Depreciation expense 
(2,000) 
(3,333)
 Pre-tax income 
20,000 
18,667
Income tax expense 
(7,000) 
(6,533)
 Net income 
$13,000 
$12,134
Net income 
$13,000 
$12,134
Depreciation 
2,000 
3,333
Deferred taxes 
467
 Cash flow from operating activities 
15,467 
15,467
Cash flow from investing activities 
0 
0
Cash flow from financing activities 
0 
0
 Net change in cash 
$15,467 
$15,467
15 The authors thank Amy Dunbar, John Phillips, and Ryan Wilson for their comments and suggestions on this section.
16 FASB ASC Master Glossary: Tax Position.

 
Measuring and Reporting Uncertain Tax Positions 
779
 authorities. If the firm is not successful in defending its position either in discussions with the 
taxing authority or in court, the amount and timing of the firm’s tax payments ultimately will 
differ from what the firm envisioned. For example, since 2005, firms have been permitted to 
deduct a portion of their profits from certain domestic production activities. (That portion cur-
rently stands at 9%.) Gibson & Associates, an engineering and construction firm, took the 
deduction, claiming that some of its activities fell within the law’s definition of production 
activities. The IRS disagreed and challenged. The parties went to tax court. From the time 
Gibson first claimed the deduction until the case was resolved, the company had an uncertain 
tax position because it would not know with certainty what the amount and timing of its tax 
payments would be until the court ruled or the parties settled.17
 
In the pre-Codification period, the FASB issued an interpretation (often referred to as 
FIN48) of then-existing GAAP literature on income taxes because it observed inconsistencies 
in how firms recognized, de-recognized, and measured benefits related to uncertain tax posi-
tions. These guidelines are currently in the FASB Accounting Standards Codification under 
Topic 740, Income Taxes, which sets forth the measurement and reporting of uncertain tax 
positions in firms’ financial statements.
 
GAAP sets out a two-step process to determine how much benefit may be recognized 
from an uncertain tax position and correspondingly how much a firm should report in its 
tax contingency reserve as a liability for unrecognized tax benefits. Step 1 involves a 
 recognition threshold. A firm must determine whether the uncertain tax position meets the 
threshold of “more likely than not” that it will be able to sustain its position based solely 
on technical merits.18 The term “more likely than not” means a likelihood of more than 
50%. The more-likely-than-not recognition threshold is a positive assertion by manage-
ment of the belief that the firm is entitled to the economic benefits associated with the tax 
position (e.g., the firm is entitled to a deduction taken on its tax return).
 
Once a tax benefit meets the recognition threshold, the firm moves to Step 2 and measures 
the tax benefit as the largest amount of benefit that is cumulatively greater than 50 percent likely 
of being realized. The difference between the tax benefit as shown on the tax return and the tax 
benefit as determined using the two-step recognition/measurement process is recorded as a Tax 
contingency reserve account, sometimes referred to as Liability for unrecognized tax benefits.
 
GAAP specifically forbids the use of a valuation allowance in place of a contingency reserve. 
Valuation allowances are used when it is uncertain the firm will be sufficiently profitable to real-
ize tax benefits, but it is not appropriate when the firm’s tax positions may not be sustained. 
Assessing Uncertain Tax Position Related 
to a Permanent Difference
Doyle Company reports pre-tax book income of $10,000 that includes a $1,000 expense that 
is also deducted on the company’s tax return. The tax law is unclear as to whether the deduc-
tion is permitted now or at any point in the future, so taking the deduction leads to an uncer-
tain tax position. Assuming Doyle has no other uncertain tax positions, no book-tax 
differences, and a tax rate of 40%, this deduction results in a $400 uncertain tax benefit. 
Management’s assessment is that it is 65% likely the deduction will be sustained based on 
17 In February 2011 the tax court ruled in favor of Gibson. For a discussion of the case, see “Highway Repairs Are Domestic 
Production Property,” The Journal of Accountancy, June 2011.
18 Factors to be considered in assessing the more-likely-than-not criterion include (1) a presumption that the tax position will 
be examined by the relevant taxing authority that has full knowledge of all relevant information, (2) technical merits of the 
tax position are to be based on relevant tax law (legislation, statutes, regulations, tax rulings, and case law), and (3) each tax 
position must be evaluated without consideration of the possibility of offset or aggregation with other positions. See FASB 
ASC Paragraph 740-10-25-7: Income Taxes—Overall—Recognition—Basic Recognition Threshold.
This is an example of a per-
manent difference uncertain 
tax position because the tax 
rules are unclear as to 
whether this expense will 
ever be deductible.

780 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
 
Because Doyle’s management assesses the likelihood of this uncertain tax position being 
sustained on its merits to be 65%, the more-likely-than-not recognition condition is satisfied. 
Doyle next moves to the measurement step. The largest amount of benefit that is cumulatively 
greater than 50 percent likely of being realized is $250 (see shaded items in the table above). 
So, Doyle may recognize $250 of the tax benefit in its financial statements in the current 
 period. The difference between the tax benefit that would be recorded as part of the normal 
tax entry due to this deduction ($400) and the $250 determined from the two-step process 
represents the amount that Doyle must record as a tax contingency reserve. Accordingly, the 
entry Doyle makes to record tax expense, taxes payable, and the tax contingency for the 
 unrecognized tax benefit associated with this uncertain tax position would be as follows:
Management’s assessment 
of the likelihood of the 
 uncertain tax position being 
sustained is not directly 
 related to the individual or 
cumulative probabilities in 
the schedule above because 
Doyle now looks beyond 
just the technical merits of 
the position. It now consid-
ers the likelihood of being 
challenged and the likely 
outcomes of a negotiation 
with the tax authorities.
DR Income tax expense   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $4,150a
 
CR Income taxes payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$4,000b
 
CR Tax contingency reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
150c
a $10,000 3 40% 1 ($400 2 $250)
b $10,000 3 40%
c $400 2 $250
 
To see how this entry records a $250 uncertain tax benefit, first consider the $4,000 in taxes 
Doyle will pay currently. That amount is computed assuming the item in question is fully deduct-
ible. The $4,000 amount would also be the income tax provision for the year if it were certain 
Doyle’s tax position would be sustained. In contrast, if the deduction were known to be impermis-
sible, Doyle’s income tax expense would have been $11,000 3 40% 5 $4,400. So, any tax provi-
sion between $4,000 and $4,400 must be recording a portion of the uncertain tax benefit. 
 
By recording a Tax contingency reserve of $150, along with the $4,000 of income tax pay-
able, Doyle records income tax expense of $4,150. The result is that income tax expense is 
$4,400 2 $4,150 5 $250 lower than in the nondeductible scenario, so a $250 uncertain tax 
benefit has been recorded.
Recording Uncertain Tax Position Related 
to Timing of Deductibility
Uncertain tax positions can sometimes arise because of uncertainty about the timing of the de-
ductibility of an expense under the tax code. Assume now that Doyle Company’s $1,000 deduc-
tion fails to meet the more-likely-than-not condition. That is, the full deduction taken in the 
current period’s tax return is unlikely to be sustained upon review. However, it is certain based 
on current tax law that this expenditure would be amortizable (deductible) for tax purposes over 
a five-year period. In other words, Doyle is certain it will eventually get to deduct $1,000, but it 
believes it is unlikely to sustain its position that the entire deduction may be taken immediately.
 
Under GAAP, Doyle subtracts only $200 of the expenditure ($1,000y5) when it computes 
the taxable income amount to be used to determine the current portion of its income tax ex-
pense. That is because only $200 is sufficiently certain to be deductible in the current year that 
 Possible Estimated Outcome 
Individual Probability 
Cumulative Probability
 
($ amount of benefit) 
of Estimated Outcomes 
of Estimated Outcomes
 
$400 
10% 
10%
 
300 
30 
40
 
250 
20 
60
 
–0– 
40 
100
the technical merits. Assume the amounts and related individual probabilities of estimated 
outcomes are as follows:

 
Measuring and Reporting Uncertain Tax Positions 
781
it may enter into Doyle’s computation of the current portion of income tax expense. So, the 
current portion of Doyle’s income tax expense is ($11,000 2 $200) 3 40% 5 $4,320.
 
Doyle also has a deferred tax asset arising for the future tax deduction it is certain to be enti-
tled to if it must ultimately amortize the $1,000 cost for tax purposes rather than deduct it imme-
diately. The deferred tax asset is recorded at $800 3 40% 5 $320. Income tax expense is the 
current portion of income tax expense minus the increase in the deferred tax asset, or $4,000. This 
should make intuitive sense because regardless of the outcome of the uncertain tax position, 
$1,000 is eventually tax deductible, so Doyle’s pre-tax income of $10,000 will have tax conse-
quences, eventually, of exactly $10,000 3 40% 5 $4,000.
 
With a $4,000 debit to Income tax expense and a $320 debit to Deferred tax asset, we would 
normally complete the entry with a $4,320 credit to Income taxes payable. And this is the 
amount that will in fact be due if, as Doyle expects, it does not sustain its tax position. However, 
Doyle does not plan to pay $4,320 now. It will, instead, file a tax return claiming the full $1,000 
deduction and make a payment of only $4,000. So the credit to Income taxes  payable is for only 
$4,000. The remaining credit of $320 is to the Tax contingency reserve, representing the addi-
tional amount that will be due if Doyle is unable to sustain its tax position. The full entry is:
DR Income tax expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$4,000
DR Deferred tax asset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
320
 
CR Income tax payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$4,000
 
CR Tax contingency reserve  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
320
 
Doyle records a reclassification entry in each of the subsequent years in which the tax posi-
tion remains uncertain as a ratable portion ($200) of the original $1,000 expenditure becomes 
deductible with certainty under current tax law. Note that this entry reverses the Deferred tax 
asset and Tax contingency reserve accounts over the remaining four-year amortization period 
of the capitalized expenditure.
DR Tax contingency reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$50
 
CR Income tax expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$50
DR Tax contingency reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$80
 
CR Deferred tax asset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$80 
Making Changes or Resolving Uncertain Tax Positions
If the original assessed probabilities of outcomes for uncertain tax positions later change or if 
the uncertain tax position is settled with the taxing authority, appropriate adjustments are made 
to the Tax contingency reserve account with offsetting adjustments to the Tax expense or Cash 
account. To illustrate these adjustments, we return to the first example in which Doyle recorded 
$150 in the Tax contingency reserve account on the $1,000 deduction taken in Year 1. Recall that 
a $250 tax benefit associated with this uncertain tax position was recognized as a reduction of 
Tax expense in Year 1.
 
Assume that in Year 2 management is more optimistic about the uncertain tax position. 
Management now believes the largest benefit amount that is cumulatively greater than 50 percent 
likely to be realized is $300. As the amount of the tax benefit likely to be realized in-
creases, the tax contingency for unrecognized tax benefits is reduced with a corresponding 
reduction in Tax expense (thereby recognizing a portion of the uncertain benefit). To reflect 
this change, the Tax contingency reserve is debited with an offsetting adjustment to Tax 
 expense in Year 2 for $300 2 $250 5 $50.

782 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
Assessing Disclosures on Uncertain Tax Positions
Exhibit 13.17 provides Deere & Company’s 2012 note disclosure for uncertain tax positions. 
This note explains how Deere’s tax contingency reserve changed in each of the last three years.
 
In 2012, Deere took uncertain tax positions that resulted in a $46 million increase in the tax 
contingency reserve. In addition, the tax reserve related to tax positions previously taken in-
creased by $31 million, consisting of $54 million in increases and $23 million in decreases, 
$9 million of which was because the statute of limitations expired, meaning the taxing au-
thorities could no longer challenge those positions. The foreign  exchange amount arises be-
cause the tax contingency reserves from foreign subsidiaries are denominated in other 
currencies. When the exchange rate with the U.S. dollar changes, these reserves, in U.S. dollar 
terms, are revalued to reflect the current exchange rate.
A reconciliation of the total amounts of unrecognized tax benefits at October 31 is as follows:
($ in millions) 
2012 
2011 
2010
Beginning of year balance 
$199 
$218 
$260
Increases to tax positions taken during the current year 
46 
23 
36
Increases to tax positions taken during prior years 
54 
13 
83
Decreases to tax positions taken during prior years 
(14) 
(42) 
(133)
Decreases due to lapse of statute of limitations 
(9) 
(13) 
(2)
Settlements 
 
(1) 
(19)
Foreign exchange 
(11) 
1 
(7)
End of year balance 
$265 
$199 
$218
EXHIBIT 13.17
Deere & Company 2012 Disclosures on Uncertain 
Tax Positions
RECAP
GAAP requires a two-step process to determine how much benefit a firm can recognize 
from an uncertain tax position and correspondingly how much a firm should report in its 
tax contingency reserve for unrecognized tax benefits. The recognition threshold requires 
management to assess whether the uncertain tax position is “more likely than not” 
(greater than 50 percent) to be sustained based on the technical merits of the position. 
If the recognition threshold is met, the firm then measures the amount of the tax benefit 
to recognize as the largest amount of benefit that is cumulatively greater than 50 percent 
likely of being realized. The difference between the tax benefit reported on the tax return 
and the tax benefit recognized using the two-step recognition/measurement process for 
measuring uncertain tax positions is recorded as an increase in the Tax contingency 
 reserve, sometimes referred to as Liability for unrecognized tax benefits.
If in Year 3 Doyle settles the issue with the taxing authority and pays $130, the entry to close 
out the Tax contingency reserve account and to pay the settlement is:
DR Tax contingency reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$100
DR Income tax expense   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
30
CR Cash   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$130
 
Income tax expense is debited for $30 in this final entry because the settlement with the 
taxing authority is $30 more than the $100 contingency reserve that previously existed for this 
uncertain tax position.

 
Extracting Analytical Insights from Note Disclosures 
783
EXTRACTING ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS 
FROM NOTE DISCLOSURES
Tax notes provide useful information beyond taxes. Information about deferred tax assets and 
liabilities, in particular, can help assess earnings quality and enhance interfirm comparisons. 
This is because, generally, all firms will select tax policies that minimize the present value of 
their tax payments, even though their financial reporting choices might differ substantially. As 
a result, firms’ tax choices are likely to be more similar to each other than their financial 
 reporting choices, providing a useful benchmark for assessing quality and comparing firms.
Using Deferred Tax Notes to Assess Earnings Quality
Companies must disclose details about individual temporary differences that give rise to the 
deferred tax asset and deferred tax liability balances on the balance sheet. Scrutiny of the details 
comprising deferred taxes can reveal important analytical insights about the actions manage-
ment has taken to boost short-term earnings. To illustrate, refer to Exhibit 13.18, which contains 
excerpts from the Year 2 income tax note for ChipPAC Inc. This excerpt identifies major ele-
ments of the deferred tax asset and liability balances. Notice that the deferred income taxes at-
tributable to book-versus-tax depreciation differences (highlighted area) went from a $92 
thousand debit balance (asset) in Year 1 to a $10.870 million credit balance (liability) in Year 2, 
an increase of $10.962 million. Some portion of this increase is likely due to acquisitions of new 
property, plant, and equipment during the year that were depreciated at a faster rate for tax pur-
poses than for book purposes. (ChipPAC’s cash flow statement reveals that $93.174 million was 
spent in Year 2 for acquisition of property and equipment.) However, fixed asset growth explains 
only a small part of the increase. What else might explain the rather large increase in this com-
ponent of deferred tax liabilities? In another note in its Year 2 annual report, ChipPAC states:
Effective January 1, Year 2, the Company re-evaluated the estimated useful lives of equipment. 
Based on an independent appraisal to evaluate the useful lives of such equipment and the Com-
pany’s internal assessment, the Company changed the estimated useful lives of assembly and 
test product equipment and furniture and fixtures from five to eight years. Previously, such 
equipment was depreciated on a straight-line basis over an estimated useful life of five years.
Analysis
EXHIBIT 13.18
ChipPAC Inc.
Excerpt from Year 2 Annual Report Income Tax Note
The tax effects of temporary differences that give rise to significant portions of the deferred tax 
assets and deferred liabilities at December 31, Year 2 and December 31, Year 1 follow:
($ in thousands) 
Year 2 
Year 1
Deferred tax assets:
 Income recognized for tax but not for books 
$ 7,598 
—
 Tax credits 
2,663 
—
 NOL carryforward 
3,490 
—
 Other 
3,381 
$6,270
  Total gross deferred assets 
17,132 
6,270
  Less: Valuation allowance 
(6,122) 
Net deferred tax assets 
11,010 
6,270
Deferred tax liabilities:
 Depreciation 
(10,870) 
92
 Reserves deducted for tax and not for books 
(570) 
(621)
  Total deferred tax liabilities 
(11,440) 
(529)
Net deferred tax liabilities 
$  (430) 
$5,741

784 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
 
The net book values of assembly and test product equipment and furniture and fixtures, as of 
January 1, Year 2, are now being depreciated over the remaining useful life, based on eight years 
from the date such assets were originally placed into service. This change resulted in a decrease 
in depreciation expense for the year ended December 31, Year 2 being $29.0 million lower than 
would have been recorded using five years.
 
By extending the useful lives of fixed assets, ChipPAC lowered book depreciation and 
widened the excess of Year 2 pre-tax book income over taxable income. This increased the 
deferred tax liability related to depreciation temporary differences by 0.35 3 $29 million 5 
$10.15 million, or about 93% of the $10.962 million total increase from the prior year. Inter-
estingly, ChipPAC reported a pre-tax profit of $18 million in Year 2. Without the $29 million 
pre-tax earnings boost from lengthening the useful lives, ChipPAC would have reported an 
$11 million ($18 2 $29) pre-tax loss.
 
A financial statement reader can glean important information from changes in deferred tax 
balances, as demonstrated in Exhibit 13.18. It was possible to infer that depreciable lives were 
extended because of the relatively large increase in deferred taxes arising from book-versus-
tax depreciation differences. As we saw, ChipPAC clearly disclosed this change in estimated 
useful lives. GAAP requires disclosure of a change in an accounting estimate only if the 
 impact of the change is material.19
 
Unfortunately, widely accepted guidelines for assessing materiality do not exist. Consequently, 
firms that are not as candid as ChipPAC could conceivably decide to extend asset lives and not 
disclose the change. Their motive could be to manipulate or smooth income, and they would 
justify nondisclosure by contending that the impact of the change is immaterial. Because materi-
ality guidelines are subjective, careful scrutiny of the income tax note provides analysts a way to 
detect subtle changes in accounting estimates that affect bottom-line earnings but are not sepa-
rately disclosed. This avenue is especially useful to auditors. A detailed examination of deferred 
income tax balances provides auditors evidence for evaluating management’s candor.20
This calculation assumes 
the statutory tax rate of 35% 
was used to calculate the 
change in deferred taxes.
 
Sudden decreases in deferred tax assets are also a potential sign of deteriorating earnings 
quality. Using warranty expense as an example, we next explain why a sudden decrease in a 
deferred tax asset may be a danger signal.
 
We saw earlier that accruals for product warranties generate deferred tax assets. The reason 
is that GAAP requires warranty expenses to be matched against the revenues of the products to 
which the warranties apply. But income tax rules do not allow deductions for warranty expenses 
until the costs of providing the warranty services are actually incurred, which generally occurs 
in a later period than when the revenues were recognized. Because GAAP warranty expenses are 
recognized sooner than warranty expenses for tax purposes, a deferred tax asset results.
 
Assume that on January 1, 2014, Carson Company begins offering a one-year warranty on 
all sales. Its 2014 sales were $20,000,000, and Carson estimates that warranty expenses will be 
Analysis
19 FASB ASC Paragraph 250-10-50-4: Accounting Changes and Error Corrections—Overall—Disclosure—Change in 
 Accounting Estimate.
20 For readers who are neither auditors nor studying to be auditors, some elaboration is necessary. At the start of an audit, the 
auditor discusses significant issues with the client’s managers to identify potential problem areas. When managers do not 
voluntarily disclose things such as income-increasing changes in accounting estimates, auditors consider this to be a potential 
danger signal that warrants an expansion in the scope of the audit. Scrutiny of the tax note provides auditors another tool for 
identifying problem areas.
RECAP
Increases in deferred tax liability balances result from a widening excess of book income 
over taxable income. These increases represent a potential danger signal that should be 
investigated because an increase in a deferred tax liability might indicate deteriorating 
earnings quality. One way to uncover such subtle deterioration in earnings quality is to 
investigate all large, sudden changes in deferred tax balances. The analyst should try to 
understand why the deferred tax liability balance increased.

 
Extracting Analytical Insights from Note Disclosures 
785
1% of sales; so, $200,000 of warranty expense is charged against Carson’s pre-tax book in-
come in 2014.
 
Assume no warranty repairs were made in 2014, so the tax deductions for warranties are 
zero. If the tax rate is 35%, Carson will have a deferred tax asset of $70,000 for warranties at 
December 31, 2014—the $200,000 book-versus-tax warranty difference times 35%. If actual
warranty costs incurred in 2015 but associated with 2014 sales are precisely $200,000, then it 
would mean Carson’s 2014 warranty estimate was accurate and should be maintained in 2015.
 
Panel (a) of Exhibit 13.19 shows what will happen if Carson Company uses the same war-
ranty expense estimate of 1% of sales in 2015. It is assumed that sales in 2015 again will be 
$20,000,000 and that actual warranty costs on 2015 sales will not be incurred until 2016. Given 
these assumptions, Carson’s December 31, 2015, deferred tax asset balance will still be 
$70,000. That is, the 2014 temporary difference reversed in 2015 (see arrow in Exhibit 
13.19[a]), but a new $200,000 temporary difference on warranties associated with 2015 sales 
originated. The example in Exhibit 13.19(a) demonstrates that the deferred tax asset balance 
will remain stable if the warranty estimate is accurate and sales volume is unchanged.
 
Let’s now assume that instead of maintaining the warranty expense estimate at 1% of 
sales, Carson lowers the estimate to 0.5% of sales in 2015. Carson does this because man-
agement wishes to increase 2015 income despite the fact that the 1% number reflects actual 
warranty experience. Notice that because the 1% estimate accurately reflects estimated war-
ranty costs in 2014, this change of an accounting estimate in 2015 represents a deterioration 
in earnings quality.
EXHIBIT 13.19
Carson Company
Illustration of Decline in Deferred Tax Assets
Panel (a) Warranty Percentage Unchanged
 
2015 
2014
Sales revenues 
$20,000,000 
$20,000,000
Estimated warranty cost percentage 
0.01 
0.01
Warranty expense per books 
200,000 
200,000
Warranty expense per tax return
 Attributable to 2014 sales 
200,000 
—
 Attributable to 2015 sales 
— 
—
Excess of book over tax expense
 Arising from 2014 sales 
— 
200,000
 Arising from 2015 sales 
200,000 
—
Tax rate 
0.35 
0.35
December 31 deferred tax asset balance 
$    70,000 
$    70,000
Panel (b) Warranty Percentage Lowered in 2015
Sales revenues 
$20,000,000 
$20,000,000
Estimated warranty cost percentage 
0.005 
0.01
Warranty expense per books 
100,000 
200,000
Warranty expense per tax return 
 
 Attributable to 2014 sales 
200,000 
—
 Attributable to 2015 sales 
— 
—
Excess of book over tax expense 
 
 Arising from 2014 sales 
— 
200,000
 Arising from 2015 sales 
100,000 
—
Tax rate 
0.35 
0.35
December 31 deferred tax asset balance 
$    35,000 
$    70,000 
2015
Reversal
2015
Reversal

786 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
 
Panel (b) of Exhibit 13.19 shows that the deferred tax asset balance will decrease from 
$70,000 to $35,000 under the new assumptions. The reason for the decrease in the deferred 
tax asset balance is that the book-versus-tax difference narrowed from $200,000 in 2014 to 
$100,000 in 2015 as a consequence of the reduction in estimated warranty expense from 1% 
to 0.5% of sales.
Using Tax Notes to Improve Interfirm Comparability
The deferred tax portion of the income tax note can be used to undo differences in financial 
reporting choices across firms and thus to improve interfirm comparisons. Here’s a specific 
illustration. Cubic Corporation and Nanometrics are both classified in Standard Industrial 
Classification (SIC) code 3829—Measuring and Controlling Devices. But the two companies 
use different depreciation methods.
 
Cubic Corporation’s 10-K for the year ended September 30, 2012 states:
Property, Plant and Equipment: We carry property, plant and equipment at cost. We provide de-
preciation in amounts sufficient to amortize the cost of the depreciable assets over their esti-
mated useful lives. Generally, we use straight-line methods for depreciable real property over 
estimated useful lives or the term of the underlying lease for leasehold improvements. We use 
accelerated methods (declining balance and sum-of-the-years-digits) for machinery and equip-
ment over their estimated useful lives.
 
So, for financial reporting purposes, Cubic uses accelerated depreciation for its machinery 
and equipment, which accounts for about 57% of its property, plant, and equipment in terms 
of gross cost (before accumulated depreciation).
 
In contrast, Nanometrics’ Form 10-K for the year ended December 29, 2012, says:
Property, Plant and Equipment—Property, plant and equipment are stated at cost. Depreciation is 
computed using the straight-line method over the following estimated useful lives of the assets:
Building and improvements 
5–40 years
Machinery and equipment 
3–10 years
Furniture and fixtures 
3–10 years
 
It’s possible that the two firms’ different depreciation choices conform perfectly to differ-
ences in the service potential of each their respective assets. But what if they don’t? How can 
an analyst adjust the numbers to improve interfirm comparisons?
 
Exhibit 13.20 contains several key financial statement figures from each company’s 10-K,  
along with the deferred tax amounts related to property, plant, and equipment reported in their 
income tax notes. Let’s begin by looking at Panel (a), which relates to Cubic Corporation. It 
shows the company had a $471,000 deferred tax asset related to property, plant, and equip-
ment at the end of fiscal 2012. It is unusual for companies to have  deferred tax assets related 
to property, plant, and equipment, but given the company uses accelerated methods for a large 
portion of its assets, it is possible to have a small deferred tax asset. The deferred tax asset is 
in fact small, indicating that cumulatively, book depreciation has exceeded tax depreciation by 
only a small amount.
Analysis
SIC is a system maintained 
by the Office of Federal 
 Statistical Policy and 
 Standards in the Department 
of Commerce to classify 
firms by the nature of their 
operations.
RECAP
This example demonstrates why shrinkage in a deferred tax asset balance should be in-
vestigated. Year-to-year changes in warranty expense estimates are just like other changes 
in accounting estimates in that they need to be disclosed only if they are material.  Because 
materiality guidelines are subjective, companies can conceivably use undisclosed estimate 
changes as a way to artificially increase earnings. Decreases in deferred tax asset balances 
can provide clues about such possibilities to statement readers.

 
Extracting Analytical Insights from Note Disclosures 
787
 
Cubic’s deferred tax asset related to property, plant, and equipment declined by $238,000 
during fiscal 2012, from $709,000 to $471,000. An increase in a deferred tax liability or a 
decrease in a deferred tax asset would occur in a period when tax depreciation exceeds book 
depreciation. So, using the statutory rate of 35%:
$238,000 5 (Tax depreciation 2 Book depreciation) 3 0.35
 
Dividing both sides by 0.35 yields:
$680,000 5 Tax depreciation 2 Book depreciation
 
Because Panel (a) of Exhibit 13.20 shows that Cubic’s book depreciation was $8.0 million, 
tax depreciation must have been $8.7 million (rounded to the nearest $0.1 million).
 
We can now perform the same analysis on Nanometrics to determine what its tax deprecia-
tion was in 2012. Panel (b) of Exhibit 13.20 shows that Nanometrics’ depreciation-related 
deferred tax liability was $5,797,000 at the end of fiscal 2012—a decrease of $432,000 from 
a year earlier. Repeating the analytical approach we used for Cubic (and noting that a decrease 
in deferred tax liability occurs when book depreciation exceeds tax depreciation):
$432,000 5 (Book depreciation 2 Tax depreciation) 3 0.35
 
Therefore:
$1,234,000 5 Book depreciation 2 Tax depreciation
 
Nanometrics’ book depreciation was $4,800,000 (Exhibit 13.20 [b]) in fiscal 2012, so tax 
depreciation must have been $3,566,000 million.
 
We have now approximated the depreciation taken by each firm for tax purposes and estab-
lished a “common denominator” for interfirm analysis. While we do not have enough infor-
mation to put Cubic on Nanometrics’ book depreciation basis, we do have enough information 
to put the two firms on an identical tax depreciation basis. This approach facilitates interfirm 
Panel (a): Cubic Corporation 
9/30/12 
9/30/11
($ in thousands)
Book depreciation 
$  8,000 
$  7,700
Income before income taxes 
130,287 
116,277
Property, plant and equipment, net of accumulated 
 depreciation (at year-end) 
55,327 
48,467
Included in Deferred Tax Assets:
Book over tax depreciation 
471 
709
 
Year Ended
Panel (b): Nanometrics 
12/29/12 
12/31/11
($ in thousands)
Book depreciation 
$  4,800 
$  3,300
Income before income taxes 
4,619 
44,584
Property, plant and equipment, net of 
 accumulated depreciation (at year-end) 
43,213 
35,521
Included in Deferred Tax Liabilities:
Depreciation and amortization 
5,797 
6,229
EXHIBIT 13.20
Selected Financial Statement Disclosures from 
Recent 10-K Reports of Cubic Corporation and 
Nanometrics Incorporated

788 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
comparisons because it is likely the two companies’ tax depreciation methods are more 
 comparable—because they are essentially set by law so that similar assets use similar depre-
ciation methods and lives—than are their financial reporting depreciation choices.
 
Adjusting each firm’s financial reporting to the same depreciation methods and useful lives 
reduces Cubic’s pre-tax income by 680,000, or 0.5% ($680,000y$130,287,000). Nanometrics’ 
pre-tax income increases by $1,234,000, or 26.7% ($1,234,000y$4,619,000). In various circum-
stances, the difference may—or may not—be significant. But making interfirm comparisons 
 using comparable data is better than basing the analysis on diverse financial reporting choices.
 
It is important to note that the preceding analysis is appropriate only in situations where 
firms have not had substantial asset disposals during the year. When depreciable assets are sold, 
the deferred tax amounts for these assets are eliminated from the Deferred tax liability account. 
Moreover, the amount eliminated due to asset sales is rarely disclosed. So, the year-to-year 
change in the deferred tax liability balance for depreciation no longer reflects only current pe-
riod book-versus-tax depreciation differences. We can determine whether the firm sold assets 
during the period by looking in the Investing Activity section of the cash flow statement to see 
whether cash was generated from asset sales. In this particular case, neither Cubic nor Nano-
metrics reported substantial asset sales their fiscal 2012 cash flow statements.
GLOBAL VANTAGE POINT
Although IFRS and U.S. GAAP accounting for income taxes largely overlap, there are impor-
tant, but subtle, differences. This section highlights key differences between IFRS and U.S. 
GAAP accounting for income taxes in five areas: (1) the approach for recognizing deferred 
tax assets; (2) reconciliation of statutory and effective tax rates; (3) reporting of deferred taxes 
on the balance sheet; (4) disclosure of income tax amounts recognized directly in equity; and 
(5) uncertain tax positions. We also briefly discuss a 2009  Exposure Draft issued by the IASB 
that was intended to bring IFRS accounting for income taxes closer to U.S. GAAP. The Expo-
sure Draft was tabled recently because the IASB now plans to undertake “a fundamental re-
view of accounting for income taxes at some time in the future.” However, the Exposure Draft 
still illustrates some initiatives the IASB is considering to help converge standards.
Approach for Recognizing Deferred Tax Assets
IFRS rules for measuring and reporting income taxes are set forth in IAS 12, “Income Taxes.”21 
IFRS rules, like GAAP, take an asset–liability approach to accounting for income taxes, which 
is intended to recognize, in the balance sheet, the future tax consequences of events or trans-
actions that are recognized on the financial statements and tax return in different periods 
(temporary difference). A temporary difference is the difference between the book basis and 
the tax basis of an asset or liability multiplied by the appropriate tax rate. For U.S. GAAP, the 
applicable tax rate is the enacted tax rate based on legislation already passed by Congress 
(currently 35%). IFRS requires firms to use the enacted or substantively enacted tax rates. 
The interpretation of “substantively enacted” varies from country to country. The IASB has 
published guidelines that address the point in time when a tax law change is substantively 
enacted in many jurisdictions that apply IFRS.
 
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS record a deferred tax liability if the book basis of the underly-
ing asset (liability) is greater (less) than the tax basis of the underlying asset (liability). Such 
International
21 “Income Taxes,” International Accounting Standards (IAS) 12 [London: International Accounting Standards Board (IASB), 
revised 2001].

 
Global Vantage Point 
789
differences result in future taxable amounts that cause future taxable income to be greater than 
book income resulting in the need to report a deferred tax liability on the balance sheet.
 
Similar to U.S. GAAP, IAS 12 requires firms to recognize a deferred tax asset if the book 
basis of the underlying asset (liability) is less (greater) than the tax basis of the underlying 
asset (liability), which results in future deductible amounts. This will cause taxable income 
to be lower than book income in the future. U.S. GAAP requires a two-step approach for 
determining the amount of deferred tax assets recorded on a firm’s balance sheet. First, 
deferred tax assets are recognized for the full amount of future deductible amounts multi-
plied by the tax rate. Second, if it is deemed more likely than not (greater than 50% likeli-
hood) that the deferred tax asset will not be realized because of uncertainty about whether 
the firm will have future taxable income to utilize fully the future deductible amount when 
it reverses, an adjustment is made to deferred tax assets through the use of a valuation 
 allowance account.
 
No valuation allowance account is used for deferred tax assets under IFRS rules. Instead, 
IFRS requires a one-step approach that provides for recognition of deferred tax assets only to the 
extent it is deemed probable that they will be realized.22 Firms are required to review the carry-
ing value of deferred tax assets at the end of each reporting period and to reduce their carrying 
value to the extent it is estimated that future taxable income will not be available against which 
to use the asset. This reduction can be reversed in the future if taxable income becomes avail-
able. Although there is no valuation allowance account used under IFRS, there should be no 
substantive differences in the net deferred tax assets that are recognized on the balance sheet 
under U.S. GAAP versus IFRS. The adjustments made to deferred tax assets are just less visible 
under IFRS.
Reconciliation of Statutory and Effective Tax Rates
Both IFRS and U.S. GAAP require a numerical reconciliation that explains the differences 
between statutory and effective tax rates. However, there are differences regarding the particu-
lar tax rates to be used in preparing this reconciliation. U.S. GAAP requires that the domestic 
federal statutory rate be used as the starting point (currently 35% in the United States). 
 Although IFRS allows firms to use this approach, it also allows firms to use a statutory rate 
that aggregates domestic rates in various jurisdictions. An example of this alternative ap-
proach is provided in Exhibit 13.21, which provides the 2012 reconciliation schedule for Al-
lianz Group, a large international insurance and asset management company headquartered in 
 Germany with subsidiaries operating throughout the world. Germany’s statutory federal tax 
rate (including surtaxes) is approximately 30%. But the expected (statutory) rate that Allianz 
uses in its reconciliation schedule differs from this rate as explained in the shaded portion of 
the note that accompanies this schedule. Note that Allianz uses individual company reconcili-
ations that are based on the respective country-specific tax rates and that the statutory rate 
includes corporate, trade, and solidarity surcharge taxes.
Reporting Deferred Taxes in the Balance Sheet
U.S. GAAP calls for firms to classify deferred tax assets and liabilities as current or noncur-
rent depending on the classification of the asset or liability giving rise to the temporary differ-
ence. For example, a deferred tax asset due to rent received in advance (an unearned revenue 
22 “Probable” is not defined in IAS 12, but in IAS 37 on contingent liabilities and assets, probable is defined as a likelihood 
greater than 50%.

790 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
account that most likely would be classified among current liabilities) would be considered 
current, while a deferred tax liability due to temporary differences related to depreciation on 
property, plant, and equipment should be classified as noncurrent. Under IFRS rules, no con-
sideration is given to the classification of the underlying asset or liability to which the de-
ferred tax item relates. Rather, deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities are reported as 
noncurrent in a classified balance sheet. U.S. GAAP requires the netting of deferred tax assets 
and liabilities (both for current and noncurrent amounts) on the face of the balance sheet when 
they relate to the same tax-paying component of an entity and the same tax authority. IFRS 
rules are more stringent and require offsetting (netting) of deferred tax assets and deferred tax 
liabilities if, and only if, both of the following conditions exist:23
1. The entity has a legally enforceable right to set off current tax assets against current tax 
liabilities.
2. The deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities relate to income taxes levied by the 
same taxing authority on either of the following:
 
a. The same taxable entity.
 
b. Different taxable entities which intend either to settle current tax liabilities and assets 
on a net basis, or to realize the assets and settle the liabilities simultaneously in each 
future period in which significant amounts of deferred tax liabilities or assets are 
 expected to be settled or recovered.
EXHIBIT 13.21
Allianz Group 2012 Annual Report Excerpts 
from Income Tax Note
The recognized income taxes for the year ended 31 December 2012 are €591 MN above (2011: 
€644 MN above; 2010; €135 MN below) the expected income taxes. The following table shows 
the reconciliation from the expected income taxes of the Allianz Group to the effectively recog-
nized taxes. The Allianz Group’s reconciliation is a summary of the individual company-related 
reconciliations, which are based on the respective country-specific tax rates after taking into 
 consideration consolidation effects with an impact on the Group result. The expected tax rate for 
domestic Allianz Group companies applied in the reconciliation includes corporate tax, trade tax 
and the solidarity surcharge, and amounts to 31.0% (2011: 31.0%; 2010: 31.0%).
 
The effective tax rate is determined on the basis of the effective income tax expenses on 
 income before income taxes.
EFFECTIVE TAX RATE
€MN 
2012 
2011 
2010
Income before income taxes
 Germany 
963 
(711) 
651
 Other countries 
7,668 
5,557 
6,522
Total 
8,631 
4,846 
7,173
Expected income tax rate 
29.5% 
28.8% 
29.3%
Expected income taxes 
2,548 
1,398 
2,099
Trade tax and similar taxes 
237 
201 
176
Net tax exempt income 
(189) 
(40) 
(571)
Effects of tax losses 
2 
178 
279
Other effects 
542 
305 
(19)
Income taxes 
3,140 
2,042 
1,964
Effective tax rate 
36.4% 
42.1% 
27.4%
23 IAS 12, para. 74.

 
Global Vantage Point
791
 
As a practical matter, these stringent requirements for netting result in deferred tax asset 
and deferred tax liabilities being reported separately on the face of the balance sheet for most 
firms that follow IFRS reporting rules.
Disclosure of Income Tax Amounts Recognized Directly 
in Equity (Other Comprehensive Income)
IFRS rules require firms to disclose the aggregate amount of current and deferred income tax 
expense on income relating to items charged or credited directly to equity through Other com-
prehensive income.24 Such a disclosure is not currently required under U.S. GAAP. Given that 
the amount and frequency of items reported as Other comprehensive income is becoming in-
creasingly important, we believe that this is important information that is lacking under cur-
rent GAAP. Exhibit 13.22 shows an example of this disclosure requirement taken from the 
2012 annual report of ArcelorMittal Corporation, a large international steel company head-
quartered in Luxembourg.
Uncertain Tax Positions
As discussed earlier in this chapter, ASC 740-10 provides extensive guidance on recogni-
tion and measurement of liabilities related to firms’ uncertain tax positions. There is cur-
rently no specific guidance in IAS 12 with respect to uncertain tax positions. Rather, IAS 
12 calls for tax assets and liabilities to be measured at the amount expected to be paid. In 
practice, this frequently results in the recognition principles in IAS 37 that relates to the 
recognition and measurement of contingent liabilities being applied.25 IAS 37 requires that 
a contingent liability be recognized when: (1) an entity has a present obligation as a result 
of a past event; and (2) it is probable that an outflow of resources will be required to settle 
EXHIBIT 13.22
ArcelorMittal: Excerpts from Income Tax Note
Income Tax Recorded Directly in Equity
Income tax recognized in equity for the years ended December 31, 2011 and 2012 is as follows:
 
2011 
2012
Recognized in other comprehensive income on:
Current tax expense (benefit)
 Foreign currency translation adjustments 
12 
(3)
 
12 
(3)
Deferred tax expense (benefit)
 Unrealized gain (loss) on available-for-sale securities 
(1) 
—
 Unrealized gain (loss) on derivative financial instruments 
(88) 
(210)
 Call options on ArcelorMittal shares 
— 
—
 Foreign currency translation adjustments 
9 
79
 
(80) 
(131)
 
(68) 
(134)
24 IAS 12, para. 81.
25 “Provisions, Contingent Liabilities, and Contingent Assets,” International Accounting Standards (IAS) 37 [London: 
 International Accounting Standards Board (IASB), revised 2001].

792 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
the obligation and a reliable estimate can be made of the amount. This general guidance 
has resulted in mixed practice with respect to recognition and measurement of contingent 
obligations related to uncertain tax positions for firms following IFRS accounting.
IASB Exposure Draft on Income Taxes
In March 2009, the IASB issued an exposure draft that would have eliminated many of the 
differences between IFRS and U.S. GAAP with respect to income tax reporting.26 Four of the 
more important of the proposed changes were as follows:
1. Similar to provisions under U.S. GAAP, firms would be required to recognize a valuation 
allowance against deferred tax assets. The net amount of deferred tax assets would equal 
the highest amount that is more likely than not to be realizable against taxable profit.
2. Firms would be required to recognize income tax expense (or benefit) arising at the 
time of the transactions and other events in the same component of comprehensive in-
come (i.e., continuing operations, discontinued operations, or items in other compre-
hensive income) in which they recognize the related transaction or event. Currently, 
there is no explicit requirement for intraperiod tax allocation under IAS 12 as exists 
under U.S. GAAP.
3. In a classified balance sheet (statement of financial position), firms would be required to 
disaggregate deferred tax liabilities and deferred tax assets into a current amount and a 
noncurrent amount on the basis of the classification of the related asset or liability. The 
valuation allowance on deferred tax assets would be required to be allocated pro rata 
 between current and noncurrent deferred tax assets by tax jurisdiction.
4. IAS 12 is silent on how to account for uncertainty over whether the taxing authority 
will accept the amounts reported to it. The exposure draft proposes that current and 
deferred tax assets and liabilities should be measured at the probability-weighted aver-
age of all possible outcomes, assuming that the taxing authority examines the amounts 
 reported to it and has full knowledge of all relevant facts. Thus, the approach for mea-
suring uncertain tax positions is somewhat different from the two-step approach in 
ASC 740-10.
The IASB is planning a fundamental review of accounting for income taxes. Based on the 
now-tabled 2009 Exposure Draft, one might expect future changes to narrow the differences 
between IFRS and U.S. GAAP for income tax reporting.
26 “Income Tax,” Exposure Draft, IASB, 2009.
RECAP
IFRS and U.S. GAAP rules for income tax reporting largely overlap but differ in several 
subtle, but important, ways. Differences exist in: (1) the approach for determining the net 
amount of deferred tax assets; (2) what statutory rate is used in the schedule that recon-
ciles statutory and effective tax rates; (3) where deferred tax assets and liabilities are 
 reported in a classified balance sheet (statement of financial position); (4) disclosure of 
income tax amounts (both current and deferred) recognized directly in shareholders’ 
equity (Other comprehensive income); and (5) recognition and measurement of uncer-
tain tax positions.

 
First A-Head 
793
SUMMARY
• The rules for determining income for financial reporting purposes—book income—differ 
from the rules for determining income for tax purposes.
• The differences between book income and taxable income are caused by both permanent 
and temporary differences in the revenue and expense items reported on a company’s 
books versus its tax return.
• A temporary difference gives rise to either a deferred tax asset or a deferred tax liability.
• Deferred tax accounting generally requires firms to report tax costs or benefits on the 
income statement in the period in which the related revenue and expense items are 
 recognized for book purposes regardless of when these amounts are reported on the 
tax return.
• The income tax note provides useful information for understanding how much of the 
 current period’s tax provision (expense) is actually payable to federal, state, and foreign 
governments, and how much is deferred. Tax notes also allow users to understand why 
firms’ effective tax rates differ from the statutory rate.
• GAAP disclosures are useful in assessing a firm’s uncertain tax positions and whether 
the firm is aggressive or conservative in recognizing the benefits associated with these 
positions.
• Tax notes provide a wealth of information that can be exploited to improve interfirm 
 comparability and evaluate firms’ earnings quality.
• There are a number of difference between IFRS and U.S. GAAP rules for accounting 
for income taxes that you should be aware of as you analyze financial statements across 
countries.
 
Appendix 
793
APPENDIX
COMPREHENSIVE INTERPERIOD TAX 
ALLOCATION PROBLEM
The following example for Hawkeye Corporation combines the various aspects of accounting 
for income taxes discussed in this chapter to demonstrate the interrelation between pre-tax 
accounting income, taxable income, taxes payable, deferred taxes, and tax expense. Working 
through this example will demonstrate the following points:
1. How to convert a pre-tax accounting income number to a taxable income number.
2. How to determine taxes payable.
3. How to determine the change in deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities.
4. How to determine tax expense.
5. How to reconcile the total tax costs (benefits) reported in the income statement with the 
total taxes payable according to the tax return for the period.
6. How various tax items are represented in the tax note.
 
Figure 13.7 provides a road map for understanding how the various book and taxable 
 income numbers and tax amounts relate to one another. Before working through each set of 
computations in the Hawkeye Corporation example, we will refer to this road map to help 
visualize the role of each computation.

794 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
Pre-tax income
(GAAP)
1/2Permanent 
differences
5Taxable income
3Tax rate 5 taxes payable
Income tax provision
Current tax provision
1/2Other temporary
differences arising and
reversing
2Net operating loss
 carryforward used
Tax rate
changes
Changes in 
valuation
allowance
Income calculations
Balance sheet effects
Income tax provision
1
5
Deferred tax
provision
Changes in deferred
tax assets and
liabilities
Changes in deferred
tax assets and
liabilities, net of
valuation allowance
Figure 13.7 
OVERVIEW OF INTERPERIOD TAX ALLOCATION
(continued)
EXAMPLE: INTERPERIOD TAX ALLOCATION
Hawkeye Corporation starts the current year, 2014, with a deferred tax asset balance of 
$32,000 and a deferred tax liability balance of $42,000. The deferred tax assets at the begin-
ning of the year are from the following items: net operating loss carryforward ($14,000), 
warranties ($10,000), and bad debts ($8,000). The deferred tax liabilities are from the fol-
lowing items: depreciation ($37,000) and installment sale profit ($5,000). The statutory tax 
rate is 40% and it is projected to be in effect when all temporary differences reverse. 
 Reported pre-tax accounting income is $500,000 in 2014.
 
Analyze the following items to determine taxable income, the change in deferred tax assets 
and liabilities (future taxable and deductible amounts), and the tax expense to be reported in 
the income statement for 2014. Assume there is no need for a valuation allowance.
ITEM DESCRIPTIONS
➀ Book pre-tax income includes $12,000 of interest income from municipal bonds.
➁ Straight-line depreciation for book purposes is $100,000 in the current year, and 
$140,000 is deductible for tax purposes under the Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery 
System (MACRS).

 
Appendix 
795
Computation of Taxable Income
Reading from top to bottom down the left side of Figure 13.7, we see three categories of items 
that cause differences between pre-tax book income and taxable income:
1. Permanent differences.
2. Net operating loss carryforwards used.
3. Temporary differences.
 
The first category of reconciling items is permanent differences. These are revenue or ex-
pense items that the tax rules treat differently—on a permanent basis—than the GAAP (book) 
rules treat them for income determination purposes.
 
Schedule 13.1 shows that Hawkeye Corporation has two permanent difference items—Item 
➀, Interest income on municipal bonds and Item ➅, Premium on executive life insurance.
 
As part of the reconciliation from pre-tax income to taxable income, the municipal bond 
interest must be subtracted from the reported pre-tax book income number because it is not 
taxable even though it has been included in pre-tax book income. In addition, the executive 
life insurance premiums that were subtracted in arriving at pre-tax book income must be 
added back because they are not tax deductible when the company is the named beneficiary.
 
The second general category of reconciling items is net operating loss carryforwards used. 
As shown in Item ➇, Hawkeye has a $35,000 net operating loss carryforward available at the 
beginning of 2014. This amount represents losses reported on previous years’ tax returns (that 
is, tax-deductible expenses and losses exceeded taxable income and gains) that can be offset 
against 2014 taxable income. Because Hawkeye’s taxable income before applying the net 
operating loss carryforward exceeds the amount of the carryforward available, the entire 
$35,000 is subtracted from pre-tax book income to arrive at taxable income in 2014.
 
The final category of reconciling items involves temporary differences. These are revenue 
and expense items that enter into the determination of book income in one period and taxable 
income in a different period. Hawkeye has several temporary differences:
• Item ➁: Depreciation expense. Hawkeye’s pre-tax book income includes $100,000 of 
straight-line depreciation expense. But for tax purposes, Hawkeye uses an accelerated de-
preciation method, which produces a $140,000 deduction in the current period. To arrive 
at taxable income, this $40,000 originating temporary difference must be subtracted from 
➂ Hawkeye collected $60,000 of rent on a warehouse it leases to a local manufacturer. Of 
this amount, $40,000 will not be recognized under GAAP until 2015 when it is earned.
➃ Hawkeye accrued $50,000 for estimated future warranty costs in 2014 and paid 
$35,000 in warranty expenses in the current period.
➄ Bad debts written off in the current period totaled $20,000, and the provision for bad 
debts under the allowance method amounted to $15,000. Hawkeye uses the direct 
write-off method for tax purposes and the allowance method for book purposes.
➅ Book income includes an $18,000 expense for premiums paid on executive life insur-
ance under which the company is the named beneficiary.
➆ In 2014, Hawkeye collected $15,000 on an installment land sale made several years ear-
lier. The profit on the sale, all of which was recorded at the time of sale for book pur-
poses, amounted to 30% of the selling price. The installment method of recognizing 
profit is being used for tax purposes. Ignore any imputed interest on the deferred 
payments.
➇ Hawkeye has a $35,000 net operating loss carryforward at the beginning of 2014.

796 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
pre-tax book income because it represents an additional amount that is deductible on the 
2014 tax return over the expense recorded in pre-tax book income.
• Item ➂: Rent collections. In 2014, Hawkeye collects $60,000 of rent, all of which is tax-
able when received. However, only $20,000 of rental income is included in pre-tax book 
income. Therefore, a $40,000 originating temporary difference must be added to pre-tax 
income to arrive at 2014 taxable income.
• Item ➃: Warranty expenses. Hawkeye accrues $50,000 for estimated warranty costs that 
were subtracted in arriving at the pre-tax book income number. For tax purposes, Hawk-
eye may deduct only the $35,000 of warranty costs that were actually paid. The $15,000 
difference represents an originating temporary difference that must be added back to the 
pre-tax book income number to yield taxable income.
• Item ➄: Bad debt provisions. For book purposes, Hawkeye uses the allowance method (de-
scribed in Chapter 8) to determine the $15,000 bad debt expense in 2014. For tax purposes, 
Hawkeye is allowed to take a deduction only when accounts are actually written off; this is 
the direct write-off method. As shown, Hawkeye writes off $20,000 of accounts receivable 
in 2014. Note that all or a portion of the accounts written off in 2014 would have been 
 expensed under GAAP in prior accounting periods. Accordingly, the additional $5,000 
 deductible for tax purposes, an amount that represents a reversing temporary difference, 
must be subtracted from pre-tax book income to arrive at taxable income for 2014.
• Item ➆: Profit on installment sale. Hawkeye uses the installment method (Chapter 3) for 
tax purposes to record profit on a land sale made in a previous period. All of this profit 
SCHEDULE 13.1
Hawkeye Corporation
Calculation of Taxable Income and Taxes Payable
Computation of taxable income
Pre-tax accounting income (given) 
$500,000
Adjustments for permanent differences
2Interest on municipal bonds (Item ➀) 
(12,000)
1Premium on executive life insurance (Item ➅) 
18,000
Income before adjustments for temporary differences 
$506,000
Adjustment for use of net operating loss carryforward (Item ➇) 
(35,000)
Adjustments for temporary differences
 2 Excess of accelerated over straight-line depreciation (Item ➁) 
 
($140,000 2 $100,000) 
(40,000)
 1 Rent received in excess of rent earned (Item ➂)
 
($60,000 2 $20,000) 
40,000
 1 Excess of accrued warranty costs over actual costs incurred
 
on warranties (Item ➃)
 
($50,000 2 $35,000) 
15,000
 2 Excess of accounts written off over current provision
 
for bad debts (Item ➄)
 
($20,000 2 $15,000) 
(5,000)
 1 Installment profit recognized for tax purposes in 2014 but
 
recognized in earlier periods for book purposes (Item ➆) 
 
(30% 3 $15,000) 
4,500
Taxable income 
$485,500
Tax rate 
3 40%
Taxes payable for 2014 
$194,200

 
Appendix 
797
was recorded in a previous period’s book income number. Thus, the gross profit on the 
amounts collected in 2014 (30% 3 $15,000 collected 5 $4,500) represents a reversing 
temporary difference that must be added to the pre-tax book income number to arrive at 
taxable income.
 
After adjustments for the net operating loss carryforward used and the temporary difference 
items, Hawkeye’s 2014 taxable income is determined to be $485,500 (see Schedule 13.1).
Calculation of Taxes Payable
Our road map in Figure 13.7 shows that taxes payable are determined by multiplying taxable 
income by the applicable tax rate. For simplicity, we have assumed that a flat tax rate of 40% 
applies to all components of taxable income. Schedule 13.1 shows that Hawkeye’s taxes pay-
able in 2014 are $194,200. As Figure 13.7 indicates, this amount is also called the current tax 
provision.
Calculation of Change in Deferred Tax 
Asset and Liability Accounts
The next step in determining the tax provision (expense) to report in Hawkeye’s 2014 GAAP 
(book) income statement is to determine the change in the deferred tax asset and deferred tax 
liability accounts. These calculations are represented in the center of Figure 13.7. It shows 
that the change in deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities depend on the amount of 
temporary differences originating and reversing (including from the use of net operating loss 
carryforwards) and any changes in tax rates. The latter cause of changes in deferred tax assets 
and liabilities arises because deferred tax assets and liabilities are always valued at the en-
acted tax rate expected to be in effect when the temporary differences reverse. The Hawkeye 
example does not involve a tax rate change, so only changes in temporary difference amounts 
will cause changes in the deferred tax assets and liabilities.
 
Schedule 13.2 provides the detailed calculations of the changes in deferred tax assets and 
liabilities. For each temporary difference (including net operating loss carryforwards used), 
we must determine three things:
1. Whether an item is an originating or reversing temporary difference.
2. Whether it affects a deferred tax asset or a deferred tax liability balance.
3. What the applicable tax rate is for determining the tax effect of the temporary difference.
 
Originating temporary differences are “new” differences between book and taxable income 
that cause increases in either a deferred tax asset or a deferred tax liability. Reversing tempo-
rary differences are realizations or reversals of “old” temporary differences that gave rise to 
deferred tax assets or liabilities in previous accounting periods. Because they represent rever-
sals of previously recorded temporary differences, reversing temporary differences are de-
creases in either a deferred tax asset or a deferred tax liability.
 
Determining whether a particular temporary difference affects a deferred tax asset or liability 
balance hinges on whether the item causes taxable income to be higher or lower than book in-
come in the current period and whether it is an originating or reversing temporary difference.
 
Hawkeye has one originating temporary difference that causes taxable income to be lower 
than book income in the current period (creating future taxable amounts):
• Item ➁. Accelerated depreciation deductions for tax purposes ($140,000) exceed straight-
line depreciation expense for book purposes ($100,000). This temporary difference gives 

798 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
SCHEDULE 13.2
Hawkeye Corporation
Calculation of Changes in Deferred Tax Accounts
 
Deferred Tax 
Deferred Tax
 
Asset 
Liability
Originating Temporary Differences:
 Future taxable amounts:
  Depreciation (Item ➁) 
 
$16,000 CR
 Future deductible amounts:
  Rent received in advance (Item ➂) 
$16,000 DR
  Excess of accrued warranty expense
   over warranty costs paid (Item ➃) 
6,000 DR
  New bad debt provisions (Item ➄) 
6,000 DR
Reversing Temporary Differences:
 Realization of future taxable amounts:
  Installment method profit recognized for 
   tax purposes (Item ➆) 
 
1,800 DR
 Realization of future deductible amounts:
  Net operating loss carryforward used (Item ➇) 
14,000 CR
  Bad debts written off (Item ➄) 
8,000 CR
Change in Deferred Tax Assets and Liabilities 
6,000 DR 
14,200 CR
Beginning balance 
32,000 DR 
42,000 CR
Ending balance 
$38,000 DR 
$56,200 CR
rise to a future taxable amount—that is, taxable income will be higher than book income 
in future periods when this temporary difference reverses. Therefore, this temporary 
 difference causes an increase (credit) in deferred tax liabilities of $16,000, as shown in 
Schedule 13.2.
 
Hawkeye has three originating temporary differences that cause taxable income to be 
higher than book income in the current period (creating future deductible amounts):
• Item ➂. Rent received ($60,000) is in excess of rent earned for book purposes ($20,000).
• Item ➃. Accrued warranty expenses for book purposes ($50,000) is in excess of warranty 
expenditures for tax purposes ($35,000).
• Item ➄. Bad debt expense of $15,000 that is accrued under the allowance method for 
book purposes will not be deductible for tax purposes until specific accounts are written 
off in future periods.
Each of these items gives rise to a future deductible amount and accordingly causes increases 
(debits) to the Deferred tax asset account of 40% times the respective temporary difference 
that arose, as shown in Schedule 13.2.
 
Hawkeye has one temporary difference that is a reversal of a deferred tax liability due to 
the realization of a future taxable amount.
• Item ➆. This $4,500 amount represents a reversing temporary difference that causes  taxable 
income to be higher than book income in 2014. Because a deferred tax liability would have 
been set up in a previous period (when the land was sold and the entire profit was recog-
nized for book purposes), the Deferred tax liability account is being reduced (debited) now 
by $1,800 ($4,500 3 40%) because the tax will be paid in the current period.

 
Appendix 
799
 
Hawkeye has two reversing temporary differences that cause taxable income to be lower 
than book income in the current period (realization of future deductible amounts):
• Item ➇. The $35,000 net operating loss carryforward is used, resulting in a reversal of the 
corresponding $14,000 deferred tax asset.
• Item ➄. The bad debts write-off is $20,000, resulting in an $8,000 reversal of an existing 
deferred tax asset.
Both of these items represent realizations of future deductible amounts and result in a 
 decrease (credit) to the deferred tax asset account, as we see in Schedule 13.2.
 
The assumed marginal corporate tax rate of 40% is applied to all temporary differences to 
determine the dollar amount of the change in the Deferred tax asset or liability account. This 
is appropriate when no enacted changes in the tax rates are scheduled to go into effect in fu-
ture periods. Using the 40% rate, the net effect of the temporary differences for Hawkeye is to 
increase deferred tax assets by $6,000 and increase deferred tax liabilities by $14,200 as 
shown in Schedule 13.2.
Calculation of Income Tax Expense
The right side of Figure 13.7 shows that income tax expense is the amount of taxes currently 
payable plus or minus changes to the deferred tax asset and liability accounts. A more detailed 
presentation of the calculation of income tax expense Hawkeye will report in its 2014 GAAP 
income statement (assuming a 40% tax rate for all periods) follows the formulas presented in 
Figure 13.5 and is reproduced in Figure 13.8. The numbers appearing below the appropriate 
boxes are taken from Schedules 13.1 and 13.2.
 
When tax rates are not scheduled to change in the future, the tax expense reported for book 
purposes can be computed directly by multiplying the pre-tax book income number, after ad-
justing for permanent difference items, by the current tax rate. The pre-tax book income num-
ber of Hawkeye adjusted for permanent differences is $506,000 (Schedule 13.1); and the 
current tax rate is 40%, thus yielding income tax expense of $202,400, which is the same 
number determined under the indirect approach in Figure 13.8. When tax rates are scheduled 
to change, income tax expense must be determined using the indirect approach, which incor-
porates the effect of tax rate changes on deferred tax assets and liabilities in the determination 
of income tax expense.
Plus
Minus
Taxes
payable
Computed 5
$194,200
5
Sum 5
$202,400
Income tax
expense
Decrease in
deferred tax asset
Increase in
deferred tax liability
Computed 5 $14,200
Decrease in
deferred tax liability
Increase in
deferred tax asset
Computed = $6,000
Figure 13.8
CALCULATION OF 
 INCOME TAX  EXPENSE: 
 INDIRECT APPROACH

800 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
Hawkeye’s Tax Note
We now examine how Hawkeye’s income tax situation appears in its 2014 income tax note. 
There are three main schedules in the tax note we will consider: the summary of income tax 
provision, the summary of deferred tax assets and liabilities, and the tax rate reconciliation.
 
Exhibit 13.23 presents these three schedules from Hawkeye’s tax note. Panel (a) contains 
the summary of the tax provision. It shows that the $202,400 income tax expense that would 
be found in Hawkeye’s income statement consists of a current provision of $194,200 and a 
deferred provision of $8,200. We have not considered the role of state and foreign taxes in this 
example. If we had, the current and deferred provisions each would have been further detailed 
as federal, state, and foreign. Note that because this schedule provides detail about an income 
statement amount, it shows three years of data, just as the income statement does.
 
Panel (b) of Exhibit 13.23 presents the summary of deferred tax assets and liabilities. This 
schedule provides two years of data because it represents detail about balance sheet amounts. 
Note that the change in each deferred tax asset or liability amount agrees with the change we 
used to compute the deferred tax provision. For example, we used a $16,000 ($40,000 3
40%) increase in deferred tax liability related to depreciation in Schedule 13.2 and the de-
ferred tax liability related to depreciation in Panel (b) of Exhibit 13.23 increased from $37,000 
at December 31, 2013, to $53,000 at December 31, 2014.
 
Panel (c) of Exhibit 13.23 presents the tax rate reconciliation. It shows the reasons why the 
tax provision differs from the amount it would have been if every component of pre-tax 
 income had a corresponding tax provision at the statutory rate of (in this example) 40%. 
Panel (a): Summary of income tax provision: 
2014 
2013 
2012
Current tax provision 
$194,200 
XXX 
XXX
Deferred tax provision 
8,200 
XXX 
XXX
 Total income tax provision 
$202,400 
XXX 
XXX
Panel (b): Summary of deferred tax assets and liabilities:
 
December 31,
 
2014 
2013
Deferred tax assets:
Net operating loss carryforward 
$   —  
$ 14,000
Warranties 
16,000 
10,000
Bad debts 
6,000 
8,000
Rent received in advance 
16,000 
— 
 
38,000 
32,000
Deferred tax liabilities:
Depreciation 
53,000 
37,000
Installment sale profit 
3,200 
5,000
 
56,200 
42,000
Net deferred tax liabilities 
$ (18,200) 
$(10,000)
Panel (c): Income tax rate reconciliation: 
2014 
2013 
2012
Tax provision at statutory rate (40%) 
$200,000 
XXX 
XXX
Municipal bond interest 
(4,800) 
XXX 
XXX
Premium on executive life insurance 
7,200 
XXX 
XXX
 
$202,400 
XXX 
XXX
EXHIBIT 13.23
Hawkeye Corporation Income Tax Note

 
Exercises 
801
 Because the two permanent differences in this example resulted in amounts recognized under 
GAAP but not for tax purposes, those differences caused the income tax provision to be dif-
ferent from 40% of pre-tax book income. For example, because the $12,000 of municipal 
bond interest income is never taxed, no tax provision is recorded related to that income, even 
though it is included in pre-tax book income. As a result, the tax provision is lower than it 
would have been if such a tax provision had been recorded by 40% 3 $12,000 5 $4,800.
E13-1
Determining current taxes 
payable (LO 2, 4)
AICPA
ADAPTED
E13-2
Determining deferred tax 
 liability (LO 2, 4)
In its 2014 income statement, Tow Inc., reported proceeds from an officer’s life insurance policy 
of $90,000 and depreciation of $250,000. Tow was the owner and beneficiary of the life insurance 
on its officer. Tow deducted depreciation of $370,000 in its 2014 income tax return when the tax 
rate was 30%. Data related to the reversal of the excess tax deduction for depreciation follow:
 
Reversal of Excess 
Enacted
Year 
Tax Deduction for Depreciation 
Tax Rates
2015 
$50,000 
35%
2016 
40,000 
35
2017 
20,000 
25
2018 
10,000 
25
Tow has no other temporary differences.
Required:
In its December 31, 2014, balance sheet, what amount should Tow report as a deferred tax 
liability?
AICPA
ADAPTED
E13-3
Determining deferred tax 
 effects on long-term 
contracts (LO 2, 4)
Mill Company began operations on January 1, 2014, and recognized income from construction-
type contracts under the percentage-of-completion method for tax purposes and the completed-
contract method for financial reporting purposes. Information concerning income recognition 
under each method is as follows:
 
Percentage of Completion 
Completed Contract
Year 
(Tax Purposes) 
(Book Purposes)
2014 
$400,000 
$    –0–
2015 
625,000 
375,000
2016 
750,000 
850,000
Required:
Assume the income tax rate is 40% in all years and that Mill has no other temporary differ-
ences. In its December 31, 2016, balance sheet, Mill should report deferred income taxes of 
how much? Indicate whether the amount is an asset or a liability.
AICPA
ADAPTED
EXERCISES
On January 2, 2013, Allen Company purchased a machine for $70,000. This machine has a 
five-year useful life, a residual value of $10,000, and it is depreciated using the straight-line 
method for financial statement purposes. For tax purposes, depreciation expense was $25,000 
in 2013 and $20,000 in 2014. Allen’s 2014 book income, before income taxes and deprecia-
tion expense, was $100,000, and its tax rate was 30%. Allen has no book-tax differences other 
than due to the machine.
Required:
If Allen had made no estimated tax payments during 2014, what amount of current income tax 
liability would it report in its December 31, 2014, balance sheet?

802 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
AICPA
ADAPTED
E13-4
Determining current portion 
of tax expense (LO 2, 4)
For the year ended December 31, 2014, Tyre Company reported pre-tax financial statement 
income of $750,000. Its taxable income was $650,000. The difference was due to the use of 
accelerated depreciation for income tax purposes and straight-line for financial reporting. 
Tyre’s income tax rate is 30%, and it made estimated tax payments of $90,000 during 2014.
Required:
1. What amount should Tyre report as the current portion of income tax expense for 2014?
2. What amount should Tyre report as the deferred portion of income tax expense for 2014?
3. Give the journal entry Tyre would make to record 2014 taxes.
AICPA
ADAPTED
E13-7
Determining deferred tax 
 asset amounts (LO 2, 4)
West Corporation leased a building and received the $36,000 annual rental payment on June 15, 
2014. The beginning of the lease period was July 1, 2014. Rental income is taxable when 
 received. West’s tax rates are 30% for 2014 and 40% thereafter. West had no other permanent 
or temporary differences. It determined that no valuation allowance was needed.
Required:
What amount of deferred tax asset should West report in its December 31, 2014, balance sheet?
AICPA
ADAPTED
E13-5
Determining current taxes 
payable (LO 2, 4)
Dunn Company’s 2014 income statement reported $90,000 income before provision for in-
come taxes. To aid in the computation of the provision for federal income taxes, the following 
2014 data are provided:
Rent received in advance 
$16,000
Income from tax-exempt municipal bonds 
20,000
Depreciation deducted for income tax purposes in excess of 
 depreciation reported for financial statement purposes 
10,000
Enacted corporate income tax rate 
35%
Required:
What amount of current federal income tax liability should Dunn report in its December 31, 
2014, balance sheet?
AICPA
ADAPTED
E13-6
Determining deferred tax 
 liability and current portion 
of tax expense (LO 2, 4)
Kent Inc.’s reconciliation between financial statement and taxable income for 2014 follows:
Pre-tax financial income 
$150,000
Permanent difference 
(12,000)
 
138,000
Temporary difference—depreciation 
(9,000)
Taxable income 
$129,000
Additional Information:
 
At December 31,
 
2013 
2014
Cumulative temporary difference
 (future taxable amounts) 
$11,000 
$20,000
The enacted tax rate was 35% for 2013 and 40% for 2014 and years thereafter.
Required:
1. In its December 31, 2014, balance sheet, what amount should Kent report as its deferred 
tax liability?
2. In its 2014 income statement, what amount should Kent report as the current portion of 
income tax expense?

 
Exercises 
803
E13-11
Determining tax effects 
of loss carryback and 
 carryforward (LO 4, 5)
Dix Company reported operating income/loss before income tax in its first three years of 
 operations as follows:
2013 
$ 100,000
2014 
(200,000)
2015 
400,000
Dix had no permanent or temporary differences between book income and taxable income in 
these years. Dix elected to carry the 2014 loss back to the extent possible. Assume a 40% tax 
rate for all years.
Required:
1. What amount should Dix report as a tax benefit on its 2014 income statement?
2. What amount of deferred tax asset should Dix report on its December 31, 2014, balance sheet?
3. What amount should Dix report as current taxes payable on December 31, 2015 (the year 
after the loss)?
AICPA
ADAPTED
E13-10
Assessing temporary and 
 permanent differences  
(LO 2, 4)
(Note: Students may want to review the material on the equity method of accounting in 
 Chapter 16 before beginning work on this exercise.) Tara Corporation uses the equity method 
of accounting for its 40% investment in Flax’s common stock. During 2014, Flax reported 
earnings of $750,000 and paid dividends of $250,000. Assume that:
• All undistributed earnings of Flax will be distributed as dividends in future periods.
• The dividends received from Flax are eligible for the 80% dividends received deduction.
• No other temporary differences exist.
• Tara’s 2014 income tax rate is 30%.
• Enacted income tax rates after 2014 are 25%.
Required:
What would be the increase in the deferred tax liability during 2014 from the preceding 
transactions?
AICPA
ADAPTED
E13-9
Reporting deferred portion 
of tax expense (LO 2, 4)
Quinn Company reported a net deferred tax asset of $9,000 in its December 31, 2014, balance 
sheet. For 2015 Quinn reported pre-tax financial statement income of $300,000. Temporary 
differences of $100,000 resulted in taxable income of $200,000 for 2015. At December 31, 
2015, Quinn had cumulative taxable differences of $70,000. The income tax rate is 30%.
Required:
In its December 31, 2015, income statement, what should Quinn report as the deferred portion 
of income tax expense?
AICPA
ADAPTED
E13-8
Determining deferred tax 
 asset amounts (LO 2, 4)
Black Company, organized on January 2, 2014, had pre-tax accounting income of $500,000 
and taxable income of $800,000 for the year ended December 31, 2014. The only temporary 
difference is accrued product warranty costs, which are expected to be paid as follows:
2015 
$100,000
2016 
50,000
2017 
50,000
2018 
100,000
Circumstances indicate that it is highly likely that Black will have taxable income in the fu-
ture. It had no temporary differences in prior years. The enacted income tax rates are 35% for 
2014, 30% for 2015 through 2017, and 25% for 2018.
Required:
In Black’s December 31, 2014, balance sheet, how much should the deferred tax asset be?
AICPA
ADAPTED

804 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
AICPA
ADAPTED
E13-14
Computing deferred 
tax asset and valuation 
 allowance (LO 2, 6)
In Figland Company’s first year of operations (2014), the company had pre-tax book income of 
$500,000 and taxable income of $800,000 at the December year-end. Figland’s only temporary 
difference is for accrued product warranty costs, which are expected to be paid as follows:
2015 
$100,000
2016 
$200,000
AICPA
ADAPTED
E13-12
Accounting for loss 
 carryforwards (LO 4, 5)
As of December 31, 2014, Colt Corporation has a loss carryforward of $180,000 available to 
offset future taxable income. At December 31, 2014, the company believes that realization of 
the tax benefit related to the loss carryforward is probable. The tax rate is 30%.
Required:
1. What amount of the tax benefit should be reported in Colt’s 2014 income statement assuming 
(a) the loss carryforward arose in 2014 and (b) the loss carryforward arose prior to 2014?
2. What additional account(s) would be affected when the loss carryforward is recognized?
AICPA
ADAPTED
E13-13
IFRS vs. U.S. GAAP tax 
 entries (LO 11)
Melissa Corporation is domiciled in Germany and is listed on both the Frankfurt and New 
York Stock Exchanges. Melissa has chosen to prepare consolidated financial statements in 
accordance with U.S. GAAP for filing with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission 
but must also prepare consolidated financial statements in accordance with IFRS in accor-
dance with European Union regulations.
 
On December 31, 2014, Melissa Corporation purchased a small office building for $1,380,000. 
For tax and financial reporting purposes, Melissa estimates that the building has a useful life of 
40 years with an estimated residual value of $100,000. Melissa uses straight-line depreciation for 
financial reporting. Assume that, for tax purposes, Melissa is permitted to deduct 5% of an asset’s 
depreciable base in the first year. This is the only building that Melissa owns.
 
At the end of 2015, Melissa had the building appraised by a qualified real estate appraiser who 
estimated the fair value of the building was $1,172,500. Melissa intends to occupy the building it-
self, and therefore, the building is classified as property, plant, and equipment under both U.S. 
GAAP and IFRS. After being revalued under IFRS, the Building account has a balance of 
$1,172,500 and the Accumulated depreciation account has a balance of zero. Assume Melissa will 
have sufficient income in the future to recover any deferred tax assets that might be recognized.
 
U.S. GAAP 
IFRS
Model used for subsequent measurement 
Cost 
Revalued at fair value
Income before temporary differences 
$500,000 
$500,000
Enacted tax rate* 
35% 
35%
* We are assuming, for simplicity, that the relevant tax rate is 35% for all jurisdictions where Melissa is 
required to pay income tax. No new tax laws are substantively enacted at December 31, 2014.
Required:
Answer the following questions for each of the following scenarios:
1. Melissa prepares its consolidated financial statements under U.S. GAAP.
 
a. Calculate taxable income in 2015.
 
b. Prepare the journal entry to record tax expense, deferred taxes, and taxes payable.
 
c. What is the effective tax rate?
2. Melissa prepares its consolidated financial statements in accordance with IFRS.
 
a. Calculate taxable income in 2015.
 
b. Prepare the journal entry to record tax expense, deferred taxes, and taxes payable.
 
c. What is the effective tax rate?

 
Exercises 
805
The enacted income tax rate for these years is 30%. Figland believes there is a high likeli-
hood that one-third of the tax benefit associated with this future deductible amount will 
not be realized.
Required:
Compute the amount of deferred tax asset and related valuation allowance that would be 
 reported in Figland’s 2014 tax note.
E13-17
Computing tax payable, 
 deferred taxes, and tax 
 expense (LO 2, 4)
Millie Co. completed its first year of operations on December 31, 2014, with pre-tax finan-
cial income of $400,000. Millie accrued a contingent liability of $900,000 for financial 
reporting purposes; however, the $900,000 will be paid and therefore is deductible for tax 
purposes in 2015. Millie also has gross profit from installment sales of $800,000 recog-
nized currently for financial reporting purposes but that will be taxable in 2015 and 2016 
when the cash is  received ($400,000 each year). Millie’s pre-tax financial income includes 
$38,000 interest earned on its holdings of the bonds of the State of Montana. The tax rate 
is 30% for all years.
Required:
1. Determine Millie’s taxable income and taxes payable for 2014.
2. Determine the changes in Millie’s deferred tax amounts for 2014.
3. Calculate tax expense for Millie for 2014.
E13-16
IFRS vs. U.S. GAAP tax 
 entries (LO 11)
On January 1, 2015, Toms River Rafting, Inc. (TRR), has a deferred tax asset representing 
$250,000 in net operating loss carryforwards on its balance sheet. When it recognized this 
asset, TRR expected to have sufficient earnings to utilize these loss carryforwards. However, 
TRR’s business has been very slow because of a severe drought and it determines at Decem-
ber 31, 2015, that it is likely the company will only be able to recover half of the net operating 
loss carryforward available at this date. TRR reported pre-tax book income of $100,000 and 
taxable income of $97,700 in 2015.
 
The difference between pre-tax book income and taxable income relates to one temporary 
difference for depreciation of property, plant, and equipment that originated in 2015.
 
The enacted tax rate is 35%. The substantively enacted tax rate is 40%.
Required:
Prepare the journal entries to record tax expense in 2015 under both U.S. GAAP and IFRS.
CMA
ADAPTED
E13-15
Determining deferred tax 
 liability for equity method 
earnings  (LO 2, 6)
(Note: Students may want to review the material on the equity method of accounting in Chap-
ter 16 before beginning work on this exercise.) Taft Corporation uses the equity method to 
account for its 25% investment in Flame, Inc., which it made on January 1, 2014. During 
2014, Taft received dividends of $30,000 from Flame and recorded $180,000 as its equity in 
Flame’s earnings. Additional information follows:
• All Flame’s undistributed earnings will be distributed as dividends in future periods.
• The dividends received from Flame are eligible for the 80% dividends received deduction.
• Flame has no other temporary differences.
• Enacted income tax rates are 30% for 2014 and thereafter.
Required:
In its December 31, 2014, balance sheet, what amount should Taft report for deferred income 
tax liability related to its investment in Flame?
AICPA
ADAPTED

806 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
E13-18
Determining tax benefit for 
uncertain tax position  
(LO 9)
Collins Company incurs a $1,000 book expense that it deducts on its tax return. The tax law is 
unclear whether this expense is deductible, so the deduction leads to an uncertain tax position. 
Assuming a 35% tax rate, the deduction results in a $350 tax benefit.
Required:
For each of the following independent cases, determine how much of the tax benefit associ-
ated with the uncertain tax position Collins can recognize and how much of a tax contingency 
reserve for uncertain tax benefits Collins needs to record.
 
Case 1 
Case 2 
Case 3
Management’s assessment of the 
 likelihood of the uncertain tax 
 position being sustained based 
 on technical merits 
65% 
40% 
80%
Likelihood of realizing $350 
10 
5 
55
Likelihood of realizing $250 
30 
5 
25
Likelihood of realizing $100 
20 
35 
15
Likelihood of realizing $0 
40 
55 
5
P13-2
Calculating the amount of 
temporary and permanent 
differences and tax entry  
(LO 2, 4)
The following information pertains to Ramesh Company for the current year:
Book income before income taxes 
$106,000
Income tax expense 
52,000
Income taxes payable for this year 
32,000
Statutory income tax rate 
40%
The company has one permanent difference and one temporary difference between book and 
taxable income. 
Required:
1. Calculate the amount of temporary difference for the year and indicate whether it causes 
book income to be more or less than taxable income.
2. Calculate the amount of permanent difference for the year and indicate whether it causes 
book income to be more or less than taxable income.
3. Provide the journal entry to record income tax expense for the year.
4. Compute the effective tax rate (that is, income tax expense divided by book income 
 before taxes). Explain why this rate is different from the statutory tax rate of 40%.
P13-1
Calculating deferred tax 
amounts with different tax 
rates (LO 2, 4)
AICPA
ADAPTED
PROBLEMS / DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
Moss Inc. uses the accrual method of accounting for financial reporting purposes and appropri-
ately uses the installment method of accounting for income tax purposes. It will collect $250,000 
of installment income in the following years when the enacted tax rates are as indicated.
 
Collection of Income 
Enacted Tax Rates
2013 
$ 25,000 
35%
2014 
50,000 
30
2015 
75,000 
30
2016 
100,000 
25
The installment income is the firm’s only temporary difference.
Required:
What amount should be included as the deferred tax liability in Moss’s December 31, 2013, 
balance sheet?

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
807
Computing tax expense 
and making deferred tax 
 calculations (LO 2, 4)
P13-4
Nelson Inc. purchased machinery at the beginning of 2014 for $90,000. Management used the 
straight-line method to depreciate the cost for financial reporting purposes and the sum-of-
the-years-digits method to depreciate the cost for tax purposes. The life of the machinery was 
estimated to be three years, and the salvage value was estimated at zero. Revenues less ex-
penses other than depreciation expense and goodwill impairment equaled $500,000 for 2014, 
2015, and 2016. Nelson pays income tax at the rate of 20% of taxable income. The goodwill 
impairment equaled $50,000 for 2014 and 2015. There was no impairment in 2016.
Required:
1. Compute Nelson’s taxable income and financial reporting income (before tax) for all 
three years.
2. What are permanent and temporary differences? Give an example of each for Nelson.
3. For 2014, 2015, and 2016, determine Nelson’s income tax payable at December 31, 
 income tax expense for the year, and deferred tax asset or liability at December 31. For 
the last item, be sure to specify whether the item is a deferred tax asset or liability.
4. Assume the federal government changes the tax rate to 30% at the beginning of 2015. 
Compute the following:
Income tax payable for 2015
Income tax expense for 2015
Reporting deferred tax 
amount on income 
 statement (LO 2, 4)
P13-3
For financial statement reporting, Lexington Corporation recognizes royalty income in the 
period earned. However, royalties are taxed when collected. At December 31, 2013, unearned 
royalties of $400,000 were included in Lexington’s balance sheet. All of these royalties had 
been collected in 2013. During 2014, royalties of $600,000 were collected. Unearned royal-
ties in Lexington’s December 31, 2014, balance sheet amounted to $350,000. Assume that the 
income tax rate was 40%.
Required:
What amount should be reported as the deferred portion of the provision for income taxes in 
Lexington’s income statement for the year ended December 31, 2014?
AICPA
ADAPTED
Determining current and 
 deferred portion of tax 
 expense and reconciling 
 statutory and effective tax 
rates (LO 2, 4, 8)
P13-5
Metge Corporation’s worksheet for calculating taxable income for 2014 follows:
($ in thousands) 
2014
Pre-tax income 
$1,000
Permanent differences
 Goodwill impairment 
400
 Interest on municipal bonds 
(200)
Temporary differences
 Depreciation 
(800)
 Warranty costs 
400
 Rent received in advance 
600
Taxable income 
$1,400
The enacted tax rate for 2014 is 35%, but it is scheduled to increase to 40% in 2015 and sub-
sequent years. All temporary differences are originating differences.
Required:
1. Determine Metge’s 2014 taxes payable.
2. What is the change in deferred tax assets (liabilities) for 2014?

808 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
3. Determine tax expense for 2014.
4. Provide a schedule that reconciles Metge’s statutory and effective tax rates (in both 
 percentages and dollar amounts).
P13-7
Tax effects of differences 
 between IFRS and U.S. GAAP 
related to impairment 
charges (LO 11)
On January 1, 2008, the Dolan Company purchased a new office building in Las Vegas, for 
$6,100,000, which it holds for rentals and capital appreciation. Dolan estimated the build-
ing would have a useful life of 25 years and a residual value of $1,100,000. Dolan uses 
straight-line depreciation for financial reporting and double-declining balance for tax pur-
poses. There are no other permanent or temporary differences between taxable income and 
book income.
P13-6
Recording entries for loss 
 carrybacks and 
 carryforwards (LO 2, 4, 5)
Smith Corporation started doing business in 2013. The following table summarizes the com-
pany’s taxable income (loss) over the 2013–2025 period and the statutory tax rate effective in 
each year:
 
Taxable 
Enacted
Year 
Income (Loss) 
Tax Rate
2013 
$ 100,000 
40%
2014 
200,000 
40
2015 
250,000 
35
2016 
400,000 
32
2017 
(350,000) 
30
2018 
(275,000) 
30
2019 
125,000 
30
2020 
175,000 
30
2021 
275,000 
30
2022 
300,000 
35
2023 
(800,000) 
35
2024 
(250,000) 
35
2025 
150,000 
35
Because Smith had no permanent or temporary differences during this period, its pre-tax fi-
nancial reporting income was identical to its taxable income in each year. During the 2022–
2025 period, Smith expected the current and future tax rates to be 35%. When possible, the 
company took advantage of the loss carryback provision of the tax law. When recording the 
tax benefits of the loss carryforward provision, management believed it was more likely than 
not that the tax benefits would be fully realized.
Required:
1. Provide journal entries to record income tax expense for the years 2017, 2018, 2023, 
2024, and 2025.
2. In answering this requirement, make the following assumptions. At December 31, 
2023 and 2024, Smith management believed it was more likely than not that only 
40% of the tax benefits would be realized through a loss carryforward. However, at 
December 31, 2025, the company revised its expectation, believing that it was more 
likely than not that 100% of the tax benefits would be fully realized through a loss 
 carryforward. Provide journal entries to record income tax expense for the years 2023, 
2024, and 2025. Also show how to report the deferred tax asset as of the end of 2023, 
2024, and 2025.

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
809
 
During 2014 and continuing into 2015, the building remains only partially occupied. 
Rental revenue in 2014 totaled $500,000. Dolan had plans to hold the building for 10 years 
and then sell it. Dolan estimates that the occupancy level will remain below its original esti-
mates but will increase slightly (2% per year) from 2016–2025. Maintenance and other 
 expenses are expected to remain steady at 80% of estimated rents.
 
At December 31, 2015, the fair value of the building based on an independent appraisal is 
$4,300,000. Estimated costs to sell the building are $200,000. The sum of the estimated net 
cash flows from the building is $4,598,000. The present value of the net cash flows at 8% is 
$4,258,000.
 
Any impairment charge that Dolan records in 2015 is not tax deductible and would only 
reverse when the asset is sold. If Dolan does not recognize an impairment loss on the building, 
book income before depreciation and taxes is $8,200,000.
 
The enacted tax rate is 30%.
Required:
Before attempting this problem, review the discussion in Chapter 10 regarding the differences 
between IFRS and U.S. GAAP requirements for testing for and recognizing impairment 
losses on noncurrent, tangible assets.
1. Determine the book and tax bases of the building on December 31, 2015.
2. Determine the amount by which the deferred tax liability increased in 2015.
3. Determine the impairment loss (if any) Dolan would recognize under U.S. GAAP and 
prepare the resulting 2015 tax expense journal entry, assuming Dolan expects to have 
 sufficient future income to fully utilize any deferred tax assets.
4. Determine the impairment loss (if any) Dolan would recognize under IFRS and prepare 
the resulting 2015 tax expense journal entry, assuming Dolan expects to have sufficient 
future income to fully utilize any deferred tax assets.
Tax rate reconciliation 
 schedules for IFRS vs. U.S. 
GAAP (LO 11)
P13-8
Bryan Trucking Corporation began business on January 1, 2014, and consists of the parent 
entity, domiciled and operating in Country X, and a subsidiary operating in Country Y. 
Bryan is required, as a listed company in Country X, to prepare IFRS financial 
statements.
 
Bryan is also listed on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE). Therefore, Bryan is regis-
tered as a “foreign private issuer” with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission and 
must file financial statements with the SEC in accordance with SEC regulations for foreign 
private issuers. These regulations permit Bryan to file its IFRS financial statements with the 
SEC, but it has decided to prepare U.S. GAAP financial statements as well for the conve-
nience of its U.S. shareholders.
 
With respect to the reconciliation of the statutory tax rate to the effective tax rate in the 
income tax note disclosure, SEC regulations for foreign private issuers permit them to recon-
cile to either the relevant statutory income tax rate in their country of domicile or to another 
applicable tax rate. Reconciling to the statutory income tax rate in its country of domicile 
would be comparable to a U.S. company reconciling to the U.S. federal tax rate.
 
Bryan carefully selected its accounting policies under IFRS and U.S. GAAP so that, in 
2014, it reported the same pre-tax book income in both the U.S. GAAP and IFRS financial 
statements. Therefore, the only difference in the tax rate reconciliation results from use of 
either a country-specific statutory tax rate (statutory tax rate in Country X) or a weighted-
average statutory tax rate (another applicable tax rate) when reconciling to the effective 
tax rate.

810 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
 
The table below presents Bryan’s pre-tax book income and the applicable statutory tax 
rates in each country and permanent differences between taxable and book income in the two 
countries in which it operates. Bryan has no temporary differences in 2014.
 
Country X 
Country Y 
Total
Pre-tax book income 
$1,250,000 
$1,100,000 
$2,350,000
Permanent differences: 
 Tax exempt income 
$40,000 
$60,000 
$100,000
 Nondeductible expense 
$25,000 
$35,000 
$ 60,000
Applicable statutory tax rates in 2014 
28% 
35%
Both Country X and Country Y tax only profits earned within the country.
Required:
Prepare the portion of the income tax note that details the reconciliation of the statutory or 
other applicable tax rate to the effective tax rate as follows:
1. Assume Bryan uses the statutory tax rate in Country X for the tax rate reconciliation in its 
U.S. GAAP financial statements.
2. Assume Bryan uses a weighted-average statutory rate for the tax rate reconciliation in its 
IFRS financial statements.
P13-9
Differences in revenue 
 recognition and tax reporting 
under IFRS vs. U.S. 
GAAP (LO 11)
The Lance Construction Company, which  began business on January 1, 2014, builds custom 
homes on the buyer’s land. Lance’s income and job costs from construction contracts that 
were started and completed during the same fiscal year are as follows:
 
Contracts Started and Completed in
 
2014 
2015 
2016
Total contract revenues 
$ 550,000 
$ 605,000 
$ 665,500
Total construction costs 
(325,000) 
(363,000) 
(399,300)
Total general and administrative costs* 
(55,000) 
(60,000) 
(65,000)
Income before taxes 
$ 170,000 
$ 182,000 
$ 201,200
* Total costs for the year not allocated to construction contracts.
Some contracts were started in the last quarter of one fiscal year and completed in the first 
quarter of the next. Total estimated revenues and costs equaled actual total revenues and costs 
for each contract. The following table shows the total contract revenues and costs for these 
contracts. Fifty percent (50%) of the work on these contracts was completed in the year that 
construction began. For example, for those contracts begun in 2014 and completed in 2015, 
50% of total costs were incurred in 2014 and 50% were incurred in 2015.
Contracts Started and Completed in Different Years
Construction started in 4th quarter of year: 
2014 
2015 
2016
Construction completed in 1st quarter of year: 
2015 
2016 
2017
Total contract revenues 
$600,000 
$800,000 
$900,000
Total construction costs 
(400,000) 
(520,000) 
(585,000)
Gross profit 
$200,000 
$280,000 
$315,000
Domiciled in the United States, Lance prepares consolidated financial statements in 
 accordance with U.S. GAAP and pays taxes under U.S. tax law. However, Lance is trying 
to increase its appeal to European investors and, therefore, decided to prepare an  additional 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
811
Converting book income to 
taxable income and 
 computation of taxes payable  
(LO 2, 4)
P13-10
(Note: Students may want to review the material on accounting for trading securities in 
Chapter 16 before beginning this problem.)
 
Over the past two years, Madison Corporation has accumulated operating loss carryfor-
wards of $66,000. This year, 2014, Madison’s pre-tax book income is $101,500. The company 
is subject to a 40% corporate tax rate. The following items are relevant to Madison’s deferred 
tax computations for 2014.
1. Equipment purchased in 2011 is depreciated on a straight-line basis for financial reporting 
purposes and using an accelerated method for tax purposes as follows:
Year 
Book 
Tax
2011 
$100,000 
$200,000
2012 
100,000 
150,000
2013 
100,000 
100,000
2014 
100,000 
50,000
2015 
100,000 
–0–
2. Madison’s trading securities portfolio generated a $13,000 unrealized gain that is not rec-
ognized for tax purposes until the securities are sold.
set of financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards 
(IFRS).
 
Because all of its construction contracts are completed in less than six (6) months, Lance 
concludes that the completed-contract method is more appropriate for financial reporting in 
the United States. Lance also qualifies for and will use the completed-contract method for 
U.S. tax reporting.
 
The completed-contract method is not permitted under IFRS and Lance is required to use 
the percentage-of-completion method as long as it can make reliable estimates of total con-
tract costs, revenues, and stage of completion of the project.
 
Lance invoices customers promptly as work is completed. Cash collections are not affected 
by its choice of accounting policy for financial reporting purposes.
 
The enacted tax rate is 35%. No change in the tax law has been proposed.
 
Note to students: Before completing the requirements of this problem you should review 
the Global Vantage Point section of Chapter 3.
Required:
Determine the following amounts under U.S. GAAP and IFRS and explain the classification 
of any deferred tax assets or liabilities on the balance sheet.
 
U.S. GAAP 
IFRS
 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2014 
2015 
2016
Revenue
Construction costs
Gross profit
General and administrative costs
Income before tax
Tax expense
Net income
Taxable income
Tax payable
Deferred tax asset (if any)
Deferred tax liability (if any)

812 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
3. Madison has not yet paid its rent for November and December of 2014, a total of $25,000. 
The expense was accrued for book purposes and is included in pre-tax book income, but it 
is not tax deductible until paid.
4. During 2014, Madison paid a $6,500 fine to its state corporation commission for allegedly 
violating state security laws. Madison neither denied nor admitted guilt related to the 
charges. The payment is not deductible for tax purposes but has been included in computing 
pre-tax book income.
Required:
1. Determine Madison Corporation’s taxable income for 2014.
2. Calculate the amount of tax payable for Madison Corporation for 2014.
P13-13
Making entries for uncertain 
tax positions (LO 9)
In Year 1, Phillips Company reported $10,000 of pre-tax book income and also had $10,000 
of taxable income. It incurred a $1,000 book expense that it deducted on its tax return. Assum-
ing a 35% tax rate, this deduction results in a $350 tax benefit. The tax law was unclear at that 
time whether this expense was deductible, so it led to an uncertain tax position.
P13-12
Converting from taxable 
 income to book income 
(LO 2, 4)
Mozart Inc.’s $98,000 taxable income for 2014 will be taxed at the 40% corporate tax rate. For 
tax purposes, its depreciation expense exceeded the depreciation used for financial reporting 
purposes by $27,000. Mozart has $45,000 of purchased goodwill on its books; during 2014, 
the company determined that the goodwill had suffered a $3,000 impairment of value for 
 financial reporting purposes. None of the goodwill impairment is deductible for tax purposes. 
Mozart purchased a three-year corporate liability insurance policy on July 1, 2014,  for 
$36,000 cash. The entire premium was deducted for tax purposes in 2014.
Required:
1. Determine Mozart’s pre-tax book income for 2014.
2. Determine the changes in Mozart’s deferred tax amounts for 2014.
3. Calculate tax expense for Mozart Inc. for 2014.
P13-11
Calculating taxes payable, 
 deferred taxes, and tax 
 expense (LO 2, 4)
(Note: Students may want to review the material on accounting for trading securities in 
 Chapter 16 before beginning this problem.)
 
At the end of its third year of operations, December 31, 2014, Delilah Corp. is reporting 
pre-tax book income of $223,000. The following items are relevant to Delilah’s deferred tax 
computations:
1. A $55,000 unrealized holding gain on its trading securities that is not recognized for tax 
purposes until it sells the securities.
2. Bad debt expense of $24,000 was recorded on its accounts receivable, although during 
2014 no actual write-offs took place.
3. During 2014, Delilah received $19,000 cash from one of its customers. The payment 
 received relates to a product that will be completed and delivered to the customer in late 
January 2015, at which time it will be taxable.
Delilah is subject to a 40% corporate tax rate.
Required:
1. Determine Delilah Corp.’s taxable income and taxes payable for 2014.
2. Determine the changes in Delilah Corp.’s deferred tax amounts for 2014.
3. Calculate tax expense for Delilah Corp. for 2014.

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
813
 
In Year 1, this uncertain tax position had a 60% likelihood of being sustained based on 
technical merits, $150 of the benefit was recognized, and a tax contingency reserve of $200 
was created for this position.
 
A court decision in Year 2 lowered the likelihood that this uncertain tax position could be 
sustained on technical merits to 40% and led to the following amounts and related individual 
probabilities of possible outcomes:
10% likelihood of realizing $350
15% likelihood of realizing $250
30% likelihood of realizing $50
45% likelihood of realizing $0
Required:
1. Based on these facts, provide the journal entry that Phillips would make in Year 1 
to record tax expense, taxes payable, and the tax contingency for unrecognized tax 
benefits.
2. Provide the entry Phillips would make in Year 2 to record any change in the status of the 
tax contingency reserve.
Comprehensive tax 
allocation problem  
(LO 2, 4)
P13-15
Flower Company started doing business on January 1, 2013. For the year ended December 31, 
2014, it reported $450,000 pre-tax book income on its income statement. Flower is subject to 
a 40% corporate tax rate for this year and the foreseeable future. Additionally, it has the follow-
ing issues that impact its tax situation:
1. At the beginning of 2014, Flower acquired $600,000 of specialized productive machinery 
that it depreciates using the straight-line method over five years with no salvage value for 
accounting purposes. For tax purposes, this specialized equipment is being depreciated 
$200,000 per year for the first three years of its productive life.
2. During 2014, the federal government fined Flower $100,000 for violating environmental 
laws. The amount was paid on November 15, 2014, and was expensed in determining 
2014’s book income. The fine is not tax deductible.
3. Flower received $40,000 of interest income as a result of its investment in the bonds 
 issued by the State of Arizona.
Making entries for uncertain 
tax positions (LO 9)
P13-14
In Year 1, MB Inc. is subject to a 40% tax rate. For book purposes, it expenses $1,500 of 
 expenditures. MB intends to deduct these expenditures on its Year 1 tax return despite tax law 
precedent that makes it less than 50% probable that the deduction will be sustained on 
its  technical merits. Instead, the best estimate is that the IRS will allow these expenses to be 
amortized straight line over a 15-year period. In Year 1 and each of the subsequent 14 years, 
$100 of amortization would be allowed.
Required:
1. In Year 1, determine which accounts MB would debit and credit and for how much in 
properly accounting for this uncertain tax position.
2. Prepare the journal entries that MB would make in Year 2 related to this uncertain tax 
position.

814 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
4. On January 2, 2014, Flower leased warehouse space for $2,000 per month for a three-
year period. On January 2, 2014, as a condition of the lease, Flower paid $30,000 to the 
lessor to cover the first 15 months of rent. Because Flower leased space in excess of its 
needs, it immediately (January 2, 2014) subleased part of the warehouse to a small, local 
company. The sublease was also for a period of three years and required the tenant to 
make $800 monthly rent payments to Flower. During 2014, Flower received $8,800 in 
monthly rental payments from the sublessee. Pre-tax book income includes an accrual 
for rent revenue earned but not yet received in cash.
5. During 2014, Flower’s CEO was killed in an automobile accident. The company had a 
$200,000 life insurance policy on the CEO and collected the proceeds of the policy 
 during October 2014.
6. During 2014, Flower sold a parcel of land held for speculative purposes. The historical 
cost of the land was $320,000, and it was sold for $680,000. The cash will be collected 
from the purchaser in 10 monthly installments of $68,000 each. During 2014, Flower 
 collected five of these $68,000 payments; the remaining payments are assumed to be 
fully collectible during 2015.
7. During 2013, Flower accumulated a $22,000 net operating loss carryforward it can use to 
offset 2014 taxable income.
8. At the beginning of 2014, the balance in the Deferred tax asset account was $8,800 and 
there was no balance in the Deferred tax liability account.
Required:
1. Beginning with pre-tax accounting income, compute taxable income and taxes payable 
for 2014. Clearly label all amounts used in arriving at taxable income.
2. Using the following schedule, compute the change in the Deferred tax asset and Deferred 
tax liability accounts for 2014. The depreciation temporary difference has been completed 
as an example.
P13-16
Determining taxes payable, 
deferred taxes, and tax 
 expense (LO 2, 4)
(Note: Students may want to review the material on the equity method of accounting in Chap-
ter 16 before beginning work on this problem.)
 
In the current year, 2014, Reality Corporation reported $200,000 of pre-tax earnings on its 
income statement. The corporate tax rate is 40% in the current year and next year, and it is 
scheduled to remain at this level for the foreseeable future. Additional information relevant to 
figuring taxes is as follows:
 1. Reality acquired $500,000 of machinery in 2013. The machinery is being depreciated on 
a straight-line basis over five years (zero salvage) for accounting purposes and MACRS 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
 
Deferred 
Deferred
Temporary Difference 
Tax  Asset 
Tax Liability
Depreciation
($200,000 2 $120,000) 3 40% 
 
$32,000 CR
3. Determine income tax expense for 2014.

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
815
for tax purposes. A comparison of depreciation charges under these two methods is as 
follows:
T  R  E   T   C    H
S
 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017
Straight line 
$100,000 
$100,000 
$100,000 
$100,000 
$100,000
MACRS 
 165,000 
 225,000 
  75,000 
  35,000 
–0–
 2. Investment income from a 30% ownership of an investee company carried under 
the equity method is shown on the income statement as $80,000. The investee paid 
$30,000 in dividends to Reality in the current year. The remaining undistributed 
earnings total for 2014 is expected to be received in equal amounts over the next 
two years in the form of dividends. All dividends are subject to the 80% dividend 
exclusion rule.
 3. During the year, Reality recognized $4,000 of rental income that had been collected and 
taxed in 2013. In addition, $10,000 of rent revenue was received in advance in the current 
year. This amount was deferred for accounting purposes and will be recognized as 
 income in 2015.
 4. Reality received $5,000 of interest on State of North Carolina bonds in the current year 
that is included in pre-tax income.
 5. Reality sold land in the current year for $50,000 that had a $20,000 book value and tax 
basis. The entire gain (not considered extraordinary) was recognized for accounting 
 purposes in 2014. However, because collections are to be received in three equal install-
ments, Reality elected to use the installment sales method for tax purposes and picked 
up one-third of the gain on its tax return in 2014. The remaining amount of the gain will 
be recognized equally in 2015 and 2016.
 6. Reality provided for future product warranty costs in the amount of $50,000 in the 
 current year for book purposes. For tax purposes, such costs are deductible when paid. 
Actual warranty costs paid in 2014 were $15,000. It is expected that the remainder of 
the accrued warranty costs will be paid in 2015.
 7. Included in pre-tax accounting income is an expense for $3,000 for insurance premiums 
paid on Mr. Reality’s life.
 8. Reality made charges to bad debts expense in the current year of $15,000. The beginning 
balance in the Allowance for bad debts account was $12,000, and $6,000 of accounts 
was written off in the current year. It is expected that the 2014 year-end balance in the 
allowance account will be written off in 2015.
 9. Reality has a $10,000 net operating loss carryforward that can be used to offset the 
 current period’s taxable income.
 10. The balance in the deferred tax asset (liability) account was $40,000 ($50,000) at the 
 beginning of 2014.
 11. It is estimated to be more likely than not that 20% of the deferred tax asset at the end of 
2014 will not be realized.
Required:
1. Starting with pre-tax accounting income, compute taxable income and taxes payable for 
2014. Clearly label all amounts used in arriving at taxable income.
2. Using the following schedule, compute the change in the deferred tax asset (liability) 
 account for 2014. The depreciation temporary difference has been completed as an example.

816 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
 
Deferred 
Deferred
Temporary Difference Item 
Tax Asset 
Tax Liability
Depreciation
($225,000 2 $100,000) 3 40% 
 
$50,000 CR
3. Determine Reality’s income tax expense for 2014.
CASES
The following tables were excerpted from Pepsico’s 2012 Form 10-K. All amounts are in mil-
lions of dollars and the deferred tax asset and liability amounts are as of December 31 of the 
respective year.
 
2012 
2011 
2010
Provision for income taxes
Current: U.S. Federal 
$ 911 
$  611 
$  932
    Foreign 
940 
882 
728
    State 
153 
124 
137
 
2,004 
1,617 
1,797
Deferred: U.S. Federal 
154 
789 
78
    Foreign 
(95) 
(88) 
18
    State 
27 
54 
1
 
86 
755 
97
 
$2,090 
$2,372 
$1,894
Deferred tax liabilities
Investments in noncontrolled affiliates 
$   48 
$   41
Property, plant and equipment 
2,424 
2,466
Intangible assets other than nondeductible goodwill 
4,388 
4,297
Other 
1,088 
1,012
Gross deferred tax liabilities 
7,948 
7,816
Deferred tax assets
Net carryforwards 
1,378 
1,373
Stock-based compensation 
378 
429
Retiree medical benefits 
411 
504
Other employee-related benefits 
672 
695
Pension benefits 
647 
545
Other 
1,372 
1,384
Gross deferred tax assets 
4,858 
4,930
Valuation allowances 
(1,233) 
(1,264)
Deferred tax assets, net 
3,625 
3,666
Net deferred tax liabiliities 
$4,323 
$4,150
Required:
1. Provide journal entries to record the income tax expense for 2010 through 2012. You may 
indicate the sum of the changes in the various deferred tax assets/liabilities by a single 
debit or credit to the Net deferred tax asset/liability account.
2. Refer to the deferred tax asset and liability items reported by Pepsico at December 31, 
2012 and 2011. For each item (except Other), determine whether the balance changed 
 because of a net originating or net reversing temporary difference. Provide a likely 
 explanation for each of the temporary differences and clearly discuss whether it  indicates 
a higher or lower financial reporting revenue or expense relative to the amount reported in 
the 2012 tax return.
3. Pepsico’s reported deferred tax expense in 2012 ($86 million) does not equal the reported 
increase in net deferred tax liability ($4,323 2 $4,150 5 $173 million) over the course of 
2012. What is the likely source of this discrepancy?
C13-1
Pepsico: Analyzing the tax 
note  (LO 2, 4, 8)

 
Cases 
817
C13-2
Google Inc.: Analyzing tax 
notes (LO 2, 4, 8)
Edited excerpts from Google Inc.’s 2012 tax note follow:
Excerpts from Tax Note
($ in millions) 
2010 
2011 
2012
Expected provision at federal statutory rate (35%) 
$3,779 
$4,314 
$4,685
State taxes, net of federal benefit 
322 
122 
99
Stock-based compensation expense 
79 
105 
52
Change in valuation allowance 
(34) 
27 
1,921
Foreign rate differential 
(1,769) 
(2,001) 
(2,200)
Federal research credit 
(84) 
(140) 
0
Tax exempt interest 
(12) 
(10) 
(7)
Non-deductible legal settlement 
0 
175 
0
Basis difference in investment in Home business 
0 
0 
(1,960)
Other permanent differences 
10 
(3) 
8
 Provision for income taxes 
$2,291 
$2,589 
$2,598
Current:
 Federal 
$1,657 
$1,724 
2342
 State 
458 
274 
171
 Foreign 
167 
248 
358
  Total 
2,282 
2,246 
2,871
Deferred:
 Federal 
(25) 
452 
(328)
 State 
47 
(109) 
(19)
 Foreign 
(13) 
0 
74
  Total 
9 
343 
(273)
Provision for income taxes 
$2,291 
$2,589 
$2,598
Deferred tax assets:
 Stock-based compensation expense 
 
$288 
$311
 State taxes 
 
138 
184
 Capital loss carryforward 
 
285 
236
 Settlement with the Authors Guild and AAP 
 
35 
28
 Vacation accruals 
 
52 
67
 Deferred rent 
 
43 
50
 Accruals and reserves not currently deductible 
 
268 
688
 Acquired net operating losses 
 
156 
505
 Tax credit 
 
55 
274
 Basis difference in investment in Home business 
 
0 
2,043
 Other 
 
11 
128
  Total deferred tax assets 
 
1,331 
4,514
  Valuation allowance 
 
(333) 
(2,629)
  Total deferred tax assets net of valuation allowance 
 
998 
1,885
Deferred tax liabilities:
 Depreciation and amortization 
 
(479) 
(761)
 Identified intangibles 
 
(398) 
(1,496)
 Unrealized gains on investments and other 
 
(90) 
(105)
 Other prepaids 
 
(70) 
(118)
 Other 
 
(33) 
(133)
  Total deferred tax liabilities 
 
(1,070) 
(2,613)
Net deferred tax liabilities 
 
($72) 
($728)
Required:
1. Prepare the book journal entry for income tax expense for 2012 (combine U.S., foreign, 
and state income taxes). Clearly indicate both the account title and whether the account is 
being debited or credited.

818 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
2. Using information given in the tax rate reconciliation, estimate Google’s pre-tax book 
 income for 2012. Show your work.
3. What was Google’s 2012 effective tax rate? Show your work.
4. Estimate Google’s taxable income. (Note: You do not have enough information to do this by 
category; therefore, combine U.S., foreign, and state taxes.) Show and clearly label all work.
5. Using information found in the tax note, determine whether depreciation and amortiza-
tion expense was higher for book or tax purposes in 2012 and by how much.
6. Based on information in the tax note, are the tax rates in foreign countries in which 
Google operates greater than or less than the U.S. tax rate?
7. Explain why federal research credits appear in the tax rate reconciliation.
C13-3
Motorola vs. Intel: Adjusting 
for depreciation differences 
(LO 2, 4, 8)
Motorola and Intel are both in the semiconductor industry and compete in many of the same 
product sectors. But each uses a different depreciation method. Motorola’s Year 2 10-K states 
the following:
Depreciation is recorded principally using the declining-balance method based on the estimated useful 
lives of the assets (buildings and building equipment, 5–50 years; machinery and equipment, 2–12 years).
 
So, Motorola is using accelerated depreciation for most of its assets. By contrast, Intel’s 
Year 2 report says:
Depreciation is computed for financial reporting purposes principally by use of the straight-line method 
over the following estimated useful lives: machinery and equipment, 2 to 4 years; land and buildings, 
4 to 45 years.
 
The following table gives several key financial statement figures for each company from its 
respective Year 2 10-K and excerpts from its income tax footnote:
From the Year 2 10-Ks of Motorola and Intel
Selected, Edited Financial Statement Disclosures
Motorola
($ in millions) 
Year 2 
Year 1
Book depreciation 
$2,308 
$1,919
Income before income taxes 
1,775 
3,225
Property, plant and equipment, net of 
 accumulated depreciation (at year-end) 
9,768 
9,356
 
December 31
Significant Deferred Tax Assets (Liabilities) 
Year 2 
Year 1
Inventory reserves 
$440 
$345
Contract accounting methods 
231 
157
Employee benefits 
291 
286
Capitalized items 
138 
89
Tax basis differences on investments 
(199) 
(176)
Depreciation 
(213) 
(197)
Deferred taxes on non-U.S. earnings 
(545) 
(382)
Other deferred income taxes 
329 
132
Net deferred tax asset 
$472 
$254
(continued)

 
Cases 
819
 
Assume a statutory tax rate of 35% for all years.
Required:
1. Using the information provided and the analytical techniques illustrated in the chapter, 
determine the tax depreciation for Motorola and Intel for Year 2.
2. Adjust each firm’s pre-tax income to reflect the same depreciation method and useful 
lives used for tax purposes.
3. Explain why the adjusted numbers provide a better basis for comparing the operating 
 performance of the two companies.
From the Year 2 10-Ks of Motorola and Intel (continued)
Intel
($ in millions) 
Year 2 
Year 1
Book depreciation 
$1,888 
$1,371
Income before income taxes 
7,934 
5,638
Property, plant and equipment, less
 accumulated depreciation (at year-end) 
8,487 
7,471
 
December 31
Significant Deferred Tax Assets (Liabilities) 
Year 2 
Year 1
Deferred tax assets 
 
 Accrued compensation and benefits 
$  71 
$  61
 Deferred income 
147 
127
 Inventory valuation and related reserves 
187 
104
 Interest and taxes 
54 
61
 Other, net 
111 
55
 
$ 570 
$ 408
Deferred tax liabilities 
 
 Depreciation 
(573) 
(475)
 Unremited earnings of certain subsidiaries 
(359) 
(116)
 Other, net 
(65) 
(29)
 
$(997) 
$(620)
C13-4
ABC Inc.: Interpreting tax 
notes and reconciling 
 statutory and effective rates 
(LO 2, 4, 6, 8)
ABC Inc. is in the business of airframe maintenance, modification and retrofit services, 
 avionics and aircraft interior installations, the overhaul and repair of aircraft engines, and 
other related services.
 
The following are excerpted from its income statement for the year ended December 31, 2014.
($ in thousands) 
2014
Earnings (loss) before income taxes 
$10,891
Income tax benefit (provision) 
(3,267)
Net earnings (loss) 
$ 7,624
The details for the income tax expense or provision follow.
Income Tax Expense 
2014
Current 
$1,756
Deferred 
1,511
Income tax expense 
$3,267
Because a goodwill impairment charge taken under GAAP may not be deducted for tax pur-
poses, the company’s tax expense was higher by $1,076 than would be expected based on the 

820 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
statutory tax rate of 35%. State taxes added another $927 to the tax expense. However, the 
reduction in the valuation allowance decreased the accounting income tax expense. In addi-
tion, several other items caused the tax expense to deviate from the tax liability. Because these 
items by themselves are immaterial, no separate breakdowns are available.
 
The following breakdowns are available for the balance sheet values of deferred tax assets 
and liabilities:
 
December 31,
($ in thousands) 
2014 
2013
Deferred Tax Assets
Accounts receivable 
$   977 
$ 1,070
Inventories, principally due to additional costs inventoried for tax purposes 
 and financial statement allowances 
3,523 
1,679
Employee benefits, principally due to accrual for financial reporting purposes 
9,814 
13,510
Accrual for costs of restructuring 
5,392 
8,750
Accrual for disposal of discontinued operations 
4,312 
5,020
Others 
23,634 
19,257
Gross deferred tax assets 
47,652 
49,286
Less: Valuation allowance 
(13,588) 
(15,710)
  Total deferred tax asset 
34,064 
33,576
Deferred Tax Liability
Plant and equipment 
(7,770) 
(8,993)
Others 
(5,187) 
(1,964)
  Total deferred tax liability 
(12,957) 
(10,957)
Net deferred tax asset 
$21,107 
$22,619
The book value of the company’s inventories increased from $91,130 at the end of 2013 to 
$127,777 at the end of 2014.
Required:
1. Prepare a schedule reconciling the statutory and effective tax rates of ABC Inc. for the 
year ended 2014.
2. Provide the journal entry to record the income tax expense for 2014, showing separately 
the effects on deferred tax asset, valuation allowance, and deferred tax liability.
3. For each component of deferred tax asset/liability, provide possible reasons for the 
change in its value from 2013 to 2014.
C13-5
Understanding tax note 
 disclosures (LO 2, 4, 8)
Excerpts from Starbucks Corporation’s tax note from the company’s Form 10-K for the year 
ended September 30, 2012, follow.
($ in millions)
Fiscal Year Ended 
Sep. 30, 2012 
Oct. 2, 2011 
Oct. 3, 2010
Current taxes:
Federal 
$466.0 
$344.7 
$457.5
State 
79.9 
61.2 
79.6
Foreign 
76.8 
37.3 
38.3
Total current taxes 
622.7 
443.2 
575.4
Deferred taxes:
Federal 
49.2 
111.6 
(76.0)
State 
(0.7) 
8.3 
(9.3)
Foreign 
3.2 
0.0 
(1.4)
Total deferred taxes 
51.7 
119.9 
(86.7)
Total provision for income taxes 
$674.4 
$563.1 
$488.7
(continued)

 
Cases 
821
Fiscal Year Ended 
Sep. 30, 2012 
Oct. 2, 2011 
Oct. 3, 2010
Statutory rate 
35.0% 
35.0% 
35.0%
State income taxes, net of federal income tax benefit 
2.5% 
2.5% 
2.5%
Benefits and taxes related to foreign operations 
(3.3)% 
(3.1)% 
(2.5)%
Domestic production activity deduction 
(0.7)% 
(0.8)% 
(0.9)%
Other, net 
(0.7)% 
(2.5)% 
(0.1)%
Effective tax rate 
32.8% 
31.1% 
34.0%
 
 
Sep. 30, 2012 
Oct. 2, 2011
Deferred tax assets:
Property, plant and equipment 
 
$62.7 
$46.4 
Accrued occupancy costs 
 
72.0 
55.9 
Accrued compensation and related costs 
 
66.9 
69.6 
Other accrued liabilities 
 
15.7 
27.8 
Asset retirement obligation asset 
 
20.1 
19.0 
Deferred revenue 
 
43.7 
47.8 
Asset impairments 
 
38.5 
60.0 
Tax credits 
 
14.6 
23.0 
Stock based compensation 
 
131.8 
128.8 
Net operating losses 
 
99.2 
85.5 
Other 
 
80.9 
58.6 
Total 
 
646.1 
622.4 
Valuation allowance 
 
(154.2) 
(137.4)
Total deferred tax asset, net of valuation allowance 
 
491.9 
485.0 
Deferred tax liabilities:
Property, plant and equipment 
 
(89.0) 
(66.4)
Intangible assets and goodwill 
 
(34.0) 
(25.2)
Other 
 
(44.8) 
(18.1)
Total 
 
(167.8) 
(109.7)
Net deferred tax asset 
 
$324.1 
$375.3
Reported as:
Current deferred income tax assets 
 
$238.7 
$230.4 
Long-term deferred income tax assets 
 (included in Other assets) 
 
97.3 
156.3
Current deferred income tax liabilities 
 (included in Accrued liabilities) 
 
(1.3) 
(4.9)
Long-term deferrred income tax liabilities 
 (included in Other long-term liabilities) 
 
(10.6) 
(6.5)
Net deferred tax asset 
 
$324.1 
$375.3
Required:
1. Provide a journal entry to record the aggregate income tax expense for the year ended 
September 30, 2012.
2. What amount of Starbucks’ income tax expense for the year ended September 30, 2012, 
was deferred? Did this deferral result in an increase in deferred tax liabilities or a 
 decrease in deferred tax assets?
3. Estimate Starbucks’ earnings before taxes in the year ended September 30, 2012.
4. What tax policy or operating decision accounts for the majority of the divergence 
 between Starbucks’ statutory tax rate and effective tax rate?
5. Estimate the amount by which Starbucks’ tax provision was lower in the year ended 
 September 30, 2012, as a result of the domestic production activity deduction.

822 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
C13-6
Using tax note disclosures 
to forecast next year’s tax 
 provision (LO 10)
The following partial income statement and income tax note excerpts were taken from Sirius 
XM Inc.’s 2012 Form 10-K.
 
During 2012, Sirius XM eliminated most of the valuation allowance it had built up, reduc-
ing it to $9.8 million at December 31, 2012.
 
You are forecasting Sirius XM’s earnings for 2013. Your best estimate is that income be-
fore income taxes will be up 5% relative to 2012. You believe there will be no tax law changes 
in 2013. You also believe that in 2013 Sirius XM will eliminate the remainder of its valuation 
allowance and that its effective income tax rate will be unchanged except for the effects of the 
valuation allowance reversals in 2012 and 2013.
Required:
1. Forecast Sirius XM’s 2013 income before income taxes.
2. What was Sirius XM’s effective tax rate in 2012?
3. What would Sirius XM’s effective tax rate have been in 2012 if not for the valuation 
 allowance reversal?
4. Assume you expect Sirius XM’s 2013 adjusted effective income tax rate to equal its 2012 
adjusted effective tax rate where the adjusted effective income tax rate is the effective 
 income tax rate excluding the impact of changes in the valuation allowance on the income 
tax provision. Forecast Sirius XM’s 2013 income tax expense, assuming it eliminates the 
remainder of its valuation allowance in that year.
5. Forecast Sirius XM’s 2013 net income.
SIRIUS XM RADIO INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF INCOME
(Condensed from original)
  
For the Years Ended December 31,
(in thousands, except per share data) 
2012 
2011 
2010
Total revenue 
$3,402,040 
$3,014,524  
$2,816,992
Total operating expenses 
2,530,015 
2,338,407 
2,351,578
 Income from operations 
872,025 
676,117 
465,414
Total other expense 
(397,557) 
(234,922) 
(417,739)
Income before income taxes 
474,468 
441,195 
47,675
Income tax benefit (expense) 
2,998,234 
(14,234) 
(4,620)
Net income 
$3,472,702 
$  426,961 
$   43,055
SIRIUS XM RADIO INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Dollar amounts in thousands, unless otherwise stated)
(16) Income Taxes (Excerpt)
The following table indicates the significant elements contributing to the difference between the federal 
tax (benefit) expense at the statutory rate and at our effective rate: 
  
For the Years Ended December 31,
  
2012 
2011 
2010
Federal tax expense, at statutory rate 
$  166,064 
$ 154,418 
$ 16,678
State income tax expense, net of federal benefit 
16,606 
15,751 
1,620
State income rate changes 
2,251 
3,851 
(2,252)
Non-deductible expenses 
477 
457 
4,130
Change in valuation allowance 
(3,195,651) 
(166,452) 
(21,749)
Other, net 
12,019 
6,209 
6,193
 Income tax (benefit) expense 
$(2,998,234) 
$  14,234 
$  4,620

 
Collaborative Learning Cases 
823
Under Armour, a maker of athletic sportswear, had a tax provision of about $75 million in 
2012. Following is the 2012 note disclosure for Under Armour’s uncertain tax positions. All 
amounts are in thousands of dollars.
Provision for Income Taxes (Excerpt)
As of December 31, 2012 and 2011, the total liability for unrecognized tax benefits, including related 
interest and penalties, was approximately $17.1 million and $11.2 million, respectively. The following 
table represents a reconciliation of the Company’s total unrecognized tax benefits balances, excluding 
interest and penalties, for the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011, and 2010:
($ in thousands) 
2012 
2011 
2010
Beginning of year 
$ 9,783 
$5,165 
$2,598
Increases as a result of tax positions taken in a prior period 
0 
0 
0
Decreases as a result of tax positions taken in a prior period 
0 
0 
0
Increases as a result of tax positions taken in the current prior period 
5,702 
4,959 
2,632
Decreases as a result of tax positions taken in the current prior period 
0 
0 
0
Decreases as a result of settlements during the current period 
0 
0 
0
Reductions as a result of a lapse of statute of limitations during the 
 current period 
(188) 
(341) 
(65)
End of year 
$15,297 
$9,783 
$5,165
As of December 31, 2012, $14.1 million of unrecognized tax benefits, excluding interest and 
penalties, would impact the Company’s effective tax rate if recognized.
 
As of December 31, 2012, 2011, and 2010, the liability for unrecognized tax benefits in-
cluded $1.8 million, $1.4 million, and $1.3 million, respectively, for the accrual of interest and 
penalties. For each of the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011, and 2010, the Company 
 recorded $0.7 million, $0.4 million, and $0.3 million, respectively, for the accrual of interest 
and penalties in its consolidated statements of income.
 
The Company files income tax returns in the U.S. federal jurisdiction and various state and 
foreign jurisdictions. The majority of the Company’s returns for years before 2009 are no 
longer subject to U.S. federal, state and local, or foreign income tax examinations by tax au-
thorities. The Company does not expect any material changes to the total unrecognized tax 
benefits within the next twelve months.
Required:
1. Prepare the journal entry that Under Armour made for 2012 related to its uncertain tax 
positions.
2. What was the total amount in the Tax contingency reserve account for Under Armour on 
December 31, 2012?
3. Of the total Tax contingency reserve account on December 31, 2012, what amount 
 represents interest and penalties?
C13-7
Interpreting uncertain tax 
 position disclosures (LO 9)
COLLABORATIVE LEARNING CASES
Collaborative
C13-8
Tax note under IFRS LO11
Lufthansa Group operates an international airline based in Germany. Lufthansa files its annual 
reports under International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). In its 2012 Annual Report 
to shareholders, Lufthansa presented the following information in a note to the financial 
statements:
Deferred tax items
In accordance with IAS 12, deferred taxes are recognised for all temporary differences between 
the balance sheets for tax purposes of individual companies and the consolidated financial state-
ments. Tax loss carry-forwards are recognised to the extent that the deferred tax assets are likely 
to be used in the future. Company earnings forecasts and specific, realisable tax strategies are 
International

824 
CHAPTER 13
Income Tax Reporting
.mhhe.com/revsine6e
www
Remember to check the book’s companion website 
for additional study material.
used to determine whether deferred tax assets from tax losses carried forward are usable or not, 
i.e. whether they have a value that can be realised.
 
The total amount of deferred tax assets that could not be capitalised as of 31 December 2012 
was EUR 498m (previous year: EUR 633m).
Required:
1. Does Lufthansa report a valuation allowance relating to its deferred tax assets? If so, how 
much is it? If not, why not?
2. Why was Lufthansa not able to capitalize €498 million of deferred tax assets as of 
 December 31, 2012?
3. In its 2012 Annual Report, AMR Corp., which operates American Airlines and reports 
 under U.S. GAAP, reported an increase in its deferred tax valuation allowance of 
$282 million (approximately €212 million as of December 31, 2012).
 
a. Did Lufthansa experience a similar increase?
 
b. What does this likely indicate about Lufthansa’s ability to recover its deferred tax 
 assets relative to AMR Corp.?

14
Chapter
E
mployer-provided pension and retiree health benefits represent valuable income 
security to the elderly during retirement. These benefits can also represent sub-
stantial liabilities and cash outflows for employers. Because the workers earn 
the benefits over their work lives and receive the benefits during retirement, employer 
accounting for some types of plans must use numerous assumptions regarding return on 
plan assets, life expectancy, salary at retirement, and so on. Actual experience can devi-
ate substantially from these assumptions. Most of the accounting challenges revolve 
around these estimation issues.
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS 
IN PENSION CONTRACTS
A pension plan is an agreement by an organization (sponsor) to provide payments—
called a pension—to employees when they retire, either in a series of payments (an 
annuity) or as a one-time “lump-sum” distribution. In the United States, the plan spon-
sor makes contributions to a pension trust—a legal entity that invests and holds the 
assets for the employee’s benefit—over the employee’s career. The retiree then receives 
pension payments from the trust during retirement. In most instances, these company 
pension payments supplement payments from government-sponsored pension plans—
such as Social Security in the United States. A pension plan represents a valuable ben-
efit to employees. Employers create these plans as a way to attract and retain a qualified 
workforce. Because pensions benefit firms in the form of higher productivity from em-
ployees, the cost of a worker’s pension plan is treated as an expense over that worker’s 
period of employment.
 
Pension plans can be divided into two categories—defined contribution plans and 
defined benefit plans—based on the nature of the plan promise.
 
Defined contribution plans specify the amount of cash that the employer puts 
into the plan trust. No explicit promise is made about the size of the periodic benefits 
the employee will receive during retirement. Rather, the promise is the amount of 
contributions the employer will make periodically. The employee exchanges service 
for this promise. The employee is generally given a variety of alternative investment 
funds (broad stock funds, growth stock funds, bond funds, etc.), and the ultimate size 
of the payments the employee will receive depends on the success of these invest-
ments. The employer receives a tax deduction for amounts contributed to the pension 
plan trust, and subsequent investment returns do not generate tax for the employer or 
14
Pensions and Postretirement Benefits
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you 
will understand:
1. The rights and obligations in defined 
contribution and defined benefit 
 pension contracts.
2. The legal form, regulatory environ-
ment, and terminology associated 
with pension plan arrangements.
3. The components of pension expense 
and their relation to pension assets 
and pension liabilities.
4. How GAAP smooths the volatility 
 inherent in pension estimates and 
forecasts.
5. The determinants of pension funding.
6. How to analyze and use the retire-
ment benefit disclosures.
7. Other postretirement benefit plan 
concepts and financial reporting rules.
8. What research tells us about the 
 usefulness of the detailed pension 
and other postretirement benefits 
disclosures.
9. The key differences in defined benefit 
plan reporting between current U.S. 
GAAP and current IFRS requirements.
825

826 
CHAPTER 14
Pensions and Postretirement Benefits
the employee until the employee retires. The retiree is taxed on the amount of annual with-
drawals at ordinary income tax rates. The amount that will ultimately be paid to the em-
ployee is determined by the accumulated value at retirement of the amounts contributed to 
the plan over the period of employment. In defined contribution plans, the employee bears 
the risk that the ultimate pension payments will be large enough to sustain a comfortable 
retirement income.
 
The common types of defined contribution plans are money purchase, profit sharing, 
and 401(k). In a money purchase plan, the employer contributes a fixed percentage of an 
employee’s salary to the pension plan. The employer must make this con-
tribution whether it is having a good year or a bad year. In a profit-sharing 
plan, the employer contributes to the plan only when profits exceed a pre-
determined threshold. The contribution may then be allocated to partici-
pants on the basis of salary or seniority. In a 401(k) plan, the employer 
makes a contribution only if the employee voluntarily contributes to a pen-
sion plan. The terms of the plan specify the matching percentage (often 
50%) and the maximum annual employer contribution or the maximum 
percentage of salary eligible for matching. Some 401(k) plans have very 
generous terms; others are somewhat miserly. Because of the fixed com-
mitments associated with money purchase plans, they consistently result in cash outflows 
for the firm whereas the cash outflows for the other types of defined contribution plans 
vary from year to year.
 
A defined benefit plan is quite different. These agreements specify the formula that 
determines the annual benefit amount (lifetime annuity) to be paid out to the employee 
during retirement rather than the annual amount that will be contributed to the plan. The 
annual pension benefit typically depends on each employee’s years of service and salary. 
For example, a defined benefit plan may specify that an employee will receive an annual 
pension equal to 3% (called a generosity factor) of his or her salary at retirement for each 
year of service. An employee with 25 years of service and an annual salary at retirement 
of $60,000 would receive an annual pension benefit of $45,000 (25 years of service 3 3% 
for each year 3 the ending salary of $60,000). Because the pension payout formula is 
specified in advance in a defined benefit plan, the employer bears the investment risk in-
stead of the employee.1 However, the employee bears the risk that the firm will go bank-
rupt and default on unfunded pension liabilities. Determining how much cash must be 
contributed to the fund to provide the annual pension benefit of $45,000 is complex and 
may be expensive to compute. These amounts must be computed using assumptions and 
procedures described later in the chapter.2 The tax  treatment for defined benefit plans is 
similar to that for defined contribution plans. The employer receives tax deductions for 
amounts contributed to the pension trust, and the employee does not pay tax until pension 
The employer’s contributing of assets to the plan 
trust is termed funding. Employees may also be 
required to contribute to the plan. For example, 
a plan might specify that the employer is to con-
tribute 10% of the employee’s salary to the plan 
and that the employee is to contribute 5%, for a 
total of 15%. The employees’ 5% contributions 
are typically deducted from their paychecks and 
directly transferred to the plan trust.
1 Cash balance plans also are defined benefit plans. This type of plan requires employers to contribute a fixed amount per 
year (say, 5% of annual pay) to the account of individual employees. The employer also guarantees a minimum rate of 
return on the pension assets (e.g., the rate on long-term U.S. Treasury bonds). This guarantee makes them defined benefit 
plans “because the employer [still ultimately] bears the investment risks and rewards and the mortality risk if the employee 
elects to receive benefits in the form of an annuity.” See A. T. Arcady and F. Mellors, “Cash Balance Conversions,” Journal 
of Accountancy, February 2000, pp. 22–28. IBM and many other employers have switched from final pay formulas to this 
type of formula to mimic the pension accumulations in a defined contribution plan.
2 Actuaries use statistical methods to estimate the defined benefit plan obligation and annual funding. Assumptions must 
be made about length of service, return on assets, life expectancy, and salaries at retirement. These assumptions are called 
actuarial assumptions. When actual experience is different from assumptions, actuarial gains or losses arise.

 
Rights and Obligations in Pension Contracts  
827
 payments are  received during retirement. Also, the parties involved in a 
defined benefit plan are the same as those in a defined contribution plan. 
However, under a defined benefit plan, employees  receive in exchange for 
service the promise of a lifetime annuity instead of the promise of contri-
butions to a trust.
 
The relationships among the employer (plan sponsor), the plan trust, and the employees 
(the eventual retirees) for both types of plans are summarized in Figure 14.1. In a defined 
contribution plan, the employee exchanges service for contributions, determined according to 
the plan formula, and returns on the invested contributions. However, under a defined benefit 
plan, the employee exchanges service for the promise of the lifetime annuity. The employer 
then determines the contribution necessary to fulfill this promise. This promise of an annuity 
leads to complex calculations and accounting. In both types of plans, the employer makes 
contributions to a separate legal trust, and the trust makes payments to the retirees.
 
Figure 14.2 shows the total nominal dollar amount of assets in each of the two types of 
pension plans over the years from 2005 to 2012. The proportion of assets in defined contribu-
tion plans as a percent of total pension assets continues to grow. Defined benefit plans, which 
have been in existence since the late 19th century, grew rapidly in the manufacturing, tele-
communication, airline, and utility industries in the first half of the 20th century. These plans 
still exist, but young firms tend to have defined contribution plans because they are less costly 
to manage, less risky for the employer, improve job mobility for the employee, and may not 
be at risk if the employer declares bankruptcy.3 In the 1980s, the value of defined contribution 
plan assets in the United States was less than the value of defined benefit plan assets. How-
ever, by the end of 2012, the value of defined contribution plan assets was 61% higher than 
the value of defined benefit plan assets. The figure also reveals that both types of plans expe-
rienced severe asset value declines in 2008 when the stock market was weak. At the end of 
2012, defined contribution plan assets were significantly higher than pre-2008 levels, and 
defined benefit plan assets were near the pre-2008 levels. Despite the trend toward defined 
contribution plans, data in Figure 14.2 show that defined benefit plans held $2.5 trillion in as-
sets at the end of 2012. In addition, the majority of S&P 500 firms sponsor defined benefit 
pension plans.
Promise of lifetime retirement annuity
(defined benefit plans only)
Service
Contributions
Retirement
Benefits
Employer
(Sponsor)
Plan
Trust
Employees
(Retirees)
Figure 14.1
PENSION PLAN ENTITIES 
AND RELATIONSHIPS
3 A defined contribution plan may be an employee stock ownership plan (ESOP) whose primary asset is employer stock. 
For example, Procter & Gamble Co. sponsors a profit-sharing plan that also is an ESOP. If an employee has invested 100% 
of his or her account in employer stock, the pension is essentially worthless in the event of employer bankruptcy, which is 
what occurred with Enron in 2001.
A plan is fully funded if its assets equal its 
 liabilities. If assets exceed liabilities, the plan 
is said to be overfunded; if liabilities exceed 
 assets, it is said to be underfunded.

828 
CHAPTER 14
Pensions and Postretirement Benefits
ACCOUNTING ISSUES RELATED TO DEFINED 
BENEFIT PENSION PLANS
The employer accounting for defined contribution plans is straightforward, as the following 
example shows.
 
Assume that a defined contribution pension plan agreement requires the company to make 
an annual contribution equal to 10% of each employee’s salary into a fund whose accumu-
lated proceeds will be paid to the employee at retirement. Employees’ salaries in 2014 total 
$10 million. Accordingly, the company records pension expense equal to the amount of cash 
contributed to the plan ($10,000,000 3 10%) as follows:
DR Pension expense   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $1,000,000
 
CR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$1,000,000
Upon retirement, individual employees receive their share of the accumulated balance from 
the investments.
 
Unfortunately, the accounting for defined benefit pension plans is not this easy. Therefore, 
we use much of the remainder of this chapter to explain it. The accounting complications arise 
because the employer must estimate the current financial statement effects of the lifetime 
 annuities promised to employees. These estimates rely heavily on the present value tech-
niques discussed in the appendix to this book on page 1093. To determine the financial state-
ment effects, an employer must consider the following factors:
1. What proportion of the workforce will remain with the company long enough to qual-
ify for benefits under the plan? Qualifying for benefits is called vesting. For example, 
Defined Benefit
Defined Contribution
Year
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
$0
$500
$1,000
$1,500
$2,000
$2,500
$3,000
$4,000
$4,500
$3,500
Billions
Figure 14.2
ASSETS BY PLAN TYPE
Source: Board of Governors of the 
 Federal Reserve System, Washington, 
D.C., www.federalreserve.gov, Flow of 
Funds Accounts of the United States, Z.1., 
L.116 Private Pension Funds, June 7, 2012 
and June 6, 2013.

 
Accounting Issues Related to Defined Benefit Pension Plans 
829
an  employee may have to stay with a firm for at least one year to become part of a 
plan and may not fully participate for five years. A forecast of the length of employee 
service requires assumptions regarding personnel turnover, mortality rates, and 
disability.
2. At what rate will salaries rise over the period until eventual retirement?
3. What is the life expectancy of covered employees after retirement—that is, over what 
length of time will the pension benefits be paid?4
4. What is the appropriate discount rate in computing the present value of the future benefits 
earned by employees in the current period?
5. What do firms do when actual experience differs from expectations? It’s impossible to 
predict exactly how long someone will work for a company, what she or he will be 
 earning at retirement, and how long she or he will live after retiring. Consequently, the 
accounting must address the differences between actual and expected experience.
 
The accounting problem is further complicated by the presence of the pension trust assets. 
In a defined contribution plan the employee bears the risk associated with pension invest-
ments. However, in a defined benefit plan the employer bears the risk. Just as pension liabili-
ties can change over time because actual experience differs from expectations, pension asset 
returns can vary greatly from year to year. Consequently, the accounting must incorporate 
asset returns and expected fluctuations in returns.
 
In December 1985, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued specified 
measurement and disclosure requirements for defined benefit pension plans.5 The disclo-
sure aspects of these GAAP rules were amended in 1998 and again in 2003.6 In 2006, the 
FASB further revised both recognition and disclosure requirements.7 The current authori-
tative accounting literature for pension measurement and reporting requirements is found 
in the FASB ASC Topic 715, Compensation– Retirement Benefits.
 
Pension expense measurement for financial reporting includes several smoothing fea-
tures to make annual pension expense less volatile. These smoothing features were in-
cluded to respond to corporate lobbying and to acknowledge that short-term gains and 
losses on pension assets and obligations may not result in cash inflows or outflows. These 
gains and losses are omitted from pension expense. From 1986 to 2006, they also were ex-
cluded from the balance sheet and were merely disclosed in notes. Since 2006, these tempo-
rary gains and losses have been recognized in accumulated other comprehensive income 
(AOCI)8 with a corresponding offset to a balance sheet pension asset or liability account. 
Despite the numerous changes to pension accounting since 1985, the FASB still views the 
existing GAAP as an interim measure and continues to study pension presentation and 
measurement issues.
4 Upon a retired worker’s death, plans often pay pension benefits (at a reduced amount) to a surviving spouse. Consequently, 
actuaries must estimate for these plans the life of the spouse in addition to that of the employee.
5 Pre-Codification, entitled “Employers’ Accounting for Pensions,” SFAS No. 87 replaced both Accounting Principles Board 
(APB) Opinion No. 8, “Accounting for the Cost of Pension Plans,” 1966, and SFAS No. 36, “Disclosure of Pension Informa-
tion,” 1980, which previously governed pension accounting and disclosure.
6 Pre-Codification “Employers’ Disclosures about Pensions and Other Postretirement Benefits,” SFAS No. 132 (Norwalk, CT: 
FASB, 1998), and SFAS No. 132 (revised 2003). The pre-Codification revised version of SFAS No. 132 has the same title as 
the 1998 version. For simplicity, citations throughout the chapter simply refer to pre-Codification SFAS 87, pre-Codification 
SFAS No. 132, and pre-Codification SFAS 132(R).
7 Pre-Codification “Employers’ Accounting for Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Plans,” SFAS No. 158 
(Norwalk, CT: FASB, 2006).
8 This chapter assumes a thorough knowledge of other comprehensive income (OCI) and AOCI. Please review Chapter 2 if 
you have questions on these concepts.

830 
CHAPTER 14
Pensions and Postretirement Benefits
 
The smoothing techniques and recognition rules that govern pension accounting can make 
it very difficult for accountants, analysts, and other external users to understand how pensions 
affect financial statements. We try to clarify the topic by providing an intuitive overview of the 
financial reporting rules for defined benefit pension plans.
FINANCIAL REPORTING FOR DEFINED 
BENEFIT PENSION PLANS
Under current GAAP, pension expense comprises five separate components9 
(a 1 indicates increase in expense, and a 2 indicates decrease in expense):
1. Service cost (1).
2. Interest cost (1).
3. Expected return on the market-related value of pension plan assets (2).
4. Recognized gains or losses (2 or 1).
5. Recognized prior service cost (2 or 1).
 
We use a simple example to illustrate how to compute pension expense Components 1 
through 3. The example assumes an environment characterized by complete certainty. This 
assumption simplifies the setting and clarifies the relationship between the various pension 
expense components. Under a complete certainty assumption, Components 4 and 5 would not 
be needed. We also use the example to introduce institutional features of defined benefit plans 
and employer balance sheet recognition. In subsequent examples, we show how Components 
4 and 5 come into play in a world of uncertainty in which expectations are often not realized 
and changes in assumptions occur frequently.
A Simple Example: A World of Complete Certainty
Consider the following example of a hypothetical company with a defined benefit retire-
ment plan:
9 If a company either (1) curtails a plan or (2) settles a plan’s liabilities by purchasing an annuity contract and generates a gain 
or loss from either event, that gain or loss would also be included in pension expense as another element. Measuring the gain 
or loss on plan settlements or curtailments is included in various sections of FASB ASC Topic 715, Compensation– Retirement 
Benefits.
10 See FASB ASC 715-30-35-43: Compensation–Retirement Benefits—Defined Benefit Plans–Pension—Subsequent 
 Measurement—Discount Rates.
Market-related value of pension plan assets is 
a technical term. It can be either (1) the fair 
value of the assets or (2) a smoothed value that 
recognizes gains and losses more slowly (over 
not more than five years).
Usually, pension plans pro-
vide survivor benefits and 
pay benefits monthly. To 
make calculations easier to 
follow, we exclude survivor 
benefits and use annual 
 pension payments in our 
 hypothetical examples.
On January 1, 2014, Robie Corporation hires Francie Stevens and also begins a defined 
benefit pension plan. Annual pension benefits are based on the formula: n (years of ser-
vice) times 0.05 (generosity factor) times the highest salary before retirement (salary 
base). Francie will receive payments once per year on December 31. Robie can predict 
with certainty Francie’s life expectancy, the duration of her employment service, and her 
salary before retirement. Francie will retire on December 31, 2015, and live until January 1, 
2019. Francie will receive an annual salary of $182,000 and $200,000 for 2014 and 2015, 
respectively. To compute the present value of pension benefits, Robie uses a 7% dis-
count rate, which represents the average rate for annuities that could be purchased 
with similar payment schedules.10 In this example, the expected long-term rate of 
return, the average rate of earnings expected for the pension plan assets, and the actual 
return on plan assets also equal 7%.11 At the end of each year, Robie contributes to the 
pension plan trust amounts equal to the present value of new benefits earned for the 
year. Robie’s accounting year ends on December 31.

 
Financial Reporting for Defined Benefit Pension Plans 
831
 
We now show how to compute Components 1 through 3 for this simple example.
Component 1—Service Cost 
In a typical defined benefit pension plan, the pen-
sion payout increases for each additional year of service. The present value of this increase is 
service cost. Stated more rigorously, service cost is the increase in the discounted present 
value of the pension benefits ultimately payable that is attributable to an additional year’s 
employment.
 
Exhibit 14.1 diagrams Francie’s work life and retirement period and shows the service 
cost calculations for 2014 and 2015. By working in 2014, Francie earns one year of pension 
benefits. Although the pension is being earned when Francie’s salary is $182,000 per year, 
the pension payment will be based on the highest annual salary at retirement, $200,000. To 
accrue the appropriate amount of pension liability, Robie computes the expected pension 
benefit per  retirement year based on the $200,000. Under the formula, Francie will receive 
$10,000 (1 year 3 0.05 generosity 3 $200,000 highest salary) each year during retirement 
because of her work in 2014. Based on her life expectancy, she will receive three payments. 
To obtain the present value of these payments, we use a present value of an ordinary annuity 
(pvoa) factor to discount the payments to the retirement date and a present value of an 
amount (pv) factor to further discount the one year from the retirement date of December 31, 
2015, to December 31, 2014, the balance sheet date. December 31, 2014 (as opposed to 
January 1, 2014), is used here because Francie does not earn a pension benefit until she has 
worked an entire year. The service cost for 2014 is $24,526 ($10,000 3 pvoa 3, 7% of 
2.62432 3 pv 1, 7% of 0.93458). Because no obligation existed at the beginning of 2014, 
11 See FASB ASC 715-30-35-47: Compensation–Retirement Benefits—Defined Benefit Plans—Pension—Subsequent 
 Measurement—Expected Long-Term Rate of Return.
EXHIBIT 14.1
Present Value Calculations for Robie Corporation Pension Plan
 
Work Period
 Francie is hired 
 
Francie retires
 
1/1/2014 
12/31/2014 
12/31/2015
2014 Service cost 5 
$24,526
5 ($10,000)(pvoa 3, 7%)(pv 1, 7%)
5 ($10,000)(2.62432)(0.93458)
 
2015 Service cost 5 
$26,243
5 ($10,000)(pvoa 3, 7%)(pv 0, 7%)
5 ($10,000)(2.62432)(1.00000)
 
PBO at 12/31/2015 5 
$52,486
5 ($20,000)(pvoa 3, 7%)(pv 0, 7%)
5 ($20,000)(2.62432)(1.00000)
 
Retirement Period
 
12/31/2016 
12/31/2017 
12/31/2018
 
$10,000 
$10,000 
$10,000
 
 
 
5 ($200,000)(0.05)(1)
 
$10,000 
$10,000 
$10,000
 
 
 
5 ($200,000)(0.05)(1)
 
$20,000 
$20,000 
$20,000
 
 
 
5 ($200,000)(0.05)(2)
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩

832 
CHAPTER 14
Pensions and Postretirement Benefits
this amount also is the cumulative pension liability at the end of 2014. The $24,526 present 
value of pension benefits earned to date is called the projected benefit obligation (PBO).
Note that the PBO calculation is based on service to date and future salaries. The change 
in PBO due to service cost also is reflected in the reconciliation of the Robie Corporation 
Pension Plan PBO given in Exhibit 14.2 Panel (a).
 
Exhibit 14.2 Panel (a) shows what happens to the plan over the five-year period. The gross 
assets and PBO of the pension plan do not appear on Robie’s balance sheet. Instead, Robie 
recognizes the funded status, the net difference between the fair value of plan assets and the 
PBO, through its pension expense and plan contribution (funding) journal entries. To record 
its pension expense, which includes only service cost in 2014 [see Exhibit 14.2 Panel (b)], 
Robie makes the following entry:
DR Pension expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$24,526
 
CR Pension liability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$24,526
In this example, Robie contributes to the plan trust $24,526, the new benefits earned (i.e., 
service cost), and makes the following entry:
DR Pension liability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$24,526
 
CR Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$24,526
EXHIBIT 14.2
Robie Corporation Pension Plan Assets 
and Liabilities and Pension Expense
Panel (a) Reconciliation of Robie Corporation PBO and Pension Plan Assets
 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018
PBO (beginning) 
$   —   
$24,526 
$52,486 
$36,160 
$18,691
Service cost 
24,526 
26,243 
 
 
Interest cost 
 
1,717 
3,674 
2,531 
1,309*
Benefits paid 
 
 
(20,000) 
(20,000) 
(20,000)
PBO (ending) 
$24,526 
$52,486 
$36,160 
$18,691 
$  — 
Assets (beginning) 
$   —   
$24,526 
$52,486 
$36,160 
$18,691
Contributions 
24,526 
26,243 
 
 
Actual return 
 
1,717 
3,674 
2,531 
1,309*
Benefits paid 
 
 
(20,000) 
(20,000) 
(20,000)
Assets (ending) 
$24,526 
$52,486 
$36,160 
$18,691 
$  — 
Funded status: Asset (liability) 
$   —   
$   —   
$ —     
$ —     
$  —    
Panel (b) Robie Corporation Pension Expense
 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018
Service cost 
$24,526 
$26,243 
 
 
Interest cost 
 
1,717 
3,674 
2,531 
1,309*
Expected return on plan assets 
 
(1,717) 
(3,674) 
(2,531) 
(1,309)*
Pension expense 
$24,526 
$26,243 
— 
— 
—
* Rounded.

 
Financial Reporting for Defined Benefit Pension Plans 
833
The above entries result in Pension expense of $24,526, a reduction in Cash of $24,526, and a 
Pension liability of $0. Exhibit 14.2 Panel (b) shows that the contribution from Robie Corpo-
ration increases the plan assets of the Robie Corporation Pension Plan. It is important to re-
member that Robie Corporation and Robie Corporation Pension Plan are separate legal 
entities. After the contribution, the plan assets equal the PBO, and the funded status equals $0. 
Recall that the Pension liability on Robie’s balance sheet also is $0.
 
Exhibit 14.1 shows that in 2015, Francie earns another $10,000 per year of pension bene-
fits, but the present value of those benefits is now $26,243 because she is one year nearer to 
her retirement date (in this case she is at her retirement date). The pvoa factor is identical to 
the one used for 2014, but the pv factor is one year less than the one used for 2014. In addition 
to service cost, the 2015 total pension expense for Robie Corporation includes two other 
items—interest cost and return on plan assets.
Component 2—Interest Cost 
A plan incurs interest on PBO until it is paid. 
Therefore, in 2015 in addition to service cost, interest cost arises from the passage of time 
and increases both PBO and pension expense. The Interest cost of $1,717 is computed by 
taking the PBO at the beginning of the period (here $24,526) and multiplying it by the dis-
count rate (here 7%). We did not have interest cost in 2014 because the liability did not arise 
until December 31, 2014, when Francie completed a year of service. Exhibit 14.2 Panel (a) 
shows that the beginning PBO of $24,526 is increased by service cost of $26,243 and interest 
cost of $1,717 to obtain an ending balance of $52,486. Because both service cost and interest 
cost increase PBO, they also increase pension expense for Robie Corporation [see Exhibit 14.2 
Panel (b)].
 
For this simple example, we can compute the PBO amount directly. Refer to Exhibit 14.1 
again. After working two years, Francie has earned a total of $20,000 per year in pension 
benefits. When we discount the three $20,000 payments using the same present factors used 
to compute 2015 service cost, we obtain the $52,486 PBO balance shown in Exhibit 14.2 
Panel (a). We illustrate the calculation of service cost and PBO in Exhibit 14.1 to help you 
understand the concepts of service cost and PBO. For most situations, actuaries must calculate 
the PBO and service cost, and analysts and accountants must focus on the reconciliation con-
tained in Exhibit 14.2 (a).
Component 3—Expected Return on Plan Assets 
Plan assets are invested 
in stocks and bonds that pay dividends and interest. Furthermore, the stocks and bonds could 
appreciate in value. The dividends, interest, and appreciation constitute the actual return on 
plan assets. At December 31, 2014, the pension plan assets (held by the trust) had a balance of 
$24,526. The 2015 expected return of $1,717 is computed by multiplying the beginning plan 
assets of $24,526 by the expected long-term rate of return assumption of 7%. For this simpli-
fied example, recall that we assume that the actual return equals the ex-
pected return (see page 830). We did not have a return in 2014 because the 
plan did not have assets until the December 31, 2014, contribution. The actual 
return increases plan assets, and the expected return decreases pension ex-
pense for Robie Corporation. Conceptually, the expected return on plan assets 
offsets increases to PBO created by the service cost and interest cost compo-
nents. In this specific case of certainty, the expected return offsets exactly the 
interest cost com ponent. Exhibit 14.2 Panel (a) shows the effect of actual re-
turn on plan assets, and Exhibit 14.2 Panel (b) shows the effect of expected 
return on pension expense.
In this example, Robie makes contributions at 
year-end, and the pension trust pays benefits at 
year-end. In practice, interest cost reflects the 
timing of benefit payments made throughout the 
year. Similarly, the expected return reflects the 
timing of both the employer contributions and 
benefit payments. For example, if Robie had not 
funded its 2014 pension cost until April 1, 2015, 
the expected return would have been $1,288 
($24,526 3 0.07 3 9y12) instead of $611.

834 
CHAPTER 14
Pensions and Postretirement Benefits
 
To record its 2015 pension expense, Robie makes the following entry:
DR Pension expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $26,243
 
CR Pension liability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$26,243
The amount equals the 2015 service cost because the expected return on plan assets offsets the 
interest cost. Robie contributes $26,243, equal to the new benefits earned in 2015, to the plan 
trust and makes the following entry:
DR Pension liability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$26,243
 
CR Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$26,243
 
The above entries result in Pension expense of $26,343, a reduction in Cash of $26,243, 
and a Pension liability of $0. Exhibit 14.2 Panel (a) shows that after the 2015 contribution is 
made to the plan, pension plan assets equal the PBO, and consequently, the funded status is 
$0, the same as the Pension liability on Robie’s balance sheet.
 
Exhibit 14.2 shows how the plan assets and the PBO change during the retirement pe-
riod. Interest costs increase the PBO, but they are offset by the actual return on plan assets. 
Similarly, payments to Francie reduce the PBO and the plan assets, thereby keeping the 
funded status at zero. There is no longer any service cost because Francie has retired. And, 
the expected return offsets interest cost, so pension expense is zero from 2016 to 2018 [see 
Panel (b)]. Also, because the plan is fully funded at this point, Robie does not have to 
make any more contributions to the plan. Given that Robie does not have pension expense 
or contributions from 2016 to 2018, it does not make any journal entries related to the 
plan. So in a world with perfect certainty, all of the sponsor’s accounting is finished when 
the employee retires.
 
We use perfect certainty in this example to help you see the relationship among the compo-
nents constituting pension expense. Of course, no perfect certainty exists in the real pension 
world. On the contrary, unforeseen pension events arise continually. Examples include the 
following:
1. Employee turnover may be higher or lower than anticipated.
2. Preretirement mortality may be unusually high or low (vis-à-vis actuarial estimates).
3. The actual return earned on pension plan assets could differ significantly from 
expectations.
4. Interest rates change, thereby causing changes in discount rate assumptions.
5. Changes in social and economic conditions may prompt companies to retroactively alter 
the level of benefits.
 
All of these factors explain why, in the real world, no simple equality exists between pen-
sion plan assets and pension plan liabilities and why pension expense does not equal service 
cost. Depending on the age distribution of the workforce, interest cost instead of service cost 
could be the dominant part of pension expense.
RECAP
Pension expense is determined by changes in pension plan assets and liabilities. If the fu-
ture were known with certainty, pension expense for defined benefit plans would always 
equal service cost, and pension plan assets would always equal pension plan liabilities. 
Starting with this simple setting will help you understand the complications that uncer-
tainty introduces.

 
Financial Reporting for Defined Benefit Pension Plans 
835
The Real World: Uncertainty Introduces Gains and Losses
Uncertainty requires assumptions for discount rates, expected return on plan assets, and nu-
merous other future events such as employee turnover and mortality. GAAP requires that the 
same interest rate be used for computing both the service cost and the interest cost compo-
nents of pension expense. However, companies are free to choose some other rate for comput-
ing the expected rate of return on pension plan assets, and most do so.
 
A firm could temporarily lower its pension expense by assuming a higher than justified 
discount rate (which reduces the service cost component) or a higher than justified expected 
rate of return (which increases the expected return component that is deducted). A higher 
discount rate assumption also reduces PBO, thereby increasing funded status. To avoid such 
manipulation, GAAP provides guidelines for the assumptions.
 
GAAP provides explicit criteria for estimating discount rates. It states that “assumed dis-
count rates shall reflect the rates at which the pension benefits could be effectively settled” 
(FASB ASC 715-30-35-43: Compensation–Retirement Benefits—Defined Benefit Plans–
Pension—Subsequent Measurement—Discount Rates). It also suggests that employers look 
to prevailing rates of return on high-quality debt instruments with maturities that match ex-
pected payouts to retirees. Because average time to retirement and average life expectancy can 
differ across firms, assumed discount rates also can differ. The GAAP guidance reduces man-
agers’ ability to manipulate its pension expense and its projected benefit obligation but does 
not eliminate it.
 
See Figure 14.3 for a graphic comparison of discount rates and rate of return assumptions 
for plan assets used by a sample of Compustat firms from 2005 to 2012.12 The sample for 
Figure 14.3 includes all U.S. NYSE firms with available data for expected long-run rate of 
return, discount rate, pension assets, and PBO. The sample size ranges from a low of 798 
firms in 2012 to a high of 932 firms in 2005. The top and bottom lines in each graph represent 
the rates in the 90th and 10th percentiles, respectively. The middle line is the median. The 
highest median discount rate of approximately 6.3% occurred in 2008. From 2008 to 2012, 
discount rates fell significantly to a low of 4.0%. As interest rates change, companies must 
recompute their PBOs using the new rates. When interest rates decline, the resulting increase 
(decrease) in PBO is called an actuarial loss (gain). The recent decline in rates coupled with 
low asset returns have led to significant underfunding in both private and government pen-
sion plans. In 2013, severely underfunded pensions were key factors in Chicago’s and Illi-
nois’ bond rating downgrades and Detroit’s bankruptcy. We discuss private pension funding 
levels later in the chapter.
 
Note that there is little variability in the discount rate assumed by firms. For example, the 
discount rate at the 10% percentile is only 1% lower than the assumption at the 90th percentile. 
One reason for the narrow range of assumptions is SEC scrutiny of pension accounting prac-
tices. A second reason is that Citigroup provides a discount rate yield curve that allows a spon-
sor to select a discount rate appropriate for the average age of its pension plan participants.13 
Most of the variation across firms should be due to differences in participant demographics.
12 Compustat® is a computerized financial database for more than 10,000 active firms listed on the New York Stock Exchange 
(NYSE) and National Association of Securities Dealers Automated Quotations (NASDAQ) exchanges that is developed 
and distributed by Standard & Poor’s Corporation. The samples for Figure 14.3 and subsequent figures exclude non-U.S. 
corporations (corporations with American depositary receipts [ADRs] or incorporated outside the United States).
13 This yield curve was originally developed by Salomon Brothers in 1994 when the SEC issued new guidance regarding 
choice of discount rates for pension and retiree health care benefits. Citigroup continues to estimate this yield curve, and the 
Society of Actuaries maintains a website that provides current Citigroup estimates and the history of the pension rate yield 
curve. See www.soa.org/professional-interests/pension/resources/pen-resources-pension.aspx. I thank James Boatsman for 
making me aware of this resource.

836 
CHAPTER 14
Pensions and Postretirement Benefits
2005
Year
Discount rate (%)
7
8
9
10
5
6
4
3
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
90th percentile
Median
10th percentile
2005
Year
Expected long-term rate
of return on plan assets (%)
7
8
9
10
5
6
4
3
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
90th percentile
Median
10th percentile
Figure 14.3 PENSION DISCOUNT RATE AND EXPECTED LONG-TERM RATE OF RETURN ON PLAN 
ASSETS 2005–2012
Sample consists of all U.S. NYSE firms with defined  benefit plans and necessary data.
Source: Standard & Poor’s Compustat® as data source; methodology not verified or controlled by Standard & Poor’s.

 
Financial Reporting for Defined Benefit Pension Plans 
837
 
The expected rates of return on plan assets are higher than the discount rates. In addi-
tion, the expected rates did not decline as much as the discount rates. The median rate of 
return was 8.5% in 2005 and declined to 7.5% in 2012. We observe more variation across 
firms in the choice of the rate of return assumption than we saw with discount rate assump-
tions. However, most of the variation is at the low end. The 90th percentile rate is gener-
ally within 0.5% of the median rate of return of assumption. Again, this may be the result 
of SEC scrutiny of high expected rates. In addition, firms are now required to disclose the 
target percentages for the classes (i.e., investment types) of plan assets and the actual asset 
allocations to help analysts assess the reasonableness of the assumptions.14
 
Uncertainty not only complicates the measurement of service cost and interest cost but also 
means that actual outcomes will likely differ from expectations. For example, the actual 
 return (the interest, dividends, and appreciation obtained during the year) on pension plan 
assets differs from the expected return, and actual turnover and pay increases differ from 
 actuarial assumptions. As we are about to show, these deviations between expected and 
 actual events if recognized immediately—would inject volatility into the periodic measure 
of pension expense. Managers abhor earnings volatility because of its potential negative 
 effects on stock valuations and accounting-based contracts (see Chapters 6 and 7) and, not 
surprisingly, strong sentiments for reducing this volatility emerged early in the exposure draft 
stage of pre-Codification SFAS No. 87. Components 4 and 5 of the annual pension expense 
calculation are designed to smooth this volatility. Our discussion now turns to each of these 
smoothing components of pension expense.
Component 4—Recognized Gains or Losses 
In a real-world environment 
that contains uncertainty, the actual return on pension plan assets can differ considerably from 
the expected return in any year. Without some smoothing mechanism, volatility in asset 
 returns would translate directly into net income volatility because the return on plan assets 
reduces pension expense. As mentioned above, changes in assumptions underlying the PBO 
calculations can also give rise to losses (gains). We focus on plan asset losses (gains) in the 
illustration that follows. We discuss PBO actuarial gains and losses later in this section and 
throughout the remainder of the chapter.
 
To illustrate this volatility, let’s assume that at the beginning of 2014, Roger Corporation’s 
pension plan assets and PBO equal $200,000. There are no deferred gains or losses, and the 
balance sheet asset (liability) equals zero. Roger assumes a 5% discount rate. Also assume 
that it does not make contributions or pay benefits in 2014 or 2015. Its service cost and actual 
return are as follows:
 
2014 
2015
Service cost 
$  7,000 
$7,500
Actual return 
22,000 
 9,760
Interest cost is $10,000 (PBO of $200,000 3 discount rate of 5%) in 2014 and $10,850 (PBO 
of $217,000 [beginning 2014 PBO of $200,000 1 2014 service cost of $7,000 1 2014  interest 
14 See FASB ASC Section 715-20-50: Compensation–Retirement Benefits—Defined Benefit Plans–General—Disclosure.

838 
CHAPTER 14
Pensions and Postretirement Benefits
cost of $10,000] 3 discount rate of 5%) in 2015. Using these amounts, the resulting plan 
 assets, PBO, and funded status for 2014 and 2015, respectively follow:
 
2014 
2015
Fair value of plan assets
 Balance at 1/1 
$200,000 
$222,000
 Actual return 
22,000 
9,760
Balance at 12/31 
$222,000 
$231,760
Projected benefit obligation 
 
 Balance at 1/1 
$200,000 
$217,000
 Service cost 
7,000 
7,500
 Interest cost 
10,000 
10,850
Balance at 12/31 
$217,000 
$235,350
Funded status: Asset (liability) 
$  5,000 
$  (3,590)
If no smoothing were permitted, Roger’s pension expense in the two years would be:
 
2014 
2015
Service cost 
$  7,000 
$ 7,500
Interest cost 
10,000 
10,850
Less: Actual return on plan assets 
(22,000) 
(9,760)
Pension expense (income) 
$  (5,000) 
$ 8,590
This accounting would result in recognition of the funded status on Roger’s balance sheet. In 
2014, to offset the pension income, a pension asset equal to $5,000 would be created. In 2015, 
this asset would be reduced by the pension expense of $8,590, resulting in a pension liability 
of $3,590.
 
Although the funded status would be on the balance sheet, the extreme change in year-to-
year pension expense (income)—$5,000 income versus $8,590 expense—would cause year-
to-year volatility in the firm’s operating income. GAAP guidance makes it possible to avert 
this volatility in pension expense by allowing firms to reduce pension expense by the expected 
return on plan assets rather than by the actual return. This result is accomplished in two steps:
• First, firms make an assumption about the expected long-term rate of return on plan 
 assets (rate of return assumption). This rate should reflect the average long-term 
 returns on the types of investments held in the pension trust. For example, long-term 
 returns for stock investments would be expected to be higher than long-term returns for 
U.S. Treasury bonds. The dollar a mount of the expected return is computed by 
 multiplying this rate by the market-related value of plan assets.
• Second, any difference between the dollar amount of the expected return and the actual 
return that is earned in a given year is recognized in OCI instead of pension expense.
If the cumulative balance of these gains (losses) becomes large relative to the pension plan 
assets and liabilities, some of the cumulative amount is shifted from AOCI to pension ex-
pense. The specific details of this shifting process are discussed in a later example.
 
To show how the initial smoothing works, assume that Roger expects to earn an 8% return. 
Under the GAAP smoothing approach, Roger’s pension expense would be reduced by the 
expected return in each year—$16,000 in 2014 (plan assets of $200,000 3 8%) and $17,760 
in 2015 ([beginning 2014 plan assets of $200,000 1 2014 actual return of 22,000] 3 8%). 
Recall from Chapter 2 that 
AOCI is the cumulative gain 
and that OCI is the change 
in AOCI for the year. OCI is 
the net of new gains and 
losses and reclassifications 
of prior gains and losses 
into net income.

 
Financial Reporting for Defined Benefit Pension Plans 
839
This expected return is pension expense Component 3 discussed earlier. The difference be-
tween the expected and actual return in each year is deferred using AOCI. Specifically:
 
2014 
2015
Service cost 
 
$  7,000 
 
$  7,500
Interest cost 
 
10,000 
 
10,850
Less:
 Actual return on plan assets 
$(22,000) 
 
$(9,760) 
 Gain (loss) excluded from 
  pension expense 
6,000 
 
(8,000) 
Expected return on plan assets 
 
(16,000) 
 
(17,760)
 Pension expense 
 
$  1,000 
 
$   590
In years such as 2014 when the actual return ($22,000) exceeds the expected return ($16,000), 
an unrecognized gain of $6,000 (see highlight) occurs. Although the $6,000 is not recognized 
in pension expense, it is recognized in OCI. In 2015, the expected return of $17,760 exceeds 
the actual return of $9,760 by $8,000. The $17,760 is included in pension expense, and the 
$8,000 difference between expected return and actual return represents a loss within OCI. By 
using the expected return to compute pension expense, the year-to-year decrease in Roger 
Corporation’s pension expense was only $410 (2015 pension expense of $590 less the 2014 
pension expense of $1,000). In contrast, if actual return had been used to compute pension 
expense, the year-to-year change in pension expense would have been an increase of $13,590 
([2015 pension expense of $590 plus 2015 unrecognized loss of $8,000] minus [2014 pension 
expense of $1,000 minus 2014 unrecognized gain of $6,000]).
 
The pre-tax effects on OCI and AOCI follow:
 
2014 
2015
AOCI (loss) – 1y1 
$    0 
$ 6,000
OCI (loss) 
6,000 
(8,000)
AOCI (loss) – 12y31 
$6,000 
$(2,000)
From these effects, we can see that OCI reflects the volatility removed from pension expense. 
By recognizing the gain and loss in OCI, Roger will still recognize a balance sheet pension 
asset (liability) equal to the funded status—just as it would have if actual return had been used 
to compute pension expense. The details of the journal entries to obtain the asset (liability) 
amount are discussed later in the chapter.
 
See Figure 14.4 for a graphic presentation of how much actual returns can differ from 
 expected returns. The data in Figure 14.4 come from the pension notes for General Electric 
Company (GE) for the years 2006–2012, excerpts of which are given in Exhibit 14.3. The data 
highlighted in the last row of Exhibit 14.3, Panel (a) represent the deferred portion of each 
year’s actual return. This is the amount of the gain or loss excluded from pension expense, and 
it is represented by the vertical distance between the actual return line and expected return line 
in Figure 14.4. Note that in four of the years (2006, 2007, 2010, and 2012), this deferral in-
creases (debits) pension expense. In three years (2008, 2009, and 2011), the deferral reduces 
(credits) pension expense. The deferred gains and losses were off-balance-sheet prior to 2006. 
Upon adoption of pre-Codification SFAS No. 158, the cumulative gains and losses became 
part of AOCI. So, in 2008, the $20.867 billion loss for the difference between actual return 
and expected return was excluded from pension expense but was included in OCI. We discuss 
GE’s journal entries for 2012 in detail later in the chapter.

840 
CHAPTER 14
Pensions and Postretirement Benefits
 
Exhibit 14.3, Panel (b) shows that GE’s expected return as a percentage of beginning plan 
assets remained relatively stable during the period, while the actual rate of return ranged from 
a high of 16.0% in 2006 to a low of negative 27.8% in 2008. For the years 2007 to 2008, the 
actual dollar return on GE’s plan assets went from positive $7.188 billion to negative $16.569 
billion. GE’s earnings before income taxes were $27.528 billion and $19.782 billion for 2007 
and 2008, respectively. Clearly, without some mechanism to smooth out the big swings in the 
yearly actual returns on pension assets, considerable volatility would be introduced into GE’s 
pension expense and net income.
How Component 4 Is Measured 
Because pension accounting requires numerous 
assumptions about future events, differences between forecasted amounts and subsequent 
220
Year
210
215
25
0
Return in billions of $
5
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
10
Actual dollar return
Expected dollar return
Figure 14.4
GENERAL ELECTRIC 
COMPANY
Comparison of Actual and 
 Expected Return on Pension 
Plan Assets (2006–2012)
EXHIBIT 14.3
Excerpts from General Electric Company Notes Underlying Figure 14.4 Data
($ in billions) 
2006 
2007 
2008 
2009 
2010 
2011 
2012
Panel (a)—Difference between actual and expected return
Actual dollar return 
$ 7.851 
$ 7.188 
($16.569) 
$ 3.859 
$ 5.280 
$ 0.088 
$ 4.854
Less: Expected 
 dollar return 
$ 3.811 
$ 3.950 
$ 4.298 
$ 4.505 
$ 4.344 
$ 3.940 
$ 3.768
Difference [gain (loss) 
 excluded from 
 pension expense] 
$ 4.040 
$ 3.238 
($20.867) 
($ 0.646) 
$ 0.936 
($ 3.852) 
$ 1.086
Panel (b)—Expected return and actual return as a % of beginning plan assets
Fair value of 
 plan assets† 
$49.096 
$54.758 
$59.700 
$40.730 
$42.097 
$44.801 
$42.137
Expected return as a % of
 beginning plan assets 
7.8% 
7.2% 
7.2% 
11.1% 
10.3% 
8.8% 
8.9%
Actual return as a % of
 beginning plan assets 
16.0% 
13.1% 
227.8% 
9.5% 
12.5% 
0.2% 
11.5%
† This is the value of the plan assets at the start of each year.
Source: General Electric Company annual reports, 2006–2012.

 
Financial Reporting for Defined Benefit Pension Plans 
841
 occurrences should be expected. Cumulative deferred net gains or losses can arise from 
three causes:
1. Cumulative differences between actual and expected returns on pension plan assets as 
 illustrated in Exhibit 14.3 and Figure 14.4.
2. Cumulative differences between actuarial assumptions and actual experience (e.g., 
 employee turnover, pay increases, and longevity beyond retirement).
3. Changes in assumptions (e.g., a change in the discount rate used for computing service 
cost and interest cost).
 
Authoritative accounting literature does not require each year’s pension expense to reflect 
actual returns on plan assets or observed actuarial outcomes. Instead, the deferred loss (gain) 
is recognized in OCI with a corresponding increase (decrease) to the balance sheet pension 
liability. However, if the gains and losses do not offset one another over time, the periodic dif-
ferences will ultimately accumulate and exceed a materiality threshold, called the corridor 
(discussed in detail below). Some of the excess gains or losses should be recognized as a 
component of  pension expense once the corridor has been exceeded. This is the role of Com-
ponent 4— recognized gains or losses.
 
The approach described below is the minimum amortization required by authoritative 
 accounting literature.15 First, the corridor is computed. It is defined as 10% of the higher of 
the following two numbers:
1. The PBO.
2. The market-related value (MRV) of the pension plan assets.
Second, the corridor is compared to the beginning balance of net actuarial loss (gain) in AOCI 
to determine whether it exceeds the corridor. If it does, then, third, the excess AOCI loss 
(gain) above the 10% corridor is amortized straight-line over the estimated average remain-
ing service period (an actuarial computation of the average number of years over which ex-
isting employees are expected to continue on the job). We now walk through an example to 
illustrate the corridor method step-by-step.
 
On January 1, 2014, Dore Corporation has ($1,600,000) in AOCI2actuarial (gain) loss. 
The MRV of pension plan assets on that date is $10,000,000, and the PBO is $8,500,000. The 
estimated average remaining service period of active employees is 15 years.
 
Figure 14.5 shows the steps in computing Component 4—recognized gains or losses. The 
10% corridor is computed by first comparing the size of the MRV ($10,000,000) with the 
PBO ($8,500,000) and choosing the higher—the $10,000,000 MRV in this instance. This 
$10,000,000 is then multiplied by 10% to arrive at the corridor of $1,000,000 (see Step 1 in 
Figure 14.5). Because the gain of $(1,600,000) is more than the $1,000,000 corridor, the rec-
ognition mechanism is triggered (see Step 2). This means that component 4—recognized 
gains or losses—will be included in computing pension expense for the year. The $(600,000) 
amount in excess of the threshold will be amortized over 15 years. This amortization means 
that pension expense component 4 will be reduced for $40,000 ($[600,000]/15), thereby re-
ducing pension expense (see Step 3). AOCI—actuarial (gain) loss also will be reduced by 
$40,000, thereby decreasing it to $(1,560,000).
 
If there were no future actuarial gains or losses and the MRV remained constant, the $560,000 
unamortized excess ($600,000 2 $40,000) would be fully amortized into income over the  ensuing 
15 A systematic method consistently applied to both gains and losses that results in a larger amount is permissible [FASB ASC 
Paragraphs 715-30-35-24 and -25: Compensation–Retirement Benefits—Defined Benefit Plans–Pension—Subsequent 
 Measurement—Gains and Losses]. This approach is discussed further at the end of this section.

842 
CHAPTER 14
Pensions and Postretirement Benefits
14 years. Realistically, however, pension accounting requires many assumptions about uncertain 
future events, and uncertainty means that further adjustments are likely. Consequently, GAAP 
requires that the computation illustrated in the example be recalculated at the start of each sub-
sequent year to determine that year’s pension expense Component 4. Nonetheless, just because 
Component 4 was required in 2014 doesn’t necessarily mean it will be required again in 2015.
 
To illustrate, let’s assume that one year later—on January 1, 2015—Dore Corporation’s 
AOCI—actuarial (gain) loss has fallen to $(250,000), plan assets are $11,000,000, and the 
PBO is $9,000,000. The 10% corridor is now $1,100,000 (that is, $11,000,000 3 0.10). This 
is higher (in terms of absolute value) than the $(250,000). Thus, the corridor is not exceeded, 
and no amortization would be required in 2015.
 
Why does GAAP use the PBO and the MRV of pension plan assets as the two benchmarks 
that potentially trigger the Component 4 amortization? Measures of projected benefit obliga-
tions and plan assets constitute the “critical 10% corridor” because the factors giving rise to 
the cumulative gain or loss represent misestimates of the “real” pension plan obligations and 
assets. In other words, gains and losses occur because the expected return on plan assets in-
cluded in pension expense understated or overstated the actual return on pension assets. Simi-
larly, gains or losses related to service cost and interest cost included in pension expense 
understated or overstated the actual increase in pension obligations. Thus, obligations and 
assets constitute the appropriate benchmarks for assessing when the cumulative error is “ex-
cessive.” The 10% corridor is simply an arbitrary measure of this “excessiveness.”
Immediate Recognition of Losses (Gains) 
In 2010 and 2011, a number of 
companies with significant pension/other postretirement benefit exposure changed from the 
corridor method to the immediate recognition method for recognizing actuarial losses 
Figure 14.5
COMPUTING COMPONENT 
4—RECOGNIZED GAINS 
OR LOSSES
Step 1. Compute the 10% corridor.
Step 2. Determine whether the corridor is exceeded.
Step 3. Compute the current year’s Component 4 amortization.
a. Compare beginning-of-year amounts of market-related value (MRV) of pension plan assets
    and projected benefit obligation (PBO).
a. Obtain the average remaining service period (ARSP) figure from the actuary. Here, ARSP 
    equals 15 years.
b. Divide the amount by which AOCI—(G)L exceeds the corridor (Step 2.b) by ARSP.
 c. The quotient from Step 3b, $(40,000) (that is, $[600,000]/15) is the Component 4 amount for
    the current year. Pension expense will be reduced by $40,000 in the current year.
a. Compare beginning-of-year AOCI—(gain) loss to the corridor computed in Step 1c.
b. Recognition is required because AOCI—(G)L—a cumulative gain in this example—exceeds
     the corridor by $600,000.
c. So, Component 4—recognized gains or losses—will appear in pension expense for the current
    year.
b. Select the larger one, that is, MRV of $10,000,000.
c. Multiply the larger one by 10%; so, $10,000,000 3 10% 5 $1,000,000.
     This is the 10% corridor.
4
MRV
$10,000,000
PBO
$8,500,000
AOCI—(G)L
$(1,600,000)
Corridor
$1,000,000
AOCI—(G)L2Corridor
$(600,000)
ARSP
15 years

 
Financial Reporting for Defined Benefit Pension Plans 
843
(gains).16 As mentioned earlier, U.S. GAAP allows faster amortization methods as long as the 
methods are systematic. AT&T was one the first companies to make the change. The effect of 
the change was to transfer $17.0 billion of losses held in AOCI to Retained earnings.17 Exami-
nation of prior years’ financial statements shows that most of these losses came from poor 
asset returns in 2008.
 
By making the change, AT&T kept these losses from being amortized to pension/other 
postretirement expense in future years. However, the change exposed the company to future 
volatility in pension expense (see the prior Roger example). Because of the severe interest rate 
declines in 2011 and 2012 (see Figure 14.3), AT&T suffered large actuarial losses that had to 
be recognized in pension expense immediately. AT&T recognized pre-tax net actuarial 
losses of $9.4 billion and $6.2 in 2012 and 2011, respectively. To put these amounts in per-
spective, service cost was $1.5 billion in 2012. Other companies that followed AT&T’s 
 approach experienced similar fates.
Component 5—Recognized Prior Service Cost 
Pension plans may be 
amended to increase or decrease benefits to employees. Firms may enhance—or “sweeten”—
pension plans for various reasons. One is to generate employee goodwill and loyalty to the 
organization, thereby retaining a quality workforce. Another reason for pension enhance-
ment—particularly retroactive enhancement—is a result of union demands in labor negotia-
tions. However, if a company suffers financial difficulties, as have many airlines in recent 
years, it may amend the plan to reduce benefits. When a firm retroactively enhances (reduces) 
the benefits provided by its pension plan, past pension expense and pension funding—which 
were both based on the “old” pension plan terms—were too low (high). This also means that 
when a firm enhances (reduces) its pension plan benefits, it immediately increases (decreases) 
its projected benefit obligation under the plan. The dollar amount of the increase (decrease) in 
the projected benefit obligation due to plan enhancements (reductions) is called prior service 
cost. Component 5 adjusts pension expense for prior service cost. Here’s an example that 
 illustrates how prior service cost arises:
16 See B. Burr, Pensions & Investments, February 21, 2011, www.pionline.com.
17 See AT&T Inc. Form 8-K, January 13, 2011.
Schiller Corporation’s pension plan contract grants employees a pension of 2% of ending 
salary at retirement for each year of service to a maximum of 30 years. Therefore, an em-
ployee with 30 years of service at Schiller could retire with a pension equal to 60% of her or 
his salary at retirement.
 
Schiller’s management now believes that the 60% pension maximum is inadequate 
given existing general economic conditions. The pension plan is retroactively changed on 
January 1, 2014. Under the revised plan, employees qualify for a pension of 2.25% of end-
ing salary at retirement for each year of service, again to a maximum of 30 years. Under 
the revised plan, the maximum pension is 67.5% of the employee’s salary at retirement 
(2.25% 3 30 years).
 
Based on Schiller’s employee demographics and expected salaries, the plan enhancement 
increases the projected benefit obligation by $14,000,000. The average remaining service 
period of employees expected to receive benefits under the plan is 10 years.
 
Although the plan enhancements are computed on the basis of services rendered in prior 
periods, the benefits to the firm will be realized in future periods. The firm realizes the bene-
fits of retroactive plan enhancements in future periods because of decreased employee turn-
over or better labor relations. Accordingly, authoritative accounting literature allows this 

844 
CHAPTER 14
Pensions and Postretirement Benefits
$14,000,000 amount of prior service costs to be amortized into pension expense on a straight-
line basis over the expected remaining 10-year service lives of employees who are expected to 
receive benefits under the plan. So, $1,400,000 would be added to pension expense over each 
of the next 10 years (that is, $14,000,000/10). This is the role of Component 5.
 
Similar to net actuarial losses, new prior service costs credit (increase) the balance sheet 
liability and debit (decrease) OCI and AOCI. In the Schiller example, as the prior service cost 
is amortized, pension expense is debited for $1,400,000, and OCI—Prior service cost is cred-
ited for the same amount. The amortization effectively transfers debits held in AOCI to pen-
sion expense (and consequently, net income and retained earnings). We discuss the balance 
sheet effects of Components 4 and 5 in detail in the Adess Corporation example below.
RECAP
Assumptions pervade pension accounting. When reality is different from assumptions or 
assumptions change, the resulting change in estimate could be recognized immediately as 
part of pension expense. Doing this would make pension expense volatile from year to 
year. GAAP allows the gains and losses to be initially recognized in OCI. If the cumulative 
net gains or losses exceed a materiality threshold called the corridor, a portion of the ex-
cess is recognized as Component 4 of pension expense. Firms may amend pension plan 
agreements to improve or reduce pension benefits as market conditions change. When 
an amendment is made, the effect on PBO is initially recognized in OCI and amortized 
from AOCI to Component 5 of pension expense over future years.
Journal Entries for Changes in Funded Status
To illustrate the journal entries for pension expense, let’s assume that Adess Corporation dis-
closes the following components in its pension note at December 31, 2014:
Service cost (Component 1) 
$23,000
Interest cost (Component 2) 
42,500
Expected return on plan assets (Component 3) 
(38,250)
Amortization of actuarial loss (Component 4) 
10,000
Amortization of prior service cost (Component 5) 
12,750
 2014 Pension expense 
$50,000
Service cost (Component 1) and interest cost (Component 2) increase PBO, and expected re-
turn (Component 3) increases plan assets. Because the sum of service cost and interest cost 
exceeds expected return by $27,250 ($23,000 1 $42,500 2 $38,250), funded status declines 
by $27,250. To reflect this decline in funded status, Adess makes the following journal entry:
Journal Entry 1: Pension expense Components 1–3
DR Pension expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $27,250
   CR Pension asset (liability)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$27,250
If the net balance in the Pension asset (liability) is a debit, it would be classified as an asset. If 
the net balance is a credit, it would appear on the balance sheet as a liability. Components 4 
and 5 are transfers from AOCI and do not affect funded status. Consequently, we make the 
following entry to record their effects on pension expense:
Journal Entry 2: Pension expense Components 4 and 5
DR Pension expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $22,750
CR OCI—net actuarial loss   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$10,000
CR OCI—prior service cost  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
12,750
These two entries may be combined into one entry, but we use two entries to make it easier to 
trace the effects.
In the journal entries involv-
ing AOCI and OCI, we make 
entries to OCI. New gains or 
losses and reclassifications 
included in OCI for the year 
must be closed to AOCI and 
disclosed in the notes related 
to comprehensive income or 
the statement of sharehold-
ers’ equity. We discuss this 
issue in more depth at the 
end of the General Electric 
pension example.

 
Financial Reporting for Defined Benefit Pension Plans 
845
 
In addition to service cost and interest cost, plan amendments also can change PBO. If the 
amendment increases pension benefits, the PBO increases, thereby decreasing funded status 
at the time of the amendment. Decreases in benefits would have the opposite effects on PBO 
and funded status. Amendments are recognized in the Pension asset (liability) account, but the 
offset is recorded in OCI—prior service cost instead of Pension expense. To illustrate, assume 
that Adess adopted an amendment, the total of which increased PBO by $27,700. To record 
the effect of the amendment, Adess makes the following entry:
Journal Entry 3: Plan amendment
DR OCI—prior service cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $27,700
CR Pension asset (liability)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$27,700
The net effect of entries 2 and 3 is a debit to OCI—prior service cost of $14,950 ($27,700 from journal 
entry 3 less $12,750 from journal entry 2).
 
We now turn to events that affect plan assets. Entry 1 was based on expected return. If the 
actual return differs from expected return, then an additional entry must be made to reflect 
funded status on the balance sheet. As stated earlier, the difference between actual and ex-
pected return must be recognized in OCI with the offsetting debit or credit to the Pension asset 
(liability) account. To illustrate, assume that Adess Corporation’s expected return exceeds its 
actual return by $5,000. To record this difference, Adess makes the following entry:
Journal Entry 4: Difference between actual and expected return
DR OCI—net actuarial loss  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$5,000
CR Pension asset (liability)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$5,000
The net effect of entries 2 and 4 is a credit to OCI—net actuarial loss of $5,000 ($10,000 from 
journal entry 2 less $5,000 from journal entry 3).
 
An entry identical to Entry 4 would be made for increases or decreases to PBO caused by 
changes in assumptions or experience losses or gains.
 
A firm typically funds an amount different than pension expense. (Factors that affect firms’ 
funding policies are discussed in the next section.) Also, the timing of pension plan contribu-
tions does not usually match the timing of expense recognition. As contributions increase plan 
assets, the Pension asset (liability) account is debited for the amount of the contribution. 
 Assuming that Adess Corporation chooses to fund $53,000 in 2014, the entry is:
Journal Entry 5: Plan contribution
DR Pension asset (liability)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$53,000
CR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$53,000
 
After making these entries, Adess Corporation’s balance sheet Pension asset (liability) ac-
count will equal its funded status. Consistent with the prior Robie example, we did not make 
an entry for benefits paid to retirees. Because both plan assets and PBO are typically reduced 
by the same amount for benefits paid to retirees, there is no effect on funded status, and con-
sequently, no journal entry is required.
Determinants of Pension Funding
Labor law, income tax rules, and varying cash flow needs strongly impact a firm’s pension 
plan funding. Let’s first consider the role of labor law.
 
The U.S. Congress enacted legislation to regulate private U.S. defined benefit pension plans in 
1974. The Employees Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) was designed to protect 
workers covered by company- or industry-sponsored pension plans. This law was deemed 

846 
CHAPTER 14
Pensions and Postretirement Benefits
 necessary because some companies with underfunded pension plans went out of business and 
defaulted on their obligations to pay benefits to employees. When Studebaker Corporation—once 
a major automobile manufacturer headquartered in South Bend, Indiana—experienced severe 
economic hardship and declared bankruptcy in 1964, its pension liabilities greatly exceeded its 
plan assets. Studebaker retirees were unprotected and consequently lost most of their promised 
pensions. Such hardships ultimately motivated legislation designed to prevent recurrences.
 
ERISA introduced minimum funding requirements, limited investments in employer stock 
to 10% of plan assets, and created the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC) to 
assume pension obligations when sponsors are bankrupt and plan assets are inadequate.18 The 
PBGC receives its funds from defined benefit plan sponsors.19 In 2000, the PBGC had a sur-
plus of $9.7 billion. However, low stock returns and low discount rates led to a $23.3 billion 
deficit by the end of 2004.20 The bankruptcies of large airlines and manufacturers with billions 
of unfunded pension liabilities worsened the deficit.
 
To provide additional protection to plan participants and to improve PBGC’s health, The 
Pension Protection Act of 2006 (PL 109-280) [hereafter, PPA] amended ERISA. Its provi-
sions were implemented in phases from 2008 to 2011. The law required firms to reduce the 
amount of underfunding more quickly than they would have under prior law. Additionally, the 
law created an “at-risk” category for severely underfunded plans and required them to reduce 
the underfunding faster. The PPA included guidelines for determining whether a plan is over-
funded or underfunded, and the PBGC issued additional interpretive regulations.21 These 
guidelines and regulations differ from those in authoritative accounting literature as to how 
liabilities are defined and what assumptions are to be used.
 
As of September 30, 2008, the deficit had fallen to $10.7 billion. However, within one 
year, at September 30, 2009, this deficit approximately doubled to $21.1 billion due to low 
interest rates and the assumption of pension obligations of bankrupt companies, such as 
Lehman Brothers, Delphi Corporation, IndyMac Bank, Circuit City, and Nortel.22 Despite the 
PPA, in 2012, the PBGC’s deficit of $29.14 billion was larger than the deficit that prompted 
the PPA. To reduce the PBGC deficits, the U.S. Congress has now indexed for inflation the 
flat and variable premiums. In addition, the PBGC works with companies and manages its 
assets to mitigate its losses.
 
The U.S. income tax law also influences pension plan funding. Because plan contributions 
are tax deductible and plan earnings are nontaxable to the plan sponsor, there is a tax incentive 
to overfund pension plans. Because of this incentive, the tax law limits the deductibility of 
contributions to already overfunded pension plans. Consequently, a firm with an overfunded 
plan limits its funding to an amount that is deductible for tax purposes.
 
Finally, firms with pension plans have a wide range of other uses for cash flows generated 
by operating activities. Examples include plant expansion, corporate acquisitions, debt retire-
ment, and dividend increases. So, firms sometimes reduce or even forgo funding of the current 
period’s pension expense—provided minimum ERISA funding guidelines are satisfied—to 
meet competing investment or financing cash needs.
18 The PBGC only partially guarantees benefits. The maximum annual pension benefit it guaranteed in 2012 was $55,840.92. 
This amount is adjusted for changes to the Social Security wage base. See Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, 2012 
 Annual Report, p. 30. This limitation affects high-wage employees, such as pilots, autoworkers, and investment managers.
19 The payment formula has been amended several times since 1974. In 2013, sponsors paid a $42 flat fee per participant plus 
a variable premium of $13 per $1,000 of underfunding. See Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, 2012 Annual Report, 
p. 28.
20 See J. VanDerhei, “Retirement Income Adequacy after PPA and FAS 158: Part One—Plan Sponsors’ Reactions,” EBRI 
Issue Brief no. 307, n.d., www.ebri.org, July 2007, p. 4.
21 See Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, Federal Register 72, no. 104 (May 31, 2007).
22 See Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, 2009 Annual Report, pp. 3 and 79.

 
Case Study of  Pension Recognition and Disclosure—General Electric 
847
 
The long term pension funding strategy that a firm chooses to follow is determined not 
only by its internal cash flow needs but also by many complex economic forces. Two studies 
sought to explain firms’ funding strategies by examining the relationship between funding 
ratios—plan assets divided by pension obligations—and a variety of variables that represent 
the economic incentives (and costs) associated with pension funding.23 These economic in-
centives can be broadly classified as (1) tax incentives, (2) finance incentives, (3) labor incen-
tives, and (4) contracting/political cost incentives.
 
The findings of this research follow:
• Firms with high marginal tax rates tend to have higher funding ratios—higher marginal 
tax rates provide an incentive to overfund.
• Firms with less stringent capital constraints and larger union membership tend to have 
higher funding ratios.
• Firms with more “precarious” debt/equity ratios (that is, firms close to violating debt 
 covenant restrictions) tend to fund a lower proportion of their pension obligations.
In general, variables designed to measure political costs were not found to be significant 
 determinants of pension funding ratios.
23 See J. R. Francis and S. A. Reiter, “Determinants of Corporate Pension Funding Strategy,” Journal of Accounting and 
Economics, April 1987, pp. 35–60; and J. K. Thomas, “Corporate Taxes and Defined Benefit Pension Plans,” Journal of 
 Accounting and Economics, July 1988, pp. 199–238.
RECAP
Tax and labor laws govern pension funding. While economic incentives appear to  influence 
long-term corporate pension funding strategies, our understanding of this multidimen-
sional decision is far from complete.
CASE STUDY OF PENSION RECOGNITION 
AND DISCLOSURE—GENERAL ELECTRIC
To understand how pension plan assets and liabilities change during the year and how these 
changes affect the financial statements, analysts must understand the pension note disclosures 
required under FASB ASC 715. We build on prior examples by analyzing ex-
cerpts of General Electric’s 2012 pension note (see Exhibit 14.4). We have 
numbered the schedules to make it easier to follow our explanations.
 
Schedule 1 shows the components of pension cost. Note that they mirror 
the components described in prior examples. Expected return, service cost, and interest cost 
are relatively stable for the three-year period. Service cost is less in absolute magnitude than 
expected return and interest cost, which is typical of mature plans. Service cost is 56% of in-
terest cost and 37% of expected return. In younger plans, service cost would be a higher per-
centage. GE’s service cost will decrease in future years because it has ended defined benefit 
coverage for new workers (see plan description above Schedule 1). GE reports an increasing 
amount of prior service cost amortization due to a 2011 plan amendment. The amount of net 
actuarial loss recognition increased from $1,336 million in 2010 to $3,421 million in 2012. 
The increase in amortization comes from the large asset and PBO losses incurred in prior 
years. The note under Schedule 6 states that GE expects to amortize $3,650 million of actu-
arial losses in 2013.
 
Schedule 2 provides the actuarial and accounting assumptions. The 4.21% discount rate for 
2011 is used to compute the PBO at December 31, 2011, and the service cost and interest cost 
for 2012. The 3.75% assumed compensation increases is also used to compute the December 31, 
The total is called “cost,” not “expense,” because 
some of the pension costs go into inventory 
 before they are expensed in cost of sales.

848 
CHAPTER 14
Pensions and Postretirement Benefits
EXHIBIT 14.4
General Electric Company: Edited, Condensed 2012 
Pension Benefits Note
PRINCIPAL PENSION PLANS are the GE Pension Plan and the GE Supplementary Pension Plan.*
 
The GE Pension Plan provides benefits to certain U.S. employees based on the greater of a 
formula recognizing career earnings or a formula recognizing length of service and final average 
earnings. Certain benefit provisions are subject to collective bargaining. Salaried employees who 
commence service on or after January 1, 2011 and any employee who commences service on or 
after January 1, 2012 will not be eligible to participate in the GE Pension Plan, but will partici-
pate in a defined contribution retirement program.
 
The GE Supplementary Pension Plan is an unfunded plan providing supplementary retirement 
benefits primarily to higher-level, longer-service U.S. employees. . . .
Schedule 1: Cost of Pension Plans
($ in millions) 
2012 
2011 
2010
Expected return on plan assets 
➀ $(3,768) 
$(3,940) 
$(4,344)
Service cost for benefits earned 
➁ 
1,387 
1,195 
1,149
Interest cost on benefit obligation 
➂ 
2,479 
2,662 
2,693
Prior service cost amortization 
➃ 
279 
194 
238
Net actuarial loss amortization 
➄ 
3,421 
2,335 
1,336
 Pension plans cost 
 
$3,798 
$2,446 
$1,072
Schedule 2:  Actuarial Assumptions
The actuarial assumptions at December 31 are used to measure the year-end benefit obligations 
and the pension costs for the subsequent year.
 
December 31,
 
2012 
2011 
2010 
2009
Discount rate 
3.96% 
4.21% 
5.28% 
5.78%
Compensation increases 
3.90 
3.75 
4.25 
4.20
Expected return on assets 
8.00 
8.00 
8.00 
8.50
Schedule 3:  Accumulated Benefit Obligation
 
December 31,
($ in millions) 
2012 
2011
GE Pension Plan 
 
$55,664 
$53,040
GE Supplementary Pension Plan 
 
4,114 
3,643
Schedule 4: Projected Benefit Obligation
($ in millions) 
2012 
2011
Balance at January 1 
 
$60,510 
$51,999
Service cost for benefits earned 
 
1,387 
1,195
Interest cost on benefit obligations 
 
2,479 
2,662
Plan amendments 
➅    —  
804
Participant contributions 
 
157 
167
Actuarial loss(a) 
➆  2,021 
6,803
Benefits paid 
 
(3,052) 
(3,120)
Balance at December 31(b) 
 
$63,502 
$60,510
(a) Principally associated with discount rate changes.
(b) The PBO for the GE Supplementary Pension Plan, which is an unfunded plan, was $5,494 million and $5,203 million 
at year-end 2012 and 2011, respectively.
(continued)

 
Case Study of  Pension Recognition and Disclosure—General Electric 
849
EXHIBIT 14.4
General Electric Company: Edited, Condensed 2012 
Pension Benefits Note (continued)
Schedule 5: Fair Value of Plan Assets
($ in millions) 
2012 
2011
Balance at January 1 
 
$42,137 
$44,801
Actual gain on plan assets 
➇ 
4,854 
88
Employer contributions 
➈ 
642 
201
Participant contributions 
➉ 
157 
167
Benefits paid 
 (3,052) 
(3,120)
Balance at December 31 
 
$44,738 
$42,137
Schedule 6: Pension Asset (Liability)
 
December 31,
($ in millions) 
2012 
2011
Funded status(c) 
$(18,764) 
$(18,373)
Pension asset (liability) recorded in the 
 Statement of Financial Position
Pension asset 
$ — 
$ 
 
—
Pension liabilities
 Due within one year(d) 
(159) 
(148)
 Due after one year 
(18,605) 
(18,225)
Net amount recognized 
$(18,764) 
$(18,373)
Amounts recorded in shareowners’ 
 equity (unamortized)
 Prior service cost 
$ 1,406 
$ 1,685
 Net actuarial loss 
24,437 
26,923
Total 
$25,843 
$28,608
(c) Fair value of assets less PBO, as shown in the preceding tables.
(d) For principal pension plans, represents the GE Supplementary Pension Plan liability.
In 2013, we estimate that we will amortize $245 million of prior service cost and $3,650 million 
of net actuarial loss for the principal pension plans from shareowners’ equity into pension cost. 
Comparable amortized amounts in 2012, respectively, were $279 million and $3,421 million for 
the principal pension plans. . . .
Schedule 7: Estimated Future Benefit Payments
($ in millions) 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018–2022
Principal pension plans 
$3,040 
$3,100 
$3,170 
$3,230 
$3,275 
$17,680
FUNDING POLICY for the GE Pension Plan is to contribute amounts sufficient to meet 
minimum funding requirements as set forth in employee benefit and tax laws plus such 
 additional amounts as we may determine to be appropriate. We contributed $433 million to 
the GE Pension Plan in 2012. The ERISA minimum funding requirements do not require a 
contribution in 2013. In addition, we expect to pay approximately $230 million for benefit 
payments under our GE Supplementary Pension Plan and administrative expenses of our 
 principal pension plans. . . .
* Author note: The 2012 GE note includes additional sets of columns for other pension plans. These columns have 
been omitted to facilitate our discussion. We also have numbered the schedules and reordered some descriptions to 
make it easier for the reader to follow our discussions.

850 
CHAPTER 14
Pensions and Postretirement Benefits
2011, PBO and the 2012 service cost. This rate is compounded annually to estimate the aver-
age salary at retirement. The 8.0% expected-return on assets assumption is used for account-
ing purposes to compute the expected return component of pension cost.24 Changes in various 
pension rate assumptions affect reported pension amounts. An increase in the discount rate 
lowers service cost and PBO. If the assumed rate of compensation increases used in determin-
ing the PBO is lowered, service cost is reduced too. Also, an increase (decrease) in the spread 
between the discount rate and the assumed rate of compensation increase lowers (raises) 
 service cost. Finally, an increase (decrease) in the expected return on plan assets decreases 
(increases) pension cost.
 
Schedule 3 provides an alternative measure of the pension liability, the accumulated ben-
efit obligation (ABO). The ABO differs from the PBO in that the ABO does not include 
projected salary increases between the statement date and the employee’s expected retirement 
date. Note that GE’s reported ABO in Schedule 3 is less than its reported PBO in Schedule 4. 
If GE terminated its pension plan (i.e., prevented employees from earning additional pension 
benefits) as of December 31, 2012, it would have to pay only the ABO of $59,778 million 
($55,664 million 1 $4,114 million) instead of the PBO of $63,502 million. This difference 
also represents the losses workers would suffer if they leave GE prior to retirement. Note that 
U.S. GAAP uses PBO for balance sheet and income statement recognition.
 
Schedule 6 provides the funded status of GE’s pension plans. GE’s funded status of 
$(18,764) million for 2012 is computed as the difference between the fair value of plan assets 
of $44,738 million (Schedule 5) and the PBO of $63,502 million (Schedule 4). As mentioned 
earlier in the chapter, when the fair value of pension assets exceeds plan liabilities, a plan is 
overfunded. If pension liabilities exceed the fair value of plan assets, a plan is underfunded. 
This funded status disclosure is important to statement readers because the plan sponsor—the 
reporting entity—is ultimately responsible for underfunded pension plans. Moreover, some-
times the reporting entity can reclaim a portion of the excess in overfunded plans. So, infor-
mation about the funded status helps analysts assess the sponsor’s financial condition.
 
Figure 14.6 summarizes the causes for increases and decreases in plan assets in a T-account 
format.25 We use GE’s fair value of plan assets disclosures in Exhibit 14.4, Schedule 5 to 
 explain each element in the figure.
• Item A represents the beginning-of-period fair value of the pension plan assets. For GE, 
the January 1, 2012 (from December 31, 2011) amount totaled $42,137 million.
• Item B, the actual return on plan assets, increased the dollar value of plan assets.  Generally, 
the amount is positive, but in very bad investment years, Item B can be negative as it was in 
2008 [see Exhibit 14.3, Panel (a)]. GE’s 2012 actual return on plan assets was a positive 
$4,854 million.
• Item C, the amount that the plan sponsor funds during the period, further increases plan 
assets. GE’s 2012 contribution was $642 million.
• Item D, contributions by plan participants, also increases plan assets. During 2012, con-
tributions by GE plan participants totaled $157 million.
24 FASB ASC Section 715-30-50: Compensation–Retirement Benefits—Defined Benefit Plans–Pension—Disclosure re-
quires firms to describe their approach to establishing the assumption, the target and actual asset allocation, and investment 
guidelines. Firms also must disclose investment categories, concentration of risk, fair value measurement methods, and the 
effects of using unobservable inputs (Level 3) on changes in asset values. These disclosures have been omitted from the GE 
excerpts to facilitate discussion.
25 In addition to the items shown in Figure 14.6, FASB ASC Section 715-30-50: Compensation–Retirement Benefits— 
Defined Benefit Plans—Disclosure requires, if applicable, disclosure of (1) changes in plan assets arising from exchange rate 
changes for pension plans of certain foreign subsidiaries and (2) changes in plan assets arising from business combinations, 
divestitures, and plan settlements.
Analysis

 
Case Study of  Pension Recognition and Disclosure—General Electric 
851
• Retirees receive benefits during the period; these benefits are disbursed by the plan trust 
and reduce plan assets, as indicated by Item E. Benefits paid to participants by the plan 
trust in 2012 were $3,052 million.
• The end-of-period fair value of plan assets is Item F. This amount totaled $44,738 million 
for the GE plans.
 
Figure 14.7 summarizes the general reasons for increases and decreases to the PBO.26 We 
use GE’s projected benefit obligation disclosures in Exhibit 14.4, Schedule 4 to explain each 
element in Figure 14.7.
• Item G is the start-of-period present value of expected future benefits that will ultimately 
be paid both to active and already retired employees. The 2012 GE beginning amount is 
$60,510 million (also the December 31, 2011 amount).
• Item H represents the increase in benefits that active employees continue to earn from 
 additional years of work. This increase in the PBO is service cost. GE’s service cost in 
2012 was $1,387 million.
• As time passes, interest accrues on the PBO (as shown in Item I). GE’s 2012 interest cost 
was $2,479 million.
• Changes in economic and other social conditions cause firms to adjust promised benefits, as 
Item J indicates. These amendments either increase the PBO (when the plan is sweetened) or 
Figure 14.6
CAUSES OF INCREASES 
AND DECREASES IN 
PLAN ASSETS
Compare with Schedule 5 of 
Exhibit 14.4
Beginning balance of plan assets
at market value
Actual return on plan assets during
the period (dividends, interest, and
change in market value)
Plan trust’s distribution of plan
assets (that is, pension payments)
to plan retirees
Plan Assets
DR
A.
B.
C.
D.
F.
E.
CR
Contribution of additional plan
assets during the period by the 
plan sponsor
Contribution of additional plan
assets during the period by the
plan participants
Ending balance of plan assets at
market value
(A 6 B 1 C 1 D 2 E 5 F)
26 In addition to the items shown in Figure 14.7, FASB ASC Section 715-30-50: Compensation–Retirement Benefits— 
Defined Benefit Plans–Pension—Disclosure requires, if applicable, disclosure of (1) changes in the PBO arising from 
 exchange rate changes for pension plans of certain foreign subsidiaries and (2) changes in the PBO arising from business 
combinations, divestitures, curtailments, plan settlements, and special termination benefits.

852 
CHAPTER 14
Pensions and Postretirement Benefits
decrease it (when benefits are reduced). GE did not increase benefits for these plans in 
2012. However, in 2011, a plan amendment increased PBO by $804 million (see item ➅ in 
Schedule 4)
• Item K, contributions by plan participants, also increases the PBO. During 2012, such 
contributions totaled $157 million, which matches the employer contribution in the plan 
assets analysis (Schedule 5).
• The assumptions used in estimating the pension liability lead to gains or losses due to 
changing medical, lifestyle, and economic conditions. Denoted by Item L, these increases 
(or decreases) in the PBO can also arise from revised interest rate assumptions. Recall 
from earlier discussions that a decrease in the discount rate assumption results in an 
 increase to the PBO. In 2012, GE decreased its discount rate assumption from 4.21% to 
3.96%, which is consistent with the $2,021 million increase to PBO in 2012. If the 
changed assumptions produced gains, the PBO would have been reduced.
• Item M represents the payout of retirement benefits to participants. This is the offsetting 
debit to the Item E credit in Figure 14.6. GE’s 2012 amount was $3,052 million.
• Finally, the ending PBO balance (Item N) is the net result of each of the preceding items. 
This amount totaled $63,502 million for the GE plans.
 
Often Exhibit 14.4 Schedules 4 (PBO) and 5 (plan assets) are shown in the same schedule, 
and the ending balances are netted to obtain the funded status (see the funded status schedule 
Beginning balance. Start-of-period
discounted present value of expected
pension benefits that will ultimately
be paid
Service cost during the period
Plan trust’s distribution of plan assets
(that is, pension payments) to plan 
retirees
Interest cost during the period
Change in promised benefits arising
from plan amendments or curtailments
during the period
Contribution of additional plan assets
during the period by plan participants
Actuarial gains or losses during the
period from changes in assumptions
(for example, mortality and turnover
rates, interest rates)
Ending balance. End-of-period
discounted present value of expected
pension benefits
(G 1 H 1 I 6 J 1 K 6 L 2 M 5 N)
Projected Benefit Obligation
DR
M.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
N.
CR
Figure 14.7
CAUSES OF INCREASES 
AND DECREASES IN PBO
Compare with Schedule 4 of 
Exhibit 14.4

 
Case Study of  Pension Recognition and Disclosure—General Electric 
853
in the earlier Roger example). In GE’s case, funded status is shown in Schedule 6—Pension 
Asset (Liability). The 2012 reported $(18,764 million) funded status is obtained by subtract-
ing the ending PBO of $63,502 million (Schedule 4) from the ending plan assets of $44,738 
million (Schedule 5). The low asset returns and low discount interest rates occurring be-
tween 2008 and 2012 moved GE from an overfunded position of $16,753 million at the end 
of 2007 to the underfunded position of $(18,764 million) we observe in Schedule 6.
 
Schedule 6 also shows how the funded status is recognized on the balance sheet. In 
2012, the $(18,764) million in net pension liabilities is recognized across three accounts: 
Pension asset of $0, Pension liabilities—due within one year of $(159 million), and Pension 
liabilities—due after one year of $(18,605 million). In the previous examples, each firm had 
only one pension plan. However, it is common for large public companies such as GE to 
have multiple pension plans. Companies may wish to have different plan formulas for sala-
ried versus nonsalaried workers or union versus nonunion workers. In addition, firms may 
have obtained a variety of plans by acquiring other companies. ASC paragraph 715-20-45-3 
requires firms to group plans according to whether they are overfunded or underfunded. For 
underfunded plans, the portion of the PBO due in the next 12 months that exceeds plan as-
sets must be classified as a current liability. For GE, the current liability relates to the GE 
Supplementary Pension Plan because it is unfunded (see note (d) below Schedule 6). There 
are no pension assets on the balance sheet because GE did not have any overfunded plans at 
the end of 2012.
 
Schedule 6 also shows the portion of the balance sheet pension assets and liabilities that 
have not yet been recognized in pension expense. As mentioned previously, these amounts are 
in AOCI. In GE’s case, at the end of 2012, AOCI includes reductions for prior service cost of 
$1,406 million and net actuarial losses of $24,437 million. We show how AOCI changed dur-
ing 2012 in conjunction with the journal entry discussion below.
 
To understand how pension accounting affected GE’s 2012 financial statements, we use 
Schedules 1, 4, 5, and 6 to reconstruct the journal entries. In discussing them, we follow the 
order of the GE schedules and use the circled numbers. The entries are very similar to the ones 
we made in the Adess example earlier in the chapter. Some of these entries could be com-
bined, but we try to make it easier to link the amounts in the note with the amounts in the 
journal entries.
 
We begin with the first three components of pension cost (Schedule 1, items ➀, ➁, and 
➂). The service cost and interest cost components of pension cost decrease funded status and 
increase the pension liability on the balance sheet. The expected return increases funded status 
and decreases the balance sheet pension liability.27 To record these components of pension 
cost, we make the following journal entry:
Journal Entry 1
 
 
($ in millions)
DR Pension plans cost  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$98
CR Pension liabilities—Due after one year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
➀1➁1➂ $98
 
The prior service cost (Schedule 1, item ➃) and actuarial loss amortization (Schedule 1, 
item ➄ ) components of pension cost do not affect funded status. Instead they represent 
27 Journal Entry 5 increases the balance sheet liability for the difference between actual return and expected return that is 
recognized in OCI.

854 
CHAPTER 14
Pensions and Postretirement Benefits
 transfers from AOCI. Consequently, the credits for these items go to OCI, not to Pension 
 liabilities—Due after one year. Therefore, we make the following entry:
Journal Entry 2
 
 
($ in millions)
DR Pension plans cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$3,700
CR OCI—Prior service cost  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
➃ $  279
CR OCI—Net actuarial loss  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
➄  3,421
 
The net effect of these two entries on pension cost is $3,798 million ($3,700 million 
from Journal Entry 2 plus $98 million from Journal Entry 1), the total pension cost shown 
in Schedule 1.
 
We now turn to the PBO reconciliation (Schedule 4). We have already made a journal entry 
for service cost and interest cost. The next row in the reconciliation shows that GE had plan 
amendments of $0 million. Although GE did not have amendments in 2012, we show how 
they would be handled to give a comprehensive explanation of how the PBO elements affect 
firm financial statements. These amendments normally increase PBO, and consequently de-
crease funded status and increase the pension liability. Under GAAP, the amendment affects 
OCI, not pension expense. Consequently, we make the following entry:
Journal Entry 3
 
 
(in millions)
DR OCI—Prior service cost  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
➅  $0
CR Pension liabilities—Due after one year. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$0
 
The next row in the reconciliation is participant contributions. We do not make an entry for 
this row because it is offset by an increase in plan assets (see Schedule 5, item ➉). We use a 
similar rationale for benefits paid. The decrease of $3,120 million in the PBO reconciliation 
(Schedule 4) is offset in the plan assets reconciliation (Schedule 5, item ).
 
The remaining row in the PBO reconciliation is an actuarial loss of $2,021 million (Sched-
ule 4, item ➆). In the Adess Corporation example, the only new actuarial gain was caused by 
the difference between the expected and the actual return on plan assets. In most cases, we 
also see gains or losses for changes in estimates of PBO. As mentioned in conjunction with 
Figure 14.7, these losses are consistent with the decrease in the discount rate assumption from 
4.21% in 2011 to 3.96% in 2012 shown in Schedule 2. These losses increase PBO, and conse-
quently, decrease the funded status and increase pension liabilities. We increase the net actu-
arial loss in AOCI at the beginning of the year with the following entry:
Journal Entry 4
 
 
(in millions)
DR OCI—Net actuarial loss (gain) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $2,021
CR Pension liabilities—Due after one year. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
➆ $2,021
 
We now turn to the reconciliation of plan assets (Schedule 5). Journal entry 1 decreased 
Pension liabilities—Due after one year for expected return, but plan assets and consequently 
the funded status and the Pension liabilities—Due after one year must reflect actual return. 
Therefore, we must adjust the Pension liabilities—Due after one year for the difference be-
tween the actual return of $4,854 (Schedule 5, item ➇) and the expected return of $3,768 

 
Case Study of  Pension Recognition and Disclosure—General Electric 
855
(Schedule 1, item ➀). In this case, the actual return exceeds the expected return by $1,086, so 
we credit decrease AOCI—Net actuarial loss with the following entry:
Journal Entry 5
 
 
(in millions)
DR Pension liabilities—Due after one year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$1,086
CR OCI—Net actuarial loss (gain)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
➇1➀ $1,086
 
The next row in Schedule 5 is the employer contribution of $642 million item ➈, which 
increases funded status and decreases the balance sheet pension liability. Consequently, we 
make the sixth journal entry:
Journal Entry 6
 
 
(in millions)
DR Pension liabilities—Due after one year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$642
CR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
➈ $642
 
As mentioned in our earlier discussion of Schedule 6, the pension liabilities must be 
 reclassified between long-term and current accounts. To obtain this entry, we compute the 
 difference between the beginning and ending pension liability accounts shown in Schedule 6. 
The difference for the pension liabilities—Due within one year account is $11 million (the 
ending balance of $159 million less the beginning balance of $148 million). To accomplish 
the reclassification, we make the following entry:
Journal Entry 7
 
(in millions)
DR Pension liabilities—Due after one year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$11
CR Pension liabilities—Due within one year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$11
 
Often when a firm has multiple plans, it may also have to reclassify some of the Pension 
liabilities—Due after one year to a Prepaid pension asset.
 
Figure 14.8 shows the cumulative effects of the journal entries on the Pension liabilities 
and OCI accounts. Note that the Pension liabilities—Due within one year and Pension 
Figure 14.8 ANALYSIS OF BALANCE SHEET LIABILITY AND OCI ACCOUNTS
Journal
Entry
Journal
Entry
January 1, 2012
Pension cost
Plan amendment
PBO actuarial loss
Actual return less expected return
Employer contribution
Reclassification
December 31, 2012
1
3
4
5
6
7
(in millions)
Pension liabilities—
$1,086
642
11
$18,225
98
–   
2,021
 $18,616
$18,605
Due after one year
Amortization
Plan amendment
$       –
$279
$279
2
3
2
4
5
OCI—
Prior service cost
Amortization
PBO actuarial loss
Actual return less expected return
$2,021
$3,421
1,086
$2,486
OCI—
Net actuarial loss (gain)
   $148
11
$159
Pension liabilities—
Due within one year
January 1, 2012
Reclassification
December 31, 2012
7
(in millions)

856 
CHAPTER 14
Pensions and Postretirement Benefits
 liabilities—Due after one year accounts have ending balances of $(18,605 million) and $(159 
million), respectively, which sum to the funded status of $(18,764 million) given in Exhibit 
14.4, Schedule 6. Each OCI account also represents the change in AOCI balances given in 
Exhibit 14.4, Schedule 6. For example, AOCI—Net actuarial loss at December 31, 2012, of 
$24,437 million less the balance at December 31, 2011, of $26,923 million equals the 
 Figure 14.8 OCI—Net actuarial loss (gain) of $2,486 million.
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income 
Disclosure and Deferred Income Taxes
Thus far, we have ignored the effects of income taxes. As you learned in Chapter 2, all AOCI 
items must be shown net of tax. Additionally, the OCI components related to new plan amend-
ments or new actuarial (gains) losses must be distinguished from the components related to amor-
tization. The reason for distinguishing the sources of (gain) loss is so that investors can separate 
new changes in firm wealth from transfers of prior (gains) losses to pension expense and net in-
come. See Exhibit 14.5 for the required disclosure for the GE pension plan. This type of disclo-
sure is usually found in the statement of shareholders’ equity or a note related to the statement.
 
The beginning and ending pre-tax AOCI amounts come from Exhibit 14.4, Schedule 6 and 
represent the total of the AOCI—Prior service cost and AOCI—Net actuarial loss. It is com-
mon to aggregate the separate beginning and ending AOCI balances. In fact, the beginning and 
ending balances often include  gains and losses related to available-for-sale securities, deriva-
tives, and foreign currency. The remaining pre-tax amounts can be traced directly to the OCI 
T-accounts in Figure 14.8. The New actuarial loss (gain) arising during period of $ 935 million 
equals the PBO actuarial loss of $2,021 million less the difference between the actual return 
and expected return of $1,086 million. The shaded pre-tax OCI amount of $(2,765 million) is 
the sum of the Figure 14.8 OCI T-account balances of $(279 million) and $(2,486 million).
 
The Tax Effect column in Exhibit 14.5 gives the tax effect for the pre-tax amounts. We 
obtain the tax effects by multiplying the assumed tax rate of 39% by the pre-tax amount. This 
rate is based on information in Note 15—Shareholder’s Equity in GE’s 2012 Annual Report. 
Analysis
EXHIBIT 14.5
General Electric Company: AOCI Effects
Impact of Pensions on 2012 OCI and AOCI (Author Calculations)
 
Pre-Tax 
Tax Effect 
After-Tax
AOCI—January 1, 2012 
$28,608* 
$11,157†  
$17,451‡
Prior service cost from plan amendment 
— 
Less: Amortization of prior service cost 
(279) 
(109) 
(170)
Net prior service cost arising during period 
(279) 
(109) 
(170)
New actuarial loss (gain) arising during 
 period 
935§ 
365 
570
Less: Amortization of net actuarial loss 
(3,421) 
(1,334) 
(2,087)
Net actuarial loss (gain) arising during period 
(2,486) 
(969) 
(1,517)
OCI 
(2,765) 
(1,078) 
(1,687)
 AOCI—December 31, 2012 
$25,843 
$10,079 
$15,764
* December 31, 2011 AOCI—Prior service cost of $1,685 million 1 December 31, 2011 AOCI—Net actuarial loss of 
$26,923 million (Exhibit 14.4, Schedule 6).
† The assumed tax rate is 39% for all rows. This rate is based on information contained in Note 15—Shareholders’ 
Equity of GE’s annual report. The tax effect amount is obtained by multiplying the tax rate by the pre-tax amount.
‡ The after-tax amount equals the difference between the pre-tax and the tax effect amounts.
§ PBO actuarial loss of $2,021 million less the difference between the actual return and expected return of $1,086 million.

 
Case Study of  Pension Recognition and Disclosure—General Electric 
857
Recall from our earlier discussions that GE receives a tax deduction when contributions are 
made and does not obtain tax deductions for pension expense or OCI losses recognized for 
GAAP purposes. Therefore, the tax effects result in a deferred tax asset instead of reductions 
in income tax payable. At January 1, 2012, GE has OCI tax-effect contra-accounts to offset 
the pre-tax shareholders’ equity in the Figure 14.8 T-accounts. The AOCI—Prior service cost 
tax effect and AOCI—Net actuarial loss tax effect credit balances are $657 million ($1,685 
million 3 39%) and $10,500 million ($26,923 million 3 39%), respectively. These balances 
sum to the $11,157 tax effect shown for the AOCI—January 1, 2012, row in Exhibit 14.5. The 
offsetting debit is to a Deferred tax asset account. To update the tax accounts for 2012 activity, 
GE makes the following entry:
 
($ in millions)
DR OCI—Prior service cost tax effect  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$109
DR OCI—Net actuarial loss (gain) tax effect  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
969
   CR Deferred tax asset  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$1,078
We debit the tax effect for OCI—Prior service cost because the amortization reduced the loss 
in AOCI. We also debit the tax effect for OCI—Net actuarial loss (gain) because there is a net 
credit to the pre-tax OCI account. The sum of these two entries reduces the Deferred income 
tax asset account discussed above.
 
The After-Tax column in Exhibit 14.5 represents the actual effects on AOCI income and 
OCI. Recall from Chapter 2 that OCI is added to net income to obtain comprehensive income. 
Because pension notes usually show before tax amounts and shareholders’ equity notes show 
aggregate after-tax amounts, it is often difficult for the financial statement reader to link the 
two notes. We hope that this detailed analysis helps you understand better the ultimate after-
tax effects of pensions on AOCI and OCI.
Additional Issues in Computing Expected Return
The GE example illustrates other complications that arise in calculating the expected re-
turn component of pension expense. Refer to Exhibit 14.4, Schedule 1. If we divide the 
2012 $3,768 million expected return by the assumed rate of return of 8.0%, we obtain 
$47,100 million. Why doesn’t this amount equal the beginning $42,137 million fair value 
of plan assets? Two factors contribute to the difference. First, recall from our initial discus-
sion of expected return calculations that firms may define the MRV as fair value at a point 
in time or a smoothed fair value measured over several years. GE uses a smoothed fair 
value. Some of the asset losses arising from the low returns in 2008 and 2011 (see Figure 
14.4) have not been included in the smoothed asset value.
 
Second, the expected return is to be computed using the beginning fair value of plan assets 
after adjusting for the timing of contributions and benefit payments made during the year. If 
GE had used the fair value of plan assets (as opposed to a smoothed value), the approximate 
value used to compute the expected return would have been $41,010.5 million, computed as 
$42,137 million Beginning fair value 1 (0.5 3 [Employer contributions of $642 million, item 
➈ 1 Participant contributions of $157.0 million, item ➉ 2 Benefits paid of $3,052.0 million, 
item ]). Multiplying the payments and contributions by 0.5 assumes that they were made 
evenly throughout the year. In the prior examples, we did not have to make this adjustment 
because contributions were made at the end of each year, thereby receiving zero weight in the 
expected return calculation. Note that the $41,010.5 million is lower than the beginning fair 
value of plan assets and considerably lower than the asset value obtained by dividing the 
 expected return by 8.0%.

858 
CHAPTER 14
Pensions and Postretirement Benefits
 
The use of smoothed values also affects the amount of actuarial losses (gains) to be amor-
tized. FASB ASC paragraph 715-30-35-24 states that the minimum amortization method 
should exclude gains and losses not yet included in the MRV. Furthermore, as mentioned 
earlier, the corridor is based on the higher of the MRV or the PBO.
 
The effects of these rules on GE’s 2012 amortization calculations can be shown as follows:
Analysis
As the MRV is decreased for prior asset losses, GE’s amortization will increase because ad-
ditional losses will increase the loss subject to amortization. The note below Schedule 6 states 
that GE will amortize $3,650 million of net actuarial losses in 2013, which is slightly higher 
than the 2012 amount of $3,421 million. In 2012, PBO was used to compute the corridor be-
cause it exceeded the MRV. When the MRV exceeds PBO, use of the MRV affects both the 
amount subject to amortization and the corridor.
 
Unfortunately, the use of smoothed values is not clearly disclosed in financial statement 
notes. Most firms do not disclose their use of a smoothed MRV to compute expected return, 
and firms that do disclose the use of smoothed values generally do not describe their smooth-
ing techniques. Firms may average gains and losses for both investment in equity and fixed 
income securities or limit smoothing to gains and losses on equity investments only. Further-
more, some firms may smooth gains and losses over three years while other firms smooth 
them over five years. A study of approximately 200 U.S. firms with large pension plans sug-
gests that two-thirds of them were using some form of smoothing.28 During the bull market of 
the late 1990s, fair values exceeded smoothed values by 15% to 20% for firms using the most 
extreme forms of smoothing. When interpreting financial statements, readers must assume 
that the expected return has been computed correctly. Because of the use of smoothed values, 
financial statement readers are not usually able to verify the expected return dollar amount by 
multiplying the stated rate of return by the beginning fair value of plan assets (adjusted for 
contributions and benefits). Estimating the next year’s amortization component also is diffi-
cult. This problem is mitigated by the requirement to disclose the actuarial (gain) loss to be 
amortized to pension expense in the subsequent year (as we saw with GE).
Extraction of Additional Analytic Insights 
from Note Disclosures
By scrutinizing the causes for increases and decreases in plan assets in the pension note (see 
Figure 14.6), analysts can often make more refined estimates of future cash flows. For example, 
let’s assume that the plan assets disclosure shows that a firm did not contribute  additional fund-
ing during the reporting period. Also assume that the note shows that the fair value of plan assets 
barely exceeds the PBO at year-end. Because the plan was overfunded, the firm could temporar-
ily suspend funding. But can it continue not to fund? Depending on the extent of the overfunding 
($ in millions)
Net actuarial loss at January 1 
$26,923.0
Difference between MRV and fair value 
 ($41,010.5 fair value less $47,100.0 MRV) 
(6,089.5)
Amount subject to amortization 
$20,833.5
Corridor 2 10% of January 1 PBO (10% 3 $60,510) 
6,051.0
Amount outside corridor 
$14,782.5
28 See P. Davis-Friday, J. Miller, and H. F. Mittelstaedt, “Market-Related Values and Pension Accounting,” Working Paper, 
Mendoza College of Business, University of Notre Dame, 2007. The authors determine the extent of smoothing using an 
 approach similar to the one used here in the analysis of General Electric’s expected return calculation.

 
Case Study of  Pension Recognition and Disclosure—General Electric 
859
and future asset returns, the answer may be no. If its funded status were to change in future 
periods, the firm would be compelled to fund the plan in future years, thereby decreasing fu-
ture net operating cash flows. Lenders and others who forecast future cash flows to estimate 
“safety cushions” must consider these factors when preparing their forecasts. Merely extrapolat-
ing the most recent net operating cash flow into future years would overlook the possibly unsus-
tainable “boost” provided by the absence of current pension funding. Thus, while companies 
with greatly overfunded plans can suspend funding for long periods and use the cash for other 
operating purposes, underfunded plans may reflect past and continuing cash flow difficulties. 
Recall from earlier discussions that severely underfunded plans will be put into an at-risk cate-
gory and be required to increase cash contributions. GAAP requires firms to provide their best 
estimate of the amount of funding expected to be paid into the plan in the ensuing year. This 
disclosure will help analysts forecast firms’ future funding requirements. GE states that it ex-
pects to contribute $230 million to its Supplementary Pension Plan but it will not make a contri-
bution to the GE Pension Plan. Despite the fact that GE’s pension plan is underfunded for GAAP 
purposes, it will not be required to make contributions under tax and labor laws (see the discus-
sion below Schedule 7 in Exhibit 14.4).
 
To help analysts determine whether fund assets are large enough to satisfy currently antici-
pated pension benefit payouts, FASB ASC Topic 715 requires firms to provide a table that 
lists the dollar benefits expected to be paid in each of the ensuing five years and in the aggre-
gate for the five years thereafter. GE’s information is shown in Schedule 7. For the next five 
years, annual payments increase from $3,040 million in 2013 to $3,275 million in 2017. The 
total amount expected to be paid from 2013 to 2022 is $33,495 million, or approximately 75% 
of the fair value of plan assets. Consequently, we would conclude that GE’s pension plans 
could be a drain on long-term cash flow if plan assets do not recover.
 
As stated earlier in the chapter, the PBGC will take over an underfunded plan when a firm 
sponsor is in bankruptcy. But the PBGC tries to recover the pension payments from the pen-
sion plan sponsor. The PBGC claim ranks on an equal footing with those of unsecured credi-
tors; accordingly, the funded status reconciliation could serve as an early warning device for 
signaling other cash demands on the firm.
 
Because pension funding status is important for assessing a firm’s current and 
future cash flows, it is important to understand how sensitive the asset and liabil-
ity measures are to changes in interest rates. For firms with a young workforce 
whose pension commitments will be paid 20 to 30 years in the future, small 
changes in discount rate assumptions can cause large increases in the present 
value of these estimated obligations. This large multiplier effect is due to the 
impact of duration—the further into the future the cash flows are to be paid out, 
the greater the impact of a change in interest rates on the present value of those 
cash flows. A common rule of thumb is that a 1% decrease in discount rate would 
increase PBO by 17.0% whereas a 1% increase would decrease it by 14.5%.30 
Again, the specific effect depends on the workforce demographics.
 
The effect of a 1% change in interest rates on the asset side is typically much smaller be-
cause fixed income investments generally represent only 30% to 40% of the pension asset 
As part of its bankruptcy reorganization in 2006, 
Delta Air Lines, Inc., terminated its pilots’ 
 pension plan and reached an agreement with the 
PBGC to assume responsibility of the plan in 
 exchange for unsecured notes and claims totaling 
$2.425 billion. At the time of the agreement, the 
estimated underfunding in the pension plan was 
$3 billion. When Delta emerged from bankruptcy 
in April 2007, the PBGC converted $800 million 
of the claims into Delta common stock and con-
tinued to attempt to collect its remaining claims.29
29 See R. Grantham, “Delta Air Lines: Pensions Fatter for Some Pilots: Guarantor Cites Stock, Assets,” The Atlanta Journal-
Constitution, August 21, 2007, p. C1; and “Business Brief—Delta Air Lines Inc.: Deal Is Reached with PBGC to End Pilots’ 
Pension Plan,” The Wall Street Journal, December 5, 2006, p. B10.
30 See H. E. Winklevoss, Pension Mathematics with Numerical Illustrations, 2nd ed. (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylva-
nia Press, 1993), pp. 213–14. The specific rule of thumb is that for each 0.25% change in discount rate, the liability will be 
altered by 4%. For a 1% change, there are four 0.25% changes. Using the Winklevoss method, we compute the effect of a 1% 
decrease as 1.044 2 1 5 17.0% and the effect of a 1% increase as 1.0424 2 1 5 214.5%.

860 
CHAPTER 14
Pensions and Postretirement Benefits
portfolio and the maturity of those investments is often shorter than the duration of the pen-
sion liability. Therefore, even modest declines in interest rates can easily shift the funded 
status of pension plans from year to year.
 
Figure 14.9 provides the median funding ratio—fair value of plan assets (FVPA) divided 
by PBO and the percentage of firms that are overfunded (funding ratio . 1) for the 2005–2012 
period.31 During the eight-year period, the median funding ratio fell from a high of 91% in 
2007 to a low of 70% in 2008. The percentage of overfunded firms follows a similar pattern. 
In 2005, 28% of the firms were overfunded, but by 2008, only 7% of them were overfunded. 
The plunge in the proportion of firms with overfunded plans resulted from two factors: (1) the 
sharp drop in equity market prices (see GE’s actual returns during this period in Figure 14.4) 
and (2) the decline in discount rate assumptions (see Figure 14.3). As the data show, the actual 
return performance of pension assets from year to year and changes in discount rates can 
quickly—and materially—alter funded status. Because of low assumed discount rates, most 
pension plans have remained underfunded with funding ratios near 70% since 2008.
 
The preceding analysis shows how both equity returns and interest rates can have dramatic 
effects on a firm’s funded status. Analysts suggest that this uncertainty makes pension debt 
riskier than traditional debt.32 Consequently, analysts have developed metrics to assess short-
term and long-term pension risk. Short-term risks include liquidity problems, debt down-
grades, union negotiations, and possibility of bankruptcy.33 Long-term risks address the 
possibility that declines in interest rates or equity values could force firms to make additional 
cash outflows. Specifically, the two pension-related risk ratios are defined as follows:
 Short-term pension risk ratio 5
PBO 2 Pension assets
Market value of common stock
 Long-term pension risk ratio 5
PBO
Market value of common stock
20.0%
0.0%
10.0%
2005
Year
2006
2007
2009
2008
2010
2012
2011
30.0%
40.0%
50.0%
60.0%
100.0%
90.0%
80.0%
70.0%
Funding ratio percentage
Percent of firms overfunded
Figure 14.9
FUNDING RATIOS AND 
PERCENT OF FIRMS 
 OVERFUNDED (2005–2012)
Source: Standard & Poor’s Compustat® as 
data source; methodology not verified or 
controlled by Standard & Poor’s.
31 The sample for Figure 14.9 is the same sample used for Figure 14.3.
32 Bear Stearns & Co. Inc., “Pension Tension: When the Benefits Tail Wags the Dog Quantifying Pension and Other Postre-
tirement Benefit Risk,” Accounting Issues, New York, NY, June 2007. Bear Stearns is now part of JP Morgan Chase.
33 Ibid., p. 8.

 
Postretirement Benefits Other Than Pensions 
861
 
To illustrate the calculations, we again use GE’s disclosures. On December 31, 2012, the 
market value of GE’s outstanding common stock was approximately $218,422 million ($20.99 
price 3 10,406 million outstanding shares). From Exhibit 14.4, we see that the PBO is 
$63,502 million and the fair value of plan assets is $44,738 million. The resulting short-term 
and long-term ratios (in millions) are:
 Short-term pension risk ratio 5 $63,502 2 $44,738
$218,422
5 0.086
 Long-term pension risk ratio 5 $63,502
$218,422 5 0.291
 
To put these ratios in perspective, Bear Stearns reports that most short-term ratios fell be-
tween 20.03 and 0.06 and most long-term ratios were between 0 and 0.25 in 2006.34 Firms 
with the highest short-term ratios include Delta Air Lines, 0.67; Ford, 0.49; and Goodyear Tire 
& Rubber, 0.34. Firms with the highest long-term ratios include General Motors, 5.56; Ford, 
4.74; and AMR, 1.8. Interestingly, Delta Air, General Motors, and AMR have declared bank-
ruptcy since the time of the Bear Stearns report. Based on these statistics, it appears that GE 
has both high short-term pension risk and high long-term pension risk. It is trying to reduce this 
risk by ending defined benefit pension coverage for new employees (see Exhibit 14.4, 
 paragraphs above Schedule 1).
 
As mentioned early in the chapter, most young firms avoid these risks and the potential 
drain on cash flows by offering defined contribution plans. However, it can be difficult for 
employers to replace or modify existing defined benefit plans because of collectively bar-
gained contracts or concerns about the effect of the replacement plan on employee 
productivity.
RECAP
A company’s pension disclosures provide information about the current economic status 
of its pension plans. This provides insights regarding expected future pension-related cash 
flows and their potential effect on firm cash flows. The funded status and the PBO can be 
used to assess defined benefit pension risk for the firm. Underfunded pension plans rep-
resent a potential drain on future cash flows and should be viewed as unsecured debt.
POSTRETIREMENT BENEFITS
OTHER THAN PENSIONS
Many companies promise to provide health care and life insurance to employees and their 
spouses during retirement. The intent of these benefits is to attract and retain a highly quali-
fied workforce just as pensions are intended to do. Also, the employment contract and ac-
counting issues are similar to those encountered for pensions. We discuss the similarities and 
point out important differences in these benefits.
 
Under accrual accounting, an expense and liability should be recognized over the period 
of employment as employees qualify for these other postretirement benefits (OPEB). 
Historically, however, few companies with postretirement benefit plans made expense ac-
cruals. Instead, “pay-as-you-go” accounting was employed—that is, as cash payments were 
made to provide the health care benefit coverage to retired employees, the amount of the 
cash outflow was charged to expense. No liability appeared on the books. Additionally, few 
34 Ibid., p. 20.

862 
CHAPTER 14
Pensions and Postretirement Benefits
companies funded these OPEB plans as benefits were earned. Two reasons for this lack of 
funding were:
• First, in contrast to pension plans, no ERISA rules required that the benefits be funded.
• Second, even if firms did consider voluntarily funding their plans, the payments would not 
have been deductible for U.S. income tax purposes, thus creating a disincentive to fund.35
 
As a result of both of these circumstances, enormous unrecorded (off-balance sheet) liabilities 
for postretirement benefits existed by the mid-1980s, but neither periodic debits to expense nor 
credits to a liability account were made to reflect the continued growth of 
these obligations. To correct for the lack of transparency with respect to 
OPEB benefits, the FASB issued pre-Codification SFAS No. 106 in Decem-
ber 1990.36 To give some idea of the size of these previously unrecorded 
postretirement benefit  liabilities, when General Motors (GM) adopted pre-
Codification SFAS No. 106 in 1992, its liability totaled $33.1 billion, and its 
after-tax charge to the income statement was $20.8 billion. In 1992, GM’s 
pre-tax loss before this accounting change was $3.3 billion.
The accounting recognition and disclosure requirements are nearly 
identical to the ones that we discussed for pensions earlier in this chap-
ter. See Exhibit 14.6 for excerpts from the postretirement benefit plans 
note in General Electric Company’s 2012 annual report.
Contracting
Near the time that the FASB issued pre-Codification 
SFAS No. 106, many firms  reduced retiree health benefit 
coverage by limiting which employees could qualify for 
benefits, shifting costs to retirees, or in some cases, end-
ing benefits entirely. One study suggests that firms with 
high OPEB liabilities and high debt-to-asset ratios prior 
to the adoption of pre-Codification SFAS No. 106 were 
more likely to reduce retiree benefits.37 The authors 
 argue that potential debt covenant violations may have 
motivated the firms to reduce plan benefits and that 
 employment contracts would have been written differ-
ently if current OPEB GAAP had always been in effect.
EXHIBIT 14.6
General Electric Company: Edited, Condensed 
2012 Retiree Health and Life Benefits Note
We sponsor a number of retiree health and life insurance benefit plans (retiree benefit plans). 
Principal retiree benefit plans are discussed below; other such plans are not significant individu-
ally or in the aggregate. We use a December 31 measurement date for our plans.
PRINCIPAL RETIREE BENEFIT PLANS provide health and life insurance benefits to 
certain eligible participants and these participants share in the cost of healthcare benefits. In 
2012, we amended our principal retiree benefit plans such that, effective January 1, 2015, our 
post-65 retiree medical plans will be closed to salaried and retired salaried employees who are 
not enrolled in the plans as of that date, and we will no longer offer company-provided life insur-
ance in retirement for certain salaried employees who retire after that date. These plans cover 
 approximately 205,000 retirees and dependents.
Schedule 1: Cost of Principal Retiree Benefit Plans
($ in millions) 
2012 
2011 
2010
Expected return on plan assets 
$  (73) 
$  (97) 
$ (116)
Service cost for benefits earned 
219 
216 
241
Interest cost on benefit obligation 
491 
604 
699
Prior service cost 
518 
647 
631
Net actuarial loss (gain) amortization 
32 
(110) 
(22)
Net curtailment/settlement gain 
(101) 
— 
—
 Retiree benefit plans cost(a) 
$1,086 
$1,260 
$1,433
(continued)
35 Employers can achieve limited tax benefits by making contributions to a Voluntary Employees Beneficiary Association 
(VEBA) trust.
36 FASB ASC Subtopic 715-60: Compensation–Retirement Benefits—Defined Benefit Plans–Other Postretirement (pre- 
Codification “Employers’ Accounting for Postretirement Benefits Other Than Pensions,” SFAS No. 106 (Norwalk, CT: FASB, 1990).
37 See H. F. Mittelstaedt, W. Nichols, and P. Regier, “SFAS No. 106 and Benefit Reductions in Employer-Sponsored Retiree 
Health Care Plans,” The Accounting Review, October 1995, pp. 535–56.

 
Postretirement Benefits Other Than Pensions  
863
EXHIBIT 14.6
General Electric Company: Edited, Condensed 
2012 Retiree Health and Life Benefits Note 
(continued)
Schedule 2: Actuarial Assumptions
The actuarial assumptions at December 31 are used to measure the year-end benefit obligations 
and the retiree benefit plan costs for the subsequent year.
 
December 31,
 
2012 
2011 
2010 
2009
Discount rate 
3.74% 
4.09%(b) 
5.15% 
5.67%
Compensation increases 
3.90 
3.75 
4.25 
4.20
Expected return on assets 
7.00 
7.00 
8.00 
8.50
Initial healthcare trend rate(a) 
6.50 
7.00 
7.00 
7.40
(a) For 2012, ultimately declining to 5% for 2030 and thereafter.
(b) Weighted average discount rate of 3.94% was used for determination of costs in 2012.
Schedule 3: Accumulated Postretirement Benefit Obligation (APBO)
($ in millions) 
2012 
2011
Balance at January 1 
$13,056 
$12,010
Service cost for benefits earned 
219 
216
Interest cost on benefit obligation 
491 
604
Participant contributions 
54 
55
Plan amendments 
(832) 
25
Actuarial loss (gain) 
(60) 
911(c)
Benefits paid 
(758) 
765
Net curtailment settlement 
(366) 
—
Balance at December 31(d) 
$11,804 
$13,056
(c) Primarily associated with discount rate change.
(d) The APBO for the retiree health plans was $ 9,218 million and $ 10,286 million at year-end 2012 and 2011, 
respectively.
A one percentage point change in the assumed healthcare cost trend rate would have the follow-
ing effects.
($ in millions) 
1% increase 
1% decrease
APBO at December 31, 2012 
$1,017 
$(860)
Service and interest cost in 2012 
76 
(63)
Schedule 4: Fair Value of Plan Assets
($ in millions)  
2012 
2011
Balance at January 1 
$1,004 
$1,125
Actual gain on plan assets 
98 
15
Employer contributions 
548 
574
Participant contributions 
54 
55
Benefits paid 
(758) 
(765)
 Balance at December 31 
$  946 
$1,004
(continued)

864 
CHAPTER 14
Pensions and Postretirement Benefits
EXHIBIT 14.6
General Electric Company: Edited, Condensed 
2012 Retiree Health and Life Benefits Note 
(continued)
Schedule 5: Retiree Benefit Asset (Liability)
 
December 31,
($ in millions) 
2012 
2011
Funded status(e) 
$(10,858) 
$(12,052)
Liability recorded in the Statement of Financial Position
Retiree health plans
 Due within one year 
$   (589) 
$   (602)
 Due after one year 
(8,629) 
(9,684)
 Retiree life plans 
(1,640) 
(1,766)
  Net liability recognized 
$(10,858) 
$(12,052)
 Amounts recorded in shareowners’ equity (unamortized)
 Prior service cost 
$  1,356 
$  2,901
 Net actuarial loss 
182 
401
Total 
$  1,538 
$  3,302
(e) Fair value of assets less APBO, as shown in the preceding tables.
In 2013, we estimate that we will amortize $395 million of prior service cost and $15 million 
of net actuarial loss from shareowners’ equity into retiree benefit plans cost. Comparable 
 amortized amounts in 2012 were $518 million of prior service cost and $32 million of net 
 actuarial loss.
Schedule 6: Estimated Future Benefit Payments
($ in millions) 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018–2022
 
$780 
$785 
$785 
$785 
$785 
$3,800
FUNDING POLICY. We fund retiree health benefits on a pay-as-you-go basis. We expect to 
contribute approximately $600 million in 2013 to fund such benefits. We fund retiree life insur-
ance benefits at our discretion.
Author note: We have numbered the schedules and reordered some information to make it easier for the reader.
 
The computations for postretirement benefits expense and measures of the liability gener-
ally parallel the format for pension expense and liability. Notice in Exhibit 14.6 that GE main-
tains both retiree health and life insurance benefit plans. Similar to the pension components of 
the pension cost discussed earlier, the net postretirement benefit cost of $1,086 million for 
2012 (as shown in Exhibit 14.6, Schedule 1) includes expected return, service cost, interest 
cost, prior service cost, and recognized actuarial loss (gain) components.
 
Retiree benefit plans cost also is reduced for a Net curtailment/settlement gain of $(101 
million). The gain is a direct result of ending post-65 retiree health care and life insurance 
benefits for a significant portion of GE’s employees (see the paragraph above Schedule 1 in 
Exhibit 14.6). Reductions in earned benefits reduce the Accumulated postretirement benefit 
obligation (APBO) and AOCI—Prior service cost as a negative plan amendment.
 However, curtailment losses (gains) also may be recognized for amendments that prevent 
employees from earning benefits tied to future service. For example, GE’s  accruals for re-
tiree life insurance may have been based on future salary levels.  Consequently, GE would 

 
Postretirement Benefits Other Than Pensions 
865
recognize a gain. A loss related to faster recognition of prior service cost could also occur. 
Settlement losses (gains) also may be recognized when a company relieves  itself of pri-
mary responsibility or significant risks associated with the plan. Accounting for curtail-
ments and settlements is complex, and we cannot determine how GE calculated the amounts 
allocated to the Net curtailment/settlement gain, OCI—Prior service cost, OCI—Net actu-
arial loss, or losses (gains) outside of pension accounts.38 As we will see in subsequent 
schedules, most of the change is viewed as a negative plan amendment, thereby reducing 
AOCI—Prior service cost.
 
Further scrutiny of this section shows that OPEB accounting guidance also incorporates 
smoothing devices that are virtually identical to Components 4 and 5 in pension accounting. 
Specifically, when OPEB plans are funded and thus have plan assets, postretirement benefit 
expense is reduced by the expected return on plan assets. To accomplish this smoothing, asset 
gains or losses are excluded from pension expense but recognized as a component of OCI. 
Similarly, these gains and losses are accumulated and amortized as Component 4 if they 
 exceed a 10% corridor. OPEB Component 5—amortization of prior service cost—exists as 
well in instances in which firms enhance or reduce the level of postretirement benefits.
 
GE’s other OPEB schedules are similar to its pension schedules. Schedule 2 gives the as-
sumptions for its OPEB plans. Note that instead of a salary growth assumption, the schedule 
contains an assumption for health care cost trend rates. The cost trend includes projected costs 
related to physician care, hospital care, prescription drugs, medical equipment, and so on. 
Health care liabilities are rarely tied to salary at retirement. The typical postretirement benefit 
plan promises employees full coverage (for example, comprehensive postretirement health 
insurance) after a certain period of employment—say, 10 years. In such circumstances, the 
actuarially determined service cost of the plan is accrued over the first 10 years of the em-
ployee’s service. The liability attributed to service to date is the accumulated postretirement 
benefit obligation (APBO). The health care cost trend rate can have a dramatic effect on the 
estimated APBO. Consequently, firms are required to make sensitivity disclosures regarding 
the effect of a 1% increase or decrease in the health care trend rate assumption. In the disclo-
sure following Schedule 3, GE states that a 1% increase (decrease) could increase (decrease) 
it’s APBO by $1,017 million or 8.6% ($860 million or 7.3%).
 
Schedules 3 and 4 relate to the APBO and plan assets, respectively, and are nearly identical 
in form to the ones presented for pensions. Note that the change in postretirement benefits 
reduces the APBO significantly. Plan amendments reduce it by $832 million and the Net cur-
tailment/settlement reduces it by $366 million. Together, they reduce the January 1 obligation 
by 9.2% [(Plan amendments of $832 million 1 Net curtailment/settlement of $366 million)/
January 1 APBO of $13,056 million]. The Plan amendments reduce the AOCI—Prior service, 
and the reduction from Net curtailment/settlement is spread among Retiree benefits plan cost, 
AOCI—Prior service cost, and AOCI—Net actuarial loss.
 
Schedule 5, the funded status and balance sheet accounts, is also very similar except that 
the balance sheet titles differ. Note that the ending 2012 amounts for both the Net liability 
recognized and the costs/losses recorded in shareowners’ equity are significantly lower than 
observed in 2011. Again, most of this reduction results from the cut in retiree health care and 
life insurance benefits mentioned earlier. The journal entries could be reconstructed in the 
same manner as we reconstructed the pension journal entries. 
 
Schedule 6 gives the estimated future payments.
Case 14-1 requires the 
 reconstruction of GE’s 
OPEB journal entries.
38 For a detailed discussion of these issues, see FASB ASC Section 715-60-35-150 to 176: Compensation—Retirement 
 Benefits—Defined Benefit Plans—Other Postretirement—Subsequent Measurement—Settlements, Curtailments, and 
 Certain Termination Benefits.

866 
CHAPTER 14
Pensions and Postretirement Benefits
Analytical Insights: Assessing OPEB Liability
Similar to pensions, the OPEB liability is riskier than many traditional forms of debt. To 
 assess the magnitude of this risk, analysts have developed risk measures for OPEBs similar to 
the ones discussed earlier for pensions. The specific ratios are defined as follows:
 Short-term OPEB risk ratio
(quick version)
5
APBO 2 Plan assets39
Market value of common stock
 Short-term OPEB risk ratio
(extended version)
5 5 years of expected benifit payment 2 Plan assets
Market value of common stock
 Long-term OPEB risk ratio 5
APBO
Market value of common stock
 Short-term OPEB risk ratio
(quick version)
5 $11,804 2 $946
$218,422
5 0.050
 Short-term OPEB risk ratio
(extented version)
5 $3,920 2 $946
$218,422
5 0.014
 Long-term OPEB risk ratio 5 $11,804
$218.422 5 0.054
To illustrate the calculations, we again use GE’s disclosures. On December 31, 2012, the mar-
ket value of GE’s outstanding common stock was approximately $218,422 million ($20.99 
price 3 10,406 million outstanding shares). From Exhibit 14.6, we see that the APBO is 
$11,804 million (Schedule 3) and the fair value of plan assets is $946 million (Schedule 4). 
The sum of the net estimated future benefit payments for the next 5 years is $3,920 million 
(Schedule 6). The resulting short-term and long-term ratios ($ in millions) are:
To put these ratios in perspective, Bear Stearns reported that most short-term quick version 
ratios fell between 0.00 and 0.0340 and most long-term ratios were between 0 and 0.04 in 
2006. Firms with some of the highest short-term quick version ratios included GM, 2.63; 
Ford, 1.56; and AMR Corp., 0.50. Firms with the highest long-term ratios included GM, 3.50; 
Ford, 1.85; and Delta Air Lines Inc., 0.76. As we saw with the pension risk ratios, most of the 
companies with the highest OPEB risk ratios declared bankruptcy. GE’s is ratios are far below 
the ratios of the extreme firms but they are higher than most firms.
RECAP
The accounting and disclosures for postretirement benefit plans are similar to pension 
accounting and disclosures. However, most postretirement benefit plans are not well-
funded. Additionally, firm sponsors bear the risk of future medical inflation unless they 
have capped their share of the expected cost. Consequently, financial statement readers 
must be mindful that the future cash outflows associated with these plans could be much 
different than the current cash outflows.
39 If VEBA trust assets are not included in plan assets (i.e., they are included elsewhere on the balance sheet), then they would 
also be deducted in the numerator in both short-term OPEB risk ratios.
40 Bear Stearns, op. cit., p. 25.

 
Postretirement Benefits Other Than Pensions 
867
Evaluation of Pension and Postretirement Benefit 
Financial Reporting
Although the FASB issued pre-Codification SFAS No. 87 more than 25 years ago, many of 
its sections remain controversial. Calculations are extremely complex, and net income 
does not reflect immediately actual asset returns or PBO actuarial (gains) losses as they 
arise. However, current GAAP requires the funded status of pension and postretirement 
plans to be recognized as a liability or an asset on a firm’s balance sheet. Management has 
discretion in choosing the rate of return assumption and the measurement method for the 
market-related value. Allowing actual return to come through net income instead of show-
ing the unexpected portion in OCI would eliminate the discretionary expected rate of re-
turn, but it would make net income more volatile. Most managers and many accountants 
argue that such a move could reduce the predictive power and faithful representation of 
net income.
 
In addition, some analysts and financial writers argue that deducting pension expense or 
adding pension income in the operating section of the income statement misstates operating 
income. They maintain that only service cost is a true current period operating item because 
service cost represents the present value of the increased pension payout arising from current 
services. They believe interest cost (Component 2 of pension expense) is a financing cost, not 
an element of operating income. Similarly, these critics believe that the expected return on 
plan assets (Component 3) should be shown in Other income just like the return on investment 
securities firms may hold.41
 
Despite concerns about prior accounting, studies provide evidence that pension and 
OPEB expense components found in notes are priced by the market.42 Additionally, other 
studies suggest a positive relationship between stock prices and the funded status of pen-
sion and OPEB plans disclosed in the notes (and not recognized on the balance sheet 
prior to 2006). These studies also show that the perceived reliability of the pension and 
OPEB amounts affects their relation with stock prices.43 Although the studies suggest that 
the market finds the pension and OPEB information useful, the results are not always 
consistent across years, and some results suggest that investors may not fully price the 
impact of the pension disclosures.44 Regulators, analysts, preparers, and researchers will 
continue to debate the appropriate recognition, disclosure, and valuation techniques for 
pensions and OPEBs.
41 For example, see R. McGough and E. E. Schultz, “How Pension Surpluses Lift Profits,” The Wall Street Journal, Sep-
tember 20, 1999; G. Morgenson, “What’s Hiding in Big Blue’s Small Print,” The New York Times, June 4, 2000; and Bear 
Stearns, “Retirement Benefits Impact Operating Income,” Accounting Issues (New York: Bear Stearns & Co. Inc., Septem-
ber 17, 1999).
42 See, for example, M. E. Barth, W. H. Beaver, and W. R. Landsman, “The Market Valuation Implications of Net Periodic 
Pension Cost Components,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, March 1992, pp. 27–62; and E. Amir, “The Effect of 
Accounting Aggregation on the Value-Relevance of Financial Disclosures: The Case of SFAS No. 106,” The Accounting 
Review, October 1996, pp. 573–90.
43 See M. E. Barth, “Relative Measurement Errors among Alternative Pension Asset and Liability Measures,” The Accounting 
Review, July 1991, pp. 443–63; B. Choi, D. Collins, and W. Johnson, “Valuation of Reliability Differences: The Case of 
Nonpension Postretirement Obligations,” The Accounting Review, July 1997, pp. 351–83; P. Y. Davis-Friday, L. B. Folami, C. 
Liu, and H. F. Mittelstaedt, “The Value Relevance of Financial Statement Recognition versus Disclosure: Evidence from 
SFAS No. 106,” The Accounting Review, October 1999, pp. 403–23; and P. Y. Davis-Friday, C. Liu, and H. F. Mittelstaedt, 
“Recognition and Disclosure Reliability: Evidence from SFAS No. 106,” Contemporary Accounting Research, Summer 
2004, pp. 399–427.
44 See, for example, M. Picconi, “The Perils of Pensions: Does Pension Accounting Lead Investors and Analysts Astray?” The 
Accounting Review, July 2006, pp. 925–55.

868 
CHAPTER 14
Pensions and Postretirement Benefits
GLOBAL VANTAGE POINT
Comparison of IFRS and GAAP Retirement 
Benefit Accounting
International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) for pensions are specified by International 
Accounting Standard (IAS) 19—“Employee Benefits.”45 Many of the concepts and accounting 
requirements parallel the provisions in FASB ASC Subtopic 715-30: Compensation–Retirement 
Benefits—Defined Benefit Plans–Pension. However, there are some important differences, 
which we describe in the subsequent paragraphs.
 
The first difference relates to prior service costs, called past service costs under IFRS. Un-
der IAS 19, past service cost is recognized immediately as part of pension expense. In con-
trast, GAAP requires firms to recognize new prior service costs as part of OCI and recycles 
them to pension expense over the shorter of the average remaining work life or the period 
covered under a collective bargaining agreement.
 
The second difference relates to the computation and treatment of actuarial gains and 
losses and comprises one of the major fundamental differences between current U.S. 
GAAP and IFRS. IAS 19 (revised June 2011, effective January 1, 2013) now requires that 
the discount rate be used to compute the expected return on plan assets. Consequently, 
the finance component of pension expense can be computed by multiplying the funded 
status (adjusted for contributions and benefit payments) by the discount rate. Actuarial 
gains and losses on the PBO and the actual return (less the expected return on plan assets) 
are recognized in OCI without subsequent amortization to pension expense. As a result, 
periodic pension expense computed under IFRS generally consists only of current service 
cost, past service cost, and net interest on the net defined benefit liability or asset (i.e., 
funded status).
 
One final difference relates to placement on the statement of comprehensive income. Ser-
vice cost is part of operating activities, the finance component is part of finance costs within 
profit and loss, and actuarial gains and losses (remeasurement component) is part of OCI.
 
Prior to 2013, IFRS alternatives had more similarities to current or prior U.S. GAAP. 
For example, firms could use a rate of return assumption that was higher than the discount 
rate, use the corridor method for amortizing actuarial losses (gains), and elect to keep ac-
tuarial losses (gains) off the balance sheet (similar to U.S. accounting prior to 2006). In 
addition, firms could amortize some prior service costs over several years. As this edition 
goes to press, firms under IFRS are reporting significant effects from the retrospective 
change in accounting. For example, upon adoption, Volvo Group reduced its Shareholders’ 
equity by 10%. Its restated 2012 income statement amounts indicate that the accounting 
change decreased 2012 comprehensive income by 24%. In its 2012 annual report, Luf-
thansa Group reported that the change in accounting would decrease its Shareholders’ 
equity by €3.5 billion (42%)!
 
Because the FASB has not yet changed U.S. GAAP with respect to pensions, pension ex-
pense is likely more volatile under U.S. GAAP in that it requires firms to amortize actuarial 
gains and losses. Also, U.S. GAAP pension expense is likely lower because it allows the 
 expected rate of return to exceed the discount rate.46
International
45 “Employee Benefits,” IAS 19, International Accounting Standards Board (London, UK, 1998, amended through 
June 2011).
46 See PricewaterhouseCoopers, “Pension and OPEB Accounting: A study of the IASB’s proposal” (New York, 2010).

 
Summary 
869
SUMMARY
• Pension plan contracts allow employees to exchange current service for payments to be 
received during retirement.
• Defined contribution pension plans specify amounts to be invested for the employee 
 during the employee’s career, and the employee’s pension will be based on the value of 
those investments at retirement.
• In the United States, most new pension plans are defined contribution plans. Consequently, 
defined contribution pension plans now hold 30% more assets than do defined benefit 
plans. Still, U.S. defined benefit pension plans hold approximately $2 trillion in assets.
• The accounting for defined contribution plans is straightforward. Defined benefit pension 
plans specify amounts to be received during retirement, thereby complicating the underly-
ing economics of the exchange and the accounting.
• Under ASC Topic 715, pension expense for defined benefit pension plans consists of 
 service cost, interest cost, expected return on plan assets, and two other “smoothing” 
components.
• The two smoothing mechanisms avoid year-to-year volatility in pension expense but 
make pension accounting exceedingly complex because many pension-related items are 
presented in AOCI.
• Under pre-Codification SFAS No. 87, the balance sheet asset (liability) on the balance 
sheet differed from the plan’s actual funded status. Current GAAP requires that the 
 balance sheet asset (liability) equal the plan’s funded status.
• Employer funding of defined benefit pension plans is influenced by tax law, labor law, 
union membership, and the employer’s financial needs.
• The reporting rules for other postretirement benefits (OPEB) closely parallel the pension 
accounting rules.
• GAAP requires information about expected future cash flows, future amortization 
amounts, and major classes of investments so that investors can make cash flow projec-
tions, assess risk, and evaluate rate of return assumptions.
• Academic research suggests that stock prices reflect pension and OPEB disclosures but 
their impact may not be fully valued.
• Statement readers should view the following circumstances as potential warning signals 
or indicators of earnings management:
 
• A significant disagreement between any of the various pension and OPEB rates 
 selected by a firm (that is, the discount rate, the expected rate of return on plan assets, 
or the rate of increase in future compensation levels or health care costs) and the rates 
chosen by other firms in its industry.
 
• A very large difference between the chosen expected rate of return on plan assets and 
the discount rate used.
 
• An increase in the year-to-year expected rate of return on plan assets that seems unre-
lated to changes in market conditions.
 
• A decrease in the assumed rate of increase in future compensation levels (or, for 
OPEB, future health cost trends) that cannot be explained by changing industry or 
 labor market conditions.
 
• Rate of return assumptions that are inconsistent with prior investment experience or 
mix of equity and debt investments.

 
• IAS 19 (revised 2011) offers guidance that is markedly different from U.S. GAAP. 
Among other things, it requires that the discount rate be used to measure both the ex-
pected return on assets and the interest cost on PBO to obtain a net financing compo-
nent. Additionally, actuarial losses (gains) recognized in OCI are not subsequently 
amortized into pension expense. It also requires new past service cost to be recognized 
immediately as a component of pension expense.
870 
CHAPTER 14
Pensions and Postretirement Benefits
EXERCISES
The following information pertains to Seda Company’s pension plan:
Actuarial estimate of projected benefit obligation at 1/1/14 
$72,000
Service cost for 2014 
18,000
Pension benefits paid on 12/31/14 
15,000
Assumed discount rate 
10%
Required:
If no change in actuarial estimates occurred during 2014, how much would Seda’s projected 
benefit obligation be at December 31, 2014?
E14-1
Determining projected 
 benefit obligation (LO 3)
AICPA
ADAPTED
At December 31, 2014, Kerr Corporation’s pension plan administrator provided the following 
information:
Fair value of plan assets 
$3,450,000
Accumulated benefit obligation 
4,300,000
Projected benefit obligation 
5,700,000
Required:
What amount of the pension liability should be shown on Kerr’s December 31, 2014, balance 
sheet?
E14-2
Determining balance sheet 
pension asset (liability)  
(LO 2, 3)
AICPA
ADAPTED
On January 2, 2014, Loch Company established a defined benefit plan covering all employees 
and contributed $1,000,000 to the plan. At December 31, 2014, Loch determined that the 
2014 service and interest costs totaled $620,000. The expected and the actual rate of return on 
plan assets for 2014 was 10%. Loch’s pension expense has no other components.
Required:
What amount should Loch report in its December 31, 2014, balance sheet as a pension asset 
(liability)?
E14-3
Determining balance sheet 
pension asset (liability)  
(LO 3)
AICPA
ADAPTED
Mary Abbott is a long-time employee of Love Enterprises, a manufacturer and distributor of 
farm implements. Abbott plans to retire on her 65th birthday (January 1, 2019) five years from 
today. Her current salary is $48,000 per year, and her projected salary for her last year of em-
ployment is $60,000.
 
Love Enterprises sponsors a defined benefit pension plan. It provides for an annual pension 
benefit equal to 60% of the employee’s annual salary at retirement. Payments commence on 
the employee’s 66th birthday or one year after the anniversary date of his or her retirement. 
The discount and earnings rate on plan assets is 8%. The average life expectancy for male and 
female employees is 76 and 80, respectively.
Required:
1. Compute the PBO related to Abbott’s pension benefits as of January 1, 2014.
2. Compute the ABO for the year ended December 31, 2014.
E14-4
Determining PBO and 
ABO (LO 1, 2, 3)
AICPA
ADAPTED

 
Exercises 
871
E14-5
Determining PBO and ABO  
(LO 1, 2, 3)
Use the facts given in E14-4. Repeat the requirements assuming that the discount and earnings 
rate is 11% instead of 8%.
AICPA
ADAPTED
E14-6
Determining actual return on 
plan assets (LO 2, 3)
The following information pertains to Gali Company’s defined benefit pension plan for 2014:
Fair value of plan assets, beginning of year 
$350,000
Fair value of plan assets, end of year 
525,000
Employer contributions 
110,000
Benefits paid 
85,000
Required:
What was the dollar amount of actual return on Gali Company’s plan assets in 2014?
AICPA
ADAPTED
E14-7
Determining balance sheet 
pension asset (liability)  
(LO 3, 4)
The following information pertains to Kane Company’s defined benefit pension plan:
Balance sheet asset, 1/1/14 
$ 2,000
AOCI—prior service cost, 1/1/14 
24,000
Service cost 
19,000
Interest cost 
38,000
Expected return on plan assets 
22,000
Prior service cost amortization 
6,000
Employer contributions 
40,000
Kane has no net actuarial gains or losses in AOCI.
Required:
In its December 31, 2014, balance sheet, what amount should Kane report as a pension asset 
(liability)?
AICPA
ADAPTED
E14-8
Determining balance sheet 
pension asset (liability)  
(LO 3, 4)
Dell Company adopted a defined benefit pension plan on January 1, 2014. Dell amortizes the 
initial prior service cost of $1,334,400 over 16 years. It assumes a 7% discount rate and an 8% 
expected rate of return. The following additional data are available for 2014:
Service cost for 2014 
$320,000
Prior service cost amortization 
83,400
Employer contribution made at 12/31/14 
335,000
Required:
Compute the pension asset (liability) to be reported on Dell’s December 31, 2014, balance sheet.
AICPA
ADAPTED
E14-9
Determining balance sheet 
pension asset (liability)  
(LO 3, 4)
On January 1, 2014, East Corporation adopted a defined benefit pension plan. At plan incep-
tion, the prior service cost was $60,000. In 2014, East incurred service cost of $150,000 and 
amortized $12,000 of prior service cost. On December 31, 2014, East contributed $160,000 to 
the pension plan. East assumes a 6% discount rate and 5% expected rate of return.
Required:
At December 31, 2014, what amounts should East report as a pension asset (liability) and 
AOCI on its balance sheet?
AICPA
ADAPTED

872 
CHAPTER 14
Pensions and Postretirement Benefits
Nome Company sponsors a defined benefit plan covering all employees. Benefits are based 
on years of service and compensation levels at the time of retirement. Nome has a September 30 
fiscal year-end. It determined that as of September 30, 2014, its ABO was $320,000, its PBO 
was $380,000, and its plan assets had a $290,000 fair value. Nome’s September 30, 2014, trial 
balance showed a balance sheet asset of $20,000.
Required:
What adjustment should Nome make to report the appropriate pension asset (liability) on its 
September 30, 2014, balance sheet?
E14-10
Adjusting balance sheet 
 pension asset (liability)  
(LO 3)
AICPA
ADAPTED
Hukle Company has provided the following information pertaining to its postretirement plan 
for 2014:
Service cost 
$240,000
Benefit payment made at 12/31/14 
110,000
Interest on accumulated
 postretirement benefit obligation 
40,000
Prior service cost amortization 
10,000
Required:
Calculate Hukle Company’s 2014 net postretirement benefit cost.
E14-11
Determining postretirement 
expense (LO 7)
AICPA
ADAPTED
The following information pertains to Lee Corporation’s defined benefit pension plan for 
2014:
Service cost 
$160,000
Actual and expected return on plan assets 
35,000
Amortization of prior service costs 
5,000
Interest on pension obligation 
50,000
Required:
Determine the pension expense that Lee Corporation would include in its 2014 net income.
E14-12
Determining pension 
 expense (LO 3)
AICPA
ADAPTED
Bostonian Company provided the following information related to its defined benefit pension 
plan for 2014:
PBO on 1/1/14 
$2,500,000
Fair value of plan assets on 1/1/14 
2,000,000
Service cost 
120,000
Actual return on plan assets 
320,000
Payments made to retirees on 12/31/14 
100,000
Amortization of prior service cost 
40,000
Recognized actuarial losses 
50,000
Contributions made to plan during 2014 
80,000
Interest rate for discounting pension obligations 
6%
Expected return on plan assets 
8%
Required:
1. What amount of pension expense should Bostonian report for 2014?
2. What is the fair value of plan assets at December 31, 2014?
3. What dollar amount of return on plan assets was deferred in 2014?
E14-13
Determining pension 
 expense, fair value of plan 
 assets, and deferred return 
on plan assets (LO 3, 4)

 
Exercises 
873
E14-14
Determining pension expense 
and AOCI balances  
(LO 3, 4)
Cummings Inc. had the following reconciliation at December 31, 2014:
Fair value of plan assets 
$5,000
PBO 
4,200
Funded status 
$  800
AOCI—prior service cost 
$  300
AOCI—net actuarial (gain) loss 
700
 Total 
$1,000
The following assumptions are being used for the pension plan in 2015:
Discount rate 
5%
Expected rate of return on assets 
8%
Average remaining worklife 
10 years
Remaining amortization period for prior service costs 
6 years
Additional 2015 Information:
Service cost 
$442
Cash contributed to the plan (year-end) 
250
Pension benefits paid by the plan (year-end) 
465
Actual return on plan assets 
650
New actuarial (gain) loss on the PBO 
64
Required:
1. Compute pension expense for 2015.
2. Compute the fair value of plan assets at December 31, 2015.
3. Compute the PBO at December 31, 2015.
4. Compute AOCI—net actuarial (gain) loss as of December 31, 2015.
E14-15
Determining postretirement 
(health care) benefits expense 
and obligation (LO 7)
Jones Company has a postretirement benefit (health care) plan for its employees. On January 1, 
2014, the balance in the Accumulated postretirement benefit obligation account was $300 mil-
lion. The assumed discount rate—for purposes of determining postretirement obligations and 
expenses—is 8%. Jones does not prefund postretirement benefits, so there are no plan assets. 
It created a $45 million prior service cost credit at the end of 2013 when the company modi-
fied the health care plan to reduce the maximum benefits paid to each employee. This amount 
is being amortized over 15 years. The service cost component of postretirement benefits for 
2014 is $35 million.
Required:
1. Determine the amount of postretirement benefits cost for 2014.
2. If benefits paid to retirees totaled $64 million in 2014, determine the balance in the 
 Accumulated postretirement benefit obligation account on December 31, 2014.
E14-16
Determining postretirement 
health care expenses and plan 
assets and liabilities balances 
(LO 7)
Zeff Manufacturing provides the following information about its postretirement health care 
plan for 2014:
Accumulated postretirement benefit obligation on 1/1/14 
$300,000
Fair value of plan assets on 1/1/14 
30,000
Benefits paid to retirees at 12/31/14 
6,500
Service cost for 2014 
20,000
Recognized prior service cost 
10,000
Recognized actuarial loss 
7,000
Actual return on plan assets 
4,500
Contributions to the plan at 12/31/14 
12,000
Discount rate 
8%
Expected long-run rate of return on plan assets 
10%

874 
CHAPTER 14
Pensions and Postretirement Benefits
Required:
1. Determine Zeff’s postretirement health care expense in 2014.
2. Determine the fair value of plan assets at December 31, 2014.
3. Determine the APBO amount at December 31, 2014.
Bonny Corp. has a defined benefit pension plan for its employees who have an average re-
maining service life of 10 years. The following information is available for 2013 and 2014 
related to the pension plan:
E14-17
Determining plan assets, PBO, 
and AOCI (LO 3, 4)
At January 1, 2014, Milo Co.’s projected benefit obligation is $300,000, and the fair value of 
its pension plan assets is $340,000. The average remaining service period of Milo’s employ-
ees is 10 years. The following additional information is available for Milo’s net actuarial gains 
and losses:
E14-18
Determining amount of 
 recognized net gain or loss 
 using the corridor approach 
(LO 3, 4)
 
2014 
2013
Projected benefit obligation, 1/1 
? 
$750,000
Service cost 
$ 70,000 
60,000
Actual return on plan assets 
66,400 
72,000
Bonny Corp. contributions for year ended 12/31 
74,000 
68,000
Benefits paid during year 
67,000 
60,000
Fair value of plan assets, 1/1 
? 
600,000
Actuarial (gain) loss on PBO during year 
(13,000) 
4,400
Expected return on plan assets 
7% 
7%
Discount rate 
6% 
6%
Bonny Corp. had no beginning balance in its AOCI—net actuarial (gain) loss on January 1, 
2013. The actuarial (gains) losses on PBO arose due to changes in assumptions made by the 
actuaries regarding salary increases (2013) and mortality estimates (2014).
Required:
1. Compute Bonny’s PBO at December 31, 2013, and December 31, 2014.
2. Compute the fair value of plan assets at December 31, 2013, and December 31, 2014.
3. Compute the year-end balance in AOCI—net actuarial loss (gain) for Bonny Corp. for 
2013 and 2014.
4. Compute OCI for the years ended December 31, 2013, and December 31, 2014.
 
2014 
2015 
2016
AOCI—net actuarial (gain) loss at 1/1 
$ 40,000 
$ 28,000 
$ 53,000
PBO at 12/31 
341,000 
402,000 
416,000
Fair value of plan assets at 12/31 
323,000 
419,000 
438,000
Required:
Compute the amount of recognized gain or loss to be included in pension expense for each 
year, 2014 through 2016. Indicate whether the recognized amount increases or decreases 
 pension expense.

 
Exercises 
875
E14-19
Determining amount of 
 recognized net gain or loss 
 using the corridor approach 
(LO 3, 4)
At January 1, 2014, Archer Co.’s PBO is $500,000 and the fair value of its pension plan assets 
is $630,000. The average remaining service period of Archer’s employees is 12 years. The 
AOCI—net actuarial loss (gain) at January 1, 2014, is $(70,000). The following additional 
information is available related to Archer’s actuarial gains and losses:
 
2014 
2015 
2016
New actuarial loss (gain) on PBO 
$(30,000) 
$ 65,000 
$(63,000)
New deferred loss (gain) on plan assets 
60,000 
55,000 
(32,000)
PBO at 12/31 
560,000 
675,000 
628,000
Fair value of plan assets at 12/31 
575,000 
530,000 
650,000
Required:
For each year, 2014 through 2016, compute
1. The amount of recognized loss (gain) to be included in pension expense. Be sure to 
 indicate whether the recognized amount increases or decreases pension expense.
2. The ending balance of AOCI—net actuarial (gain) loss.
3. OCI—net actuarial (gain) loss.
E14-20
Determining pension 
 elements (LO 3, 4)
George Corporation has a defined benefit pension plan for its employees. The following infor-
mation is available for 2014:
PBO at 1/1 
$930,000
Payments made to retirees at 12/31/14 
204,000
Service cost 
196,000
Actual return on plan assets 
30,000
Plan contributions at 12/31/14 
130,000
Fair value of plan assets at 12/31/14 
880,000
Amortization of prior service cost 
76,000
Discount rate 
10%
Expected rate of return on plan assets 
6%
Required:
1. What was the January 1, 2014, fair value of the plan assets?
2. What is the expected dollar return on plan assets for 2014?
3. What amount of pension expense should George report for the year ended December 31, 
2014?
4. What was the dollar amount of return (loss) on plan assets that was deferred during 2014?
5. Prepare the journal entries to record pension expense, the contribution, and the deferred 
 return (loss).
E14-21
Determining pension 
 elements (LO 3, 4, 6)
On January 1, 2014, Cello Co. established a defined benefit pension plan for its employ-
ees. At January 1, 2014, Cello estimated the service cost for 2014 to be $45,000. At 
 January 1, 2015, it estimated 2015 service cost to be $49,000. On the plan inception date, 
prior service credit was granted to employees for five years, the period of time between the 
company’s formation and plan inception. The prior service cost was estimated to be 
$650,000 at January 1, 2014. Cello uses a 10% discount rate and assumes a return on plan 
assets of 9%. The average remaining service life of employees is 20 years, and the 

876 
CHAPTER 14
Pensions and Postretirement Benefits
 company will fund at the end of each year an amount equal to service cost plus interest 
cost for 2014 and 2015.
 
December 31,
 
2015 
2014
PBO 
? 
?
Benefits paid at 12/31 
2,000 
–0–
Fair value of plan assets 
? 
–0–
Contributions at 12/31 
? 
?
Actual return on plan assets 
3,200 
–0–
Required:
1. Compute the amount of prior service cost to be included as a component of pension 
 expense for 2014.
2. Compute pension expense for 2014.
3. Compute the fair value of plan assets at December 31, 2014.
4. Compute the PBO balance at December 31, 2014.
5. Prepare the company’s required journal entries to record the effects of its pension plan in 
2014.
6. Repeat requirements 1 through 5 for 2015.
7. Prepare T-accounts for Pension asset (liability), OCI—prior service cost, and OCI—net 
actuarial (gain) loss to show the effects of the entries made in requirements 5 and 6. Label 
the effects.
PROBLEMS / DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
The following information pertains to Sparta Company’s defined benefit pension plan:
Discount rate 
8%
Expected rate of return on plan assets 
10%
Average service life 
12 years
At 1/1/14
 PBO 
$600,000
 Fair value of pension plan assets 
720,000
 AOCI—prior service cost 
240,000
 AOCI—net actuarial (gain) loss 
(96,000)
At 12/31/14
 PBO 
910,000
 Fair value of pension plan assets 
825,000
Service cost for 2014 was $90,000. No contributions were made or benefits paid during the 
year. Sparta’s Accrued pension liability was $8,000 at January 1, 2014. Sparta uses the 
straight-line method of amortization over the maximum period permitted.
Required:
Determine the amount for each of the following items:
1. Interest cost.
2. Expected dollar return on plan assets.
3. Actual return on plan assets.
4. Recognized actuarial gain (minimum amortization).
5. Recognized prior service costs.
6. Balance in the AOCI—net actuarial (gain) loss account on December 31, 2014.
P14-1
Determining components 
of pension expense  
(LO 3, 4, 6)

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
877
P14-2
Determining expense and 
 balance sheet amounts 
 (journal entries) 
(LO 3, 4, 6)
Turner Inc. provides a defined benefit pension plan to its employees. The company has 
150 employees. The average remaining service life of employees is 10 years. The AOCI—net 
actuarial (gain) loss was zero at December 31, 2013. Turner uses a market-related (smoothed) 
value to compute expected return.
Additional Information:
 
December 31,
Description 
2014 
2013
PBO 
$1,450,000 
$1,377,000
ABO 
1,425,000 
1,350,000
Fair value of plan assets 
1,395,000 
1,085,000
Market-related value of plan assets 
1,369,000 
1,085,000
AOCI—prior service cost 
? 
292,000
Balance sheet pension asset (liability) 
? 
(292,000)
Service cost 
117,400
Contribution 
169,000
PBO actuarial gain 
182,100
Benefit payments made 
None 
None
Discount rate 
10% 
10%
Expected rate of return 
10% 
10%
Required:
Round all amounts to the nearest dollar:
1. Compute the amount of prior service cost that would be amortized as a component of 
pension expense for 2014 and 2015.
2. Compute the actual return on plan assets for 2014.
3. Compute the unexpected net gain or loss on plan assets for 2014.
4. Compute pension expense for 2014.
5. Prepare the company’s required pension journal entries for 2014.
6. Compute the 2014 increase/decrease in AOCI—net actuarial (gain) loss and the amount 
to be amortized in 2014 and 2015.
7. Confirm that the pension asset (liability) on the balance sheet equals the funded status as 
of December 31, 2014.
P14-3
Determining expense and 
 balance sheet amounts 
 (journal entries) 
(LO 3, 4, 6)
Puhlman Inc. provides a defined benefit pension plan to its employees. It uses a market- 
related (smoothed) value to compute its expected return. Additional information follows:
 
December 31,
Description 
2014 
2013
PBO 
? 
$2,500,000
ABO 
$2,335,000 
2,150,000
Fair value of plan assets 
? 
2,100,000
Market-related value of plan assets 
2,342,800 
2,100,000
Benefit payments made 
272,000 
231,000
AOCI—net actuarial (gain) loss 
114,000 
–0–
AOCI—prior service cost 
? 
400,000
Balance sheet pension asset (liability) 
? 
(400,000)
Service cost 
214,000 
Contribution 
321,000 
Actual return 
129,000 
Discount rate for PBO 
9% 
10%
Expected rate of return 
10% 
10%
Average remaining service life of employees 
15 years 
15 years

878 
CHAPTER 14
Pensions and Postretirement Benefits
During 2014, the PBO increased by $33,000 due to a decrease in the discount rate from the 
previous year. The 2013 discount rate assumption was used to compute 2014 service cost and 
interest cost.
Required:
Round all amounts to the nearest dollar:
1. Compute the fair value of plan assets at December 31, 2014.
2. Compute the prior service cost that would be amortized as a component of pension 
 expense for 2014 and 2015.
3. Compute the PBO at December 31, 2014.
4. Compute pension expense for 2014.
5. Prepare the company’s required pension journal entries for 2014.
6. Compute the 2014 increase/decrease in AOCI—net actuarial (gains) or losses and the 
amount to be amortized in 2014 and 2015.
7. Confirm that the pension asset (liability) on the balance sheet equals the funded status as 
of December 31, 2014.
P14-4
Relating pension concepts 
to pension accounting 
(LO 1, 2, 3)
You have the following information related to Chalmers Corporation’s pension plan:
1. Defined benefit, noncontributory pension plan.
2. Plan initiation, January 1, 2014 (no credit given for prior service).
3. Retirement benefits paid at year-end with the first payment one year after retirement.
4. Assumed discount rate of 7%.
5. Assumed expected rate of return on plan assets of 9%.
6. Annual retirement benefit equals years of credited service 3 0.02 3 highest salary.
 
You have the following information for Frank Bullitt, the firm’s only employee:
Start date 
January 1, 2011
Expected retirement date 
December 31, 2028
Expected number of payments during retirement 
20
Selected actual and expected salary levels:
Date 
Salary Level
January 1, 2011 
$22,000
January 1, 2014 
27,000
January 1, 2015 
30,000
January 1, 2028 
75,000
Required:
1. Calculate the service cost and the interest cost components of pension cost for 2014 and 
2015.
2. Calculate the PBO at the end of 2014 and 2015.
3. Compute the fair value of plan assets for 2014 and 2015, assuming that $1,200 in contri-
butions is made to the pension fund at the end of each year. There were no actuarial gains 
or losses during 2014 or 2015.
4. Calculate pension expense for 2014 and 2015.
(problem continued on next page)

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
879
P14-5
Calculating PBO, ABO, 
and pension expense 
(LO 1, 2, 3)
Assume that the pension benefit formula of ABC Corporation calls for paying a pension ben-
efit of $250 per year for each year of service with the company plus 50% of the projected last 
year’s salary at retirement. Payments begin one year after the employee attains the age of 65 
and are paid annually thereafter. The average life expectancy of employees is 76.
 
The pension plan is adopted on January 1, 2014. One of the company’s employees, I.M. 
Workaholic, is granted credit for 10 years of prior service. He is 50 years old at the date the 
plan is adopted. His current annual salary is $20,000, but his salary level when he retires in 
15 years is expected to be $30,000.
 
Assume a 10% rate of interest for both the discount rate and the expected rate of return on 
plan assets.
Required:
1. Determine the PBO and ABO related to Workaholic’s pension benefits as of January 1, 
2014.
2. What would the projected benefit obligation be on December 31, 2014?
3. How much pension expense should ABC Corporation recognize in 2014 for Workaholic? 
Show the components of pension expense.
P14-6
Determining PBO, ABO, 
and pension expense 
(LO 1, 2, 3)
Assume the same facts for ABC Corporation as in P14-5 with the following exceptions:
• Assume both that ABC fully funds the estimated PBO on January 1, 2014, and that 
 invested funds earn an actual return of 12% in 2014.
• Suppose that in addition to funding the estimated PBO on January 1, 2014, ABC follows 
a policy of contributing to the pension fund (at the end of each year) an amount equal 
to the estimated pension expense less the prior service cost component, which was pre-
funded. On January 1, 2015, the discount rate drops from 10% to 9% while the expected 
return on plan assets remains at 10% for 2015.
Required:
1. How much pension expense should ABC recognize in 2014? Show the components of 
pension expense. Explain how this differs from your answer in requirement 3 of P14-5.
2. Compute the pension expense and amount funded in 2015. (Assume that the actual return 
on plan assets was 10% in 2015.) Compare the funded status of the plans at the end of 
2015 and 2014. Explain the change.
P14-7
Identifying effect of funding 
and discount rate assumption 
on pension expense 
(LO 2, 3, 5)
On January 1, 2014, Magee Corporation started doing business by hiring R. Walker as an em-
ployee at an annual salary of $50,000, with an annual salary increment of $10,000. Based on 
his current age and the company’s retirement program, Walker is required to retire at the end of 
the year in 2017. However, at his option, he could retire any time after completing one full year 
of service. Regardless of when he retires, the company will pay a lump-sum pension at the end 
of 2018. The lump-sum payment is calculated to be 25% of the cumulative lifetime salary 
Walker earned. Magee’s annual discount rate is 10%. Assume that Walker retires at the end of 
2017.
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
5. Prepare the required journal entries for 2014 and 2015.
6. Show how your answer for 2014 would change if the plan had granted credit for prior 
service.

880 
CHAPTER 14
Pensions and Postretirement Benefits
Required:
1. Assuming that Magee Corporation does not fund its pension expense, calculate this 
 expense for 2014–2017. Clearly identify the service and interest cost components. Based 
on your calculations, provide journal entries to record the effects of pensions during 
2011–2018.
2. Assume that Magee fully funds its pension cost as soon as it vests and that the contribu-
tions to the pension fund earn exactly a 10% rate of return annually. Based on these 
 revised assumptions, redo requirement 1.
3. Explain why the total pension expense in requirement 1 and in requirement 2 differ.
4. Assume that Magee does not fund its pension expense. Discuss how different assumptions 
regarding the discount rate affect the pension expense. Compare the pension expense with 
discount rates of 5%, 10%, and 15%.
P14-8
Determining effect of 
 discount rate assumption 
on pension expense and 
PBO (LO 2, 3, 5)
Use the same set of facts as in P14-7. In addition, assume that based on ERISA rules, Magee 
Corporation must contribute the following amounts to the pension fund:
 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017
Contributions 
$8,475 
$11,000 
$15,000 
$18,000
Magee intends to fund the pension plan only to the extent required by ERISA rules. Assume 
that the contributions to the pension fund earn exactly a 10% rate of return annually.
Required:
1. The CEO of the company, Reece Magee, is considering three possible discount rates (8%, 
10%, and 12%) for calculating the annual pension expense. Provide schedules showing 
how much pension expense will be reported under each of the three scenarios during the 
2011–2018 period.
2. Provide schedules showing the funded status of the pension plan during the 2014–2017 
period.
3. Magee is wondering which of the three discount rate assumptions would be considered 
the most and least conservative for the purposes of determining net income. Prepare a 
schedule that shows how total pension expense compares across the three discount rate 
assumptions. Explain your results.
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
P14-9
Interpreting OPEB disclosures 
and making journal entries 
(LO 3, 6, 7)
The following information is based on an actual annual report. Different names and years are 
being used.
Bond and some of its subsidiaries provide certain postretirement medical, dental, and vision 
care and life insurance for retirees and their dependents and for the surviving dependents of 
eligible employees and retirees. Generally, the employees become eligible for postretirement 
benefits if they retire no earlier than age 55 with 10 years of service. The liability for postre-
tirement benefits is funded through trust funds based on actuarially determined contributions 
that consider the amount deductible for income tax purposes. The health care plans are con-
tributory, funded jointly by the companies and the participating retirees. The December 31, 
2015 and 2014, postretirement benefit liabilities and related data were determined using the 
January 1, 2015, actuarial valuations.

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
881
 
Information related to the accumulated postretirement benefit obligation plan for the years 
2015 and 2014 follows:
 
Years Ended December 31,
($ in thousands) 
2015 
2014
Change in benefit obligation
Benefit obligation at beginning of period 
$1,236,000 
$1,139,000
Service cost 
41,000 
38,000
Interest cost 
82,000 
78,000
Plan participants’ contributions 
4,000 
3,000
Actuarial loss (gain) 
(188,000) 
25,000
Benefits paid 
(51,000) 
(47,000)
Special termination benefits 
27,000 
—
Benefit obligation at end of period 
1,151,000 
1,236,000
Change in plan assets
Fair value of plan assets at beginning of period 
865,000 
767,000
Actual return on plan assets 
105,000 
122,000
Employer contributions 
24,000 
20,000
Plan participants’ contributions 
4,000 
3,000
Benefits paid 
(51,000) 
(47,000)
Fair value of plan assets at period-end 
947,000 
865,000
Plan assets less than benefit obligations 
(204,000) 
(371,000)
AOCI—net actuarial (gain) loss 
(555,000) 
(352,000)
AOCI—prior service cost 
41,000 
48,000
The assumed discount rates used to determine the benefit obligation as of December 31, 2015 
and 2014, were 7.75% and 6.75%, respectively. The fair value of plan assets excludes $9 mil-
lion and $7 million held in a grantor trust as of December 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively, for 
the payment of postretirement medical benefits.
 
The components of other postretirement benefit costs, portions of which were recorded as 
components of construction costs for the years 2015, 2014, and 2013 follow:
($ in thousands) 
2015 
2014 
2013
Service cost 
$ ?   
$ ?   
$ 34,000
Interest cost on APBO 
?   
?   
76,000
Expected return on plan assets 
?   
?   
(61,000)
Amortization of prior service costs 
4,000 
4,000 
4,000
Recognized gain 
(14,000) 
(14,000) 
(13,000)
Curtailment loss 
30,000 
–0– 
–0–
 Net periodic benefit cost 
$ ?   
$ ?   
$ 40,000
The other postretirement benefit curtailment losses in December 2015 represent the recogni-
tion of $3,000 of additional prior service costs and a $27,000 increase in the benefit obliga-
tions resulting from special termination benefits.
 
The health care cost trend rates used to measure the expected cost of the postretirement 
medical benefits are assumed to be 8.0% for pre-Medicare recipients and 6.0% for Medicare 
recipients for 2015. Those rates are assumed to decrease in 0.5% annual increments to 5% for 
the years 2021 and 2017, respectively, and to remain level thereafter. The health care cost 
trend rates, used to measure the expected cost of postretirement dental and vision benefits, are 
a level 3.5% and 2.0% per year, respectively. Assumed health care cost trend rates have a 

882 
CHAPTER 14
Pensions and Postretirement Benefits
P14-10
Amortizing actuarial (gains) 
losses (LO 3, 4)
The following information pertains to the pension plan of Beatty Business Group:
 
Beginning of the Year
 
 
Fair Value of 
(Gain ) Loss
Year 
PBO 
Pension Plan Assets 
for the Year
 (1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4)
2011 
$  400,000 
$  390,000 
 
2012 
450,000 
410,000 
$  (60,000)
2013 
570,000 
500,000 
(120,000)
2014 
840,000 
800,000 
120,000
2015 
1,000,000 
1,100,000 
175,000
2016 
1,200,000 
1,280,000 
250,000
2017 
1,450,000 
1,310,000 
80,000
Note that the information in Columns (2) and (3) are as of the beginning of the year, whereas 
the information in Column (4) is measured over the year.
 
The AOCI—net actuarial (gain) loss at the end of 2011 was $(70,000). The Gain (loss) for 
the year account represents the excess of the realized return on pension plan assets over the 
expected return for the specific year. When a (gain) loss was reported, the realized return was 
(higher) lower than the expected return during that year. The estimated remaining service 
 period of active employees is five years for each of the calendar years.
Required:
Provide a schedule showing how the (gain) loss is amortized over the 2012–2017 period. Clearly 
indicate whether the amortization increases or decreases the pension expense in each year.
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
 significant effect on the amounts reported for the health care plans. A percentage change of 
one point in the assumed health care cost trend rates would have the following effects:
 
1 Percentage Point
($ in thousands) 
Increase 
Decrease
Effect on total 2015 service and interest cost components 
$ 26,000 
$ (20,000)
Effect on APBO as of 12/31/2015 
190,000 
151,000
Required:
1. Assuming an expected rate of return on plan assets for 2015 and 2014 of 8.8% and 9%, 
respectively, compute the missing amounts in the first table and determine the Net 
 periodic benefit cost for years 2015 and 2014. (Round amounts to nearest million.)
2. Assuming that the employer submitted the $4,000,000 of participant contributions 
 directly to the trust, show the journal entry that Bond would make to record its 2015 
 company (employer) contribution, Net periodic benefit cost, and AOCI effects.
3. Show that the 2015 journal entries result in a balance sheet pension asset (liability) equal 
to the funded status. Assume that the beginning 2015 balance equals the ending 2014 
funded status.
P14-11
Interpreting pension 
 disclosures (LO 2, 3, 4, 6)
Selected pension information extracted from the retirement benefits note that appeared in 
Green’s 2014 annual report follows. (These numbers have been modified but are based on the 
activities of a real company whose name has been disguised.)

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
883
 
All employees of Green and employees of certain other subsidiaries are eligible to partici-
pate in the company’s pension plans. The defined benefit plans provide benefits for participat-
ing employees based on years of service and average compensation for a specified period of 
time before retirement.
 
The following table provides a reconciliation of the changes in the plans’ benefit obliga-
tions and fair value of assets for the years ended December 31, 2014 and 2013:
Components of Net Periodic Pension Cost
($ in millions) 
2014 
2013 
2012
Defined benefit plans:
 Service cost 
$236 
$213 
$179
 Interest cost 
433 
418 
393
 Expected return on assets 
(514) 
(472) 
(421)
Amortization of:
 Prior service cost 
5 
4 
4
 Actuarial (gain) loss 
21 
22 
26
Net periodic benefit cost 
$181 
$185 
$181
Reconciliation of Projected Benefit Obligation
($ in millions) 
2014 
2013
Obligation at January 1 
$6,117 
$5,666
Service cost 
236 
213
Interest cost 
433 
418
Actuarial loss (gain) 
? 
300
Plan amendments 
? 
–0–
Benefit payments 
? 
(480)
Obligation at December 31 
$5,624 
$6,117
Reconciliation of Fair Value of Plan Assets
($ in millions) 
2014 
2013
Fair value of plan assets at January 1 
$5,564 
$5,127
Actual return on plan assets 
7 
847
Employer contributions 
100 
70
Benefit payments 
? 
(480)
Fair value of plan assets at December 31 
? 
$5,564
Funded Status
($ in millions) 
2014 
2013
Projected benefit obligation 
$(5,624) 
$(6,117)
Fair value of assets 
? 
5,564
Funded status at December 31: 
$  (341) 
$  (553)
AOCI—Actuarial (gain) loss 
$  288 
$   651
AOCI—Prior service costs 
138 
68
Total 
$  426 
$  719
The following table provides a statement of funded status of the plans as of December 31, 
2014 and 2013:
The following table provides the components of net periodic pension cost for the years ended 
December 31, 2014, 2013, and 2012:

884 
CHAPTER 14
Pensions and Postretirement Benefits
The following assumptions were used by the Company in the measurement of the benefit 
obligation as of December 31:
Weighted-Average Assumptions 
2014 
2013
Discount rate 
8.25% 
7.00%
Salary growth rate 
4.26 
4.26
Expected return on plan assets 
9.48 
9.59
Required:
Show supporting computations with clear labels for all calculations.
1. What is the fair value of plan assets as of December 31, 2014?
2. What was the amount of benefit payments distributed to retirees in 2014?
3. Determine the amount of increase (decrease) in the projected benefit obligation (PBO) as a 
result of amendments to the plan during 2014 and reconcile it to AOCI—prior service costs.
4. Determine the amount of the actuarial loss (gain) on the PBO in 2014.
5. What was the effect of increasing the discount rate from 7.00% in 2013 to 8.25% in 2014?
6. Give the journal entries that Green would have made to record the effects of its pension 
plan for 2014.
7. Verify that the journal entries result in a balance sheet pension asset (liability) that is 
equal to the December 31, 2014, funded status.
P14-12
Evaluating the effects of 
 unreasonable rate of return 
assumptions (LO 3, 4, 6, 9)
Berle Corp. has a defined benefit pension plan that features the following data:
Jan 1, 2013 (beginning of fiscal year):
Fair value of plan assets 
$4,000
Projected benefit obligation 
$6,200
Accumulated benefit obligation 
$5,900
AOCI balance relating to actuarial estimates 
$900 (debit/loss)
The following assumptions are used for the pension plan in 2013:
Discount rate 
7.5%
Average remaining employee service life 
25 years
Additional information relating to 2013:
New service cost 
$300
Cash contributions to the plan assets (end of 2013) 
$150
Pension benefits paid by the plan (end of 2013) 
$350
Actual return on plan assets 
$360
Actuarial estimate adjustment to the PBO 
$50 (debit/loss)
The CFO of Berle Corp. devises a plan to inflate artificially net income by using an estimate 
for expected return on plan assets of 25% (the traditional estimate for return on plan assets is 
10%). Under U.S. GAAP, the CFO chooses to amortize only the portion of any beginning 
AOCI balance outside the corridor into pension expense/income.
Required (ignore potential deferred tax effects):
1. Compute the 2013 pension expense/income under U.S. GAAP. What was the effect of the 
CFO’s plans on 2013 pension expense/income?
2. Compute the 2013 pension expense/income under IFRS. What was the effect of the CFO’s 
plan on 2013 pension expense/income?
(problem continued on next page)

 
Cases 
885
3. Compute the effect of the CFO’s plan on 2014 pension expense/income under U.S. GAAP. 
In other words, what is the effect of the plan on future period amortization of the AOCI 
balance?
4. Compute the effect of the CFO’s plan on 2014 pension expense/income under IFRS. 
In other words, what is the effect of the plan on future period amortization of the 
AOCI balance?
CASES
Refer to the 2012 General Electric Retiree Health and Life Benefits disclosure appearing in 
Exhibit 14.6.
Required:
1. Reconstruct the journal entries that GE would have made in 2012 to record the effects of 
its retiree health and life benefits plans.
2. Explain how GE’s health and life benefits plans affected its OCI account for 2012.
Hint on Curtailment/settlement: Follow the first six journal entries made for the GE pension 
example before addressing the curtailment/settlement. The curtailment entry includes the 
following:
DR Curtailment loss (outside of Retiree benefit plans cost)  . . . . . . .  
$32
CR OCI—Prior service cost  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$195
CR OCI—Net actuarial loss (gain)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
102
You should be able to reconstruct the rest of the curtailment entry from information in the 
Retiree Health and Life Benefits disclosure.
C14-1
Interpreting OPEB 
 disclosures (LO 6, 7)
C14-2
Novartis: Interpreting IFRS 
pension accounting 
(LO 3, 6, 9)
Novartis, which files under IFRS, reported the following information in its first quarter report 
for 2013:
Impact of introducing revised accounting standard on Employee Benefits in 2013
The Group introduced the revised IFRS accounting standard IAS 19 (R) “Employee Benefits,” 
on January 1, 2013. The principal impact of this is that the return on pension plan assets and the 
interest calculated on the defined benefit obligations now use the same interest rate reflecting 
the current market yield of high-quality corporate bonds. Previously the return on plan assets 
was calculated based on the higher long-term expected return on assets, so the adoption of the 
new accounting standard increases the annual cost of post-employment benefits included in 
 Corporate Other Expense. It has also been required to restate for the amortization of previously 
unrecognized past service credits. As required by the new standard, the Group’s 2012 Consoli-
dated Financial Statements have been retrospectively restated to reflect these changes. For the 
full year 2012, the impact of these restatements is an additional expense of USD 318 million 
 before tax (USD 235 million after tax) and in the first quarter of 2012 an additional expense of 
USD 79 million before tax (USD 58 million after tax), offset by a corresponding adjustment 
of the actuarial losses recognized in comprehensive income.
Required:
1. Did the adoption of the revised IAS 19 increase or decrease Novartis’ annual pension 
 expense? Why?
(case continued on next page)

886 
CHAPTER 14
Pensions and Postretirement Benefits
2. Why did Novartis have to adjust its 2012 (prior year’s) financial reporting for its 
pensions?
3. Are there any cash flow implications of these changes for Novartis?
C14-3
Union Pacific Corporation: 
 Interpreting pension and 
OPEB note disclosures 
(LO 3, 6, 7)
Presented below are excerpts from the 2008 annual report of Union Pacific.
At December 31, 2008, Union Pacific had a stock price of $47.80 and 503.2 million shares outstanding. Its 
balance sheet at December 31, 2008, shows total assets of $39.7 billion and total liabilities of $24.3 billion. 
Its income statement for the year ended December 31, 2008, shows net income of $2.3 billion and interest 
expense of 0.5 billion.
4. Retirement Plans
Pension and Other Postretirement Benefits
Pension Plans—We provide defined benefit retirement income to eligible non-union employees 
through qualified and non-qualified (supplemental) pension plans. Qualified and non-qualified pension 
benefits are based on years of service and the highest compensation during the latest years of employ-
ment, with specific reductions made for early retirements.
Other Postretirement Benefits (OPEB)—We provide defined contribution medical and life insurance 
benefits for eligible retirees. These benefits are funded as medical claims and life insurance premiums 
are paid.
 
Changes in our PBO and plan assets are as follows for the years ended December 31:
Funded Status 
Pension 
OPEB
(Millions of  Dollars) 
2008 
2007 
2008 
2007
Projected Benefit Obligation
Projected benefit obligation at beginning of year 
$2,112 
$2,113 
$ 326 
$ 374
 Service cost 
34 
34 
3 
3
 Interest cost 
137 
124 
24 
20
 Plan amendments 
— 
— 
(9) 
(10)
 Actuarial loss (gain) 
132 
(33) 
101 
(34)
 Gross benefits paid 
(143) 
(126) 
(27) 
(27)
Projected benefit obligation at end of year 
$2,272 
$2,112 
$ 418 
$ 326
Plan Assets
Fair value of plan assets at beginning of year 
$2,058 
$1,989 
$ — 
$ —
 Actual return on plan assets 
(592) 
183 
— 
—
 Voluntary funded pension plan contributions 
200 
— 
— 
—
 Other funded pension plan contributions 
8 
— 
— 
—
 Non-qualified plan benefit contributions 
12 
12 
27 
27
 Gross benefits paid 
(143) 
(126) 
(27) 
(27)
Fair value of plan assets at end of year 
$1,543 
$2,058 
$ — 
$ —
Funded status at end of year 
$ (729) 
$  (54) 
$(418) 
$(326)
 
Pension 
OPEB
Service cost 
$ 34 
$ 3
Interest cost 
137 
24
Expected return on plan assets 
(152) 
—
Amortization of prior service cost/(credit) 
6 
(34)
Amortization of actuarial loss 
10 
13
 
35 
6
Components of pension expense for 2008 include the following:

 
Cases 
887
Assumptions—The weighted-average actuarial assumptions used to determine benefit obliga-
tions at December 31:
Percentages 
2008 
2007
Discount rate 
6.25% 
6.50%
Expected return on plan assets 
8.00% 
8.00%
Salary increase 
3.50% 
3.50%
Percentages 
2008 
2007 
2006
Discount rate 
6.50% 
6.00% 
5.75%
Expected return on plan assets 
8.00% 
8.00% 
8.00%
Salary increase 
3.50% 
3.00% 
2.75%
Assumptions—The weighted-average actuarial assumptions used to determine expense were 
as follows for the years ended December 31:
For 2008, the discount rate was based on a Mercer yield curve of high quality corporate bonds 
with cash flows matching our plans’ expected benefit payments. For 2007 and 2006, the dis-
count rate was based on a hypothetical portfolio of high quality corporate bonds with cash 
flows matching our plans’ expected benefit payments. The expected return on plan assets is 
based on our asset allocation mix and our historical return, taking into account current and 
expected market conditions. The actual return (loss) on pension plan assets, net of fees, was 
approximately (30)% in 2008, 9% in 2007, and 14% in 2006.
Required:
1. What is the amount of assets or liabilities recognized on Union Pacific’s balance sheet for 
its U.S. pension benefits at December 31, 2008?
2. Compute the ending balance of Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income—Actuarial 
(Gains) Losses for the Pension Plans. The amounts are before taxes. Be sure to label 
your items and show your computations.
(Millions of  Dollars) 
Pension 
OPEB
Prior service cost/(credit) 
$ 18 
$(137)
Net actuarial loss 
158 
85
Total 
$176 
$ (52)
Pre-tax amounts recognized in accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) as of Decem-
ber 31, 2007, consist of:
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income—
Actuarial (Gains) Losses (Pension Plans)
Beginning 
$158
Ending
3. Based on information in the pension note, would you expect the pension expense to be 
higher or lower than its 2008 amount? Explain.
(case continued on next page)

888 
CHAPTER 14
Pensions and Postretirement Benefits
4. Compute the short-term pension risk ratio and the short-term OPEB risk ratio (extended 
version) as of December 31, 2008.
5. Compute the long-term pension risk ratio and the long-term OPEB risk ratio as of 
 December 31, 2008.
6. Based on your answers to requirements 4 and 5, explain whether Union Pacific has 
 significant pension and OPEB risk.
C14-4
Union Pacific Corporation: 
Comparing U.S. GAAP and 
IFRS pension and OPEB 
 accounting (LO 9)
Refer to the Union Pacific information in Case 14-3.
Required:
Explain how pension expense and OCI would change if Union Pacific were using IAS 19.
International
.mhhe.com/revsine6e
www
Remember to check the book’s companion website 
for additional study material.

15
Chapter
S
tatement readers must understand the accounting procedures and reporting 
 conventions for owners’ equity for these reasons:
1. Appropriate income measurement. Differentiating between owners’ equity changes 
that increase income or decrease income and changes that don’t increase or de-
crease income will help answer these questions: Why are bond interest payments 
an expense that reduces net income while dividend payments on common and pre-
ferred stock are not an expense that reduces net income? Why do certain financing 
transactions—such as early debt retirements—generate accounting gains and losses 
while others—such as stock repurchases and debt conversions—do not generate ac-
counting gains and losses?
2. Compliance with contract terms and restrictions. Many “exotic” securities having 
characteristics of both debt and equity have been developed over the years by invest-
ment bankers. How should these hybrid securities be classified for monitoring compli-
ance with contractual restrictions such as maximum allowable debt-to-equity ratios?
3. Legality of corporate distributions to owners. Owners’ equity is generally regarded 
as a financial “cushion” protecting corporate creditors. Cash distributions to 
 shareholders—dividends and stock repurchases—reduce this cushion. How much 
of this cushion can legally be distributed as dividends? When a company liquidates, 
in what order of priority can cash payouts be made to its various claimants?
4. Linkage to equity valuation. Analyzing the true worth of equity shares requires an 
understanding of the amount of earnings that accrue to each share. Equity valuation 
thus depends on how a company’s options, warrants, and convertible securities 
 affect its earnings per share.
After discussing each of these issues, we describe how earnings per share (EPS) is calcu-
lated and then look at the controversy surrounding GAAP for employee stock options. 
The chapter concludes with a discussion of accounting for hybrid securities—convertible 
debt and others—that contain both debt-like and equitylike features.
APPROPRIATE INCOME MEASUREMENT
Some increases (decreases) in owners’ equity are considered to be income (loss), while 
other increases (decreases) are not income (loss). To know why, you must understand 
the modern GAAP definition of the “firm.”
15
Financial Reporting for Owners’ Equity
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you 
will understand:
1. Why some financing transactions—
such as debt redemptions—produce 
reported gains and losses while 
 others—such as stock repurchases—
do not.
2. Why companies buy back their stock, 
and how they do it.
3. Why some preferred stock resem-
bles debt, and how preferred stock 
is reported on financial statements.
4. How and when retained earnings 
 limits a company’s distributions to 
common stockholders.
5. How to interpret the balance sheet 
items that constitute shareholders’ 
equity.
6. How to calculate basic earnings per 
share (EPS) and diluted EPS, and 
whether EPS is a meaningful number.
7. What generally accepted accounting 
principles (GAAP) says about 
 employee stock options, and why 
the accounting treatment has been 
controversial.
8. How and why GAAP understates the 
true cost of most convertible debt, 
and how IFRS guidelines avoid this 
understatement.
889

890 
CHAPTER 15
Financial Reporting for Owners’ Equity
What Constitutes the “Firm”?
Although GAAP is intended to address the information needs of both lenders and investors, 
when it comes to measuring net income GAAP adopts a decidedly “ownership” perspective.1 To 
see why and how consider the basic accounting principle that income can be earned (or expenses 
incurred) only through transactions between the firm and “outsiders.” But who is “inside” the 
firm, and who are the outsiders? Under the GAAP view, the firm is the net capital deployed: 
 
Assets 2 Liabilities 5 Owners’ equity
 
Net capital deployed 
 Owners’ capital
Owners are the “insiders” who provide that net capital. Consequently, no income or loss can 
arise from transactions between the firm and its owners because owners are not outsiders. This 
perspective explains why interest payments to banks or bondholders are expenses that reduce 
net income while dividend payments to common and preferred shareholders are not expenses 
that reduce net income.
• Banks and bondholders are outsiders—hence, interest costs are expenses.
• Shareholders are not outsiders—thus, dividends are a distribution of earnings to owners, 
not an expense of the company.
 
This “ownership” perspective of GAAP income measurement helps us understand why 
certain financing transactions generate income or losses while other transactions do not.
 
One way corporations raise capital is by selling equity shares to investors. Called com-
mon stock, equity shares provide the opportunity for purchasers to participate in the com-
pany’s future profitability.2 In addition to conveying ownership rights, common stock has 
limited liability. As long as each share is initially sold for more than the per share dollar 
amount—called par value—printed on each stock certificate the shareholder’s potential 
loss is limited to the original purchase price of the common 
share. Limited liability makes investing in common stock attrac-
tive because although potential gains from ownership are unlim-
ited, the risk of loss is limited to the share purchase price.
To see how the accounting for common stock works, assume 
that at its formation, Nahigian Corporation issues (meaning “sells 
to investors”) 5,000 shares of common stock at $50 per share and 
that the shares have a par value of $1 each. Nahigian records the 
stock issuance as:
DR Cash   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$250,000
 
CR Common stock—$1 par value . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$  5,000
 
CR Paid-in capital in excess of par   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
245,000
1 According to the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) “[t]he objective of general purpose financial reporting is to 
provide financial information about the reporting entity that is useful to existing and potential investors, lenders, and other credi-
tors in making decisions about providing resources to the entity. Those decisions involve buying, selling, or holding equity and 
debt instruments and providing or settling loans and other forms of credit.” See Statement of Financial Accounting Concepts No. 
8 “Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting, Chapter 1: The Objective of General Purpose Financial Reporting” (Norwalk, 
CT: FASB, 2010). Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) Topic 480: Distinguishing Liabilities from Equities provides guid-
ance useful for determining which particular providers of capital qualify as “owners” for GAAP income measurement purposes.
2 Investors who buy preferred stock (discussed later in the chapter) also participate in the company’s future profitability. 
However, investors who buy debt instruments do not participate in the company’s future profitability. Instead, debtholders 
gain only a specified (fixed or variable) rate of return—for example, “7% interest per annum,” or in the case of variable rate 
debt, “LIBOR plus 1y2%.”
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎭
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎭
The term par value refers to the nominal value or face value 
of a security—a dollar amount printed on the face of each 
stock certificate. With common stock, par value is set by the 
company issuing the stock. At one time, par value represented 
the original investment in cash, goods, or services behind 
each share of stock. Today, par value is an assigned amount 
(such as $1 per share) used to compute the dollar accounting 
value of the common shares on the company’s balance sheet. 
Par value has no relation to market value.

 
Appropriate Income Measurement 
891
The $1 par value per share bears no necessary relationship to the market value of each share 
at issuance ($50) or later. (Remember that par value is just the dollar amount printed on each 
stock certificate.) The difference between the $50 issue price and the $1 par value is credited 
to the separate owners’ equity account Paid-in capital in excess of par—sometimes called 
 Additional paid-in capital.
 
Suppose that several years later, Nahigian Corporation reacquires 200 of these shares at a 
cost of $48 each. When a corporation buys back its own shares, the repurchased shares are 
called treasury stock if the shares are to be held in the corporate treasury for later use. The 
accounting entry is:
DR Treasury stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$9,600
   CR Cash   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$9,600
Notice that no gain or loss is recorded for the difference between the $50 per share price at 
which the shares were first issued and the $48 repurchase price. The reason stock repur-
chases do not involve accounting gains and losses is that they are transactions between the 
company and its owners.
 
When treasury stock is acquired, it is not considered a corporate asset. Instead, treasury 
stock is treated as a reduction in owners’ equity. Treasury stock is debited, as shown above, 
and it then appears on the balance sheet as a contra-equity account. Here’s how the owners’ 
equity section of Nahigian’s balance sheet looks after the company repurchased 200 shares of 
common stock for $9,600:
Nahigian Corporation
Owners’ Equity
Common stock, $1 par value, 5,000 shares issued 
$  5,000
Paid-in capital in excess of par 
245,000
Retained earnings (assumed for illustration) 
700,000
 Total paid-in capital and retained earnings 
$950,000
Less: Treasury stock (at cost) 
(9,600)
 Total owners’ equity 
$940,400
 
Now assume that Nahigian decides several months later to raise more equity capital by 
reselling all 200 treasury shares at $53 per share. The entry would be:
DR Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$10,600
   CR Treasury stock   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$9,600
   CR Paid-in capital in excess of par . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
1,000
This entry eliminates the contra-equity account Treasury stock. The $53 per share selling 
price is $5 per share higher than the $48 paid to reacquire the shares. Despite this “excess,” no 
income is recognized on this transaction between the firm and its owners. Instead, the 
 difference of $1,000 (or 200 shares 3 [$53 2 $48]) is added to 
the Paid-in capital in excess of par account.
 
What if rather than being held in treasury for later use, Nahigian 
permanently retires the repurchased shares by cancelling the stock 
certificates. When shares are repurchased and retired, the Common 
But if Nahigian had reacquired outstanding debt at a price lower 
than its book value, an extinguishment gain would be recorded, 
as described in Chapter 11. Debt redemptions generate account-
ing gains (and losses) while stock repurchases do not.

892 
CHAPTER 15
Financial Reporting for Owners’ Equity
stock account is reduced for the par value of shares retired ($200 in our example) and the Paid-in 
capital account is reduced for the “excess” purchase price ($9,600 2 $200 5 $9,400) as:
DR Common stock—$1 par value  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$   200
DR Paid-in capital in excess of par  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
9,400
   CR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$9,600
The share certificates are then canceled, thus reducing the total number of shares issued.
 
A further complication arises when repurchased shares are to be retired and the excess 
purchase price ($9,400 in our example) exceeds the available Paid-in capital balance. To il-
lustrate this complication, suppose the Paid-in capital account balance just prior to the share 
buyback is only $5,000. Nahigian would then record the share repurchase and retirement as:
DR Common stock—$1 par value  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 200
DR Paid-in capital in excess of par  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
5,000
DR Retained earnings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
4,400
   CR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$9,600
Notice that (1) $5,000 of the excess purchase price is used to reduce the Paid-in capital ac-
count to zero, and (2) the remaining excess purchase price ($9,400 2 $5,000 5 $4,400) is 
then recorded as a reduction to Retained earnings.
RECAP
The “ownership” perspective of GAAP income measurement explains why financing trans-
actions with banks or bondholders generate income or losses while transactions with share-
holders do not. This same intuition explains why treasury stock gains and losses are not 
recognized. Because treasury stock transactions are between the company and its share-
holders (owners) and not outsiders, no income is recognized—even when the successive 
stock transactions are favorable such as those in the Nahigian Corporation illustration.
Why Companies Repurchase Their Stock
Firms reacquire their own common stock for many reasons. Sometimes a company needs 
shares for employee stock option redemptions. Sometimes management may conclude that 
the company’s shares are undervalued at the prevailing market price and that the best use of 
corporate funds is to invest in those shares by buying some of them back from stockholders. 
At other times, perhaps management just wants to distribute surplus 
cash to shareholders rather than to keep it inside the company.
A company’s surplus cash—the amount over and above the cash 
needed for day-to-day operating activities—can be a problem for manage-
ment and for shareholders. Management worries that another company or 
investor group might launch a hostile takeover of the business, using the 
company’s own cash surplus to partially finance the takeover. If a hostile 
takeover is successful, some managers will inevitably lose their jobs. 
Shareholders, on the other hand, worry that management might spend the 
company’s surplus cash on unprofitable—negative net present value—
projects and on lavish “perks” such as corporate speedboats or race cars. So, its better to give the 
money to shareholders—after all, it is money to which they are entitled.
 
Stock repurchases have one other advantage: Shareholders who take the stock repurchase 
cash are taxed at capital gain rates. If instead the cash is paid out as dividends, shareholders 
would be taxed at ordinary income rates, which are often higher than capital gain tax rates.
Suppose that Raider Company intends to acquire Target 
Company for $150 million in cash. Raider already has 
$30 million cash set aside for the takeover and has lined 
up another $100 million from a bank loan. But that still 
leaves Raider $20 million short. Where can it find the 
money it needs to complete the takeover? One possibility 
is to tap into Target’s surplus cash. In other words, the 
more surplus cash that Target has, the easier it becomes 
for Raider to use the money to help pay for the takeover.

 
Appropriate Income Measurement 
893
 
The popularity of stock repurchases has varied over time as a result of changes in the eco-
nomic climate, stock market price levels, and the availability of surplus corporate cash. Only 
87 U.S. companies announced stock buyback plans in 1980, with the dollar value totaling 
$1.4 billion. In 1998, 1,570 U.S. companies announced stock repurchases that totaled $222.0 
billion.3 Figure 15.1 shows the total dollar value of the buybacks for each quarter from 2005 
through 2012 for Standard & Poor’s 500 companies. These large U.S. firms repurchased more 
than $384 billion worth of their shares during the four quarters of 2012, an amount that repre-
sents roughly 80% of the free cash flows the companies produced that year.
 
The typical share repurchase is at a price about 23% more than the stock’s market value 
just before the repurchase offer is announced.4 Those shareholders who sell their stock back 
to the company capture this price premium. But what about the shareholders who don’t sell? 
According to perhaps the best-known study on the subject, the stock of the average corpora-
tion that repurchases its shares outperforms the rest of the market by 12% over the four years 
´05
´06
´07
´08
´09
´11
´10
´12
340
360
380
320
300
 Number of Companies
$ Value in Millions
280
260
240
20,000
40,000
60,000
80,000
100,000
120,000
140,000
160,000
180,000
Dollar Value (in $M) of S&P 500 Quarterly Bybacks
Companies Making Bybacks over Qtr
Time Series Average
Figure 15.1 THE DOLLAR VALUE OF STOCK REPURCHASED EACH QUARTER 2005–2012 BY U.S. COMPANIES IN 
THE STANDARD & POOR’S 500 INDEX (IN $ MILLIONS)
Source: “Buyback Quarterly,” FactSet Research Systems Inc., April 2, 2013. The Standard & Poor’s 500 Index (S&P 500) is one of the most commonly used benchmarks for the 
overall U.S. stock market. A team of analysts and economists at Standard & Poor’s chooses 500 stocks for the index based on market size, liquidity, and industry grouping, 
among other factors.
3 G. Grullon and D. Ikenberry, “What Do We Know about Stock Repurchases?” Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, 
Spring 2000, pp. 31–51.
4 D. Ikenberry, J. Lakonishok, and T. Vermaelen, “Market Underreaction to Open Market Share Repurchases,” Journal of 
Financial Economics, October 1995, pp. 181–208.

894 
CHAPTER 15
Financial Reporting for Owners’ Equity
following the announcement of the repurchase program. Even better, high book-to-market 
price stocks that are repurchased beat the market by 45% over the next four years.5 So, it 
seems that everybody wins when shares are repurchased. Those who sell shares back to the 
company capture a price premium for doing so, and those who don’t sell but instead continue 
to own the shares capture an above-market return on their investment over the next four years.
 
But not all buybacks are created equal.6 While share repurchases as a whole help to boost 
investor returns, not all companies use repurchases to demonstrate that their stock is underval-
ued or to distribute excess cash to shareholders, skeptics say. Instead, share repurchases are 
sometimes used for other purposes. For example, here’s what Microsoft said in 1997 about its 
stock repurchase program:
Management believes existing cash and short-term investments together with funds generated from 
operations will be sufficient to meet operating requirements for the next twelve months. Microsoft’s 
cash and short-term investments are available for strategic investments, mergers and acquisitions, 
other potential large-scale cash needs that may arise, and to fund an increased stock buyback pro-
gram over historical levels to reduce the dilutive impact of the Company’s employee stock option 
and purchase programs. Despite recent increases in stock repurchases, the buyback program has not 
kept pace with employee stock option grants or exercises. Beginning in fiscal 1990, Microsoft has 
repurchased 134 million common shares for $4.2 billion while 336 million shares were issued under 
the Company’s employee stock option and purchase plans.7 [Emphasis added.]
 
Microsoft’s buyback program partially offsets share dilution8 caused by the company’s 
stock option and repurchase plans. But what does a company gain from buying back its 
shares with one hand while issuing shares through 
options with the other hand? Some analysts answer 
not much. While an employee usually buys shares 
for less than the market price under stock option pro-
grams, the company pays the market price to buy them 
back. In dollar terms, the number of shares outstand-
ing may seem to be shrinking because the company 
has spent more to buy back shares than employees 
have spent to acquire them. But in fact, the number of 
shares could remain unchanged or even increase.
Another concern for analysts is that many companies 
borrow to finance their stock repurchase programs. 
While such moves might have tax or other advantages, 
these companies simply replace equity with debt. Share-
holders get the buyback’s benefits only at the expense of 
owning a more leveraged company—one with more 
debt and less equity than before the repurchase. Also, 
these companies face the risk that an economic down-
turn could make it more difficult to service debt.
5 Ibid.
6 G. Morgenson, “Why Buybacks Aren’t Always Good News,” The Wall Street Journal, November 12, 2006.
7 Microsoft Corporation, Quarterly Report to Shareholders (10-Q filing), March 31, 1997.
8 Share dilution is akin to taking an apple pie that is already cut into six large pieces and then slicing each piece in half again 
so that the pie ends up divided into 12 much smaller pieces. Consider a simplified example of share dilution. Suppose that a 
company is worth $60 million, and 6 million shares of stock are in the hands of investors. Each share is then worth $10. Next 
suppose that management gives stock options for 6 million shares to employees, who then exercise their options and receive 
the new shares. If the company’s value is unchanged, each outstanding share is now worth only $5 because the same 
$60 million pie (that is, the company) is now divided into twice as many slices (the 12 million shares outstanding). That’s 
share dilution in a nutshell.
Analysis
Intel’s experience highlights the issue. Every year since 1992, this semi-
conductor manufacturer bought back stock. But in 1999, for example, 
while it issued only $543 million of stock and bought back a whopping 
$4.6 billion of stock under its share repurchase plan, its common shares 
outstanding actually increased to 3,334 million from 3,315 million. What 
is the reason for this growth in the number of shares? The company paid 
$64.95 a share for the stock it repurchased—but it received only $9.70 for 
each share  issued when employees exercised their stock options. More 
shares were  issued than were repurchased.
Microsoft terminated its stock buyback program in 2000. Before doing 
so, the company sold “put” warrants for 157 million shares. The war-
rants entitled holders to sell shares of Microsoft back to the company at 
a price of about $74 per share. If Microsoft shares are  trading at $54 
when the warrants are later exercised and the average purchase price is 
$74, the company then must come up with $20 a share—or $3.14 billion—
to settle the warrants. That’s a lot of cash!

 
Appropriate Income Measurement 
895
 
Even more worrisome is that some stock buybacks are motivated solely by a desire to 
boost EPS. Consider Rocket Software, which completed a successful third quarter with earn-
ings of $220,000 and EPS of $1.00. This was the ninth consecutive quarter that Rocket Soft-
ware’s EPS increased by 10% or more. But it appears that this string of EPS increases is about 
to be broken—fourth quarter earnings were projected to be only $220,000, unchanged from 
the third quarter.
 
How can the company keep its EPS record intact? Management could increase earnings (as 
well as EPS) by finding ways to grow sales revenues or reduce expenses. Or Rocket Software 
could buy back some of its common stock:
If the buyback should reduce total shares outstanding from 220,000 to 200,000, fourth quarter 
EPS will be $1.10, and the company can claim another quarter of 10% EPS growth.
 
Sounds simple? It’s not! There is a hidden assumption. Stock buybacks consume cash. 
Where did Rocket Software get the cash needed for its buyback? Suppose that the company 
had to borrow the cash. Then the (after-tax) interest expense on the loan—let’s say it’s 
$5,500—would have reduced projected fourth quarter earnings to $214,500. The company 
would then have to buy back 25,000 shares—or 5,000 more than originally anticipated—to 
reach its $1.10 EPS goal ($1.10 EPS 5 $214,500y195,000 shares outstanding after the 
 expanded buyback). Instead of borrowing the cash, Rocket Software could sell some of its 
marketable securities, investments, or other productive assets. But asset sales may also have a 
dampening effect on future earnings.
 
As long as earnings fall by less (in percentage terms) than the buyback percentage re-
duction in shares outstanding, EPS will indeed go up! But this EPS increase may actually 
mask deteriorating business fundamentals. Here’s an example. In July 2003, AutoNation 
reported record second quarter EPS of $0.37, a 16% increase from its quarterly EPS one 
year earlier. But the company’s second quarter net income was up only a paltry 2.4% from 
the previous year’s figure. AutoNation achieved the added jump in EPS by repurchasing 
47.8 million of its shares over the year—shrinking its outstanding shares by nearly 14%, 
thus boosting its EPS.
 
By artificially inflating a company’s reported EPS, stock buybacks can be used to camou-
flage business slowdowns. Research evidence confirms that firms sometimes use stock buy-
backs to boost EPS and thereby meet (or beat) the quarterly earnings targets set by Wall Street 
analysts.9 Buybacks can also wind up bolstering top executives’ pay when short-term or long-
term incentive compensation is tied to EPS performance.
 
When it comes to stock buybacks and EPS growth, it pays to look behind the numbers. 
That is why it has become increasingly important for prudent investors and analysts to sort 
through firms’ share repurchase plans and to determine the reasons behind each buyback. 
Only then can investors and analysts figure out whether a repurchase plan is a sign to buy—or 
not to buy—the stock.
9 P. Hribar, N. Thorne-Jenkins, and W. B. Johnson, “Stock Repurchases as an Earnings Management Device,” Journal of 
 Accounting and Economics, April 2006, pp. 3–28.
 
Without 
With 
 
Buyback  
Buyback
Projected fourth quarter earnings 
$220,000 
$220,000
Common shares outstanding 
220,000 
200,000
Projected EPS 
$      1.00 
$      1.10

896 
CHAPTER 15
Financial Reporting for Owners’ Equity
COMPLIANCE WITH CONTRACT TERMS
Owners’ equity is one of the accounting numbers used in many contracts with lenders, suppli-
ers, and others (Chapter 7). For example, lending agreements usually include covenants that 
restrict maximum allowable debt-to-equity levels, where equity refers to the book value 
amount disclosed on the company’s balance sheet. Firms have incentives to use their financial 
reporting latitude to circumvent these contractual restrictions. Consequently, financial state-
ment analysts must understand how owners’ equity is reported to determine whether a com-
pany they are evaluating is in compliance with its contract terms.
 
For example, the 2012 annual report of National Beverage Corporation contained the 
 following statement:
[A] subsidiary of the Company maintains unsecured revolving credit facilities with banks aggre-
gating $75 million (the “Credit Facility”). . . . The Credit Facility requires the subsidiary to maintain 
certain financial ratios, principally debt to net worth and debt to EBITDA (as defined in the loan 
agreements) and contains other restrictions, none of which are expected to have a material effect on 
our operations or financial position. At April 28, 2012, we were in compliance with all loan cove-
nants and approximately $1.2 million of retained earnings was restricted from distribution.
In this case, lending banks are using several financial statement items—debt, net worth (think 
“owners’ equity”), and a variation of accounting net income called EBITDA—to restrict Na-
tional Beverage’s ability to distribute cash to stockholders. This restriction is intended to en-
sure that National Beverage maintains a cash cushion for repayment of the 
bank loans. Monitoring compliance with the form and substance of this con-
tractual restriction requires an understanding of accounting for owners’ 
equity.
Some financial experts suggest that certain equity instruments, such as 
preferred stock, are popular because they can be used to avoid various con-
tractual restrictions. Preferred stock gets its name because relative to common 
stock, it confers on investors certain preferences as to dividend payments and 
the distribution of corporate assets. Preferred shareholders must be paid their dividends in full 
before any cash distribution can be made to common shareholders; if the company is liqui-
dated, preferred stockholders must receive cash or other assets at least equal to the stated 
(par) value of their shares before any assets are distributed to common shareholders.
 
The stated value of preferred stock is typically $25 per share. The dividend is often ex-
pressed as a percentage of the stated value. A typical 8% preferred issue would promise a divi-
dend of $2 per share ($25 stated value 3 8%). Unlike bond interest expense, 
however, preferred stock dividends are not contractual obligations that, if un-
paid, could precipitate steps toward bankruptcy. Instead, the company’s board 
of directors must declare each quarterly preferred dividend and can omit them 
even in profitable years. Bank loans do not provide the flexibility to omit pay-
ments when cash flows are tight.
 
However, preferred shares are usually cumulative. This means that if for any reason a 
 particular quarter’s preferred dividend is not declared, no dividends on common shares can be 
paid until all unpaid past and current preferred dividends are paid. This feature protects 
 purchasers of preferred shares from excessive cash distributions to common stockholders. 
RECAP
Stock repurchases don’t produce accounting gains or losses, but they can produce above-
market returns for investors. Still, it’s important to look behind the numbers and deter-
mine why and how a company is buying back its stock.
Contracting
Preferred stock does not ordinarily carry voting 
rights. Participating preferred stock entitles its 
holders to share in profits above the declared 
dividend along with common shareholders. Most 
preferred stock is nonparticipating, meaning 
that holders are entitled to receive only the 
 stipulated dividends.
An alternative to the 8% fixed-rate preferred stock 
is an adjustable-rate preferred, which pays a 
dividend that is adjusted, usually quarterly, based 
on changes in the Treasury bill rate or other 
money market rates.

 
Compliance with Contract Terms 
897
Also because it’s okay to occasionally “skip” a preferred dividend, preferred shares are less 
risky to issuing corporations than is debt.
 
Companies’ widespread use of preferred stock is a curious phenomenon. Preferred 
 dividends—unlike bond interest expense—are not a deductible corporate expense for tax pur-
poses. Why do companies choose to raise capital through preferred stock rather than through 
debt where tax-deductible interest payments reduce financing costs relative to preferred stock?
 
One reason preferred stock is attractive to corporate investors is that 70% to 80% of the 
dividends that corporations receive from their stock investments can be tax free (Chapter 13) 
whereas the interest income corporations receive from debt investments is fully taxable. So, 
preferred shares offer tax advantages to corporate investors but what about the companies that 
issue preferred stock?
 
Corporations that issue preferred stock do so because:
1. Preferred stock is less risky than debt because missing a preferred dividend payment, un-
like missing an interest payment, will not trigger bankruptcy. This feature of preferred 
stock appeals to financially weak companies.
2. Companies with a history of operating losses usually don’t pay income taxes because of 
their operating loss carryforwards. For these companies, debt no longer has a tax advan-
tage, and thus preferred stock becomes more attractive as a source of new money.
3. Preferred stock is treated as equity rather than debt on financial statements. Companies 
precluded from issuing more debt because of covenant restrictions can sometimes issue 
preferred stock instead and sidestep these restrictions.
 
The distinction between preferred stock and debt can be murky because preferred stock 
(like debt) usually does not grant its holders voting rights so preferred shareholders often have 
no direct control over the company’s affairs.
 
The distinction between debt and preferred stock has been further blurred as companies 
began issuing mandatorily redeemable preferred stock. Although called preferred stock, 
mandatorily redeemable preferred stock requires the issuing company to retire it (as with 
debt) at some future date—usually in 5 or 10 years. This type of preferred stock represents 
what many consider to be debt “disguised” as equity.
 
Redeemable preferred stock—where the issuing company has the option, but not the obli-
gation, to redeem—has been around since the 1940s, but its use increased substantially during 
the late 1970s and 1980s. At first, the accounting approach used for this new form of preferred 
stock was identical to that for traditional (nonredeemable) preferred shares; namely, the pro-
ceeds obtained from issuing the stock were shown as part of owners’ equity and any periodic 
cash distributions to preferred shareholders were recorded as dividends. Things changed in 
1979 when the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) prohibited firms issuing such 
securities from including them under the balance sheet caption Owners’ Equity.10 This prohi-
bition meant that amounts for redeemable preferred stock could no longer be combined with 
true owners’ equity items such as traditional (nonredeemable) preferred stock and common 
stock in financial statements filed with the SEC. Redeemable preferred stock was instead to 
be shown on a separate line between liabilities and shareholders’ equity—the so-called mez-
zanine section to the balance sheet.
 
Then in May 2003, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) went one step further 
by requiring “liability” treatment for most mandatorily redeemable preferred stock.11 The 
10 Accounting Series Release No. 268 “Presentation in Financial Statements of Redeemable Preferred Stocks” (Washington, 
DC: Securities and Exchange Commission [SEC], July 1979).
11 FASB Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) Topic 480: Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.

898 
CHAPTER 15
Financial Reporting for Owners’ Equity
FASB concluded at the time that, even though the securities are called “preferred stock,” they 
meet the definition of a balance sheet liability and should be classified as such. In other words, 
if it walks like a duck and quacks like a duck, it must indeed be a duck!
 
What did this mean for firms with mandatorily redeemable preferred stock? Beginning 
in 2003, these securities could no longer be shown on the balance sheet in the “mezzanine” 
between liabilities and shareholders’ equity. Instead, mandatorily redeemable preferred 
stock would be shown as a balance sheet liability and included alongside long-term debt. 
The FASB’s “liability” treatment for mandatorily redeemable preferred stock also requires 
companies to record as interest expense any dividends on the preferred stock.12 For 
example:
Class A Preferred Stock is mandatorily redeemable on March 31, 2028, and has been classified as 
debt in the accompanying consolidated balance sheet . . . The dividends on the mandatorily redeem-
able Class A Preferred stock are recorded as interest expense in the accompanying consolidated 
statements of operations.
Source: The Hillman Companies, Inc. 2009 annual report.
 
The SEC and the FASB exclude mandatorily redeemable preferred stock from the owners’ 
equity section of the balance sheet. However, this classification exclusion may not capture the 
real economic characteristics of these securities because many companies have issued manda-
torily redeemable preferred shares that are convertible—at the option of the investor—into 
common stock. It’s possible that the company may never redeem preferred shares with this 
convertibility feature for cash. If instead it retires the preferred shares by converting them into 
common shares, then they truly represent equity, not debt—and thus their presentation status 
as nonequity may be arguable.13
 
Investors seem to be aware of the possibility that some redeemable preferred shares are a 
lot like debt while other redeemable preferred shares are a lot like equity. One study con-
firmed that the stock price behavior of companies whose redeemable preferred shares had 
clear debtlike characteristics was different from the behavior of companies whose shares had 
equitylike characteristics.14 Investors apparently use disclosures about redeemable preferred 
shares to assess whether a particular issue should be regarded as debt or equity for valuation 
purposes.
 
A new form of mandatorily redeemable preferred stock, called a trust preferred 
 security, has become popular. The company first creates a special purpose entity—the 
trust—that then sells redeemable preferred stock to outside investors. The company then 
borrows money from the trust with repayment terms identical to those of the preferred 
stock issued by the trust. Outside investors own “trust preferred” stock, but the company 
itself has issued debt—not preferred stock—and thus gains the tax advantages associated 
with debt.
12 Buried in the details of GAAP is an exception to the required liability treatment. Suppose that the preferred shares can be 
converted into common stock. The conversion option makes the preferred stock conditionally (not mandatorily) redeemable 
in the FASB’s eyes—the stock must be redeemed only if stockholders do not exercise their option to convert the preferred 
into common shares. Because the company’s ultimate obligation to redeem the preferred shares is uncertain, GAAP does not 
require immediate “liability” treatment for conditionally redeemable preferred stock. This means that a company can con-
tinue to classify its redeemable preferred stock in the balance sheet mezzanine between liabilities and owners’ equity and that 
preferred dividends need not be reflected as interest expense. “Liability” treatment at fair value is required, however, once the 
conversion privilege expires and the preferred stock becomes mandatorily redeemable.
13 See P. Kimmel and T. D. Warfield, “Variation in Attributes of Redeemable Preferred Stock: Implications for Accounting 
Standards,” Accounting Horizons, June 1993, pp. 30–40. These authors report that almost 69% of the mandatorily redeem-
able preferred stock issued in 1989 and included in their sample was convertible into common stock.
14 P. Kimmel and T. D. Warfield, “The Usefulness of Hybrid Security Classifications: Evidence from Redeemable Preferred 
Stock,” The Accounting Review, January 1995, pp. 151–67. 
Later in this chapter, we 
 describe the issues that 
arise when conversion is 
mandatory.
Valuation

 
Compliance with Contract Terms 
899
 
Here’s what Motorola said about its trust preferred securities:
In February, Motorola Capital Trust I, a . . . wholly-owned subsidiary of Motorola, sold 20 million 
Trust Originated Preferred Securities (“TOPrS”) to the public at an aggregate offering price of 
$500 million. The Trust used the proceeds from this sale . . . to buy . . . Subordinated Debentures 
from Motorola with the same payment terms as the TOPrS. Motorola, in turn, used the $484 million 
of net proceeds from the sale of the Subordinated Debentures to reduce short-term indebtedness.
Motorola formed a wholly owned subsidiary—Motorola Capital Trust—that sold $500 mil-
lion of trust preferred stock to the public. Motorola then borrowed $484 million of cash 
($500 million of proceeds minus $16 million in investment banking fees and other transaction 
costs) from the Trust in exchange for Motorola’s subordinated debentures. Motorola has the 
cash and debt, its wholly owned subsidiary has the debentures receivable, and outside inves-
tors have trust preferred stock. This transaction structure sounds complicated, but it’s really 
quite simple to create. And here’s the final piece of the puzzle: The interest and principal pay-
ments on the loan are matched to the dividend and mandatory redemption payments on the 
preferred stock. So, when Motorola makes an interest (or principal) payment to the trust, the 
trust then makes a dividend (or redemption) payment to outside investors.15
 
The benefit to Motorola should now be clear—interest expense is tax deductible but pre-
ferred dividends are not. By issuing trust preferred securities instead of traditional preferred 
stock, Motorola transformed what would otherwise have been a nondeductible preferred divi-
dend payment into an interest expense tax deduction.
 
How are trust preferred securities shown on the balance sheet? Despite having the charac-
teristics of debt—a required payment each period (called a dividend instead of interest) and a 
final payment at the end (called a mandatory redemption payment 
instead of a principal payment)—these hybrid securities have 
not always been classified as debt on the balance sheet. Before 
2003, they were often listed in the “mezzanine” section of the bal-
ance sheet between debt and equity along with all other mandato-
rily redeemable preferred stock. However, most trust preferred 
securities—as well as most mandatorily redeemable preferred 
stock—are now shown as balance sheet liabilities.16
 
SEC rules require companies to differentiate clearly between common stock and any type 
of preferred stock, whether redeemable or not. This means that preferred stock must always 
be shown separately from common stock on the balance sheet. Finally, GAAP requires com 
panies to disclose the dollar amount of preferred stock redemption requirements for each of 
the five years following the balance sheet date.17 Accordingly, future cash flow commitments 
for redeemable preferred stock are clearly highlighted for statement users.
 
Here’s what Samsonite Corporation said in 2003 about its preferred stock redemption 
schedule:
The Company is required to redeem all of the Senior Redeemable preferred Stock outstanding 
on June 15, 2010, at a redemption price equal to 100% of the liquidation preference thereof, 
plus, without duplication, all accumulated and unpaid dividends to the redemption date. The 
 Senior Redeemable Preferred Stock is redeemable at the option of the Company in whole or in 
15 The key features of trust preferred securities are described in P. J. Frischmann, P. D. Kimmel, and T. D. Warfield, “Innova-
tion in Preferred Stock: Current Developments and Implications for Financial Reporting,” Accounting Horizons, September 
1999, pp. 201–18.
16 FASB ASC Paragraphs 480-10-55-6 to -8: Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity—Overall—Implementation Guidance 
and Illustrations—Trust Preferred Securities.
17 FASB ASC Paragraph 505-10-50-11: Equity—Overall—Disclosure—Redeemable Securities.
Motorola’s debt held by the wholly owned trust is eliminated 
when the company prepares its consolidated financial state-
ments (Chapter 16 tells you why this occurs). That leaves 
only the redeemable preferred stock sold to outside investors 
on the consolidated balance sheet.

900 
CHAPTER 15
Financial Reporting for Owners’ Equity
part, at any time and from time to time on or after June 15, 2001, at redemption prices ranging 
from 110% of the liquidation preference to 100% of the liquidation preference depending on the 
redemption date.18
 
Samsonite had about $286 million of mandatorily redeemable preferred stock outstanding. 
The redemption provision required Samsonite to redeem all of the outstanding shares on June 15, 
2010, at 100% of the liquidation preference ($286 million). Samsonite had the option to  redeem 
shares as early as 2001, but it will then have pay a higher price for the shares (up to 110%).
18 Samsonite Corporation 2003 annual report.
RECAP
Equity or debt? When it comes to redeemable preferred stock, the answer isn’t obvious. 
That’s why the FASB now requires redeemable preferred stock to be classified as a bal-
ance sheet liability as long as the obligation to redeem is unconditional. When redemp-
tion is conditional—for example, because the preferred can be converted into common 
shares—liability treatment is not required until changing circumstance makes redemp-
tion inevitable.
LEGALITY OF CORPORATE DIVIDEND 
DISTRIBUTIONS
State laws govern corporate dividend distributions to shareholders, and these laws vary from 
state to state. The intent of these laws is to prohibit companies from distributing “excessive” 
assets to owners and thereby making themselves insolvent—that is, incapable of paying credi-
tor claims. Some states limit dividend distributions to owners to the amount of retained earn-
ings; in other states, the limit is retained earnings plus paid-in capital in excess of par. These 
laws protect creditors by ensuring that only solvent companies distribute cash to owners. 
(Stock repurchases, another way companies can distribute cash to owners, are not subject to 
these dividend distribution limitations.)
 
Assume that the Owners’ Equity section on Delores Corporation’s balance sheet appears 
on December 31, 2014, as:
Common stock, $1 par value 
$20,000,000
Paid-in capital in excess of par 
35,000,000
Retained earnings 
43,000,000
 Owners’ equity 
$98,000,000
 
In some states, Delores Corporation could distribute only up to $43,000,000 of assets—the 
retained earnings amount—as dividends to owners. The dividend distribution could be in the 
form of cash or other assets such as inventory, equipment, or even land. In other states, the maxi-
mum might be $78,000,000—retained earnings ($43,000,000) plus paid-in capital ($35,000,000). 
Many states would require corporations to give public notice if their dividends were “paid” from 
paid-in capital.
 
Existing GAAP disclosures focus on the source of owners’ equity—contributed capital 
(par plus capital in excess of par) versus earned capital (retained earnings, from which GAAP 
deducts dividends)—under the often erroneous presumption that this distinction informs ana-
lysts about legally permitted asset distributions. But many states have adopted the 1984 
 Revised Model Business Corporation Act as a guide to the legality of dividend distribu-
tions. This act redefined solvency. Under this act, as long as the fair value of assets exceeds 
the fair value of liabilities after the distribution, the company is considered to be solvent. In 
Remember, managers have 
incentives to borrow money 
and then pay all of the cash 
to shareholders, leaving the 
company insolvent and the 
bank with a loan receivable 
that will never be repaid!
If the distribution involves 
inventory, equipment, or 
land, it’s called a property 
dividend.

 
Legality of  Corporate Dividend Distributions 
901
extreme cases, this means that an asset distribution would be legal even if the book value of 
net assets is negative after the distribution. If Delores Corporation’s fair value of assets minus 
fair value of liabilities totaled $200 million, then $200 million (rather than $43 million or 
$78 million) would be the maximum legal asset distribution. Notice that a $200 million distri-
bution would result in negative owners’ equity of $102 million. The point is that the book 
value of owners’ equity may not give an accurate picture of potentially legal distributions in 
states that have adopted the 1984 Act.19
 
To ascertain the amount of potential cash distributions, statement analysts need to know 
two things: (1) the distribution law in the state where the firm is incorporated and (2) fair 
value information if state law permits distributions based on the excess fair value of net assets. 
Unfortunately, this fair value information may be difficult to obtain because GAAP does not 
yet require that information to be disclosed except for marketable securities and certain in-
vestments (Chapter 16) and limited other items.
 
Certain limited disclosures regarding potential distributions are required by GAAP. When 
mandatorily redeemable preferred stock has been issued, the dollar amount of the redemption 
requirement for each of the ensuing five years after the balance sheet date must be disclosed. 
Similarly, preferred stock dividend and liquidation preferences must be disclosed along with 
significant differences between the liquidation amount and the par or stated value of the 
 underlying shares.20 Nevertheless, these disclosures still do not allow interested readers to 
compute the total potential distribution to owners.
 
What happens when companies distribute stock instead of cash? Under current U.S. 
GAAP, stock dividends reduce retained earnings, but stock splits may not. Small stock 
distributions (less than 25% of shares outstanding) are required to be recorded as stock 
dividends: The market value of the distributed shares is transferred from retained earnings 
to the par value and paid-in capital accounts. Distributions that equal or exceed 25% of 
shares outstanding—commonly called stock splits—can be treated in either of two ways: 
(1) like a true split, which reduces the per share par value and increases the number of 
shares proportionately or (2) like a stock dividend. Consequently, stock dividends—and 
stock splits recorded as stock dividends—reduce the company’s future cash dividend- 
paying ability in states where cash dividends are limited by retained earnings. Peterson, 
Millar, and Rimbey (1996) report that 83% of the 285 “stock split” companies in their 
study actually accounted for the distribution as stock dividends.21 They also found that the 
stock market does indeed recognize that retained earnings reductions may restrict future 
dividends in some states but not in others.
 
The United States is the only country that records stock dividends at market value. All 
other countries record the “dividend”—a distribution in name only—at a nominal amount, 
either par value or book value.
19 See M. L. Roberts, W. D. Samson, and M. T. Dugan, “The Stockholders’ Equity Section: Form without Substance?” 
 Accounting Horizons, December 1990, pp. 36–37.
20 FASB ASC 505-10-50: Equity—Overall—Disclosure.
21 C. A. Peterson, J. A. Millar, and J. N. Rimbey, “The Economic Consequences of Accounting for Stock Splits and Large 
Stock Dividends,” The Accounting Review, April 1996, pp. 241–53.
More than 500 public com-
panies in the United States 
paid cash dividends in 2012 
despite having negative 
 retained earnings.
RECAP
GAAP reporting rules may not be sufficient to allow analysts to ascertain the maximum 
legal dividend distribution available to common stockholders. Analysts must be aware 
that other data may have to be gathered to ascertain the dollar amount that can be 
distributed.

902 
CHAPTER 15
Financial Reporting for Owners’ Equity
SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY: FINANCIAL 
STATEMENT PRESENTATION
The shareholders’ equity section from a recent balance sheet of Whole Foods Markets is 
shown in Exhibit 15.1. Most companies report as separate capital contribution amounts a fig-
ure for Common stock—par value and another figure for Paid-in capital in excess of par. Be-
cause Whole Foods’ common stock has no par value, the company’s balance sheet displays a 
single Common stock figure ($1,283,028) that represents the total capital contributed to the 
company by common stock investors. The balance sheet indicates that none of Whole Foods’ 
common shares are held in treasury. So, shares repurchased (if any) must have been retired 
rather than held for later distribution.
 
As you may recall from Chapter 7, loan agreements and regulatory agency rules sometimes 
restrict the amount of dividends a company can distribute to shareholders. Because of such 
restrictions, the entire balance of retained earnings may not be available for dividend distribu-
tion. Cortland Bancorp, for example, is regulated by the Ohio Division of Financial Institu-
tions which restricts Cortland’s dividends to (undistributed) statutory earnings of the current 
and prior two years. To alert financial statement readers to these dividend restrictions, some 
companies disclose restricted retained earnings separately from unrestricted retained earn-
ings amounts on their balance sheets. Others disclose their dividend restrictions only in finan-
cial statement notes. What about Whole Foods Markets? No dividend restriction is mentioned 
in the notes and none is indicated on the balance sheet (Exhibit 15.1).
 
An unusual feature of the Whole Foods’ balance sheet is that the company’s $413 million 
of redeemable preferred stock is shown in the mezzanine between total liabilities and share-
holders’ equity. Here’s what the company said about the preferred stock:
On December 2, 2008, the Company issued 425,000 shares of Series A 8% Redeemable, Con-
vertible, Exchangeable, Participating Preferred Stock . . . for approximately $413.1 million . . . 
The Series A Preferred Stock is classified as temporary shareholders’ equity since the shares are 
(i) redeemable at the option of the holder and (ii) have conditions which are not solely within 
the control of the Company.
The preferred stock is convertible into common shares at any time holders so desire. The stock 
can also be exchanged for other securities—in this case, convertible notes—or redeemed for 
EXHIBIT 15.1
Whole Foods’ Markets, Inc. 
Balance Sheet Excerpts
($ in thousands) 
2009 
2008
Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity
 Total liabilities 
$1,742,460 
$1,874,712
Series A redeemable preferred stock, $0.01 par value, 
 425,000 and no shares authorized, issued and
 outstanding in 2009 and 2008, respectively 
413,052 
—
Shareholders’ equity:
Common stock, no par value, 300,000 shares 
 authorized; 140,542 and 140,286 shares issued and 
 outstanding in 2009 and 2008, respectively 
1,283,028 
1,266,141
Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) 
(13,367) 
422
Retained earnings 
358,215 
239,461
Total shareholders’ equity 
1,627,876 
1,506,024
Commitments and contingencies
 Total liabilities and shareholders’ equity 
$3,783,388 
$3,380,736

 
Global Vantage Point
903
cash. However, redemption is not mandatory. These features make it unclear whether the pre-
ferred stock is best viewed as equity or debt, so Whole Foods has opted for a mezzanine 
 presentation intended to convey the temporary equity nature of the preferred stock.
 
A balance sheet only reports the end-of-period amount of each 
shareholders’ equity account. Analysts and investors turn to the 
statement of shareholders’ equity to learn about the detailed 
changes in each account, as illustrated in Exhibit 15.2. These dis-
closures reveal that Whole Foods:
• Declared preferred stock dividends during the year but did not 
declare dividends on common stock.
• Issued 256,000 shares of common stock to employees and incurred $12.8 million in 
share-based pay expense, but no shares of common stock were repurchased and retired.
• Experienced $13.7 million in (net) unrealized losses charged to other comprehensive 
 income (recall our discussion of comprehensive income in Chapter 2).
Shortly after the 2009 year-end, Whole Foods’ announced its 
intention to redeem the preferred stock. Investors had a 
 simple choice: take the cash value offered by the company 
or convert the preferred stock into shares of Whole Foods’ 
common stock. Investors chose the more valuable alternative, 
converting all outstanding preferred shares into about 
29.7 million shares of common stock.
EXHIBIT 15.2
Whole Foods’ Markets, Inc. 
Statement of Shareholders’ Equity Excerpts
 
 
 
Accumulated
 
 
 
 
Common 
Other 
 
Total
 
 
Shares 
Common 
Stock in 
Comprehensive 
Retained 
Shareholders’
($ and share amounts in thousands) 
Outstanding 
Stock 
Treasury 
Income (Loss) 
Earnings 
Equity
Balances at September 28, 2008 
$140,286 
$1,266,141 
— 
$       422 
$239,461 
$1,506,024
Net income 
— 
— 
— 
— 
146,804 
146,804
Foreign currency translation adjustments 
— 
— 
— 
(8,748) 
— 
(8,748)
Reclassification adjustments for amounts 
 included in income, net of income taxes 
— 
— 
— 
8,440 
— 
8,440
Change in unrealized loss on cash flow 
 hedge instruments, net of income taxes 
— 
— 
— 
(13,481) 
— 
(13,481)
Comprehensive income 
 
 
 
 
 
133,015
Redeemable preferred stock dividends 
— 
— 
— 
— 
(28,050) 
(28,050)
Issuance of common stock pursuant to 
 team member stock plans 
256 
4,286 
— 
— 
— 
4,286
Excess tax benefit related to exercise of 
 team member stock options 
— 
54 
— 
— 
— 
54
Share-based payment expense 
— 
12,795 
— 
— 
— 
12,795
Other 
— 
(248) 
— 
— 
— 
(248)
Balances at September 27, 2009 
$140,542 
$1,283,028 
— 
$(13,367) 
$358,215 
$1,627,876
Note: Statement details for the 2007 and 2008 are required disclosures but have been omitted from this exhibit for brevity.
RECAP
Look to the statement of shareholders’ equity if you want to fully understand how and 
why the individual shareholders’ equity accounts changed during the period.
GLOBAL VANTAGE POINT
The balance sheet presentation of shareholders’ equity under IFRS closely mirrors that 
used by U.S. GAAP firms, although the terminology may at first seem odd. Exhibit 15.3 
shows the shareholders’ equity accounts of Vodafone Group Plc, the global mobile tele-
communications company based in the United Kingdom. Several of the account titles 
International

904 
CHAPTER 15
Financial Reporting for Owners’ Equity
should seem familiar. Additional paid-in capital, Treasury shares, and Accumulated other 
comprehensive income are items found on most U.S. company balance sheets and their 
meaning is unchanged. Retained losses is the term Vodafone uses to denote its retained 
earnings deficit (negative balance). That just leaves the Called up share capital account 
which, as you’ve probably guessed, is somewhat akin to the Capital stock-par value ac-
count sometimes found on U.S. company balance sheets. Suppose Vodafone’s issues shares 
with a nominal £10 value per share but investors pay less than this amount (say only £8 per 
share) to the company. Vodafone can, at a later date, ask for payment of the remaining £2 
by “calling up” the shares. A financial statement note reveals that all of Vodafone’s shares 
are fully paid, so the Called up share capital account balance just reflects the nominal 
value of shares issued.
 
There are several other aspects of IFRS for shareholders’ equity that you should know:
• As Chapter 2 mentions, an IFRS balance sheet often presents shareholders’ equity before 
liabilities.
• A statement of changes in shareholders’ equity is required, and the format closely mirrors 
that required by U.S. GAAP as illustrated in Exhibit 15.2.
• Most redeemable preferred stock is reported as debt even when redemption is not manda-
tory, as is some preferred stock that is not redeemable. The reason why can be found in 
IAS No. 32, which says that preferred stock (“preference shares”) is classified as debt if 
the issuer is or can be required to deliver cash (or another financial instrument) to the 
holder.22 So, don’t be surprised to see preferred stock listed as an IFRS balance sheet 
 liability and, when it is, the dividends on those preference shares will be treated as 
 interest expense.
EARNINGS PER SHARE
The amount of future income and cash flow that a company is expected to generate is a 
major determinant of that company’s value (Chapter 6). Valuing the firm as a whole is 
crucial during merger negotiations, corporate takeovers, and buyouts—relatively rare 
events in the ongoing life of a firm. For day-to-day valuations, many analysts prefer to 
focus on the value of individual common shares. For this purpose, knowing how much of 
EXHIBIT 15.3
Vodafone Group Plc 
Equity Section of Balance Sheet
(£ in millions) 
2013 
2012
Equity
 Called up share capital 
3,866 
3,866
 Additional paid-in capital 
154,279 
154,123
 Treasury shares 
(9,029) 
(7,841)
 Retained losses 
(88,785) 
(84,184)
 Accumulated other comprehensive income 
11,146 
10,971
Total equity shareholders’ funds 
71,477 
76,935
22 International Accounting Standard No. 32, “Financial Instruments: Presentation” (IASC 1995), as amended effective 
 January 1, 2009.

 
Earnings per Share 
905
the company’s total earnings accrue to each share is helpful. This is why earnings per 
share (EPS) is computed and required to be shown on the income statement.
 
Computing EPS is straightforward when the company has a simple capital structure. We 
first describe the procedures for computing EPS for a simple capital structure and then extend 
those procedures to situations involving more complicated capital structures.
Simple Capital Structure
A simple capital structure exists when a company has no convertible securities (neither con-
vertible debt nor convertible preferred stock) and no stock options or warrants outstanding. In 
these circumstances, a straightforward formula is used to compute basic earnings per com-
mon share:23
The 40,000 additional common shares were issued on September 1 and thus were outstanding 
for the last third of the year. The change in Retained earnings during 2014 is:
The denominator of the basic EPS formula uses the weighted average number of common 
shares outstanding. Because additional shares were issued in September, this weighted aver-
age number of outstanding shares is computed as follows:
23 The guidance for computing EPS is contained in FASB ASC Topic 260: Earnings per Share.
Basic EPS 5
Net income 2 Preferred dividends
Weighted average number of common shares outstanding
 
To illustrate, assume that Solomon Corporation had the following capital structure in 2014:
 
January 1 
December 31
Preferred stock, $100 par value, 7%, 
 10,000 shares issued and outstanding 
$ 1,000,000 
$ 1,000,000
Common stock, $1 par value
 160,000 shares issued and outstanding 
160,000 
 200,000 shares issued and outstanding 
 
200,000
Paid-in capital in excess of par 
12,000,000 
16,000,000
Retained earnings 
1,100,000 
1,800,000
 Total stockholders’ equity 
$14,260,000 
$19,000,000
Retained earnings, January 1 
$1,100,000
Net income for the year 
1,257,331
Preferred stock dividends 
(70,000)
Common stock dividends 
(487,331)
Retained earnings, December 31 
$1,800,000
 
(a) 
(b) 
(c)
 
Shares 
Portion 
Weighted Shares
Time Span 
Outstanding 
of Year 
([a] 3 [b])
January 1–August 31 
160,000 
2y3 
106,667
September 1–December 31 
200,000 
1y3 
66,667
 
 
 
173,334

906 
CHAPTER 15
Financial Reporting for Owners’ Equity
Solomon Corporation’s basic EPS for the year 2014 is:
 Basic EPS 5
Net income 2 Preferred dividends
Weighted average number of common shares outstanding
 5 $1,257,331 2 $70,000
173,334 shares
5 $6.85 per share
24 As this book goes to press, the FASB and IASB have yet to formally ratify this proposed change to the computation of basic 
EPS. See FASB ASC Paragraph 260-10-45-60: Earnings per Share—Overall—Other Presentation Matters—Participating Se-
curities and the Two Class Method and “Short-Term International Convergence,” Project Updates (Norwalk, CT: FASB, 2010). 
As you are about to discover, convertible securities have always been considered in the computation of diluted EPS.
Mylan Inc., a global phar-
maceutical company, issued 
about 2.2 million shares of 
such preferred stock in 
2007. Each preferred share 
automatically converted into 
common shares on Novem-
ber 15, 2011.
Convertibles are corporate securities—usually preferred shares or bonds—that are 
exchangeable for a set number of other securities—usually common shares—at a 
prestated price and at the option of the security holder. Convertibility “sweetens” 
the marketability of the bond or preferred stock. A call option gives the holder the 
right to buy shares (typically 100) of the underlying stock at a fixed price before a 
specified date in the future—usually three, six, or nine months. Employee stock 
options are often of three to five years in duration. If the stock option is not exer-
cised, the right to buy common shares expires. A subscription warrant is a secu-
rity usually issued with a bond or preferred stock that entitles the holder to buy a 
proportionate amount of common stock at a specified price—usually higher than 
market price at the time of issuance—for a period of years or in perpetuity.
 
You should know about a wrinkle in the computation of basic EPS. Sometimes companies 
issue securities—most commonly it’s preferred stock—that must be converted into common 
shares. The FASB and the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) at one time agreed 
that these mandatorily convertible securities should also be included in the computation of 
basic EPS as soon as conversion becomes obligatory.24 The rationale for doing so is that manda-
torily convertible securities will eventually be included in the basic EPS computation anyway 
once they are converted into common stock. But why wait until the conversion actually occurs 
because conversion is mandatory and thus inevitable? It makes more sense to include them in 
the weighted average common shares outstanding as if they had already been converted.
 
To see how mandatorily convertible securities alter the computation of basic EPS, suppose 
that Solomon Corporation’s 10,000 shares of preferred stock mandatorily convert into 20,000 
shares of common stock on January 1, 2018. (Notice that preferred stockholders have no say 
in the matter—the preferred shares will automatically convert into common stock on the des-
ignated date.) Two adjustments to our basic EPS computation are required to accommodate 
the mandatorily convertible preferred:
1. Increase the weighted average common shares outstanding by 20,000 shares to reflect the 
“as if” conversion of preferred into common as of the first day of the reporting period (here, 
January 1, 2014) because the preferred shares were outstanding for the entire period.
2. Eliminate the preferred dividend adjustment to net income because preferred stock- 
 holders are now viewed as though they are common stockholders.
Solomon Corporation’s basic EPS for the year 2014 now becomes:
 Basic EPS 5
Net income 2 Preferred dividends
Weighted average number of common shares outstanding
 5
$1,257,331 2 $0
173,334 shares 1 20,000 “as if” shares 5 $6.50 per share
Complex Capital Structure
A firm has a complex capital structure when 
its financing includes either securities that are 
convertible into common stock or options and 
warrants that entitle holders to obtain common 
stock under specified conditions. These finan-
cial instruments increase the likelihood that ad-
ditional common shares will be issued in the 
future. This possible increase in the number of 
shares is called potential dilution because, 

 
Earnings per Share 
907
once the additional common shares are issued, current shareholders—those who did not 
 receive any of the new shares—will then own a smaller slice of the company.
  To illustrate the EPS calculation for a complex capital structure, suppose that Jackson Prod-
ucts has 20,000 shares of common stock outstanding and $100,000 of convertible debentures—
that is bonds that can be converted into common stock at a specified price (say, $5 per share of 
common stock) at anytime at the bondholder’s option. According to the terms of the debenture 
agreement, each $1,000 face value bond can be exchanged for 200 shares of common stock 
(200 shares 5 $1,000 bondy$5 per share conversion price). If all debentures were exchanged, 
bondholders would receive 20,000 new shares of common stock. The effect on current common 
shareholders would be to dilute their claim to earnings from 100% (when they own all of the com-
mon shares outstanding) to 50% (when they own only half of the common shares outstanding).
 
Computed basic EPS overlooks this potential dilution of current shareholders’ ownership 
interest in the company. To recognize the increase in outstanding shares that would ensue 
from conversion or options exercise, GAAP requires companies with complex capital struc-
tures to compute another measure called diluted EPS.
 
The diluted EPS figure is a conservative measure of the earnings flow to each share of 
stock. It’s conservative because the diluted EPS measure presumes the maximum possible new 
share creation—and thus the minimum earnings flow to each share. The computation of di-
luted EPS also requires that certain reasonable assumptions be made. For example, consider 
the potential conversion of convertible debentures into common shares. Once the bonds are 
converted to common stock, the company no longer needs to make further debt principal and 
interest payments. Consequently, the diluted EPS computation recognizes that:
1. New shares are issued upon conversion (a denominator effect).
2. After-tax net income increases when the debt interest payments are eliminated after 
 conversion (a numerator effect).
 
Assumptions must also be made for employee stock options or warrants when computing 
diluted EPS. When holders of options or warrants exercise them, they receive common shares; 
but at the same time, the company receives cash in an amount representing the exercise price 
of the options or warrants. In the computation of diluted EPS, this cash is assumed to be used 
to acquire already outstanding common shares in the market. Because of adjustments for 
 assumptions such as these, the diluted EPS formula is slightly more complicated:
Diluted EPS 5
Net income 2 Preferred dividends 1 Income adjustments due to
dilutive financial instruments
Weighted average number of
common shares outstanding 1 Newly issuable shares due to
dilutive financial instruments
 
To illustrate how the diluted EPS computation works, we extend the Solomon Corporation 
example. Assume that as of January 1, 2014, Solomon also had the following financial instru-
ments outstanding:
• $1,000,000 of 5% convertible debenture bonds due in 15 years, which were sold at par 
($1,000 per bond). Each $1,000 bond pays interest of $50 per year and is convertible into 
10 shares of common stock.
• Options to buy 20,000 shares of common stock at $100 per share. These options were 
 issued on February 9, 2012, and expire on February 9, 2015.
Assume that the tax rate is 35% and Solomon stock sold for an average $114 market price 
during 2014. Each of these two financial instruments is potentially dilutive and must be 

908 
CHAPTER 15
Financial Reporting for Owners’ Equity
incorporated into the diluted EPS computation as shown in the following equations. (To 
keep things simple, assume also that Solomon’s preferred stock does not have a mandatory 
conversion feature so that basic EPS is still $6.85.)
 
The convertible debentures are included in diluted EPS by assuming conversion on the first 
day of the reporting period (here, January 1, 2014). The after-tax effect of interest payments 
on the debt is added back in the EPS numerator, and the additional shares that would be issued 
on conversion are added to the denominator. This is called the “if-converted” 
method. We now illustrate the computation of diluted EPS in the presence of 
convertible debt.
The convertible debentures are presumed to have been converted into 
10,000 additional shares of stock at the beginning of the year (January 1, 
2014). Accordingly, 10,000 new common shares are added to the diluted EPS 
denominator. Under the if-converted method, no interest would have been paid 
on the debentures this year because all bonds are assumed to be converted as of January 1. This 
means that interest of $50,000 would not have been paid on the presumptively converted bonds. 
With a 35% tax rate, net income would increase by $32,500 ($50,000 3 [1 2 0.35]), and this 
amount is added to the diluted EPS numerator.
There are 1,000 bond certificates outstanding 
($1,000,000y$1,000 par value 5 1,000 certifi-
cates), each convertible into 10 shares of common 
stock. Conversion of all bond certificates results 
in 10,000 new shares (or 1,000 certificates 3 10 
shares per certificate).
Diluted EPS 5 
Net income 2 Preferred dividends
Weighted average number of
common shares outstanding
 
1  Income adjustments due to
dilutive financial instruments
1  Newly issuable shares due to
dilutive financial instruments
Diluted EPS 5 
$1,257,331 2 $70,000
173,334
 
1  Income adjustments due to
dilutive financial instruments
1  Newly issuable shares due to
dilutive financial instruments
 
Basic EPS 5 $6.85 per share
Diluted EPS 5 $1,257,331 2 $70,000
    173,334
 
1 $32,500 5 $6.65 per share
1 10,000
 
“As if” conversion of debt
 
The outstanding stock options in our example will affect only the denominator of the di-
luted EPS computation. This denominator adjustment reflects the difference between the op-
tion exercise price ($100 per common share) and the average market price ($114 per 
common share) during the period. GAAP guidance assumes that any proceeds received on 
exercise of the options ($100 per share) are used to buy back already outstanding common 
shares at the average market price for the period. This is called the treasury stock method.
We next illustrate the adjustment to compute 
diluted EPS under the treasury stock method.
Stock options are dilutive when they are “in 
the money”—that is, when the average market 
price (here, $114) exceeds the option exercise 
price ($100). Using the treasury stock method, 
we assume that the $2,000,000 proceeds to the 
company from presumptive exercise of the op-
tions (that is, 20,000 shares at $100 per share) are 
used to repurchase previously issued common 
In-the-money options are said to be dilutive because the number of shares that 
can be repurchased with the proceeds from the options is smaller than the number 
of new shares issued on exercise of the options. To see this dilution, suppose that 
employees exercise options for 1,000 shares of common stock at a $10 per share 
exercise price when the stock is trading at $20 per share. The company will re-
ceive proceeds of $10,000 cash from employees ($10 per share exercise price 3 
1,000 options) and issue 1,000 new shares of stock. The company can then use 
the cash proceeds to buy back at most 500 shares ($10,000y$20 market price per 
share) from other investors. The net result is dilution because 500 additional 
shares of common stock are now outstanding.

 
Earnings per Share 
909
Antidilutive securities are 
those where conversion or 
exercise increases EPS. 
Such securities are ignored 
when calculating basic or 
diluted EPS.
shares at the $114 average market price. The cash from the options is sufficient to acquire 17,544 
shares (that is, $2,000,000y$114 per share 5 17,544 shares). Because 20,000 shares are pre-
sumed issued and 17,544 are presumed acquired, the difference (2,456 net new common shares) 
is added to the diluted EPS denominator:
Diluted EPS 5 $1,257,331 2 $70,000 1 $32,500
173,334 1 10,000 1 2,456
5 $6.57 per share
 
Treasury stock
 
conversion of options 
Notice that diluted EPS equals $6.57, which is lower than the basic EPS number $6.85. This poten-
tial decrease in the computed earnings flow to each common share motivates the diluted EPS 
computation. Diluted EPS allows current shareholders to see how small their slice of earnings will 
be when the potential dilution from convertible securities, options, and warrants is considered.
Analytical Insights
Now that you understand how GAAP computes diluted EPS, let’s revisit our earlier claim that 
the diluted EPS figure is a conservative measure of the potential dilution from convertible 
securities. To see why this is so, consider how the if-converted method is applied in comput-
ing diluted EPS for Jackson Products. Recall that the company issued its convertible bonds 
with a conversion price of $100 per share of common stock, meaning that the bondholder can 
exchange each $1,000 bond certificate for 10 shares of common stock at any time. Remember 
too that the if-converted method assumes that all of the bonds are exchanged for common 
shares at the beginning of the reporting period (January 1, 2014).
 
But what if Jackson Products’ common stock is worth only $75 per share on January 1, 
2014? Are bondholders willing to exchange their certificates for common shares under these 
conditions?
 
Probably not. If bondholders surrender their certificates, they will receive 10 shares of 
stock for each certificate. Each share of stock is worth only $75, so the total value of shares 
received is just $750 per certificate. That’s what bondholders get when they elect to convert a 
certificate into common shares, but what do they give up? By surrendering the certificate, 
bondholders forgo the right to collect $1,000 in cash later when the bonds mature. Unless the 
risk of nonpayment is extremely high, bondholders will hold on to their certificates rather than 
exchange them for common shares.
 
The message here is that conversion—and thus EPS dilution—is unlikely when a compa-
ny’s stock price ($75 in our example) is substantially below the conversion price ($100). 
Conversion becomes much more attractive to bondholders once the underlying stock price 
rises above the conversion price. For example, if Jackson Products’ common stock was trad-
ing at $150 per share, bondholders would then receive $1,500 worth of stock for each $1,000 
bond certificate surrendered rather than just $1,000 when the bond matures (plus, of course, 
some interest paid along the way).
 
The if-converted method for computing EPS dilution ignores the fact that bondholders are 
unwilling to convert their debt certificates into shares of common stock when the share price 
is below the conversion price. Instead, the if-converted method presumes that all convertible 
debt certificates are exchanged for common shares at the beginning of the reporting period 
regardless of the prevailing share price. This approach yields a diluted EPS figure that is con-
servative because it reflects the maximum potential new common shares from conversion. The 
Analysis

910 
CHAPTER 15
Financial Reporting for Owners’ Equity
resulting EPS figure overstates earnings dilution—and understates diluted earnings per 
share—when a company’s share price is substantially below the conversion price of the debt.
 
The treasury stock method suffers from the opposite problem. The treasury stock method 
tends to understate potential earnings dilution—and overstate diluted EPS—from employee 
stock options in some situations. To see why, recall from the Solomon Corporation example 
that the treasury stock method for computing diluted EPS involves a denominator adjustment 
that reflects the difference between the option exercise price ($100 per common share) and the 
average market price ($114 per common share) during the period. Any proceeds received on 
exercise of the options ($100 per share) are presumed to be used to buy back already outstand-
ing common shares at the average market price for the period.
 
But what if the average market price of Solomon shares is slightly below the exercise price, 
say $99.95 per share? According to the treasury stock method, employee stock options are no 
longer dilutive when the average share price during the period falls below the exercise price. 
So, no adjustment at all is made to the denominator in computing diluted EPS. This approach 
ignores the possibility that Solomon’s share price may rise above the exercise price ($100) 
sometime in the near future. As a result, the treasury stock method understates potential earn-
ings dilution—and overstates diluted EPS—from employee stock options when the average 
share price for the period is slightly below the exercise price.25
Is Earnings per Share a Meaningful Number?
EPS data are reported in the financial news and are prominent in corporate financial reports 
even though EPS can be a misleading financial performance measure. One reason for this is 
that managers can use their accounting discretion to distort reported earnings, the EPS nu-
merator. These potential threats to earnings quality are described throughout this book. A 
second reason is that stock repurchases can be used to distort the EPS denominator, as previ-
ously mentioned in this chapter. But there is still another reason that EPS can be a misleading 
financial performance measure.
 
EPS ignores the amount of capital required to generate the reported earnings. This is easy 
to show. Consider the 2014 financial performance of two companies:
 
Company A 
Company B
Net income available to common shareholders 
$ 1,000,000 
$ 1,000,000
Weighted average common shares outstanding 
100,000 
100,000
Basic earnings per share 
$10 
$10
Gross assets 
$20,000,000 
$30,000,000
Liabilities 
10,000,000 
10,000,000
Equity capital (Assets 2 Liabilities) 
10,000,000 
20,000,000
Return on equity (ROE) 
10% 
5%
Company A and Company B report identical basic EPS of $10, but Company B needed twice 
as much equity capital and 50% more gross assets to attain the $1,000,000 net income. Even 
though both A and B report the same level of net income and EPS, B has a return on equity of 
only 5%, while A’s figure is 10%. Company A generates more earnings from existing 
 resources—that is, from its equity capital.
 
Because EPS ignores capital commitments, problems can arise when trying to interpret 
EPS. The narrow focus of the EPS ratio clouds comparisons between companies as well as 
Analysis
25 One study confirms that GAAP systematically underestimates the economic dilution from stock options. See J. Core, 
W. Guay, and S. P. Kothari, “The Economic Dilution of Employee Stock Options: Diluted EPS for Valuation and Financial 
Reporting,” The Accounting Review, July 2002, pp. 627–52.

 
Accounting for Share-Based Compensation 
911
year-to-year EPS changes for a single company. For example, even if year-to-year earnings’ 
levels are the same, a company can “improve” its reported EPS by simply repurchasing some 
outstanding common shares.
GLOBAL VANTAGE POINT
Although the GAAP guidance on earnings per share has much in common with IFRS require-
ments, a few differences remain. These include differences in the application of the treasury 
stock method, the way contingently issuable shares are treated, and in the details that pertain 
to contracts that can be settled in cash or shares.
RECAP
EPS is a popular and useful summary measure of a company’s profit performance. It tells 
you how much profit (or loss) each share of common stock has earned after adjustments 
for potential dilution from employee stock options, warrants, and convertible securities 
are factored in to the calculation. But as discussed, EPS has its limitations.
ACCOUNTING FOR SHARE-BASED 
COMPENSATION
Many U.S. companies compensate managers and other salaried employees with a combina-
tion of cash and stock options—that is, options to purchase equity shares in the company. A 
typical employee stock option gives the employee the right to purchase a specified number of 
common shares at a specified price within some specified time period. The specified price—
called the exercise price—usually equals or is higher than the market price of the company’s 
shares at the time the options are issued. But not always. An option to buy 100 shares at $50 
per share at any time within the next five years might be granted (issued) to employees when 
the shares themselves are selling for $30. When the exercise price exceeds the current share 
price, as it does in this example, the stock option is “out of the money.” Nevertheless, an op-
tion to purchase common shares at $50 is valuable even though the shares are currently selling 
for only $30 because there’s a chance the stock price will climb above $50 sometime during 
the ensuing five years.
 
The number of U.S. employees holding stock options rose dramatically beginning in the 
late 1970s. Only about 250,000 employees held stock options in 1975. Five years later, 
stock options were an important part of the compensation paid to roughly 3.1 million em-
ployees, and by 2002, this number had increased to 9.3 million employees. According to 
one estimate, companies in the Standard & Poor’s 500 stock index awarded $126 billion in 
employee stock options in 2002 alone, more than the 2002 gross domestic product of 
 Ireland.26 Senior executives in these companies are not the only ones who receive part 
of their pay in the form of stock options. Almost all of Amazon.com’s 7,700 full- and 
 part-time employees and a “very large percentage” of Micro-
soft’s 50,500 employees had been granted stock options by 
2002.  According to one 2010 estimate, 36% of the employees 
that worked for U.S. companies with stock owned shares of the 
company through some kind of formal benefit plan (e.g., direct 
stock grant, 401(k) plan, and so on), and 24% held stock 
options.27
The popularity of stock options has fallen for reasons you 
will soon discover. A little more than 75% of companies in 
the S&P 1500, which tracks the stocks of small and mid-cap 
firms along with those of larger S&P 500 firms, relied on 
stock options in 2009 to pay their CEOs. In 2005, the figure 
stood at 93%.
26 L. Lavelle, A. Borrus, R. D. Hof, and J. Weber, “Options Grow Onerous,” BusinessWeek, December 1, 2003.
27 “Data Show Widespread Employee Ownership in U.S.,” The National Center for Employee Ownership.
International

912 
CHAPTER 15
Financial Reporting for Owners’ Equity
 
Companies use stock options to augment cash compensation for several reasons:
• Options help align employees’ interests with the interests of owners (stockholders). 
 Employees with stock options have an incentive to make decisions that ultimately cause 
the share price to exceed the option exercise price.
• Many “start-up” high-growth companies are “cash starved” and cannot afford to pay 
competitive cash salaries. Stock options provide a way for them to attract talented 
 employees while conserving cash.
• As long as the exercise price is equal to or more than the market price of the underlying 
stock when the option is issued, this compensation is not taxable to the employee until 
the option is exercised. This is an attractive feature because it allows employees to 
 accumulate wealth while postponing taxes.
 
The GAAP that governs financial reporting for employee stock options granted as compen-
sation have evolved over time as options-based pay gained in popularity. The controversy over 
stock options reporting that raged during this evolution was unprecedented in the history of 
U.S. accounting standards setting. Companies that issued employee stock options, their audi-
tors, the SEC, and ultimately, the U.S. Senate lobbied the FASB to influence the final report-
ing rules. The intense debate over stock options presents an opportunity to discuss financial 
reporting incentives (Chapters 1 and 7) in a concrete setting and to illustrate how politics often 
enters the standards-setting process.28
Historical Perspective
Suppose an employee agrees to work this year in exchange for a small current salary and the 
promise of additional cash compensation to be paid in five years. No one disputes the notion 
that the employee’s salary should be recorded on the company’s books as an expense of the 
current year. But what about promised compensation? Should it be recorded as a current 
year’s expense, or should expense recognition be postponed five years until the employee ac-
tually receives the cash? This question is at the heart of the employee stock options debate.
 
Before 1995, accounting for stock-based compensation was governed by Accounting Prin-
ciples Board (APB) Opinion No. 25.29 It was issued in 1972, one year prior to publication of 
what is now the universally accepted approach for valuing traded stock options: the Black–
Scholes method.30 Because APB Opinion No. 25 preceded modern option pricing theory, it 
offered no mechanism for establishing the value of stock options granted as compensation to 
employees. Options issued with an exercise price equal to or more than the market price of the 
underlying common shares were assumed to have no intrinsic value for compensation ex-
pense purposes because their value could not be established with reasonable objectivity. Un-
der this approach, if on June 28, 1972, Ramos Corporation issued 10-year options to 
employees that entitled each to buy 100 shares at $10 per share when the existing share price 
was also $10, no compensation expense would be recognized because the value of these 
 options could not be established reliably.
Granting employee stock 
options with an exercise 
price less than the current 
market price of the firm’s 
common stock—for instance, 
an exercise price of $10 per 
share when the grant date 
market price is $15 per 
share—imposes a tax cost 
on employees. This is be-
cause the excess of market 
price over exercise price 
($5 in our  example) must 
be included in employees’ 
 taxable income when the 
options are granted.
28 For a blow-by-blow account of the stock option controversy in the 1990s, see S. Zeff and B. Dharan, Readings and Notes 
on Financial Accounting (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1987), pp. 507–17.
29 Pre-Codification “Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees,” APB Opinion No. 25 (New York: American Institute of 
Certified Public Accountants [AICPA], 1972). This pronouncement was superseded by SFAS No. 123.
30 F. Black and M. Scholes, “The Pricing of Options and Corporate Liabilities,” Journal of Political Economy, May–June, 
1973, pp. 637–54. Corporate finance books explore the derivation of the Black–Scholes method and other option valuation 
techniques in detail; for example, see R. A. Brealey, S. C. Myers, and F. Allen, Principles of Corporate Finance, 8th ed. (New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 2005).

 
Accounting for Share-Based Compensation 
913
 
Obviously, options with terms such as those in the Ramos Corporation 
 example are valuable: the price of the company’s common stock could easily rise 
above the $10 exercise price sometime during the option’s 10-year life. Over the 
1970s and early 1980s, option pricing theory evolved into option pricing practice 
using the Black–Scholes model as the standard for valuing traded options. 
 Despite this post-APB Opinion No. 25 breakthrough, options issued as compen-
sation were generally treated as being valueless at the grant date for accounting 
purposes. Compensation expense was recognized in rare instances.
 
During the 1980s, U.S. companies increasingly adopted employee com-
pensation packages designed to link employee pay to company performance. 
Stock option plans proliferated as an element of employee compensation. Many auditors and 
other financial experts considered the then-existing GAAP presumption that options were 
valueless to be simply incorrect. Because these beliefs were widespread, the FASB began re-
considering the accounting for stock options in 1984.
 
Strong and widespread opposition to the FASB’s stock options initiative surfaced quickly 
as it became clear to the business community that the new proposal would result in expenses 
being recognized on the income statement when stock options were granted. Those opposed 
to the FASB’s proposal raised arguments against expense recognition that roughly parallel the 
four themes of this chapter:
1. Appropriate income measurement.
2. Compliance with contract terms and restrictions.
3. Legality of corporate distributions to owners.
4. Linkage to equity valuation.
Objections to the FASB’s stock option approach reflected each of these themes. Next, we 
survey those objections.
Opposition to the FASB
Some opponents of the FASB’s proposal questioned whether providing stock options to em-
ployees constituted an accounting expense. These opponents said that treating stock options 
as an expense would violate appropriate income measurement because stock options do not 
involve a cash outflow. On the contrary, they argued, when—and if—the options were even-
tually exercised, cash would flow into the company, not out.31 FASB supporters counterar-
gued that cash was not the issue. Expenses often arise independently of cash outflows. One 
prominent advocate of this position was Warren Buffett, chairman of Berkshire Hathaway, 
Inc., who said:
[Some contend] that options should not be viewed as a cost because they “aren’t dollars out of 
a company’s coffers.” I see this line of reasoning as offering exciting possibilities to American 
corporations for instantly improving their reported profits. For example, they could eliminate 
the cost of insurance by paying for it with options. So if you’re a CEO and subscribe to this “no 
cash–no cost” theory of accounting, I’ll make you an offer you can’t refuse: Give us a call at 
Berkshire and we will happily sell you insurance in exchange for a bundle of long-term options 
on your company’s stock.
An expense would be recorded under the intrin-
sic value approach if the option exercise price is 
below the market price of the shares at the grant 
date. For example, Ramos would record $200 of 
compensation expense (and a corresponding 
 increase to owners’ equity) if the option exer-
cise price was $8 per share and the grant-date 
market price was $10 per share. This pattern of 
exercise price and market price rarely occurred, 
so most companies did not record an expense.
31 To illustrate the point, there is no cash outflow or inflow to the company when Ramos Corporation first grants 100 options 
with a $10 exercise price to an employee. But there may be a cash inflow to Ramos at some later date if (and when) the em-
ployee exercises the options. At the exercise date, Ramos will receive $1,000 cash ($10 per option 3 100 options) from each 
employee if all of the options are exercised.

914 
CHAPTER 15
Financial Reporting for Owners’ Equity
 
Shareholders should understand that companies incur costs when they deliver something of 
value to another party and not just when cash changes hands.32
Buffett’s position that expenses arise when stock options are issued is consistent with how 
we account for issued stock. When stock is issued, shareholders give up something of 
value—a portion of their ownership interest—in exchange for something else of value, 
usually cash from new investors. Both the value given up and the value received are re-
corded. Buffett argued that the same accounting rules should apply for employee stock 
options. Shareholders are giving up a portion of their ownership interest by having the 
company issue additional stock—or options for stock—to employees. In exchange, share-
holders receive valuable services from the employees that are paid for in stock options 
rather than in cash. From this perspective, issuing stock options to employees represents 
an expense to the company.
 
Another argument raised by opponents was that treating employee stock options as an 
 expense could jeopardize compliance with contract terms and conditions. Companies with 
large employee stock option awards might, under the FASB’s approach, violate loan cove-
nants tied to reported earnings. For example, the times-interest-earned ratio would deteriorate 
if option grants were expensed because the recorded expense would reduce the earnings num-
ber used in this ratio.
 
Impartial observers who understand contracting incentives can see why companies with 
significant employee options would raise this objection. Their interests would be harmed, 
and economic intuition tells us that companies would resist such initiatives. But you can 
appreciate the FASB’s mission to “do the right thing”—to draft rules that closely mirror 
underlying economic circumstances. If a particular accounting approach correctly captures 
these economic effects, it presumably should be used even though some companies may be 
harmed. Furthermore, some of the most vocal opponents were companies whose employee 
stock options—if expensed—would have decreased earnings by a trivial amount. Because 
the potential impact of the FASB proposal on these firms’ covenants was insignificant, what 
was really motivating their opposition? Perhaps the answer lies in how (and how much) 
corporate executives are paid.
 
The compensation paid to top corporate executives was under intense scrutiny in the early 
1990s. Corporate restructurings and layoffs were widespread, a recession was in progress, and 
many companies demonstrated lackluster financial performance. In this climate, some critics 
questioned whether top corporate executives should continue to enjoy increasingly large sala-
ries and bonuses while their employees were experiencing financial hardship. The issue 
quickly became political.
 
In 1993, the U.S. Congress limited the tax deductibility of executive compensation to 
$1,000,000 per employee—any excess over that amount could not be claimed as a deduction 
on the corporate tax return except when compensation was tied to the achievement of explicit 
and preset performance goals. The passage of this law clearly illustrates public sentiment on 
this issue. Corporate leaders, sensitive to the increasing scrutiny of executive compensation 
levels, may have felt that the FASB’s plan to expense stock options would draw unwanted 
 attention to executive pay.
 
The legality of corporate distributions to owners was never at issue regarding executive 
compensation. Political considerations aside, companies are free under the law to pay corpo-
rate executives whatever amounts their boards of directors deem appropriate. However, an 
issue of whether large executive salaries were proper did arise. Some companies were 
32 Warren Buffett, Letter to Shareholders, Berkshire Hathaway, Inc., 1992 annual report.
Contracting

 
Accounting for Share-Based Compensation 
915
 perceived to oppose the FASB’s stock options expense proposal because it would add the 
value of options to cash compensation and thus make it easier for critics of “excessive” pay to 
spotlight certain companies and executives.
 
Opponents also invoked an argument based on equity valuation. They believed that a sim-
ple “price–earnings multiple” relationship exists between reported earnings and common 
stock values. Under the FASB’s plan, they argued, employee stock option grants would in-
crease compensation expense and lower earnings—and thus lower stock price. (Our discus-
sion of equity valuation in Chapter 6 suggests that the relationship between earnings and share 
price is more complicated than this.) Opponents argued that as stock prices fell, small compa-
nies who were heavy users of stock options would have difficulty raising new equity capital. 
This position was voiced by Senator Dianne Feinstein (Democrat, California) when she intro-
duced legislation designed to block the FASB’s stock option expensing initiative. She said:
[The Bill] will also require the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) to reexamine [its] 
recent decision to impose huge new accounting charges on the use of employee stock options. 
I am seriously concerned that if FASB’s rule is adopted, tens of thousands of desperately needed 
jobs in California and the Nation will never be created.33
Senator Feinstein believed that the proposed stock options expense rule would make it more 
difficult for high-technology companies to raise new equity capital, thereby inhibiting expan-
sion and job creation. Senator Feinstein may also have thought that cash-starved start-ups in 
Silicon Valley would have to let employees go if the companies had to pay workers in cash 
rather than stock options.
 
Despite growing business opposition, the FASB persisted and continued to move toward 
expense treatment of stock-based compensation. In response to intense business lobbying, 
Congress later initiated legislation which would have eliminated the FASB’s independence by 
requiring the SEC to approve all new accounting standards.34 Faced with this threat, the FASB 
was compelled to abandon its proposal and implement a compromise treatment.
The Initial Compromise—SFAS No. 123
The widespread, powerful opposition to recognizing stock-based compensa-
tion as an expense caused the FASB to allow a choice of accounting 
methods:
1. Companies could choose to continue using the intrinsic value approach 
under which compensation expense was rarely recognized.
2. Alternatively, companies could measure the fair value of the stock option 
at the grant date and charge this amount to expense.35
A stock option’s fair value is measured using standard option-pricing models 
with adjustments for factors unique to employee stock options. The FASB 
encouraged companies to adopt the fair value approach rather than to continue 
using the intrinsic value approach because it considered the fair value 
 approach to be preferable. Companies that chose to continue using intrinsic value accounting 
were also required to disclose in a financial statement note what net income would have been 
Valuation
Suppose that Ramos Corporation used the fair 
value approach for its employee stock options. 
Recall that Ramos granted 100 options with a 
$10 exercise price to an employee. Let’s assume 
that these options vest immediately—meaning 
the employees can exercise them at any time 
 after the grant date—and have a fair value of 
$1.50 each (or $150 in total), as determined by 
an  appropriate options-pricing model. Under the 
fair value approach, Ramos would record $150 
of compensation expense on the date the options 
were granted. Ramos would also record a corre-
sponding increase to owners’ equity.
33 Congressional Record—Senate, June 29, 1993, S8252.
34 Called the Accounting Standards Reform Act of 1994, this bill was introduced by Senator Joe Lieberman (Democrat, 
 Connecticut). Congressional Record—Senate, October 6, 1994, S14510.
35 Pre-Codification “Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation,” SFAS No. 123 (Norwalk, CT: FASB, 1995) para. 11. In 
December 2004, the FASB ended the favorable accounting treatment employee stock options received under SFAS No. 123. 
This pronouncement was accordingly excluded from the FASB Accounting Standards Codification and it is not part of GAAP.

916 
CHAPTER 15
Financial Reporting for Owners’ Equity
had compensation expense been recognized under the fair value approach. See Figure 15.2 for 
a diagram of the stock option reporting alternatives.
 
SFAS No. 123 was a political compromise. FASB members were unanimous in the belief 
that companies incur expenses when they grant stock options to employees as part of a com-
pensation package, yet SFAS No. 123 allowed companies to avoid doing so by continuing their 
use of the intrinsic value method. Most companies opted to account for employee stock op-
tions as they had in the past. This meant that they recorded no compensation expense except 
in those rare cases where the option exercise price was below the stock price on the grant date.
 
Because two methods were allowed, companies not using the fair value approach were 
 required to provide pro forma—“as-if”—disclosures of net income and EPS calculated with 
a charge to compensation expense for options granted.
 
The dollar impact of stock compensation expense for some companies was staggering. 
Cisco Systems’ net income for 2002 was $1.893 billion or $0.26 per share, but this figure did 
not include compensation expense for employee stock options because the company still used 
the intrinsic value method allowed by SFAS No. 123. If it had included compensation expense, 
Cisco Systems’ 2002 EPS would have been reduced from $0.26 to just $0.05, a decrease of 
$0.21 per share. This 81% decline represents $1.520 billion of the company’s 2002 earnings. 
Of course, for many companies, the dollar impact was much smaller.
Stock Options Debate Rekindled
“It’s going to happen, and quite appropriately so.”
Federal Reserve Chairman—Alan Greenspan, referring to the 
growing momentum for counting stock options as an expense, in 
testimony before the Senate Banking Committee July 16, 2002
In October 2002, the FASB and IASB signed a memorandum of understanding (called the 
Norwalk Agreement) which, among other things, committed both organizations to work 
Method 1
Continue to apply the
earlier intrinsic value approach
in the financial statements
In addition, must disclose
pro forma net income and
earnings per share as if the
fair value method had
been applied in measuring
compensation cost
Method 2
Adopt the fair value method
for measuring compensation
cost in the financial
statements
Firms had a choice of 
accounting methods
Figure 15.2
EMPLOYEE STOCK OPTION 
REPORTING ALTERNATIVES 
UNDER SFAS NO. 123
SFAS No. 123 was revised in June 2005 to 
prohibit continued use of the intrinsic 
value approach (Method 1). Now firms 
must use the fair value approach 
(Method 2).

 
Accounting for Share-Based Compensation 
917
 toward mutual convergence of their accounting standards. In November 2002, the IASB is-
sued an exposure draft that called for mandatory expensing of the fair value of employee 
stock options. The FASB, which had hoped to avoid revisiting this accounting issue, was 
obliged by the Norwalk Agreement to do so and to converge with the IASB’s exposure draft 
position.
 
In early March 2003, the FASB renewed its deliberation of stock-option compensation ac-
counting. It reached a tentative decision in April 2003 to require all companies to expense the 
fair value of employee stock options at the grant date. For most U.S. companies, this meant 
that they would have to abandon the intrinsic value method and begin using the fair value 
method. The dollar impact of this required accounting change would be substantial. For ex-
ample, the composite 2001 earnings per share of firms in the Standard & Poor’s 500 Index 
would have been reduced by 24.5% (representing about $45 billion in composite earnings) if 
the fair value of options granted that year had been expensed.
 
Congress reacted swiftly to forestall the move. In late March 2003, Representatives David 
Dreier (Republican, California) and Anna Eshoo (Democrat, California) introduced legisla-
tion entitled the “Broad-Based Stock Option Plan Transparency Act of 2003” (H.R. 1372). If 
enacted, the bill would direct the SEC to require enhanced reporting disclosures for employee 
stock options. It would also prevent the SEC from recognizing any new stock option account-
ing standard until the SEC submitted a report to Congress on the effectiveness of the new 
disclosures following a three-year period of study.
 
The IASB opposed the bill and expressed concern about the impact it could have on ac-
counting standards in general: “If the U.S. Congress or political authorities in other countries 
seek to override the decisions of the competent professional standards setters . . . accounting 
standards will inevitably lose consistency, coherence, and credibility.”36 In testimony before a 
house committee, FASB chairman Robert Herz warned in June 2003 that the bill to delay new 
rules on stock options would set a “dangerous precedent” of congressional interference in 
 accounting standards setting.37
 
What sparked renewed debate over stock option accounting? Two factors brought the issue 
back into the political and regulatory arena:
1. The explosive increase in stock option grants during the late 1990s.
2. Public outrage over the accounting abuses uncovered subsequently at many companies.
Stock option “overload” was widely regarded as one—perhaps the most important—factor 
contributing to the accounting fiascoes at companies such as Enron and WorldCom. The pre-
vailing view was that managers who were eager to cash in their options resorted to question-
able accounting practices designed to inflate revenues and earnings, and boost share prices. 
Rather than align the interests of shareholders and managers, options were thought to have 
done the opposite: transferring vast amounts of wealth to executives even as outside share-
holders suffered. These concerns spawned a reform movement aimed at curbing the use of 
options by forcing companies to count them as an expense.
36 Paul A. Volcker, former Federal Reserve Board chairman and chairman of the foundation that oversees the IASB, in written 
testimony to Congress, as quoted in C. Schneider, “Who Rules Accounting,” CFO Magazine, August 2003.
37 A companion bill was introduced in the Senate in May 2003. A third bill, introduced in November 2003 by Senator Michael 
Enzi (Republican, Wyoming) would limit expensing to options granted to a company’s five highest paid executives. In re-
sponse to this proposal, one financial commentator quipped: “While Congress is at it, why not make only the salaries of the 
top dogs expenses, while the lower rungs of employees get to be free for a company. Think how many employees a company 
could hire if it didn’t cost them anything. Why, if Congress could outlaw all expenses, the economy would really boom.” See 
J. Eisinger, “Microsoft Can Count, Intel Can’t,” The Wall Street Journal, July 21, 2004.

918 
CHAPTER 15
Financial Reporting for Owners’ Equity
 
But not everyone agreed! The battle between those who favored and those who opposed 
stock options expensing involved familiar arguments:
WHY CRITICS SAID OPTIONS SHOULD 
BE EXPENSED
• Some 75% to 80% of executive pay now comes in the 
form of options. Because all other forms of compensation 
must be deducted from earnings, options should be treated 
the same.
• Deducting the cost of options will yield more accurate 
earnings numbers, which should help restore investor 
 confi dence.
• Because options are now all but free to companies, exces-
sive grants to top execs have been encouraged. But options 
do have costs: They dilute shareholders’ stakes and deprive 
companies of the funds they would otherwise get by sell-
ing those shares in the open market. Such costs should be 
refl ected in earnings.
• Bringing more discipline to options grants will also reduce 
the incentives top execs now have to pump their stocks 
through short-term earnings maneuvers in the hope of 
cashing in big option gains.
WHY OPTIONS EXPENSING DEFENDERS DISAGREED
• Unlike salaries or other perks, granting options requires 
no cash outlay from companies. Because there is no real 
(cash) cost to the company to deduct, doing so will 
 unjustly penalize earnings.
• There are no universal standards for expensing options; all 
valuation methods require big assumptions and estimates. 
So, expensing them will reduce the accuracy of income 
statements and leave them open to manipulation.
• Deducting the cost of options will reduce earnings, which 
is likely to drive down share prices.
• Rather than take the hit to earnings, companies can issue 
far fewer options. That would hurt morale, limit a key tool 
used to lure talent, and inhibit companies from aligning 
employee and shareholder interests.
• Tech fi rms argue that generous option grants have spurred 
the risk taking and entrepreneurship so crucial to innova-
tion. Expensing options risks damaging that benefi t.
Source: A. Borrus, P. Dwyer, D. Foust, and L. Lavelle, “To Expense or Not to 
Expense,” BusinessWeek, July 29, 2002.
NEWS CLIP
 
As the options reform movement gained steam in 2003, nearly 500 U.S. companies— 
 including Amazon.com, Bank One, Coca-Cola, Computer Associates, and Procter & Gamble—
said that they would soon begin expensing stock options voluntarily using the SFAS No. 123 
fair value alternative. (Boeing and Winn Dixie had been doing so already for several years.) 
Other companies such as General Electric and Microsoft curtailed their employee stock  options 
programs in favor of outright stock grants.38 Still others, most notably Intel and Sun Microsys-
tems, remained steadfast in their opposition to counting stock options as an expense.
 
By February 2004, Canadian accounting regulators and the IASB had issued new standards 
mandating the use of fair value approaches to employee stock option accounting.39 Then in De-
cember 2004, the FASB released a revised version of SFAS No. 123 (known as SFAS No. 123R 
“Share-Based Payment”) which is now codified and which affirms its earlier tentative decision to 
prohibit the use of the intrinsic value method of stock option compensation accounting.40 
 Share-based payment GAAP thus required all U.S. firms to use the fair value method. In 
“It’s an accounting issue that 
shouldn’t be resolved by our 
yelling, that shouldn’t be 
 political, that shouldn’t be 
 settled in op-ed columns—it 
should [be] settled by [the] 
FASB going away on a 
 deserted island and thinking 
about it. A lot of emotion 
has blocked this rational 
 accounting issue. A lot of 
what people are pissed about 
is executive compensation. 
The distinction between 
 executive compensation and 
option expensing kind of 
gets lost.”
Source: Andy Grove, CEO of 
 Intel Corporation, as quoted in 
Fortune, September 16, 2002.
38 Under a stock grant program, employees receive shares of common stock as part of their compensation packages. The 
employer (say, Microsoft) must record as compensation expense the fair value of the shares granted.
39 “Share-Based Payment,” International Financial Reporting Standard [IFRS] No. 2 (London: IASB, 2004).
40 FASB ASC Topics 505: Equity and 718: Compensation—Stock Compensation. Although it focuses primarily on stock option 
compensation and other equity payments for employee services, it also establishes guidance for a much broader class of transac-
tions in which a company either (1) exchanges equity instruments for any goods or services or (2) incurs a liability in exchange 
for goods and services, and that liability’s settlement amount is linked to the fair value of the company’s equity instruments.

 
Accounting for Share-Based Compensation 
919
 February 2005, the European Commission endorsed the new IASB stock option accounting rules 
for required use in the European Union. By then, more than 800 U.S. firms had announced their 
intent to voluntarily adopt the fair value method. Companies that expensed their employee stock 
options voluntarily tended to experience a positive or neutral share price reaction when the deci-
sion to expense was announced.41
Current GAAP Requirements
The key provisions of the current authoritative guidance are:
1. Companies must record the cost of employee services received in exchange for a stock 
option award (limited exceptions exist).
2. This compensation cost is determined by the award’s grant-date fair value measured using 
option-pricing models adjusted for the unique characteristics of employee stock options 
(unless observable market prices are available).42
3. This grant-date compensation cost is recognized as an expense on a straight-line basis 
over the vesting period.
4. Incremental compensation cost arising from modifications to the original award terms 
is also recognized during the vesting period; however, changes in the fair value of the 
original options award itself are not recognized.
Implementing the fair value approach is not difficult but firms’ option compensation practices 
are widely varied and so are the detailed GAAP rules for measuring compensation expense.43 
We describe these procedures tersely using a “big-picture” approach—that’s all you need to 
grasp the overall impact of the fair value approach on financial numbers.
 
Assume that Guyton Corporation grants 100 common stock options to each of its top 300 
managers on January 1, 2014. At that date, both the exercise price of the options and the market 
price of Guyton’s stock is $30. To provide managers an incentive to remain at Guyton, the options 
cannot be exercised before January 1, 2017. This time span between the grant date and the first 
available exercise date is called the vesting period. Guyton’s options do not expire until Janu-
ary 1, 2024, giving the options a 10-year legal life. But GAAP requires that we estimate the 
 expected life of the options—meaning we must forecast when employees are likely to exercise 
the options. Factors to consider in estimating the expected life include the average length of time 
similar grants have remained outstanding in the past and the expected volatility of the company’s 
common stock price. Let’s assume that Guyton’s options have an expected life of five years.
 
The fair value of stock options is measured at the grant date—the date when both the 
grant’s terms are set and the stock options are awarded to individual employees. Here’s how 
the fair value of a stock option should be determined:
The fair value of an equity share option . . . shall be measured based on the observable market 
price of an option with the same or similar terms and conditions, if one is available . . . [If an 
41 See D. Aboody, M. Barth, and D. Kasnik, “Firms’ Voluntary Recognition of Stock-Based Compensation Expense,” Journal 
of Accounting Research, May 2004, pp. 123–50; and F. Elayan, K. Pukthuanthong, and R. Roll, “Investors Like Firms That 
Expense Employee Stock Options and They Dislike Firms That Fail to Expense,” Journal of Investment Management, 2005.
42 For a detailed comparison of the option prices obtained by using different valuation models, see M. Amman and R. Seiz, 
“Valuing Employee Stock Options: Does the Model Matter?” Financial Analysts Journal, September/October 2004, pp. 21–37. 
Research on the use of the modified Black–Scholes–Merton model for valuing employee options includes J. Carpenter, “The 
Exercise and Valuation of Executive Stock Options,” Journal of Financial Economics, May 1998, pp. 127–58; C. Marquardt, 
“The Cost of Employee Stock Option Grants: An Empirical Analysis,” Journal of Accounting Research, September 2002, 
pp. 1191–1217; and C. Bettis, J. Bizjak, and M. Lemmon, “Exercise Behavior, Valuation, and the Incentive Effects of 
 Employee Stock Options,” Journal of Financial Economics, May 2005, pp. 445–70.
43 FASB ASC Topic 718: Compensation—Stock Compensation.
For most companies today, 
the expected life of em-
ployee stock options is 
somewhere between three 
and five years.

920 
CHAPTER 15
Financial Reporting for Owners’ Equity
 observable market price is not available, the equity share option fair value] shall be estimated 
using a valuation technique such as an option pricing model . . . that takes into account, at a min-
imum, all of the following: the exercise price of the option; the expected term of the option . . . ; the 
current price of the underlying share; the expected volatility of the price of the underlying share 
for the expected term of the option . . . ; the expected dividends on the underlying share . . . ; 
[and] the risk-free interest rate(s) for the expected term of the option.44
GAAP says that an observable market price is the starting point for determining the fair value 
of employee stock options. Of course, the problem is that a market price is rarely (if ever) avail-
able because employee stock options are not traded on an organized exchange. When a market 
price is not available, GAAP says that fair value 
is to be determined using an options pricing 
mode but it does not specify which particular 
model—the Black-Scholes model or some other 
theoretically sound approach—is to be used.
It is not necessary to understand the theory 
behind option pricing models to understand the 
financial reporting for employee stock options. 
As the preceding excerpt indicates, measuring 
fair value requires estimating several other variables that we have not yet specified in the Guyton 
example. We will assume that the risk-free interest rate is 6.75%, no dividends are forecasted for 
the company’s common stock, and the expected volatility of Guyton’s common stock is 20%. 
See Exhibit 15.4 for a summary of these facts.
Inserting the numbers from the top at Ex-
hibit 15.4 into the Black–Scholes option pric-
ing model indicates that each option has a fair 
value of $10.05 at the grant date.45 The total 
compensation cost of all employee stock option 
awards is $301,500 ($10.05 3 30,000 options). 
Let’s assume that all 300 managers will meet the vesting requirements and ultimately exercise 
all 30,000 options.
Firms are required by GAAP to estimate what proportion of the options originally 
granted will never vest due to employee turnover. Compensation expense includes 
only those options that are not forfeited. For example, if Guyton Corporation esti-
mates that only 29,000 options would ultimately vest, total compensation cost 
would be $291,450 (that is, $10.05 3 29,000) rather than $301,500.
Volatility in option pricing models is measured using a benchmark of 1 standard 
deviation of a stock’s return over a specified time period. Assume that Guyton 
stock has experienced an average annual historical return of 10%, higher in some 
years and lower in others. Because 1 standard deviation is roughly 66% of a nor-
mal distribution, the 20% expected volatility means there is a 66% probability 
that the return on Guyton’s stock will be 10% 6 20% in any one year—that is, 
there is a two-thirds chance that the return in any one year will range between a 
low of 210% and a high of 130%.
EXHIBIT 15.4
Guyton Corporation
Variables Used to Estimate the Value of Employee Stock Options
Options granted (100 shares 3 300 employees) 
30,000
Exercise price 
$30
Stock price at grant date 
$30
Expected life of options 
5 years
Risk-free interest rate 
6.75%
Expected volatility of common stock 
20%
Expected dividends on common stock 
–0–
Using the Black–Scholes Option Valuation formula, the fair value of each Guyton option is 
 estimated to be $10.05 at the grant date.
44 FASB ASC Topic 718, various paragraphs.
45 Designed for valuing options traded in open stock exchanges, the standard Black–Scholes formula doesn’t consider the added 
restrictions of employee options, such as vesting and lack of transferability. Those limits make employee options worth much 
less than exchange-traded options. So, companies that strictly follow the standard Black–Scholes formula to determine options 
expense would take a much larger charge to earnings than is necessary. Another way to calculate option expense is called the 
binomial (or lattice) model. This approach uses a different mathematical formula and requires more assumptions including those 
that explicitly address vesting and other features unique to employee stock options. A key advantage of the binomial model is 
that it considers the possibility that changes in the stock price may influence the timing of when employees exercise options.

 
Accounting for Share-Based Compensation 
921
 
Stock-based compensation is intended to increase the employees’ stake in the firm, creat-
ing an incentive for them to work in the best interests of all owners. The vesting requirements 
provide an extra incentive to stay with the company long enough to benefit from the antici-
pated value of the options. For these reasons, GAAP assigns total compensation cost of 
$301,500 to expense on a straight-line basis over the vesting period. Guyton Corporation 
would recognize $100,500 ($301,500y3 years) as compensation expense in each of the years 
2014 through 2016:
DR Compensation expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$100,500 
   CR Paid-in capital—stock options . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$100,500
This same entry is made each year although the market value of the company’s stock—and 
therefore the fair value of outstanding employee stock options—will undoubtedly change over 
time. GAAP specifies that compensation cost—option fair value—is measured only once, at 
the grant date.
 
Let’s say that Guyton’s share price rises above the $30 exercise price after the vesting pe-
riod and managers exercise all 30,000 options on the same day. The entry to record the exer-
cise of employee stock options (assuming $20 par value stock) is:
DR Cash (30,000 3 $30)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$900,000
DR Paid-in capital—stock options ($100,500 3 3 years)  . . . . . . .  
301,500
   CR Common stock—par ($20 3 30,000)   . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$600,000
   CR Paid-in capital in excess of par   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
601,500
Notice that (1) compensation expense is recognized in the same amount each year over the 
vesting period and (2) if the options are exercised, the total amount added to the common 
stock and capital in excess of par is $1,201,500—the sum of the cash received when the 
 options are exercised plus the calculated fair value of the options at the grant date.
 
If we assume that Guyton’s share price never rises above the exercise price, the options 
will never be exercised. No cash will flow in. The offset to cumulative three-year compensa-
tion expense ($301,500) will remain in the Paid-in capital—stock options account. This dollar 
figure represents the estimated value of employee productivity (measured at the option grant 
date) that in effect was “donated” to the company without any corresponding ownership claim 
being given up to Guyton’s employees.
 
There’s one more wrinkle you should understand. As share prices tumbled during the 
2008 global recession, a number of companies “repriced” their employee stock options. 
Why? Because options no longer provide a meaningful pay incentive when they are “under-
water” in the sense that the share price (say $15) is below the exercise price (say $30). 
Employees perceive underwater options to be worthless when there is only a remote chance 
that the share price will rise above the exercise price at sometime in the future. Option 
 repricing is a way to solve this incentive problem. In Guyton’s case, repricing might entail 
reducing the original $30 exercise price to just $15, the share price prevailing when the 
 options are repriced.
 
Here’s what CounterPath Corporation, a Canadian software design company, said about its 
repriced options:
On March 12, 2009, the company reduced the exercise price of 1,282,711 employee incentive 
stock options to $0.47 (CDN $0.60) per common share for all of its employees and contractors 
holding stock options, other than for its officers and directors. In accordance with ASC 718 the 
Company measured the new fair value of the repriced options and also revalued the original 
For income tax purposes, 
employers can deduct from 
taxable income the tax cost 
of options—calculated as 
the difference between the 
exercise price and the stock 
price on the day the em-
ployee exercises the options. 
The deduction is available 
only in the period when the 
options are exercised.

922 
CHAPTER 15
Financial Reporting for Owners’ Equity
 options as of the date of modification. The excess fair value of the repriced options over the 
 re-measured value of the original options represents incremental compensation cost. The total 
incremental cost of the repriced options is approximately $191,425 of which $139,281 has been 
recognized to the statement of operations on the transaction date with $52,144 to recognize over 
the remaining service period of the repriced options.
CounterPath uses stock options to pay, in part, employee wages and contractor fees. The com-
pany’s share price fell from $2.35 per share in November 2007 to just $0.25 per share in 
February 2009. As a result of this steep share price decline, the options went underwater. 
CounterPath then repriced its options by lowering the exercise price. The added compensation 
cost associated with the repriced options is $191,425, determined according to FASB ASC 
718. A portion of this cost ($139,281) is recognized immediately as compensation expense, 
while the remaining cost ($52,144) is recognized gradually over the service period because 
some options are not yet fully vested.
 
Accounting for stock-based pay has also changed the way companies must report on their 
cash flow statements the tax benefits they obtain from employee stock option compensation. 
The income tax and accounting details are somewhat complex, but we can use the Guyton 
Corporation example to illustrate the major points. Recall that Guyton issued options for 
30,000 shares with an exercise price of $30 per share. Suppose the stock’s market value is 
$50 per share when the options are later exercised. Under current U.S. tax law, Guyton is 
 allowed a tax deduction for the intrinsic value of the options ($50 share price 2 the $30 op-
tion exercise price, or $20 per share) in the exercise year. (Employees who exercise stock op-
tions must pay ordinary income taxes that same year on the $20 per share intrinsic value.) 
Guyton’s tax deduction ($600,000, assuming that all 30,000 options are exercised) exceeds 
the total compensation expense ($301,500) the company has recorded. Because Guyton pays 
out less cash in taxes, this $104,475 excess tax benefit—or ($600,000 2 $301,500) 3 0.35 if 
Guyton’s marginal income tax rate equals 35%—is recognized on the cash flow statement.
 
Prior to current GAAP, most firms listed their excess tax benefits as part of operating cash 
flow, which is where tax-related items typically are shown. Analysts and investors closely 
watch operating cash flow. They see it as perhaps the purest measure of company performance 
because it is immune to accrual accounting 
gimmicks that can distort reported earnings. 
Firms now must shift the excess tax benefit to 
financing cash flow, a less important part of the 
cash flow statement that measures cash flowing 
in and out of the company for things such as 
stock and debt offerings, dividend payments, 
and share repurchases (see Chapter 17). The 
classification shift required by GAAP slashed 
millions of dollars off operating cash flow at 
some companies—$260 million at Cisco Systems and $77.3 million at Google—but left total 
company cash flow unchanged.
 
Fewer companies today than in the past use employee stock options as a form of compen-
sation. One popular alternative to stock options is restricted stock, which are shares issued 
to employees that can be sold only in the future (say three years) after the stock vests. 
 Employees forfeit their shares if they leave the company during the vesting period. Other 
companies have abandoned stock options in favor of larger annual performance-based cash 
bonuses. Among companies that still use stock options, many have cut back the size of their 
awards, shortened the exercise life, or reduced the number of employees covered by the 
 options plan.
Analysis
The accounting for restricted stock awards is simple enough. Suppose that Guyton 
grants 10,000 shares of restricted stock to its employees when the stock is trading 
at $30 per share. Employees can’t sell any shares for three years (the vesting 
 period). The shares’ value at the grant date ($300,000) increases owners’ equity, 
and an equal amount representing deferred compensation is recorded as an offset-
ting  contra-equity account. The net effect on owners’ equity at the grant date is 
zero.  Guyton then recognizes one-third of the grant-date fair value (or $100,000) 
as compensation expense each year during the service (vesting) period and records 
a corresponding reduction to the deferred compensation contra-equity account.

 
Accounting for Share-Based Compensation  
923
Options Backdating Scandal
On a summer day in 2002, shares of Affiliated Computer Services Inc. sank to their lowest level 
in a year. Oddly, that was good news for Chief Executive Jeffrey Rich. His annual grant of stock 
options was dated that day, entitling him to buy stock at that price for years. Had they been 
dated a week later, when the stock was 27% higher, they’d have been far less rewarding. It was 
the same through much of Mr. Rich’s tenure: In a striking pattern, all six of his stock-option 
grants from 1995 to 2002 were dated just before a rise in the stock price, often at the bottom of a 
steep drop.46
 
In March 2006, Wall Street Journal reporters Charles Forelle and James Bandler published a 
story alleging that top executives at six companies repeatedly received stock option grants on 
days when share prices hit lows. Was this pattern just blind luck? In Jeffrey Rich’s case, the 
likelihood is extraordinarily remote according to the reporters: “around one in 300 billion. The 
odds of winning the multistate Powerball lottery with a $1 ticket are one in 146 million.”47 
If not just luck, then why were such favorable grant dates chosen? One possibility is that 
the effective dates on some options were deliberately and improperly changed—a practice 
known as backdating—thus conferring extra pay to executives regardless of company stock 
performance.
 
Forelle and Bandler’s Wall Street Journal article was the tipping point in the options back-
dating scandal. One week after the allegations first surfaced, federal or state officials were 
investigating more than 20 companies for backdating options grants, and 10 executives or 
 directors at those companies had resigned. Over the next 12 months, more than 260 companies 
launched internal reviews of their options grants. More than 50 top executives and directors 
lost their jobs. Criminal investigations by the Department of Justice were under way at 
54 companies, and many others were targets of SEC inquiries. Shareholders at 158 companies 
brought suit against officers and directors seeking monetary damages.
 
How did the two Wall Street Journal reporters spot questionable options timing? They en-
listed the help of Erik Lie, a University of Iowa finance professor, whose results of a 2005 
study of nearly 6,000 option grants between 1992 and 2002 strongly suggested that some op-
tion awards had grant dates retroactively set to an earlier date when the stock price was 
lower.48 Backdating can be detected by carefully analyzing stock prices before and after the 
grant date. While companies can (and do) time their option awards to coincide with stock 
price downturns, they cannot predict with certainty when prices will rebound upward. Thus, it 
would be highly unlikely for option grants to routinely be awarded on dates just ahead of 
sharp stock price gains. Statistical procedures estimate just how unlikely are the option grant 
dates. Utilizing Lie’s data, the two Wall Street Journal reporters identified a number of suspi-
cious option grants including those at Affiliated Computer Services (Figure 15.3).
 
Backdating stock option awards can violate accounting rules and SEC disclosure regula-
tions and, depending on how it is done, may constitute fraud. The practice also can violate 
federal income tax rules. To understand how the accounting and tax rules are violated, let’s first 
consider an award that is not backdated. Suppose that Streit Corporation grants stock options to 
employees on August 4 when the stock is trading at $30 per share but the strike price is set at 
only $22. (Firms are free to set strike prices at whatever level they deem appropriate.) Using 
the intrinsic value method, as did most firms at the time, Streit immediately recognizes com-
pensation expense equal to the $8 per share difference between the grant date share price ($30) 
and the strike price ($22). Employees who receive the option awards also have to pay ordinary 
The exercise (or “strike”) 
price on employee stock 
 options typically equals 
whatever the market price 
of the stock happens to be 
on the day the options are 
granted. The lower the strike 
price, the better the employ-
ee’s chance for future profit 
when later exercising the 
 options. For example, an 
 options grant made on 
 August 4 when the stock is 
trading at $30 per share 
 becomes more valuable to 
the employee if it is back-
dated to July 8 when the 
market price of the stock was 
only $22.
Of course, firms using the 
fair value method immedi-
ately recognized an even 
larger compensation 
expense.
46 C. Forelle and J. Bandler, “The Perfect Payday,” The Wall Street Journal, March 18, 2006.
47 Ibid.
48 E. Lie, “On the Timing of CEO Stock Option Awards,” Management Science, May 2005, pp. 802–12.

924 
CHAPTER 15
Financial Reporting for Owners’ Equity
income taxes that year on the $8 per share. Backdating the award to, say, July 8 when the 
stock’s market price was also $22 meant that Streit and unscrupulous managers at other firms 
could claim that the grant date intrinsic value was zero for both accounting and tax purposes. 
This result misstates GAAP compensation expense and employees’ taxable income.
 
To rectify the GAAP violation, backdating firms must restate previously issued financial 
reports. That’s what happened at Affiliated Computer Services. An internal investigation un-
earthed a handwritten note in which the company’s chairman discussed the practice of always 
picking the lowest price “so far” in the quarter to award stock options.49 The company later 
acknowledged that it had issued backdated stock options to top executives, including former 
CEO Jeffrey Rich. Compensation expense in earlier years was understated and pre-tax income 
overstated by $51 million. Several top executives resigned in the wake of the scandal.
 
The Wall Street Journal won a Pulitzer Prize, journalism’s highest honor, for exposing the 
widespread practice of backdating stock option awards, and Time magazine recognized Erik 
Lie as among the 100 most influential people in the world.
Dollars
Examples of options granted (Stock prices adjusted for splits)
Date of grant
10
12
Nov.
Oct.
Sept.
Aug.
1998
14
16
18
$20
12
15
Aug.
July
June
May
2000
18
21
24
$27
30
36
Sept.
Aug.
July
June
2002
42
48
54
$60
Figure 15.3 SUSPICIOUS STOCK OPTION AWARD GRANT DATES
Three especially favorable stock grants to Jeffrey Rich, former CEO at Affiliated Computer Services, and what the stock price did 
two months before and after each grant date.
Source: Graph from C. Forelle and J. Bandler, “Perfect Payday: Options Scorecard,” The Wall Street Journal, March 18, 2006. Copyright © 2006 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. 
All rights reserved worldwide. Reprinted with permission.
49 J. Bandler and C. Forelle, “Note Raises Pressure on ACS,” The Wall Street Journal, March 22, 2007. Prior to enactment of 
the Sarbanes-Oxley Act in August 2002, firms reported their stock option grants to the SEC on a monthly basis with a win-
dow of 10 days after the close of each calendar month—conceivably, a 40-day window. Now companies have only 2 days 
after the grant date to report awards.
RECAP
Stock options are an important part of employee pay at many corporations today and for 
good reason. They save cash and motivate employees, and companies previously could 
avoid recording compensation expense for options grants. Now firms must record as 
compensation expense the grant-date fair value of any option awards.
CONVERTIBLE DEBT
Several years ago, Smithfield Foods offered investors the opportunity to purchase up to $400 mil-
lion of convertible notes. These notes paid a stated interest rate of 4% annually, matured in 
five years, and could be exchanged at any time for Smithfield Food stock at a conversion price 
of $22.68 per common share. Because the notes were issued in units of $1,000 face value, the 

 
Convertible Debt 
925
conversion price meant investors could exchange each note for slightly more than 44 shares of 
stock ($1,000 face valuey$22.68 per share conversion price 5 40.082 shares). Investors 
snapped up the entire $400 million of the convertible note.
 
What price do you suppose Smithfield Foods received for each $1,000 face value note?
 
To put this question in context, the average yield to maturity—that’s the effective interest 
rate—on newly issued high-grade industrial debt was about 8% per year at that time. Smith-
fields’ nonconvertible debt borrowing rate was estimated to be over 10% per year. Given the 
economic climate of the time, it may surprise you to learn that the company was able to sell 
its 4% notes at par, receiving $1,000 in cash for each $1,000 face value issued. By contrast, 
the promised cash flows associated with each note—$40 each year plus another $1,000 at 
maturity in the year 2013—had a discounted present value at 10% of only $772.55. Investors 
were willing to pay $227.45 more than the present value of each Smithfield note because of 
the conversion feature attached to the debt.
 
We now explain the financial reporting for convertible debt and its implications for those 
who use financial statements.
Background
Convertible notes and bonds give investors the opportunity—but not the obligation—to ex-
change a company’s debt for common stock in accordance with terms in the bond indenture. 
The conversion price—the dollar value at which the debt can be converted into common 
stock—is typically higher than the prevailing market price of the company’s common 
shares when the debt is issued. The option to convert is solely at the investor’s discretion 
and it will be exercised only when and if the investor finds the exchange financially desir-
able. Shares of Smithfield Foods were trading around $20 at the time the convertible notes 
were issued—or about $2.68 less than the conversion price. Investors had little incentive to 
exchange their notes for stock immediately. The conversion feature’s real value to investors 
was the possibility that the stock price might climb higher than $22.68 sometime over the 
next five years.
 
Convertible notes and bonds are also usually callable, or redeemable, by the issuer at a 
specified price before maturity. When convertible debt is called, investors must either convert 
or have the debt redeemed for a cash price that is generally less than the value of the common 
stock into which the debt can be converted. Call provisions protect the company against 
 extreme price increases by forcing investor action. Otherwise, investors would simply 
 continue holding the debt in anticipation of further share price increases.
 
Convertible debt is a common form of borrowing. In the third quarter of 
2012, for example, 186 companies worldwide issued convertible debt totaling 
nearly $20.7 billion. This compares to the roughly $55 billion raised by over 
220 companies during the second quarter of 2007, just prior to the onset of the 
global financial crisis of 2007–2008 and the Great Recession of 2009.50 Con-
vertible debt offerings increase during periods of rising stock prices or turmoil 
in debt markets. The opportunity to share in future stock price increases is 
more attractive to potential debt investors during a period of bullish market 
expectations for common stocks or when debt markets are illiquid and there is 
little investor interest in traditional debt securities. This sentiment is what en-
ables companies to issue convertibles on favorable terms.
To illustrate, suppose that Smithfield Foods’ 
stock price reached $25 per share several years 
after the notes were first issued. Each $1,000 
par value convertible note would then represent 
a claim to $1,100 in common stock (44 shares 3 
$25 per share). Suppose that Smithfield’s 
notes were callable at a redemption price of 
$1,027.50 each. Smithfield could force conver-
sion by “calling” the debt and investors would 
then take the more valuable common stock 
($1,100) rather than the less valuable 
 redemption cash payment ($1,027.50).
50 “Credit Trends: Convertible Bond New Issuance Picks Up in Second-Half of 2012,” RatingsDirect, Standard & Poor’s 
 Ratings Services (December 3, 2012).

926 
CHAPTER 15
Financial Reporting for Owners’ Equity
Financial Reporting Issues
Convertible debt poses this financial reporting dilemma: Should a value be assigned to the 
debt’s conversion feature? Clearly, conversion features are valuable to both the issuing com-
pany and investors. The conversion option enabled Smithfield Foods to borrow $100 million 
at 4% annual interest when other companies were paying 8% annual interest. Moreover, the 
availability of Black–Scholes and other option pricing models means that we now have well-
established methods for assigning values to option features such as the Smithfield conversion 
privilege. However, GAAP for convertible debt predates the development of modern option 
pricing theory.51
 
GAAP specifies that convertible bonds must be recorded as debt only, with no value as-
signed to the conversion privilege. (There is an exception—described later in the chapter—if 
conversion can be settled by cash payment rather than by delivery of stock.) Two reasons for 
not assigning a value to the conversion privilege are cited:
1. The inseparability of the conversion feature from the debt component of the convertible 
security.
2. The practical problems of determining separate values for the debt and the conversion 
 option in the absence of separability.
 
Given the lack of option pricing models at the time, standards setters concluded:
In the absence of separate transferability, values are not established in the marketplace, and 
 accordingly, the value assigned to each feature is necessarily subjective. A determination of the 
value of the conversion feature poses problems because of the uncertain duration of the right to 
obtain the stock and the uncertainty as to the future value of the stock obtainable upon conver-
sion. Furthermore, issuers often claim that a subjective valuation of a debt security without the 
conversion option but with identical other terms . . . is difficult because such a security could not 
be sold at a price which the issuer would regard as producing an acceptable cost of financing.52
Given modern option pricing methods, it is unlikely that accounting standards setters would 
reach the same conclusion today. Nevertheless, GAAP for most convertible debt continues 
to reflect the “debt only” approach.
 
Here’s how Smithfield Foods records the issuance of all $400 million of its convertible 
notes at par value:
DR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$400,000,000
   CR Convertible subordinated debentures . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$400,000,000
This entry assigns the entire $400 million to the convertible debt liability. One year later, 
Smithfield records interest expense of $16,000,000 (or 0.04 3 $400 million) and the cash in-
terest payment, which also occurs that day:
DR Interest expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$16,000,000
   CR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$16,000,000
(This entry ignores the real-world complication that arises when companies accrue interest 
throughout the year.)
51 FASB ASC Subtopic 470-20: Debt—Debt with Conversion and Other Options, which builds on the much earlier pre- 
 Codification APB Opinion No. 14.
52 Pre-Codification APB Opinion No. 14 para. 8. This paragraph is considered nonessential for Codification purposes and 
therefore does not appear in the FASB ASC.

 
Convertible Debt 
927
 
Thus far, the accounting for convertible debt parallels the accounting for the straight-debt 
securities described in Chapter 11. Smithfield Foods will continue to record interest expense 
at the rate of 4% annually—the effective borrowing rate if the 
conversion option is ignored—until the debt is retired or con-
verted. Let’s move several years forward to see what happens at 
conversion.
 
Suppose that some (but not all) investors have now chosen to 
exercise their conversion privilege by exchanging $100 million 
of the notes. Furthermore, the company’s stock has a current 
market value of $25 per share, which is above the $22.68 conversion price. This means that 
investors will surrender notes with a face value (and book value) of $100 million in exchange 
for common stock with a market value of about $110 million. GAAP permits companies to 
record debt conversion in either of two ways:
1. The book value method records the newly issued stock at the book value of debt retired.
DR Convertible subordinated debentures . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$100,000,000
   CR Common stock ($1 par) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$ 4,400,000
   CR Paid-in capital in excess of par   . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
95,600,000
2. The market value method records the newly issued shares at their current market value. 
Any difference between that $25 market value and the $22.68 conversion price is recog-
nized as a loss (or gain) on conversion.
DR Convertible subordinated debentures . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$100,000,000
DR Loss on debt conversion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
10,000,000
   CR Common stock ($1 par) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$  4,400,000
   CR Paid-in capital in excess of par   . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
105,600,000
The conversion loss is not classified as an extraordinary item because it is neither unusual in 
nature nor infrequent in occurrence.53 Of course, Smithfield Foods would continue to record 
interest expense on the remaining $300 million of convertible notes outstanding.
 
The book value approach recognizes no accounting gain or loss at retirement because the 
debt book value is just transferred to the common stock accounts. The market value approach, 
however, credits common stock at full market value as if the shares issued were sold for cash 
on the conversion date. It’s easy to see why the book value method is more popular. Almost all 
debt conversions occur when the company’s stock price is above the conversion price, and this 
situation triggers recognition of an accounting loss under the market value method. Managers 
can avoid recording this loss by instead selecting the book value approach.
Analytical Insights
This discussion of convertible debt has two messages for financial statement readers.
 
One message: Estimating the future cash flow implications of convertible debt is difficult. 
This is because it is necessary to consider both the scheduled interest and principal payments 
for the debt as well as the likelihood of conversion prior to maturity. Option pricing methods 
can be used to evaluate the probability of conversion over long time intervals. For near-term 
At the stated conversion price, investors will receive about 
4,400,000 common shares for their $100 million of notes 
($100 million conversion price per share). Because each share 
has a $22.68 market value, investors receive stock worth 
about $110 million.
53 From Chapter 2, remember that to qualify as an extraordinary item under GAAP, the event must be both unusual and 
infrequent.
Analysis

928 
CHAPTER 15
Financial Reporting for Owners’ Equity
projections, however, a simple comparison of the conversion price with the current market 
price of common stock can prove informative. If the options are “underwater” (meaning that 
the exercise price is more than the current share price) and close to expiration, they are unlikely 
to be exercised. The debt agreement should also be examined for call provision details.
 
The other message: Recorded interest expense may seriously understate the true cost of 
debt financing for companies that issue convertible bonds or notes. Few people would argue 
that Smithfield Foods is as creditworthy as the U.S. government. Yet the company borrowed 
money at 4% annually when investors were charging the federal government 3.5% annual 
interest for loans of similar duration. By ignoring the value of conversion features, current 
GAAP understates interest expense.
 
The appearance of “zero-coupon, zero-yield” convertible debt issued by U.S. companies 
has served only to underscore the inherent deficiencies of GAAP when it comes to interest 
expense.54 To see why, consider this example. In April 2014, Skagit Inc. sells $750 million of 
“zero-coupon” convertible notes and received proceeds equal to the notes’ $750 million face 
value. The notes mature in 2019 and can be converted into shares of Skagit common stock at 
the noteholder’s option.
 
Recall from Chapter 11 that “zero-coupon” notes do not require the borrower (in this case, 
Skagit) to make periodic interest payments over the life of the loan. And, because the Skagit 
notes were issued at par—meaning that Skagit received cash equal to the $750 million face 
value—there is no discount to amortize over the life of the loan. No periodic coupon interest 
and no discount amortization together mean no interest expense gets recorded. In short, Skagit 
will not recognize any interest expense on the loan even though the notes may never be con-
verted into shares of common stock.
 
The lesson for corporate managers is clear: Current GAAP allows you to avoid interest 
expense as long as you issue zero-coupon convertible debt and structure the conversion fea-
tures so that the debt sells for par (face) value. The lesson for analysts is equally clear: Interest 
expense sometimes can seriously understate a company’s true cost of debt.
Convertible Debt That May Be Settled in Cash
The FASB has on occasion revisited the question of how best to account for convertible debt, 
but U.S. GAAP continues to specify that traditional convertible debt must be recorded as debt 
only and with no value assigned to the conversion privilege.55 There is a GAAP exception for 
convertible debt where the borrower has the right, upon conversion, to pay some or all of the 
conversion value in cash rather in shares of stock.56 In this special case, GAAP requires sepa-
rate recognition of the debt and equity components.
 
To illustrate this required accounting treatment, suppose Lebeda Corporation issues on 
January 1, 2014, convertible notes with an aggregate face value of $100 million and a 2% 
nominal (stated) interest rate. The notes mature in 10 years and interest payments occur annu-
ally on December 31. In other words, the notes specify promised cash flow payments to inves-
tors of $2 million in December of each year plus the $100 million principal in December of 
54 Because the debt pays no interest (“zero coupon”) and is issued at no discount (“zero yield”), it’s known as no-no debt.
55 During its deliberation of pre-codification SFAS No. 150 “Accounting for Certain Financial Instruments with Characteris-
tics of both Liabilities and Equity,” the FASB proposed separate recognition of the debt and equity components of a convert-
ible debt instrument. However, the final version of SFAS No. 150, issued in May 2003 (and incorporated in the Codification 
as FASB ASC Topic 480: Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity), did not address so-called compound financial instruments 
such as convertible debt.
56 FASB Staff Position No. APB 14-1, “Accounting for Convertible Debt Instruments That May Be Settled in Cash upon 
Conversion (Including Partial Cash Settlement),” issued in May 2008 and incorporated in the Codification as part of FASB 
ASC Subtopic 470—20: Debt—Debt with Conversion and Other Options.

 
Convertible Debt 
929
2023. The notes are convertible into 1 million shares and, if exercised, Leb-
eda can either deliver shares or pay cash equal to the settlement-date market 
value of the shares. So, if investors were to exercise the conversion feature at 
a time when Lebeda’s share price was $115, management would either hand 
over the 1 million shares or pay $115 million in cash. Finally, the notes are assumed to be 
issued at par, meaning that Lebeda received $100 million cash from investors. Without the 
conversion feature, investors would have priced the notes to yield an 8% effective return that 
properly reflects Lebeda’s credit risk and the company would have raised only $59,739,512 
at issuance.
 
Because the convertible debt may be cash-settled at conversion, GAAP requires Lebeda to 
recognize the convertible debt as part debt and part equity. The initial carrying value of the debt 
component is measured as the fair value of a similar liability that does not possess the conver-
sion feature. The carrying value of the equity component is measured by deducting this liability 
fair value from the proceeds received when the convertible debt was issued. Here is the journal 
entry Lebeda would record on January 1, 2014, when the convertible debt is issued:
DR Cash 
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$100,000,000
   CR Convertible notes payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$59,739,512
   CR Shareholders’ equity—Conversion option  . . . . .  
 
$40,260,488
Because the notes have a fair value of $59,739,512 in the absence of the conversion feature, 
the remaining portion of the convertible debt proceeds ($40,260,488 5 $100,000,000 2 
$59,739,512) is assigned to the conversion (equity) component.
 
In subsequent years, accounting for the convertible notes adheres to the effective interest 
method described in Chapter 11. For example, Lebeda will make the following December 31, 
2014, journal entry to record interest expense for the year and the $2 million cash interest 
payment:
DR Interest expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$4,779,161
   CR Interest payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$2,000,000
   CR Convertible notes payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$2,779,161
To record interest expense for 2014 using the effective interest method ($4,779,161 5 $59,739,512 3 0.08)
DR Interest payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$2,000,000
   CR Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$2,000,000
To record the cash interest payment for 2014.
As you may recall, Lebeda’s interest expense in 2015 (next year) will be $5,001,494 
(5 [$59,739,512 1 $2,779,161] 3 0.08) under the effective interest method even though the 
cash interest payment that year is still just $2,000,000.
 
Let’s jump ahead several years and suppose investors exercise the conversion feature on 
January 1, 2019, when the market price of Lebeda’s common stock is $140 per share. The 
cash settlement amount to be paid by Lebeda is $140 million but GAAP requires that we 
split—accounting professionals use the term “bifurcate”—this amount into two components: 
one amount paid to repurchase the debt component of Lebeda’s convertible note and a second 
amount paid for the equity component. Bifurcation is accomplished using the same approach 
employed when the notes were issued. Lebeda management first measures the debt  repurchase 
amount as the fair value of a similar liability that does not possess the conversion feature. The 
You should verify that the present value of the 
note cash flows is $59,739,512 when discounted 
at an 8%  effective interest rate.

930 
CHAPTER 15
Financial Reporting for Owners’ Equity
equity settlement amount is then measured by deducting this liability fair value from the cash 
settlement amount. For example, if Lebeda’s borrowing cost for five-year debt is 7.5% on the 
conversion date, the debt repurchase fair value would be $77,747,633. (You should verify that 
the January 1, 2019, present value of remaining note interest and principal payments is 
$77,747,633 when discounted at 7.5%!) The equity settlement amount then is $62,252,367 
(5 $140,000,000 2 $77,747,633). Given this fact pattern, Lebeda would record the following 
journal entry to reflect cash settlement of the conversion option:
DR Convertible notes payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$76,043,740
DR Loss on debt settlement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$1,703,893
DR Shareholders’ equity—Conversion option  . . . . . . . . . .  
$40,260,488
DR Paid-in capital in excess of par . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$21,991,879
   CR Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$140,000,000
To record cash settlement of the convertible notes payable. The Loss on debt settlement amount ($1,703,893) is 
measured as the bifurcation-determined debt repurchase amount ($77,747,633) minus the January 1, 2019, carrying 
value of the convertible notes payable liability ($76,043,740). The Paid-in capital in excess of par reduction 
($21,991,879) is the bifurcation-determined equity settlement amount ($62,252,367) minus the conversion option 
carrying value ($40,260,488).
 
Although the accounting treatment illustrated by this example may seem overly complex, 
the key point to remember is quite simple. When a convertible debt instrument contains this 
sort of cash settlement provision, GAAP requires more interest expense to be recognized than 
would otherwise be the case. Without the cash settlement provision, Lebeda will record only 
$2 million of interest expense each year the convertible notes are outstanding, based on a 2% 
nominal interest rate. Because of the cash settlement provision, Lebeda must bifurcate the 
convertible notes and recognize 2014 interest expense of $4,779,161 based on an 8% effective 
interest rate that reflects the company’s actual credit risk.
GLOBAL VANTAGE POINT
In 2006, the French telecommunications company Alcatel merged with Lucent Technologies, 
a U.S. counterpart, to form Alcatel-Lucent. The combined French company has operations in 
more than 130 countries. Here is what Alcatel-Lucent says about its convertible debt:
Certain financial instruments contain both a liability and an equity component, including bonds 
that can be converted into or exchanged for new or existing shares and notes mandatorily 
 redeemable for new or existing shares. The different components of compound financial 
 instruments are accounted for in equity and in bonds and notes issued according to their 
 classification, as defined in IAS 32 “Financial Instruments: Disclosure and Presentation.”
 
For instruments issued by historical Alcatel, the financial liability component was valued on the 
issuance date at the present value (taking into account the credit risk at issuance date) of the future 
cash flows (including interest and repayment of the nominal value) of a bond with the same charac-
teristics (maturity, cash flows) but without any equity component. The portion  included in equity is 
equal to the difference between the debt issue amount and the financial  liability component.
Unlike U.S. GAAP, the IFRS guidance for convertible debt require the liability and equity 
components to be separated.57 This approach recognizes that when a company such as 
 Alcatel-Lucent issues convertible debt it is really issuing two distinct types of securities—
International
It’s a bit more complicated 
for convertible debt  issued 
by historical Lucent Tech-
nologies. The  financial 
 liability component is a 
present value computed as 
of the business combination 
date. The amount assigned 
to equity equals the differ-
ence between the convert-
ible’s fair value at that date 
and the financial liability 
component amount.
57 IFRS has required the separation of convertible securities into debt and equity components since 1996. See “Financial In-
struments: Disclosure and Presentation,” International Accounting Standard No. 32 (London: International Accounting Stan-
dards Committee, 1996). International Accounting Standards are now known as International Financial Reporting Standards, 
and the International Accounting Standards Committee (IASC) is now the IASB.

 
Global Vantage Point 
931
(1) debt that may be in the form of a bond or note and (2) an option to convert that debt into 
shares of stock—even though investors pay just one price for the combined financial instru-
ment. The debt represents a balance sheet liability and the option is shareholders’ equity.
 
To illustrate how this separation of liability and equity components is achieved, suppose 
Alcatel-Lucent issues €500 million of 10-year convertible notes that pay interest at 5% annu-
ally. Investors pay €500 million for the notes even though the company’s credit risk at the time 
implies a 10% interest rate for traditional debt of similar duration. To record the convertible 
note issuance, Alcatel-Lucent must first determine the present value of the financial liability 
component using the 10% interest rate. The figure turns out to be €346.4 million, an amount 
you should confirm. Alcatel-Lucent then makes the following entry:
DR Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€500.0 million 
   CR Convertible notes payable   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
€346.4 million
   CR Shareholders’ equity—Conversion option  . . . . .  
 
€153.6 million
When Alcatel-Lucent records interest expense later in the year, it will do so using the effective 
10% rate of interest rather than the nominal 5% interest rate stated in the note. As illustrated 
in Chapter 11, this effective interest rate approach results in the following entry for annual 
interest expense in the first year:
DR Interest expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€34.64 million 
   CR Cash (interest payment)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
€25.00 million
   CR Convertible notes payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
€9.64 million
The cash interest payment of €25 million is determined by the nominal rate of interest (5%) 
and the face amount of the notes (€500 million), but interest expense is determined by the ef-
fective borrowing rate (10%) and the amount borrowed (€364.4 million). The difference be-
tween these two figures is recorded as an increase to the note payable. Over time, the 
convertible note payable balance will grow to equal €500 million at maturity.
 
Canadian GAAP has required the use of this components approach to convertible debt ac-
counting for quite some years. It was also part of U.S. GAAP, but only briefly. In 1966, the 
Accounting Principles Board (APB)—the U.S. GAAP standards setter at the time—issued 
guidance that required explicit recognition of the conversion option value derived in a manner 
similar to our Alcatel-Lucent example. This U.S. GAAP guidance was “suspended temporarily” 
in 1967 and then rescinded two years later. Why? Some observers claim that the APB bowed 
to pressure from the investment banking community, which had argued that the discounted 
present value approach was too subjective for their clients. Investment bankers may also have 
been concerned about the possible loss of business. As illustrated in our Alcatel-Lucent 
 example, the component approach results in higher interest expense (€34.64 million rather 
than €25.00 million) and thus lower reported profits. Investment bankers may have feared that 
required use of the components approach would dampen client demand for convertible debt 
securities and thus reduce the fees they earned from helping clients issue those securities. In 
either case, the APB rescinded the component approach requirement in 1969.
Of course, this components 
approach is required by U.S. 
GAAP when the convertible 
debt permits full or partial 
settlement in cash upon 
conversion.
RECAP
Convertible debt gives investors the upside potential of common stock and the safety net 
of debt. That’s why the effective interest rate on convertible debt seems so low—the op-
tion value of the conversion feature compensates for the lower interest paid to investors. 
Because GAAP ignores the conversion option except when cash settlement is a possibility, 
interest expense may be understated and cash flow forecasting may be impeded.

932 
CHAPTER 15
Financial Reporting for Owners’ Equity
• Many aspects of financial reporting for owners’ equity transactions are built on technical 
rules and procedures that have evolved over time.
• Other aspects of owners’ equity accounting have not changed despite changing economic 
and legal environments.
• Still other aspects of owners’ equity accounting involve complicated pronouncements that 
reflect political compromises.
• Financial statement readers must recognize these influences and avoid unwarranted 
 inferences based on the reported figures.
• Stock buybacks don’t produce accounting gains and losses, but they can be used to 
 artificially inflate a company’s reported EPS.
• Preferred stock that has a mandatory redemption feature looks a lot like debt, so GAAP 
now requires it to be classified as debt in most cases.
• Some companies can pay dividends in excess of their retained earnings balance, but their 
ability to do so depends on state law.
• EPS numbers are adjusted for potential dilution from stock options, warrants, and 
 convertible securities.
• GAAP now requires companies to record compensation expense when stock options are 
given to employees, but GAAP ignores the option value in traditional convertible debt.
• GAAP can understate interest expense when companies issue traditional convertible debt, 
but IFRS rules overcome this deficiency.
• While some rules for owners’ equity accounting may seem arbitrary—and therefore 
 insignificant—these financial statement items have a profound impact on lending 
 agreements, regulation, and the cost of equity capital.
SUMMARY
932 
CHAPTER 15
Financial Reporting for Owners’ Equity
EXERCISES
Required:
1. What is the difference between preferred stock and common stock?
2. What is treasury stock?
3. Why does the SEC require companies to exclude redeemable preferred stock from 
 shareholders’ equity even when redemption is not mandatory?
4. Describe how the cost of stock-based compensation is determined?
5. Once the cost of stock-based compensation is determined, describe how the amount to be 
expensed in a given period is determined?
6. Explain the difference between basic and diluted earnings per share.
E15-1
Understanding Shareholders’ 
Equity (LO 1, 3, 6, 7)
E15-2
Issuing common 
stock (LO 5)
Spridget Company has 1 million shares of common stock authorized with a par value of 
$3 per share, of which 600,000 shares are outstanding. The company received $7 per share 
when it issued shares to the public.
Required:
What is the book value of the Common stock par account and the Additional paid-in capital 
account?

 
Exercises 
933
AICPA
ADAPTED
E15-5
Analyzing various stock 
 transactions (LO 1, 5)
Warren Corporation was organized on January 1, 2014, with an authorization of 500,000 
shares of common stock ($5 par value per share). During 2014, the company had the  following 
capital transactions:
January 5 
Issued 100,000 shares at $5 per share
April 6 
Issued 50,000 shares at $7 per share
June 8 
Issued 15,000 shares at $10 per share
July 28 
Purchased 25,000 shares at $4 per share
December 31 
Sold 25,000 shares held in treasury at $8 per share
Required:
What should be the balance in the Additional paid-in capital account at December 31, 2014?
AICPA
ADAPTED
E15-6
Determining how many 
shares (LO 5)
Munn Corporation’s records included the following stockholders’ equity accounts:
Preferred stock, par value $15, authorized 20,000 shares 
$255,000
Additional paid-in capital—preferred stock 
15,000
Common stock, no par, $5 stated value, 100,000 shares authorized 
300,000
Required:
How many shares of preferred stock and how many shares of common stock have been issued?
AICPA
ADAPTED
E15-7
Treasury stock (LO 1)
Weldon Wire has issued 2,500,000 shares of $2 par common stock at an average price of 
$10 per share. Of these, 100,000 shares were repurchased during the year for $15 each and 
retired. Another 200,000 shares of the shares were repurchased for $17 each and are being 
held for later use. There were no other common stock transactions during the year.
AICPA
ADAPTED
E15-3
Retiring common 
stock (LO 1)
The stockholders’ equity section of Peter Corporation’s balance sheet at December 31, 2014, 
follows:
Common stock ($10 par value); authorized 1,000,000 
  shares, issued and outstanding 900,000 shares 
$ 9,000,000
Additional paid-in capital 
2,700,000
Retained earnings 
1,300,000
 Total stockholders’ equity 
$13,000,000
On January 2, 2015, Peter purchased and retired 100,000 shares of its stock for $1,800,000.
Required:
What is the balance in the Additional paid-in capital and Retained earnings accounts immedi-
ately after the shares were retired?
E15-4
Analyzing debt and 
 redeemable preferred 
stock (LO 3)
ForeEver Yours, Inc., a manufacturer of wedding rings, issued two financial instruments at the 
beginning of 2014: a $10 million, 40-year bond that pays interest at the rate of 11% annually 
and 10,000 shares of $100 preferred stock that pays a dividend of 7.5% annually. The pre-
ferred stock has a mandatory redemption feature that requires the company to repurchase all 
outstanding shares at par ($100 per share) in 40 years.
Required:
Describe how each financial instrument will affect the company’s balance sheet and income 
statement in 2014.

934 
CHAPTER 15
Financial Reporting for Owners’ Equity
E15-8
Determining stockholders’ 
equity after a stock 
 repurchase (LO 1, 5)
Newton Corporation was organized on January 1, 2014. On that date, it issued 200,000 shares 
of its $10 par-value common stock at $15 per share (400,000 shares were authorized). During 
the period from January 1, 2014, through December 31, 2016, Newton reported net income of 
$750,000 and paid cash dividends of $380,000. On January 5, 2016, Newton purchased 
12,000 shares of its common stock at $12 per share. On December 31, 2016, the company 
sold 8,000 treasury shares at $8 per share.
Required:
What is the book value of total shareholders’ equity as of December 31, 2016?
AICPA
ADAPTED
E15-9
Stock dividends and retained 
earnings (LO 4)
On December 31, 2014, the Stockholders’ Equity section of Mercedes Corporation was as 
follows:
Common stock, par value $5; authorized 30,000 shares; 
 issued and outstanding, 9,000 shares 
$ 45,000
Additional paid-in capital 
58,000
Retained earnings 
73,000
 Total stockholders’ equity 
$176,000
On March 1, 2015, the board of directors declared a 10% stock dividend and accordingly 
 issued 900 additional shares. The stock’s fair value at that time was $8 per share. For the three 
months ended March 31, 2015, Mercedes sustained a net loss of $16,000.
Required:
What amount should the company report as retained earnings on its quarterly financial state-
ment dated March 31, 2015?
AICPA
ADAPTED
E15-10
Weighted-average number of 
shares (LO 6)
Mason Manufacturing had 600,000 shares of common stock outstanding and 150,000 shares 
of $100 par value preferred stock outstanding January 1, 2014. An additional 120,000 shares 
of common stock were issued on August 1 and 24,000 common shares were repurchased and 
retired on December 1. Mason’s preferred stock is not convertible into common shares.
Required:
Calculate the weighted-average number of common shares outstanding for purposes of com-
puting Mason’s 2014 basic earnings per share.
E15-11
Retained earnings 
 transactions (LO 4)
The Retained earnings account for Nathan Corporation had a credit balance of $800,000 at the 
end of 2013. Selected transactions during 2014 follow:
a. Net income was $130,000.
b. Cash dividends declared were $60,000.
c. Repurchased 100 shares of Nathan Corporation common stock, paying $20 per share. 
Each share has a $5 par value and was originally issued for $35.
d. Sold 20 shares of Nathan Corporation common stock for $22 each.
Required:
Calculate Nathan’s retained earnings balance as of the end of 2014. What is the maximum 
dividend Nathan could have declared in 2014? Assume there are no legal or contractual re-
strictions that apply.
Required:
Determine the balance in each of the following shareholders’ equity accounts: Common 
stock—par; Additional paid-in capital; and Treasury stock.

 
Exercises 
935
AICPA
ADAPTED
E15-12
Determining shareholders’ 
equity after a stock 
split (LO 5)
Effective April 27, 2014, Dorr Corporation’s shareholders approved a two-for-one split of the 
company’s common stock and an increase in authorized common shares from 100,000 shares 
(par value of $20 per share) to 200,000 shares (par value of $10 per share). The stock split 
shares were issued on June 30, 2014. Dorr’s shareholders’ equity accounts immediately  before 
issuance of the stock split shares were:
Common stock, par value $20; 100,000 shares authorized;
 50,000 shares outstanding 
$1,000,000
Additional paid-in capital 
150,000
Retained earnings 
1,350,000
Required:
After issuing the stock split shares, what are the balances of the Additional paid-in capital and 
Retained earnings accounts in Dorr’s June 30, 2014, statement of shareholders’ equity?
AICPA
ADAPTED
E15-13
Computing basic EPS 
(LO 6)
Tam Company’s net income for the year ending December 31, 2014, was $10,000. During the 
year, Tam declared and paid $1,000 cash dividends on preferred stock and $1,750 cash divi-
dends on common stock. At December 31, 2014, the company had 12,000 shares of common 
stock issued and outstanding—10,000 had been issued and outstanding throughout the year 
and 2,000 were issued on July 1, 2014. No other common stock transactions occurred during 
the year, and the 5,000 shares of preferred stock are not convertible into common shares.
Required:
What should be the 2014 earnings per common share of Tam Company, rounded to the 
nearest penny?
AICPA
ADAPTED
E15-14
Finding the number of shares 
for EPS (LO 6)
Fountain Inc. has 5,000,000 shares of common stock outstanding on January 1, 2014. It issued 
an additional 1,000,000 shares of common stock on April 1, 2014, and 500,000 more on July 1, 
2014. On October 1, 2014, Fountain issued 10,000 convertible bonds; each one had a $1,000 
face value and paid 7% interest. Each bond is convertible into 40 shares of common stock. No 
bonds were converted during 2014.
Required:
What number of shares should be used in computing basic EPS and diluted EPS, respectively?
AICPA
ADAPTED
E15-15
Calculating earnings per 
share (LO 6)
Information concerning the capital structure of the Petrock Corporation is as follows:
 
December 31,
 
2013 
2014
Common stock 
90,000 shares 
90,000 shares
Convertible preferred stock 
10,000 shares 
10,000 shares
8% convertible bonds 
$1,000,000 
$1,000,000
During 2014, Petrock paid dividends of $1 per share on its common stock and $2.40 per share 
on its preferred stock. The preferred stock is convertible into 20,000 shares of common stock. 
The 8% convertible bonds are convertible into 30,000 shares of common stock. The net in-
come for the year ending December 31, 2014, was $285,000, and the company’s income tax 
rate was 40%.

936 
CHAPTER 15
Financial Reporting for Owners’ Equity
E15-16
Employee stock 
 options (LO 7)
On July 18, 2014, Amos Corporation granted nontransferable options to certain key employ-
ees as additional compensation. The options permit the purchase of 20,000 shares of Amos’s 
common stock at a price of $30 per share. On the grant date, the stock’s market value was 
$42 per share. The options were exercisable beginning January 1, 2015, and expire on Decem-
ber 31, 2018. On February 3, 2015, when the stock was selling for $45 per share, all options 
were exercised.
Required:
How much compensation expense should Amos have recorded in 2014 and 2015 if the options 
are worth $17 per share on the grant date?
AICPA
ADAPTED
PROBLEMS / DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
Keystone Enterprises just announced record 2014 EPS of $5.00, up $0.25 from last year. This 
is the 10th consecutive year that the company has increased its EPS, an enviable record. 
 Unfortunately, management fears that this string of EPS increases is about to be broken. 
 Keystone is forecasting net income for 2015 and 2016 at $10 million each year, the same level 
earned in 2014. The company has 2,000,000 shares of common stock outstanding, no pre-
ferred stock, and no convertible debt.
Required:
1. How many common shares does Keystone need to buy back at the beginning of 2015 and 
2016 to maintain EPS growth of $0.25 per share each year? (Note: Keystone will use 
 excess cash from operations to pay for the stock.)
2. Explain why your answer to requirement 1 would change if the buybacks were to occur in 
the middle of each year.
3. Why do you think Keystone’s management would be concerned about maintaining the 
company’s record of EPS growth?
P15-1
Identifying incentives for stock 
repurchases (LO 2)
Understanding convertible 
debt (LO 8)
P15-2
Massey Coal just issued $50 million of convertible notes. Each note has a $1,000 face value, 
a stated interest rate of 2%, and matures in five years from the issue date. Investors have the 
option of holding each note to maturity or converting the note into 100 shares of Massey Coal 
common stock. Conversion is not permitted during the first two years after the issue date. The 
company received $50 million cash from investors when the convertible notes were issued.
Required:
1. Why were investors willing to pay $50 million for Massey’s debt when the promised 
 interest rate is only 2%?
2. Several analysts claim that Massey’s incremental borrowing rate for a similar five-year 
note without the conversion option is 12%. Describe how analysts might have arrived at 
this borrowing rate from information typically found in a company’s financial statements 
and notes.
3. Which interest rate—2% or 12%—would be used to compute Massey Coal’s interest 
 expense under U.S. GAAP, assuming cash settlement of conversion is not permitted. 
Which interest rate would be used under IFRS guidance?
Required:
1. What was basic EPS for 2014, rounded to the nearest penny?
2. What was diluted EPS for 2014, rounded to the nearest penny?

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
937
P15-3
Recording cash and stock 
 dividends (LO 5)
The stockholders’ equity section of Warm Ways Inc.’s balance sheet at January 1, 2014, shows:
Preferred stock, $100 par value, 10% dividend,
 50,000 shares issued and outstanding 
$  5,000,000
Common stock, $6 par value, 1 million shares issued
 and outstanding 
6,000,000
Paid-in capital in excess of par 
119,000,000
Retained earnings 
50,000,000
 Total stockholders’ equity 
$180,000,000
Warm Ways reported net income of $9,250,000 for 2014, declared and paid the preferred 
stock cash dividend, and declared and paid a $0.25 per share cash dividend on 1 million 
shares of common stock. The company also declared and distributed a 10% stock dividend on 
its common shares. When the stock dividend was declared, 1 million common shares were 
outstanding, and the market price of common stock was $135 per share.
Required:
1. Prepare journal entries to record the three dividend “events” that took place during 2014.
2. If the company’s common stock was valued at $135 per share when the stock dividend was 
declared, what would the stock price be just after the dividend shares were distributed?
P15-4
Determining effect of splits 
and dividends on retained 
earnings (LO 5)
It’s July 1, 2015, and the market price of Warm Ways’ common stock (Problem P15-3) is 
$175 per share. There are 1.1 million common shares outstanding, and the Retained earnings 
account shows a balance of $45,000,000. Management wants to declare and pay a 20% com-
mon stock dividend, but this would mean halting the company’s cash dividend payments 
because a 20% stock dividend would cause retained earnings to fall by $38,500,000 (that is, 
20% 3 1.1 million shares 3 $175 per share). This would leave a balance of only $6,500,000, 
far below the $25,000,000 minimum required for cash dividends as specified in the company’s 
loan agreement. It would take several years to build up retained earnings so that Warm Ways 
could again pay cash dividends.
 
The chief financial officer of the company has proposed two ways to distribute common 
shares and still manage to pay cash dividends:
• Option A: Split the stock 12 for 10.
• Option B: Increase the size of the stock dividend from 20% to 30%, and record the share 
distribution as a stock split.
Required:
1. How will these two approaches affect the company’s retained earnings?
2. As a common stockholder, would you prefer a 20% stock dividend, a 12-for-10 stock 
split, or a 30% stock dividend? Why?
AICPA
ADAPTED
P15-5
Analyzing convertible 
debt (LO 8)
On January 1, 2012, when its $30 par-value common stock was selling for $80 per share, 
 Gierach Corporation issued $10 million of 4% convertible debentures due in 10 years. The 
conversion option allowed the holder of each $1,000 bond to convert the bond into five shares 
of the company’s $30 par-value common stock. Cash settlement upon conversion is not permit-
ted. The debentures were issued for $10 million. Without the conversion feature, the bonds 
would have been issued for $8.5 million.
 
On January 1, 2014, the company’s $30 par-value common stock was split three for one. 
On January 1, 2015, when the company’s $10 par-value common stock was selling for $90 per 
share, holders of 40% of the convertible debentures exercised their conversion options.

938 
CHAPTER 15
Financial Reporting for Owners’ Equity
Required:
1. Following U.S. GAAP, prepare a journal entry to record the original issuance of the 
 convertible debentures.
2. How much interest expense would the company recognize on the convertible debentures 
in 2012?
3. Prepare a journal entry to record the exercise of the conversion option.
4. Why do many companies use the book value method to record debt conversions?
Cash-settled convertible 
debt (LO 8)
P15-6
Avnext Industries issues 10-year convertible notes at par for $10,000 on December 31, 2014. 
The notes mature in 10 years and are convertible into 400 shares of Avnext common stock at 
any time after January 1, 2019. Interest is paid annually at the end of each year at an interest 
rate of 2% of the principal amount (i.e., $200 per year). If investors exercise the conversion 
feature, Avnext either can deliver shares of common stock or make a cash payment equal to 
the market value of those shares. In the absence of the conversion feature, investors would 
have demanded a 6% return on an Avnext loan of similar terms.
Required:
[A] Using the bifurcation approach required by U.S. GAAP in this setting:
1. What are the fair values of the debt and equity components of Avnext’s convertible notes? 
Round to the nearest dollar.
2. What journal entry would Avnext make to record the issuance of the convertible notes?
3. How much interest expense would Avnext recognize in 2015? In 2016?
4. What would be the carrying value of the convertible notes as of December 31, 2016?
5. Suppose investors opt to exercise the conversion feature on January 1, 2020, when Avnext 
common stock is trading at $30 per share. What is the cash settlement amount, and how 
much of this amount should be assigned to repurchasing the debt versus settlement of the 
conversion (equity) option? Round to the nearest dollar and assume that Avnext’s borrow-
ing cost at the conversion date is 5%.
6. What journal entry would Avnext make to record cash-settlement conversion of the notes 
on January 1, 2020?
[B] Using U.S. GAAP for traditional convertible debt instruments:
1. What journal entry would Avnext make to record issuance of the convertible notes?
2. How much interest expense would Avnext recognize in 2015? In 2016?
3. What would be the carrying value of the convertible notes as of December 31, 2016?
4. Suppose investors opt to exercise the conversion feature on January 1, 2020, when Avnext 
common stock is trading at $30 per share. What journal entry would Avnext make to re-
cord cash-settlement conversion of the notes on January 1, 2020? Round to the nearest 
dollar and assume that Avnext’s borrowing cost at the conversion date is 5%.
Computing EPS (LO 6)
P15-7
The Shareholders’ Equity section of Holiday Roads Company’s balance sheet shows:
 
December 31, 
December 31,
 
2013 
2014
Preferred stock, $200 par value, 5% dividend,
 20,000 shares issued and outstanding 
$ 4,000,000 
$ 4,000,000
Common stock, $2 par value 
400,000 
520,000
Paid-in capital in excess of par 
19,600,000 
26,800,000
Retained earnings 
3,000,000 
4,000,000
 Total stockholders’ equity 
$27,000,000 
$35,320,000

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
939
 
Net income for 2014 was $1,700,000, preferred stock dividends were $200,000, and com-
mon stock dividends were $500,000. The company issued 60,000 shares of common stock on 
July 1, 2014.
Required:
1. What is the company’s basic EPS for 2014?
2. Suppose that Holiday Roads also had $500,000 of 10% convertible subordinated deben-
tures outstanding at the beginning and end of 2014. Each $1,000 bond is convertible into 
100 shares of common stock, cash settlement is not permitted, and the company’s income 
tax rate is 34%. What is the company’s diluted EPS for 2014?
3. What other types of securities in addition to convertible debt can affect the calculation of 
diluted EPS?
4. During 2013, Holiday Roads Company granted options to employees that allowed them to 
buy 50,000 shares at an exercise price of $10 per share, which was also the market price 
per share on the grant date. The options may be exercised beginning in 2016. The average 
market price per share of the company’s shares in 2014 was $23. Building on requirement 
2, what would be the company’s diluted EPS for 2014 in light of both the convertible 
 subordinated debentures and the employee stock options?
P15-8
Setting limits on 
 dividends (LO 4)
Tredegar Industries Inc. makes plastic films and molded plastic products and soft alloy alumi-
num extrusions, distributes business applications software, and provides proprietary chemis-
try services. A note to the company’s annual report states:
While certain of the Company’s subsidiaries’ debt facilities are outstanding, the Company’s subsidiaries 
must meet specific financial tests on an ongoing basis, which are customary for these types of facilities. 
Except as provided by applicable corporate law, there are no restrictions on the Company’s ability to pay 
dividends from retained earnings. However, the payment of cash dividends by the Company’s subsidiar-
ies to the Company are subject to certain restrictions under the terms of various agreements covering the 
Company’s subsidiaries’ long-term debt. Toledo, PDI, and Bal Crank [three of Tredegar’s subsidiaries] 
are not permitted under each subsidiary’s respective debt agreements to pay cash dividends. Assuming 
certain financial covenants are met, General Chemical [another subsidiary] is permitted to pay cash divi-
dends of up to 50% of the net income  (subject to certain adjustments) of General Chemical for the 
 applicable period. Consequently, the Company’s ability to pay cash dividends on Common Stock may 
effectively be limited by such agreements. At [year end] approximately $51,000 was available for divi-
dend payments in accordance with these covenants.
 
The company’s financial statements showed net income of $45,035, dividends of $3,176, 
and year-end retained earnings of $99,027. (All dollar amounts here and in the note are in 
thousands.)
Required:
1. Explain why and how lenders restrict a subsidiary’s ability to pay dividends to the parent 
corporation.
2. What was Tredegar’s dividend payout ratio?
3. What is the maximum amount of dividends the company could have paid to common 
stockholders in the year without violating the terms of its lending agreements?
4. Suppose that Tredegar’s loan agreements contained no restrictions on dividend payments 
by subsidiaries or the parent company. What is the maximum legal amount of dividends 
the company could have paid to common stockholders?
5. Do contractual or legal restrictions on dividend payments seem to be influencing the 
company’s dividend policy?

940 
CHAPTER 15
Financial Reporting for Owners’ Equity
Repurchasing stock and 
 calculating EPS (LO 2)
P15-9
Central Sprinkler Corporation manufactures and sells automatic fire sprinkler heads and 
valves, and it distributes components for automatic sprinkler systems. Selected information 
from the company’s 2014 financial statements show:
 
Years Ended October 31,
($ in thousands except per share amounts) 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014
Earnings available to common 
$2,376 
$4,018 
$8,458 
$3,763
Average common shares outstanding 
4,752 
5,023 
3,383 
3,330
EPS 
$  0.50 
$  0.80 
$  2.50 
$ 1.13
In late December 2012, Central Sprinkler bought back 1,237,000 shares of common stock for 
$11,750,000.
Required:
1. What would EPS have been in 2013 and 2014 had the company not repurchased its com-
mon shares? Assume the stock buyback occurred on December 31, 2012, and notice that 
the company has an October 31 fiscal year-end.
2. Compare the company’s profit performance in 2014 to earlier years, and comment on this 
comparison.
3. The stock buyback isn’t the only reason that average common shares declined from 2012 
to 2013. What else do you think could have contributed to this decline in average com-
mon shares?
Preferred stock and credit 
analysis (LO 3)
P15-10
AT&T Wireless Services was once one of the largest wireless communication—think “cell 
phones”—service providers in the United States. Information from its annual report to share-
holders follows:
 
December 31
($ in millions) 
Year 2 
Year 1
Long-term debt 
$  6,705 
$  2,547
Preferred stock 
7,644 
3,000
Common stockholders’ equity 
19,281 
21,887
 Total stockholders’ equity 
$26,925 
$24,887
Net income before interest and taxes 
$972 
$771
Interest expense 
$386 
$ 85
Long-term debt/total equity 
0.25 
0.10
Times interest earned 
2.52 
9.07
The company’s (nonredeemable) preferred stock pays dividends at the rate of 8% annually.
Required:
1. Suppose that the increase in the preferred stock account was due to the issuance of new 
preferred shares at par on January 1, Year 2. What journal entry would the company make 
on the date to record the new preferred stock?
2. What journal entry would the company make to record preferred dividends for Year 2 and 
for Year 1?
3. Suppose that AT&T Wireless had issued 8% debt (at par) rather than any preferred stock. 
What general journal entry would the company make to record interest on the debt for 
Year 2 and for Year 1?
4. Compute the company’s long-term debt-to-total-equity ratio and its interest coverage ratio 
for Year 2 and Year 1 as if AT&T Wireless had issued 8% debt rather than preferred stock.
 (Continued)

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
941
5. Lenders generally do not restrict a company’s ability to raise more equity capital. That’s 
because the dollars raised from selling stock provide a cash cushion that protects the 
lender’s debt claim. Under what conditions might lenders want to limit a company’s 
 ability to issue preferred stock?
6. How would the preferred stock be shown on the company’s balance sheet if the shares 
contained a mandatory redemption feature?
P15-11
Calculating earnings per 
share (LO 6)
Hanigan Manufacturing had 1,800,000 shares of common stock outstanding as of January 1, 
2014, and 900,000 shares of 10% noncumulative (nonconvertible) preferred stock outstand-
ing. The following events occurred during 2014:
• On February 28, Hanigan sold 60,000 common shares.
• On May 15, Hanigan issued a 4% common stock dividend and paid cash dividends of 
$1,200,000 to common shareholders and $225,000 to preferred stockholders.
• On July 1, Hanigan repurchased and retired 6,000 common shares.
• On September 1, Hanigan issued $1,000,000 of convertible 10% bonds for par value. Each 
$1,000 bond certificate is convertible into 40 common shares. Cash settlement is not 
permitted.
• Under the terms of a separation agreement with its founder and former owner, Mike 
 Hanigan, the company is obligated to issue Mr. Hanigan an additional 60,000  common 
shares if 2014 net income exceeds $5 million. No shares were issued as of  December 31, 
2014.
• Hanigan’s net income for 2014 was $6,300,000 and the income tax rate was 40%.
Required:
Compute Hanigan Manufacturing’s basic and diluted earnings per share for 2014.
P15-12
Calculating EPS when the 
capital structure is 
 complex (LO 6)
Kadri Corporation reported basic EPS of $3.00 and diluted EPS of $2.40 for 2014. Its EPS 
calculations follow:
 
EPS Calculation for 2014
 
Numerator 
Denominator
Net income 
$3,500,000
Less dividend on 10% convertible preferred stock 
(500,000)
Weighted-average common shares outstanding 
 
1,000,000
 Basic EPS 5 $3.00 
$3,000,000 
1,000,000
Stock option dilution 
— 
33,334
Series A convertible debt dilution 
240,000 
250,000
Series B convertible debt dilution 
300,000 
200,000
10% Convertible preferred stock dilution 
500,000 
200,000
 Diluted EPS 5 $2.40 
$4,040,000 
1,683,334
 
Kadri issued the convertible preferred stock at the beginning of 2014 and the Series A and 
 Series B convertible debt at par in late 2013. No stock options were granted or exercised 
in 2014.
Required:
1. The convertible preferred stock has a $100 par value per share. How many preferred 
shares were issued, and what was the common stock conversion rate for each preferred 
share?

942 
CHAPTER 15
Financial Reporting for Owners’ Equity
2. The Series B convertible debt pays interest at 10% annually, and Kadri’s marginal income 
tax rate is 40%. How much Series B debt was outstanding, and what is the common stock 
conversion rate for each $1,000 face Series B bond?
3. What are the interest rate and common stock conversion rate for the $5 million par of 
 Series A debt?
4. During the year, 50,000 shares were under option, and the average exercise price was $20 per 
share. What was the average market price of the company’s common stock during 2014?
5. Explain why Series A debt carries a lower interest rate than Series B debt although both 
were issued at par on the same day in 2013.
P15-13
Analyzing shareholders’ 
 equity (LO 5)
Trask Corporation, a public company whose shares are traded in the over-the-counter market, 
had the following shareholders’ equity account balances at December 31, 2013:
Common stock 
$ 7,875,000
Additional paid-in capital 
15,750,000
Retained earnings 
16,445,000
Treasury common stock 
750,000
 
Transactions during 2014 and other information relating to the shareholders’ equity 
 accounts follow:
• As of January 1, 2014, Trask had 4,000,000 authorized shares of $5 par-value common 
stock; it had issued 1,575,000 shares of which 75,000 were held in treasury.
• On January 21, 2014, Trask issued 50,000 shares of $100 par value, 6% cumulative 
 preferred stock at par in exchange for all of Rover Company’s assets and liabilities. 
On that date, the net carrying amount of Rover’s assets and liabilities equaled their 
fair values.
• On January 22, 2014, Rover distributed the Trask shares to its stockholders in a 
 complete liquidation and dissolution of Rover. Trask had 150,000 authorized shares 
of  preferred stock.
• On February 17, 2014, Trask formally retired 25,000 of 75,000 treasury common stock 
shares. The shares were originally issued at $15 per share and had been acquired on 
 September 25, 2013, for $10 per share.
• Trask owned 15,000 shares of Harbor Inc. common stock purchased in 2013 for 
$600,000. The Harbor stock shares were trading securities. On March 5, 2014, Trask 
 declared a property dividend of one share of Harbor common stock for every 100 shares 
of Trask common stock held by a shareholder of record on April 16, 2014. Harbor stock’s 
market price on March 5, 2014, was $60 per share. The property dividend was distributed 
on April 29, 2014.
• On January 2, 2012, Trask granted stock options to employees to purchase 200,000 shares 
of the company’s common stock at $12 per share, which was also the market price on that 
date. The options had a grant date fair value of $1.50 per share and are exercisable within 
a three-year period, beginning January 2, 2014. On June 1, 2014, employees exercised 
150,000 options when the stock’s market value was $25 per share. Trask issued new 
shares to settle the transaction.
• On October 27, 2014, Trask declared a two-for-one stock split on its common stock and 
reduced the per share par value accordingly. Trask shareholders of record on August 2, 
2014, received one additional share of Trask common stock for each share of Trask 
 common stock held. The laws of Trask’s state of incorporation protect treasury stock 
from dilution.
AICPA
ADAPTED

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
943
• On December 12, 2014, Trask declared the yearly cash dividend on preferred stock, 
 payable on January 11, 2015, to shareholders of record on December 31, 2014.
• On January 16, 2015, before the accounting records were closed for 2014, Trask learned 
that depreciation expense had been understated by $350,000 for the year ended Decem-
ber 31, 2013. The after-tax effect on 2013 net income was $245,000. The appropriate 
 correcting entry was recorded on the same day.
 
Net income for 2014 was $2,400,000.
Required:
1. Prepare Trask’s statement of retained earnings for the year ended December 31, 2014.
2. Prepare the shareholders’ equity section of Trask’s balance sheet at December 31, 2014.
3. Compute the book value per share of common stock at December 31, 2014.
P15-14
Stockholders’ equity 
(LO 5)
Nike Inc. is one of the world’s largest sellers of athletic footwear and athletic apparel. The 
following information is from Nike’s annual report.
Note 7: Redeemable Preferred Stock
NIAC is the sole owner of the Company’s authorized Redeemable Preferred Stock, $1 par value, which 
is redeemable at the option of NIAC or the Company at par value aggregating $0.3 million.
Note 8: Common Stock
The authorized number of shares of Class A Common Stock, no par value, and Class B Common Stock, 
no par value, are 110 million and 350 million, respectively. Each share of Class A Common Stock 
is convertible into one share of Class B Common Stock. Voting rights of Class B Common Stock are 
limited in certain circumstances with respect to the election of directors.
From the Balance Sheet
Class A Convertible Common Stock—98.1 and 99.1 million shares outstanding at May 31, Year 3 and 
Year 2, respectively. Class B Common Stock—168.0 and 169.5 million shares outstanding at May 31, 
Year 3 and Year 2, respectively.
From the Statement of Cash Flow
 
Years Ended May 31
($ in millions) 
Year 3 
Year 2 
Year 1
Cash provided by operations:
 Net earnings 
$  663.3 
$ 589.7 
$ 579.1
 Adjustments 
417.2 
66.8 
120.5
 Net cash provided by operating activities 
$1,080.5 
$ 656.5 
$ 699.6
Cash provided (used) by investing activities: 
$ (302.8) 
$(342.3) 
$(440.0)
Cash used by financing activities:
 Proceeds from long-term debt issuance 
$  329.9 
$      0.0 
$ 505.1
 Reductions in long-term debt 
(511.8) 
(119.2) 
(1.7)
 Proceeds from exercise of stock options 
59.5 
56.0 
23.9
 Repurchase of stock 
(226.9) 
(157.0) 
(646.3)
 Dividends—common and preferred 
(128.9) 
(129.7) 
(133.1)
Net cash provided (used) by financing activities 
$ (478.2) 
$(349.9) 
$(252.1)
Required: Part A
1. How many shares of redeemable preferred stock were outstanding on May 31, Year 3? 
What is the par value of each share of preferred stock?

944 
CHAPTER 15
Financial Reporting for Owners’ Equity
2. Suppose that Nike had sold 10,000 shares of preferred stock for $25 per share on June 1, 
Year 3. Prepare the journal entry to record this sale of preferred stock.
3. Assume the preferred stock described in requirement 2 pays a $0.10 per share annual 
 dividend on May 15 each year. Prepare the journal entry to record the dividend payment 
on May 15, Year 3.
4. How many shares of common stock were outstanding on May 31, Year 3?
5. Explain why the number of shares outstanding might differ from the number of shares 
 authorized or the number issued.
6. Why do some companies issue two classes of common stock?
7. Did Nike issue any common stock in the year ended May 31, Year 3? Why?
Required: Part B
Ignore your answers to all of Part A; instead assume the following hypothetical situation:
• Nike had 14,750,000 shares outstanding at the end of May Year 3. On this date, the 
 balance in (a) the Common stock account was $147,500, (b) the Additional-paid-in capital 
account was $2,282,000, and (c) the Retained earnings account was $226,069,000.
• All cash dividends are paid in the year they are declared. Cash dividends in millions were 
$14.080, $240.830, and $0 in Year 6, Year 5, and Year 4, respectively.
• Net income in millions was $50.059, $49.589, and $45.080 for Year 6, Year 5, and Year 4, 
respectively.
• During the year ended May 31, Year 5, the company issued 17,250,000 common shares to 
the public as a stock dividend.
 
Determine the balances of Common stock, Additional paid-in capital, and Retained 
 earnings accounts for the years ended May 31, Year 4, Year 5, and Year 6, respectively.
Stock option accounting: 
Transitioning to current 
GAAP (LO 6)
P15-15
The following excerpt is from Ball Corporation’s 2006 annual report.
Effective January 1, 2006, the company adopted SFAS No. 123 (revised 2004), “Share-Based Pay-
ment,” and elected to use the . . . Black–Scholes valuation model. Tax benefits associated with option 
exercises are reported in financing activities in the consolidated statements of cash flows beginning in 
2006. Prior to January 1, 2006, expense related to stock options was calculated using the intrinsic value 
method under the guidelines of Accounting Principles Board (APB) Opinion No. 25, and has therefore 
not been included in the consolidated statements of earnings in 2005 and 2004. Ball’s earnings as re-
ported included after-tax stock-based compensation of $6.6 million and $12.5 million for the years 
ended December 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively. If the fair value based method had been used, after-
tax stock-based compensation would have been $8.7 million in 2005 and $9.3 million in 2004. . . . The 
adoption of SFAS No. 123 (revised 2004) resulted in higher stock-based compensation in 2006 of 
$6.3 million compared to 2005.
Required:
1. Explain why Ball recorded $6.6 million of stock-based compensation expense in 2005 
 although the company was using the intrinsic value method.
2. What was the approximate fair value of the 2005 and 2004 stock option awards?
3. Some firms reduced the value of their 2006 stock option awards compared to earlier years or 
curtailed their use of stock options entirely. What is the accounting reason for these actions?
4. Does it appear that Ball reduced the value of its 2006 stock option awards?
5. Explain where Ball reported the cash flow statement item “tax benefits associated with 
option exercises” prior to the beginning of 2006.

 
Cases 
945
CASES
Groupe Casino is a French multinational company that operates more than 9,000 multiformat 
retail stores—hypermarkets, supermarkets, discount stores, convenience stores, and  restaurants—
throughout the world. In January 2005, Casino issued €600 million of notes at a price of 101, 
meaning that the company raised €606 million cash by issuing these securities. Details of the 
note offering are described in C11-3 in Chapter 11.
Required:
• Casino management treated the notes as equity instruments for financial reporting purposes 
in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). What specific IFRS 
guidance helps accountants and auditors distinguish between liabilities and equities?
• Do you concur with management’s decision to treat the notes as equity instruments? Why?
• Suppose the notes were issued on January 1, 2005, that the first year’s floating interest 
rate is 5%, and that interest is to be paid on December 31 of each year. Prepare the journal 
entries Casino would use to record (a) issuance of the notes on January 1, 2005; (b) interest 
expense for the year; and (c) the cash interest payment on December 31, 2005. Income 
tax considerations may be ignored.
• How would the Casino notes be treated under U.S. GAAP?
C15-1
Groupe Casino: Determine 
whether it is debt or 
 equity (LO 5)
P15-16
Distinguishing liabilities from 
equities (LO 3)
The following excerpts are taken from the annual report of J. Crew Group, Inc.
At January 29, 2005 and January 28, 2006, 92,800 shares of Series A preferred stock and 32,500 shares 
of Series B preferred stock were issued and outstanding. Dividends compound to the extent not paid in 
cash. . . . On October 17, 2009, Group is required to redeem the Series B preferred stock and to pay all 
accumulated but unpaid dividends on the Series A preferred stock.
 
[Under current GAAP, the company is required to classify as] long-term debt the liquidation value 
of Group Series B preferred stock and the related accumulated and unpaid dividends and the accumu-
lated and unpaid dividends related to the Series A preferred stock since these amounts are required to 
be redeemed in October 2009. The preferred dividends related to . . . the Series B preferred stock and 
to the accumulated and unpaid dividends of the Series A and Series B preferred stock . . . are included 
in interest expense. The Series A preferred stock is only redeemable in certain circumstances (includ-
ing a change in control at Group) and does not qualify for classification under SFAS No. 150. Accord-
ingly, the dividends related to the Series A preferred stock are deducted from stockholders’ deficit. 
(Edited for brevity.)
Required:
1. Explain why it makes sense that J. Crew Group is required to include its Series B preferred 
stock among long-term debt on the balance sheet.
2. Where on J. Crew’s balance sheet was this debt shown before the current GAAP guidance 
on mandatorily redeemable preferred stock were issued?
3. Explain why it makes sense to include the dividends paid on Series B preferred stock as 
part of interest expense.
4. Where is the Series A preferred stock shown on the company’s balance sheet?
5. Why does J. Crew use a different accounting treatment for Series A preferred stock and 
Series B preferred?
6. What impact (if any) has current GAAP guidance had on the popularity of mandatorily 
redeemable preferred stock as a corporate financing device?

946 
CHAPTER 15
Financial Reporting for Owners’ Equity
C15-2
Employee stock option 
 accounting at Starbucks 
 Corporation (LO 7)
Starbucks Corp., the passionate purveyors of coffee and everything else that goes with a full 
and rewarding coffeehouse experience, included the following table in its 2009 annual report:
Total stock based compensation and ESPP expense recognized in the consolidated financial statements 
 
Fiscal Year Ended
(in millions) 
Sep 27, 2009 
Sep 28, 2008 
Sep 30, 2007
 Stock option expense 
$61.6 
$57.6 
$ 92.3
 RSU expense 
16.6 
5.6 
—
 ESPP expense 
5.0 
11.8 
11.6
Total stock-based compensation expense on the 
 consolidated statements of earnings 
$83.2 
$75.0 
$103.9
Total related tax benefit 
$29.3 
$24.0 
$ 35.3
Starbucks maintains several share-based compensation plans that permit the company to grant 
employee stock options, restricted stock, and restricted stock “units” or RSUs. Starbucks also 
has an employee stock purchase plan (“ESPP”) that allows participating employees to buy 
shares at a discounted price. At some companies, the discount can be as much as 15% lower 
than the prevailing market price.
 
Stock options to purchase Starbucks’ common shares are granted at an exercise price equal 
to the market price of the stock on the date of grant. Most options become exercisable in four 
equal installments beginning one year from the date of the grant and expire 10 years from the 
date of grant.
 
Suppose Starbucks issues 100,000 employee stock options on January 1, 2013, and that 
one-fourth of the options vest in each of the next four years, beginning on December 31, 2013. 
For financial reporting purposes, the company elects to separate the total award into four 
groups (or tranches) according to the year in which each vests. Starbucks then measures the 
compensation cost for each vesting date tranche as if it was a separate award. The following 
table provides details about each vesting tranche:
Vesting Date 
Shares Vesting 
Fair Value per Option
Dec. 31, 2013 
25,000 
$2.00
Dec. 31, 2014 
25,000 
$3.20
Dec. 31, 2015 
25,000 
$4.80
Dec. 31, 2016 
25,000 
$7.00
Required:
1. Each tranche has the same exercise price—the market price of the stock on the grant date, 
or $23 on January 1, 2013. Explain why the option fair value increases with the vesting date.
2. Consider only the first option tranche vesting on December 31, 2013, and suppose that 
the price of Starbucks’ common stock is $40 on that date. Determine the compensation 
expense that Starbucks would record in 2013 for this first option tranche. No stock 
 options are exercised by employees that year.
3. Suppose that the price of Starbucks’ common stock falls to $35 as of December 31, 2014. 
Considering only the first two option tranches, determine the compensation expense that 
Starbucks would record in 2014. No stock options are exercised by employees that year.
4. At the beginning of 2015, employees exercise 10,000 of the 2013 options. Employees hand 
over the 10,000 options along with $23 per option—the exercise price—and receive from the 

 
Cases 
947
company an equal number of shares. The price of Starbucks’ common stock is $35 per share 
on the exercise date. Prepare the journal entry Starbucks will use to record this transaction.
5. Back in 2009, Starbucks’ shareholders approved a management proposal to allow for a 
one-time stock option exchange program, designed to provide employees an opportunity 
to exchange certain outstanding but underwater stock options for a lesser amount of new 
options granted with lower exercise prices. Under this proposal, employees could ex-
change options granted with an exercise price greater than $19 and receive new options 
with an exercise price of about $15. A total of 14.3 million stock options were tendered 
by employees and 4.7 million of new stock options were granted. According to the com-
pany’s financial statement note: “No incremental stock option expense was recognized 
for the exchange because the fair value of the new options, using standard employee stock 
option valuation techniques, was approximately equal to the fair value of the surrendered 
options they replaced.” Explain why a company might offer employees the opportunity to 
exchange underwater stock options for new options with a lower exercise price.
6. Explain how management determined that only 4.7 million of new options would be 
granted in exchange for the 14.3 million options tendered. In other words, why might 
management be reluctant to grant 10.0 million of the new options?
C15-3
RN-Nabisco Group: 
 Calculating dividends 
and agency costs (LO 4)
Several years ago, RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation (Holdings) offered for sale 93 million 
shares of its subsidiary RN-Nabisco Group. According to the prospectus, the estimated initial 
public offering price for RN-Nabisco common stock would be in the range of $17 to $19 per 
share. Holdings hoped to raise about $1.7 billion from the stock offering and to use the pro-
ceeds to reduce its debt burden. But investors weren’t buying—at least not at the prospectus 
price—and Holdings scuttled the stock offer 23 days after it was first announced.
 
At the time, the Nabisco Group was one of the world’s leading packaged foods businesses 
with sales of more than $6.7 billion. The Group’s Nabisco Biscuit Division was the largest 
cookie and cracker manufacturer and marketer in the United States with eight of the nine top-
selling brands.
 
Holdings was composed of the Nabisco Group and the Reynolds Group, which included 
the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, the second largest manufacturer of cigarettes. The 
Reynolds Group’s net sales as a percentage of Holdings’ total consolidated net sales were 
57%. Holdings was formed in 1989 when its predecessor company—RJR Nabisco, Inc. 
(RJRN)—was taken private in a leveraged buyout transaction. Holdings was taken public 
again in 1991 with the buyout group retaining 49% of Holdings’ stock.
 
The plan at the time was to split off Nabisco Group from Reynolds Group and thereby 
improve the company’s share price. Holdings had seen its stock price fall 36% that year for 
two reasons: R.J. Reynolds’ earnings had been hurt by a brutal cigarette price war that began 
in early April, and investors had become increasingly concerned about the uncertainty over 
tobacco liability.
The Proposal
The Nabisco stock offered to the public would initially represent 25% of the equity of the 
Nabisco Group. The Reynolds Group would retain the balance of Nabisco’s equity. Each out-
standing share of common stock of Holdings would be redesignated into a common share of 
Reynolds stock, which was intended to reflect separately the performance of the Reynolds 
Group as well as the retained interest of the Reynolds Group in the Nabisco Group.

948 
CHAPTER 15
Financial Reporting for Owners’ Equity
 
The offering prospectus described the company’s dividend policy as:
The Board of Directors of Holdings currently intends to pay regular quarterly dividends on the Nabisco 
Stock in an aggregate annual amount equal to approximately 45% of the prior year’s earnings of Hold-
ings attributable to the outstanding Nabisco Stock. Consistent with this policy, Holdings currently 
 intends to pay . . . an initial regular quarterly dividend of $0.13 per share of Nabisco Stock. While the 
Board of  Directors does not currently intend to change such initial quarterly dividend rate or dividend 
policy, it  reserves the right to do so at any time and from time to time. Under the Certificate of Incor-
poration and Delaware law, the Board of Directors is not required to pay dividends in accordance with 
such policy.
 
Dividends on the Nabisco Stock are limited by the Certificate of Incorporation and will be payable 
when, as and if declared by the Board of Directors out of the lessor of (i) the Available Nabisco Dividend 
Amount and (ii) funds of Holdings legally available therefore. Payment of dividends on the Nabisco 
Stock is also subject to the prior payment of dividends on the outstanding shares of Preferred Stock of 
Holdings (and any new class or series of capital stock of Holdings with similar preferential dividend 
provisions) and to restrictions contained in the Credit Agreements and certain other debt instruments of 
RJRN. . . . The “Available Nabisco Dividend Amount” is similar to that amount that would be legally 
available for the payment of dividends on Nabisco Stock under Delaware law if the Nabisco Group were 
a separate company, and will be increased or decreased as appropriate by, among other things, Holdings 
Earnings Attributable to the Nabisco Group. “Holdings Earnings Attributable to the Nabisco Group,” for 
any period, means the net income or loss of the Nabisco Group during such period determined in ac-
cordance with generally accepted accounting principles (including income and expenses of Holdings 
allocated to the Nabisco Group on a substantially consistent basis). . . .
 
Holdings has never paid any cash dividends on shares of Common Stock. . . . The Board of Directors 
currently intends to pay future quarterly “pass-through” dividends on the Reynolds Stock with respect to 
the Reynolds Group’s Retained Interest in the Nabisco Group. Holdings currently intends to pay . . . an 
initial quarterly pass-through dividend of approximately $0.03 per share of Reynolds Stock. . . . Subject 
to [certain limitations], the Board of Directors would be able, in its sole discretion, to declare and pay 
dividends exclusively on the Nabisco Stock or exclusively on the Reynolds Stock, or on both, in equal or 
unequal amounts, notwithstanding the respective amount of funds available for dividends on each series, 
the amount of prior dividends declared on each series or any other factor.
Required:
As a potential investor in Nabisco Group stock, what agency problems do you face that are 
not present when you buy common stock in most other companies?
COLLABORATIVE LEARNING CASE
[A] Aon Corporation’s Mezzanine Preferred Stock
In its 2002 annual report to shareholders, Aon Corporation described its mandatorily redeem-
able preferred stock as follows:
In January 1997, Aon created Aon Capital A, a wholly-owned statutory business trust, for the purpose of 
issuing mandatorily redeemable preferred capital securities (Capital Securities). The sole asset of Aon 
Capital A is $726 million aggregate principal amount of Aon’s 8.205% Junior Subordinated Deferrable 
Interest Debentures due January 1, 2027.
 
Aon Capital A issued $800 million of 8.205% (mandatorily redeemable preferred) Capital Securities 
in January 1997. The Capital Securities are subject to mandatory redemption on January 1, 2027 or are 
redeemable in whole, but not in part, at the option of Aon upon the occurrence of certain events. . . . Dur-
ing 2002, approximately $98 million of the Capital Securities were repurchased on the open market for 
$87 million, excluding accrued interest. . . .
C15-4
Classifying as equity or debt 
(LO 3, 8)
Collaborative

 
Collaborative Learning Case 
949
 
Aon’s 2002 balance sheet showed the following amounts:
($ millions) Liabilities and Stockholders’ Equity 
2002 
2001
Insurance premiums payable 
$ 9,904 
$ 8,233
Insurance policy liabilities 
5,310 
4,990
General liabilities 
 General expenses 
2,012 
1,770
 Short-term borrowings 
117 
257
 Notes payable 
1,671 
1,694
 Other liabilities 
1,673 
1,071
Total Liabilities 
20,687 
18,015
Redeemable Preferred Stock 
50 
50
Mandatorily Redeemable Preferred Capital Securities 
702 
800
Total Common Stockholders’ Equity 
3,895 
3,465
Required:
1. Aon’s capital securities are forms of preferred stock. Assume that Aon Capital A (the 
trustee) issued the preferred shares on January 1, 1997, for $800 million cash, the same day 
that Aon Corporation issued $800 million of its junior debentures to the trust. Describe 
the cash flows associated with these two transactions—that is, explain who received 
cash and who gave up cash in each case.
2. One year later (on December 31, 1997), Aon Corporation must pay 8.205% interest to 
debt holders, and Aon Capital A must pay an 8.205% dividend to preferred stockholders. 
Describe the cash flows associated with each of these payments—that is, explain who 
 received cash, who gave up cash, and how much cash was exchanged.
3. Why did Aon Corporation create Aon Capital A?
4. For financial reporting purposes, Aon Corporation will issue consolidated financial state-
ments that include the activities of Aon Capital A. In addition, GAAP at the time did 
not require liability treatment of mandatorily redeemable preferred stock. How did 
Aon Corporation show its cash interest payment on December 31, 1997?
5. Why does Aon Corporation’s 2002 balance sheet show the Capital Securities in the 
 “mezzanine” section between total liabilities and stockholders’ equity?
6. Aon Corporation is an insurance company, so most of its liabilities relate to insurance 
policy premiums and policy liabilities. The company’s debt includes Short-term borrow-
ings and Notes payable. Compute Aon’s debt-to-equity ratio for 2002 assuming that the 
Capital Securities are treated as part of equity. Repeat the calculation, this time assuming 
that the Capital Securities are part of debt. Which debt-to-equity ratio provides the most 
accurate measure of the company’s true debt and equity position? Why?
[B] Cephalon Inc.’s Zero-Coupon, Zero Yield-to-Maturity Convertible Notes
Cephalon Inc. issued $750 million of zero-coupon convertible notes. Because the notes were 
issued at par, meaning that Cephalon received $750 million cash for the notes, they have a 
zero yield-to-maturity. Settlement in cash upon conversion is not permitted. Here is what 
Cephalon said about the notes:
We issued and sold in a private placement $750.0 million of Zero Coupon Convertible Subordinated 
Notes (the “Notes”). The interest rate on the Notes is zero and the Notes will not accrete interest. . . . The 
Notes are subordinate to our existing and future senior indebtedness. The Notes were issued in two 
tranches and have the following salient terms:
• $375.0 million of Zero Coupon Convertible Subordinated Notes due June 15, 2023 . . . are convertible 
prior to maturity, subject to certain conditions described below, into shares of our common stock at a 

950 
CHAPTER 15
Financial Reporting for Owners’ Equity
conversion price of $59.50 per share (a conversion rate of approximately 16.8067 shares per $1,000 
principal amount of notes). . . .
The Notes also contain a restricted convertibility feature that does not affect the conversion price of the 
notes but, instead, places restrictions on a holder’s ability to convert their notes into shares of our com-
mon stock (“conversion shares”). A holder may convert the notes if one or more of the following condi-
tions is satisfied:
• if, on the trading day prior to the date of surrender, the closing sale price of our common stock is 
more than 120% of the applicable conversion price per share (the “conversion price premium”);
• if we have called the notes for redemption;
• if the average trading prices of the notes for a specified period is less than 100% of the average of 
the conversion values of the notes during that period . . . ;
• if we make certain significant distributions to our holders of common stock or we enter into speci-
fied corporate transactions.
Because of the inclusion of the restricted convertibility feature of the Notes, our diluted income per com-
mon share calculation does not give effect to the dilution from the conversion of the Notes until our 
share price exceeds the 20% conversion price premium or one of the other conditions above is 
satisfied.
Source: 10-Q filing for Cephalon Inc., June 2003.
Required:
1. Cephalon is a U.S. Company. What accounting entry did Cephalon make to record the 
$750 million proceeds received from issuing the notes? Over the next year, what other 
 accounting entries (if any) related to these notes did the company make?
2. The notes mature in 2023, approximately 20 years from the date they were issued. At a 
6% rate of annual interest, the present value of $1,000 to be received 20 years from today 
is only $311.805. (You might want to verify this conclusion.) Suppose that Cephalon’s 
true cost of borrowing money is 6% per year. How much did note holders pay for 
 Cephalon debt, and how much did they pay for the option to convert the notes into 
shares of common stock?
3. Suppose that Cephalon separated the notes into debt and equity components and then 
 recorded each component separately. What accounting entry would the company make on 
the issue date to record the proceeds received from issuing the notes? Over the next year, 
what other accounting entries (if any) related to these notes would the company make?
4. Describe Cephalon’s financial reporting advantages of issuing zero-coupon, zero yield-
to-maturity notes rather than a more traditional debt instrument. Why aren’t the notes 
 included in the company’s computation of diluted earnings per share?
5. If Cephalon were to issue those same notes today, would it still be able to use the 
 accounting entries outlined in your answer to requirement 1?
[C] Avenet’s Cash Settled Convertible Debt
Avenet Inc., a U.S. company, is a global provider of electronic parts, enterprise computing and 
storage products, and supply chain and logistics services for the electronic components indus-
try. The company’s 2009 annual report contained the following note:
The Financial Accounting Standards Board issued authoritative guidance which requires the issuer of 
certain convertible debt instruments that may be settled in cash (or other assets) on conversion to sepa-
rately account for the debt and equity (conversion option) components of the instrument. The standard 
requires the convertible debt to be recognized at the present value of its cash flows discounted using the 
non-convertible debt borrowing rate at the date of issuance. The resulting debt discount from this present 
value calculation is to be recognized as the value of the equity component and recorded to additional 

 
Collaborative Learning Case 
951
paid in capital. The discounted convertible debt is then required to be accreted up to its face value and 
recorded as non-cash interest expense over the expected life of the convertible debt.
Required:
1. At the time this authoritative guidance was issued, Avenet had already issued $300 mil-
lion of 2% Convertible Senior Debentures due in 2034. The debentures were issued at par 
several years earlier, and thus Avenet received the full $300 million cash at the issue date. 
What journal entry did Avenet make at the time to record the convertible debt issuance? 
How much interest expense would Avenet record each year?
2. Under the approach now required by GAAP for cash-settled convertible debt, Avenet says 
the debt discount to be recorded at the issue date would have been $50 million and that 
the nonconvertible debt borrowing rate at the date of issuance would have been 7%. What 
journal entry would Avenet make to record the convertible debt issuance under current 
GAAP? How much interest expense would Avenet record during the first full year?
3. If Avenet followed IFRS guidance rather than U.S. GAAP, which of the two accounting 
treatments would the company have used at the issue date?
4. Avenet decided to extinguish its 2% Convertible Subordinate Debentures just prior to 
adopting the new U.S. GAAP guidance (described above) for cash settled convertible 
debt. Why did the company decide to retire the debt early?
mhhe.com/revsine6e
www
Remember to check the book’s companion website 
for additional study material.

This page intentionally left blank

16
Chapter
C
ompanies often buy shares of other companies. The reasons for such purchases 
vary. The investment may be a passive one, whereby the investing company does 
not influence the operating decisions of the investee, but rather makes the invest-
ment to be part of a portfolio that is 
managed to return a profit, or simply 
to earn a return on funds that might 
otherwise sit idle. When the invest-
ment is a passive one, the investor’s 
return comes from dividends and share 
price increases. The investor might 
instead take a more active role and 
seek to make improvements in the in-
vestee company’s operations through, for example, representation on the board. The 
investment may even be of a majority interest, which could facilitate physical integration 
of the two firms in an attempt to derive “synergies.” When a company has an active invest-
ment, the investor’s return is likely to come from increased operating profits and growth.
 
Share ownership generally entitles the investor-shareholder to vote at the company’s 
annual shareholder meetings or on special matters that might come up during the year. 
Shareholders vote to elect company 
directors; to approve the company’s 
outside auditor; and on proposed 
mergers and buyouts, compensation 
plan changes, and corporate charter 
amendments. Other shareholder pro-
posals often address environmental, 
social, and political issues such as 
prohibiting the company from doing business in unfavored countries. Because the num-
ber of votes a shareholder may cast depends on the number of shares held, to a large 
extent, the investor’s ownership proportion determines the degree to which it can influ-
ence the investee’s decisions; that is, whether the investment is active or passive.
 
Under existing GAAP, the method of accounting for intercorporate investments de-
pends on the degree to which the investor company is able to influence the operating deci-
sions of the investee. And, because the proportion of shares held by the investor is 
generally related to its degree of influence, that proportion is an important factor, although 
not an absolute deciding factor, in determining the accounting method to be used.
16
Intercorporate Equity Investments
953
Each share of common stock usually entitles the 
owner to one vote, but those who own preferred 
stock usually have no voting rights. There are 
exceptions. Some companies issue dual-class 
common stock (often denoted Common A and 
Common B) in which one class has voting rights 
and the other does not. In addition, some compa-
nies do issue voting preferred stock.
Synergies are ways in which two or more compa-
nies are more valuable when managed together 
than the sum of their values apart. Synergies may 
arise because of operating efficiencies that allow 
for more cost-effective production by, for exam-
ple, closing some plants and operating the re-
maining plants at a greater proportion of capacity. 
They may also arise because of opportunities to 
market or distribute products together.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you 
will understand:
 1. How an investor’s degree of 
 influence over an investee company 
determines the accounting treat-
ment of equity investments and why.
 2. How fair value accounting is applied 
to securities held in trading and 
 available-for-sale portfolios and how 
impairments are recorded.
 3. How to apply the equity method 
and the fair value option.
 4. What consolidated financial state-
ments are, how they are prepared 
under the acquisition method, and 
how noncontrolling interests are 
measured and reported.
 5. How goodwill arises and when it 
is considered impaired and written 
down.
 6. How business combinations were 
previously accounted for under the 
purchase and pooling of interests 
methods and how the method used 
to record an acquisition in the past 
affects financial analysis, even today.
 7. What variable interest entities 
(VIEs) are and when they must be 
consolidated.
 8. How operations reported in foreign 
currencies affect the preparation of 
financial statements in U.S. dollars.
 9. The major differences between IFRS 
and U.S. GAAP related to accounting 
for financial assets, consolidations, 
special purpose entities (SPEs) or 
VIEs, and joint ventures.
 10. How to account for investments in 
debt securities.

954 
CHAPTER 16
Intercorporate Equity Investments
Figure 16.1
FINANCIAL REPORTING 
 ALTERNATIVES FOR 
 INTERCORPORATE 
EQUITY INVESTMENTS 
* Presumptive ownership level. May be rebutted by evidence indicating level of influence is substantial even though 
ownership is below 20% or that level of influence is not substantial even though ownership exceeds 20%.
** For qualifying transactions completed through an exchange of shares.
Type of investment:
Level of influence:
Level of ownership:
Accounting:
Minority Passive
No substantial influence
Less than 20%*
Trading Securities: 
Fair value measurement 
with unrealized gains 
and losses reported in 
income statement
Available-for-sale 
 Securities: Fair value 
measurement with unre-
alized gains and losses 
reported in other com-
prehensive income
Minority Active
Substantial influence
20%–50%*
Equity method
Fair value option 
permitted
Controlling
Effective control
More than 50%
Full consolidation
Transactions 
 completed 2009 or 
later: Acquisition 
Method
Transactions 
 completed July 1, 
2001 through 2008: 
Purchase Method
Transactions 
 completed prior 
to July 1, 2001: 
 Purchase Method 
or Pooling of 
Interests**
 
We first discuss minority passive investments, in which the investor has no significant 
influence over the investee’s operating decisions and usually owns less than 20% of the 
investee’s voting shares. Then we consider minority active investments. In these cases, the 
investor does have influence over the investee, but not complete control. Ownership is 
typically between 20% and 50% of the voting shares. Then we analyze controlling invest-
ments, in which the investor holds more than 50% of the voting shares and therefore can 
unilaterally dictate policy, subject only to contractual and legal restrictions. We also con-
sider the special reporting problems created by subsidiaries in foreign countries and some 
of the financial analysis issues that arise because companies that have made acquisitions at 
different points in time may have recorded those transactions differently as the rules for 
merger and acquisition (M&A) accounting have changed. Although this chapter primarily 
focuses on equity investments, we consider the accounting for investments in debt in the 
appendix.
 
Figure 16.1 summarizes the types of equity investments firms can make and the accounting 
methods applied in each case. We now consider each of those methods.
MINORITY PASSIVE INVESTMENTS: 
FAIR VALUE ACCOUNTING
Owning a small portion of a public company does not convey the power to elect directors or 
influence the company’s operating policies, so it’s safe to assume such an investment is made 
for speculation—that is, the investor hopes to earn a return from dividends and share price 
appreciation. Existing GAAP presumes that ownership of less than 20% of another company’s 
voting shares constitutes a passive investment because an investment at such low levels 
 seldom provides the investor with an opportunity to influence the investee’s activities signifi-
cantly. As Figure 16.1 shows, minority passive investments are classified on the investor’s 

 
Minority Passive Investments: Fair Value Accounting  
955
books in one of two ways. The classification depends on whether the investment is part of an 
actively managed portfolio intended to profit from near-term price swings.1
 
Passive equity investments that the investor intends to hold for a short time and that are 
purchased in an attempt to profit from near-term price changes are classified as trading secu-
rities. They are generally part of an actively managed portfolio designed to achieve trading 
gains.2 Trading securities are generally shown on the balance sheet as current assets. Passive 
equity investments that are not trading securities are called available-for-sale securities. 
These securities may be classified as either current or noncurrent, depending on manage-
ment’s intended holding period.
 
Both trading and available-for-sale securities are initially recorded at cost—that is, the total 
amount paid for the securities, including any brokerage fees. At subsequent balance sheet dates, 
these investments are written up or down to their fair values, often referred to as marked-to-market. 
As discussed in Chapters 7 and 8, GAAP specifies three levels of fair value measurement. Level 1 
fair value measurements are determined from prices in actively traded markets. Level 2 holdings 
are valued based on observable inputs such as quoted market prices for similar 
securities. Level 3 items are illiquid assets that must be valued using internal mod-
els (e.g., discounted expected cash flows) using unobservable inputs. Firms are 
required to disclose the portion of their trading and available-for-sale portfolios 
that are valued using each of the three levels of measurements. The subsequent 
illustrations assume that Level 1 measurements (market prices in actively traded 
markets) are readily available for all securities.
Trading Securities
Market price increases of trading securities are debited to a Fair value adjustment account that 
is added to the Trading securities asset account (reported at original cost). Market price decreases 
are credited to the same Fair value adjustment account and deducted from the Trading securities 
asset account. The offsetting credit or debit is made to the Unrealized gain or loss on trading se-
curities account in the income statement. An example of fair value accounting for securities that 
Principal Financial Corporation purchased for short-term speculation follows:
Fair value accounting is required for market-
able securities under FASB ASC Topic 320: 
 Investments—Debt and Equity Securities, but is 
an option that a firm may elect for minority ac-
tive  (equity) investments and certain other types 
of assets and liabilities under ASC Topic 825: 
 Financial Instruments. For further discussion of 
fair value measurement, see Chapters 7 and 8.
Purchases and Sales of Trading Securities by Principal Financial 
Corporation
 
Fair Value at December 31,
 
Date 
Acquisition
Security 
Acquired 
 Cost 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017
Company A common 
1/1/14 
$ 10,000 
$11,000 
$13,000 
$ 14,000 
$12,000
Company B preferred 
1/1/14 
20,000 
18,000 
17,000 
18,000 
*
Company C common 
7/1/15 
30,000 
— 
26,000 
33,000 
34,000
Company D common 
7/1/15 
40,000 
— 
41,000 
37,000 
30,000
 
 
$100,000 
$29,000 
$97,000 
$102,000 
$76,000
* Company B preferred stock was sold on January 1, 2017, for $18,500.
1 The reporting rules for noncontrolling passive investments are contained in FASB ASC Topic 320: Investments—Debt and 
Equity Securities.
2 FASB ASC Paragraph 320-10-25-1: Investments—Debt and Equity Securities—Overall—Recognition—Classification of 
Investment Securities.

956 
CHAPTER 16
Intercorporate Equity Investments
 
Let’s first consider the entry to record the purchase of Company A common shares and 
Company B preferred shares on January 1, 2014:
DR Trading securities—Company A common  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $10,000
DR Trading securities—Company B preferred   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
20,000
   CR Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$30,000
Dividends on these securities are recorded as income when they are declared—if Company A 
declared dividends on December 15, 2014, and Principal’s share of those dividends was 
$1,000, then the entry would be:
DR Dividends receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $1,000
   CR Dividend income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$1,000
When Principal Financial receives the cash dividend in January 2015, it will debit Cash for 
$1,000 and credit the Dividends receivable account for $1,000.
 
The 2014 year-end fair value adjustment requires two steps:
Step 1: The total fair value of all trading securities is compared to the total cost of the 
 securities. Any difference becomes the target balance for the Fair value adjustment account.
Step 2: The Fair value adjustment account must be increased (or decreased) to equal its 
 target balance, and then an unrealized gain (or loss) for the same amount must be recorded.
Principal Financial’s 2014 year-end adjustment would be:
 
Step 1  
Step 2
 
Trading Securities Portfolio 
Fair Value Adjustment Account
 
Total fair value 
$  29,000 
$(1,000) 
Target balance (CR)
2 Total cost 
(30,000) 
{0{ 
Current balance
5 Difference 
$  (1,000) 
$(1,000) 
Adjustment needed (CR)
DR Unrealized holding loss on trading securities 
 
 (income statement) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $1,000
   CR Fair value adjustment—trading securities   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$1,000
Principal’s December 31, 2014, balance sheet reports the trading securities at $29,000, the net 
of the investment costs and the fair value adjustment account.
 
Now let’s look at the entry to record the purchase of Company C and Company D common 
stock on July 1, 2015:
DR Trading securities—Company C common  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $30,000
DR Trading securities—Company D common . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
40,000
 
CR Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$70,000
 
Following the two-step process, Principal Financial’s 2015 year-end fair value adjustment is:
 
Step 1  
Step 2
 
Trading Securities Portfolio 
 Fair Value Adjustment Account
 Total fair value 
$   97,000 
$(3,000) 
Target balance (CR)
2 Total cost 
(100,000) 
2 (1,000) 
Current balance (CR)
5 Difference 
$    (3,000) 
$(2,000) 
Adjustment needed (CR)

 
Minority Passive Investments: Fair Value Accounting  
957
 
This entry highlights why it is necessary to use the two-step procedure. Comparing the 
portfolio fair value to the cost of the underlying investments at each valuation date (as shown 
in Step 1), rather than comparing the total portfolio fair value at two successive dates, incor-
porates changes in the portfolio’s composition at successive valuation dates.
 
The fair value adjustment for 2016 is:
DR Unrealized holding loss on trading securities 
 
 (income statement)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $2,000
   CR Fair value adjustment—trading securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$2,000
DR Fair value adjustment—trading securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$5,000
   CR Unrealized holding gain on trading securities—
 
 (income statement). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$5,000
 
Step 1  
Step 2
 
Trading Securities Portfolio 
Fair Value Adjustment Account
 
Total fair value 
$ 102,000 
$ 2,000 
Target balance (DR)
2 Total cost 
(100,000) 
2 (3,000) 
Current balance (CR)
5 Difference 
$   2,000 
$ 5,000 
Adjustment needed (DR)
 Using the fair value on the last balance sheet date in computing 
the realized gain or loss avoids double counting any unrealized 
gain or loss recorded in previous periods’ income statements. 
 
When trading securities are sold, a realized gain or loss is recorded. The amount of the re-
alized gain or loss is the selling price of the securities minus the fair value of the securities on the 
last balance sheet date. The original cost of the securities sold and 
the related portion of the Fair value adjustment account are 
 removed from the accounts. This procedure is illustrated for the 
sale of Company B preferred stock on January 1, 2017:
Entry to Record the Sale of Company B Common Stock
DR Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$18,500
DR Fair value adjustment—trading securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,000*
   CR Realized gain on sale of trading securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$   500
   CR Trading securities—Company B preferred. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
20,000
* $20,000 cost 2 $18,000 fair value at 12/31/16 5 $2,000.
Computation of Realized Gain or Loss
Selling price of Company B preferred stock 
$ 18,500
Fair value at 12/31/16 balance sheet date 
(18,000)
 Realized gain 
$   500
 
After this entry is recorded, the balances in the Trading securities account and the Fair 
value adjustment account are:
Trading securities account at cost ($100,000 2 $20,000) 
$80,000
Fair value adjustment account ($2,000 DR balance 
 on 12/31/16 1 $2,000 DR reversal from sale) 
4,000
Trading securities at 12/31/16 fair value 
$84,000

958 
CHAPTER 16
Intercorporate Equity Investments
 
The fair value adjusting entry at the end of 2017 compares the target balance for the Fair 
value adjustment account to the  balance that will appear in this account after the sale of the 
Company B preferred stock, as in the following computation:
 
Step 1  
Step 2
 
Trading Securities Portfolio 
 Fair Value Adjustment Account
 Total fair value 
$ 76,000 
$(4,000) 
Target balance (CR)
2 Total cost 
(80,000) 
2 4,000 
Current balance (DR)
5 Difference 
$  (4,000) 
$(8,000) 
Adjustment needed (CR)
DR Unrealized holding loss on trading securities 
 
 (income statement) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$8,000
   CR Fair value adjustment—trading securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$8,000
 
After this entry is recorded, the trading securities section of Principal Financial’s balance 
sheet on December 31, 2017, would show trading securities at a $76,000 fair value, consisting 
of $80,000 of cost and a ($4,000) fair value adjustment.
Available-for-Sale Securities
Now assume that Principal Financial bought the securities described earlier because of their 
perceived longer-term investment potential—not for short-term speculation purposes. In 
this case, the securities would be classified as “available for sale.” The entries to record the 
purchase, dividend, and fair value adjustment for available-for-sale securities are similar to 
the entries for trading securities.
 
The only significant difference when treating investment securities as “available for sale” 
rather than “trading” is that the mark-to-market adjustment is not included in net income. 
Instead, the upward or downward adjustment to reflect fair value for available-for-sale se-
curities results in a direct credit or debit to a special owners’ equity account. These unreal-
ized gains or losses on available-for-sale securities are one of the Other comprehensive 
income components described in Chapter 2.
 
Returning to our example, the 2014 year-end downward fair value adjustment for Principal 
Financial’s available-for-sale portfolio is:
DR Other comprehensive income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$1,000
   CR Fair value adjustment—available-for-sale securities  . . . . . . . 
 
$1,000
 
As was the case with trading securities, a credit balance in the Fair value adjustment ac-
count is treated as a contra-asset account so that the net book value of the available-for-sale 
portfolio in the December 31, 2014, balance sheet is $29,000 ($30,000 cost 2 the $1,000 fair 
value adjustment). If fair values increase, as they did in 2016, the adjustment is effected by a 
debit to the Fair value adjustment account and a credit to Other comprehensive income.
 
GAAP excludes unrealized gains and losses on available-for-sale securities from net income 
because the securities are not held for active trading. Recording the debit or credit directly into 
owners’ equity—rather than through net income—alleviates the potential for earnings volatility 
unrelated to eventual investment performance. When available-for-sale securities are later sold, 
the cumulative unrealized gain or loss is realized and included in net income. The realized loss 
on sale of Company B preferred stock that would be recorded in 2017 would be $1,500, which 
is the difference between the selling price ($18,500) and the original cost of these shares 
($20,000). When gains and losses that arose in earlier periods are finally recognized in the 

 
Minority Passive Investments: Fair Value Accounting  
959
 income statement, the associated amounts are “recycled” out of Other comprehensive income. 
For example, the complete entry to record the sale of Company B preferred stock in 2017 is:
DR Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$18,500
DR Fair value adjustment—available-for-sale securities  . . . . . . . . . . . .  
2,000
DR Realized loss on sale of available-for-sale securities  . . . . . . . . . . . .  
1,500
   CR  Available-for-sale securities—
                    Company B preferred stock. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$20,000
   CR Other comprehensive income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
2,000
DR Deferred tax asset   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$350
   CR Income tax expense   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$350
DR Deferred tax asset   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$350
   CR Other comprehensive income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$350
After this entry is recorded (and the Other comprehensive income account is closed out to Ac-
cumulated other comprehensive income) there will be no balance in Accumulated other com-
prehensive income related to the investment in Company B preferred stock nor will there be 
any Fair value adjustment related to that investment. The entire loss of $1,500 is recognized in 
2017. In contrast, when we assumed the investment in Company B preferred stock was a trad-
ing security, the $1,500 loss was recognized across the entire holding period: ($2,000 loss in 
2014, $1,000 loss in 2015, $1,000 gain in 2016, $500 gain in 2017).
Income Tax Effects
Fair value adjustments have income tax consequences but, because under income tax law 
gains and losses are not recognized until a security is sold, the tax effects are deferred. Let’s 
consider the trading securities example first. In that example, Principal recorded a $1,000 loss 
in 2014. This loss reduced the company’s pre-tax income but had no effect on 2014 taxable 
income, resulting in a temporary difference. The effect of this loss is to reduce 2014 income 
tax expense by $350 (assuming a 35% marginal tax rate) and to create a deferred tax asset of 
the same amount. The deferred tax asset arises because there is a $1,000 future deductible 
amount as a result of the temporary difference. In journal entry form, the tax effect is:
Principal does not actually make this journal entry separately. Rather, it is part of the company’s 
overall tax entry. The journal entry notation above is simply telling us that in Principal’s tax 
entry, the debit to Deferred tax asset is $350 higher (or the credit to it is $350 lower) and the 
debit to Income tax expense (assuming the company has a positive income tax provision) is 
$350 lower as a result of this particular item.
 
Now consider the available-for-sale case. Recall from Chapter 13 that when a transaction 
is reported as part of other comprehensive income rather than in net income, its tax effect is 
also reported in other comprehensive income, not in income tax expense. Therefore, the in-
come tax effect of any entries to adjust the fair value of available-for-sale securities is also 
part of other comprehensive income. Like the situation for trading securities, the tax effect is 
a deferred tax effect because no gain or loss is reported for tax purposes until the security is 
sold, resulting in a temporary difference. The income tax effect (assuming a 35% income tax 
rate) of the $1,000 holding loss in available-for-sale securities would be:

960 
CHAPTER 16
Intercorporate Equity Investments
This entry differs from the trading securities case in that the credit is to Other comprehensive 
income, not income tax expense. When combined with the original pre-tax entry to record 
the fair value adjustment, the result is a $650 ($1,000 2 $350) reduction, net of tax, in Other 
comprehensive income in 2014, just as in the trading securities case there was a $650 reduc-
tion in net income.
 
In subsequent years, similar income tax consequences would be recorded. In 2015 Princi-
pal recorded an additional $2,000 unrealized holding loss, which would result in an increase 
in the deferred tax asset of $700 ($2,000 3 35%) regardless of the classification of the invest-
ment. In the trading securities case, Income tax expense would be reduced. In the available-
for-sale securities case, the Other comprehensive loss would be reduced. In 2016 Principal 
recorded a $5,000 unrealized holding gain. Principal would record the following entries in the 
trading securities and available-for-sale cases for the income tax effects, which would again 
be part of the overall tax entry.
Trading Securities Case:
DR Income tax expense   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$1,750
   CR Deferred tax asset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$1,050
   CR Deferred tax liability   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
700
Available-for-Sale Securities Case:
DR Other comprehensive income   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$1,750
   CR Deferred tax asset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$1,050
   CR Deferred tax liability   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
700
Other-Than-Temporary Impairment of 
Available-for-Sale Equity Investments
The previous discussion illustrates the required accounting when fair value changes are con-
sidered temporary. Occasionally, the fair value of a security will decline for a reason that is 
judged to be “other than temporary.” The meltdown in the credit markets that occurred in 
2007–2008 and the related illiquidity of investments in mortgage-backed securities and 
 collateralized debt obligations (see Chapters 7 and 8) provide a classic example of this sort 
of situation.
 
To determine whether a decline in value of an available-for-sale equity security is other 
than temporary, a firm considers the extent of the decline in value, the issuer’s prospects and 
financial condition, as well as the investor’s ability and intent to hold the investment until the 
value recovers. If the decline is deemed to be other than temporary, the security is written 
down to its fair value and a charge is taken against net income.
 
Suppose, for example, that Toews Corporation had previously made an investment in  Carcillo 
Company common stock and classified the investment as available-for-sale. The original cost 
of the investment was $100,000 and as of December 31, 2013, the fair value was $90,000. 
Toews has no other available-for-sale securities. As of December 31, 2013, Toews has a 
$10,000 credit balance in the Fair value adjustment account and a $10,000 debit balance (be-
fore considering taxes) in Accumulated other comprehensive income. At December 31, 2014, 
the investment in Carcillo is worth only $60,000 and the impairment is deemed to be other 
than temporary, due to Carcillo’s poor future prospects. Toews must record the impairment in 

 
Minority Active Investments: Equity Method
961
its income statement in 2014 and reduce its cost basis to $60,000. The entry to record the 
impairment (before considering taxes) is:
DR Impairment loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $40,000
DR Fair value adjustment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
10,000
CR Other comprehensive income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$10,000
CR Investment in Carcillo Company common stock . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
40,000
Toews’s balance sheet is now as if it had just purchased the Carcillo stock for $60,000. The 
subsequent accounting continues with the standard approach to available-for-sale securities, 
whereby changes in fair value are reflected in Other comprehensive income, unless there is 
another impairment that is deemed to be other than temporary.
 
Exhibit 16.1 provides an excerpt from a note in AIG’s 2009 10-K report describing other-
than-temporary impairment charges recorded on a variety of its investments.
EXHIBIT 16.1
American International Group (AIG): Excerpts 
from 2009 10-K Report
Other-Than-Temporary Impairments
As a result of AIG’s periodic evaluation of its securities for other-than-temporary impairments in 
value, AIG recorded impairment charges in earnings of $7.8 billion, $48.6 billion, and $4.6 billion 
in 2009, 2008, and 2007, respectively.
 
With the adoption of the new other-than-temporary impairments accounting standard on April 1, 
2009, such severity loss charges subsequent to that date exclusively related to equity  securities and 
other invested assets. In all prior periods, such charges primarily related to mortgage-backed, asset-
backed and collateralized securities, corporate debt securities of financial institutions and other equity 
securities. Notwithstanding AIG’s intent and ability to hold such securities until they had recovered 
their cost or amortized cost basis, and despite structures that indicated, at the time, that a substantial 
amount of the securities should have continued to perform in accordance with original terms, AIG 
concluded, at the time, that it could not reasonably assert that the impairment would be temporary.
RECAP
Trading securities and available-for-sale securities—the two types of minority passive eq-
uity investments—are carried at fair value on the balance sheet. The unrealized holding 
gain or loss on trading securities is run through net income in the period of the fair value 
change. Unrealized gains and losses on available-for-sale securities do not net affect net 
income in the period of the fair value change; instead these gains and losses are reported 
as Other comprehensive income (OCI), net of tax effects, and these amounts are closed 
out to a special owners’ equity account—Accumulated other comprehensive income 
(AOCI). Other-than-temporary impairment of available-for-sale equity securities is re-
ported as an adjustment to earnings.
MINORITY ACTIVE INVESTMENTS: EQUITY METHOD
When an investor has the ability to significantly influence the investee’s decisions, it is said to 
have an active investment. Under GAAP, there is a presumption that an investor holding 20% 
or more of an investee’s voting shares is able to significantly influence the investee’s deci-
sions. This presumption could be rebutted by evidence that the investor is unable to influence 
the investee. For example, the existence of a formal agreement that the investor not seek board 
representation or assist others in doing so after a failed takeover attempt would indicate a lack 
of ability to influence, even if ownership exceeded 20%.3 The presumption that ownership 

962 
CHAPTER 16
Intercorporate Equity Investments
below 20% indicates the investor does not have influence over the investee is also rebuttable. 
For example, if the investee’s shares are widely held, an investor with, say, 18% ownership 
could have significant influence, which might be evidenced by its ability to gain a seat on the 
board of directors.
 
When the investor has significant influence, the simple accounting approach described for 
passive investments is no longer suitable. To see why, recall that the entry made on Principal 
Financial’s books when an investee declared a dividend was:
DR Dividends receivable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $1,000
   CR Dividend income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$1,000
January 1, 2014: Initial Investment in Planet Burbank
DR Investment in Planet Burbank   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $9,000,000
   CR Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 $9,000,000
(To record investment at cost.)
When the investor can significantly influence the investee’s dividend policy, the minority pas-
sive accounting treatment would allow the investor to affect its own reported income by influ-
encing dividend policy. For example, if the investor is able to cause the investee to raise its 
dividend, the higher dividend would immediately run through the investor’s income statement.
 
To preclude this avenue for income manipulation, minority active investments are ac-
counted for using the equity method, as indicated in Figure 16.1. Under the equity method, 
the investor records its initial investment in the investee at cost. Subsequently, the Investment 
account is increased for the investor’s pro rata share of the investee’s net income, and there is 
a corresponding credit to the Investment income account. In the case of a loss, the investor’s 
Investment account decreases and there’s a corresponding debit to the Investment loss 
account.
 
Because the investor’s earnings are increased for its share of the investee’s earnings each 
period, it would be inappropriate to record dividend distributions received from the investee as 
income too. This would “double count” the investee’s earnings on the investor’s books. Under 
the equity method, dividends from the investee reduce the Investment account. Thus, the net 
increase in the Investment account is the amount by which the investor’s share of the in-
vestee’s earnings exceeds its share of the investee’s dividends declared. The intuition is that 
the equity method recognizes income on the investor’s books when the investee creates its 
ability to pay dividends by earning a profit, not when it actually pays the dividend.
 
The following example illustrates the entries under the equity method.
On January 1, 2014, Willis Company purchases 30% of the outstanding common shares of 
Planet Burbank Inc. for $9 million. The book value and fair value of Planet Burbank’s net 
 assets (assets minus liabilities) is $30 million. Thus, Willis pays book value for its investment in 
Planet Burbank (30% 3 $30 million 5 $9 million). During 2014, Planet Burbank earns a 
$10 million net profit, and declares a $500,000 dividend on December 15, 2014. Under the 
equity method, Willis makes these entries:
3 An investor that has significant influence but does not exercise it has not rebutted the presumption of ability to influence. To 
rebut the presumption, it must be the case that the investor cannot influence the investee, not simply that it does not influence 
the investee.

 
Minority Active Investments: Equity Method 
963
 
The carrying value in the investment account at the end of the year would be:
December 15, 2014: Investor’s Share of Dividends Declared
DR Dividend receivable from affiliate  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$150,000
   CR Investment in Planet Burbank. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$150,000
(To reduce the investment account for dividends declared—30% of $500,000)
December 31, 2014: Investor’s Share of Earnings
DR Investment in Planet Burbank. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $3,000,000
   CR Income from affiliate  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 $3,000,000
(To recognize 30% of Planet Burbank’s total reported income of $10,000,000)
Initial investment amount 
$ 9,000,000
Plus: Willis’s cumulative pro rata share of 
 Planet Burbank’s net income 
3,000,000
Minus: Willis’s cumulative pro rata share of 
 dividends declared by Planet Burbank 
(150,000)
Investment account carrying value 
$11,850,000
 
The example shows how the equity method reduces the opportunity for income manipulation. 
Willis Company’s income statement is affected only by its pro rata share of Planet  Burbank’s net 
income. Planet Burbank’s dividend declaration—and subsequent payment—has no effect on 
Willis’s income. Thus, while Willis could conceivably use its influence to increase Planet 
 Burbank’s dividends, doing so would leave its income unchanged under the equity method.
When Cost and Book Value Differ
In contrast to our Planet Burbank example, investors rarely buy shares at a price exactly equal 
to the book value of those shares. When the investor’s cost differs from book value, a new 
 issue arises.
 
To illustrate, let’s return to Willis Company’s purchase of Planet Burbank stock. Recall that 
Planet Burbank’s book value is $30 million. Let’s say that Willis paid $24 million for its 30% 
stake instead of $9 million. Why would Willis pay $24 million when the book value of the shares 
purchased is only $9 million (30% of $30 million)?
 
Before we answer that question, let’s note that GAAP assumes transactions entered into be-
tween unrelated parties are at a fair price. That is, we assume Willis (and the seller) are both well 
informed about Planet Burbank’s financial condition and prospects and the fact that they negoti-
ated a price of $24 million is evidence per se that $24 million is a fair price for the shares. So, 
again, why would an informed buyer pay $15 million more than book value for this investment?
 
There are two reasons. First, Planet Burbank’s books are prepared under GAAP, and 
 reflect most balance sheet items at historical cost rather than at current value. As shown in 
Panel (a) of Exhibit 16.2, the fair value of Planet Burbank’s net assets is $70 million, or 
$40 million greater than the $30 million book value (see the highlighted area). Sellers of 
Planet Burbank stock presumably know what the company’s net assets are worth. On the basis 
of that knowledge, the asking price for the shares acquired by Willis Company will be greater 
than book value by $40 million 3 30% 5 $12 million.
 
Willis paid $24 million, or $15 million more than book value. The difference between fair 
value and book value of inventories and fixed assets (see highlighted area) explains only 
$12 million of the disparity, leaving $3 million unexplained. The remaining disparity brings us 

964 
CHAPTER 16
Intercorporate Equity Investments
to the second reason why an informed buyer would knowingly pay a premium to acquire an in-
vestment in another company. Goodwill exists because thriving, successful companies are gen-
erally worth more than the sum of their individual net assets. Planet Burbank has developed a 
reputation for product quality, prompt service, and fair treatment of both employees and custom-
ers. Consequently, employees like to work for the company, and customers actively seek its 
products. The result is that Planet Burbank is exceptionally profitable—it earns a very large re-
turn on its investment base. The capitalized value of this earning potential is what gives rise to 
the remaining $3 million difference. This “extraordinary” earnings potential is called goodwill.
 
As Panel (b) of Exhibit 16.2 shows, we have now decomposed the amount Willis paid for 
its investment into three components: $9 million for its pro rata share of the book value of 
Planet Burbank’s net assets, leaving a $15 million excess of cost over book value acquired; 
$12 million for its pro rata share of the excess value of Planet Burbank’s separately identifi-
able assets of liabilities over their respective book values; and $3 million for goodwill.
 
When the cost of the shares acquired exceeds the underlying book value at the acquisi-
tion date, as it does in this case, the investor is required to amortize any excess that is 
 attributable to separately identifiable assets and liabilities not having an indefinite life. For 
all practical purposes, this means all assets and liabilities other than goodwill and land. 
Amortization is recorded as a reduction (debit) to Investment income and a reduction 
(credit) to the Investment account. The rationale for amortizing the excess of the investor’s 
cost over book value is that equity method accounting seeks to replicate the earnings the 
investor would report if it had purchased each of the investee’s assets and liabilities indi-
vidually. In the Willis example, Willis would have paid $9 million more than its share of 
book value for the depreciable assets, so its depreciation over the life of those assets would 
have been $9 million greater than the depreciation it “picks up” by incorporating its pro 
rata share of Planet Burbank’s earnings.
EXHIBIT 16.2
Willis Company: Equity Investment with Goodwill
Panel (a)
 
Book 
Fair 
 
Investor’s
($ in millions) 
Value 
Value 
Difference 
Share (30%)
Cash and receivables 
$10 
$10 
$ 0 
$ 0
Inventories (FIFO cost flow) 
15 
25 
10 
3
Depreciable assets (net of depreciation)* 
25 
55 
30 
9
Liabilities 
(20) 
(20) 
0 
0
 Net assets 
$30 
$70 
$40 
$12
* Average remaining useful life of 10 years.
Panel (b)
($ in millions)
Analysis of Willis’s investment cost over book value
 Cost of 30% investment 
$24
 30% of book value of Planet Burbank’s net assets (30% 3 $30) 
9
 Excess of cost over book value of Willis’s shares 
$15
Amount of excess attributable to
 Inventories—30% 3 ($25 2 $15) 
$ 3
 Depreciable assets—30% 3 ($55 2 $25) 
9
Remainder attributable to implicit goodwill 
3
 
$15
We often refer to the invest-
ee’s net assets as separately 
identifiable to contrast them 
with goodwill. However, 
separately identifiable net 
assets could also include 
 assets that are not actually 
recognized in the balance 
sheet. The most common 
such asset would be a patent 
or other intellectual prop-
erty that was developed in-
ternally and, as a result of 
the accounting rules for 
 research and development, 
have no cost reported in the 
balance sheet.

 
Minority Active Investments: Equity Method 
965
 
Using the equity method, the entries based on the preceding set of facts, including that 
Planet Burbank earned $10 million and declared a $500,000 dividend in 2014, are:
January 1, 2014: Initial Investment in Planet Burbank
DR Investment in Planet Burbank. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$24,000,000
   CR Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 $24,000,000
(To record investment at cost.)
December 15, 2014: Investor’s Share of Dividends Declared
DR Dividend receivable from Planet Burbank  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$150,000
   CR Investment in Planet Burbank. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$150,000
(To reduce the investment account for dividends declared—30% of $500,000)
December 31, 2014: Investor’s Share of Earnings
DR Investment in Planet Burbank. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$3,000,000
   CR Income from affiliate  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 $3,000,000
(To recognize 30% of Planet Burbank’s reported net income of $10 million)
December 31, 2014: Amortization of Excess Cost over Book Value Attributable to Inventory 
and Depreciable Assets
DR  Income from affiliate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$3,900,000
   CR Investment in Planet Burbank. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 $3,900,000
(To amortize excess cost per calculation below.)
The excess investment cost over book value attributable to inventory is assigned to inven-
tory items on hand on January 1, 2014, when Willis purchased Planet Burbank’s stock. This 
inventory is presumed to have been sold during 2014 under the FIFO cost flow assumption 
(see Chapter 9). The amount attributed to depreciable assets is amortized over the average 
remaining 10-year life of those assets. The amount attributed to goodwill is not amortized.
 
Under the equity method, Willis recognized an investment loss of $900,000 ($3,000,000 2 
$3,900,000) in 2014. The December 31, 2014, balance in the Investment in Planet Burbank 
account is $22,950,000 ($24,000,000 1 $3,000,000 2 $150,000 2 $3,900,000).
Fair Value Option for Equity Method Investments
Firms may elect the fair value option for investments that would otherwise be accounted for under 
the equity method.4 The election is irrevocable. Firms are allowed to elect the fair value option on 
election dates, which, for equity investments, include dates when one of the following events 
occurs: (1) the firm first acquires an investment that is eligible for equity method treatment; 
(2) the investment becomes subject to the equity method of accounting (e.g., investment goes 
from below 20% of the outstanding voting common stock to more than 20%); or (3) an investor 
ceases to consolidate a subsidiary (e.g., because the investor no longer holds a  controlling  interest) 
but continues to hold sufficient common stock to qualify for equity method treatment.
 
Excess  
2014
 
Investment Cost 
Amortization
Amortization is computed as
 Attributed to inventory (all sold during the year) 
$3,000,000 
$3,000,000
 Attributed to depreciable assets (over 10 years) 
9,000,000 
900,000
 Attributed to goodwill (not amortized) 
3,000,000 
—
 
$15,000,000 
$3,900,000
4 FASB ASC Subtopic 825-10: Financial Instruments—Overall, and all Fair Value Option Subsections thereof.

966 
CHAPTER 16
Intercorporate Equity Investments
 
Under the fair value option, unrealized gains and losses arising from changes in the invest-
ment’s fair value are reported in the investor’s income statement. The investor firm does not 
report its proportionate share of the investee profits and losses in earnings, and dividends re-
ceived flow directly to earnings. Dividend distributions typically reduce the fair value of the 
investee’s stock. So, increases in investor earnings from investee dividend distributions are 
likely to be offset by earnings decreases due to investment fair value declines.
 
Assets and liabilities measured at fair value must be reported in the balance sheet sepa-
rately from other investments. This can be accomplished by separate line-item disclosure or 
by presenting the investment amounts in aggregate with parenthetical disclosure of the fair 
value amounts included in that line item.
 
To illustrate the fair value option, recall Willis Company’s acquisition of 30% of Planet Bur-
bank’s common stock on January 1, 2014 (see Exhibit 16.2). Suppose Willis elects the fair value 
option for this investment at the acquisition date. As of December 31, 2014, the fair value of 
Willis’s investment in Planet Burbank stock has increased to $30 million. In its 2014 income 
statement, Willis would report an unrealized gain from equity investment of $6 million ($30 mil-
lion 2 $24 million) and as investment income its share of Planet Burbank’s declared dividend 
($150,000).5 Willis’s income statement would show no equity in Planet Burbank earnings, and 
no reduction in earnings for amortization of excess investment cost over Planet Burbank book 
values attributable to inventory or depreciable assets. Willis Company’s  December 31, 2014, 
balance sheet would show the Investment in Burbank stock at the $30 million fair value amount.
RECAP
Under GAAP, a minority active equity investment, which generally involves an investment 
of between 20% and 50% of the investee, is accounted for under the equity method. The 
investor reports as income its pro rata share of the investee’s net income, subject to any 
amortization of the excess cost of the purchase price over the investee’s book value at 
the time the investment was acquired. The investment account increases when income is 
recognized under the equity method and decreases when dividends are received. Firms 
may elect the fair value option for minority active investments, in which case the invest-
ment is instead reported at fair value, with dividends received and fair value adjustments 
reported as income in the income statement.
A majority-owned company may not be consolidated if effective control does not 
rest with the majority owner (parent). For example, if the majority-owned entity 
is in legal reorganization or in bankruptcy or operates under foreign exchange re-
strictions, controls, or faces other governmentally imposed uncertainties that cast 
significant doubt on the parent’s ability to control the entity, consolidation is not 
deemed appropriate.*
* FASB ASC Paragraph 810-10-5-10: Consolidation—Overall—Scope and Scope Exceptions.
CONTROLLING (MAJORITY) INTEREST: 
CONSOLIDATION
An entity that gains a controlling financial in-
terest in another entity is referred to as the ac-
quirer or parent company. Controlling 
financial interest is generally deemed to occur 
when one entity, directly or indirectly, owns 
more than 50 percent of the outstanding voting 
shares of another entity (subsidiary).6 Under 
these circumstances, the subsidiary’s financial 
statements are combined—line by line—with those of the parent using a process called con-
solidation.  Consolidated financial statements are designed to cut across artificial  corporate 
5 In order to ensure consistency, Willis should not record the income until the Planet Burbank stock is trading “ex dividend,” 
meaning without the right to receive the dividend. At that point, Willis retains the right to receive the dividend, even if it sells 
its shares, and Planet Burbank’s stock price should be lower by the amount of the dividend.
6 FASB ASC Topic 810: Consolidation.

 
Controlling (Majority) Interest: Consolidation 
967
boundaries to portray the economic  activities of the 
parent and the subsidiary as if they were one entity.
 
The procedures for recognizing and measuring the 
subsidiary’s assets and liabilities and reporting 
 noncontrolling (minority) interest in the subsidiary 
in consolidated financial statements have changed 
several times. Transactions accounted for under two 
previously permitted methods continue to be ac-
counted for under those methods, so they cannot be 
ignored.
 
The following sections describe the accounting required for current transactions, 
called the acquisition method, and the basics of how to prepare consolidated statements. 
We first examine a 100% acquisition and then an acquisition with a noncontrolling inter-
est (i.e., where the parent acquires less than 100% of the subsidiary’s voting stock). We 
then describe the previously permitted methods—the purchase method and the pooling of 
interests method—and highlight the key differences between the acquisition method and 
these methods.
Acquisition Method and Preparation of 
Consolidated Statements (100% Acquisition)
The acquisition method assigns the fair value of the consideration given to the acquired enti-
ty’s identifiable net assets (assets minus liabilities) at the acquisition date. If the value of 
consideration given exceeds the fair value of the acquired entity’s identifiable net assets, then 
goodwill is considered part of the acquisition cost. We use the following example, where the 
parent acquires 100% of the subsidiary’s stock, to illustrate.
 
Assume that on December 31, 2013, immediately before acquiring Gaston Corporation on that 
date, the balance sheet of Alphonse Corporation (the acquirer or parent company) was as follows:
Assets
Current assets 
$15,000,000
Fixed assets, net of accumulated depreciation 
20,000,000
 Total assets 
$35,000,000
Liabilities and Stockholders’ Equity
Current liabilities 
$ 1,000,000
Common stock ($1 par) 
28,000,000
Capital in excess of par 
2,000,000
Retained earnings 
4,000,000
 Total liabilities and equity 
$35,000,000
 
Alphonse paid $10 million cash to buy all of the outstanding shares of Gaston Corporation. 
After the transaction is recorded, Alphonse’s current assets will be $10 million lower due to 
the payment of cash, and an investment account of $10 million will exist. See Exhibit 16.3 for 
both companies’ balance sheets immediately after the acquisition.
 
Exhibit 16.3 illustrates Alphonse’s consolidation of Gaston as of the acquisition date.  
We describe each step in the process. Note that the individual balance sheets of the two 
companies are not simply added together. As we will see, doing that would result in double 
counting.
When two companies form a joint venture and each company owns ex-
actly 50% of the joint venture, neither of the “parent” companies consol-
idates the joint venture. Rather, each accounts for its investment under the 
equity method. Chapter 11 describes how this allows the joint venture en-
tity to incur debt—usually guaranteed by the “parent” companies—but 
the debt does not appear on either parent’s balance sheet because consol-
idation is not required. Intercorporate investment rules can be skillfully 
used to create off-balance-sheet assets and liabilities that  impede accu-
rate financial analysis.
A noncontrolling interest is 
the equity interest in a sub-
sidiary not attributable, 
 directly or indirectly, to the 
parent. Prior to the issuance 
of pre-Codification SFAS 
No. 141R and SFAS No. 
160, noncontrolling interests 
were referred to as  minority 
interests.

968 
CHAPTER 16
Intercorporate Equity Investments
Adjustments to the Consolidated Balance Sheet
Step 1: Elimination of the Investment in Gaston Account against Gaston’s Equity 
Alphonse paid $10 million for Gaston, a company whose net assets totaled only $8 mil-
lion (assets of $8.5 million less liabilities of $0.5 million). Why did Alphonse pay more 
than the book value of the acquiree’s net assets? An informed buyer would do so for two 
reasons: (1) the fair value of Gaston’s individual assets was more than their combined 
book value (we assume this excess was $1.5 million here and was attributable to the fixed 
assets) and (2) goodwill, which is the remaining $0.5 million.
 
The factors comprising the $10 million acquisition value of Gaston are:
Recorded book value of Gaston’s net assets 
$ 8,000,000
Unrecorded difference between fair value and book value 
 of Gaston’s fixed assets ($8,000,000 2 $6,500,000) 
1,500,000
Unrecorded value of Gaston’s goodwill 
500,000
 Acquisition value 
$10,000,000
To see why we do not add the two balance sheets together to get the consolidated balance 
sheet, note that the $10 million Alphonse paid is already on its balance sheet (under Invest-
ment in Gaston in Exhibit 16.3). But, as we have just seen, $8 million of the acquisition 
cost represents the book value of Gaston’s net assets, which also appears in Gaston’s bal-
ance sheet. Simply adding the two balance sheets together would double count Gaston’s 
net assets. 
Now consider Alphonse’s stockholders’ equity accounts, comprised of $28 million 
(Common stock), $2 million (Capital in excess of par), and $4 million (Retained earnings). 
These stockholders’ equity accounts represent the ownership interest in Alphonse’s net 
 assets, which include Alphonse’s investment in Gaston. Gaston’s stockholders’ equity 
 accounts, comprised of $6 million (Common stock) and $2 million (Retained earnings), 
Worksheet for Preparing Consolidated Balance Sheet—Date of Acquisition
 
 
Adjustments and Eliminations
 
 
 
 
 
Consolidated
 
Alphonse 
Gaston 
Dr. 
Cr. 
Balance Sheet
Assets
 Current assets 
$  5,000,000 
$2,000,000 
 
 
$ 7,000,000
 Fixed assets (net) 
20,000,000 
6,500,000 
$ 1,500,000 (B) 
 
28,000,000
 Investment in Gaston 
10,000,000 
— 
 
 $  2,000,000 (B)
 8,000,000 (A)
⎧
⎨
⎩
 
—
 Goodwill 
 
 
500,000 (B) 
 
500,000
 
$35,000,000 
$8,500,000 
 
 
$35,500,000
Liabilities
 Current liabilities 
$  1,000,000 
$  500,000 
 
 
$ 1,500,000
Stockholders’ Equity
 Common stock 
28,000,000 
6,000,000 
6,000,000 (A) 
 
28,000,000
 Capital in excess of par 
2,000,000 
— 
 
 
2,000,000
 Retained earnings 
4,000,000 
2,000,000 
2,000,000 (A) 
 
4,000,000
 
$35,000,000 
$8,500,000 
$10,000,000 
$10,000,000 
$35,500,000
EXHIBIT 16.3
Alphonse Company and Gaston Company: 
Acquisition Method—100% Ownership

 
Controlling (Majority) Interest: Consolidation 
969
also represent ownership of Gaston’s net assets. If the stockholders’ equity accounts of 
the two companies were simply added together, ownership of Gaston would be counted 
twice—once as part of Alphonse’s stockholders’ equity and again as Gaston’s stock-
holders’ equity.
To avoid the double counting of both Gaston’s net assets and the ownership interests in 
Gaston, Gaston’s stockholders’ equity accounts are eliminated against Alphonse’s Invest-
ment in Gaston account. This is done opposite notation (A) in the Adjustments and Elimi-
nations column in the consolidating worksheet in Exhibit 16.3. After this elimination, 
consolidated owners’ equity is composed of only Alphonse’s stockholders’ equity accounts 
because these alone represent the consolidated entity’s ownership.
Step 2: Reclassification of the Remainder of the Investment in Gaston Account The 
remaining balance in the Investment in Gaston account represents the amount of the acqui-
sition value that is not reflected in Gaston’s book values. As the acquisition value allocation 
shows, the $2 million remaining balance represents unrecorded fixed asset appreciation of 
$1.5 million and goodwill of $0.5 million. These amounts must stay on the consolidated 
balance sheet because Alphonse paid for them. However, they must be assigned to the items 
they actually represent: (1) an increase to fixed assets and (2) the acquisition of goodwill. 
These amounts are reclassified to the appropriate accounts in the Adjustments and Elimina-
tions column of Exhibit 16.3 (next to notations B). After these adjustments are made, 
the Investment in Gaston account has been eliminated and thus does not appear in the con-
solidated column. Also, consolidated fixed assets have been increased by $1.5 million, and 
goodwill of $0.5 million is separately reported.
 
The process described here is solely for the purpose of preparing consolidated statements. 
The adjustments are not recorded on the books of the acquirer (parent company). However, 
they can also be expressed in journal entry form. For example, the entry to avoid double 
counting the book value of Gaston’s net assets and its owners’ equity is:
DR Common stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$6,000,000
DR Retained earnings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,000,000
   CR Investment in Gaston  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 $8,000,000
To avoid double counting Gaston’s net assets and its owners’ equity 
(adjustment notation [A] in Exhibit 16.3).
DR Fixed assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$1,500,000
DR Goodwill . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
500,000
   CR Investment in Gaston  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 $2,000,000
To eliminate the remaining investment account balance and recognize the write-up of Gaston’s 
Fixed assets (net), to fair value, and to recognize acquired goodwill (adjustment notation [B] in 
Exhibit 16.3).
Similarly, reclassification of the remaining $2 million in the Investment in Gaston account to 
reflect the fair value of Gaston’s fixed assets and acquired goodwill can also be expressed in 
journal entry form:
 
After these adjustments, the last column of Exhibit 16.3 reflects the amounts reported in 
the consolidated balance sheet. Note that in this case, a 100% acquisition under the acquisi-
tion method, a new basis of accounting is established for the subsidiary’s net assets (including 
goodwill)—they are reported at full fair value at the acquisition date.

970 
CHAPTER 16
Intercorporate Equity Investments
Intra-entity Loans 
Suppose that several months prior to the Gaston acquisition, Al-
phonse had borrowed $300,000 from Gaston that had not been repaid by the acquisition date of 
December 31, 2013. Under these circumstances,  another adjustment is needed to consolidate the 
financial statements. This adjustment is necessary because Alphonse and Gaston are now part 
of the same economic unit. The Alphonse loan receivable on Gaston’s books and the Gaston 
loan payable on Alphonse’s books are not due from or due to outsiders. To include the intra-entity 
receivable and payable in the consolidated balance sheet would overstate both assets and liabili-
ties by $300,000. That’s why the  following additional adjustment would be made in preparing the 
consolidated statements:
DR Loan payable—Gaston (on Alphonse’s books)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $300,000
   CR Loan receivable—Alphonse (on Gaston’s books)  . . . . . . .  
 
$300,000
To eliminate the intra-entity loan from Gaston to Alphonse.
 
There will also be eliminations and adjustments in the income statement, which are dis-
cussed later.
Acquisition Method with Noncontrolling Interests 
(Less Than 100% Acquisition)
The Consolidation Topic (ASC 810) embraces the economic unit concept for consolidation—
a concept founded on the principle that the subsidiary’s individual accounts should not be di-
vided and measured differently along ownership lines. According to this view, a controlled 
company must be consolidated as a whole regardless of the parent’s level of ownership. Au-
thoritative accounting literature says that the parent must measure and recognize the subsid-
iary as a whole at business fair value. This means that under the acquisition method, the 
parent company includes in its consolidated financial statements 100% of the subsidiary’s 
individual assets acquired and liabilities assumed at their full fair values determined as of the 
acquisition date, even when the parent owns less than 100% of the controlled subsidiary.
 
How is business fair value determined in the presence of a partial (less than 100%) acquisi-
tion? GAAP says business fair value is the sum of (1) the controlling interest fair value and (2) 
the noncontrolling interest fair value. Measurement of the controlling interest fair value is rela-
tively straightforward—for the vast majority of cases, the value of the consideration transferred 
provides the best evidence of the controlling interest fair value. Measurement of noncontrolling 
interest fair value is more difficult because the non-
controlling shareholders are not parties to the transac-
tion. One approach is to use the consideration paid by 
the parent for the controlling interest to impute a fair 
value for the acquired firm as a whole and then use the 
noncontrolling percentage of this imputed total ac-
quired firm fair value to measure the noncontrolling 
interest fair value. For example, if the fair value of a 
75% controlling interest is $240 million, then the im-
puted total business fair value would be $320 million ($240 million 4 0.75). The estimated 
noncontrolling interest fair value would be $80 million ($320 million 3 25%).
 
To illustrate the acquisition method with less than 100% ownership, refer to the data for the 
Alphonse and Gaston business combination underlying Exhibit 16.3. Assume instead, though, 
that Alphonse pays $8 million to acquire 80% of Gaston’s outstanding shares. Assuming no 
premium was paid to gain control, Gaston’s imputed total business fair value is $10 million 
This approach for estimating the noncontrolling interest’s fair value would 
not be appropriate if the parent pays a premium to secure sufficient shares 
to gain financial control. This can sometimes occur when the shares are 
 being acquired from a single party that owns a large block of the acquiree’s 
shares (e.g., 60%). In this case, the noncontrolling interest fair value is 
 independently computed without regard to the consideration paid by the 
parent (e.g., by using the traded price of the shares not held by the major 
blockholder).

 
Controlling (Majority) Interest: Consolidation 
971
($8 million 4 0.80). Therefore, the fair value of the noncontrolling interest is $2 million (20% 3
$10 million). The factors comprising Gaston’s value are:
 
The worksheet to prepare the consolidated balance sheet of Alphonse and its 80%-owned 
subsidiary, Gaston, under the acquisition method is shown in Exhibit 16.4.
 
Entry (A) eliminates Gaston’s equity accounts, which total $8 million. The portion pertain-
ing to the 80% Alphonse owns is eliminated against the investment account. The other 20% 
sets up a Noncontrolling interest in Gaston. Entry (B) reclassifies the remainder of the invest-
ment account by increasing Alphonse’s share (80%) of Gaston’s net assets to fair value and 
also recognizing the goodwill attributable to Alphonse’s controlling interest. Entry (C) recog-
nizes the noncontrolling interest in the total business fair value of Gaston. In effect, it repeats 
entry (B) but for the unacquired portion of Gaston’s net assets by adjusting to the fair value at 
the acquisition date and including goodwill.
 
After these adjustments, the net assets of the subsidiary (Gaston) are reported at acquisition 
date full fair value in the consolidated balance sheet. All of the acquired entity’s goodwill is rec-
ognized and the noncontrolling interest in the net assets of the subsidiary is reported at fair value. 
 
Although the noncontrolling interest is not an equity interest in Alphonse, it is an equity 
interest nonetheless in a portion of the consolidated net assets. As a result, GAAP requires 
 
Controlling 
Noncontrolling
($ in millions) 
Interest 
Interest 
Total
Recorded book value of net assets 
$6.4 
$1.6 
$  8.0
Unrecorded fixed assets 
1.2 
0.3 
1.5
Goodwill 
0.4 
0.1 
0.5
 Total 
$8.0 
$2.0 
$10.0
Worksheet for Preparing Consolidated Balance Sheet—Date of Acquisition
 
 
Adjustments and Eliminations
 
 
 
 
 
Consolidated
 
Alphonse 
Gaston 
Dr. 
Cr. 
Balance Sheet
Assets
 Current assets 
$ 7,000,000 
$2,000,000 
 
 
$ 9,000,000
 Fixed assets (net) 
20,000,000 
6,500,000 
 $  1,200,000 (B)
 
300,000 (C)
⎧
⎨
⎩
 
 
28,000,000
 Investment in Gaston 
8,000,000 
— 
 
 $  1,600,000 (B)
 6,400,000 (A)
⎧
⎨
⎩
 
—
 
 
 
400,000 (B) 
 
 Goodwill  
 
 
100,000 (C) 
 
500,000
Total assets 
$35,000,000 
$8,500,000 
 
 
$37,500,000
Liabilities
 Current liabilities 
$ 1,000,000 
$  500,000 
 
 
$ 1,500,000
Stockholders’ equity
 Common stock 
28,000,000 
6,000,000 
6,000,000 (A) 
 
28,000,000
 Capital in excess of par 
2,000,000 
— 
 
 
2,000,000
 Retained earnings 
4,000,000 
2,000,000 
2,000,000 (A) 
 
4,000,000
 Noncontrolling interest 
 
 
 
 $  1,600,000 (A)
 
400,000 (C)
⎧
⎨
⎩
 in Gaston 
 
 
 
 
2,000,000
 Total stockholders’ equity 
34,000,000 
8,000,000 
 
 
36,000,000
Total liabilities and 
 stockholders’ equity 
$35,000,000 
$8,500,000 
$10,000,000 
$10,000,000 
$37,500,000
EXHIBIT 16.4
Alphonse and Gaston: Acquisition Method—80% Ownership
⎧
⎨
⎩

972 
CHAPTER 16
Intercorporate Equity Investments
that the noncontrolling interest be shown in the stockholders’ equity section of the consoli-
dated balance sheet.
Income Statement Consolidation
Exhibit 16.5 shows the worksheet for preparing the consolidated income statement for 
 Alphonse and its subsidiary (Gaston) for the first year after acquisition in the 80% acquisition 
case. We additionally assume Alphonse sold goods to Gaston for $25,000, which Gaston re-
sold to outside parties later in the year. The intra-entity sale between Alphonse and Gaston 
must be eliminated. To see why, suppose that Alphonse sold goods to Gaston on March 15, 
2014, after the December 31, 2013, acquisition, and then Gaston resold all of these goods to 
outside customers before the end of the year. The facts follow:
RECAP
Consolidated financial statements portray the parent company and its majority-owned 
subsidiaries as a single economic unit. But the individual balance sheets (and income 
statements) of each subsidiary and the parent are not simply added together. Instead, 
adjustments are made on the consolidated worksheet to avoid double counting internal 
business transactions as well as various balance sheet items. When the parent company 
acquires less than a 100% interest in a subsidiary, a noncontrolling (minority) interest in 
the subsidiary’s net assets and income is created. Because the consolidated statements 
include the subsidiary’s total assets, liabilities and net income, the noncontrolling share-
holders’ interest in these amounts must be reflected in the consolidated statements.
INTRA-ENTITY SALE
 
Alphonse’s Sale  
Gaston’s Resale
 
to Gaston 
to “Outsiders” 
Total
Selling price 
$25,000 
$34,000 
$59,000
Cost of goods sold 
20,000 
25,000 
45,000
 Gross profit 
$ 5,000 
$ 9,000 
$14,000
Merely adding together the income statements of Alphonse and Gaston to form the consoli-
dated income statement would result in double counting of sales and cost of goods sold. This 
would happen because neither Alphonse’s $25,000 sale to Gaston nor the $25,000 of cost of 
goods sold on Gaston’s income statement represents a transaction with outsiders. Therefore, 
the intra-entity sales transaction must be eliminated in preparing the consolidated income 
statement, as shown in Exhibit 16.5.
 
After this elimination, the consolidated income statement reflects only revenues realized 
from outsiders and costs paid to outsiders. The double counting of the intra-entity sales and cost 
of goods sold has been eliminated. Advanced accounting textbooks discuss the more complex 
situation where the inventory has not been resold to a third party by the end of the period.
 
We also assume the expected remaining life of Gaston’s fixed assets at the acquisition date 
was 20 years.  As a result, we amortize the portion of the excess acquisition value attributed to 
fixed assets ($1,500,000) over 20 years, resulting in $75,000 of amortization per year.  Be-
cause the cost basis of the fixed assets in the consolidated balance sheet exceeds the cost basis 
of the fixed assets in Gaston’s balance sheet, depreciation from a consolidated perspective 
would be understated without this adjustment.
 
The other adjustment that must be made made is to allocate the noncontrolling interest’s 
share of Gaston’s net income appropriately. Note that net income of $3,032,000 includes net 
income attributable to both the noncontrolling interest and Alphonse’s shareholders. The por-
tion of Gaston’s earnings assigned to the 20% noncontrolling interests (($1,612,000 2 
$75,000) 3 20% 5 $307,400, shaded) is then subtracted to arrive at net income attributable to 
the Alphonse shareholders.

 
Controlling (Majority) Interest: Consolidation 
973
Accounting for Goodwill
As illustrated in the Alphonse and Gaston example, 
the acquisition method typically results in recogni-
tion of goodwill in the consolidated balance sheet. 
This goodwill is not amortized. Instead, goodwill is 
written down only when it is deemed to be impaired.7 
To test for impairment, firms must first allocate 
goodwill arising from an acquisition to one or more 
reporting units (e.g., segments) at the acquisition 
date. Once  allocated, the two-step impairment test 
outlined in Figure 16.2 is applied at the reporting 
unit level. A two-step approach is necessary because 
goodwill is not separately identifiable. So, we must 
first determine if the reporting unit itself is impaired. If it is, then the 
second step establishes the amount of the goodwill impairment charge, 
if any.
 
In the first step, the reporting unit is considered impaired if the 
book value of its net assets (including allocated goodwill) exceeds its 
fair value. If the reporting unit is impaired, then the goodwill assigned 
to the reporting unit is compared to its implied goodwill, which is the 
amount of goodwill that would be recognized in a current transaction 
if the reporting unit were acquired at its fair value. The impairment 
charge is the difference between the goodwill reflected in the consoli-
dated balance sheet and the implied goodwill. The following numeri-
cal example illustrates how to determine goodwill impairment under 
GAAP:
Examples of circumstances that would trigger impairment testing include:
• A significant adverse change in legal factors or in the  business climate.
• A regulator’s adverse action or assessment.
• Unanticipated competition.
• A loss of key personnel.
• A likelihood that a reporting unit or a significant portion of a reporting 
unit will be sold or disposed of.
• A significant asset group is being tested for recoverability.
• Recognition of a goodwill impairment loss in the financial statements of 
a subsidiary that is a component of a reporting unit.
FASB ASC Paragraph 350-20-35-30: Intangibles—Goodwill and other—
Goodwill—Subsequent Measurement.
7 FASB ASC Section 350-20-35: Intangibles—Goodwill and Other—Goodwill—Subsequent Measurement.
Fair value of a reporting unit refers to the price that 
would be received to sell the unit as a whole in an or-
derly transaction between market participants at the 
measurement date.*  If the reporting unit is publicly 
traded, the stock price provides the best evidence of 
fair value. If stock prices are not available, fair values 
are determined using one or more other methods 
 including discounted cash flow analysis or a multiple 
of earnings or some other performance measure such 
as revenues or earnings before interest, taxes, depreci-
ation, and amortization.
* FASB ASC Paragraph 350-20-35-22: Intangibles—Goodwill 
and Other—Goodwill—Subsequent Measurement— 
Determining the Fair Value of a Reporting Unit.
EXHIBIT 16.5
Alphonse and Gaston: Acquisition Method—80% Ownership
Worksheet for Preparing Consolidated Income Statement
After the Acquisition
 
Adjustments and
Eliminations  
 
Consolidated
 
 
 
 
 
Noncontrolling 
Income
 
Alphonse 
Gaston 
Dr. 
Cr. 
Interest 
Statement
Sales revenue 
$ 25,000,000 
$ 15,000,000 
$ 25,000 
 
 
$ 39,975,000
Cost of goods sold 
(20,000,000) 
(10,900,000) 
 
$25,000 
 
(30,875,000)
Gross profit 
5,000,000 
4,100,000 
 
 
 
9,100,000
Selling, general, and 
 administrative expenses 
(2,500,000) 
(1,500,000) 
75,000 
 
 
(3,925,000)
Interest expense 
(200,000) 
(120,000) 
 
 
 
(320,000)
Tax expense 
(805,000) 
(868,000) 
 
 
 
(1,673,000)
 Consolidated net income 
1,495,000 
1,612,000 
 
 
 
3,032,000
Net income attributable to 
 noncontrolling interest 
— 
— 
 
 
$307,400 
(307,400)
Net income attributable to 
 Alphonse shareholders 
$  1,495,000 
$  1,612,000 
$100,000 
$25,000 
$307,400 
$  2,724,600
First Year after Acquisition

974 
CHAPTER 16
Intercorporate Equity Investments
Step 1: Determine the reporting 
unit’s fair value using stock price
(if publicly traded) or some
combination of other methods
including discounted cash flow
model, comparable multiple, etc.
Determine whether the
fair value of the reporting unit
is greater than book value.
Yes
No
Impairment charge = Goodwill
recognized in the balance
sheet – Implied goodwill
Impairment test
ends; make no
charge to earnings
Step 2: Allocate fair value
calculated in Step 1 to the 
assets and liabilities of the
reporting unit.
Impairment test
ends; make no
charge to earnings.
Implied goodwill = Fair value of the
reporting unit – Fair value of the
identifiable net assets
Determine whether the
implied goodwill is at least as
great as its carrying value on
the balance sheet.
Yes
No
Figure 16.2
GOODWILL IMPAIRMENT 
TEST
Source: FASB ASC Topic 350: 
Intangibles—Goodwill and other
Assume that Aggressive Company acquires all of Slow Growth Company’s outstanding vot-
ing stock early in 2014 for $100 million. On that date, Slow Growth’s identifiable tangible and 
intangible net assets had a fair value of $80 million resulting in goodwill of $20 million. Ag-
gressive assigned $15 million of the goodwill to reporting unit A and $5 million to reporting 
unit B. On December 31, 2014, Aggressive performs an impairment test and  determines the 
following:
 
($ in millions) 
Unit A 
Unit B
(a) Fair value of reporting unit (including goodwill) 
$60 
$45
(b) Book value of reporting unit 
75 
35
(c) Is the reporting unit impaired? 
Yes 
No
(d) Sum of fair values of identifiable net assets of 
 
unit A, exclusive of goodwill 
50 
—
(e) Implied fair value of goodwill (a)–(d) 
10 
—
(f) Book value of goodwill 
15 
—
(g) Impairment charge (f)–(e) 
$ 5 
—
 
The accounting rules for determining goodwill impairment, together with the rather dra-
matic downturns in the stock market in 2002–2003 and 2008–2009, resulted in a significant 
number of firms reporting goodwill impairments totaling hundreds of billions of dollars.

 
Previous Approaches to Consolidated Statements 
975
 
The following excerpt from a special equity research report discusses the possible valua-
tion implications of such write-downs:
The facts and circumstances surrounding each goodwill impairment charge will need to be eval-
uated for their investment significance. The FASB rules require information about goodwill to 
be provided at the segment level, increasing the likelihood that the market will be cognizant of 
potential changes in fundamentals diminishing the value of goodwill. If the market is aware of 
this deterioration from other information, the impairment charge is unlikely to affect the compa-
ny’s stock price. However, if there is an impairment in a reporting unit that previously had been 
thought to have good fundamentals, it will be news to the market and could have a negative 
 impact on stock price.8
8 “Goodbye, Goodwill,” Equity Research Special Report (New York: Bear Stearns & Company, Inc., 2001).
RECAP
Under current GAAP, goodwill is subject to a consideration of possible impairment.  
 Financial statement users need to assess whether a goodwill impairment charge is a sign 
of a bad acquisition, a miscalculation of the value of the target (that is, the acquirer over-
paid), or the result of an unexpected deterioration in the fundamentals of the business 
acquired.
PREVIOUS APPROACHES TO CONSOLIDATED 
STATEMENTS
As we mentioned earlier, the procedures for recognizing and measuring a subsidiary’s assets 
and liabilities and reporting a noncontrolling (minority) interest in a subsidiary in consoli-
dated financial statements have changed several times in the recent past. Although only the 
acquisition method is permitted for merger and acquisition (M&A) transactions entered into 
today, transactions originally accounted for under either of the other two methods—the pur-
chase method and the pooling of interests method—continue to be accounted for under those 
methods. That is, the method applied depends on when the parent company acquired the sub-
sidiary, not the date of the financial statements being presented. So, the effects of accounting 
methods that may no longer be applied to current transactions are still evident in current fi-
nancial statements, making it important for analysts to understand the financial statement 
implications of all the approaches to M&A accounting, including those methods that are no 
longer permitted for current transactions.
 
Panel (a) of Figure 16.3 summarizes the three methods that have been used over the years 
to account for acquisitions. Until July 1, 2001, two methods were permitted. The pooling of 
interests method was permitted for transactions that met certain criteria, including that more 
than 90% of the voting common stock was acquired and that the transaction was consum-
mated through an exchange of stock. The guiding principle behind the pooling of interests 
method was that the transaction was treated as if the two companies joined together to become 
a new entity, rather than that one of the companies acquired the other. The financial statements 
were restated retroactively as if the two companies had always been one. With this view of the 
transaction, there is no “purchase price.” And, without a purchase price, there is no resetting 
of asset values to fair value or any recognition of goodwill. This feature of pooling of interests 
was viewed positively by many companies, especially because at the time that poolings were 
permitted, goodwill was subject to amortization. An acquiring company that had to recognize 
goodwill on an acquisition looked forward to up to 40 years of charges against earnings for 
goodwill amortization. As a result, many companies would structure transactions in a way to 
ensure pooling of interests could be applied. A 1995 study argued that in order to satisfy the 
Valuation

976 
CHAPTER 16
Intercorporate Equity Investments
pooling of interests criteria for its 1991 acquisition of NCR, AT&T paid somewhere between 
$50 million and $500 million extra for the acquisition.9
 
Amid concerns that many transactions were being structured to qualify as poolings of in-
terests even though they were clearly acquisitions of one company by another, not the merg-
ing of equals to form a new entity, the FASB banned poolings, effective July 1, 2001. However, 
any transactions completed prior to that date could be accounted for as poolings and did not 
have to be restated under purchase accounting, the only other acceptable method at the time. 
Many companies today have subsidiaries that were acquired in transactions accounted for as 
poolings of interests and, as a result, do not report goodwill related to those subsidiaries.10
 
Beginning July 1, 2001, only the purchase method was permitted. This method treated the 
transaction as an acquisition of one company by another, regardless of whether the consider-
ation paid was in cash or stock. If the consideration was in stock, the purchase price was 
deemed to be the fair value of the stock given up in the transaction. Any excess paid above 
book value for the acquired company was attributed to specific assets and liabilities as well as 
to goodwill, in much the same way we did the allocation of excess cost for equity method 
transactions. Unlike under the acquisition method, fair value for the entire entity was not im-
puted from the purchase price when less than 100% was acquired. Rather, the step-up in 
 values and recognition of goodwill only occurred on the portion of the assets acquired.
 
Importantly, through 2001 for calendar-year firms, goodwill was amortized over not 
more than 40 years. As shown in Panel (b) of Figure 16.3, goodwill is no longer amortized 
and has not been since 2002.11 This change in the rules—the elimination of goodwill 
Figure 16.3
M&A ACCOUNTING 
RULES OVER TIME
Panel (a): Methods to Account for Acquisitions
Dates
Prior to July 1, 2001 
 Pooling of interests method for qualifying transactions; otherwise 
purchase method
July 1, 2001 through 2008 
Purchase method only
2009 and later 
Acquisition method only
Panel (b): Goodwill
Dates
2001 and earlier 
Goodwill amortized over not more than 40 years
2002 and later 
Goodwill not amortized; subject to review for impairment
Panel (c): Presentation of Noncontrolling Interests
Dates
2008 and earlier 
 Subtract noncontrolling interest to arrive at net income; i.e., 
 consolidated net income includes only the controlling interest’s 
portion of the  subsidiary’s income
2009 and later 
 Net income is before subtracting noncontrolling interets; Consoli-
dated net  income separated into portion attributable to noncontrolling 
 interests and portion attributable to parent company shareholders
9 See T. Lys and L. Vincent, “An Analysis of Value Destruction in AT&T’s Acquisition of NCR,” Journal of Financial Eco-
nomics, October–November 1995.
10 The last major transaction to qualify for pooling treatment was Pepsico’s acquisition of the Quaker Oats Company.
11 Goodwill amortization was also eliminated for 2001 for acquisitions taking place after June 30 of that year.

 
Previous Approaches to Consolidated Statements 
977
amortization—made the elimination of the pooling of interests method more palatable to 
many companies. Although under the purchase method—the only acceptable M&A 
method remaining when poolings were eliminated—companies recognized goodwill on 
most transactions, the goodwill was not subject to amortization. Rather, it is subject to an 
annual review for impairment.
 
Effective January 1, 2009, for calendar-year firms, the purchase method was replaced with 
the acquisition method. The key difference between these two methods is that under the pur-
chase method, assets were “stepped up” to their fair values and goodwill was recognized only 
on the portion of the company acquired. Under the acquisition method, the step-up in values 
and the recognition of goodwill is on the entire acquired company, even if less than 100% is 
acquired. For example, suppose Dale Corporation acquired 90% of Mara Inc. for $90 million. 
Mara’s book value of equity at the acquisition date was $60 million. Under the purchase 
method, Mara’s assets would be stepped up (including goodwill recognition) by $36 million, 
the excess cost Dale paid for its 90% interest ($90 million 2 $60 million 3 90%). Under the 
acquisition method, Mara’s assets would be stepped up (again including goodwill recogni-
tion) by $40 million, the inferred value of the entire entity ($90 milliony0.90 5 $100 million) 
less the entity’s book value of $60 million.
 
The final change in financial reporting for business combinations and consolidations, 
shown in Panel (c) of Figure 16.3, relates to the presentation of noncontrolling interests in 
the income statement. Prior to 2009, the portion of a less-than-wholly-owned subsidiary’s 
income that was attributable to the minority (noncontrolling) shareholders would be re-
ported as an expense in the parent company’s income statement, effectively reversing that 
portion of the subsidiary’s net income that had been included in the consolidated numbers. 
The result was that consolidated net income would reflect only the parent company’s share 
of the consolidated subsidiary’s earnings. In the Dale and Mara example, Dale would in-
clude 100% of Mara’s revenues and expenses in its income statement, but then remove the 
10% it did not own with a line called “minority interest expense,” resulting in Dale report-
ing consolidated net income that included only 90% of Mara’s net income. Beginning in 
2009 for calendar-year firms, consolidated net income is defined to include all earnings of 
a parent and its consolidated subsidiaries, even if the consolidated subsidiaries are not 
wholly owned. That net income is then allocated between the parent company shareholders 
and the noncontrolling interests (i.e., the minority shareholders of the subsidiary’s stock). 
When the noncontrolling interests are subtracted from consolidated net income, the result-
ing amount is called consolidated net income attributable to  parent company shareholders. 
As a result, the “bottom line” in an income statement  today often is not consolidated net 
income, but rather consolidated net income attributable to parent company shareholders.
 
The following sections describe how the purchase method and the pooling of interests 
method differ from the acquisition method.
The Purchase Method
Under the purchase method, assets and liabilities are stepped up and goodwill is recognized 
only on the acquired portion of the subsidiary’s asset and liability accounts. As a result, the 
subsidiary’s assets and  liabilities are not reported at their full fair values in the consolidated 
balance sheet. Rather, the subsidiary’s net assets are valued at the parent’s proportional inter-
est in the net asset fair values plus the noncontrolling interest in the book value of the subsid-
iary’s net assets at the acquisition date. Moreover, the noncontrolling interest equity is 
reported as the proportionate share of the subsidiary’s net asset book value.

978 
CHAPTER 16
Intercorporate Equity Investments
 
To illustrate how the purchase method works, we return to the example in the previous  section 
where Alphonse acquires an 80% interest in Gaston by paying $8 million. The book value of 
Gaston’s total net assets at the date of acquisition is $8 million ($8.5 million of assets minus 
$0.5 million of liabilities). The difference between the amount paid by Alphonse ($8 million) and 
its equity in the book value of Gaston’s net assets (80% 3 $8 million 5 $6.4 million) is $1.6 mil-
lion. If we again assume the excess of fair value over book value of all of Gaston’s depreciable 
fixed assets is $1.5 million, then the $1.6 million difference is apportioned as follows:
Allocation of Excess Acquisition Cost:
Price paid by Alphonse for 80% interest in Gaston 
$8,000,000
Book value of 80% of Gaston’s net assets at acquisition
 (80% 3 $8,000,000) 
6,400,000
Excess cost over book value of net assets acquired 
$1,600,000
Excess attributed to Alphonse’s share of the difference 
 between fair value and book value of Gaston’s 
 fixed assets (80% 3 $1,500,000) 
$1,200,000
Amount attributed to Gaston’s unrecorded goodwill 
400,000
Total excess cost assigned 
$1,600,000
EXHIBIT 16.6
Alphonse and Gaston: Purchase Method—80% Ownership
Worksheet for Preparing Consolidated Balance Sheet—Date of Purchase
 
 
Adjustments and Eliminations
  
 
 
 
 
Consolidated 
 
Alphonse 
Gaston 
Dr. 
Cr. 
Balance Sheet
Assets 
 Current assets 
$   7,000,000 
$ 2,000,000 
 
 
$  9,000,000
 Fixed assets (net) 
20,000,000 
6,500,000 
$1,200,000 (B) 
 
27,700,000
 Investment in Gaston 
8,000,000 
— 
 
 $1,600,000 (B) 
6,400,000 (A) 
—
 Goodwill 
 
 
400,000 (B) 
 
400,000
 
$ 35,000,000 
$ 8,500,000 
 
 
$37,100,000
Liabilities 
 Current liabilities 
$   1,000,000 
$    500,000 
 
 
$  1,500,000
Noncontrolling (minority)
Interest in Gaston 
 
 
 
1,600,000 (A) 
1,600,000
Stockholders’ equity 
 Common stock 
28,000,000 
6,000,000 
6,000,000 (A) 
 
28,000,000
 Capital in excess of par 
2,000,000 
— 
 
 
2,000,000
 Retained earnings 
4,000,000 
2,000,000 
2,000,000 (A) 
 
4,000,000
 
$35,000,000 
$ 8,500,000 
$9,600,000 
$9,600,000 
$37,100,000
Immediately after this purchase combination, the worksheet to prepare the consolidated bal-
ance sheet of Alphonse and its 80%-owned interest in Gaston is as in Exhibit 16.6. The two 
adjustment and elimination entries reflected in the consolidated worksheet in Exhibit 16.6 are 
the same as elimination entries (A) and (B) shown for the acquisition method. But note that 
entry (C) is missing. That was the entry that recognized an additional $300,000 of fixed assets 
and $100,000 of goodwill to reflect the write-up to fair value of the noncontrolling shareholders’ 
investment in Gaston, along with an additional $400,000 of noncontrolling interest.

 
Previous Approaches to Consolidated Statements 
979
 
The key differences between the consolidated balance sheet under the acquisition method 
and the purchase method are summarized in the table below.
 
Acquisition Method 
Purchase Method
Subsidiary net assets  
Valued at full fair value 
Fair value of the controlling
 (assets – liabilities) 
 
 interest portion
 
 
 Subsidiary’s book value for the 
 noncontrolling interest portion
Goodwill 
Valued at full fair value 
 Only recognized for the controlling 
 interest portion
Noncontrolling equity interest 
Noncontrolling interest  
Noncontrolling interest portion of
 
 portion of the subsidiary’s  
 the subsidiary’s book value of
 
 total fair value of net assets 
 net assets
 
Figure 16.4 illustrates graphically how these alternative valuation approaches compare for 
Alphonse’s acquisition of Gaston. Panel (a) (the one that looks like Colorado) illustrates the 
acquisition method. Note that all of the subsidiary’s net assets are stepped up to the fair value 
implied by Alphonse’s purchase of 80% of Gaston. The top four cells represent goodwill 
($0.5 million) plus the step up of separately identifiable net assets ($1.5 million). The three 
cells at the right represent the noncontrolling interest. Note that the noncontrolling interest is 
valued at the value implied by the purchase price, even though the portion of the assets owned 
by the noncontrolling interest was not acquired. Panel (b) (the one that looks like Utah) repre-
sents the purchase method. The shape illustrates the mixed valuation approach. Gaston’s net 
assets are valued partially at fair value and partially at the existing book value. Note that the 
Figure 16.4
GRAPHICAL 
 REPRESENTATION OF 
 ACQUISITION AND 
 PURCHASE METHODS
Panel (a): Alphonse and Gaston—Acquisition Method
 
Alphonse’s  
Noncontrolling
(Millions of  dollars)  
interest 
Interest
Goodwill 
0.4 
0.1 
0.5
Step-up in value of separately  
 identifiable net assets 
1.2 
0.3 
1.5
Book value 
6.4 
1.6 
8.0
 
8.0 
2.0
Panel (b): Alphonse and Gaston—Purchase Method
 
Alphonse’s  
Noncontrolling
(Millions of  dollars)  
interest 
Interest
Goodwill 
0.4 
 
0.4
Step-up in value of separately 
 identifiable net assets 
1.2 
 
1.2
Book value 
6.4 
1.6 
8.0
 
8.0 
1.6

980 
CHAPTER 16
Intercorporate Equity Investments
noncontrolling interest is now only $1.6 million, which is 20% of the original book value of 
Gaston’s net assets. Relative to the acquisition method, net assets are valued $0.4 million 
lower ($0.1 million related to goodwill and $0.3 million related to separately identifiable net 
assets) and the noncontrolling interest is correspondingly lower as well.
 
Besides adjustments of assets and liabilities to their fair values and the treatment of non-
controlling interests, four items are treated differently under the purchase method than under 
the acquisition method. These differences are described below.
• Direct combination costs. Business combinations require several types of costly 
 professional services. Examples include investment banking services, preparation of legal 
documents, and tax planning and accounting services. The purchase method considered 
these to be costs of making the acquisition. Therefore, these costs were capitalized in the 
Investment account. The increased purchase price resulted in an increase in the amount of 
goodwill recognized. The acquisition method treats these costs as payments for services 
which are expensed as incurred and reported in the consolidated income statement in the 
period of acquisition.
• Contingent consideration. Some business acquisitions provide for contingent consider-
ation to be given to the acquired firm’s shareholders if some future performance measures 
are met. For example, additional payments by the parent may be required if the subsidiary’s 
profits reach a certain threshold within a short time following the acquisition.  Under the 
purchase method, such contingent payments were accounted for as postcombination 
 adjustments to the purchase price. The acquisition method treats contingent consideration 
as a negotiated component of the acquisition cost and, therefore, is treated as part of the 
fair value of consideration transferred at acquisition. This means that the estimated value 
of the contingent consideration is recorded on the acquirer’s books at the acquisition date 
and is included in the calculation of goodwill acquired.
• Bargain purchases. When the fair value of the consideration paid by the acquiring firm 
is less than the fair value of the separately identified assets acquired net of liabilities 
 assumed in a business combination, a bargain purchase is deemed to have occurred. This 
situation can occur in a forced sale in which the seller is acting under compulsion or 
 financial  distress. The purchase method used this negative amount to reduce the sub-
sidiary’s assets were reported below their estimated fair values. The acquisition method 
records no assets at amounts below their assessed fair values and, therefore,  recognizes a 
gain on bargain purchase at the acquisition date.
• Acquired in-process research and development. The purchase method allocated the 
purchase price (fair value of consideration given) to the tangible and intangible assets 
 acquired and liabilities assumed. For many firms, especially those in high-tech industries, 
a significant portion of the purchase price was allocated to in-process research and 
 development (IPR&D). Prior GAAP immediately wrote off amounts allocated to IPR&D 
unless those assets had an alternative future use.12 Because of the ambiguity in determin-
ing whether IPR&D had an alternative future use, firms often abused this discretionary 
accounting treatment by aggressive allocations that  created large write-offs. This paved 
the way for later reporting higher consolidated  earnings when the R&D projects turned 
out to be viable. Current GAAP closes this  loophole by requiring that tangible and intan-
gible R&D assets acquired in a business combination, including those that may have 
12 Pre-Codification “Applicability of Statement No. 2 to Business Combinations Accounted for by the Purchase Method—An 
Interpretation of FASB Statement No. 2,” FASB Interpretation No. 4. (1975). This pronouncement has been superseded but 
is available at www.fasb.org under pre-Codification Standards.

 
Previous Approaches to Consolidated Statements 
981
no alternative future use, be measured at fair value and recognized in the consolidated 
balance sheet at the acquisition date. These  capitalized R&D costs are reported as intangi-
ble assets with indefinite lives subject to  periodic impairment reviews (see Chapter 10).
Pooling of Interests
To see how pooling works and its financial statement effects relative to the acquisition 
method, let’s return once more to the Alphonse and Gaston example from earlier in the chap-
ter. Instead of acquiring a 100% ownership in Gaston with cash, assume that Alphonse ex-
changes 8 million shares of its own stock with a fair value of $10 million for all of Gaston’s 
outstanding stock. Also assume this transaction meets all the requirements to qualify as a 
pooling of interests.
 
In a stock-for-stock exchange, the owners of both Alphonse and Gaston continue as eq-
uity investors in the newly merged corporation. This continuation of ownership interests in 
poolings contrasts sharply with what happens in a cash buyout. After a cash buyout, the 
acquired company’s former shareholders have 
no further equity interest in the combined en-
terprise. Pooling-of-interests reporting rules 
treat the two formerly independent companies 
as though they have decided to join resources 
and “keep house together.” Because both orig-
inal ownership interests survive, no buyout is 
considered to have taken place. The consolidation of Alphonse’s and Gaston’s financial 
statements combines the book values of the two entities. As in acquisition and purchase ac-
counting, however, intra- entity transactions and double-counted items must be eliminated 
as in Exhibit 16.7.
 
The only adjustment needed here is the elimination of the Investment in Gaston account 
against Gaston’s equity accounts. No other adjustments or reclassifications are needed 
EXHIBIT 16.7
Alphonse and Gaston Company: Pooling Method—100% Ownership
Preparation of Consolidated Balance Sheet—Date of Acquisition
 
 
Adjustments and Eliminations 
Consolidated
 
Alphonse 
Gaston 
Dr. 
Cr. 
Balance Sheet
Assets 
 
 
 
 
 Current assets 
$15,000,000 
$2,000,000 
 
 
$17,000,000
 Fixed assets, net 
20,000,000 
6,500,000 
 
 
26,500,000
 Investment in Gaston 
8,000,000 
— 
 
$8,000,000 (A) 
—
 
$43,000,000 
$8,500,000 
 
 
$43,500,000
Liabilities 
 
 
 
 
 Current liabilities 
$ 1,000,000 
$  500,000 
 
 
$ 1,500,000
Stockholders’ Equity 
 Common stock 
36,000,000 
6,000,000 
$6,000,000 (A) 
 
36,000,000
 Capital in excess of par 
2,000,000 
 
 
 
2,000,000
 Retained earnings 
4,000,000 
2,000,000 
2,000,000 (A) 
 
4,000,000
 
$43,000,000 
$8,500,000 
$8,000,000 
$8,000,000 
$43,500,000
The entry to record the acquisition on Alphonse’s books would use the book value 
of Gaston’s net assets ($2,000,000 1 $6,500,000 2 $500,000) as the carrying 
amount in the investment account—that is,
DR Investment in Gaston  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 $8,000,000
   CR Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
 
$8,000,000

982 
CHAPTER 16
Intercorporate Equity Investments
The computed growth rates are misleading because the basic operating revenue data—and all 
other items in the income statement—are noncomparable.
 
To aid interperiod comparisons, existing disclosure rules require a pro forma (meaning 
as if) note to the financial statements that gives information for key income statement items 
as if the acquisition had taken place on the first day of the previous fiscal year, in this case 
January 1, 2005. These pro forma note disclosures for Lincoln National (shown in Panel (c) 
because Alphonse’s Investment in Gaston account equals Gaston’s net book value of eq-
uity. That is why under pooling of interests there is no write-up of assets or recognition of 
goodwill.
Financial Analysis Issues—Acquisition 
Method and Purchase Method
The disclosure rules for business combinations accounted for under the acquisition or pur-
chase methods complicate financial analysis. Trend analysis becomes difficult. Why? Because 
under U.S. GAAP, comparative financial statements are not retroactively adjusted to include 
data for the acquired company for periods prior to the acquisition. To illustrate, Panel (a) of 
Exhibit 16.8 presents comparative income statements from the 2007 annual report of Lincoln 
National Corporation, a holding company that operates multiple insurance, investment man-
agement, broadcasting, and sports programming businesses through subsid-
iaries. In April 2006, Lincoln National acquired a 100% interest in 
Jefferson-Pilot  Corporation, a financial services and broadcasting holding 
company in an  acquisition accounted for using the purchase method. Accord-
ingly, Lincoln National’s 2006 consolidated income statement includes the 
revenues and  expenses of Jefferson-Pilot from the acquisition date (April 3) 
through December 31, 2006, Lincoln National’s fiscal year-end. (See Panel (b) 
of Exhibit 16.8.) Under the rules of purchase accounting that existed at that time,13 the 2005 
numbers reported in Lincoln  National’s 2007 consolidated comparative income statement do 
not include any of Jefferson-Pilot’s results for that year. However, Jefferson-Pilot’s full-year 
revenues and expenses are included in Lincoln National’s 2007 consolidated income state-
ment numbers. Thus, the  income statements over the three years are noncomparable—Lin-
coln National’s 2007 statements include Jefferson-Pilot’s results for 12 months, the 2006 
statement reflects Jefferson-Pilot’s performance for 9 months, and the 2005 statement ex-
cludes Jefferson-Pilot’s results altogether!
 
To illustrate the problem of trying to perform time-series comparisons for a business com-
bination, we use the operating revenue amounts in Panel (a) of Exhibit 16.8. The three-year 
operating revenue data from Lincoln National’s consolidated statement of income, along with 
a computation of year-to-year growth in this measure is:
13 Pre-Codification SFAS No. 141, para. 49.
Because the acquisition method also includes 
the operating results of the acquired subsidiary 
in consolidated income only from the date of ac-
quisition, the same distortions in year-to-year 
growth rates described here for the purchase 
method also apply to the acquisition method.
($ in millions) 
2007 
2006 
2005
Operating revenue as reported in consolidated 
 financial statements 
$10,594 
$8,962 
$5,475
Rate of growth in operating revenue compared to
 prior year 
18.2% 
63.7%

 
Previous Approaches to Consolidated Statements 
983
EXHIBIT 16.8
Lincoln National Corporation and Subsidiaries
Disclosures Subsequent to a Business Combination: Purchase Accounting
Panel (a)
Consolidated Statement of Earnings
($ in millions) 
2007 
2006 
2005
Revenue
 Insurance premiums 
$ 1,945 
$ 1,406 
$   308
 Insurance fees 
3,254 
2,604 
1,752
 Investment advisory fees 
360 
328 
256
 Net investment income 
4,384 
3,981 
2,702
 Realized gain (loss) 
(118) 
(3) 
(3)
 Amortization of deferred gain on indemnity reinsurance 
83 
76 
77
 Other revenue and fees 
686 
570 
383
  Total revenues 
10,594 
8,962 
5,475
Expenses
 Benefits and interest credited 
5,152 
4,170 
2,332
 Underwriting, acquisition, insurance and other expenses 
3,284 
2,790 
1,981
 Interest and debt expense 
284 
224 
87
  Total benefits and expenses 
8,720 
7,184 
4,400
Income before federal income taxes 
1,874 
1,778 
1,075
Federal income taxes 
553 
483 
244
  Income before cumulative effect of accounting changes 
1,321 
1,295 
831
  Income (loss) from discontinued operation, net of 
   federal income taxes 
(106) 
21 
—
   Net income 
$ 1,215 
$ 1,316 
$   831
Panel (b)
Excerpts from Annual Report Note
On April 3, 2006, we completed our merger with Jefferson-Pilot by acquiring 100% of the outstand-
ing shares of Jefferson-Pilot in a transaction accounted for under the purchase method of account-
ing prescribed by SFAS No. 141, “Business Combinations” (“SFAS 141”). Jefferson-Pilot’s results 
of operations are included in our results of operations beginning April 3, 2006. As a result of the 
merger, our product portfolio was expanded, and we now offer fixed and variable universal life, 
fixed annuities, including indexed annuities, variable annuities, mutual funds and institutional ac-
counts, 401(k) and 403(b) offerings, and group life, disability, and dental insurance products. We 
also own and operate television and radio stations in selected markets in the Southeastern and 
Western United States and produce and distribute sports programming.
Panel (c)
 
 
 
Year Ended
(in millions) 
2007 
 
2006 
 
2005
Revenue 
$10,594 
 
$10,134 
 
$9,559
 
 
4.54% 
 
6.00% 
Net Income 
1,215 
 
1,430 
 
1,352
 
 
−15.03% 
 
5.80%
of Exhibit 16.8) reflect full-year results for Jefferson-Pilot in both 2006 and 2005. However, 
these pro forma data do not encompass all income statement items and do not include peri-
ods prior to 2005. Consequently, even with the note disclosure, it is usually not possible for 
analysts to make comparisons of complete income statements adjusted for the acquisition. 
This is a serious deficiency that destroys the comparability of the time-series financial 

984 
CHAPTER 16
Intercorporate Equity Investments
 statement data used by lenders and other financial analysts. Indeed, if the acquired company 
is large in relation to the acquirer, the consolidated financial statements seriously distort 
trends and other comparative data.
 
The pro forma rates of operating revenue growth for 2006 and 2007 were 6.0% and 4.5%, 
respectively—assuming that the combination had occurred at the beginning of 2005. These 
rates are much lower than the rates computed from the operating revenue numbers actually 
reported in the financial statements—63.7% and 18.2%. Also note in Panel (c) of Exhibit 16.8 
how the sparseness of pro forma disclosures makes it possible to compare only one other in-
come statement line item: bottom-line net income. The only way to overcome this problem is 
to gather past financial statement data for Jefferson-Pilot and consolidate its past results with 
those of Lincoln National (using appropriate assumptions about intra-entity sales and loans, 
of course). It’s easy to obtain these data when the acquired company is publicly held. How-
ever, if it is not publicly held, these data may be difficult or even impossible to obtain.
 
For business combinations accounted for as poolings of interests (allowed until July 1, 
2001), this comparability problem did not occur. That’s because under pooling, all past finan-
cial statement data were retroactively consolidated to include both parties to the combination. 
Keep in mind, however, that while the pooling-of-interests approach overcame some income 
statement comparability problems, the reported financial data using this approach are still 
fraught with deficiencies.
RECAP
Trend analysis under acquisition and purchase method accounting becomes difficult be-
cause U.S. GAAP comparative financial statements are not retroactively adjusted to in-
clude data for the acquired company for periods prior to the acquisition. In the year of the 
acquisition, the consolidated income statement includes the parent company results 
for the full year and the results of the subsidiary from the time the acquisition took place 
to the end of the year (that is, for the fraction of a year the parent owned the subsidiary). 
In the year following acquisition, the consolidated income statement includes the full year 
results for both the parent and the subsidiary. In the year prior to the acquisition, the in-
come statement includes the results of the parent company only and does not include 
any of the subsidiary’s results. This can lead to distortions in year-to-year growth rates in 
revenues and profits that statement users need to be aware of. Supplemental disclosures 
allow analysts to make adjustments to the reported numbers to make more valid com-
parisons, but only for selected statement items.
Financial Analysis Issues—Acquisition Method vs. 
Pooling of Interests
The pooling-of-interests method has been widely criticized. To help understand why, consider 
Exhibit 16.9, which highlights the differences in consolidated balance sheets that would result 
for Alphonse & Gaston Company, the combined organization, under acquisition versus 
 pooling-of-interests accounting.
 
Prior to the acquisition, Gaston had a fair value of $10,000,000—the amount Alphonse was 
willing to pay. Acquisition accounting brings Gaston into the consolidated balance sheet at its 
fair value of $10 million. Under pooling-of-interests accounting, Gaston is shown in the con-
solidated balance sheet at its net book value of $8 million. The $1.5 million and $500,000 
differences in fixed assets and goodwill, respectively, are shown in the “Difference” column 
in Exhibit 16.9. The other balance sheet differences are because Alphonse paid with cash in 
the acquisition method example and with stock in the pooling example.

 
Variable Interest Entities
985
 
Pooling critics argue that pooling permits acquiring companies to record acquisitions at 
artificially low amounts. In our example, Gaston is worth $10 million, and this is presumably 
the value that the sellers demanded. Therefore, the value of Alphonse stock that Gaston’s 
shareholders received must have been $10 million. Despite this economic reality, the transac-
tion is booked at $8 million under the pooling-of-interests method. Critics charge that this 
understatement distorts the balance sheet as well as subsequent income statements. The in-
come in future years is affected because fixed assets are $1.5 million lower—the unrecorded 
difference between fair value and book value—under pooling than under acquisition account-
ing, so future depreciation expense will be lower. Similarly, because no goodwill exists under 
pooling, there is no potential goodwill impairment to reduce future earnings.14 Both of these 
effects make income under pooling higher. Critics further charge that the lower pooling bal-
ance sheet numbers for gross assets and equity make rate-of-return ratios appear higher. That’s 
because, under pooling, the denominator of both the return-on-assets and return-on-equity 
ratios is lower. Some critics suggest that these distortions are not accidental. They argue that 
the cosmetic statement effects of pooling explain its popularity among takeover-minded ex-
ecutives prior to July 1, 2001, when it was permitted under GAAP. Pooling provided an op-
portunity to buy companies and then record the acquisition on the books at artificially low 
numbers, thereby improving the appearance of subsequent financial statements.
VARIABLE INTEREST ENTITIES
Enron’s collapse in 2001 created a demand for increased disclosure and transparency about 
companies’ interests in special purpose  entities (SPE) or variable 
interest entities (VIE). A VIE is a corporation, partnership, trust, or 
any other legal structure used for  business  purposes that either (a) 
Pre-Codification standards referred to these legal entities as 
special purpose entities (SPE). FASB ASC now refers to 
these as variable interest  entities (VIE).
Comparative Consolidated Balance Sheets
 
 
  
Difference
 
 
Pooling-of-  
(Pooling
 
Acquisition 
Interests  
minus
 
Method 
Method 
Acquisition)
Assets 
 
 
 Current assets 
$ 7,000,000 
$17,000,000 
$10,000,000
 Fixed assets, net 
28,000,000 
26,500,000 
(1,500,000)
 Goodwill 
500,000 
— 
(500,000)
 
$35,500,000 
$43,500,000 
$  8,000,000
Liabilities 
 
 
 Current liabilities 
$ 1,500,000 
$1,500,000 
—
Stockholders’ Equity 
 
 
 Common stock 
28,000,000 
36,000,000 
$  8,000,000
 Capital in excess of par 
2,000,000 
2,000,000 
—
 Retained earnings 
4,000,000 
4,000,000 
—
 
$35,500,000 
$43,500,000 
$  8,000,000
EXHIBIT 16.9
Alphonse and Gaston Company: Acquisition versus 
Pooling-of-Interest Method
14 At the time poolings were permitted, goodwill under the purchase method (the other permissible alternative at the time) 
was amortized, making future earnings charges a certainty.
Enron, with the help of its 
chief financial officer, Andrew 
Fastow, set up a number of 
limited partnerships through 
which it engaged in billions of 
dollars of complex transactions 
to hedge fluctuating  values in 
some of Enron’s broadband 
telecommunications and other 
technology  investments. Under 
existing reporting rules at the 
time, Enron was able to avoid 
consolidation of these VIEs, 
thereby keeping hundreds of 
millions of dollars of debt and 
losses off of their financial 
statements.

986 
CHAPTER 16
Intercorporate Equity Investments
does not have equity investors with voting rights or (b) has equity investors that do not provide 
sufficient financial resources for the entity to support its activities. VIEs are often formed to 
engage in what are called structured financing arrangements, which offer a company an 
 opportunity to borrow money based on the 
value of a specific project or asset rather than 
on its own credit rating. Major uses of VIEs 
 include synthetic leasing (see Chapter 12), se-
curitizing loans and mortgages (see Chapter 8), 
selling  receivables (see Chapter 8), and setting 
up take-or-pay contracts or throughput 
arrangements.
The accounting for VIEs is complex and we 
only provide an overview here. In 2009, GAAP 
was amended to address the problem of off-
balance-sheet entities generating significant 
losses for companies during the 2008 eco-
nomic crisis. The critical issue is determining 
when the sponsoring entity must consolidate a 
VIE. GAAP requires a reporting (sponsoring) 
entity to consolidate a VIE if that company has 
a controlling financial interest in a VIE and, 
thus, is the VIE’s primary beneficiary.15 A 
company is deemed to have a controlling fi-
nancial interest in a VIE if it has both of the 
following characteristics:
1. The power to direct the activities of the VIE that most significantly impact the VIE’s 
 economic performance.
2. The obligation to absorb losses of the VIE that could potentially be significant to the 
VIE or the right to receive benefits from the VIE that could potentially be significant to 
the VIE.
When these two conditions are met, the reporting entity (primary beneficiary) must consoli-
date the VIE using the acquisition method. A reporting entity must identify which activities 
most significantly impact the VIE’s economic performance and determine whether it has the 
power (through voting rights or similar rights) to direct those activities. Only one reporting 
entity, if any, is expected to be identified as the primary beneficiary of a VIE and, therefore, to 
consolidate its activities.
Because the primary beneficiary is required to consolidate a VIE, financial 
statement users are provided with more complete information about the re-
sources, obligations, risks, and opportunities facing the sponsoring firm. After 
the changes to the accounting guidelines in 2009, companies began consoli-
dating numerous entities that had previously been off-balance-sheet. Because 
the consolidation of these entities increased both debt and assets, the debt-to-
equity ratios for these companies increased. We discuss this issue within the 
context of a securitization entity in Chapter 8 (pages 437–439). The collater-
alized borrowing scenario in the Chapter 8 example is equivalent to what 
 occurs in a consolidation.
For example, a company building a factory can borrow money based on the worth of 
the factory or on expectations of its future revenue.
A take-or-pay contract is an “agreement between a purchaser and a seller that 
 provides for the purchaser to pay specified amounts periodically in return for 
products or services. The purchaser must make specified minimum payments 
even if it does not take delivery of the contracted products or services.”*
 
For example, two companies may form an SPE with a nominal investment 
to build an oil refinery that both companies will use. The SPE borrows money to 
build the refinery with the note being guaranteed by one or both companies. 
Both companies agree to make minimum payments to the SPE each quarter in 
 exchange for a specified number of barrels of refined oil on which they may or 
may not take delivery.
 
A throughput agreement is an “agreement between a shipper (processor) and 
the owner of a transportation facility (such as an oil or natural gas pipeline or a 
ship) or a manufacturing facility that provides for the shipper (processor) to pay 
specified amounts periodically in return for the transportation (processing) of the 
product. The shipper (processor) is obligated to provide specified minimum 
 quantities to be transported (processed) in each period and is required to make 
cash payments even if it does not provide the contracted quantities.”*
* FASB ASC Master Glossary.
15 FASB ASC Paragraph 810-10-25-20: Consolidation—Overall—Recognition—Variable Interest Entities.
Although more than one reporting entity could 
have the characteristics in (2) above, generally 
only one reporting entity is likely to have the 
power to direct the activities of the VIE that most 
significantly impact its economic performance. 
Many joint ventures are VIEs with joint power. 
If each of the partners must consent to those ac-
tivities that most significantly impact the VIE’s 
economic performance, then GAAP would not 
require either party to consolidate the VIE.

 
Accounting for Foreign Subsidiaries and Foreign Currency Transactions 
987
ACCOUNTING FOR FOREIGN SUBSIDIARIES AND 
FOREIGN CURRENCY TRANSACTIONS
Transactions denominated in foreign currencies pose a unique problem. Because these trans-
actions must be presented in the financial statements in a different currency than the currency 
used to complete the transaction, the transaction must be translated into the home currency—
the U.S. dollar in the case of a U.S. company. This problem is not unique to companies having 
foreign subsidiaries that need to be consolidated. Any company having transactions denomi-
nated in a foreign currency must translate the transactions. We address the issue here because 
the same  approach to accounting for foreign currency transactions also applies to the transla-
tion of the financial statements of certain foreign subsidiaries.
Foreign Currency Transactions
Foreign currency transactions are business transactions denominated in a foreign currency. 
Examples include a U.S. company taking out a bank loan denominated in Norwegian kroner 
or purchasing inventory in the Netherlands on credit for a price expressed in euros. The ac-
counting for foreign currency transactions depends on the type of asset acquired or liability 
incurred. Let’s consider a foreign currency transaction that involves the acquisition of a mon-
etary asset—that is, an asset such as cash or accounts receivable whose value is derived from 
the number of monetary units into which it is convertible.
 
Assume that on January 1, 2014, Yankee Corporation (a U.S. company) sells 100 units of 
its product to a U.K. customer for £10 per unit, or £1,000 total. Payment is due on April 1, 
2014. On January 1, 2014, assume that £1 is worth $2 and that the per unit production cost 
incurred by Yankee is $8. Given this information, Yankee records the foreign currency transac-
tion on its books in this way:
DR Accounts receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $2,000 
   CR Sales revenue. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$2,000
 To record the receivable of £1,000 at its 1/1/14 U.S. dollar equivalent of $2,000.
DR Cost of goods sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$800 
   CR Inventory   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$800
To record 100 units @ $8.
The receivable is denominated in pounds—which makes this a foreign currency transaction. 
Because Yankee keeps its books in dollars, the receivable must be reexpressed in home- 
currency units when preparing financial statements. The economically equivalent amount of 
U.S. dollars is found using the exchange rate in effect at the transaction date—£1 5 $2.  
Although the  receivable is initially reflected on the books at $2,000, in reality what the cus-
tomer owes is £1,000, not $2,000.
 
Suppose that by the end of the quarter, the pound has fallen relative to the dollar, so that on 
March 31, 2014, the exchange rate is £1 5 $1.80. At the current exchange rate, the receivable 
is worth only $1,800, so Yankee books the following entry when preparing its quarterly 
statements:
DR Foreign exchange loss   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$200
   CR Accounts receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$200
To reduce the U.S. dollar value of a £1,000 receivable to $1,800.

988 
CHAPTER 16
Intercorporate Equity Investments
Yankee has a loss because it is owed pounds whose 
value in U.S. dollar terms has fallen. This loss is re-
flected in the income statement of the period in which 
the loss occurs. Monetary assets (such as accounts 
receivable) that arise from foreign currency transac-
tions are shown in the financial statements at their 
dollar equivalent using the exchange rate in effect at 
the financial statement date. Monetary liabilities 
(such as accounts or bonds payable) are similarly translated using the exchange rate in effect 
at the statement date. The statement date exchange rate is referred to as the current rate.
 
Suppose that the exchange rate on April 1, 2014, when the receivable is paid, is still 
£1 5 $1.80. The customer remits £1,000, which Yankee converts into dollars. The entry on 
Yankee’s books is:
Most liabilities are monetary because they are expressed in units of 
 currency (for example, a Japanese yen account payable of ¥9,000,000) 
and will be settled using foreign currency monetary assets. However, a 
few liabilities are settled by using nonmonetary assets; this small class of 
 liabilities is considered to be nonmonetary. Examples include estimated 
product warranty liabilities and customer deposits for products to be 
 produced and delivered in future periods.
DR Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$1,800
   CR Accounts receivable   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$1,800
To remove the receivable from the books. The initial $2,000 minus the 3/31/14 
write-down of $200 equals the carrying amount of $1,800.
 
We next illustrate the accounting for a foreign currency transaction that involves a non-
monetary asset. Nonmonetary assets are items such as inventory, equipment, land, buildings, 
and trucks whose value is not derived from the right to receive cash.
 
Suppose that because of Yankee’s growing volume of sales to U.K. customers it decides 
to purchase a warehouse in London to store inventory awaiting shipment to customers. It 
purchases a building on June 30, 2014, for £300,000; on that date, the exchange rate is 
£1 5 $1.75. The building is recorded on Yankee’s books at the U.S. dollar equivalent of 
the foreign currency transaction price at the purchase date:
DR Warehouse building  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $525,000
   CR Cash   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$525,000
To record the acquisition of the London warehouse at the U.S. dollar equivalent 
of the foreign currency transaction price: £300,000 3 1.75 5 $525,000.
 
The subsequent accounting for nonmonetary assets acquired in a foreign currency transac-
tion is identical to the accounting for nonmonetary assets acquired in the domestic currency. 
Specifically, the fixed asset’s historical cost in dollars is used as the measurement basis in 
subsequent financial statements throughout the asset’s life. Regardless of the pound’s value 
relative to the U.S. dollar at year-end 2014, the London warehouse is still shown on Yankee’s 
books at $525,000—that is, at its acquisition cost in dollars (minus depreciation, of course). 
Thus, to reflect the gross carrying amount of nonmonetary assets acquired in a foreign cur-
rency transaction, Yankee uses the exchange rate in effect at the time of the transaction. This 
rate is called the historical exchange rate.
RECAP
The accounting for assets and liabilities arising from foreign currency transactions de-
pends on the nature of the item—that is,
1. Foreign currency monetary assets and liabilities are remeasured using the current 
exchange rate in effect at the balance sheet date.
2. Foreign currency nonmonetary assets and liabilities are remeasured using the histori-
cal exchange rate in effect when the item was acquired or incurred.

 
Accounting for Foreign Subsidiaries and Foreign Currency Transactions 
989
Foreign Subsidiaries
All majority-owned subsidiaries—foreign and domestic—must be consolidated using the 
methods described earlier in the chapter. However, there’s an additional complication when 
consolidating foreign subsidiaries. The subsidiary’s financial statements, which are expressed 
in foreign currency units, must first be transformed into the parent’s currency units—U.S. 
 dollars for a U.S. parent—before the consolidation process begins.
 
The transformation under U.S. GAAP specifies one of two procedures, depending on the 
foreign subsidiary’s operating characteristics:16
1. Foreign subsidiaries that are mere extensions of the parent with no self-sufficiency are 
 remeasured using the temporal method. For example, a European sales subsidiary of 
a U.S. seed company, which sells seed produced by the U.S. parent to European farmers 
and remits the sales proceeds back to the U.S. parent, would use the temporal method.
2. Foreign subsidiaries that are essentially freestanding units with self-contained foreign 
 operations are translated using the current rate method. For example, a European 
 manufacturing and sales subsidiary of a U.S. computer company, which buys parts in 
 Europe, assembles the final product, and sells it to European businesses, would use the 
 current rate method.
 
The procedure selected to transform subsidiary statements expressed in foreign currency 
units into the parent’s currency units is called the functional currency choice because it is 
based on whether the currency in which the subsidiary effectively operates (i.e., the functional 
currency) is the local currency or the parent company’s currency. What guides this choice is 
subtle;17 foreign subsidiaries whose operations are not self-sufficient are considered to be ef-
fectively operating in the parent’s currency (the U.S. dollar for a subsidiary of a U.S. com-
pany) while engaging in a series of foreign currency transactions. The transformation of the 
results to the parent’s currency accordingly treats the financial results of these subsidiaries in 
the same way foreign currency transactions are treated. Freestanding subsidiaries follow a 
different approach because they are deemed to be effectively operating in the local currency 
and therefore not engaging in foreign currency transactions.
Accounting for Nonfreestanding Foreign Subsidiaries 
To see what it 
means when we say that a foreign subsidiary is not freestanding, let’s consider a U.S. com-
pany, Doodle Corporation, with a U.K. subsidiary called Dandy Ltd. Dandy serves as  Doodle’s 
U.K. marketing arm. Doodle manufactures a product in the United States using U.S. sourced 
materials and labor. Some of the production is shipped from the United States to the United 
Kingdom where it is sold to U.K. customers at a price denominated in pounds sterling. Prod-
uct distribution and the collection of the receivables are coordinated by two U.K. employees 
of Dandy Ltd. Upon collection of the receivables, the pounds are remitted to the United States. 
This cycle is repeated as the pounds are converted into dollars, the dollars are used in the 
United States to manufacture more inventory, and some portion of the inventory is again 
shipped to the United Kingdom for sale to customers there. Dandy’s only U.K. assets are (1) 
a small amount of cash to pay expenses, (2) inventory from Doodle that has not yet been 
shipped to customers, and (3) a building that serves as both a warehouse and an office for the 
two employees.
16 FASB ASC Section 830-10-45: Foreign Currency Matters—Overall—Other Presentation Matters. Although our discussion 
centers on consolidation of a foreign subsidiary, the rules described here must also be used in conjunction with the equity 
method when the parent owns between 20% and 50% of a foreign company.
17 See L. Revsine, “The Rationale Underlying the Functional Currency Choice,” The Accounting Review, July 1984, 
pp. 504–14.

990 
CHAPTER 16
Intercorporate Equity Investments
 
The situation described here is a classic illustration of a foreign subsidiary that is merely an 
extension of the parent. Dandy Ltd. is a marketing arm of Doodle rather than a viable, free-
standing company. It is a conduit for administering foreign sales and has no independent life 
of its own.
 
Under GAAP, subsidiaries like Dandy Ltd. are treated as if they were created for the sole 
purpose of facilitating foreign currency transactions. Because such subsidiaries are conduits 
for foreign currency transactions, upon consolidation they are treated as if the parent company 
had engaged in the foreign transactions directly. That is, the consolidated financial state-
ments of a nonfreestanding subsidiary are identical to the financial statements that would 
have resulted had the subsidiary not existed and instead the parent had engaged in the 
foreign currency transactions directly.
 
The temporal method achieves this effect in the financial statements by translating the 
subsidiary’s foreign currency statements into U.S. dollars18 using the exchange rates shown in 
Exhibit 16.10. The guiding principles behind these exchange rates are:
1. Monetary assets and liabilities are continuously revalued to the current rate at any point 
in time, whereas nonmonetary assets and liabilities are not revalued when exchange 
rates change.
2. When a transaction results in the recognition of a new asset or liability, the new asset 
or liability is valued (in U.S. dollar terms) using the exchange rate in effect at the 
time of the transaction and the corresponding revenue or expense is valued at the 
same amount.
EXHIBIT 16.10
Translation Exchange Rates under 
the Temporal Method
Account Category 
Rate Used
Balance sheet
 Monetary assets and liabilities 
Current rate
 Nonmonetary assets and liabilties 
Historical rate
Income statement
 All revenue and expense accounts resulting 
   in an immediate inflow or outflow of cash 
or recognition of a new asset (e.g., sales 
revenue creates an account receivable) 
or of a new liability (e.g., salary expense 
creates wages payable) 
Rate at time of transaction
 Expenses resulting in de-rcognition of an 
  existing asset translated at the current rate 
 (e.g., all expenses paid in cash) 
Rate at time of transaction
 Expenses resulting in de-recognition of an 
   existing asset translated at the historical 
rate (e.g., depreciation de-recognizes a 
fixed asset, cost of goods sold 
de-recognizes inventory) 
Historical rate
18 Authoritative accounting literature uses the term remeasure when describing the conversion from foreign currency units to 
home currency units under the temporal method. For simplicity, we ignore this nuance and refer to the process as 
translation.

 
Accounting for Foreign Subsidiaries and Foreign Currency Transactions 
991
3. When a transaction results in the de-recognition of an existing asset or liability, the 
 corresponding U.S. dollar amount is removed from the balance sheet with a like amount 
treated as revenue or expense.
 
a. If the de-recognized asset or liability was a monetary item, it was valued at the current 
rate at the transaction date (because it had been continually revalued) so the transaction 
date exchange rate is used to determine the amount of revenue or expense recognized.
 
b. If the de-recognized asset or liability was a nonmonetary item, it was valued at the ex-
change rate in effect when the item was first recognized (i.e., the historical exchange rate), 
so the historical rate is used to determine the amount of revenue of expense to recognize.
 
To illustrate the temporal method, consider the following transactions for Dandy Ltd. 
 during 2014.
1. On January 1, 2014, it receives inventory costing $800 from Doodle when £1 5 $2, and 
sells those goods on credit for £1,000.
2. The pound falls to £1 5 $1.80 on March 31, 2014. Dandy collects receivables of £1,000 
on April 1, 2014, when £1 5 $1.80.
3. Dandy purchases a building in London for £300,000 on June 30, 2014, when 
£1 5 $1.75.
These transactions are identical to the foreign currency transactions entered into by Yankee 
Corporation directly in our earlier example. In Exhibit 16.11, we show the result of using the 
temporal method to translate Dandy Ltd.’s statements. The results under GAAP for Yankee’s 
foreign currency transactions are displayed in the shaded column for comparison.
 
Comparing the Dandy statement numbers with those of Yankee in Exhibit 16.11 demon-
strates that using the temporal method results in Dandy’s statements being denominated in 
EXHIBIT 16.11
Comparison of Temporal Method Results with 
Accounting for Foreign Currency Transactions
Foreign Currency
 
Temporal Method Translation 
Transactions
 
Dandy Ltd.  
Exchange 
Dandy Ltd.  
Yankee
 
in £s 
Rate 
in $s 
Corporation
Income statement 
 Sales 
£    1,000 
1£ 5 $2 
$    2,000 
$    2,000
 Cost of sales 
400 
1£ 5 $2 
800 
800
Gross profit 
600 
 
1,200 
    1,200
 Foreign exchange loss* 
— 
 
200 
200
Operating income 
£       600 
 
$    1,000 
$    1,000
Selected balance sheet accounts 
At 3/31/14
 Account receivable 
£    1,000 
1£ 5 $1.80 
$    1,800 
$    1,800
At 4/1/14 
 Cash 
£    1,000 
1£ 5 $1.80 
$    1,800 
$    1,800
At 6/30/14 
 Building 
£300,000 
1£ 5 $1.75 
$525,000 
$525,000
* Computed as:
Monetary asset on acquisition 
£1,000 when 1£ 5 $2.00 5 $2,000
Monetary asset at March 31, 2014 
£1,000 when 1£ 5 $1.80 5  1,800
 Foreign exchange loss 
$  200

992 
CHAPTER 16
Intercorporate Equity Investments
dollar figures that equal those of Yankee. This is no coincidence. Both Dandy and Yankee are 
considered to have engaged in identical foreign currency transactions, so the two sets of 
results must be equal. The temporal method achieves this result.
Accounting for Self-Contained Foreign Subsidiaries 
When a foreign 
subsidiary and its parent operate independently, the translation of the subsidiary’s financial 
statements into U.S. dollars uses the current rate method. To understand why, let’s consider a 
self-contained subsidiary whose operations do not rely extensively on the parent.
 
A U.S. food company has a Swiss subsidiary formed by a capital infusion from the U.S. 
parent. Once the equity infusion was in place, the remainder of the Swiss subsidiary’s long-
term capital was raised using Swiss franc borrowing. The subsidiary engages in no transac-
tions with the parent. Operations are entirely contained in Switzerland where the company 
hires employees, buys inventory, manufactures its product line, and sells to Swiss and other 
European customers. The Swiss operation plows back operating profits to expand into new 
product lines and to increase production capacity. While the parent may periodically receive 
dividends from the subsidiary, its investment remains until it either sells or liquidates the 
subsidiary.
 
For self-contained foreign subsidiaries, the effect of changes in exchange rates on future 
dollar cash flows is uncertain. Consider a rise in the Swiss franc. One possible effect of the 
rise is that it will make the subsidiary’s products more expensive to foreign purchasers and 
could adversely affect profits. The rise in the Swiss franc also means that input purchases in 
other currencies are less expensive, so a favorable profit effect could ensue. The possibilities 
are many and depend on the subsidiary’s individual characteristics and on those of the  markets 
in which it operates. These possibilities include:
1. Does the subsidiary price its product sales in countries outside Switzerland in Swiss 
francs or in units of the foreign currencies?
2. Does the subsidiary adjust its Swiss franc selling price when the value of the franc rises 
or falls?
3. What proportion of the product input does the subsidiary purchase in Switzerland in 
francs?
4. Does the Swiss franc borrowing have a floating rate of interest that would be sensitive to 
exchange rate changes?
These are only a few of the many possibilities that could influence the magnitude and direc-
tion of the effect of the exchange rate change on ultimate dollar cash flows from the subsid-
iary. Because the ultimate exchange rate effects on U.S. dollar cash flows are uncertain, 
U.S. GAAP requires such subsidiaries to be translated using the current rate method and 
that any debit or credit arising from translation “gains” or “losses” be reported as Other 
comprehensive income, which becomes part of Accumulated other comprehensive income 
in stockholders’ equity. Under the current rate method, all asset and liability accounts are 
translated at the current exchange rate in effect at the balance sheet date and all income state-
ment accounts are translated at the exchange rate that was in effect at the time of the transac-
tion. In most cases, this means the weighted average exchange rate over the period can be 
used because it is common to assume transactions occurred evenly through the year. However, 
if there is a material transaction at a specific date (e.g., a large sale on a particular day) then 
the exchange rate on that date is used.
 
Because all asset and liability accounts in the balance sheet are translated at the same rate, 
the translated balance sheet asset and liability accounts have the same proportionality as the 
 See Chapter 2 for further 
discussion of Other compre-
hensive income components. 

 
Accounting for Foreign Subsidiaries and Foreign Currency Transactions 
993
accounts expressed in foreign currency units. 
For example, the Swiss subsidiary’s quick ratio 
derived from its Swiss franc statements will be 
identical to the quick ratio after the statements 
are translated into U.S. dollars using the current 
rate method. The current rate method provides a 
practical way to go from foreign currency units 
to dollars while still maintaining or very closely 
approximating the subsidiary’s financial ratios. 
Furthermore, by denying income statement 
recognition to the balancing debit or credit 
that arises from translation, the uncertain ultimate effect of exchange rate changes is explic-
itly carried forward. Figure 16.5 is a diagram of the translation approach under FASB ASC 
Topic 820-10-30: Foreign Currency Matters—Overall—Translation of Financial Statements.
 
The figure shows that GAAP requires firms to categorize each of their foreign subsidiaries as 
either (1) a nonfreestanding subsidiary, whose activities are so closely integrated with the parent 
that they are considered to be engaging in foreign currency transactions on behalf of the parent 
or (2) a self-contained subsidiary with an independent or virtually independent operating exis-
tence of its own. For nonfreestanding subsidiaries, exchange rate movements have an immedi-
ately determinable effect on dollar cash flows; for this reason, translation gains and losses are 
run through the income statement. By contrast, self-contained subsidiaries are put into an in-
come “holding pattern” because exchange rate movements have an indeterminate impact on the 
parent’s ultimate dollar cash flows. Consequently, a neutral translation mechanism—the current 
rate method—is used for these subsidiaries, and the resulting equity debits or credits are  reported 
in other comprehensive income rather than as elements of net income.
 
Exhibit 16.12 contains excerpts from the Pfizer Inc. 2012 annual report. Panel (a) of 
 Exhibit 16.12 shows a portion of the note disclosure regarding foreign subsidiaries. Most of 
 Ratio proportionality between foreign currency and translated dollar numbers 
is maintained  precisely for any ratio for which the numerator and denominator 
are confined to a single statement. Examples include the current ratio—both 
balance sheet accounts—and gross margin ratio—both income statement 
 accounts. This is true because the current rate method translates most  accounts 
within a single statement at the same rate—weighted average rate for income 
statement items and end-of-year rate for balance sheet asset and liability items. 
For ratios that use numbers from both statements—for example, rate of return 
on assets—the current rate method does not maintain perfect proportionality. 
However, the difference between the “mixed-statement ratio” expressed in foreign 
currency and the translated ratio expressed in U.S. dollars is usually very small. 
 Figure 16.5
 TRANSLATION APPROACH 
USED IN U.S. GAAP 
FASB ASC Topic 830-10-30: 
Foreign Currency Matters—
Overall—Translation of 
Financial Statements 
Statements of
nonfreestanding
subsidiary expressed
in foreign currency units
Statements of
nonfreestanding
subsidiary
expressed in dollars
Gains and losses from
translation reported in 
income statement
Foreign subsidiary
consolidated with
parent
Results:
“Gains” and “losses”
from translation bypass
income statement and
go into Accumulated
other comprehensive
 income (AOCI)
(stockholders’ equity)
Remeasure foreign
currency units into
dollars using the
temporal method
Translate foreign
currency units into
dollars using the
current rate method
Statements of self-
contained subsidiary
expressed in foreign
currency units
Statements of self-
contained subsidiary
expressed in dollars
Results:

994 
CHAPTER 16
Intercorporate Equity Investments
EXHIBIT 16.12
Pfizer Inc.
Panel (a): Foreign Currency Translation Note
For most of our international operations, local currencies have been determined to be the functional currencies. We translated func-
tional currency assets and liabilities to their U.S. dollar equivalents at exchange rates in effect as of the balance sheet date and we 
translated functional currency income and expense amounts to their U.S. dollar equivalents at average exchange rates for the period. 
The U.S. dollar effects that arise from changing translation rates are recorded in Other comprehensive income/(loss). The effects of 
converting non-functional currency assets and liabilities into the functional currency are recorded in Other deductions—net. For opera-
tions in highly inflationary economies, we translate monetary items at rates in effect as of the balance sheet date, with translation 
 adjustments recorded in Other deductions—net, and we translate nonmonetary items at historical rates.
Panel (b): Other Comprehensive Income (Expense)
The following table provides the changes, net of tax, in Accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss):
 
Net Unrealized Gains/(Losses) 
Benefit Plans  
Accumulated
 
Currency  
 
 
 
Prior 
Other
 
Translation  
Derivative 
Available- 
Actuarial 
Service 
Comprehensive
 
Adjustment  
Financial  
for-Sale 
Gains/ 
(Costs)/Credits 
Income/
(millions of  dollars) 
and Other 
Instruments Securities 
(Losses) 
and Other 
(Loss)
Balance, January 1, 2010 
$ 3,550 
$   6 
$ 269 
$(3,367) 
$  94 
$  552
Other comprehensive income/(loss)(a) 
(3,381) 
(214) 
(112) 
(580) 
295 
(3,992)
Balance, December 31, 2010 
169 
(208) 
157 
(3,947) 
389 
(3,440)
Other comprehensive income/(loss)(a) 
775 
(153) 
(111) 
(1,173) 
(27) 
(689)
Balance, December 31, 2011 
944 
(361) 
46 
(5,120) 
362 
(4,129)
Other comprehensive income/(loss)(a) 
(1,121) 
273 
117 
(990) 
(103) 
(1,824)
Balance, December 31, 2012 
$  (177) 
$ (88) 
$ 163 
$(6,110) 
$ 259 
$(5,953)
(a) Amounts do not include foreign currency translation adjustments attributable to noncontrolling interests of $7 million loss in 2012, $45 million loss in 2011 and 
$5 million income in 2010.
As of December 31, 2012, we estimate that we will reclassify into 2013 income the following pre-tax amounts currently held in Accu-
mulated other comprehensive loss: $4.7 million of the unrealized holding gains on derivative financial instruments; $609 million of ac-
tuarial losses related to benefit plan obligations and plan assets and other benefit plan items; and $62 million of prior service credits, 
primarily related to benefit plan amendments.
Pfizer’s foreign subsidiaries are translated using the current rate method, which means that 
translation adjustments go to a currency translation adjustment account in the Accumulated 
Other Comprehensive Income section of Pfizer’s Shareholders’ equity.
 
Panel (b) of Exhibit 16.12 shows how Accumulated other comprehensive income changed 
over the most recent three years. The currency translation adjustments are quite volatile, going 
from a $3,381 million loss in 2010 to a $775 million gain in 2011 to a $1,121 million loss in 
2012. Clearly, these gains and losses are material and highly transitory in nature, which no 
doubt is one reason the FASB elected to have these gains and losses separately disclosed as 
other comprehensive income.
GLOBAL VANTAGE POINT
This section highlights key differences between IFRS and U.S. GAAP in four areas: 
(1) accounting for financial assets (marketable securities and investments); (2) consoli-
dated financial statements and accounting for business combinations; (3) accounting for 
special purpose entities (SPEs) or variable interest entities (VIEs); and (4) accounting for 
joint ventures. We also briefly discuss key changes in accounting for financial instruments 
International

 
Global Vantage Point 
995
recently proposed in a FASB exposure draft designed to bring U.S. GAAP into greater 
alignment with IFRS.
Accounting for Financial Assets (Marketable Securities 
and Investments)
IFRS accounting for financial assets (along with other financial instruments) is contained in 
three pronouncements: IAS 32, “Financial Instruments: Presentation”; IAS 39, “Financial In-
struments: Recognition and Measurement”; and IFRS 7, “Disclosures.” Responding to criti-
cisms of current recognition and measurement rules for financial instruments, the IASB has 
begun to replace IAS 39 with IFRS 9. Phase 1 of this change deals with classification and 
measurement of financial assets and financial liabilities. The IASB issued IFRS 9, “Financial 
Instruments,” in November 2009 (with an update in October 2010) to address classification 
and measurement of financial assets and financial liabilities, with transition required for fiscal 
years beginning on or after January 1, 2015. Originally, the IASB had intended adoption by 
2013, but it delayed the transition date to allow constituents more time to prepare for the 
changes. Phase 2 deals with impairment methodology. The IASB is currently redeliberating 
its proposed guidance regarding impairment of financial assets after it received numerous 
comment letters from constituents voicing concerns over guidance proposed in a recent Expo-
sure Draft. Phase 3 deals with hedge accounting. As of May 2013, the IASB is finalizing its 
deliberations and plans to issue revisions to IFRS 9 with modified hedge accounting guidance. 
Because of the delayed implementation date for IFRS 9, we will discuss current guidance and 
anticipated guidance (after the 2015 transition) here.
 
Exhibit 16.13 highlights the current similarities and differences between U.S. GAAP and 
IFRS related to accounting for financial assets. Panel (a) summarizes classification, types of 
assets included, measurement bases, and where the unrealized gains and losses are reported 
for various financial assets; Panel (b) provides a summary of impairment testing. Key areas of 
difference between IFRS and U.S. GAAP are shaded.
 
Like U.S. GAAP, IFRS currently classifies financial assets into trading, available-for-
sale (AFS), held-to-maturity, and equity-method investment categories. Fair value (FV) 
measurement is used for debt and equity securities held in the trading portfolio with FV 
unrealized gains/losses reported in income. For the available-for-sale category, there are 
three areas of difference between IFRS and U.S. GAAP. IFRS includes nonmarketable 
equity securities in this category if FV can be determined, and FV unrealized gains/losses 
are reported in Other comprehensive income (OCI) as is the case for other equity and debt 
marketable securities that are classified as AFS. U.S. GAAP does not allow nonmarketable 
equity securities to be included in the AFS category. Such assets are generally reported as 
other assets and measured at cost. IFRS differs from U.S. GAAP with respect to the treat-
ment of unrealized gains and losses on financial assets with a foreign exchange component 
(e.g., securities held by a foreign subsidiary that are denominated in a foreign currency). 
IFRS isolates the unrealized gains and losses due to the foreign exchange component and 
reports this in income. Any remaining unrealized gain/loss is reported in OCI. U.S. GAAP 
does not isolate the portion due to foreign exchange adjustment and reports the entire FV 
unrealized gains/losses in OCI. Another difference between IFRS and U.S. GAAP relates 
to conventional loans and receivables. IFRS allows firms to include these financial assets 
in the AFS category if FV is determinable, and the related unrealized gains/losses are 
 reported in OCI. U.S. GAAP does not permit conventional loans and receivables to be 
classified as AFS (see Chapter 8 for measurement and reporting of these items under 
U.S. GAAP).

996
EXHIBIT 16.13
U.S. GAAP vs. IFRS
Classification, Measurement, and Reporting of Financial Assets
Panel (a):
Classification
Assets Included
Measurement Basis and Where Unrealized Gains and 
Losses Are Reported
U.S. GAAP
IFRS
U.S. GAAP
IFRS
U.S. GAAP
IFRS
Trading
Debt and marketable equity assets (no significant influence) 
intended to be traded
Fair value (FV) with unrealized holding gains/losses reported in 
income
Available for sale (AFS)
Debt and marketable equity assets (no significant influence) not 
classified as trading or HTM
Fair value with unrealized holding gains/losses reported in OCI
Nonmarketable equity securi-
ties (no significant influence) 
are not permitted to be classi-
fied as AFS (Shown in Other 
assets section of balance sheet)
Nonmarketable equity securi-
ties (no significant influence) 
can be alternatively classified 
here if fair value is determin-
able. Otherwise, see other 
assets.
Generally measured at cost
Fair value with unrealized hold-
ing gains/losses reported in OCI
Financial assets with foreign exchange components
Fair value with unrealized hold-
ing gains/losses reported in OCI
Fair value with unrealized hold-
ing gains/losses due to foreign 
exchange separately reported in 
income and the remaining unre-
alized holding gains/losses re-
ported in OCI
Conventional loans and receiv-
ables are not permitted to be 
classified as AFS
Conventional loans and receiv-
ables can be alternatively clas-
sified here as AFS. Otherwise, 
see loans/receivables 
(Chapter 8).
See Chapter 8.
Fair value with unrealized 
gains/losses reported in OCI
Held to maturity (HTM)
Debt assets intended to be held to maturity
Amortized cost using the effective interest method
Equity-method investment
Equity assets with significant influence (. 20%) but not control 
(, 50%)
These assets are measured at cost and adjusted thereafter with the 
investor’s share of post-acquisition earnings (equity method).
Firms can elect FV option
No fair value option
(continued)

997
EXHIBIT 16.13
U.S. GAAP vs. IFRS (continued)
Summary of Impairment Determination, Measurement, Reporting and Reversal
Panel (b):
Impairment Determination
Impairment Measurement
Impairment Reporting
Impairment Reversal
Category
U.S. GAAP
IFRS
U.S. GAAP
IFRS
U.S. GAAP
IFRS
U.S. GAAP
IFRS
AFS—debt
If fair value is 
less than the 
amortized cost 
basis and other-
than-temporary 
impairment
If objective 
evidence of 
impairment
Amortized cost basis less fair value
Income for im-
pairment due to 
credit losses
Income
Not permitted
Permitted in 
income if the 
reversal can be 
objectively 
related to an 
event occurring 
after the impair-
ment was 
recognized
OCI for impair-
ment due to 
other factors
Income
OCI
AFS—equity
If fair value is 
less than the cost 
basis and other-
than-temporary 
impairment
If objective 
evidence of 
impairment
Cost basis less fair value
Income
Not permitted
HTM—debt
If fair value is 
less than the 
amortized cost 
basis and other-
than-temporary 
impairment
If objective 
evidence of 
impairment
Amortized cost 
basis less fair 
value
Amortized cost 
basis less the 
present value of 
estimated future 
cash flows 
discounted at the 
original 
effective interest 
rate
Income for 
impairment due 
to credit losses
Income
Not permitted
Permitted in 
income if the 
reversal can be 
objectively 
related to an 
event occurring 
after the impair-
ment was 
recognized 
Source: Adapted from the Ernst & Young Academic Resource Center, Financial Assets—lecture notes with permission of the Ernst & Young Foundation. Copyright 2010. All rights reserved.

998 
CHAPTER 16
Intercorporate Equity Investments
 
When firms transition to IFRS 9, they will classify financial instruments based on both the 
entity’s business model for managing the financial instruments and the contractual cash flow 
characteristics of the financial instruments. IFRS 9 can lead to similar treatment to U.S. 
GAAP for financial assets. However, financial assets will default into one of two categories: 
(1) a financial asset to be measured at amortized cost or (2) a financial asset to be measured at 
fair value through profit or loss (i.e., net income). Conceptually, (1) is similar to the U.S. 
GAAP held-to-maturity category (See appendix to this chapter.) because IFRS 9 allows this 
designation only if the business plans to hold the assets to collect contractual cash flows and 
the financial asset contractually provides principal and interest payments on regularly timed 
specified dates. All other assets that do not meet the criteria for (1) will default to (2), that is, 
measurement at fair value through profit or loss. Conceptually, (2) is similar to the U.S. 
GAAP trading security category. IFRS 9 will provide an option to classify financial invest-
ments in the equity of other companies as instruments “not held for trading.” If firms utilize 
this irrevocable election for specific investments, the fair value changes in the investments 
will flow to other comprehensive income instead of to net income. Conceptually, this option 
is similar to the U.S. GAAP available-for-sale security category.
 
Like U.S. GAAP, IFRS equity-method investments (equity ownership greater than 20%, 
but less than 50%) are initially reported at cost with subsequent adjustment for the investor’s 
share of investee profits/losses reported in income (see discussion earlier in chapter). How-
ever, unlike U.S. GAAP, IFRS does not allow firms to use the fair value option for equity-
method investments. The IASB plans to revisit its guidance for the equity method. The board 
notes that this method “is often criticised (because some constituents) question whether it 
provides helpful information to users, while others note the complexities and inconsistencies 
it creates when it interacts with other requirements in IFRS.”
 
Panel (b) of Exhibit 16.13 summarizes key differences between IFRS and U.S. GAAP for 
impairment of financial assets. IFRS reports all impairment losses for AFS-debt securities in 
income regardless of the reason. If impairment is due to credit losses (e.g., issuing company 
becoming insolvent), U.S. GAAP reports the losses in income. Impairment losses due to other 
factors (e.g., markets for mortgage-backed securities collapsing) are reported in OCI. For AFS 
debt securities, IFRS allows reversal of impairment losses through income if the reversal can 
be tied to an event occurring after the impairment was recognized.19 U.S. GAAP does not al-
low reversal of impairment losses due to credit losses, but increases in fair value on debt secu-
rities impaired for non-credit loss reasons are recorded in OCI as part of the normal fair value 
adjustment process described earlier in the chapter. Impairments of AFS equity securities are 
treated similarly under IFRS and U.S. GAAP.
 
For held-to-maturity debt securities, the measurement of impairment loss is somewhat dif-
ferent under the two sets of standards. U.S. GAAP measures the impairment loss as the differ-
ence between the amortized cost basis and the fair value of the security. IFRS compares the 
amortized cost to the present value of estimated future cash flows discounted at the original 
effective interest rate. Reversal of impairment losses through income is permitted under IFRS 
if the reversal can be tied to an event occurring after the impairment was recognized. U.S. 
GAAP does not permit firms to recognize reversal of impairment losses on HTM debt 
securities.
 
As of summer 2013, the IASB was redeliberating its March 2013 Exposure Draft that pro-
posed to require firms to recognize immediately expected credit losses on financial assets. 
The Exposure Draft’s objective was to provide financial statement users with more useful and 
19 The amount of reversal through income is limited to the amount of the original impairment loss.

 
Global Vantage Point 
999
timely information about potential credit losses on firms’ financial assets. The proposal sug-
gested that firms should have to report, each period, changes in the values of financial assets 
that are associated with changes in the credit quality of agents that determine the economics 
of the financial assets (e.g., loan borrowers). Currently, credit losses are not typically recog-
nized until actual default has occurred on a financial asset.
Consolidated Financial Statements and 
Accounting for Business Combinations
For annual reporting periods beginning prior to January 1, 2014, IFRS guidance on account-
ing for business combinations and preparation of consolidated financial statements appears in 
IAS 27 (amended), “Consolidated and Separate Financial Statements”; Standards Interpreta-
tions Committee (SIC) 12, “Consolidation—Special Purpose Entities”; and IAS 31, “Interests 
in Joint Ventures.” For annual reporting periods beginning after January 1, 2014, IFRS guid-
ance will follow IFRS 10, “Consolidated Financial Statements,” which was issued in May 
2011. IFRS 10 incorporates all the sources of guidance for consolidation into one standard, 
provides a revised definition of control so that a single control model can be applied to all 
entities, and enhances disclosures about consolidated and unconsolidated entities.
 
Generally, IFRS and U.S. GAAP are fairly well converged with respect to when consolida-
tion is deemed necessary and the approach for measuring the subsidiary assets and liabilities 
on the consolidated balance sheet. However, there are a few areas of substantive difference.
 
IFRS and U.S. GAAP require a firm to consolidate entities it controls. IFRS defines control 
more broadly than does U.S. GAAP. Under IFRS, a firm is deemed to control another entity 
when it has the power to govern the financial and operating policies of that entity so it can obtain 
benefits from that entity’s activities. For situations not involving special purpose entities (SPEs) 
or variable interest entities (VIEs), a firm is presumed to have control if it owns, directly or indi-
rectly, more than 50% of the outstanding voting stock, which is the primary criteria used under 
U.S. GAAP for preparing consolidated financial statements. However, IAS 27 requires a firm to 
assess the substance of its relationship with an investee, and if control is deemed to be exercised 
in the absence of majority ownership, then consolidation is still required. Thus, because the 
IFRS definition of control is much broader than that used in U.S. GAAP, it is possible to reach 
different conclusions regarding the need to consolidate.20
 
Under U.S. GAAP, a parent and a subsidiary are permitted to have different accounting 
policies. This is most likely to occur when the subsidiary is following some specialized indus-
try guidance. However, under IFRS the accounting policies of the subsidiary must conform to 
those used by the parent. When differences exist, adjustments must be made in consolidation 
to conform the subsidiary’s accounting policies to those of the parent.
 
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS generally classify noncontrolling interest on the balance sheet 
in the stockholders’ equity section shown separate from the equity of the parent. On the in-
come statement, noncontrolling interest is shown as a deduction from total entity (parent 1 
100% subsidiary) consolidated earnings. Under U.S. GAAP and the acquisition method (de-
scribed earlier in the chapter), the noncontrolling interest is measured at the full business fair 
value of the subsidiary at time of acquisition. This means that noncontrolling interest includes 
20 IFRS 10 offers an exception to consolidation for specified investment entities. By definition, an investment entity (a) ob-
tains funds from one or more investors for the purpose of providing investment management services; (b) has a business 
purpose focused entirely on investing funds for returns from capital appreciation and/or investment income; and (3) measures 
and evaluates the performance of substantially all of its investments on a fair value basis. IFRS 10 states that an investment 
entity will measure an investment in a subsidiary at fair value through profit or loss (i.e., net income) in accordance with IFRS 9 
instead of consolidating the subsidiary.

1000 
CHAPTER 16
Intercorporate Equity Investments
the fair value of all reported subsidiary net assets and the relevant portion of any goodwill 
arising from the transaction. Under IFRS, firms can exercise a choice in initially measuring 
noncontrolling interest. One approach is to use the full business fair value as used in U.S. 
GAAP, which means that noncontrolling interest includes a portion of total goodwill that is 
recognized at date of acquisition. Alternatively, firms can elect to measure noncontrolling in-
terest at the fair value of the identifiable net assets (i.e., those reported by the subsidiary) at 
the acquisition date, which excludes goodwill from the measurement of noncontrolling 
interest. 
Accounting for Special Purpose Entities (SPEs) 
or Variable Interest Entities (VIEs)
Legal entities created to accomplish a narrow and well-defined objective (e.g., to effect a 
lease, research and development activities, or a securitization of financial assets) are referred 
to in IFRS as special purpose entities (SPE). U.S. GAAP refers to these entities as variable 
interest entities (VIE). These entities may take the form of a corporation, trust, partnership, 
or unincorporated entity. The primary accounting issue is determining when a reporting com-
pany must consolidate the activities of the SPE or VIE. As noted earlier in the chapter, U.S. 
GAAP requires the “primary beneficiary” to consolidate the activities of the VIE. A com-
pany is deemed to be the primary beneficiary if it has (1) the power to direct the economic 
activities that most significantly impact the VIE and (2) the obligation to absorb losses or the 
right to receive benefits considered potentially significant to the VIE.
 
Under IFRS, SPEs are consolidated when evidence indicates the reporting company “con-
trols” the SPE. Under SIC 12, control is presumed if any of the following conditions exist:
• The SPE performs activities on behalf of the reporting company.
• The reporting company has decision-making powers over the activities of the SPE.
• The reporting company has the right to obtain the majority of the benefits of the SPE 
activities.
• The reporting company retains the majority of the residual or ownership risks related to 
the SPE or its assets.
When implemented, IFRS 10 will consider that control has been established when the firm 
has (a) power over the investee; (b) exposure, or rights, to variable returns from its involve-
ment with the investee; and (c) the ability to use its power over the investee to affect the 
amount of the firm’s returns.
 
Because the criteria are different, the decision as to whether to consolidate the activities of 
a SPE or VIE can sometimes differ under IFRS vs. U.S. GAAP.
Accounting for Joint Ventures
IFRS accounting for joint ventures is set forth in IFRS 11, “Joint Arrangements.” It states that 
a joint venturer shall recognize its interest in a joint venture as an investment using the equity 
method in accordance with IAS 28, “Investments in Associates and Joint Ventures,” unless 
there is an exemption specified in that standard. This is generally similar to U.S. GAAP.
FASB Exposure Draft on Financial Instruments
As an outgrowth of joint deliberations with the IASB, the FASB recently issued an Exposure 
Draft of a proposed accounting standards update on accounting for financial instruments that 

 
Global Vantage Point 
1001
has similarities to IFRS 9.21 If adopted, this proposal would substantially change the account-
ing for financial assets to be more similar to IFRS 9 in a number of ways, but with some key 
differences. This section outlines the key changes that are being proposed related to the ac-
counting for financial assets.
 
The global financial crisis in 2007–2008 highlighted the ongoing concern that the existing 
accounting model for financial instruments is inadequate and often inconsistent in measuring 
seemingly similar instruments. For example, under existing U.S. GAAP, some debt instru-
ment investments are measured at amortized cost (loans held for investment or held-to-matu-
rity debt securities), some at lower of cost or market (loans held for sale), and some at fair 
value (debt securities held in trading portfolio). Moreover, impairments of financial assets are 
measured and reported differently depending on the category and instrument type. Investors, 
preparers, and high-level governmental bodies throughout the world urged the IASB and 
FASB to develop a single converged financial reporting model for financial instruments that 
would eliminate some of these inconsistent treatments and provide investors and regulators 
with relevant and transparent information about an entity’s exposure to financial instruments. 
The main objective of the proposed standard is to provide financial statement users with a 
more timely and representative depiction of an entity’s involvement with financial instru-
ments, while removing some of the complexities that currently exist in accounting for these 
instruments.
 
Exhibit 16.14 summarizes the key differences between existing GAAP and what is be-
ing proposed in the FASB Exposure Draft as it relates to financial asset topics covered in 
this chapter. The proposal eliminates the current classifications of trading, available for 
sale, and held to maturity and replaces them with three classifications that describe the 
measurement basis and where the related fair value changes will be reported: (1) fair value 
net income (FV–NI); (2) fair value—OCI (FV–OCI); and (3) amortized cost. Thus, under 
the proposal, most financial assets other than equity investments where the investor exer-
cises significant influence would be measured at fair value. For those debt securities that 
the reporting entity plans to hold for collection of contractual cash flows, the proposed 
guidance would require a reconciliation from amortized cost to fair value on the face of the 
balance sheet.
 
In a departure from current practice, most changes in fair value of financial assets would be 
recorded in net income under the FASB Exposure Draft. This would include fair value changes 
for equity securities, certain hybrid securities, and debt instruments that can contractually be 
prepaid in a way that the investor would not recover substantially all of its initial investment.22 
FV–OCI treatment is limited to debt instruments with the features noted in Exhibit 16.14. 
The Board believes that applying a consistent measurement model (FV) for all financial in-
struments will improve comparability across firms and consistency in how a firm accounts for 
different financial instruments. By presenting both fair value and amortized cost information 
for debt instruments that are being held for collection of the contractual cash flows, the Board 
believes that statement users can more easily incorporate either or both types of information 
into their analyses of the firm. We believe the proposals called for in this exposure draft will 
overcome many of the deficiencies and inconsistencies that currently exist for the reporting of 
financial instruments.
21 “Recognition and Measurement of Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities,” Financial Instruments—Overall (Subtopic 
825-10) (Norwalk, CT: FASB, February 2013). This Exposure Draft can be accessed at www.fasb.org.
22 Recall that IFRS 9 provides an option to designate irrevocably an equity investment as FV-OCI. The FASB’s proposed 
guidance would require, instead, that all equity investments be classified and measured as FV-NI, with a practicability excep-
tion only. This is a material difference across standards, which means these standards are not likely to be converged when 
implemented.

1002
EXHIBIT 16.14
Summary of Proposed Changes in FASB Exposure Draft on Financial Instruments
Financial Asset Topics Covered in this Chapter
Accounting Issue
Current Approach
Proposed Approach in ED
Classification and measurement
Classification is based on entity’s trading strategy
Trading—Fair value with changes to income 
(FV-NI)
Available for sale (AFS)—Fair value with 
changes to OCI (FV-OCI)
Held to maturity (HTM)—Amortized cost
Three classification and measurement bases for most financial assets:
• Fair value with changes to income (FV-NI)
• Fair value with changes to OCI (FV-OCI)
• Amortized cost
FV-NI items
Equity and certain debt securities based on entity’s 
trading strategy (see above)
All equity securities, certain hybrid instruments, and financial instruments that can 
be contractually prepaid in such a way that the holder (investor) would not 
recover substantially all of its investment
FV-OCI items
Equity and certain debt securities based on entity’s 
trading strategy (see above)
Primarily debt securities to be held until the end of the contract term
Amortized cost items
Certain debt securities expected to be held 
to maturity
Held-to-collect contractual cash flows where the contractual terms of the financial 
asset give rise on specified dates to cash flows that are solely payments of 
 principal and interest
Unconsolidated equity investments 
with significant influence
Equity method with fair value option
If an investment is determined to be held for sale, it would be classified and mea-
sured at FV-NI. If not held for sale, it would be accounted for under Topic 323 
(Investments—Equity Method and Joint Ventures)
Presentation
For many instruments, amortized cost reported on 
balance sheet and fair value reported in notes
Generally, both fair value and amortized cost (where applicable) values will be 
 presented on the balance sheet for each investment
Impairment
Different impairment rules depending on the cat-
egory and instrument type
Single impairment model. Only for FV–OCI instruments.
Reclassifications
Allowed but generally at fair value
Allowed only when the business model changes, which is expected to occur very 
infrequently

 
Summary 
1003
SUMMARY
• Financial reporting for intercorporate equity investments depends on the degree to which 
the investor is able to influence the investee’s operating decisions. Proportionate share 
size is a presumptive factor in assessing an investor’s influence over an investee.
• When the ownership share is less than 20%, it is presumed that the investor cannot exert 
significant influence on the investee’s decisions. These minority passive investments are 
shown at fair value on the balance sheet. Unrealized gains or losses on the trading portfo-
lio are recorded on the income statement, and unrealized gains and losses on the available-
for-sale portfolio are recorded as a component of other comprehensive income (OCI), 
which is closed out to a special stockholders’ equity account, Accumulated other 
 comprehensive income (AOCI).
• Other than temporary impairments of available-for-sale equity securities are recorded as 
an adjustment to net income.
• Minority active investments generally involve between 20% and 50% ownership and give 
the investor the ability to influence the investee’s operating decisions significantly. The 
equity method is used to account for such investments whereby the investor records its 
proportionate share of the investee’s profits and losses, net of any excess cost amortiza-
tion, with a corresponding adjustment to the investment account.
• GAAP allows firms to elect the fair value option for equity investments. Unrealized gains 
and losses resulting from fair value changes are reported on the investor’s income statement.
• Consolidated financial statements are required when one entity (parent) gains a control-
ling financial interest (more than 50% interest in voting common stock) in another entity 
(subsidiary). Prior to July 1, 2001, the purchase and pooling-of-interests methods were 
used to account for business combinations. From that date through 2008, only the pur-
chase method was allowed. Beginning in 2009, the acquisition method must be used to 
account for all business combinations. The key differences between these three methods 
are: (1) how to measure the subsidiary’s net assets (assets minus liabilities) at the acquisi-
tion date, (2) the amount of goodwill recognized, and (3) how the noncontrolling (minority) 
interests are measured and reported on the consolidated balance sheet.
• Goodwill is typically recorded in business combinations accounted for under the acquisi-
tion and purchase methods. Goodwill is subject to an annual impairment test. If goodwill 
is determined to be impaired, it is written down with an offsetting charge to consolidated 
earnings.
• The acquisition and purchase methods of accounting complicate financial analysis be-
cause none of the subsidiary’s profit is included in consolidated earnings in the years 
prior to acquisition, a partial year’s profit is included from the date of acquisition through 
the end of the year in the acquisition year, and 100% of the subsidiary’s profits are in-
cluded in the years following the year of acquisition. This approach distorts year-to-year 
growth rates in sales and profits.
• Enron’s collapse brought about a demand for increased disclosure and transparency re-
garding companies’ interests in variable interest entities (VIE). A VIE is a corporation, 
partnership, trust, or any other legal structure used for business purposes that either 
(1) does not have equity investors with voting rights or (2) has equity investors that do 
not provide sufficient financial resources for the entity to support its own activities. GAAP 
requires a company to consolidate a VIE if that company has the power to direct the 
 significant economic activities of the VIE and is subject to a risk of loss from the VIE’s 

 activities or is entitled to receive the benefits of the VIE that are potentially significant 
gains or losses to the VIE. A company that consolidates a VIE is called that entity’s 
 primary beneficiary.
• Before foreign subsidiaries can be consolidated, foreign  currency amounts to be 
 remeasured in U.S. dollars.
• Foreign subsidiaries that are mere extensions of the U.S. parent and have no self-sufficiency 
are remeasured using the temporal method. The temporal method treats the subsidiaries’ 
business transactions as if they had been undertaken by the parent—but in the foreign 
currency.
• Foreign subsidiaries that are freestanding economic units are remeasured using the 
 current rate method. This method provides an easy way to re-express foreign currency 
amounts in dollars while maintaining the proportionality of most of the subsidiary’s 
 financial ratios.
• There are a number of important differences between IFRS and U.S. GAAP: (1) measure-
ment and reporting of financial assets; (2) how noncontrolling interests are measured on 
consolidated statements; (3) determining when SPEs or VIEs must be consolidated; and 
(4) accounting treatment for joint ventures.
APPENDIX
ACCOUNTING FOR INVESTMENTS IN 
DEBT SECURITIES
We saw in this chapter that investments in equity securities are classified as either trading se-
curities or available-for-sale securities, depending on the purpose of the investment. Those 
same classifications are available for debt securities, as well, in addition to a third classifica-
tion called held to maturity. Debt securities may be classified as held to maturity if the inves-
tor company has both the ability and the intent to hold the security until its maturity date. The 
held-to-maturity classification is not available for equity investments because those invest-
ments have no maturity date.
Held-to-Maturity Securities
Debt securities (e.g., bonds and notes) that a firm intends to hold to maturity are generally 
accounted for at amortized cost.23 Interest income is recognized following the effective inter-
est method (see Chapter 11), and the investment account is adjusted for the amortization of 
premium or discount in each period. No adjustments are made for changes in the fair value of 
debt securities in the held-to-maturity portfolio.
 
We illustrate the accounting for held-to-maturity debt investments with the following ex-
ample. Assume that Principal Financial purchases a five-year $100,000 bond from Baker 
Company with a 7% coupon interest rate for $108,659 on January 1, 2014. The effective yield 
on this bond investment is 5%, meaning the discount rate that equates the $108,659 purchase 
price with the present value of the promised cash flows is 5%. The bond matures on Decem-
ber 31, 2018, and a $7,000 coupon payment is due at the end of each year. The following 
amortization table reflects interest income, amortization of bond premium, and amortized cost 
of the bond at each year-end. The table also shows the bond’s fair value at each balance sheet 
1004 
CHAPTER 16
Intercorporate Equity Investments
23 FASB ASC Section 320-10-35: Investments—Debt and Equity Securities—Overall—Subsequent Measurement.

 
Appendix 
1005
date. This  information will be relevant when we extend the example to available-for-sale se-
curities and trading securities.
 
Although, in general, held-to-maturity investments are accounted for at amortized cost, they 
are considered financial instruments, so firms may elect to use fair value accounting under the 
fair value option set forth in ASC 825-10-25 (Financial Instruemts—Overall—Recognition).
Available-for-Sale Securities
Investments in debt securities classified as available for sale are presented in the balance sheet 
at fair value, requiring an adjustment at each balance sheet date, much like there is an adjust-
ment for equity securities. However, for debt securities, the investor applies the effective inter-
est method just as it would for a held-to-maturity investment, and adjusts the amortized cost 
at each balance sheet date to the fair value. The adjustment is reported as part of other com-
prehensive income.
 
For example, suppose Principal Financial had classified its investment in the 7% Baker 
Company bonds as available for sale. It would have made the exact same entries in 2014—ini-
tially recording the investment at cost and then recording $5,433 of interest income, resulting 
in the amortization of $1,567 of bond premium. At December 31, 2014, the amortized cost of 
the bonds was $107,092, and that amount was reported as an asset on the balance sheet in the 
DR Investment in Bonds  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $108,659
   CR Cash. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$108,659
 
Principal makes the following entry on December 31, 2014, to record interest income and 
amortization of the bond premium.
DR Cash   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $7,000*
   CR Interest Income   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$5,433†
   CR Investment in Bonds   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
1,567‡
* $100,000 3 7%
† $108,659 3 5%
‡ $7,000 2 $5,433
 
 
 
Premium 
Amortized 
Fair
 Year-End 
Interest 
Amortization 
Cost 
Value
 Jan. 1 
— 
— 
$108,659 
$108,659
 2014 
$5,433 
$(1,567) 
107,092 
107,500
 2015 
5,355 
(1,645) 
105,447 
105,000
 2016 
5,272 
(1,728) 
103,719 
103,000
 2017 
5,186 
(1,814) 
101,905 
102,000
 2018 
5,095 
(1,905) 
100,000* 
100,000
* Before payment of principal on December 31, 2018.
 
The following entry would be made on January 1, 2014, to record the acquisition of the bond.

1006 
CHAPTER 16
Intercorporate Equity Investments
original example. The bonds had a fair value on that date of $107,500, so Principal makes an 
additional entry in order to present the bonds at fair value:
DR Fair Value Adjustment—Available-for-Sale Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . $408
   CR  OCI—Unrealized gain or loss in fair value of 
 available-for-sale securities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$408
Note that although the bonds fell in value by $1,159 during 2014, the amortization of pre-
mium under the effective interest method ($1,567) reduced the book value of the bonds to 
$107,092, so an upward fair value adjustment of $408 is required to present the bonds at fair 
value on the balance sheet.
 
In subsequent periods, Principal Financial continues to account for the bonds under the ef-
fective interest method using the original amortization table. That is, it does not redo the amor-
tization schedule based on the fair value at December 31, 2014. So, the interest income pattern 
in the income statements for the entire five-year life of the bonds will be identical to the interest 
income pattern under the held-to-maturity classification. In 2015, Principal would make the 
following entry to record the interest income under the effective interest method:
DR Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$7,000
   CR Interest Income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$5,355
   CR Investment in Bonds  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
1,645
DR OCI—Unrealized gain or loss in fair 
   value of available-for-sale securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$855
   CR Fair Value Adjustment—
     Available-for-Sale Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$855
DR Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $105,000
DR Fair Value Adjustment—
   Available-for-Sale Securities   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
447
DR Loss on sale of bonds  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
447
   CR Investment in Bonds  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$105,447
   CR  OCI—Unrealized gain or loss in fair 
 
value of available-for-sale securities   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
447
The above entry adjusts the Investment in bonds account to its amortized cost of $105,447 at 
December 31, 2015. The fair value on that date is $105,000, indicating that the balance in the 
Fair value adjustment account at December 31, 2015 needs to be a credit of $447. Because the 
account currently has a debit balance of $408, Principal Financial makes the following fair 
value adjustment entry at December 31, 2015:
The result of this entry is that the Fair value adjustment account has a credit balance of $447 
and the Investment in bonds is reported on the balance sheet, net of the Fair value adjustment, 
as $105,000 ($105,447 – $447).
 
When an available-for-sale investment is ultimately sold, the full amount of the gain or loss 
is recognized in the income statement and the related amount in Accumulated other compre-
hensive income is “recycled.” For example, if at the end of 2015 Principal sold its Baker 
bonds for $105,000, it would have made the following entry, assuming it had already recorded 
the receipt of the interest payment at December 31, 2015, and the premium amortization and 
fair value adjustment for 2015:

 
Appendix 
1007
This entry eliminates the Accumulated other comprehensive income balance, removes the 
bonds from the balance sheet, along with the associated fair value adjustment, and recognizes 
the entire holding period loss in the 2015 income statement.
Trading Securities
The accounting for trading securities is similar to available-for-sale securities, except that fair 
value adjustments are recognized in income rather than in OCI. Had Principal Financial clas-
sified the bonds as trading securities, there would have been a $408 gain reported in the in-
come statement in 2014 and an $855 loss in 2015. Because gains and losses are recorded in 
the income statement each period as the bond’s value fluctuates, there is no additional gain or 
loss recognized on the sale. Only the change in value during 2015 is recognized in 2015.
Other-Than-Temporary Impairments
In the chapter we saw that available-for-sale equity securities might incur an other-than- 
temporary impairment, in which case the investment is written down and an impairment 
charge is taken on the income statement. Other-than-temporary impairments can also occur 
with available-for-sale and held-to-maturity debt securities. Other-than-temporary impair-
ments are not an issue for debt instruments classified as trading securities because these are 
already marked to fair value through the income statement.
 
For available-for-sale debt securities, if a firm intends to sell the security or it is more 
likely than not that the firm will be required to sell the security before recovery of its amor-
tized cost basis less current-period credit loss, then the amount of impairment is recognized in 
earnings equal to the entire difference between the investment’s amortized cost basis and its 
fair value at the balance sheet date. If a firm does not intend to sell the security and it is un-
likely that the firm will be required to sell the security before recovery of its amortized cost 
basis less any current-period credit loss, then the other-than-temporary impairment is sepa-
rated into the following two components:24
a. The amount representing the credit loss
b. The amount related to all other factors
 
The portion of the impairment related to the credit loss is recognized in earnings. The por-
tion of the impairment related to other factors is recognized in other comprehensive income. 
The previous amortized cost basis less the other-than-temporary impairment recognized in 
earnings becomes the new amortized cost basis of the investment. The new amortized cost 
basis is not adjusted for subsequent recoveries in fair value. However, the new amortized cost 
basis is adjusted for accretion and amortization as described in the following paragraph (see 
FASB ASC Paragraph 320-10-35-35).
 
Subsequent to the recognition of an impairment loss on debt securities, a firm continues to 
estimate the present value of cash flows expected to be collected over the life of the debt security. 
For debt securities for which the impairment was recognized in earnings (i.e., credit loss), the dif-
ference between the new amortized cost basis and the cash flows expected to be collected are 
recognized in earnings as interest income using effective interest amortization (see Chapter 11). 
For debt securities for which the impairment loss is due to other factors (i.e., not credit loss) sub-
sequent increases and decreases (if not an other-than-temporary impairment) in the fair value of 
these available-for-sale securities are included in other comprehensive income.
24 FASB ASC Paragraphs 320-10-35-35-34A to 35-34E: Investments—Debt and Equity Securities—Overall—Subsequent 
Measurement—Debt Securities: Determination of the Amount of Other-than-Temporary Impairment Recognized in Earnings 
and Other Comprehensive Income.
Credit loss is the difference 
between the amortized cost 
basis of a debt security and 
the present value of 
 expected cash flows for that 
security discounted at the 
 effective interest rate implicit 
in the debt instrument when 
it was originally acquired.

1008 
CHAPTER 16
Intercorporate Equity Investments
EXERCISES
The following data pertain to Tyne Company’s investments in marketable equity securities. 
(Assume that all securities were held throughout 2014 and 2015.)
 
Fair Value
 
Cost 
12/31/15 
12/31/14
Trading 
$150,000 
$155,000 
$100,000
Available for sale 
150,000 
130,000 
120,000
Required:
1. What amount should Tyne report as unrealized holding gain (loss) in its 2015 income 
statement?
2. What amount should Tyne report as net unrealized gain (loss) on available-for-sale securi-
ties at December 31, 2015, in its statement of stockholders’ equity? Ignore tax effects.
E16-1
Accounting for  trading 
and available-for-sale 
securities (LO 2)
AICPA
ADAPTED
E16-2
Accounting for  available-
for-sale securities 
(LO 2)
During 2014, Rex Company purchased marketable equity securities as a short-term 
 investment. These securities are classified as available for sale. The cost and fair values at 
December 31, 2014, follow:
Security 
Cost 
Fair Value
Company A—100 shares 
$ 2,800 
$ 3,400
Company B—1,000 shares 
17,000 
15,300
Company C—2,000 shares 
31,500 
29,500
 
$51,300 
$48,200
 
Rex sold 1,000 shares of Company B stock on January 31, 2015, for $15 per share, 
 incurring $1,500 in brokerage commission and transaction taxes.
Required:
1. Ignoring income taxes, how much should Rex report as unrealized gain or loss on its 
available-for-sale securities at December 31, 2014, in the statement of stockholders’ 
equity?
2. On the sale, Rex should report a realized loss of how much?
AICPA
ADAPTED
E16-3
Accounting for  trading 
securities (LO 2)
Information related to Jones Company’s portfolio of trading securities at December 31, 2014, 
follows:
Aggregate cost of securities 
$340,000
Gross unrealized gains 
8,000
Gross unrealized losses 
52,000
 
Jones reported a $10,000 credit balance in its Fair value adjustment—Trading securities 
account in its December 31, 2013 (prior year), balance sheet. Assume that it sold no trading 
securities during 2013 or 2014.
Required:
1. How much should Jones report as unrealized gain or loss on its 2014 income statement?
2. Prepare the journal entry that Jones would make to record the 2014 fair value adjustment 
to its trading portfolio.

 
Exercises 
1009
AICPA
ADAPTED
E16-4
Using the equity method 
(LO 1, 3)
In January 2014, Harold Corporation acquired 20% of Otis Company’s outstanding common 
stock for $400,000. This investment gave Harold the ability to exercise significant influence 
over Otis. The book value of these shares was $300,000. The excess of cost over book value 
was attributed to an identifiable intangible asset, a patent, which was undervalued on Otis’s 
balance sheet and had a remaining 10-year useful life.
 
For the year ended December 31, 2014, Otis reported net income of $90,000 and paid cash 
dividends of $20,000 on its common stock.
Required:
1. How much would Harold Corporation’s income increase in 2014 as a result of its invest-
ment in Otis?
2. What is the carrying value of Harold’s investment in Otis Company at December 31, 2014?
AICPA
ADAPTED
E16-5
Using the equity method and 
fair value option (LO 1, 3)
Sage Inc. bought 40% of Adams Corporation’s outstanding common stock on January 2, 
2014, for $400,000. The carrying amount of Adams’s net assets at the purchase date totaled 
$900,000. Fair values and carrying amounts were the same for all items except for plant and 
inventory, for which fair values exceeded the carrying amounts by $90,000 and $10,000, 
 respectively. The plant has an 18-year life. All inventory was sold during 2014. During 2014, 
Adams reported $120,000 net income and paid a $20,000 cash dividend.
Required:
1. What amount should Sage report in its income statement from its investment in Adams 
for the year ended December 31, 2014?
2. What is the December 31, 2014, balance in the Investment in Adams account?
3. Assume that on January 2, 2014, when Sage acquired a 40% interest in Adams, it elected 
to account for this investment at fair value. If the fair value of Sage’s investment in 
 Adams is $470,000 on December 31, 2014, what amount should Sage report in its 2014 
income statement for this investment under the fair value option?
E16-6
Determining business 
 rationale and whether to 
 consolidate a VIE; Intra-entity 
sales (LO 4, 7)
Papa John’s International, Inc., operates and franchises pizza delivery and carryout restaurants 
in domestic and global markets. In its December 30, 2012, 10-K filing with the SEC, Papa 
John’s discloses the following relationship with a variable interest entity (VIE):
Through February 2011, we had a purchasing arrangement with BIBP, a special-purpose entity 
formed at the direction of our Franchise Advisory Council, for the sole purpose of reducing 
cheese price volatility to domestic system-wide restaurants. BIBP was an independent, franchisee-
owned corporation. BIBP purchased cheese at the market price and sold it to our distribution 
subsidiary, PJ Food Service, Inc. (“PJFS”), at a fixed price. PJFS in turn sold cheese to Papa 
John’s restaurants (both Company-owned and franchised) at a set price. PJFS purchased 
$25.1 million of cheese for the three months ended March 27, 2011, and $153.0 million of 
cheese  during 2010 from BIBP.
Required:
1. Discuss the primary business rationale for Papa John’s purchasing arrangement with BIBP.
2. What criteria did Papa John’s use to determine if it should consolidate BIBP in its 
 financial statements?
3. Assuming that Papa John’s consolidated BIBP, how were the intra-entity sales described 
above accounted for in the consolidation process?

1010 
CHAPTER 16
Intercorporate Equity Investments
E16-7
Determining the value of 
goodwill (LO 4, 5)
On April 30, 2014, Pound Corp. purchased for cash all 200,000 shares of the outstanding 
common stock of Shake Corp. for $20 per share. At April 30, 2014, Shake’s balance sheet 
showed net assets with a $3,000,000 book value. On that date, the fair value of Shake’s prop-
erty, plant, and equipment exceeded book value by $300,000.
Required:
What amount should Pound report as goodwill on its April 30, 2014, consolidated balance sheet?
E16-8
Goodwill—acquisition 
method (LO 4, 5)
On April 1, 2014, Dart Company paid $620,000 for all issued and outstanding common stock 
of Wall Corporation in a transaction properly accounted for under the acquisition method. 
Wall’s recorded assets and liabilities on April 1, 2014, follow:
Cash 
$ 60,000
Inventory 
180,000
Property and equipment (net of accumulated
 depreciation of $220,000) 
320,000
Goodwill (net of accumulated write-downs
 of $50,000) 
100,000
Liabilities 
(120,000)
Net assets 
$540,000
On April 1, 2014, Wall’s inventory had a $150,000 fair value, and its property and equipment 
(net) had a $380,000 fair value.
Required:
What is the amount of goodwill resulting from the business combination?
AICPA
ADAPTED
E16-9
Preparing consolidated 
 financial statements (LO 4)
On January 1, 2014, Pitt Company purchased an 80% investment in Saxe Company. The ac-
quisition cost was equal to Pitt’s equity in Saxe’s recorded net assets at that date. On January 
1, 2014, Pitt and Saxe had retained earnings of $500,000 and $100,000, respectively. During 
2014, Pitt had net income of $200,000, which included its equity in Saxe’s earnings, and 
 declared dividends of $50,000. Saxe had net income of $40,000 and declared dividends of 
$20,000. No other intra-entity transactions between the parent and subsidiary occurred.
Required:
What should the consolidated retained earnings be on December 31, 2014?
AICPA
ADAPTED
E16-10
Determining consolidated 
 retained earnings (LO 4)
On January 1, 2014, Pack Corp. purchased all of Slam Corp.’s common stock for $500,000. On 
that date, the fair values of Slam’s net assets equaled their book values of $400,000. During 
2014, Slam paid cash dividends of $8,000. The following balance sheet and income statement 
accounts are reported on Pack and Slam’s separate financial statements at December 31, 2014:
 
Pack 
Slam
Balance sheet accounts 
 Investment in Slam 
$552,000 
$     0
 Retained earnings 
780,000 
250,000
Income statement accounts
 Equity in earnings of Slam 
60,000 
0
 Net income 
150,000 
60,000
Required:
What amount of retained earnings will Pack report in its December 31, 2014, consolidated 
balance sheet?

 
Exercises 
1011
E16-11
Consolidated balances using 
the acquisition method 
(LO 4)
Sea Company purchased 60% of Island Company’s common stock for $180,000. On the 
 acquisition date, Island’s book value of net assets totaled $250,000 and the fair value of iden-
tifiable net assets totaled $275,000. The $25,000 excess of fair value over book value on the 
acquisition date is attributable to fixed assets. Sea appropriately uses the acquisition method 
to account for the business combination.
 
Immediately after acquisition, Sea Company’s and Island Company’s separate condensed 
balance sheets are as follows:
 
Sea Company 
Island Company
Other assets 
$750,000 
$320,000
Investment in Island Company 
180,000 
0
 
$930,000 
$320,000
Liabilities 
$250,000 
$ 70,000
Common stock 
450,000 
200,000
Retained earnings 
230,000 
50,000
 
$930,000 
$320,000
Required:
1. What is the dollar amount of the total assets in the consolidated balance sheet immedi-
ately after the acquisition?
2. What is the dollar amount of the noncontrolling interest in the consolidated balance sheet 
immediately after the acquisition? Assume that the noncontrolling interest fair value is 
imputed based on Sea’s acquisition price.
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
AICPA
ADAPTED
E16-12
Recording transaction foreign 
exchange gain/loss (LO 8)
On September 1, 2014, Cano & Company, a U.S. corporation, sold merchandise to a foreign 
firm for 250,000 euros. Terms of the sale require payment in euros on February 1, 2015. On 
September 1, 2014, the spot exchange rate was $1.30 per euro. At Cano’s year-end on Decem-
ber 31, 2014, the spot rate was $1.28, but the rate increased to $1.33 by February 1, 2015, 
when payment was received.
Required:
1. What foreign currency transaction gain or loss should be recorded in 2014?
2. What foreign currency transaction gain or loss should be recorded in 2015?
AICPA
ADAPTED
E16-13
Accounting for 
 available-for-sale securities 
(LO 2)
Stone has provided the following information on its available-for-sale securities:
Aggregate cost as of 12/31/14 
$170,000
Unrealized gain as of 12/31/14 
4,000
Unrealized losses as of 12/31/14 
26,000
Net realized gains during 2014 
30,000
Stone reported $1,500 in the contra-asset valuation account to reduce these securities to their 
fair value at December 31, 2013.
Required:
What amount should be debited as an unrealized loss to the stockholders’ equity section of 
Stone’s December 31, 2014, balance sheet as a result of 2014 fair value changes related to its 
available-for-sale securities? (Ignore taxes.)

1012 
CHAPTER 16
Intercorporate Equity Investments
E16-14
Fair value accounting for 
 trading securities (LO 2)
Founded on January 1, 2014, Gehl Company had the following short-term investments in 
 securities at the end of 2014 and 2015 (all were held in the “trading” portfolio):
Equity 
 
2015
Security 
Cost 
Fair Value
A 
$ 96,000 
$ 94,000
B 
184,000 
162,000
C 
126,000 
136,000
Required:
If the company recorded a $4,000 debit to its Fair value adjustment—Trading securities 
 account at the end of 2015 as its fair value adjustment, what must have been the unrealized 
gain or loss recorded at the end of 2014?
E16-15
Eliminating intra-entity profit 
(LO 4)
Pinto Inc. owns 100% of Scale Inc. The following information is from the 2014 income state-
ments of Pinto and Scale:
 
Pinto 
Scale
Sales 
$1,000,000 
$600,000
Cost of goods sold 
600,000 
540,000
 Gross profit 
400,000 
60,000
Depreciation expense 
60,000 
15,000
Other expenses 
130,000 
30,000
 Income from operations 
210,000 
15,000
Gain on sale of equipment to Scale 
16,000 
0
 Income before income taxes 
$ 226,000 
$ 15,000
Additional Information:
1. Pinto’s reported sales revenue includes $200,000 of intra-entity sales to Scale. Scale sold 
three-fourths of this inventory to outside customers by the end of 2014. Pinto sells to 
Scale on terms similar those available to its outside customers.
2. Scale purchased equipment from Pinto for $60,000 on January 1, 2014. The equipment is 
depreciated using the straight-line method with no residual value and eight years of life 
remaining as of January 1, 2014.
Required:
1. How much intra-entity profit should be eliminated from Scale’s inventory when preparing 
2014 consolidated financial statements?
2. What amount of depreciation expense should be reported in the 2014 consolidated income 
statement?
E16-16
Consolidating sales and cost 
of goods sold with intra-entity 
transactions (LO 4)
Pate Corp. owns 80% of Strange Inc.’s common stock. During 2014, Pate sold inventory to 
Strange for $600,000 on the same terms as sales made to outside customers. Strange sold the 
entire inventory purchased from Pate by the end of 2014. Pate and Strange report the follow-
ing for 2014.
 
Pate 
Strange
Sales 
$2,700,000 
$1,600,000
Cost of sales 
1,800,000 
900,000
 Gross profit 
$  900,000 
$  700,000
Required:
1. What amount should Pate report as sales revenue in its 2014 consolidated income statement?
2. What amount should Pate report as cost of sales in its 2014 consolidated income statement?

 
Exercises 
1013
E16-17
Comparison of acquisition 
versus pooling method 
(LO 4, 6)
On July 1, 2014, Pushway Corporation issued 100,000 shares of common stock in exchange 
for all of Stroker Company’s common stock. The Pushway stock issued had a market value 
of $500,000 on the date of the exchange. Following are the July 1, 2014, pre-acquisition 
balance sheets of Pushway and Stroker, plus fair value information for Stroker’s assets and 
liabilities.
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
 
 
Stroker
 
Pushway 
Book Value 
Fair Value
Assets
 Current assets 
$300,000 
$100,000 
$100,000
 Long-term assets 
600,000 
400,000 
470,000
Total assets 
$900,000 
$500,000 
$570,000
Liabilities
 Current liabilities 
$200,000 
$ 50,000 
$ 50,000
 Long-term liabilities 
250,000 
100,000 
120,000
Total liabilities 
450,000 
150,000 
$170,000
Stockholders’ Equity
 Common stock 
300,000 
250,000
 Retained earnings 
150,000 
100,000
Total stockholders’ equity 
450,000 
350,000
Total liabilities and equity 
$900,000 
$500,000
AICPA
ADAPTED
E16-18
Translating foreign 
 currency (LO 8)
A wholly owned subsidiary of Ward Inc. has certain expense accounts for the year ended 
 December 31, 2014, stated in local currency units (LCU) as follows:
Required:
1. Provide the journal entry Pushway recorded for the acquisition of Stroker, assuming 
Pushway used the acquisition method.
2. What amount will be shown on the July 1, 2014, consolidated balance sheet for the 
following:
 
a. Total assets
 
b. Total liabilities
 
c. Total equity
3. Now assume the pooling method was used to record the acquisition. Complete require-
ments 1 and 2. (Note to student: Ignore the fact that the date in this problem would 
 prohibit the use of the pooling method).
 
LCU
Depreciation of equipment (related assets 
 were purchased January 1, 2012) 
120,000
Provision for doubtful accounts 
80,000
Rent 
200,000
The exchange rates at various dates are as follows:
 
Dollar Equivalent
 
of LCU
12/31/14 
$0.40
Average for year ended 12/31/14 
0.44
1/1/12 
0.50

1014 
CHAPTER 16
Intercorporate Equity Investments
Assume that the LCU is the subsidiary’s functional currency and that the charges to the 
 expense accounts occurred approximately evenly during the year.
Required:
What total dollar amount should be included in Ward’s 2014 consolidated income statement 
to reflect these expenses?
E16-19
Reporting transaction foreign 
exchange gain/loss (LO 7)
Lindy, a calendar-year U.S. corporation, bought inventory items from a supplier in 
 Germany on November 5, 2014, for 100,000 euros, when the spot exchange rate was $1.40 
per euro. At Lindy’s December 31, 2014, year-end, the spot exchange rate was $1.38. On 
January 15, 2015, Lindy bought 100,000 euros at the spot exchange rate of $1.44 and paid 
the invoice.
Required:
How much foreign exchange gain or (loss) should Lindy report in its income statements for 
2014 and 2015?
E16-20
Adjustments and eliminations 
for consolidation under 
 acquisition method (LO 4)
On January 5, 2015, Alpha Inc. acquired 80% of the outstanding voting shares of Beta Inc. 
for $2,000,000 cash. Following are the separate balance sheets for the two companies 
 immediately after the stock purchase, as well as fair value information regarding Beta Inc.:
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
 
 
Beta
 
Alpha 
Book Value 
Fair Value
Assets
 Current assets 
$1,750,000 
$  500,000 
$  500,000
 Fixed assets, net 
5,000,000 
1,625,000 
2,000,000
 Investment in Beta 
2,000,000 
— 
—
Total Assets 
$8,750,000 
$2,125,000 
$2,500,000
Liabilities
 Current Liabilities 
$  250,000 
$  125,000 
$  125,000
Stockholders’ Equity
 Common stock 
7,000,000 
1,500,000
 Capital in excess of par 
500,000 
—
 Retained earnings 
1,000,000 
500,000
 Total Stockholders’ Equity 
8,500,000 
2,000,000
Total Liabilities and 
 Stockholders’ Equity 
$8,750,000 
$2,125,000
Required:
1. Prepare the entries for adjustments and eliminations required to prepare the consolidated 
balance sheet immediately after acquisition under the acquisition method.
2. Prepare the consolidated balance sheet immediately after acquisition.
AICPA
ADAPTED

 
Exercises 
1015
Consolidated worksheet 
and balance sheet under 
 acquisition method (LO 4)
E16-21
On January 1, 2014, Chesapeake Corporation issued common stock with a fair value of 
$810,000 in exchange for 90% of Deardon Corporation’s common stock. Following are the 
January 1, 2014, separate balance sheets of Chesapeake and Deardon immediately following 
the acquisition, plus fair value information for Deardon’s assets and liabilities:
 
Deardon
 
Chesapeake 
Book Value 
Fair Value
Assets
 Current assets 
$  500,000 
$  400,000 
$  450,000
 PP&E, net 
800,000 
800,000 
775,000
 Patent 
100,000 
— 
75,000
 Investment in Deardon 
810,000 
— 
—
Total assets 
$2,210,000 
$1,200,000 
$1,300,000
Liabilities
 Current liabilities 
$  400,000 
$  150,000 
$  150,000
 Long-term liabilities 
500,000 
270,000 
300,000
Total liabilities 
900,000 
420,000 
$  450,000
Stockholders’ Equity
 Common stock 
900,000 
400,000
 Retained earnings 
410,000 
380,000
Total stockholders’ equity 
1,310,000 
780,000
Total liabilities and equity 
$2,210,000 
$1,200,000
Required:
1. Provide the adjustments and elimination entries needed to prepare the post-acquisition 
January 1, 2014, consolidated balance sheet under the acquisition method.
2. Prepare the January 1, 2014, consolidated balance sheet.
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
E16-22
Financial asset denominated 
in a foreign currency  
(LO 2, 9)
On January 1, 2014, Morrill, Inc., purchased at par value a bond issued by a German com-
pany for 5,000 euros. Morrill classifies this security in its available-for-sale (AFS) portfo-
lio. On December 31, 2014, the fair value of the bond is 4,800 euros. The applicable 
exchange rates are:
• January 1, 2014: $1.30 5 1 euro
• December 31, 2014: $1.40 5 1 euro 
Required:
1. Prepare the January 1, 2014, and December 31, 2014, journal entries, assuming Morrill 
uses U.S. GAAP to account for the bond investment. Ignore fair value adjustments for 
other securities in Morrill’s AFS portfolio.
2. Repeat requirement 1 assuming Morrill uses IFRS.
3. Compare the effect on 2014 income and other comprehensive income (OCI) for U.S. 
GAAP and IFRS.

1016 
CHAPTER 16
Intercorporate Equity Investments
PROBLEMS / DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
On January 1, 2014, Figland Company purchased for cash 40% of Irene Company’s 300,000 
shares of voting common stock for $1,800,000. At the time, 40% of the book value of the 
underlying equity in Irene’s net assets was $1,400,000; $50,000 of the excess was attributed 
to the excess of fair value over book value of inventory, which Irene accounts for using the 
first-in, first-out (FIFO) inventory method; and $150,000 was attributed to undervaluation of 
depreciable assets with an average remaining life of 10 years. The remainder was attributed to 
implicit goodwill.
 
As a result of this transaction, Figland can exercise significant influence over Irene’s oper-
ating and financial policies. Irene’s net income for the year ended December 31, 2014, was 
$600,000. During 2014, Irene paid $325,000 in dividends to its stockholders.
Required:
1. How much income would Figland report on its 2014 income statement for its investment 
in Irene?
2. What would be the balance in the Investment in Irene Company account on December 31, 
2014?
P16-1
Equity method accounting  
(LO 3)
P16-2
Accounting for trading 
 securities (LO 2)
Second National Insurance Company provided this information for its trading securities 
portfolio:
 
Fair Values
Security 
Date 
Acquisition Cost 
12/31/13 
12/31/14 
12/31/15
Company A Common 
1/15/13 
$50,000 
$60,000 
$55,000 
$58,000
Company B Common 
6/30/13 
30,000 
25,000 
13,000* 
10,000
Company C Preferred 
2/1/14 
20,000 
— 
25,000 
18,000
Company D Common 
5/1/15 
10,000 
— 
— 
12,000
* Second National sold 50% of the Company B common shares for $14,000 on July 1, 2014. Fair values at December 31, 
2014, and December 31, 2015, are for the Company B shares remaining in the trading portfolio.
Required:
1. Provide the journal entries to record the fair value adjustment on December 31, 2013. 
 Assume that Second National uses an account entitled Fair value adjustment—trading 
 securities to adjust the cost of the trading portfolio to year-end fair values. Show support-
ing calculations in good form.
2. Provide the entry to record the sale of Company B’s common shares on July 1, 2014. 
 Assume that the last fair value adjustment for these shares was on December 31, 2013.
3. Provide the journal entry and supporting calculations for the fair value adjustment on 
 December 31, 2014.
4. Provide the journal entry and fair value adjustment on December 31, 2015.
5. What would the entry to record the sale of Company B common shares on July 1, 2014, 
have been if this security had been considered an available-for-sale security? Ignore 
tax effects.

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
1017
P16-3
Consolidated balance sheet 
and income statement under 
acquisition method (LO 4)
On December 31, 2014, Pate Corporation acquired 80% of Starmont Corporation’s common 
stock for $900,000 cash. Assume that the fair values of Starmont’s identifiable assets and 
 liabilities equaled book values on the acquisition date. Following are the December 31, 2014, 
separate balance sheets of Pate and Starmont immediately following the acquisition:
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
 
Pate 
Starmont
Assets
 Current assets 
$  400,000 
$  300,000
 Long-term assets 
1,000,000 
860,000
 Investment in Starmont 
900,000 
—
Total assets 
$2,300,000 
$1,160,000
Liabilities
 Current liabilities 
$  300,000 
$  100,000
 Long-term liabilities 
900,000 
170,000
Total liabilities 
1,200,000 
270,000
Stockholders’ Equity
 Common stock 
500,000 
300,000
 Retained earnings 
600,000 
590,000
Total stockholders’ equity 
1,100,000 
890,000
Total liabilities and equity 
$2,300,000 
$1,160,000
The following are Pate’s and Starmont’s results of operations during 2015:
 
Pate 
Starmont
Sales revenue 
$1,500,000 
$1,000,000
Cost of goods sold 
900,000 
650,000
SG&A expenses 
200,000 
130,000
Additional Information:
• Included in these totals are intra-entity sales from Pate to Starmont totaling $100,000. 
Pate applies the same markup on sales to Starmont as to its other customers. Starmont 
sold all of this inventory to outside customers during 2015 for $150,000.
• There was no goodwill impairment during 2015.
• The applicable income tax rate is 35%.
Required:
1. Prepare the December 31, 2014, consolidated balance sheet under the acquisition method.
2. Prepare the consolidated income statement for the year ended December 31, 2015. Show 
the deduction for net income allocated to noncontrolling interest to arrive at net income—
attributable to Pate shareholders.
P16-4
Equity method and fair value 
option (LO 3)
On January 1, 2014, Newyork Capital Corporation purchased 30% of the outstanding com-
mon shares of Delta Crating Corp. for $250 million and accounts for this investment under the 
equity method. The following information is available regarding Delta Crating Corp.
($ in millions)
Net identifiable assets at 1/1/2014 acquisition:
 Fair value 
$  700
 Book value 
500
2014 net income 
100
2014 dividends declared and paid 
30
2015 net income 
80
2015 dividends declared and paid 
20
12/31/2014 fair value (based on market value) 
1,000
12/31/2015 fair value (based on market value) 
1,200

1018 
CHAPTER 16
Intercorporate Equity Investments
Two-thirds of the difference between the book value and fair value of Delta’s identifiable net 
assets at acquisition is attributable to depreciable assets having fair value greater than their 
book value and the remaining one-third is attributable to land having fair value in excess of its 
book value. The depreciable assets have an average remaining useful life of 10 years and are 
being depreciated by the straight-line method with zero residual value.
Required:
1. Provide the journal entries that Newyork Capital would make in 2014 and 2015 to  account 
for its investment in Delta Crating under the equity method. Provide supporting details 
for all calculations needed.
2. Determine the carrying value of Newyork’s Investment in Delta Crating account on 
 December 31, 2014, and December 31, 2015, under the equity method.
3. Now assume that Newyork elected the fair value option for the equity method on the 
 January 1, 2014, acquisition date. Repeat requirements 1 and 2.
4. Based on your answers, discuss the impact of the fair value option on Newyork’s net 
profit margin in 2014 and 2015.
P16-5
Using acquisition versus 
 purchase methods with 
 goodwill (LO 4, 5, 6)
On January 1, 2014, Delta Inc. acquired 80% of Sigma Company’s outstanding stock for 
$80,000 cash. Following are the balance sheets for Delta and Sigma immediately before the 
acquisition, as well as fair value information regarding Sigma’s assets and liabilities:
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
 
Sigma Company
 
Delta Inc. 
Book Value 
Fair Value
Assets
 Cash 
$ 91,000 
$ 8,000 
$  8,000
 Accounts receivable 
19,000 
15,000 
9,000
 Inventory 
47,000 
31,000 
43,000
 Land 
12,000 
5,000 
12,000
 Plant and equipment, net 
66,000 
35,000 
51,000
Total 
$235,000 
$94,000 
$123,000
Liabilities and shareholders’ equity
 Accounts payable 
$ 52,000 
$35,000 
$ 35,000
 Long-term debt 
66,000 
15,000 
15,000
 Common stock 
 
 
  Delta—5,000 shares, $1.00 par 
5,000 
— 
  Sigma—4,000 shares, $0.50 par 
— 
2,000 
 Additional paid-in capital 
30,000 
12,000 
 Retained earnings 
82,000 
30,000 
Total 
$235,000 
$94,000 
Required:
1. Prepare the entry Delta would make to record the acquisition of Sigma under the 
 acquisition method. Use the amount paid by Delta for its 80% interest to impute the total 
fair value of Sigma at acquisition.
2. Calculate the amount of goodwill that Delta will record as a result of acquiring Sigma.
3. Provide the adjustment and elimination entries Delta would make to prepare the consoli-
dated balance sheet immediately after the acquisition.
4. Prepare the consolidated balance sheet for Delta immediately after its acquisition of 
Sigma Company.
5. Repeat requirements 1–4 under the purchase method. (Note to student: Ignore the fact 
that the date in this problem would preclude the use of the purchase method.)

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
1019
P16-6
Consolidating at acquisition: 
Acquisition vs. purchase 
method (LO 4, 5, 6)
Prince Corp. and Sprite Corp. reported the following balance sheets at January 1, 2014:
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
On January 2, 2014, Prince issued $36,000 of stock and used the proceeds to purchase 90% of 
Sprite’s common stock. The excess of the purchase price over Sprite’s book value of net assets 
was allocated 60% to inventory and 40% to goodwill.
Required:
Show the amounts that Prince will report on its January 2, 2014, consolidated balance sheet for 
the following items under (a) the acquisition method and (b) the purchase method. (Note to stu-
dent: Ignore the fact that the date in this problem would preclude the use of the purchase method.)
1. Current assets.
2. Noncurrent assets.
3. Goodwill.
4. Current liabilities.
5. Noncurrent liabilities.
6. Stockholders’ equity (controlling interest).
7. Stockholders’ equity (noncontrolling or minority interest).
 
Prince 
Sprite
Current assets 
$30,000 
$15,000
Noncurrent assets 
55,000 
25,000
 Total assets 
$85,000 
$40,000
Current liabilities 
$20,000 
$10,000
Long-term debt 
20,000 
5,000
Stockholders’ equity 
45,000 
25,000
 Total liabilities and 
  stockholders’ equity 
$85,000 
$40,000
P16-7
Consolidating account 
 balances with intra-entity 
transactions (LO 4)
The following information is reported in the separate and consolidated balance sheets and 
income statements of Palace Corp. and its subsidiary, Show Corp., at December 31, 2014:
Additional Information:
During 2014, Palace sold goods to Show at the same markup on cost it uses for all sales. At Decem-
ber 31, 2014, Show had not paid for all of these goods and still held 50% of them in inventory.
 
 
 
Consolidated
 
Palace 
Show 
(after eliminations)
Balance sheet accounts
 Accounts receivable 
$ 58,000 
$ 36,000 
$ 80,000
 Inventory 
52,000 
40,000 
80,000
 Investment in Show 
120,000 
— 
—
 Goodwill 
— 
— 
30,000
 Stockholders’ equity 
308,000 
100,000 
308,000
Income statement accounts
 Revenues 
$350,000 
$240,000 
$510,000
 Cost of goods sold 
245,000 
200,000 
377,000
 Gross profit 
105,000 
40,000 
133,000
 Equity in earnings of Show 
16,000 
— 
—
 Net income 
$ 70,000 
$ 20,000 
$ 80,000

1020 
CHAPTER 16
Intercorporate Equity Investments
Required:
1. What was the amount of intra-entity sales from Palace to Show during 2014?
2. What was the carrying amount of the inventory that Show purchased from Palace on the 
December 31, 2014, consolidated balance sheet?
3. How much did Show owe to Palace for intra-entity sales at December 31, 2014?
4. What percent of Show’s stock does Palace own?
P16-8
Consolidating intra-entity 
sales (LO 4)
On October 1, 2014, Pacer Corp. acquired all of Sunny Corp.’s outstanding stock for cash. The 
fair value of Sunny’s net assets was less than the purchase price but more than the net carrying 
amount. During October 2014, Pacer sold goods to Sunny at a profit. At December 31, 2014, 
40% of these goods remained in Sunny’s inventory.
Required:
1. Specify reasons for preparing consolidated financial statements that present operating 
 results, cash flows, and financial position as if a parent company and its subsidiaries were 
a single entity.
2. How will the acquisition affect Pacer’s consolidated balance sheet at October 1, 2014?
3. What eliminations are required for the intra-entity sales when preparing consolidated 
 financial statements at December 31, 2014?
4. What is the effect on Pacer’s separate balance sheet immediately after the October 1, 
2014, acquisition?
P16-9
Elimination entries and 
 consolidated balance 
sheet (LO 4)
The following are the balance sheets for Plate and Salad immediately prior to Plate’s Septem-
ber 1, 2014, acquisition of Salad:
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
Consider the following cases:
Case 1
Plate buys 100% of Salad’s common stock for $180,000 cash. The fair value of Salad’s assets 
and liabilities equal their book value.
Case 2
Plate buys 100% of Salad’s common stock for $210,000 cash. The fair value of Salad’s land is 
$20,000 and of its buildings and equipment is $110,000. All other fair values equal book 
values.
 
Plate 
Salad
Assets
 Cash 
$500,000 
$100,000
 Accounts receivable 
50,000 
20,000
 Inventory 
100,000 
30,000
 Land 
50,000 
10,000
 Bldg. & equip. net 
200,000 
100,000
Total 
$900,000 
$260,000
Liabilities & equity
 Accounts payable 
$ 40,000 
$ 80,000
 Bonds payable 
200,000 
–0–
 Common stock & APIC 
300,000 
100,000
 Retained earnings 
360,000 
80,000
Total 
$900,000 
$260,000

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
1021
P16-10
Elimination entries and 
 consolidated balance sheet 
under acquisition versus 
 purchase method (LO 4, 6)
Refer to the balance sheets of Plate and Salad in the previous problem. Assume that Plate buys 
80% of Salad’s common stock for $180,000 cash. The fair value of Salad’s land is $20,000, the fair 
value of Salad’s buildings and equipment is $110,000, and all other fair values equal book values.
Required:
Provide answers to the following under (a) the acquisition method and (b) the purchase method. 
(Note to student: Ignore the fact that the date in this problem would preclude the use of the 
 purchase method.)
1. Prepare the journal entry on Plate’s books to record the acquisition of Salad.
2. Prepare the elimination entries needed to prepare a consolidated balance sheet immedi-
ately after the acquisition.
3. Prepare the consolidated balance sheet immediately after the acquisition.
e cel
x
mhhe.com/revsine6e
P16-11
Eliminating entries and 
 accounting for goodwill  
(LO 4, 5)
On January 1, 2014, Pluto Company acquired all of Saturn Company’s common stock for 
$1,000,000 cash. On that date, Saturn had retained earnings of $200,000 and common stock 
of $600,000. The book values of Saturn’s assets and liabilities were equal to fair values except 
for the following:
Additional Information:
1. The equipment had an estimated remaining useful life of five years at acquisition.
2. Goodwill was not impaired at December 31, 2014, but was impaired by $25,000 at 
 December 31, 2015.
3. Reported income for Pluto (excluding equity income from Saturn’s earnings) and Saturn 
follows:
 
Book Value 
Fair Value
Equipment (net) 
$200,000 
$220,000
Land 
 250,000 
 300,000
 
Pluto 
Saturn
Year 2014 
$500,000 
$200,000
Year 2015 
$350,000 
$100,000
Required:
1. Prepare the January 1, 2014, journal entry on Pluto’s books to record the acquisition of Saturn.
2. Prepare the elimination entries needed to prepare a consolidated balance sheet immedi-
ately after acquisition.
3. Calculate consolidated income for 2014 and 2015.
Required:
1. Prepare the September 1, 2014, journal entry on Plate’s books to record the acquisition of 
Salad.
2. Prepare the elimination entries needed to prepare a consolidated balance sheet immediately 
after the acquisition.
3. Prepare the consolidated balance sheet immediately after the acquisition.
P16-12
Comparing translation effect 
on ratios (LO 8)
AutoParts Heaven is a U.S. company whose operations include a large, 100% owned foreign 
subsidiary. The subsidiary’s functional currency is the U.S. dollar. The local currency in the 
country where the foreign subsidiary operates is appreciating against the U.S. dollar. The 
subsidiary accounts for inventories using the FIFO method.
AICPA
ADAPTED

1022 
CHAPTER 16
Intercorporate Equity Investments
P16-13
Financial asset impairment 
and recovery (LO 2, 8, 10)
On January 1, 2014, Wilson Corporation acquired mortgage-backed securities (MBS) from Na-
tional Financial for $10,000 and classified the investment in its available-for-sale (AFS) portfolio. 
On December 31, 2014, the MBS’s fair value had declined to $7,000, and this decline was consid-
ered an other-than-temporary impairment. The $3,000 impairment during 2014 was attributed to:
• Credit losses–$1,000
• Other factors–$2,000
On December 31, 2015, the MBS’s fair value recovered to $9,000. The $2,000 increase during 
2015 was attributed to:
• Credit losses–$750
• Other factors–$1,250
Required:
1. Assume that Wilson follows U.S. GAAP. Prepare the journal entries to record:
• The January 1, 2014, purchase
• The December 31, 2014, impairment
• The December 31, 2015, impairment recovery
 
Summarize the amounts that Wilson reports in income and other comprehensive income 
(OCI) during 2014 and 2015.
2. Repeat requirement 1 assuming Wilson follows IFRS.
3. Now assume that the MBS’s value recovered to $11,000 on December 31, 2015. Explain 
how the $4,000 increase during 2015 will be allocated to income and OCI under (a) U.S. 
GAAP and (b) IFRS.
P16-14
Variable interest entities 
(LO 7)
In its 2005 annual report, Waste Management Inc. provided the following note to the financial 
statements:
Financial Interest in Surety Bonding Company—During the third quarter of 2003, we issued a 
letter of credit to support the debt of a surety bonding company established by an unrelated third 
party to issue surety bonds to the waste industry and other industries. The letter of credit, which 
is valued at $24.8 million as of December 31, 2005, serves to guarantee the surety bonding com-
pany’s obligations associated with its debt and represents our exposure to loss associated with 
our financial interest in the entity.
 
As of December 31, 2005, $60 million of current assets, $6 million of long-term assets, 
$33 million of current liabilities, $22 million of long-term debt and $11 million in minority 
 interest have been included in our Consolidated Balance Sheet.
Required:
1. Why did Waste Management have to include $60 million of current assets, $6 million of 
long-term assets, $33 million of current liabilities, $22 million of long-term debt, and 
$11 million in minority interest in its Consolidated Balance Sheet?
Required:
Compare each of the following ratios for the foreign subsidiary in its functional currency af-
ter translation to the same ratios in the local currency before translation. Briefly explain why 
each ratio differs.
1. Gross profit margin percentage.
2. Operating profit margin.
3. Net profit margin.

 
Cases 
1023
CASES
The disclosure rules for business combinations complicate financial analysis. Trend analysis 
becomes difficult because comparative financial statements are not retroactively adjusted to 
include data for the acquired company for periods prior to the acquisition.
 
For example, consider Shopko’s acquisition of Pamida on July 6, Year 1. Excerpts from 
Shopko’s Year 1 annual report highlight the revenue and earnings growth achieved in that 
year. In the president’s letter, William Podany noted the following:
For more than ten consecutive years we have achieved new records for revenues and this year we are 
pleased to report another year of record earnings.
The management’s discussion and analysis (MD&A) section began with the following 
statement:
Consolidated net sales for fiscal Year 1 (52 weeks) increased $939.5 million or 31.8% over fiscal Year 0 
weeks (52 weeks) to $3,898.1 million.
The details of the acquisition were disclosed in the following note in Shopko’s Year 1 annual 
report:
On July 6, Year 1, the Company acquired all of the outstanding voting and nonvoting common stock 
of Pamida for $94.0 million in cash, $285.8 million in assumed debt and $138.6 million in assumed 
trade and other accrued liabilities. Pamida is a retail chain headquartered in Omaha, Nebraska, op-
erating Pamida retail stores in 15 Midwest, North Central and Rocky Mountain states. In connec-
tion with the Pamida acquisition, the Company incurred special charges of $8.1 million for 
employee  retention programs, elimination of administrative functions and various integration initia-
tives. The allocation of the purchase price of Pamida was based on estimated fair values at the date 
of acquisition.
 
This acquisition was accounted for under the purchase method of accounting and the allocation of the 
purchase price was based on fair values at the date of acquisition. Goodwill associated with the Pamida 
acquisition was approximately $186.6 million. The results of operations since the dates of acquisition 
have been included in the consolidated statements of earnings.
 
The following presents selected unaudited pro forma consolidated statement of earnings 
information that has been prepared assuming the Pamida acquisition occurred on January 1, 
Year 1, and January 1, Year 0, respectively:
C16-1
Shopko: Business acquisitions 
and analysis of sales growth  
(LO 6)
 
Fiscal Years
($ in thousands, except per share data—unaudited) 
Year 1 
Year 0
Net sales 
$4,181,567 
$3,630,951
Earnings before extraordinary item 
101,190 
56,678
Diluted earnings per share before extraordinary item 
3.54 
2.14
2. What percentage of Surety Bonding Company’s equity was owned by Waste Management?
3. At the end of 2005, Waste Management reported $3,451 million in total current assets and 
$3,257 million in total current liabilities. Did Waste Management’s accounting treatment 
with respect to the Surety Bonding Company increase or decrease Waste Management’s 
current ratio? Why might an analyst or investor be confused by this accounting treatment 
when considering measures of short-term liquidity?

1024 
CHAPTER 16
Intercorporate Equity Investments
Required:
1. How should a financial statement user interpret the reference to 31.8% sales growth in the 
MD&A section?
2. Suppose you are asked to prepare a sales forecast for the year ended December 31, Year 
2. Based on the information shown here, what is the best estimate of Shopko’s sustainable 
growth in sales between the years ended December 31, Year 0, and December 31, Year 1? 
Explain your answer.
C16-2
City Holding Company: 
Accounting for 
 available-for-sale 
securities (LO 2)
City Holding Company is a multibank holding company headquartered in West Virginia. The 
company comprises multiple facilities located in West Virginia, Ohio, and Kentucky. The 
banking subsidiaries provide a full range of banking services and make investments in debt 
and equity securities under limitations and restrictions imposed by regulations of the Comp-
troller of the Currency.
 
Appearing on the following pages are City Holding Company’s consolidated balance sheet 
and cash flow statement as well as selected note information pertaining to the available-for-
sale securities for Year 2 and Year 1.
 
Using the information provided, determine responses to the questions that follow. Provide 
detailed support where appropriate.
Consolidated Statement of Earnings 
 
Fiscal Years
($ in thousands) 
Year 1 
Year 0
Revenues: 
Net sales 
$3,898,090 
$2,958,557
Licensed department rentals and other income 
13,856 
12,325
 
3,911,946 
2,970,882
Costs and Expenses: 
Cost of sales 
3,047,930 
2,296,085
Selling, general and administrative expenses 
601,157 
471,546
Special charges 
8,068 
5,723
Depreciation and amortization expenses 
84,438 
67,590
 
3,741,593 
2,840,944
Income from operations 
170,353 
129,938
Interest expense—net 
(46,894) 
(38,311)
Gain on sale of ProVantage stock 
56,760 
—
Earnings before income taxes, minority interest and 
 extraordinary item 
180,219 
91,627
Provision for income taxes 
71,800 
35,991
Earnings before minority interest and extraordinary item 
108,419 
55,636
Minority interest 
(2,463) 
—
Earnings before extraordinary item 
105,956 
55,636
Extraordinary (loss) on retirement of debt, net of 
 income taxes of $2,443 
(3,776) 
—
Net earnings 
$   102,180 
$     55,636
Note: At the time of this case, gains and losses on early retirement of debt received extraordinary item treatment and minor-
ity interest was subtracted in arriving at net earnings.
Shopko’s consolidated statements of earnings for the years ended December 31, Year 1, and 
December 31, Year 0, follow:

 
Cases 
1025
(Note: Unrealized gains [losses] on available-for-sale securities are not recognized for tax 
purposes until the securities are sold. Accordingly, the tax effects of these unrealized gains 
[losses] are recognized as adjustments to the deferred tax liability [asset] accounts. Unrealized 
gains [losses] on available-for-sale securities are shown net of related tax effects as an adjust-
ment to stockholders’ equity. Assume that the all realized gains and losses reported in the note 
on page 1027 relate to available-for-sale securities. Transfers of securities from the held-to-
maturity to available-for-sale category are recorded at fair value with the unrealized gain 
[loss] recorded in stockholders’ equity.)
Required:
1. Determine the net before-tax unrealized holding gain (loss) on available-for-sale 
 securities that City Holding recognized in Year 2. Assume no adjustments are made to 
the Unrealized holding gain (loss) account when securities are sold.
2. Assuming a 35% tax rate, determine the deferred tax amounts related to the net unreal-
ized holding gains (losses) that were recorded in Year 2. Indicate whether the deferred tax 
amounts were a liability or an asset.
3. Prepare the entry that City Holding made at December 31, Year 2 to record the unrealized 
gain (loss) on available-for-sale securities and to adjust the related stockholders’ equity 
account.
4. Prepare the entry that City Holding made to record sales and calls on available-for-sale 
 securities in Year 2.
5. To the extent possible, explain the year-to-year change in the cost basis of the available-
for-sale securities (from $377,013,000 on December 31, Year 1, to $436,070,000 on 
 December 31, Year 2).
T  R  E   T   C    H
S
City Holding Company and Subsidiaries
Condensed Consolidated Balance Sheets
 
December 31
($ in thousands) 
Year 2 
Year 1
Assets
Cash and cash equivalents 
$  129,318 
$  170,327
Investment securities available for sale, at fair value 
445,384 
383,552
Investment securities held to maturity, at amortized cost 
 (approximate fair value at December 31 Year 2—$74,415) 
72,410 
—
Loans, net of allowance for loan losses 
1,175,887 
1,341,620
Other assets 
224,912 
220,796
 Total assets 
$2,047,911 
$2,116,295
Liabilities
Total deposits 
$1,564,580 
$1,691,295
Other liabilities 
317,938 
278,651
 Total liabilities 
1,882,518 
1,969,946
Total Stockholders’ Equity 
165,393 
146,349
 Total liabilities and stockholders’ equity 
$2,047,911 
$2,116,295
(continued)

1026 
CHAPTER 16
Intercorporate Equity Investments
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
City Holding Company and Subsidiaries
Note Four: Investments
 During Year 2, the Company initiated an investment strategy to invest in trust preferred securities issued 
by other financial institutions. Only those securities issued by financial institutions that satisfy various 
asset size, profitability, equity-to-asset ratio, and certain other criteria, as pre-established by management, 
are evaluated for potential investment. Securities acquired were predominantly investment grade or were 
reviewed and approved for investment by the Company’s executive loans committee. As of December 31, 
Year 2, the Company had invested $40.75 million, classified as held-to-maturity, and $17.43 million, 
classified as available-for-sale, pursuant to this strategy. 
 
 Also during Year 2, the Company transferred debt securities with an estimated fair value of 
$37.14 million and an amortized cost basis of $36.03 million from the available-for-sale classification 
to the held-to-maturity category. Transfers of debt securities into the held-to-maturity category from the 
available-for-sale classification are made at fair value at the date of transfer. The unrealized holding gain 
of $1.11 million at the date of transfer is retained in the other comprehensive income section of stock-
holders’ equity and in the carrying value of the held-to-maturity securities. Such amounts are amortized 
over the remaining life of the security. 
City Holding Company and Subsidiaries (continued)
Condensed Consolidated Cash Flow Statement
 
Years Ended December 31
($ in thousands) 
Year 2 
Year 1 
Year 0
Operating Activities
Net income (loss) 
$  32,459 
$  (8,015) 
$ (38,373)
Adjustments to reconcile net income (loss) to net 
 cash provided by operating activities:
Depreciation and amortization, including goodwill 
 impairment 
7,370 
9,791 
53,128
Various adjustments for loan transactions 
4,284 
47,410 
115,617
Realized investment securities (gains) losses 
(1,459) 
(2,382) 
5,015
Other adjustments 
9,409 
(4,405) 
12,242
 Net cash provided by operating activities 
52,063 
42,399 
147,629
Investing Activities
Proceeds from maturities and calls of securities 
 held-to-maturity 
4,994 
— 
—
Purchases of securities held-to-maturity 
(40,783) 
— 
—
Proceeds from sales of securities available for sale 
348,052 
262,241 
51,606
Proceeds from maturities and calls of securities 
 available for sale 
165,014 
171,546 
32,417
Purchases of securities available for sale 
(608,709) 
(431,113) 
(80,640)
Net decrease (increase) in loans 
147,121 
400,832 
(64,191)
Other investing activities 
(373) 
(49,416) 
(97)
 Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities 
15,316 
354,090 
(60,905)
Financing Activities
Net increase (decrease) in deposits 
(126,715) 
(218,228) 
128,171
Other financing activities 
18,327 
(98,562) 
(246,379)
 Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities 
(108,388) 
(316,790) 
(118,208)
Increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents 
(41,009) 
79,699 
(31,484)
Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year 
170,327 
90,628 
122,112
 Cash and cash equivalents at end of year 
$ 129,318 
$  170,327 
$   90,628

 
Cases 
1027
 
Gross gains of $1.46 million were realized during Year 2 on sales and calls of securities. 
There were no gross losses realized during Year 2. Gross gains of $2.67 million and $105,000 
and gross losses of $290,000 and $5.12 million were realized on sales and calls of securities 
during Year 1 and Year 0, respectively. Of the gross gains reported in Year 2, $1.35 million 
was directly attributable to two interest rate risk management processes utilized during the 
year. First, the Company reported $0.62 million in gains realized from the Company’s invest-
ment in a mutual fund that generates capital gains, as opposed to interest income. Second, as 
further discussed in Note Five, the Company reported $0.73 million in gains realized from an 
investment transaction that entailed the short-sale of a high-coupon U.S. Treasury bond. 
Gross gains of $2.67 million in Year 1 include $1.62 million of gains realized from the Com-
pany’s investment in a mutual fund during Year 1. The Company maintained an average 
 
The aggregate carrying and approximate market values of securities follow. Fair values are based on 
quoted market prices, where available. If quoted market prices are not available, fair values are based on 
quoted market prices of comparable financial instruments.
Available-for-Sale Securities
 
December 31,  Year 2
 
 
Gross 
Gross 
Estimated
 
 
Unrealized 
Unrealized 
Fair
($ in thousands) 
Cost 
Gains 
Losses 
Value
U.S. Treasury securities and obligations
 of U.S. government corporations
 and agencies 
$107,108 
$5,607 
$— 
$112,715
Obligations of states and political
 subdivisions 
22,687 
804 
— 
23,491
Mortgage-backed securities 
130,739 
2,819 
— 
133,558
Other debt securities 
51,591 
101 
(76) 
51,616
 Total debt securities 
312,125 
9,331 
(76) 
321,380
Equity securities 
123,945 
59 
— 
124,004
 
$436,070 
$9,390 
$(76) 
$445,384
Available-for-Sale Securities
 
December 31,  Year 1
 
 
Gross 
Gross 
Estimated
 
 
Unrealized 
Unrealized 
Fair
($ in thousands) 
Cost 
Gains 
Losses 
Value
U.S. Treasury securities and obligations
 of U.S. government corporations
 and agencies 
$202,422 
$6,751 
$  (318) 
$208,855
Obligations of states and political
 subdivisions 
64,609 
1,426 
(135) 
65,900
Mortgage-backed securities 
90,969 
90 
(1,519) 
89,540
Other debt securities 
6,089 
161 
— 
6,250
 Total debt securities 
364,089 
8,428 
(1,972) 
370,545
Equity securities 
12,924 
83 
— 
13,007
 
$377,013 
$8,511 
$(1,972) 
$383,552

1028 
CHAPTER 16
Intercorporate Equity Investments
 balance of $46.25 million invested in the mutual fund during Year 1. This mutual fund gener-
ated capital gains, as opposed to interest income, which utilized capital loss carryforwards 
available to the Company for income tax purposes. The capital loss carryforwards were 
 primarily generated by the gross securities losses recognized in Year 0. Gross losses of $5.12 
million in Year 0 are comprised of losses the Company recognized on its investments in 
small business investment corporations.
 
The book value of securities pledged to secure public deposits and for other purposes as 
required or permitted by law approximated $158.11 million and $260 million at December 31, 
Year 2 and Year 1, respectively.
C16-4
Air Products: Joint ventures 
and off-balance-sheet effects  
(LO 3)
Excerpts from the Year 2 annual report of Air Products and Chemicals, Inc., follow. The in-
come statement and balance sheet are condensed but the note entitled “Summarized Financial 
Information of Equity Affiliates” is shown in its entirety.
 
The note provides information on several joint ventures that Air Products has entered into—
primarily to incinerate municipal solid waste and generate electricity.
C16-3
Measurement and reporting 
of noncontrolling interest 
 under acquisition method  
(LO 4)
On December 31, 2009, Internet Capital Group (ICG) acquired 89% of the equity of Gov-
Delivery for $19,670,000. This acquisition was accounted for under the acquisition method. 
In its 10-K filing with the SEC, ICG disclosed the following purchase price allocation to net 
 assets and noncontrolling interest based on acquisition date fair values:
Required:
1. Locate the current accounting guidance in FASB ASC 805 for measuring noncontrolling 
interest in a subsidiary at the acquisition date. What is the basic measurement principle 
ICG must use to recognize the noncontrolling interest in GovDelivery at acquisition?
2. The accompanying note states that ICG valued the noncontrolling interest of GovDelivery 
with consideration of discounts for lack of control and lack of marketability. Discuss the 
appropriateness of this valuation technique with reference to current accounting 
standards.
3. Based on the above acquisition price allocation, estimate the amount of the discount ap-
plied to the noncontrolling interest valuation on the acquisition date relative to the ac-
quired shares.
4. How will this acquisition affect ICG’s consolidated income statement for the year ended 
December 31, 2009, and its consolidated balance sheet at December 31, 2009?
5. Explain the effect on future years’ consolidated net income of the asset allocations listed 
in the table.
($ in thousands)
Goodwill 
$ 3,644
Customer lists (11-year life) 
13,910
Trademarks/trade names (11-year life) 
1,320
Technology (10-year life) 
710
Other net assets 
1,506
 
21,090
Noncontrolling interest(1) 
(1,420)
 
$19,670
(1) ICG determined the noncontrolling interest of GovDelivery with consideration of discounts for lack of control and lack 
of marketability.

 
Cases 
1029
Air Products and Chemicals, Inc. and Subsidiaries
Consolidated Income Statement (Modified)
 
Years Ended September 30
($ in millions) 
Year 2 
Year 1
Sales and other income 
$ 5,401.2 
$ 5,857.8
Costs and expenses
Cost of sales 
3,827.7 
4,243.3
Selling and administrative 
715.1 
752.1
Research and development 
120.6 
122.5
Other (income) expense, net 
(37.1) 
(5.5)
Operating income 
774.9 
745.4
Income from equity affiliates, net of related expenses 
76.2 
81.2
Gain on sale of U.S. packaged gas business 
55.7 
—
Gain on divestiture of interest in cogeneration facilities 
— 
101.6
Loss on early retirement of debt 
— 
(75.8)
Interest expense 
122.3 
191.2
Income before taxes and minority interest 
784.5 
661.2
Income taxes provision (benefit) 
240.8 
190.5
Minority interest in earnings of subsidiary companies 
18.3 
5.1
Net income 
$   525.4 
$   465.6
Consolidated Balance Sheets (Modified)
 
September 30
($ in millions) 
Year 2 
Year 1
Assets
 Total current assets 
$ 1,909.3 
$ 1,684.8
Investment in net assets of and advances to equity affiliates 
484.2 
499.5
Plant and equipment, at cost 
10,879.8 
10,226.5
Less accumulated depreciation 
(5,502.0) 
(5,108.0)
Plant and equipment, net 
5,377.8 
5,118.5
Goodwill 
431.1 
384.7
Other noncurrent assets 
292.6 
396.6
 Total assets 
$ 8,495.0 
$ 8,084.1
Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity
 Total current liabilities 
$ 1,256.2 
$ 1,352.4
Long-term debt 
2,041.0 
2,027.5
Deferred income and other noncurrent liabilities 
827.4 
702.0
Deferred income taxes 
725.6 
778.4
 Total liabilities 
4,850.2 
4,860.3
Minority interest in subsidiary companies 
184.4 
118.0
Total shareholders’ equity 
3,460.4 
3,105.8
 Total liabilities and shareholders’ equity 
$ 8,495.0 
$ 8,084.1
Summarized Financial Information of Equity Affi  liates
The following table presents summarized financial information on a combined 100% basis of the princi-
pal companies accounted for by the equity method. Amounts presented include the accounts of the fol-
lowing equity affiliates: Stockton CoGen Company (50%); Pure Air on the Lake, L.P. (50%); Bangkok 
Cogeneration Company Limited (48.8%); Daido Air Products Electronics, Inc. (49%); Sapio Produzione 
Idrogeno Ossigeno S.r.L. (49%); INFRA Group (40%); Air Products South Africa (50%); Bangkok In-
dustrial Gases Company Ltd. (50.6%); INOX Air Products Limited (INOX) (49.4%); APP GmbH in 
WPS GmbH & CoKG (20%); DuPont Air Products Nanomaterials, LLC (50%); Island Pipeline Gas 

1030 
CHAPTER 16
Intercorporate Equity Investments
(33%); Tyczka Industrie-Gases GmbH (50%); and principally other industrial gas producers. In the 
fourth quarter of Year 2, the company obtained control of San Fu after increasing its ownership interest 
from 48% to 70%. In the fourth quarter of Year 1, the company sold its 50% interest in Cambria CoGen 
Company and Orlando CoGen Limited. Amounts presented reflect the accounts of these companies for 
the periods during which the equity method was applied.
($ in millions) 
Year 2 
Year 1
Current assets 
$  732.6 
$  833.9
Noncurrent assets 
1,148.7 
1,391.0
Current liabilities 
572.5 
605.1
Noncurrent liabilities 
452.2 
620.3
Net sales 
1,608.8 
1,690.2
Sales less cost of sales 
543.0 
611.5
Net income 
196.3 
219.4
The company’s share of income of all equity affiliates for Year 2, Year 1, and Year 0 was $88.7, $91.1 
and $99.6, respectively. These amounts exclude $12.5, $9.9, and $12.0 of related net expenses incurred 
by the company. Dividends received from equity affiliates were $42.0, $44.9, and $49.7 in Year 2, Year 1 
and Year 0, respectively.
 
The investment in net assets of and advances to equity affiliates at 30 September Year 2 and Year 1 
included investment in foreign affiliates of $449.5 and $465.9, respectively.
 
As of 30 September Year 2 and Year 1, the amount of investment in companies accounted for by the 
equity method included goodwill in the amount of $69.6 and $77.2, respectively. Goodwill is no longer 
amortized, as discussed in Note 1.
Required:
1. What are some reasons companies give to justify entering into joint ventures?
2. Using the information provided, estimate what the effect on Air Products’ return-on- 
assets ratio and debt-to-equity ratio would have been if its proportionate share of the joint 
ventures had been included as individual assets and liabilities on the consolidated balance 
sheet. For this purpose, use a 35% tax rate, and assume that Air Products’ proportionate 
ownership in these equity affiliates averaged 45%.
.mhhe.com/revsine6e
www
Remember to check the book’s companion website 
for additional study material.

17
Ode to Cash Flow
Though my bottom line is black, I am flat upon my back, 
My cash flows out and my customers pay slow, 
The growth of my receivables is almost unbelievable; 
The result is certain—unremitting woe! 
And I hear the banker utter an ominous low mutter, 
“Watch cash flow!”1
A
s this poem suggests, accrual earnings may not always provide a complete mea-
sure of enterprise performance and financial health. There are several reasons 
for this. Accrual accounting necessarily involves subjective judgments that can 
introduce measurement error and uncertainty into reported earnings. Examples include 
estimates of uncollectible receivables, useful lives of assets, and future pension and 
health care benefits. One-time write-offs and restructuring charges require subjective 
judgments that can adversely affect the quality of the reported earnings number as a reli-
able indicator of a company’s long-run performance. Moreover, managers can readily 
manipulate accrual income by postponing discretionary expenditures for research and 
development or advertising or by purposeful last-in, first-out (LIFO) dipping.
 
For these reasons, analysts must scrutinize a firm’s cash flows—not just its accrual 
earnings—to evaluate its performance and creditworthiness. A significant difference 
between accrual earnings and operating cash flow may be a “red flag” that signals dis-
tortions of reported profits or impending financial difficulties.
 
Equity analysts are interested in operating cash flows because a firm’s value 
 ultimately depends on the discounted present value of its expected future cash flows. 
Recent operating cash flows are sometimes used in conjunction with current earnings as 
a jumping-off point for generating forecasts of expected future operating cash flows. 
Thus, cash flows can provide useful information for assessing equity values.2
Statement of Cash Flows
1031
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you 
will understand:
1. The major sources and uses of cash 
reported in the operating, investing, 
and financing sections of the state-
ment of cash flows.
2. Why accrual net income and operat-
ing cash flow differ and the factors 
that explain this difference.
3. The difference between the direct 
and indirect methods of determining 
cash flow from operations.
4. How to prepare a statement of cash 
flows from comparative balance 
sheet data, an income statement, and 
other financial information.
5. Why changes in balance sheet ac-
counts over a year may not reconcile 
to the corresponding account 
changes included in the statement of 
cash flows.
6. How operating cash flows can be 
distorted.
7. Differences between reporting 
 interest and dividends received and 
interest and dividends paid on the 
statement of cash flows under IFRS 
rules vs. U.S. GAAP.
1 H. S. Bailey, Jr., cited in R. Green, “Are More Chryslers in the Offing?” Forbes, February 2, 1981, p. 69.
2 Research evidence that supports this assertion includes J. Rayburn, “The Association of Operating Cash Flow and 
 Accruals with Security Returns,” Journal of Accounting Research, Supplement 1986, pp. 112–33; P. Wilson, “The Relative 
Information Content of Accruals and Cash Flows: Combined Evidence at the Earnings Announcement and Annual 
 Report Release Date,” Journal of Accounting Research, Supplement 1986, pp. 165–200; P. Wilson, “The Relative 
 Information Content of Accrual and Funds Components of Earnings after Controlling for Earnings,” The Accounting 
 Review, April 1987, pp. 293–322; and M. Johnson and D. Lee, “Financing Constraints and the Role of Cash Flow from 
Operations in the Prediction of Future Profitability,” Journal of Accounting, Auditing and Finance, Fall 1994, pp. 619–52.
17
Chapter

1032 
CHAPTER 17
Statement of Cash Flows
 
Commercial lenders monitor a firm’s operating cash flows because such cash flows pro-
vide the resources for periodic interest payments and the eventual repayment of principal. 
Low or negative operating cash flows signal poor credit risks.
 
Investment bankers scrutinize operating cash flows before deciding whether to underwrite 
a debt or equity issue. They know that the ultimate purchasers of the securities will assess the 
attractiveness of the securities based, in part, on the firms’ expected operating cash flows.
STATEMENT FORMAT
The Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) mandates that firms provide a statement 
of cash flows that explains the sources and uses of cash.3 Firms are required to disclose cash 
flows generated (or used) from three distinct types of activities:
1. Operating cash flows result from events or transactions that enter into the determination 
of net income—that is, transactions related to the production and delivery of goods and 
services to customers. In effect, operating cash flows are a company’s cash-basis revenues 
and expenses.
2. Investing cash flows result from the purchase or sale of productive assets such as plant 
and equipment, from the purchase or sale of marketable securities (government bonds or 
stocks and bonds issued by other companies), and from the acquisitions of other compa-
nies or divestitures.
3. Financing cash flows result when a company sells its own stock or bonds, pays divi-
dends or buys back its own shares (treasury stock), or borrows money and repays the 
amounts borrowed.
Current U.S. GAAP allows firms the option of choosing between two alternative formats for 
presenting cash flows from operating activities: (1) the direct method and (2) the indirect 
method. Each of these alternative formats is illustrated on the following pages.
 
A fourth “section” consisting of a single line appears in the cash flow statements of compa-
nies having foreign operations. This item, called “Effect of exchange rates on cash and cash 
equivalents” (or some similar title) represents the change in the U.S. dollar amount presented for 
cash resulting from foreign currency holdings being revalued as exchange rates change. For ex-
ample, a U.S. company with a European subsidiary holding euros would report a different cash 
balance at the end of the year than the beginning of the year even without any cash flows from 
its European subsidiary, if the exchange rate between the U.S. dollar and the euro changed.
The Direct Method
Exhibit 17.1 presents the fiscal 2012 (and comparative 2011) statement of cash flows for 
Golden Enterprises, a small snack food company, whose fiscal year ends June 1, 2012. The 
statement separates cash flows into operating, investing, and financing activities. For fiscal 
2012, operating activities generated positive cash flow of $5.747 million, while investing ac-
tivities resulted in net cash outflow of $4.992 million. The major investing outflow was to 
purchase property and equipment. The company had net cash outflow from financing activities of 
$1.583 million with net outflows from debt repayments in excess of debt issuances ($37.468 2 
$36.640 5 $0.828 million) as a primary contributing source, along with $1.467 million in 
3 FASB ASC Topic 230: Statement of Cash Flows.
FASB ASC Topic 230— 
Statement of cash flows—
uses the term net cash flows 
from operating activities. 
Because they are widely 
used in practice, we also use 
the terms operating cash 
flows and cash flow from 
operations in this chapter. 
They mean the same thing.
The International Financial 
Reporting Standards (IFRS) 
format for cash flow state-
ments is similar to the U.S. 
GAAP format. See “Cash 
Flow Statements,” IAS No. 7 
(London: International 
 Accounting Standards 
 Committee, revised 1992). 
Cash flows are classified by 
operating, investing, and 
 financing activities. 
 Operating cash flows can be 
reported using either the 
 direct method or the indirect 
method, but the direct 
method is preferred (paras. 
18–20).

 
Statement Format
1033
 dividend payments. As a result of its operating, investing, and financing activities, Golden En-
terprises generated a net decrease in cash of slightly more than $825 thousand for fiscal 2012.
 
Golden Enterprises follows the direct method for presenting cash flows from operations. 
The direct method requires firms to report major classes of gross cash receipts (cash revenues) 
and gross cash payments (cash expenses). Note that Interest income and Interest expense are 
shown as components of cash flows from operating activities. This treatment is in accordance 
with GAAP reporting requirements, which classifies these two items as elements of cash 
flows from operating activities because cash flows from operating activities generally reflect 
the cash effects of transactions entering into the determination of net income.
EXHIBIT 17.1
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows 
(Direct Method)
Golden Enterprises, Inc. and Subsidiary
For the Fiscal Years Ended June 1, 2012 and June 3, 2011
 
2012 
2011
Cash flows from operating activities
 Cash received from customers 
$135,839,804 
$130,362,172
 Interest income 
7,353 
4,439
 Rental income 
42,552 
36,775
 Other operating cash payments/receipts 
63,968 
144,371
 Cash paid to suppliers and employees for 
  cost of goods sold 
(68,449,193) 
(64,735,374)
 Cash paid to suppliers and employees for selling, 
  general, and administrative 
(61,099,333) 
(57,818,135)
 Income taxes 
(375,077) 
(1,868,129)
 Interest expense 
(282,784) 
(371,584)
Net cash provided by operating activities 
5,747,290 
5,754,535
Cash flows from investing activities
 Purchases of property, plant, and equipment 
(5,214,408) 
(5,559,183)
 Proceeds from sale of property, plant, 
  and equipment 
222,755 
96,916
Net cash used in investing activities 
(4,991,653) 
(5,462,267)
Cash flows from financing activities
 Debt proceeds 
36,639,753 
38,903,745
 Debt repayments 
(37,468,412) 
(36,328,583)
 Change in checks outstanding 
  in excess of bank balances 
712,031 
(85,126)
 Purchases of treasury shares 
— 
(36,960)
 Cash dividends paid 
(1,466,831) 
(1,467,507)
Net cash (used in) provided by financing 
 activities 
(1,583,459) 
985,569
Net (decrease) increase in cash and cash equivalents 
(827,822) 
1,277,837
Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year 
2,721,638 
1,443,801
Cash and cash equivalents at end of year 
$    1,893,816 
$    2,721,638
Author note: Golden’s 2012 fiscal year runs from June 4, 2011 to June 1, 2012.
The minimum specific 
 categories of cash inflows 
and cash outflows that are 
required to be reported 
 under the direct method are:
a. Cash collected from cus-
tomers (including lessees 
and licensees).
b. Interest and dividends 
received.
c. Other operating cash 
receipts.
d. Cash paid to employees 
and other suppliers of 
goods and services.
e. Interest paid.
f. Income taxes paid.
g. Other operating cash 
payments.

1034 
CHAPTER 17
Statement of Cash Flows
 
Golden Enterprises discloses Cash received from customers of $135.840 million in fiscal 
2012. This number differs from the accrual accounting sales  revenue number of $136.186 mil-
lion, which is reported in Golden’s 2012 income statement shown in Exhibit 17.2. There are 
two possible reasons for this difference:
1. Some 2012 credit sales had not been collected in cash by year-end.
2. During 2012, cash was received for payment on accounts receivable generated from sales 
recognized in prior years.
 
The “Cash paid to suppliers and employees for cost of goods sold” of $68.449 million in 
Golden’s 2012 cash flow statement (Exhibit 17.1) differs from the $70.642 million reported 
for Cost of sales in Golden’s accrual-basis income statement (Exhibit 17.2). Similarly, “Cash 
paid to suppliers and employees for selling, general, and administrative” of $61.099 million 
and the $0.375 million of cash paid for Income taxes in the cash flow statement differ from 
the $61.591 million of Selling, general, and administrative expenses and the Provision for 
income taxes of $1.738 million reported in Golden’s income statement.
 
Overall, Exhibits 17.1 and 17.2 show that Golden Enterprises generated positive operating 
cash flows of $5.747 million in fiscal 2012 while its accrual-basis net income was $2.208 mil-
lion. Why is there a discrepancy between Golden’s net income and operating cash flows? The 
answer is found in the reconciliation of net income to net cash provided by operating activi-
ties. This reconciliation explains the differences that cause net income to deviate from operat-
ing cash flow. This reconciliation for Golden Enterprises is shown in Exhibit 17.3.4
EXHIBIT 17.2
Consolidated Statements of Income
Golden Enterprises, Inc. and Subsidiary
For the Fiscal Years Ended June 1, 2012 and June 3, 2011
 
2012 
2011
Net sales 
$136,185,657 
$131,047,850
Cost of sales 
70,642,277 
67,429,666
Gross margin 
65,543,380 
63,618,184
Selling, general, and administrative expenses 
61,591,496 
58,402,401
Operating income 
3,951,884 
5,215,783
Other (expenses) income:
 Gain on sale of assets 
162,876 
79,483
 Interest expense 
(282,784) 
(371,584)
 Other income 
113,873 
185,585
  Total other income (expenses) 
(6,035) 
(106,516)
  Income before income taxes 
3,945,849 
5,109,267
   Provision for income taxes 
1,738,226 
2,094,499
Net income 
$    2,207,623 
$    3,014,768
Author note: Golden’s 2012 fiscal year runs from June 4, 2011 to June 1, 2012.
4 This reconciliation schedule is required of all firms that use the direct method of presenting operating cash flows. See FASB 
ASC Paragraph 230-10-45-28: Statement of Cash Flows—Overall—Other Presentation Matters—Reconciliation of Net 
 Income and Net Cash Flow from Operating Activities.

 
Statement Format
1035
 
The reconciliation of net income to net operating cash flow, in addition to being a required 
supplemental disclosure for companies using the direct method, comprises the operating sec-
tion of the cash flow statement for companies using the indirect method. That is, the operating 
section of an indirect method cash flow statement is a reconciliation from net income to oper-
ating cash flow. Therefore, we discuss the reconciliation in the context of the indirect method 
cash flow statement.
The Indirect Method
The indirect method begins with accrual-basis net income and adjusts for the following:
• Items included in accrual-basis net income that did not affect operating cash flows in the 
current period, such as
 
• Noncash revenues or gains (such as revenues earned but not received in cash and gains 
on the disposal of fixed assets).
 
• Noncash expenses or losses (such as depreciation and amortization, provision for bad 
debt expense, and expenses accrued but not paid in cash).
• Items excluded from accrual-basis income that did affect operating cash flows in the 
 current period, such as
 
• Cash inflows (revenues) received but not recognized as earned in the current period 
(such as rent received in advance and collections on account).
 
• Cash outflows (expenses) paid but not recognized for accrual accounting purposes in 
the current period (such as prepaid insurance and payments on account).
EXHIBIT 17.3
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows 
(Indirect Method)
Golden Enterprises, Inc. and Subsidiary
For the Fiscal Years Ended June 1, 2012 and June 3, 2011
 
2012 
2011
Cash flows from operating activities
Net Income 
$2,207,623 
$3,014,768 
Adjustment to reconcile net income to net 
 cash provided by operating activities:
➀ Depreciation 
3,303,353 
3,174,956 
➁ Deferred income taxes 
557,576 
1,329,868
➂ Gain on sale of property and equipment 
(162,876) 
(79,483)
➃ Change in receivables-net 
(345,853) 
(685,678)
➄ Change in inventories 
(161,169) 
(94,964)
➅ Change in prepaid expenses 
48,956 
(230,574)
➆ Change in cash surrender value of insurance 
176,177 
364,240
➇ Change in other assets 
(151,239) 
(167,256)
➈ Change in accounts payable 
(297,983) 
186,036
➉ Change in accrued expenses 
(132,524) 
138,626 
11 Change in salary continuation plan 
(100,324) 
(92,506)
12  Change in accrued income taxes 
805,573 
(1,103,498)
 Net cash provided by operating activities 
$5,747,290 
$5,754,535
Author note: Golden’s 2012 fiscal year runs from June 4, 2011 to June 1, 2012.

1036 
CHAPTER 17
Statement of Cash Flows
The overwhelming majority of public companies use the indirect method. Firms favor the in-
direct method because it relies exclusively on data already available in the accrual accounts. 
In addition, it characterizes cash flow in a way that many analysts find useful. For example, 
the change in inventory (a reconciling item in the indirect method cash flow statement) is use-
ful information because it relates to expansion or contraction of inventory that can be placed 
in context depending on whether sales are growing or not. If sales are growing, an increase in 
inventory is expected. If sales are shrinking, an increase in inventory may signal obsolescence 
problems. Purchases of inventory (which are provided in a direct method cash flow statement) 
are less useful in addressing questions such as this one. Similarly, changes in accounts receiv-
able may be more informative than cash collections.
 
We’ll use Exhibit 17.3 to show how the indirect method reconciles accrual accounting net 
income ($2,207,623 in Exhibit 17.2) with cash flow from operations ($5,747,290 in Exhibit 
17.1). Each of the reconciling items is discussed individually.
 
Items ➀ through ➂ in Exhibit 17.3 represent amounts included in the accrual-basis net 
income figure that did not have an operating cash flow effect—that is, they did not cause 
cash flow from operations to increase or decrease during the year. Because they did not have 
a cash flow effect, the accrual-basis net income must be adjusted for these items to arrive at 
cash flows from operations.
➀ Depreciation 
This is the most common indirect method adjustment. During 2012, 
Golden Enterprises made the following entry for depreciation:
DR Depreciation expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$3,303,353 
   CR Accumulated depreciation on fixed assets . . . . . . . .  
 
$3,303,353
Although the debit reduced net income, the credit did not represent a cash outflow. Hence, this 
noncash expense caused net income to diverge from cash provided by operating activities. 
That’s why depreciation expense must be added back to net income as a reconciling item un-
der the indirect method.
➁ Deferred Income Taxes 
Golden showed an increase in its deferred tax liabilities 
net of deferred tax assets of $557,576 in 2012. Golden’s pre-tax book income exceeded its taxable 
income in 2012 due to a variety of temporary differences we discussed in Chapter 13. When this 
happens, the debit to income tax expense exceeds the taxes owed and paid in the current period. 
This increase in net deferred tax liabilities must be added to accrual-basis net income because the 
tax expense on Golden’s income statement overstates the cash outflow for taxes in fiscal 2012.
➂ Gain on Sale of Property and Equipment 
This amount represents the 
excess of the selling price over book value of assets sold during the period. In 2012, Golden 
sold assets for a gain of $162,876. The gain increased net income, but it did not reflect the 
increase in cash flow from operations related to this transaction. The gain is considered a 
noncash addition to accrual income, so it must 
be subtracted from net income to arrive at cash 
flows from operations. The cash received from 
the transaction is shown later in the investing 
activities section. The amount reported there is 
the $222,755 actually received in cash.
Items ➃ through 12  represent amounts that 
were included in the $2,207,623 net income 
We can infer that the assets sold had a net book value of $59,399 by subtracting 
the gain of $162,876 from the $222,275 cash proceeds received on the sale. So, 
the entry to record the sale of assets was:
DR Cash 
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$222,275
   CR Assets (net of accumulated 
      depreciation). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$59,399
   CR Gain on sale  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
162,876

 
Statement Format 
1037
for which the net income effect either exceeds or falls below the cash flow effect. Because 
the net income effect and the cash flow effect differ, the following adjustments must appear 
in the reconciliation.
➃ Change in Receivables—Net 
During 2012, the amount in Golden’s Accounts 
receivable (net of Allowance for uncollectibles) account increased by $345,853. This means 
that sales on account (accrual-basis revenue) were greater than cash collections on account 
(cash-basis revenue) in 2012. Accordingly, a subtraction must be made from the accrual-basis 
net income to arrive at cash provided by operating activities.
➄ Change in Inventories 
During 2012, the amounts in Golden’s inventory accounts 
increased by $161,169, so inventory purchased exceeded the cost of inventory sold during the 
year. Let’s temporarily assume that all inventory purchases were paid for in cash. (Adjustment 
➈ discusses changes in the Accounts payable account that corrects for noncash inventory pur-
chases.) The inventory buildup means that cash outflow for inventory exceeded the accrual-
basis Cost of goods sold on Golden’s income statement. Thus, the increase in inventories must 
be subtracted from accrual-basis income to obtain cash flows from operations because the cash 
outflow for inventory exceeded the amount charged to expense under accrual accounting.
➅ Change in Prepaid Expenses 
Golden’s Prepaid expenses decreased in fiscal 
2012 by $48,956. This decrease represents cash payments for items such as insurance and rent 
that were below the amounts expensed on Golden’s accrual-basis income statement. Because 
cash payments were below the accrual-basis expenses, Golden adds this decrease in prepaid 
expenses to accrual earnings to obtain cash flows from operations.
➆ Change in Cash Surrender Value of Insurance 
Golden carries life in-
surance policies on certain key executives in the firm. When it pays the premiums, part of the 
payment increases the cash surrender value of those policies. When policies are terminated, 
the company receives cash from the insurance company. During the year, Golden’s balance 
sheet (not shown) shows a decrease in the Cash surrender value of life insurance of $176,177, 
which indicates that cash was received from termination of one or more of these policies. 
Golden treats this as an operating source of cash.5
➇ Change in Other Assets 
Golden’s balance sheet shows a $151,239 increase in 
the Other asset account. This increase likely resulted in a credit (decrease) to one or more 
expense accounts on Golden’s income statement. Because these reductions in expenses do not 
reflect the cash flow effect of these transactions, this amount is subtracted from Golden’s 
 accrual-basis earnings to arrive at the operating cash flows for the period.
➈ Change in Accounts Payable 
Golden’s Accounts payable account decreased 
by $297,983 during the year. Thus, cash payments on account exceeded credit purchases on 
account by this amount. Because credit purchases (but not cash payments on account) are in-
cluded as part of the Cost of goods sold on Golden’s income statement, this decrease in ac-
counts payable represents the excess of cash outflows for inventory during the period above 
the accrual-basis expense reported on the income statement. Hence, this amount is shown as a 
subtraction from accrual-basis earnings to arrive at cash flows from operations.
5 An alternative and perhaps preferable method is to treat this as an investing source of cash inflows because the cash sur-
render value of life insurance policies could be viewed as a noncurrent investment. For a discussion of the issues surrounding 
this classification, see David McCann, “Key-Person Insurance: A Cash Flow Puzzle,” April 4, 2012, CFO.com.

1038 
CHAPTER 17
Statement of Cash Flows
➉ Change in Accrued Expenses 
Accrued expenses represent expenses for items 
such as salaries, wages, and interest incurred in the current period but not paid. Golden’s Accrued 
expenses (which reflects several liability accounts on its balance sheet) decreased by $132,524 
during fiscal 2012. Because this decrease in accruals, which resulted in an offsetting credit to ex-
pense accounts on Golden’s income statement, did not result in an inflow of cash, this amount is 
shown as a subtraction from accrual earnings to arrive at cash flows from operations for the year.
 Change in Salary Continuation Plan 
Golden has a salary continuation 
(pension) plan for certain key executives. This liability account is increased each year for the 
present value of increased retirement benefits earned during the year (which are reported as an 
expense on the accrual-basis income statement) and is decreased for the cash payments made 
to retired executives during the year. Golden’s balance sheet shows a net decrease in current 
and noncurrent salary continuation liabilities of $100,324 for fiscal 2012, which implies that 
the cash payments for retirement benefits exceeded the amount recognized as expense on the 
accrual-basis income statement. Therefore, this amount is deducted from the accrual-basis 
income to arrive at cash flows from operations for the period.
 Change in Accrued Income Taxes 
This current liability account is in-
creased for income taxes that are due for the period (with an offsetting debit to Tax expense on 
the accrual-basis income statement) and is reduced for cash payments made to the govern-
ment for taxes in the current period. Golden’s Accrued income taxes payable account in-
creased by $805,573 in 2012. This implies that Golden’s cash outflow for income taxes was 
less than the tax expense recorded on the accrual-basis income statement. Thus, this amount 
is added to accrual income to arrive at cash flows from operations for the year.
 
The direct and indirect methods for computing net cash provided by operating activities 
will result in the same number—$5,747,290 in Golden’s 2012 annual report. Those who 
prefer the direct method justify their preference by claiming that this method discloses operat-
ing cash flows by category—inflows from customers, outflows to suppliers, and so on. They 
contend that this categorization facilitates cash flow predictions. For example, assume that an 
analyst expects product selling prices to increase by 6% in the ensuing year. The direct meth-
od’s disclosure of cash received from customers could then be multiplied by 106% to con-
struct next year’s cash forecast. (There is no similarly easy way to incorporate the expectation 
of a 6% price increase in the indirect method approach.)
 
Analysts who prefer the indirect method believe the size and direction of the items reconcil-
ing income to operating cash flow provide a rough yardstick for evaluating the quality of earn-
ings. When a company reports high accounting income but simultaneously has low or negative 
cash flow from operations, this situation is considered a sign of low-quality earnings that are 
not sustainable. For example, if the excess of income over cash flow is accompanied by a large 
buildup in accounts receivable, this increase could indicate that the company is aggressively 
recognizing revenue. The receivables buildup may have occurred, for example, if a company 
shipped unwanted merchandise to distributors in an effort to inflate sales. Or the buildup could 
result from sales to customers with marginal creditworthiness that may never be collected.
 
Although the FASB allowed a choice between the direct and indirect methods for deter-
mining operating cash flows when it formulated current reporting requirements for the state-
ment of cash flows, it anticipated that the vast majority of firms would use the indirect method. 
Because few firms were expected to use the direct method, the Board feared that users might 
find it difficult to compare the operating cash flows of firms using the direct method to that of 
firms using the indirect method. To address this comparability concern, GAAP requires firms 
using the direct method to provide a reconciliation between accrual earnings and operating 
cash flows such as the one that is presented by those firms using the indirect method. Golden 
Analysis

 
Statement Format 
1039
Enterprises’ choice of the direct method explains why we have operating cash flow informa-
tion for them under both methods.
 
Additionally, firms using the indirect method are required to disclose separately the 
amount of interest paid. Consequently, those who believe interest expense represents a cash 
flow from financing activities will always have sufficient information available to reclassify 
this item out of cash flows from operating activities for firms using the indirect method. How-
ever, GAAP does not require a separate disclosure of dividends and interest income received. 
Therefore, analysts who believe that these items should be classified as cash flows from in-
vesting activities will generally not have sufficient information to make this reclassification 
for firms that opt for the indirect method.
 
One additional difficulty confronting analysts using cash flow statement disclosures relates 
to the treatment of income taxes. Recall from Chapter 2 that intraperiod income tax allocation 
is followed in constructing the income statement—that is, the income tax expense associated 
with income from continuing operations is separately disclosed. Items not included in the com-
putation of income from continuing operations (such as gains and losses from discontinued 
operations and extraordinary items) are reflected net of their associated income tax effects. In-
traperiod income tax allocation facilitates predictions by statement users. The tax expense as-
sociated with the presumably recurring income from continuing operations is reported 
separately from the tax expense associated with items appearing below income from continu-
ing operations. Unfortunately, GAAP does not treat cash outflows for income taxes in the same 
way. The entire amount of cash payments for income taxes is included in the Cash flows from 
operating activities section even though some of the taxes relate, for example, to gains on sales 
of assets whose gross cash flows are included in the Cash flows from investing activities sec-
tion of the statement. The failure to differentiate tax cash flows by type (those pertaining to 
income from continuing operations versus other items) complicates forecasts of future cash 
flows. The FASB asserted that the allocation of taxes among the cash flow sections would be 
so complex and arbitrary that the benefits would not justify the costs. While this cost-benefit 
justification may be correct, the FASB provided no evidence to support its assertion.
GAAP also requires firms 
using the indirect method to 
separately disclose income 
taxes paid.
RECAP
The statement of cash flows provides a summary of a firm’s operating, investing, and fi-
nancing activities that explains its change in cash position for the period. Operating cash 
flows can be presented using either the direct or indirect method. The direct method 
details major sources of cash receipts and major categories of cash expenditures. The in-
direct method begins with accrual earnings and adjusts for (1) items included in accrual-
basis income that did not affect cash and (2) items excluded from accrual earnings that 
did affect operating cash flows.
Other Elements of the Cash Flow Statement
Let’s return to Exhibit 17.1. Golden Enterprises’ cash flow statement illustrates the typical 
range of items included in the Investing activities and Financing activities sections of the state-
ment. The items included are relatively straightforward, and there should be no difficulties in 
interpreting these disclosures. For example, Golden shows investing cash outflows in 2012 for 
purchases of property, plant, and equipment of $5,214,408. Cash inflows from investing activi-
ties resulted from the sale of property, plant, and equipment of $222,755. Note that the gross 
inflows and outflows are both shown. That is, both purchases and sales of property, plant, and 
equipment are shown in the investing section, rather than a single net number.
 
Financing cash inflows resulted from the issuance of debt ($36,639,753); financing cash 
outflows were for debt repayment ($37,468,412), an increase in bank overdrafts ($712,031), 
and cash dividends paid ($1,466,831).

1040 
CHAPTER 17
Statement of Cash Flows
 
The net result of Golden’s operating, investing, and financing activities for the year was a 
decrease in cash and cash equivalents of $827,822.
PREPARING THE CASH FLOW STATEMENT
The interrelationships among net income, cash flow, and assets and liabilities dictate how 
a cash flow statement for a period can be derived from the balance sheets at the beginning 
and end of that period. If a transaction giving rise to income or expense has a correspond-
ing cash flow, there is no reconciling item in the indirect method cash flow statement be-
cause income and cash flow are equal. And, no assets (other than cash) or liabilities will 
change in value. In contrast, if a transaction results in a different amount of income and 
cash flow, one or more assets (other than cash) and liabilities must change in value. For 
example, if sales revenue outpaces collections, accounts receivable must increase by the 
difference. If cost of goods sold exceeds inventory purchases, inventory declines. When 
depreciation is taken, there is an expense with no cash flow, and fixed assets decrease. As 
a result, we can use the changes in all balance sheet accounts other than cash to derive the 
cash flow statement.
 
This section illustrates the procedures used to prepare a cash flow statement. Exhibit 17.4 
provides comparative 2013–2014 balance sheet data, a 2014 income statement, and selected 
additional information for Burris Products Corporation. In the appendix to this chapter, we 
show the same example using a spreadsheet format to construct the analysis.
 
Reviewing the comparative balance sheets in Panel (a) of Exhibit 17.4 shows that the cash 
balance decreased by $8,000 during 2014. The purpose of a cash flow statement is to explain 
the underlying causes of this $8,000 change in the cash balance. Recall that the causes for 
change arise from operating, investing, and financing activities.
 
Constructing a cash flow statement requires the preparer to gather information like that in 
Exhibit 17.4. The three-step process that follows is then used to build the components of the 
statement.
Step 1: Identify the journal entry or entries that led to the reported change in each 
 noncash balance sheet account.
Step 2: Determine the net cash flow effect of the journal entry (or entries) identified in 
Step 1.
Step 3: Compare the income statement effect of the entry (Step 1) with its cash flow 
 effect (Step 2) to determine what cash flow statement treatment is necessary for each 
item.
 
This three-step approach is used to develop Burris’s cash flow statement in Exhibit 17.5 
using the indirect method of determining net cash flow from operating activities.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
The Operating Activities section of the statement in Exhibit 17.5 begins with net income of 
$182,000. Under the indirect method, net income represents an initial rough approximation of 
the cash generated by operating activities. Starting the statement with net income presumes 
that revenues are ultimately collected in cash and that expenses represent cash outflows. In the 
long run, this approximation is basically correct. In any single period, however, accrual ac-
counting net income will not equal that same period’s cash flow from operating activities. The 
reason is that cash flows for some revenue and expense items occur either before or after ac-
crual accounting revenue and expenses are recognized. The adjustment for these differences 

 
Preparing the Cash Flow Statement 
1041
between the timing of revenue and expense recognition and cash flow impact appear as the 
eight numbered items following the net income figure in Exhibit 17.5. We now explain each 
of these items.
➀ Depreciation 
The income statement in Panel (b) of Exhibit 17.4 indicates that 
 depreciation expense recognized during 2014 was $158,000. We use the three-step analytic 
approach, as follows:
Step 1: The journal entry that generated the account change was:
DR Depreciation expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $158,000
   CR Accumulated depreciation   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$158,000
EXHIBIT 17.4
Comparative Balance Sheets, 2014 Income 
Statement, and Additional Information
Burris Products Corporation
Panel (a)
 
December 31, 
Increase or
Comparative Balance Sheets 
2014 
2013 
Decrease
Cash 
$     25,000 
$      33,000 
$    8,000 Decrease
Accounts receivable 
171,000 
180,000 
9,000 Decrease
Inventory 
307,000 
295,000 
12,000 Increase
Land 
336,000 
250,000 
86,000 Increase
Buildings and equipment 
1,628,000 
1,430,000 
198,000 Increase
Accumulated depreciation 
(653,000) 
(518,000) 
135,000 Increase
 
$1,814,000 
$1,670,000
Accounts payable 
$   163,000 
$   160,000 
$    3,000 Increase
Customer advance deposits 
99,000 
110,000 
11,000 Decrease
Bonds payable 
500,000 
500,000 
–0– 
—
Discount on bonds payable 
(66,000) 
(70,000) 
4,000 Decrease
Deferred tax liability 
100,000 
94,000 
6,000 Increase
Common stock 
850,000 
800,000 
50,000 Increase
Retained earnings 
168,000 
76,000 
92,000 Increase
 
$1,814,000 
$1,670,000
Panel (b)
2014 Income Statement
Sales revenues 
$ 3,030,000
Cost of goods sold 
(2,526,625)
Depreciation expense 
(158,000)
Sales commissions (all cash) 
(34,000)
Interest expense 
(44,000)
Gain on sale of equipment 
17,000
 Income before taxes 
    284,375
Income tax expense 
(102,375)
 Net income 
$    182,000
Additional Information
1. Equipment with a cost of $63,000 and a book value of $40,000 was sold for $57,000.
2. Cash dividends of $90,000 were paid in 2014.

1042 
CHAPTER 17
Statement of Cash Flows
Step 2: The journal entry appearing in Step 1 does not involve cash. Indeed, deprecia-
tion is unlike most other expenses because cash outflow often occurs before the expense 
recognition—that is, when the asset is initially purchased.
Step 3: Depreciation expense was included in the determination of net income (Step 1). 
But depreciation expense does not represent a cash outflow (Step 2) in the current period. 
Consequently, depreciation expense must be added back to net income to derive cash flow.
In short, depreciation expense is added back to accrual-basis income to obtain operating cash 
flows because it was included in the determination of net income even though it doesn’t rep-
resent a cash outflow of the current period.
➁ Gain on Equipment Sale 
The net income number includes a $17,000 gain on 
the sale of equipment, as shown in Panel (b) of Exhibit 17.4. Using the same three-step 
 approach, we arrive at the following:
Step 1: With the additional information disclosed below the income statement in  Panel 
(b) of Exhibit 17.4, we can develop the following journal entry for the gain:
DR Accumulated depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$23,000
DR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
57,000
CR Equipment   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$63,000
CR Gain on sale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
17,000
EXHIBIT 17.5
2014 Statement of Cash Flows
Burris Products Corporation
Operating activities
Net income 
 
$ 182,000
 Adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash 
  provided by operating activities
➀ Depreciation 
158,000
➁ Gain on equipment sale 
(17,000)
➂ Amortization of bond discount 
4,000
➃ Deferred income taxes increase 
6,000
➄ Accounts receivable decrease 
9,000
➅ Customer advance deposits decrease 
(11,000)
➆ Inventory increase 
(12,000)
➇ Accounts payable increase 
3,000
 
 
140,000
Net cash provided by operating activities 
 
322,000
Investing activities
➁ Equipment sale 
 
    57,000
➈ Land purchase 
 
(86,000)
➉ Buildings and equipment purchase 
 
(261,000)
Net cash used for investing activities 
 
(290,000)
Financing activities
 Common stock issued 
 
    50,000
 Dividend paid 
 
(90,000)
Net cash used for financing activities 
 
(40,000)
Net decrease in cash during 2014 
 
$    (8,000)
Note that if the equipment 
originally cost $63,000 and 
its book value was $40,000, 
the accumulated depreciation 
must have been $23,000.

Step 2: The sale resulted in a cash inflow of $57,000. This cash inflow is the result of 
investing activities.
Step 3: Comparing the accrual accounting effect (Step 1) to the cash flow effect 
(Step 2) reveals three problems: (1) the recognized accrual gain ($17,000) does not 
 correspond to the cash inflow ($57,000), (2) the $17,000 gain is included in income and 
thus would be categorized as an operating activities cash inflow unless adjustments are 
made, and (3) the $57,000 cash inflow from investing activities must be separately 
 reflected in the statement.
The cash flow statement in Exhibit 17.5 reflects the information uncovered in Step 3. The 
$17,000 gain is subtracted from net income to arrive at cash flow from operating activities, 
and the $57,000 total cash received is correctly categorized and shown as a cash inflow from 
investing activities.
➂ Amortization of Bond Discount 
Panel (a) of Exhibit 17.4 discloses that the 
Discount on bonds payable account decreased by $4,000 during 2014. The three-step ap-
proach shows the following:
Step 1: Because the income statement reports interest expense as $44,000, the journal 
entry that led to the balance sheet change for discount on bonds payable was:
DR Interest expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$44,000 
 
CR Discount on bonds payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$  4,000
 
CR Cash. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
40,000
Step 2: Interest expense of $44,000 was subtracted in computing net income, although 
the cash outflow for the payment of interest in 2014 was only $40,000.
Step 3: Because the accrual accounting income statement charge for interest expense 
($44,000) exceeds the cash outflow ($40,000), the $4,000 difference must be added back 
to net income in the operating activities section of the cash flow statement.
➃ Deferred Income Taxes Increase 
 The deferred tax liability increased by 
$6,000, as shown in Panel (a) of Exhibit 17.4. The three-step approach shows the 
following:
Step 1: Because income tax expense for 2014 was $102,375, the journal entry for taxes 
in 2014 was:
DR Income tax expense   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $102,375
 
CR Deferred tax liability   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$  6,000
 
CR Cash. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
96,375
Step 2: There is a disparity between the amount of the expense included in the determi-
nation of net income ($102,375) and the cash outflow to pay taxes ($96,375).
Step 3: Because the income statement expense is $6,000 more than the cash outflow, 
$6,000 must be added back in the Operating Activities section of the cash flow statement 
in Exhibit 17.5.
 
Preparing the Cash Flow Statement 
1043

1044 
CHAPTER 17
Statement of Cash Flows
➄ Accounts Receivable Decrease 
Panel (a) of Exhibit 17.4 shows that during 
2014 Accounts receivable decreased by $9,000. Following the three-step approach we obtain:
Step 1: If we assume that all 2014 sales were initially credit sales, the aggregate entry 
to record these sales would be:
DR Accounts receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$3,030,000
 
CR Sales revenue   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$3,030,000
If we assume that the only transaction causing a decrease in the Accounts receivable account 
is for collections on account, the $9,000 decrease during 2014 implies the following entry for 
cash collections:
DR Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$3,039,000
   CR Accounts receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$3,039,000
Step 2:  Because Accounts receivable decreased, cash collections during the year 
($3,039,000) must have exceeded the amount of revenues included in income ($3,030,000).
Step 3: The $9,000 excess of cash collections over accrual revenues must be added 
back to net income in Exhibit 17.5 to obtain net cash flow from operating activities.
➅ Customer Advance Deposits Decrease 
Burris Products Corporation re-
quires cash payments from customers prior to the sale of special order custom merchandise. 
This advance payment represents a liability on the balance sheet. As the custom products are 
delivered to customers, the liability is reduced and revenue is recognized. During 2014, the 
amount of the liability decreased by $11,000, as shown in Panel (a) of Exhibit 17.4.
Step 1: The accounting entry that reflects the reduction in the advance payment liability 
during 2014 was:
DR Customer advance deposits  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$11,000
 
CR Sales revenues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$11,000
Step 2: Sales revenues were $11,000 higher due to the recognition of revenue related to 
previously received deposits. However, there was no corresponding cash flow effect this 
year because the cash flow arose in 2013 when the special products were ordered and 
paid for and the liability was recorded.
Step 3: Because revenues included in the computation of 2014 net income exceeded 
2014 cash inflows by $11,000, this amount must be deducted in the operating activities 
section of the cash flow statement.
➆ Increase in Inventory 
When inventory increases during a period, the dollar 
amount of new inventory purchases exceeds the cost of goods that were sold.
Step 1: If we initially assume that all inventory is purchased for cash (we will relax this 
assumption in adjustment ➇, which is discussed next), the two accounting entries giving 
rise to a $12,000 increase in inventory (see Panel (a) of Exhibit 17.4) are:
DR Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$2,538,625
 
CR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 $2,538,625
[$2,526,625 Cost of goods sold 1 $307,000 Ending inventory 2 $295,000 
Beginning inventory]

 
and
DR Cost of goods sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$2,526,625
 
CR Inventory   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$2,526,625
 
Note that the combined result of these two entries is a $12,000 increase in inventory.
Step 2: The cost of goods sold number that is subtracted in the computation of net 
 income ($2,526,625) is $12,000 lower than the cash outflow to buy inventory.
Step 3: Because net income understates the cash outflow to acquire inventory, $12,000 
must be deducted from income in Exhibit 17.5.
➇ Increase in Accounts Payable 
Adjustment ➆ for the increase in inventory 
was computed under the assumption that all in-
ventory was purchased for cash. We assumed 
this because it makes it easier to see why an 
increase in inventory must be adjusted for 
when preparing a cash flow statement. We now 
relax this assumption because Panel (a) of Ex-
hibit 17.4 shows that Accounts payable in-
creased by $3,000 during 2014. A $3,000 
increase in Accounts payable means that 
$3,000 of the $12,000 inventory increase dur-
ing the year was not paid for in cash. There-
fore, $3,000 is added to net income in the cash 
flow statement.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Turning to the investing activities section of Burris’s cash flow statement (Exhibit 17.5), we 
see three transactions affected cash—one was a cash inflow and two were cash outflows.
➁ Equipment Sale 
This transaction was analyzed earlier when we adjusted accrual 
net income for the gain on sale of equipment. The $57,000 cash received when this equipment 
was sold represents an investing source of cash.
➈ Land 
Panel (a) of Exhibit 17.4 indicates that the Land account increased by $86,000. 
The analysis here is straightforward.
Step 1: The journal entry that reflects this increase is
DR Land   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$86,000
   CR Cash. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$86,000
Step 2: This transaction represents an outflow of cash of $86,000.
Step 3: The cash outflow is categorized as an $86,000 investment outflow.
There is another way to look at adjustments ➆ and ➇ that may make it easier for 
you to understand the accrual-to-cash adjustment. Together, adjustments ➆ and ➇ 
are designed to isolate the difference between accrual accounting’s cost of goods 
sold measure and cash inventory purchases. Specifically:
Accrual accounting cost of goods sold included
 in the determination of net income 
$2,526,625
Add: Adjustment ➆ (inventory increase) 
12,000
Equals: 2014 total inventory purchases 
2,538,625
Subtract: Adjustment ➇ (payables increase) 
(3,000)
Equals: 2014 cash paid for inventory purchases 
$2,535,625
In combination, adjustments ➆ and ➇ subtract $9,000 from income, an amount 
equal to the difference between cost of goods sold ($2,526,625) and cash paid for 
inventory purchases ($2,535,625).
 
Preparing the Cash Flow Statement 
1045

1046 
CHAPTER 17
Statement of Cash Flows
➉ Buildings and Equipment Purchase 
The Buildings and equipment account 
increased by $198,000 during 2014 (see Panel (a) of Exhibit 17.4). However, in computing the 
cash outflow that was incurred to acquire these fixed assets, we cannot simply use the $198,000 
net account change. The reason is that some equipment was sold during 2014 (see preceding 
Item ➁). Therefore, it is necessary to adjust the change in the Buildings and equipment account 
for the cost of the equipment sold to deduce the cost of the buildings and equipment purchased.
Step 1: When several items affect a particular account, it is useful to begin by recon-
structing the account over the period being analyzed.
Buildings and Equipment
12/31/13 Balance 
$1,430,000
 
 
Reduction in account
Building and equipment  
 
arising from sale
purchases (amount necessary 
 
of equipment (see 
to balance the account) 
261,000 
discussion of Item ➁) 
$63,000
12/31/14 balance 
$1,628,000
The analysis reveals that the increase in the Buildings and equipment account due to pur-
chases of assets was $261,000, resulting in the following journal entry:
DR Buildings and equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $261,000
   CR Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$261,000
Step 2: This transaction represents a cash outflow of $261,000.
Step 3: The outflow is categorized as a $261,000 investment cash outflow.
This adjustment illustrates that when constructing a cash flow statement, the analyst must 
be careful to look beyond just the net change in the account—he or she must also consider 
other known items that were added to or subtracted from the account during the period.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
The financing section of Burris’s cash flow statement in Exhibit 17.5 shows two other account 
changes during the period that had cash flow implications.
 and 
 Stock Sale and Dividend Paid 
The increase in the Common stock 
account indicates additional capital was raised when new shares were sold. Furthermore, the 
additional information lists a $90,000 cash dividend (see Exhibit 17.5). The analysis of these 
items is straightforward:
Step 1: The stock sale journal entry was:
DR Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$50,000
   CR Common stock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$50,000
 
The dividend generated the following entry:
DR Retained earnings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$90,000
 
CR Cash   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$90,000

 
Reconciliation between Statements: Some Complexities 
1047
Step 2: The cash effects of these items are unambiguously indicated in the entries—that 
is, a $50,000 inflow for the new financing and a $90,000 dividend outflow.
Step 3: Both the $50,000 cash inflow and the $90,000 cash outflow are categorized as 
cash flows from financing activities.
RECAP
To prepare a cash flow statement, (1) re-create the accounting entries that explain the 
changes in all noncash balance sheet accounts, (2) determine the net cash flow effect of 
the entry and the type of activity that generated or used the cash, and (3) compare the 
accrual accounting effect of the entry with the cash flow effect to determine what adjust-
ments, if any, are needed to convert accrual earnings to cash flow from operations.
RECONCILIATION BETWEEN STATEMENTS: 
SOME COMPLEXITIES
Financial statement users frequently encounter situations in which changes in balance sheet ac-
counts over the year do not reconcile to the corresponding account changes in the statement of cash 
flows. We’ll demonstrate this discrepancy and explain why it happens using data from the H.J. 
Heinz Company’s fiscal 2012 10-K report. The fundamental point of our analysis is this: While all 
accruals cause changes in balance sheet accounts, not all changes in operating 
balance sheet accounts (for example, receivables, inventory, and payables) are 
caused by accruals. Therefore, trying to infer accruals that affect income by ana-
lyzing changes in balance sheet accounts can be, and often is, misleading.
 
Exhibit 17.6 shows Heinz’s statement of cash flows for the fiscal year ended 
April 29, 2012, and the previous fiscal year. Exhibit 17.7 shows data from 
Heinz’s fiscal 2012 comparative balance sheet for two selected accounts— 
Inventory and Property, plant, and equipment. The operating activities section 
of Heinz’s cash flow statement is prepared using the indirect method, and starts with fiscal 2012 
accrual-basis net income of $939,908,000. Adjustments to reconcile net income to cash pro-
vided by operations are presented next. Notice that on the cash flow statement, the $60,919,000 
change in inventory is added to accrual-basis income, implying that inventory decreased by this 
amount. However, the change in Inventory on Heinz’s comparative balance sheet (Exhibit 17.7) 
shows a $122,195,000 decrease—a discrepancy of $61.276 million.
 
A similar discrepancy exists when trying to reconcile changes in Heinz’s “Property, plant, 
and equipment” balance sheet account with information presented on its cash flow statement. 
Heinz’s comparative balance sheets show a year-to-year increase in the Property, plant, and 
equipment account (before accumulated depreciation) of $41,846,000 (Exhibit 17.7). How-
ever, the “Investing activities” section of Heinz’s statement of cash flows (Exhibit 17.6) shows 
fiscal year 2012 capital expenditures (implying an increase in Property, plant, and equipment) 
of $418,734,000—a difference of nearly $377 million.
 
Why don’t the changes in working capital accounts like Inventory and fixed asset accounts 
like Property, plant, and equipment shown on Heinz’s balance sheet correspond with the 
amounts shown on its statement of cash flows? There are at least four reasons for these 
differences:
1. Asset write-offs due to impairment, corporate restructuring, or retirement,
2. Translation adjustments on assets and liabilities held by foreign subsidiaries,
3. Acquisitions of other companies, and
4. Simultaneous investing and financing activities not directly affecting cash.
The term accruals is used in a generic sense to 
include not only accrued revenues and accrued 
expenses but also deferred revenues and de-
ferred expenses. So, accrual adjustments in-
clude situations in which the revenue or expense 
recognition under accrual accounting occurs 
both before and after the cash flow.
To understand why, review 
discussion on page 1044 for 
Item ➆ in Exhibit 17.5 for 
Burris Products.

1048 
CHAPTER 17
Statement of Cash Flows
EXHIBIT 17.6
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
H.J. Heinz Company and Subsidiaries
 
Fiscal Years Ended
 
April 29, 2012 
April 27, 2011 
April 28, 2010
($ in thousands) 
(52 1/2 Weeks) 
(52 Weeks) 
(52 Weeks)
Operating activities
 Net income 
$    939,908 
$1,005,948 
$    882,343
 Adjustments to reconcile net income to cash provided 
  by operating activities:
 Depreciation 
295,718 
255,227 
254,528
 Amortization 
47,075 
43,433 
48,308
 Deferred tax (benefit)/provision 
(94,816) 
153,725 
220,528
 Net losses on divestitures 
— 
— 
44,860
 Pension contributions 
(23,469) 
(22,411) 
(539,939)
 Asset write-downs from Fiscal 2012 productivity initiatives 
58,736 
— 
—
➀ Other items, net 
75,375 
98,172 
90,938
Changes in current assets and liabilities, excluding 
 effects of acquisitions and divestitures:
 Receivables (includes proceeds from securitization) 
171,832 
(91,057) 
121,387
➁ Inventories 
60,919 
(80,841) 
48,537
 Prepaid expenses and other current assets 
(11,584) 
(1,682) 
2,113
 Accounts payable 
(72,352) 
233,339 
(2,805)
 Accrued liabilities 
(20,008) 
(60,862) 
96,533
 Income taxes 
65,783 
50,652 
(5,134)
  Cash provided by operating activities 
1,493,117 
1,583,643 
1,262,197
Investing activities
➂ Capital expenditures 
(418,734) 
(335,646) 
(277,642)
 Proceeds from disposals of property, plant and equipment 
9,817 
13,158 
96,493
➃ Acquisitions, net of cash acquired 
(3,250) 
(618,302) 
(11,428)
➄ Proceeds from divestitures 
3,828 
1,939 
18,637
 Sale of short-term investments 
56,780 
— 
—
 Change in restricted cash 
(39,052) 
(5,000) 
192,736
 Other items, net 
(11,394) 
(5,781) 
(5,353)
Cash (used for)/provided by investing activities 
(402,005) 
(949,632) 
13,443
Financing activities
 Payments on long-term debt 
(1,440,962) 
(45,766) 
(630,394)
 Proceeds from long-term debt 
1,912,467 
229,851 
447,056
 Net payments on commercial paper and short-term debt 
(42,543) 
(193,200) 
(427,232)
 Dividends 
(619,104) 
(579,618) 
(533,552)
 Purchases of treasury stock 
(201,904) 
(70,003) 
—
 Exercise of stock options 
82,714 
154,774 
67,369
 Acquisition of subsidiary shares from noncontrolling interests 
(54,824) 
(6,338) 
(62,064)
 Other items, net 
1,321 
27,791 
(9,099)
Cash used for financing activities 
(362,835) 
(482,509) 
(1,147,916)
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents 
(122,147) 
89,556 
(17,616)
Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 
606,130 
241,058 
110,108
Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year 
724,311 
483,253 
373,145
Cash and cash equivalents at end of year 
$ 1,330,441 
$   724,311 
$    483,253

 
Reconciliation between Statements: Some Complexities 
1049
Discrepancies in Current Accruals
We’ll use Heinz’s inventory account to illustrate reasons for the discrepancy between working 
capital components of net accrual adjustments on the cash flow statement and changes in 
these accounts on the balance sheet. From Exhibit 17.7, the change in inventories from 
Heinz’s comparative balance sheet is a decrease of $122.2 million while the inventory de-
crease implied by the accrual adjustment on Heinz’s cash flow statement (Exhibit 17.6) is 
$60.9 million. Although a precise reconciliation is not possible, the primary factors causing 
the difference arise for the reasons explained next.
Write-Offs Due to Obsolescence and Restructuring 
When inventories 
become obsolete (or fresh produce deteriorates, as can occur for Heinz) write-downs occur, 
which cause a reduction in inventory balances other than from sales. Inventory accounts, as 
well as property, plant, and equipment accounts, can also decrease because of corporate re-
structurings. Note 3 of Heinz’s fiscal 2012 financial statements indicates the company took a 
$224.3 million pre-tax charge for “productivity initiatives.” Of this amount, $58.7 million was 
a noncash charge for asset writedowns, and that amount appears as an addback in the cash 
flow statement (Exhibit 17.6). Although some of the asset writedowns undoubtedly were for 
property, plant and equipment, some may also have been for inventory, thereby explaining 
some of the difference between the change in inventory balances from the fiscal 2011 to the 
fiscal 2012 balance sheet and the inventory change reflected in the cash flow statement.
Foreign Currency Translation Adjustments 
Heinz has numerous foreign sub-
sidiaries whose statements are translated using the current rate approach described in Chapter 16. 
This method generates a potential discrepancy between the change in the inventory amount pre-
sented in the balance sheet and the statement of cash flows inventory change figure. This occurs 
because on the cash flow statement, inventory change is computed by comparing purchases with 
cost of goods sold, and if purchases exceed cost of goods sold, an inventory increase is indicated. 
EXHIBIT 17.7
Selected Accounts from Comparative 
Balance Sheets
H.J. Heinz Company and Subsidiaries
 
 
 
Changes in 
 
 
 
Account 
($ in thousands) 
April 29, 2012 
April 27, 2011 
Balances*
Inventories
 Finished goods and work-in-process 
$     1,082,317 
$   1,165,069
 Packaging material and ingredients 
247,034 
286,477
Total inventories 
1,329,351 
1,451,546 
$(122,195)
Property, plant, and equipment accounts
Land 
81,185 
85,457 
Buildings and leasehold improvements 
1,009,379 
1,019,311 
Equipment, furniture and other 
4,175,997 
4,119,947 
 
5,266,561 
5,224,715 
41,846
Less: Accumulated depreciation 
22,782,423 
22,719,632 
 Total property, plant, and equipment, net 
$    2,484,138 
$   2,505,083 
$(20,945)
* Amounts without parentheses represent increases in accounts from 2011 to 2012, while amounts with parentheses 
represent decreases in accounts.

1050 
CHAPTER 17
Statement of Cash Flows
To determine the inventory change for foreign subsidiaries, translated pur-
chases and cost of goods sold are compared. Inventory purchases and cost 
of goods sold are translated into dollars using the exchange rates in effect 
at the times of the various transactions. In contrast, foreign subsidiaries’ 
beginning inventories are translated at the beginning-of-period exchange 
rate while ending inventories are translated at the end-of-period exchange 
rate. The difference corresponds to the different nature of the two state-
ments: The balance sheet reflects an instant in time (and thus uses the ex-
change rate at that instant); the cash flow statement uses a series of 
exchange rates. It should not be surprising therefore that the measures of 
inventory change on the two statements will differ. 
Acquisitions 
Another reason why the inventory change on the 
two statements differs is because of acquisitions. The ending inventory 
number reported on the consolidated balance sheet includes the inven-
tory of subsidiary companies acquired during the year, even though the 
beginning inventory excludes those subsidiaries’ inventories. On the 
statement of cash flows, the increase in inventory due to acquisitions is 
reported as a component of Acquisitions, net of cash acquired in the In-
vesting Activities section. Therefore, the inventory change figure in 
the Operating Activities section of Heinz’s cash flow statement (Ex-
hibit 17.6) excludes inventory changes arising due to acquisitions.
The same factors explain discrepancies between changes in other 
working capital accounts on the balance sheet and accrual adjustments 
shown on the statement of cash flows.
Discrepancies Related to Property, Plant, and Equipment
Asset Impairments 
A portion of the discrepancy between the change in Property, 
plant, and equipment on Heinz’s balance sheet (an increase of $41.8 million before accumu-
lated depreciation shown in Exhibit 17.7) and the Capital expenditures on the cash flow state-
ment ($418.7 million in Exhibit 17.6, Item ➂) might be explained by asset impairment 
write-downs (see discussion in Chapter 10). The following excerpt is taken from Heinz’s note 
on significant accounting policies related to property, plant, and equipment:
The Company reviews property, plant, and equipment, whenever circumstances change such that 
the recorded value of an asset may not be recoverable. Factors that may affect recoverability  include 
changes in planned use of the asset and the closing of facilities. The Company’s  impairment review 
is based on an undiscounted cash flow analysis at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows 
exist and are largely independent. When the carrying value of the asset exceeds the future undis-
counted cash flows, an impairment is indicated and the asset is written down to its fair value.
While there is no indication of an impairment charge for fiscal 2012, Heinz has recorded fixed 
asset impairment charges in the past.
Retirements and Reclassifications to Assets Held for Sale 
During the 
year, Heinz may have sold or retired fixed assets that were not fully depreciated. Recall from 
Chapter 10 that the entry to record the retirement would take the following form:
DR Accumulated depreciation—plant and equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$XXX
DR Loss on retirement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
XXX
 
CR Plant and equipment (for cost of assets retired)  . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$XXX
This difference usually does not arise when all foreign 
subsidiaries are accounted for using the temporal 
method (Chapter 16). The reason is that under the tem-
poral method, the U.S. dollar value of inventories is 
not adjusted for changes in the exchange rate. Inven-
tory is always translated at the exchange rate in effect 
when it was purchased. The accounting matches the 
accounting that would have been used if the inventory 
had been purchased using U.S. dollars. Therefore, for  
firms whose subsidiaries all utilize the temporal ap-
proach, inventory change differences between the two 
statements usually do not arise.
Changes in inventories due to acquisitions do not 
 create a corresponding accrual adjustment 
to cost of goods sold on the income statement. There-
fore, changes due to these events would not be 
 included as part of the inventory adjustment to 
accrual-basis income (Item ➁ in Exhibit 17.6) to arrive 
at operating cash flows.
For simplicity, the translation may also be done using 
the weighted average rate of exchange in effect over 
the period.

 
Reconciliation between Statements: Some Complexities 
1051
 
It is generally not possible for financial statement users to determine the exact dollar amount 
of the year-to-year change in fixed asset accounts due to retirements, although Heinz’s Note 3 
does indicate the company closed 8 factories during fiscal 2012 as part of its productivity initia-
tives. In addition, Heinz could have had property, plant and equipment reclassified to assets 
held for sale during the year, reducing the amount reported as property, plant and equipment.
Foreign Currency Translation Adjustment 
As noted already, Heinz trans-
lates the accounts of most of its foreign subsidiaries using the current rate approach. Accord-
ingly, the Property, plant, and equipment accounts of these subsidiaries are translated using 
the current exchange rate—at the balance sheet date—between the dollar and the foreign 
currency. The rise (fall) of the functional currencies of these subsidiaries relative to the U.S. 
dollar would result in an increase (decrease) in the balance of the Property, plant, and equip-
ment account that would not be reflected on the cash flow statement.
Acquisitions 
If Heinz had acquired companies during the year and those companies all 
owned property, plant, and equipment, should the portion of cash flow related to the cost of 
properties acquired be classified as Capital expenditures, or should it be included as a part of 
Acquisitions, net of cash acquired? Under current GAAP, capital expenditures reported on the 
cash flow statement contain only cash outflows made to acquire property directly. Cash out-
flows for property acquired as part of a business acquisition are classified under Acquisitions. 
The Investing Activities section of the statement of cash flow in Exhibit 17.6 shows that Heinz 
paid $3.25 million for acquisitions, net of cash acquired (Item ➃), in fiscal 2012. However, 
additional disclosures in the 10-K indicate this payment was actually additional contingent 
consideration paid on a 2011 acquisition.
Simultaneous Noncash Financing 
and Investing Activities
Occasionally firms engage in investing and financing activities that cause changes in balance 
sheet asset and liability accounts even though they do not affect cash receipts or cash payments. 
Examples include (1) purchasing a building by incurring a mortgage loan to the seller, (2) acquir-
ing an asset by entering into a capital lease, or (3) issuing stock for noncash assets in connection 
with a business acquisition. Current GAAP requires firms to disclose these noncash simultaneous 
financing and investing activities either in a narrative or in a schedule, which is sometimes in-
cluded as a separate section of the statement of cash flows. Although there is no evidence in 
Heinz’s fiscal 2012 10-K report that any of the balance sheet changes in property, plant, and 
equipment were acquired with noncash consideration, this is a fairly common situation. 
 
Exhibit 17.8 provides the 2012 statement of cash flows for Amazon.com. The supplemen-
tal cash flow information (at the bottom of this statement) summarizes simultaneous financing 
and investing activities (highlighted) totaling $831 million that increased fixed asset accounts 
on Amazon’s balance sheet but did not result in any cash flow.
RECAP
The year-to-year changes in comparative balance sheet accounts may not coincide with 
the changes implied from amounts reported on the statement of cash flows. The factors 
contributing to these differences include (1) asset write-downs due to impairment or re-
structuring, (2) the translation of foreign subsidiary accounts using the year-end current 
exchange rate between the dollar and the foreign currency, (3) acquisitions of other com-
panies, and (4) simultaneous noncash financing and investing transactions. Disclosures in 
notes, along with information in the income statement and in the operating activities sec-
tion of the cash flow statement, are often helpful in reconciling some of these differences.

1052 
CHAPTER 17
Statement of Cash Flows
EXHIBIT 17.8
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
Amazon.Com, Inc.
Year Ended December 31,
($ in millions) 
2012 
2011 
2010
Cash and cash equivalents, beginning of period 
$ 5,269 
$ 3,777 
$ 3,444
Operating activities
Net income (loss) 
(39) 
631 
1,152
Adjustments to reconcile net income (loss) to net cash from 
 operating activities:
  Depreciation of property and equipment, including 
  internal-use software and website development, and 
  other amortization 
2,159 
1,083 
568
 Stock-based compensation 
833 
557 
424
 Other operating expense (income), net 
154 
154 
106
 Losses (gains) on sales of marketable securities, net 
(9) 
(4) 
(2)
 Other expense (income), net 
253 
(56) 
(79)
 Deferred income taxes 
(265) 
136 
4
 Excess tax benefits from stock-based compensation 
(429) 
(62) 
(259)
Changes in operating assets and liabilities:
 Inventories 
(999) 
(1,777) 
(1,019)
 Accounts receivable, net and other 
(861) 
(866) 
(295)
 Accounts payable 
2,070 
2,997 
2,373
 Accrued expenses and other 
1,038 
1,067 
740
 Additions to unearned revenue 
1,796 
1,064 
687
 Amortization of previously unearned revenue 
(1,521) 
(1,021) 
(905)
  Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities 
4,180 
3,903 
3,495
Investing activities
  Purchases of property and equipment, including 
  internal-use software and website development 
(3,785) 
(1,811) 
(979)
 Acquisitions, net of cash acquired, and other 
(745) 
(705) 
(352)
 Sales and maturities of marketable securities and 
  other investments 
4,237 
6,843 
4,250
 Purchases of marketable securities and other investments 
(3,302) 
(6,257) 
(6,279)
  Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities 
(3,595) 
(1,930) 
(3,360)
Financing activities
 Excess tax benefits from stock-based compensation 
429 
62 
259
 Common stock repurchased 
(960) 
(277) 
—
 Proceeds from long-term debt and other 
3,378 
177 
143
 Repayments of long-term debt capital lease, 
  and finance lease obligations 
(588) 
(444) 
(221)
  Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities 
2,259 
(482) 
181
 Foreign-currency effect on cash and cash equivalents 
(29) 
1 
17
   Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents 
2,815 
1,492 
333
Cash and cash equivalents, end of period 
$ 8,084 
$ 5,269 
$ 3,777
Supplemental cash flow information
 Cash paid for interest on long-term debt 
$   31 
$      14 
$      11
 Cash paid for income taxes (net of refunds) 
112 
33 
75
 Property and equipment acquired under capital leases 
802 
753 
405
 Property and equipment acquired under build-to-suit leases 
29 
259 
172

 
Analytical Insights: Ways Operating Cash Flows Can Be Distorted or Manipulated 
1053
ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS: WAYS OPERATING CASH 
FLOWS CAN BE DISTORTED OR MANIPULATED
Healthy firms generate cash from their day-to-day operating activities. Firms that can’t gener-
ate cash internally jeopardize their operations and risk loan default or bankruptcy. That is why 
an understanding of operating cash flows is so critical to assessing a company’s financial 
health. Analysts watch operating cash flow for another reason—major discrepancies between 
accrual earnings and operating cash flows sometimes can be used to indentify instances in 
which earnings have been managed upward. Because cash flow from operations is such a 
carefully monitored number, firms have incentives to make this number look as strong as pos-
sible. Therefore, it is important for you to understand the ways in which operating cash flows 
can be distorted or even legitimately managed. In this section, we briefly review and illustrate 
some of the ways this can happen.
Changes in Working Capital Accounts
Changes in working capital accounts (excluding short-term debt) are one of the major 
sources and uses of operating cash flows. For example, collections on accounts receivable 
increase operating cash flows while payments on accounts payable or accrued expenses 
decrease operating cash flows. Two ways management can improve the short-run appear-
ance of a firm’s operating cash flows are to (1) accelerate the collection of receivables in 
the current period or (2) delay the payment of accrued expenses and accounts payable 
until after period-end. For example, receivables collection can be accelerated by offering 
special cash discounts or incentive programs to encourage customers to pay early. Pay-
ment of accounts payable can be extended beyond the normal collection period, but the 
firm may incur late payment fees by doing so. Thus, these improvements in operating 
cash flows are only temporary. So, large decreases in accounts receivable or large in-
creases in accounts payable and accrued expenses should be viewed with a healthy 
level of skepticism because the impact on 
 operating cash flows may not be sustainable. 
As demonstrated in Chapters 5 and 8, quarter- 
to-quarter changes in the number of days 
 accounts receivable outstanding and of days 
accounts payable outstanding can be monitored to spot shifts in collection or payment 
policies that contribute to operating cash flow distortions.
Accounts Receivable Sale (Securitization) 
versus Collateralized Borrowing
As you recall from Chapter 8, firms can accelerate the conversion of receivables into cash by 
selling (factoring) the receivables, securitizing the receivables, or borrowing against receiv-
ables pledged as collateral on the loan. You should be aware of how the cash flow statement 
reflects each transaction and you should monitor whether a firm has increased its use of one 
or more of these ways of accelerating the collection of cash from receivables during the 
period.
 
The accounting treatment for an accounts receivable sale either through factoring or secu-
ritization is determined by the criteria provided in the FASB Accounting Standards Codifica-
tion (ASC) Topic 840: Transfers and Servicing. If the receivables transfer fails to qualify as a 
sale under GAAP, it is treated as a secured (collateralized) borrowing (see Chapter 8). The 
Days accounts receivable outstanding 5 365yAccounts receivable turnover where 
Accounts receivable turnover 5 Net credit salesyAverage accounts receivable; 
Days accounts payable outstanding 5 365yAccounts payable turnover where 
 Accounts payable turnover 5 Inventory purchasesyAverage accounts payable.

1054 
CHAPTER 17
Statement of Cash Flows
outstanding receivables remain on the company’s balance sheet, and the loan proceeds 
 received are shown as a financing cash inflow. Thus, receivable transfers that are secured 
 borrowings have no effect on operating cash flows.
 
On the other hand, two things happen when the transfer qualifies as a true sale under FASB 
ASC Topic 840: (1) The accounts receivable are removed from the company’s balance sheet 
and (2) the decrease in receivables is shown as an operating cash inflow on the cash flow 
statement.6 Some analysts believe that classifying receivables sales as operating cash inflows 
provides a potentially misleading picture of sustainable cash flows from current operations.7 
The reason is that the outright sale or securitization of accounts receivable transfers what 
would be future operating cash flows into the current period. Accounts receivable that nor-
mally would be collected in the subsequent period and be recorded as operating cash inflow in 
that period are instead collected and reported as cash flows from operations in the current 
period. Although new receivables may be sold or securitized in the future period, these new 
receivables would serve only to replace those sold in the previous period. Only by increasing 
the amount of receivables sold or securitized in the subsequent period can the firm increase 
operating cash flows in the subsequent period. Clearly, financial statement users should moni-
tor major changes in a firm’s use of receivable sales and securitized transactions and be aware 
of how these changes can temporarily distort operating cash flows.
Capitalizing versus Expensing
Many recent accounting frauds involved improper capitalization of costs that instead should 
have been expensed. The poster child for this sort of accounting abuse was WorldCom’s im-
proper capitalization of line costs from 2001 to 2002 that resulted in an earnings overstate-
ment of nearly $4 billion. WorldCom’s operating cash flows over this time frame were also 
overstated because the improperly capitalized costs were treated as investing cash outflows on 
its cash flow statement. This type of distortion permanently boosts operating cash flow be-
cause amounts capitalized are later expensed as depreciation or amortization, which are non-
cash income statement deductions that do not reduce cash flow from 
operations. Identifying improper capitalization of operating costs is difficult 
to spot. But one should be suspicious of significant increases in capital expen-
ditures reported in the investing section of the cash flow statement that coin-
cide with significant decreases in operating expenses as a percentage of sales (typically shown 
in the Selling, general, and administrative expenses account).
Software Development Costs
Computer software companies must expense all software development costs as incurred 
until the software reaches “technological feasibility.” These costs are also treated as com-
ponents of operating cash outflows on the cash flow statement.8 Once technological feasi-
bility is achieved, software development costs are capitalized, and the corresponding cash 
6 FASB ASC Paragraphs for Cash Flows from Operating Activities and Investing Activities of Topic 230, Statement of Cash 
Flows, provide guidance on the cash flow statement reporting of receivable sales.
7 See “Cash Flow Metrics and Cash Flow Statement Navigation Guide,” Accounting Issues (New York: Bear Stearns, June 
2006); and C. W. Mulford and K. Shkonda, “The Impact of Securitizations of Customer-Related Receivables on Cash Flow 
and Leverage: Implications for Financial Analysis,” College of Management, Georgia Institute of Technology, June 2006.
8 FASB ASC Section 985-20-25: Software—Costs of Software to be Sold, Leased, or Otherwise Marketed—Recognition.
Costs expensed on the income statement are 
treated as operating cash outflows to the extent 
that they are paid in cash.
Technological feasibility 
is established when the 
company has completed 
a detailed program design 
or a working model.

 
Analytical Insights: Ways Operating Cash Flows Can Be Distorted or Manipulated 
1055
flows are shown as investing activity outflows on the cash flow statement.9 There are no 
bright-line GAAP criteria for determining when technological feasibility is achieved. So, 
firms can use their discretion to determine whether technological feasibility has been 
reached in ways that distort operating cash flows. By selecting a low threshold for techno-
logical feasibility, firms can move software development costs out of the operating section 
and into the investing section of the cash flow statement, thereby improving their operat-
ing cash flows.
 
Because the technological feasibility thresholds are likely to vary considerably across 
firms, some analysts believe the amount of capitalized software development costs should 
be deducted from operating cash flows to improve interfirm comparability of that num-
ber. We believe this to be a prudent adjustment to make when comparing the operating 
cash flow results of software development companies. If material, the amount of software 
development costs is typically disclosed as a line item in the investing section of firms’ 
cash flow statement as illustrated by the excerpt from BMC Software’s cash flow state-
ment in Exhibit 17.9. Moving the amount of capitalized software development costs from 
the investing to the operating section of the cash flow statement not only improves inter-
firm comparability of operating cash flows but also corrects for a firm’s attempt to 
 improve operating cash flows by lowering the technological feasibility threshold in the 
current period relative to prior periods.
Capital versus Operating Leases
The accounting treatment for leased assets is another area that hinders interfirm compara-
bility of operating cash flows. Recall from Chapter 12 the two ways to account for leased 
assets—the capital lease approach and the operating lease approach. These two alternative 
accounting methods have quite different effects on firms’ cash flow statements. Under capital 
EXHIBIT 17.9
Capitalization of Software Development Costs
BMC Software
 
Fiscal Year Ended March 31
($ in millions) 
Year 1 
Year 2 
Year 3
Cash flow from operations (as reported): 
$ 606 
$ 499 
$ 502
 Adjustment for capitalized software development costs 
(88) 
(53) 
(62)
 Revised cash flow from operations 
518 
446 
440
Cash flows from investing:
 Purchases of property and equipment 
(24) 
(50) 
(58)
 Cash paid for technology acquisitions & other investments 
(408) 
(54) 
(266)
 Purchases of marketable securities 
(134) 
(322) 
(191)
 Proceeds from maturities/sales of marketable securities 
404 
229 
331
 Capitalization of software development costs 
(88) 
(53) 
(62)
 Other investing activities 
1 
2 
11
Net cash used by investing activities: 
$(249) 
$(248) 
$(235)
9 Ibid.

1056 
CHAPTER 17
Statement of Cash Flows
lease treatment, an asset and a liability equal to the present value of the mini-
mum lease payments are recorded on the lessee’s balance sheet at the inception 
of the lease. There is no immediate cash flow effect because the asset acquisi-
tion and capital lease obligation are considered to be a single simultaneous 
financing and investing transaction. Thus, the lease liability increase is not 
shown as a financing source of cash, nor is the leased asset increase recorded 
as an investing use of cash.
 
Under capital lease treatment, each lease payment comprises two elements: (1) an interest 
element and (2) a loan principal paydown amount as reflected in the following entry.
Capital lease entry for lease payment
DR Interest expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $60,000 
 Operating cash outflow
DR Lease payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
40,000 
 Financing cash outflow
 
CR Cash   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$100,000
To record a $100,000 lease payment of which $60,000 is interest and the remainder is a principal 
payment on the lease obligation.
 
The interest expense amount reduces earnings and operating cash flows. The principal re-
payment amount ($40,000) is a financing cash outflow (debt repayment). Therefore, only the 
interest expense component of the capital lease payment reduces operating cash flows.
 
For an operating lease, the lessee records no asset or liability on its balance sheet at the 
inception of the lease. It records the entire amount of each lease payment as rent expense and 
as an operating cash outflow as reflected in the following entry.
Operating lease entry for lease payment
DR Rent expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $100,000 
 Operating cash outflow
 
CR Cash. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$100,000
To record an operating lease payment of $100,000.
Thus, the same lease under operating lease treatment reports lower operating 
cash flows in every year of the lease term relative to a firm that uses capital 
lease treatment for a lease with an identical payment schedule. The difference 
in operating cash flows in any given year is the portion of the lease payment 
attributed to principal repayment under capital lease treatment ($40,000 in the 
capital lease entry for lease payment). Over the life of the lease, the total differ-
ence in operating cash flows under capital versus operating lease treatment is 
the present value (as of the lease inception) of the minimum lease payments—firms using capital 
lease treatment record higher operating cash flows equal to this amount.
 
The proportion of leases treated as capital versus operating leases varies greatly across 
firms, even for firms within the same industry (see Exhibit 12.4 in Chapter 12). Firms’ oper-
ating cash flows therefore also vary greatly, complicating the comparison of firms’ operating 
cash flows. One approach to make the financial statement effects (including the operating 
cash flow effects) more comparable across firms that use varying amounts of operating ver-
sus capital leases is to use the data disclosed in lease notes to prepare a pro forma capitaliza-
tion of operating leases. Following the procedures outlined in the appendix to Chapter 12, the 
present value of operating leases can be estimated as of the end of the current report year 
(Year t). Multiplying this amount by the interest rate used in computing the present value of 
the operating leases gives the portion of the next year’s (Year t 1 1) scheduled operating 
lease payment that would be considered interest under capital lease treatment. To adjust the 
If material, these simultaneous financing and 
 investing transactions are required to be 
 disclosed in the Supplemental Cash Flow 
 Information  section of the cash flow statement 
as shown in Exhibit 17.8 for Amazon.com.
For a firm with a 10-year lease requiring a pay-
ment of $100,000 at the end of each year and 
using a 10% discount rate, the present value of 
the lease payments and the total difference in 
operating cash flows under capital versus oper-
ating lease treatment is $614,457.

 
Analytical Insights: Ways Operating Cash Flows Can Be Distorted or Manipulated 
1057
reported operating cash flows in Year t 1 1 for differences between operating and capital 
lease treatment, one adds back the total operating lease payments for that year (shown in the 
lease note) and deducts the amount of pro forma interest on the capitalized operating leases 
as just described. By making this adjustment, the operating cash flows of firms with varying 
proportions of operating to capital leases are made more comparable.
 
We use the data from the Whole Foods example in the appendix to Chapter 12 to illustrate 
this adjustment. The present value of Whole Foods’ operating leases as of September 30, 
2012, was $3.570 billion. Using an 8% discount rate, the amount of the fiscal 2013 scheduled 
operating lease payment of $309.1 million (see Exhibit 12.11) that would be considered pro 
forma interest under capital lease treatment is $285.6 million (8% 3 $3.570 billion). To il-
lustrate the adjustment to Whole Foods’ operating cash flows for capital versus operating 
lease treatment for fiscal 2013, we assume fiscal 2013 operating cash flows before the adjust-
ment will be the same as in fiscal 2012 ($ in millions).
Whole Foods’ operating cash flow for fiscal 2013 before 
 adjustment (assume same as fiscal 2012) 
$ 920
Add: Operating lease payment in fiscal 2013 (in 2012 lease note) 
309
Subtract: Pro forma interest in fiscal 2013 if operating leases capitalized 
(286)
Operating cash flow adjusted for capital lease treatment of operating leases 
$ 943
Cash Flow Effect of Stock Option Expensing
Pre-Codification SFAS No. 123(R), “Share-Based Payment,” effective January 1, 2006, for 
calendar year-end companies, significantly changed the accounting for stock option grants 
and the reporting of the cash flow tax benefits that firms receive from these grants.10 Prior to 
adopting this standard, most firms did not expense stock option grants for GAAP purposes. 
However, firms do receive a tax deduction equal to the intrinsic value of nonqualified stock 
options when employees exercise the options. The intrinsic value is the difference between the 
market price of the firm’s stock and the option’s exercise price. The tax benefit is obtained by 
multiplying the intrinsic value at the exercise date by the statutory U.S. corporate tax rate, 
currently equal to 35%. For example, if an employee exercised 1,000 options at an option 
price of $40 per share when the stock was selling for $100, the company would receive a tax 
benefit in the year of exercise of $21,000 [35% 3 1,000 3 ($100 2 $40)].
 
Prior to pre-Codification SFAS No. 123(R), these tax benefits were not reflected as a reduc-
tion to the company’s GAAP tax expense in the income statement because there was no cor-
responding compensation expense reported in the income statement. Instead, the tax benefit 
was treated as an increase in Additional paid-in capital in the equity section of the balance 
sheet. Because the options exercised resulted in real cash savings by reducing the taxes other-
wise payable, the tax benefit realized by the company was shown on the cash flow statement as 
an operating cash inflow. This treatment resulted in operating cash flow reflecting the amount 
of taxes actually paid in cash in the year that options were exercised.
 
Exhibit 17.10 illustrates how stock option tax benefits were reported in the cash flow state-
ment prior to adoption of pre-Codification SFAS No. 123(R) for the exercise of 1,000 options 
assuming the market price of the stock at the exercise date was $100, the exercise price was 
$40, and the tax rate was 35%. The firm reported $50,000 of income under GAAP.
 
Before we present the cash flow statement effect of stock option exercises following the 
adoption of pre-Codification SFAS No. 123(R), let’s review the measurement and reporting 
of stock options under this standard (see Chapter 15 for details). Companies are required to 
10 FASB ASC Topic 718: Compensation—Stock Compensation [pre-Codification SFAS No. 123(R)].

1058 
CHAPTER 17
Statement of Cash Flows
(1) measure the cost of employee services received in exchange for an award of equity instru-
ments (such as stock options) based on the award’s grant date fair value and (2) recognize this 
cost as compensation expense over the period during which an employee is required to pro-
vide services in exchange for the award, which is typically a vesting period of three to five 
years. The fair value at grant date is determined using an option pricing model such as the 
Black–Scholes or binomial models.
 
To illustrate the measurement and reporting of option expense under current GAAP, as-
sume that an employee is granted 1,000 nonqualified stock options with an exercise price of 
$40 and a Black–Scholes fair value of $15 on the grant date. The options vest over three 
years. Also assume that during these three years, the company has income before employee 
option expense of $100,000 for both book and tax purposes. We assume a 35% tax rate 
throughout.
 
The stock option compensation expense the company would report in each of Years 1–3 is 
$5,000 ([1000 3 $15]y3). Because nonqualified stock options are not deductible on the tax 
return until exercised, a deferred tax asset originates in Years 1–3 for the tax benefit related to 
the $5,000 compensation expense recorded on the company’s GAAP financial statements (see 
Chapter 13 for discussion of temporary differences). The amount of the deferred tax asset re-
corded in each year is $1,750 ($5,000 3 35%). See Exhibit 17.11 for the cash flow statement 
presentation in Years 1–3.
EXHIBIT 17.10
Cash Flow Statement Presentation of Stock Option 
Benefits in Year of Option Exercise Before Adoption 
of pre-Codification SFAS No. 123(R)
Cash flows from operating activities
 
Net income 
$50,000
 
Change in deferred taxes 
–0–
 
Tax benefit from exercised employee stock options 
21,000*
 
Change in income taxes payable 
–0–
5 Operating cash flows 
$71,000
* 1000 3 ($100 2 $40) 3 35% 5 $21,000
EXHIBIT 17.11
Cash Flow Statement Presentation of Stock Option 
Benefits in Years 1–3 (Before Exercise) Following 
Adoption of pre-Codification SFAS No. 123(R) 
Cash flows from operating activities
 
Net income 
$  96,750*
 
Add: Stock option expense (noncash expense) 
5,000
 
Subtract: Increase in deferred tax asset (noncash reduction of tax expense) 
(1,750)
 
Tax benefit from exercised employee stock options 
–0–
 
Change in income taxes payable 
–0–
5 Operating cash flows 
$100,000
* $100,000 Income before option compensation expense
25,000 Option compensation expense ($15,000y3 yrs.)
 
11,750 Deferred portion of current period’s tax provision (35% 3 $5,000)
 $  96,750 Reported GAAP income

 
Global Vantage Point
1059
 
When the employee exercises the option (assumed to be in Year 4), the company’s tax sav-
ings in that year is $21,000 (1,000 3 [$100 2 $40] 3 35%). Under the reporting rules of 
 accounting for stock compensation, a tax benefit equal to the amount of the previously recognized 
deferred tax asset is reported in the operating section of the cash flow statement (3 3 $1,750 5 
$5,250).The amount of tax benefit received in excess of the previously recorded deferred tax 
asset is considered an “excess tax benefit.” This excess tax benefit ($21,000 2 $5,250 5 
$15,750) is shown as a financing cash inflow on the company’s cash flow statement rather than 
as an operating cash flow as was reported prior to pre-Codification SFAS No. 123(R) (see 
 Exhibit 17.10).
 
The cash flow statement presentation of the company’s tax benefits in the year of option 
exercise under pre-Codification SFAS No. 123(R) is shown in Exhibit 17.12. To provide com-
parability with Exhibit 17.10, we assume the company reports income of $50,000 for book 
and tax purposes and recognizes no stock option expense in the year.
 
Comparing Exhibit 17.12 and Exhibit 17.10 demonstrates the rather dramatic negative effect 
that changes in accounting for stock-based compensation have had on the reported operating 
cash flows of firms with significant option grants and exercises. Although year-to-year compa-
rability is no longer a problem unless one is analyzing a cash flow history that goes back to 2005 
or earlier, adjustments to operating cash flow would need to be made for longer analyses.
EXHIBIT 17.12
Cash Flow Statement Presentation of Stock Option 
Benefits in Year of Option Exercise Following 
Adoption of pre-Codification SFAS No. 123(R)
Cash flows from operating activities
 
Net income 
$ 50,000
 
Add: Tax benefit from exercised employee stock options 
21,000*
 
Deduct: Excess tax benefit from exercised employee stock 
 
 options ($21,000 2 $5,250) 
(15,750)†
 
Change in income taxes payable 
–0–
5 Operating cash flows 
55,250
Cash flows from financing activities
 Excess tax benefit from exercised employee stock options 
15,750
* 1000 3 ($100 2 $40) 3 0.35 5 $21,000
† $21,000 2 (3 3 $1,750) 5 $15,750
Note that the tax benefit recognized in the operating activities section of the cash flow statement is $21,000 2 $15,750 5 
$5,250, which is the amount of the previously recorded deferred tax asset related to the option awards recognized in 
Years 1–3 (3 3 $1,750). This is the reduction in deferred tax asset that occurs in the year of exercise.
RECAP
In this section, we describe ways that operating cash flows can be distorted or legitimately 
managed and how accounting alternatives can hinder interfirm comparisons of this num-
ber. Analysts and other financial statement users should be aware of the techniques for 
enhancing the comparability of operating cash flows both across firms and over time.
GLOBAL VANTAGE POINT
IAS 1, “Presentation of Financial Statements,” requires firms to provide a statement of cash 
flows as part of a complete set of financial statements for each period for which financial 
statements are presented.11 Requirements for the preparation and presentation of the statement 
11 “Presentation of Financial Statements,” IAS 1 (London: IASB, revised 2003).
International

1060 
CHAPTER 17
Statement of Cash Flows
of cash flows are set forth in IAS 7.12 Like U.S. GAAP, IFRS rules call for the statement of 
cash flows to report changes in cash and cash equivalents broken down into three categories: 
operating, investing, and financing activities. IFRS rules permit entities that use bank over-
drafts repayable on demand as part of their normal cash management activities to include 
those amounts as a component of cash and cash equivalents. U.S. GAAP does not allow bank 
overdrafts to be considered as cash and cash equivalents. Rather, overdrafts are considered 
borrowing and always classified as a financing activity.
 
IAS 7 allows entities to use either the direct or indirect method for presenting cash flows 
from operating activities. However, firms are encouraged, but not required, to use the direct 
method. A recent survey of 100 large foreign companies that follow IFRS reporting rules13 
reports that 9% of the firms surveyed used the direct method of reporting operating cash 
flows, which is a much higher percentage than for firms following U.S. GAAP (only 1%). 
Unlike U.S. GAAP, which requires firms that use the direct method to provide a reconciliation 
of net income to cash flows from operating activities (essentially the indirect method), IFRS 
rules do not require this additional disclosure, although many firms still provide it.
Reporting of Interest Received and Paid, Dividends 
Received and Paid, and Tax Refunds and Payments
As noted earlier in the chapter, U.S. GAAP requires entities to classify interest paid, interest 
and dividends received, and income tax receipts and payments as operating activities even 
when associated with an investing or financing transaction. Entities are also required to clas-
sify dividends paid as a financing activity. Under IFRS rules, nonfinancial firms are permitted 
to report interest and dividends received as either operating or investing activities and interest 
paid as either an operating or a financing activity. Dividends paid are typically classified as a 
financing cash flow because they are related to obtaining financial resources. But IFRS rules 
allow firms to classify dividends paid as a component of cash flows from operating activities 
in order to help users to determine the ability of an entity to pay dividends out of operating 
cash flows.14 Cash flows from income taxes are to be reported separately as an operating ac-
tivity unless they can be specifically identified with financing and investing activities.
 
Exhibit 17.13 presents the 2012 statement of cash flows and related note for Vodafone 
Group, PLC, a large international mobile telecommunications company headquartered in 
England. Panel (a) provides the body of the statement of cash flows broken down into operat-
ing, investing, and financing sections, while Panel (b) shows the details of operating cash 
flows under the indirect method presented in note 27. Several differences between IFRS and 
U.S. GAAP presentation are highlighted. Note that dividends received from associate compa-
nies and dividends received from investments are reported in the investing activities section 
(item ➀). Interest received (item ➁) is also shown as an investing activity. Unlike U.S. GAAP, 
which currently requires interest paid to be reported in the operating activities section, 
 Vodafone reports interest paid in the financing activities section (item ➂).
 
The alternative treatment of these items by firms following IFRS reporting is not all that un-
common. A recent AICPA survey of 100 large foreign companies that follow IFRS reporting 
shows that of those firms 33% reported interest received and 26% reported dividends received in 
the investing activities section of the cash flow statement, while 29% reported interest paid in the 
financing activities section.15 You should be aware of these differences in cash flow reporting that 
currently exist between companies that follow U.S. GAAP versus IFRS reporting rules. 
12 “Cash Flow Statement,” IAS 7 (London: IASB, 1992).
13 P. Walters, IFRS Accounting Trends and Techniques (New York: AICPA 2010).
14 IAS 7, para. 34.
15 P. Walters, IFRS Accounting Trends and Techniques, p. 487.

Vodafone Group PLC
Panel (a):
 
 
For the Years Ended 31 March
(amounts in £m) 
  
2012 
2011 
2010
Net cash flow from operating activities 
12,755 
11,995 
13,064
Cash flows from investing activities
Purchase of interests in subsidiaries and joint 
 ventures, net of cash acquired 
(149) 
(46) 
(1,777)
 Other investing activities in relation to purchase of subsidiaries 
310 
(356) 
—
 Purchase of interests in associates 
(5) 
— 
—
 Purchase of intangible assets 
(3,090) 
(4,290) 
(2,134)
 Purchase of property, plant and equipment 
(4,762) 
(4,350) 
(4,841)
 Purchase of investments 
(417) 
(318) 
(522)
 Disposal of interests in subsidiaries and joint 
  ventures, net of cash disposed 
832 
— 
—
 Disposal of interests in associates 
6,799 
— 
—
 Disposal of property, plant and equipment 
117 
51 
48
 Disposal of investments 
66 
4,467 
17
➀ Dividends received from associates 
4,023 
1,424 
1,436
➀ Dividends received from investments 
3 
85 
141
➁ Interest received 
322 
1,659 
195
 Taxation on investing activities 
(206) 
(208) 
—
Net cash flow from investing activities 
3,843 
(1,882) 
(7,437)
Cash flows from financing activities
 Issue of ordinary share capital and reissue of treasury shares 
71 
107 
70
 Net movement in short-term borrowings 
1,206 
(573) 
227
 Proceeds from issue of long-term borrowings 
1,642 
4,861 
4,217
 Repayment of borrowings 
(3,520) 
(4,064) 
(5,184)
 Purchase of treasury shares 
(3,583) 
(2,087) 
—
 Equity dividends paid 
(6,643) 
(4,468) 
(4,139)
 Dividends paid to non-controlling shareholders in subsidiaries 
(304) 
(320) 
(56)
 Contributions from non-controlling shareholders in subsidiaries 
— 
— 
613
 Other transactions with non-controlling shareholders in subsidiaries 
(2,605) 
(137) 
—
➂ Interest paid 
(1,633) 
(1,578) 
(1,601)
Net cash flow from financing activities 
(15,369) 
(8,259) 
(5,853)
Net cash flow 
1,229
1,854
(226)
Panel (b):
27. Reconciliation of Net Cash Flow from Operating Activities
(amounts in £m) 
2012 
2011 
2010
Profit for the financial year 
7,003 
7,870 
8,618
Adjustments for:
 Share-based payments 
143 
156 
150
 Depreciation and amortisation 
7,859 
7,876 
7,910
 Loss on disposal of property, plant and equipment 
47 
91 
101
 Share of result in associates 
(4,963) 
(5,059) 
(4,742)
 Impairment losses 
4,050 
6,150 
2,100
 Other income and expense 
(3,705) 
16 
(114)
 Non-operating income and expense 
162 
(3,022) 
10
 Investment income 
(456) 
(1,309) 
(716)
 Financing costs 
1,932 
429 
1,512
 Income tax expense 
2,546 
1,628 
56
 Decrease/(increase) in inventory 
24 
(107) 
2
 Increase in trade and other receivables 
(689) 
(387) 
(714)
 Increase in trade and other payables 
871 
1,060 
1,164
Cash generated by operations 
14,824
15,392
15,337
Tax paid 
(2,069) 
(3,397) 
(2,273)
Net cash flow from operating activities 
12,755
11,995
13,064
EXHIBIT 17.13
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows

1062 
CHAPTER 17
Statement of Cash Flows
 
As recently as May 2011, the IASB and FASB were jointly developing major proposed 
changes to the presentation of all the primary financial statements, including the statement 
of cash flows. If these changes had been adopted, they would have eliminated many of the 
differences noted above for the statement of cash flows, while altering the presentation for-
mat in several significant ways. A July 2010 Exposure Draft proposed that all firms use the 
direct method to present operating cash flows, with an indirect method reconciliation of 
operating income to operating cash flows in the notes to the financial statements. Both 
boards received a number of comment letters from constituents that provided negative feed-
back about the proposed changes. For example, the vice president and comptroller of 
 Chevron Corporation wrote to FASB, in a letter dated October 25, 2010, “We strongly oppose 
the proposed requirement to use the direct method for the statement of cash flows. . . .We 
use an indirect method . . . and we understand nearly all preparers use the same approach. 
We have not heard from our financial statement users a demand for a direct statement of 
cash flows. . . . The information required to compile a statement of cash flows using the 
direct method is not readily available. The time, effort and cost required to compile the 
necessary data would be significant and likely far exceeds any perceived benefits.”
 
The FASB’s agenda now lists this project as “inactive,” suggesting that the two boards do 
not currently plan to pursue the proposal any further.
• The statement of cash flows provides information for assessing a firm’s ability to generate 
sufficient cash to pay for operating expenses, capital improvements, and currently matur-
ing obligations.
• Firms able to generate consistently strong positive cash flows from operations are consid-
ered better credit risks and benefit from a lower cost of capital.
• The two alternative methods for presenting the operating activities section of a cash flow 
statement are the direct and indirect methods.
• Most firms use the indirect method. It begins with net income and adjusts for deprecia-
tion, amortization, noncash gains and losses, and changes in noncash working capital 
 accounts other than short-term debt, which cause net income to differ from operating cash 
flows for the period.
• You will frequently encounter situations in which the changes in noncash accounts 
shown on comparative balance sheets will not reconcile with the adjustments shown on 
the cash flow statement. These discrepancies are due to one or more of the following 
causes: (1) asset write-offs due to impairment, corporate restructuring, or retirement, 
(2) translation adjustments on assets and liabilities held by foreign subsidiaries, (3) acqui-
sitions of other companies or operating units, and (4) simultaneous investing and financing 
activities not directly affecting cash. Failure to understand how these events cause balance 
sheet account changes to differ from changes in account balances shown on the cash flow 
statement can lead to incorrect interpretation of both statements.
• Operating cash flows can sometimes be distorted or legitimately managed. You should 
be aware of the ways this can occur and how to adjust reported operating cash flows to 
enhance the comparability of this important number across firms and over time.
• IFRS rules allow firms greater flexibility relative to U.S. GAAP in how interest and divi-
dends received and interest and dividends paid are reported on the statement of cash flows.
SUMMARY

 
Appendix 
1063
APPENDIX
WORKSHEET APPROACH TO INDIRECT METHOD 
CASH FLOW STATEMENT
This appendix describes a worksheet approach to creating cash flow statements. The method-
ology is identical to that described in the chapter in that it relies on analyzing the changes in 
all of the balance sheet accounts. However, the compact format and positive/negative notation 
for debits and credits makes this approach relatively easy to implement once one is comfort-
able with the concepts underlying the cash flow statement.
 
Exhibit 17.14 presents the worksheet. The top and bottom rows of the analysis present the 
balance sheets at the beginning and end of the period for which a cash flow statement is de-
sired. Debit balances are shown as positive amounts and credit balances are shown as nega-
tive amounts. (This notation allows us to present “t-accounts” for each balance sheet account 
in a single column.) Using spreadsheet software and the positive/negative notation, it is easy 
to check that the balance sheets are input correctly by assuring that those two rows both sum 
to zero.
 
Once the balance sheets are input, the analyst must reconcile each of the balance sheet ac-
counts other than cash, so that the entire change from the beginning balance to the ending 
balance is explained. Each change is placed in the column for that balance sheet item, again 
using positive/negative notation to represent debits/credits. The amounts are entered into rows 
that will correspond to line items in the cash flow statement.
 
It is useful to place a formula in a cell below each of the reconciliations that computes the 
amount that column is out of balance. When the cell shows a zero, the reconciliation of the 
corresponding column is complete. For example, before beginning the analysis, the common 
stock column would be out of balance by $50,000 because there is a $50,000 difference be-
tween the beginning and ending balances that has not been explained. When the analysis is 
complete, and the $50,000 stock issuance is entered into the common stock column, the out of 
balance amount is zero.
 
In each row of the cash column, there should be a formula that computes the negative of 
the sum of all the other cells in that row. So, for example, in the inventory increase line there 
is a $12,000 debit in the inventory column, reflecting an increase in the inventory balance. 
This resulted in inventory purchases exceeding cost of sales by $12,000 and therefore the 
negative reconciling item in the cash flow statement. The cash column, with appropriate sub-
totals for the various sections of the cash flow statement, becomes the basis for the cash flow 
statement.
 
Although most of the entries in the worksheet are self-explanatory, the analysis of 
buildings and equipment deserves some explanation. According to the original example, 
buildings and equipment having an original cost of $63,000 and a book value of $40,000 
were sold for $57,000. The worksheet must result in a reversal of the $17,000 gain, which 
is included in the income statement, as a reconciling item in the operating section of 
the  cash flow statement. We accomplish that by showing a $17,000 increase in the 
 Buildings and equipment account, creating a negative $17,000 amount in the operating 
section of the cash flow statement. We then show proceeds on the sale of $57,000 in the 
investing section, corresponding to $80,000 minus $23,000 from the buildings and 
 equipment and accumulated depreciation columns. Where does the $80,000 come from? 
It is equal to the original cost of $63,000 plus the $17,000 gain. So why do we add 
those amounts?

1064
EXHIBIT 17.14
Cash Flow Statement Worksheet
 
Burris Products Corporation
 
 
 
 
 
Buildings 
 
 
Customer 
 
Discount Deferred
DEBIT/(CREDIT) 
 
Accounts 
 
 
and 
Accumulated 
Accounts 
Advance 
Bonds 
on Bonds 
Tax 
Common Retained
($ in thousands) 
Cash 
Receivable 
Inventory 
Land 
Equipment 
Depreciation 
Payable 
Deposits 
Payable 
Payable 
Liability 
Stock 
Earnings
Balance, December 31, 2011 
33 
180 
295 
250 
1,430 
(518) 
(160) 
(110) 
(500) 
70 
(94) 
(800) 
(76)
Operating activities
 Net income 
182 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(182)
 Depreciation 
158 
 
 
 
 
(158)
 Gain on equipment sale 
(17) 
 
 
 
17
 Amortization of bond 
  discount 
4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(4)
 Deferred income taxes 
  increase 
6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(6)
 Accounts receivable 
  decrease 
9 
(9)
 Customer advance 
  deposits decrease 
(11) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11
 Inventory increase 
(12) 
 
12
 Accounts payable increase 
3 
 
 
 
 
 
(3)
  Net cash provided by 
   operating activities 
322
Investing activities
 Equipment sale 
57 
 
 
 
(80) 
23
 Land purchase 
(86) 
 
 
86
 Buildings and equipment 
  purchase 
(261) 
 
 
 
261
  Net cash used for 
   investing activities 
(290)
Financing activities
 Common stock issued 
50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(50)
 Dividends paid 
(90) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
90
  Net cash used for 
   financing activities 
(40) 
 
 
 
 Balance, December 31, 2012 
25 
171 
307 
336 
1,628 
(653) 
(163) 
(99) 
(500) 
66 
(100) 
(850) 
(168)
Unreconciled 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0

 
Exercises 
1065
 
We perform the analysis as if the sale had been recorded in two steps. First, the asset is 
written up to the amount at which it is to be sold. With a $17,000 gain to be reported, there 
would be a write-up of the asset as follows:
DR Buildings and equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$17,000
 
CR Gain on sale of equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$17,000
Then the equipment is sold at its new, higher, book value of $57,000.
DR Cash 
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$57,000
DR Accumulated depreciation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
23,000
 
CR Buildings and equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$80,000
Although this is not the way the firm would have actually recorded the transaction, the net 
effect of these journal entries is equivalent to what the firm would have actually done:
DR Cash 
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$57,000
DR Accumulated depreciation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
23,000
 
CR Buildings and equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$63,000
 
CR Gain on sale of equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
17,000
 
By separating the entry into the two components as we did, we were able to create the cash 
flow statement appropriately, reversing any gain or loss in the operating section and showing 
the sale proceeds in the investing section. The trick is to think of first writing the asset up or 
down to the amount at which it was sold and then recording the sale at the revised book value.
 
A careful analysis of each of the columns in Exhibit 17.14 will reveal that the information 
in that column is identical to the information provided in the original analysis in the chapter. 
Exhibit 17.14 is not a different analysis but rather a different way to format the analysis, one 
that lends itself well to the use of spreadsheet software in order to reduce the amount of time 
(and the opportunity for arithmetic errors) involved in creating a cash flow statement.
EXERCISES
The income statement and statement of cash flows for ABC Equipment Company for 2014 are 
provided below.
E17-1
Deriving a direct method 
 presentation of cash flow 
from operating activities 
(LO 2, 3)
ABC Equipment Company
Income Statement for the Year Ended December 31, 2014
                 ($ in millions)
Sales 
$81,860.0
Gain on the sale of marketable securities 
83.2
Equity in earnings of affiliates 
856.0
 Total revenues and gains 
82,799.2
Cost of goods sold 
39,853.2
General and administrative expenses 
22,280.8
Interest expense 
11,549.2
Income tax expense 
3,646.4
 Total expenses 
77,329.6
Net income 
$  5,469.6

1066 
CHAPTER 17
Statement of Cash Flows
Supplemental Information:
Other current liabilities represent obligations for general and administrative expenses.
Required:
Derive a direct method presentation of cash flow from operating activities for ABC Equip-
ment  Company. Assume all depreciation is included in General and administrative expenses.
ABC Equipment Company
Statement of Cash Flows for Year Ended December 31, 2014
Operations
Net income 
$  5,469.6
Adjustments for noncash transactions:
Depreciation 
2,656.0
Increase in deferred tax liability 
328.0
Equity in undistributed earnings of affiliates 
(188.4)
Gain from sale of marketable securities 
(83.2)
(Increase) decrease in accounts receivable 
298.4
(Increase) decrease in inventories 
(795.6)
(Increase) decrease in prepayments 
(161.2)
Increase (decrease) in accounts payable for inventory 
135.6
Increase (decrease) in other current liabilities 
(443.2)
Cash flow from operations 
7,216.0
Investing
Sale of marketable securities 
199.2
Acquisition of marketable securities 
(292.8)
Acquisition of property, plant, and equipment 
(3,502.8)
Acquisition of subsidiaries 
(178.0)
Cash flow from investing activities 
(3,774.4)
Financing
Common stock issued to employees 
137.6
Repurchase of common stock 
(403.6)
Dividends paid to stockholders 
(971.6)
Additions to short-term borrowing 
510.4
Additions to long-term debt 
486.4
Payments on long-term debt 
(1,905.6)
Cash flow from financing activities 
(2,146.4)
 Net change in cash 
1,295.2
Beginning of year cash balance 
2,027.2
 End of year cash balance 
$  3,322.4
E17-2
Determining cash flow from 
operating activities (LO 2)
Lino Company’s worksheet for the preparation of its 2014 statement of cash flows included 
the following information:
AICPA
ADAPTED
 
December 31 
January 1
Accounts receivable 
$29,000 
$23,000
Allowance for uncollectible accounts 
1,000 
800
Prepaid rent expense 
8,200 
12,400
Accounts payable 
22,400 
19,400
Lino’s 2014 net income is $150,000.
Required:
What amount should Lino include as net cash that is provided by operating activities in the 
statement of cash flows?

 
Exercises 
1067
E17-3
Calculating cash flows from 
operating activities, direct 
method (LO 2, 3, 4)
An income statement for Hamilton Corporation follows:
Revenues from sales of products 
 
$360,000
Cost of goods sold:
 Beginning inventory 
$   48,000 
 Purchases 
228,000 
 Ending inventory 
(168,000) 
(108,000)
Depreciation expense 
 
(48,000)
Gain on retirement of bonds  
 
60,000
Uncollectible accounts expense 
 
(6,000)
Salary expense 
 
(42,000)
Insurance expense 
 
(6,000)
Income tax expense 
 
(36,000)
Net income 
 
$174,000
Additional Information:
a. Decrease in accounts receivable (net of allowance for doubtful accounts), $36,000.
b. The prepaid insurance account increased by $4,800 during the year.
c. Included in salary expenses are salaries of $9,600 accrued at the end of the year; no 
 salaries were unpaid at the beginning of the year.
d. The bonds payable had a book value of $240,000 at the date of retirement.
e. Increase in accounts payable, $21,000.
Required:
Prepare a schedule showing the net cash flows generated by the operating activities of  Hamilton 
Corporation. Use the direct method.
E17-4
Determining cash collections 
from customers (LO 4)
During 2014, King Corporation wrote off accounts receivable totaling $25,000 and made sales, 
all on account, of $710,000. Other information about the company’s sales activities follows:
 
Beginning of 2014 
End of 2014
Accounts receivable 
$170,000 
$140,000
Allowance for uncollectible accounts 
22,000 
50,000
In addition, in February 2014, King accepted a $6,000 note from a customer whose account 
was overdue. King collected $2,300 on this note during December 2014.
Required:
Prepare a schedule showing the amount of cash collected from customers during 2014.
E17-5
Determining cash flows from 
investing and operating 
 activities (LO 1, 4)
Karr Inc. reported net income of $300,000 for 2014. Changes occurred in several balance 
sheet accounts as follows:
Equipment 
$25,000 increase
Accumulated depreciation 
40,000 increase
Note payable 
30,000 increase
Additional Information:
1. During 2014, Karr sold equipment that cost $25,000 and had accumulated depreciation of 
$12,000, for a gain of $5,000.
2. In December 2014, Karr purchased equipment costing $50,000 with $20,000 cash and a 
12% note payable of $30,000.
3. Depreciation expense for the year was $52,000.
AICPA
ADAPTED

1068 
CHAPTER 17
Statement of Cash Flows
Required:
1. In Karr’s 2014 statement of cash flows, what should be the net cash from operating 
activities?
2. In Karr’s 2014 statement of cash flows, what should be the net cash used in investing 
activities?
E17-6
Determining cash flows from 
investing and financing 
 activities (LO 1, 4)
Superfine Company collected the following data in preparing its cash flow statement for the 
year ended December 31, 2014:
Amortization of bond discount 
$  1,000
Dividends declared 
22,500
Dividends paid 
19,000
Gain on sale of equipment 
3,000
Proceeds from the sale of equipment 
5,000
Proceeds from the sale of treasury stock (carrying amount $32,500) 
37,500
Purchase of BAS Inc. bonds (par value $100,000) 
90,000
Required:
Determine the following amounts that should be reported in Superfine’s 2014 statement of 
cash flows.
1. What amount should Superfine report as net cash used in investing activities?
2. What amount should Superfine report as net cash provided by financing activities?
E17-7
Determining cash flow from 
investing activities (LO 1)
Alp Inc. had the following activities during 2014:
• Acquired 2,000 shares of stock in Maybel Inc. for $26,000.
• Sold an investment in Rate Motors for $35,000 when the carrying value was $33,000.
• Acquired a $50,000, four-year certificate of deposit from a bank. (During the year, interest 
of $3,750 was paid to Alp.)
• Collected dividends of $1,200 on stock investments.
Required:
In Alp’s 2014 statement of cash flows, what amount would be shown for net cash used in 
 investing activities?
AICPA
ADAPTED
E17-8
Relationship between balance 
sheet and statement of cash 
flows (LO 4, 5)
Selected financial statements for Ralston Company, a sole proprietorship, are as follows:
Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2013
Assets:
 Cash 
$ 30,000
 Equipment 
36,000
 Accumulated depreciation: equipment 
(11,250)
 Leased property 
18,000
  Total 
$ 72,750
Liabilities and owner’s equity:
 Lease liability 
$ 18,000
 Ralston, capital 
54,750
  Total 
$ 72,750

 
Exercises 
1069
Statement of Cash Flows for the Year Ended December 31, 2014
Cash flows from operating activities
 Collections from customers 
$ 37,500 
 Payments for salaries 
(8,250) 
 Payments for other expenses 
(6,750) 
  Net cash provided by operating activities 
 
$  22,500
Cash flows from investing activities
 Sale of equipment 
5,250 
 Purchase of land 
(13,500) 
 Purchase of investments 
(22,500) 
  Net cash used by investing activities 
 
(30,750)
Cash flows from financing activities
 Payment on lease liability 
(3,000) 
 Issue of long-term notes 
15,000 
 Owner withdrawals 
(12,000) 
  Net cash from financing activities 
 
–0–
Net decrease in cash 
 
$  (8,250)
Additional Information:
a. During 2014, equipment having accumulated depreciation of $4,500 was sold for a 
$3,000 gain.
b. A $3,750 lease payment was made in 2014, reducing the lease liability by $3,000.
c. 2014 depreciation expense: on leased property, $3,000; on equipment, $8,250.
d. Net income for 2014, $14,250.
Required:
Using the provided data, prepare Ralston’s December 31, 2014, balance sheet.
E17-9
Determining operating 
cash flow (LO 1, 2)
Metro Inc. reported net income of $150,000 for 2014. Changes occurred in several balance 
sheet accounts during 2014 as follows:
Investment in Videogold Inc. stock, carried on the 
 equity basis 
$5,500 increase
Accumulated depreciation caused by major repair 
 to projection equipment 
2,100 decrease
Premium on bonds payable 
1,400 decrease
Deferred tax liability (long term) 
1,800 increase
Required:
Determine the reported net cash provided by operating activities for Metro in 2014.
AICPA
ADAPTED
E17-10
Statement of cash flows 
 preparation (LO 1, 2, 3)
Hoffman Engineering Company is a young and growing producer of pre-stressed concrete 
manufacturing equipment. You have been retained by the company to advise it in the prepara-
tion of a statement of cash flows. Hoffman uses the direct method in reporting net cash flows 
from operating activities. You have obtained the following information concerning certain 
events and transactions for the company during the year ended December 31, 2014:
a. The board of directors declared a $200,000 cash dividend on December 15, 2014, payable 
on January 15, 2015, to stockholders of record on January 5, 2015.
b. On August 27, 2014, Hoffman purchased $500,000 of its common stock on the open market.
c. Depreciation expense of $50,000 was included in the income statement.
AICPA
ADAPTED

1070 
CHAPTER 17
Statement of Cash Flows
d. The amount of net income for the year was $800,000, which included an extraordinary 
loss of $75,000 (see next item).
e. On June 1, 2014, a tornado caused an uninsured inventory loss of $75,000 ($115,385 loss, 
less tax benefit of $40,385). This extraordinary loss was included in the determination of 
net income (as indicated in item d).
f. Uncollectible accounts receivable of $20,000 were written off against the allowance for 
uncollectible accounts. Also, $35,000 of bad debts expense was included in net income; 
the same amount was added to the allowance for uncollectible accounts.
g. On August 1, 2014, a building and some land were purchased for $500,000. Hoffman 
gave in payment $100,000 cash, $150,000 market value of its unissued common stock, 
and a $250,000 mortgage note.
h. Hoffman realized a $5,500 gain on the sale of a machine. The machine originally cost 
$60,000, of which $25,000 was undepreciated at the time of the sale.
Required:
Write a brief explanation of how each of the items above should be disclosed in Hoffman’s 
statement of cash flows for 2014. If any item is neither an inflow nor an outflow of cash, 
 explain why it is not and indicate how the item should be disclosed, if at all, in Hoffman’s 
statement of cash flows. 
E17-11
Determining cash used in 
 financing activities (LO 1)
During 2014, Xan Inc. had the following activities related to its financial operations:
Payment for the early retirement of long-term 
 bonds payable (carrying value $370,000) 
$375,000
Distribution in 2014 of cash dividend declared 
 in 2013 to preferred shareholders 
31,000
Carrying value of convertible preferred stock in 
 Xan converted into common shares 
60,000
Proceeds from sale of treasury stock 
 (carrying value at cost, $43,000) 
50,000
Required:
In Xan’s 2014 statement of cash flows, how much should net cash used in financing 
 activities be?
AICPA
ADAPTED
PROBLEMS / DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
The management of Banciu Corporation provides you with the comparative analysis of changes 
in account balances between December 21, 2013, and December 31, 2014, appearing below.
P17-1
Preparing a statement of cash 
flows under the indirect 
method (LO 1, 2, 4)
AICPA
ADAPTED
 
December 31,
 
2014 
2013
Debit balances
 Accounts receivable 
$   306,000 
$   327,600
 Cash 
174,000 
223,200
 Inventories 
579,600 
645,600
 Leasehold improvements 
104,400 
104,400
 Machinery and equipment 
1,112,400 
776,400
 Patents 
33,360 
36,000
 Securities held for plant expansion 
180,000 
–0–
 Totals 
$2,489,760 
$2,113,200
(continued)

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
1071
Supplemental Information:
a. The following table presents a comparative analysis of retained earnings as of December 
31, 2013, and December 31, 2014.
 
December 31,
 
2014 
2013
Beginning balance 
$ 321,600 
$ 157,200
Net income 
234,000 
206,400
 
555,600 
363,600
Dividends declared 
(48,000) 
(42,000)
Premium on repurchased preferred stock 
(1,200) 
–0–
Ending balance 
$ 506,400 
$ 321,600
b. On December 10, 2014, the board of directors declared a cash dividend of $0.24 per 
share, payable to holders of common stock on January 10, 2015.
c. Purchased new machinery for $463,000. In addition, Banciu sold certain machinery it was no 
longer using for $57,600. The machinery cost $127,000 and had accumulated depreciation of 
$53,800 at the date of the sale. Banciu made no other entries in Machinery and equipment or 
related accounts other than for depreciation.
d. Purchased 120 preferred shares, par value $100, at $110 and subsequently canceled the 
shares. Banciu debited the premium paid to Retained earnings.
e. Paid $2,400 of legal costs in successful defense of a new patent, which it correctly debited 
to the Patents account. It recorded patent amortization amounting to $5,040 during the 
year ended December 31, 2014.
f. During 2014, Banciu wrote off accounts receivable totaling $3,600 as uncollectible.
g. During 2014, Banciu purchased $180,000 of securities that are being held for future plant 
expansion.
Required:
1. Prepare the entries (in general journal form) that would be entered into T-accounts needed to 
prepare a statement of cash flows from the data given. For example, the first entry would be
DR Cash (Operations—Net income)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$234,000 
   CR Retained earnings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  
$234,000
2. Prepare a statement of cash flows for Banciu Corporation for 2014. Use the indirect 
method for presenting cash flow from operations.
Credit balances
 Accounts payable 
$279,360 
$   126,000
 Accumulated amortization of leasehold 
  improvements 
69,600 
58,800
 Accumulated depreciation of machinery 
  and equipment 
499,200 
446,400
 Allowance for uncollectible accounts 
19,200 
20,400
 Cash dividend payable 
48,000 
–0–
 Common stock 
600,000 
600,000
 Current portion of 6% serial bonds 
  payable 
60,000 
60,000
 Preferred stock 
108,000 
120,000
 Retained earnings 
506,400 
321,600
 6% Serial bonds payable—noncurrent 
  portion 
300,000 
360,000
 Totals 
$2,489,760 
$2,113,200
 
December 31,
 
2014 
2013

1072 
CHAPTER 17
Statement of Cash Flows
P17-2
Cash flow statement under 
indirect method 
(LO 1, 2, 3, 4)
The Barden Corporation’s comparative balance sheets for 2014 and 2013 are presented below.
Barden Corporation
Balance Sheets
 
 
December 31,
 
2014 
2013
Assets
Cash 
$   337,000 
$   246,000 
$    91,000
Accounts receivable, net 
420,000 
280,000 
140,000
Marketable securities 
15,000 
–0– 
15,000
Inventories 
520,000 
440,000 
80,000
Land 
650,000 
400,000 
250,000
Plant and equipment 
1,160,000 
1,266,000 
(106,000)
Less: Accumulated depreciation 
(180,000) 
(200,000) 
20,000
Total assets 
$2,922,000 
$2,432,000 
$  490,000
Liabilities and Stockholders’ Equity
Liabilities:
 Accounts payable 
$   660,000 
$   500,000 
$ 160,000
 Accrued wages 
540,000 
520,000 
20,000
 Long-term bonds (due 7/1/2020) 
260,000 
360,000 
(100,000)
 Total liabilities 
1,460,000 
1,380,000 
80,000
Stockholders’ equity: 
 
 
 Common stock and 
  Additional paid-in capital 
966,000 
760,000 
206,000
 Retained earnings 
496,000 
292,000 
204,000
 Total stockholders’ equity 
1,462,000 
1,052,000 
410,000
Total liabilities and stockholders’ equity 
$2,922,000 
$2,432,000 
$  490,000
Increase
(Decrease)
The income statement of Barden Corporation for the year ended December 31, 2014, is as 
follows:
Barden Corporation
Income Statement for the Year Ended December 31, 2014
Sales 
$ 1,600,000
Gain on sale of marketable securities 
2,000
Gain on extinguishment of debt 
44,000
 Total revenue and gains 
1,646,000
Expenses:
 Cost of goods sold 
720,000
 Personnel costs 
386,000
 Depreciation 
40,000
 Loss on sale of equipment 
8,000
 Interest 
32,000
 Miscellaneous 
16,000
  Total expenses 
1,202,000
Income before income taxes 
444,000
Income tax expense 
200,000
 Net income 
$ 244,000
Additional Information:
a. On January 11, 2014, Barden purchased land for $170,000 cash.
b. On January 23, 2014, Barden extinguished long-term bonds with a face value of $100,000.

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
1073
c. On February 8, 2014, Barden issued 8,400 shares of common stock for cash. The stock 
was issued at $15 per share.
d. Barden purchased marketable securities for $30,000 on March 15, 2014; one-half of the 
securities were later sold on December 3, 2014.
e. On June 9, 2014, Barden issued 7,600 shares of common stock for land. The common 
stock and land had current market values of $80,000 at the time of the transaction.
f. On July 1, 2014, Barden declared and paid a $40,000 cash dividend.
g. On October 18, 2014, Barden sold equipment costing $106,000, with a book value of 
$46,000, for $38,000 cash.
Required:
Prepare a cash flow statement using the indirect method for operating activities.
P17-3
Determining amounts 
 reported on statement of 
cash flows (LO 1, 2, 4)
The following are selected balance sheet accounts of Zach Corporation at December 31, 2014 
and 2013, as well as the increases or decreases in each account from 2013 to 2014. Also pre-
sented is selected income statement information for the year ended December 31, 2014, as 
well as additional information.
Selected Balance Sheet Accounts
 
 
 
Increase
 
2014 
2013 
(Decrease)
Assets
Accounts receivable 
$   34,000 
$   24,000 
$10,000
Property, plant, and equipment 
277,000 
247,000 
30,000
Accumulated depreciation 
(178,000) 
(167,000) 
11,000
Liabilities and Stockholders’ Equity
Bonds payable 
49,000 
46,000 
3,000
Dividends payable 
8,000 
5,000 
3,000
Common stock, $1 par 
22,000 
19,000 
3,000
Additional paid-in capital 
9,000 
3,000 
6,000
Retained earnings 
104,000 
91,000 
13,000
Selected Income Statement Information for the Year Ended 
December 31, 2014
Sales revenue 
$155,000
Depreciation 
33,000
Gain on sale of equipment 
13,000
Net income 
28,000
Additional Information:
• Accounts receivable relate to sales of merchandise.
• During 2014, equipment that cost $40,000 was sold for cash.
• During 2014, $20,000 of bonds payable were issued in exchange for property, plant, and 
equipment. There was no amortization of bond discount or premium.
Required:
Items 1 through 5, which follow, represent activities that will be reported in Zach’s statement 
of cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2014. For each item, determine both the 
amount that should be reported in Zach’s 2014 statement of cash flows and the section (oper-
ating, investing, or financing) in which the item should appear.
AICPA
ADAPTED

1074 
CHAPTER 17
Statement of Cash Flows
1. Cash collections from customers (direct method)
2. Payments for the purchase of property, plant, and equipment
3. Proceeds from the sale of equipment
4. Cash dividends paid
5. Redemption of bonds payable
P17-4
Preparing statement of cash 
flows under indirect method 
(LO 1, 2, 3, 4)
Neighborhood Supermarkets is preparing to go public, and you are asked to assist the firm by 
preparing its statement of cash flows for 2014. Neighborhood’s balance sheets at December 31, 
2013 and December 31, 2014, and its income statement for the year ending December 31, 2014, 
appear below.
Neighborhood Supermarkets, Inc.
Balance Sheet
 
December 31,
($ in thousands) 
2014 
2013
Assets
Current:
 Cash 
$    91,000 
$    59,351
 Marketable securities 
18,147 
20,068
 Accounts receivable, net 
52,478 
45,318
 Inventories 
228,515 
187,433
 Prepaid expenses 
6,254 
5,085
  Total current assets 
396,394 
317,255
Property and equipment:
 Land 
86,193 
86,003
 Buildings and improvements 
417,954 
417,954
 Equipment 
673,570 
646,427
 Leasehold improvements 
139,418 
136,589
 Accumulated depreciation 
(815,060) 
(775,860)
  Total property and equipment 
502,075 
511,113
Goodwill 
35,162 
15,722
Intangibles and other 
3,843 
4,124
Total assets 
$ 937,474 
$ 848,214
Liabilities
Current:
 Accounts payable 
$ 127,865 
$    95,128
 Accrued expenses 
30,227 
28,173
 Accrued self-insurance 
21,998 
23,344
 Deferred revenue 
6,731 
6,920
 Income taxes payable 
484 
738
  Total current liabilities 
187,305 
154,303
Noncurrent:
 Notes payable 
25,000 
—
 Postretirement benefit obligations 
12,454 
12,454
 Deferred income taxes 
22,544 
20,357
  Total noncurrent liabilities 
59,998 
32,811
Total liabilities 
247,303 
187,114
Stockholders’ Equity
Common stock 
9,949 
9,949
Retained earnings 
826,473 
795,473
Accumulated other comprehensive income 
4,604 
4,560
Treasury stock (at cost) 
 (150,855) 
(148,882)
 Total stockholders’ equity 
690,171 
661,100
Total liabilities and stockholders’ equity 
$ 937,474 
$ 848,214

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
1075
Neighborhood Supermarkets, Inc.
Income Statement for the Year Ended December 31, 2014
($ in thousands)
Net sales 
$2,516,364
Cost of sales 
1,837,657
Gross profit 
678,707
Depreciation expense 
(47,201)
Amortization expense 
(6,207)
Self-insurance expenses 
(43,000)
Loss on sale of equipment 
(60)
Operating, general, and administrative expenses 
(486,665)
 Income from operations 
95,574
Gain on sale of marketable securities 
208
Investment income 
1,556
Income before provision for income taxes 
97,338
Provision for income taxes 
(35,107)
 Net income 
$      62,231
Additional Information:
a. The only entries in retained earnings for 2014 were for net income and cash dividends.
b. During 2014, bad debt expenses of $906 were included in operating, general, and admin-
istrative expenses; no accounts were written off.
c. Adjusting marketable securities upward by $68 led to the increase of $44 in accumulated 
other comprehensive income, after considering the deferred tax effect of $24.
d. On July 1, 2014, Neighborhood Supermarkets bought land ($190) and equipment ($20,000), 
paying $10,190 in cash and issuing a $10,000 five-year note payable with interest at 6% pay-
able annually. Accrued interest on the note was included in operating, general, and adminis-
trative expenses because the amount was deemed too immaterial to report separately.
e. No treasury stock was reissued during 2014.
f. Equipment costing $9,052 with a book value of $1,051 was sold for cash.
g. A much smaller competitor was acquired on December 31, 2014, for $34,890 cash and a 
7%, $15,000 note that matures in two years. Neighborhood allocated the acquisition cost 
as follows: inventory, $5,500; intangibles, $5,926; equipment, $16,195; leasehold im-
provements, $2,829; goodwill, $19,440.
Required:
Use the indirect method to prepare Neighborhood Supermarkets’ statement of cash flows for 
2014. Use the worksheet approach from the appendix.
P17-5
Preparing and analyzing cash 
flow statement (LO 1, 2, 4)
The balance sheets of Global Trading Company follow:
Balance Sheets as of December 31,
 
2014 
2013
Assets
Cash 
$120,000 
$108,000
Accounts receivable 
50,000 
300,000
Less: Allowance for doubtful accounts 
(20,000) 
(30,000)
Inventory 
80,000 
250,000
Prepaid insurance 
–0–  
20,000
(continued)

1076 
CHAPTER 17
Statement of Cash Flows
 
2014 
2013
Property, plant, and equipment 
500,000 
500,000
Less: Accumulated depreciation 
(450,000) 
(400,000)
Goodwill 
–0–  
70,000
 Total assets 
$280,000 
$818,000
Liabilities and Owners’ Equity
Accounts payable 
$100,000 
$  22,000
Salaries payable 
17,000 
11,000
Bank loan 
82,500 
390,000
Capital stock 
75,000 
75,000
Retained earnings 
5,500 
320,000
 Total liabilities and owners’ equity 
$280,000 
$818,000
Additional Information:
• The company reported a net loss of $279,500 during 2014.
• There are no income taxes.
• Goodwill as of December 31, 2013, was part of an acquisition made during 2013.
• The company’s bank provides a working capital loan to a maximum of 75% of net 
 accounts receivable and inventory.
Required:
1. Prepare a statement of cash flows using the indirect method for the year ended December 
31, 2014.
2. On the basis of available information, assess the financial performance of the company 
during 2014. In answering this part, consider both the net income and cash flows of the 
company. Also evaluate the future prospects of the company.
3. Assuming that the bad debt expense during 2014 was $55,000, calculate the amount of 
bad debts written off during the year. Further assume that the company collected 
$1,250,000 cash from its customers during 2014, and then compute the sales revenue for 
the year. You may assume that all sales are credit sales.
4. In answering this part, assume that Global uses the first-in, first-out (FIFO) inventory 
method. On December 31, 2014, the company purchased $35,000 worth of inventory on 
credit from a supplier. The transaction was inadvertently not recorded because physical 
possession was not obtained as of December 31, 2014. Discuss the effect of this omission 
on Global Trading Company’s financial statements.
P17-6
Reconciling changes in balance 
sheet accounts with amounts 
reported in the cash flow 
statement (LO 1, 2, 4)
Excerpts from the financial statements of Publix Super Markets, Inc., and Stanley Black & 
Decker, Inc., are provided next.
Publix Super Markets, Inc.
Excerpts from Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 29, 2012 
and December 31, 2011:
(Amounts are in thousands) 
2012 
2011
Assets
Current assets
 Cash and cash equivalents 
$  337,400 
$  366,853
 Short-term investments 
797,260 
447,972
 Trade receivables 
519,137 
542,900
 Merchandise inventories 
1,409,367 
1,361,709

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
1077
Reconciliation of Net Earnings to Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities for the 
Years Ended December 29, 2012, and December 31, 2011, and December 25, 2010:
 
2012 
2011 
2010
Net earnings 
$1,552,255 
1,491,966 
1,338,147
Adjustments to reconcile net earnings to net cash 
 provided by operating activities:
 Depreciation and amortization 
493,239 
492,639 
507,341
 Increase in LIFO reserve 
28,419 
67,145 
14,124
 Retirement contributions paid or payable in 
  common stock 
304,285 
291,240 
275,547
 Deferred income taxes 
7,002 
95,848 
20,722
 Loss on disposal and impairment of property, 
  plant and equipment 
24,855 
13,734 
19,896
 Gain on AFS securities 
(10,386) 
(19,886) 
(24,516)
 Net amortization of investments 
108,300 
80,890 
48,113
 Change in operating assets and liabilities 
  providing (requiring) cash:
  Trade receivables 
22,517 
(50,782) 
16,165
  Merchandise inventories 
(76,077) 
(70,277) 
12,121
  Prepaid expenses and other noncurrent assets 
(3,374) 
(15,635) 
(8,054)
  Accounts payable and accrued expenses 
181,916 
(51,741) 
63,852
  Self-insurance reserves 
6,497 
9,762 
(13,494)
  Federal and state income taxes 
(41,153) 
15,763 
(5,113)
  Other noncurrent liabilities 
5,912 
(9,479) 
1,117
   Total adjustments 
1,051,952 
849,221 
927,821
 Net cash provided by operating activities 
$2,604,207 
2,341,187 
2,265,968
Stanley Black & Decker, Inc.
Excerpts from Consolidated Balance Sheet as of End of Fiscal 2012 
and 2011:
 
Fiscal
($ in millions) 
2012 
2011
Assets
Current assets
 Cash and cash equivalents 
$  716.0 
$  906.9
 Accounts and notes receivable, net 
1,538.2 
1,445.0
Excerpt from Fiscal 2012 Income Statement:
 Provision for doubtful accounts 
$    11.3
Operating Section of Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
 
For Fiscal Years
($ in millions) 
2012 
2011 
2010
Operating activities
Net earnings attributable to common shareowners 
$ 883.8 
$ 674.6 
$ 198.2
Adjustments to reconcile net earnings to cash 
 provided by operating activities: 
 Depreciation and amortization of property, 
  plant and equipment 
237.9 
228.5 
203.4
 Amortization of intangibles 
207.4 
181.6 
145.3
 Inventory step-up amortization 
6.3 
0.8 
173.5
 Pretax (gain) loss on sales of businesses 
(384.7) 
16.2 
—
(continued)

1078 
CHAPTER 17
Statement of Cash Flows
 
For Fiscal Years
($ in millions) 
2012 
2011 
2010
 Loss on debt extinguishment 
45.5 
— 
—
 Asset impairments 
10.8 
0.6 
24.1
 Stock-based compensation expense 
89.7 
68.9 
85.1
 Provision for doubtful accounts 
11.3 
15.9 
10.6
 Income tax settlements 
(48.6) 
(73.4) 
(36.2)
 Debt-fair value amortization 
(18.3) 
(34.1) 
(37.9)
 Other non-cash items 
(28.5) 
(12.2) 
3.8
Changes in operating assets and liabilities: 
 Accounts receivable 
(55.2) 
10.1 
22.5
 Inventories 
11.4 
(90.2) 
35.3
 Accounts payable 
109.1 
214.2 
77.3
 Deferred revenue 
(17.6) 
(6.0) 
1.5
 Accrued expenses 
24.2 
2.2 
51.4
 Other current assets 
(151.7) 
28.4 
18.7
 Long-term receivables 
(15.2) 
(21.1) 
(14.6)
 Defined benefit liabilities 
(107.0) 
(130.5) 
(276.9)
 Other long-term liabilities 
301.1 
(119.5) 
39.2
 Other long-term assets 
(145.5) 
43.9 
15.0
Net cash provided by operating activities 
$ 966.2 
$ 998.9 
$ 739.3
From Stanley Black & Decker’s Accounts receivable note:
(Millions of  Dollars) 
2012 
2011
Trade accounts receivable 
$1,454.1 
$ 1,356.7
Trade notes receivable 
125.9 
100.2
Other accounts receivables 
24.4 
41.7
Gross accounts and notes receivable 
1,604.4 
1,498.6
Allowance for doubtful accounts 
(66.2) 
(53.6)
Accounts and notes receivable, net 
$1,538.2 
$ 1,445.0
Long-term trade notes receivable, net 
$   146.4 
$    131.2
Required:
1. Reconcile the difference, if any, between the change in accounts receivable as reported in 
the statement of cash flows and the change in receivables based on the balance sheet 
value for each company.
2. Both companies report a small change in cash relative to their respective operating cash 
flow for 2012. Explain.
P17-7
Preparing cash flow 
 statement—Indirect method 
(LO 1, 2, 4)
Presented next are the balance sheet accounts of Bergen Corporation as of December 31, 2014 
and 2013.
 
 
 
Increase
 
2014 
2013 
(Decrease)
Assets 
Current assets: 
 Cash 
$   541,000 
$   308,000 
$233,000
 Accounts receivable, net 
585,000 
495,000 
90,000
 Inventories 
895,000 
780,000 
115,000
  Total current assets 
2,021,000 
1,583,000 
438,000
AICPA
ADAPTED
(continued)

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
1079
 
 
 
Increase
 
2014 
2013 
(Decrease)
Land 
350,000 
250,000 
100,000
Plant and equipment 
1,060,000 
720,000 
340,000
Accumulated depreciation 
(295,000) 
(170,000) 
 (125,000)
Leased equipment under capital lease 
158,000 
–0– 
158,000
Marketable investment securities, at cost 
–0– 
75,000 
(75,000)
Investment in Mason, Inc., at cost 
180,000 
180,000 
–0–
  Total assets 
$3,474,000 
$2,638,000 
$836,000
Liabilities and Stockholders’ Equity 
Current liabilities: 
 Current portion of long-term debt 
$   159,000 
$     –0– 
$159,000
 Accounts payable and accrued expenses 
760,000 
823,000 
(63,000)
  Total current liabilities 
919,000 
823,000 
96,000
Note payable, long-term 
300,000 
–0– 
300,000
Liability under capital lease 
124,000 
–0– 
124,000
Bonds payable 
500,000 
500,000 
–0–
Unamortized bond premium 
16,000 
18,000 
(2,000)
Deferred income taxes 
60,000 
45,000 
15,000
Common stock, par-value $20 
640,000 
600,000 
40,000
Additional paid-in capital 
304,000 
244,000 
60,000
Retained earnings 
611,000 
408,000 
203,000
  Total liabilities and stockholders’ equity 
$3,474,000 
$2,638,000 
$836,000
Additional Information:
• On January 2, 2014, Bergen sold all of its marketable investment securities for $95,000 cash.
• On March 10, 2014, Bergen paid a cash dividend of $50,000 on its common stock. No 
other dividends were paid or declared during 2014.
• On April 15, 2014, Bergen issued 2,000 shares of its common stock for land having a fair 
value of $100,000.
• On May 25, 2014, Bergen borrowed $450,000 from an insurance company. The underly-
ing promissory note bears interest at 15% and is payable in three equal annual install-
ments of $150,000. The first payment is due on May 25, 2015.
• On June 15, 2014, Bergen purchased equipment for $392,000 cash.
• On July 1, 2014, Bergen sold equipment costing $52,000, with a book value of $28,000 
for $33,000 cash.
• On December 31, 2014, Bergen leased equipment from Tilden Company for a 10-year 
 period. Equal payments under the lease are $25,000 due on December 31 each year. The 
first payment was made on December 31, 2014. The present value at December 31, 2014, 
of the 10 lease payments is $158,000. Bergen appropriately recorded the lease as a capital 
lease. The $25,000 lease payment due on December 31, 2015, will consist of $9,000 prin-
cipal and $16,000 interest.
• Bergen’s net income for 2014 is $253,000.
• Bergen owns a 10% interest in the voting common stock of Mason, Inc. Mason reported 
net income of $120,000 for the year ended December 31, 2014, and paid a common stock 
dividend of $55,000 during 2014.
Required:
Prepare a cash flow statement for Bergen using the indirect method for 2014.

1080 
CHAPTER 17
Statement of Cash Flows
P17-8
Working backward from the 
statement of cash flows  
(LO 1, 2, 4)
A statement of cash flows for Friendly Markets, Inc., for 2014 appears below.
Operations
 (1) Net income 
$  1,161,442
Adjustments for noncash transactions:
 (2) Depreciation and amortization 
496,106
 (3) Retirement contributions paid in common stock 
256,110
 (4) Deferred income taxes 
27,018
 (5) Loss on disposal of property, plant, and equipment 
32,482
 (6) Loss on sale of investments 
6,801
 (7) Net amortization of investments 
15,625
 Change in operating assets/liabilities providing (requiring) cash:
 (8) Trade receivables 
(140,082)
 (9) Merchandise inventories 
2,302
 (10) Prepaid expenses 
(5,825)
 (11) Accounts payable and accrued expenses 
103,014
 (12) Self-insurance reserves 
(14,381)
 (13) Federal and state income taxes 
33,186
 (14) Other noncurrent liabilities 
24,434
Net cash provided by operating activities 
1,998,232
Investing
 (15) Payment for property, plant, and equipment 
(693,489)
 (16) Proceeds from sale of property, plant, and equipment 
4,150
 (17) Payment for investments 
(1,133,449)
 (18) Proceeds from sale of investments 
777,381
Net cash used in investing activities 
(1,045,407)
Financing
 (19) Payment for acquisition of common stock 
(629,453)
 (20) Proceeds from sale of common stock 
152,096
 (21) Dividends paid 
(325,295)
 (22) Other, net 
18,530
Net cash used in financing activities 
(784,122)
Net increase in cash 
168,703
Cash at beginning of year 
201,813
Cash at end of year 
$     370,516
Required:
Prepare the worksheet entry that would be made to prepare a cash flow statement for each of 
the numbered line items. For example, the worksheet entry for item (1) is as follows:
(1) 
DR Cash (operations—Net income)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $1,161,442
 
   CR Retained earnings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
$1,161,442
P17-9
Preparing a statement of cash 
flows—Indirect method 
(LO 1, 2, 4)
Omega Corporation’s comparative balance sheet accounts worksheet at December 31, 2014 
and 2013, follow, together with a column showing the increase (decrease) from 2013 to 2014.
Comparative Balance Sheet Worksheet
 
 
 
Increase
 
2014 
2013 
(Decrease)
Cash 
$    800,000 
$     700,000 
$  100,000
Accounts receivable 
1,128,000 
1,168,000 
(40,000)
Inventories 
1,850,000 
1,715,000 
135,000
Property, plant, and equipment 
3,307,000 
2,967,000 
340,000
Accumulated depreciation 
(1,165,000) 
(1,040,000) 
(125,000)
Investment in Belle Company 
305,000 
275,000 
30,000
Loan receivable 
270,000 
–0–  
270,000
 Total assets 
$  6,495,000 
$  5,785,000 
$  710,000
AICPA
ADAPTED
(continued)

 
Problems / Discussion Questions 
1081
 
 
 
Increase
 
2014 
2013 
(Decrease)
Accounts payable 
$  1,015,000 
$     955,000 
$    60,000
Income taxes payable 
30,000 
50,000 
(20,000)
Dividends payable 
80,000 
90,000 
(10,000)
Capital lease obligation 
400,000 
–0–  
400,000
Capital stock, common, $1 par 
500,000 
500,000 
–0– 
Additional paid-in capital 
1,500,000 
1,500,000 
–0– 
Retained earnings 
2,970,000 
2,690,000 
280,000
 Total liabilities and stockholders’ equity 
$  6,495,000 
$  5,785,000 
$  710,000
Additional Information:
• On December 31, 2013, Omega acquired 25% of Belle Company’s common stock for 
$275,000. On that date, the carrying value of Belle’s assets and liabilities, which approxi-
mated their fair values, was $1,100,000. Belle reported income of $120,000 for the year 
ended December 31, 2014. No dividend was paid on Belle’s common stock during the year.
• During 2014, Omega loaned $300,000 to Chase Company, an unrelated company. Chase made 
the first semiannual principal repayment of $30,000 plus interest at 10%, on October 1, 2014.
• On January 2, 2014, Omega sold equipment for $40,000 cash that cost $60,000 and had a 
carrying amount of $35,000.
• On December 31, 2014, Omega entered into a capital lease for an office building. The 
present value of the annual rental payments is $400,000, which equals the building’s fair 
value. Omega made the first rental payment of $60,000, when due, on January 2, 2015.
• Net income for 2014 was $360,000.
• Omega declared and paid cash dividends for 2014 and 2013 as follows:
 
2014 
2013
Declared 
12/15/14 
12/15/13
Paid 
2/28/15 
2/28/14
Amount 
$80,000 
$90,000
Required:
Prepare an indirect method statement of cash flows for Omega Corporation for the year ended 
December 31, 2014, using the worksheet method illustrated in the appendix to this chapter.
P17-10
Operating cash flow impact 
of securitization (LO 2, 6)
Rite Aid Corporation operates retail drugstores in the United States. It is one of the country’s 
largest retail drugstore chains with 3,333 stores in operation as of March 3, Year 3. The com-
pany’s drugstores’ primary business is pharmacy services. The company also sells a full selec-
tion of health and beauty aids and personal care products, seasonal merchandise, and a large 
private brand product line.
 
The following condensed information was extracted from Rite Aid’s Form 10-K for the 
fiscal year that ended March 3, Year 3 (all dollars in thousands).
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows—Operating Activities Section
 
Year Ended
 
3/3/Year 3 
3/4/Year 2 
2/26/Year 1
Net Income 
$  26,826 
$1,273,006 
$  302,478
Total noncash charges (credits) 
379,715 
(810,731) 
129,729
Changes in operating assets and liabilities:
 Net proceeds from accounts receivable securitization 
20,000 
180,000 
150,000
 Accounts receivable 
(39,543) 
(51,494) 
36,549
 Net changes in other operating assets and liabilities 
(77,853) 
(173,616) 
(100,310)
Net cash provided by operating activities 
$309,145 
$   417,165 
$  518,446

1082 
CHAPTER 17
Statement of Cash Flows
Consolidated Statements of Operations
 
Year Ended
 
3/3/Year 3 
3/4/Year 2 
2/26/Year 1
Revenues 
$17,507,719 
$17,270,968 
$16,816,439
Costs and expenses
 Cost of goods sold 
12,791,597 
12,571,860 
12,202,894
 Selling, general, and administrative expenses 
4,370,481 
4,307,421 
4,127,536
 Store closing and impairment charges 
49,317 
68,692 
35,655
 Interest expense 
275,219 
277,017 
294,871
 Loss on debt modifications and retirements, net 
18,662 
9,186 
19,229
(Gain) loss on sale of assets, net 
(11,139) 
(6,462) 
2,247
 
 
17,494,137 
17,227,714 
16,682,432
Income before income taxes 
13,582 
43,254 
134,007
Income tax benefit 
(13,244) 
(1,229,752) 
(168,471)
 Net income 
$        26,826 
$  1,273,006 
$      302,478
Selected Data Pertaining to Accounts Receivable
 
Year Ended
 
3/3/Year 3 
3/4/Year 2 
2/26/Year 1
Year-end Accounts receivable, net 
$374,493 
$354,949 
$483,455
Allowance for uncollectible accounts at year-end 
30,246 
32,336 
31,216
Additions to uncollectible accounts charged to 
 costs and expenses 
26,603 
34,702 
47,291
Accounts Receivable
The Company maintains an allowance for doubtful accounts receivable based upon the 
 expected collectibility of accounts receivable. The allowance for uncollectible accounts 
at March 3, Year 3, and March 4, Year 2, was $30,246 and $32,336, respectively. The 
 Company’s accounts receivable are due primarily from third-party payors (e.g., pharmacy 
benefit management companies, insurance companies, or governmental agencies) and are 
recorded net of any allowances provided for under the respective plans. Since payments due 
from third-party payors are sensitive to payment criteria changes and legislative actions, the 
 allowance is reviewed continually, and adjusted for accounts deemed uncollectible by 
management.
 
The Company maintains securitization agreements with several multiseller asset-backed 
commercial paper vehicles (“CPVs”). Under the terms of the securitization agreements, the 
Company sells substantially all of its eligible third-party pharmaceutical receivables to a 
bankruptcy remote Special Purpose Entity (SPE) and retains servicing responsibility. The as-
sets of the SPE are not available to satisfy the creditors of any other person, including any of 
the Company’s affiliates. These agreements provide for the Company to sell, and for the SPE 
to purchase these receivables. The SPE then transfers an interest in these receivables to vari-
ous CPVs. Transferred outstanding receivables cannot exceed $400,000. The amount of 
transferred receivables outstanding at any one time is dependent upon a formula that takes 
into account such factors as default history, obligor concentrations, and potential dilution 
(“Securitization Formula”). Adjustments to this amount can occur on a weekly basis. At 
March 3, Year 3, and March 4, Year 2, the total of outstanding receivables that have been 
transferred to the CPVs were $350,000 and $330,000, respectively. The Company has deter-
mined that the transactions meet the criteria for sales treatment in accordance with (pre-
Codification) SFAS No. 140 “Accounting for Transfers and Servicing of Financial Assets and 
Extinguishment of Liabilities.”

 
Cases 
1083
Required:
1. Calculate cash collected from customers during fiscal Year 3.
2. Had Rite Aid not securitized receivables during Year 3, Year 2, and Year 1, what would 
its operating cash flows have been in each of these years? Do you believe that Rite 
Aid’s operating cash flows were materially affected by its receivables securitization 
practices?
3. Calculate pre-tax operating income for Year 3, Year 2, and Year 1, and compare it 
to operating cash flows as originally reported and to operating cash flows assuming 
that Rite Aid did not securitize receivables. Compare both results and comment 
on the impact of Rite Aid’s practice of securitizing receivables. (Hint: When 
 calculating pre-tax operating income, include only items that relate to core business 
operations.)
CASES
Statements of cash flows are provided for three companies:
• Telstra Corporation Limited is an Australian telecommunications and media company, 
formerly owned by the Australian government and privatized in stages from the late 1990s. 
Telstra is the largest provider of local and long-distance telephone services, mobile 
 services, dial-up, wireless, DSL, and cable Internet access in Australia.
• Seven Group Holdings Limited has a portfolio of businesses with a presence in industrial 
services, media, property, and other investments.
• First Solar, Inc., manufactures and sells solar modules with advanced thin film semi-
conductor technology and designs, constructs, and sells photovoltaic (PV) solar power 
systems.
 
Telstra and Seven Group Holdings are both Australian companies and report under A-IFRS, 
the Australian version of IFRS. Australia, along with many European countries, was one of 
the initial adopters of IFRS, putting it into effect in 2005.
 
(Note: The Australian Accounting Standards Board has made certain amendments to the 
IASB pronouncements in making A-IFRS, however these generally have the effect of 
eliminating an option under IFRS, introducing additional disclosures or implementing re-
quirements for not-for-profit entities, rather than departing from IFRS for Australian 
entities.)
Required:
Prepare a table like the one below and in each cell enter any reporting differences that you 
find between these three companies. Consider “reporting differences” to be any item found on 
more than one firm’s statement of cash flows but reported in different sections.
 
 
Telstra 
Seven Group Holdings 
First Solar
Operating section  
 
Investing section  
 
Financing section
C17-1
Statement of cash flow 
differences under IFRS and 
U.S. GAAP (LO 7)

1084 
CHAPTER 17
Statement of Cash Flows
Telstra Corporation Limited and Controlled Entities
Statement of Cash Flows
 
Year Ended 30 June
 
2012 
2011 
Change 
Change 
 
$m 
$m 
$m 
%
Cash flows from operating activities
Receipts from customers (inclusive of 
 goods and services tax (GST)) 
28,364 
27,389 
975 
3.6
Payments to suppliers and to employees 
 (inclusive of GST) 
(17,491) 
(17,860) 
369 
(2.1)
Net cash generated by operations 
10,873 
9,529 
1,344 
14.1
Income taxes paid 
(1,597) 
(1,511) 
(86) 
5.7
Net cash provided by operating activities 
9,276 
8,018 
1,258 
15.7
Cash flows from investing activities
Payments for:
 property, plant and equipment 
(3,006) 
(2,342) 
(664) 
28.4
 intangible assets 
(942) 
(909) 
(33) 
3.6
Capital expenditure (before investments) 
(3,948) 
(3,251) 
(697) 
21.4
 shares in controlled entities 
  (net of cash acquired) 
0 
(36) 
36 
(100.0)
 payments for associates 
(9) 
0 
(9) 
(100.0)
 payments for other investments 
(18) 
0 
(18) 
(100.0)
Total capital expenditure 
(3,975) 
(3,287) 
(688) 
20.9
Proceeds from:
 sale of property, plant and equipment 
17 
16 
1 
6.3
 sale of intangible assets 
2 
0 
2 
100.0
 sale of shares in controlled entities 
  (net of cash disposed) 
(9) 
288 
(297) 
(103.1)
 sale of businesses (net of cash disposed) 
(2) 
14 
(16) 
(114.3)
 sale of associates 
0 
23 
(23) 
(100.0)
Proceeds from finance lease principal amounts 
54 
74 
(20) 
(27.0)
Repayments of loans to jointly controlled and 
 associated entities 
3 
2 
1 
50.0
Loans to jointly controlled and associated entities 
(443) 
0 
(443) 
n/m
Interest received 
117 
122 
(5) 
(4.1)
Settlement of hedges in net investments 
49 
96 
(47) 
(49.0)
Dividends received 
0 
41 
(41) 
(100.0)
Distributions received from FOXTEL Partnership 
108 
70 
38 
54.3
Net cash used in investing activities 
(4,079) 
(2,541) 
(1,538) 
60.5
Operating cash flows less investing cash flows 
5,197 
5,477 
(280) 
(5.1)
Cash flows from financing activities
Proceeds from borrowings 
3,049 
2,340 
709 
30.3
Repayment of borrowings 
(2,224) 
(2,536) 
312 
(12.3)
Repayment of finance lease principal amounts 
(52) 
(61) 
9 
(14.8)
Staff repayments of share loans 
3 
8 
(5) 
(62.5)
Finance costs paid 
(1,154) 
(1,135) 
(19) 
1.7
Acquisition of non-controlling interests 
(37) 
0 
(37) 
n/m
Dividends paid to equity holders of Telstra Entity 
(3,475) 
(3,475) 
0 
0.0
Dividends paid to non-controlling interests 
(16) 
(14) 
(2) 
14.3
Net cash used in financing activities 
(3,906) 
(4,873) 
967 
(19.8)
Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 
1,291 
604 
687 
113.7
Cash and cash equivalents at the 
 beginning of the year 
2,637 
2,105 
532 
25.3
Effects of exchange rate changes on cash and 
 cash equivalents 
17 
(72) 
89 
(123.6)
Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year 
3,945 
2,637 
1,308 
49.6

 
Cases 
1085
Seven Group Holdings Limited
Consolidated Cash Flow Statement
 
 
2012 
2011
 
 
$’000 
$’000
Cash flows related to operating activities
Receipts from customers 
 
4,726,707 
3,443,091
Payments to suppliers and employees 
 
(4,819,946) 
(3,447,287)
Dividends received from equity accounted investees 
 
25,626 
33,157
Other dividends received 
 
38,798 
31,372
Interest and other items of a similar nature received 
 
4,371 
7,621
Interest and other costs of finance paid 
 
(109,677) 
(58,487)
Income taxes received/(paid) 
 
19,040 
(38,341)
Net operating cash flows 
 
(115,081) 
(28,874)
Cash flows related to investing activities
Payments for purchases of property, plant and equipment 
 
(81,854) 
(60,997)
Proceeds from sale of property, plant and equipment 
 
9,587 
1,689
Payments for purchase of intangible assets 
 
(3,154) 
(10,563)
Acquisition for non-controlling interests 
 
(197,680) 
—
Consideration for business combination, net of cash acquired 
 
(422,461) 
(44,093)
Proceeds from sale of subsidiary, net of cash disposed 
 
164,028 
—
Acquisition of equity accounted investees 
 
(83,767) 
(448,360)
Proceeds from sale of shares in equity accounted investees 
 
1,989 
300,586
Payments for other investments 
 
(21,119) 
(297,433)
Proceeds from sale of other financial assets 
 
29,910 
4,522
Other 
 
2,010 
(285)
Net investing cash flows 
 
(602,511) 
(554,934)
Cash flows related to financing activities
Proceeds from issue of shares—Seven Group Holdings Limited 
 
8,250 
7,000
Proceeds from issue of shares—subsidiaries 
 
2,000 
159
Ordinary dividends paid 
 
(110,488) 
(109,948)
TELYS4 dividends paid 
 
(33,209) 
(34,222)
Proceeds from borrowings 
 
1,933,575 
1,347,215
Repayment of borrowings 
 
(1,018,759) 
(1,007,698)
Net financing cash flows 
 
781,369 
202,506
Net (decrease)/increase in cash and cash equivalents 
 
63,777 
(381,302)
Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of period 
 
65,244 
449,671
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents 
 
(1,272) 
(3,125)
Cash and cash equivalents at end of the period 
 
127,749 
65,244
First Solar, Inc. and Subsidiaries
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
 
Years Ended
 
December 31, 
December 31, 
December 31, 
($ in thousands) 
2012 
2011 
2010
Cash flows from operating activities
 Cash received from customers 
$ 3,231,268 
$ 2,290,944 
$ 2,458,088
 Cash paid to suppliers and associates 
(2,447,337) 
(2,159,429) 
(1,614,763)
 Interest received 
4,693 
10,156 
20,531
 Interest paid 
(19,916) 
(14,229) 
(7,610)
 Income tax refunds (payments), net 
21,543 
(46,153) 
(80,064)
 Excess tax benefit from share-based 
  compensation arrangements 
(27,373) 
(110,836) 
(69,367)
 Other operating activities 
(669) 
(3,916) 
(1,323)
(continued)

1086 
CHAPTER 17
Statement of Cash Flows
 
Years Ended
 
December 31, 
December 31, 
December 31, 
 
2012 
2011 
2010
Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities 
762,209 
(33,463) 
705,492
Cash flows from investing activities
 Purchases of property, plant and equipment 
(379,228) 
(731,814) 
(588,914)
 Purchases of marketable securities 
(29,200) 
(331,240) 
(462,070)
 Proceeds from sales and maturities of 
  marketable securities 
108,663 
492,613 
556,904
 Payments received on notes receivable 
— 
— 
61,658
 Investment in note receivable, affiliate 
(21,659) 
— 
—
 Payments received on note receivable, affiliate 
4,498 
— 
—
 Purchase of restricted investments 
(80,667) 
(62,749) 
(43,064)
 Change in restricted cash 
16,215 
(23,154) 
—
 Sale of investment in related party 
— 
— 
28,596
 Acquisitions, net of cash acquired 
(2,437) 
(21,105) 
(296,496)
 Other investing activities 
83 
992 
1,301
Net cash used in investing activities 
(383,732) 
(676,457) 
(742,085)
Cash flows from financing activities
 Proceeds from stock option exercises 
176 
8,326 
9,379
 Repayment of borrowings under revolving 
  credit facility 
(1,305,000) 
(450,000) 
—
 Proceeds from borrowings under revolving 
  credit facility 
1,375,000 
550,000 
100,000
 Repayment of long-term debt 
(178,842) 
(33,796) 
(27,879)
 Proceeds from borrowings under long-term 
  debt, net of discount and issuance costs 
— 
370,108 
—
 Excess tax benefit from share-based 
  compensation arrangements 
27,373 
110,836 
69,367
 (Repayment of) proceeds from economic 
  development funding 
(6,820) 
16,188 
—
 Other financing activities 
(996) 
(444) 
(416)
Net cash (used in) provided by 
 financing activities 
(89,109) 
571,218 
150,451
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash 
 and cash equivalents 
6,307 
(21,368) 
(12,668)
Net increase (decrease) in cash and 
 cash equivalents 
295,675 
(160,070) 
101,190
Cash and cash equivalents, beginning 
 of the period 
605,619 
765,689 
664,499
Cash and cash equivalents, end of the period 
$     901,294 
$     605,619 
$     765,689
Supplemental disclosure of noncash 
 investing and financing activities
 Property, plant and equipment acquisitions 
  funded by liabilities 
$        62,344  
$        74,391 
$        88,977
 Settlement of long-term debt 
$           4,802 
$       — 
$        —
C17-2
Lucky Lady Inc.: Preparing 
comprehensive statement of 
cash flows (LO 1, 2, 3, 4)
The income statement for the year ended December 31, 2014, as well as the balance sheets as 
of December 31, 2014, and December 31, 2013, for Lucky Lady Inc. follow. This information 
is taken from the financial statements of a real company whose name has been disguised.
Income Statement
 
For the Year Ended
($ in thousands) 
December 31, 2014
Revenues 
 Casino 
$  26,702
 Rooms 
2,897
 Food and beverage 
2,351
 Other hotel/casino 
5,066
 Airline 
20,784
  Total revenues 
57,800
(continued)

 
Cases 
1087
Balance Sheets
 
December 31,
($ in thousands) 
2014 
2013
Assets
Cash 
$  211,305 
$  579,963
Gross accounts receivable 
35,249 
2,178
Less: Allowance for doubtful accounts 
(4,733) 
(1,531)
Prepaid expenses 
11,755 
1,219
Inventories 
12,662 
154
 Total current assets 
266,238 
581,983
Gross property, plant, and equipment 
953,796 
471,506
Less: Accumulated depreciation 
(86,512) 
(21,796)
Pre-opening expenses 
–0– 
10,677
Other operating assets 
26,601 
21,116
 Total assets 
$1,160,123 
$1,063,486
Liabilities and Stockholders’ Equity
Accounts payable 
$   14,181 
$    4,322
Accrued salaries and wages 
8,194 
945
Accrued interest on long-term debt 
9,472 
9,429
Other accrued liabilities 
33,502 
9,744
Construction payables 
96,844 
32,296
Current maturities, capital leases 
1,830 
289
Current maturities, long-term debt 
1,573 
–0–
 Total current liabilities 
165,596 
57,025
Deferred revenues 
10,784 
–0–
Deferred income taxes 
6,517 
6,517
Long-term obligation, capital leases 
14,044 
162
Long-term debt 
481,427 
473,000
 Total liabilities 
678,368 
536,704
Common stock 
506 
485
Capital in excess of par value 
662,365 
589,827
Common stock in treasury 
(29,490) 
(29,490)
Retained earnings (deficit) 
(151,626) 
(34,040)
 Total stockholders’ equity 
481,755 
526,782
Total liabilities and equity 
$1,160,123 
$1,063,486
 
For the Year Ended
($ in thousands) 
December 31, 2014
Operating Expenses
 Casino 
9,341
 Rooms 
1,016
 Food and beverage 
2,529
 Other hotel/casino 
5,777
 Airline 
20,599
 Selling, general, and administrative (including
  bad debt expense of $3,855) 
19,679
 Depreciation expense 
8,018
 Hotel preopening expenses 
45,130
 Aircraft carrying value adjustment 
68,948
Total operating expenses 
181,037
Operating income 
(123,237)
Nonoperating items:
 Interest income 
12,231
 Interest expense 
(6,596)
 Other, net 
16
Income before taxes 
(117,586)
 Provision for income taxes 
–0–
Net income (loss) 
$(117,586)

1088 
CHAPTER 17
Statement of Cash Flows
Additional Information and Author Notes:
• Aircraft valuation adjustment: The company reduced the book value of its aircraft 
and related equipment to their expected recoverable values and recognized an aircraft 
carrying value adjustment in the 2014 income statement. [Author Note: You may treat 
this item as “extra” depreciation recorded during the year due to abnormal decline 
in the asset value.]
• Property, plant, and equipment: Includes land, buildings, aircraft equipment, 
 furniture and fixture, equipment under capital lease, and so on. During 2014, the 
company acquired equipment under capital leases for $16,987,000. The company 
also sold equipment with a net book value of $2,501,000 for $684,000 cash. [Author 
Note: The gain or loss on this sale is combined with some other item in the income 
statement. Any other change in the gross book value of Property, plant, and 
 equipment may be attributed to outright purchase of other equipment and building 
construction costs.]
• Capital lease and long-term liabilities: [Author Note: When preparing the cash flow 
statement, you may find it convenient to combine the current and long-term portions of 
each of these liabilities.]
• Pre-opening expenses: Pre-opening expenses include direct project salaries, advertising, 
and other pre-opening services incurred during the pre-opening period of the Lucky Lady 
Hotel. Such expenses were expensed upon opening the facility.
• Stock offering: The increases in Common stock and Capital in excess of par accounts are 
due to a common stock offering completed on August 17, 2014.
• Laundry loan: On June 16, 2014, the company obtained a $10,000,000 loan from a finan-
cial institution for a laundry facility in North Las Vegas, Nevada. As of December 31, 
2014, $10,000,000 has been drawn down under the loan. Construction of the facility was 
completed in December 2014. The laundry provides the laundry and dry cleaning services 
for the Lucky Lady Hotel.
Required:
Using the indirect method, prepare the statement of cash flows for the year ended December 
31, 2014, in as much detail as possible. For example, borrowing and repayment, if any, should 
be shown separately as financing inflow and outflow, respectively. Similarly, to the extent that 
information is available, separately disclose and explain the changes to each asset and each 
liability account that affected Lucky Lady’s cash flows during 2014.
C17-3
Opus One, Inc.: Preparing 
and analyzing the cash flow 
statement (LO 1, 2, 4)
The following information is based on a real company whose name has been disguised. Opus 
One operates in a single business segment, the retailing and servicing of home audio, car 
audio, and video equipment. Its operations are conducted in Texas through 20 stores and two 
service centers. The information provided in the annual report has been combined and 
abbreviated.
Additional Information Regarding Year Ended June 30, 2014:
• The company did not declare or pay any cash or stock dividends during the year.
• The company reported a $7,377 loss from scrapping equipment with a book value of the 
same amount.
• The depreciation expense for the year was $2,265,735.
• The following breakdown is provided for the long-term debt:

 
Cases 
1089
 
June 30,
($ in thousands) 
2014 
2013
Long-Term Debt
 Term loan 
$3,420,000 
$  –0–
 Mortgage note 
534,475 
555,455
 Total 
3,954,475 
555,455
 Less: Current installments 
(681,716) 
(21,348)
Long-term debt—current installments 
$3,272,759 
$534,107
Opus One, Inc.
Balance Sheet as of June 30, 2014 and 2013
 
June 30,
($ in thousands) 
2014 
2013
Current Assets
Cash 
$    50,885 
$    19,481
Receivables 
4,625,920 
6,963,195
Less: Allowance for bad debts 
(403,000) 
(1,200,000)
Inventories 
25,986,364 
26,801,526
Prepaid expenses 
455,875 
710,058
Income taxes receivable 
1,573,055 
3,073,537
Noncurrent Assets 
Property and equipment 
22,182,371 
20,637,912
Less: Accumulated depreciation 
(9,031,181) 
(6,822,553)
Deferred tax asset, net 
1,043,403 
531,803
Goodwill 
244,241 
268,691
 Total assets 
$46,727,933 
$50,983,650
Current Liabilities 
Revolving credit agreements 
$ 4,810,398 
$18,743,407
Accounts payable 
11,054,418 
7,951,545
Accrued liabilities 
3,655,358 
2,380,493
Current installments of long-term debt 
681,716 
21,348
Long-Term Liabilities
Long-term debt minus current installments 
3,272,759 
534,107
Other liabilities and deferred credits 
4,072,586 
3,308,714
 Total liabilities 
27,547,235 
32,939,614
Shareholders’ Equity
Common stock and additional paid-in capital 
10,126,944 
10,117,946
Retained earnings 
9,053,754 
7,926,090
Total shareholders’ equity 
19,180,698 
18,044,036
 Total liabilities and shareholders’ equity 
$46,727,933 
$50,983,650
 
On February 26, 2014, the company obtained a $3,600,000 term loan from a bank due 
February 28, 2018.
Required:
1. Prepare a statement of cash flows for the year ended June 30, 2014, using the indirect 
approach.
2. On the basis of the cash flow statement, analyze Opus One’s financial performance during 
the fiscal year 2014.

1090 
CHAPTER 17
Statement of Cash Flows
C17-4
Capitalizing software 
 development costs (LO 6)
ESCO Technologies Inc. and Take-Two Interactive Software, Inc., both capitalize software 
development costs in accordance with their respective policies as summarized here. The con-
densed financial information that follows was extracted from each company’s fiscal 2007 
Form 10-K (all dollars are in thousands). Full financial statements for each company may be 
accessed at www.sec.gov.
ESCO Technologies Inc.
ESCO Technologies Inc. and its wholly owned subsidiaries are organized into three reporting 
units: Communications, Filtration/Fluid Flow, and RF Shielding and Test. The Communications 
unit is a proven supplier of special purpose fixed network communications systems for electric, 
gas, and water utilities, including hardware and software to support advanced metering applica-
tions. The Filtration unit develops, manufactures, and markets a broad range of filtration products 
used in the purification and processing of liquids. The Test unit provides its customers with the 
ability to identify, measure, and contain magnetic, electromagnetic, and acoustic energy.
Statement of Cash Flow Data Affected by Software 
Capitalization Policies
 
Years Ended September 30,
 
2007 
2006 
2005
Net cash provided by operating activities 
$ 45,263 
$   58,626 
$ 68,556
Cash flows from investing activities: 
 
 
 Acquisition of businesses, net of cash acquired 
(8,250) 
(91,968) 
—
 Capital expenditures 
(19,503) 
(9,117) 
(8,848)
 Additions to capitalized software 
(30,094) 
(27,977) 
(8,342)
Net cash used by investing activities 
$(57,847) 
$(129,062) 
$(17,190)
Selected Other Financial Statement Items
 
Years Ended September 30,
 
2007 
2006 
2005
Total current assets 
$260,350 
$207,257 
Net property, plant, and equipment 
78,277 
68,754 
Goodwill 
149,466 
143,450 
Capitalized software, net 
65,700 
45,200 
Other intangible assets, net 
11,542 
14,002 
Other assets 
10,772 
10,031 
 Total assets 
$576,107 
$488,694 
Amortization of capitalized software 
7,700 
3,300 
Net earnings 
$ 33,713 
$ 31,280 
$43,544
Condensed Note Disclosure: Capitalized Software
The costs incurred for the development of computer software that will be sold, leased, or otherwise 
marketed are charged to expense when incurred as research and development until technological 
feasibility has been established for the product. Technological feasibility is typically established 
upon completion of a detailed program design. Costs incurred after this point are capitalized on a 
project-by-project basis in accordance with (pre-Codification) SFAS No. 86. Costs that are capital-
ized primarily consist of external development costs. Upon general release of the product to cus-
tomers, the Company ceases capitalization and . . . amortizes the software development costs over 
a three- to seven-year period based upon the estimated future economic life of the product.

 
Cases 
1091
Take-Two Interactive Software, Inc.
Take-Two Interactive Software, Inc., is a global publisher, developer, and distributor of interactive 
entertainment software, hardware, and accessories. Its publishing segment develops, markets, and 
publishes software titles for leading gaming and entertainment hardware platforms.
Selected Other Financial Statement Items
 
Years Ended October 31,
 
2007 
2006 
2005
Current assets
 Software development costs and licenses 
141,441 
85,207 
 Other current assets 
357,082 
459,666 
 Total current assets 
498,523 
544,873 
Software development costs and licenses, net of current portion 
34,465 
31,354 
Other noncurrent assets 
298,155 
292,579 
 Total assets 
$ 831,143 
$  868,806
Net income (loss) 
$(138,406) 
$(184,889) 
$35,314
Statement of Cash Flow Data Affected by Software Capitalization Policies
 
Years Ended October 31,
 
2007 
2006 
2005
Operating activites
 Net Income (loss) 
$ (138,406) $ (184,889) $     35,314
 Adjustments to reconcile net income (loss) to net cash 
  provided by (used for) operating activities: 
  Amortization and write-off of software development 
   costs and licenses 
109,891 
147,832 
81,959
  Other adjustments, net 
54,499 
89,728 
43,573
 Changes in assets and liabilities, net of effect from 
  purchases and disposal of businesses: 
  Software development costs and licenses 
(163,859) 
(143,248) 
(138,609)
  Other changes in assets and liabilities, net 
73,830 
133,939 
17,743
 Net cash (used for) provided by operating activities 
$   (64,045) $     43,362 
$     39,980
Investing activities
 Payments for purchases of businesses, net of cash acquired 
(5,795) 
(191) 
(37,753)
Condensed Note Disclosure: Software Development Costs
We utilize both internal development teams and third-party software developers to develop the 
 titles we publish.
 
We capitalize internal software development costs (including stock-based compensation, spe-
cifically identifiable employee payroll expense, and incentive compensation costs related to the 
completion and release of titles), third-party production and other content costs, subsequent to 
 establishing technological feasibility of a software title. Technological feasibility of a product 
 includes the completion of both technical design documentation and game design documentation. 
Amortization of such capitalized costs is recorded on a title-by-title basis in cost of goods sold 
(software development costs) using (1) the proportion of current year revenues to the total revenues 
expected to be recorded over the life of the title or (2) the straight-line method over the remaining 
estimated useful life of the title, whichever is greater.
 
We frequently enter into agreements with third-party developers that require us to make ad-
vance payments for game development and production services. . . . We capitalize all advance 

1092 
CHAPTER 17
Statement of Cash Flows
payments to developers as software development. On a product-by-product basis, we reduce soft-
ware development costs and record a corresponding amount of research and development expense 
for any costs incurred by third-party developers prior to establishing technological feasibility of a 
product. We typically enter into agreements with third-party developers after completing the tech-
nical design documentation for our products and therefore record the design costs leading up to a 
signed developer contract as research and development expense. We also generally contract with 
third-party developers that have proven technology and experience in the genre of the software be-
ing developed, which often allows for the establishment of technological feasibility early in the 
development cycle. In instances where the documentation of the design and technology are not in 
place prior to an executed contract, we monitor the software development process and require our 
third-party developers to adhere to the same technological feasibility standards that apply to our 
internally developed products.
 
Prior to establishing technological feasibility, we expense research and development costs as 
incurred.
Required:
Some analysts believe the amount of capitalized software costs should be subtracted from 
operating cash flows to improve interfirm comparability and to correct for a firm’s possible 
attempt to improve operating cash flows by lowering the technological feasibility threshold in 
the current period relative to prior periods. Consider this possibility when responding to re-
quirements 1 and 2.
1. Make any needed adjustment to Take-Two’s statement of cash flows to improve interfirm 
comparability of its operating cash flows.
2. Make any needed adjustment to ESCO Technologies’ statement of cash flows to improve 
interfirm comparability of its operating cash flows.
3. What is the likely impact of any adjustment(s) you made in requirements 1 and 2 on an 
analysis of operating cash flows?
4. What impact do ESCO’s software capitalization policies have on the company’s net 
 income as reported for fiscal 2007? (Hint: Compare to income assuming that ESCO 
 expenses all software development costs when incurred. Assume a marginal income tax 
rate related to the software development costs of 35%. Do not adjust income tax expense 
related to any elements of pre-tax income other than software development costs.)
5. Compare Take-Two’s and ESCO Technologies’ policies with respect to establishing tech-
nological feasibility and comment on the impact of these policies on reported net income.
6. Re-create summary journal entries for the fiscal 2007 activity in Take-Two’s Software 
 development costs and licenses account. Do your entries reconcile with the information 
reported on Take-Two’s cash flow statement? If not, offer a plausible explanation for any 
discrepancy. (Hint: Combine both current and noncurrent balance sheet items related to 
software development costs and licenses.)
.mhhe.com/revsine6e
www
Remember to check the book’s companion website 
for additional study material.

1093
TIME VALUE OF MONEY
Cash is an economic resource. When firms borrow cash—for example, take a two-year bank 
loan—they are renting the use of that economic resource for the two-year term of that loan. 
The lender’s charge for renting its cash to the borrower is interest.
 
Interest is an important concept because many business transactions involve borrowing, 
lending, or investing. Because of interest, a dollar amount invested today increases (or accu-
mulates) to a higher amount in the future. The amount that that dollar grows to in the future is 
the future value. Similarly, because of interest, a dollar amount that will be received in the 
future—say, two years from now—is less valuable than that same dollar amount in hand 
 today. Calculating today’s value of a future dollar amount is called discounting. The result of 
that discounting calculation is the present value of that future dollar amount.
 
The time at which cash inflows and cash outflows occur determines the ultimate future 
value or the present value of those flows. Correctly valuing these flows is necessary to repre-
sent properly the value of the assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses arising from various 
business transactions.
Future Value
Assume that Alice Han’s parents give her a $1,000 check for her twenty-first birthday. She 
wants to invest the money for graduate school, which she will attend in two years. Three local 
banks advertise that their savings accounts pay 6% interest per year, although how that 
 interest is computed differs among them. Bank A pays 6% simple interest on the cash in a 
depositor’s savings account. Simple interest means that each year’s interest is computed on 
the original amount invested, which is called the principal. So, interest each year would 
be $1,000 3 0.06, or $60. At the end of two years, the account at Bank A will have a future 
value of $1,120, calculated as:
Future value with simple interest 5 $1,000 1 $60 1 $60 5 $1,120
 
Bank B pays 6% compound interest on savings accounts. Compound interest means that 
interest is paid not just on the in itial principal but also on the interest that has been earned 
each period to date. So, the accumulated amount would be computed as follows:
Appendix
The concepts of present 
value and future value are 
totally driven by the role of 
interest. These concepts are 
unrelated to the buying 
power of money—inflation 
or deflation—which is a dis-
tinct and separate topic that 
we do not discuss in this 
appendix.
Date 
Interest Calculation 
Accumulated Amount
Initial principal 
 
$1,000.00
 
T
Year 1 
$1,000 3 0.06 5 $60.00 
$1,060.00
 
T
Year 2 
$1,060 3 0.06 5 $63.60 
$1,123.60

1094 
Appendix
Future value with interest compounded annually 5 $1,123.60
Date 
Interest Calculation 
Accumulated Amount
Initial principal 
 
$1,000.00
Year 1—First 6 months 
$1,000 3 0.03 5 $30.00 
$1,030.00
   —Last 6 months 
$1,030 3 0.03 5 $30.90 
$1,060.90
Year 2—First 6 months 
$1,060.90 3 0.03 5 $31.83 
$1,092.73
   —Last 6 months 
$1,092.73 3 0.03 5 $32.78 
$1,125.51
T
T
T
T
Future value with interest compounded semiannually 5 $1,125.51
Bank B has compounded the interest annually; that is, interest is computed only once a year.
 
Bank C pays 6% interest compounded semiannually. This means that interest is computed 
every six months at a rate of 3%. The accumulated amount is:
 
Because most business transactions use compound interest, so will our examples. The for-
mula for computing compound interest is
FV 5 PV11 1 r2n
Where:
 FV 5 future value
 PV 5 present value
 r 5 interest rate per compounding period
 n 5 number of compounding periods
For simplicity, let’s assume that interest is compounded annually. So, the compounding period 
is a year. Using the formula to compute the future amount of a $1,000, two-year deposit in 
Bank B:
FV 5 $1,000(1 1 0.06)2
FV 5 $1,123.60
Of course, $1,123.60 equals the same future amount computed previously by the earlier more 
tedious calculation.
Present Value
As you just saw, if interest is compounded annually at 6%, the future value of $1,000.00 
after two years is $1,123.60. This means that $1,123.60 to be received two years in the fu-
ture is equivalent to $1,000 today—its present value—when the interest rate is 6% per year. 
To be sure you understand this concept of present value, we’ll look at it from another 
perspective.

 
Appendix 
1095
 
Assume that Alice Han’s parents, knowing that she wanted to enroll in graduate school in 
two years, gave her a choice of birthday gifts:
• $1,000 cash immediately.
• $1,123.60 to be received in exactly two years.
Which option should she choose? If she is determined to spend the money for graduate school 
(that is, she doesn’t need the cash immediately) and if she knows that 6% per year is the pre-
vailing interest rate, she should be indifferent between the two options. Here’s why. If she 
chooses the $1,000 today, she could put it in a savings account at Bank B at 6% per year com-
pounded annually where it would accumulate to $1,123.60 in two years.1 So, the two alterna-
tive gift amounts are identical at 6% per year compounded annually. Being indifferent between 
$1,000 today and $1,123.60 in two years means that the present value of $1,123.60 due in two 
years is $1,000 at a 6% interest rate compounded annually.
 
By rearranging the formula for computing compound interest, we can represent this notion 
of present value:
FV 5 PV11 1 r2n
Solving this formula for PV, we find the present value:
PV 5
FV
(1 1 r)n
Table 1 at the end of this appendix shows the present value factors for various compounding 
periods and various interest rates per period. These present value factors result from solving 
the present value equation for PV. This table provides the factor for computing the present 
value of a dollar to be received n periods in the future at interest rate r. (A portion of that table 
is reproduced here for convenience.)
 
Using Han’s two gift options as a concrete example, we can show you how to use Table 1. 
Look at the intersection of the Period 2 row and the 6% column (denoted PV 2, 6%) and you 
will see the number 0.89000 (highlighted). This number is the factor that represents the pres-
ent value of a dollar to be received at the end of two years at a 6% per period discount rate. 
TABLE 1 (Selected Excerpts)
Present Value of $1
PV 5
1
(1 1 r)n 5 (1 1 r)2n
    (n)
Periods 
2% 
3% 
4% 
5% 
6% 
7% 
8% 
9% 
10% 
11% 
12% 
15%
 
1 
0.98039 
0.97087 0.96154 0.95238 0.94340 
0.93458 0.92593 0.91743 0.90909 
0.90090 0.89286 0.86957
 
2 
0.96117 
0.94260 0.92456 0.90703 0.89000 
0.87344 0.85734 0.84168 0.82645 
0.81162 0.79719 0.75614
 
3 
0.94232 
0.91514 0.88900 0.86384 0.83962 
0.81630 0.79383 0.77218 0.75132 
0.73119 0.71178 0.65752
 
4 
0.92385 
0.88849 0.85480 0.82270 0.79209 
0.76290 0.73503 0.70843 0.68301 
0.65873 0.63552 0.57175
 
5 
0.90573 
0.86261 0.82193 0.78353 0.74726 
0.71299 0.68058 0.64993 0.62092 
0.59345 0.56743 0.49718
1 For simplicity, we focus on annual compounding and ignore the possibility of depositing money in Bank C.

1096 
Appendix
To verify this, notice that if 89¢ were invested at 6% compounded annually for two years, it 
would accumulate to:
Discount rate is what the 
 interest rate is called when 
computing present values.
We use table factors 
throughout the text so 
that students can see how 
amounts are calculated and 
be prepared for exams that 
rely on tables. These calcu-
lations can also be done 
 easily in Excel or with a 
 financial calculator.
Because 0.89000 is the present value factor for one dollar, the present value for $1,123.60 
(Alice’s parents’ second birthday choice amount) is $1,123.60 3 0.89000 5 $1,000. So, you 
see how Table 1 helps us verify that the two gift amounts have identical present values.
 
Careful examination of Table 1 reveals two general characteristics of present value 
computations. First, looking down any column, you can see that the numbers become 
smaller. For example, in the 6% column, the number in the Period 3 row is 0.83962, which 
is smaller than 0.89000—the number in the Period 2 row. This illustrates that the further in 
the future is the dollar flow, the smaller is its present value. Second, looking to the right 
across any row, the numbers again become smaller. For example, in the Period 2 row, in 
the 7% column, the number 0.87344 is smaller than 0.89000—the number in the 6% 
 column. This illustrates that the higher the discount rate is (7% versus 6%), the smaller 
the present value of $1 is. Why? Because the higher the discount rate is, the smaller is the 
amount that must be invested at r% to equal $1 in n periods. At 7%, only 87.344¢ must 
be invested to equal $1 in two periods, whereas at 6%, 89¢ must be invested to equal $1 in 
two periods.
Present Value of an Ordinary Annuity
Jacquie Henderson has just won the state lottery’s $100,000 Bonanza. The winnings are paid 
out in four equal installments. Each $25,000 installment is mailed to the winner on the one-
year anniversary of the lottery drawing beginning 365 days from now. Jacquie understands 
that the discounted present value of the prize is less than $100,000 and wishes to compute its 
exact value using a discount rate of 5%. One way she can do this is to list each of the four 
payments separately and use the present value factors from Table 1. Doing it this way, the 
computation is:
Date 
Interest Calculation 
Accumulated Amount
Initial principal  
$0.89
Year 1 
$0.89 3 0.06 5 0.0534. Then, $0.89 1 0.0534 
5$0.9434
Year 2 
$0.9434 3 0.06 5 0.0566. Then, $0.9434 1 0.0566 
5$1.00
T
T
Payment Number 
Payment Amount 
Present Value Factor 
Present Value
 
1 
$25,000 
0.95238 
$23,809.50
 
2 
25,000 
0.90703 
22,675.75
 
3 
25,000 
0.86384 
21,596.00
 
4 
25,000 
0.82270 
20,567.50
 
Total 
 
 
$88,648.75
As the computation shows, the present value of the advertised $100,000 prize is only 
$88,648.75. Notice that the $25,000 undiscounted dollar amount received each period is the 

 
Appendix 
1097
same. When each payment in a series is the same dollar amount, the series is called an annu-
ity. When each payment is made at the end of each period, as in our example, that payment 
series is an ordinary annuity (also called an annuity in arrears).
 
To compute the present value of an ordinary annuity, it isn’t necessary to compute the pres-
ent value of each payment separately as we just did. Instead, Table 2 of the appendix provides 
present value factors for ordinary annuities of various lengths at selected discount rates. A 
portion of Table 2 is reproduced here for convenience.
 
Notice in Table 2 that the intersection of the Period 4 row and the 5% (denoted PVOA 4, 
5%) column contains the factor 3.54595 (highlighted). This number is simply the sum of the 
four present value factors we just used in the lottery computation. Specifically:
TABLE 2 (Selected Excerpts)
Present Value of an Ordinary Annuity of $1
PVOA 5 a1 2
1
(1 1 r)nbyr
    (n)
Periods 
2% 
3% 
4% 
5% 
6% 
7% 
8% 
9% 
10% 
11% 
12% 
15%
 
1 
0.98039 
0.97087 0.96154 0.95238 0.94340 
0.93458 0.92593 0.91743 0.90909 
0.90090 0.89286 0.86957
 
2 
1.94156 
1.91347 1.88609 1.85941 1.83339 
1.80802 1.78326 1.75911 1.73554 
1.71252 1.69005 1.62571
 
3 
2.88388 
2.82861 2.77509 2.72325 2.67301 
2.62432 2.57710 2.53129 2.48685 
2.44371 2.40183 2.28323
 
4 
3.80773 
3.71710 3.62990 3.54595 3.46511 
3.38721 3.31213 3.23972 3.16987 
3.10245 3.03735 2.85498
 
5 
4.71346 
4.57971 4.45182 4.32948 4.21236 
4.10020 3.99271 3.88965 3.79079 
3.69590 3.60478 3.35216
Payment Number 
Present Value Factor
 
1 
0.95238
 
2 
0.90703
 
3 
0.86384
 
4 
0.82270
 
Total 
3.54595
So, you see that 3.54595 is the present value of an ordinary annuity of $1.00 each period for 
four periods. To determine the present value of an ordinary annuity of $25,000 each period for 
four periods, we multiply 3.54595 times $25,000. The product, $88,648.75, is identical to the 
number we just computed more tediously for the present value of Jacquie Henderson’s lottery 
winnings.
Present Value of an Annuity Due
Let’s return to the lottery example and assume now that Henderson receives the first lottery 
check immediately. The next three checks follow at one-year intervals, that is, at the start of 
each of the next three periods. When each payment is made at the beginning of the period, as 
we now assume in this example, that payment series is an annuity due (also called an annu-
ity in advance).

1098 
Appendix
 
To determine the present value of the lottery winnings when the payout is an annuity due, 
we can again compute from Table 1 the present value at 5% of each of the $25,000 checks, 
remembering that the present value factor for the first payment received today is 1.0000:
Payment Number 
Payment Amount 
Present Value Factor 
Present Value
 
1 
$25,000 
1.00000 
$25,000.00
 
2 
25,000 
0.95238 
23,809.50
 
3 
25,000 
0.90703 
22,675.75
 
4 
25,000 
0.86384 
21,596.00
 
Total 
 
 
$93,081.25
When the lottery payments are made at the start of the year rather than at the end of the year 
(that is, an annuity due rather than an ordinary annuity), the present value of those payments 
is higher—$93,081.25 versus only $88,648.75 for the ordinary annuity.
 
Tables for computing the present value of an annuity due are also available; see Table 3 of 
this appendix. A portion of Table 3 is reproduced here for convenience.
 
The highlighted present value factor at the intersection of the Period 4 row and the 5% 
column (denoted PVAD 4, 5%) is 3.72325. Multiplying 3.72325 times $25,000 yields 
$93,081.25, the answer we just computed. And, if you have suspected that the 3.72325 factor 
is simply the sum of 1.00000 1 0.95238 1 0.90703 1 0.86384, your suspicion is not only 
correct but also you understand annuities, discount rates, and present value.
TABLE 3 (Selected Excerpts)
Present Value of an Annuity Due of $1
PVAD 5 1 1 a1 2
1
(1 1 r)n21byr 
    (n)
Periods 
2% 
3% 
4% 
5% 
6% 
7% 
8% 
9% 
10% 
11% 
12% 
15%
 
1 
1.00000 
1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 
1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 
1.00000 1.00000 1.00000
 
2 
1.98039 
1.97087 1.96154 1.95238 1.94340 
1.93458 1.92593 1.91743 1.90909 
1.90090 1.89286 1.86957
 
3 
2.94156 
2.91347 2.88609 2.85941 2.83339 
2.80802 2.78326 2.75911 2.73554 
2.71252 2.69005 2.62571
 
4 
3.88388 
3.82861 3.77509 3.72325 3.67301 
3.62432 3.57710 3.53129 3.48685 
3.44371 3.40183 3.28323
 
5 
4.80773 
4.71710 4.62990 4.54595 4.46511 
4.38721 4.31213 4.23972 4.16987 
4.10245 4.03735 3.85498

 
Appendix 
1099
Please visit our website (www.mhhe.com/revsine6e) for a spreadsheet template that can be 
used to find present value factors for interest rates not shown in this appendix.
TABLE 1
Present  Value of $1
PV 5
1
(1 1 r)n 5 (1 1 r)2n
 (n)
Periods 
2% 
3% 
4% 
5% 
6% 
7% 
8% 
9% 
10% 
11% 
12% 
15% 
16% 
17%
 
1 
0.98039 0.97087 0.96154 0.95238 0.94340 0.93458 0.92593 0.91743 0.90909 0.90090 0.89286 0.86957 0.86207 0.85470
 
2 
0.96117 0.94260 0.92456 0.90703 0.89000 0.87344 0.85734 0.84168 0.82645 0.81162 0.79719 0.75614 0.74316 0.73051
 
3 
0.94232 0.91514 0.88900 0.86384 0.83962 0.81630 0.79383 0.77218 0.75132 0.73119 0.71178 0.65752 0.64066 0.62437
 
4 
0.92385 0.88849 0.85480 0.82270 0.79209 0.76290 0.73503 0.70843 0.68301 0.65873 0.63552 0.57175 0.55229 0.53365
 
5 
0.90573 0.86261 0.82193 0.78353 0.74726 0.71299 0.68058 0.64993 0.62092 0.59345 0.56743 0.49718 0.47611 0.45611
 
6 
0.88797 0.83748 0.79031 0.74622 0.70496 0.66634 0.63017 0.59627 0.56447 0.53464 0.50663 0.43233 0.41044 0.38984
 
7 
0.87056 0.81309 0.75992 0.71068 0.66506 0.62275 0.58349 0.54703 0.51316 0.48166 0.45235 0.37594 0.35383 0.33320
 
8 
0.85349 0.78941 0.73069 0.67684 0.62741 0.58201 0.54027 0.50187 0.46651 0.43393 0.40388 0.32690 0.30503 0.28478
 
9 
0.83676 0.76642 0.70259 0.64461 0.59190 0.54393 0.50025 0.46043 0.42410 0.39092 0.36061 0.28426 0.26295 0.24340
 
10 
0.82035 0.74409 0.67556 0.61391 0.55839 0.50835 0.46319 0.42241 0.38554 0.35218 0.32197 0.24718 0.22668 0.20804
 
11 
0.80426 0.72242 0.64958 0.58468 0.52679 0.47509 0.42888 0.38753 0.35049 0.31728 0.28748 0.21494 0.19542 0.17781
 
12 
0.78849 0.70138 0.62460 0.55684 0.49697 0.44401 0.39711 0.35553 0.31863 0.28584 0.25668 0.18691 0.16846 0.15197
 
13 
0.77303 0.68095 0.60057 0.53032 0.46884 0.41496 0.36770 0.32618 0.28966 0.25751 0.22917 0.16253 0.14523 0.12989
 
14 
0.75788 0.66112 0.57748 0.50507 0.44230 0.38782 0.34046 0.29925 0.26333 0.23199 0.20462 0.14133 0.12520 0.11102
 
15 
0.74301 0.64186 0.55526 0.48102 0.41727 0.36245 0.31524 0.27454 0.23939 0.20900 0.18270 0.12289 0.10793 0.09489
 
16 
0.72845 0.62317 0.53391 0.45811 0.39365 0.33873 0.29189 0.25187 0.21763 0.18829 0.16312 0.10686 0.09304 0.08110
 
17 
0.71416 0.60502 0.51337 0.43630 0.37136 0.31657 0.27027 0.23107 0.19784 0.16963 0.14564 0.09293 0.08021 0.06932
 
18 
0.70016 0.58739 0.49363 0.41552 0.35034 0.29586 0.25025 0.21199 0.17986 0.15282 0.13004 0.08081 0.06914 0.05925
 
19 
0.68643 0.57029 0.47464 0.39573 0.33051 0.27651 0.23171 0.19449 0.16351 0.13768 0.11611 0.07027 0.05961 0.05064
 
20 
0.67297 0.55368 0.45639 0.37689 0.31180 0.25842 0.21455 0.17843 0.14864 0.12403 0.10367 0.06110 0.05139 0.04328
 
25 
0.60953 0.47761 0.37512 0.29530 0.23300 0.18425 0.14602 0.11597 0.09230 0.07361 0.05882 0.03038 0.02447 0.01974
 
30 
0.55207 0.41199 0.30832 0.23138 0.17411 0.13137 0.09938 0.07537 0.05731 0.04368 0.03338 0.01510 0.01165 0.00900
 
35 
0.50003 0.35538 0.25342 0.18129 0.13011 0.09366 0.06763 0.04899 0.03558 0.02592 0.01894 0.00751 0.00555 0.00411
 
40 
0.45289 0.30656 0.20829 0.14205 0.09722 0.06678 0.04603 0.03184 0.02209 0.01538 0.01075 0.00373 0.00264 0.00187 

1100 
Appendix
TABLE 2
Present  Value of an Ordinary Annuity of $1
PVOA 5 a1 2
1
(1 1 r)nbyr
 (n)
 Periods 
2% 
3% 
4% 
5% 
6% 
7% 
8% 
9% 
10% 
11% 
12% 
15% 
16% 
17%
 
1 
0.98039 
0.97087 
0.96154 
0.95238 
0.94340 
0.93458 
0.92593 0.91743 0.90909 0.90090 0.89286 0.86957 0.86207 0.85470
 
2 
1.94156 
1.91347 
1.88609 
1.85941 
1.83339 
1.80802 
1.78326 1.75911 1.73554 1.71252 1.69005 1.62571 1.60523 1.58521
 
3 
2.88388 
2.82861 
2.77509 
2.72325 
2.67301 
2.62432 
2.57710 2.53129 2.48685 2.44371 2.40183 2.28323 2.24589 2.20958
 
4 
3.80773 
3.71710 
3.62990 
3.54595 
3.46511 
3.38721 
3.31213 3.23972 3.16987 3.10245 3.03735 2.85498 2.79818 2.74324
 
5 
4.71346 
4.57971 
4.45182 
4.32948 
4.21236 
4.10020 
3.99271 3.88965 3.79079 3.69590 3.60478 3.35216 3.27429 3.19935
 
6 
5.60143 
5.41719 
5.24214 
5.07569 
4.91732 
4.76654 
4.62288 4.48592 4.35526 4.23054 4.11141 3.78448 3.68474 3.58918
 
7 
6.47199 
6.23028 
6.00205 
5.78637 
5.58238 
5.38929 
5.20637 5.03295 4.86842 4.71220 4.56376 4.16042 4.03857 3.92238
 
8 
7.32548 
7.01969 
6.73274 
6.46321 
6.20979 
5.97130 
5.74664 5.53482 5.33493 5.14612 4.96764 4.48732 4.34359 4.20716
 
9 
8.16224 
7.78611 
7.43533 
7.10782 
6.80169 
6.51523 
6.24689 5.99525 5.75902 5.53705 5.32825 4.77158 4.60654 4.45057
 
10 
8.98259 
8.53020 
8.11090 
7.72173 
7.36009 
7.02358 
6.71008 6.41766 6.14457 5.88923 5.65022 5.01877 4.83323 4.65860
 
11 
9.78685 
9.25262 
8.76048 
8.30641 
7.88687 
7.49867 
7.13896 6.80519 6.49506 6.20652 5.93770 5.23371 5.02864 4.83641
 
12 
10.57534 
9.95400 
9.38507 
8.86325 
8.38384 
7.94269 
7.53608 7.16073 6.81369 6.49236 6.19437 5.42062 5.19711 4.98839
 
13 
11.34837 10.63496 
9.98565 
9.39357 
8.85268 
8.35765 
7.90378 7.48690 7.10336 6.74987 6.42355 5.58315 5.34233 5.11828
 
14 
12.10625 11.29607 10.56312 
9.89864 
9.29498 
8.74547 
8.24424 7.78615 7.36669 6.98187 6.62817 5.72448 5.46753 5.22930
 
15 
12.84926 11.93794 11.11839 10.37966 
9.71225 
9.10791 
8.55948 8.06069 7.60608 7.19087 6.81086 5.84737 5.57546 5.32419
 
16 
13.57771 12.56110 11.65230 10.83777 10.10590 
9.44665 
8.85137 8.31256 7.82371 7.37916 6.97399 5.95423 5.66850 5.40529
 
17 
14.29187 13.16612 12.16567 11.27407 10.47726 
9.76322 
9.12164 8.54363 8.02155 7.54879 7.11963 6.04716 5.74870 5.47461
 
18 
14.99203 13.75351 12.65930 11.68959 10.82760 10.05909 
9.37189 8.75563 8.20141 7.70162 7.24967 6.12797 5.81785 5.53385
 
19 
15.67846 14.32380 13.13394 12.08532 11.15812 10.33560 
9.60360 8.95011 8.36492 7.83929 7.36578 6.19823 5.87746 5.58449
 
20 
16.35143 14.87747 13.59033 12.46221 11.46992 10.59401 
9.81815 9.12855 8.51356 7.96333 7.46944 6.25933 5.92884 5.62777
 
25 
19.52346 17.41315 15.62208 14.09394 12.78336 11.65358 10.67478 9.82258 9.07704 8.42174 7.84314 6.46415 6.09709 5.76623
 
30 
22.39646 19.60044 17.29203 15.37245 13.76483 12.40904 11.25778 10.27365 9.42691 8.69379 8.05518 6.56598 6.17720 5.82939
 
35 
24.99862 21.48722 18.66461 16.37419 14.49825 12.94767 11.65457 10.56682 9.64416 8.85524 8.17550 6.61661 6.21534 5.85820
 
40 
27.35548 23.11477 19.79277 17.15909 15.04630 13.33171 11.92461 10.75736 9.77905 8.95105 8.24378 6.64178 6.23350 5.87133

 
Appendix 
1101
TABLE 3
Present  Value of an Annuity Due of $1
PVAD 5 1 1 a1 2
1
(1 1 r)n21byr
 (n)
 Periods 
2% 
3% 
4% 
5% 
6% 
7% 
8% 
9% 
10% 
11% 
12% 
15% 
16% 
17%
 
1 
1.00000 
1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000
 
2 
1.98039 
1.97087 1.96154 1.95238 1.94340 1.93458 1.92593 1.91743 1.90909 1.90090 1.89286 1.86957 1.86207 1.85470
 
3 
2.94156 
2.91347 2.88609 2.85941 2.83339 2.80802 2.78326 2.75911 2.73554 2.71252 2.69005 2.62571 2.60523 2.58521
 
4 
3.88388 
3.82861 3.77509 3.72325 3.67301 3.62432 3.57710 3.53129 3.48685 3.44371 3.40183 3.28323 3.24589 3.20958
 
5 
4.80773 
4.71710 4.62990 4.54595 4.46511 4.38721 4.31213 4.23972 4.16987 4.10245 4.03735 3.85498 3.79818 3.74324
 
6 
5.71346 
5.57971 5.45182 5.32948 5.21236 5.10020 4.99271 4.88965 4.79079 4.69590 4.60478 4.35216 4.27429 4.19935
 
7 
6.60143 
6.41719 6.24214 6.07569 5.91732 5.76654 5.62288 5.48592 5.35526 5.23054 5.11141 4.78448 4.68474 4.58918
 
8 
7.47199 
7.23028 7.00205 6.78637 6.58238 6.38929 6.20637 6.03295 5.86842 5.71220 5.56376 5.16042 5.03857 4.92238
 
9 
8.32548 
8.01969 7.73274 7.46321 7.20979 6.97130 6.74664 6.53482 6.33493 6.14612 5.96764 5.48732 5.34359 5.20716
 
10 
9.16224 
8.78611 8.43533 8.10782 7.80169 7.51523 7.24689 6.99525 6.75902 6.53705 6.32825 5.77158 5.60654 5.45057
 
11 
9.98259 
9.53020 9.11090 8.72173 8.36009 8.02358 7.71008 7.41766 7.14457 6.88923 6.65022 6.01877 5.83323 5.65860
 
12 
10.78685 10.25262 9.76048 9.30641 8.88687 8.49867 8.13896 7.80519 7.49506 7.20652 6.93770 6.23371 6.02864 5.83641
 
13 
11.57534 10.95400 10.38507 9.86325 9.38384 8.94269 8.53608 8.16073 7.81369 7.49236 7.19437 6.42062 6.19711 5.98839
 
14 
12.34837 11.63496 10.98565 10.39357 9.85268 9.35765 8.90378 8.48690 8.10336 7.74987 7.42355 6.58315 6.34233 6.11828
 
15 
13.10625 12.29607 11.56312 10.89864 10.29498 9.74547 9.24424 8.78615 8.36669 7.98187 7.62817 6.72448 6.46753 6.22930
 
16 
13.84926 12.93794 12.11839 11.37966 10.71225 10.10791 9.55948 9.06069 8.60608 8.19087 7.81086 6.84737 6.57546 6.32419
 
17 
14.57771 13.56110 12.65230 11.83777 11.10590 10.44665 9.85137 9.31256 8.82371 8.37916 7.97399 6.95423 6.66850 6.40529
 
18 
15.29187 14.16612 13.16567 12.27407 11.47726 10.76322 10.12164 9.54363 9.02155 8.54879 8.11963 7.04716 6.74870 6.47461
 
19 
15.99203 14.75351 13.65930 12.68959 11.82760 11.05909 10.37189 9.75563 9.20141 8.70162 8.24967 7.12797 6.81785 6.53385
 
20 
16.67846 15.32380 14.13394 13.08532 12.15812 11.33560 10.60360 9.95011 9.36492 8.83929 8.36578 7.19823 6.87746 6.58449
 
25 
19.91393 17.93554 16.24696 14.79864 13.55036 12.46933 11.52876 10.70661 9.98474 9.34814 8.78432 7.43377 7.07263 6.74649
 
30 
22.84438 20.18845 17.98371 16.14107 14.59072 13.27767 12.15841 11.19828 10.36961 9.65011 9.02181 7.55088 7.16555 6.82039
 
35 
25.49859 22.13184 19.41120 17.19290 15.36814 13.85401 12.58693 11.51784 10.60857 9.82932 9.15656 7.60910 7.20979 6.85409
 
40 
27.90259 23.80822 20.58448 18.01704 15.94907 14.26493 12.87858 11.72552 10.75696 9.93567 9.23303 7.63805 7.23086 6.86946

This page intentionally left blank

1103
Index
A
 Abarbanell, J., 332n 
 Abercrombie & Fitch Co., 76, 77 
 Abnormal earnings approach to valuation, 
317–321, 340–347 
 illustration, 318–319 
 intrinsic stock price estimate, 344–347 
 return on common equity (ROCE), 
320–321 
 Aboody, D., 557n, 919n 
 Absorption costing, 476–480 
 Accounting changes, 74–80 
 in accounting estimate, 75, 76–79 
 in accounting principle, 75–76, 328 
 current-year impact of change in 
 accounting principles, 328 
 prospective approach, 74 
 in reporting entity, 75, 80 
 retrospective approach, 74, 75–76 
 as triggers for debt covenant violation, 
376–377 
 uncertain tax positions and, 781–782 
 Accounting errors 
 intentional errors deemed to be 
“immaterial,” 148 
 inventory, 522–523 
 nature of, 152n 
 responsibility for discovering, 152–153 
 Accounting estimate, change in, 75, 76–79 
 Accounting principle, change in, 75–76, 328 
 Accounting quality, 240–242 
 Accounting Regulatory Committee, 32 
 Accounting Research Bulletins (ARBs), 38 
 Accounting Standards Board (ASB), 29 
 Accounting Standards Codification (ASC), 
22, 40, 314 
 Accounting Standards Updates (ASUs), 22 
 Accounts payable, 193 
 changes for statement of cash flows, 1037 
 statement of cash flows, 1045 
 Accounts payable turnover, 268 
 Accounts receivable, 191.  See also 
Uncollectibles 
 aging, 419–421 
 amortized cost, 450–451 
 factoring, 425, 433, 434, 442, 1053–1054 
 fair value accounting, 431–432 
 financial asset securitization, 436–443 
 international accounting issues, 450–451 
 net realizable value, 417–427 
 recognition as sales, 422–427 
 statement of cash flows, 1044 
 Accounts receivable turnover, 266–267 
 Accretion expense, 564 
 Accrual accounting 
 accrued expenses 
 adjusting entries, 93–94 
 changes for statement of cash 
flows, 1038 
 accrued income taxes, changes for 
statement of cash flows, 1038–1039 
 accrued liabilities, 193 
 accrued revenues, adjusting entries, 94 
 adjusting entries, 55–56, 92–94 
 cash-basis accounting versus, 54–57 
 cash flows versus accrual earnings, 
204–209 
 “cookie jar reserves,” 148 
 discretionary accounting accruals, 
377–379 
 international accounting issues, 85–87 
 statement of cash flows, 1047–1050 
 Accumulated benefit obligation (ABO), 850 
 Accumulated other comprehensive income 
(AOCI), 82, 195, 829, 856–857 
 Accumulated postretirement benefit 
obligation (APBO), 865 
 Acito, A. A., 706n 
 Acquired goodwill.  See Goodwill, acquired 
 Acquiror, 966 
 Acquisition method 
 intercorporate equity investment, 977, 
979, 982–985 
 pooling of interests versus, 984–985 
 purchase method versus, 982–984, 
1018 
 majority interest, 967–970 
 noncontrolling (minority) interests, 
970–975 
 Acquisitions.  See Intercorporate equity 
investments 
 Activity ratios, 266–270 
 Actual return, defined benefit plan, 
833–834, 837 
 Actuarial assumptions, 826n 
 Actuarial gains or losses, 826n 
 Actuarial loss (gain), 835–837 
 Actuaries, 826n 
 Additional paid-in capital, 194 
 Adelphia Communications Corporation, 
234–235, 241–242 
 Adjustable-rate preferred stock, 896 
 Adjusting entries 
 for accrued expenses, 93–94 
 accrued revenues, 94 
 changes for statement of cash flows, 
1036–1039 
 defined, 55–56, 92 
 fair value adjustment account, 955–956 
 intra-entity transactions, 970 
 for prepayments, 92–93 
 in T-account analysis, 92 
 for unearned revenues, 93 
 Advanced Micro Devices, Inc., 356 
 Affiliated Computer Services Inc., 
923, 924 
 Affirmative covenants, 374–375 
 Agency cost, 372 
 Agency relationship, 372 
 Aging of accounts receivable, 419–421 
 Ahold, 481 
 AIG (American International Group), 
441, 961 
 Air Products and Chemicals, 1028–1030 
 Aixtron Aktiengesellschaft, 603 
 Akerlof, G., 11 
 Albertson’s LLC, 261n 
 Alcatel-Lucent, 930–931 
 Alcoa Inc., 502 
 Allen, F., 912n 
 Allianz Group, 789, 790, 791 
 Allowance for uncollectibles account 
balance, 419–421 
 Altman, E., 278n, 280n 
 Altman Z-score, 278–280 
 Altria Group Inc., 501, 502 
 Amazon.com, 268, 269, 762, 911, 918, 
1051, 1052 

1104 
Index
 classification criteria/measurement 
 conventions, 188–195 
 common-size, 196–197, 248–253 
 common stock, 194 
 consolidated, 968–969 
 constructive capitalization of leases, 
722, 724–729 
 current and noncurrent assets held for 
sale, 192 
 current and noncurrent liabilities held for 
sale, 193 
 current portion of long-term debt, 193 
 deferred income tax reporting, 191–192, 
789–791 
 equity, 187, 194–195 
 goodwill, 193 
 international accounting issues, 198–200, 
903–904 
 inventories, 191 
 investments, 193 
 liabilities, 187, 193–194, 601–603 
 long-term debt, 193–194 
 noncontrolling interests, 195 
 notes payable, 193 
 off-balance-sheet liabilities, 241–242, 
631–633 
 other assets, 193 
 other liabilities, 194 
 property, plant, and equipment, net, 
192–193 
 reconciliation between statements, 
1047–1052 
 retained earnings, 194–195 
 short-term investments, 190 
 sigma fund, 190 
 trend statements, 248–253 
 Baldwin Piano and Organ Company, 
120–121 
 Ball, R., 332n, 380n 
 Ball Corporation, 944–945 
 Bandler, James, 923, 923n, 924n 
 Bank, D., 144n 
 Banking industry, minimum capital 
requirements, 393–394 
 Bank of America, 398 
 Bank One, 918 
 Bargain purchase option, 691, 691n, 980 
 Barth, M. E., 315n, 390n, 439n, 867n, 919n 
 Base period, 518 
 Base salary, 380, 381 
 Basic earnings per common share, 905–906 
 Basic EPS, 80, 81 
 Bausch & Lomb, Inc., 423–425, 442 
 Bear Stearns, 441 
 Beatty, A., 378n, 394n, 421n 
 Beaver, W. H., 316n, 867n 
 Benchmark comparison, 240, 390–392 
 Bennett, Tommy, 415 
 Berenson, A., 26n, 146n, 148n, 390n 
 Beresford, D. R., 16 
 Assets, 189–193 
 accounts receivable.  See Accounts 
receivable 
 balance sheet presentation, 187 
 held for sale, 192, 564–565 
 intangible.  See Intangible assets 
 long-lived.  See Long-lived assets 
 monetary, 190, 987 
 nonmonetary, 190, 988 
 notes receivable.  See Notes receivable 
 trend analysis, 248–253 
 Asset turnover, 256, 258 
 lease accounting, 689, 703, 729 
 Asset valuation allowances, 759–764 
 no history of profitability, 761–762 
 profitable companies, 762–764 
 Assignment, cautions for financial statement 
 analysis, 442–443 
 AT&T Inc., 2, 704, 843 
 AT&T Wireless Services, 940–941 
 Available-for-sale securities, 190, 955 
 asset impairment, 960–961 
 intercorporate debt investments, 
1005–1007 
 intercorporate equity investments, 
958–959, 995–999 
 minority passive investments, 958–959 
 other-than-temporary impairments, 1007 
 Average market price, 908 
 Average remaining service period, 841 
 Avoidable interest, 550–553 
 computing, 551–553 
 defined, 550 
B
 Backdating, 27, 923–924 
 Bad debt expense, 418 
 estimating, 241 
 as temporary (timing) difference 
between book income and 
taxable income, 747 
 Bad debt provisions, computation of taxable 
income, 796 
 Badertscher, B., 147n 
 Bailey, H. S., Jr., 1031n 
 Balance sheet, 187–202.  See also Owners’ 
equity 
 accounts payable, 193 
 accounts receivable, net, 191 
 accrued liabilities, 193 
 accumulated other comprehensive 
income, 195 
 additional paid-in capital, 194 
 analysis of income statement and balance 
sheet accounts, 212 
 assets, 187, 189–193 
 capital lease versus operating lease 
approach, 699–704 
 cash and cash equivalents, 189–190, 203 
 American Institute of Certified Public 
Accountants (AICPA), 19, 22, 
37–39, 482 
 American International Group (AIG), 
441, 961 
 Amir, E., 867n 
 Amman, M., 919n 
 Amortizable intangible assets 
 asset impairment, 558–560, 579 
 defined, 556 
 Amortization 
 bond discount, 609 
 capital lease, lessee accounting, 693, 
696–698 
 debt carried at amortized historical cost, 
621–625 
 defined, 565 
 fair value accounting, 620–621 
 interest-based, 723 
 Amortized cost, 190, 450–451, 613 
 AMR Corporation, 700, 704, 740–741, 866 
 Analysts, 14–16 
 Analytical review procedures, 15 
 Angwin, J., 573n 
 Annual (short-term) incentives, 380, 381–383, 
389–390 
 Annuity, 605, 825 
 annuity due, 605, 1097–1098, 1101 
 ordinary, 605, 1096–1097, 1100 
 Anticipated transaction 
 cash flow hedge, 643, 644, 646–649 
 nature of, 642 
 Antidilutive securities, 909 
 Anytime Fitness, 138 
 Aon Corporation, 948–949 
 Apple Computer, 20, 57 
 Aral Company, 490–491, 496–499 
 Arcady, A. T., 826n 
 Arden Group, 84 
 Argenti Corporation, 303–305 
 Armstrong, C., 389n 
 Ashcraft, A., 441n 
 Ashenfelter, O., 380n 
 Asset impairment, 558–562 
 amortizable intangible assets, 
558–560, 579 
 available-for-sale equity investments, 
960–961 
 events triggering impairment testing, 
973, 974 
 indefinite-lived intangible assets, 
556, 561 
 international accounting issues, 579–580 
 Krispy Kreme case study, 561, 562 
 management judgments and, 561–562 
 recoverable amount, 579 
 statement of cash flows, 1050–1051 
 tangible assets, 558–560 
 Asset retirement, statement of cash flows, 
1050–1051 

 
Index 
1105
 disclosure, 704, 705–706, 719–723 
 executory costs, 695–696, 700 
 FASB criteria for capital lease, 
690–692 
 financial statement effects, 699–704 
 illustration, 692–695 
 international accounting issues, 
719–722 
 payments in advance, 698–699 
 residual value guarantees, 693, 
696–697 
 lessor accounting, 706–716 
 capital versus operating leases, 
708–709 
 direct financing leases, 706, 708, 
709–715 
 international accounting issues, 
719–722 
 sales-type leases, 706, 707 
 operating lease approach versus, 
1055–1057 
 Capital leases, 240–241 
 Capital structure 
 complex, 906–909 
 debt/equity ratio, 187–188, 623, 
631–633, 689 
 simple, 905–906 
 Card, D., 380n 
 Cardinal Health, 685–686 
 Carpenter, J., 919n 
 Carrefour Group, 48 
 Carroll, T., 506n, 517n 
 Carrybacks, net operating loss, 757–759 
 Carryforwards, net operating loss, 
757–759 
 Carrying value, 59 
 continuation with modification, 446–449 
 Cash, 189–190 
 Cash balance plans, 826–827 
 Cash-basis accounting, accrual accounting 
versus, 54–57 
 Cash conversion cycle, 268–269 
 Cash equivalents, 189–190, 193 
 Cash flow analysis, 272–277 
 cash flow from financing activities, 203, 
204, 276, 1032, 1046–1047 
 cash flow from investing activities, 203, 
204, 275, 1032, 1045–1046 
 cash flow from operating activities, 203, 
204, 208, 214–216, 274–275, 1032, 
1040–1045 
 Cash flow assessment 
 defined, 309 
 discounted cash flow approach, 310–314, 
340–347 
 estimating implications for convertible 
debt, 927–928 
 lease accounting, 693–695, 703 
 Cash flow coverage ratio, 272 
 Cash flow hedge, 643, 644, 646–649 
 cost versus, 963–965 
 exchanges recorded at, 574–575 
 intercorporate equity investment, 977 
 Book value method, for convertible debt 
accounting, 927 
 Borden, Inc., 671–673 
 Borrus, A., 336n, 911n, 918n 
 Bosman, J., 488n 
 Boyd, J., 379n 
 BP, 488 
 Brealey, R. A., 310n, 912n 
 Brio Software, Inc., 175–177 
 British Airways, 721 
 Brookfield Multiplex Group, Ltd., 
159–161 
 Brown, K., 390n, 573n, 703n 
 Brown, N., 557n 
 Brown, P., 332n, 347n 
 Buffett, Warren, 20, 913–914, 914n 
 Bulkeley, W. M., 415n 
 Bundled (multiple-element) sales, 
142–143 
 Burberry PLC, 198, 199 
 Burgstahler, D., 144n, 332n 
 Burks, J. J., 706n 
 Burr, B., 843n 
 Bush, George W., 399 
 Business combination.  See Intercorporate 
equity investments 
 Business fair value, 971 
 Business opportunity valuation, 340–343 
 Business Roundtable, 41 
 Business valuation, 310–321 
 abnormal earnings approach, 317–321, 
340–347 
 defined, 309 
 discounted free cash flow approach, 
310–314 
 earnings in, 314–316 
C
 Callable bonds, 925 
 Callen, J., 315n 
 Call options, 906 
 Call provisions, 334 
 Canedy, Dana, 427n 
 “Capacity swaps,” revenue recognition 
abuses, 151 
 Capital adequacy ratio, 393–394 
 Capital asset pricing model (CAPM), 311n 
 Capitalization, expensing versus, 1054 
 Capitalized costs, 549–555 
 asset capitalization criteria, 553–555 
 equity costs, 395 
 interest, 551–553 
 Capital lease approach, 690 
 lessee accounting, 699–704 
 comparison with operating lease 
approach, 691 
 Berkshire Hathaway, 502, 913–914 
 Berman, D. K., 573n 
 Bernard, V., 320n, 332n 
 Bernstein, L., 329n 
 Best Buy, 294 
 Bettis, C., 919n 
 Beyer, A., 13n, 323n 
 Bierman, H., Jr., 478n 
 “Big Bath” restructuring charges, 147–148 
 Big Daddy’s BBQ, Inc., 185–186 
 Big Lots Inc., 78 
 Bilardello, J., 335n 
 Bill and hold sale, 426 
 Billett, M. T., 379, 379n 
 Bizjak, J., 919n 
 Black, F., 912n 
 Black-Scholes model, 913, 919n, 920–921 
 Blockbuster Inc., 297–298, 362, 630 
 Bloom Corporation, 443–444 
 Bloomingdale’s, 261 
 Blouin, J., 774n 
 Blumenstein, R., 554n 
 BNSF Railway, 704 
 Boeing, 57, 86, 264, 284, 718–719, 918 
 Boise, Inc., 294–295 
 Bond indenture agreement, 604 
 Bonds payable, 604–625 
 amortization of bond discount, 1043 
 bonds, defined, 604 
 book value versus market value after 
issuance, 613–616 
 cash flow characteristics, 604–605 
 century/millennium bonds, 679–681 
 convertible.  See Convertible debt 
 defined, 334 
 extinguishment of debt, 615–616 
 fair value accounting, 616–620 
 floating-rate debt, 613–615 
 future cash flow effects of debt, 627–630 
 graphic presentations, 611–612 
 international accounting issues, 
620–621 
 issued at discount, 605, 606–609, 611 
 issued at par, 605–606, 611 
 issued at premium, 605, 609–611 
 managerial incentives and financial 
reporting, 621–625 
 public debt, 334 
 Boockholdt, J. L., 523n 
 Book income, 191–192, 745–751 
 defined, 745 
 permanent differences between taxable 
income and, 745–746, 748 
 temporary (timing) differences between 
taxable income and, 745–751 
 Book/tax conformity, 31 
 Book value, 59, 573–575 
 bond market value versus, 613–616 
 extinguishment of debt, 615–616 
 floating-rate debt, 613–615 

1106 
Index
 Consolidated financial statements, 31, 
966–970 
 balance sheet, 968–969 
 business combinations, 999–1000 
 controlling (majority) interest, 954, 
966–975, 986 
 historical approaches 
 acquisition method, 977, 979, 982–985 
 pooling-of-interests method, 975–976, 
981, 984–985 
 purchase method, 976–980, 
982–984, 1018 
 nonfreestanding foreign subsidiaries, 
989–992, 993 
 Consolidation, 631, 966–967 
 Constant, Mark L., 264–265 
 Constant perpetuity, 313, 313n 
 Constructive capitalization, 722, 724–729 
 Contingent consideration 
 common components of revenue 
contracts, 164 
 intercorporate equity investments, 980 
 Contingent liabilities, 652–656 
 gain contingencies, 654 
 international accounting issues, 655–656 
 loan guarantees, 654–655 
 loss contingencies, 652–654 
 Continuation with modification 
 sum of restructured flows exceeds 
carrying value of payable, 
446–448, 450 
 sum of restructured flows is less than 
payable’s carrying value, 
448–449, 450 
 troubled debt restructuring, 444, 445–449 
 Continuing involvement, 718 
 Contra accounts, 93 
 Contract efficiency, 7 
 Contracting, 371–416.  See also Employee 
stock options; Franchising; Lease 
accounting; Pensions and other 
postretirement benefits (OPEB) 
 backdating, 27, 923–924 
 conflicts of interest, 241–242, 372, 373 
 contract, defined, 371 
 debt covenants in lending agreements, 
334, 372–379 
 fair value accounting, 21, 321–323, 
397–400 
 incentives for off-balance-sheet financing, 
241–242, 631–633 
 incentives to “manage” earnings, 
400–401 
 long-term construction accounting, 
158–161, 747 
 lower of cost or market method, 509–510 
 management compensation, 379–392 
 owners’ equity compliance with contract 
terms and restrictions, 889, 896–900 
 regulatory agencies, 392–397 
 Collins, D. W., 506n, 517n, 867n 
 Collins, J., 421n 
 Combination.  See Intercorporate equity 
investments 
 Comcast, 704 
 Comiskey, E., 523n 
 Commercial and tax law approach, 29 
 Commercial paper, 628 
 credit risk assessment, 333–334 
 Commercial substance criterion, 574 
 Commodities 
 completed-transaction (sales) 
method, 131 
 market price (production) method, 
132–133 
 revenue recognition prior to sale, 
130–133 
 Commodity price risk, 635 
 Common-size statements, 239, 246–254 
 balance sheet, 196–197, 248–253 
 cash flows, 253–254 
 income statement, 246–248 
 Common stock, 194, 890.  See also Owners’ 
equity 
 voting rights, 953 
 Comparability principle, 18 
 Comparative balance sheet, 97 
 Compensation.  See Employee stock options; 
Management compensation 
 Compensation discussion and analysis 
(CD&A), 385–386 
 Competitive advantage, 258–261 
 Competitive disadvantage, 12 
 Completed-contract method, 129–130 
 comparative account balances, 130 
 Completed-transaction (sales) method, 
131, 133 
 Completed transactions, 82 
 Completeness principle, 18 
 Completion of production, 63 
 Complex capital structure, 906–909 
 Component of an entity, 68 
 Compound interest, 1093–1094 
 Comprehensive income, 81–82, 83 
 Comprehensive risk assessment, 335 
 Compustat, 835, 835n 
 Computer Associates International Inc. 
(CA), 24–27, 381–383, 415, 918 
 Computer Sciences Corporation, 79 
 Conceptual framework, 17 
 Concession, 444 
 Confirmatory value principle, 17 
 Conflicts of interest, 241–242, 372 
 debt covenant, 373 
 ConocoPhillips, 502 
 Conseil National de la Comptabilité 
(France), 29 
 Conservatism principle, 19, 549, 654 
 Consignment sales, 149, 475 
 Consistency principle, 74 
 Cash flows 
 accrual earnings versus, 204–209 
 bond, 604–605 
 deferred income taxes and, 776–778 
 deriving cash flow information, 
209–214 
 timing differences between inflows and 
outflows, 277 
 Cash received, exchanges of nonmonetary 
assets, 575 
 Cash surrender value of insurance, changes 
for statement of cash flows, 1037 
 Caterpillar Inc., 502 
 Cause-of-change analysis, 239, 243–246 
 CDOs (collateralized debt obligations), 
397–400, 960–961 
 Ceiling, 507 
 Century bonds, 679–681 
 Cephalon Inc., 949–950 
 Cerberus Capital Management, 261n 
 Chalk Hill, 647–648 
 Chamberlain, S., 394n, 421n 
 Change.  See Accounting changes 
 Chase National Bank, 36 
 Checkpoint Systems, 669–670 
 Chevron Corp., 502 
 Chicago Corporation, 96 
 Chief executive officer (CEO) 
 as chief operating decision maker 
(CODM), 282 
 compensation mix, 381 
 Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX) of 2002, 1, 5, 
20, 42, 153 
 Chief financial officer (CFO) 
 as chief operating decision maker 
(CODM), 282 
 Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX) of 2002, 1, 5, 
20, 42, 153 
 Chief operating decision maker 
(CODM), 282 
 Choi, B., 867n 
 Choi, F., 29n 
 Chrysler Corporation, 13n 
 Circuit City, 846 
 Cisco Systems, 390n, 916, 922 
 Citigroup, 398, 466–468, 665–666, 835 
 City Holding Company, 1024–1028 
 Closed transactions, 82 
 Closing journal entries, 96–97 
 Coach Inc., 332 
 Coca-Cola Company, 28, 918 
 Cohen, D. J., 13n, 281n, 323n, 482n, 569n 
 Collateral, 9 
 Collateralized debt obligations (CDOs), 
397–400, 960–961 
 Collateralized loans, 433, 435 
 sale of receivable (factoring) versus, 
436–442 
 Collectibility of receivables, 423 
 Collins, C., 147n 

 
Index 
1107
 purposes, 373–374 
 violations 
 manager responses, 377–379 
 mandated accounting changes, 
376–377 
 Debt/equity ratio, 187–188, 623, 
631–633, 689 
 Debt-for-debt swaps, 621–625 
 Debt-for-equity swaps, 621–625 
 Debt issue costs, 620 
 Debt ratios, 270–272 
 Debt securities.  See also Bonds payable; 
Notes payable 
 intercorporate debt investments, 
1004–1007 
 Dechow, P. M., 144n, 145n, 146n, 
315n, 389n 
 Dechow, W. Ge, 329n 
 Deckers, 302–303 
 Deere & Company, 196, 502, 770–774, 
775, 782 
 Default risk, 277–280, 437 
 credit ratings, 277–278, 336–339 
 Deferred gain, sale and leaseback, 717 
 Deferred income tax accounting 
 asset valuation allowances, 759–764 
 no history of profitability, 761–762 
 at profitable companies, 762–764 
 balance sheet reporting, 191–192, 
789–791 
 changes for statement of cash flows, 1036 
 company versus individual deferred 
items, 776, 777 
 current versus deferred portion of current 
period tax provision, 770 
 deferred tax assets, 755–757, 764–769, 
775–776, 788–789, 797–799 
 deferred taxes and cash flow, 776–778 
 deferred tax liabilities, 755, 764–769, 
775–776, 797–799 
 defined, 746 
 impact of pensions, 856–857 
 international tax issues, 788–789 
 interperiod tax allocation, 751–755, 
793–801 
 statement of cash flows, 1043 
 tax notes 
 to assess earnings quality, 783–786 
 to improve interfirm comparability, 
786–788 
 interperiod tax allocation, 800–801 
 Deferred income tax assets, 755–757 
 approach to recognizing, 788–789 
 calculation of change, 797–799 
 classification, 764 
 deferred tax asset valuation allowances, 
759–764 
 international tax issues, 788–789 
 liability approach, 764–769 
 sources of, 775–776 
 Critical event, 60, 123 
 Crocs, 302–303 
 Cross default, 375 
 Cross-sectional analysis, 240 
 Crown Crafts, Inc., 464 
 CSK Auto Corporation, 481 
 CSX Corp., 704 
 Cubic Corporation, 786–788 
 Cummins, C., 573n 
 Cumulative effect, 76 
 Cumulative interest expense, 608 
 Cumulative preferred stock, 896–897 
 Currency (foreign exchange) swaps, 638 
 Current assets, held for sale, 192 
 Current asset turnover, 258 
 Current cost, 547 
 Current cost accounting, 485, 486 
 Current earnings, 325–326 
 Current liabilities, 602–603 
 held for sale, 193 
 Current market price, 190 
 Current portion of long-term debt, 193 
 Current rate, 988 
 Current rate method for self-contained 
foreign subsidiaries, 989, 992–994 
 Current ratio, 266 
 capital lease versus operating lease 
approach, 702–703 
 Current replacement costs, 188 
 Curtailment, 864–865 
 Cushing, B. E., 505n 
 Customers, demand for financial 
statements, 9 
D
 Daimler AG, 541 
 Danaher Corporation, 295 
 Danier, 512 
 Dash, E., 665n 
 Davies, P., 415n 
 Davis-Friday, P. Y., 858n, 867n 
 Days accounts receivable outstanding, 267 
 Days inventory held, 267–268 
 Days payable outstanding, 268 
 Dealer’s profit, sales-type leases, 707 
 DeAngelo, H., 378n 
 DeAngelo, L., 378n 
 Debentures 
 convertible, 908 
 defined, 334, 443, 604 
 Debits (DR), 54 
 in T-account analysis, 90–92 
 Debt covenants, 372–379 
 affirmative covenants, 374–375 
 default 
 events of default, 375–376 
 types of default, 377 
 negative covenants, 375 
 protective covenants, 334 
 revenue recognition 
 completed-contract method, 129–130 
 percentage-of-completion method, 
124–129 
 Contra-equity accounts, 891 
 Contra-revenue accounts, 421–422 
 Controlling financial interest, 954, 966–975, 
986.  See also Majority interest 
 Conversion price, 925 
 Convertible debt, 924–931 
 analytical insights, 927–928 
 background, 925 
 bonds, 604 
 debentures, 908 
 estimating future cash flow implications, 
927–928 
 financial reporting issues, 926–927 
 “if-converted” method for computing EPS 
dilution, 908, 909–910 
 international accounting issues, 930–931 
 recorded interest expense, 928 
 settlement in cash, 928–930 
 Convertible preferred stock, 902–903, 906 
 “Cookie jar reserves,” 148 
 Cooper, Cynthia, 3–4 
 Core, J., 910n 
 Corridor, 841–842 
 Costco Wholesale, 475, 704 
 Cost of goods sold 
 adjusting from FIFO to LIFO, 515–517 
 adjusting from LIFO to FIFO, 489–491, 
497–499 
 Cost-plus contracts, 158 
 Cost principle, 19 
 Cost recovery method, 136–138 
 Cost-volume-profit analysis, 478 
 Council of the European Union, 31 
 Counterparty, 637 
 Covenant-lite loans, 379 
 Covenants, 9, 15, 689, 896–900.  See also 
Lease accounting 
 CR.  See Credits (CR) 
 Cram, C., 315n 
 Craver, R., 405n 
 Credit-adjusted risk-free rate, 563 
 Credit analysis, 277–280, 334–336 
 Credit markets, financial crisis, 397–400 
 Creditors, 14–15 
 Credit ratings, 277–278, 336–339 
 Credit risk, 14–15, 265–266 
 defined, 309 
 determining, 333 
 Credit risk assessment, 333–339 
 credit analysis, 334–336 
 credit-rating agencies, 277–278, 
336–339 
 traditional lending products, 333–334 
 Credit scores, 335–336 
 Credits (CR), 54 
 in T-account analysis, 90–92 

1108 
Index
 Discount rate, defined benefit plan, 830, 
836, 868 
 Discretionary accounting accruals, 377–379 
 Disposal group, 68, 69–70 
 assets considered “held for sale,” 69, 70, 
564–565 
 assets have been sold, 68, 69 
 disposition of long-lived assets, 569 
 Dividends, 889, 900–901 
 legality of, 900–901 
 preferred stock, 897 
 statement of cash flows, 1046–1047, 
1060–1062 
 Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and 
Consumer Protection Act, 382 
 Dollar-value LIFO, 491, 517–522 
 Donnelly, B., 329n 
 Dopuch, N., 505n 
 Double-declining balance (DDB) 
depreciation, 566–567, 568, 569 
 Dow Chemical, 502 
 DR.  See Debits (DR) 
 Dreier, David, 917 
 Dresser Industries, 679–681 
 Drorak, P., 385n 
 Due diligence, 335 
 Dugan, M. T., 901n 
 Duke Energy Corporation, 395, 408, 
414–415 
 Dun and Bradstreet, 280, 335 
 Dunbar, Amy, 778n 
 Dunlap, Albert J., 425–426, 427 
 DuPont (E.I. du Pont de Nemours and 
Company), 491, 492, 502 
 Dwyer, P., 918n 
E
 Earnings 
 announcements, 330–332 
 current, 325–326 
 growth opportunities, 326–327 
 permanent earnings component, 327–328 
 risk differences, 326 
 role in valuation, 314–316 
 sources of variation, 325–330 
 transitory earnings component, 327–328 
 value-irrelevant earnings component, 
327–328 
 Earnings before interest and taxes 
(EBIT), 258 
 Earnings before interest (EBI), 255–258 
 Earnings management, 144–151 
 distribution of annual net income, 
144–145 
 incentives, 400–401 
 popular devices, 147–149 
 prevalence, 144–147 
 revenue recognition abuses, 149–151 
 stock buybacks, 895 
 financial analysis and depreciation 
differences, 569–572 
 Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery 
System (MACRS), 396, 569, 747, 748 
 statement of cash flows, 1036, 
1041–1042 
 straight-line (SL) depreciation, 
566, 568, 569 
 sum-of-the-years’ digits (SYD) 
depreciation, 567–568 
 temporary differences, 747, 748–751 
 units-of-production (UP) depreciation, 
566, 568 
 Depreciation process, 565 
 Derivative securities, 633, 634–641 
 financial reporting for, 640–641 
 forward contracts, 634 
 futures contracts, 634–636, 639 
 options contracts, 638–639 
 swap contracts, 637–638 
 Dharan, B., 912n 
 DHB Industries, 475 
 Dichev, I., 144n 
 Dichev, L. D., 378n 
 Diluted EPS, 80, 81, 906–910 
 “if-converted” method for computing, 
908, 909–910 
 treasury stock method, 908, 910 
 DiPiazza, Samuel, Jr., 14 
 Direct combination costs, intercorporate 
equity investments, 980 
 Direct financing leases, 706 
 compared with operating leases, 
713–715 
 front loading of income, 714–715 
 guaranteed versus unguaranteed residual 
values, 713 
 illustration, 709–713 
 Direct method, statement of cash flows, 
204n, 208, 214–216, 1032–1035 
 Direct write-off method for 
uncollectibles, 418 
 Discontinued operations, 68–71, 328 
 alternative disclosure, 69 
 assets considered “held for sale,” 69, 70, 
564–565 
 assets have been sold, 68, 69 
 proposed reporting changes, 70–71 
 Discount, bonds issued at, 605, 
606–609, 611 
 Discount amortization, 609 
 Discounted free cash flow approach to 
valuation, 310–314, 340–347 
 Discounted present value, 188, 193–194, 
310, 546–547 
 liabilities, 601–603 
 long-lived assets, 546–547 
 Discounting, 1093 
 collateralized loans, 433, 435 
 defined, 435 
 Deferred income tax liabilities, 755 
 calculation of change, 797–799 
 classification, 764 
 liability approach, 764–769 
 sources of, 775–776 
 Deferring costs, 395 
 Defined benefit plans, 825, 826–861 
 accounting issues, 828–861 
 assets by plan type, 828 
 cash balance plans, 826–827 
 determinants of pension funding, 835–837, 
845–847, 851–852, 857–858 
 financial reporting, 830–847 
 accumulated other comprehensive 
income disclosure, 856–857 
 deferred income taxes, 856–857 
 expected return on plan assets, 
833–834 
 extraction of additional analytic 
insights from note disclosures, 
858–861 
 General Electric case study, 847–861 
 interest cost, 833 
 journal entries for change in funded 
status, 844–845 
 journal entries for components of 
pension cost, 853–856 
 measurement and disclosure 
requirements, 829 
 recognized gains and losses, 837–843 
 recognized prior service cost, 843–844 
 service cost, 831–833 
 401(k) plans, 826 
 money purchase plans, 826 
 nature of, 826–827 
 plan relationships, 827 
 profit-sharing plans, 826 
 vesting, 828–829 
 Defined contribution plans, 828 
 assets by plan type, 828 
 nature of, 825–826 
 relationships, 827 
 DeFond, M. L., 377n, 388n 
 Degeorge, F., 144n 
 Delayed delivery, revenue recognition 
abuses, 149 
 Dell Inc., 268 
 Delphi Corporation, 846 
 Delta Airlines Inc., 704, 866 
 Denny’s Inc., 138 
 Dentsply International, 627–629, 646 
 Depletion, defined, 565 
 Depreciation expense, 93, 565–572 
 capital lease, lessee accounting, 694–695, 
722–723 
 computation of taxable income, 795–796 
 depreciation, defined, 565 
 disposition of long-lived assets, 569 
 double-declining balance (DDB) 
depreciation, 566–567, 568, 569 

 
Index 
1109
 Events of default, 375–376 
 Exchanges of nonmonetary assets, 572–575 
 book value, 573–575 
 cash received, 575 
 commercial substance criterion, 574 
 to facilitate sales to customers, 575 
 fair value not determinable, 574 
 Executive compensation.  See Management 
compensation 
 Executory contracts, 688 
 Executory costs, 695–696, 700 
 Exercise price, 911, 912 
 Exit price, 321 
 Expected benefit approach, carrying amount 
of long-lived assets, 546, 547 
 Expected future benefit pattern, 315 
 Expected life of options, 919 
 Expected long-term rate of return, 830 
 Expected return, defined benefit plan, 
833–834, 857–858 
 Expense matching, 59, 64–65 
 Expense recognition, 59, 64–65 
 Expenses 
 adjusting entries, 93–94 
 defined, 53 
 matching principle, 58–59, 64–65 
 revenues versus, 53 
 External auditors, 152 
 Extinguishment of debt, 615–616 
 Extraordinary items, 71–72 
 Exxon Corporation, 672–673 
 Exxon Mobil Corporation, 84–85, 502, 542, 
545–546 
F
 Face value, 890 
 bond, 604 
 Factor, 434 
 Factoring, 425, 442, 1053–1054 
 cautions for financial statement analysis, 
442–443 
 with recourse, 433, 434 
 without recourse (nonrecourse), 433 
 Fairfield, P. M., 67n, 72n, 329n 
 Fair value accounting, 21, 82, 188, 193, 314, 
321, 558 
 accounts receivable, 431–432 
 bonds payable, 616–620 
 cash received, 575 
 commercial substance criterion, 575 
 employee stock options, 915–916, 919 
 exchanges of nonmonetary assets, 574 
 exchange transaction to facilitate sales to 
customers, 575 
 fair value adjustment account, 955–956 
 fair value not determinable, 574 
 and financial crisis, 397–400 
 fundamental valuation, 321–323 
 guidelines, 617 
 Emerging companies, 275 
 Employee Retirement Income Security Act 
(ERISA) of 1974, 845–846 
 Employee stock options, 381, 383–384, 
906–908, 911–924 
 Black-Scholes model, 913, 919n, 
920–921 
 cash flow effect of expensing, 1057–1059 
 current GAAP requirements, 919–922 
 demand for financial statements, 8–9 
 exercise price, 911, 912 
 historical perspective, 912–913 
 initial compromise with  SFAS No. 123 , 
915–916 
 joint IASB/FASB memorandum of 
understanding (Norwalk 
Agreement), 916–919 
 opposition to FASB proposal, 913–915 
 options backdating scandal, 923–924 
 Employee stock ownership plans 
(ESOP), 827n 
 Enacted tax rate, 788 
 Energy Policy and Conservation Act of 
1975, 21 
 England, J. D., 389n 
 Enron Corporation, 31, 362, 632–633, 718, 
827n, 917, 985 
 Enterprise-wide disclosures, 284 
 Entry price, 321 
 Enzi, Michael, 917n 
 Equity, 187, 194–195.  See also 
Intercorporate equity investments; 
Owners’ equity 
 disclosure of income tax amounts 
recognized directly, 791 
 liability versus, 603–604 
 trend analysis, 248–253 
 valuation, 323–332 
 Equity cost of capital, 311 
 Equity in undistributed earnings of 
investees, as temporary (timing) 
difference between book income and 
taxable income, 747 
 Equity investors, 14 
 Equity method of accounting 
 intercorporate equity investments, 
995–999 
 minority active investments, 954, 
961–966 
 off-balance-sheet liabilities, 631–633 
 Erickson, M., 747n, 774n 
 ESCO Technologies Inc., 1090 
 Eshoo, Anna, 917 
 Established growth companies, 275 
 Estimates, intentional bias, 148 
 E-Trade Group, 196 
 European Commission, 32, 919 
 European Union (EU), Council of the 
European Union, 31 
 Evans, D., 441n 
 Earnings multiple, 316 
 Earnings per share (EPS), 80–81, 324, 
904–911 
 analytical insights, 909–910 
 basic, 80, 81 
 benchmarks, 390–392 
 catering to Wall Street, 390–392 
 complex capital structure, 906–909 
 diluted, 80, 81, 906–910 
 hedge accounting and, 650 
 international accounting issues, 911 
 management compensation tied to, 
387–388, 390–392 
 as meaningful number, 910–911 
 presentation, 81 
 simple capital structure, 905–906 
 Earnings quality, 328, 329–330, 783–786 
 Earnings restatements, 152–157 
 announcements, 155 
 reasons for, 153–154 
 responsibility for, 153–154 
 Earnings surprises, 330–332 
 Eastman Chemical, 650 
 Easton, P., 339n 
 eBay Inc., 330, 331 
 Economic performance approach, 29 
 Economic sacrifice approach, carrying 
amount of long-lived assets, 546, 
547–549 
 Economics of financial information, 6–14 
 demand for financial statements, 7–10 
 supply of financial information, 10–13 
 disclosure benefits, 11–12 
 disclosure costs, 12–13 
 Economic value added, 53n, 386, 413–414 
 Edwards, A., 774n 
 Efendi, J., 147n 
 Effective interest basis, 608–609 
 Effective interest method, 694 
 Effective tax rate, 750 
 reconciliation with statutory tax rates, 789 
 statutory tax rate versus, 770–774, 789 
 Effective yield, 193–194 
 bond, 605–606 
 Efficient markets hypothesis, 8 
 Eichenwald, K., 554n 
 Eisinger, J., 917n 
 Elayan, F., 919n 
 Election dates, 965–966 
 Electric utilities industry, rate regulation, 
394–397 
 Electronic Arts, 296 
 Electronic Data Systems Corporation 
(EDS), 376–377 
 Eli Lilly, 474 
 Elkamhi, R., 379n 
 Elliott, J. A., 148n, 389n, 390n 
 EMC Corporation, 214–216 
 Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 
2008 (EESA), 399 

1110 
Index
 cautions for factoring, assignment, and 
securitization, 442–443 
 common-size statements, 196–197, 239, 
246–254 
 cross-sectional analysis, 240 
 financial ratios, 239, 255–280 
 international accounting issues, 264–265 
 pro forma projections, 347–353, 916, 982 
 regulatory accounting principles (RAP), 
392–397 
 segment reporting, 281–288 
 time-series analysis, 68, 239–240, 982 
 trend statements, 239, 246–254 
 Whole Foods Market, 242–261 
 Financial statement forecasts (projections), 
347–353 
 illustration, 348–353 
 nature of, 347–348 
 pro forma, 347–353, 916, 982 
 Financing activities, 203, 204, 276, 1032 
 in preparing statement of cash flows, 
1046–1047 
 simultaneous noncash investing activities 
and, 1051, 1052 
 Financing profit, sales-type leases, 707 
 Finger, C., 315n 
 Finished goods inventory, 267, 469, 477 
 Finn, M. W., 390n 
 Firm commitment 
 fair value hedge, 642, 643–646 
 nature of, 642 
 First-in first-out (FIFO) inventory 
accounting, 241, 329, 396, 470–471, 
482–483 
 eliminating realized holding gains, 
502–503, 515–517 
 inventory holding gains, 132, 484–488 
 First Solar, Inc., 1083, 1085–1086 
 Fitch Inc., 336 
 Fitch Ratings, 438n, 439n, 441 
 Fixed assets.  See Long-lived assets 
 Fixed-charge coverage, 374–375 
 Fixed costs, 476 
 Fixed GAAP, 376–377 
 Fixed-price contracts, 158 
 Floating-rate debt, 613–615 
 Floor, 507 
 Foehr, Matthew J., 544n 
 Folami, L. B., 867n 
 Foley, F., 774n 
 Food Lion, Inc., 407–408 
 Foot Locker, Inc., 404 
 Ford Motor Company, 28–29, 332, 502, 
762–763, 866 
 Forecasting, 310 
 financial statement forecasts, 347–353, 
916, 982 
 hedge accounting for forecasted 
transaction, 643, 644, 649 
 pension and other postretirement benefit 
(OPEB) accounting, 829, 858, 
859, 867 
 receivables accounting, 451 
 Financial advisors, 15 
 Financial assets 
 intercorporate equity investments, 
995–999, 1000–1002 
 securitization, 436–442 
 financial crisis of 2008, 441–442 
 guarantor, 437 
 securitization entity (SE), 437–440 
 structure, 438 
 transferor, 436 
 Financial crisis of 2007-2008, 397–400 
 controversy, 398–400 
 convertible debt, 925 
 impairment of financial assets, 1001 
 meltdown, 397–398 
 securitization and, 441–442 
 Financial difficulties, indicators, 444 
 Financial Executives International, 41 
 Financial flexibility, 15, 335 
 Financial performance, linking management 
compensation to, 380, 386–390 
 Financial ratios, 239, 255–280 
 cash flow/credit analysis, 272–277 
 debt ratings, 338–339 
 default risk, 277–280 
 leverage analysis, 262–263 
 liquidity analysis, 266–270 
 profitability analysis, 255–261 
 solvency analysis, 266, 270–272 
 Financial reporting 
 accounting changes, 74–80 
 adversarial nature of, 23–27 
 aggressive approach, 24–27 
 economics of financial information, 6–14 
 demand, 7–10 
 supply, 10–13 
 importance of, 2–3 
 international accounting issues, 27–34 
 lessee accounting 
 capital lease versus operating lease, 
699–704 
 tax accounting versus, 718 
 lessor accounting 
 direct financing versus operating 
leases, 713–715 
 tax accounting versus, 718 
 pensions and other postretirement benefits 
(OPEB).  See Pensions and other 
postretirement benefits (OPEB) 
 rules of, 16–22 
 tax reporting versus, 553 
 Financial statement analysis, 239–308 
 accounting quality, 240–242 
 benchmark comparison, 240 
 cause-of-change analysis, 239, 243–246 
Fair value accounting—Cont.
 intercorporate equity investments 
 controlling (majority) interest, 973 
 minority active investments, 965–966 
 minority passive investments, 954–961 
 muting earnings volatility, 617–619 
 notes receivable, 431–432 
 opposing views, 619–620 
 Fair Value Coalition, 399 
 Fair value hedge, 642, 643–646 
 Fair value hedge accounting rules, 645 
 Fair value of plan assets (FVPA), 860 
 Faithful representation principle, 
18, 548, 558 
 Falkenstein, A., 503n 
 Fama, E. F., 310n 
 Fannie Mae (Federal National Mortgage 
Association), 398, 437, 441 
 Fastow, Andrew, 985 
 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation 
(FDIC), 398 
 Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation 
(Freddie Mac), 148, 398, 437 
 Federal National Mortgage Association 
(Fannie Mae), 398, 437, 441 
 Federal Trade Commission (FTC), 21 
 FedEx Corp., 50–51 
 Feinstein, Dianne, 915 
 Feltham, G., 320n 
 Fiat S.A., 28–29 
 Fields, T., 388n 
 Finance leases, 719–722.  See also Capital 
lease approach 
 Financial Accounting Standards Board 
(FASB), 7, 19–22, 24, 33, 40–41, 
56–57 
 acquisition method, 970–975 
 convertible debt, 928–930 
 criteria for capital lease treatment, 
690–692 
 earnings in valuation process, 315–316 
 employee stock options, 913–915, 918n 
 fair value rules, 399, 400 
 general purpose financial reporting, 890n 
 intercorporate equity investments, 
1000–1002 
 joint IASB/FASB memorandum of 
understanding (Norwalk 
Agreement), 916–919 
 joint IASB/FASB project on fair value 
measurement and disclosure, 323 
 joint IASB/FASB project on revenue 
recognition, 162–164 
 lease accounting, 690–692, 703–704, 720, 
722–723 
 mandatorily redeemable preferred stock, 
897–898 
 other postretirement benefits 
(OPEB), 862 

 
Index 
1111
 Gleason, C., 154n 
 Global Crossing, 31 
 Godfrey, Arthur, 745 
 Goedhart, M., 312n, 317n 
 Going concern, 444 
 Goldman Sachs, 398 
 Goldsmith-Pinkham, P., 441n 
 Goldwyn, Sam, 371 
 Goods available for sale, historical versus 
current costing, 486 
 Goodwill, 193, 313–314, 556 
 acquired 
 acquisition method, 973–975 
 majority interest, 973–975, 976 
 minority passive investments, 964–965 
 as temporary (timing) difference 
between book income and taxable 
income, 747 
 implied, 973–975 
 Google Inc., 817–818, 922 
 Grace period, 375–376 
 Graham, J. R., 146n, 391n, 392n, 774n 
 Granite Construction, 596 
 Grant date, employee stock option, 
919–920 
 Grantham, R., 859n 
 Grayson, Alan, 400 
 Great Depression, 36 
 Green, R., 1031n 
 Greenberg, R., 315n 
 Greenspan, Alan, 916 
 Gross accounts receivable approach to 
uncollectibles, 419 
 Groupe Casino, 682–683, 945 
 Group statements, 31 
 Grove, Andy, 918n 
 Growth opportunities, 326–327 
 Grullon, G., 893n 
 Guarantor, 437 
 Guay, W., 910n 
H
 Hall, W. K., 261n 
 Hamm, S., 24n 
 Hampton Hotels, 138 
 Han, J., 396n 
 Hand, J. R. M., 389n, 625n 
 Hanlon, M., 774n 
 Hanna, D., 148n, 389n 
 Hansen Natural Corporation, 652–653 
 Harley-Davidson, Inc., 13n, 284–288 
 Harris Teeter Supermarkets (HTSI), 
260, 261 
 Hartzell, J., 774n 
 Harvey, C. R., 146n, 391n, 392n 
 Hay Group, Inc., 381n 
 HealthSouth, 31 
 Healy, P. M., 262n, 347n, 378n, 388n 
 Future deductible amounts, 755 
 Futures contracts, 634–636 
 options contracts versus, 639 
 Future taxable amounts, 755 
 Future value, 1093–1094 
G
 Gain contingencies, 654 
 Gain on sale of property or equipment, 
statement of cash flows, 1036–1037, 
1042–1043, 1045 
 Ganguin, B., 335n 
 Gaver, J. J., 390n 
 Gaver, K. M., 390n 
 Ge, W., 329n 
 General Accounting Office (GAO), 42 
 General Electric Company, 541–542, 918 
 defined benefit plans, 839–840, 847–861 
 other postretirement benefits (OPEB), 
861–867 
 Generally accepted accounting principles 
(GAAP), 16–19, 35–42 
 contingent liabilities, 655–656 
 convertible debt, 926–927, 931 
 corporate dividend distributions, 900–901 
 current institutional structure, 40–42 
 deferred tax assets and liabilities, 
764–669 
 defined benefit plan reporting, 835 
 derivative instruments, 640–641 
 early developments, 36–37 
 earnings in valuation process, 315 
 emergence, 37–39 
 employee stock options, 912, 
919–922, 924 
 hedge accounting, 641–649, 651 
 hierarchy, 22 
 intercorporate equity investments, 
954–955 
 inventory accounting, 511–512 
 lease accounting, 702–704, 705, 
719–722 
 long-lived asset accounting, 547–549, 
576–580 
 long-term debt, 620–621 
 mandatorily redeemable preferred 
stock, 898n 
 owners’ equity, 890 
 pensions and other postretirement benefits 
(OPEB), 868 
 receivables accounting, 449–451 
 revenue recognition, 60–64 
 understatement of internally developed 
intangible assets, 557 
 General Motors, 180–181, 768–769 
 General Motors Bonus Plan, 381 
 Generosity factor, 826 
 Gleason, Annie, 683 
 Foreign currency exposure hedge, 
643, 644, 649 
 Foreign currency transactions 
 intercorporate equity investments, 
987–988 
 translation adjustments, 1049–1050, 1051 
 Foreign exchange (currency) swaps, 638 
 Foreign subsidiaries, 989–994 
 nonfreestanding, 989–992, 993 
 self-contained, 989, 992–994 
 Forelle, Charles, 923, 923n, 924n 
 Form 20-F, 34 
 Forward contracts, 634 
 Foster, G., 13n, 21n, 332n 
 401(k) plans, 826 
 Foust, D., 918n 
 Fowler, Karl, 666 
 Franchising 
 continuing (periodic) fees, 138, 141 
 defined, 138 
 discounted cash flow in valuing, 
340–343 
 finalizing loans, 372–374 
 financing decision, 343 
 initial franchise fee, 138, 139–140 
 revenue recognition for franchise sales, 
138–141 
 valuing a business opportunity, 
340–343 
 Francis, J. R., 346n, 389n, 847n 
 Frank, M., 764n 
 Frankel, M., 502n 
 Frankel, R., 347n 
 Fraud risk factors, 15 
 Freddie Mac (Federal Home Loan Mortgage 
Corporation), 148, 398, 437 
 Free cash flow, 310–314 
 Free from material error principle, 18, 548 
 Fremgen, J., 478n 
 Frisby Technologies, 405 
 Frischmann, P. J., 899n 
 Full capitalization approach, 558 
 Fully funded pension plans, 827 
 Functional currency choice, 989 
 Fundamental analysis, 8 
 Fundamental valuation, defined, 309 
 Fundamental value, 14 
 Funding, pension plan 
 defined, 826 
 determinants of defined benefit plan 
funding, 835–837, 845–847, 
851–852, 857–858 
 fully funded, 827 
 funding ratios, 847 
 overfunded, 827, 846, 850 
 underfunded, 827, 850 
 Funding ratios, 847 
 Future cash inflows, 546 
 future cash flow effects of debt, 627–630 

1112 
Index
 regulation through, 396–397 
 tax deductibility of management 
compensation, 914, 921 
 tax rates 
 deferred income tax accounting when 
tax rates change, 764–769 
 differences across countries, 773–774 
 effective, 750, 770–774 
 enacted, 788 
 statutory, 749, 770–774, 789 
 substantively enacted, 788 
 uncertain tax positions, 778–782 
 assessing disclosures, 782 
 making changes or resolving uncertain 
tax positions, 781–782 
 related to permanent difference, 
779–780 
 related to timing of deductibility, 
780–781 
 Incremental borrowing rate, 693n, 722 
 Indefinite-lived intangible assets, 
556, 561, 580 
 Indenture, 334, 604 
 Independent auditors, 15 
 Independent Film Development 
Corporation, 202 
 Indirect method, statement of cash flows, 
204, 1032, 1035–1039, 1063–1065 
 Indus International, Inc., 184–185 
 IndyMac Bank, 846 
 Inflation, LIFO reserves, 493 
 Information asymmetry, 6–7 
 Initiation fees, revenue recognition 
abuses, 150 
 In-process research and development 
(IPR&D), 980 
 Input market, 546 
 Insiders, owners as, 890 
 Installment sales 
 computation of taxable income, 796–797 
 as temporary (timing) difference between 
book income and taxable income, 747 
 Installment-sales method, 62, 134–136 
 IFRS rules, 161–162 
 interest on installment contracts, 136 
 journal entries, 135 
 Institutional Brokers Estimate System 
(I/B/E/S), 146 
 Insubstance defeasance, 389 
 Intangible assets, 193 
 indefinite-lived assets, 556, 561, 580 
 long-lived assets, 555–558 
 international accounting issues, 
578–579, 580 
 types, 555–556, 580 
 Intel, 480, 818–819 
 Intercorporate debt investments, 1004–1007 
 Intercorporate equity investments, 953–1030 
 controlling (majority) interest 
investments, 966–975 
 Income from continuing operations, 
66–67, 328 
 Income recognition, 58 
 Income statement, 65–74 
 analysis of income statement and balance 
sheet accounts, 212 
 categories of transitory income statement 
items, 72–74 
 common-size, 246–248 
 comprehensive income, 81–82, 83 
 continuing operations, 66–67, 328 
 discontinued operations, 68–71, 328 
 extraordinary items, 71–72 
 format and classification, 65–74 
 other comprehensive income (OCI), 82, 
83, 85–87 
 special or unusual items, 67–68 
 trend statements, 246–248 
 Income tax expense, calculation, 799 
 Income tax reporting, 745–824.  See also 
Taxable income 
 deferred income taxes 
 asset valuation allowances, 759–764 
 deferred income tax assets, 
755–757, 764 
 deferred income tax liabilities, 
755, 764 
 interperiod tax allocation, 751–755, 
793–801 
 when tax rates change, 764–769 
 financial versus tax accounting 
 book income/taxable income, 745–746 
 incentives, 553 
 for leases, 718 
 temporary (timing) and permanent 
differences, 746–751 
 income tax note disclosures, 770–778 
 assessing earnings quality, 783–786 
 company versus individual deferred 
items, 776, 777 
 current versus deferred portion of 
current period tax provision, 770 
 deferred taxes and cash flow, 776–778 
 improving interfirm comparability, 
786–788 
 sources of deferred tax asset and 
liabilities, 775–776 
 statutory versus effective tax rates, 
770–774, 789 
 intercorporate equity investments, 
minority passive investments, 
959–960 
 international tax issues, 788–792 
 investment tax credit (ITC), 20–21, 39 
 LIFO conformity rule, 396, 501–502, 
512–513 
 net operating losses 
 carrybacks, 757–759 
 carryforwards, 757–759 
 preferred stock dividends, 897 
 Hedge accounting, 641–649 
 cash flow, 643, 644, 646–649 
 considerations, 642, 644 
 fair value, 642, 643–646 
 foreign currency exposure, 643, 644, 649 
 international accounting issues, 651 
 matching process, 641 
 Hedged item, 642, 644 
 Hedge effectiveness, 649–650, 651 
 Hedging, 633–650 
 derivative instruments, 633, 634–641 
 effectiveness, 649–650, 651 
 hedge accounting, 641–649 
 international accounting issues, 651 
 Hedging instrument, 642, 644 
 Held for sale, 69, 70 
 assets, 192, 564–565 
 liabilities, 193 
 Held-to-maturity securities 
 intercorporate debt investments, 
1004–1005 
 intercorporate equity investments, 995–999 
 Hershey Co., 291 
 Hess Corp., 502 
 Hillman Companies, Inc., 898 
 Hire purchase contracts, 721–722 
 Historical cost, 188 
 amortized, 613 
 carrying amounts for long-lived assets, 
547, 548–549 
 debt carried at amortized, 621–625 
 fair value accounting, 318 
 Historical cost accounting, 486 
 Historical exchange rate, 988 
 H.J. Heinz Company, 1047–1051 
 Hoechst AG, 31 
 Hof, R. D., 911n 
 Holding gains, 485 
 inventory, 484–488, 502–503 
 Holthausen, R., 323n 
 Home Depot, 261 
 Honda Motor Company, 28–29 
 Horngren, C., 478n 
 Hribar, P., 895n 
 Hsieh, D. A., 505n 
 Hughes, P. J., 389n 
I
 IBM, 305–308 
 “If-converted” method for computing EPS 
dilution, 908, 909–910 
 Ikenberry, D., 893n 
 Illinois Tool Works, 364–365 
 Imhoff, E. A., Jr., 702n 
 Implied goodwill, 973–975 
 Imputed interest 
 defined, 429 
 on notes payable, 625–627 
 on trade notes receivable, 427–431 

 
Index 
1113
 last-in first-out (LIFO) accounting, 
241, 329, 471, 483–502, 503–506 
 lower of cost or market method, 191, 
506–511 
 specific identification, 481–482 
 weighted average, 470 
 costs included in, 475–481 
 absorption costs, 476–480 
 manufacturing costs, 476 
 variable costs, 476–480 
 vendor allowances, 480–481 
 defined, 191, 469 
 determination of inventory quantities, 
472–475 
 periodic inventory system, 472–475, 504 
 perpetual inventory system, 472–475 
 finished goods, 267, 469, 477 
 international accounting issues, 
488, 511–513 
 inventory errors, 522–523 
 items included in, 475 
 raw materials, 267, 469, 477 
 statement of cash flows, 1044–1045 
 work-in-process, 267, 469, 477 
 Inventory holding gains and losses, 
132, 484–488 
 Inventory turnover ratio, 267–268, 500–501 
 Investing activities, 203, 204, 275, 1032 
 in preparing statement of cash flows, 
1045–1046 
 simultaneous noncash financing activities 
and, 1051, 1052 
 Investment banks, 606 
 Investment property, 578 
 leases as, 720 
 Investments, 193 
 Investment tax credit (ITC), 20–21, 39 
J
 Jaffee, J. F., 276n, 310n 
 Jagolinzer, A., 389n 
 Jefferson-Pilot Corporation, 982–984 
 Jenkins, N., 154n 
 Jennings, R., 506n 
 Jensen, M., 147n, 380n 
 Jet Blue Airways, 704 
 Jiambalvo, J., 377n 
 Jiffy Lube International, 138 
 Johnson, B., 154n 
 Johnson, G., 315n, 517n 
 Johnson, M., 1031n 
 Johnson, W. B., 332n, 506n, 706n, 867n, 895n 
 Joint costs, 549 
 Joint ventures, 631–633, 967, 1000 
 Jordan, B. D., 634n 
 Journal entries 
 cash flow hedge, 647–648 
 changes in defined benefit plan funded 
status, 844–845 
 receivables accounting, 451 
 revenue recognition, 60 
 International Accounting Standards 
Commission (IASC), 20, 31 
 International Accounting Standards (IAS), 
long-lived asset accounting, 
576–578 
 International Financial Reporting Standards 
(IFRS), 20, 22, 30–31, 34 
 balance sheet presentation, 198–200 
 contingent liabilities, 655–656 
 convertible debt, 930–931 
 hedge accounting, 651 
 income tax reporting 
 disclosure of income tax amounts 
recognized directly in equity/other 
comprehensive income, 791 
 IASB exposure draft, 792 
 recognizing deferred tax assets, 788–789 
 reconciliation of statutory and effective 
tax rates, 789–791 
 uncertain tax positions, 791–792 
 installment sales, 161–162 
 intercorporate equity investments, 995–999 
 inventory accounting, 488, 511–512 
 lease accounting, 719–722 
 long-lived asset accounting, 576–580 
 long-term construction accounting, 
158–161 
 long-term debt, 620–621 
 other comprehensive income (OCI), 85–87 
 owners’ equity reporting, 903–904 
 pensions and other postretirement benefits 
(OPEB), 868 
 receivables accounting, 450–451 
 revenue recognition and measurement, 
157–158 
 statement of cash flows, 214–216, 1032 
 Internet resellers 
 gross versus net basis, 150–151 
 revenue recognition abuses, 150–151 
 Interperiod income tax allocation 
 comprehensive, 793–801 
 deferred income taxes, 751–755 
 defined, 746 
 In-the-money options, 908 
 Intraperiod income tax allocation, 70 
 defined, 746 
 sources of deferred tax assets and 
liabilities, 775–776 
 Intrinsic stock price estimate, 344–347 
 Inventories, 469–544 
 changes for statement of cash flows, 1037 
 consignment sales, 149, 475 
 cost flow assumptions, 469–472, 481–493 
 empirical evidence on policy choice, 
504–506 
 first-in first-out (FIFO) accounting, 
241, 329, 396, 470–471, 482–483, 
484–488, 502–503, 515–517 
 foreign currency transactions, 987–988 
 foreign subsidiaries, 989–994 
 historical approaches, 975–985 
 acquisition method, 977, 979, 
982–985 
 pooling-of-interests method, 975–976, 
981, 984–985 
 purchase method, 976–980, 
982–984, 1018 
 international accounting issues, 994–1002 
 consolidated financial statements, 
999–1000 
 financial assets, 995–999, 1000–1002 
 joint ventures, 1000 
 special purpose entities (SPEs), 1000 
 variable interest entities (VIEs), 1000 
 minority active investments, 
954, 961–966 
 minority passive investments, 954–961 
 statement of cash flows adjustments, 
1050, 1051 
 variable interest entities, 985–986 
 Interest-based amortization, 723 
 Interest capitalization, 551–553 
 Interest cost, defined benefit plan, 833 
 Interest coverage ratio, 272 
 Interest expense, 1093 
 avoidable interest, 551–553 
 changes for statement of cash flows, 1039 
 convertible debt, 928 
 interest, defined, 601 
 statement of cash flows, 1060–1062 
 Interest income 
 computation of taxable income, 795 
 statement of cash flows, 1060–1062 
 Interest rate “collar,” 638n 
 Interest rate implicit in the lease, 693n 
 Interest rates 
 bonds payable, 604 
 stock prices and, 380 
 “teaser,” 398 
 Interest rate swaps, 637, 647–648, 650 
 Interfirm comparability, tax notes to 
improve, 786–788 
 Internal auditors, 152 
 Internal Revenue Code (IRC), 396 
 Internal Revenue Service (IRS), 396–397 
 International Accounting Standards Board 
(IASB), 7, 20, 31–34 
 exposure draft on income taxes, 792 
 fair value rules, 399, 400 
 hedge accounting, 651 
 joint IASB/FASB memorandum of 
understanding (Norwalk 
Agreement), 916–919 
 joint IASB/FASB project on fair value 
measurement and disclosure, 323 
 joint IASB/FASB project on revenue 
recognition, 162–164 
 lease accounting, 722–723 

1114 
Index
 Lessor.  See also Lease accounting, lessor 
accounting 
 defined, 687 
 Lev, B., 315n, 323n, 329n, 557n 
 Leverage analysis, 262–263 
 lease accounting, 689, 703 
 Levitt, Arthur, 144, 144n, 147–149 
 Liabilities, 601–686 
 accrued, 193 
 balance sheet presentation, 187, 193–194, 
601–603 
 bonds payable, 604–625 
 book value versus market value after 
issuance, 613–616 
 cash flow characteristics, 604–605 
 extinguishment of debt, 615–616 
 fair value accounting, 616–620 
 floating-rate debt, 613–615 
 graphic presentations, 611–612 
 international accounting issues, 
620–621 
 issued at discount, 606–609 
 issued at par, 605–606 
 issued at premium, 609–611 
 managerial incentives and financial 
reporting, 621–625 
 contingent, 652–656 
 gain contingencies, 654 
 international accounting issues, 
655–656 
 loan guarantees, 654–655 
 loss contingencies, 652–654 
 current, 193, 602–603 
 as debt versus equity, 603–604 
 defined, 601 
 hedges, 633–650 
 derivative instruments, 634–641 
 effectiveness, 649–650 
 hedge accounting, 641–649 
 international accounting issues, 
603, 620–621, 651, 655–656 
 mandatorily redeemable preferred stock, 
897–898 
 monetary, 601, 602–603, 988 
 noncurrent, 193, 602–603 
 nonmonetary, 601 
 notes payable, 193 
 future cash flow effects of debt, 
627–630 
 imputed interest, 625–627 
 off-balance-sheet, 241–242, 
631–633 
 from retiring long-lived assets, 
563–564 
 trend analysis, 248–253 
 Liability approach, deferred income tax 
assets/liabilities, 764–769 
 Liability valuation account, 608 
 Lie, Erik, 923, 923n 
 Lieberman, Joe, 915n 
 dollar-value LIFO, 491, 517–522 
 eliminating LIFO ratio distortions, 
499–501 
 inventory holding gains, 132, 484–488 
 LIFO conformity rule, 396, 501–502, 
512–513 
 LIFO dangers, 503–504 
 LIFO liquidation, 486, 493–499, 517–518 
 LIFO reserve disclosure, 488–493, 497 
 tax implications, 501–502 
 Lavelle, L., 911n, 918n 
 Layaway sales, revenue recognition abuses, 
149–150 
 Lease accounting, 687–744 
 capital lease approach, 688, 690–715, 718 
 constructive capitalization, 722, 724–729 
 evolution, 687–690 
 international accounting issues, 
719–723 
 joint FASB/IASB exposure draft, 
722–723 
 lessee accounting, 690–706 
 capital lease treatment, 688, 690–706 
 capital versus operating leases, 718 
 disclosures, 689, 704, 705–706, 
720–721 
 FASB criteria for capital lease 
treatment, 690–692, 703–704 
 lessee, defined, 687 
 operating lease treatment, 688, 
690–706, 691, 699 
 lessor accounting 
 capital versus operating leases, 
708–715 
 decision tree, 707, 710 
 direct financing lease, 706, 708, 
709–715 
 disclosures, 718–719, 720–721 
 lessor, defined, 687 
 sales-type lease, 706, 707, 710, 
715–716 
 operating lease approach, 687–706 
 sale and leaseback, 716–718 
 Securities and Exchange Commission 
(SEC) initiative, 689–690 
 Lease payment, 687 
 LeClere, M. J., 505n 
 Lee, C., 347n 
 Lee, C. J., 505n 
 Lee, D., 1031n 
 Lehman Brothers, 264–265, 398, 
441, 846 
 Lemmon, M., 919n 
 Lemons, 11, 11n 
 Lenders, demand for financial statements, 9 
 Lennox International, 295 
 Leone, Marie, 214n, 314n, 652n 
 Lessee.  See also Lease accounting, lessee 
accounting 
 defined, 687 
 Journal entries—Cont. 
 closing, 96–97 
 components of pension cost, 853–856 
 cost recovery method, 137 
 installment sales method, 135 
 minority passive investments, 
956–961 
 percentage-of-completion 
method, 127 
 posting, 94–95 
 J.P. Morgan, 36 
 Justice Department, 27 
K
 Kanjorski, Paul, 399–400 
 Kansas City Southern, 704 
 Kaplan, R. S., 386n 
 Kapstone Paper and Packaging Corporation, 
294–295 
 Kasnik, D., 919n 
 Keiretsu, 30 
 Keller, T., 548n 
 Kellogg Company, 683–685 
 Kennedy Administration, 21 
 Kimbrough, M., 557n 
 Kimmel, P. D., 898n, 899n 
 Kinney, W., 332n 
 Kmart, 481 
 Koller, T., 312n, 317n, 347n 
 Kothari, S. P., 315n, 323n, 332n, 910n 
 Kozlowski, Dennis, 372 
 Kraft, K. A., 281n, 482n, 569n 
 Kraken Group, 666 
 Kranhold, E. K., 414n 
 Kravet, T., 774n 
 Krispy Kreme Doughnuts, 363–364, 390, 
403–404 
 analysis of uncollectible accounts 
receivable, 420–421 
 asset impairment recognition and 
disclosure, 561, 562 
 loan guarantees, 654–655 
 Kroger Company, 292–293, 471 , 501, 
502, 704 
 Krull, L., 774n 
 Kumar, Sunjay, 415 
L
 Laing, Jonathan R., 144n, 426n 
 Lakonishok, J., 893n 
 Landsman, W. R., 867n 
 Larcker, D., 389n 
 Largay, J., 277n 
 Last-in first-out (LIFO) inventory 
accounting, 241, 329, 396, 
471, 483–484 
 adjusting cost of goods sold from LIFO to 
FIFO, 489–491, 497–499 

 
Index 
1115
 Malkin, L., 640n 
 Management approach, 281–283 
 Management compensation, 379–392 
 annual (short-term) incentives, 
380, 381–383, 389–390 
 augmenting cash compensation, 912 
 base salary, 380, 381 
 bonus plans, 380, 381–383 
 debt-for-debt swaps, 621–625 
 debt-for-equity swaps, 621–625 
 demand for financial statements, 8–9 
 financial reporting for debt, 621–625 
 incentives tied to accounting numbers, 
380, 386–392 
 long-term incentives, 380–381, 383–385 
 proxy statements and, 385–386 
 stock options.  See Employee stock 
options 
 Management discretion, 241 
 asset impairment recognition and 
disclosure, 561–562 
 discretionary accounting accruals, 
377–379 
 Management Discussion and Analysis 
(MD&A), 286, 385 
 Managers, response to potential debt 
covenant violations, 377–379 
 Mandatory conversion, 906 
 Mandatory redemption, 604 
 preferred stock, 897–899 
 Mandatory reporting, 9 
 Manufacturer’s profit, sales-type leases, 707 
 Manufacturing costs, 476 
 Manville Corporation, 23 
 Marathon Petroleum Corp., 502 
 Maremont, M., 144n, 424n 
 Marked-to-market, 132–133, 643 
 Market price, 321, 385 
 Market price (production) method, 
132–133 
 Market-related value, 830 
 Market risks, 633.  See also Hedging 
 Market value, bond book value versus, 
613–616 
 extinguishment of debt, 615–616 
 floating-rate debt, 613–615 
 Market value method, for convertible debt 
accounting, 927 
 Mark-to-market accounting, 21, 399 
 Marquardt, C., 919n 
 Martin, R., 332n 
 Matching principle, 58–59, 64–65 
 Materiality principle, 17, 18 
 Mature companies, 275 
 Maturity structure, 188 
 Maturity value, bond, 604 
 Maydew, E., 747n, 774n 
 McCaffey, John L., 255 
 McCann, David, 1037n 
 McConnell, P., 151n, 748n 
 units-of-production (UP) depreciation, 
566, 568 
 exchanges of nonmonetary assets, 
572–575 
 book value, 573–575 
 cash received, 575 
 commercial substance criterion, 574 
 to facilitate sales to customers, 575 
 fair value not determinable, 574 
 intangible assets, 193, 555–558, 578–579 
 international accounting issues, 576–580 
 impairments, 579–580 
 intangible long-lived assets, 578–579 
 tangible long-lived assets, 576–578 
 long-term asset turnover, 258 
 obligations from retiring long-lived 
assets, 563–564 
 tangible assets, 576–578 
 Long-term asset turnover, 258 
 Long-term construction accounting 
 international accounting issues, 158–161 
 as temporary (timing) difference between 
book income and taxable income, 747 
 Long-term debt, 193–194.  See also Bonds 
payable 
 Long-term debt to assets, 270–271 
 Long-term debt to tangible assets, 270–271 
 Long-term incentives, 380–381, 383–385 
 Long-term loans, credit risk assessment, 333 
 Long-term pension risk ratio, 861 
 Loss contingencies, 652–654 
 Lower of cost or market method, 191, 
506–511 
 applications, 509 
 ceiling, 507 
 contracting origins, 509–510 
 evaluation of lower of cost or market rule, 
510–511 
 floor, 507 
 scenarios, 507–509 
 Lublin, J., 144n 
 Lufthansa Group, 823–824 
 Lundholm, R., 317n, 347n 
 LVMH Group, 577–578 
 Lys, T., 13n, 147n, 323n, 388n, 
975–976, 976n 
M
 MACRS (Modified Accelerated Cost 
Recovery System), 396, 569, 747, 748 
 Macy’s, 704 
 Magliolo, J., 394n, 421n 
 Majority, 282 
 Majority interest, 966–975 
 acquisition method, 967–970 
 consolidation accounting, 966–970 
 goodwill, 973–975 
 issue of control, 966 
 noncontrolling (minority) interest, 967 
 LIFO conformity rule, 396, 501–502, 
512–513 
 LIFO liquidation, 255, 486, 493–499, 
517–518 
 LIFO reserves, 488–493, 497 
 Limited liability, 890 
 Lincoln National Corporation, 982–984 
 Lindahl, F. W., 505n 
 Linsmeier, Thomas, 633n 
 Lipe, R. C., 328n, 702n 
 Lipin, S., 144n 
 Liquidity, 188, 266–270 
 Litigation costs, 13 
 loss contingencies due to, 652–654 
 Liu, C., 867n 
 Livedoor, 27 
 Loan charge-offs, 394 
 Loan guarantees, 654–655 
 Loan loss provision, 394 
 Locke, Gary, 765n 
 London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR), 
613–615 
 London Stock Exchange (LSE), 29 
 Longer-term investment potential, 958–959 
 Long-lived assets, 192–193, 545–600 
 amortization, 565 
 asset impairment, 558–562 
 amortizable intangible assets, 
558–560, 579 
 financial assets, 998 
 indefinite-lived intangible assets, 
556, 561 
 international accounting issues, 579–580 
 Krispy Kreme case study, 561, 562 
 management judgments and, 561–562 
 tangible assets, 558–560 
 assets held for sale, 564–565 
 carrying amount, 546–555 
 capitalization criteria, 553–555 
 computing avoidable interest, 
551–553 
 discounted present value, 546–547 
 economic sacrifice approach, 546, 
547–549 
 expected benefit approach, 546, 547 
 GAAP approach, 547–549 
 tax versus financial reporting 
incentives, 553 
 defined, 545 
 depletion, 565 
 depreciation, 565–572 
 disposition of long-lived assets, 569 
 double-declining balance (DDB) 
depreciation, 566–567, 568, 569 
 financial analysis and depreciation 
differences, 569–572 
 straight-line (SL) depreciation, 566, 
568, 569 
 sum-of-the-years’ digits (SYD) 
depreciation, 567–568 

1116 
Index
 Nonrecurring income statement items, 
72–74 
 Nonrefundable up-front fees, revenue 
recognition abuses, 150 
 Nordstrom, 261, 268, 269 
 Norfolk Southern Corporation, 704 
 Norris, F., 16n, 397, 399n, 441n 
 Nortel, 846 
 Northern Trust Corporation, 330, 331 
 Norton, D. P., 386n 
 Norwalk Agreement, 916–919 
 Notes payable, 193 
 convertible.  See Convertible debt 
 defined, 334 
 future cash flow effects of debt, 627–630 
 imputed interest, 625–627 
 Notes receivable.  See also Uncollectibles 
 amortized cost, 450–451 
 collateralized borrowing, 433, 435 
 fair value accounting, 431–432 
 financial asset securitization, 436–443 
 imputing interest, 427–431 
 international accounting issues, 450–451 
 troubled debt restructuring, 443–450 
 Notes to financial statements, 200–202 
 income tax note disclosures, 770–778 
 assessing earnings quality, 783–786 
 company versus individual deferred 
items, 776, 777 
 current versus deferred portion of 
current period tax provision, 770 
 deferred taxes and cash flow, 
776–778 
 improving interfirm comparability, 
786–788 
 sources of deferred tax asset and 
liabilities, 775–776 
 statutory versus effective tax rates, 
770–774, 789 
 pension benefit note disclosures, 
848–849, 858–861, 862–864 
 related-party transactions, 202 
 subsequent events, 201–202 
 Summary of Significant Accounting 
Policies, 200–201 
 Novartis AG, 48–49, 264, 885–886 
 Nucor Corporation, 296–297, 502 
O
 Obama, Barack, 382, 765 
 O’Brien, T., 144n 
 Obsolescence write-offs, 1049 
 O’Connell, V., 7 
 Off-balance-sheet financing, 689 
 Off-balance-sheet liabilities, 241–242, 
631–633.  See also Lease accounting 
 Ohlson, J., 280, 280n, 317n, 320n, 323n 
 Olsen, C., 332n 
 Olsson, P., 346n 
 Murphy, K., 380n 
 Mutually underperformed contract, 687 
 Myers, R., 337n 
 Myers, S. C., 310n, 912n 
N
 National Beverage Corporation, 896 
 National City Bank, 36 
 National Coal Corporation, 596–597 
 Negative abnormal earnings, 317 
 Negative covenants, 375 
 Negative plan amendment, 864–865 
 Neiman Marcus, 261 
 Nelson, E., 144n 
 Nelson, K., 315n 
 Net assets, 58, 59 
 Net carrying value, 609 
 Net contract position, 163 
 Net income 
 cash flows versus accrual earnings, 
204–209 
 distribution of annual, 144–145 
 Net operating income after taxes (NOPAT), 
constructive capitalization of leases, 
728–729 
 Net operating loss 
 carrybacks, 757–759 
 carryforwards, 757–759 
 Net realizable value, 132, 188, 191, 
417–427, 507, 512, 546–547 
 defined, 417n 
 returns and allowances, 417, 421–422 
 uncollectibles, 417–421 
 Net work, 376 
 Neutrality principle, 18, 548 
 News Corporation, 313–314 
 New York Mercantile Exchange 
(NYMEX), 634 
 New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), 29, 36 
 Niedzielski, J., 650n 
 Nike Inc., 943–944 
 NINJA loans, 398 
 Nobes, C., 29n 
 Noise, 327–328 
 Nominal rate, bond, 604 
 Nominal value, 890 
 Noncash additions, 99 
 Noncash deductions, 99 
 Noncontrolling (minority) interests, 
195, 967 
 acquisition method, 970–975 
 minority active investments, 961–966 
 minority passive investments, 954–961 
 Noncurrent assets, held for sale, 192 
 Noncurrent liabilities, held for sale, 193 
 Nonmonetary assets, 190, 988 
 Nonmonetary liabilities, 601 
 Nonparticipating preferred stock, 896 
 Nonrecourse, factoring, 433 
 McDonald’s Corporation, 118–119, 138, 
302, 402 
 McGinty, T., 399n 
 McGough, R., 867n 
 McKay, P. A., 650n 
 McNichols, M., 421n 
 Measurable event, 60–64, 123 
 Meckling, W., 380n 
 Meek, G., 29n 
 Mellors, F., 826n 
 Mentor Graphics Corporation, 291 
 Mergers.  See Intercorporate equity 
investments 
 Merrill Lynch, 398 
 MGM Resorts International, 552–553 
 Microsoft Corporation, 24, 142, 368–370, 
410–411, 894, 918, 918n 
 Milgrom, P., 380n 
 Millar, J. A., 901, 901n 
 Millennium bonds, 679–681 
 Miller, J., 858n 
 Miller, M. H., 310n, 690n 
 Minder, Thomas, 409–410 
 Minimum capital requirements, 393–394 
 Minimum lease payments, 693 
 Minority active investments, 954, 961–966 
 cost versus book value, 963–965 
 equity method, 962, 965–966 
 Minority passive investments, 954–961 
 available-for-sale securities, 958–959, 
960–961 
 fair value accounting, 954–961 
 goodwill, 964–965 
 impairment of investments, 960–961 
 income tax effects, 959–960 
 trading securities, 955–958 
 Mittelstaedt, H. F., 858n, 867n 
 Mock, R., 484n, 513n 
 Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery 
System (MACRS), 396, 569, 
747, 748 
 Mohrman, M. B., 377n 
 Molson Coors Brewing Company, 668–669 
 Monahan, S., 339n 
 Monetary assets, 190, 987 
 Monetary liabilities, 601, 988 
 noncurrent, 602–603 
 Money purchase plans, 826 
 Moody, John, 336 
 Moody’s Investors Services, 278, 336, 355, 
438n, 439n 
 Morgan Stanley, 264, 398 
 Morgenson, G., 239n, 480n, 867n, 894n 
 Mortgage-backed securities (MBS), 
397–400, 441–442, 960–961 
 Mortgage bonds, 604 
 Motorola, 818–819, 899 
 Motorola Solutions, Inc., 188–195, 201 
 Moyer, S., 421n 
 Mulford, C. W., 523n, 1054n 

 
Index 
1117
 Pensions and other postretirement benefits 
(OPEB), 825–888.  See also Defined 
benefit plans; Defined contribution 
plans 
 assessing OPEB liability, 866 
 changes for statement of cash flows, 1038 
 definitions, 825–826 
 evaluation of pension and postretirement 
benefit financial reporting, 867 
 gains and losses due to uncertainty, 
835–837 
 General Electric case study, 847–867 
 health care reform and deferred tax 
assets, 765 
 international accounting issues, 868 
 rights and obligations, 825–827 
 temporary (timing) difference between 
book income and taxable income, 747 
 Pension trust, 825 
 Pepsico, 816, 976n 
 Percentage-of-completion method, 
62, 124–129 
 comparative account balances, 130 
 journal entries, 127 
 Performance-based pay plans, 384–385 
 Performance obligations, 163 
 Period costs, 64, 65, 476 
 Periodic inventory system, 472–475, 504 
 Permanent differences, 192 
 between book income and taxable 
income, 746, 748 
 defined, 746 
 examples, 748 
 nature of, 769–770 
 uncertain tax position related to, 
779–780 
 Permanent earnings component, 327–328 
 Perpetual inventory system, 472–475 
 Peterson, C. A., 901, 901n 
 Petrino, R. J., 281n, 482n, 569n 
 Pettit, J., 311n 
 Pfizer Inc., 201, 202, 993–994 
 Phillips, John, 778n 
 Phillips, K., 488n 
 Picconi, M., 867n 
 Pincus, M., 505n 
 Pittards, PLC, 235–236 
 Pizza Hut, 138 
 Plumlee, M., 29n 
 Political costs, 13 
 Pooling-of-interests method, intercorporate 
equity investment, 975–976, 981, 
984–985 
 Popov, L., 379n 
 Porter, M. E., 261n 
 Positive abnormal earnings, 317 
 Posting, 94–95 
 Potential dilution, 906–907 
 Potomac Electric Power Company, 196 
 Predictive value, 17 
 convertible debt, 924–931 
 analytical insights, 927–928 
 background, 925 
 financial reporting issues, 926–927 
 international accounting issues, 
930–931 
 settlement in cash, 928–930 
 employee stock options, 906–908, 
911–924 
 current GAAP requirements, 919–922 
 historical perspective, 912–913 
 initial compromise with  SFAS No. 123 , 
915–916 
 joint IASB/FASB memorandum of 
understanding (Norwalk 
Agreement), 916–919 
 opposition to FASB proposal, 913–915 
 options backdating scandal, 923–924 
 financial statement presentation, 
902–903 
 financing transactions, 890–892 
 international accounting issues, 903–904 
 legality of corporate distributions to 
owners, 889, 900–901, 914–915 
 linkage to equity valuations, 889, 
902–903, 915 
 preferred stock, 896–900 
 revaluation surplus account, 577 
P
 Palepu, K., 262n, 347n, 378n 
 Palmrose, Z., 21n, 154n 
 Papa John’s International, Inc., 1009 
 Parent, 966 
 Parent company, 31 
 Park, C. W., 388n 
 Parker, R., 29n 
 Parmalat, 27 
 Parrino, R., 379n 
 Participating preferred stock, 896 
 Par value 
 bond, 604 
 bonds issued at, 605–606, 611 
 common stock, 194, 890 
 preferred stock, 896 
 Patel, A. V., 281n, 482n, 569n 
 Patel, J., 144n 
 Patents, 556 
 Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act 
of 2010, 765 
 Payment default, 377 
 Pegg, J., 151n 
 Penman, S., 262n, 312n, 317n, 320n 
 Pension, 825 
 Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation 
(PBGC), 846, 846n 
 Pension plan, 825 
 Pension Protection Act of 2006 
(PL 109-280), 846 
 Operating activities, 203, 204, 208, 
214–216, 274–275, 1032 
 distortion or manipulation of cash flows, 
1053–1059 
 in preparing statement of cash flows, 
1040–1045 
 Operating and financial flexibility, 188 
 Operating cycle, 57, 188, 266, 268–269 
 Operating lease approach 
 capital lease approach versus, 1055–1057 
 evolution of lease accounting, 687–690 
 lessee accounting, 688, 689 
 comparison with capital lease 
approach, 691 
 constructive capitalization, 
722, 724–729 
 disclosure, 704, 705–706, 719–723 
 financial statement effects, 699–704 
 international accounting issues, 
719–722 
 lessor accounting, 688, 708–709, 
713–715 
 capital versus operating leases, 
708–709 
 international accounting issues, 
719–722 
 sale and leaseback, 716–718 
 Operating leases, 240–241 
 Operating risks, 633.  See also Hedging 
 Operating segment, 282 
 Options contracts, 638–639.  See also 
Employee stock options 
 Oracle Corporation, 142–143, 602–603 
 Ordinary annuity, 605, 1096–1097, 1100 
 Original effective yield rate, 194 
 Ormazabal, G., 439n 
 Ostrower, J., 264n 
 Oswald, D. R., 346n 
 Other comprehensive income (OCI), 82, 83, 
642, 829n, 838–839 
 accumulated, 195 
 international accounting issues, 
85–87, 995 
 minority passive investments, 958–961 
 Other postretirement benefits (OPEB), 
861–868 
 assessing OPEB liability, 866 
 defined, 861 
 evaluating financial reporting, 867 
 General Electric case, 861–868 
 Output market, 546 
 Overfunded pension plans, 827, 846, 850 
 Owners’ equity, 889–951.  See also Earnings 
per share (EPS) 
 appropriate income measurement, 
889–896 
 company repurchase of stock, 892–895 
 nature of the “firm,” 890–892 
 compliance with contract terms and 
restrictions, 889, 896–900 

1118 
Index
 RAP.  See Regulatory accounting principles 
(RAP) 
 Rapoport, M., 768n 
 Rate of return, 10, 187 
 Rate of return assumption, defined benefit 
plan, 838 
 Rate regulation, electric utilities industry, 
394–397 
 Ratio proportionality, foreign currency and 
translated dollars, 993 
 Raw materials inventory, 267, 469, 477 
 Realized holding gains, 485, 515–517 
 Reason, T., 652n 
 Receipts, 637 
 Receivables, 417–468.  See also 
Uncollectibles 
 accounts receivable 
 amortized cost, 450–451 
 factoring, 425, 433, 434, 442 
 fair value accounting, 431–432 
 international accounting issues, 
450–451 
 net realizable value, 417–427 
 changes for statement of cash flows, 1037 
 disclosure requirements, 442–443 
 notes receivable 
 amortized cost, 450–451 
 collateralized borrowing, 433, 435 
 fair value accounting, 431–432 
 financial asset securitization, 
436–443 
 imputing interest, 427–431 
 international accounting issues, 
450–451 
 troubled debt restructuring, 443–450 
 Recognized gains or losses, defined benefit 
plan, 837–843 
 Recourse, factoring, 433 
 Recoverable amount 
 intangible asset impairment, 580 
 tangible asset impairment, 579 
 Recovery of investment criterion, 692 
 Rego, S., 764n 
 Regulatory accounting principles (RAP), 
392–397 
 banking industry capital requirements, 
393–394 
 electric utility industry rate regulation, 
394–396 
 regulatory assets and liabilities, 393 
 taxation, 396–397 
 Regulatory agencies, demand for financial 
statements, 9–10 
 Regulatory assets and liabilities, 393 
 Reilly, D., 323n, 488n, 768n 
 Reiter, S. A., 847n 
 Related-party transactions, 202 
 Relevance principle, 17 
 Remeasuring nonfreestanding foreign 
subsidiaries, 989–992, 993 
 franchising, 138–141 
 prior to sale, 124–133 
 sales with right of return, 141 
 subsequent to sale, 134–138 
 Profit-sharing plans, 826 
 Pro forma projections, 347–353, 916, 982 
 Pro forma pro rata basis, 26 
 Projected benefit obligation (PBO), 
832–833, 851–852 
 Property, plant, and equipment, 192–193. 
 See also Asset impairment; Long-
lived assets 
 asset retirement, 1050–1051 
 changes for statement of cash flows, 
1036–1037, 1050–1051 
 statement of cash flows, 1036–1037, 
1042–1043, 1045–1046 
 Property dividends, 900 
 Property rights approach, lease accounting, 
690, 722 
 Proprietary view of the firm, 552 
 Prospective approach, reporting accounting 
changes, 74 
 Protective covenants, 334 
 Proxy contests, 8 
 Proxy statements, 385–386 
 Public Company Accounting Oversight 
Board (PCAOB), 5, 20, 41–42 
 Public debt, credit risk assessment, 334 
 Public entities 
 defined, 281n 
 segment reporting, 281–288 
 Publix Super Markets, Inc., 292–293, 704, 
1076–1077 
 Pukthuanthong, K., 919n 
 Pulliam, S., 399n 
 Pungaliya, R., 379n 
 Purchase method 
 acquisition method versus, 
982–984, 1018 
 intercorporate equity investments, 
976–980, 982–984 
Q
 Quaker Oats Company, 976n 
 Qualifying special purpose entity (QSPE), 
438–440 
 Quality of information, 6–7 
 Quantitative thresholds, 282 
 Quick ratio, 266, 270 
 Qwest Communications, 704 
R
 Rajan, M. U., 386n 
 Rajgopal, S., 146n, 391n, 392n 
 Ramakrishnan, R., 327 
 Ramesh, K., 315n, 378n 
 Preferred stock, 890n, 896–900 
 adjustable-rate, 896 
 common stock versus, 899–900 
 convertible, 902–903, 906 
 cumulative, 896–897 
 as debt versus equity, 604 
 dividends, 897 
 mandatorily redeemable, 897–899 
 participating/nonparticipating, 896 
 trust preferred security, 898–899 
 voting rights, 953 
 Premium, bonds issued at, 605, 609–611 
 Prepaid expenses 
 changes for statement of cash flows, 1037 
 as temporary (timing) difference between 
book income and taxable income, 747 
 Prepayments 
 adjusting entries, 92–93 
 statement of cash flows, 1044 
 Present value, 1094–1101 
 annuity due, 605, 1097–1098, 1101 
 ordinary annuity, 1096–1097, 1100 
 tables, 1099–1101 
 Present value accounting, 549 
 asset impairment, 579–580 
 defined benefit plan calculations, 831 
 imputing interest, on notes payable, 
625–627 
 imputing interest, on trade notes 
receivable, 427–431 
 liabilities arising from retiring long-lived 
assets, 563–564 
 Price/earnings (P/E) ratio, 316, 325–330 
 Price index, 518n 
 Primary beneficiary, 439n 
 Principal, 1093 
 Principal-agent relationship, 372 
 Principal amount, bond, 604–605 
 Principal payment, preferred stock, 899 
 Principles-based approach, 32 
 Prior period adjustments, 154–157 
 Prior service cost, recognized, 843–844 
 Pritsch, G., 379n 
 Procter & Gamble Co., 827n, 918 
 Product costs, 64, 476 
 Production phase, 62 
 Product warranties, 601 
 common components of revenue 
contracts, 164 
 computation of taxable income, 796 
 as temporary (timing) difference between 
book income and taxable income, 
747, 784–786 
 Profitability analysis, 255–261 
 Profit margin, 256, 257 
 Profit performance 
 expense recognition/matching, 64–65 
 revenue recognition, 60–64 
 bundled (multiple-element) sales, 
142–143 

 
Index 
1119
 Sale and leaseback, 716–718 
 Sale of receivable (factoring), borrowing 
versus, 436–442 
 Sale of receivables (factoring), 425, 433, 
434, 442 
 Sales 
 changes for statement of cash flows, 
1036–1037 
 exchange transactions to facilitate, 575 
 Sales cycles, 333 
 Sales returns and allowances, 421–422 
 Sales revenue approach to uncollectibles, 418 
 Sales-type leases, 706, 707, 710, 715–716 
 Salomon Brothers, 835n 
 Salton, Inc., 625–627 
 Samson, W. D., 901n 
 Samsonite Corporation, 899–900 
 Sandberg, J., 554n 
 Sangiorgi, F., 441n 
 Santayana, George, 1 
 Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX) of 2002, 1, 5, 
20, 153 
 compliance, 42 
 Section 906, 42 
 Satyam Computer Systems, 27 
 SBC Communications, 393 
 Schipper, K., 329n 
 Schneider, C., 917n 
 Scholes, M., 421n, 747n, 774n, 912n 
 Scholz, Susan, 152n, 154n 
 Schrand, C., 329n, 763n 
 Schroeder, Michael, 427n 
 Schuetze, W. P., 40n 
 Schulte, R., 478n 
 Schultz, E. E., 867n 
 Sears, 704 
 Seasonal lines of credit, 333 
 Section 906 (SOX), 42 
 Secured bonds, 334 
 Secured credit, 333 
 Securities Act of 1933, 36–37, 152 
 Securities and Exchange Commission 
(SEC), 22, 24, 27, 34 
 Accounting Series Releases , 39 
 comparative income data, 68 
 differentiating between common stock 
and preferred stock, 899–900 
 Electronic Data Gathering and Retrieval 
(EDGAR) system, 19 
 establishment, 5, 36 
 Financial Reporting Releases , 37 
 lease accounting initiative, 
689–690 
 mandatorily redeemable preferred stock, 
897–898 
 Regulation FD, 11 
 Regulation S-X, 37, 68n 
 Staff Bulletins , 37 
 Securities Exchange Act of 1934, 5, 36, 37, 
42, 152 
 process overview, 63 
 specialized sales transactions, 138–143 
 bundled (multiple-element) sales, 
142–143 
 franchise sales, 138–141 
 sales with right of return, 141 
 subsequent to sale, 134–138 
 cost recovery method, 136–138 
 installment sales method, 134–136, 
161–162 
 Revenues 
 adjusting entries, 93 
 cash-basis, 54–55 
 defined, 53 
 expenses versus, 53 
 matching principle, 58–59, 64–65 
 Revenues received in advance, as temporary 
(timing) difference between book 
income and taxable income, 747 
 Revised Model Business Corporation Act of 
2004, 900–901 
 Revolving loans, credit risk assessment, 333 
 Revsine, L., 310n, 989n 
 Rich, Jeffrey, 923, 924 
 Richardson, S., 144n, 145n, 146n, 
154n, 332n 
 Richardson, V., 154n 
 Ricoh Company Ltd., 463 
 Riedl, E. J., 561n 
 Rigas, John, 234–235 
 Right of return, 141 
 Rimbey, J. N., 901, 901n 
 Risk (uncertainty), 310 
 risk differences, 326 
 Rite Aid Corporation, 1081–1083 
 RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation, 
947–948 
 Roberts, J., 380n 
 Roberts, M. L., 901n 
 Robinson, L., 774n 
 Roll, R., 919n 
 Romero, S., 554n 
 Roosevelt, Franklin D., 36 
 Ross, S. A., 276n, 310n, 634n 
 Roxio, Inc., 177–178 
 Royal Ahold, 27 
 Royal Dutch Shell plc, 598–600 
 Roychowdhury, S., 479n 
 Rules-based approach, 32 
 Russell, Arthur, 24 
 Ryan, S., 400n, 441n, 634n 
S
 Safety margin, 378 
 Safeway, Inc., 260, 261, 704 
 Safra Republic Holdings S.A., 679–681 
 Saks Inc., 481 
 Salary continuation.  See Pensions and other 
postretirement benefits (OPEB) 
 Rental income, computation of taxable 
income, 796 
 Replacement cost, 547 
 Replacement cost accounting, 485, 506 
 Reportable segments, 282 
 Reporting entity, changes in, 75, 80 
 Report of the National Commission on 
Fraudulent Financial Reporting 
(Treadway Commission), 42 
 Repurchase of stock, 892–895 
 Research and development (R&D) expenses, 
556–558 
 development, defined, 579 
 intercorporate equity investments, 980 
 research, defined, 579 
 Residential mortgage-backed securities 
(RMBS), 337 
 Residual value, 687 
 Residual value guarantees, 693, 696–697, 713 
 Restricted retained earnings, 902 
 Restricted stock, 384, 922 
 Restructuring 
 “Big Bath” charges, 147–148 
 defined, 443 
 troubled debt, 443–450 
 Retained earnings, 194–195 
 restricted, 902 
 Retrospective approach, reporting 
accounting changes, 74–77 
 Return on assets (ROA), 187, 255–261, 440 
 competitive advantage, 258–261 
 constructive capitalization of leases, 
728–729 
 management compensation tied to, 387 
 Return on common equity (ROCE), 187, 
195, 262–263 
 abnormal earnings and, 320–321 
 Returns and allowances 
 defined, 417 
 estimating, 421–422 
 Revenue recognition, 58, 60–64 
 abuses, 149–151 
 critical event condition, 60, 123 
 earnings management, 144–151 
 premature or aggressive, 149 
 existing accounts receivable as sales, 
422–427 
 international accounting issues, 157–164 
 long-term construction accounting, 
158–161 
 measurability condition, 60–64, 123 
 prior to sale, 124–133 
 commodities, 130–133 
 completed-contract method, 129–130 
 completed-transaction (sales) method, 
131, 133 
 market price (production) method, 
132–133 
 percentage-of-completion method, 
124–129 

1120 
Index
 projected, 353 
 reconciliation between statements, 
1047–1052 
 statement format, 1032–1040 
 direct method, 204n, 208, 214–216, 
1032–1035 
 indirect method, 204, 1032, 
1035–1039, 1063–1065 
 trend statements, 253–254 
 Statement of financial position.  
See Balance sheet 
 Stater Brothers Holdings, 292–293 
 Statutory tax rate, 749 
 effective tax rate versus, 770–774, 789 
 reconciliation with effective tax rates, 789 
 Stern Stewart & Company, 386 
 Stevenson, R. B., Jr., 12n 
 Stewardship, 8 
 Stewart, G. B., III, 317n 
 Stickney, C., 277n, 347n 
 Stock buybacks, 892–895 
 Stock-for-stock exchange, 981 
 Stock options.  See Employee stock options 
 Stock price 
 earnings management, 144–151 
 earnings surprises, 330–332 
 interest rates and, 380 
 intrinsic stock price estimate, 344–347 
 linking management compensation to, 380 
 overvaluation, 147 
 Straight-line (SL) depreciation, 566, 568, 569 
 Strike price, 923 
 Structured financing arrangements, 
985–986 
 Studebaker Corporation, 846 
 Study Group on Establishment of 
Accounting Principles (Wheat 
Committee), 39 
 Subordinated debt, defined, 443 
 Subprime loans, 441–442, 718 
 Subscription warrants, 906, 907–908 
 Subsequent events, 201–202 
 Subsidiaries, 966 
 foreign, 989–994 
 unconsolidated, 631–633 
 Substantively enacted tax rate, 788 
 Subway, 138 
 Summary of Significant Accounting 
Policies, 200–201 
 Sum-of-the-years’ digits (SYD) 
depreciation, 567–568 
 Sunbeam Corporation, 425–427 
 Sunoco Inc., 502 
 Supercuts, 138 
 Supervalu, 259, 260–261, 261n, 704 
 Suppliers, demand for financial statements, 9 
 Swanson, E., 147n 
 Swaps 
 debt-for-debt, 621–625 
 debt-for-equity, 621–625 
 Sokobin, J., 441n 
 Solomon, D., 554n 
 Solvency, 188, 266, 270–272 
 Sorter, G., 478n 
 Sougiannis, T., 557n 
 Southwest Airlines, 633, 704 
 Spatt, C., 441n 
 Special or unusual items, 67–68 
 Special purpose entities (SPEs), 437n, 
632–633, 718, 985–986, 999, 1000. 
 See also Securitization entity (SE) 
 Specific identification, 481–482 
 Speculation, 132 
 Sponsor, 825 
 Sprint Nextel Corporation, 704 
 Srivastava, A., 147n 
 Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) 
codes, 786 
 Standard & Poor’s Corp., 277–278, 
336–339, 438n, 439n 
 Stand ready obligation, 654–655 
 Stanley Black & Decker, Inc., 1077–1078 
 Starbucks Corporation, 820–821, 946–947 
 Stated interest rate, bond, 604 
 Stated (par) value, 896 
 Statement of cash flows, 202–214, 
1031–1092 
 cash flows versus accrual earnings, 
204–209 
 common-size, 253–254 
 deriving cash flow information, 
209–214 
 distortion of operating cash, 1053–1059 
 accounts receivable sale (securitization) 
versus collateralized borrowing, 
1053–1054 
 capitalizing versus expensing, 1054 
 capital versus operating leases, 
1055–1057 
 changes in working capital accounts, 
1053 
 software development costs, 
1054–1055 
 stock option expense, 1057–1059 
 financing activities, 203, 204, 276, 1032, 
1046–1047 
 international accounting issues, 214–216, 
1059–1062 
 investing activities, 203, 204, 275, 1032, 
1045–1046 
 operating activities, 203, 204, 208, 
214–216, 274–275, 1032, 1040–1045 
 other elements, 1039–1040 
 preparing 
 cash flows from financing activities, 
1046–1047 
 cash flows from investing activities, 
1045–1046 
 cash flows from operating activities, 
1040–1045 
 Securitization, cautions for financial statement 
analysis, 442–443, 1053–1054 
 Securitization entity (SE), 437–440, 986 
 Sefcik, S. E., 389n 
 Segal, D., 315n 
 Segment reporting, 281–288 
 definition of reportable segment, 281–283 
 Harley-Davidson, Inc., 284–288 
 required disclosures, 283–284 
 Seiz, R., 919n 
 Seniority, public debt, 334 
 Sensitivity analysis, 343 
 Serial bonds, 604 
 Service activation fees, revenue recognition 
abuses, 150 
 Service cost, defined benefit plan, 831–833 
 Servpro, 138 
 Settlement, troubled debt restructuring, 444, 
445, 450 
 Settlement losses (gains), 865 
 7-Eleven Inc., 138 
 Seven Group Holdings Limited, 1083, 1085 
 Shackelford, D., 421n 
 Share dilution, 894, 894n 
 Shareholders’ equity, 902–903.  See also 
Owners’ equity 
 Shaw, W., 389n 
 Sheraton Corporation of America, 548, 578 
 Shevlin, T., 332n, 747n, 774n 
 Shkonda, K., 1054n 
 Shopko, 1023–1024 
 Short-term investments, 190 
 Short-term loans, credit risk assessment, 333 
 Short-term pension risk ratio, 861 
 Short-term speculation, 955–956 
 Siegel, J., 329n 
 Sigma fund, 190 
 Signals, debt covenants, 373–374 
 Silvers, Damon, 323n 
 Simko, P. J., 506n 
 Simon, A., 484n, 513n 
 Simple capital structure, 905–906 
 Simple interest, 1093 
 Singapore Airlines, 740 
 Sinking fund provisions, 334 
 Sirius XM Radio Inc., 822 
 Skinner, D. J., 378n, 390n, 394n 
 Slack, 378 
 Sloan, Alfred P., 381n 
 Sloan, R. G., 317n, 347n, 389n, 390n 
 Slotting fees, 480–481 
 Smith, C. W., 380n, 634n 
 Smithfield Foods, 924–925, 927 
 Smithson, C. W., 634n, 647n 
 Snap-On, Inc., 658–660 
 Society of Actuaries, 835n 
 Soffer, L., 312n, 317n, 347n 
 Soffer, R., 312n, 317n, 347n 
 Software development costs, 557–558, 
1054–1055 

 
Index 
1121
 Troubled debt restructuring, 443–450 
 continuation with modification, 444, 
445–449 
 defined, 443–444 
 GAAP rules, 449–450 
 indicators of financial difficulty, 444 
 settlement, 444, 445, 450 
 True and fair view, 29 
 Trust preferred security, 898–899 
 Trybol AG, 409–410 
 Tuna, I., 144n, 145n, 146n, 154n, 332n 
 Tweedie, David, 46 
 Twite, G., 774n 
 Tyco International, 372 
 Type A leases, 722–723 
 Type B leases, 722–723 
U
 Unbiased expectations, 330–331 
 Uncertain tax position, 778–782 
 assessing disclosures, 782 
 defined, 778–779 
 international tax issues, 791–792 
 making changes or resolving, 781–782 
 related to a permanent difference, 
779–780 
 related to timing of deductibility, 
780–781 
 Uncollectibles 
 adequacy of allowance for uncollectible 
account balance, 419–421 
 defined, 417 
 direct write-off method, 418 
 estimating, 417–419, 653 
 gross accounts receivable, 419 
 loss contingencies, 653 
 sales revenue approach, 418 
 writing of bad debt, 418, 419 
 Unconsolidated subsidiaries, 631–633 
 Under Armour, 823 
 Underfunded pension plans, 827, 850 
 Understandability principle, 19 
 Unearned revenues, adjusting entries, 93 
 Union Pacific Corporation, 704, 886–888 
 United Airlines, 371, 704 
 U.S. Constitution, Sixteenth Amendment, 36 
 U.S. Department of the Treasury, increase in 
incidence of accounting 
irregularities, 152–153 
 United States Steel Corp., 502 
 Units-of-production (UP) depreciation, 
566, 568 
 Universal Hospital Services, Inc. (UHS), 
155–157 
 Unrealized holding gains, 485 
 Unrealized holding losses, 618 
 Unsecured credit, 333 
 UPS, 116–117 
 Upton, C. W., 690n 
 Temporary (timing) differences, 192 
 between book income and taxable 
income, 746–751 
 defined, 746 
 examples, 747 
 problems caused by, 748–751 
 10-K filing, 40 
 10-Q filing, 40 
 Terminal value, 346 
 Term lending agreements, 333 
 Tesoro Corp., 502 
 Thaler, R., 332n 
 Thiagarajan, R., 329n 
 Thomas, J. K., 327, 332n, 847n 
 Thompson, R. B., II, 506n 
 Thompson Financial (First Call), 80 
 Thorne-Jenkins, N., 895n 
 Throughput agreements, 986 
 Tiemann, J., 441n 
 Tier I capital, 466n 
 Tiffany & Company, 297 
 Timeliness principle, 19 
 Time-series analysis, 68, 239–240, 982–984 
 Time value of money, 1093–1101 
 future value, 1093–1094 
 present value, 1094–1101 
 Timing differences, 192 
 Titman, S., 774n 
 TiVo, 556 
 Toshiba Corporation, 48 
 Total liabilities, 272 
 Toyota Motor Company, 33 
 Traceable costs, 64 
 Trade receivables.  See Accounts receivable 
 Trading securities, 190, 955 
 intercorporate debt instruments, 1007 
 intercorporate equity investments, 
955–958, 995–999 
 minority passive investments, 955–958 
 Transferor, 436 
 Transitory earnings component, 327–328 
 Translating self-contained foreign 
subsidiaries, 989, 992–994 
 Treadway Commission, 15, 42 
 Treasury stock method, 908, 910 
 Tredegar Industries Inc., 939 
 Trend analysis, 248–253 
 improved, 497–499 
 LIFO-to-FIFO adjustment, 497–499 
 Trend statements, 239, 246–254 
 balance sheets, 248–253 
 income statements, 246–248 
 statement of cash flows, 253–254 
 Trezevant, R., 502n 
 Triggers 
 accounting changes as, 376–377 
 debt covenants as, 373–374 
 impairment testing, 973, 974 
 loss level for write-down, 559 
 Troubled, defined, 444 
 interest-rate, 637, 647–648, 650 
 swap contracts, 637–638 
 Swartz, Mark, 372 
 Sweeney, A. P., 377n 
 Sweeney, R. J., 67n, 72n 
 Synthetic leases, 718 
T
 T-account analysis, 88–99 
 adjusting entries, 92–94 
 as analytical technique, 97–99 
 closing entries, 96–97 
 credits, 90–92 
 debits, 90–92 
 posting journal entries, 94–95 
 Take-or-pay contracts, 986 
 Take-Two Interactive Software, Inc., 
1091–1092 
 Tangible assets 
 asset impairment, 558–560, 579–580 
 international accounting issues, 576–578, 
579–580 
 Tangible net worth, 240 
 Target Corporation, 594–596, 704 
 Taxable income, 191–192, 745–751.  See 
also Income tax reporting 
 computation, 795–797 
 defined, 745 
 permanent differences between taxable 
income and, 745–746, 748 
 temporary (timing) differences between 
taxable income and, 745–751 
 Tax deductibility, uncertain tax position 
related to timing of, 780–781 
 Taxes.  See Income tax reporting; Taxable 
income; Tax position 
 Taxes payable, 797 
 Tax incentive to overfund pension plans, 
income tax reporting, 846 
 Tax position, 778 
 uncertain, 778–782 
 assessing disclosures, 782 
 defined, 778–779 
 international tax issues, 791–792 
 making changes or resolving, 781–782 
 related to a permanent difference, 
779–780 
 related to timing of deductibility, 
780–781 
 Tax Reform Act of 1993, 384–385 
 Taylor, D., 439n 
 Taylor, E., 410n 
 TCBY Enterprises, 374–375 
 Technical default, 377 
 Technological feasibility, 556, 1054–1055 
 Tecumseh Products Company, 295 
 Telstra Corporation Limited, 1083, 1084 
 Temporal method, nonfreestanding foreign 
subsidiaries, 989–992, 993 

1122 
Index
 profitability analysis, 255–261 
 shareholders’ equity, 902–903 
 solvency analysis, 266, 271–272 
 trend statements, 246–254 
 Wilford, D. S., 634n 
 Willet, E. R., 36n 
 Wilson, G. P., 421n 
 Wilson, P., 421n, 1031n 
 Wilson, Ryan, 774n, 778n 
 Winklevoss, H. E., 859n 
 Winn Dixie, 918 
 Wolfson, M., 421n, 747n, 774n 
 Wong, F., 763n 
 WorkCover Queensland, 86 
 Worker, Homeownership, and Business 
Assistance Act of 2009, 758 
 Working capital accounts, changes in, 1053 
 Work-in-process inventory, 267, 469, 477 
 WorldCom, 1–2, 3–6, 15, 31, 153, 
554–555, 917 
 Worthy, F. S., 144n 
 Wright, D. W., 702n 
 Write-down of assets.  See Asset impairment 
 Write-offs 
 for bad debts, 419 
 due to obsolescence, 1049 
 restructuring, 1049 
 for uncollectibles, 418 
 Wu, M., 154n 
 Wysoki, P., 332n 
Y
 Yield, effective, 193–194 
 Yohn, T. L., 67n, 72n 
Z
 Zarowin, P., 315n 
 Zeckhauser, R., 144n 
 Zeff, S. A., 21n, 35n, 41n, 128n, 548n, 
705n, 912n 
 Zero-coupon/zero-yield convertible debt, 928 
 Zhou, R., 332n 
 Zimmerman, J., 380n 
 Zion, D., 151n 
 Zmijewski, M., 280, 280n 
 Z-scores, 278–280  
 Walther, B., 13n, 323n 
 Wang, Charles, 415 
 Wang, S., 396n 
 Warfield, T. D., 898n, 899n 
 Wargo, Al, 650 
 Warrants, 906, 907–908 
 Warranty expense.  See Product warranties 
 Washington Mutual, 398 
 Waste Management Inc., 1022–1023 
 Watson, J., 315n 
 Watts, R. L., 19n, 315n, 323n, 380n 
 Wealth transfer gain, 623 
 Weber, J., 378n, 911n 
 Weber, R., 774n 
 Weighted-average cost of capital 
(WACC), 311n 
 Weighted average inventory costing 
method, 470 
 Weil, R. L., 503n 
 Wellington International Airport Limited, 
105–106 
 Wellman, Avraham, 652–653 
 Wells, P., 315n 
 Wessels, D., 312n, 317n 
 Westerfield, R. W., 276n, 310n, 634n 
 Wheeler, J., 774n 
 Whisenant, S., 329n 
 Whole Foods Market, 19, 242–261, 291 
 cash flow/credit analysis, 272–277 
 cause-of-change analysis, 243–246 
 common-size balance sheets, 248–253 
 common-size cash flow statements, 
253–254 
 common-size income statements, 
246–248 
 credit risk, 265–266 
 debt ratios, 271 
 default risk, 277–280 
 depreciating long-lived assets, 569–572 
 intrinsic stock price estimate, 344–347 
 lessee disclosure, 704, 705–706, 722, 
724–729 
 leverage analysis, 262–263 
 LIFO-to-FIFO adjustment, 491, 492 
 liquidity analysis, 269–270 
 management compensation linked to 
economic value added (EVA), 
386, 413–414 
V
 Valero Energy Corp., 502 
 Valuable property rights, 695 
 Valuation 
 abnormal earnings approach, 317–321, 
340–347 
 business, 309, 310–321 
 cash flow assessment, 309, 310–314, 
340–347 
 earnings, 314–316, 323–332 
 equity, 323–332 
 fundamental, 309, 321–323 
 international accounting issues, 323 
 intrinsic stock price estimate, 344–347 
 value-relevance, 310, 323–332 
 Value-irrelevant earnings component, 
327–328 
 Value-relevant attribute, 310, 323–332 
 VanDerhei, J., 846n 
 Variable costs, 476–480 
 Variable interest entities (VIEs), 439n, 633, 
985–986, 999, 1000 
 Vasvari, F., 339n 
 Vendor allowances, 480–481 
 Verifiability principle, 19, 548 
 Verizon Communications Inc., 704 
 Vermaelen, T., 893n 
 Vesting, 828–829, 919, 921 
 Vickery, J., 441n 
 Vincent, L., 329n, 388n, 389n, 975–976, 
976n 
 Visa Inc., 672–673 
 Vodafone Group Plc, 903–904, 1060, 1061 
 Volatility, defined, 920 
 Volcker, Paul A., 917n 
 Voluntary Employees Beneficiary 
Association (VEBA) trust, 862n 
 Voting rights, 953 
W
 W. T. Grant, 277 
 Wachovia, 398 
 Wahlen, J., 421n 
 Walgreen Co., 501, 502, 743–744 
 Walmart, 196, 204, 205, 266–269, 271, 475, 
594–596, 704 
 Walters, P., 1060n 

