
FindingAnyone,
Anywhere,
Anyruhen
Noel Montgomery 
Elliot
FrnErLY Boors

A FrnErry Boor
Published by Firefly Books Ltd.2009
Copyright O 2009 Firefly Books Ltd.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the Publisher.
First printing
PublisherCataloging-in-PublicationData LibraryandArchivesCanada
(U.S.) 
Cataloguing in Publication
Elliot, Noel Montgomery l94l- 
Elliot, Noel Montgomery, 1941-
Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anylvhen I 
Finding anyone anylvhere anywhen /
Noel Montgomery Elliot. 
Noel Montgomery Elliot.
Originally published: Brampton, ON: 
Includes index.
Genealogical Research Library 2W5. 
ISBN-I3: 978-1-55407-470-9
f3201 p. : ill. ; cm. 
ISBN-I0: l-55407-470-3
Includes index. 
L Web sites-Directories. 2. Internet
Summary: Techniques for using the Internet 
searching. 3. Genealogy-Computer
to locate people who lived during any 
network resources. 4. Investigations-
century in the past, as well as how to find 
Computer network resources. I. Title.
people living today in any place in the 
2A4201.F.44 2009 
025.04
world. 
C2008-907445-9
ISBN-l 3 : 978- I -55407 -47 0-9 (pbk.)
ISBN- 1 0: | -55407 -470-3 (pbk.)
I . Genealogy-Computer network
resources-Handbooks, manuals, etc. 2.
Genealogy-Computer network re sources-
Directories. I. Title.
025,069291 dc22 
CS21.5E555 2009
Published in the United States by 
Published in Canada by
Firefly Books (U.S.) Inc. 
Firefly Books Ltd.
P.O. Box 1338, Ellicott Station 
66 Leek Crescent
Buffalo, New York 14205 
Richmond Hill, Ontario L4B lHl
Printed in Canada
The publisher gratefully acknowledges the financial support for our publishing program by
the Government of Canada through the Book Publishing Industry Development Program.

Thble of Contents
Our lliddm History
13
The^ryUfotds
Finding People in the Past
55
Th,e Lost Genealogi,es
83
Finding People in tlrc Present
115
Tlc Fuhrre Intemet
127
Worldrui.de Website Directory
131
Infux
315
Introduction
7

Disclaimer:
The information contained in this book represents the views
of the author and therefore all information contained herein
is provided on an "as is" basis without warranty of any kind,
either express or implied. The reader assumes the entire risk
as to the accuracy and the use of this book. Website addresses
mentioned in this book are being provided as a convenience
and for informational purposes only; they do not constitute an
endorsement or an approval by the author or The Genealogical
Research 
Library, Inc., ofany ofthe products, service s or opinions
of any corporation or organization or individual. The author
and The Genealogical Research Library bear no responsibility
for the accuracy, legality or content of said websites or their
addresses. 
Please contact the owners or operators of websites
for answers to questions regarding content. The author is
Director of Research of The Genealogical Research Library,
Inc., which operates the website, www.grl.com. The author
welcomes comments and corrections at noel@gr1.com.

Introduction
In the beginnirg, our ancient ancestors created artwork
and text, pictographs and hieroglyphics, and each
created work was an original.
With the invention of the printing press, mass
production of copies of any original work became
possible. Creativity exploded worldwide. As costs
came down, the ability ofpeople to share artandprinted
communication created a virtual torrent of knowledge
and information.
It is always the creativity of individuals-inventors,
innovators and visionaries-that leads the way.
The invention of radio and television created
instantaneous mass communication. Each broadcast
meant that anyone with a receiver would receive a
simultaneous copy of the original work. Recording
devices allowed copies to be literally frozen in time,
for later playback.
In 1958, Jack St. Clair Kilby invented the integrated
electronic circuit, or microchip. His invention paved
the way for the miniaturrzation of computers and the
birth of the Internet. Once again, another creative
individual influenced and changed the world.

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anyone
And so it was with the invention of the popular
personal computer or PC. The Apple computer, one
popular example, was born in I 97 5. TWo teenagers in
California were largely responsible for its success.
The Apple was designed by Steve Wozniak to
demonstrate 
to his local computer club, and when a store
ordered 50 oftheffi, he and his friend Steve Jobs, began
production. The Apple II and its clones revolutioni zed
the lives of millions of people throughout the United
States and Canada.
The low price of PCs brought them within reach of
highly creative and talented young people in their teens
and twenties. For the first time, the power previously
available only to multinational corporations and
governments was suddenly available to the public.
Apple computer clubs swept the continent. Here, in
monthly meetings, computer enthusiasts 
could meet to
excitedly discuss new ideas and try out new experiments
and programs.
Still, one thing was missing. And thatmissing something
created a truly formidable challenge.
These avid computer club enthusiasts and other PC
users wanted to go far beyond their local clubs and
neighborhoods. They wanted nothing less than to be
able to communicate 
globally, and exchange ideas with
other young people all over the world.

Introduction
To do this, they needed to cross language and
geographical barriers, and political boundaries. It also
had to be free, or almost free. How on earth could all
these creative people-potentially millions of people
scattered around the globe-share information and
communicate with each other?
A large part of the answer came during a remarkable
four-year period from l99l to 1994. A visionary
scientist named Tim Berners-Lee, working in Geneva,
Switzerland, created a shared information space which
allowed communication among a group of research
scientists. These scientists needed the ability to retrieve
information regardless of the variety of computer
platforms that were in use at the time.
Berners-Lee's real intent, however, even in his first
proposal in 1989, went far beyond the needs of the
physicists he worked with. He envisioned nothing less
than a worldwide communication system for public
use. And from 1995 onwards" the World Wide Web
literally skyrocketed in populartty.
True, there were many Internet protocols being
developed as early as the late 1960s, particularly by
the U.S. military, and small nets were being used at an
early date. It was the public's demand, however, that
exploded the Internet into the real global phenomenon
it has now become.

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
Today, the distinction has become blurred between the
Internet and the WorldWide Web (www). In this book I
will often use the words interchangeably, 
but generally
speaking, the word Internet will always include the
World Wide Web.
The idea of retrieving information was paramount for
the scientists in Switzerland when the World Wide
Web was born, and it is still paramount. Remember
this: everything that we call human history is simply
what individuals have done, whether they acted alone
or in a group. And retrieving information about
individuals, precisely and aceurately, is what this
book is all about.
The Internet opened up tremendous resources that are
extending deep within all fields of knowledge. The
most remote details from the ancient past are coming
alive at an unbelievable rate. New discoveries in the
present are being added as they occur. Timelines
become blurred: the first partofthis sentence 
is alre ady
in the past.
New information is accumulating at a stupendous
rate. It cannot be fathomed by any one person. It is
unprecedented. 
Nobody, not even governments, can
stay on top of it.
Every day hundreds of millions of new facts become
available. Those who delve too deeply into the
10

Introduction
information world find themselves speaking of a new
disease - information overload.
This book is designed to provide you with the specific
techniques that allow you to find and identify almost
any individual, whether that person lived a hundred
years dgo, a thousand years dgo, or even if that person
is alive and living in our world today. This book will
also provide you with the tools you need for navigation
as the Internet unfolds.
You will also be sharing a vision of where the
information highway is headirg, what type of traffic it
will have in the future and whv.
To clearly see that future vision, we must flrst explore
some unknown ancient history about ourselves.
This ancient history is quite well hidden. It is unknown
to the vast majority of people in the world today. That,
however, is all about to change.
11

Our Hidden History
Homo Sapiens at Dawn
The birth of modern man begins many thousands of
years ago. Scholarly ancient history books along with
recent archaeological 
discoveries have told us far more
today than what was known just one generation ago. It
is for certain, however, that our beginnings are rooted
in small tribal groups or clans.
The members of these tribes are truly our ancient
ancestors. 
If they did not exist. then we would not exist
today.
Recent discoveries are making it clear, however,
that if we do not relearn some basic truths about our
ancient past, our civilization today will most likely
collapse-not in some distant future like some have
imagined-but perhaps within our lifetime. If society
and governments incur great errors, it will be partly
because we forgot where we came from.
Many historians have studied the differences between
ancient tribes. Emphasizing differences is only half the
story, however, and focusing just on differences alone
may be misleading.
After all, if you focus just on the differences between
you and your own siblings, without understanding
l 3

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
the similarities and common elements, it might result
in a fight. If we focus on differences only between
nations, but without understandin 
E, Lt could-and has
in countless instances-led to war and destruction.
Instead of differences, let us look at the similarities
between all of the ancient tribes, and see if we can pick
up some new understanding. 
Remember: many of these
tribes developed seemingly unknown to each other,
on several continents. And yet there were three major
similarities between all of them. It is the similarities
that provide important and crucial clues about our own
nature, charucteristics and origin.
1 .
Kinship
A11 early tribes were charactertzedby a strong energy-
bond we call kinship. Each member of the tribe felt
a strong sense of belonging. They shared a powerful
family feeling. This bond created a strong rapport and
affinity between each member of the tribe. They knew
how they were all related to each other. They understood
this on very deep levels and felt that relationship
emotionally. It was a constant.
2. 
A Common Ancestor
Early tribes all carrie4 from generation to generation,
the verbal story of a common ancestor. The common
ancestor was seen as the tribe's founder, head or chief.
T4

Our Hidden Hlstorv
He was viewed as the ancestor 
from whom they had all
descended. 
This shared belief strengthened 
the kinship
feeling among every member of the tribe and provided
a sense of purpose and value to the very existence of
the tribe itself. Every man, woman and child felt this
force: they had a common ancestor.r
3. 
Shared Religious Beliefs
Shared religious beliefs, regardless 
ofwhat other groups
believed, acted as a unifying force, and strengthened
the feeling of oneness among each member of the tribe.
It also helped to ensure the probability and protection
of their descendants.
The Rise of the Nation-State
As tribes grew larger and larger through the centuries,
they would encounter other tribes, and if friendly
enough they might coexist and engage in trade, or even
form alliances against an invading tribe that appeared
to be a common threat. Some encounters, however,
were more like clashes, and the differences in beliefs
and symbols spawned a multitude of rivalries, conflicts
and wars.
Those thatprevailed in wars, whether by physical might
or intelligence, formed what we call nation-states. 
This
led to formation of countries and nations, usually led
by monarchs, demigods, emperors or dictators. The
l 5

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
important thing to remember about this development is
that the oneness or family feeling that previously was
a common characteristic of each tribe was gradually
displaced within this new framework of society. The
feeling of kinship declined as nation-states continued
to move aggressively up through the hallways of time
and into the fufure, eventually reaching what we now
call our lifetime.
Now we have arrived in our present world. Countless
conflicts are going on around the world. We sense many
threats to our future existence. Yet these impending
threats are mixed in with the hopes of the majority of
people who wish for a more peaceful life in the future,
along with reasonable 
prosperity.
It is during this time, in just slightly more than a decade,
that the Internet has flourished. Like any new tool or
invention, it has the potential for great harm, or great
benefit. It really depends on how it is used.
The Internet is part of the new media along with
television and a plethora of electronic gadgets.
The media forms our new community. The
electronic village is our hometown. 
. We
know celebrities but they don't know us.
The new community is not a reciprocal
neighborhood like earlier ones. These
vicarious relations help create a new kind of
1 6

Our Hidden Hlsrctr-t
loneliness-the loneliness of people whose
relationships are with personae instead of
persons.2
The Discovery of Ebla
Ebla is typical ofthe archaeological 
discoveries 
that keep
changing our previous concepts about early civilization
and bring a wealth of new information to light.
For 15 years archaeologists 
had been digging in the
mounds of an ancient civrhzatton on the plain of Syria.
The dig took place between ancient Egypt and the
Mesopotamian empire.
Then, in 1968, the archives of an ancient city-state
were unearthed revealing 15,000 clay tablets covered
in an unknown cuneiform writing. At first, none of the
experts were able to translate the writing, even though
there are almost 7,000 known living languages in the
world today.3
A little later, the archaeologists made yet another
fortunate discovery. They found a unique set of tablets
within the archive that showed the unknown Eblamite
words along with the equivalent words in Sumerian.
By good fortune, Sumerian was a language that was
understood by language experts. Suddenly they had
the key to understanding this unknown language.
t 7

Findin g Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
Incidentally, these translation tablets formed the oldest
dictionary or lexicon ever discovered on our planet.
Armed with the key to deciphering the Eblamite
tablets, the experts began the unprecedented task of
translation. No archaeologists had ever encountered
15,000 clay tablets that required translation.
In the words of Dr. Giovanni Pettinato, an expert in
ancient languages who had participated in the Italian
Archaeological Mission in Syria,
All the other texts of this period recovered
to date do not total a fourth of those from
Ebla.a
A remarkably clear view of daily life in ancient Ebla
began to unfold. The records being translated cover
trade, commerce and the historical chronicles of
this ancient empire. The details include over 5,000
geographical 
place-names. 
In essence, 
Ebla is rewriting
much of history in that part of the ancient world.
Among thousands of people recorded in the tablets is
the name of Davi{ which has never been found in such
ancient texts except the Bible. The large number of
genealogical 
references include the names ofAbraham,
Esau, Saul and a King Ebrium, who was believed by
some scholars to be Eber, the great-great-grandson 
of
1 8

Our Hidden Hlstory
Noah. Ebla's scribes had even kept track of the names
of the people just traveling through their country.
In the Old Testament of the Bible, the Book of
Deuteronomy refers to Abraham's grandfather as being
a Syrian. These discoveries have excited and mystified
scholars of Judaism, Christianity and Islam, and have
left historians thinking anew about the formative years
of ancient civ thzation.
Although the discovery of Ebla is fascinating, it is just
one of a multitude of other discoveries coming to light
all over the world. Some recent discoveries are nothing
short of astonishing.
For example, more than 400,000 fragments of scrolls,
books andpapyrus were found in a 30-foot deep city dump
near Oxyrhynchus, an ancient provincial capital in Egypt
that dates from Roman times. Some of these fragments
are more than 2,000 years old. Another large deposit of
fragments from an ancient library has also been found
in Herculaneum. The fragments are covered with grime,
soot and ash-the result of volcanoes and fires.
Now, thanks to NASA technology and innovative
scientists, enhanced multispectral imaging allows
researchers to see through multiple layers of these
fragments, even black upon black layers, to actually see
the original writing clear enough to read reconstruct
and recreate as modern images.
1 9

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
Texts from these two cities now being translated
include property records, New Testament epistles,
early Islamic writings and fragments of lost plays by
Euripides, Sophocles, and unknown works by the most
famous classical writers and poets of antiquity.i Only
20 years ago many historians would have thought such
scientific achievements 
were utterly impossible.
Many of the missing pieces of our true and ancient
history are now coming to light. The shape of history
is altering so quickly and on such a large scale that
the authors of our history books arc hard-pressed to
stay abreast of the changes that follow each new major
discovery.
Let me put it this way: the new revelations of science and
archaeology require constant updating of our textbooks
if we are to live in an aware and educated societv.
'/
The Discoverv of Cousinhood
Consider this opening phrase of a poem published in
1670 by John Wilmot:
The world appears like a great family.6
Later, in 1839, William Blackstone published a classic
work entitled Commentary on the Laws of England.T In
his research, he had noted that we all have a surprising
number of ancestors.
20

Our Hidden Hlstorv
For example, you have two parents, different from each
other, or you would not exist.
It would seem logical to assume that your two parents
each had two parents also, and therefore you have four
grandparents. And you might further assume that your
four grandparents each had two parents, and so on.
Your ancestors seemingly double with each generation
as you go back in time. And although this may seem
very logical and correct, it is actually not true! In fact,
it's impossible. You can prove it to yourself in a few
minutes.
Take a calculator and keep doubling your ancestors
every 28 years or so (an average generation) and before
you can get back to 2000 years &go, your ancestors
outnumber the total world population at that time! And
remember: we're not talking about anyone else - just
your ancestors! The truth is, human history is loaded
with cousins marrying cousins, far beyond what most
people would ever imagine.
Mathematicians, genealogists and other scientists
have examined this apparent enigma and have come
to one conclusion: many of your ancestors knowingly
or unknowingly married their cousins. This resulted in
a reduction in the number of ancestors from the usual
rate of expansion.
21

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
Genealogists 
call this phenomenon pedigree collapse.
Pedigree collapse appears to have first been mentioned
in a paper by Robert C. Gunderson.s 
It means that our
ancient family trees are much smaller than we used
to believe. As well, these repeated marriages between
related cousins are far more plentiful in the past than
we ever imagined. Parts of our ancestral family tree
had branches that were expanding at a normal rate
while other branches were contracting by comparison.
Certain individuals may show up in your family tree
more than once. Acknowledging these events is the
only way to reconcile world population with the fact
that we each have two parents.e
In a more extreme example, the marrrage of a brother
and sister has quite a dramatic effect. This happened in
some royal families, for instance. When a brother and
sister marry, then there are only the same two people
as parents for both of them in the previous generation,
not four.
Often, because of religious and cultural beliefs, known
sexual liaisons between certain individuals with their
cousins were kept quiet and were closely guarded
secrets. Genetic evidence is changing all that.
Far more children were born out of wedlock than our
parents and grandparents ever would have believed.
In fact, many of our parents and grandparents simply
22

Our Hidden Hlstory
wouldn't want to believe that this happened so
often. This is understandable. 
After all, there was no
convincing evidence of this reality until recently.
A term I particularly dislike is the word illegitimate
when applied to children. Any child born into this
world is as legitimate as any other chil{ and the use of
the term illegitimate is of ill intent and demeaning and
should never be used.
It would be more approprrate to refer to the activities
of a parent of the child as engaging in illegitimate
activities, contravening their vows or disrespecting
social norms, but the child is not guilty of anything.
Today, DNA evidence and the human genome project
have led to much closer linkage and cooperation
between two very complementary sciences: genealogy
and genetics.
While scientists may continue to argue about the exact
and final degree of relationship, it is evident to them
that everyone in the world is related. The relationship
between us all is very clear:
We are all cousins
Many scientists now estimate that no person in the
world could be further apartfrom you than 50th cousin.
other scientists believe that nobody else in the world
- t 1
z )

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
today could be any further apart from you than 32nd
cousin. But they all agree on one thing: that we are
cousins.
You may ask, "Does this include all of the various races
besides my own?" The answer is an emphatic yes. Yes,
it includes all so-called races. No exceptions.
Even remote tribes are not really being discovered for
the first time. They are only being rediscovered a very
long time after they were separated from other ancient
tribes. In more ancient times they had ancestors in
common to us all. And the latest evidence still indicates
the origin of our species took place in Afric a and spread
out from there to other continents.
The most remote tribes are part of the overall human
gene pool. In their ancient history they were inter-
mingled with other tribes and had common ancestors
with them before being cut off through exploration,
nafural catastrophes or other events.
When you hear news about a remote tribe being
discovere{ remember they represent those more
distant 32nd or 50th cousins. They are cousins greatly
removed by degree, but nevertheless 
they are still our
cousins. 
ro
As Guy Murchie pointed out, each one of us has
ancestors that include:
24

all the blacks,
Latins, Eskimos
around AD 700.1t
On a very positive
Shoumatoff, had this
cousinhood:
Our Hidden Hlstory
Chinese, Arabs, Malays,
who lived on Earth
note, another author, Alex
to say on the subject of
The political implications of this great
kindred are quite exciting. If all of us
could be made aware of our multiple inter-
relatedness, 
if the same sort of altruism that
usually exists among close kin could prevail
through the entire humanpopulation . . . [our]
differences . . . would seem secondary."
It is evident as we look at today's world that the
knowledge about our ancient kinship feelings and
our beginnings are unknown to the vast majority of
people.
It is also evident that most people are unaware of
the vast wealth of names of people and places being
unearthed in ancient archives every yeaL
Many of the tribes existing today pass along vast
genealogies 
of their ancestors orally. They are recited
aloud from the eldest to the youngest. Now these
genealogies are being recorded and documented by
the younger generations. This is all possible with
25

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
modern tape, CD and DVD recording devices and
with video cameras.
Vast archives in the Vatican contain details about
millions of people who lived during past centuries.
They wait for their reawakening to be acknowledged
in the world of digital data. Other religious institutions
have contributions to make as well. We're waiting for
them too.
However, the biggest unknown fact is still this: all
of the people who ever lived in the past, along with
everyone alive today, are cousins.
The factthatthese things are unknownproduces 
the exact
opposite effect of what was true of our ancestors who
lived in those ancient tribes: most of us don't feel any
kinship feelings with people of different nationalities.
Most of us only feel kinship for a very few of our
own nationality. We have lost that kinship feeling, that
oneness feeling, that should exist within mankind.
As a result of this lack of knowledge, we are obviously
paying the consequences 
right now. The consequences
are wars, genocide, starvation, disease, murder and
other atrocities. In truth, our ignorance is working
against the probability of our own future existence.
Are we not aware of the 2,000-year-old expression,
A house divided against itself cannot stand?1r
26

Our Hidden Hlstorv-
What Creates Prejudice?
If you think about the fact those millions of ancestors
lead precisely and directly down through the centuries
to you, you may begin to change some of your built-in
assumptions. 
Try to imagine for just a few minutes the
range and kinds of people your ancestry includes.
Your ancestors include criminals, nobility, royalty and
scoundrels ofevery kind. Remove just one ofthem from
your ancestry and the you that is you right no% would
not even exist. Give that reahzation a few minutes of
your time. Refresh your memory screen.
Genealogical Bridges
Anthony Wagner is well known for his essays in
the genealogical interpretation of history. In his
scholarly book, Pedigree and Progress, he explains
how occurrences that took place centuries ago are
now emerging as major genealogical landmarks when
viewed from today's vantage point:
In the year 1265 a nephew of Kubla Khan,
Emperor of China, married the half-sister of
a Byzantine Emperor, who in 1279 married
the sister-in-law of a nephew of St. Louis,
King of France, and of Eleanor of Provence,
Queen of England.ra
27

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
This meant that 700 years ago a genealogical bridge
was connected across the continents ofEurope andAsia
in less than 15 years, and through only eight people.
This is just one example of the countless thousands
of genealogical bridges creating interlinkage between
races, nations and countries throughout the course of
human history. Every living person today is the result
of common ancestry and genealogical bridges.
I remember vividly an incident that occurred when I
was invited to speak to a group of students in a school
in Ontario.
While talking about cousinhood I noted that these
young children were absolutely fascinated. Then,
during recess, one of the teachers asked me to come
outside to the schoolyard where the children were
playing. She told me how one of the girls that had
been in my class had run out to all of her friends and
blurted out excitedly: "Did you know we're cousins?"
They all clustered around and were still talking about
it excitedly when I arrived.
I began to wonder at that point, "What if all children,
in every country were actually taught this when they
were young?" I think the change would be enormous,
and when these children reached university dga, they
might take their professors and leaders to task for not
understanding how this really changes everything.
28

Our Hidden Hlstorv
Could world wars develop if everyone had a kinship
feeling for all ethnic groups? Wouldn't we instead rely
far more on understanding, 
reasoning, negotiation and
real diplomacy?
Keep these discoveries in mind as we progress.
As the full implications of these discoveries are
assimilate{ our basic and fundamental ideas about
ourselves and our relationships with each other must
change.
Our educational institutions, by definition, should be
the early transmitters of these new perspectives, but
not by boring and repetitive lecturing. Instead:
Teaching is now understood as mafure
assistance to youthful learning, or self-
teaching. 
. The teacher becomes a part
of the learning group, sharing his greater
maturity and knowledge, but seeking out
ways of assisting others to learn rather than
going through an empty ritual of forced
feeding.ls
With the essence of this chapter in mind we will now
step into the Internet world and lock-in on the single
most important search technique we need to find the
proverbial needle in the haystack.
29

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
NOTES
' Cheyne, T. K. (D.D.), and Black, J Sutherland (LL.D), (Editors) et al,
Encyclopaedia Biblica, The MacMillan Company (NY) and Adam and
Charles Black, London, 1899.
2 Pipher, Mary. The Shelter of Each Other; Rebuilding Our Fqmilies, New
York: Random House, 1996.
3 See www.nationsonline.org.
4 P. 735, "Ebla, Splendor of an Unknown Empire",, l{ational Geographic
Magazine, (National Geographic Magazine, Vol. 154, No. 6, December,
1978, published by the National Geographic Society, Washington, DC.
5 Gugliotta, Guy, "Imaging Technology Makes Ancient Text Readable",
Washington Post staff writer, Washington Post (www.washingtonpost.
com), May 30, 2005.
6 Wilmot, John, Earl of Rochester, Like A Greqt Family, 1610.
7 Blackstone, William, Commentaries on the Law,s of England, The
Clarendon Press (Oxford University Press), Occana, NY, 1969.
8 Gunderson, Robert C., "Tying Your Pedigree into Royal,, Noble and
Medieval Families". Senior Royalty Research Specialist, Family History
Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.
e The Mountain of Names, A History of the Human Famifit, by Alex
Shoumatoff, 1985, A Touchstone Book, Simon & Shuster, NY.
t0 AreYou and I Really Cousins...or...How 
Maryt Ancestors Did We have
inA.D. I and in 1700 B.C.? byArden H. Braeme, Jr. II, OAE, Published
in The Augustan Society Omnibus Book 7 (1986),74-78. Robert L. Cleve,
Ph.D., OAE, KCR, Chairman of the Board The Augustan Society, Inc,
kindly supplied this article.
rl Murchie, Guy, The Seven Mysteries of Life: An Exploration of Science
and Philosophy, Mariner Books, 1999, pg 344ff.ISBN 0-39595-91-5
12 The Mountain of l{ames, A History of the Human Family, by Alex
Shoumatoff, 1985, A Touchstone Book, Simon & Shuster, NY.
30

Our Hidden Hlstorv
t3 Abraham Lincoln, quoted in his speech of June 6, 1858. Origin: The Holy
Bible, Matthew 12:25, when Jesus is recorded as saying "Every kingdom
divided against itself is brought to desolation; and every city or house
divided against itself shall not stand".
la Wagner, Anthony, Pedigree and Progress: Essays in the Genealogical
Interpretation of History, Phillimore & Co., Chichester, England, 1975.
Page 72.
15 Giles, Harry H. "Order and Pattern in Successful Teaching", from The
Educational Trend, December 1954. Also quoted by Morse, William C.
and Wingo C. Max, Psychology and kaching,
a
1
J I

The Internet Unfolds
When the Internet began, it is important to know that
there was an immediate need for convergence. 
By this
statement, I mean that text alone, without diagrams,
images, pictures and photos, wasn't enough.
Several centuries dgo, the brilliant educator Comenius
created a breakthrough in teaching and wrote a
revolutionary book entitled Orbis Pictus (Pictured
World). It was the first picture-book or illustrated
manual of instruction for the young. It was published
at Nuremberg, Germany in 1657 .
Comenius, with the instinct of a great
teacher, felt that to give words without things
(pictures) to the pupil was not simply to
retard his progress, but to lay the foundation
of vague and inaccutate conceptions.r
Another educator, Pestalozzr, ventured further by
trying to have the actual object in front of the child
learning the word-and from these two educators
"flowed the excellent custom of giving object lessons
in infant schools".2
Object lessons and show and tell sessions 
are still used
today in virtually every school. These techniques are
- l a
J J

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
tried tested and proven to more clearly communicate
ideas, topics and personal experiences.
And so it was that the Internet also needed, right from
the beginning, a convergence of images, pictures, and
text to bring about a clear understanding through this
new communication medium.
At first, websites sprang up more or less helter-skelter
and confusion abounded. one of the main challenges
was how to find the website that actually had the
information you were looking for.
This led to the natural need for massive indexes to the
data held on various websites. Ideally, these indexes
would guide researchers 
to the right place where they
might find the proverbial needle in a haystack.
If you know the history of nonfiction books to any
degree, one of the most basic requirements is an
index, especially when complex terminology is used
throughout the book.
Remember: a noun is the name of a person, place
or thing. Histori cally, our libraries always had card
catalogs in the past, and many still do.
These card catalogs were essentially indexes to the
book titles and subjects in a collection, and of course,
the authors had to be indexed by name as well. And
34

The Internet Unfolds
books about geographical regions, different languages
or from different countries had to be specified and
grouped together.
What happened in the history of books is very similar,
in part, to what has happened-and is continuing to
happen 
the Internet.
If we look at the history of books themselves, certain
kinds of books were really indexes with data attached.
Some of the major ones are:
Dictionaries
Lexicons
Encyclopedias
Bibliographies
Concordances
Directories
The Internet has many advantages 
over books, however,
because once books were reproduced digitally,
computer programs could be written to cross-reference
information in ways never before possible with books
in libraries.
On the Internet you can search many encyclopedias
for free. One of the best free encyclopedia websites
will even let you participate in creating this marvelous
resource. Take a look at the following website available
in 10 different languages:
35

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
http:llwikipedia.org
Every word written in a book or on a website could be
partofan index, and cross-referencing 
and sophisticated
crisscross indexing became the major centerpiece of
what are now known as search engines.
In 1962 the visionary Marshall Mcluhan stated:
When millions ofbooks can be compressed 
in
a match-box space, it is not the book merely,
but the library that becomes portable.3
In the near future, most libraries will expand to
become virtual libraries on the Internet. At first,
catalogs will go online, and then their older and
rarest books along with high-demand books. once
the data on the pages ofthese books has been digitally
converte4 then it can be shared globally. Best of all,
this can be provided to anyone at very low cost, and
in many instances for free.
In the future, our descendants 
will likely have library
buildings filled with physical books in their pioneer
villages, showing future citizens what life was like
during the early 2000s !
More and more libraries are being transported onto
the Internet to become virtual libraries. These virtual
libraries are indeed portable, whether the data covers a
36

The Internet Unfolds
dozenbooks or a million volumes. Books that were rare
and locked in climate controlled glass display cabinets
in the past, will be available to anyone, anywhere and
at anytime they wish.
One choice for users will be to view scanned images
(photographed pages) of books showing them as they
were originally. Many researchers need to see the
original work and form. This is particularly useful for
rare books, artwork, maps and illustrations.
Another choice will be viewing the digital data that
provides the user with the informational content, but
not the original appearance 
or form. These are digital
books.
Digital books are highly useful for many reasons, such
as changing the font type and size and republishing a
book that is in the public domain (not under copyright
protection). Many older books were in very tiny type
sizes, making them difficult to read. Now such works
can be available in very large easy to read fonts.
In the Western Hemisphere, Johannes Gutenberg
invented the printing press with removable metal or
wooden letters in I 436. China had already been printing
on a press using moveable hardened clay letters since
1041, although printing in China had begun long before
that, during the 800s.
37

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
Then, in the 1960s, along came offset printing or
instant printing, using photo-typesetting, and a new
revolution was born.
Suddenly a photograph could be made of a rare
work of art, and that photograph could be impressed
electronically on a metal or paper plate. Thousands of
copies could be produced automatically and instantly
without the need of any typesetting.
Many collectors of rare original artworks and maps
panicked at first, because they were afraid that if
someone took a picture of their rare masterpiece, the
value would be diminished.
Some purists felt that since early offset printing was
inferior in quality compared to the original artwork, it
would cheapen everything. They were all wrong.
Suppose you were a stamp collector, for example,
and you possessed 
a very rare stamp worth $100,000.
Someone could take a beautiful, high-resolution digital
photo of that stamp and the photo might be worth a
few dollars, but it is the original stamp that is worth
the $ 100,000.
Offset printing, by producing prints and copies of rare
art, cteated two marvelous benefits for both collectors
of rare art and the public at large.
38

The Internet Unfolds
First, everyone, even the poor and middle classes, could
afford a copy of a rare piece of art, and appreciate and
enjoy it in their own home.
Second" as millions of people shared the appreciation
and beauty of rare art, the value ofthe originals actually
went up. As more new people acquired wealth for the
first time, they had a new awareness 
of greatart through
seeing prints and pictures of it. Owning an original was
highly desired especially by the nouveau riche. Today,
investing in original works of art is a huge field and
prices continue to escalate over time.
Once again, the old marketing truths of supply and
demand were working, but in a new way.
It is important to reahze that nobody told the public to
buy this great reproduced art. People just looked at the
prints and were internally motivated within themselves
to acquire a copy or print. Just the exposure to art itself
motivated the public to buy.
Stores selling prints were simply displaying what was
avarlable, but not dictating what the public should like.
Observant storeowners quickly became aware of what
the public wanted.
I think one of the great errors of our time is marketing
people who try to dictate or limit the choice of the
public through strident advertising and controlled
39

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
distribution. Just show us everything avarlable, and we
will choose what we like. It's just the way it really is.
The Information Highway
The time we live in has often been called the
Information Age and we are truly witnessing nothing
less than an information revolution. While there is an
overwhelming explosion of data worldwide, wisdom
is needed to find our way through this overwhelming
morass of data. We need to hone in on our specific
objectives and goals without getting totally lost in a
never-ending and expanding universe of data.
Careful search techniques can locate information
minutes that may have taken many decades to find
the past.
For the most part, governments are rightly avoiding
direct taxation of Internet users. The invention and use
of the Internet was always premised upon it belonging
to the people. Nevertheless, governments are very
tempted to tax, especially in countries where the level
of greed of those in control rises above the people's
primary needs and rights.
When radio was first invented, the government stepped
in and required everyone who wanted to own a radio
receiver to purchase a license from the government.
Just listening to a radio in your home in the 1920s
m
in
40

The Internet Unfolds
required a radio license. A little experience with the
public reaction to licensing led government officials to
drop the idea very quickly decades ago.
Incidentally, speaking of radio, did you know that
many elements of the Internet came from the hobby of
amateur radio or ham radio? This fraternity of people
talked on short-wave radio to others in every country
of the world long before the Internet was invented.
They created and coined the word "net" where people
clustered together on the air to discuss popular topics
in a unique and invisible information space.
It was ham radio operators who created and operated
the first radio and television broadcast stations.
They assisted people to make free telephone calls
between countries even as early as the 1950s, using
phone patches, an elementary forerunner of VoiP
technology today.
If we look back now to the information highway, we
see that the highway is the actual infrastructure of the
Internet itself.
Picture in your mind a complex web of millions
of highways with turnpikes, intersections or hubs.
Websites are like tourist attractrons along the way.
There are stores, businesses, 
services, libraries, malls
and thousands of other travel stops en route. You can
4 1

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
tour or be a sightseer, or you can go instantly to any
destination.
The big difference between the Internet versus cars on
a highway is that you can move along the information
highway to your destination at almost the speed of
light: 186,000 miles per second. And gas prices aren't
going up!
It's not just information, it's instant information.
Distant websites on the far side of the planet seem to
be as close as websites next door to us, and as faster
Internet access speeds prevail, these huge distances
and faster speeds seem to merge or collapse, and they
soon become meaningless.
In our minds, whether we are conscious of it or not, we
experience time and space disappearing, or becoming
the same thing.
This merging of time and space can actuall5r create a
growing psychological challenge for children raised
from birth in the first Internet-only generation in
history.
If young children are dominated by only the Internet
and games, ttcanbecome increasingly difficult forthem
to clearly distinguish between the invisible Internet
world and the real three-dimensional 
world where their
physical bodies live and breathe and where they must
42

The Internet Unfolds
learn to interchange and socialize with other children.
This is a new and vital challenge for our educational
systems and social scientists.
Let's look at the builders of the information highways.
Building this immense highway system requires a
huge investment by many large and small corporations.
Why are they spending so much money? You need to
know. It is the power of our needs that really dictates
what is happening. This is the single biggest clue to
understanding how the Internet will develop in the
future.
Billions of dollars have being spent so far on building
the information highway. Why? That enormous amount
of money is being invested because the investors expect
trillions of dollars will be made in the future from its
existence. That is, of course, only if those investors
make the right choices. And who determines the right
choices? We do!
No planners build highways unless they assume from
the beginning that there will be a lot of future traffic.
Traffic on the Internet consists of digital bytes and
bits, whether it is emails, video, audio, games, movies,
search engine queries or anything else. It's all just one
thing: traffic.
The benefit for us? Wise members of the public can get
huge benefits for no cost or very little cost, by doing
A 1
+ J

Fin din g Any on e, Anyw here, Anyw h en
some careful thinking and a little research on their
own. Let's start right now.
Search Engines
Whether you are searching for someone in the past,
or someone living today, the first essential tool on the
Internet is a search engine. Everybody knows about
them, but the majority doesn't really know the best
way to use them.
When Internet novices first locate a search engine, the
majority of them just type in a word or phrase, click
enter and wait. That is often a great waste of time and
can bring frustration and despair. Let's understand
what these search engines are and how they work.
Search engines are websites that contain powerful
programs called databases. A 
database stores
information in such away that any piece of information
can be quickly retrieved through an elaborate system
of indexes and related links.
Database websites can be contained on a single
computer (a server) or on alarge number of computers
(server farms).
These powerful servers take in your request for
information, search their internal database indexes, and
serve back the results of your search request. Ebay and
44

The Internet Unfolds
Amazon, for example, use huge numbers of servers or
server farms to handle auctions or sell books, videos
and all kinds of other products.
Search engines began in the 1990s. Many of the early
search engines were created as university research
projects. Many students and university researchers
had the foresight to see our future needs and they also
had the knowledge and creativity to write programs to
meet those needs.
Major search engines today such as www.google.
com ean handle millions of transactions in less than a
second for people requesting information at the very
same moment from all over the globe. It is no wonder
that when Google went public in 2005 it was the largest
public offering of its kind and raised $2.7 billion dollars
from the public and institutional investors.
Currently Google has billions of web pages in its index,
and it is constantly growing.
Google has big plans for the future and their researchers
and developers have already turned out new resources
that are highly useful, as well as beta or test versions
of new databases and programs they are working on.
You can stay on top of their research work by going to
http : I llabs.google. 
com
45

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
When you search on most search engines, they currently
show the flrst 10 or more websites matching what
you seek-but-the first l0 are often those websites
that have the most links to them from other websites.
Usually the flrst links are sponsored links that pay the
search engine owner for positioning near the top.
These first results may contain what you're looking
for, but if not, there are ways around this to locate a
site you may wish to find. The website you seek may
purposely not have many links from other websites, or
they might not be able to afford to pay Google for high
ranking as a sponsor or advertiser.
Some current search engines are:
www.google.com
www.yahoo.com
www.c4.com
www.altavista.com
www.lycos.com
www.ask.com
www.dogpile.com
www.hotbot.com
www.clusty.com
www.msn.com
www.kartoo.com
www.ixquick.com
www.gigablast.com
www.teoma.com
www.alltheweb.com
46

The Internet Unfolds
www.infospace.com
www.killerinfo.com
www.A9.com
www. scholar. 
google. com
www.findarticles.com
www. newspaperarchive. 
com
Some search engines require memberships. Some
search engines search several other search engines,
which can save time especially if the subject you are
researching is relatively rare.
It is important to reahze that search engines do not
search genealogy databases, 
or any other databases
that require memberships and passwords.
In fact, there are some websites that have no home
pages at all, and contain databases known only to a
select group of people. Most of these are not included
in search engine results. These kinds of websites
arc part of what has been called the dark Internet or
hidden Internet. It's likely that much more data may
be within the hidden Internet than the visible Internet
we're already familiar with.a
In general, powerful databases 
are structured in such a
way that they can only be used by members possessing
valid usernames and passwords.
4l

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anyw,hen
So, even if a membership database 
contains millions or
billions of names, you cannot determine what names
are in there unless you are at that website. Sometimes
you can carry out a free or limited search without being
a member.
This is why websites containing databases should be
visited and utilized if they cover the people and time
periods you seek. A search engine can find the home
page of these websites, but you must click on the link
provided by the search engine to go there and check it
out. That's part of researching.
There are very useful websites that list the many
different types of search engines available. Some of
these specialrze rn various subject fields of endeavor.
Check out www.allsearchengines.com. Another
website that compares search engines is:
www. s e archengine showdown. c om
The main point to note is this: search engines differ
from what was previously possible with printed books
in the past, because they multiply amillionfold the ways
of finding out information about anyone, anywhere, at
any time period in the past and present.
A logical question might be, "How do search engines
gather up such vast amounts of information?" Do they
employ an army of people indexing information for
them? Not at all!

The Internet Unfolds
Computer programmers create digital robots-known
as robots or crawlers-that roam around the World
Wide Web visiting every website they can to index the
home page and other pages on websites where they are
not blocked.
Every moment of every day these crawlers are tapping
into new and old websites to gather up information.
The crawlers convey the newly found datato the home
website, where it is integrated into the ocean of data
that's already there. The ocean just grows and grows.
At the search engine's home, every word is indexed
except for words like "the","and", etc. In other words,
they are primarily looking at nouns, the names of
people, places and things.
Search engines churn out their data in a similar form
to concordances. 
That is, if you are searching for a
particular person, place, or thing, search results will
usually provide you with the name of the subject you
seek within a sentence or two taken from a website
source.
This way you have the word within the context of a
sentence. This triggers your mind to select the most
likely source for the information you seek, even when
many sources come up in the search.
49

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
Usually the most relevant results come up first, but as
mentioned above, some search engines and directories
will show or highlight their paid advertisers first, along
with heavily linked websites.
This often means that cluttered websites having links
to, or ads for, many other websites may show up with
higher priority than the website that you may wish to
find. However, many websites prefer not to clutter up
their sites with a lot of links and ads. A lot of clutter
looks unsightly and unprofessional.
When I began using the Internet, I remember looking up
the word genealogy on a search engine, and I was truly
astounded to see there were over 10,000 responses. 
I
was astounded because in the early 1990s genealogy
wasn't exactly a household word.
Today, when I search for the word genealogy on a
popular search engine, I get almost 80 million hits or
responses! Initially, on the surface, that might seem
wonderful, but in fact, it reveals a huge new problem
facing researchers. 
Who can look through 80 million
responses? 
Instead of too few facts, suddenly there are
too many facts to go through!
Search Engine Techniques
I mentioned earlier that beginners often go to a
search engine, type in a name and wait for the results.
50

The Internet Llnfblds
Sometimes even people using the Internet a lot do little
more than just type in what they're looking for. That is
most often a big mistake.
For example, I went to Googlet and entered my name,
Noel Elliot.I got back almost two million results.
However, as soon as I put quotation marks around my
name, "I{oel Elliot," I got back about 3,500 results.
Quotation marks are widely used by search engines to
mean the results must be precisely the words or phrase
between the quotation marks.
I got almost two million results on the first search
because the search engine-if I just enter Noel Elliot-
will look for Noel Elliot but it will also look for any
website page that mentions Noel and Elliot even if they
are widely separated in an article.
So remember this: if the name you are searching for
is rare or uncommon, then using quotation marks will
bring back comparatively few entries.
However, this doesn't work very well for common
names. For example, if I choose the name"John Smith"
within quotation marks, I get over five million results.
However, if I add a middle name, "Joltn Maynard
Smith," I get less than 75,000 results. It turns out that
5 l

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
someone famous had that name. But if I add the name
Elliot as the middle name and search on "John Elliot
Smith," then I get only 74 results. Obviously this name
is not as famous. Experiment, experiment!
Here's another angle. I tried entering my name without
quotation marks plus the word genealogy and Canada,
like this: I{oel Elliot genealogy Canada. I got 14,600
results. Even that is a lot better than the two million
results I got when entering my name without the words
genealogy and Canada.
One more step: if I enter "Noel Elliot" genealogy
Canada, I get only five results. This is just a small
sampler of how you can narrow down the results of
a search.
A little ingenuity, thought and experimentation will
convert a beginner to at least an amateur in a very short
time. In today's worl d, a search engine is the primary
resource for every kind of research.
This simply means that search techniques have to be
constantly refined in order to precisely find the person
you are searching for.
I strongly recommend that when you visit a search
engine website, take the time to click on advanced
search. Examine all the options very carefully and you
will be richly rewarded.
52

The Internet Unfolds
You will be pleasantly surprised what search engine
administrators have orgafirzed to refine your search
immeasurably. Search engine operators spend a lot of
time and energy to try and clearly illustrate what is
now possible.
One last trick that you find very handy is to specify a
range of years. For example, if I search "JohnSmith"
born 1617...1618I 
get only 122 results. 
So, even with
a popular name like John Smith, the search can be
narrowed down b naming the year(s) of probable birth,
marrrage or death. When you specify a range of years
such as 1 617 ...1621 the search will bring back results
only within that speciflc range.
NOTES
1 H. T. Peck, Editor-in-Chiefl The International Cyclopaedia,A Compendium
of Human Knowledge, Yol. XI, Dodd" Mean & Company, 1898, page 30
(emphasis mine).
2lbid, page 30.
3 Mcluhan, Marshall, The Gutenberg Galaxy, University ofToronto Press,
Toronto, 1962.
a Stewart, Alan, "The Hidden Web" (insert), "Genealogical Googling",
Family Chronicle Magazine, July/August 2005, page 28.
5 This search was done on October 13.2008
53

9 9
'eurp ut >lceq oB e,rvr 
se elqesuedslpur
soruoceq 
U esneceq peqsllqelse IIe \ pue plo sl ecuercs
sgl leql pelS frerr oq ilu plnoqs o \ puv 'serueu elrleu
pue leurEuoqe uo sncoJ sJeqlo lor{ pue 'seEueqc
erueu uo sncoJ sJeqlo 'serueuJns se qcns oseureu
Jo ed,(1 cgrceds euo lsnf ur ezrlerceds lr{8rul ecuercs
Iensnun sHt urqlr./K sJeqcJeoseJ 
Jo dnorS ureuec v
'slo^ou uoqcu
w pesn ueuo serusu pelue^ul pue peuloc 3o ,(pnrs oql
sopnlcur uo^e lI 'sorueu snorl4cg sB IIo \ se serueu
IeeJ sessudruocue ocuorcs s1{J 'sEurq} pue seceld
'eldoed Jo soueu redord eql qU^\ sleep ,(3o1o1ewouo
'sotueu Jo
Xpnls eq] se dn 11e ]l runs plnoc no1'uo os pue ,fto1srq
'urEuo 'sEurlleds eleuJolle 'sEurueeru 
Jreql pue setuu
Jo uorlecursselc 
eq] sr {Eo1o}euouo 'Eunleeds flpeorg
'lerluesse
euoceq ,(11equo^e secuercs u,,!r.ou{un ,(1enr1e1er
osoq] ']sed eql olq ,(8o1eeueE 
e puelxe ol Euqees
ere nof 3lr tenelroH 'cllqnd r,If ol spro./K JerlruJ lou
fluregec oJe 'socuercs crlseruouo eql Jo 'r(Eololetuouo
encsa11 
aql o1 ,tSololuruouo
tsDd arfl a? aliload Euppa?{

99
snorJes e peq'o?e r(rnluec e ueql eJoru 'sreqloJq oAU
esoddns sn lol :orJeuocs 
freurEeulr slt{l ernlcrd A\oN
seEuuqJ eruup p8e111
s's006I elel
o1 -plu eql ol dn spoued Jeloc ue{}Jo .&\oJ 
e 'segeze?
oseql o1 sexepur qsrlqnd sourleruos slsrEololetuouo
pue slsrSoleeueE 
{leleunpoC 'se8ueqc erueu 1e8e1 
pug
uec srole8rlsonur eJeq,{\ eceld e sr(e,lle sl eJoq} sueeru
slql 'eneze1 lercurlord eql q peqsrlqnd eq o] o^rl
,(eql 'epeue3 ur epetu ere se8usqo erueu 1eEe1 
uor{A\
z'epeueJ ul serueurns 
ueruler{n 000'08
JoAo Jo .,fteuorlclp E seprnord uo4crlqnd Jeqlouv
'eEuuqc eruuu erpJo eJe./\,\eun 
eJea {r,{tJI eo4
,!peg rloril ecer1 o1 te1u1 suorlereueE 
'euo'(ue roJ llncgJlp
.&ren oq flEgul ]l osl,\\Jog]o 'eEueqc s1qt po]ue{uncop
sJeloqcs 
crlsetuouo'fleleungoC 
r'r(4socef 
ol DISocLAe 
fetsa
uro{ orueruns sF{ peEueqc edorng tuo{ epeueJ o}ul
EurlerErrrur uosred ouo 'eldurexe JoC 'se8ueqc erueu
rDIA\ petuecuoc eJe slsrSoleeueE 
pu slsrSololetuouo
seEuuqJ oruug p8al
iselsl r{sl}lrg oq} pue edornE ur suorwry^ orueurns
000'0S Lueqt ororu rlll^t. rcql ereduroJ 'sorueurns 000'I
lnoqe lsnf ,(lleur8rro eJo.a\ eJeql 'ecuetuy qlroN pue
edornE ur ueql Joplo qcnu oJe serueuJns 
oJeqa 6eurqJ uI
ua qu,fuy' a.ta q u{uV' a u o [uy 3 ulp u t.i

L9
'Je]el ,{rnluec e '1|ou drqsuq Jreq}
eldduc ol luownEre plo u ,l\olle 01 peeu egl IooJ re8uol
ou sepls qloq uo sluepuocsep 
eql 'r(11ensn 
pue 'serlnue3r
JJo lnc oserl] Jo eruos punoJ elur{ I sree.,{ eq} JoAO
'lle^\ {clrq e Uq plnollr feq} 'ee4 {1pleg rreq} ocer} o}
,{r1 sluepuecsep eq} uor{,rvr 
'rc1e1suor}eJeueg 
'}sed setul}
ur fllercedse '>lulql lqEgr nor( se erer se ]ou sr sH]
'ureEy ',letyrc reg fpuleg srq elour lqElur re{}orq ouo
,(puleg oql q deeqs {celq u sl ereqt wLlt sdeqred
EurlseE8ns 
'en8en Eurqleruos ^,(es 
lq8pr Jer{}orq euo eq}
'{1uleg oquo uedreq}o eq} }noqe pe>lseyr 'rftoruour ruor;
pepeJ ]sotule peq {ple; sH pue req}orq e}oruer eq} se
'rcTa-I flpre; s6reqlorq reqlo oq] ]noqe peq {qe4eedsun
Eurqleuros sr ere{} }eq} {dur1 ro 'flerlue ,fipreg rer{}o
oql plo^e ol uerplrqc rloql esrer lqEpr reqlorq rlceg
n 
'ploqosnoq
AIIureJ S6JeqloJq slq qu^r uorlcouuoc Jo uorlercosse
snorlgo Kue peq re8uol ou eq eroJeroql pue ,(1yueg
luoroJJlp BJo se^\ er{JI suJIosruF{ r{slnEu4srp ,(pee1c o1
erueurns sH;o 3ur11eds 
eq] eEueqc lq8lur re{}orq ouo
flpreg srorllo or{} q}rllr e}ercosse
ueJpllt{c ro se^r./K 
JIe{} }el o} }ou peplcep qcee ,{eqt pue
'ure?e reqlo qcee ol4eeds o] releu peprcep srorllorq or{}
esuelut os 1oB lueurnEre er{} }eq} eurEeurr Jequrg sn loT
.eul|l leql
w Iensnun lou sellr ]eql 'uorErler JeAo ]uetun?m
$Dd aW ur a1doa1 Sutputg

8S
Eurlleds eql ,(llensn ,(1]cerrocur u.at.op serueu perdoc
fldurs sellestueql slercuJo uorlerEpru4 sorurloulos
'pusloruoq
uesoqc '(lzlreu rrer{} ur selrl rreq} ueEeq frqt se punoJ eq
l6uplnoc feql oJns e>letu o] lueln plno,{\ eldnoc Eunof e
qcns 'r(11erryuN 
reeQ ol ]crJls oo1 fldulrs ero \ ]BrI] selru
flpleg Jo lno .,fuzn Jreql se,&\ .,Qrungoddo pue puel JoJ
ecrJeruV qUoN o1 Sureeg 'eno1 ur eldnoc Euno.'( e JoC
'sHt ol JelIIuIS seIJolS 
Jo spusnoql ,{ueul
sdeqred ro sperpunr{ serl ,fto1sr11 'Jor{}o qcee .(r;uur ro
ees Je^eu plnoc ,{eqt suoseeJ JoAe}eqA^, 
JoJ wqt sJepJo
lcrrls erreS sluered rreq] sdeqre4 'selsJ rlsrlrrg eq] ro
edorng ur ,(1pleg pue sluered Eureeg eldnoc Eunor(
e eJe./y\ 
fr.It sdeqre4 ,(1]ceuocw sorusu le{} pelleds
,(lesodrnd sluerErure seesJolo eruos 'f11euorsccO
'1sed oql ur ecrreruv quoN o] pelerErururl oq \
esoql le >lool resolc e o>le1 
qlel 'seEueqc erueu reqlo roC
uollurS;unu1
fnpot sueddeq ruls ]l ]uelxe ressel
qcnu e o] pue '1sed eql w eu4l orll il peueddeq sq] ol
rulnuls serrols ,fteurEBurl IIB lou ere srql e{}l sorro}s
'pelruner oruoceq f,eqt fnpot peleredes sluupuecsop
Surdee{ pue fpule; e dn Suuleerq roJ spunorE se uees
e;e reEuol ou fr,{t }nq 'oge suor}BJeue8 
,!reJ B seqcseJq
snorJes fren se uees ueeq orcq l{Erul s}uerunEre 
p1o eqJ
uaqu.[uy' a,taqmr(uV' 
auo tuy 3u!pu!,t

69
'uorlexul Jo snsuec 'e?eutetu Jo sluetuncop
Jelul Jo serueu ]sJU uo uego 'uorleurrurle Jo ssecord
e f,q,(lureur 'lno pernEg oq uec seEueqc erueu eseql
uele 'reqleEol >lJo.&\ 
slsr8oleeueE pu slsrEololetuouo
eroru oql '1ef puv 'fem sFIl ecrreruV qlroN perelue
spuusnoq] sreded peEro; Jo 'sreded oN 'ssecord
Eurdee>l-procor 
orll qEnorrll pelcelepun dlls ol rersee
se.Al 1r 'uorlerEruurl Jo sreef lsorlJeo or{} ut ,(pelncrped
lpeEueqc seq qcnu loN 'cle 'qol eql roJ
qcntu eJc l.uplp 'euroq leE ol qsnJ e ul sJe>le1-snsuec
rood eJo^^l. 
oJeql pue 'snolnclleur pue InJeJec eJe.a\
or{,l\ sJe>le}-snsuec 
pooE oJo.a\ 
eJor{} rcqt onJ} osle sl }I
'so>lelsru o{eur,(Iseo plnoc slercuJo uor}er8ruurr
puu sJo>lel-snsuec 
{qrn ees o} fsee s.U pue uoqenbe
oql olur uollelcunuord rood puu sluecc uErero; ppv
'lcegred sr ouole poqlour ouo ou lnq 'llern fren 11eds
plnoc oqrvr eldoed Jo uorlereue8 e pecnpord scruor{d
'scruoqdJo eEpelnou{
rrogl uo peseq U geds ol .,ft1 uer{} pue pnole ue>1ods
erueu e reeq plnozlr e1doe4 'slooqcs rno IIe ul lq8nel
Eureq s.,ll. scruoqd 'o?e sreef 0g se fyluecer se lsnf
wql ]no lulod lsnur e/K eJeq puv 'ult.op lt SutltJ./K uer{llr
erueu eqlJo punos eql pelerdrelur slercuJo er{} ^\oq pue
,(11eqren 
pecunouord se./K erueu eql felr eq] uo peseq
ue$o sulv\ lI esneceq 
"(ervr,(ue 
sJoJJo ol lcefqns se./K
$Dd aW ut a1doa4 Surputg

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
In general, professional genealogists 
have up to 21 ways
around a genealogy block in the mid to late 1800s.
Familiarity and the study of surnames and given names
by onomatologists provide us with reference books
that often provide a breakthrough in tracing names that
have changed over time. These reference books belong
on the shelf of every serious genealogist.
Criminals
Others immigrating into NorthAmerica were criminals,
intent on doing anything they could to create an alias
or false surname. This might work well until the
time of marriage, since that particular record usually
required the parents' names of the bride and groom,
and required witnesses who provided their names and
addresses. Often people trying to hide their identity
would give some correct names, or parts of names, on
such a document.
There are several other ways of tracing these purposely
changed names that are very sophisticated. These
techniques are known primarily to highly innovative
genealogists and private investigators versed in an
intense process of elimination and other methods, some
of which may occasionally extend into gray areas.
A very few generations later, however, descendants
of criminals might run into serious health problems
60

Finding People in the Past
if they cannot get a medical history of their ancestors
to assist them in their own medical diagnoses. This
means that one result of hiding your identity is that
your descendants' 
lives could be at risk.
Fortunately, DNA and the genetic sciences are
advancing to the place where even those who do not
know their family ancestry can be assisted and more
so with each passing year.
Is Singapore Ahead of North America?
In the year 2000, Singapore became the first country
in the world to conduct their entire population census
on the Internet.
Think of the great savings and efficiency over door-to-
door enumerations and all the paperwork and voter-
machine problems.
Every crtrzenin Canada has a Social Insurance Number
(SIN) and every citizen in the U.S. has a Social
Security Number (SSN). Computers love to crunch
numbers and they can do it instantly. What on earth
are we waiting for? Maybe our governments should
be humble enough to inquire from Singapore about
their methodologies.
Anotherpleasant surprise on my trip to Singapore was the
way in which they kept new or changed phone numbers
61

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
instantly up-to-date. A screen on your telephone stayed
up-to-date as a directory for the whole country.
This makes we wonder: How many trees do we cut
down every year to produce telephone books? And we
have to wait a year to get a new replacement for our
current books. And the beat goes on. Waste of time.
Waste of money. Waste of natural resources.
And think about all those trucks that are loaded down
with heavy telephone books, bound in huge groups and
dropped off at apaftment buildings, condos, businesses
and homes by a small army of people hired to deliver
them.
Let's consult with Singapore!
Genealogists to the Rescue
Genealogy is classified two different ways-first, the
"-ogy" ending tells us it is a science of something-
and that something is genus, or generations, or human
genesis.
Genealogy is the science of identifying an individual,
in relationship to other family members. It uses the
evidence generated by direct family connection of
siblings, parents and so on.
62

Finding People in the Past
As mentioned earlier, the science part of genealogy is
becoming more closely linked with another science,
genetics-the science where the chromosomes and the
DNA molecule are being unraveled and accelerated.
In the great classification of things, genealogy is not
only classified as a science on its own, it is also seen as
an auxiliary branch of history. Genealogy provides the
skeleton of family history. It is important to keep this
duality-genealogy and history-clear in your mind"
even though we will deal primarily with the science of
genealogy in this book.
Genealogy has to do with a lot of investigative
techniques, the outcome of which should provide
documentary evidence. These source documents
and findings provide a picture of a series of sharp
occurrences between the cradle and the grave, and
associations 
with close family kin.
A very large percentage of biographies begin with
details about the grandparents and parents , and other
family members, otherwise we would not understand
the background the challenges, and the kind of
environment the subject was raised in during their
formative years.
Genealogy is always a search for truth. It separates
family mythology and family fiction (and sometimes
over-inflated egos) from the reality of events as they
63

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
really occurred. In this sense, genealogy is refreshing,
for it teaches us that every family has ups and downs
during the many generations that take place over a long
period of time.
The person who really spotted and predicted the
popularity of genealogy in the future, was L6on
Roy, an archivist who worked in the Archives of the
Province of Qu6bec, Canada.a
The records of French Canadians are among the best
in the world if not the very best. In Qu6bec, genealogy
is often more than just a hobby or pastime-it is a
passion.
Some of the largest family reunions in the world take
place in Qu6bec. It has been stated with authority
that the greatest national treasure of Qu6bec is their
genealogical heritage. Their records are simply the
best of any state or province in North Amerrca.
This is particularly fortunate for many American
families in New England, New York, Michigan and
all the northern border States who descended from
the French. It is very common to trace such families
back into the 1600s and beyond with relative ease,
since links are most often provided to ancestors in the
ancestral villages and parishes in France.
64

Finding People in the Past
Since the French have spread out into every province
in Canada, it is also fortunate for Canadians who have
some French ancestry, including the M6tis and the
Acadians.
Remember the Roots television series craze that swept
North America and then Austraha? More people
watched the television mini-series than watched man's
first step on the moon.
Years later the Roots television production was selected
by the Chinese government to be their New Year's
special program, and it was seen on national television
across China.
I tried to imagine the likelihood of the story of a black
man's ancestry from Africa, &s told by a descendant
generations later in the United States, being used as an
example and inspiration for the people in China. Since
it was for the Chinese New Year, perhaps it was chosen
by the government to motivate the people of China to
view their future with optimism. I think it worked!
Anyway, during the Roots publicity, the fascinating
thing to me, and mentioned in a greatmany magazines
in the 1970s, was that all the so-called experts didn't
see it coming. The public's interest in genealogy had
been growing uphill in strength and numbers every
year since 1960, but the experts didn't even see it
happening as any kind of significant event.
65

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
All along, I kept thinking: Here is a hobby that is
growing dynamically. Millions of people are strongly
interested and excited. Nobody told the public to
get interested in this hobby, no government told the
people to do it, no advertisements 
told the public to get
interested in tracing your family tree.
This is very important! Why? Simply because it shows
that this phenomenon was a natural inborn need rising
to the surface in people's lives at this particular time
in history. It was all part of a search for identity and
meaning in a society that was in danger of becoming
rootless. It was some kind of natural response to the
times we were living in and the conditions we felt
around us.
And yet, it remained seemingly undetected for decades,
even by the so-called social scientists.
The only people who really knew it was happening
were those who were working in archives, because
each year they needed more money and time to meet
the swelling demand for information. For example, in
their annual reports year after year, the Nova Scotia
Archives referred to the huge backlog of mail, and
asked other archivists how they coped with the rising
tide of requests.
Genealogical societies
were beneficiaries of
many historical societies
rising public interest in
and
this
66

Finding People in the Past
genealogy. Word of mouth played alarge role until the
media caught on. The ongoing interest in genealogy
led to a swelling of the ranks among genealogical and
historical societies. More and more clubs and familv
associations sprang up.
Each genealogy group had a library of helpful books,
or used the local history collection of their public
library. More and more books were being published"
especially in the awakening period from the 1960s
to the 1990s. Printed indexes to census records, birth
records, baptismal records, tax records, voters' lists,
immigration lists, crty, town, township and county
histories, sprang up everywhere.
Avid genealogists 
and historians came out in droves to
genealogical society meetings. Societies held fairs and
other meetings, drawing the public. Later, in these huge
annual events, people crowded around the publication
displays searching for books of interest.
In my mind, the most valuable indexes combine many
indexes from different types of sources, in different
periods of time, into one massive alphabetical index.
For example, in 1984, The Genealogical Research
Library produced a three-volume set of books titled
People of Ontario 1600-1900. It had been derived
from a large number of publications and historical
property maps, and thus Ontario was the first province
67

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
to have an index combining a multitude of sources into
one large index. It had been produced using the Apple
II computer, machine-language prograffis, a disk
operating system and a library of 5" floppy diskettes.
By the 1990s after upgrading the indexing programs
and training scores of indexers, the library published
12 volumes, which covered all of Can ada for three
centuries of time, 1600- 1900.
By the year 2000, the data in those books and new
indexing had reached the place where even 84 huge
volumes wouldn't contain all the dat a, andso the library
decided to begin development of a major database
engine for their website, www.grl.com.
Here's a personal way I can truly illustrate the huge
advantage of the Internet over a library of genealogy
books.
Let's compare the previous printing of the 12 books
in the 1990s, with the Internet databank which came
online in 2003.
The original 12 volume set of books published in the
1990s cost over $1000 to purchase. 
They held details
of about two million ancestors.
Today, just ten years after those books were published,
for a very few dollars, anyone can join the library
68

Finding People in the Past
at www.grl.com and search 2I million records. Add
to that one million source document images that are
available as well. These images can be downloaded
for free by members. And then add to that, several
thousand antique maps of every country in the world.
The maps are also avarlable to members.
The cost has dropped to a tiny fraction of the cost of
the 12 volumes, while the amount of data available
has increased dramatically on the Internet. Plus source
images and maps. Additionally, a search on the Internet
takes a fractton of a secon il far faster than you can open
a book and even begin to look.
Two Major Commercial Databases in the U.S.
In the U.S., there are two huge genealogy websites that
are commercial in nature, namely, www.ancestry.com
and www.genealogy.com. 
Both of these are databases
owned by The Generations Network (previous known
as www.myfamily.com). Both databases charge for
most of their services on a database by database
basis or by specific collections. Examine the content
carefully to discern which database you need before
paying any money. I advise people the same way about
the database at www.grl.com.
It is always sensible to see if you can find what you need
for free, before paying to search a fee-based website.
Ultimately, you may indeed find that some fee-based
69

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
sites are highly useful for finding what you're looking
for and there are often many benefits to membership.
Most fee-based websites keep people employed who
are excellent indexers-and they can be fired if their
error-rate is not kept at a minimum. Other websites
may have volunteer indexers providing the data, only
to discover they have a mixture of correct and incorrect
data. There are good indexers and there are indexers
that are not so good.
In summdry, there are advantages and disadvantages
of fee-based as well as free websites. so the onus is on
you to search carefully.
Cyndi's List
For the record, a popular website for locating
genealogical websites has traditionally been Cyndi's
List at www.cyndislist.com. While I still use this
website, personally I liked the older layout this site had
a few years ago. For ffie, I found the old listings quicker
and easier to use than the current layout. However, that
said, it is still the #1 index to genealogy sites and it is a
primary resource and many researchers 
use it.
The largest database 
in the world, however, is absolutely
free to search. And that database-surprisingly to most
newcomers-is contained in two Mormon church
websites, as follows:
70

Finding People in the Past
www.familysearch.org
http : I I prlot fami lys e arch. or gl r ecords e arch/start. html#
If you are searching for your ancestors I suggest you
start with the free searches. 
If you are unsuccessful, 
then
try the cornmercial searches, 
especially if they give you
a free search or trial period to see what they have.
There are thousands of free databases. 
We have listed
a few thousand of them in the Worldwide website
Directory at the end of this book. For example, most
state and provincial archives have a website where more
and more material is becoming searchable. 
They range
drastic ally in the amount of information available.
About the world's Largest Free Genealogy Website
As mentione4 the single largest sources of free
genealogical 
records in the world is foun datthe Monnon
church websites mentioned above. As more records are
indexed around the world, they are moved into the free
online databas 
e at www.familysearch.org.
Interestingly, this huge website and search engine is
operated by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day
Saints or Mormons as they are popularly called. I
myself am not a Mormon, but they have made a huge
impact on genealogical research globally. Again, the
Mormon website at www.familysearch.org 
is the single
most important website on our planet for finding free
genealogical information.
7T

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
The genealogy data includes the famous IGI
or International Genealogy Index, which is a
tremendous resource for genealogy for a large
number of countries.
Let me get the legal niceties covered here: this website
is owned by The Corporation of the President of the
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints, Inc. The
website's copyright ownership is vested in Intellectual
Reserve, Inc., and the International Genealogy Index
is a trademark owned by Intellectual Reserve, Inc.
The IGI lists millions of births, christenings, 
baptisms
and marrrages in countries around the world. Since a
great many of these records are obtained from parish
registers, the IGI is very valuable because in such
cases, these are records of primary evidence.
The Mormon IGI is particularly strong in certain
countries including the United States, England Wales,
Scotland Mexico, Ireland Germany, Austria, Canada
and Russia.
The IGI records that were used to produce the indexed
database were all microfilmed originally. These
microfilms of scanned documents are stored in massive
vaults in the mountains near Salt Lake City, Utah,
within atomic bomb proof facilities containing a fresh
water supply in the event of a catastrophe or war.
72

Finding People in the Past
For the Mormons themselves, 
the acquiring and storage
of these records is a necessity for church work by their
members. You might notice thatthe IGI index is devoid
of death records and cemetery records, and that's
because of certain beliefs held by Mormons. When
it comes to birth, baptism, christening and marriage
records, however, they are loaded.
The Mormons also maintain their internationally
famous Family History Library in Salt Lake City. This
facility is a place not only used by researchers 
in the
U.S., but by visiting researchers and scholars from
many other countries as well.
The Mormon website also has another set of free
records that are indispensable if you are searching
for people who lived during the 1800s or early 1900s
in England, Wales, Scotland the United States and
Canada. These are the every-name indexes to federal
censuses. They've had very popular census records
indexed for many years now, specifically:
1881 census of England Wales, and Scotland
1880 census of the U.S.A. (all states)
1881 census of Canada (all provinces)
The 1881 censuses mention every family member,
household by househol{ who was alive in those years.
They include the name of every man, woman and
child. Their ages are given, along with birthplaces,
- at 3

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
occupations, marrtal status and many other important
facts as well. Every month more census records for
various years are being added country by country.
In the Worldwide Website Directory included in this
book, I have also listed many other websites providing
various census years for different countries, some as
early as the 1600s and others as recent as 1945.
This book is not meant to be a training manual for
genealogists. 
A discussion of tax lists, school censuses,
assessment 
rolls, cemetery records, burial records, wills
and a plethora of other kinds of records is beyond the
scope of this book. However, the Worldwide Website
Directory will link you to these kinds of records and
much, much more.
I will, however, discuss two particular areas here that
are more specific to Internet searching. Let's discuss
that old standby newspapers, and kick it up a notch
or two.
Newspapers
One of the sources for births, marriages and deaths-
as well as millions of articles and social columns that
might mention the people you seek-are newspapers.
Newspapers were being printed long before vital
records of births, maffrages and deaths were being
t4

Finding People in the Past
collected by 
governments. Some newspapers
published extensive genealogies 
of families who were
early settlers.
The Yarmouth Herald, for example, located in Nova
Scotia, published vast genealogies of New England
families that had branches of the familv who came to
Canada.
The collected genealogies from the Yarmouth Herald
were eventually published between the years 1896
and 1901 . These comprehensive 
genealogies 
included
detailed listings of families, generation by generation,
often beginning in the 1600s and ending in the late
1800s. These newspaper genealogies were compiled
into a massive book and published in 1993.s This
book contains invaluable genealogical data for those
seeking ancestors in the New England states as well
as in Nova Scotia. The descendants 
of these families
today are scattered throughout many other regions of
the U.S. and Canada, and probably in a great many
other countries as well.
In the Worldwide Website Directory you will find
newspaper websites for about 200 different countries.
You can investi gate these on your own as well.
You will find almost every country listed and the
principal newspapers, 
along with links to connect you
directly to the particular newspaper you seek. Many of
75

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
the newspapers 
have email addresses 
included in these
listings.
If you are searching for a lost relative and you know
they lived in a certain crty, why not write a letter to the
editor? It's free, and thousands of people have found
missing family links by taking this simple step. Today
you can contact editors by email, avoiding the cost of
postage, envelope and a drive to the post office.
Digital Newspapers and Indexes
Wouldn't it be nice if you
name ever mentioned in a
year period? Or a century?
could search for anyone's
newspaper over a 40 or 50
It's here alreadv!
Several groups around the world are scanning old
newspapers and using highly sophisticated OCR
(optical character recognition) software to convert
old newspapers into digital data. Once dtgrtrzed other
software creates indexes on any noun mentioned.
This is a researcher's 
dream come true, or at least it's
becoming more true with each passing month.
One of the first companies that caught my attention
near the beginning of newspaper drgttrzation was Cold
North Wnd, Inc., and I have followed their progress
with great anticipation.
76

Finding People in the Past
Their website is at www.paperofrecord.com. They
have drgittzed well over 2l mlllion newspaper pages at
the time of writing. Newspapers in many countries are
being dtgrtrzed. This is necessarily a pay site, but well
worth the money if you see newspapers 
in their list that
you need to search.
Another website, www.newspaperarchive.com, 
claims
to have 993.6 million articles covering 77 | cities,
over a 240 year period, and 2,97 5 titles, as of the time
of writing. I searched on a rare name to sample the
index and got several hundred hits. Again, this is a
subscription site.
Also of particular interest to genealogists 
is the website
http : //www. geneal ogybank. com/gbnlC
At the time of writing www.genealogybank.com 
had
125 million articles, from more than 500,000 issues
of about 2,500 historical U.S. newspapers. These
newspapers were originally published between 1690
and 1980.
They also have the texts online for searching I 1,700
books prior to the year 1900, and I 5 1 ,000 reports, as
well as other lists and documents spanning the years
1789 to 1980. Their website constantly lists newly-
added newspapers and I am impressed with the speed
at which more content is being digittzed and added to
their website.
77

Finding Anyone, Anltwhere, Anywhen
Other newspaper websites you may wish to investigate
are:
http : I I p ap ersp ast. natlib. gov t.nz
http : I I smalltownp apers. c om
http : I I dr eam. lib.utah. edu/d tgrtall unews/
http : I I db .hb. wa shington. e du/pre s s/index. html
http : //www. 1o c . gov/chronicl inga mertcal
http : I I nzdI.s adl . ul eth. cal c gi -b irVl ibrary ? a-p &p - ab out
& c-niupepa&l-mi&nw-utf- 8
http://www.kb.se/
www. s e c state . wa. gov/hi story/new sp ap ers . a spx
http : I I nup ep a. or gl c gt-b i n/nup ep a ? I - e n ( H awai i )
http : I I www. nl a. gov. aul anplanl (Australia)
Some newspapers have their own drgrttzation program
or indexing prograffis, or both underway. Here are a
few wide-ranging examples :
The Tbronto Star (1894-20A2)
http : I I thestar.pages 
o fthep ast. c a
The Times (London, England) (1785-1985)
www. galegroup. 
com/Times
The Brooklyn Daily Eagle (1841-1902)
www bro oklynpubl i c I ibrary. org/e ag I e
The Tundra Times (1962-1977)
http : I I ttip .tuzzy. or g
78

Finding People in the Past
PERSI - The World's Largest Periodical Index
PERSI, The Periodical Source Index, with more than
1.8 million index entries, is the largest subject index
to genealogical and historical periodical articles in
the world. It was created by the Allen County Public
Library in Fort Wayne, Indiana. This library was
originally known as the Fort Wayne Public Library.
It covers more than 5,000 periodicals written in English
and French (Canada) since the year 1800, although the
articles cover the 1700s to the present.
You can access PERSI at:
http : I I p er sr. heritag e que stonl ine . c om/hqoweb I hbr ary I
do/persi
Also, www.ancestry.com has a searchable PERSI
index, avarlable by subscription:
http : //www. anc e stry. c om/ s e arch/db. a sp x ? db i d- 3 I 6 5
Introducing the Lost Genealogies
Did you know that there are millions of ancestors in a
very specific collection of books that have never been
indexed?
79

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
Are you aware that many of the libraries and archives
you've probably visited in the past actually have these
books available?You may not have seen them, however,
because they are not in the genealogy collection.
Although researchers may work nearby, comparatively
few of them have delved into this other collection of
books.
This other collection of books contains invaluable
records. Families are recorded generation by generation.
Many of these genealogies start around the late 1800s
and go as far back in time as 1,000 years ago.
Therefore, I have singled out this overlooked collection
of books and I refer to them as the Lost Genealogies. 
If
I were to use the old dictionary meaning of "fabulous,"
it would really apply here. These genealogies are truly
fabulous.
The purpose of the next chapter is to reveal these Lost
Genealogies and to show you why they are the single
most unused source of genealogic 
al data in the world
today.
NOTES
1 KlymasZ, R. B. [Robert Bogdan]. - 
A classffied dictionaty of Slavic
surname changes in Canada. - Winnipeg : Ukrainian Free Academy of
Sciences, 1961. - 64 p. - (Onomasttca ; no.22). - Added title page in
Ukrainian. The surname example cited was chosen at random.
80

Finding People in the Past
2 Bogdan, F. fForwitt]. - Dictionary of Ukrainian surnames in Canada.
- Winnipeg : Onomastic Commission of UVAN : Canadian Institute of
Onomastic 
Sciences,1974. 
- 50, 354p. - (Onomastica 
;no.47).-Title
on added t.p.: Dictionnaire des noms de famille ukrainiens au Canada.
Title on added t.p.: Slovnyk ukrai'ns'lqtkh prizvyshch u Kanadi
3 Hande, D'Arcy. - Changes of name : The Saskatchewan 
gazette, I9I7 to
1950. - Compiled by D'Arcy Hande, Debbie Moyer, Rae Chamberlain. -
Regina: Saskatchewan 
Genealogical 
Society, c1993.- [3], iii, [1],89 p.
o Roy, L6on, "The Keeping of Church Registers of Judicial Status in the
Province of Qu6bec", Rapport de L'Archiviste de la Province de Quebec
pour 1959-1960, Published by Roch Lefebvre, Imprimeur de Sa Majest6
La Reine, English section pages l69ff.
s Yarmouth Nova Scotia Gene.alogies, Transcribed from the Yarmouth
Herald, by George S. Brown, Published by Genealogical Publishing
Company, Inc., Baltimore, Maryland, 1993.
8 1

The Lost Genealogies
Heraldry, Coats ofArms, and Crests
Coats of arms and crests originated many centuries
ago before the general public could read and write.
They were popular throughout Europe, the British Isles
(United Kingdom) and Japan.
Knights and soldiers in battle, often wearing suits of
armor, with their face helmets closed" did not have a
clear view of who was who in the midst of fighting,
and a split second hesitation could mean the difference
between life and death. Certain garments worn over
the armor, and specific symbols emblazoned on their
shields were the fastest way to distinguish between one
of their own or the enemy. They could recognize color
patterns and designs easily, even if they were unable to
read or write.
The coats of arms were generally issued by a central
legal authority in each country, and were usually
reserved for people of noble families and royalty.
In England for example, even today the College of
Arms continues to grant arms to those who are deemed
worthy. The design involves complicated mixes of
symbols, colors and replications of animal furs and
metals, all with certain meanings and characteristics.
83

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anyone
Today you will see coats of anns for cities, provinces,
states and countries and are often part of official seals.
It is important to knoW however,thatthere is generally
no such thing as a coat of arms or crest for a surname.
Coats of arms were granted to individuals, So having
the same surname as someone in the past that had a
coat of arms does not meorr you are a direct descendant
of that person.
Heraldry merchants can be found at fairs, malls, and
even on the Internet. They may show you a picture of
a coat of arms with your surname below it. Beware of
this, unless you know-with genealogical evidence-
that you are a direct descendant of the original person
to whom such arms were granted. Save your money.
Why then, does legitimate heraldry play such an
important part in genealogical research? Applicants
for coats of arms had to attach genealogical evidence
as documentation, which had to be verified as part of
the registration of arms. In some cases the coat of arms
came with extensive genealogy-or at the very least a
brief family history-that's why it is so important.
Such genealogies will trace the ancestry of European
families back into the 1300s and sometimes 
even earlier
than that. It is the most neglected area of genealogical
research.
84

The Lost Genealogies
Genealogies 
attached to coats of arms bridge huge gaps
that are missing in written records. These genealogies
had to be accepted by the authorities granting arms. The
authorities had professional experts who thoroughly
examined all genealogical 
evidence. It was very serious
business.
Remember that although these arms were originally
for noble families, the genealogies 
would nevertheless
often include people that were not of the nobility
themselves, including those who were distantly related
in some way. Many of these marvelous genealogies
would often encompass 
time periods where genealogical
records were either missing or had been destroyed.
More than 250,000 people were awarded coats of arms
in the past. Imagine the genealogies 
and family histories
and the connectivity that would be included among such
a large number ofpeople. I daresay thatmillions ofpeople
would fall under one huge genealogical umbrella.
As more heraldic genealogies are discovered, more
pieces are added to this global jigsaw puzzle that is
truly gigantic in size.
As usual, the pessimists will say most records can
never be found, whereas optimists and realists can say
truthfully that with each passing year, a virtual torrent
of new information is emerging and sometimes it
originates from the most unlikely places.
85

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anyone
How far it will evolve in years to come is anybody's
guess, but it will - without any doubt - continue to
grow larger and larger as we move into the future
where vast storehouses 
of information and knowledge
will reside at our fingertips.
It is also possible that genetics will be able to be
combined with what you know of your family tree, to
actually extend your genealogy - by person if not by
name - back far enough to connect in with ancestors
from centuries ago. Still skeptical? Visit the many
websites involved in DNA sampling. Here are just a
few of many that may surprise you:
www. smgf. org/index j spx
www. ybase . org/de fault. asp
The oldest original books combining heraldry and
genealogy were all painstakingly made by hand. In
a few cases just one original is made. In other cases,
copies were made one by one for a limited number of
patrons, libraries or archives.
The Genealogical Research Library has copied many
of these handwritten books and once the genealogies
are completely indexed, they will make them available.
Once agarn, what was once available only to the
privileged few in the past will be available to everyone,
at little or no cost.
86

The Lost Genealogies
As these books of heraldry with attached genealogies
are assembled together and added to the growing
genealogical databases, the skeptics who predicted
huge gaps would always remain will be proven wrong
once again.
The rest of this chapter contains a few samples of
heraldic designs and the genealogies associated
with them.
I trust that these images 
and copies 
are worth
thousands of words, so I will let them speak for
themselves. These are very real examples of The Lost
Genealogies.
87

The Lost Genealogies
89

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anyone
*il*[ n.nilf*.0lttnErt$Yfilr Elf .
i. rilfttTftfftuuRTffi *s[L " 
ftf.ft
ratrs$.
lxfllnlon**gr- ry}.
sfi$fias.
l*rrcnn. {fll"
ERUS$.
Lorc4a. {14?.
fi,tf.fidrdrd"
{[*tr.
# &
#
$#
# w
vFfiilSfi*'
v E$FSI(.
90

The Lost Genealogies
ffirm*rn 
Hgm*n Ysn.
Ser Sttmnrits dioser Osshlsoht*, rrlaber dis ror-.
ecbi*dcastsn 
Schreibnrtea 
0o a. 8, Erutr, Srgemern, Srgnuq
Argrnem, Anniu etcr. iu lf*men roigtr ist riebt, wio dio
Tr*ditisn angibf dss F&rstentham .Halberetailt, obrohl
as sicbt nnmsglich istr d*m dsr $hnmr*tr 
iss Ga-
gchlechtr 
in Livland Snrtbolomrssr, 
d*r hier bsraite
l{S*, f4$S und l{5? rlr EsyalhnFcbtigter dar ftittcr-
rchalt dar Qsbistr l{andsn sn T9atak enchsist aur oissm
Zn*ige st ,msts, der dch iu SalbsrsHdlirchen nieilor-
gelaaeer h*tte, $nr $tnumlmrt igt vislnehr d*r Ftrrten-
tbsm Cdeuborg dor h*ntigen Provinr fi*nnorsr nnd dsr
8t*nmritn Eimssn an dar lrsils srirgbsn Alfold md
Brtggen, Fnr Hoilanbsrgrchr Crleub*rgbche Urlnnilgn-
bnsb {Eb* Tbsit Y Nr. E folgando Hitglierlor ilor Os-
gchlcshtl ton 1181*181S m;
flgf Sar*h*rd do ginie3an.
l$* 
" 
de Snusim.
1t8* 
, 
dE Smirloim.
IISE 
n 
da Simerm.
f188 
, 
de Xaimsr*eu,
f l89 
, 
de Eimesheim st frster ejne ffer*
msn do Bffsom {Bomtn},
ltSl .Snreh. de EmCIsratn 
nobilis.
ll$* Ssrob. de fieynoglom.
tlgf Sorsbard v. biruersrm, Trkr ron Joh. nnd
E *h cld,
11Sg B u reb. ds Himermm, Tnter ?, Joh. unil
Htboldne.
lg0{ Bnrch. v, Smmos, Sosh, in Hildorhriu.
lg08 Bar*h, ile Smesbem, Donh. in Hildgshaim,
l8l8 Sonr. fro Tmeofam.
Igl$ S'r is il ric h ran Bernffstrr Zeuge eiaor Uin-
dsner llr]snds.
um 18&0 Albe rt ron Ernirren, detrgn rel. Bruder
Frioilrith 
nsd ilor Ldltmem T06btsr Engele und Clni-
gurfrr, in ainsr trXrkosdr snter 8i$hfTolkri! 
?, tir-
den 1l$?S*lggl) - Lippirchc Begertm L Alh, ![a $,
1866 Lu{or da Escaem, i& Ltlnoburguhon.
fmO f,udsr ir Srmmaa, im Lfino]urgirsbou"
(Ilie bsidsn let{genannten (1965 oad 1300} riad
w ohl vea obigsn Eilileeboiursber Eddlmtsn vsrxhiedsn
oud Lrben ali thnrit! 
f,bbrffi fu l,tnoburgpbm,]
- - Da obcrgv*emh firFnilirobo Btemmrrtai de Oo-
rchlschb Srriholaurosl 
brtta fl S$bnsr Suthtlo-
9 l

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anyone
m&orr {I[,] * Argomtl unn f.,rutsos (iler Asltom
g"nsssf) * Srntrr 
- dia 1*8$ auftmten Lststsror
histediilr sino Sittra 
H, N. guh, ?, Gnitd*tr; {is IS0$
Beprhof srhislt.
- Yiellaicht s{u ilritter Sruilu ibttElbsn nnil $*hn ilsr
Brrtbals&sor **r H*n* Srgssr& *ossail Sshvis-
gervrter, tr'ronbolfr Briocken Bit ibm rm toutrg naoh
Poter nnd Paul l{Sil rsn Sisilriuh 
v, Brinchen, ilcs$en
"*ntbdl rn Mb 
Fipperer, ilon Hof au lrsm$rff uld d**
Dorf Sordeff tKsp. W*inei,1 md Sorf Lianrutr*r {Ksp.
f,rpatenru) ltaft. 
l{6E ilbsrtrf$ gonannter Fronhold
und seine Frnu Slss gw*nntem S*sr 
$rg*m*m tlie*
orhsufte Got {Hof K5'ppegerns-Kibbijerr iiE.} dem der
D. O. U. Berend v. d. Sareh dasaslbe d d. Wenden 1{7*
Dienrhg nnch tiehaclb bautttigt.
Er w*r t 605 toilt; seins S6bnC 
B e i n b o I d u. L c ? s n r If.,
(ilor iuugc gen*nnt; erhallpn d. d" gS. llsi fSSi f ib-
bijorr 
nnd der Bssite v. Bcprhof (1, ohn lr*nmur)
dureh ilsn Comtbnr ToB l'cltin: 1f ounsrntt r. Dslsig
augerproehon,
Fsl nh olitr, der schon lSSl nrkunillioh, ist tohl
erblor rsffitorbsn, uogcgs$ L s rc s I If , dis g*nanntrn
Siltor, ris ruth Schlosi Ludt {d*l eiu*r s$ianr 86hro
Joh&nn iuikeg 9. $eptomber 
tnfg dsm Johsnn vstr
Pletteuborg anftrng) ttberuahn,
.lurroi Johann h*tts fr*rsns IL aosb S S$bns:
f.)Lorsnt IIL {todt tS*$}dsss*n 
ffittwe IESS Ff*ndbe-
ritrorin ?or Ksnils! trr 
and dessea $obn L o r aefr IY.
l$*t !frrndevor und llaigse* iJE r*rgffrndsts, lS4? und
trS{$. 156* 165S nrksndlich *uf Kcjel und Sall iJS. *r*
Eaheint und srblar em I l. Septenbor lSS0 gegsn ilis
&ngrcn imQdecht blio\ II) nolnhold us{ tll} Fr*m
hold.
S;ims bsiilan thsiltsn iltr I L Juni Ii49 drrn ihnss
ron ihrcm $fisfuts' Johan& r. 'Wmogel aaf f,uhdt
*lr 
Sntrobtdigqug f&r garint 
Anrpr&bhc olus Seit-
lang oatsogon ggrilono, etst ?om Smnthnr sfi lrollin sm
96.- Usi I0f0- riedsr zngesproshrna Dorf Kibliierr
{e. obgn} uosu ihmals iler gleighrsmige Eofr ilis D6rfer
Lemnofer, Korrtts, Toylem-ote, ilie Uthls uu Tt stsitli"
ilns luirils ffo dci lrro nnil ilsr Krug an T9rm*f, ris
du llorf *taolorro {Abfirrxs}r dns rio ls$S rorkaufcn,
geh$rfu.
92

The Lost Genealogies
Snde der lS. Jahrburilortl bsgsrssn ilie Ge'brfiiler
Lureat nnil Jncsb {beid* tsfrt 1SS0} Filttittp 
sorie
die {von L o rsr ! trY.- *orbton} Sfifar SIII und Otten*
kAll-iJL. Ibrs Kiuder erhitltsi Yom Herzcg C*rl ron
Sfrdsnhanlsnil arn $. Dezember t6m Kibbiiari bertfiSgt,
wal Kunignnde* Tosbter o*er Eukelin, -e,iae1 Yon ihnen
nsbrt gell snd Otte*k&trl ihrcm Ssnnll 
Hsinrie h ?.
Stryh lS$2 sabrEchto.
- Yorher rubon, almlieh tm ?2. Mlrs IS9? d' d. 'War'
gshsn bert8tigte S. Si gn un d $I. Yon Polen einem
Crrp ar I. ?.- Frms din-Sfltor f,ohenb*rg usf, lYiegruclr'
hof (incb Srmerbof; geheirraa, dF mhon_ (rabnqbeinlicb)
Hnsr r$r Ordenrroit beserr*n h*tte, dr stto ErbgEter.
Iliffoilbffi r*rorbtan *uf Cnt pttt L Sokn I C*rprr IL, dtm
ria, rb fiabrd. S.agimanbquartiernoirh, ar rtarb ror l0*$
alr Okout und Cinnannrint r. Erfort) 
-t 
Sabrdon bo'
rtltigt 
rrsdm, 
Ssinen uan[adigu 
linden 
(aus der
Ehr ht 
Annr r. Iosrenraldo) t gob. 1600 * 1S4S) rurdr
von der X0ai5h Cbrirtine Bu 6. Jdi l0ag dis nocbmalige
Bertltfuung ilarEberzu Theil. Y on dissu Eindul hintsrlisgr
aamhdneni nnr J ob tla Srrirrr 
{f vor 1ffi2 als rchwed'
Bilhsirtr) 
Nt*hloemou, densn ilis 8ghrd. Sadnstisrs*
kommimion nm ?$, J*nusr ISSS itio Ottar ebsnfdlr bo-
lietr, ilerglcichan FniLoIr, 
rtt dc Srmitis lut Tiilon'
brnrmnhen Sesitr rerorbt rrtr*
In dia lirl*nilirohc 
sdsbnrkilol 
rards 
(in dis
Xrtrildn 
r" t?{S, t?d$ unil 1?*?) dle S'lmilis ". 
E. boi
Xlrrra I rub Xr" I vorseicbnst und ttrrr dis Elnrer
Kolanborg und Wiqrnalibof , rsl&o 
Aredr 
J obt!!
Areuil r" 8.. l?#}
t, dnnn (hal'
,, 
-r 
*5 
\aarrasa.}?-tu*.vrrF
rnngrri*hter b*rr% d*r *it f?{S, nsbri
vmlmfro
mil-der rnoh Jtumerichn inne-httts, r*f dla $rboa ilCI
Krnmerjnukon ?. S. t?8{ rer}rnftea.
Ri"r denelbea (rohl iis l.dtrto ihrn gffibleebb)
;rr titholnlns 
?. 8., rslche d& 
mit {am s,oftrth
r. Berg rnf Sr,hlenhof rormlhltr unil oins fhrin 
irt
der !'stdnercsbdlr Gnfol v. Berg. dsr rnoh ibr WaDDsr
ir drr reiaige mf3euommsn br[- h .&&Irod irt'-dio
frmili* 
rn 8. Fabraar l?{S *lr notorbr,h bei XfNg|o I
(Nr. 8!l) oin*$bagct, rbar dort b*td ebmftlh 
rla$hsn.
93

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anyone
W n p p s n
(T*fel SS')
Dar snl*t'$t! allcldisgt tuch mit ridsn Yarirntau in
Subg nn{ Stcllung, geftf,rte Weppen trrt ein gn&ailtor
Sfihil{ in dcsaen - ob'orem rilbernbn Salds Z gn' tsnto
Hohrenrfimpfe iu mhrrrcn 
golilrerbrf,mtan S$tkcn, Rit
Armrtnmndln, ron brr. rohrtglinkam mal reh*$trhten
goklonam (diss grftnen) Pfeilo in ilie lusrorv Snlta ge-
rchocrsar *ur drm sntarrn Falds, rorin ;in goldroh;frmos
Sohrcbn nsbron. 
Anf iom gakrsntan H'*lma mit sohtlr*-
golilrilbarnea Declsn der ruebta Xohrsnrnupf.
Die rnt T*fal S 
nrch {an Siryel ds Lrnrass
F.rmes (Arrimir) v. 1558 gozaiebnetsn TTqplor hrt s,tEtt
dar Uohron$mpfr oinel belbea f,osloritor E. ISL f,Onigin.
Ib 
$kta 
bekrnnte gie3el (iler Barthnlo616r;
n S,, r. I. t*ST rtigt untsr I cn Edts rbgcahnittenm
t!!ryl6pfen 
in Schildbrupts, 0 t$. 8. S) -Pfernige in
$hilnq; dryogar f[hrt lroian! 
Erma 154? aiuen gBDr
dsm S*ppen, Lr.- r? on D fiah ar" Ihnolailnn lVrppn
rohilit (e[tds 
Sdtin odx gchrcb].
Ihr rpf,ters ilappcs o. lEEo Trr:
gohifil: 
guorgstbiilt ituruh rahmrbu rotbon Sdler,
oben iE gilbst *c.hsaail g grtr6nte JlngliagrrEmpfe,
rorrlrtlgalobrt, 
mit Armthnmeln, rilberusm Eocl Etd
rohrerram Xtltel&en, 
jo lmtrecht drrcbbbrt 
"oB 
gp-
rtlrston 
S*rsrt; 
nnton ron Scbrrrr 
rnil Solil in {
Bdhm prclmtt
$atg (foH-n$:- ^whrcnd sin iilryhicben S*nnpf,
D oal er r rethgeldm.rcbtrrrrilhrs.
Dlri.Eiga Srp-pen. I}tr rsehto Bnmpf mit blllom
F"gt and golilsnsn Xlntslohrn, dr t-inke ElDg-
Lshrh
Eo lm (gahr[rt]: mit ;ashronilcu hlomgrtteiilstrm
frun, der ein goldeoa Llaiooreptsr b$L
trle c tcn r bl*ugoldan-robrrrgolien.
94

The Lost Genealogies
95

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anyone
[88 f$TonB, 
PRfg$S, 
n$f[,
FRoVrffi S$rtffitrt|.
lt[ff1t"$1t&[H3,f.
wN.
ilEn$[n,u.
H$fiffipaSfiS$l,itf[. .
taS[TI$l[,$r.W"
X&'fTfffi- f}ra.
96

The Lost Genealogies
Ilettlch 
(Grsfen v. ll., Freiberyn Y$n Tschetschan)'
tfaf. s$.)
Bsbmiecker Fr*ih*rr*n**n* rito. 16{};' 9. $, fur Jor-
chim y, $tr. usd sein* Yettern Salthsssr, Hans nnrl tie*rg;
Beichegrafenst*nd 
dtfi. ]6$S. lt. 11. ftr Joactrim frhtn.
r Af"
Sralte* schlesisches Gesebleclrt, rrelebeg seit Beginn
iles XtrT. J*hrhanilerts in sehleiischen lrnd gl*iaischca
Srksnd,en unt*r *em $sm*u {."geeaor, L'zcch*r, Czeschor
vorkommt; dtr Sans lletticb wnr*e von dsm Snta ]Iett-
kat t!fi*ttichsr, S*tch*r, Hedgor] sobl arrgenommer.
In glfltahcbsa [hkunil*n erscheinsn 131fi Otto unil Tamus
{Thomao} Ca., f{lg Sans Cc, und no*h 14$ti ein sndersr
Sans Cs" 
Alr tt*mmvrter 
i!*s Sesrhlechtas darfls
$cbibko *der $chibeechin y. (]s. zn Sross-Petersits und
Polsnitz t Kr. ltleumarht) ?u betr*chten aeio, welcher mit
Serzog Bernbard yon Miinrkrberg in dsr Sshlaeht bei
Milhldorf hitmpft* nnd bir 1SSS errflbnt wird. Dessen
l"T*chlotnmss Tb*mme, Otto. nnd F'rieilrich werden nnter
dem $*men n![edgow za Oc*igo tKr. Slriegna] err$hnt,
rrogogen Knno tlt9l slg oMetachsw* *ufgef[brt wird"
Des leist*r*n l.Inehkonmen Scheijbechin, Hnns nnd Fre-
demsnn ,,Set*box" verkaafen 140$ Polgnitz an dag Yin-
aenastift in Breslsu; Seorg ?. ,M*tcb*w* I{52 anf fs*
gramsilorf {Kr. Schreidnitg); 1{54 Xeisrich y. nTzet
gch*nr*, Erbherr rnf P*nlsdorf (Pohlsilorf- Kr. Neurnarlt).
Yon letstersm ct*mmte Hsns auf -ff*t*b*u qMetthru,
Xr" N*nmsrktr *nd Barg*rie 1ibid"), rclcher als der nS-
here starnrsvater dcr Freihsrren nnrl Srnfau ?on llettich
?,a" betra*lltr:n i*t und 14$S atarb. .Or hinhrliese S $6hne;
B*lthasar ant oXetehee I$0**IS{S, Kasp*r auf Borgnnie
$ liir$]-!nd f{ans anf Xaudorf {Kr. Neimarkt,p t {rnft.
Kaepars Nachk*mnrcBsnhat[ erl*sch nit seinri Enkeln r
vsn Balthasar stammt* Iradicl*ns, *mtmasn dsr t'om-
sende Gr6hnig, welcher Bm IS?0 freiselwita {Kr }ien*
r$dt), enrio lS8* Ifoeb*n tibid.) und Glf,ssn {fir. Lerb-
schiital erw*rb tt ls8i) ; you Ssns stsrsmten Christoph
unil Xicol*us_ {rrlcbe IAsg Eilb*rsdorf bei Falkenbeig
erkauft*al, Joschim {welcher tS0? dns $eriorat Y,riese
anit des Siitcrn l.angbnbrfich, Riegemdorf, Brclrelsd.orf,
97

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anyone
Dittmtnnsd,nrf stc lm l(reise Nenstsilt stiftstel cnd
Ss$par tbis 1697 anf }{iinsr*, Beit ISSA auf $shr$bsdorf
t. p*rt.), Dic Siihne Ladislass: Bnltbaaarn Hann unil
(ieorg, sowi* l{icolsns $olrn }o*chin wnrden in den Frei-
herreustand erhoben 
; letzt*rer spilt*r *ach in d*n $rsfan*
rtand. $iesrlben iibsrnahmsr 1ti0* dis $shlossherrsehsft
Batibcr in Ffaurlbcsitz, relche fS0S in Srbbesits iiber*
ging unrl bis lSP,l b*i ilem Gsechleclrte 
blieb. Ilelthasar
{t l{tlg odcr ldl$} hinterliss ?sR seiner Ge&shlin fle-
lena v. $clraffgotsch 
zwei itls*httr snd einen $ohn, H*ns
Chriatoph, wclcher nach kindcrloser Fhe mit Julisna r.
Zvolc und tioldst*in t$$S *tarb; Ha*a wer 1S?g Sorn-
tkur dss Jah*nniterorilene 
ren Klcin-Oals, 1$8$ an Lsasen
nnd Orosg-Tirrs 
und stsrh tSlS nls k. k,Xilmmcrer, IIof-
Kamun*rrailr 
und Ober-Silberhfimnlcrer; 
Georg hintsrliees
bri sr:in*m ?ads 1S l;] aas sciner She nit X*ri* v. Ssuclr
sinen $ohn, ffilns Lie*rg, mit sel*hem eeine l{aehhom-
rnensehsft erlssch. Jaaehira *etuta derr $bmm d*uernd
fo*, bis dsrselbs mit d*m T'sde des &rafan Ecinrich Josef
Fcrdinand t8$3. 1 I " 4" im *tr*nnesstsmm* 
erlosrh.
Aug rler adligeu l,inia {ron Ka*par abstamraeail} 
war
Xsns auf Wiersbcl rKl. I.'nlkcnberg] uud $shrfrbsdorf k.
k. Rsth und Hauptruann von &liins*rberg nnd liranhen-
steip (t 169l i nnd dcsgen srutler lfic*lsne tf err, 1fi14
-I8l .hllannitc,rardcus 
('omih$r str Klein-tlele. {s*it l$0$r,
erzherengli*hcr 
Kflmnrercr und Geh. Rstlr; rnit'd*s ersts:
rsn sOhnen rius d,er Sho mit Anna [lari* y. fieilli,tz
Hans Sieol*ns *uf $chr[bsdorf tt ] (it$t nstl K*rl 
r-
bs*h ditger Zweig. Ansserdsffi bliihte nnch 
yo$ cbes-
genanntenr 
Georg ( t4ie) cbstaffm*nd 
eine adliso Li-
li*, in -d*ryn lleEitz tiireeraderrf, 
Paulsdorf lPohlitt*rf),
Iogr**Jdorf, Roth-Kirschdmf. Sehmachtcnhayn. 
$trnsi,
$_cifgre$orf,, 
rliftcl - Pcilan" r,ingen * xeudod, - Guhrrits,
Kariech etc. excheinen; doch &loach au{rh ' diese Linie
in der zreitcn llf,lfta des XlTf Jahrhnnserts.
Dis sichsrs starnrnreihe 
des (ieschl*chtes 
iet fcl-
gende, l] fl*ns auf Hetche_ 
und F*rganie tt IdgS); Gem"
itlargaretb* $t*ls ron Schlssz tbiJ t$t?;": 
gl H*ns
auf ldendarf nnd H[nsrn rf tf,,Sl. IS" S.]; Gf,m" I: Heil-
ril 
y.- d. fleyd* r. d H. -Ls_uterbrch 
(t issgh lI" Anna
v.- sieds-n {f lir6?};_ - q} Nicolaus yon Hfinerri m Tfeig-
witr, $chiinborn snd Antheil tosenau {t c- l5sg} i sefr.
98

The Lost Genealogies
Ilel*u* v. H**ss zr Klein.SndHtz {t telS}; - 
*i Jor-
chim tFrEiherr 1605, Qr*f lSSSl, k" k. rirkl. Seh. Ae&
md K*mnar*r, Ob*r-Silberhtmmersr, ksnigl. poln. *nd
sshwed, &ttb, seit 1ti4$ L*udeghaaptmann der !'ttrten-
thtmer Opp*In und Haiibor (" 16?8, t'1616. gS. $");
Sem. f. lti10 ?; U t6g6 .[nua ltaris Srafin Dohna zu
Wartenbcrg; * 
ir) Kerl Joschiun (f ISg?, i 1684" 14.
$"); G**. Ann* Xnri* Freiin Pr*ehonshy rsn Praek*u;
- 
lil Ksrl Cbri*taph {' I tiir.l* 3S. [ 1., t t?SS] I Gem^.
Ir:8? Hnri* $abir* GrSfin v. Yerdngo {* lrrS$, *9. &.,
t l_Tl_9" 
S0. 4.] ; * 
?) Ksrl Jsschim i* 1$gS. Sl. 5.;
t I ?{8. li. lt}.} g Gem" *Iaria Jcbanna Freiin y, It'elczeck
(* 1?t14. 19" U., i lJti?, l$. 4 i; 
8i Frsna K*rl Jo-
hann Anton ,Iosef* k. k. Xflmmerer und Oberst t' l?*?.
7. S., t I8t$. gl, ti.); Gem. L 1?ri8. 2l- ll. Maria Jo-
hanna &r$fin Altlaun (t t?4$. 18" 9., t f ?8{. tr?. I.) ;
U. l?S?. dti. 7. Josefa M*ri* Srflfin *lth*nn t* 1?S?.
1S S., f tIiS?. {}. 3.}; 
9.1 Hcinrieh J*s*f F*rdin*nd
t* l,??S. I*. 9., t ISSS. 11. 4.i; fiem. It (tS. I,T S, IIs*
ri* ann*Freiin ron s*urura-Jeltsch (* l?8ti. ?. 1., t I8$s.
fr, 4.); Ietaterer *doptkt* seiner s^ahnester 
Tochtef Kcro-
lixa Ann* I ran*isks Agnns trflohr r" Ehrenfeld (t l8l,i.
ll. $., f t$ti$, $1. 3.), rel*hs sish in sreiters[* l8rg.
I I, {i. mit s*il*lf }taris Bsrnhsral orafcn v, $till&ied,-
Rstronitz und, N*urade, Gr*nden ron Portug*l und Orafen
y$n .tle*iat*r*. kon. pretrss. nirhl. r,ieh. X;th uud obsr-
Cerernouienmeieter 
ve-rmihlte.
Dis Reiha der $enior*tsh*rn auf wiesa ist nadr-
stehende 
: \, Jo*chim llb ln$?, t tri lt) i * 
II" Jaschim
{*i*. q}fn }ilr. a}; - - ry. Walf Ki*o}ii* {t f $i,1. g$. O.},
k- k. Ksmmnrer xnd, $elrlossh*uptmann zil Rsubnr; -
IY. Karl Joachinn trid. oben Nr,' ir); 
Y, Johann 'Joa-
chim {t ltig7. ti. 10.}; Sem. Johanm"?herssi* Sr6fin ?.
lferberstein irerm, Ir,?3 29" Il.i : 
yI. Johsnn Le*
pqlq {i t?0it. 18" -1."1 
; Sem. Scphemia $leonora Grflfin
Altl|rmn t. l{lt;r{. [[. ii,, f nach if tOl; * 
ylf. Ferdi-
nand trlarimilirn t' t(itjs, t 1?4*. g" ir.l, Ir*ndre*lrtsbei-
sitscr der Tiirstontbfrnrer 
Oppeln und itntibor nnd f.an-
deshnnptm*nn 
dcrselbeu 
Ffiriienthiirner; Gem. l?14. ?,t.
7. X*ris Johanna (iriifin v. Sehratteebacir 
{* lS9?, t l?4i.
*S. ir ) ; 
Vr II, Karl Joaclrim {rid obsn Nr. ?l I

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anyone
IX. Karl t'hrietuph ,losef J*cob Heisrich t' l?*S.:lir. ?;
t l?8S" I? ti.1 ; Gel$* l?..1, l8- ?. Il*ria Annr Fr*rsieh*
Freiin y. Gruttschreibcr 1* t ?Eg. {- I 1., t I ?8ri. 4" 6.) ;
X. Franz Karl Joh*nn Anton Joesf {virl, ohen Nr. 8i;
AI. Karl-3f*gnur Jsbann Neparnah- 
{* t??'1. 23. $.;
t t 885. 90. 8.]* Landegfrltcster de* firsises l{eugtadt Ol$" ;
&em. t. l?$n, l;r. ll. ffi*ria Antonia Gritfin v. Kariatli
1* 1??X. g. 1., t I80s. t2. g.); xI. lg0rt. Is. 4, I$aria
Ann* ffriifin Hen*kel r. Ilannergm*rsli f l?Ti" 8. 6.*
t 18?9" 4S. i"). Nsslr dem Tsdc de* Gfsn Karl lfagnua
krrn dic Seuiomtsh*rschaft urit fienehnigung der Ago*-
ten enm Y*rkanf.
Das Senchlecht ist gfinztich ls86 erlnssben mit iler
Gr*ff* Meri* Antonin Jsssfa t* l$$ri" lS. 1S" l , rerm,
l8sF. ,$, ls" nrit Josef ffr*fr:n vdn Lsrirch, Freihsrnl roa
F[guth und K-arnin {* t?77. S. rg., t tgil. $- lg.}, h" k.
Kf,mm*rsr untl k, pretrss. Generalmljor &, p,
Die n*chsteheird aufgefithrtc c**titigs Ahn*nt*fel der
Grfifin lfari* Antonia gibf einen Beweis fiir die r*it *$s-
gedebnte Tsrwandtschaft des lf ettiche*bsn Geschlechtee
nnd. snthftlt fnlgenda Oesehleehter" l) Graf rsn 3lstticb,
Freiherr roil Tschetschan 
i * 
21 Bdrglgr*f ron sabnr;
: 
il) - ftreihsrr Proshrwehy yolr Proskau; 
4l Fr*ihsrr
Kochti$y ron. Kschtitr;" * 
*, $ref ysn ln*rdrgo i a
6) l'reiherr '{,*jic ron l[asenbarri; 
T, Freiheri Li*b*
rteinrkf,"o} Kolovr*ti * 8I s*eiharr cnlonn* soaFek;
- ^. !l Freiherr "on Welezek and (hoss-Dsbsneko 
; *
I0) ?1, * 
llJ r*f von Eranchn*, Freiher: ron tsiikan;
: 
!2)-1on frusuar nnd !{om*rna; 
13) F*ibarr r&n
Berubtoldt und Unganrchitz i : 
t{} Frsibsrr E*g*nm*ller
von Dubenweiler I 
I rr) Graf ion sprinzenl'*eis; -
100

The Lost Genealogies
t 0 l

ults!$AD
Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anyone
r02

The Lost Genealogies
Ilngnnd 
v. Sclr:or;tlltr
{Tafel 308, g0?}.
W'r I. ($iege} t?$S): gis rsshhcbrsittndor Wolf,
Der Helm trflgt oin*n ofi Flug" - 
IL (?Iiener Xino-
rihn Nscrolo*iun 1$4S): In & sitr rmhtrnpringen{sr
*ufgeriohtekr r. TFolf mit nidorgshshrtom Wodot *
$L (Strfuirobm T9*ppanbncb iler Joh. Satrfri$ Ecitron-
krse aur dem Snde - ilas lff. Jhiltrlr 
TYio rorhin, rbm
de; .Sotf linLrgorsndet. Dar gfhr. Ealm mit r,.f,'Ils*ko
trilg$ dea Tfolf rsohland, : 
IY, (ff*g]: 
Osyiort; 1 u,
4 ria II, S n, $ ia Sl, einc rier Qridtsmtaine- hobr
rebrrm qolgeJusqs drsin*l gorinnte bl. Hsuar (Sn'
nsrtil*r$, 
Ttrei Fokr. Helma D*r mchta nit-r.*s.
Daala trflgt ilou ltolf 
anl dis Hintgllrofe niodergrtsD,
dsr lisls mit bl.-S. Dtck* zrsi Snffehhdrnsr, dro recbto a,
ilas lir&o n, iadu *umoq eit einsm ganahltaa g. Krumo
le*etuL - 
Y. -{1{&0}: Bevierti l, I n. I rie-lorbin, *
in 8.11s?i epringenda, mit ilen Kbpfeu voaoinroder, lul!
rlsa .Btoken gsgolsqrnilergetehrte anfgerichtetsr' nit
siaor $r ilren S, Xalrb[ndorl bofertigten g, Kotts zr-
Earnmsngehoppeltc 
& Bilden nit etfgerechfeu Obren E
scbrtggolreust ysrgeblnngsnstr 
Scbwiinzer {P tatrhon-
trlr$. 
Dtri golf. Helme. $or reohte rie bbi Iy, ds
mittl. mit bl"*$, Dechr trr$ 
ror sisem of. rie felit g
bnreishnsten adlsrsffugo zvai nit Hermelia [boraogene
Btffslehsrnar, jeden alllon eit sinem g. Krrnmc beru:taq
mlcher au isinan riabsn fi*sksn mit* rus 
-s. 
rnapfd
herrorgeberdsa Etbnenfedern becteskt i*t u" dsr links
Eolm mit r.-r. paslo trxgt {is beiden Rtdsn mit rEch.
uf;rts abbf,ngenilar Kstt* rsbsnsincndar auf dia Eintsr-
Uido uiederget*tr. 
YL ($toiornxrl. Tfappenbuch ilar
zsebarias Bartrah ron Jahie ri6?): Wie l.orhir,, aber
dsr wolf im l. tr'elde rschhssbrei*?nd r!. ilie ilauor in
2. u. & F*lila nit 4 flinnon, dersn nr*sors ia des Fotdss,
rmd trster. Der lisks gln furgt die heiilon Bfiden lris
in *. trtclde.
Kirtnsr Eradsl.
I. Otto Ungpad, t nnch 1?, f, n0i, A Stift gt
Fanl, * II. Otto ilngnad, t saah [. Iy.'lt$0. - fiL
103

Finding An)/one, Anywhere, Anyone
1) Wolfrrm, birch0ff. Srmborg, $chon\ f nn$h *. IY.
tgll, 
r 
S) E*inrieh IIug rd, f nrcb lS. X" m4$, X
I) mit Osrtrul r. U,araburgi trl mit Kybsrg ?. Eh-
ron fs lr. m g) Otto, f nroh S, III. l2{S. * 
IY. Otto
Ilngnd, l3?1, X mit einsr r. Lippnwits. 
$0hne: I,
Konrrd, 12?& 
g Ofto ilrr Adtf r. f. ts* S, $trich
trngnri[ lS**1*8?. 
$6hns: 1) Sernhrrd, Brn 1$gg, *
2l Uhich Ungn*il, Er 1$28, X mit llamnt, T. d. Ja*
h*m ?. Kuohl** t" Hohanhnshql Tashtar Annq X
nit Ssindsh Surggfon sn S Br a.
Y. Otto Uogniil iler Aelt. anf Wdilmrtoin u,'Linn-
b*rg, Bq f nmh %* YIIL 1306, X nit Barbarq T. &
Otto r. Eirssrdorf. 
Kindcrr 1) K-stb*rin4 X ror lS.
YI, lS0S mit Otto dem Jfrns. r. Wcirronort, 1308. -
S) Friedriah, Dombsrr gu gsLbnrg, t nrch gllflf 
1312.
3) Otto der JErg., t ngch $.- V. 1816, X I) vor g.
Y. 1919 mit . ...., T. d. Friedrieh 
Saohr; II) vor 81.
fY. ffi!12 eit Elisfibsth, f. d" Otto ils Aelt" r. Tr*un
ssf E*nrwk r. & A une v. Silrsndorf. 
4) Konrad, 1
Y$i*n IX. Krt Ds$, lSlS, & bsi rlsu Hinonton, X nit
Strkufi Sr*lrnfr 
& d" E l*onburgn t n*eh ?I. XlI
lA{S. - S} Walfguag, ra lL
YI. WolfgEng Ungund anf ffsldsn*tein u, Waffar-
leonburg, lisoh6fl. Bamberg. Bnrggrsf ls Wolfrbarg, t
nrch 98. YIIL 1SS8" X vsr [S; IN" lS4S mit Anaa,
T. d, I$olfhart y. Ean*u 
186?. Eindsrl (1) Wslf.
blrt, rF. f. - 
{$ Annr, - 1388 X Eit WitUitm dam
Jfing. ,v. Schlrff 
anborg aaf BsaEeilstsin, f fS98. r
(8) O*o llugurd snf TYalilsnetdn, Sr, t naoh $* f"
1S88, X nit Wsndulr r. Sr*ilsnsgg. Kindern L Sru-
bnrq X l$gg mitKsnrnil Fret dan-.Ifrng, auf Plmksr-
mtt" ffi fl. trrrtla, 
t l*$*, 6 
St Johnnnalrydle
Duino, 1888 X mia Jihmu i, Eeichsnburg. -: 8.
PanLrar, hsglo Ffleger rrr Bleibnrg, t t44f gasrtrg
nrch Usinilian, A Pfrrrkirshe Orar, X I) 1d19 nii
Aguer, T. d, Jo-Faan 
Harkgfen ?. Bochbsrg r. d.
Agaer r. Gleroldrock, t g. n- 14!16 {rrr X in- l. Ehs
nit tr'rieilri& Ofon r, O t Lo n l n r& f 8$; Y. t*l8) ;
II) 1{SS nit Hargr,ret*, T, il Diotegon Treshross 
"-
S mmsrborg npf *Aifbsnrsinrt als Wvsn Schn I Andrem,
* lrian 
litr* 
iE hai sf. *tsf*h-
t04

The Lost Genealogies
?ftr. Wolfhgrt Ungnril, $r, * moh 1S. IY. 1S8S,
X mit Jrbanna Sshenk r. Ontarritz, 
A Minoriten-
fuirter WoXeb$rg. Xinilsr: I, Ksnmd Uodid, birch6fi.
Bamberg. Burggraf zv Gd{go, _f zwiacben O.otgr f4{b
u. 14 0; X I1 mit Anrcr _T._aL -Heiorich y, B.pproh
auf Klamb-u. Fittan r" d. Ksth*rfua ?. Eottssnsnn;
tr) mit Tfaudnl*, ?. d. fhamrr lfsr ?. St Gaorgsr u.
Bhring. Torhhrr Demuth, X 
'nit Esinrich Oralanil
anf Leonbnrg"  
g, Ilntlq 
t slr Wna, X sit Bnrk-
lsril r) Babonrtsin 
rnf San*699, f ror 80. Tf. 1*AS.
* S, Luzi*, X, f*m mit Ulricb v. ?Fsirrbri*oh, -
*. lfol$s!$, 
tr* f,.
YIII, 
Walfgang $ngnrd ruf Eeunburg, birchsf.
Bamberg. Burggraf au Grifen, f zrfuchen Hittroch ror
8t Bopraeht 1498 E. S'reitag ror Souotag Iuvosavit i!
ilsr Fartor 1429, X L&2 mit tfiarg*rota, T, d. Berengor
Dnmarsdorfer & d. ,,. r, v, Planlenrart, f nach 1?.
XL 1*4S. Xinder: l) Johmr Toguad ruf Walden$ei&
Grdlenogg, Lisbsnboig, Ealbsnr*inn Dietricb*bib, Felil-
hircben, Tfioderdrimn, Sonnegg tr* Planhenvart, kri;
Sat n. Ksnmerusisisrn in dsn rr.-[. Ertd 
anfgen,
14$ I, erbielt ilittnmb ror Georgi 1**9 o. s. d. TYIsnrr
Nenstadt Samrtag ror St. Poteretag 1466 Fappenbesso-
raagsn, t Tgiener ltenstEdt 1{6t, 6 Pfsrrhirehe Gras,
X f{$? nit Rish*rdr y, P err ogg. I'osht*rr Annr,
keis, Ssfd*mo, t Abend ?sr [artini 1{60, X Wionei
Nsnstrdt Os&6m 1454 mit Sishaal SBurgsfon v" Mas-
d e tr r rg Gfan zu Earilegg auf Pulkru-r- Weitarrfela
$-augurlor{, !{arkereilo{ Wa&ndsrf, Plermi4g Baeobhch,
$qr_chegg, -ktu, Obsr- _u. Unts!-Nalb, E6flsb, 8Orohitr,
Zellerndo{ Sshrem*, fberssbnrs, Mallebern, &iftstri
tlo4 Perurdorf, Xatzerilord, $chsnfold, Albernilorf, Pf*f-
I:tfotf, 
Neo.Roppered-orf, Leodaggar, $taatr, Firacb,
Hitterbsr_g, Ferf-ne_tds, -Ilryenotoin, lFeirrenberg L
Yelbor, f 'T$ien 24, IIL t{88, A Chor der Algusfrner-
kircbs.' 
2i Wolfgrug, Br, f uEieru. Bom arrrgchon 4.
YI[. 1452 u. Joli l{56. - 
S} Goorg, ktil. Bat n. Eptm.
rtr Ortenbarg, t utrrsrur. gt.- Agnsisg 1458, t 
trirche
EberndorL T 4) Ottg, f zrirchen L IX. tl{T-a. April
t4{9, A Ofen. 1 
?} Chrirtof, r._f. _T 6) Uargaritr,
X ryit .folaBn r. flcbdnbatg. - 7, Elhibtb, X mit
Lecnharil Schsnh v. Ostsr tits.
105

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anyone
IX. Chrirtof llnguad r f. d. Wisr er life n r tnilt
tor dem Palmtag f46A P*nisrhort ?.8onnsgs
sul Wddenrteinr_ Gradenegg, Liebenborg, Hrlbenrdn-,
Di*riabrtein, S'slillirahon, Staia, Plrnkan*art u. Wamu-
laonb,nrg, ldf. Bet n Hptn. tE Cil$, erhialt Hittnssh
vor Georgi 1**$ o, l. d.- Wirnm l{ourtndt Srnrtag vor
Sf Potentng 14$S ff*ppenbrlernngs& rurila f 4$1 ir
d cn n.-[. Er td anfgeu., f Doanarrtag uach DraikL
nigrtcg 1490, A Pfankirshe Sbnrnilorf, X 
1{63 mit
Annr Katbrrrrs, f. d, SrsJohmn der Jflng. y. Sraun-
borg *sf Hn*g u. Ussesnbsusen u, il. Aaus M*rschsll
v. tlpprntrgiq f naelq l{?fr. Kinder: {l} Johann, xF. t
: 
(g) Katharfuq X I) nit *udrecr r, Eobenrrrt 
anf
Brrls*hrtsfo u. Krupp, t 1605; II) mit Jshann Joaahin
!._lorgltell 
anf Siirac!, Bq t5l?. 
(A) Xaria, X
1505 mit Wignlorg_von Thnr-n auf Naubeuirn, t l'5,i0;
beida A gt. Jakobskapelle Salzbarg.
x. Johann ungaaii, Panisrherr-v. Bonnegg auf wal-
ilonrteiL _-9T*{rnagg,_ 
Liebenber, Ealbenrali', Distrish-
rtair, Foldkirchen, -$tein, Planfenrart u. Tiasrerlssn-
P*g, _t Grifeo vor_1590, X mit Urrgarota, T. d, Leon-
hard Loebacr ?. rriebeifclg E- d, ,.-. -. v, wildeorgeir.
$iailcr: 1, Johmu, s, f. t. u, Aelt, Linis. * 
S, A[-
dreSlr_ -r. f. N. r. JEng. Linie. - 
g. christof, t 
l5zz
nroh $got"g ror cm{n. 
d 
4. pol5neua, t lb?9, X
nit Petsr Lrro r. Sactitisn, beidi * 
Lni5nrtinrirhof-
!uqh* Tfian. * $. Elissbsth, 't 
I'5tt,J{ 
njt emrsclt
Schlik scfeu ru Bmr*ao inf Budgnitz"'nntsii*r', 
sl;
logelr $:n*den,-__Kpeden, 
Ko_nigrber!, 
Kffi;#riu,
ft*6, Winte_n!, -Wohnlg n, Zltnitq" t l5f8. 
-- 
g.
-Itrrqrq _e!zgl. Eofdama, f- uacb 6. ril, lb63. )( Inss-
bru-ck .1528 mit wilhelm r.' puc hheim auf Eiilsoreich-
rtcis u* Omthd, t lf4g.
Aol tsrs lrinior Ssnncg g {orloroheu}"
XL Johrnn llngnrd, t. 'L Sr[rrsl 
*9. y. f Sg?
RFrhr ru qonnjgl qlf w*ldir*ain, wfu*r6db*g,
Bing ootbshee, 
pior, todrircb; gil*.hG& -ili. 
a;i
& Obrter Stallneilt; r, yonchsoi&t, e.-.'d. Frag f:
XIt rs*s srbobargeiprn 
ilsi wnrareinii'xomibte-ffiail
rtar Fol{hph. h Krdatisn r. sn dor winilirehou oranzn,
106

The Lost Genealogies
Irdesbpto. in $tsisrmark bir l$56. ioit lS$2 Land-
rtanrt -in Kraiu, * iu Steiermerk il8O, t aof Winte-
dtz 27. XII. 1S64, A F&gtengrnft dsr Eirsbr T[-
bingor, X I) nit Asne f,rris, Etbt d. Oeorg r. Thrrn
rnf Frie*richrt*in, Surkfald r. Xlingenfelil a. d. EeIenE
Frangrpasi a" d. E. Ycglia; II) auf Br,rby 1. YU. 16[6
mit iltria ilagilaletrs, 
T" d. Wolfgpng RGfsn ul
Barby, Xlhlingan, Koraubnrg u. ]1'*Iternianbnrg o. d.
Agrer BGfln ru Usngfold &. d. g. $eobnrg, * 15e0, t
'TT'ien 16, XI. 1565, $, neben ibrom Ssnal. Kinderl a) anr
1. Sbe: l)I,ndrig, ksfu. K&., S*t, Hpim. u. Yireilom sr
Ciili, t Kts,genfnrt r*ch I. Yffi. lS8S, A gtadtBfan-
kircbe &s*., ]( 
8. X. 1s8t nit An n I tfiiia, 
Er'uL il.
T9ilhelm Neututnn 
ruf 'W*rnerleonburg, 
Trsffen, Iofon.
rtoin u. D6llash [. d. B*rb*r* B.umpf a. d. E. Wtllroer.
r Yitlseh 88. XI, 1535, f auf Hsris 18. XIL 162S, A
Bpit*lr&ircbe daa. (**r'X 
in 1. Ebe ip Oktbr 1E$? diG
Joh*uns Jatob BFrbrn r. TbannbtrrsDr 
t Friassch
?S. fX, 1560, A Doniaik*uerhircbo d&8. u.-io I, Ehs
1S. [ 15S$ uit*el*stof ?. Lisohtenrteiu, f t590, a.
rieder X 
in {, Sbs 9. ff, 1S8? mit K*rl 3'rhrn ?,
Teuff esbach aof 0frcnbnrg, t auf Stattanbera 
sri-
scban 19. I E. 6. IX. 1510, -in 6. Ehs *lf Unrsu lg.
XI. 1611 mit Ferdinnnd v. fi*lfi.rnans* SGfss trs Or-
t*rbnrg Frbsn tr Frsienrtriu, Karlrbe*b, Lill u. Eri-
court auf Oberfalkerstein, f filgsenftrrt ISIS un iB 6.
Eho 161? nit Cleorg 
Luilrig BGfen Zu Seb v s.tzenberg
E. Hobenlandaberg- 
suf ti-**g u. Elsbetheazoll, t *o"f
Frerdeurn 22" T*, l6i8- ;g Kapuzirorhloster'!ilnrau).
= 2) Chrietof {Ingn*d BFrbT zu $onn*gg auf $zamobor
Sbobergelpsn dss Wsrnsatiner Komiills, 
kail. Rst,
obergt u. Kndi zn Erlrn, B*unr in Kro*tiin u. salma.
tieu, lKqrclat 
im Dsrbr 16S5, X ait A n n * K*tba-
lina, T. d. Stofan Logsotr csy d-o'genero 
Tomsj rr. d.
log*Jelry 
r. Petrorina, 1 Siomoli-ny {rar wi;der X
itr 2. Ehe mit Nitolsur Bethori v. ilwed, t 1685, -u
lr S" Shs nit $iogmnail Forglch 
v. Ohymer ruf Tr,
polm*uy, Srecrbd, Sznmog, KeO, $zaldnoz u. $asnt-X{r*
too, f Tyrnau 2il, Yn lS81). ?ochter: Anna ilarir,
* IS$$, f l6lt' 
X PreEsbrrg 2$. t 1584 nit ?bs&rs
Sfen Erdady ?. !fionyor$kordk 
u. !fionosuld *uf Ehmu,
t *nf Krapina 1?. f. 1$2{, E Kirehs Agrrn, * $} Si-
t07

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anyone
Isaon Sugnad, S$'rhr st $onnegg anf T$'*ldesrtoinn 
Eim-
melrtein , gsll , Kloingr0n , .Enderrgrtn, illlhlsn torf,
Wqk*q,- Bockrgr[n s. Wergendorf, Lris. Eptu., hrgl.
rfphg. Knhr, I Gsridorf in Tbtringec zriasler t*, fV.
160S r. Mai 160?, X Sgalfeld 1$?l mit Katbarina
Srbt. d" Oietrich Edl. Horrn y. Plegso B. d, K*tharini
Beofs y, Plrnen *. d. g" $reiz (rar X ia 1. She Eit
Joh*nn R0fen ur Gleichgn-Blrihenhoim snf Rbembdr
t l5S?}. ?osht6rr Arns U*ri* Sofia, * $onrtlg Qqa,.
aimodogeniti lb?$, tot 1611tn X nI. IX" 1d0l uif Chri.
gtof BGfen uq f, oinin gB n - Tforterbulg *nf $chann-
!51S' f 1qS2. * _1) {f,tl, t ,unyerm. 
Gartain 1509, A
Y6lhermarkt. - 
5) Ehrenroich, t 
dag. 1598; X 
'n]E
. . .. . Pc ugsher y. Leouateia (war X iD l. Eha Eit
K*rl ?. rris a h ta s s t sin anf uurau, t arirchan L6zn [.
191*),-:^ ?). {uiith jtir$rt!, 
t 8, IIL LIZS, X
TYien 1548 mit Johann Baptirt dsn Jiing. Gfsu Eoyos
tr'rhrn an St*chssnstsin 
rnf fribusrink*ti t g?. x. 1369.
s v) ann* 
H*ria, x l6sg nit Jareilar dsn Jtrc.
T. Kolotrrat-Liebgteinirkf auf Pder*bnrg u. Babei-
rtein,-t_rS9S: - 8) FoliriGar tr{argerstsXarir, t lg.
r& lS?0, X reit Pesk'"a ?. -Win( isch*Orietr
B['rhrn ru {1t{r$io in: im fld, f ZS. X. 1691" - bl
&rr 2. Ehs: 9) Johann Oeorg, f unierm, yelrdis p6, v.
s83. - 10) wolfgang, t aB- Jahro alt unyennf gauer-
brsnn bei Citli 1591,-E Y0lkernarkt,
J tn grs Liniel Bloiburg.
X[ Andrsar llngnail* !, d" Srfrrsel Ag, y, lSgl
&tr'rhr zn Eonngg_g rinf Districhstain, pr*nhonra*,
Waseerleonburg 
E. -zrikow etz, rsit r6ng r,rndstsnri
in Krair, kair. 8r* rr. obentitsllsisilter, f snf goe
!egg_ 1s&?, & Kirchs Bleiburg, X I) 1S26' mir Aunr
$ngllonia-1fiffir, .T. -dj JohanF tbqs- r, IFellelbnrg a
d, ilari* Hnrgeratr sultaor, 'Wre iles christof Jnlinr
lfea r, L o d ro n; II) Sanetng nsch St. Fr*na tSB4
mit Jobrnna Benigaa, Erbt. il-adalbsrt v. Fsrnrteir
auf frauonberg u Hratliitko n. d. Johsnaa n Warten-
berg; III) 1551 mit ,Annan f. d. Johsnn Sofmrnn
Frhrn zr Srilnptchal n. Strechau anf Ofalburg, Orog*
108

The Lost Genealogies
q6&, Wolkenrtein, Stainrch, $ahrattenborg, Badkenbnrg,
Ganoritz, Ttfrer, Kais_errbergr 
Crmmsrn, ulutern, spial-
letg a,_ d. .Dcnrn, Wildenrtein, Knmmer, Kogal, Fradkan-
Lurg, NSg-Attaryee, .&an4*riedl, $tep Hollc, Krenrdorf,
fole, Gloiar" Garrch, Senltenborg, Oberrallree, All- u,
Neu-Lembacb, Saldenbofen, Warfenateia, Brudl &, al,
Lei0ba, Henkirohen & Aepang tl. d. Potentisna ?. Obor-
but& f nach ?iL. VUL 156?. Kinrler: a) aur 1. Ehs:
1) Ailsm anf tr'ranenbarg c, Tfilt*riu, srhielt 156S mit
Osr.-Art f 7 dar nngsr. Iniligemt, f rnf der Ineel
$sbinta in Sngsrn, X I) mit -Eargarota, 
T. d, Ailsm
der Aelt. r. $tera berg anf Slatn*, Sloritz, Orttaberg,
Hmfrtsugal, Xlonar, Konopirrht, I{epomuh, Att Pilro-
nota CI, Planita no d, ldorgareta Msloreta r. !f,alsritz
a" d. E Pstznn; II) mit Sliaabatb, T. d. Alsriur
Thutzd 
?. Sathlenff,lr* n. d. Magdalenr Sa6kely y-
K6rend *. d. H. Sathordol, t gg. Sf. $?q (Iae X in
1. the nit Jarosl*us ?. Psrnstein auf Sefenrtiii u.
siedcr X in S. Shs 156? mit Julins Sfea su S*tn E
lieuburg em fnn ecf Sahxadorf, Ladendorf, Grorg-Petr-
lowitz u. ooiling, t g. YIr. 169s, A stiftskircho bei
St: Dorothea Tfiial.'- 
2) Maria }talgareta, f g, f,
16?$, I 
n*rh 1540 mit Srssnur ?, Windisch-(irsetz
EFrbrn sa Wrldstein l. iB Tbrl, t t il; tb?B; beide
1$ boi {en }aminilcusrn S:aa * 
b} aur 8.. Ehr: 3}
Eivid, r, f. * _ *) Johann, 1S69, f bm lt6l. 
- 
6i
Aun* ilari$ X 
I) 1669 nit Juliur Schlil &Gfsn
sr Sa*rars *d Sabeartein, t 1676i II) nit Eeinrlob
,Ssblik ngfsn an Bamsns anf Plan, Wofeahor, Horos-
rtein *" ffinmslttoin, t 94.. II. tr$E[. {! 
s} sor S.
ths: 6) Potentians,
Xrf, I)*rid Ongodl BFrbr !r Sannogg *uf 310i.
bntg* S,sltol dor llnirarritft 
Wittenborgr }air. Gleb. nat
.u. Hoflriegrmtaprflr. s. D. u, Kolr bCi den Yerhand-
lalgon rs Xuab*u, Lmil*tand ia Sr. ob der.Banr 16$6,
lb86 in don B.-0. altsn Erid rafgo,s erhiolt lbSS
mit Ber.*Art. gA atar nsgar. hdigenit, t X,mohEt 28.
XIL 1600, $, Eorn, X-YdchlanarLt 18. L I5?g mit
Svr, T. iL Luku L,ang ?.'W'allsnbnrg snf Kitzbtbal n
i, X*ri* Slirabeth 
*Froiin r, thnanbarstr r. d" H'
Gndenegp Kisilar! {1} Cbrirtof, f ntr}errn. * 
(})
109

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anyone
Ailan, 1 rnveru.- 
(B) Andre-arr.F, 
f. : ($. Cgolg, f
urtsrs, * 
(?)-Slira!rt! 
I&gqdsn& f Oitonburg in
Eayora l$g1, X anf Efierding l; II. 1S9? nnit Emrmor
dom Adt &Gl'on v. $tarhrpbafs 
anf Sehasmberg,
Biedcgg Wildborg B. tobeortain, *-auf Grt6ttanau t-{.
flt 
-16{8, A Eelmone6dt - 
t-6) ErfeniE! f Neu-
hrnr in $6hmsa lcgg uavsrm. # 
(3) Krthrrinb, -t 
ltr-
forrn
Xtrt Androar $agnail BFlhr su $onnogg ruf Ennr
gg r. -S1!deurte!n, f Sndon t6tl$, )( Elnl 1S. fX.
1s01 n* uarir ilrrgaratr 
Barbaro, -Erb[ 
d, Fris-
ilri& r. Prur {rhrn gr rfitilbag 
anf sng*Irtain E. d,
sligsbotb BFraiir v. Bogendorf aEf Mollcnbars & d. E.
sitrcldor{, f tirg 
Is. - I]L 1669. Eindor: -1. Dsyid.
r. f, c 
A. Helcra, f lrrorm" r 
8. Btisabeth Uar-
gareta , X 
r) 1648 nit 
anton GEuther EGlfen ?.
O^lilenllrg 
r* Ilslmsnbont, gersb. 16S5, t lS. yf.
166?i Ir) mit Johrnn v. srianholte 
*-{"-srr 
sli-
rrbsth , 
X 
smdan nit 
Johsnn Srinbsit Eh ran-
routor En Hofreit& anf Hrsrkirshetr. * e f,$htrina
f mvq3m,
XlT, Dari,il Uagpld, r. d. Prsrtbnrg g. Xf, 16{6
nstor YarlaihrDg iler Pdatinrtor nsch itim Beshts ilor
SrytSrlut BOf u. !. d. Prerrbarg ?" IfI" lff{? suoh
or bltr iL sf y. Tf oi rr e n;o lff tr'rhr ss sonrsgg u.
Fo?trtg anf Srigrhirchsn, Konatea, Soggeuhofon, Sffiit.
feu!!en, Boith E Sgielberg im M*bl&de u. Eechbars
ry N.-(1., rcit 1{: I igtg Oberr&erbluilbofmeietor 
i" O;
$ q. {., in d*r rshrlb. B$fgftotlegiun cufgon 1S68,
Rr d. 0..r. ggl{. YL, tri* WOB uI K&, i rOOa *
linr s, IIr, lrJs, X-mit Hrrir slirab*ib, Erbi. d:
$elmbrrd chrfutof-Jorgoq 
der Jfrag. Frhri rnT;trt:
ftf; iltih:; i:lf{' dE,*fi ' t' ;: fi:tr' "t'Jfr.li
letrr r. Polbaim *. d. g. pnn, t 24. Iv. L6z4* Kiidsrr
}]_!ropolg_ 
Yilh:{., t.jgts. : ei .rourtrtr-D-;id, 
.T
{gng. -. 3} Ferilinrnd WCnml, 
f jung. - 
4} Uarrt
il"argaletq t 186L x wisn s8. Ix. -1s6a nit Franz
Ernrt $ c hlir 
&Gfsn sr Bmrauo l. 
waimhirchen,
tr'hborrn ruf sopldtpa, ajtonbnrg, Pran, fi*uen;t-in;
oottrchrn & ruaitadt,'t Begenrbiig 
ls. mtr. rota *
1 1 0

The Lost Genealogies
S) Ealnhrrd, r. l, * 
6) Katharinr Dli:sbth, * Wiea
10. Yril. 16S?.
X9" Hslmhrril 
Christsf Sngna* BGf r. Sgirsor-
,lrCIlf Frbr m Sonn egg n. Ennrogg otrf Sbyregg, $pial-
berg Boith, Bhrinlanthon, P*r, 
Lurtenfelilen, Lu*sn-
l.tq,. K0ppacbr,firpttft, Orielkirehou,.Srltchr-Orpb.rninglt
Eocbberg u. Woicrkarteborg, Obergtorhlrndhofmaistor ir
Oa. ob d. 8., &rbsshont. dor Eschetifln P*uan, krir.
Tf&R r, Km,, Br d. O, y. golil Yl.r' arhislt als Pfmil-
tnbubor ron Crrleteia r. d. Wien 24. xf, l0?4 dss b0hn.
.Inlola$, * f6e$, f l.ina tr8, II" t?0S; X I) ffien 93. f.
16$8 nit Usria Sqtsnu& Frobsnia Snftmln Porthnn*,
T, d. Miahrsl Ailolf 3.Gfor r. Altb*nn Frhm auf ils
Goklburg ru Snntstt{n & il. Urdr Evr Slir*bstb 
r.
$ternbgrg snf Sbsntb*t Eichhorn u. fririrxsdorf, r gE
X. 1636, t ?. t 166f i II) Wisn 2*. YI. 166S mit S'nn-
drtc Eanigua Gffn v, Porsia n. Brugnarq T. d. BFrtsa
Jobann f'srilinsl 
il Ofen r. Ortonburg r. ilitterbnrg
a,nf ppittct, $enorohch n Prem tr, d. Featrir 
Benigni
K*nka y. Ri6sn *uf TFtlrcbimn f Augebnrg g'/,. YIIL
1690; III) \{ien 26. }L 1691 mit taris -Elirabotb, 
T.
d. J o h sntr Androar dsr J[ng, B$fan v. lro n g b ei'n b
aaf Pertlrbia, Kapfenrtoin, $sbrrrranang, Soiat[-al Xor.
rendarf a. Eeiileuiold E, d. lfiaril Ami-Eslera 
ftesah-
wmder Preiin ?.' [, ru $chritrtr 
auf Xranichbergn r
Orrr 84. f. lSS6, t Wisn 10. nL I ?19 (rrr ;iodor" X
in 3. Shc Tfian IS. VIL l7g* mit O t tb Srnrt Shrdn.
teich &Sfaa v, Abgnryorg u. Trn nr anf Eglofe, Altmann-
stsiu s. Wolksnbwg, Jilajor*t*hemn mf Pefronell, Uaimru,
$rapottgnrtain, Bisunbsrg, BrasEsberg, Wolfpreein g, Bock-
fiierr, Grogs-Schrsfubarth 
E. Drogq f I{ien 8, IfL 1?15,
6bsifles psminikrnera). Kiuder; (1) Urria Eligrbeth
Socantlioa Thereaiq * dr* 1?. IY, f656, t 1689, x I)
dar" 8" YL 16?5 nit Xichrol 
Franr Fsrilinand-B0fei
y, Althrtrn 
&brn anf der Soldbnrg uE Xnrrtsttsr,
Grulicb, Uittalrdde, 
Sch6nfelil, Wdfshdorf. prisgsuitt
und_ Sg!!i!r, t Prag 8. IY. 1677; II) mit 'O Lt avilr
r,srl Bsfsn Csvrilni 
Frbrn $i u"-ttam*tondorf anl
F**, 
Pragotaiu, Kr_eczen u. Arbirg, f nach 1689. * ($
Leop'okl Hicbrel l'ortcnrf 
t Wied 21, Iy. 165?. -
(S) ticbael 
Wenael Frauz Jog*f Janurrinr tragua{
1 1 1

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anyone
sgf 
?. Fsfusonrolf 
['rhr rr Sffinsgs e, Snniegs. ]
Wies l{. IX. 165q t 16?9, X dsr.--l?. L 16IE--Eit
Ernottr 
Balben 8Gflu v. f sntooucscli. 
T. d.
8I-rtot 
B*Imnnrl Elgs 
", 
AuBrI! *uf Oteiei, SrN&-
dort Eohenegg, Ortorlurg E. Pottendod r. d" trdr
[rrgrrctr 
.Jorof* BOfrn r. Sisirish*oh 
&riilr nt
finlCurtoin, Hotlmbarg o.. Tbalborg r. d. E ltikolrbrrg,
t Wisn 26. V. 1663, t d8r. 6. Y. 1?0I, A bsi dd
Sabotten, StH' 
tr*i 
rri;ittr x in S. Ebs ie$0'mit Srr,rr
Ohrirtof trhcrsnhlllrr 
?. Alchdborg S$fsd sr ['rrn-
Lonbnrg Frhrn sd L,rndrlrol, 
TYcra[org, Eohsn.Ortsp
ritc r" Eerhborg, fejorrtrbgrrn rd flrnsrogg, Ftmmr,
KISL [Intsttsh n. Weyregg, t f L IL 
1684 E. in S, Ehi
15. L t68E nit 'Tlolfpng Androal 
B0fen 
", Onid o.
Bsreabotg Frhrn raT L-emLanrn, Orafcnrtoh, Greifm-
burg, Bothngtsin, Eeatrehacb, TY'alasaggr 
-$onaegg,
E6hosborgctr, stoir, Bochborg u Lorotto, f-ffien 
8LE
1695). Toohtcr: Uarir Thoreris 
Franlirlr 
Antonir
Ghrirtim luf Wl*chin, 
* Prrg g?. XL 16?8, t iur April
l?dl, 
X TFien 2{. YIf. 163{ Eit Jobann Lcopold
Ilonrt B.Frttn Trsntrsn 
Sfon rn Fclkmetcin &hin nr
Spraobeudfiin n. $chrofmrtoin *nf Xekei, KaJr, Ln*
Golilogg, Pislaohhu& 
tsgrbrsh, 
tr'riering, Xlertinitr,
Knloritz, Eemnentadt, Cechtit4 Kfivsosdor, Geblsr
{or4 &t$ilhs, 
K*lissht, I{swchlsc;, .S$hm*-Btdolak,
S*rorprtrk n. Bog$s, t arrt 8t P6lteu 18. X. 1f94. A
bsi ilen Bsarbitsr 
gu gU Xichael 'WieD" G t{} KsibE
rinr Oeri*rld, f Spaogsnberg 
t?. UL tiiq'x' 
i6E$-nir
Itqtg Anton Fslir Philipp B0fsn v. Arcor f HehuDgsn
8. L l?0S. * {6} Srauzilln Bmtrir, * Wieir 29. X. lC-60.
* t6) !f,erprotA '* da* ?8. Xff, I6ff?, - 
(?) Jorsf
lntou, t in ![ii 1699. - {8} tarir Annq f lt1' Jahro elt
dr* le YL 167S. * 
(9) Uhrrs Jorofr 8i'bsrta, r 1S?8,
t das. & Y. 1?4$, X -i. n ISSS nit 
llanasl Addru
Wilhelm Anton $fsn ?. Erfsvoirt, 
Fkhenn *uf firn,*
fenegg. Grafear6{h, Scbdnberg, Ge?endorf, Ober-$ea
l".tor_ Bior_blum, Iteuaigen, Thilr-otbsl, Walkgrrilorf, Lo.
detssb s. l-ilnmiert, f Wien 90. YXt 
l?g$. A bsi ilan
Kapuzinera rwigchal Krems u. gtoia. 
: iIOt Fhrng
Anton 
llugrad BGf v. ssiscenrolf Frhr zi $ounegg
h,Hii:u#,'ff 
t*$1,$** 
f lffitd*:Tl,*s
rt2

The Lost Genealogies
borg, B.eobberfr 
$. Wla*chiu, Obaraterblandbofmeigter 
in
S0. 0b d, E,, kaic. Sm. II. SXofrat, * 1S?9, f Linz tffi-
schetr 19. o. *S. lf. 1?1S, & bei den Jesxiten dtc,, X
T9'ien 96. Y. 1?08 mit Ma.rir Fransiska Issbella An-
tonir $ibyll*, T. d, K rs p s r Friedrich BGfsn v, L& &-
borg Frhrs ,c Orteaegg tr. Ottenstein *uf Kunrtadt u. d.
I r a n si s k r Tberesia S'reiiu Hieserle r, Cbodan t. d. H.
Zaliboiitz, * 8. YII, I"682, f 1?{S. Tocbter: Hari* Auna
Josefa, kair. Hofdans u. Sthrd,l * 1?0S, t 16. IIl.
I?80, X Wien t&. IY. LlfirmitJobsnn lryilbelm S'rsnz
Xaver Anton 3*Itbrrar Sdusrd RFsten Trantron Gfen
zu F*Ikenrtein !'rbrn s$ Sprethenetsis &. Scbrofsnttoin,
Xajoratrherrn rnf Matroi, Raapenbiibel, 
Poisbrsurl' Kayq
Iraa, gt, P$lten, Fladnitz, lloS'ring, Golilogg, Pielach-
ha*g, Frieaing, Aggebach, 
$t. Pantaleon, 
$teinbscb, Griib-
ryisg, Grilnhorg, Hartinitu, Kralonitr, Eannoratadt,
Cesbtits, Kiireocdor, Wlasebim, Qoblarndord Zabr{dk&,
l{*ngcbloss, B0hm.-Stdolatz, $irospatak r. Iieg6el, f
frisn Sl, X. 171b, 5 
Pfarrkirchs $t Sicbael. *
(11) Ferdinard, s. f. 8. n. Aelt" A*t, * 
(12) An-
ton, r. f. N. r. Jnng,_Ast. 
(1S) Xsria Annt, Stkral ,
* l?. YIII. IS9$, f Sraz ?, Y. l?SSr x I) lfion 9. X.
1?14 nit Jolaun Oeorg Wilh slm B$fen Gallsr v.
$chraueaeg Frhrn snf Schramberg, 
Tfl'qldschaeh 
n, Lan-
ureb, f Grst 29. & t?E$i II) U. XL I?S1 nit X'ordi-
nsnd Laopold RGfen Breurnsr Eallem 
HErrn aaf $taats
Frbrn zu Sttbing, Fladnits o. Babemtsin, f ,, Iy.
1?6?.
Aelt$r6r AEtl Erlash.
XYf. F erdi n au il Bonayeatura $ngn*d BGf y.
TVeigsenwolf 
f'rhr ru Sonaegg n. Snnregg, Fkberr suf
&l1ch, Ptlr, Srierhir*beuo 
KImstan, Itbaii-lanrhet, Pran,
ffokrchitr s. Srrtorchoyr obenterblrndbofmelgtoi 
is oo.
ob d. &., Erbsshenk der Sochstifts Pcrrtq k. h, WG&
B. 813.1 * 2$. I. tr69$, t Nrien A0, Xn l?111, x 26, Xf,
I?ls mit Hlria Thrraria 
ssrbars Fnnzinka Josefi
Erttchia, T, d, Tbamar Gnnilaskar B$fen v, $tar-
be pbsrg snf Eschelberg, 
tichtsnhes, Bottenegg, 
Ober-
talloee, Haur, Freigtsdf Ebenfurth, Beicbenrtein, 
Senftel-
Ftg, Zdbigg,_ Pottenilo4 Weigehilorf, Nagy-Oroszi o.
Eatran u. d. Beatrir 
Franziska, Uarie.
I  l 3

Finding People in
the Present
Dead or Alive?
There is a myriad of reasons why you might want to
locate someone that you believe is living somewhere
in North America. This section will cover techniques
for finding people living in the present, both here and
in many other countries.
If the person you seek was living in the U.S., then
before going through a sequence of searches to find
him or her in the present, you should first check to
see if that person has died recently. For example, you
may be trying to locate an old friend that you went to
school with when you were a child.
The Social Security Death Index (SSDI) is maintained
in the U.S. Social Securitv Administration's Death
Master File.
The names include anyone who had a Social Security
Number (SSN) and whose death was reported to Social
SecurityAdministration, 
and ifbenefits were payable to
the surviving spouse. It contains applications beginning
at the end of I 936, although the vast majority ofrecords
are for those who died between 1965 and the present.
It is updated annually.
1 1 5

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anyw,hen
Currently, my personal favorite free source of this
index is maintained at www.newenglandancestors.org.
updated to 2005, the ssDI contains the names of about
75 million people. The exact address for the SSDI is:
http : I I www.newenglandancestors 
.orgl database_
search/ssdi.asp
If you find the person you seek, you can also order
a copy of their original SSN application form. That
application usually shows the full name (and in the
case of women, their maiden name), place of birth,
date of birth, their address at the time of application,
color, the names of parents including the maiden name
of the mother, and the signature of the applicant. The
signature is very important for comparing to wills,
deeds and other important documents the deceased
may have signed.
Once you locate data in the SSDI, you can then
order a copy of the Application for a Social
Security Number (SS-5). To request a copy of a
SS-5 form, you must send a letter to the Social
Security Administration (pursuant to the Freedom
of InformationAct) with the details of the individual
in question. Your letter must include: the name of
the individual, the social security number, date and
place of death and reason the information is wanted
(family history is an acceptable reason). You will
1 1 6

Finding People in the Present
need to inquire what the charge is-fees have been
rising. Send your letter to:
Social Security Administration
Freedom of Information Officer
4-H-8 Annex Building
6401 Security Blvd.
Baltimore. MD 21235
One last search you might want to do, however, before
searching for a living person, is to check out www.
interment.net for cemetery listings, especially if you
know the likely state or a tri-state area where he or she
might have died.
Once you have carried out the SSDI search, if you do
not find a record indicating death and benefits, then
it is quite possible that the person you are seeking is
actually alive today. In that case, the following section
will prove most useful. Finding an old friend from
years tgo, or finding a long-lost relative, can be a very
exciting experience.
U.S. - Searching for a Living Person
A recent and very powerful search used by
governments, lawyers, businesses, 
professional skip
tracers and individu.als is available at
www.zabasearch.com
lt7

Finding An))one, Anywhere, Anywhen
Free search results will often include the last several
addresses 
of an individual. In many cases it often reveals
the birthyear, month or date so you can use a process of
elimination to zero in on the person you seek.
Another bonus-search results will often include
telephone numbers (don't be surprised to see both
listed and unlisted numbers).
Zabasearch claims that this free public information
is collected from phone listings, court records, real
property records, subscriptions etc. In other words,
they claim that their sources are publicly available
government records and commercial sources.
For those with an investigative trait, zabasearch offers
a background check for a fee, which may provide a lot
of information about an individual.
Once you have the street address in Zabasearch, you
can go to www.terraserver.com 
for a satellite image of
the area. To get driving instructions and road maps, go
to the popular www.mapquest.com. 
This is also a very
useful website if you are vacationing anywhere in the
U.S. and Canada.
New and impressive technology will soon be available
from www.pictometry.com. 
They will be able to provide
images of buildings and homes in 3D technology with
45-degree angle photography. 
A sample is avarlable on
1 1 8

Finding People in the Present
the website. It will provide excellent visualizatron for
91 1 emergency calls as well as an unlimited number of
other uses.
Althou gh zaba means free, this search may not be free
in the near future. I would not be surprised to see an
annual subscription fee or minimum annual purchase
of one background check per year, for example - time
will tell. At the time of writing this website search is
in beta or testing mode and is free unless you want a
background search.
Other websites similar m some ways to Zabasearch
afe:
www. criminal searche 
s . c om
www.peoplesearch.com
www.people scanner. 
com
www.intelius.com
www.ussearch.com
More than a decade ago, white and yellow page listings
began appearing on the Internet. Today, it is relatively
easy to acquire mailing addresses and telephone
numbers along with postal or zip codes.
Telephone Directories Worldwide
Websites that cover white and yellow pages in the U.S.
or Canada or both include:
1 1 9

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
www.whitepages.com
http : //www. superpage 
s. com/? SRC-insp
www.411.com
www.switchboard.com
In England and the UK, check out www. l92.com
which as well as directories, has an amazing set of
electoral rolls covering the years 2002 to 2008. These
even allow investigators to verify the ages of people
in some years. I'm certain that these kinds of searches
will be in strong demand in the future in many other
countries.
To locate telephone directories in other countries, I
will first assume you have read the section on search
engines. If so, then the easiest way is to use a search
engine and enter white pages Sweden, for example. In
some countries, what we call white pages (in North
Americ a) are actually known as yellow pages in some
other countries, so the alternative technique is to enter
into a search engine yellow pages followed by the
name of the country. Experiment with naming a large
city rather than a country if you have no success.
Contacting people by telephone is not all that expensive
compared to years 4go, and costs have been coming
down thanks to websites like www.magtcjack.com and
wwwjaxtr.com. Remember too that people having the
same surname and living in the same area as the person
you seek may know the person you're looking for. I've
t20

Finding People in the Present
used white page searches effectively many times over
the past two decades. Often this search has located the
person I was seeking after all other search techniques
had failed.
What ,f yo, don't lcnow the surname?
Believe it or not, there is a way of searching for someone
if you don't have a surnaffie, or if you have forgotten
the surname. It is a simple three-step process that is
easy once you know how!
(1.) Go to www.intelius.com and select a state, enter
the first name and if you know the initial for the middle
name enter it also. The more information you can
supply, the better. Also, & rare or unusual given name
will produce a manageable list of search results.
(2.) Search. The results can then be examined. You will
see a list of people with the first names and initials you
provided, along with their acfual surnames. You may
recognrze the surname if you have forgoffen it, but even if
you don't, you have a list of possible names to check out.
And how do you check them out? Copy the list or print it
out on a sheet of paper, and proceed to the next step.
(3.) Go to www.41 I .com and enter the full name details
you now have, and the state. The search results usually
provide you with the fulI address and telephone number
in most instances.
r2l

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
If you find who you are looking for, you can call them
to ensure you have the right person and not someone
else who just happens to have the same name as the
person you seek. Don't ever make assumptions about
this. Once you think you have found the right person,
you can go back to www.intelius.com and order a
background search to see if you have a match (former
addresses, 
etc.).
This search technique works well at the time of writing,
but may not be available in the future. The future is
uncertain, however, so there may acfually be several
ways of carrying out this type of search.
Searching for the Living: Worldwide
Another way of finding someone living today is to use
quotation marks around the person's name (include
their middle name or initial if you have it) in a search
engine. Search engine techniques are outlined in a
previous chapter. This is a very powerful search, global
in its scope, and should never be overlooked. Also, use
the advanced features in the search engine to narrow
your search even more. If you don't use the advanced
features you are not doing the best job of searching.
Your next step would be to check newspapers. The
chapter, Finding People in the Past, ends with a careful
outline of how to locate newspapers in any country, and
more importantly, how to search digital newspapers
r22

Finding People in the Present
online. Since many of the newspapers are indexed by
every name, up to the present date, you can search for
a living person, either today (literally), or during the
last decade, for example.
Digital newspapers 
with digital indexes to every name
mentioned therein are a very new type of resource
that will have a profound effect on all researchers and
biographers in the near future. While many genealogists
are using them already, chances are the number of
people using this technique will grow rapidly. Many
people alive today, including those who might be called
hermits or obscure crttzens by others, can be located in
this manner.
Dead or Alive in Canada
Zabasearch does not currently extend into Canada, but
one website that caters to companies as clients to carry
out background checks, credit reports and criminal
records is www.backcheck.net.
In Canada, nothing similar to the SSDI exists for
public access yet, but there are excellent indexes to
cemeteries, the most notable of which are the OCFA5
and OCFA6 (Ontario Cemetery Finding Aid) and the
BCCFA (British Columbia Cemetery Finding Aid).
Ontario is the most populated province and the OCEA5
and OCFA6 are indexes to people buried in Ontario.
123

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
One major disadvantage is that it does not include the
date or year of burial. While this is a serious missing
piece of data, this search does provide a great benefit to
persons who had either uncommon surnames or given
names. Also, if you know the county where an ancestor
might be burie4 this search is very helpful. The city of
Toronto is not covered very well in the OCFA search,
but Mt. Pleasant Cemetery and its associated 
cemeteries
have very complete computertzed records on site.
The OCFA search has the names of more than three
million people. To search, go to:
www. i slandnet. com/oc fa
The BCCFA is similar, but it does contain dates. It is
very valuable for locating burials in British Columbia.
This is a free search of the burial records of 344,000
people, and is available from:
www. i s landnet. com/b c c fa
The Alberta Genealogical Society has been indexing
cemeteries throughout the province and will do limited
searches for a $2 fee at the time of writing. Check for
updates at:
http : I I ab gensoc. 
calnameindex.html
124

Finding People in the Present
New Brunswick has more than 217,000 cemetery
records available. They are loc ated at:
http : I I ar chtve s . gnb . cal APP S A{B C emeteri e s/
D e fault. aspx? L-EN&PageLo ad-Form
Genealogical Societies
In each province, genealogical societies and their
branches have indexed many of the cemeteries in their
district or county, often with full extracts and dates.
The advantage is that you usually find the person you
seek along with other family members mentioned on
the gravestone or on a cluster of family stones.
Large Libraries
If you live in Can ada, then sizeable regional libraries,
provincial libraries, and provincial archives have
extensive collections of other useful documents.
As well-and always worthy ofnote-the Metropolitan
Toronto Reference Library (MTRL) is Canada's largest
public reference library. It has an excellent collection
of records covering many provinces, and tnfact, many
countries.
r25

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
Their catalog of holdings as well the holdings of all
other Toronto Public Libraries can be accessed at:
htQ : I lwww.torontopublicl rbrary.cal .
Also in Toronto, the North York Public Library has a
very large collection of genealogical books and films
covering most of Canada. They can be reached at:
http : //www torontopubli c I ibrary. c a/uni_c an_index j sp .
And now, let's step into the future together.
r26

The Future Internet
Where is the Internet headed in the future?
I provided an answer to this years d5o, in the first
edition of this book, and the answer remains so simple
that it is almost elusive to the experts.
If you can speak with a child or if you can think for a
moment like a teenager, the answer is plainly evident.
If you ask a child when he would like to hear his favorite
song he will say right now. If you needed to know the
population of a country for a paper you are writing, you
want it now. This idea of the instant world has led us to
calling young people The Now Generation.
What we want is now.
If you extrapolate that and look at the World Wide Web
and picture it as the source of instant everythirg, then
you will see where the web is going. Some corporations
and governments may arrive struggling, kicking and
screamirg, but they will be inevitably dragged along
by the people towards the eventual outcome: Instant
information, instant media, the past and the present-
all available, now.
Already television cable companies have responded to
this public pressure - you and your family may want
t27

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
to watch a certain movie at 6 p.m., stop the movie for
supper at 7 p.m., start it up agarn at 8 p.m. and put it
on pause while you get a snack, take a break, or when
you want to create your own intermission.
In this case, the media is bending to your timetable and
needs, instead of forcing you to bend to an artificial
timetable that is not related to, nor cognrzant of, your
personal needs.
People don't want to build their lives around the me dra,
they want the media to be responsive to their desires at the
very moment they want it. And it is already headed in that
direction. Convergence 
will escalate into new territory.
If it is cheap enough or freely included in a monthly
service fee, the public will respond. Google learned
this early, as well as other websites, large and small.
The Internet has proved this time and time again,
and created many millionaires simply because they
caught sight of what the people wanted, and they met
these needs.
All music, all motionpictures, all history, all geography,
all education, all art, all music, all art forms, all
knowledg., will be wanted on that instant basis. That
is the ultimate goal of the future Internet.
If a teacher is world famous because students find
him or her to be one of the best, then why shouldn't
a million people be able to tune in to that inspiring
128

The Future Internet
teacher and repeat the lesson or speed it up, based on
their own progress? Why shouldn't they learn at their
own speed and still be able to gather in groups and
forums and socialize with others?
This is the most probable desired future, and we are
moving rapidly in that direction.
In the 1980s, I was told that a patent of a new invention
in Europe would take an average of five years before
U.S. researchers 
became aware of it. This was called
the technology gap.Now that five-year gap is almost
instantaneous.
Several thousand years z3o, the prophet Daniel
predicted that the day would come when
.. .knowledge would cover the earth as the
waves cover the sea.
In 1947 and agarn in a reprinted edition in 1960, Philip
Wylie, in his book, An Essay on Morals. stated,
American or Russian, Chinaman, Jup,
Hindu, or Briton - we are all on this same
planet which has become boat-sized (all) of
a sudden.r
In 1 962,Marshall Mcluhan, in his book, The Gutenberg
Galaxy, wrote about a global electronic village where
he envisioned a shared information space-an invisible
129

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
place where space and time were no longer barriers to
acquiring knowledge.2
That time is now, and for better rather than worse, the
personal computer and the Internet may eventually
become the communicative glue that helps to link
mankind into a fabric of oneness, creating a new
bond of kinship that would include all races, cultures,
sciences and religions.
NOTES
l wylie, Philip, An Essay on Morals, Pocket Books, cardinal Edition,
1960, Chapter 1, page 9. Note: the original Rinehart edition was published
in January,1947.
2 Mcluhan, Marshall. The Gutenber Galaxy: The Making of Typographic
Man. New York, N.Y: New American Llbrary, 1969.
130

T-he Wbrldwide
Website 
Directory
The balance of this book contains a directory of several
thousand websites, located in more than 250 countries,
states and provinces. To create this directory, over
25,000 websites were visited and examined.
If you spend just a few minutes reading the instructions
below, and you will be searching like a professional in
minutes.
( 1) First, select the country, or religious group, or ethnic
group you wish to research, and you are on your way. If
you have (or can borrow) a scanner with OCR capability,
you can scan your chosen list, and then change the
scanned image into digital text. That's the key.
(2) Then, copy your digital list of websites into an
email. Then, at the very end of each website link, press
the enter button on your keyboard and you should
instantly create a hyperlink. Continue down the list
changing each website address into a link.
(3) Then, send the email to yourself. When it arrives,
you can then click on any link and travel instantly to
the selected website. Another way to accomplish the
same thing would be to copy the web links you created
1 3 1

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
in your email, into a Word document instead, for easy
reference.
As you know, websites URLs can change, so over
time from this publication date there will be some
updating required to keep things current in the website
directory.
Please note that the directory will be regularly updated
through membership in www.grl.com or you can use
search engines to add additional websites suitable for
your own personal objectives.
Meanwhile, whoever you are looking for, I wish you
good hunting!
r32

Wo rl dw i d e We b s it e D ire c t o rv
Worldw ide Web s ite D ire ctory
This directory consists of one alphabetical index of
addresses for websites, which includes countries,
ethnic groups, and religious groups. This compilation is
copyrighted and may not be reproduced by any method
whatsoever. However, this directory is maintained
in up-to-date status for members of www.grl.com
where instant links direct you to each site for rapid
searching.
Aboriginal Peoples
(see I{ative Peoples)
Acadiun
http ://www.acadian-cemeteries.acadian-home. 
org: 80/
frames.html
www. acadian-caj 
un. com
www.acadian.org
www. c o I I e ction s. ic . gc. c al acadian/engl 
i sh/ero ots/ero ots . htm
www.vivelacajun.com
www. ge o c iti e s . c om/strivingmom/be I I e i I e . html
www. p ers o. wanado o . frile. perto I 2acadiel . htm
http : I I pll ot. fami ly s e arc h . or gl r e cord s e arc h/ start . htm I #p - g
www.familysearch.org
www.archives.gnb.ca
www.grl.com
www.blupete.com
www. c anadi ana. org/E C O I mtq? id- a6 4 5 0 I 7 5 ac &do c - | 23 5 9
133

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
www.genealogie.com
www. i slandregi ster. com
www. umfk. maine. edu/archive s/
http : I I c gi2 . cvm. q c . cal glap orte/ I 8 3 7 . pl ? cat-ptyp e& cherche:
BIOGRAPHIE
www. genealogie.umontr 
eal.cal enlacceslibreBD. htm
www. terriau. org/welcome_engli 
sh. htm#Home
www. acadian-cajun. 
com/genac I .htm
members. 
aol. com/GF S Judi/Acadiansurnam. 
html
www. g r e gor. c al In dexe s I ac adia-surnam e s index. htm
http : I I memb er s . trip o d. c om/-kj unkuti e/ori g in s . htm#A c adia
www. lvo. com/MAG/GENEALOGIE. HTML
http : //ourworld. c ompuserve . c om/homep age s/lwj one s/
indefran.htm
www. umoncton. c al etudeacadienne 
s/centre/cea. 
html
www.grl.com
http : I I phi I ip p e . c a i I I e b e au . fre e . frlre c e n s e m e nt . htm
http : I I p ers o . wanado o . frlfroux/
www. u s tanne . e dnet. n s . c a I c ac adienl gene al ogi e . htm
http : I I epf. p lanet e . qc . c alb ase I
www. franc ogene . c om/a cadial index. php
http : I I cyberqueb 
ec . cal famille - ac adienne
www. grandcolombier. 
co m/ 20}3-histoire I acadre lgalere.html
www. sec ondenation. 
com
www. museeac a dten.calfrenchlarchive 
s/index.htm
www. gov. ns. calnsarm/c ap I acadtan/
www. umoncton. c al etudeacadienne 
s/centre/bon-com. 
htm
www. umoncton. c al etudeacadienne 
s/centr e I white I sha. html
www. umoncton. c al etudeacadienne 
s/centre/memramcook/
mem-lis.htm
www. geocitie s. com/Heartland/8 
7 87 lbl 8 6 8 - 69. htm
www. p inette . ne tl genealo gy I lk- ac ad. htm I
r34

Wo rl dw i d e We b s it e D ire c t o rv
www. umoncton. c al etudeacadienne 
s/centr e I white I sha. html
http : I I c o11 
e ctions . i c . gc . c a/l oui sb ourg/genealogy/index. 
html
http:llupperstjohn.contlarcostook/deane-kavanagh.htm
http : I I upperstj ohn. c om/ I 820 I index. htm
www. geocitie s. c om/Heartland/A 
cr es I 2 I 62 I
www. um ce .calbtblio/cdem/livre s/index. htm
http : //us ers . ade lphi a. net/-frenchcx/frsurnm I . htm
www. newenglandance 
stors. org/re search/Database/cemeteries/
default.asp
www. umoncton. c al etudeacadiennes/centre/cea. 
html
http : I I acim. umfk. maine . edu/
www. ustanne. e dnet. ns . c al cacadi enlgenealogie. 
htm
Afghanistan
www. world-newspapers. 
com/
www. u q .net . aul - zzhs o szyi fi I e s/ g g_in dex . htm I
www. ro otsweb. c oml - af gwgw/
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www. museeguimet. 
frlgblhome s/home_ id20 407_u 1 12. htm
www. 4 dw. n e t/roy alarV Afgh an i s t anl dur r an i 7 . htm
www. fami lytre e dna. c om/surnamej o in. asp ? c ode:L 8 1323 &
special-True&proj ecttype-G
www. afghan- network. net/Rul ers
www. afghan-network.ne 
tlbiographie s/
Africa
(see also individual countries)
http : I I garamond. stanford. e dui dept s/s srg I afr ic al lib af. html
www. afri c a-re s e arch. org I marnframe. html
135

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
http : I I pilot. familysearch. orgirecordsearch/start. 
html#p:0
www.familysearch.org
www.bl. uk/collectionsiafrican. 
html
www. worldvitalrec ords. com
African-Americsn
www.afrigeneas.com
www. ibiblio. org/laslave/fi elds. php
www. aamu. edu/archivemuseumc enter I aboutus/index. html
www. famu. edu/ acadl archives
www. af. publ ic . lib. ga. us I aarll index. html
http : //www. afri que st. c om/
www. chipublib. orgl }}2branche s/woodson/wnharsh.html
www. m arque tte . e du/l ibr ary I c olle cti ons/arc hive s I natl e _
writes.html
tttp : I I ami s t a dre s e arc h c e nte r. o rglm anu - I i s t. c fm
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www.pratt. lib. md.us/slrc I afam
www.fhwgs.org
www. blackarchive s. org/balscope.htm
www. nypl. org/re search/sc/sc. 
html
www. ws su. edu/hbrary larchive s/speech. 
asp
http : I I llbrary. c i n cymu s e um . o rgl aag I gutde . htm I
http : I I astro . o c i s . temp I e . e du/-mas ante/b 1o cks on. html
www.cofc.edu/avery
www. fi sk. e dui index. asp ? cat:1 &pid:2 57
www. hamptonu. e du/museum/archive 
s. htm
http : I I memory. 1o c . gov/ammem
http : I I 209 . I 0 . | 6 .2 I /TEMPLATE/FrontEnd/index. c fm
www. npl. lib. va. us/sgm/oldlobby/afram. 
html
http : I I www2 . 1 ib. ude I . e du/ subj /blks/inter netl af amarc . htm
136

Worldwide Web site Directory
Albsnia
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. uq .net. aul - zzhs o szylfi I e s/g g_index. html
www. libdex. c om/c ountry. html
www. rootsweb. com/-albwgw
http : I I pllot. familysearch . or gl rccordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
www.fletetebardha.com
Algeria
www. world-newsp apers. com
www. libdex. c om/country. html
www.pieds-noirs.org
www. gene agm. o r gl AB CD frm. htm
www.geneagm.org/
www. archive s-dgan. gov. dz
www. editions - gandini. c om
http : I I site.acgc. 
free. fr
www.geneagm.org
www. geneagm. org/LIE N SAGMfrm. htm
www. genealoj . org/EN texte I page I 3 2 .html
www. arab info seek. com/algeria. 
htm
www. gene al ogie - gamt. org/index 2 .asp
www. afric a-re s e arch. ors I mainframe . html
I
Americun Ssmoa
www. oneworl d. n etl artrcle/c ountr y I | 6
www. I inkpendium. c om/genealogy/U SA/A S
www. ac c e s s genealogy. 
c om/ samoa
www. ro otsweb. comi - samoaw gw
137

Finding Any one, Anywhere, Anywhen
http : I I ptlot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www.ashpo.org
Andorru
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. I ibdex. com/country. html
http : I I memb ers . ao l. c om/mro s ad o0 07 I andorra. htm
www. italysoft . com/utility I andorra. html
http : I I pilot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www.arxius.ad
Anglican Church
(Canada, Austrulia New Zealand & Polynesiu)
www.rootsweb. c om/ - canns/anglic 
an.html
http : I I aab c .bc . cal aab c I arrglic an. html
http : I I aab c .bc . cal aabc I angdko o. html
http : I I llbrary. m c m a s t e r. c al ar chive s / an g I i c anl d i o c e s e/ g . htm I
http: I I ngb. chebucto. org/Research/st_thomas. 
shtml
www. archivi sts. org. auldire ctor y I datal 23 I . htm
www. an gl i c an. o r g.nzl Re s ourc e s/Arc hive s I . htm
www. ep i scop alarchive s. org/gene alogy. html
www. archives. gov. on. calenglish/interloan/v-bkofmarriages.htm
www. manl. nf. c alhr dar chive s. htm
www. trinity.utoronto. ca lLlbrary/special. htm
Angola
www. world-newspapers. 
c om
www. I ibdex. c om/c ountrv. html
138

Worl dw i de Web s it e Dire c t ory
www. africa-re search. org/mainframe. html
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
Anguilla
http : I I pllot. familysearch . or ghecordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www. candoo. com/genre sources
Antigua und Barbuda
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. candoo. com/genre source s
http : i/www. ro o t sweb. anc e stry. c o m I - atgw gw I
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Antilles Frunguises
(see also Guadaloupe and Martinique)
www. candoo. com/genre source s
http : I I pilot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
Arab World
(see specffic country)
Arctic
www. spri. c am. ac. uk/lib rary I ar chive s
http : I I pll o t. fam i ly s e arch . or gl rc cord s e archl start. html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
r39

Finding Any one, Anywhere, Anywhen
Argentinu
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. libdex. c om/country. html
www. mininteri o r. gov. ar I agn
www. e c omchaco. com. arlcultur al ar chlo. htm
www. bapro . c om. arlmus eo/muse o_detgral. htm
http : I I pllot. familysearch . or gl recordsearch/start. 
html#p:O
www.familysearch.org
http : I I immi g rant ship s . net/iri sh_argliri sh_arg I 822 _29 .html
http : I I www. si sb i.uba.ar I
www. h-net. org/ -latam/archive s/bueno saires. html
Armenia
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. ist. uwaterloo. cal- marj I genealogyichildren/
Childrenl92T .htmI
www. 1 ibdex. c om/country. html
http : I I pll ot. fami ly s e arc h . or gh e cord s e arc h/start. html#p -0
www.familysearch.org
www.matenadaran.am
Aruba
www.world-newspapers. 
com
http: I I pllot. familysearch . or gl rccordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Asia
(see specific country)
140

Wo rl dw i d e Web s it e D ire c t orv
www.affho.org
http : I I www. ro of sweb. anc e stry. c om/- as i agw I
www.nla.gov.au llap
www. bl . uk/c o I I e cti on s/a s i ap ac i fi c afri c a. html
www.bl. uk/collections/orientalcollections.html
www. s-asian. 
cam. ac. uk/libhome. html
www. worldvitalrecords. com
Austrulia
http : //www. naa. gov. aulcollection/explore/migration/index. 
aspx.
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. I ib dex. c om/c ountry. html
www. awm. gov. aulre se archi index. htm
www. doors-to-the-past. 
com. aulstrays.html
www.ausbdm.org
www.bdm.nsw.gov.au
http : I I fre ep ag e s . g ene al ogy. ro of sweb. anc e stry. c o ntl - maddenp s/
TIPPEMl.htm
http : I I pllot. familysearch . or gl r ecordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
http : I I memb ers . i inet. net . aul -p erthdp s/c onvi ct s/index. html
http : I I me mb er s . i i n e t. n e t . au I - p erth dp s/m rlitary I inde x . htm I
www.affho.org
http : I I hom e . p ac i fi c . net. aul- dp ark er h ar c .htm
www. archives.tas. 
gov. au
www. arc hive s . anu. e du. au I nb ac I html/index. php
www. awm. gov. aulre s e arch/re search. htm
www. b I ac ktown. nsw. g ov. aulbl acktown/index. c fm ? 1 C B 6 6 4 A2 -
BCDg-D 61 6-8203 - 8 69ABEFB2006
http : I I www. bri sbane. ql d. gov. arl/B C C : BA S E : I 9 57 8 48 5 3 4 :
pc-PC_1244
r41

Finding Any one, Anywhere, Anywhen
www. castlemainehistoricalsociety. 
com/page3 
.html?id:I9 6
www. geelongcity.vic. gov. aui S ervice s_In_Geelong/Archives
http : I I hom e . v i c n e t . n e t . au I -hhs I arc h iv e s . htm
www. libraryj cu. edu. aulSpecials
http : I I v oyag er. o c s . m q. e du . aul c gi-b in/Pwebre c on. c g i ? D B -
local&PAGE-First
http : I I www. n aa. gov. aul s ervi c e s I f amlly -hi stori ans/index. a spx
www. nl a. gov.aulc 
o lle ctlrare c o I l. html
www. nt . gov. aul dc i s/nta
http : //wwwparrac ity.nsw. gov. aulculture_and_lei sure/
heritage_centre/local_studies_and family_history_
library
www. penrithc ity. nsw. gov. aulindex. asp ? i d-5 5 6
www. prov. vic. gov. auldefault. asp
www. archive s . qld. gov. au
www. rah s . o rg . a uh ahso/o2}Ilbr ary. htm I # S p e c i a 1 % 2 0 c o I I e c t i o n s
http : //www. s I . n sw. gov. aul ab out/c o I I e cti on s/
www. slq. qld. gov. aulaboutl collljol
www. s 1 s a. sa. gov. auls ite/p age. c fm? are a_id- I 5 &nav_id: I 6 5 9
http : I I www. statelibrary. 
tas. gov. aulwhatdo/services/famhistory
www. slv.vic. gov. auicollections/australiana/index.html
www. li swa. wa. gov. aulb attye . html
www. re c ords. nsw. gov. au
http : I I www. sro . wa. g ov. aulindex. asp
www. archive s. sa. gov. au
www. lib. unime lb. e du. aulc olle cti ons/archive s
www. I ib. unime lb. e du. aulc o I I e cti on s/ sp e c i al
www. une. edu. aularchives/
www. library.uq. edu. aulfryer/index.phtml#special
www.sag.org.aul
www. archivenet. gov. aularchives. 
html
www. gabr. net. a ul gabr _home . html
t42

Worldwide Webs ite Directory
www. atua. org. aulatua.htm
www. archivi sts . org. aui dire ctor y I asa_dir. 
htm
http : I I rmm i g rantship s . ne tl ww2 _au. html
http : I I www. anc e stry. c o m.aul
www.nla.gov.au 
haam
www. bl. uk/collections/oe 
soz. html
http : I I c en su s I i nks . c o m/ s e arc h. p hp ?what- au stral i a
www. genealogybranche 
s. com/international. 
html
www. maxp age s . c om/p o landl C en sus_Re s e arch
http : //www. fftrs. org. ulCmembers2/overseas/australia.php
Austria
http : I I www. eegsociety. 
org/Home. aspx
http s : //www. wie n. gv.atl grab auskunft/internet/suche. 
aspx
http : I I www. di gento . delt ttel I 1 02 5 64 .html
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. libdex. com/c ountry. html
http : //www. ro of sweb. anc e stry. c om/-autwgw/
www. patscheide 
r. atl start. htm? ahnenforschung. 
htm
http : I I sit e s . huj i . as .rI I ar ch ive s/w rennao/o2 
0 I i s t. htm
http : I I pllot. fami lysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www. s t adt- s alzb w g. at I i nt e rn e t/ s t a dtve rwal tun g/
kul tur s chul verw altunl t2 _l 3 1 | 5 I t2 _89 89 3 I p2 _8 9 9 I 3 . htm
www. oe sta. gv. atlewelcom. htm
www. doew. atlengli sh/content. 
html
www. onb. ac. atls ammlungerVhschrift/index. 
htm
www. onb. ac . atl s ammlu n gen/ Iitarc hivi index. htm
www. k ab ar ettarc h iv. at
www. s a lzbur g . gv. at I en I th e m e n/ s e / s a I zb ur gl ar chive . htm
http : //stevemorse. 
org/
t43

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
www.graz.at
www. eisenstras 
se. info/schatzsuche/schatzsuch 
er I ar chiv I
archiv_wai dho fen. shtml
http : I I tmmi grantship s. net/austria_pol 
and galic ia 1 8 8 9 . html
www. we 1 s . atlm agtstr at I m a g i s tr atl main -c o nt e nt. a sp ? d s- id:2 4
http : //ub.uni-graz. atlsosa/index.html
http : //www2 .uibk .ac .atl ub/hb/as s
www. vorarlberg. gv. atlvorarlberg/bildung-schule/bildung/
1 an de s arc hiv/ s t art.htm#
www. oe sta. gv.atldeudiv/arch-oe. htm
http : /ftro m e . b awu e . de I -han ac ek/in f o I aar chive . htm
www. genealogie netz.de lreglAUT/austria. html
http://hlt.atl
www.genealogie.co.at
Austro-Hungarian E mpire
h@ : I lhomepage 
s.rootsweb. 
ance stry. com/-andert/pomogy. 
htm
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
http : I I stevemors e . org/
Azerbaijan
www. world-newspapers. 
com
http : I I pilot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www. libdex. com/countrv. html
Bahqi (Buhu'i)
http : I I llbrary. b ahai . org/ s c/index. html
t44

Worldwide Web site Directorv
http : //www. p I anetb ahai . o r gl c gi-bin/main. p I
www.bahai-faith.org
www.bahar.org.za
www.bahai.co.zw
Buhumas
www. worl d-newsp apers. c om
www. I ibdex. c om/c ountry. html
www. candoo. com/genre source s
www.bahamasnationalarchive 
s.bs
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
http : I I www. rootsweb. anc e stry. c om/-bhswgw/
Bahrain
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. u q .net. avl - zzhs o szyl fi I e s/ g g_in dex . htm I
http : I I pllot. familysearch .or gl r ecordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www. lib dex. c om/c ountry. html
www.uob.bh/
Bangladesh
www. worl d-newsp ap ers. c om
www. I ibdex. c om/c ountry. html
http : I I www. ro of sweb. anc e stry. c om/-b gdw gw/
http : I I pllot. familysearch .or gh ecordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
http : I I gene alogy. ab out. c om/c s/indi a
t45

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
Buptists
www. gendoc s. demon. co.uk/bapt. html
www. rootsweb. com/-usgenweb I me lbaptist/freewill/fi le s. html
www.sbhla.org
http : I I davi sweb. s amford. e du/ab out/ sp e c i al . html
www.abc-usa.org/abhs
www. m acdiv.cal students/baptistarchive 
s.php
http : I I hbr ary . ac adtau. c a l arc h ive s / g enre s e arc h. htm l
www. kybapti st. o r gll<bc 
I welcome. nsf/pages/ExecutiveArchives
http : I I lIbrary. cn. e du/b aptarc h. html
http : //home . p ac ifi c . net. aul- dp ark er lb ar c .htm
www.abc-usa.org/abhs
http : I lhomepage 
s. rootsweb. com/-baptist/collections.html
http : I I ryl ibweb. man. ac . uk/ data2 I spc o I l/nb c
http : //www. carthage. lib. il.us/community/churche 
s/primbap/
pbl.html
http : I I llbrary. fu rm an . e du/ staff/ c o nt a c t. htm
www. b g ct. org/b g c tro otlo ffi c e . c fm ? s e cti on id-7 & offi c e i d-4 3
www. americ answe di shinst . or gl ar chive s. htm
www. mc. edu/campus/library 
I mbhc.htm
www. wfu . e du/Library/sp ec i allindex. html
http : //lib r ary.acadtau. 
calarchives/genresearch. 
html
www.abc-usa.orgiabhs
http : I I c aro lus . fu rman. e du/dept s/ sp e c c o I 1/ sp e c c o I I . htm
www.bapti stherit age . orglmodule s.php?name-Re 
search
www.hkbu. edu. hVllbrary I sca/index. html
www.poleungkuk. org. hk/museum/store_e. 
htm
http : I I IIb. hku. hk/hksp c/index. html
www.c3 .hulohTBmev ltartalom/9S I 2l szebeni.htm
www. sbhla. or gfi inks . htm
www.baptisten. or gl starthndex. 
php
146

Worl dw i de We b s it e Dire c t ory
Barbudos
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www.barbmuse.org.bb
www. geneal ogy- que st. c om/c ollections/j amc ens. html
www. candoo. com/genre source s
http : I lbarbado s. org/mus eum2 . htm
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
www. rootsweb. com/-brbwgw
Belarus
www. eeg so c i ety. org/Index. html
www. worl d-newspap ers. c om
www. libdex. c om/c ountry. html
http : I I prlot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www. rootsweb. com/-blrwgw
www. archive s . gov. byleindex. htm
www. mfu -net. rul r rc I ul<r aine . htm
Belgium
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. libdex. com/c ountry. html
http : I I gene aknowhow. net/di g i/re s ourc e s . html
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-g
www.familysearch.org
http : I helgium. rootsweb. com/index. html
http : I I freepages. 
genealogy. 
rootsweb. c om/-fkruse/oldsports/
index.htmL
147

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
http : I I me mb re s . ly c o s . frl numa I as s g e n surn e t. htm I
http : I I membre s . lyc o s . frlhb arni c h/gene fam. htm
http : //www. dij kgraaf. org/b ene lux. htm
www. infob e I . c om/worl d
www. ro otsweb. c om/-be lghi st/F I anders/index. 
htm
http:llarch.arch.be
http : //www.kbr. be/collections/re 
serve/re serve_consult_fr. 
html
www. ae quatori a .b e I ar chive s_proj e ctl Engl i sh/E Gindex. html
www. na to .rntl archive s/index. htm
http : I I stads archi e f. antwerp en. b e/de fault. asp
www. brugge . be I ar chtef lindex. htm
www. I oke ren. b e/cultuu r I ar chref. htm
www. sint-niklaas.be/module 
s/phpwiki/index.php?pagename-
Stadsarchief
www. s int-pieters -leeuw. be/admini s tr atie I staftl_docu_archie 
f. htm
www. leuven.be/showpage. 
asp?iPagelD 
:9 5J
www. veurne. b e/ Stadsar chtef I 2203 I default. aspx ? id:3 I 9 3
http : //surf. tolB EL -archive s
www. censuslinks. 
com/index
http : I I gene aknowhow. net/di g i/re s ourc e s . html
Belize
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. candoo. com/genre source s
http : I I prlot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p:O
www.familysearch.org
Benin
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. I ibdex. c omlc ountrv. html
148

Wo rl dw i d e Web s it e D ire ct o rv
www. afri c a-re s e arch. org I matnframe . html
http : I I pllot. familysearch .or gh ecordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
Bermuda
www. I ib dex. c om/c ountry. html
www. c andoo. com/genre source s
http : I I pllot. familysearch .or gh ecordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www. ro otsweb. c om/-bmuwgw/b ermuda. htm
Bessurabis
(see also Moldova)
www. eegsoci ety. org/Index. html
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Bhutan
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. rootsweb. com/-btnwgw
http : I I p1l o t. fam i ly s e arc h . or gh e cords e arc h/ start. html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Blacks
(s e e Afri c an - Am e ri c an)
Bohemia
www. e egsociety. 
org/Index. html
r49

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www.cgsi.org
http : I I freepages. 
genealogy.rootsweb. 
com/-elainetmaddox
Bolivia
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. libdex. c om/country. html
www. h - n et. org/ -latanl arc hive s/proj e c t3 . htm I
http : I I pilot. familysearch. org/recordse 
archlstart. html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Bosniu and Herzegovinu
www. worl d-newsp apers. com
www.arhivrs.org
www.arhivsa.ba
http : I I pilot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Botswuns
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. uq .net. aul - zzhs o szylfi I e s/g g_index. html
www. libdex. com/country. html
www. gov. bw/government/mini stry_o f_l ab our_and_home_
affairs. html#national_archive 
s_and_rec 
ords
www. africa-re search. org/mainframe. html
http : I I pil ot. fami ly s e arc h . or gk e co rd s e arc h/ s tart. htm l#p - 0
www.familysearch.org
150

Worl dw i de We b s it e Dire c t ory
Brazil
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. lib dex. c om/c ountry. html
www. arquivoe stado. sp. gov.br
www. rio . rj . gov. brlarquivo
www. arquivonac ional . gov. br
www. secult. ce. gov. brlAPEC/Apec. asp
www.ape.es.gov.br
www.arqpep.pa.gov.br
www. cpdoc. fgv.brlacces 
susihtm/ap_oqsap.htm
www.museuhistoriconacional. 
com.br/ingles/mh-m-2 
. htm
www.ssac.unicamp.br
www.cedem.unesp.br
www.h-net.org/-latamlarchiveslbrazrl.html
www. geocitie s. com/arquivo smunicipai s
http : I I prlot. familysearch . or gl rccordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Brethren
www.cob-net.org/fobg
www.bridgewater. 
edu/departments/library/specialcoll/
#brethren
www. c ob-net. org/genhis. htm
British Commonweulth
www. cwgc. org/cwgcinternet/search. 
aspx
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
http : I I www.pricegen. com/engli shgenealogy. html
1 5 1

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
British Virgin Islunds
www. candoo. com/genresource 
s
http : I I pllot. familysearch .or gk ecordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Brunei
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. uq .net . aul - zzhs o szy I file s I gpi n dex . htm I
www. libdex. c om/c ountry. html
www.brunei.gov.bn
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Buddhism
www. shambhalashop. 
com/archives
http : I I c cb s . ntu. e du. tw/F ULLTEXT/JR- P H Illew 9 28 6 4 .htm
www. ucpre s s. edu/books/pa ges I 9995 . html
www. c ambodianbuddhi st. org
www. hsuyun. org/Dharm al zbohy lHome lhome-index. html
Bukovinu
www. eeg s o c iety. org/Index. html
http : I I pllot. familysearch .or gh ecordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
Bulgaria
www.world-newspapers. 
com
152

Wo rl dw i de We b s it e Dire c t orv
www. libdex. c om/c ountry. html
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
Burkina Faso
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. libdex. c om/c ountry. html
http : I I pllot. familysearch . or ghecordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www. afric a-re s e arch. org I mainframe . html
Burmu
(Myanmar)
www. u q .net . aul - zzhs o szylfi I e s/ g g_in dex . htm I
www. rootsweb. c om/-mmrwgw/
http : I I gene al o gy. ab out. c o nl gi I dynami c/o ffs ite . htm? s ite-
http%3A%2F%2F
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-g
www.familysearch.org
www. oz emai I . c o m. auoh2F o/o7 
E cldavo/o2F
J
Burundi
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. u q .net . au I - zzhs o szy I file s I gg_i n d ex . htm I
www. I ibdex. c om/c ountry. html
www. africa-research. 
org/mainframe.html
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
153

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
Cajun
www. bayougene 
alogy. c om
www. acadian-caj 
un. com
www. geocitie s. com/-colony
http : I I ourwo rl d. c o mp u s e rve . c o m/h o m ep a g e s / lwj o n e s /
indefran.htm
www.ghcaraibe.org
www. no tarialar chive s . org/
http : I I pilot. familysearch . or gh ecordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Cumbodia
www. camnet. com.kh/archive s. cambodia
www. worl d-newsp ap ers. c om
www. u q .net . aul - zzhs o szylfi I e si g g_in dex . htm I
www. rootsweb. c om/-khmwgw/
www. c amb o dianbuddhi st. org
http : I I pllot. familysearch .or gl r ecordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
Cumeroon
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. libdex. c om/c ountry. html
www. afric a-re s earch. org I matnframe. html
http : I I pil ot. fami ly s e arch . or gl r e cord s e arc h/ start. html #p - 0
www.familysearch.org
r54

Wo rl dw i d e We b s it e D ire c to rv/
Cansdu
(First, this list shows websites that are Canada-wide.
Following this list, see also each province listed separately)
www.genealogy.gc.ca
http : //www c ollectionsc anad a. gc . calgenealo 
gy I 022 -9 I I -e. html
www. cw gc . or gl cwgc internet/search. 
aspx
www. archive s c a nada. cal car I menu. html
http : I I www. c o I I e c t i o n s c anada. gc . c al datab a s e s /war-
dead/0O 
I 05 6- 1 00.0 1 -e.php
http : I I www. c anadi ana. org/eco. php ? do c-micro I ib &rd- a6f7 5 4
03 66b9 I 1 5 9&page-Initial
http : I I fre ep a ge s . g ene al o gy. ro of sweb. anc e stry. c o ml - gaelynn/
prison.htm
http : I I prlot.familysearch. 
org/recordsearch/start.html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.ca
http : I I www. un ite d- c hurc h. c a/l o c aU ar chive s
www.grl.com
www. world-newspapers. 
com
http : I I www. c o I I e c t i o n s c anada. gc . c a/ i n de x - e . htm I
www. i st. uwaterloo . cal -marj I genealogy/childrerVchildren. 
html
www. libdex. com/c ountry. html
http : I lhome . att. n et I -L o cal_C atho I i c/# S e I e ct_L o c ati on
www. canadiana. 
org/eco/engli sh/index. html
http : I I geonames.nrc 
an.gc.calindex_e.php
www.m cgrll.caldcpl
www. ingeneas. 
com/free/index. html
http : I I me mb re s . ly c o s . frl numa I as s g e n s urne t. htm I
www2 . ville. montreal. qc .c,albiblio 
I
www. newenglandance 
stors. org/re search/Database/cemeterie 
s/
default.asp
155

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
www. infob e 1. c om/world
www 3 . symp ati c o . c aibkinnon/ob it_links. htm#ab
http : I I unitedchurcharchive 
s. vicu.utoronto. cal
www. archive sc a nada. calengli sh/index. html
www. ge oc itie s. com/Heartland/A 
cr es I 2 | 62 I
www. generations. 
on. calgenealogy. 
htm
www. uidaho. edu/special- 
collections/Other. 
Repo sitories. html
www. c o I I e cti on s c anada . cal c ollecti on/index- e. html
http : I lhome. interlog. c om/-ucrdc/archives. html
www. I ibrary. utoronto. c a/ eastl
http : I I www 8 . cpr . c al cm s/Eng I i sh/Ge neral +Publ i c/H eri tage I
Archives.htm
www. hunterinformation. c om/corporat.htm
www. astro.uni-bonn. 
de/-pbro sche/hi st* astr lha_arch. 
html
www. astro.uni-bonn. 
de/-pbrosche/hist_sci/hs_arch.html
http : I I ml a-hhs s . org/hi stlo c a. htm
http : I I www. c o I I e c ti on s c anada. gc . c al c anadi andire ctori e s/
www.sharpweb. orgl
http : I I scrip torium. I ib. duke . e du/wo menJ arti c I e . html
www. hunterinformation. com/c orporat. htm
www. p i asa. or glp oli sharchive s inameri c a. html
http : I I canadianlibgenie.blogspot. 
com
http : I I c cgw iki . v pl . c al tndex . p hp /c c g_wiki/ C hine s e_
Immigration_List
www. census 
links. com/index
www. gene alogybranche 
s. com/international. html
Canuda (bJ) Provinces.t :
Alberta
http : I I www. c o I I e c t i on s c anada. gc . c al index - e . html
156

Wo rl dwi d e We b s it e D ire c t ory
www. afh s . ab. c a/d atal announc ement s/index. html
http : //us er s . ro ot sweb. c o ml - c anab/index . html
www. ode s s a3 . org/c o llecti ons/c emeteri e s/c an adal
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.ca
www.grl.com
www ode s sa3 . org/collections/obits/
www. arc hive s c a nada. c al c ar I c ar _e . asp ? l-e & a-p &v- I
http:llabsensoc.sa
http : I I calgarypubliclibrary. 
com/hbr ary llocal_hi story. htm
www. glenb ow. o r gl ar chle s . htm
http : I I c o1 1 e c ti on s . i c . g c . c al rw rer e- I a-p aixl s o c i ete_
genealogique/
www. southp e ac e archive s. org/
British Columbia
www.collectionscanada 
.cal archivianet/020 
I I I e.html
www.grl.com
www. b c arc h ive s . g ov. b c . c a I textual I gener al I gene alo g . htm
www.bcarchives.gov.bc.caltextuaUgovernmt/vstats/v_events.hfi 
n
www. i s landnet. c onlb ccfal
http : I I pllot. familysearch .orgh ecordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.ca
www. rootsweb. c oml - canb c I
www. arc hive s c a nada. c al c ar I c ar _e . a sp ? l- e &a-p &v :2
www.bc gs.cal
www. c ity. vanc ouver. b c . c al cty clerk/archive s/
www.richmond. calhome.htm
www. crowsne st .bc .cal camall crharl. html
r57

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
www. inlo fna. org lI ABC lWe I c ome. html
www.sfu .calarchives/
http : I I aab c .b c . cal aab c I archweb. html
http : I I aab c .b c . cal aab c lbcguide. html
Labrador
(see I{ewfoundland & Labrador,l
Manitoba
www. c o ll e ctions c anada . cal archivianet/02 
0 I I I _e. html
www. g ov. mb . c a I chc I ar chive s/hb c a/ in dex . htm I
www. gov. mb . c al chc I ar chive s/index. html
http : I I www. mb geneal ogy. c om
http : I I pilot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.ca
www.grl.com
http : //www. shsb.mb.cal
www. rootsweb. c oml - canmbiindex. htm
www. geocities. com/ugg ncr I
www. arc hive s c a nada. c al car I car _e . a sp ? l- e &a-p &v: 3
http : I I winnipeg. calclerks/docs/archives/archive 
s. stm
www. shsb. mb. calengli shindex. htm
http : I I web 2 . g ov. mb. c a/c c al v rtal I Query. php
I{ew Brunswick
www. newirelandnb. calnb_irish_family_name 
s.html
www. archive s . gnb. c a/Archive s
http : i/www. ac adian- c emeteri e s . ac adian-home. org : 8 O/frame s .
html
158

Worl dw id e We b s it e D irecto rv
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.ca
www.grl.com
www. I i b. unb. c a/ g ddm/ d atal p anblp anbweb. htm I
http : I I upp erstj ohn. c om/ | 820 I index. htm
www. rootsweb. c om/ - cannb I
www. um ce . calblbl i o/c dem/l ivre s/index. htm
www. rootsweb. com/-nbgfgc/cemetaryindx. 
html
www. newenglandanc 
e stors. org/re s e arch/Database/c 
emeteri e s/
default.asp
www. arc hive s c a nada. c al c ar I c ar _e . asp ? l- e &a1 &v : | 2
http : I I archive s . gnb. c a/Archive s/D e fault. a spx ? L:EN
www. umoncton. c al etudeacadienne 
s/centre/archive 
scum/
arcum2.html
www. umonc ton. c al etude ac adi enne s/c entr e I ar cpi. html
www. lib. unb. c a/archive s/
I{ewfoundland & Labrador
www.grl.com
http : I I ngb. chebucto. org/index. html
www. rootsweb. c oml - cannf/index. html
www. manl. nf. c alhr dar chive s. htm
www. united-chu r ch.cal archives/nfl/home. 
shtm
www. arc hive s c a nada. c al car I c ar _e . asp ? l- e &a1 &v :4
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
http : //www. newfoundlandgenealogy. 
com/
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.ca
http : I I ngb. chebucto . orgNGB RIF/
www3 . nf. sympatic o. calnlgs
159

Findin g A ny o n e, Anlnu h ere, Anywh en
www. stj ohns archdioc e s e .nf . cal archive s . asp
www. stj ohns . c a/c itys ervic e s/archive s/index j sp
www. I ibrary. mun. c alqe i i I cns I ar chive s/c n s arc h. php
www.mun.calmhal
www. tcr. gov. nl . cal p anll
www. anl a. nf. c a/dire ctory. htm
www. anla.nf .caldirectoryThematic. 
htm
www. fs s. ul aval. c a/etude s - inuit- studi e s I v olu22n I . HTML
www. labradorvirtualmus eum.cal 49
I{orthwest krritories
www.grl.com
www. ro of sweb. c om/ - c anntl
www. arc hive s c a nada. c al c ar I c ar _e . asp ? 1- e &a-p &v: I 0
http : i/pwnhc . I e arnnet. nt. c al pr o gram s/archive . htm
http : I I pllot. familysearch . or gl recordsearch/start.html#p:O
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.ca
http : I I aab c .b c . cal aab c I icaul. html
Nova Scotia
http s : //www. novascotiagenealogy. 
com/
www. gov. ns . calns arml caplgene alogy. asp
http : //immigrantships.netAalifaxlists/halifaxarr_depart_0 
1 .html
http : //www. acadi an- c emeterie s. ac adian-home. org : 8 O/frame s .
html
http : //www. c ounc i I o fn s archive s . c al ar chw ay I
www. ro otsweb. c oml - canns/#DATABA S E S
http : I I pllot. familysearch . orgh ecordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
http : //www. ro ot sweb. anc e stry. c om/-n s c she et lb aptre c s . html
160

Wo rl dw i d e Web s it e D ire c t orv
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.ca
http : I lhomepage 
s. rootsweb. ance stry. com/-downhome/
nscensus.html
www.grl.com
www. c h e b u c t o . n s . c al - j acktar I priv s e arc h. htm I
www. rootsweb. c oml - canns/nsresource 
s.html
http : I I www. g e o c iti e s . c o rn/he artlandl far nl 7 8 43lc en I 7 7 }Iunl .
html
http : I I www. ro of sweb. an c e stry. c om/ - c as o c c g s/c en sus . htm I
www. gov. ns. c a/nsarm/databases/bonds
http : I I homepage s. rootsweb. ance stry. com/-cap stick/
www. gov. n s . c a/ns arnl database 
s/l and
www. ro otsweb. c oml - canns/index. 
html
www. newenglandance 
stors. org/research/Database/cemeteries/
default.asp
www. united-chu r ch.cal archive s/maritime/home. 
shtm
www. chebucto . ns . c a/Re creation/GAN S/index. html
http : //nsgna. ednet.ns. 
cal
www. Iib rury. daL calspcol/spcoll. htm
www. go. ednet. ns. cal-ip 9 6003 I gene. html
http : I I mu s eum. g ov. n s . c a/ mmah es e archlre s e arc h. htm I # I ibr ary
www. msvu. c a/l lbr ary I archive s/index. asp
www.gov.ns.calnsarm/
www. smu. c a/admini strati on/archive s/archive s. html
www. ustanne. e dnet. ns . c al cacadien/gene 
alogie . htm
http : I I y armouth c ountymu s eum. e dnet. n s . c al ar chive s . htm
http : I I www 8 . cpr . c al cm s/Eng I i sh/G eneral +Publ i ci H er itage I
Archives.htm
1 6 1

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
I{unavut
www. archive s c a nada. cal car I car _e. asp ? 1: e &a-p &v- I 1
http : I I gene al ogy. ab out. c om/o d/nu navutl
www. ro otsweb. c oml - canntlnunavut. htm
www. native americ ans . c om/Inuit. htm
www.avataq.qc.ca
http : I I c ol I e cti ons . i c . gc . c al cape _dors etlindex 1 . html
http : I I c ol I e ge . hmc o . c om/hi story/readers 
c omp/naind/html/
na_O1 
13O0_eskimo.htm
http : I I pilot. familysearch . or gh ecordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.ca
www.grl.com
http:lhnuit.pail.ca
www. nunavut. com/te chnology/engli sh/download. html
www. geoc itie s. com/Ath ens I 9 47 9/inuit. html
http : I I p ando ra. c i i . wwu. e du/vaj d al e a2 I 0/a1 eut. htm
www. i slandnet. com/-j veinot/c ghl/nunavut. html
www. genealogie 
.gc.cal 
07 I 07 07 0206_e.html
www. fs s. ul aval . cal etude s - inuit- studie s I v oLu22n I . HTML
Ontario
www. ogs. on. calogspi/welc 
ome.htm
http : I I pllot. familysearch .or gl recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.ca
http : I I www. gravemarker s. cal
www.grl.com
www. rootsweb. com/-ongenpro/census
www.waterlooogs.ca
t62

Wor I dwi de We b s it e D ire c t o rv
www. wellingtonogs. on . cal 200 4 I
http : I I www. c o I I e c t i o n s c anada . gc . c a I the-p ub I i c /i n dex - e . htm I
www.ogs.on.calogspi
http : I I my. tb ayte I . net/bmartin/ s item ap . htm
www. i slandnet. com/ocfa/homepage. 
html
homep age s. rootsweb. c o ml -maryc/thi s i s it. htm
www. tp 1. toronto. on. callocalhisto ry I rundr.html
www. geneofun. on. calongenweb
www. I 0Omegsfree3 
. com/gr anny I I clair I .html
www. upp erc anadagene 
al ogy. com/addre s se s S . html
www. upp erc anadageneal 
ogy. c om/re s ourc e s. html
www. arc hive s c a nada. c al c ar I c ar _e . asp ? I - e & a-p &v: 6
www. detroit. lib.mi. us/burton/french_canadianguide. 
htm
www. detroit. I ib. mi. us/burton/c anadian_guide. 
htm
http : I I fchsm. hab itant. or gl
www. archives. gov. on. cal
www.adarchives 
.orgl
www. brocku. c a I llbr arylsp c l/index. htm
www. city. toronto. on. calarchive s/
www.elgtn.cal
http : /iwww. in fog o . gov. on . c al inf ogolm ainPage . do
www. I ibrary. gue lph. on. c al lo c alhi story/
www. c o I I e cti onsc anada. c a/c o llecti on/index- e. html
http : I I llbrary. m c m a s ter. c a I ar chive s/re a dyweb. htm
www. tpl. toronto. on. caluni_can_index 
j sp
www. p c ma. cal archive s_agre e . htm
http : I I archive s. queensu. 
cal
www. regi on. p e e I . on. c a/h errtage larchive s . htm
www. county. simcoe. on. c al ar chive s. cfm
www. stcatharines. 
library.on.calservices/special.htm
www. tb pI. c al internal. asp ? id- 8 7 &ctd-229
www. trentval leyarchive s. c om/tva. htm
r63

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
www. trin ity. utoronto . c a I Llbr aryl sp e c i al . htm
www. uo ttaw a. cal academrc 
I q ccf lre s do c . html
www. library. utoronto . c a/utarms/
www. library. utoronto. c a/ eastl
www. library. utoronto . c a/fi sher/
www. lib. uwo. c a/archive s/talman. shtml
http:llathena.uwindsor.calunrtslarchive/main.nsf
http : I lllbrary. vicu. utoronto. calspecial/j onesintro.htm
www. wcm. on. c al archive. php
Prince Edward Island
www.grl.com
www. terriau. org/we lc ome_engli sh. htm#Home
www.edu .pe.calparol
http : I I uggpe i. i sn .netl
www.united-chur ch.cal archive s/maritime/home. 
shtm
www. arc hive s c a nada. cal car I c ar _e . a sp ? 1- e &a-p &v :7
www.peigs.cal
http : I I prlot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.ca
www. wyattheritage. com/mainsit e I macnaught/index. 
asp
www. edu.pe. calparo/re s earcV r esearch. 
asp
www. up ei . c a I Iibr ary I html/ s p e c i al c o I I e c ti o n s .
html#peicollection
Quebec
www. c o I I e c ti on s c anada . cal ar chiv ianetl 020 I 1 I _e . html
http : I I c g12 . cv m. qc . c al glap orte/ I 8 3 7 . p I ? c at-ptyp e & c herche -
BIOGRAPHIE
r64

Worl dw i de We b s it e Dire c to rv
www.grl.com
www. genealogie. 
umontr eal.cal erVacce 
slibreBD. htm
http : I lhemc em. sharonmark. com/
http : I I memb ers. trip o d. c om/-e fo rtier I
http : I I cyb e rqu e b e c . c al _layout/ ? uri -http : // cyb e rqu eb e c . c a I
famille-acadienne/
www.sgcf.com/
http : I I pllot. familysearch .or gh ecordsearch/start.html#p-0
http : I I www. vo ic imafami I I e . info : 8 0/
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.ca
www. genealogie. 
org/club/sfohg-o ttaw al
http : I I muni c ip al ite . yamac hi che . qc . c a/top onymi e I gene al ogi e/
index.html
www. club- genealogie- 
longueuil.qc .cal
www. geneal ogi e . org/c lub/s glaurentide s/
www. rootsweb. c oml o/o7 
E qcchatea/cvhs. 
htm
http : I I federati ongene alo gre . qc .cal
www. ro otsweb. c om/ - canqc/index. 
htm
www. united-chur ch.cal archives/mo/home. 
shtm
www. arc hive s c a nada. c al c ar I c ar _e . a sp ? l- e &a1 &v: 8
http : I I me saieux . c onl anlde fault. htm
www.sgar.orgl
www.ancestry.ca
www. federationgenealogie. 
qc. ca
www. histoirequebec. 
qc. cai
www. bnquebec. cal p ortaU dtl accueil. html#
www. detroit. lib. mi.us/burtory'french_canadian_guide.htm
www. u o ttaw a . c a I ac ademic I cr c cf lre s do c . htm I
http : //www2 . ville. montre al.qc .calchmlengl/centre-doca. 
shtm
www. et rc . cal archive s. html
www. mcq. org/obj ets/fonds_archive 
s/index.html
r65

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
www. rab aska. c om/hi sto ire/lac auxsable s. htm
www. b ib. umon tr eal. cal C S/
www. archiv. umontreal. c a/
www. archive s. u qam. cal
www.bibliotheques.uqam. 
calbibliotheques/livres_rares/
collection.html#col
http : /lwww2 . vi I I e . montre al. qc . cal arc hive s/archive s . htm
www afg s . org/afg srsrc . html
www.rdaq.qc.cal
www. rootsweb. c om/ - canqcllookup s. htm
www. ro of sweb. c omJ - c an qclre s s ourc e s . htm# s o c i ete s
http : I hlbnum2 . bnqueb e c . c albnafl ove I l/index. html
http : //simmons . b2b2 c . cal
Saskatchewan
www. saskgenealogy. 
com
www. c o I I e cti ons c anada . cal ar chivianet/02 0 I I 1 _e. html
www. ro otsweb. c oml - cansk/ S askatchewan/
http : I I pllot. familysearch .or gh ecordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.ca
www.grl.com
www. ode s s a3 . org/c o11 
e ctions/c emeterie s/c an adal
www. odes sa3 . org/collections/obits/
www. archive s c a nada. cal car I c ar _e . asp ? 1- e &a-p &v -9
www. s askarchive s . com/web/index. html
www. us ask. cal archive s/
http: I I www. city. saskatoon. 
sk. calorg/clerks_offi celarchives/
index.asp
www. city. saskatoon. 
sk. cal or gl parks/cemetery/index. 
asp
r66

Wo rl dw i d e We b s ite Dire c t ory
Yukon krritories
www.grl.com
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.ca
www. ro otsweb. c om/ - canyk/
www. arc h ive s c a nada. c al c ar I c ar _e . asp ? l- e &a-p &v: I 3
http : I I aab c .b c . c al aab c I c anwan. html
Cape Verde
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. ri c . e dul adam s I ibrary/re s ourc e s/b ibl i ograp hi e s/
capeverde.html
http: I I 13 I . 1 28.7 0.21 searcV
p ? S EARCH-cape*verdean+collection
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www. afri c a-re s e arch. org I mainframe. html
Caribbean Islands
http : I lhome . att. n etl -L o cal_C atho 1 i c/# S e I e ct _L o c ati on
www.ghcaraibe.org
www.casbah.ac.uk/
http : I I pllot. familysearch. orgirecordsearch/start.html#p-g
www.familysearch.org
Catholic
www. rc ab . or gl Arch ive s/g ene o I ogy_re s ourc e s . html
r67

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
http : I I archive s . archchic ago . org
www.archbalt.org
www.nd .edul-archives
www.onr.com/user/cat
www. c atho I i c - library. org. uk/re gi sters . html
www. archdioce se-no. or gl ar chle s/p age4. htm
www. rc. net/phi lade lphi al pabr c I index.html
www vat tcan.v allibrary_archive s/vat_secret_archive 
s/index. htm
www. c grr. com/contents. 
htm
www. ro ot sweb. c om/-mikent/mc ge e 1 9 5 0 I cathol i c indi ans. html
http : I I memb ers . trip o d. c om/- e nl i s t_ I /enl i s ts e arch. htm
www. ro of sweb. c om/-miwayne/hamtramck. htm
http : I lhome . att. n etl -L o cal_C atho I i c /# S e I e ct_L o c ati on
www. ro otsweb. c oml - canns/catholic. 
html
www. archival c enter. org/index. html
www. onr. com/u ser I catl
http : I I llbrari e s . cu a . e dul achrcualindex . html
www.jesuit.org/
www. nd . e dul - archive s/ab out. htm
www. xul a. e du/l ibr ary I archive s. html
http : I lb av.vati c an. v al en/ v _ho me_b avlv_stori a/ index. shtml
www. stj ohnsarchdiocese.nf. 
c alarchles. asp
www. p cj . e du/p cj Ilbr ary I Re s ourc e s . htm# S p e c i al C o I I e c ti on s
http : I lllbrary.udayton. 
edu/basic sirarebooksiuscath.php
www. cbu. e du/libr ary I archive s/
www. c atho I ic I inks . org/archive s c atholic links . htm
www. c ato I i c o s . o r gl ar chive s. htm
www. kato I sk. no/utenriks/index_en. 
htm
http : I lhome . att. n etl -Lo cal_C atho I i ci
www. p ari she s onl ine . c om/s criptside fault. asp
168

Worldwide Website Directory
Cayman Islqnds
www. candoo. com/genre source s
www. c ando o . c om/genre s ourc e s I j amaica. htm
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
C entral African Republic
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. I ib dex. c om/c ountry. html
http : //lists. rootsweb. c om/index/in rll C AF IAFR-CENTRAL-
AFRICAN-REPUBLIC. html
http : I I pilot. familysearch . or gh ecordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www. africa-re search. org/mainframe.html
Centrul Americu
(see specffic country)
http : I lhome . att. n etl -L o cal_C atho I i c/# S e I e ct_L o c ati on
http : I lhom e . att. n etl -L o cal_C ath olic I C atho I i c - C Am eri c a. htm
http : I I pllot. familysearch .or gl r ecordsearch/start. 
html#p-g
www.familysearch.org
Ceylon
(see Sri Lanka)
Chsd
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. I ibdex. c om/c ountrv. html
r69

Finding Anyone, Anyvhere, Anywhen
www. africa-re search. org/mainframe. html
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Chsnnel Islsnds
www.genuki.org.uk
www.ancestry.co.uk
http : I I ptlot. familysearch .or gh ecordsearch/start. 
html#p-g
www.familysearch.org
Chechnya
www.world-newspapers. 
com
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Czechoslovakis (see Czech Republic)
www. ce sar ch.czladre 
sar. aspx?lang-en
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Chile
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. lib dex. c om/c ountry. html
www. bib.udec. cllbibliotecas/chistoria.htm
www. apellidositalianos. 
com.ar larchivos_chilenos.htm
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
170

Worldwide Website Directory
China
www. world-newspapers. 
com/
www. uq .net . avl - zzhs o szvlfi I e s/ g g_in dex . htm I
http : I I c cew i k i . v pI . c a I index . p hp i c c g_w i k i/ C h i n e s e_
Immigration_[,ist
www. lib dex. c om/c ountry. html
www. rootsweb. com/-chnwgw
http : I I ptlot.familysea r ch. or glrecordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
www. I ibrary. uto r onto . cale ast
www.nlc.gov.cn
www. lib. tsinghua. edu. cnlengli sh/service. 
html#A ncientoh2}
Book%20Service
www. lib. cuhk. edu. hk/information/rarebook/rbroom.htm
www. c ityu. e du. hk/lib/c o I le ctlprd/index. htm
www. hkbu. e du. hVlibrar y I scahndex. 
html
www. museeguimet. 
frigblhomes/home_ 
id20407_u I 12. htm
http : I I orpheu s . uc sd. e du/chine s ehi story/chine s e_archive s. htm
www. hsupn. org lDharmal zbohy lHome/home-index. 
html
http : I I gene al ogy. ab out. c o tttl hbr arylautho rs/ucb o ey 1 a. htm
Christisn Reformed Church
www.calvin.edu lhU
Christianity
(see various church groups)
www. home. cio. n etl timo lman
www. acns. com/ -mm9n/Genealo gy I chal . htm
r7l

Finding Any one, Anywhere, Anywhen
Church of England
www. ep i s c op alarchive s. org/gene alogy. html
Churches of God
(see Pentecostal)
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Duy Saints, The
www.familysearch.org
http : I I p tl o t. fam i ly s e arc h . or gh e co rd s e arc h/ s tart. htm I #p - 0
Church of the Nazarene
www. na zar ene . orglarchive s/index. html
Costs ofArms
(see Heraldry)
Colombia
www. world-new sp apers. c om
www. I ibdex. c om/country. html
www. unicauca. edu. co/portafolio/archivo_histori 
co I archivo_
infogral.php
http : I I pllot. familysearch .orghecordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
Comoros
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. afric a-re se arch. org I mainframe. html
r72

Wo rl dw i de Web s it e D ire c torv
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
Congo
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. afri c a-re s e arch. org I mainframe. html
http : I I pllot. familysearch .or gl r ecordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
Congo Democrstic Republic
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. afric a-re s e arch. org I mainframe . html
http : I I ptlot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-g
www.familysearch.org
Congregutionsl
www. uc c . or gl aboutus/archive 
s/
Cook Islsnds
www.world-newspapers. 
com
http : I I pllot. familysearch .or gl rccordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Costa Rica
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. libdex. com/country. html
www. archivonacional. 
go. cr
t73

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
http : I I archivo. ucr. ac . cr
www. h - n e t. o rgl -Iatarnl arc h ive s/p roj e c t 7 . htm I
http : I I pilot. familysearch .or gh ecordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
COte d'Ivoire
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. rootsweb. com/-j fu 11er/gen_mail_country- 
ivo. html
www. afric a-re s e arch. org I mainframe . html
http : I I ptlot. familysearch .or gh ecordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Crimes
www. huri. harvard. edu/abb_grimsted/index. 
html#Autonomous
www. huri . harvard. e du/abb_grim s te dl O -2. htm I
www. archive s. gov. ualEng/Archive s
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
Croatia
www. I ib dex. c om/c ountry. html
www. rootsweb. com/-hrvwgw
www. ri arhiv. hrlD efault. asp
www.daz.hrlindex.htm
www.arhiv.hr
www. carpatho-rusyn. 
org
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
174

Worl dw i d e Web s it e D i re c t o ry
Cubu
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. cub agenweb. 
orgij aruc o. htm
www. library. mi ami. e du/archive s/intro . html
www. s anal ej andro . cult. cu/p age s/archivo I | 2 5. htm
www.arnac.cu
www. candoo. com/genre source s
www.cubagenweb.org
http : I I pilot. familysearch . or gh ecordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
Curogao
(s ee l{etherland Antilles)
Cyprus
www. I ib dex. c om/c ountry. html
www. heritage. o r g.cy I archive s. htm
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Czech Republic & Czechoslovskia
www. eegsociety. 
org/Index. html
www. libdex. com/country. html
www. nkp . czl _en/ pa g e s/p ag e . php 3 ?p age-orst_stud ov na2 _
en.htm
www. ah mp . czl englindex. html
http : I I archiv. pb. czlBnglindex. htm
www. m v cr. czl archivyle index. htm
www. mv cr. czl archivyllitomerice/engli sh/index. html
r75

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
www.cgsi.org
www. iabsi. com/ger/public
http : I I cze chgene al ogy. org
http : I I pIlot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Denmurk
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. I ib dex. c om/c ountry. html
http : I I ddd. dda. dVddd_en. htm
www. infob e 1. com/world
www. aalb org. dk/s ervic eo mr aader lkultur+og+fritid/kultur/
arkiver/default.htm
www. emiarch. dk/home. php 3
www. dpc. dk/Polarl-ibrary/Start.html
www. grindstedbib. dk/arkiv/arkiv.htm
http : I lhernin gb ib. dk/de fault. a sp ? i d: I 5 &mnu: I 5
www.sa.dk/lao
www.sa.dk/lav
www.sa.dVlak
www.sa.dVlaa
htp : I lholb o . dk/arkiv/de fault. php
www. 2 1 OOlokalhistorisk. 
dVArkiv. htm
www. ringe. dk/lokalarkiv
www.hab.de
www. censuslinks. 
com/index
www. geneal ogybranche s . c om/international. html
http : I I pllot. familysearch . or gh ecordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
176

Wo rl dw i de Web s i t e D ire c t orv
Disciples of Christ (see Christian Church)
Djibouti
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. afric a-re s e arch. org I matnframe. html
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-g
www.familysearch.org
Dominicu
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. candoo. com/genre source s
www. candoo. com/genre source s/dominica. htm
http : I I pllot. fami lysearch . or gk ecordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Dominican Republic
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. libdex. c om/country. html
www. candoo. c om/genre source s
www. ro otsweb. c om/-domwgw/mhhbc gw. htm
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-g
www.familysearch.org
Doukhobors
www. s askgene al ogy. c om/c emeter y I c em;reli gion. asp
www.doukhobor.org
http : I I e do c s . I ib. s fu . c al proj e ct s/D oukhob or- C o I I e c ti on
1',77

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
E ast Gulicia (Lrkraine)
www. eegso c iety. org/Index. html
http : I I pllot. familysearch . or gh ecordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Esst Prussia
www. eeg so c iety. org/Index. html
http : I I pllot. familysearch .or gh ecordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
East Timor
www. world-newspapers. 
com
http : I I prlot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Euster Islsnd
www. netax s . c om/-tranc e I r ap anui. html
www. rootsweb. c ornl -pyfivgw/e aster I ea-tr. htm
http : I I pllot. familysearch .orgl recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Ecuudor
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. libdex. com/c ountry. html
www. ane. gov. eclane/site/welcome. 
htm
www. h- net. or gl -lataml ar chive s/archivo-munic ipal-camilo. html
www. h-net. org/ -latam/archive s/archivo-ecuador. 
html
178

Wo rl dw i de We b s i t e D ire c t o rv
www. h- net. or gl -Iatantlarchive s/archivo- guayas. html
http : I I pllot. familysearch .orgl recordsearch/start.html#p-g
www.familysearch.org
Egypt
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. u q .net . au I - zzhs o szylfi I e s / g g_i n de x . htm I
www. I ib dex. c om/c ountry. html
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
http : I I llb. au c e gyp t . e du/ s c re e n s/rb s c I . htm I
www. afri c a- re s e arch. org I marnframe . html
Ekuterinosluv
www. eegsociety. 
org/Index. html
http : I I pilot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
El Salvudor
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. I ib dex. c om/c ountry. html
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-g
www.familysearch.org
Ellice Islsnds
(see Tuvalu)
Emirates
(see United Arab Emirates)
179

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
Englund
http : //www.pricegen. com/engli sh_genealogy.html
http : //www. familyrelative s. com : 8 0/
www. cw gc .or gl cwgcinternet/search. 
aspx
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www.findmypast.com
www.genuki.org.uk
www. 1837online.com
http : I I www. durhamre cords online. c om/
http: I lwww. I 90 I censusonline. 
com
http : I I ptlot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
wwwfamilysearch.org
www.britishorigins. 
com
www. nati onal archive s . gov. uk
http : I I www. o ldbai leyonline. org/
www. lib dex. c om/c ountry. html
http:llwww. 1 85 I -unfilmed.org.uk/intro.htm
www.ancestry.co.uk
www.a2a.org.uk
www. oldbaileyonline. org
www. britannia. c om/b i o s I azhst.html
http : I I freebmd. rootsweb. com/c gilsearch.pl
www. camelotintl. com/tower_site/pri 
soners/index. 
html
www. infob el. c om/world
www. ndad.nationalarchive 
s. gov. uk
www.britishrecordsas 
sociation. org.uk
www.burke s-pee rage .netl sites/peerageandgentry/sitepage 
s/
home.asp
www.aim25.ac.uk
www. nationalarchives. 
gov. uk/ho spitalrecords/
www.historv.ac.uk
180

Worldwide We bs ite Directorv
www. kcl. ac. uk/lhcma/mi sc/locreg. htm
www.m25lib.ac.uk
www.port.nmm.ac.uk
www. p o rt. nmm. ac . uk/RoAD S /subj e ct- I i sti nghrer lbi og. html
www. archiveshub. 
ac.uk
www.mundus.ac.uk
www. cityofl ondon. gov. uVcorpo ratton/ family-re search
www. cityofl ondon. gov. uk/corpo rationl family-res ear cW
regi sterS earchForm. 
asp
www. bl. uk/collections/orientaloffi 
ce. htmL
www. I ambethp al ac e I ibrary. org
www. bro oke s . ac . uk/s ervi c e s/library/speccol l. html
http : I I archive. guardian. co. uk/Default/Skins/DigitalArchive/
C lient. asp ? Skin-DigitalArchive&enter-true&AppName-
2&AW:12237 6t482937
www. rothschi I darchive. or gl tal de fault. asp
www. rafmuseum. org.utr</london/collections/archive/index. 
cfm
www. royalsoc. ac.uVpage. 
asp?id- I 684
www. britishorigins. com
www.ancestry.co.uk
http : I I fre e c en. ro otsweb. c om/
www. censuslinks. 
com/index
www. maxpage s. com/poland/Census_Re 
search
www. familyhi storyonline. net/d atabase 
lindex. shtml
www. railwayance stors. fsnet. co.uk
www.sog.org.uk
www. hi stori c aldirectori e s . org/hd/fi ndbyloc ation. asp
www. british- genealogy. 
com/index. html
www.familia.org.uk
www.lineages.com
www. fami lyre c ords . gov. uk/top i c s . htm
www. yorkshirebmd. org. uk
1 8 1

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
Episcopsl Church
(see also Anglican)
www. ep i s c op alarchive s . org/gene al ogy. html
www. 1 ambuth. e dtil ac adem i c s/l ibr ary I
Memphi sC onferenc eArchive s. html
http : I I llbrary. s ewane e . e du/archive s/index. html
Equatorial Guinea
www.world-newspapers. 
com
http : I I pllot. familysearch .or gl rccordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Eritrea
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. I ib dex. c om/c ountry. html
http : I I denden. c om/Eritre anArchive s/main. html
www. afric a-re s e arch. org I mainframe. html
http : I I ptlot. familysearch .or gl recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Essenes, Order of l{azoreun
http : //e s s ene s . net/chronn az.html
Estoniu
http:llwww.isik.ee/
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. libdex. c om/c ountry. html
www.genealoogia.ee
r82

Worl dw id e Web s it e Dire c t orv
www. gene aloogia. e e/Engli sh/fro. html
www. eh a.eel english/english.htm
http : I I p 11 
ot. fam i ly s e arc h . or gh e cords e arc h/ start. htrnl#p - 0
www.familysearch.org
www. fo lklore . e e kll er al ava. htm
www. kirmus . e e/A sutus I enl general . php
http:l leja.pri.eel
www.ra .eel?toprc-25
www. utllb. ee I enlindex.php ?cat-coll&name-rare
Ethiopia
www. world-newsp apers. com
www. u q .net . au I - zzhs o szvlfi I e s / g g_i n d ex . htm I
www. I ib dex. c om/c ountry. html
www. afri c a-re s e arch. org I marnframe. html
http : I I p1lot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Europe
(see specffic country)
http : I I hom e . att. n etl -L o cal_C atho I i c/# S e I e ct_L o c ati on
http:l lfeefhs.org
http : I I pil ot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www. worldvitalrecords. com
www.familysearch.org
Fulklsnd Islsnds
www.world-newspapers. 
com
http : I I pll ot. fami ly s e arc h . or gl r e cords e archl s tart. htm l#p - I
www.familysearch.org
183

Finding Anyone, Anyvvhere, Anywhen
Fsroe Islands
www. libdex. c om/country. html
www. s leipnir. fo/natarc. htm
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Federsted States of Micronesia
(see Micronesia)
Fiji
www. world-newsp apers . c om
www. uq .net. aul - zzhs o szy I fiIe s I ggin dex . html
www. libdex. c om/country. html
www. us p .ac .f1 lhbr ary I collection/pacifi ccollection/pacifi c_
collection.htm
wwwj ane soceania. 
com/oceaniagenealogy
wwwfiji.gov.fi
http : I I pilot. familysearch .orghecordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Finland
www. world-newspapers. 
com
http : I I my .tb ayt e I . net/bmar tinl 19 0 I fi nn. htm
www libdex. c om/c ountry. html
http : //s fhs. eget. n etl ar chive s. html
www. lib.helsinki. fi/english/services/collections/specialcoll.htm
www. I ib. he I s inki . fi/engl i sh/ s ervi c e s/c o I I e ction s/
manuscriptcoll.htm
www. svenskac entralarkivet. fi
184

Worl dw i de Web s i t e Dire c t o rv
www. fi nl it. fi /engli sh/ki a/index. htm
www. finlit. fi/english/kraiindex.htm
www. valtioneuvo sto . fi /vn/li ston/b as e. I sp ?r- I I 2 I &k:
en&old:J 54
www. tyark. fi/englanti. html
http : I I v esta.narc. 
fi/arki stolinkit
http : I I juoru. uta. fi /- o tkik e lherrtage . html
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
France
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. lib dex. c om/c ountry. html
www. archive snationale s. culture. gouv. fr
http : I I www. stehe I ene . org
http : I I mi granet. gene acte s. org
www. geneacte 
s. org/index-en.html
www. culture. gouv. fridocumentation/leonore/pres. 
htm
www. gene al ogy. tm.fr I acte . htm
http : I I les . guil I otine s . fre e . frl
www.ancestry.fr
http : I I me mb re s . ly c o s . frl numa I as s g e n s urn e t. htm I
www. infob e 1. c om/worl d
www. e s- c onseil .ft I pramona/liens. 
htm
www. franc e- genealogie. 
com
www. gene fede. org/menu. php
www.notrefamille.com
www. v I . p ari s . fri frlc ulture/arc hive s_p ari s/Re s s ourc e s_
documentaire s/Archives_genealogique 
s. A SP
www. v I . p ari s . frlfrlcultur e I ar chive s_p ari s/Re s s ourc e s_
documentaire 
s/B ibliotheque. 
ASP
r85

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
www. frenchline s. com/recherche_fr.php
www.cdhf.net/fr
www. cdhf .netl fr lindex.php ?t-accueil&h-liens/cercle s
http : I I www. archivesnationales. 
culture. gouv. frlchan/index. html
www. franc e. dip lomatie. frlarchive s . gb
http : I lhisto ire - s o c i al e . univ -p ari s I . frlD o cum ent/Arc hive s . htm
htrp : I I p al i s s y. hum ana. univ- nante s . fr/l ab o s I chtl f ond s/in dex. htm
www. archivesnationale 
s. culture. gouv. frlcamt
www. archivesnationale 
s. culture. gouv. frlchan
http: I lwww. servicehistorique. 
sga. defense . gouv. fr
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
www.archives.uha.fr
Freemusons (Musons)
www. nymas oni c library. org
Frieslund (see l{etherlands)
Gubon
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. I ib dex. c om/c ountry. html
www. afric a-re search. org/mainframe. html
http : I I pilot. familysearch .orgl recordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
Galicia, Esst (Ukraine) West (Polund)
www. e e g soc i ety. org/Index. html
www.halgal.com
186

Worl dwi d e We b s ite D ire c t o rv
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
http : I I immi grantship s . net/austria_po 
land gal i c ia 1 8 8 9 . html
Gsmbis
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. afric a-re s e arch. org I marnframe. html
http : I I pll o t. fami ly s e arch . or gl r e cords e archlstart. html#p - 0
www.familysearch.org
Georgiu
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. libdex. c om/c ountry. html
http : I I ptlot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Germany
http : I I www. di gento. de/t rtell | 02 5 64 .html
www. eegsociety. 
org/Index. html
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. I ibdex. c om/c ountry. html
http : I I freepage s. genealogy. 
rootsweb. com/-fkruse/oldsports/
index.html
www. heritagepursuit. 
com/Ellmendinger/E llm. htm
http : I I membre s . lyc o s . frlnuma/a s s gen surnet. html
www. ode s sa3 . org/collections/families
http : I I pilot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestrv.de
187

Finding Anyone, Anwhere, Anywhen
www. o de s s a 3 . org/c o I 1 e cti on s I landl wprus s i a
http : i/ s ite s . huj i . ac .1Il ar chive s/GERMANY- L I S T S /
Danzigo/o201 
.htm
www. I ibrari e s . uc . e du/l ibrari e s/arb I ger _americ anal index. html
http : // staufenb erg. onl ine -h. de/Archiv/index. html
www. gda.bayern. 
de/enp I .htm
www. gda. b ayern . de I famfor. htm
www. eo-bamberg. 
de/eob/opencms/sites/bistum/seelsorge/
dro ez _f am i I i e/index. htm I
www. ez ab. de I e I eb frame . html
www.ekd.de
www.ekbo.de
www.bb- evangelisch. 
de/index.php ? sid- 228 5
www. erzbistumberlin. de
www.archivzentrum.de
www. hdg. de/F in aI I engl p age426 .htm
www. bunde stag. de/htdo c s_e/datab/index. 
html
www.evlka.delarchiv
www.lkan-elkb.de
www.lad-bw.de
www. I ande sarchiv-berl in. de/lab -neu/start. html
www.archiv-ekir.de
http : //sites.huj i. ac .rll archives
http : I lhome. bawue. de/-hanacek/info/earchive.htm
www.archiverlp.de
www. franc e genweb. org I ar chiv es . htm
www. dhi. waw.pll enlbrblioteka/nih/biblioteka
http : //stevemorse. 
orgl
www. censuslinks. 
com/index
www. maxpages. 
com/poland/Census_Re 
search
www.volkerjarren.de
www.cgsi.org
www. b apti sten. o r gl startlindex. php
188

Worl dw i d e Web s i t e D ire c t o ry
Ghunu
www. u q .net . au I - zzhs o szvlfi I e s/ g g_i n dex . htm I
www. I ibdex. c om/c o untry. html
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. africa-re search. org/mainframe. html
http : I I pll o t. fami ly s e arc h . or gl r e cords e arc h/start. htm l#p -0
www.familysearch.org
Gibrultar
www. world-newspapers. 
com
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
Greece
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. libdex. c om/country. html
http : I I cmrs. o su. edu/rcmss/
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Greek Catholic
www. halgal. com/hal gal. asp
Greenland
www. libdex. c om/c ountry. html
www. ro o t sweb. c oml - grlb alti I gre enl and. htm
www. geocities. com/Ath ensl 9 47 9/inuit. html
189

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
http : I I p ando ra. c i i . wwu. e du/vaj d al e a2 I 0/al eut. htm
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
wwwfamilysearch.org
Grensdu
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. c ando o. com/genre s ource s
http : I I pilot. familysearch .or gh ecordsearch/start. 
html#p-g
www.familysearch.org
Grodno
www. ee g soc i ety. org/Index. html
www. archive s. gov.by/EArh/E_Hist grodno.htm
www. archive s. gov. bylEArh/E_naz_i st. htm
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Guam
www. lib dex. c om/c ountry. html
http : I I v italre c . com/gu. html
http: I I pilot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Guadeloupe
(see also Antilles Frangaise)
(see also Martinique)
www. candoo. com/genre sources
190

Wo rl dw i de We b s it e D ire c t o rv
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
Guatemslu
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. I ib dex. c om/country. html
www. hi sp anic s oc iety. org/engli sh/l ibrary. htm
http : I I pll ot. fami ly s e arc h . or gl r e cords e arc h/start. htm I #p - 0
www.familysearch.org
Guinea
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. afric a-re search. org/mainframe. html
http : I I pllot. familysearch . or gh ecordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Guineu Bissau
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. I ib dex. c om/c ountry. html
www. africa-research. 
org/mainframe. html
http : I I prlot. familysearch .or gh ecordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
Guyanu
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. lib dex. c om/c ountry. html
www.ghcaraibe.org
www. candoo. com/genre source s
r9l

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
www. ro otsweb. com/- guyc igtr
http : I I pllot. familysearch .or gh eaordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Gypsy (Gypsies)
www.rtftrs.org.uk
Haiti
www.agh.qc.ca
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www.anhhaiti.org
www. agh. qc . cal indexen. html
http : I I pages. infinit.net/cerame/heraldic 
america/etudes/
haiti0l.htm
http : I I pilot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
Heraldry
www.heraldica.org
http : I I memb ers . trip o d. c om/- GaryFe I i x/index 1 . htm
www. p o I i s hro o t s . c o m/h erb ar z I herb ar z _i ndex . htm
www.poli shroots. comlh eraldry lheraldry_intro. htm
www. p o I i shro of s . c om/h er aldry lrus s i an_he ral dry. htm
http : I I www. di g. com. pl/pther/
www. amateurheralds. 
orgl
www. c o I I e ge -o f- arms. gov. uk/
www. archive s. gov. by/E Itd/egene alogy. htm
www.polishroots. org/heraldry. htm
http : I lheraldiek.beginthier. 
nli
t92

Wo rl dwi d e We b s ite D ire c torv
http : I I namen. b e ginthier. nll
www. stamboomsurfpagina. 
nl/regionaal. html
www. gene alogy-heraldry. sld
www.hagsoc.org.aul
http : I I uqc o nn e c t .netl - zzh s o s zylfi I e s/ g g_in dex . htm I
www. ge o c itie s. c om/ S i lic onVal le y I G ar age I 446 4 lKamon I . html
www. gene alogy-heral dry. sk
http : i/user. orbit.net. mt/fournier/mncop. htm
http : I I members.tripod. 
com/-GaryFelix/index5 H.htm
www. archive s. gov/re search_room/genealogy/immigrant_
arrival s/mexic an_b order_cro s sing s. html
Hinduism (Hindu)
www.hinducouncil. 
com. au
www.swamrnatayan.org
www.akshardham.com
www. gandhi s erve. orglindex. html
Holiness Churches
(see Pentecostal)
Holland (see Netherlsnds)
Honduras
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. candoo. com/genre source s
http : I I ptlot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
r93

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
Hong Kong
(see China)
Hrvutska
(see Croatia)
Huguenots
http : I lhuguenots - franc e . or gl
www. b - efa. or glhuguenotstreet/index. 
html
http : I I hugue n o t s - fran c e . o rgi e n g I i s h/n o rm an di e/ c aux/ c aux . htm
www. huguenot. netnation. com/ge ner all
www. huguenotsocietyofamerica. 
org/
www. g e o c iti e s . c om/He a rtrandlY al I eyl 8 r 40 lb e gin - e . htm
Hungary
www. ro otsweb. c om/-wghungar
www. natarch. hu/mol_e. htm
http : I I www. cookcountygenealogy. 
com/
www.bparchiv.hu
www. e eg soc i ety. org/Index. html
www. world-newsp ap ers. c om
www.felix-game.ca
www. I ib dex. com/c ountry. html
http : //homepages. 
rootsweb. com/- andertl pomogy.htm
www. ro otsweb. c om/-wghungar
www.bparchiv.hu/
www.bacs-kiskun-levelt ar.hul e index.html
www.c3.hu/-sop archvl
www. b og ardi . c o ml c gi-bin/rdx I inks . p I ? archive s
http : I I pilot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-g
194

Wo rl dwi d e We b s ite D ire c t orv
www.familysearch.org
www. vleveltar. gyor. hu/
www.nogradarchiv.hu/
www. szolarchiv. hu/j nsz_megyei_leveltar.htm
http:lldav.hrl
www. voj vo di n a. c o m/ku ltu r ahtml I arc h ive s . htm
www. archive s . org. yui am r eza.htm
www. geocitie s. com/transylvania_archives_proj 
ecti
www. c 3 .hul %7 Etolnalev/
www.c3 .hul%7Bmev ltaftalom/98 I 2l szebeni.htm
www.militaria.hu/
http : //stevemorse. 
org/
www. gyorme gy- arch. hr.r/
www.bekes-archiv.hu/
www. m e k. i i f. hu I p ortal szint I tar sadlha dtu dl adacta9 7 I html I
index.htm
www.hevesarchiv.hu/
www.th.hu/
www.bparchiv.hu/
www.bacs-kiskun-levelt ar.hul e index.html
www.mol.gov.hu/
www.bogardi.com/genl
leveltar.lap.hu/
www. mfl sz. hu/fo oldal/index. php ?page-kiadvanyok/ei_
leveltarak_ang.php
www.cimer.lap.hu/
www. mek. iif. hu/ p ortal szintlegyeb/lexikor/
www.pim.hu/
http : //hungaria. o r glhall gene alogia/index. php ? &newsid-3 I 6
http : I I genealogia. 
lap.hui
www. gene al ogy-heral dry. sk/
www. maxpages. 
com/polandl Census_Research
195

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
www.cgsi.org
www. iab si. c om/ger/public
Iceland
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. libdex. c om/c ountry. html
www. inlofna. org IIABC lWelcome. html
www.kb.se/
www. archive s. i s/index.php ?node-english
www.riksarkivet.no
www.ub.uio.no
www.ub.uu.se
www.hab.de
http : I I prlot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p:0
www.familysearch.org
http:llwww.ra.se
http : I I rmc . I ibrary. c orne 11. 
edu/Fi ske/
Ile Saint Jean
(see Canada, Prince Edward Island)
India
www. worl d-newsp ap ers . c om
www.uq.net. aul- zzhsoszylfi le s/ggindex.html
www. I ib dex. c om/c ountry. html
www. indialab ourarchive s. org
http : //syc d. gov. inlarchive s/arch_about_eng. 
htm
http : I lkannadas iri. kar. ni c .rn/ ar chive s
www. kerala. gov. irldept_archives/archid. 
htm
http : I I arc hivesmanipur. 
nic. inlintrod. htm
196

Worl dw id e Web s ite Dire ct o rv
http : I I nati onal archive s. ni c . in
http : I I pllot. familysearch .or gk ecordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www. nl india. org/c o I I e cti on_rare_others. 
html
www. archive -in dia. or glfolkland_contact.html
www. bl. uk/c o I le ctions/ori entaloffi ce. html
http : I I gene al ogy. about. c om/c s/in dial
http : I I gene al o gy. ab out. c o nt/ gi I dynami c/o ffs ite .
htm ? s it e-httpoh3 A%2F oh2F www.o zemai I . c om.
auoh2Fo/oTE 
cldav%2F
J
Indonesiu
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. u q .net . au I - zzhs o szvlfi I e s/ g g_in dex . htm I
www. I ib dex. c om/c ountry. html
www.arsipjatim.go.id
www.anri.go.id
www. mu s e e gui met.fr I gblhome s/home_ id20 407_u I 12 . htm
www. rootsweb. com/-idnwgw
http : I I pll ot. fam i ly s e arc h . or gl rc cord s e arc h/start. html#p : 0
www.familysearch.org
www. i g v.nl I jir I jirnm gr. html
Inuit
(see also l{unavut under Canada)
www. native americ ans. c om/Inuit. htm
www.avataq.qc.ca
http : I I c olle ctions . i c . gc . c al cap e _dorset/index I . html
http : I I college. hmco. com/hi story/readerscomp/naind/htmll 
na_
01 1300_eskimo.htm
197

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
http:llinuit.pail.ca
www. geocitie s. com/Ath ens I 9 47 9/inuit. html
www. i s landnet. com/-j veinot/c ghl/nunavut. html
www. fs s . ul aval . c a/etude s - inuit- studie s I v olu22n I . HTML
Iran
www. world-newspapers. 
com/
www. uq .net. aul - zzhso szvlfi I e si g g_in dex. htm I
www. libdex. com/country. html
http : I I pll ot. fami lyse arch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
http : I I p ag e s . ut. a c .ir I libraryl S AL O ON S . HT M#iran
http : I I en wikip edia. org/wiki/Shah_o f_Iran
Iruq
http : I lwww.incia. 
co .uW 4667.html
www. world-newspapers. 
c om/
http : I I al -r afidayn . c u I ture fo rum. n etlh i s to ry - h e ri t a g e -
phi 1 o s op hy -f9 I iraqi -p ers onalitie s -t5 8 0 - 3 0 .htm# 5 67 |
www. uq .net. aul - zzhs o szylfi I e s/g g_index. html
http : I I pll o t. fami ly s e arc h . or gl r e cords e arc h/ start. htm I #p : 0
www.familysearch.org
Irelund, Republic of
(see also lVorthern lreland)
http : I I ifhf. brs gene al ogy. c om/
www.genuki.org.uk
www. I ibdex. com/countrv. html
198

Worl dwid e Web s it e Dire ct orv
http : I I gri ffi th s . a s kab outire I and. i e : 8 0/gv 4 I gv _f ami ly_s e arc h_
form.php
www.ancestry.co.uk
www. g o ire I and. c om/gen ealo gy I iri sh_famine . htm
www. infob e l. c om/worl d
http : I I pilot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
http : //www. clarel tbr ary.re I
www.familysearch.org
http : I I www. c ensus. nati onalarchive s . iel
www.tiara.ie
www.proni.gov.uk
www.nli.ie
www.ucd.ielarchives
www. ro otsweb. c oml o/o7 
Emii g sm
www. aihs. org/collections.html
www. nyu. e du/l ib r ary lb obst/re s e ar cW atal
www.archives.iel
www. gene alogybranche 
s. com/international. 
html
www. newirelandnb. calnb_irish_family_name 
s. html
www. hi s tori c al dire ctori e s . orglh d/fi ndbyl o c ati on. a sp
http : I I imm i g rant s h ip s . ne t/ i ri s h_argli ri s h_ ar gl 822 _29 .htm I
www.lineages.com
www.rootsweb. com/-irlkik/ihm/ire I 84 I .htm
www.irish-roots.net
www. pre sbyerianirel and. org/c ongregati ons/index. html
Islam
www. lib r ary.y ale. e dr.r/ne 
areast/ms s . html
www. frie sian. com/i slam. htm
www. forumancientcoins. 
com/historia/islam_gen3 
. htm
www. marashilib r ary. c oml engli sh/b io -main. html#grand
t99

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
Isle of Man
www.genuki.org.uk
www.ancestry.co.uk
www. isle-of-man. com/intere sts/genealogy/fhs
www. isle-of-man. com/interests/genealogy/sources.htm
www. hi storic aldirectorie s. org/hd/fi ndbylo c ation. asp
htp : I I pilot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
Israel
(see also Judaism)
http : I I www. its - aro I s en. org
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. libdex. c om/country. html
http : //site s. huj i. ac .tll ar chive s/
http : I I jnul . huj i . a c .11 
I engl c o l_sp e c i al . html
www. tau. ac. ilicenlib/eng/sublibraries/special_collections/
collections.shtml
http : I I www I . yadvashem. org/ab out_y adl dep artment s/archive s/
home_archive.html
www. cgil. milano. itlArchivio/
http : I I srte s. huj i. ac .tll ar chivesi
www. am alnet. k I 2 . i l/ s ite s lk<r 
azotlkrai 0 0 I 2 .htm
www.isragen.org.il
www. israelgenealogy. 
c om/
http : I I pilot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
200

Worldw ide Web s it e D ire c t ory
Italy
www. world-newsp apers. c om
www. libdex. c om/c ountry. html
http : I I dpl s . dac c. wi s c . e du/C atasto/index. 
html
http : I I memb re s . ly c o s . frl numa I as s g e n s urn et. htm I
www. infob e I . c om/worl d/
http : //www. ro o tsweb. anc e stry. c om/ - itaw gw I
http : //www ro ot sweb. anc e s try c om/- it amohs I 7 lazio _index. htm I
http : I I www. ro of sweb. anc e stry. c om/ - ttamo I i s/
http : I I memb ers . ao I . c om/p o inthomp g/home . htm
http : I I www. ital i angen. org/
http : I I www. an g e I fi re . c om/ok3 /p e arl s o fwi s dom/
http : //www. trentinoheritage. c om/
http : I I www. angelfire. com/mt/si crly I I
http : /iwww. g e o c iti e s . c om/b i gp omi anltran s atlintro . html
www. culturadimpre sa. org/english/ activilElenco_eng/
elenchome_eng.htm
www. c omune . fe .ttl ar chl io/index. htm
www. regione. piemonte. itlcultur al archivi/index.htm
http : I I plain. unip v.rtl
www. genealogylinks. 
net/europe I italy
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www. anzwers . o r gl fr e e I itahange
www.ancestry.it
Ivory Coust
(see C6te d'Ivoire)
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. rootsweb. com/-j fu ller/gen_mail_country-ivo. 
html
201

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
www. afric a-re s e arch. org I matnframe. html
http : I I ptlot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Jainism
wwwjainsamaj.org
wwwjainworld.com
Jamsica
www. worl d-newspapers. 
c om
www. lib dex. c om/c ountry. html
http : I I j ard. govj m/main
www. mona. uwi. e du/rec ords
www. genealogy-que 
st. c om/c ollecti ons/j amcens. html
http : //us ers . pul lman. c om/mitche lm/j amaic a.htm
http : I I j amai c anfamilyse arch. c om
www. rootsweb. c om/-j amwgw/
http : I I gene alogy. ab out. c o ntl o d/ j amarcal
www. c ando o. com/genre sourc e s I j amarca. htm
www. everygeneration. 
co. uk/familytree/donaldlindo.htm
www.rgd.govjm
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearcVstart. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Jupun
www. digital. archive s. go j p/index_e. html
www. worl d-newsp ap ers. c om/
www. uq .net . aul - zzhs o szy I file s I gg_in dex . htm I
www. libdex. c om/c ountry. html
www. ro otsweb. com/-j pnwgW
202

Worl dw i de We b s it e Dire c t orv
www. di grtal . ar chive s . g o .jp I datal index_e . html
www. archive s. go j p/index_e. html
http : I I abi sh. byui . e du/ sp e c i al C o I I e cti on s/ fhc I J ap anlindex. asp
www. I ibrary. utoronto . c a/east/
www. mo fa. go j p/about lhqk ecor dl
www.archives.g 
o.jpl
www. ndl . go j p/enls ervic e I tolq o lc las s iclindex. html
www.pref. saitam a.jp I A20/BA I 8/index I .html
www.pref. yamaguchi j p/gyo sei/common-fi les/siseflr/mo 
nJo I
e4monjo.htm
www. mu s e e guime t. frlgb/home s/home_ id20 407_u I 12 . htm
www. ro otsweb. c om/-j pnwgw/
http : I I abi sh. byui . e dui sp e c i al C o 1 1 e c ti on s/ fhc I J ap anlab out. htm
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www. stichting- sakura. nl
www. geocities. 
com/SiliconValley 
I Garagel 4464 lKamon I .html
Javu
(see also Indonesia)
www. u q .net. au I - zzhs o szvlfi I e s / g g_in dex . htm I
www. arsipj atim. go. id/
http : I I pllot. familysearch .or gh ecordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Jewish
(see Judaism)
Jordan
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. u q .net . aul - zzhs o szylfi I e s/ g gi nd ex . htm I
203

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
www. libdex. com/country. html
www. amman. e du I libr ary .htm
http : I I pilot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Juduism
wwwjewishgen.org
http : I I www. its-aro lsen. org
www. eegsoc i ety. org/Index. html
wwwj gs gb. org. uk/downl2 . shtml
www. cj c . c al temp I ate . php ? acti on- archive s & Typ e -
0&Language:EN
http : I I www. ikg-wien. atlstatic/unter/html/gs_index. 
htm
http : I I stevemors e . org/
www.isragen.org.il
www.bh.org.il
http :l leja.pri.eel
www.sephardim.com
wwwj ewi shgen. orglHungary
wwwj ewishgen. 
org/SAfrica
http:llwww.ushmm.org
http : I I www. yadvashem. 
org
http : l/www. ipn. gov. pll watl enl | 0 I 5
www. shtetlinks j ewi shgen. org
http : I I geo c iti e s. c om/winter_p eter_4
www.nljewgen.org
wwwj ewi shgen. org/sfbaj gs
www. co lumbusj ewishhi storical society. org
wwwj ewi shgen . oryl jri-p l/j rip lweb. htm
www.iajgs.org
www. rootsweb. com/-ukrode s s/
204

Wo rl dwi d e We b s ite D ire c t o rv
www. ro otsweb. c om/-ukro de s s/p age3. html
www. orthohe lp . c om/ge neall egypt. HTM
http : //s ite s. huj i. ac .tll ar chive s/p age 3 . htm
http : // s ite s . huj i . ac .tl I archive s/w iennao/o2 
0 1 i st. htm
http : // s ite s . huj i . ac .rl I ar chive s/GERMANY- LI S T S/
Danzigo/o2O1 
.htm
http : /i s ite s . huj i . ac .tll ar chive s/ge r mano/o2O 
c o I I e c ti on s . htm
www. orthohelp. com/geneal/differ. 
HTM
www. mygeneal ogy. chlc e metery I
www.angelfi re.comlallAttardBezzinaLawrencl
wwwj gs gb. org.uk/snire. shtml
www.wiesenthal. 
com/site/pp. asp?c:fwlYKnN8lzH&b :242509
wwwj hcwc. mb . cal ar chives. htm
www. 1 ib r ary.y ale. e du/j u daical
www. ushmm. org/re search/c o lle ctions/
www. sp ertus. edu/c o I I e ctions_re s ourc e s/index. php
www.rtrfoundation. org/
www.redcross. org/services/intl/holotrace 
I 9 -29 -00.html
http : //sp e c i al. lib. umn. e dr-r/u mjal
wwwj ewishgen. org/j hscj /Archive.html
wwwj hsmw. org I ar chl es. html
www.cjh.orglacademic
wwwj t s a. e du/l ib r ary I ab outl sp e c i al c o I I . shtml
www. am eri c anj ew i sharc hive s . org I aj al gener al I no _fl ash. html
wwwj ewishtoronto.net/content_display.html?ArticlelD-5 
8 1 44
wwwj ewisharchives. 
net/
www.bibliomaven. com/j udaica.html
http : I I mys ql . sn a fu . d e / cj u d aicuml arc h iv/in dex . htm I
www. zetna. org. yul zeWkonyveV4 3 h ep ert html
www.c3.hu/-bpjewmus/
http : I I sites. huj i. ac .1ll ar chives/
www. sephardim . or gl j amgenl
20s

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
www.bh. org. ilicenealogy/links. aspx#Algeria
wwwjewfaq.org
Kumpuches
(see Cambodia)
Kazakhstan
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. libdex. c om/c ountry. html
www. hartford-hwp . c om/arc hive s I 5 3 I index -b. html
http: I I ptlot. familysearch .or gh ecordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Kenya
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. libdex. c om/country. html
www. afric a-re search. org I mainframe . html
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
Kherson
www. eegs o c iety. org/Index. html
www. lemko . org/gene alo gy I oblasts. 
html
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Kiev
www. eegso c iety. org/Index. html
www. archives. gov.ualEng/Archives/

Wo rl dw i d e We b s it e Dire c t orv
http : I I www2 j ewi s h gen. o r gl databa s e s/v s i a/v s iaweb. htm
http : I I prlot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Kirgizian
www. I ibdex. com/c ountry. html
http : I I pilot. familysearch . or gh ecordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Kiribsti
www. world-new sp ap ers. com
wwwj anere sture. c om/kirib atigene alogy
www. microne s iagenweb. c om/i s lands/kirib ati
http : I I pilot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Koreu, North
www. world-newspapers. 
com/
www. u q .net . au I - zzhs o szy I file s I gg_i n d ex . htm I
www. library. utoronto. c a/e ast
www. museeguimet. 
frlgb/home s/home_ id20407_u I 12. htm
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Korea, South
www. world-newspapers. 
com/
www. uq .net . aul - zzhs o szylfi I e s/ g g_in dex . htm I
www. I ib dex. c om/c ountry. html
www. ro otsweb. c om/-korwgw- s/
207

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
www. library. utoronto. cale ast
http : I I arc hive s. go. kr/e_gars/index. 
asp
http : i/l ibrary. snu. ac . kr/eng/u s e_in for/anc i entdo c j sp
www.museeguimet. 
frlgb/home s/home_ id20407_u 1 12. htm
www. acce s sgenealogy. 
com/mili tary lkorean.php
www. lineages. c o. ukidwodp/index.php/World/Korean/
%EC%82%AC%ED%9A%8CI
http : I I pilot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-g
www.familysearch.org
Kosovo
http : I I www. albanian. com/information/countries/kosova/
index.html
www.rodoslovlje.com
http : I I pllot. familysearch .orgl recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Kuwuit
www. worl d-newsp apers. com
www. uq. n e t . aul- zzhs o szy I fiIe s I gg-i n dex . htm I
www. libdex. c om/c ountry. html
www. ro otsweb. c om/-kwtwgw/
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-g
www.familysearch.org
Kyrgyzstan
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. libdex. c om/c ountry. html
http : I I c ountry s tudi e s . us/kyrgyz s tanl I I . htm
208

Worl dwi de We b s i t e Dire c t o rv
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Lsos
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. u q .nel . aul - zzhs o szylfi I e s/ g g_in dex . htm I
www. rootsweb. com/-laowgw
http : I I pllot. familysearch .or gh ecordsearch/start. 
html#p-g
www.familysearch.org
Latin America
(see also by country name)
http : //us ers . ao I . c om/mro s adoO 0 7/addre s s. htm
http : I I pll ot. fam i ly s e arc h . or gh e cord s e arch/start. html#p -0
www.familysearch.org
Lutvia
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. I ib dex. c om/c ountry. html
http : //lists. rootsweb. com/index/intl/LvA/LvA- SALDUS. html
www. ro otsweb. c om/-lvaw gw I
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Lebanon
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. I ib dex. c om/c ountry. html
www. c an. gov. lb/index. html
209

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
www. rootsweb. com/-lbnwgw
http : I I gene al ogyto day. c om/famil y I syrranl
http : I I pll o t. fami ly s e arc h . or gh e cord s e archl start. html#p -0
www.familysearch.org
Lesotho
www. world-newsp ap ers. com
www. uq .net. aul - zzhso szylfi I e s/ g g_index. html
www. libdex. c om/country. html
www. ro of sweb. c om/-j fu I I erlgen_mai l_c ountry- I e s .
html#AFR-LESOTHO
www. afric a-re s e arch. org I mainframe . html
http : I I pll o t. fam i ly s e arc h. org/re c o rd s e arc hi s tart. html #p -0
www.familysearch.org
Liberiu
www. world-newsp ap ers. com
http : //1i sts. rootsweb. 
com/index/intvlB VAFR-LIB ERIA.html
http : I I c charity. c om/l ib eri a
www. afri c a-re s e arch. org I matnframe. html
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
Libyu
(Libyan Arab Republic)
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. uq .net. aul - zzhs o szvlfi I e s/ g g_index. html
www. libdex. com/country. html
http : //l i sts. rootsweb. com/index/inrllLBY IAFR-LIB YA. html
www. afric a-re s e arch. org I matnframe . html
210

Worldwide Web s ite Directorv
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Liechtenstein
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www.la.llv.li
www. 11v. 
lillande sarchiv. li-redirect
www. genealogie netz. de h egl CHlver/sginfo-e.htm
www. genealogie netz. de I r egl CHlverlgrinfo-d. htm
h@ : //lists. rootsweb. com/in dex/ nIWIE/LIECHTENSTEIN. html
www. nettyroyal. nl/l ink/liechtenstein2 . html
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Lithuanis
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. lib dex. c om/c ountry. html
www. p o I i shro o ts . c om/h er aldry I I ith_rna. htm
www. inyourpocket. com/lithuania/vilnius/en/venue?id-
LIVIENX0 0 6 | 7 Blt;3 ;3 3 3%7 D
www. lithuani angenealo gy. or gl
www.lnb.ltl
http : I I pilot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www. antique sat oz.coml napoleon/lithtart.htm
Luthersn
www. lutherans online. com/lutheransonline/genealogy
www. kinque st. com/genealogy/databases 
I marrrages. 
html
www. ode s sa3 . orglcollections/churches
2tl

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
www.elcic.ca
www. lc seastdi s trtct.calmalinsky. 
htm
www.lccarchives.ca
http:llchi.lcms.org
www. ltsp . e duikr auth/ ar chive s. html
Luxembourg
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. I ib dex. c om/country. html
www. infobe l. c om/world
www. luxembourg. c o. uk/genealog. 
html
www. editus. lu/accueil/index.php
www. roots. lu/Display.php ?pagename-Page 
I
www. gene alogylinks. net/europ e/luxemb ourg
www. blue. lu/query? q-gene alogy
www. stthomas . edu/librarie s/sp e c i allluxGenRe s. htm
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
htp : I I www. luxembourg. c o. uk/genealog. 
html
http : I I www. dij kgraaf. org/bene lux. htm
Macsu (Macuo)
www. I ib dex. c om/country. html
www. icm. gov. mo/ICM/feinf. asp#ah
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
http : I I arc h iver. ro ot sweb . c om/ th/re adlP O RTU GAL I | 9 9 8 -0 5 I
08947 1 8983
2t2

Wo rl dw id e Web s it e D irec t orv
Macedonis
www. world-newsp ap ers. com
www. I ib dex. com/c ountry. html
www. albanian. com/information/countrie 
s/macedonia/index. 
html
www. ro otsweb. com/-mkdwgw/
http : I I pllot. familysearch . or gh ecordsearch/start.html#p:0
www.familysearch.org
Madugascur
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. uq . net. aul- zzhsoszy I filesl gg*index . html
http : //li sts. rootsweb. c om/index/intl/MD GiAFR-
MADAGASCAR.htmI
www. afri c a-re s e arch. org I marnframe . html
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Mulswi
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. lib dex. c om/c ountry. html
http : I I chamb o . s dnp . org . mw/rul e o flaw I ar chive s/
www. rootsweb. com/-j fu ller/gen_mail_country-mal.html
www. africa-re search. orglmainframe.html
http : I I pllot. familysearch . orgl recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Mali
www.world-newspapers. 
com
http : //li sts. rootsweb. com/index/intllMLIl AFR-MALI. html
2t3

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
www. afric a-research. 
org/mainframe. html
http : I I pilot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Mulaysia
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. uq .net . aul - zzhs o szylfi I e s/ g g_in dex . htm I
www. libdex. c om/country. html
www. ke ene . e drl/Iibr ary I Oran gA s I i/
http : //p kukmweb. ukm. myl -llbr ary I sp e c i al . htm
www. umlib. um. e du.my I ZABA. HTM
http : I I pllot. familysearch .or gl recordsearch/start.html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
Maldives
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. maldive sroyalfamily. com/maldive s_china. shtml
www. n d 1 . g o j p/ e n/p ub I i c ati o n/c d nlao I 03 4 I 3 40 4 .html
www. recipeland. 
com/encyclopaedia/index.php/Maldives
www. ndl . g o j p/en/publ i c ati on/c d nlao I A 4 6 I 4 6 4 .html
http : I I pilot. familysearch . or gl rccordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Malts
www. world-new spapers. 
c om
www. libdex. c om/c ountry. html
www. ang e lfi re . c oml aU Attar dB ezzinaLawre nc
www. c ertifi kati. gov. mt/? lng-mt
www. aragon 1 0. free - online . c o. ukNotarie sMalta. htm
214

Worl dwid e Web s i t e D ire c t ory
www. aragon I 0 . fre e - onl ine . co. uk/Notarie sGozo. htm
http : //1 i s t s . ro ot sweb. c om/index/in tlll|l4l.I IMAIjIA. html
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
http : I I en wikip e dia. org/wiki/Malta
Murshall Islunds
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. libdex. c om/c ountry. html
http : I I members. tripod. com/-alelemuseum/Archive 
s. html
www. mi crone s i agenweb. 
c om/i slands/marshal 
I
wwwj ane socea nta.com/oceania_genealogy
http : I I prlot. familysearch .or gh ecordsearch/start.html#p-g
www.familysearch.org
Martinique
(see also Antilles Frangaises)
www. candoo. com/genre sources
http : I I pllot. familysearch .or gk ecordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Masons
(also see Freemasons)
www. nymas oni c I ibrary. org
Msuritqnis
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. I ib dex. c om/c ountry. html
215

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
http : //l i sts . ro otsweb. c om/index/intl/MRT/AFR-
MAURITANIA.htmI
www. thenati ono fmoori sh- americ ans. org/go I denO 1 . htm
www. afric a-re s e arch. org I mainframe . html
http : I I pll ot. fam i ly s e arch . or gl rc cord s e arch/ start. html #p - 0
www.familysearch.org
Mauritius
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. lib dex. c om/c ountry. html
www. uo m . ac . m ul Lrbr ary I hbr ary. htm# c o I I
www. cousinconnect. 
com/p I al I L3 I
http : //li sts. rootsweb. com/index/intl/Mu S/AFR-
MAURITIUS.html
www. afric a-re s e arch. org I mainframe . html
http : I I pIl o t. fami ly s e arc h . or gk e co rd s e archl start. html#p - 0
www.familysearch.org
Mennonite
www. eegsociety. 
org/Index. html
http : I I www. m cusa- archive s. org/
www. mennonit es . cal canada. 
html
www.mcusa-archives. 
org
www.mhsc. calindex.html
www.mhsc.ca
www. mcusa-archive 
s. org
www.goshen.edu/mhl
www. lmhs . org/archive/index. 
html
www. mhep . org I hbr ary.html
www. emu. e du/librarv lhrstlib. html
216

Worl dw id e Web s it e D i re c t o ry
www. maxpage s. com/polandiCensus_Re 
search
http : I I feefhs. org/MEN/indexmen. html
http : I I members. ao 1. c om/rhin0igenealogy. 
html
Methodists
www. depts . drew. e duilibluma. html
www.gcah.org
http : I I go. owu. e du/- I ibrweb/spuma. htm
http : I I llbrary. owu. e du/ spuma. htm
www. lyc oming. e du/um ar cW
www. wo fford. edu/sandorTe 
szlerLibrary larchive s/default. asp
www. 1 ambuth. e dul academi c s/l ibr ary I
Memphi s C onferenc eArchive s. html
www. gcah. orgl S e arching.htm
Mdtis
www. othermeti s. net/AboGene/genelink. 
html
www. rootsweb. com/-wioconto/Lake sfamilies. h tm#martell2
http : I I members. 
aol. c om/vwilson 57 7 I I 8 3 6-mix.html
www. lexi snexi s .contl academic lguide s/western_hist/
s t_l oui s_fur/ fur | 2 . asp
www. meti sre s ourc e c entre. mb. c al genealogy
www. nativeameric ans. comiMeti s. htm
www. ro of sweb. c om/ - c an slC S a s katchew an/ etbnic I
meti s - saskatchewan. 
html
www. ro otsweb. c om/ -nameti s
www. gl enb ow. org/c o I I e ctions/archive s/gene alogy
www. quintinpublic ations. com/metis. htm
www. native - language s. or gl meti s. htm
www. meti sduqu ebec . calgenealogie. 
htm
2 1 7

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
Mexico
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. libdex. c om/c ountry. html
http : I frnom 
e . att. n etl -L o cal_C atho I i c/# S e I e ct_L o c ati on
http : I I me mb ers . trip o d. c om/- GaryFe I ixlindex I . htm
www. infob e 1. co ml teldrc I de fault. asp
www. hi sp anic s o c iety. orgiengli sh/library. htm
www.agn.gob.mx/
http : I I aham. arquidi oc e si smexi c o . org. mx/
www. b ibl i og. unam. mx/b ib/c o I e c c i one s/fondo s e c 2 . html
www. b ibli og. unam. mx/b ib/c olec c ione s/fondo sec I . html
http : I lblbl i o . c o lmex . mx I tnf o I c ol gral . htm#f
www.bib.uia.mx/colecciones/do 
cl acervos_historicos.html
www. h-net. org/ -latamlarchives/archivo-chiapas.pdf
www. h-net. org/ -latamlarchives/proj ect5 .html
www. h-net. org/ -latam/archive s/proj ect4.html
www. h - ne t . org/ *latam/ arc h ive s/p roj e c t 2 .htmI
www. h- net. org/ -lataml arc hive s/proj e c t 1 . html
www. h-net. org/ -latam/archive s/archivo-hi s-mil. html
www. h-net. org/ -latam/archive s/proj ect6.html
www. h-net. org/ -latamlarchive s/proj ect9.html
www. h-net. org/ -latam/archive s/merida. html
www. censuslinks. 
com/index
www. rootsweb. com/-mexwgw
http : I I memb ers . ao I . c om/mro s ado 0 0 7 /mx c ivre g. htm
http : I I memb ers . trip o d. c om/- G aryFe I ixi index 5 H . htm
www.familysearch.org
218

Worl dw i d e We b s i t e D ire c t ory
Micronesia
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. microne siagenweb. 
com
www. fsmgov. org/b irth. html
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
Minsk
(see Belarus)
Moldova
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. libdex. c om/country. html
www. ro otsweb. c om/-mdawgw/
www. route storoots. com/
www. rootsweb. com/-mdawgw
http : I I pt lot. familysearch . or gh ecordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Monsco
www. nettyroyal .nlllinVmonaco 1 . html
http : I I www. warg s. c om/e s says/le sbi an. html
http : //lists. rootsweb. c om/index/su rname I m/monaco. html
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-g
www.familysearch.org
Mongoliu
www. world-newspapers. 
com
http : //us erp age . fu-b erl in. d e I - c orff lmfaq- 3 . html
2t9

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
www.msnbc.msn. 
com/i dl 537 90 | 4 I
www. mongo liatoday. c om/i s sue/5 /
http : I I arc h a e o I o gy. ab out. c o m/ I ib r ary I atlas/b lm o n g o I i a. htm
http : I I engli sh. peop le. com. cnlengli sh/2 0 0 I | 0 I | 2 I
eng200 I I 0 1 2_821 28.html
www. smhric. org/E_Bula g_2 .p df
http : I I pllot. familysearch .or gh ecordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Montsewat
www. candoo. com/genre sources
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Moravis
www. ee gso ci ety. org/Index. html
www.cgsi.org
http : I I cze chgeneal ogy. org
http : I lhom e . b awu e . d e /-h an a c e k/e g e n e / enre fov. htm
http : I I fee fhs . org I CZS I fr g-mohs. html
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Moravian & Moruvian Brethren
www. eegsociety. 
org/Index. html
www. enter. net/- sm schl ack/
www. moravi anarchive s . or gl
www. moravi anchurcharchive s . or gl
http : I I freepages. 
genealogy.rootsweb. 
com/-elainetmaddo>r/
220

Worldwide Website Directory
Montenegro
www. alb ani an. c om/information/c ountrie s/montene sro/
index.html
www.montenegro.org
http : I I genforum. gene alogy. c om/montenegro
www. ro otsweb. c om/-mntwgw/
www. geoc itie s. com/henrivanoene/royalmontenegro. 
html
www. ro do s I ovlj e . c om/phorum/re ad. php ? 5, I 00 6
http : I I pilot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-g
www.familysearch.org
Mormons
(see Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints)
Morocco
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. u q .net . au I - zzhs o szy I file s I gg_i n d e x . htm I
www. libdex. c om/c ountry. html
www. mygenealogy. 
chlc emetery
http : //lists. rootsweb. com/inde>r/intlAvlAVAFR-
MOROCCO.html
www. genealogie- 
gamt. org/index 2 .asp
www. afric a-re search. org/mainframe. html
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Mozumbique
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. libdex. com/country. html
221

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
www.ahm.uem.mzl
http : //lists. rootsweb. com/index/intIlMozl
AFR-MOZAMBIQUE.htmI
www. afric a-re se arch. org I matnframe. html
http: I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
Myanmar
(Barma)
www. world-new spap ers. c om
www. rootsweb. c om/-mmrwgw/
http: I I pllot. familysearch .orgl recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
l{amibia
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. lib dex. c om/country. html
http : I I mi I I ennium. fortune c ity. c om/hindm ar sW 7 I I I
genealog/orte.htm
http : //lists. rootsweb. c om/index/intl/NAIWAFR-NAMIB IA. html
www. klausdi erks. c om/B iographi e s/B iographie s_U. htm
www. africa-re se ar ch.or glmainframe.html
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
lYutive Peoples
(Canada & U.S.A.)
www. gov. ns . c a/ns arml v ttuallmikmaq/
www. rootsweb. c om/-us gwnat I
222

Worldwide Webs ite Directory
http : I I me mb e r s . a o I . c o m/b bb e n g e/ fro nt . htm I
http : I I digita I . I ibrary. o kstate . e du lkappler lindex. htm
http : I I memb ers . ao I . c om/e s arrettl nal na _narc . htm
http : I I www. nsula. e dui cre o lel
www. ro otsweb. c om/-itgenweb/
www. windriverhi story. org/washakie archi. html
http : I I anpa.ualr. 
edu/finding_aidsicollection_finding_aids. 
htm
http : I I www. dar. org/l ibrarylspe cc o I . c fm
www. marquette. edu/libr ary I collections/archive 
s/
native_writes.html
www. gbl. indian a. edul abstracts/gen5 
. html
http : I I ltbrary. v i cu. utoronto . c a/ sp e c i a\lj one s intro . htm
www. hamptonu. e du/museum/archive 
s. htm
http : I I memory. I o c . gov/ammem/
www. cr. np s. gov I aadl feature/feature. 
htm
www. cr. np s . gov I aadl featur e I tr aveler. htm
www.censusfinder.com
www.nativeamericans. 
com
lYative Peoples
(outside of Canada and U.S.A.)
www. angl i c an. o r g.nzlRe sourc e s/Archive s I . htm
www. keene. edu lhbrary/OrangAsli/
www. ai at s i s . g ov. aul lbry I c 1 I ctn s/c I I ctn s_hm. htm
www. cairnsmuseum. 
org. aulhistsoc. 
html
www. I ibrary. uq. e du. aulfryer/index. phtml# sp ec ial
www. library.unisa. 
edu. aulresources/collections/special. 
asp
www. u s p . ac .f1 I hbr ary I co I I e cti o n/p ac i fi c c o I I e ct ion/
pac ifi c_collection. 
htm
www. uog. e du/m ar c I c ollect. html
www. aucklandcitylibrarie 
s. com/general. 
aspx?ct: I 8
223

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
http:llllbrary.christchurch.org.nzlCentral/AotearoaNZCentrel
www. natl ib. gov t.nz I en/ usrngl 2 atl . html
www. pre sbyterian. org.n zl archive s/archive sframe. html
www. 1 ib rary. auc kl and. ac . nzl subj e cts I nzp I nzphome . htm
http : I I L1br ar y . c ant e rb ury. ac .nz I mb/ g e n e fi c h. s htm I
www. waikato . a c .nz I hbrarv/re s o ur c e s huc huc c o 1l e c ti on. shtml
[\rsuru
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. microne siagenweb. 
com/i slands/n aurul
http : I I hom e . att. n et I -L o ca l_C ath olic I C ath o I i c - Au s tral i a -
Oceania.htm#Nauru
http : I I pllot. familysearch . or gh ecordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
IYepal
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. u q .net. aul - zzhs o szylfi I e s/ g g_i n d e x . htm I
www. libdex. c om/country. html
www. rootsweb. com/-nplwgw
www. mus e e gui met.fr I gblho me s/home_ id20 407 _u I I 2 . htm
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
lYetherland Antilles
www. libdex. c om/country. html
www.ghcaraibe.org
www. c ando o . c om/g enre s ourc e s I nethanti I I e s . htm
www. rootsweb. c om/ - antwgw
224

Worl dw i de Web s i t e D ire c t orv
www.nationalarchives. 
an
http : I I sps e arc h. i I s e . nll s e arc hre sult s j sp x ? in-anti I I en
www. mavi c anet. c om/directory I engl 241 64. html
www.candoo.com
http : I I pll ot. fam i ly s e arc h . or gl r e cord s e arch/start. htm l#p- g
www.familysearch.org
f{etherlands
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. I ib dex. c om/country. html
http : I I gene aknowhow. net/di g i/re s ourc e s . html
www. en. nationaalarchief. 
nl/default. asp
http : I I me mb re s . ly c o s . frl numa I as s g e n surn e t. htm I
www. infob el. c om/worl d
http : I I www. dij kgraaf. org/b enelux. htm
http : I I archief. startpunt. nu/
www. archiefnet. 
nl/index. asp?taal-en
http : I lhom e . h c cnet. nl/p . m olema I arc hi e f. htm
http : I I archieven. 
b eginthier. nl
http : I lhome . hc cnet. nllj aw. w arnar br ab antl
http:llwww.cbg.nli
http : I I gene aknowhow. net/di gilre s ourc e s . html
http : I I www. hop e . edu/j o intarchive s/
http : I I www. hi stori ekamer. nl/
http : I I www. stamb oom. nu/forum/
http : I I www. x s4 al I . nl/-kvenj b/gennl. htm
http : I I fami I ienamen. b eginthier. nl
www.gencity.nl
www. stamb o om surfp agina. nl
www. linkhitlist. com/cgill-Hl-_N. exe?G2l&LinkNo-9 | 8024
&ListNo-49837
225

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
www.swinx.net
http : I I gene alogie. p agina. nl/
www. linkhitli st. com/cgillHl_N .exe? G2L&LinkNo-9 13 6 12
&ListNo-49837
www. linkhitlist. co ml cgilLHL_N. e xe? G2L&LinkNo- I I 07 8 3 5
&ListNo-49837
www. I inkhitl i st. c om/c gilLHL_N . exe? G2L&L inkNo-9 I I 6 0 9
&ListNo-49837
www.voorouders.net/
www. drents archie fnet. nll
www.archief.delft.nl
http : I I gene aknowh ow. net/di g i/re s ourc e s . html
www. angelfire. c oml gal digtt
www. stamb o om. nu/forum
www.hennekam.org
www. gene al ogylinks. net/europ e/netherlands
http:llgenealogy.about.com/1ibrary/authors/uchennekam2a.htm
www.ngv.nl
www. dutchgene alogy. c om
www. euronet. nllus ers/mnykerk/gene alog. htm
http : I I p 1l o t . fam i ly s e arc h . or g I r e co rd s e arc h/ s t art. htm I #p - 0
wwwfamilysearch.org
lr{evis
(see also St Kitts and l{evis)
www. candoo. com/genresource 
s
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
226

Worldwide Webs ite Directory
lYew Caledoniu
www.archives.gouv.nc
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-g
www.familysearch.org
ft{ew Zealsnd
www. cwgc. org/cwgc internet/search. 
aspx
www.nram.org.nz
www.natlib.govt.nz
www. archive s. g ovt.nz hndex. html
www. dn zb . govt.nz I dnzb
http : I I p ap erspa st. natl ib. govt.nz
http : I I fre ep a ge s . g en e al o gy. ro of sweb. anc e s try. c o ml - nzbound/
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. u q .net . au I - zzhs o szylfi I e s/ g g_i n de x . htm I
www. libdex. com/country. html
www. c c c . govt. n zlHandbo ok/archive s . asp
http:lllrbrary.christchurch.org.nzlCentraUAotearoaNZCentrel
www. natl ib. gov t.nz I enl usingl 2 atl . htm I
www. 1 i b r ary . auckl an d. a c .nz I sub j e cts I nzp I nzphome . htm
http:llllhary.canterbury.ac.nzlmblgenefi 
ch.shtml
http:llllhary.canterbury.ac.nzlservices/collns.shtml
www. waikato . a c .nz I hbrary/re s ourc e s/nz c huc _c ol I e cti o n. shtml
www. wellington. govt. n zl sewice s/archives
www. wcl. govt. n zl w elhngton/heritageindex.html
http : I I pllot.f am i ly s e arc h. org/re c ord s e arc h/start. htm l#p - 0
www.familysearch.org
www.nram.org.nzl
www. bl. uk/collections/oe 
soz. html
http : I I www. nz s ghami lto n. co .nzl
227

Finding Anyone, Anyvvhere, Anywhen
I{icarugua
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. libdex. c om/country. html
http : I I genforum. g ene al o gy. c om/ nic ar agual
http : //lists. rootsweb. com/index/intlA{ICNICARAGUA. html
http : //es. group s.yahoo. com/group/Gen_CentroAm 
erical
www. rootsweb. com/-j fu ller/gen_mail_country-nic. 
html
www. geocities. com/inghmiami/Genealogia_N 
rcaragua. 
html
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/rec ordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
Niger
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. libdex. c om/country. html
http : //lists. rootsweb. com/inde>r/intlAIEVAFR-NIGER. html
www. africa-research. 
org/mainframe. html
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
IYigeria
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. uq. ne t. aul- zzhs o szylfi I e s/ g g_in dex . htm I
www. lib dex. com/country. html
http : //1i sts. rootsweb. com/inde>r/intl/NGA/AFR-NIGEzuA. html
www the abi. org. uk/nigeria. htm
www. afric a-re s e arch. org I mainframe . html
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
228

Worl dw i de We b s i t e D ire c t o rv
lt{obility & IYoble Families
(see Royalty & Ir{obility)
lYorthern lrelund
http : I I ifhf .brsgenealogy. 
c om/
www. world-newsp apers. com
www. I ib dex. c om/c ountry. html
www.groni.gov.uk/
www. aihs. org/c ollections. html
www. nyu. e du/l ibr ary lb obst/re s e a r cW ata
http : I I gri ffi th s . a skab outire I and. i e : 8 0/gv 4 I gv _f ami ly_s e arch_
form.php
www.archives.iel
http : I I www. c ensus. nationalarchive s. iei
www.rascal.ac.uk/
www. genealogybranche 
s. com/international. 
html
www. hi stori c al dire ctorie s. org/hd/fi ndbylocation. asp
www.familia.org.uk
www.lineages.com
www. nireland. c om/genealogy
www. ni dex. c om/gene al ogy. htm
www. rootsweb. c om/-nirarm
www. rootsweb. com/-nirwgw
www. n-ireland. c o. uk/pages/Genealogy
www. iri shfamilyre se arch. co. uk
http : I I immi grant s hip s . n etliri s h_argliri sh_ ar gl 822 29 .html
www.proni.gov.uk
www. genuki . org. uk/bi g/irl
www. ireland. anglican. o r glhbraryilibroots. html
www. ireland. anglic an. o r glhbr arylindex. html
www. anc e strvireland. 
co.uk
229

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
http : I I memb ers . trip o d. c om/ - C aryl_Wi I I i am s/E ire - 7 . html
www.rootsweb. com/-irlkik/ihm/ire 1 84 1 .htm
www.irish-roots.net
www. pre sbyerianire land. org/c ongre gations/index. 
html
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
IYorway
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. libdex. c om/country. html
www. rhd. uit. no/folketellinger/folketellinger_e. 
aspx
http : I I hom ep a g e s . ro of swe b. c o m/ -no rway I na2 .html
www. naha. stolaf. edu/archives. 
htm
www.ub.uio.no/
http : I I atn. hibo. no/home page I
htp : //sognogfi ordane.kulturnett.no/arkivnett/heime 
side. htm
www. bergen. kommune. no/byark iv etl
http : //sognog{ ordane. kulturnett. no/arkivnett/kommunar/
viVlokhistarkiv.htm
www.ub.ntnu.no/
www. ub. uib. no/avdeling/spe 
s/manuskript/manuskriptindex. 
htm
www. byarkivet. o s 1o. kommune . no/
www.farkiv.ol.no/
www. a- arkiv. te lemarksnett. 
no/
www.arbark.no/
http : I I folk.uio. no/achristo/index.html
http : I I www. geocitie s. com/Heartland/3 8 5 6 I
http : I I www. nn d ata.no I hom e/j b o rg o s /j b o rg o s e . htm
http : I I www. fe lle sraad. c om/
http : //www. geocitie s. com/genealo gyno I
http : //www geoc ities. com/coastwater/nina_mo11er_nordby. 
html
230

W'orldwide Web site Directory
www.censusfinder.com
www. censuslinks. 
com/index
www. genealogybranche 
s. com/international. 
html
http : I I www. rootsweb. c om/-wgn orw ay I
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-g
www.familysearch.org
www. norway- gene al ogy. c om
www. utvandrersenteret. 
no
Oceaniu
http : I I hom e . att. n et I -L o cal_c atho I i c/# S e I e ct_L o c ati on
wwwj anesoceania.com/oceania 
genealogy
www.haabaa. 
co ml dir I 323 I I3.php
www. ro otsweb. c om/ -p ac i fgw
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-g
www.familysearch.org
Oman
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. u q .net . av/ - zzhs o szylfi I e s/ g g_i n dex . htm I
www. I ibdex. c om/c ountry. html
www. forumanc ientc o ins . c om/hi storia/i s I am_gen5 . htm
http : I I pilot. familysearch .or gh ecordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Ottoman Empire
(see Turkey, Greece, Palestine, Syria, Libya, Egypt,
Hungary, Yugoslavia, Croatia, Bosnia, Albania, Macedonia,
Romania, Moldova, BulgariA, s or.,tthern (Jlvaine, Turkey,
Georgia, Armenia, Iraq, Kuwait, Cyprus, Lebanon, Jordan,
23r

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
Eastern and Western Saudi Arabia, Oman, Bahrain, eastern
Yemen, Egypt, Tunisia, and northern Algeria)
www. geocitie s. com/EnchantedFore 
st/ l32l hndex.html
http : I I pilot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
Pucific
(see also Oceania)
www.bl. uk/collections/asiapacifi 
cafric a. html
http : I I r sp as . anu. edu. aulpambu
http : I I pilot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Pskistsn
www. worl d-newsp ap ers . c om
www. libdex. c om/c ountry. html
www. ge o c iti e s . c om/rab i azaf ar7 8/p akg enweb. html
www. mus e e gui met.fr I gblhome s/home_ id20 407_u 1 I 2 . htm
www. rootsweb. com/-j fu 11er/gen_mail_country-pak. 
html
http : I I memb ers. ozemarL com. aul - clday I
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Palsu
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. micronesiagenweb. 
com/islands/palau
wwwj ane so ce ania. com/oce ania_genealogy
http : I I pilot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
232

Worldwide Web s it e D ire c tory
Palestine
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. libdex. com/country. html
www. isragen. 
org. iIlRO S/namechanges. 
html
http : I I pll ot. fam i ly s e arc h . or gl r e cord s e arc h/start. htm l#p-O
www.familysearch.org
Pulitinate (Palitines)
http : I I www. p al am. org/bkstore 3 /
http : I I me mb e r s . a o I . c o m I ntgenl tayl or I p al ati n e . htm 1
www. rootsweb. 
com/-ote/palatines
Punams
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. libdex. c om/c ountry. html
www. rootsweb. com/-j fu ller/gen_mail_country-pan. 
html
http : //us ers . ao I . c om/mro s ado 0 0 7/addre s s . htm
http : I I pll ot. fam i ly s e arc h . or gl rc cord s e arc h/s tart. html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Pupua I{ew Guines
www. world-newspapers. 
com
http : //l i sts . ro otsweb. c om/index/intl/PNc/
PAPUA-NEWGUINEA.htmI
http : I I fre ep a g e s . g ene a I ogy. ro o t swe b. c om/- arkb i o s I pngl
http : I I coomb s. anu. e du. aul Sp e c i alProj /PNG/Index. htm
http : I I pil o t. fam i ly s e arch . or gk e cords e arc h/ start. html#p - g
www.familysearch.org
233

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
Paruguay
www.world-newspapers. 
com
http : //www I . I ani c . utexa s . e du/l a/ s al p ar aguay I
www.pyadopt.org
www. genc irc le s . c om/c lub siworl d/ par aguay
www. bvp . org. pylindex. htm
www. guiaslatinas. 
com.py
http : //e s . g roup s . y aho o . c om/g roup I P ar aguayG ene alo gial
http : I I pllot. familysearch .orgl recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Pentecostal Church
www. p c tn. or gl arclgeneral. 
html
www. agheritage . org/re s e arch/re se arch. c fm
http : I I faculty. leeu. e du/- dr c I
Persia
(see also lran)
www. u q .net. aul - zzhs o szvlfi I e s/ g g_i n d e x . htm I
www. frie s i an. com/iran. htm
www. therain. org/appendixe 
s/app 5 7 . html
http: I I pllot. familysearch .orgl recordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
Peru
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. lib dex. c om/country. html
www. hi sp ani c s oc iety. org/engli sh/l ibrary. htm
234

Wo rl dw id e We b s ite D ire c t o rv
www. arzobi spadodelim a. or gl igle sias/ca tedrall archivo. htm
www. bnp. gob.pe/index.htm
www. h - n e t . o rgl -latart/ arc h iv e s / arc h ivo - ar z-lima. htm I
www. h-net. org/ -Iatarlarchive s/archivo-gen-lima. 
html
www. h-net. org/ -Iatant/archive s/proj ectS .html
http : I I memb ers. ao 1. c om/mro s ad o007 I p eru. htm
http : I I gene alogi a. p erucultural. org. p e/
www. bnp. gob.pelindex. 
htm
http : I I ptlot. familysearch .or gl r ecordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
Philippines
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. libdex. com/country. html
www. geocitie s. com/Heartland/R ancU 9 12 | I
www. bibingka. com/namesidefault. 
htm
www. dl su. e du. p h/l ibrar y I ar chle s/c o I I e cti o n s . a sp
www. fi lipinasl ibrary. org.ph/library/default. asp ?id -Maino/o2}
Re fe re n c eo/o2 
}Lib r ary
www. geo c ities. com/HeartlandiR ancU 9 12 I I
www. census . gov. pW datalcivilreg/index.html
www. familysearch. org/Eng/S earch/frame set_search. 
asp
http : I I r evi sta. c a r ay anpre s s . c om/
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Pitcuirn & IYorfolk Island
www. lare au. org/genweb. 
html
www. ro otsweb. c oml - ausnorfo
http : I I ptlot. familysearch .or gl r ecordsearch/start.html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
235

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
Polund
www. e e gso c iety. org/Index. html
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. libdex. c om/c ountry. html
www.bkp an.poznan.pll
www. p o land. p l/archive s/index. htm
http : I llinktoyourroots. hamburg. de/ltyr/Suchmask 
e I en/
1,3825,,00.htm1
www. p o I i s hro o t s . c o m/h erb ar z I herb aru _in dex . htm
http : I I gene al og. home. pl/
www. g e o c iti e s . c om/Athen s/O lympu s/ 8 6 9 I I tpna. htm
www. o de s s a3 . org/c ollections I landl p olandl
www. o de s s a3 . org/c o I I e cti on s I landl wprus s i a/
www. archiwa. gov. p 1/? C IDA:4 3
www.pgsm.org
www. gdansk. ap . gov. p l/engl i sh/linki/po land. php
www. piasa. org/poli sharchives. 
html
www. archiwa. gov. p 1/? C ID A: 17 7
www. uni. wroc.pVJEDNO STKI/ARCHIW-E. HTM
www. maxpages. 
com/poland/ Census_Re 
search
www.halgal.com
www. mfu - n et. r ul r r r I uI<raine . htm
www.pgsa.org
www. polishroots. org/genpoland/
www. genealogylinks. 
net/europe I polandl
http : I I gene al ogy. about. c om/od/po landl
http : //slucki. republika.pl/
http : I I gene al og. home. p l/
http : I I akuc hinka I 0 . trip o d. c om/p o I i shgentran s I atel
http : I I immi grantship s. net/austria_p 
o land gal ic i a I 8 8 9 . html
www.rootspoland.com
236

Worldwide We b s i te D ire c torv
http : I I www. c o okc ountygenealogy. c om/
wwwjewishgen .org jri-pll
http: I I stevemorse 
. org/
http : I I pIlot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-g
www.familysearch.org
Polynesia
(see also Tahiti)
www. angl i c an. o r g.nzlRe s ourc e s/Archive s I . htm
www. rootsweb. com/-pyfwgw/tahiti
www. rootsweb. com/-pyfwgw/frenchp/index. htm
wwwj anere sture. com/polynesia_myths
wwwjaneresture.com
http : I I philtar.uc sm. ac. uk/encyc lopedia/poly/gene 
s s. html
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Portugal
www.iantt.pt
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. libdex. c om/c ountry. html
http : I I me mb re s . ly c o s . frl numa I as s g e n s urn e t. htm I
www. mygene al ogy. ch/c emetery/
www. bn.ptlc oleccoe s/arquivo s. html
http : I I www. ge oc iti e s . c om/fc andi do2 00 I /p ortgen/general. 
html
cdi.upp.ptl
www. arquivo -m aderc a. ot gl
http : I I exp ert ge ne a I ogy. c orn/ 7 x-S p ainPortugal Gen
http : I I www. lus aweb. c om/
www. dholmes. com/rocha I .html
237

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
www. i s landroute s. c om/p ortgenart. shtml
http : /ihome. att.n etl -Local_C atholic/Catholic-Portugal.htm
www.well. com/user/ideamen/pgeneal. 
html
http: I I pllot. familysearch .orgl rccordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Posen
www. eegsociety. 
org/Index.html
www.posen-l.com
http : I I f ee fhs. org/indexger. 
html
www.polishroots. org/genpoland/pos. 
htm
wwwj ewi shgen. org/InfoFile siPo s enRe s ourc e s. html
http : I I wiki. genealogy. 
net/index.php/Provinz_Posen
www. genealogie netz. de lreglPO S/po sen_e. html
http : I I poli shroots. netfirms. com/links/polish_archives. 
html
http : I I prlot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Presbyteriun
www. pre sbyteri an. org. n zl ar chl es
www.pcanet. org/history
www. hi story. p cus a. org/index. html
www.presbyterian. 
org. n zl ar chives/archivesframe.html
www. pre sbyteri anire land. org/congregations/index. 
html
Prussia
www. ode s sa3 . org/co I le ctions I land/ wprus s ial
www. ge o c itie s . c om/ S i I i c onVal I e y I Hav en/ 1 5 3 8 /prus s i a. html
http: I I www. mennonitegenealogy. 
com/prus sia/
238

Wo rl dw i de We b s i t e Dire c t o rv
http : I I carlnp at. cu stomer. netspac e . net. auloe frrO 0 7 . html
http : I I pllot. familys e arch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
Puerto Rico
www. world-newsp ap ers. com
www. libdex. com/country. html
www. icp. gobie rno .pr I agp I
www. preb. c om/ geneall ahasj pr. htm
www. p reb. c o m/ gene aI2 I adaq. htm
www. icp. gobierno.prlbge/libro 
sraros. 
htm
www. preb. c om/apunte s 6 hehj aa. htm
www. apellidositalianos. com.ar larchivos_puerto_rico.htm
www. rootsweb. coml-prwgw
www. sg arner349. com/Puerto_Rico
www.genealogiapr.com
www. vitalrec. com/pr. html
http : I I emt. web. prw. netl
www. pucpr. edu/bibl iotec a/index. htm
http : I lhome. c oqu i.netl crales I 5iindex. htm
http : I I wp.pr. superpage 
s. com/people. phtml
www.proyecto salonhogar. 
c om/B iografi asPr
www.candoo.com
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Qatar
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. libdex. com/country. html
http : I I pil o t. fam i ly s e arch . or gl r e cords e archl start. html#p -0
www.familysearch.org
239

Finding Any one, Anywhere, Anywhen
Qazaqstan
(see Kazakhstan)
Quakers
www.usgennet. orgiusa/nylcounty/dutche ss I datal
quakerindex.htm
www. swarthmore . e du/L lbr ary I fri ends
www. genealogy-quest. 
com/collections/nycquakers.html
http : I I plainfi e ld. fri end. googlep age s . com/
www. interment .netl datal usl pal york/warrington. htm
www. swarthmore. edu/L lbrary I friends/
www. rootsweb. c om/-engqfhs/
www. g e o c i t i e s . c o m/H e artl and/P larns I 20 6 4 I s quake r. htm
www. rootsweb. c om/-quakers
http : I I pllot. familysearch .orghecordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
Reformed Church
www. rc a.or gl aboutus/archives/index. 
html
Repablic of lrelund
(see lreland & Ir{orthern lreland)
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www.genuki.org.uk
http: I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Republic of the Msrshsll Islsnds
(see Marshall Islands)
240

Worl dw ide We b s i t e Dire c t ory
Rhodesiu, lr{orth
(see Zambia)
Rhodesia, South
(see Zimbabwe)
Romunis
www. eeg s o c i ety. org/Index. html
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. I ib dex. c om/c ountry. html
www. ro otsweb. c om/-romwgw/index. html
www. ro otsweb. c om/-romwgw/romaniare se arch. html
http : I I archive s . unitarian. rol
www. mae. ro/index.php ?unde-doc&id-5 045
www. maxpage s . c om/p o land/C ensus_Re 
search
www. genealogylinks.net/europe 
I rcmania
http : I I fee fhs. org/RO/frg-ro . html
www. huntington. edu/srs/srsothe 
rcr ganizations.htm
http : I I pllot. familysearch .orgl rccordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
Royulty & lYobility
www. u q .net . au I - zzhs o szy I fiIe s I gg_in dex . htm I
www.4dw.net/royalarU
www. geocitie s. com/tfboettger/re 
search/gergen.htm#G
ftp. c ac . p su. e du/- saw/roy aIh oy algen. html
http : I I www. xs4a11.n1/-kvenjb/gennl. 
htm
www. ac . wwu. e du/- stephan/Rulers/
www. ange lfi re. c oml in/he inbruins/
www. x s 4 all .nl I -kvenj b/gennl . htm
241

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
http : I I p age s . pro di gy. net/pthero ff
www.royalist.info
www. geocitie s. com/christopherj 
bennett
www.tyndale. cam. ac.uk/E gyptl
www. heraldic a. org/topic s/france/roygenea. 
htm
www. ne ttyroya I .nl I IinW gene al ogy. html
www. da tar abra. com/royal s/fami lytre e . a sp
www. britannia. com/history/mon ar chsl
we spatterson. 
c om/biblical/gen. html
www. royal stuarts. org/
www. berkshirehistory. 
c om/bio s/index. html
www. p o I i s hro ot s . c om/h er aldry I I ith_rna. htm
www. geocities. 
com/Tokyo/Temp 
le I 39 53 I
www. geocitie s. com/Ath ensl 8 420/main. html
wwwjanm.org/
http : I I gold. raj abhat. e du/eng/rb ook. htm
www. burke s-peerage. 
net/site s/peerageandgentry/sitepages/
home.asp
http : I I gene al ogia. I ap . hu/
www. genealogic s. orgiprominent. php
www. genealogic s. org/photohi story.php
www. genealogic 
s. org/browsesourc 
e s.php
www. agad. arch iwa. g ov. p I I enghnfo o g eng . html
www. 4 dw. ne t/royal ark/Pers i a/p ah lav 12 .htm
www. geocitie s. com/Tokyo/Temp 
Ie I 39 53 I
www. worl dro ot s . c om/b rigitte k oy aI I r oyal 0 0 . htm
www. 4dw. net/royalark/Korea/korea. 
htm
www. 4 dw. net/roy aIarULao s/lao s2 . htm
www. casaimper iaI.or gl principe. htm
www. nettyroyal. nl/link/monaco 1 . html
http:llworldroots.com/bngrttelroyal/sitemap2.htm
242

Wo rl dw i d e Web s it e D ire c t o ry
http : I I engli sh. p e op I e . c om. cnlengl isV 200 | | 0 I | 2 I
eng200 1 1 0 1 2_821 28.html
Russia
www. eegsociety. 
org/Index. html
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. libdex. com/country. html
www.polishroots. c om/h eraldry lrussian_heraldry.htm
www. ro otsweb. c om/-ruswgw/
www.mtu-net.ru 
lrrrl
www.iis g.nll-abbl
www. ode s sa3 . org/collections/familie 
s/
www. ode ssa3 . org/collections I stpete I
http : I I cmrs. o su. edu/rcms s/
www.iis g.nll-abbl
www. i i s g.nU - abb/rus fe d. html
www.gasur.naro 
dtul
http : I lhist. dcn- asu. rulm caal
http : I I p ando ra. c i i . wwu. e duivaj d al e a2 I 0/al eut. htm
www. g en e al o gyl i nks . n etleurop e I germany I ger mans - from-
russia.htm
http : I I pllot. familysearch .or gkecordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
http: I I stevemorse 
. orgi
Russian Empire
(see country)
www. eegsociety. 
org/Index. html
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
243

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
Rusyn & Carputhiun
www. c arp atho -rusyn. org
www.cgsi.org
www.rusyn.com
www.tccweb.org
www. i are I ative . c om/s I ov akt2 .htm
www. c arp atho -rusyn. org I cr al p etercra. 
htm
http : I I pllot. familysearch . or gl rccordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Rwunds
www.world-newspapers. 
com
http : I I w eb spinners. com/Gakondo/en/Lists/Genealogy.php
http : //lists. rootsweb. c om/index/intl/RwA/AFR-RwANDA. html
www. hrw. org/reports/ I 9 9 9 I rw andalGeno I - 3 - 0 9 . htm
www. afri c a-re s e arch. org I mainframe . html
http : I I prlot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-g
www.familysearch.org
Ssint Kitts and lYevis
(see also Nevis)
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www.tc.umn. edu/-terre0 1 I /genhome.html
www. cando o. c om/genre s ourc e s/stknevang. 
htm
www.candoo.com
http: I I web site. lineone.net/-stkittsnevis/
http : I I pllot. familysearch .or gl r ecordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
244

Worldw i d e We b s ite D irecto ry
Saint Lucis
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. c ando o. c om/genre s ourc e s/hi storic al. htm
http : //us ers . ao l. c om/mro s ado0 0 7/addre s s. htm
http : //home . att. n etl -L o cal_C ath ohc I C atho I i c - CAmeri c a. htm
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Saint Vincent und Grensdines
www. world-newspapers. 
com
http : //sv.usaroots. 
com/
www. ro otsweb. c om/-vctwgw
www. hwcn. org/- aa4 62 I svgref. html
www. c andoo. c om/genre sourc e s/hi storic al. htm
http : I I prlot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Sumoa
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www.uq.net.aul-zzhsoszy/fi 
les/ggindex.html
www. rootsweb. c om/- samo awgw/index. html
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Sao Tome and Principe
www.world-newspapers. 
com
http ://lists.rootsweb. 
com/index/intl/STP/AFR- SAO-TOME-
AND-PRINCIPE.html
245

Finding An))one, Anywhere, Anywhen
http : I I arc h ae o I ogy. ab out. c om/l i br ary I atl a s/bl s aotome . htm
www. afri c a-re s e arch. org I matnframe . html
http : I I pll o t. fam i ly s e arc h . or gk e co rds e arc h/ start. html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
Suudi Arsbiu
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. I ibdex. c om/c ountry. html
http ://lists.rootsweb. 
com/index/intl/SAU/SaudiArabia.html
http : I I w orkm al I . c omiw fb 20 0 l/ s audi_a rubial saudi_arab 
i a_
history*nineteenth_cent 
ury _arabia. html
www. an g e lfi re . c oml tnl Battl e Pri de / S audi . html
www.saudiembassy.net
www. s audiemb as sy. net/C ountry/Hi story. asp
www. arab info s e ek. c om/qatar. htm
http : I I pllot. familysearch . or gl rccordsearch/start. 
html#p-g
www.familysearch.org
Scotland
www. sc otlandspeople. 
gov.uk/index. 
aspx
www. nationalarchive s. gov. uk
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. libdex. c om/country. html
www.ancestry.co.uk
www. electric scotland. 
com/
www. medieval scotland. 
org/scotnames/
http : //www. s aflrs. org. uk/
www.ffs q.qc.cal
www. infobe I . c om/world
www.nas.gov.uk/
246

Worl dw i d e We b s it e D ire c t orv
www.ancestry.co.uk
www.scan.org.uk/
www. an gu s . g ov. uk/h i sto ry I ar chl e s/D e fault. htm
www. gro- scotland. gov.uv
www. gro- scotland. gov.uk/famrec/index.html
www. scotlandspeople. 
gov.uk/
www. hi storicaldirectorie s. org/hd/findbylocation. 
asp
www.familia.org.uk
www.lineages.com
http : I I pllot. familysearch .orgl r ecordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
http : I I comdir. b fre e . on. ca hr antogs I
www. ge o . ed. ac . uk/home/sc otl and/genealogy. 
html
www. familysearch. org/Eng/S ear chl ft ame set_search. 
asp
www. geo. ed. ac.uk/scotgaz
www. genuki. org. uk/big/sct
www.nls.uk
www.ktb.net/-dwills/scotrefi 
I 3 3 00-scottishreference.htm
www.anesflrs.org.uk
www.dgfhs.org.uk
www.gwsflrs.org.uk
www. lanarkshirefhs. 
org.uk
www. tayval I eyfhs . org. uk
www.cursiter.com
Senegal
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. libdex. com/country. html
www. archive sdusenegal. 
sn/
http : //lists. rootsweb. com/in dexl intU SEN/AFR- SENEGAL.html
www. afric a-re s earch. org I marnframe. html
247

Finding Anyone, Anl+vhere, Anywhen
http : I I pilot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Serbis qnd Montenegro
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. I ib dex. c om/c ountry. html
www. archive s . o r g.yul oarhivue. htm
www. arhiv. sv. gov. Wl el 00000 I .htm
www. archive s. o r g.yul amr eza.htm
www. zetn a. org. yul zek/konyvek/ 43 I r ep ert. html
www. arhivp anc evo. org. yu/arhive . htm
www. m atf .b g. ac .yul iaV
www. arh w zaj e c ar. org. yu/
www.arhivns.co.yu/
www. yurop e . c o ml or gl tes lalarhive . htm
www. geneal ogylinks. net/europ e/serb i a-montene gro
www. geocitie s. com/henrivanoene/genserbia. 
html
www. chivalricorders. org I r oy alty lgothalserbgen. 
htm
http : I I pllot. familysearch .or gh ecordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
Seventh-day Adventist
www. andrew s . e du/l ibra ry I c ar I sdap i ob its . html
www. andrews. e du/libra ry I car I links . htm
www. avondale. edu. aulinformatiorVcooranbong/heritage.php
Seychelles
www.world-newspapers. 
com
http : I I fre ep a ge s . m i s c . ro of sweb. c om/-b a rker I
248

Worldwide Website Directorv
http : //smgf. org/demographic 
s. html
www. africa-re search. org/mainframe. html
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Shintoism
www. sivanandadl 
shq. org/religions/shintoi sm. htm
www2 . kokugaku in.ac .jp lij c c/wp/bts
Siberis
(see also Russia)
http : I I pandora. c ii. wwu. e du/vaj d al ea2l 0/aleut. htm
http : I I f ee fhs . org/map s/ND EXMAP. HTML
http : I I group s . yahoo. c om/group/Kre sy- S ib erial
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
http : I I stevemors e . orgl
Sierrs Leone
www.world-newspapers. 
com
http : //lists. rootsweb. com/index/intV SLE/AFR- SIERRA-
LEONE.html
www. africa-re search. org/mainframe. html
htp : I I pllot. familysearch. org/rec ordsearch/start. 
html#p-g
www.familysearch.org
Sikhism
www. sri gurugranths ahib. org
249

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
Silesis
www. e e gsoc iety. org/Index. html
www.cgsi.org
http : I I freepage s. genealogy. 
rootsweb. com/-elainetmaddox/
http : I I memb e r s . ao I . c om/B e al I C omp/ s i I e s i a. htm
www. polishroots. 
org/genpoland/sil.htm
www.familysearch.org
www. genealogie netz. de lregi S CIlsil-e. html
http:llgroups.msn.com/GermanGenealogy/silesiaschlesien.msn
http : I I pIlot. familysearch . or gl recordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
Singapore
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. I ib dex. c om/c ountry. html
www. rootsweb. com/-sgpwgw
www.ectttzen.gov.sg
http : //us er. itl . ne tl - glen/as ianintro . html
http : I I prlot. familysearch . orgl recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Slovukiu
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. eeg s o c iety. org/Index. html
www. I ib dex. c om/c ountry. html
www. c ivil. gov. sk/ SNARCHIV/uk. htm
www. ro otsweb. c om/- svkwgw/
www.tccweb.org
http : I I cmrs . o su. e du/rcms s/
250

Worldwide Webs ite Directorv
http : I I src -home . s I av. hokudai. ac j p I hbr aryll ib - eng. html
www. genealogy-heraldry. 
sk/
www.nlr.ru: 8 1 0 I I engl nk lmanuscript.html
www.nlr.ru: 8 I 0 I /en gl nb hbook.html
www. civil. gov. sk/SNARCHIV/uk.htm
www. archivneusohl. 
sk/
www. c ensuslinks. 
com/index
www.cgsi.org
http : I I www. i are I ative . c om/s I ovaki a. htm
http : I I www. tc cweb. org/
http : I I www. c sagsi. org/
http:llwww.cgsi .orgl
www. iabsi. com/gen/public
www. gene alogy-heral dry. sk
www. iarelative. com/slovakia. htm
www. slovakia. org/society- geneology. 
htm
http : I I fee flrs . org/iarls lovaki a. html
www. geoc ities. c om/familysk/re search. html
http : I I pll ot. fam i ly s e arc h . or gh e cord s e arc h/ s tart. html#p- g
www.familysearch.org
Slovenia
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. libdex. c om/country. html
www. ro otsweb. c om/- svnwgw/index. htm
www. s I oveni angene alo gy. or gl
www2 . arn e s . s i/- r zjtopl ho d/dru stvo/pre dst. htm
www. infob e l . c o ml teldrc lte l dir. asp ?p age-leng/euro/si
www. uidaho. edu/special-collections/euro2. 
html#si
www. ange lfl re . c om/c ou ntry I v enetil
www.gov. si/ars/ 1 a.htm
251

Finding Any one, Anywhere, Anywhen
http : I I www. c arantha. neti
www. zal-lj . si/Ang/Ang.htm
www.pa-ng.si
www. pokarh-mb. si/index.php? id- 2 &L:2
www.pokarh-mb.si
http : I I p1lot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Society of Friends
(see Qaakers)
Solomon Islunds
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. ro otsweb. c om/-me lwgw/so lomons
wwwj anere sture. com/solhome/index. 
htm
http : I I dlc. dlib. indiana. e du/archive/00 0 0 | 487 I
http : I I p1lot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Somalia
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. I ib dex. c om/c ountry. html
I i sts. rootsweb. 
com/index/intl/SOM/AFR- 
SOMALIA.html
http : I I countrystudie s . us/ somalia I 4 .htm
http:l lwww. somaliawatch.orglarchivefebO 
I /0 1 03 I 220l.htm
http : I I countrystudie s. us/somalia/3 8 . htm
www. afric a-re se arch. org I mainframe . html
http : I I pllot. familysearch .orgh ecordsearch/start.html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
252

Worldwide Website Direc tory
South Africu
www. nati onal . archsrch. gov.zal sm3 0 0 cvlsmws/sm3 0 Odl
www.ggsa.info
www. cwgc. org/cwgcinternet/search. 
aspx
http : I I r ap i dttp. c om/milhi st/
www. national. archives. gov.zal
http : I lhome . g I ob al. c o . zal-m erc ory'index. htm
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. libdex. com/country. html
www. I ibrary. unp . ac .zal paton/c o I I e ctions . htm
www. brenthurst .or g.zallibrary. htm
http : I lhome . att.netl -L o c al_C atho I i c/# S e I e ct_L o c ati on
www. national. archive s. gov.zal
www. nl sa. ac .zalcollections_special. 
html
www.puk.ac .zalbiblioteek/about_e.html#SpecialCollections
www.rhodes. ac. zalhbrary I cory lindex.html
www.wtts.ac.zalsahal
www. l ib .ust. ac .zak arcbks l
www. Iib .uct.ac .zah ar ebks/index. 
php ?html-/rarebks/
collections. 
htm&id: I 93 &libi d:29
www. un rsa.ae,zalDe 
fault. asp ? Cmd-ViewContent&
ContentlD:7160
www. su n.ac .zalltbrary lenglabout/Collections/
SpecialCollections. 
html #afrtcana
www. nati onal. archive s . gov.zal dir_rep o sitory I 9 9 9 . htm
wwwj ewi shgen. org/info fiIesl za-infoa. txt
www. geocities. com/Heartland/Meadows/7 
589 I genea_en.html
www.genealogy. 
eo.za
http : //1i sts. rootsweb. com/in dex/ intU ZAFIS oUTH-AFRICA.html
http : I I gen e al o gy. ab o ut. c om/o d/ s o uth_afri c a
www. hagsoc. org .aul sagraves/index.php
253

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
www.africagenweb.org
www. 1 82Osettlers.com
http : I lhome. glob al. c o .zal-mercon
www.familysearch.org
www. africa-re search. org/mainframe.html
http: I I prlot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Spuin
www.world-newspapers. 
com
http : I I www. uc lm. e s/archivo
www.irargi.org
http : I I me mb re s . ly c o s . frl numal as s g e n s urne t. htm I
www. I ibdex. c om/c ountry. html
www. infob e 1. c om/world
www.mcu.es/
www. us c . e s/-tr otal p aleo/arquivo s . html
www. xtec. e s/-aguiu 1 /socials/arxius. 
htm
www. xtec. e s/-aguiu 1 /soc ials/museus. 
htm
www. arxivers. c oml catllinks. asp
www.usc. es/arquivo/
www.bib.ub. es/www7 lTres I .htm
www. irargi. org I 02 default. htm
www. genealogia-es. 
com
www. gene al ogi a-e s. c om/ enlazar c. html
www.worldgenweb.org
http : I I memb ers . ao I . c omA alb o ane tl sp arn/ chart. html
www. ro otsweb. c om/-e spandal
http : //www. g e o c iti e s . c om/g ene al o gtac anartal
www. spani sh- genealogy. 
com
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-g
www.familysearch.org
254

Worldwide Web site Directory
Sri Lanka
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. I ib dex. c om/c ountry. html
www. rootsweb. com/-lkawgw/index2 . html
www. familyhi story. I auri e ashton. c om/sri lanka. htm
http : //us ers . b i gp ond. net . aul c eylondatab 
as e/
www. de fons eka . c oml anc e stry. htm
http : I I lakdiva. o rglt ennen t I v | _p3_c 0 I . htm I
http:llweb.pdx.edu/-rnmlynch/srilankaltnp2}}2lbackground.htm
http : I I withanage.tripod. 
c om/people. 
htm
www. 1 ankal ibrary. c omlge o/dynasty. htm
http : I I p1l ot. fami ly s e arc h . or gl rc cord s e arc h/ start. htm I #p - 0
www.familysearch.org
Sudan
www. world-newsp ap ers. com
http : //l i sts. rootsweb. com/index/intl/SDN/AFR- SUDAN. html
www. me forum. or gl article I 22
http : I lbubl. ac . uk/l ink/s/sudan. htm
www. sudan I 0 I . com/people_groups.htm
http : I I vlib. iue . i t/h i story I afnc a I sudan . htm I
www lambethpalacelibrary. 
org/holdings/Guides/genealogy.html
www.msnbc. msn. com/i dl 5 498 I 49 I
www. arab info seek. com/sudan. 
htm
www. afri c a-re s e arch. org I marnframe . html
http : I I pllot. familysearch . or gl r ecordsearch/start. 
html#p-g
www.familysearch.org
255

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
Suriname
www. world-newspapers. 
com
http : I I vlib. iue. itlhistory/americas/Suriname/
www. surinaamsegenealogie.nl
wwwj odens avanne. sr. org
www. nati onsonline . org/oneworl d/suriname. htm
http : I I pllot. familysearch . or gl recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Swazilund
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. u q .net . aul - zzhs o szvlfi I e s/ g g_i nd ex . htm I
www. lib dex. c om/c ountry. html
www. gov. szlhome . asp ?p id :2002
http : //l i sts . rootsweb. c om/index/in tI I SW Z I
AFR-SWAZILAND.htmI
http : I I fre ep ag e s . gene al o gy. ro ot sweb. c om I -r oy alty I afrrc al
persons.html
www. roy al ty. nu/A fri c a/ S w aziland.htm I
www. unpre s s . c o .za/b o ok php ? acti on- di sp I ayb o ok& c on fDlo 
5 B
bookid% 5D--57
www. africa-research. 
org/mainframe.html
http : I I ptlot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Sweden
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. lib dex. c om/c ountry. html
www. foark.umu. se/census/Index.htm
256

Wo rldwi de We b s ite D ire c t o rv
http : I I me mb re s . ly c o s . frl numa I as s g e n s urn e t. htm I
www. genealogi. 
se/roots/
http : //s fhs. eget. net/archives.html
www. augustana. 
e du/swens on/genealogy. 
html
www. americ answedi shinst . or gl archive s. htm
www.genealogi.se
http : I I www. s sa. stockholm. se/
http : I I www. genhouse- 
sweden. com/sidor/indexe. 
html
http : I I www. sveri ge atl as . se
www.arkion.se
http : I I www. algonet. se/-hogman/swe_genealogy.htm
www.ub.uu.se/
http:llwww.ra.se/
www. upp sala. se/uppsala 
I templates/StandardPage
18293.aspx
www. foark.umu. se/english/search.htm
www. swemi. se/arkivet- 120 18. asp
www. raa. s e/b ibl i otek/engli sh/spec_c 
ol1. asp
www. s sa. stockholm. se/
www. norrtalj e . se/temp late s/Pag e _2 
53 4. aspx
www. norrkoping. se/kultur-fritid/stadsarkivet.xml
www. ra. se/kra/engli sh. html
www. lund. se/templates 
lP age-l 
I 8 I 7.aspx
www. l inkop ing. s elOrgani s ation/Kommunstyrel sen/
Arkivmyndi gheten/index. 
htm
http : //e ski I stuna. s e/temp I ate s/Page_ 
| 6264 . aspx
www. ra. se/ula/english. 
html
www.censusfinder.com
www. censuslinks. 
com/index
www. gene alogybranche 
s. c om/international. html
www. rootsweb. com/-swewgw
www.svar.ra.se
257

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
www.dis.se
www. foark. umu. se/census/Index. 
htm
www3 . dcs. hull. ac. uk/genealogy/swedi 
sh
www.genealogi.se
www. abc. se/-m 6921 I geneal.html
www. inetme dia. nu/webbkarta
www.royalcourt.se
http : I I w elcome. to/Eli sab eth. Thorsel I
www. genline. co ml databasen/swedens_lan.php
www. augustana. 
e du/swens on
http : I I pllot. familysearch . orgl recordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
Switzerland
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www.fr.ch
www. libdex. c om/country. html
www. eye. ch/swi s s gen/schweiz-en. 
html
http : //www. eye . c h/ swi s s gen/ver/b s info - e . htm
http:llwww.ghgrb.ch/
http : I I www. eye . ch/swi s s gerVver/b e info - e . htm
http : I I www. eye . ch/swi s s gen/ver/frinfo - e . htm
http : I I www. eye. ch/swissgen/ver/geinfo-e.htm
http: I I www. eye. chlswissgen/ver/grinfo-d. 
htm
http : I I www. eye . ch/ swi s s g en/ver/j uinfo - e . htm
http : I I www. eye . c h/ swi s s g en/ver/luinfo - e . htm
http : I I www. eye . c h/ swi s s g enlver/fp fi nfo - d. htm
http : I I www. eye . c h/ swi s s gerVver/ne info - e . htm
http : I I www. eye. ch/swissgen/GHGO/index. 
html
http : I I www. eye . chlswi s s gen/ver/v s info - e . htm
http : I I www. eye . ch/ swi s s gen/ver/vdin fo - e . htm
258

Wo rl dwide We b s it e D ire c tory
http : I I www. eye . chlswi s s genl v er lzhin fo - e . htm
http : I I www. eye . chl swi s s genl v er lti info - e . htm
http : I I www. mindspring. com/-philipp/che. html
http : I I www. ge o c iti e s . c om/b i gp o mtanJ tr ans atlintro . html
www. s t aluzer n . ch I v s a I arc hiv e i arc h ive . htm I
www.so zialarchiv.ch/
www. bunde s arc hiv. c h/b ar I engtne/H ome
www. bunde s arc h iv. cVb ar I en gin e/ S howNew sWindow ? I g:
en_US#
www. ub. unibas . ch/ ww zl ww zpro sp. htm
www. stub. unibe. ch/index. php? p: | &i:7 0
www.ub. unibas. ch/info I 0h. htm
http : I I uni arc hiv. unib e . c h/
www. zb. un i zh. ch/index. html ?h ttp : I I www. zb. un izh. ch/
s onders aihandslbrie f. htm
www.eye.chlswissgen
www. eye. ch/swis sgen/verein-e.htm
www. genline . c o ml databasen
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Syria
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. rootsweb. com/-syrwgw
http : I I gene al o gyto day. c om/fam i I y I sy rianl
www. princ eton. edu/-batke/itl/deni se/abb asids. htm
www. fi nfo . dk/wwwfi nfo/HTML I ar abisV G I ob al L inks/
Syrien.html
www. ge o c itie s. c om/EnchantedFore 
st/ I 3 2 | I tndex. html
www. tyndale. cam. ac. uk/Egyptl ptolemies/background/
bg_daughters.htm
2s9

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
http : I I pllot. familysearch .or ghecordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Tahiti
(see also Polynesia)
www. uq .net. aul - zzhs o szvlfi I e s/ g g_in dex . htm I
www. ang I i c an. o r g.nz I Re s ourc e s/Archive s I . htm
wwwj aneresture. 
com/polyne sia_myths/tahiti.htm
http : I lb erc I o . ne t/ p age02 I 02 en-tahi t i . htm I
wwwj ane soceania. 
com/oceania_genealogy/
www. sacred-texts. 
com/p ac lhhUhhl I 3 . htm
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Thiwan
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. libdex. c om/c ountry. html
www. rootsweb. com/-twnwgw/
www. msnbc.msn. com/i d/ 8464488
http : I I c cs . nc I . e du. tw/c onfe r ence _20 04 I 207 I
conference_O3_ 
I 9.htm
http : I I gene al ogy. about. c om/l ibrary/authors/ucb o ey I a. htm
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Thjikistan
www. world-newspapers. 
com
http : I I pllot. familysearch .or gl rccordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
260

Wo rl dwi d e Web s it e D ire c t orv
Tangunyika
(see Thnzania)
Tanzunia
(United Republic of Thnzania)
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. I ibdex. c om/c ountry. html
www. afric a-re s e arch. org I marnframe. html
http:llarchaeology.about.com/librarylatlas/bltanzanta.htm
www. lib. utexas. edu/maps/i slands_oceans_poles 
I zanzibar _
island_76 
jpg
http : I I p 11 
o t. fam i ly s e arch . or gh e cords e arch/ start. html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Thoism (Tao)
www.abodetao.com
http : I I pilot. familysearch .or gh ecordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
Thailund
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. uq .net . au I - zzhs o szvlfi I e s/ g g*i ndex . htm I
www. lib dex. c om/c ountry. html
www. ro otsweb. c om/-thaw gw I
http : I I gold. raj abhat. e du/eng/lic. htm
http : I I gol d. raj abhat. e du/eng/rbook. htm
http : I I llbr ar y .tu. ac . thl de tai l/ ab out . htm I # sp e c i a I
www. mu s e e guime t. frlgb/home s/home_ id20 407_u I I 2 . htm
http : I I pllot. familysearch .or gh ecordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
261

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
Tibet
(see also Buddhism)
www. ro otsweb. c om/-tibetwgw/
www. museeguimet. 
frlgb/homes/home_ 
id20407_u I 12 .htm
http : I I en tib e t. c n/en_inde xl hac I t20 0 5 0 7 0 1 _3 9 9 9 8. htm
www. tibet. c om/Status/mongol. 
html
http : I I tri s . I ib. v i rg in i a. e du/tib e t/xm 1/ showE s s ay. p h p? xml- I
collections/hi story/summaries. 
xml& l:d 1 e 5 5 8 8
http : I I ichhan. hp . info s e ek. c o j pi I i st/tibete 1 . html
http : I I info . tib et. snl en/ cul ture/ti s I t200 5 07 0 1 _3 9 7 63 .htm
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p:0
www.familysearch.org
Timor
www.arsipjatim.go.id
www. cl al.or gl jpf I . html
www. suthlib.nsw. 
gov. aulssc/suthlib.nsf/AllDocs/RWP3 
C6D40
3 SDDB 3 4 AE9 CA2 5 6E8 C003 5 5 A96?OpenDocument
www. aph. gov. au I hbr aryipub s/rp I 2000 -0 | I 0 lRP2 I . htm
www. havenworks . com/world/east-timor
www. e s s.uwe. ac . uk/Timor/background2 . htm
www. cafod. org. uk/where_we_w orU asialeasuimor/making_
p overty_hi story_in_e asuimor
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
Togo
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. c i a. gov I craipublications/factbook/geos/to. 
html
262

Wo rl dwi de Web s i te Dire c t o ry
www. infoplease .coml ipalA0 I 0803 8.html
http : //lists. rootsweb. com/index/intVTGO/AFR-TOGO.html
www. afric a-re search. org I marnframe . html
http : I I pilot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Tonga
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. uq .net . aul - zzhs o szvlfi I e s / g g-index . htm I
http : I I fre ep a g e s . ge ne al ogy. ro of sweb. c om/-royalty I tongal
persons.html
www. cousinconnect.com/p 
I al 17 4
www. nz etc . or gl tml s c ho larly I tei- Tre M a or -b 4 -2 -5 . htm I
www. genealogy. 
or g.nzl siglpacifi c.html
wwwj ane soceania. 
com/oceania-genealogy
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Trunsylvania
www. geocitie s. c oml ft ansylvania-archives-proj 
ectl
http : I I archive s . u nitafian.r o I
www.transi lvania. info/c gi-bin/indexing?Ac-PRoCES S:
LISTSUBCAT&CAT: 1 1 & SUBCAf'_ I 5 O&FROM_
O&LANG:1
www. genealogie netz.de lreglESE I Tburg_info.html
http : I I fee fhs. org/F IJIDG- G S EE. HTML
www. bogardi . c om/c gi -b in/rdxlinks. p l?regionalethnic
www. zum. de/whkmla/region/eceurope/xtransylvania. 
html
http : I I prlot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
263

Finding Any one, Anlnvhere, Anywhen
Trinidad and Tobago
www. worl d-new spapers. 
c om
www. libdex. c om/country. html
www. nali s. gov. ttlHerrtage/Heritage.htm
www. mainl ib. uwi. ttlwi sc. html
www. rootsweb. com/-ttowgw
http : //users. c arib - link. ne tl -rfu arne s/
www. candoo. com/genre sources/#TRINIDADTOBAGO
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Tunisia
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. u q .net . aul - zzhs o szvlfi I e s / g g_in dex . htm I
www. archive s. n at.tnl eng/de fault. asp
www. genealogytoday. 
com/genealogy/planet. 
mv?Location-
Tuni s ia& leve l-C ountry& gc-T[IN
www. rootsweb. com/-j fuller/gen_mail_country-tun. 
html#
AFR-TUNISIA
www.archives.nat.tn
http : I I arc hae o I ogy. ab out. c om/g i I dy nami c/o ffs ite . htm ?
s ite-http : //www northafr ica. de I
http : I I archaeology. 
about. com/gildynamic/offsite. htm?
site-http : //www. northafr rca. de I
www. genealogie-gamt. 
org/index 2 .asp
www. cousinconnect. 
com/p I al 17 6 I
www. afric a-re s e arch. org I marnframe . htm
http : I I pilot. familysearch . orgl r ecordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
264

Wo rl dwid e Web s it e D ire c to ry
Turkey
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. u q .net . au I - zzhs o szylfi I e s / g g_i nde x . htm I
www. I ibdex. com/c ountry. html
www. devletars ivleri. gov. trl
www. arc himac . oryl Or ganization s/KEK. spml
www. arc h i m a c . o rgl O rg anrzation s/index . sp m I
www. mus limphi I o s ophy. coml 1Vklf. htm#F StT
www. sefarad. org/publicationl lml040l9. html
www. rootsweb. com/-turwgw
wwwj ew i s h g e n . o rgl S e fard S I G/ i zmrr _rnfo fi I e . H T M
www.mkutup.gov.t
http : I I p1lot. familysearch .or gh ecordsearch/start. 
html#p-g
www.familysearch.org
Turkmenistan
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. atlape di a. c om/online/c ountri e s/turkmeni. htm
www. pupre s s. princeton. edu/chapters/i 
7 8 5 8 . html
www. econ. uiuc. edu/-slav r ev I 602abs. 
html
http : I I pll ot. fam i ly s e arc h . or gl r e cord s e arc h/start. html#p-g
www.familysearch.org
Turks snd Csicos Islands
www.candoo.com
www.tcmuseum.org
http : //us ers . ao 1. com/mro s ado00 7/c aic o s. htm
www. tcmuseum . or gl fami ly_hi story_re s ear cW
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-g
www.familysearch.org
265

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Arywhen
Tuvalu
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. tuvaluislands. com/history. htm
wwwj anere sture. com/abouuuvalu/tuvalu. htm
http : I I tuvalu. s ite. ne j p/about/index. html
www. map s outhp acifi c. c om/tuvalu/index. html
http : I I en wikipedi a. org/wiki/Tuvalu
www. state. gov/ r I pal eth gn/ | 647 9 .htm
wwwj anere sture . c om/tu v aIu2 lhome . htm
www. ro otsweb. c om/-py fw gw/tuv alul
www. frontl ineonnet. 
com/ fll 82 5 I 18 2 5 06 3 0. htm
http : //islamic-world. net/countries/tuvalu. 
htm
www. cousinconnect. 
com/ p I al 17 9 I
http : I I pilot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Uganda
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. uq .net. aul - zzhs o szvlfi I e s/ g g_in dex . htm I
www. I ibdex. c om/c ountry. html
http : //1i sts. rootsweb. com/index/intl/UGA/AFR-UGANDA. html
www. 4dw. net/royal ark/Uganda/buganda8 
. htm
http : //home. att. n etl -Local_Catholic/Catholic-Africa. htm#
Uganda
htp : //us -africa.tripod. com/uganda2. 
html
www. myuganda. co.ug/about/history.php
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-g
www.familysearch.org
266

Wo rl dw ide Web s it e D ire c tory
(Ikraine
www. eegsociety. 
org/Index. html
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. 1 ib dex. c om/c ountry. html
www. huri. harvard. e du/abb_grimsted/index. 
html
www. huri. harvard. edu/abbgrimsted/index. html#state
www. ro otsweb. c om/-ukrwgw/index2 . htm
www.halgal.com/
www. geoc itie s. com/ugg ncr I
www.lemko.org/
www.tccweb.org
www. huri.harvard. edu/library. coll.html
www. geneal ogi c altre e . org .ual engle index. html
www. archive s. g ov.ualBngl
www. huri. harvard. edu/abb_grimsted/index.html#Autonomous
www. huri . harvard. e du/abb_grimsted/
www. archive s . gov. ualEng/Archive s/
www. archive s. gov. ualEn gl genealogia. 
php
www. geoc itie s. com/ukrainianfamilies/
www.halgal.com
www. mtu-net. ru I r r r I ul<raine. 
htm
www. I emko. orglgene al o gy I oblasts. 
html
www. gene alogyl inks . net/europe I ul<r atne I
http: I I genealogy. 
iatp . org .ual englothercountries/
http : I I p1lot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
United Arab Emirates
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. u q .net . au I - zzhs o szylfi I e s/ g g_i n d ex . htm I
267

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
www. libdex. com/country. html
http : I I llbrary. aus. ac. aelservices/more.html#special
http : I I genforum. gene alogy. com/ uae I
http : I I pllot. familysearch. orgirecordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
United Church of Canada
www. ro otsweb. c oml - cann s/unite d. html
http : I I www. un ite d- c hurch. c a/l o c aI I ar chive s
http : I I unitedchurcharchive 
s. vicu.utoronto. cal
United Kingdom
(see component countries)
www. nati onal archive s . gov. uk
www.familysearch.org
www. cw gc .or gl cwgcinternet/search. 
aspx
www.findmypast.com
ancestry.uk
www. infob e 1. c om/world
www. genealogybranche 
s. com/international. 
html
www.genuki.org.uk
www. uk- genealogy. 
org.uk
http : I I pllot. familysearch . orghecordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
http : I I ance stry. co.uk
United States ofAmericu
(First, this list shows websites that are USA-wide. Following
this list, see also each State listed separately)
268

Worldw i de Web s i te D ire c t orv
http : I I p1lot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
www. archive s . gov/re search_ro om/genealogy
GenealogyBank.com
www.footnote.com
http : I I www. god fr ey. or g. I
PeopleFinders.com
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. newenglandance 
stors. org
www.afrigeneas.com
www. I ib dex. com/c ountry. html
http : I I www. e I I i s i s I and. org/ s e arc h/p as s S e arch. asp
http : I lhome . att. n etl -L o cal_C atho I i c/# S e I e ct_L o c ati on
www. virtualj ame stown. org/s ervantc ontracts. html
http : //home. att. net/-wee-monste r I mrhtary.html
www. worldvitalrecords. 
com
www.loc.govlrrl
www.usgenweb 
.orgl
www.ancestry.com
www.genealogy.com
www. acp 1. lib. in.us/gene alogy I persi. html
www. kindredkonnections. 
com
www. franc o ameri c anc entrenh. c oml
http : I I stevemors e . org/
www. ui daho. edu/spec 
i al -
c ollections/Other. 
Repo sitorie s. html
www. am e ri c an anti quari an. org/di g ital2 .htm
http : //special. lib. umn. edu/ymcal
www. archive s . gov/fac ilitie s/mo/st_loui s. html
www. di gital - I ibrarian. c om/genealogy. 
html
www. c ircusworldmuseum. 
com/hbrarv lresearch. 
html
www. el li si slandrec 
ords. org
269

Finding Anyone, An1+vhere, Arywhen
www. hunterinformation. c om/corporat. htm
www. astro. uni-bonn. de/-pbrosche/hist_sci/hs_arch.html
http : I I ml a-hhs s. org/hi stl oc a. htm
http : I I www. one greatfami ly. com/Home. aspx
http : //www. I ib. byu. edu/sub sutility/index. php ? s id- I 6
www.sharpweb. orgl
http : // s c ripto rium . I ib. duke . e du/wo men/ arti c I e . html
www. hunterinformation. com/corporat. htm
www. heritageque stonline. com
http : I I www. gengateway. 
com/american_genealogy. 
htm
www.census-online.com/links/United 
Statesi
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www.lineages.com
United States (by State)
Alabama
www. ro otsweb. com/roots- l/U SA/al. html
www.algenweb.us
GenealogyBank.com
http : I I www. archive s. state. al. us/ge.html
www. interment. net/us/a\lindex. 
htm
www. arc hive s . state . al . u s/re fere nc I f amtly. htm I
www. ge o c itie s . c om/Are a5 | lLair I 3 680 I cwlcw-al. html
www. archive s. state. al. us/
http : I I ptlot. familysearch .or gl recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www. heritagequestonline. 
com
www.ancestrv.com
270

Worl dwide We b s i t e D ire c t ory
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
www. lib. auburn. edu/sca/search.html
www. archive s. state. al. us/re ferenc/hs gli st. html
www. genealinks. com/states/al. 
htm
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. daddezio. com/soc i etv lhtlll SH-AL-NDX.html
Alaska
www. rootsweb. com/roots-1/USA/ak.html
www.akgenweb .orgl
www. interment .netl us I aVindex. htm
GenealogyBank.com
www. archive s. state. ak.us/
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
www. archives. gov/facilitie s/aklanchorage.html
www. daddezio. com/soci ety lhlIll SH-AK-NDX. html
http : I I pllot. familysearch . or gl recordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
www. heritageque 
stonline. com
www.ancestry.com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
http : I I www. archive s . state . ak. u s/ g ene al o gy I geneal ogy. html
271

Findin g Any o n e, Anywh e re, A rynvh en
Arizona
www. ro otsweb. c om/roots- l/U SA I az.html
http : I I www. az I ibrary. gov/i s/gene al ogy/index. c fm
GenealogyBank.com
www. lib . az.us lBi o/index. c fm
http : I I pilot. familysearch .orgl r ecordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www. heritage que stonline. com
www.ancestry.com
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
www. interment. net/us/a z hndex.htm
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. dadde z i o . c om/ s o c ietv/hi I 1/ S H -AZ -NDX. html
Arkansas
www.argenweb.net
http : I I www. state . ar. us/family_gen. php
www. southwe starchive s. com
www.rootsweb. com/-usg enweb I ar larfi le s.htm
www.rootsweb. com/-usgenweb/arlsearch. 
htm
GenealogyBank.com
www. argenweb. net/arc ounty. htm
http : //searche s. rootsweb. com/c gi-bin/arkland/arkland.pl
http : I I pllot. familysearch .orgl recordsearch/start. 
html#p-g
www.familysearch.org
www. heritagequestonline. 
com
www.ancestry.com
272

Worldwide Web s ite Directory
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
www. interment. net/us/arlindex. 
htm
www. ge o c itie s. c om/Are a5 | lLarr. I 3 680 I cwlcw- ar. html
www.ark-ives.com/
www. southwe starchive s. com/
http : I I anpa. ualr. edu/finding_aids/collection_finding_aids. 
htm
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. daddezio. c om/soci etv lhllll SH-AR-NDX.html
Califurnia
http:llcagenweb.com
www. interment. net/us/c a/index. htm
www. berke I eypubl ic library. org/system/hi strm. html
GenealogyBank.com
http : I I www2 . anahe im. n etl arttcle. c fm? id: I I 3
www. c al i forni ah i s to ri c al s o c i ety. org/c o I 1 e ction s/
research_coll.html
http : I I www. I i b r ar y . c a . gov/ c a I h i s t/ g en e al o gy. htm I
www. ss .ca.gov larchives/archives.htm
www. c srmf. org/doc . asp ? id: | 22
www. c sudh. e du I archl es/c su/index. html
www. lap I . orgi c entral/hi story. html
www. 1 ibrary. s fsu. e du/ sp e ctaU ar chive s I . html
http : I I pll ot. fami lysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www. heritageque 
stonline. com
www.ancestry.com
www.footnote.com
273

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
PeopleFinders.com
w\,I V. californiapioneers. orgl
www. library. ucla. edu/libraries/special/scweb/archives.htm
www. us fc a. e du/hbr ary I archive s . html
www. usc. edu/isd/archiv esl arc lllbraries/index.html
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. daddezio. com/soci ety lhilllsH-CA-NDX. html
Colorado
http:llcogenweb.com
http : I I www. c o I orado . gov I dp al doit/archive s/gene al . htm
GenealogyBank.com
www. interment. net/us/colindex. 
htm
www. co loradohistory. org/chs_libr ary I library. htm
www. colorado. g ov I dpaldoit/archives/
www. archive s. gov/facilities/co/denver. 
html
http : I I ucblibraries. colorado. edu/archives/index.htm
http : I I pllot. familysearch .orgl recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www. heritageque stonline. com
www.ancestry.com
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. daddezio. com/soci ety lhllllSH-CO-NDX. html
274

Worldwide Webs ite Directory
Connecticut
http : I I www. c sl ib. org/starting. htm
http : I I www. c tgenweb. org
www. interment. net/us/ctlindex. htm
www. newenglandance 
stors. org/research/Databas 
e I great
Migrationsidefault. 
asp
GenealogyBank.com
www.chs.org/libraryl
www. c slib. org/archives. 
htm
http : I I oId s aybro ok. c om/H i story/re s e arch. htm
www. I ib. uc onn. e du/o nl ine/re s e arch/ sp e c I ib/A S C/
http : I I pllot. familysearch .orgl rccordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www. heritageque 
stonline. com
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
www. lib r ary.y ale . e du/ms s a/
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. dadde z i o . c o m/ s o c i ety /hIIl I S H - C T-NDX. html
Delaware
www.degenweb.org
www. interment. net/us/de/index. 
htm
www. state. de. us/so s/dpai
www. hs d. org/library. htm
http : I I www. hs d. org/gengd. htm
GenealogyBank.com
275

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
www. udel. eduiArchive s/
http : I I del gens oc . org/de lrep. html
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www. heritageque stonline. com
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. da d d e z i o . c o m/ s o c i etv I hrll I S H - D E -N D X. htm I
District of Columbia
www. interment. net/us/dclindex. 
htm
http : I I c arn e g i e i n s t i tut i o n. org/ I e g acy I def au I t. htm I
GenealogyBank.com
http : I I www. dar. org/library/specco l. c fm
http : //o s . dc . gov/o s/cwpiview,A, 1 207,Q,5 8 5 8 8 9 . asp
www.lo c .gov lrrlmss/
www7. nationalacademies. 
org/archives/
http : I I pllot. familysearch .or gl recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www. heritagequestonline. 
com
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
www. nmnh. si. edu/naal about. htm
www. archive s. gov/index. html
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
276

Worldwide Web site Directory
Peoplescanner.com
http : //siarchive s. si. edu/
Florida
www. interment. net/us/fl/index. htm
http : I I dli s . do s . state . fl . us I hbr arylB ibl i ographi e s/gene al ogy. c fm
http : I I dlis. dos. state. fl .us barm/
GenealogyBank.com
www. I ibrary. mi ami. e du/archive s/intro. html
http : I I pllot. familysearch . or gl recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www. heritagequestonline. 
com
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. daddezio. com/soci etv lhrlU SH-FL-NDX.html
Georgia
www. thec le aranc e s. org/c le aranc e s/de stinations.php 
?
placeid-61
www. ro o tsweb. c om/ - gagenweb
www. interment. net/us/galindex. 
htm
http : I I www. ge orgi a. gov I 00 I channe l_title/
0,209 4,4802 _l 3 r I 4gg, 00. html
GenealogyBank.com
www. atlantahi storycenter. 
c om/
www. af. publ ic . I ib. ga. us I aarlhndex. html
277

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
www. ge orgiaarchive s. org/
www. archive s . gov/fac i I rtres I gal atl anta. html
www. lib s.uga. edu/hargrett/speccoll.html
http : I I pllot. familysearch .orgh ecordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www. heritageque stonline. com
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. daddezio. com/soci etv lhllll SH-GA-NDX.html
Hawaii
www. rootsweb. c om/-hi genweb/hawaii . htm
http:llhawali.govlhealth/vital-records/vital-records/
genealogy.html
GenealogyBank.com
www. interment. net/us/hi/index. htm
www. mauimuseum. org/archives 1 .html
www. punahou. edu/librari e s/Archive s/
http : I I pilot. familysearch .orgl recordsearch/start.html#p-g
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www. heritagequestonline. 
com
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. daddezio. com/soci etv lhllll SH-HI-NDX. html
278

Wo rl dw i de We b s i t e D ire c t o rv^
Idaho
http : I I www. idahohistory. net/library_collections. 
html
GenealogyBank.com
www. ro otsweb. c om/-i dgenweb/
www. interment. net/us/id/index. htm
www. idahohistory. net/libr ary _archives.html
www. lib. uidaho. edu/special-collections/
http : I I pilot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www. heritageque 
stonline. com
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. daddezio. 
c om/societv/hill/SH-ID-NDX. 
html
J
Illinois
http : I I www. s o s. state. i l. us/dep artments/archive 
s/s ervic e s. html
www. interment. net/us/i d/index. htm
www. evanstonhistorical 
.orgl archives.html
www. cyb erdrive i I I ino i s . c om/dep artments/archive 
s/
archives.html
www. newb erry. org/gen ealogy lL3 gabout. html
http : I I www. c ookcountygenealogy. 
com/
GenealogyBank.com
www. I ibrary. northwe stern. e du/s pec I
www. skokiehistory. info/genealog. 
html
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
279

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
www.familysearch.org
www. heritage que stonline. com
http : I I www. edwardsvillelibrary. org/online-databases/
www.ancestry.com
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
www. rootsweb. c om/-il s gs/index. html
www. b su. edu/library I collections/archive 
s/
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. daddezio. com/soci ety lhilV SH-IL-NDX.html
Indiana
www.ingenweb .orgl
http : I I www. acp I . I ib. in. us/gene alogy/index. html
www. interment. net/us/in/index. htm
GenealogyBank.com
htp : I I friendsofallencounty. 
org/fivacdb.php
http : I I fri ends o fal I enc oun ty. or gl
www. I egion. org/? section-community& sub secti on-
com_library&content-com-lib-collection
www. indianahistory. org lllbrary/collections.html
http: I I pllot. familysearch .orghecordsearch/start.html#p-0
http : I I www. indgensoc. org/membersonly/databases.php
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www.heritagequestonline. 
com
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
CriminalSearches.com
280

Worl dw ide We b s i t e D ire ct ory
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. daddezio. com/soci etv lhllll S H-IN-NDX. html
J
Iowa
http:lhagenweb .orgl
http : I I www. i owahi story. o rgll ibr ary I f ami ly_hi st ory I
research_tips.html
GenealogyBank.com
www. interment. net/us/i a/index. htm
www. iowahi sto ry. orgl archive s/index.html
http : I I pllot. familysearch . or gl rccordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www. heritageque 
stonline. com
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. daddezio . c om/s o c ietv/hil 1/ S H-IA-NDX. html
Kansas
http : I I www. k s h s . o rgl g e n e a I o g i s t s / i n de x . htm
http : //skyway s. I ib. ks . us/genweb/index. 
html
www. interment. net/usiks/index. 
htm
GenealogyBank.com
http : I I www. kans asmemory. org/
www. ode s sa3 . org/co llections llandkansas/
www. fhsu. edu/forsvth lib/arch. shtml
28r

Finding Any one, Anywhere, Anywhen
www. kshs. org/place s/chr/index. htm
www. 1ib. ksu. edu/depts/spec/
http : // skyways . lib. ks. us/kans as/genweb/mhg 
s/
mhgs_library.htm
http : I I pr I ot. fam i ly s e arch . or gk e co rds e arc h/ start. html#p - 0
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www. heritage que stonline. com
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. dadde zi o . c o m/ s o c i etv lhlll I S H - KS -NDX . html
Kentuclgt
http : I lkdla. ky. gov/re searchlinks/genealogy. 
htm
www. kygenweb. netlindex. html
www. interment. net/usiky/index. htm
GenealogyBank.com
www. kyb apti st. org/kb c/wel c ome . ns f/p age s/
ExecutiveArchives
http : // s o s . ky. gov/ I and/ s e ar chl def ault. htm
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www. heritageque 
stonline. com
www.ancestry.com
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
282

Wo rl dw i de Web s it e D ire c t orv
Peoplescanner.com
www. dadde z i o . c o m/s o c i etv lhllIl S H - KY-ND X. html
Louisiana
www. ibiblio. org/laslave/fi 
elds.php
http : //searche s. rootsweb. com/c gi-bin/lal andllaland.pl
GenealogyBank.com
www.lagenweb .orgl
www. clickers. o t gl genealogy/louisian. 
html
www. rootsweb. c om/roots-l/USAila. html
www. interment. net/us/lalindex. htm
www. sec. state. la.us/archives/archive 
s/archive s-index.htm
www. youngsanders. 
org/page3 . html
www. no tartalar chive s . org/
www. state. lib. I a. us/1a_dyn_temp 
1. c fm? doc_id- I I 4
http : I I www. state . I ib. I a. u s/l a_dyn_te mp I . c fm ? do c _td:27 9
http : //www. m s a. md. g ov/m s a/re fs er v I gene al ogy/html/
genstart.html
http : I I www. nsul a. edu/cre o lel
www. xul a. e du/l ibr ary I archive s . html
http : I I pllot. familysearch . or gl r ecordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www. heritageque 
stonline. com
www.ancestry.com
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. dadde z i o . c o m/ s o c i etv lhtll I S H - LA-ND X. html
283

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
Maine
http : I I uppersd ohn. com/aroo stook/deane-kavanagh. 
htm
http : //www. maine. gov/por tall facts_history/genealogy. 
html
http : I I upp erstj ohn. c om/ I 820 I index. htm
www. ro of sweb. c om/-megenweb/
GenealogyBank.com
www. interment. net/us/me/index. 
htm
www. newenglandanc 
e stors. orglre s e archlD atabase/
cemeterie 
s/default. asp
www. mainehi story. org/library_overvi ew. shtml
wWw. state. me.us/so 
s/arcl
www. umfk. maine. e du/archive s/
http : I I acim. umfk. maine . e du/
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www. heritageque stonline. com
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. dadde z i o . c o m/ s o c i etv lhtlll S H - ME -NDX. html
Maryland
www.mdgenweb.orgl
www. interment. net/us/md/index. 
htm
www. bo rarl.or glre sourc e slarchive s_library. asp
GenealogyBank.com
www.lib.umd.edu/LABI
284

Worl dw id e Web s i t e D ire c t o rv
www. mdhs. org/hbr ary llibrary.html
www. mdarchive s. state. md. us
www. arc hive s . g ov/ fac i I iti e s/md/arc hive s _2 .html
www. lib. umd. edu/ARCV/
http : I I pllot. familyse arch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www. heritageque 
stonline. com
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. dadde z i o . c o m/ s o c i etv lhtlV S H - MD -NDX. html
J
Massachusetts
http : I I www. s e c . s tate . ma .us I ar c I ar c getl geni dx. htm
www. ro of sweb. c oml - magenweb/
www. interment. net/us/malindex. 
htm
www. am eri c ananti quari an. orgldi gital2 .htm
GenealogyBank.com
http : I lhul . harvard. edu/h uar c I
www. huri. harvard. edu/librarv. 
coll. html
www. mas shi st. o r glhbrary I
www. sec. state.ma.us/arc 
I arcrdx.htm
www. nha. org/1 ib r ary I gene alogy. html
www. archives. gov/northeast/pittsfield/pittsfi 
eld.html
www. archive s. gov/northe ast/waltham/waltham. 
html
www. newenglandance 
stors. org/
www. mas s. gov/lib/collections/sc.htm
www. mi lne I ibra ry. or glhlh. html
28s

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
http : I I prlot. familysearch. org/rec ordsearch/start. 
html#p:0
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www. heritageque 
stonline . c om
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. da dde z i o . c o m/ s o c i etv I hlll I S H - MA -NDX. html
Michigan
www. ro of sweb. c om/-mi stcla2 I
www. ro otsweb. c om/-mi genweb/
www. interment. net/us/mi/index. htm
http : I lb entl ey. umich. e du/
GenealogyBank.com
http : I I clarke. cmich. edu/
www. detroit. 1ib. mi. us/E_Re source s/E-
Re s ource s_BurtonHi storical. htm
www.ds gr.orgl
http : I I www. mcpl. lib. mo.us/genlh/
http : //fchsm. habitant. or gl
www. ro ot sweb. c oml o/ol Emii g sm/
www.pgsm.org/
www.michigan. 
gov lhall},160l ,7 - 1 60- I 548 | _1927 I _
21341--,00.html
www. msu. e du/unit/msuarhc/col1ections. 
htm
GenealogyBank.com
www.michigan. gov lhall},1607 ,l - 1 60- 17 445 _1927 3 _
193 13--,00.html
286

Worl dw i d e We b s it e Dire c t orv
www. umi ch. e du/-bh1/bh1/refhome/genie. 
htm
www. wmich. edu/library I ar chive s/index.php
http : I I pll ot. fami ly s e arc h . or gl r e cords e arc h/ start. html #p - 0
www.familysearch.org
http : I I quod. lib. umich. edul ml micounty/
www.ancestry.com
www. heritageque 
stonline. com
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. dadde zi o. c om/s o c ietv/hi I 1/ S H-MI -NDX. html
J
Minnesota
www. ro otsweb. c om/-mngenweb/
http : I I www. mnhs . org/gene alogy/
GenealogyBank.com
www. interment. net/us/mn/index. 
htm
www. mnhs. org/c ollections/lib rary lllbrary.htm
http : //spec ial. lib. umn. edu/ rar e I
http : I I pllot. familysearch. orgirecordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www. heritageque 
stonline. com
rvww.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
http : I I www. daddez i o . c om/ s o c i etylhi I 1/ S H - MN -ND X. htm I
287

Finding Any one, Anywhere, Anywhen
Mississippi
www. interment. net/us/ms/index. 
htm
http : I I www. m dah. state . m s . us/ admiry'al l_s o c i eti e s . html
http : I I lauderdal e c o u nty . or g I arc h ive s p age2 .htm
www.mdah.state.ms.us
GenealogyBank.com
www. olemi ss . edu/depts/general_hbrary 
lfi le s/archive s/
index.html
www. lib. usm. e d ul - ar chive s/
http : I I pilot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www. heritageque 
stonline. com
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. dadde z i o . c o m/ s o c i etv lhrlV S H - M S -NDX . html
Missouri
www. ro otsweb. c om/-mogenweb/mo . htm
http : I I www. s o s. mo . gov I ar chl es/re s ourc e s/links . asp
www. interment. net/us/mo/index. 
htm
www. na zar ene . or gl ar chle s/index. html
www. mohi story. org/c ontent/L ibraryAndRe se arch/
LRCGenerallnfo.aspx
GenealogyBank.com
www. archive s. gov/facilitie s/mo/kansas_city. 
html
www. archive s . gov/fac il itie s/mo/st_l oui s . html
288

Wo rl dw i d e We b s it e D ire ct orv
http : I lb av.vati c an. v al enl v _hom e_b avlv_stori a/index. shtml
www.umkc.edu/whmckc
http : I I ptlot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www. heritageque 
stonline. com
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. dadde z i o . c o m/ s o c i etv lhrlU S H - M S -NDX. htm I
Montana
http : //www. montanahi storicalsocie ty. or gl rcsearch/l rbrary I
genealogyre 
search. 
asp
GenealogyBank.com
www. ro otsweb. c om/-mtgenweb
www. interment. net/us/mtlindex. htm
www. I ewi s andc I ark. org I ? p -IIb _ar c &n-l ib_arc
http:llmontanahistoricalsociety.org/researchlllbrarylaboutus.asp
http : I I pllot. familysearch . or gh ecordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www. heritageque 
stonline. com
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. daddezi o . c om/s oc i etv/hil 1/ S H-MT-NDX. html
289

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
lr{ebraska
http:llnesenweb 
.orgl
http : I I www. hhs. state . ne. us/c e d/gene alog. htm
www. GenealogyB ank. c om
www. interment. net/us/ne/index. 
htm
www. nebraskahistory. 
or glhb - ar chlindex. htm
http : I I pll ot. fami ly s e arc h . or gl rc cord s e arc h/ start. html#p -0
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www. heritageque 
stonline. com
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. dadde zi o . c om/ s o c i etv ,htll I S H -NE -ND X. html
Ir{evada
http : I I www. state archive s . us/nevada. 
htm
http : I I www. nvgenweb. org/
GenealogyBank.com
www. interment. net/us/nv/index. 
htm
http : I I pll ot. fami ly s e arch . or gl rc co rds e arch/ start. html #p - 0
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www. heritage que stonline. com
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
290

Wo rl dw i de We b s it e D ire c t o rv
Peoplescanner.com
www. da dde z i o . c om/ s o c i etv ,hlll I S H -NV-ND X. html
I{ew Hampshire
http : I I www. nh. g ov/nh s 1/ s ervi c e s I public I g ene al o gy. html
www. usro ots . c o ml o/ol Eus gwnhus/
GenealogyBank.com
www. interment. net/us/nh/index. 
htm
http : I I www. dartmouth. e du/-Iibr ary h auner I
www. nhhi story. org/sp e c i al c o I I e cti ons . html
www. state. nh. us/nhsl/history/index. 
html
http : I I pllot. familyse arch. org/rec ordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www. h eritageque 
stonline. com
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders. 
com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. da dde z i o . c om/ s o c i etv I hlll I S H -NH -NDX. html
IVew Jersey
http : I I www. nj arc h ive s . org/1 inks/web c a tl gene alogy. htm I
www.njgenweb 
.orgl
GenealogyBank.com
www. interment. net/us/nj /index. htm
wwwj ers eyhi story. org/archive smain. html
www. s t at e . nj . u s/ s tate I damtl hnk s/archive s . html
www. princ eton. edu/-rb sc/
291

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
www. librari e s. rutgers. edu/rul/lib s/scua/gene 
alogy/
genealogy.shtml
http : I I ptlot. familysearch. org/re c ordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www. heritage que stonline. com
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders. 
com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. dadde z i o . c o m/ s o c i etv lhtlI I S H -N J-ND X. htm I
J
I{ew Mexico
http : //www. nmcpr. state. nm.us/archive 
s/anc e stors. htm
GenealogyBank.com
http : I I www. nm genweb. u s/
www. interment. net/us/nm/index. 
htm
http : I I archive s. nmsu. edu/
www. unm. e du/-unmarchv/unmarchv. 
html
http : I I p tlot.f ami ly s e arc h. org/re c ord s e arcW start. html#p - 0
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www. heritage que stonline. com
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. dadde z i o . c o m/ s o c i etv lhlll I S H -NM -ND X. html
292

Worldw i de Web s ite Dire c t ory
I{ew York
www. ro otsweb. c om/-nygenweb/
http : I I www. archive s . ny s e d. g ov/a/re s e arc h/re s_top i c s_
genealogy.shtml
www. interment. net/us/nylindex. htm
http : I I www. newyorkanc e stors . org/
www. newengl andanc e stors. org/re s e arch/D atab as e/
cemeterie 
s/de fault. asp
http : I I query. nytime s. com/search/query? 
srchst-nyt&& srcht-
a&srchr:n
GenealogyBank.com
www. newyorkfami lyhi story. org
www.nypl.org
www. alb anyc ounty. c om/achor
www.buffalolib. org/libraries/collections/grosvenor. 
asp?
sec-genealogy
www.bechs. org/re search. htm
www.cjh.orglacademic
www. c o lumb i a. e du/cullweb I indiv lrbmll
http : I I rmc . I ibrary. c orne I I . e du/
www. liu. edu/cwi s/cwp/library/sc/sc. 
htm
www. morganlibrary. org/collectionsldefault. 
asp
www. archive s. gov/northeast/nyc/new_york. 
html
www. newyorkfamilyhi story. org/module s. php ?name-
Content&pa- showpage&pid- I 0
www. archive s. nysed. gov/aindex. shtml
www. nysha. org/llbr ary I special_collections/
http : I I ny- gene s. blogspot. com/
www. nys l. nysed. gov/ms sde sc. htm
http : I I hbrary. nyu. e du/c o I I e c ti on s I ar chl es . html
www. nyu. e dull ib r ary lb obst/re s e a r cW aial
293

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
http : I I llbrary. alb any. e du/ sp e c c o I l/
www. lib.roche ster. edu/rbk/rarehome.htm
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordse 
arch/start. html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www. heritageque stonline. com
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. da dde z i o . c om/ s o c i etv lhllll S H -NY-ND X. html
I{orth Carolina
www. rootsweb. c om/-nc genweb
www. interment. net/us/nclindex. 
htm
www. I ib r ary . appstate . e du/app c o ll I gene al o gy. htm I
GenealogyBank.com
http : //scriptorium. lib. duke. edu/
www. ah. dcr. state. nc . us/archivesl
www. ah. dcr. state . nc . us/archive s/OB HC/de fault. htm
http : I I l:brary. unc g. e du/depts/sp 
e c c o 11/
http : I I www. ac c e s sgenealogy. 
com/northcarolina/index.htm
www. wfu . e du/L ibrary/sp ec i allindex. html
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www. heritageque 
stonline. com
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
CriminalSearches.com
294

Worldwide Website Directorv
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. dadde z i o . c om/ s o c i etv lhlll I S H -NC -NDX. html
IVorth Dakota
http : I I www. nd. gov/hi st/s allgen. htm
www. ro otsweb. c om/-ndgenweb/
GenealogyBank.com
www. interment. net/us/nd/index. 
htm
www. ode s sa3 . org/collections/cemeterie 
s/nodak/
www. ode s sa3 . org/collections/c 
ensus/
www. ode s sa3 . org/c ollections llandl nodaU
www. state. nd.us/hi st/sal.htm
http : I I ptlot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www. heritageque 
stonline. c om
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. da dde z i o . c om/ s o c i etv I hlll I S H -ND -ND X. html
Ohio
http : //www. columbuslibrary. org/ebranch/index. 
c fm?pageid-
69&parentid-481
www. rootsweb. com/-ohgenweb/
www. interment. net/us/oh/index.htm
www. am eri c anj ew i sharchive s . org I a1 al genera l/no_fl a s h. html
295

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
GenealogyBank.com
htrp : I I Ilbrary. c a s e . e du/ks 1/ sp e c c o I l/c o I I e cti on s . html
http : I I llbrary. c incymu s eum. org/
www. eri e I ac kh s . or gl ELH S /E LH S Arc hive s . html
www. ohiohi story. org/re source/s tatearc I index. html
http : I I Ilbrary. o su. e du/s ite s/archive s/
www. 1 ibrari e s . uc . e dui I ib r ane s I arblindex. html
http : I I ptlot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www. heritageque 
stonline. com
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. dadde z i o . c o m/ s o c i etv lhllV S H - O H -NDX. html
J
Oklahoma
http : I I www. o dl. state . ok .us I o ar I re s ourc e s/geneal ogy. htm
http : //www. okgenweb. org/
www. ro of sweb. c om/-itgenweb/
GenealogyBank.com
www. interment. net/us/ok/index. 
htm
http : I I llbrary. n s u o k. e du/Arc hiv e s / i n de x . htm 1
www. odl. state. ok.us/oarlindex2 . htm
www- lib. ou. edu I inf o I index. asp ? rd-22
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www. heritageque 
stonline. com
296

Wo rldw ide Web s it e D ire c t orv
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. dadde z i o . c o m/s o c i etv I htll I S H - O K-ND X. html
Oregon
http : I I ar cw eb. s o s . state . or. us/b anners/genealogy. 
htm
GenealogyBank.com
www. ro otsweb. c om/-orgenweb/
www. interment. netlus/orlindex. htm
www. newp ortnet. c om/c o asthi story/Re s earch. htm
http : I I arcweb. s o s. state. or. us/
http : //o sul ibrary. ore gon state . e du/archive s/
www. sohs. org/Page. 
asp?NavlD:43
http : I I pllot. familyse arch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www. heritageque 
stonline. c om
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. dadde z i o . c o m/ s o c i etv lhlll I S H - O R-NDX . htm I
Pennsylvania
http : I I www.portal. state.pa.us/portal/server.pt?open-
5 | 2 &mo de-2 &obj ID: | 426
297

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
www.pagenweb 
.orgl
www. interment. net/us/p a/index. htm
www.abc-usa.org/abhs
GenealogyBank.com
www. mercermus eum. org/spruancelibrary/index. 
html
www. I anc asterhi story. org/re s e arch/ s ervic e s. html
www. archive s. gov/midatlantrc I public_servic e s/
public_services.html
www. hb g. p su. e du/librar y I hb amc . html
www. phmc . state . p a. us/b aW dan/ overview. htm? s e c id: 3 I
www. ph rla. gov lphil s/carchive. 
htm
http : I I llbrary. te mp I e . e du/ c o I I e c ti on s/urb an a/
http : I I c arl i s I e -www. army. mil/us amhi/
www. I ibrary. pitt. edu/librarie s/special/spec 
ial. html
www.hsp.org/
www. hsp . org/de fault. asp x? td-2
http : I I p il o t. fam i ly s e arch . or gl r e cords e arc h/ start. htm I #p - 0
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www. heritageque 
stonline. com
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
http : I I www. dadde z i o . c o m/ s o c i etylhi I l/ S H - PA -ND X. html
Rhode Island
http : I I www. ri g en s o c . org/ri g enre s ourc e s . htm
GenealogyBank.com
www. rootsweb. c om/-ri genweb/
298

Worldwide Webs ite Dire ctorv
www. interment. net/us/rilindex. htm
www. newe n g I an danc e stors . o rglre s e arc l/D atab a s e/
g re atM i g rati on s/de fault. asp
www. newenglandance 
stors. org/re search/D atabase 
I
c emeterie s/default. asp
www. afg s . org/afg srsrc . html
www. b r own . e du/Fa c i I it i e s/Un ive r s ity_L tbr ar y I lirb s I hay I
index.html
www. p rov i de nc e ath e naeum. org/ s ervi c e s/ sp e c c o I I . php
www. ri c . e dul adam s I ibrarylre s ourc e s/b ib I i ograp h i e s/
capeverde.html
GenealogyBank.com
www. rihs . org/1 ibraryhome . htm
http : I I www3 . sec. state. ri. us/Archive s/
www. c ourts . ri . gov/re c ordsi de faultre c ords . htm
www. uri. edu/library/special_collectionsi
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/rec ordsearch/start.html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www. heritage que stonline. com
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. dadde z i o . c om/ s o c i etv I hrll I S H - RI -ND X. html
South Carolina
http : I I archive s. s c . gov/gene alogy/
www. ge oc itie s. com/Heartland/Hills/3 837 I ? 200 5 8
www interment. net/us/sc/index. 
htm
299

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
GenealogyBank.com
www. bj u. edu/library I collections/spc. 
html
www. mindspring. c om/-c amdenarchive 
s/index. html
www. c cpl . org/c ontent. asp ? c atID : 5 402 &p arentlD : 5 3 I 2
www. c itade 1. e du/archive s andmus eum/#archive s
www.cofc.edu/avery
www. geocitie s. comAleartland/Est ates I 7 212 I tntr oduction. html
www. threerivershi storicalsociety. 
org
www. state. sc.us/scdah/re 
search. 
htm
www.schistory.org/
www. sc. edu/librarylsocar/books.html
http : I I c aro lu s . furm an. e du/depts/ sp e c c o I 1/ sp e c c o I I . htm
www. sc. edu/library/spcoll/rarebook.html
http : I I pil o t. fami ly s e arc h . or gl rc cords e arc hi start. html #p-0
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www. heritageque stonline. com
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. daddezi o . c om/s oc i etv lhllIl S H - S C -NDX. html
J
South Dakota
http:l lwww. sdhistory. or glarcl arcgen.htm
http://sdgenweb.com/
GenealogyBank.com
www. interment. net/us/s d/index. htm
www. ode s sa3 . org/collections/cemeterie 
s/sodak
www. odessa3 
. org/collections/census
300

Wo rl dw i d e l|'e b s i t e D i re c t orv
www. ode s sa3 . org/c ollections/land/sodak
www. sdhi story. o r gl ar c I archive s. htm
www. usd. edu/l ibrary/special
http : I I prlot. familysearch . or gl recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www. heritageque 
stonline. com
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. dadde z i o . c o m/ s o c i etv I hlll I S H - S D -ND X. html
knnessee
http : I I www. tenne s s e e . g ov/t s I a/hi story/index . htm
www.tngenweb.org
www. interment. net/us/trVindex. 
htm
http : I I llbrary. c n. e du/b aptarc h. html
GenealogyBank.com
http : I I faculty. leeu. edu/- dr c I
wwwj mc l. tn. orglgenealog. 
htm
www.lambuth. e dul academics/library 
I
Memphi sC onferenceArchive 
s. html
http : I I hom e . I ore tto te I . ne tl -lc archive s/arc hive s . htm
www. lmunet. e du/mus eum/c o I I e ction/ sc gui de s. htm
http : I I j anus . mtsu. e du/
www.sbhla.orgl
www. sumnertn. or gl ar chive s/de fault. htm
www. tenne s see. gov/tsla/history/index. 
htm
http : I I exlibris. memphis. edu/about/depts/special/index.html
301

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
http : I I llbrary. s ewane e . e du/ archive s/index . html
http : I I www. library. vanderbilt. edr.r/speccol/
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www. heritageque 
stonline. c om
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. dadde zi o . c om/ s o c i etv lhlll I S H - TN -ND X. htm I
Tbxas
http : I I www. tsl . state . tx. u s I arc I genfirst. html
www. ro otsweb. c om/-txgenweb/
GenealogyBank.com
www. interment. net/us/txlindex. htm
www. dallashi sto ry.or gl about/re search. htm
www. c i. dallas. tx. us/c so I archl es. shtml
www.drtl.orgl
www. irvinglibr ary.or glgenealogy. 
html
www. archive s. gov/facilitie s/txlfort_worth. html
www. tsl. state. tx. us/shc/index. 
html
www. glo. state. tx.us/archives. 
html
www.tsl. state.tx .usl arc I
www. library. unt. edu/archive s/default. htm
http : I I pilot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www. heritageque 
stonline. com
www.footnote.com
302

Worldw ide Web s i t e D ire c t ory
PeopleFinders.com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. daddezio. c om/soci etv lhllll SH-TX-NDX. html
Utah
http : I I arc h ive s . u tah. gov lre s e arc h/gui de s/index . htm I
www. ro otsweb. c om/-utgenweb/index. html
www. interment. net/us/utlindex. 
htm
www. familysearch. org/Eng/Lib rary IFHL I frameset_
library.asp
GenealogyBank.com
http : I lhistoryre se arch.ut ah. gov I
http : I lhbr ary.usu. 
edu/Spec ol/index. html
http : I I pilot. familyse arch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
http : I I archive s . u tah. gov I digitaU 32 8 . htm
www.ancestry.com
www. heritageque 
stonline. com
www.footnote.com
http : I I www. I ib. byu. edu/ sub suti I itylindex. php ? sid: I 6
PeopleFinders. 
com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. da dde z i o . c o m/ s o c i etv lhlll I S H - UT-NDX. html
Vermont
http : I I v erm o nt - arc h ive s . o rglre s e ar cW gene alo gy I gene . htm
http : I I hom e . att . n et I -L o ca l_H i sto ryiVT_H i story. htm
303

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
www. interment. netius/vtlindex. htm
www. vermonthi story. org/ms scoll. htm
http : I I v ermont-archives. 
org/
GenealogyBank.com
www. norwich. edu/ac ademic s/library. html
http : I I maozi. mi ddl ebury. e du/ SharingVTHi story/index. htm
http : I I prl o t. fam i ly s e arch . or gl r e cords e arc h/ start. html#p : 0
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www. heritageque 
stonline. com
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders. 
com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. dad d e z i o . c o m/ s o c i ety lhllll S H -V T-ND X. html
Virginia
http : I I www. I va. 1 ib. va. u s/WHATWE HAVE I gene I index . htm
www. interment. net/us/valindex. 
htm
www. lva. I ib. va. us/whatwehave
http : I I www. arlingtonva. us/Dep artments/Librarie s/hi story/
Librarie sHi storylocalHi story. aspx
GenealogyBank.com
http : I I www. che s ap eake. lib.va.us/Wallace/
wal I ace_memorial_room.htm
http : //so s. ky. gov I landl nonmilitary/
www. 1ib. virginia. edu/small/vhp
www. emu. e du/l ibr ary lhrstl ib. html
www. co. fairfax. va. us/lib r ary lbr anche s/vrldefault. htm
www. hamptonu. edu/museum/archive 
s. htm
304

Wo rl dw id e Web s it e D ire c t ory
www. hrl. lib. state. va.us/handley/service 
s. asp?p:7 6
www. lva. lib. va.us/whatwedo/archive 
s/index. htm
http : I I memory. I o c . gov/ammem/
www. mcu. usmc. mil/MCRCweb/Archive/default. htm
www. mountvernon. org llearnl collections/index. 
cfm/s si3 8
www. np I . I ib. va. u s/ s gm/ o I dl obby I ar chiv e. html
www. lib. odu. edu/special/index. 
htm
www. le e sburgva. org/s ervi c e s/Library/Re s ourc e s/
www. lib. virginia. edu/small/collections/mss. 
html
www. vahi storic aI. or gl r esearch/genealogy.htm
www. vm r. e dul archive s/alumni . html
http : I I llbrary. w lu. e du/de tai 1 s . a sp ? re s I D - I 04
www.vgs.org/
http : I I alax . lva. I ib. va. u s/F /? func -fi I e & fi I e_name-
fl nd-b - c las29 &Io c al_b as e-C LA S 2 9
www. civilwar. np s. gov/cws s/
http : I lllbrary. wlu. edu/re search/specialcollections/
http : I I prlot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www. heritageque 
stonline. c om
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. dadde z i o . c om/ s o c i etv IhIII I S H -VA-NDX . html
Washington
http : I I www. s e c s tat e . wa. g ovihi story/ g ene al ogy. a sp x
http : I I www. digitalarchive s. wa. gov : 8 0/
305

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
www.wagenweb.org/
www. interment. net/us/walindex. 
htm
GenealogyBank.com
www.hqrl.com/
www. archive s. gov/fac ilitie s/wals e attle . html
www. c ityo fs e attl e. net/C ityArchive s/
http : //sfhs. eget. n etl ar chive s. html
www. sec state. w a. gov I archive s/
www. cwu. edu/-archives/
www. s e c state . w a. gov I archive s/archive s_eastern. 
aspx
www. s e c s tate . w a. gov I arc hive s/archive s_northwe st.
aspx?m:undefined
www. s e c state . w a. gov I arc hive s/archive s_puget. aspx ?
m-undefined
www. secstate.w 
a.gov I archives/archives_southwest. 
aspx?
m-undefined
www. wwu. e du/depts/re 
cmgmt/
http : I I pll ot. fami ly s e arc h . or gh e cord s e arc h/ s tart. html#p - 0
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www. heritageque 
stonline. com
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. dadde z i o . c om/ s o c i etv lhrlIl S H - WA -ND X. html
West Virginia
http : I I www. wvculture. org/history/genealog. 
html
www. interment. net/us/wv/index. htm
306

Worldwide Website Dire c t ort,
GenealogyBank.com
www. marshall. edu/sp ec coll/wvcoll. asp
www. wvculture . org/hi story/wv samenu. html
www. librarie s.wvu. edu/appalachranl
www. I ibrarie s. wvu. e duiwvc o lle ction/index. htm
http : I I prlot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www. heritage que stonline. com
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. dadde z i o . c o m/ s o c i etv jhrlU S H - WV-ND X. html
Wisconsin
http : I I wi s c ons inhi story. o r gl genealogy I
www. interment. net/us/wii index. htm
GenealogyBank.com
www. dodgej e ffgen. com/library. html
www. mp 1. org/Fi I e/hum_mi lwro ad_index. htm
http : I I archive s. library. wisc. e du/
www. uwm. edu/Librarie s I ar cW divi sion/
www. polishroots. orgiheraldry. htm
www. wla. lib. wi. us/wiglhr/local. html
www. wisconsinhi story. o rglllbraryarchive s/
http : I I pll ot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www. heritageque 
stonline. com
307

Finding Any one, Anywhere, Anywhen
www.footnote.com
http : I I 209 .9 4 . 1 8 3 . 1 0/web s itelservi c e s_vdb. htm
PeopleFinders.com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. daddezio. com/soci etv lhlIIl SH-WI-NDX. html
Wyoming
wygenweb.org
www. interment. net/us/wy/index. htm
wwwj acksonholehistory.or 
gk esearch. 
shtml
GenealogyBank.com
http : I I wyo archive s . state . wy. us/
http : I I ahc . uwyo . e du/de fault. htm
www. windriverhi story. org/washaki e archi. html
http : I I vrryo arc hive s . state . wy. us/index. htm
http : I I pllot. familysearch . or ghecordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.com
www. heritageque 
stonline. com
www.footnote.com
PeopleFinders.com
CriminalSearches.com
Intelius.com
Peoplescanner.com
www. da d de z i o . c o m/ s o c i etv I hill I S H - WY-N D X . htm I
(Iruguay
www.world-newspapers. 
com
308

Worl dw i de We b s i t e D ire c t ortt
www. I ib dex. c om/c ountry. html
www.mec.gub.uylagn
www. rau. e du. uy/unive r sidadl agl
www. ap e I li do s i tal i ano s. c om. ar I archivo s_uruguayo s . htm
http : I I me mb er s . ao I . c om/mro s ado 0 0 7 /uru guay. htm
www. genealogie netz. de lreglWElTiuruguay. html
http : //lists. rootsweb. com/index/intVURY/URUGUAY. 
html
http : I I vlib. iue . itlh i story I amer rca s/Uru g uay I
www. iegu.org.uy/
http : I I pil o t. fam i ly s e arc h . or gl rc cords e arc h/ start. htm l#p - 0
www.familysearch.org
Uzbekistan
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. I ib dex. c om/c ountry. html
http : I I vlib. iue . itlhi s tory I asiallJ zb eki stan
http: I flcweb2 .loc . gov/fr dl csluztoc .html
www. forumanc i entc o ins . c om/hi storia/i s lam_gen6 . htm
www. cousinconnect. 
com/p I al 184 I
http : I I pilot.f am i ly s e a r ch. or gl re c o rd s e ar chl start. html #p : 0
www.familysearch.org
Vsnuutu
www. world-newsp ap ers. com
www. vanuatu.usp. 
ac. fi /llbrary lcollections.htm#Special%
20Collections
www. ro otsweb. c om/-melwgw/vanuatu
wwwlonelyplanet.com/destinations/pacifi 
clvanuatu/history.htm
http : I lhome . att. n etl -L o cal_C ath olic I C atho I i c - Au stral i a -
Oceania. 
htm# Stillehavet
309

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
Vuticun
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. I ib dex. c om/c ountry. html
www. va trc an.v al index. htm
http : I I b av.vat i c an. v a I enl v _ho m e_b avlh o m e_b av. s htm I
www. I ib. utex a s . e du/map s/europ e I v atrc anc ityj p g
www. va ttc an.v al index. htm
www. vatic an. va lllbrary _archive s/vat_secret_archive 
s/c oll
ections/index.htm
www. ha ar etz.comlhasen/obj 
ects/pages/PrintArticleEn.
jhtml?itemNo:49957 l
http : I I prlot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
Venezuelu
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. lib dex. c om/c ountry. html
www. apellidositalianos. 
com.ar larchivos_venezolanos.htm
www. ve nezuelag ene al o gi a. o rg
http : //e s . group s . yaho o . c om/group N enezue I a_g en e alo gral
www. surname s. org/venezuel. 
htm
www. auyantepui. c om/hi storia/index. shtml
http : I I fre ep a ge s . g ene al ogy. ro of sweb. c om I -v enezuelal
sp/sucre.html
http : I I fre ep a ge s . gene al ogy. ro of sweb. c o m I -tantagente I
http : I /bus c a d o r. in fo gu i a. n e t/ S o c i e da d/ G e n e a I o g i a/
www. orinoco. org I ap gllotndex. asp ?lang-en&first:true
3 r 0

Worldw ide Web s i t e D ire c t orv
http : I I pll o t. fam i ly s e arch . or gk e cord s e arc h/ start. html#p - 0
www.familysearch.org
Vietnum
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. ro otsweb. c om/-vnmwgw/
www. archive s. gov/re s e arch_ro om/re s e arch_top ic s/
kore a_and_vi etnam_c asualtie s. html
http : I I p 1l o t. fam i ly s e arch . or gl rc co rds e arc h/ start. htm I #p - 0
www.familysearch.org
Virgin Islands ((I.S.A.)
www. I ib dex. c om/c ountry. html
http : I I uvi al . uvi . e du/iml s/D e C hab ertlindex. htm I
www.candoo.com
www. c andoo. com/genre source s/microfi lms. htm
http : I I p 11 
o t. fam i ly s e arc h . or gl rc cords e arc h/ start. htm I #p -0
www.familysearch.org
Volhyniu
(See also Russia and Poland)
www.wolhynien.de
www. ro otsweb. c om/-ukrwgw/vo lynska
www.odessa3.org
wwwj ewi shgen. org/ukraine/vo thynia
www. inthemidstofwo lve s. c om
www.sggee.org
http : I I ptlot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
3 1 1

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
Wales
(see also England and UK)
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. I ib dex. c om/c ountry. html
http : I I pllot. familysearch .or gh ecordsearch/start.html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
www.ancestry.co.uk
www. rootsweb. com/-wlsafhs/index. htm
www.llgc. org.uk/ cacl cac0023 .htm
www. ul 1. ac. uk/hi s/introhi s. html
www. oz .netl -markhow/welshros. 
htm
www. hi s t ori c al dire c to ri e s . org/hd/ fi ndby I o c ati on. a sp
www. genuki . org. ukib i g/wal
memb ers . trip od. c om/-C aryl_Wi I I i ams/index- 2 . html
www. bb c . c o . uk/wal e s/hi story/s ite s/familyhi story
www.clwydfhs.org.uk
www. uk- gene al ogy. org. uk/wale s
West Prussiu
(see also Poland and Germany)
www. genealogie netz. de lreglWPRU/wprus. htm
http : //www. vffow. de/default. htm
www. genealogie netz. de lvereine/AGoFF/index. 
htm
www.westpreussen.de
www.bundesarchiv.de
www.ezab.de
http : I I germanro ots . home .att.netl putzigl
http : I I pllot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p:0
www.familysearch.org
312

Wo rl dw ide We b s i t e D i re c t o ry
Western Suhuru
www.world-newspapers. 
com
http : //1i sts. rootsweb. com/index/intVE SH/AFR-
WESTERN-SAHARA.html
www. ro otsweb. com/-nafric a/WE S TERNSAHARA/
S ahraawiyGateway. 
html
Yemen
www. world-newspapers. 
com
www. u q .net . aul - zzhs o szyl fi I e s/ g g_in d e x . htm I
www. I ib dex. c om/c ountry. html
www.arab.netlyemen
www. forumanc ientc o ins . c om/hi stori a/i s lam_gen5 . htm
http : I I azaalctty. com/hi story. htm
http : I I prlot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
Yugoslavia
(see Serbia and Montenegro)
Zambiu
(previous ly lr{orthern Rho de s ia)
www. world-newspapers. 
c om
http : //1i sts. rootsweb. com/index/in rll ZMB I AFR-ZAMB IA. html
wwwj ewi shgen. org/SAfrica/subcont. 
htm
www. statehouse. 
gov. zm
http : I I web. idrc. c al es I ev -43 0 | 6 -201 - I -DO_TOPIC. html
http : I I p il o t. fami ly s e arc h . or gh e co rds e arc h/ start. html#p - g
www.familysearch.org
3 1 3

Finding Anyone, Anywhere, Anywhen
Zsnzibar
(see also Tanzania)
www. uq .net. aul - zzhs o szy I fiIe s I gg_in dex . htm I
www. forumancientc oins. com/hi storia/i slam_gen6. 
htm
www.amecea.org
www. c asb ah. ac . uk/new s articIeZ. stm
http : I I www. wsu. e du : 8080 I %7 Edee I CIVAFRCA/
SWAHILI.HTM
http:llarchaeology.about.com/librarylatlas/bltanzania.htm
http : I I www. p davi s. nl/Frere. htm
http : I I ptlot. familysearch. org/recordsearch/start. 
html#p-O
www.familysearch.org
Zimbabwe
(previously Southern Rhodesia)
www.world-newspapers. 
com
www. lib dex. c om/c ountry. html
www. uz . ac . zw I ltbr ary I inner/ sp e c i al c o I I . htm I
www.bahat.co.zw
wwwj ewi shgen. org/SAfrica/subc ont. htm
www. afric a-re s earch. org I mainframe. html
http : I I pllot. familysearch .or gk ecordse 
archlstart. html#p-0
www.familysearch.org
314

Index
A
Alberta Genealogical Society,
r24
Allen County Public Library,
79
Amateur radro,4I
Apple computer, 8, 68
B
Berners-Lee, 
Tim, 9
Blackstone, William, 20
British Colombia Cemetery
Finding Ai{ 123 - 125
C
Coats of Arms, 83, 84
College ofArms, 83
Comenius, 33
Commentary on the Laws of
England,20
Common ancestor, 14 - 15
Cousinhood 20,28
Cyndi's List, 70
D
Dark Internet,4T
Digital robots, 49
E
Ebla, 17,18, 19
Essay on Morals, An, 129
F
Family History Ltbrary, 7 3
G
Genealo 
gy, 23, 50, 52, 55, 62
- 64, 67 ,72, g6
Genealogical 
bridge, 28
Genealogical Research
Ltbrary, 67,86
Generations Network, The, 69
Geneva, Switzerland 9,10
Google, 45, 46, 51, L28
Gunderson, Robert C., 22
Gutenberg, Johannes, 37
Gutenberg Galaxy, 129
H
Heraldry, 83 - 87
Herculaneum, 19
Hidden Internet,4T
I
Information highway, 40 - 43
Integrated electronic circuit, 7
International Genealogy
Index,72
Italian Archaeoloqical
Mission, 18
J
Jobs, Steve, 8
K
Kilby, Jack St. Clair, 7
Kinship , 14, 15, I 6, 25, 26
M
Metropolitan Toronto
Reference Library, I25
Mcluhan, Marshall, 36, 129
Murchie , Guy,24
N
Name changes, 56 - 58
3 1 5

Index
Legal name changes, 56 
Social Security Death Index,
Illegal name changes 
, 
| 15 - ll7 , 123
5 6 - 5 8  
T
Nation-state, 15, 16 
Telephone 
Directories
NorthYork Public L1brary,126 
Il9 - 120
O 
Canada, 120
Offset printing, 38 
US, 120
Ontario Cemetery Finding 
England" 120
Ai{ 123 - 124 
Worldwide, 120
Onomatology, 55 
W
Optical character recognition, Wagner, Anthony, 27
76, l3l 
Wilmot, John, 20
Orbis Pictus, 33 
Worldwide Website Directory
Oxyrhynchus, 19 
Aboriginal Peoples, see
P 
Native Peoples
Pedigree collap se, 22 
Acadian , I33 - 35
Pedigree and Progress,2T 
Afghanistan, 135
People of Ontario 1600-1900, 
Africa, 135 - 36
67 
African-Americ an, 136
Periodical Source Index, 
Albania, I37
PERSI, 79 
Algeria, I3J
Pestalozzi,33 
American Sarnoa, 137 - 38
Pettinato, Dr. Giovanni, 18 
Andorra, 138
R 
Anglican Church, 138 - 39
Roots television series, 65 
Anguill a, 139
Roy, Leon,64 
Antigua and Barbuda, 139
S 
Antilles Francaises, 
139
Search Engines, 44 - 53, 122 
Arctic, 139
definition,44 
Argentina, I40
history,45 
Armenia, 140
indexin g, 49 
Aruba, 140
search techniques, 
50 - 53 
Asia, 1,40 - 4l
Shoumatoff, Alex,25 
Australi a, l4l - 43
Singapore, 61, 62 
Austria , 143 - 44
3 r 6

Index
Austro-Hungarian Empire,
t44
Azerbatjan, 144
Bahai (Baha'1), 144 - 45
Bahamas, 145
Bahrain, 145
Bangladesh, 145
Baptists , 146
Barbado s, 147
Belarus , I47
Belgium, 147 - 48
Belize. 148
Benin, 148
Bermuda, 149
Bessarabia, 149
Bhutan, 149
Bohemi a, 149 - 150
Bolivia, 150
Bosnia and Herzegovina,
15 0
Botswana, 150
Brazll, I5l
Brethren" 15 I
British Commonwealth, I 5 1
British Virgin Islands, 152
Brunei, 152
Buddhism, 152
Bukovina, 152
Bulgaria, 152 - 53
Burkina Faso, 153
Burma, 153
Burundi, 153
Ca1un, I54
Cambodra, 154
Cameroon, 154
Canada. 155 - 56
Alberta, 156 - 57
British Columbia.
1 5 7  -  5 8
Manitoba, 158
New Brunswick, 158 - 59
Newfoundland and
Labrador, 159 - 60
Northwest Territories, 1 60
Nova Scotia, 160 - 61
Nunavut, 162
Ontario, 162 - 64
Prince Edward Island, 164
Quebec, 164 - 66
Saskatchewan, 
166
Yukon Territories, 167
Cape Verde, 167
Caribbean Islands, 167
Catholic, 167 - 68
Cayman Islands, 169
Central African Republic,
r69
Central Americ a, 169
Ceylon, see Sri Lanka
Chad, 169 - 70
Channel Islands, 170
Chechnya, 170
Chile, 170
China, 171
Christian Reformed
Church, l7l
Christiantty, 17I
Church of England, 172
3t7

Index
Churches of God see
Pentecostal
Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-Day Saints, I72
Church of the Nazarene.
172
Colombia, 172
Comoros, lJ2
Congo, 173
Congo Democratic
Republic, 173
Congregatronal, I73
Cook Islands, 173
Costa Rica, 173 -14
Cote D'Ivoire. 174
Crtmea, 17 4
Croatta, 17 4
Cuba, ll5
Curacao, see Netherland
Antilles
Cyprus, 175
Czech Republic and
Czechoslovakia, 
17 5 - 7 6
Denmark 
, 17 6
Djibouti, 177
Dominica, I77
Dominican Rep ublic, L7 7
Doukhobors, 177
East Galicia, 178
East Prussia" 178
East Timor, 178
Easter Island, 178
Ecuador, 178 - 79
Egypt, 179
Ekaterinoslav, 179
El Salvado\ 179
Ellice Islands, see Tuvalu
England, 180 - 81
Episcopal Church, 182
Equatorial Guinea, 182
Eritrea, 182
Essenes, 
Order of
Nazorean, 182
Estonia, 182 - 83
Ethiopia, 183
Europe, 183
Falkland Islands, 183
Faroe Islands, 184
Fiji, 184
Finland, 184 - 85
France, 185 - 86
Freemasons, 
186
Gabon, 186
Galicia, 186 - 87
Gambia, I8J
Georgia, I87
Germany, 187 - 88
Ghana, 189
Gibraltar, 189
Greece, 189
Greek Catholic, 189
Greenland 189 - 90
Grenada, 190
Grodno, 190
Guam, 190
Guadeloupe, 190 - 91
Guinea, 191
Guinea Bissau, 191
3 1 8

Index
Guyana, l9l - 92
Gypsy, 192
Hattr, I92
Heraldry, 192 - 93
Hinduism. 193
Holland" see Netherlands
Honduras, 193
Huguenots, 194
Hungary, 194 - 96
Iceland, 196
India, 196 - 97
Indonesta, 197
Inuit, 197 - 98
Iran, 198
Iraq, 198
Ireland Republic of,
198 - 99
Islam. 199
Isle of Man, 200
Israel, 200
Italy,20l
Ivory Coast, 20I - 202
Jainism " 202
Iamatca,202
Iapan,202 - 203
Java,203
Jordan, 203 - 204
Judaism,204 
- 206
Kazalchstan, 206
Kenya,206
Kherson,206
Kiev, 206 - 7
Kirgizian,20J
Kiribati .207
Korea, North, 207
Korea, South, 207 - 208
Kosovo,208
Kuwait, 208
Kyrgyzstan,20S - 209
Laos,209
Latin Americ a. 209
Latvta,209
Lebanon, 209 - 10
Lesotho 
.210
Ltberia,2t0
Lrbya,zl} - n
Liechtenstein, 
21 1
Lithuania,2lL
Lutheran,2II - 12
Luxemb ourg, 2I2
Macau (Macao),212
Macedonia,2l3
Madagascar,2l3
Malawi,2l3
Mali, 213 - 14
Malaysia,2l4
Maldives,21.4
Malta, 214 - 15
Marshall Islands, 215
Martini que, 215
Masons 
,215
Mauritama, 215 - 16
Mauritius,216
Mennonrte,216 
- 17
Methodrsts,2IJ
Metts,2l7
Mexico ,218
Microne sia. 219
319

Index
Moldova,2l9
Monaco 
,219
Mongolia,2l9 - 20
Montserrat,220
Moravia,220
Moravian and Moravian
Brethren,220
Montenegro,22I
Mormons, see Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-
day Saints
Morocc o., 221
Mozambique, 221 - 22
Myanmar (Burma),222
Namibia,222
Native Peoples,
Canada and US, 222 - 23
Outside Canada and US.
223 - 24
Nauru, 224
Nepal,224
Netherland Antilles.
224 - 25
Netherlands, 225 - 26
Nevis, 226
New Caledonra,227
New Zealandr 22T
Nicaragua,228
Niger, 228
Nigeria,228
Nobility, see Royalty
Northern Ireland\ 229 - 30
Norway, 230 - 3I
Oceania,23l
Oman,23I
Ottoman Empire,23l
Pactfic,232
Palau,232
Palestine,233
Palitinate,233
Panama,,233
Papua New Guinea, 233
Paraguay,234
Pentecostal 
Church, 234
Persia, 234
Peru, 234 - 35
Philippines, 235
Pitcairn and Norfolk
Islands, 23 5
Poland, 236 - 37
Polynesta,237
PortugaI,237 - 38
Posen,238
Presbyt ertan, 238
Prussia, 238 - 39
Puerto Rico, 239
Qatas 239
Quakers 
,240
Reformed Church,240
Republic of keland, 240
Romania,24I
Royalty and Nobility,
241 - 43
Russia, 243
Russian Emprce,243
Rusyn and Carpathian, 244
Rwanda,244
Saint Kitts and Nevis" 244
320

Index
Saint Lucta,245
Saint Vincent and
Grenadines,245
Samoa,245
Sao Tome and Principe,
245 - 46
Saudi Arabra,246
Scotlan| 246 - 47
Senegal 
,247 - 48
Serbia and Montenegro,
248
S eventh-Day Adventist,
248
Seychelles,248 
- 49
Shintoism,249
Stberta,249
Sierra Leone,249
Sikhism,249
Silesia, 250
Singapore,250
Slovakia,250 
- 51
Slovenia,25l - 52
Soloman Islands,252
Somalia,252
South Africa, 253 - 54
Spatn,254
Sri Lanka,255
Sudan,255
Suriname,256
Swaziland" 256
Sweden,256 
- 58
Switzerland, 258 - 59
Syria, 259 - 60
Tahitl260
Tarwan,260
Tajikistan,260
Tanzanta,26L
Taoism (Tao),261
Thailandr 26l
Ttbet" 262
Trmor,262
Togo, 262 - 63
Tonga,263
Transylvania, 263
Trinidad and Tobago, 264
Tuntsia,264
Turkey, 265
Turkmemstan,265
Turks and Caicos Islands.
265
TuvaIu,266
Uganda,266
Ukraine ,267
United Arab Emirates,
267 - 68
United Church of Canada,
268
United Kingdom,268
United States of America.
268 - 70
Alabama, 2J0 - 71
Alaska,2J I
Artzona,2J2
Arkansas,,272 
- 73
Californta,2T3 
-74
Colorado, 2J 4
Connectrcut, 27 5
Delaware.2J5 
-76
321

Index
District of Colombia.
2 7 6 - 7 5
Florida,2lT
Georgia,2TJ 
- 18
Hawatt,278
Idaho,279
Illinois, 279 - 80
Indiana,280 - 81
Iowa, 281
Kansas, 281 - 82
Kentucky, 282 - 83
Louisiana,283
Marne,284
Marylandb 284 - 85
Massachusetts, 
285 - 86
Michigan,286 - 87
Minnes ota, 28J
Mississippi, 288
Missouri, 288 - 89
Montana,289
Nebraska,290
Nevada,290 - 9l
New Hampshtre,297
New Jersey, 29I - 92
New Mexico ,292
New York, 293 - 94
North Carolina,294 - 95
North Dakota,295
Ohio, 295 - 96
Oklahoma,296 - 9l
Oregon,297
PennsylYanra,2gT 
- 98
Rhode Islan4 298 - 99
South Caroiina,299 - 300
South Dakota, 300 - 301
Tennessee,30l 
-302
Texas, 302 - 303
Utah, 303
Vermont, 303 - 304
Virginia,304 - 305
Washington, 305 - 306
West Virginia,306 - 307
Wisconsin, 307 - 308
Wyoming, 308
Uruguay, 308 - 309
Uzbekistan, 309
Vanuatu,3}g - l0
Vatican, 3 l0
Venezuela.3l0- 11
Vietnam, 311
Virgin Islands (U.S.), 31 1
Volhynia,3ll
Wales, 312
West Prussia, 312
Western Sahara, 3 13
Yemen, 313
Yugoslavra,3l3
Zambra,3L3
Zanzlbar,3L4
Zimbabwe,3l4
Wozniak, Steve, 8
Wylie, Philip, 129
Z
Zabasearch, 
1 L7, ll8, I23
322

