FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
“I was fortunate to have worked for 23 years at one of the most successful
financial services firms in the world. The concepts in Fired Up or Burned
Out reminded me of many of the reasons I think the firm was so consis-
tently successful and why we enjoyed working there. In particular, the
pride people felt at being part of the organization gave meaning to their
work. In addition, because people always treated each other with respect
there was a strong emotional commitment. This is a valuable book with
very enduring ideas that have proven to be important to success.”
—Joseph R. Zimmel, Former Partner and Managing Director 
Goldman, Sachs & Co.
“An enthralling and impressive work. I am completely convinced that
the basic precepts in this book will stand the test of time for many cen-
turies to come, indeed, probably forever. It shows how to empower
people and create great societies, corporations, and cultures. I’m giving
it to everyone at my own firm.”
—Russell Reynolds Jr., Founder and Former CEO,
Russell Reynolds Associates, and Chairman, RSR Partners
“Reading this book is like having a great conversation; new and interest-
ing people join in along the way, adding their own personal and varied
insights and encouraging an increasingly smart and useful dialogue.
Readers are compelled to emerge smarter, more thoughtful, and more
energized and engaging with this book.”
—Regina Fazio Maruca, Former Senior Editor,
Harvard Business Review, and Coauthor, Your Leadership Legacy
“A fabulous book, a must-read! People are hungry to learn more about
the one-to-one connection to enhance their businesses and lives. Read
Michael’s book and learn from others who are successfully making the
human connection a reality in their businesses.”
—Jack Mitchell, Chairman and CEO of Mitchells/Richards/Marshs,
and Author of Hug Your Customers: The Proven Way to Personalize Sales
and Achieve Astounding Results

“Through fascinating stories, Fired Up or Burned Out convinced me of
the power of connection—in life and in work. It helped me see what is
missing in so many organizations. Just as important, I learned what to
do about it.”
—Marian Chapman Moore, Professor and Academic Director, Darden MBA
for Executives, Darden Graduate School of Business, University of Virginia
This book offers extremely practical advice about how leaders of any
type of institution can create and maintain an environment and work-
place atmosphere where participants become energized and fully
engaged. The “Connection Culture” explains how to motivate everyone
to pull his/her own weight and work together to create a winning team.
It seems to me that America’s great institutions, such as General Electric,
the U.S. Marine Corps, the New York Yankees, the University of Notre
Dame, Goldman Sachs, and Davis Polk have been Connection Cultures
for a long time and that their “connection” has clearly contributed to
their consistent success over time.
—Hank Higdon, Chairman 
Higdon Partners LLC
“One of the things I’ve learned is that for employees to stage engaging
experiences for a company’s customers, they have to be engaged them-
selves in that company and what it stands for. Read Fired Up or Burned
Out, and Michael Stallard will show you exactly how to ignite their pas-
sion by connecting them to your purpose.”
—B. Joseph Pine II, Coauthor, The Experience Economy,
and Cofounder, Strategic Horizons LLP
“An inspiring and valuable guide for CEOs, senior business leaders, line
managers and those first venturing into the business world. The insights
provided through relevant and thoughtful anecdotes of both successful
leaders and associated organizations serve as a strategic aid to anyone in
a leadership role looking to empower each and every employee.”
—Russ D. Gerson Chief Executive Officer 
The Gerson Group

“So many corporate success stories can be traced back to the dedication
and enthusiasm of the people who work for the company. This book
provides the perfect “how-to” in developing engaged and empowered
employees. I’m using it as our text book for everyone in management.”
—Mark Curtis, President and Co-Founder 
Splash Car Wash Company
“The greatest assets in an organization are the employees, and engaging
them is the most direct way to improve your business.Fired Up or Burned
Out clearly outlines how executives can focus their energies, not only to
improve their individual leadership abilities but also to add to the effec-
tiveness of the entire team in achieving the organization’s goals.”
—E. Pendleton James, Chairman, Pendleton James Associates,
and Former Assistant to President Reagan for Presidential Personnel
“Fired Up or Burned Out is a must-read for anyone in a leadership role.
Leadership can seem so complex and often times confusing when, in
fact, following ‘core principles’ that focus on the ‘basic needs’ of every
individual will always guide a leader to the truth! This book describes
these core principles and basic needs in an easy-to-remember model
that should be displayed on every leader’s desk. The model is beautifully
explained and wonderfully illustrated by examples of great leaders
throughout history in every walk of life.”
—Keith A. VanderVeen, Midwest Regional President,
Wachovia Securities, LLC
“This is a must-read for any leader or anyone aspiring to be in a leadership
role. Lessons drawn uniquely from acclaimed personalities of the past
become the foundation for strong leadership in tomorrow’s world. There’s
no other book like it.”
—Richard Murphy, Founder and Former CEO, ODI International

“There are few business leaders who understand the power of human
connection. Given the shifting demographics in this country, it must be
understood that virtually all people have the potential to achieve suffi-
ciently to succeed in life. The broad principles and concepts in this book
provide me with hope that American business leaders might begin to
understand that all people have the potential to learn enough so that they
have met the thresholds of competition in the global community. It is a
renewed belief in humankind’s capacity that provides the wellspring of
what others can begin to follow. If our hope is for a world that provides
fair opportunities for individuals, companies, and their communities,
then we must be determined to work to make it so. Those companies that
embrace the principles advocated in Fired Up or Burned Out will ulti-
mately reap the benefits of successful competition in the new ‘flat world.’”
—Eric J. Cooper, Ed.D., President,
National Urban Alliance for Effective Education
“Stallard’s strategy gives business owners the tools to energize and
strengthen their employees. Fired Up or Burned Out is a must-read for
leaders who are looking for new ways to inspire spirit in the workplace.”
—Shep & Ian Murray, Co-Founders and CEOs of Vineyard Vines
www.vinyardvines.com

FIRED UP
o r
B U R N E D  O U T
How to Reignite Your Team’s Passion,
Creativity, and Productivity
MICHAEL LEE STALLARD
with Carolyn Dewing-Hommes and Jason Pankau

© 2007 by Michael Lee Stallard
All rights reserved. No portion of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means—electronic, mechanical, photo-
copy, recording, scanning, or other—except for brief quotations in critical reviews or
articles, without the prior written permission of the publisher.
Published in Nashville, Tennessee, by Thomas Nelson. Thomas Nelson is a registered
trademark of Thomas Nelson, Inc.
Thomas Nelson, Inc., titles may be purchased in bulk for educational, business,
fund-raising, or sales promotional use. For information, please e-mail
SpecialMarkets@ThomasNelson.com.
ISBN 978-1-59555-281-5 (trade paper)
Library of Congress Catalog-in-Publication Data
Stallard, Michael Lee.
Fired up or burned out : how to reignite your team's passion,
creativity, and productivity / Michael Lee Stallard ; with Carolyn
Dewing-Hommes and Jason Pankau.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 978-0-7852-2358-0 (hardcover)
1. Employee motivation. 2. Leadership. 3. Mentoring in business.
I. Dewing-Hommes, Carolyn. II. Pankau, Jason. III. Title.
HF5549.5.M63S68 2007
658.3'14—dc22
2007001645
Printed in the United States of America
09 10 11 12 13  LSI  7 6 5 4 3 2 1

x
To our wonderful families and friends.
Being with you brings us much joy and encouragement.


CONTENTS
Introduction
xiii
PART I
WHAT FIRES US UP?
Chapter 1: The Case for Connection at Work
2
Chapter 2: The Science of Connection
9
Chapter 3: The Connection Culture
16
Chapter 4: Connection and the Legend
24
Chapter 5: Trouble in Times Square
31
Chapter 6: The Next Step in the 
Evolution of Organizations 
36
PART II 
THE THREE KEYS TO CONNECTING YOUR TEAM
AND LIGHTING THEIR FIRES:
VISION, VALUE, AND VOICE
Chapter 7: Inspire with Identity
44
Chapter 8: Create Meaning in Your Organization
51
Chapter 9: Delete What Devalues
62
Chapter 10: Dial Up the Value
75
Chapter 11: Three Benefits of Knowledge Flow
82
Chapter 12: Increase Flow
99
ix

PART III
THE FIRE STARTS WITH YOU: BECOME A PERSON OF CHARACTER AND
CONNECTION TO IGNITE THE TEAM AROUND YOU
Chapter 13: People Who Connect
110
Chapter 14: The Journey to Connection
116
Chapter 15: Developing Character Strengths
and Connection
121
PART IV
LEARN FROM TWENTY GREAT LEADERS OVER TWENTY DAYS
WEEK 1
Day 1: French Hero of the American Revolution
132
Day 2: Restoring the Glory
135
Day 3: The Shot Heard Around the World
138
Day 4: Soldier of Peace
142
Day 5: Hug Your Customers™
147
WEEK 2
Day 6: A Most Unlikely Turnaround
151
Day 7: Enlightened Monarch?
154
Day 8: First in Their Hearts
157
Day 9: Reconnecting a Nation
159
Day 10: Connection to the Cause
162
WEEK 3
Day 11: Community Catalyst
164
Day 12: The Business of The Body Shop
166
CONTENTS
x

Day 13: More Than an Oracle
169
Day 14: Ritz-Carlton Character and Culture
172
Day 15: Peter Drucker’s Kind of Leader
176
WEEK 4
Day 16: Dr. Fred’s INN
179
Day 17: Purpose-driven Pastor
182
Day 18: Patriot Playbook
185
Day 19: High-Five Moments
188
Day 20: Transforming the Culture of Kim
191
Conclusion:
Build a Fire That Lasts
195
Appendix A:
Questions to Assess Organizational Culture
and Connection
203
Notes
206
Acknowledgments
218
About the Authors
221
Index
223
CONTENTS
xi


xiii
INTRODUCTION
W
What fires up people and helps them and the organizations they
work in thrive? I’m not talking about motivational speeches and
incentives that produce a short-term burst of enthusiasm. I mean,
what really makes people perform to the best of their abilities for
long periods of time? What causes individuals to put their hearts
in their work?
Although people generally enter their organizations fired up,
over time most work environments reduce that inner fire from a
flame to a flicker. As I will explain, solving this problem needs to
be one of the highest priorities of today’s organizations.
In this book you will learn how to increase the fire and passion
inside people that is necessary for individuals and organizations to
achieve their potential. The approach I will describe is based on the
results of E Pluribus Partners’ multiyear study of leaders who suc-
ceeded and those who failed to engage the people they led. Our
work draws upon explanations and insights identified from diverse
fields of knowledge, including psychology, sociology, neuroscience,
political science, organizational behavior, systems theory, history,
philosophy, and religion.

One of the best ways to learn how to fire up people is to study
the best practices of outstanding leaders. The leaders you’ll learn
from include these:
•
a renowned basketball coach whose Hall of Fame biography
credits him for producing teams that “scaled unprecedented
heights that no future organization in any sport is likely to
approach”
•
a remarkable twenty-five-year-old queen in the 1500s with no
leadership experience who inherited a bankrupt England and
led her country to become one of the most powerful nations
on earth
•
an exceptional woman who began as a volunteer in her organi-
zation, then went on as CEO to transform it into one of the
best-managed organizations worldwide, according to the late
Peter Drucker
•
a distinguished American career soldier who was awarded the
Nobel Peace Prize, named Time magazine’s Man of the Year
twice, and was considered by Winston Churchill to be the
primary architect of the Allies’ victory during World War II
These are just a few of the remarkable people whose stories will
help you understand how to fire up people in your organization.
DO YOU THRIVE OR JUST SURVIVE?
How many people truly thrive at work? Research by the Gallup
Organization suggests that fewer than three in ten Americans are
INTRODUCTION
xiv

engaged in their jobs.1 In other countries, the number is even
lower. Just imagine the wasted human potential! Because so few
individuals are thriving in organizations, it follows that organiza-
tions are wasting much of their potential too.
Over the course of my twenty-five-year business career, there
have been times when I thrived and others when I merely sur-
vived. In a couple of the worst instances, the work culture slowly
drained the life out of me. So there you have it: thrive, survive, or
die. Which term describes what your work culture is doing to
you? If you are a leader, how would the people who report to you
answer that question?
I’ve been interested in work cultures throughout my career
because I wanted to understand the culture that would bring out
the best in me. My interest increased dramatically in the late 1990s
when I became the chief marketing officer for the global private
wealth management business of a major international brokerage
firm on Wall Street. In that position, I recognized that a key suc-
cess factor for our business was building strong relationships
between our clients and our firm’s frontline professionals, and I
did whatever was possible to promote such relationship building.
In addition, we developed and implemented business practices
to keep our frontline professionals fired up. The result was that
our revenues doubled over a two-and-a-half-year period, and our
business achieved its first billion-dollar revenue year in the firm’s
history. During that time I realized that my colleagues and I had
discovered something special.
In the spring of 2002, I left Wall Street to start a think tank to
assist people and organizations in achieving their potential. In the
search to comprehend every aspect of how to help people thrive
in organizations, I learned from the advice and insights of experts
in a broad range of fields, and from the approaches of great and
INTRODUCTION
xv

failed leaders. My coauthor Carolyn Dewing-Hommes shared
with me her insights gained from a Citibank study when she had
access to some of the world’s most prominent companies and
their leaders. My other coauthor, Jason Pankau, shared insights
that he developed as a leader and a coach of corporate leaders.
One important insight emerged from two experiences that for-
ever changed my life.
THE POWER OF CONNECTION
My wife was diagnosed with breast cancer in late 2002. Fortu-
nately, it was detected early, removed by surgery, and treated with
radiation. While Katie underwent treatments at our local hospital,
the kindness and compassion of many health-care workers com-
forted us. Some of them were cancer survivors. They knew what
we were going through, and they went beyond their regular duties
to make a human connection with us. Those connections boosted
our spirits.
Twelve months later, Katie was diagnosed with cancer again,
this time ovarian. During the first half of 2004, Katie had six
chemotherapy treatments. She took a break from chemo over the
summer, then started high dosage chemotherapy at Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York City. Our experience
there really surprised me. Every time we approached the front
doors of the Fifty-third Street entrance in midtown Manhattan,
the exuberant doormen locked their eyes on us and greeted us
with big, warm smiles as if we were friends coming to visit. The
receptionist and security people were equally friendly. At our first
office visit, Dr. Martee Hensley, Katie’s oncologist, spent an hour
educating us and answering a long list of questions. Although the
INTRODUCTION
xvi

statistics were sobering, Dr. Hensley’s warm disposition and opti-
mistic attitude lifted our spirits and gave us hope. Simply put, the
connection with the people at Sloan-Kettering encouraged us.
One day while Katie was having a treatment, I went to the gift
shop to get something to drink and stumbled on a meeting in
the adjacent lounge where Sloan-Kettering employees were dis-
cussing an employee survey. I overheard them share that they
loved working there because they loved their colleagues, their
patients, and their cause, which is to provide what is stated on
the center’s printed materials . . . the best cancer care, anywhere. It
was apparent that those health-care professionals had formed a
connection with one another and with their patients. During our
time at Memorial Sloan-Kettering, I witnessed more joy, trust,
cooperation, and connection there than in 95 percent of the offices
I had been in over my career. Who would have guessed that a can-
cer treatment center could be such a vibrant and positive work
environment?
Today, I’m overjoyed to say, Katie is in remission for both
cancers, and she feels great. Reflecting on those days, I’m con-
vinced that the connection we felt from the tremendous outpour-
ing of care provided by health-care workers, friends, and family
helped Katie overcome cancer, and it protected our family’s spir-
its. An American Cancer Society publication stated that feeling
alone is one of the worst things for cancer patients. We rarely felt
alone because we were constantly reminded that many, many
people were pulling for us. We figured people were praying for us
from probably every religion known to man, and even our athe-
ist friends said they were sending positive thoughts our way. Per-
haps for the first time in my life, I experienced the joy that comes
from a real sense of community and connection to people beyond
my family and close circle of friends.
INTRODUCTION
xvii

For years I did not fully appreciate or understand the impor-
tance of relationships and connection. There is increasing evidence
that this is a national problem. The well-documented decline in joy
following World War II in the midst of growing economic pros-
perity is widely believed to be attributable to diminishing con-
nection in our lives: families have spread out geographically, more
families have become headed by two-career couples, and more
time has been spent in the workplace. Two books by respected
authorities in their fields, psychologist David Myers’s American
Paradox 2 and political scientist Robert Lane’s The Loss of
Happiness in Market Democracies,3 describe this phenomenon. In
the pages ahead, I will shed light on this problem and how we can
correct it.
CONNECTION AFTER 9/11
Another insight about our environment’s impact on us came to
me as I considered what I felt on the mornings following the
terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001. Walking from Grand
Central Station to my office near Times Square, I vividly remem-
ber looking down the canyon-like avenues and seeing American
flags flying everywhere against the backdrop of a giant smolder-
ing cloud that hovered over the southern end of Manhattan. I
also recall New Yorkers nodding and making eye contact with me
as if to say, “We’ll make it through this.” (If you’ve been to New
York City, you know that making eye contact with strangers is
rare.)
A sense of connection in our shared belief in freedom and
democracy moved the hearts of people across America to fly their
flags and send money for the families who lost loved ones. And
INTRODUCTION
xviii

connection moved rescue workers and volunteers to come to New
York City and Washington, D.C., to do what they could to help.
Although New Yorkers pride themselves on individualism, I can
tell you they were profoundly moved by the outpouring of affec-
tion from their fellow Americans. During that time of shock, of
mourning, and of sadness, the empathy and compassion
extended by people throughout the United States and the rest of
the world provided the healing embrace New Yorkers needed to
continue on.
Social commentator David Brooks, writing about American
unity following September 11, likened us to one big family
because even though we may have our differences, when one of
our own is in trouble, we are there for one another.4 The same
strength of connection got us through the Depression and World
War II.
The sense of connection I felt following the 9/11 terrorist
attacks had a profound effect on me. It led Carolyn, Jason, and
me to name our think tank E Pluribus Partners, inspired by
America’s motto E Pluribus Unum, which in Latin means “out of
many, one.” John Adams, Benjamin Franklin, and Thomas
Jefferson chose that phrase. If they had seen Americans coming
together in the aftermath of 9/11, I believe they would have stood
up and cheered.
WE MUST CONNECT WITH OTHERS TO THRIVE
The more we reflected on our own experiences and the more
research we conducted about what makes people and organiza-
tions thrive, the more Carolyn, Jason, and I became convinced
that it came down to this: connection. Our connection with others
xix
INTRODUCTION

in our organization keeps us fired up for long periods of time.
Connection meets basic human psychological needs for respect,
recognition, belonging, autonomy, personal growth, and mean-
ing. When these needs are met, we thrive. Research shows that
when connection is present, organizations are more productive,
more innovative, and more profitable. Our lives, including the
time we spend working, are enriched with greater connection.
My hope is that you will recognize the vital role of connection
in reaching your personal potential and experiencing life at its
best.
Conversely, the lack of connection will gradually burn us
out. Organizational environments where connection is low or
absent diminish our physical and mental health. They create a
low level of toxicity that drains our energy, poisons our attitudes,
and impacts our ability to be productive. Like the frog in the
proverbial kettle of water that is oblivious to the fact that the
water is slowly coming to a boil, a person in a low-connection
environment had better wise up to his situation before it’s too
late.
In addition to bringing out the best in individual perform-
ance, connection improves group performance. Research has
proven that connection makes us better problem solvers, more
creative, more trusting, and more cooperative. Trust and cooper-
ation are the lubrication, if you will, that make the tasks of organ-
izations run better. In a work environment that fails to increase
individual engagement and connection among people, results
will eventually suffer. Too often that’s exactly what happens when
leaders experience success for a time, only to see their organiza-
tion’s performance decline.
Creating the right work environment requires paying atten-
tion to the so-called soft aspects of organizations. These are
INTRODUCTION
xx

emotional issues such as the meaning of work and the way
people treat one another. A 2004 study of fifty thousand employ-
ees at fifty-nine global companies conducted by the Corporate
Leadership Council, a unit of the prestigious Corporate
Executive Board, found that emotional factors were four times
more effective in increasing employee engagement than rational
factors.5
It would be rational, then, to take a hard line on the soft
issues that have been overlooked in the past. While our human
natures may lead us to assume that other people think the way
we do (or at least they should), those who have studied person-
ality and neuroscience tell us that people are wired very differ-
ently. The overwhelming majority of leaders with whom I have
dealt excelled in left brain-directed linear and analytic thinking
yet were less sensitive to the issues that had an emotional effect
on people, a cognitive strength primarily directed by the right
brain hemisphere.6 (According to the research of one psycholo-
gist—based on his study of more than 2,245 executives—95 per-
cent of them who completed the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator, a
test that identifies temperament, were classified as left brain-
directed “thinkers” rather than right brain-directed “feelers.”7)
Herein lies the challenge. Because of the left brain’s dominance
in most leaders, they tend to view actions that improve engage-
ment and connection as inefficient and therefore unimportant,
and they discount the feelings of people with other tempera-
ments. Such leaders will be persuaded that investing in the soft
issues is beneficial only when they see proof of its positive, tan-
gible effect on the performance of people and organizations. My
hope is that the following pages will persuade leaders with facts
and testimonies that economic and organizational benefits come
from the soft issues.
INTRODUCTION
xxi

THE COMPETITIVE ADVANTAGE OF CONNECTION
Building organizational connection is already happening in many
revered companies. From Main Street to Wall Street, I am encour-
aged to see leaders beginning to recognize the value of connection
and fostering a sense of community. The Ritz-Carlton Hotel Com-
pany, Starbucks, and jetBlue are very intentional about increasing
their connection among employees and with customers. Harley-
Davidson has created a community around its motorcycle riders,
employees, and management, and the company sponsors cross-
country trips and road rallies. On Wall Street, Goldman Sachs has
enhanced and expanded its leadership training in order to advance
the connection among its leaders. Goldman has even made lead-
ership training available to the up-and-coming leaders of its client
companies to strengthen its connection with them before the
promising leaders reach the top jobs. In San Francisco, the biotech
company Genentech, which Fortune magazine named in 2005 as
the number-one-rated company to work for, brings in cancer
patients to connect with its employees, throws weekly parties for
employees to connect with one another, and celebrates big prod-
uct breakthroughs with company-wide parties that have featured
entertainers Elton John, Mary J. Blige, and Matchbox 20.8
Southwest Airlines learned that its performance at the gate
improved when it maintained a 10 to 1 frontline employee-to-
supervisor ratio because supervisors could connect with, coach,
and encourage those people.9 (Some airlines have frontline
employee-to-supervisor ratios of 40 to 1 that make connection
difficult to maintain.)
Ed Catmull, the head of Pixar Animation Studios, formed
Pixar as an antidote to the disconnection that is the norm in the
film industry where independent contractors come together for a
INTRODUCTION
xxii

specific project and then disband upon the project’s conclusion.10
Pixar keeps the team together so that they build connection.
Catmull also created the in-house Pixar University to increase
connection across Pixar. At Pixar University connection occurs
when every employee, from the janitors to Catmull himself,
spends four hours each week in classes with colleagues learning
about the arts and animation and about each other. It’s no coinci-
dence that Pixar University’s crest bears the Latin phrase Alienus
Non Dieutius, which means “alone no longer.”11
The bottom line is that connection is a necessity to any organi-
zation that aspires to achieve sustainable superior performance.
Organizations with people who report they are more connected
and engaged are also better performers across the board in a vari-
ety of measures from customer satisfaction to profitability.
An overwhelming amount of evidence points to the need to
increase connection in our organizations. It is possible to thrive
at work and be a catalyst for positive change. If you are ready to
experience work and life at its best and are tired of settling for
less, it’s time to get fired up!
INTRODUCTION
xxiii


In Part I you will learn . . .
!
why a sense of emotional connection is necessary for
people and organizations to thrive.
!
why you need connection to achieve your personal
potential and how connection affects your physical
and mental health.
!
about research from sociologists, psychologists, and
neuroscientists that increasingly demonstrates the
powerful effect of connection on people.
!
what elements are necessary to create a connection
culture (a culture that increases connection among
people).
!
about the stories of two leaders and the cultures they
created as illustrations of what a connection culture
is and what it is not.
!
about the basic human psychological needs that are
met by connection and some developments in mod-
ern organizations that have become obstacles to
meeting these needs for most people.
PART I
WHAT FIRES US UP?

THE CASE FOR CONNECTION AT WORK
O
One of the most powerful and least understood aspects of business
is how a sense of connection among people affects their success in
life. Just as the wind moves trees and gravity moves objects, con-
nection is invisible, yet has a very real effect on the behavior of
people. I’m convinced that unless the people in an organization have
a strong sense of connection—a bond that promotes trust, cooper-
ation, and esprit de corps—they will never reach their potential as
individuals, and the organization will never reach its potential.
Employees in an organization with a high degree of connec-
tion are more engaged, more productive in their jobs, and less
likely to leave the organization for a competitor. Such employees
are more trusting and more cooperative, share information with
their colleagues, and therefore help decision makers reach well-
informed decisions. Organizations that cultivate connection will
be more innovative. Connection transforms a dog-eat-dog envi-
ronment into a sled dog team that pulls together.1
So what is connection anyway? When we interact with people,
we generally feel that we connect with some and not with others.
2
CHAPTER 1

Connection describes something intangible in relationships. When
it is present, we feel energy, empathy, and affirmation; when it is
absent, we experience neutral or even negative feelings. Although
we know what it’s like to feel connected on a personal level, few
among us understand the effect of connection on us and on our
organizations.
TODAY’S WIDESPREAD DISCONNECTION AND
DISENGAGEMENT AT WORK
The Gallup Organization has done extensive research in this area.
The best measure of connection is Gallup’s Q12 survey that asks
questions about whether other people in your workplace care for
you, help you grow, and consider your opinions and ideas. In
2002 the Gallup Organization published the results of a landmark
research study in the Journal of Applied Psychology that tracked
nearly eight thousand American-based business units over seven
years. Business units with higher Q12 scores—in other words,
higher connection—experienced higher productivity, higher
profitability, and higher customer satisfaction, as well as lower
employee turnover and fewer accidents.2
Other studies confirm the opportunity exists to improve per-
formance by improving employee engagement. The 2004 study by
the Corporate Executive Board that I mentioned earlier concluded
that the most committed employees outperform the average
employee by 20 percent and are 87 percent less likely to leave the
organization.3 A Hewitt study of fifteen hundred companies over
four years showed companies with higher employee engagement
realized higher total shareholder return.4
Unfortunately, Gallup research also clearly shows that the lack
THE CASE FOR CONNECTION AT WORK
3

of connection has resulted in widespread employee disengage-
ment. Results from its Q12 survey consistently indicate approxi-
mately 75 percent of workers do not feel engaged or connected
at work.5 The 2004 Corporate Executive Board global study of
employee engagement revealed even more dismal results: 76 per-
cent of those surveyed had a moderate commitment to their
employers, and 13 percent had very little commitment.6
The state of many organizations today is like that of a body
builder who exercises only one arm. The result: one bulging bicep
and three skinny, underdeveloped limbs. Can any body builder or
organization perform at its peak with only 25 percent of its mem-
bers engaged?
The Gallup Organization conservatively estimates the annual
economic cost to the American economy from the approximately
22 million American workers who are extremely negative or
“actively disengaged” to be between $250 and $300 billion. This
figure doesn’t include the cost for employees who are disengaged
but have not spiraled down to the level of active disengagement.7
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
4

Widespread disengagement is a waste of human talent and
energy. It’s not healthy for employees or employers. People don’t
live with this level of frustration forever. When they are able to,
many will flee to greener pastures, most likely to leaders and envi-
ronments that will provide the connection they need, whether to
somewhere else in your organization or to your competitor.
THE URGENCY OF CONNECTION
Two megatrends promise to make connection even more impor-
tant: the coming labor shortage and increasing globalization of
labor. In the Americas, Europe, and Asia, birth rates have plum-
meted below worker replacement levels.8 When more baby boom-
ers retire in a few years, shortages are likely in many segments of
the labor market. The numbers are daunting. The US Bureau of
Labor Statistics projects a shortfall of 10 million workers by
2010.9 The Employment Policy Foundation projects a shortage
of workers within this decade and lasting through much of the
first half of this century. At its peak, it is expected that America
will experience a shortfall of 35 million workers.10 Because work-
ers will have so many jobs to choose from, leaders must under-
stand the impact of the looming labor shortage. They will need
to provide a workplace culture that attracts and retains employ-
ees or suffer as insufficient labor is available to meet their growth
goals.
The coming labor shortage was highlighted in a lead article of
the Harvard Business Review. In “It’s Time to Retire Retirement,”
authors Ken Dychtwald, Tamara Erickson, and Bob Morison con-
cluded, after a year-long study of the implications for businesses
of the aging workforce:
THE CASE FOR CONNECTION AT WORK
5

•
Mass retirement threatens to drain talent from businesses
over the next ten to fifteen years.
•
Businesses will need to attract and retain older workers to meet
their human resource needs.
•
The workplace environment will need to be altered in order to
attract and retain workers.11
The media’s coverage of this megatrend has just begun. The
Wall Street Journal, Time, Foreign Affairs, the New York Times, and
other thought-leading periodicals have recently featured articles
on the approaching labor shortage. You can be sure that the noise
level will rise to a clamor over the years ahead.
The second megatrend, the globalization of labor, will also
intensify the need to engage people at work. Many areas of the
economy, such as the financial capital markets, already operate in
a global manner. Financial capital easily moves around the world,
and the prices of financial assets in one part of the world affect
prices everywhere else. Globalization is beginning to happen with
labor too.
With the rise of offshoring, globalization will continue in the
market for people (or human capital, as economists describe us).
Technological advances such as broadband Internet connections
and online collaboration capabilities have made it easier for com-
panies to move work and jobs around the globe. China and India
have already attracted a large number of jobs from other coun-
tries. As this trend accelerates, companies that want to retain jobs
in their home countries will need to boost the productivity of
their people or lose business to competitors that reduce prices by
offshoring.
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
6

Many firms will be unprepared for the storms ahead, however.
Sydney Finkelstein of Dartmouth’s Tuck School of Business stud-
ied cases of business failure to identify what managers can learn
from mistakes of the past, and he noted that they usually knew of
the developments in their industry that produced unfavorable
change but failed to do anything about them.12 The emerging
storms from disengagement, an aging population, and globaliza-
tion could turn out to be issues managers were aware of but failed
to act upon. To gain a performance advantage and reduce their
vulnerability in the face of these issues, leaders can intentionally
create a work environment that increases engagement and con-
nection within the organization. The reward? A business that
achieves sustainable peak performance including employees who
are so committed to their organization that they recruit on its
behalf. It can happen and will happen when you get connected
and get fired up.
REVIEW, REFLECTION, AND APPLICATION
! Connection affects our success in life. How is the level of
connection in your life? How connected do you feel to your
colleagues and to the organization where you are employed?
Gallup research shows approximately three-fourths of
Americans are not connected or engaged at work.
! Gallup research also shows that business units with higher
levels of engagement—in other words, a higher degree of
connection—experience higher productivity, higher profit-
ability, and higher customer satisfaction, as well as lower
employee turnover and accidents.
THE CASE FOR CONNECTION AT WORK
7

! Connection in the workplace will become even more impor-
tant given the coming labor shortage and increasing globali-
zation of labor.
! So what? Increasing connection in the workplace is a signifi-
cant opportunity to improve the performance of individuals
and organizations.
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
8

THE SCIENCE OF CONNECTION
I
In recent years, neuroscientists have discovered that positive
human contact has a physiological effect on people. More
specifically, it reduces the blood levels of the stress hormones
epinephrine, norepinephrine, and cortisol. It increases the neuro-
transmitter dopamine, which enhances attention and pleasure,
and serotonin, which eases fear and worry. Connection also
increases the levels of oxytocin and/or vasopressin that make us
more trusting and helps us bond with others.1 In laymen’s terms,
connection makes us feel good. Connection provides a sense of
well-being, it minimizes stress, and it makes us more trusting.
The observations of psychiatrists confirm these discoveries
about connection. Dr. Edward Hallowell, a practicing psychiatrist
and instructor of psychiatry at Harvard Medical School, has writ-
ten that most business executives he encounters in his practice are
deprived of connection with others, and he has stated that it
makes them feel lonely, isolated, and confused at work. He believes
that people in organizations with a deficiency of connection
become distrusting, disrespectful, and dissatisfied. He describes
9
CHAPTER 2

these cultures without connection as “corrosive.” To treat patients
suffering from emotional isolation, Dr. Hallowell helps them in-
crease connection in their lives.
Some psychoanalysts and psychologists at Wellesley College
are doing work in what they refer to as “Relational-Cultural
Theory.” Based on years of research, they believe the lack of con-
nection in the workplace is one reason why more and more mid-
career women are walking away from successful careers. They
sense that their workplace cultures are unhealthy. Because women
in general tend to be more relational than men, they typically
sense when the relational dynamics are less than ideal. Men seem
to be less sensitive to connection and the damage done to individ-
uals and organizations when connections are lacking or absent.2
CONNECTION MEETS BASIC HUMAN
PSYCHOLOGICAL NEEDS
Other research establishes that connection improves mental and
physical health throughout our lives3:
•
Babies who are held, stroked, and cuddled are mentally and
physically healthier.
•
Adolescents who feel connected at home and at school are
more well-adjusted.
•
Patients with greater social support recover faster.
•
People who experience positive human contact are more cre-
ative and better problem solvers.4
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
10

•
Adults with more social relationships are less prone to sick-
ness, depression, and suicide.
•
Seniors with greater social relationships live longer.
All of this evidence begs the question, what is it about con-
nection that makes it so powerful? We have deeply felt human
needs to be respected, to be recognized for our talents, to belong,
to have autonomy or control over our work, to experience per-
sonal growth, and to do work that we feel has meaning and do it
in a way that we feel is ethical. When we work in an environment
that recognizes these realities of our human nature, we thrive. We
feel more energetic, more optimistic, and more fully alive. When
we work in an environment that fails to recognize these parts of
our human nature, our physical and mental health are damaged.5
People want and need to be valued. Psychologist Abraham
Maslow, in the landmark article “A Theory of Human Motivation,”
described it this way:
All people in our society (with a few pathological exceptions)
have a need or desire for a stable, firmly based, (usually) high
evaluation of themselves, for self-respect, or self-esteem, and for
the esteem of others. By firmly based self-esteem, we mean that
which is soundly based on real capacity, achievement and respect
of others.These are,first,the desire for strength,for achievement,
for adequacy, for confidence in the face of the world, and for
independence and freedom. Secondly, we have what we may call
the desire for reputation or prestige (defining it as respect or
esteem from other people), recognition, attention, importance or
appreciation . . . More and more today . . . there is appearing
widespread appreciation of their central importance.6
THE SCIENCE OF CONNECTION
11

Maslow went on to recognize that the needs for self-esteem
and the esteem of others are deficit needs (needs that, if unmet
over time, will produce pain and the desire to relieve them). One
example of a deficit need is the physical need for nourishment.
Left unmet, this deficit need produces the pain of hunger and the
drive to seek food and eat.
When people are shown respect in the workplace and their
real talents and contributions are genuinely recognized, they
become fired up. They put their hearts into their work. Being
consistently disrespected or ignored damages their sense of self-
worth and drives them to seek ways to restore their status. If they
are unable to, they eventually become disengaged.
Having established our need to be valued as a deficit need,
Maslow commented on the effect of meeting esteem needs:
Satisfaction of the self-esteem need leads to feelings of self-
confidence, worth, strength, capability and adequacy of being
useful and necessary in the world. But the thwarting of these
needs produces feelings of inferiority, of weakness and of
helplessness. These feelings in turn give rise to either basic
self-discouragement or else neurotic trends.7
While Abraham Maslow brought new insights to help us
understand human motivation, the individual’s need to be valued
has been recognized by wise observers of human nature since
ancient times. The philosopher Aristotle, in his Nicomachean
Ethics, recognized that people seek happiness, which comes, in
part, from having self-esteem and receiving the honor of others
that one rightly deserves. In his other works, Aristotle argued
that the best state—or culture, for our purposes—is one that
does everything possible to promote the pursuit of happiness.
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
12

He observed that happiness was necessary to achieve human
health, vitality, and vigor, all of which are sure signs of human
connection.
The human hunger for respect and recognition is strong. Left
unmet, it produces lackadaisical or potentially destructive behav-
ior. Television shows such as The Office, movies such as Office
Space, and comic strips such as Dilbert tap into the very real dis-
content created when people feel they are not valued. Companies
that ignore the esteem needs of their employees are committing
self-sabotage. Predictably, large numbers of their employees just
go through the motions, or worse, they seek ways to retaliate
against an organization that marginalizes them. Unethical behav-
ior is more likely to occur in cultures where large numbers of
people are disconnected. People may be more willing to commit
illegitimate acts to achieve the results they desire and win the
recognition they crave or to retaliate against people who they feel
treat them unfairly. Other basic human psychological needs in-
clude the needs for autonomy, personal growth, and meaning
(we’ll explore these needs in more detail later on).
Let’s consider how the human psychological needs and con-
nection play out in the workplace. When we first meet people, we
expect them to respect us. If they look down on us or they are
uncivil or condescending, we get upset. In time, as our colleagues
get to know us, we expect them to appreciate or recognize us for
our talents and contributions. That really makes us feel good. Later
on, we expect to be treated and thought of as integral parts of the
community. Our connection to the group is further strengthened
when we feel we have control over our work. Connection is dimin-
ished, however, when we feel others are micromanaging or over-
controlling us. People who overcontrol us send the message that we
are incompetent and that we are not trusted or respected.
THE SCIENCE OF CONNECTION
13

Connection is enhanced when we experience personal growth.
In other words, our role, our work in the group, is a good fit with
our skills and provides enough challenge that we feel good when
we rise to meet it but not so much that we become totally stressed
out. When we are in the right role and therefore more productive,
people notice and affirm us. This also increases our sense of con-
nection to the group. Finally, we are motivated when we know our
work is meaningful in some way and we are around other people
who share our belief that our work is important. To the extent that
these human needs for respect, recognition, belonging, autonomy,
personal growth, and meaning are met, we feel connected to the
group.
The bottom line is that connection plays a critical part in
improving individual performance. People who are more con-
nected with others fare better than those who are less connected.
Because it meets our human needs, connection makes people
more trusting, more cooperative, more empathetic, more enthu-
siastic, more optimistic, more energetic, more creative, and bet-
ter problem solvers. In this environment, people want to help
their colleagues. They are more open and share information that
helps decision makers become better informed. The openness
and marketplace of ideas that emerge in a trusting, cooperative
environment also make people more innovative.
REVIEW, REFLECTION, AND APPLICATION
! Neuroscientists have shown that connection enhances atten-
tion, a sense of pleasure and trust in others, and reduces fear
and worry.
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
14

! Psychiatrists have observed in business executives that their
lack of connection makes them feel lonely, isolated, and
confused, and makes them distrusting, disrespectful, and
dissatisfied.
! Sociologists and medical researchers have discovered that
from the time of our birth, people with a higher degree of
connection experience superior physical and mental health.
! Connection with others has a positive effect on us because it
meets our basic human psychological needs for respect,
recognition, belonging, autonomy, personal growth, and
meaning.
! So what? The findings of neuroscientists, psychiatrists, sociol-
ogists, and medical researchers support that a higher degree
of connection improves our mental and physical perform-
ance. We ignore it at our peril.
THE SCIENCE OF CONNECTION
15

I
16
THE CONNECTION CULTURE
CHAPTER 3
If connection is so beneficial to firing up people and to improving an
organization’s performance, what can be done to foster it and make
it part of your organization’s DNA? I believe the answer is to inten-
tionally create a connection culture. Culture is the predominant
beliefs and behaviors shared by a group of people. A connection cul-
ture, therefore, is a culture that embraces the necessary beliefs and
behaviors that enhance connection among people and meet the uni-
versal human needs. The elements in a connection culture that meet
these basic human psychological needs can be summarized as vision,
value, and voice.
CONNECTION CULTURE ELEMENT #1: VISION
The first element of a connection culture is vision. It exists in an
organization when everyone is
motivated by the organization’s mission,
united by its values, and
proud of its reputation.

Sharing a purpose or set of beliefs unites and motivates people.
At Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center people are united and
motivated by the aspiration stated in their tagline, the best cancer
care, anywhere, and the organization’s reputation as a leading can-
cer center in the world.
Another example of vision is Apple Computer’s “Think
Different” advertising campaign. It was conceived following Steve
Jobs’s return to Apple in 1996 after a twelve-year exile. As you
may recall, Apple had booted Jobs and brought in marketing pro
John Scully to take Apple to the next level, which never happened.
So the board of directors turned back to Jobs for help. One of his
first efforts when he returned was to work with Apple’s ad agency
to create the “Think Different” campaign. It featured pictures of
innovators in science, philosophy, and the arts such as theoretical
physicist Albert Einstein, humanitarian Mahatma Gandhi, dancer/
choreographer Martha Graham, photographer Ansel Adams,
physicist Richard Feynman, and painter Pablo Picasso. The cam-
paign communicated that Apple people were more than technol-
ogists; they were innovators and artists who gave others like
themselves the tools to change the world. It created a powerful
emotional bond, a connection between Jobs, Apple employees,
and Apple customers, who are, by the way, intensely loyal and
evangelistic when it comes to spreading the gospel of Apple.1
Other organizations have a compelling vision that unites and
motivates their people. Charles Schwab’s vision is to create “the
most useful and ethical financial products in the world.” Disney’s
vision is to “make people happy.”Our vision at E Pluribus Partners
is to “unlock human and corporate potential.”
Another favorite example of a brilliant leader who brought
vision to a group of people goes back a few years. During World
War II, President Franklin Delano Roosevelt traveled to Seattle,
THE CONNECTION CULTURE
17

Washington, to meet with 18,000 aircraft workers at Boeing
Corporation. FDR brought with him a young airplane pilot
named Hewitt Wheless from Texas. The pilot had escaped death
thanks to the resilience of the bullet-riddled B-17 plane he flew
out of harm’s way. His plane had been built at that very Boeing
plant. Do you think seeing and hearing that young pilot thank
them for saving his life connected them to a common cause? You
bet it did. It transformed those welders and riveters into freedom
fighters. From 1941 until 1945 American aircraft companies out-
produced the Nazis three to one and built nearly three hundred
thousand airplanes.2
CONNECTION CULTURE ELEMENT #2: VALUE
The second element of a connection culture is value. Value exists
in an organization when everyone
understands the basic psychological needs of people,
appreciates their positive, unique contributions, and
helps them achieve their potential.
Let me give you a few examples of value in a culture. David
Neeleman, the CEO of jetBlue, meets 95 percent of new employ-
ees on their first day of work. From day one he demonstrates that
he values them. He also sets aside one day each week to travel on
jetBlue flights where he serves beverages and gets down on his
hands and knees to clean planes. His actions show that he doesn’t
devalue the work done by the people with the least prestigious
jobs at jetBlue. Throughout the course of each day the high-
energy and outgoing Neeleman is constantly connecting with
crew members and customers. He knows that connection is im-
portant. In fact, he has said that most airlines treat passengers like
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
18

cattle and that jetBlue is different because its crew members
make personal connections with passengers. Neeleman’s efforts
have paid off as jetBlue’s reputation as a great place to work has
spread. In 2002, when jetBlue had to fill two thousand positions,
it received 130,000 applications.3 Could your organization find
the best of the best if it had an application pool like that?
Value also includes protecting people from the abuse of power,
such as incivility,sexual misconduct or prejudice,and other actions
that make people feel disconnected from their community because
it failed to protect them. On a few rare occasions, Jack Mitchell,
CEO of the retail clothier Mitchells/Richards/Marshs, has told cus-
tomers to take their business elsewhere because they became ver-
bally abusive to an employee.4
Allan Loren, who led the turnaround of Dun and Bradstreet,
established a rule that no meeting would be scheduled on Mondays
or Fridays if it required people to travel over the weekend. He val-
ued employees enough to protect their personal time. Loren also
wanted to see them grow, so he matched everyone in the organi-
zation with a buddy who would provide continuous feedback
about personal growth goals. Buddies were selected based on
their strengths in areas in which a particular employee wanted to
improve. Loren asked that employee satisfaction surveys be com-
pleted twice each year to see how people were doing.5
Carl Sewell, CEO of Sewell Automotive in Dallas, one of the
most successful automobile retailers nationwide, intentionally
hires caring people and nurtures a caring culture that creates con-
nection among employees and customers. His passion for hiring
such employees intensified after he was treated for cancer by ded-
icated health-care professionals at M. D. Anderson Cancer Center
in Houston.6 Sewell knows firsthand how uplifting it is to be
around others who really value us.
THE CONNECTION CULTURE
19

CONNECTION CULTURE ELEMENT #3: VOICE
The third element of a connection culture is voice. It exists in an
organization when everyone
seeks the ideas of others,
shares ideas and opinions honestly, and
safeguards relational connections.
Seeking and considering people’s ideas and opinions help
meet the human needs for respect, recognition, and belonging.
“Being in the loop,” so to speak, makes people feel connected to
their colleagues, just as “being out of the loop” makes people feel
disconnected. Voice also requires communicating in a way that is
sensitive to the emotions of others. Being sensitive to people’s
feelings safeguards connections just as insensitivity quickly
destroys them.
A. G. Lafley, the CEO of Procter & Gamble, is a master of
using voice to boost the performance of his organization. Lafley
actively seeks people’s views. When he meets with people, he tells
them what’s honestly on his mind before he asks them to share
the issues they are thinking about. He encourages them to “get the
moose out of the closets” before they grow into bigger problems.
When he first became CEO, Lafley asked P&G’s chief marketing
officer to conduct a survey of employees and request their ideas,
many of which he ended up implementing. Lafley knows how
much it fires up people to see their ideas come to life. In his inter-
actions with people, he makes it all about them rather than all
about him. And the results he has helped produce have been
stunning. When he became CEO, P&G was performing poorly
and morale was low. In his first twelve months, Lafley led an
effort that resulted in a substantial increase in employee approval
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
20

of P&G’s leadership and soaring profitability and stock price, so
much so that P&G was able to acquire the Gillette Corporation.7
THE CONNECTION FORMULA
A good way to remember the elements in a connection culture is
to remember the following formula: Vision + Value + Voice =
Connection. When these elements of a connection culture are in
place, it’s a win-win for individuals and organizations.
The following diagram maps the rationale that supports con-
nection: the connection culture meets basic human psychological
needs that help individuals and organizations thrive.
In the next two chapters, we will examine two leaders and the
cultures they created to illustrate what a connection culture is and
what it is not. The first leader is enshrined in the Basketball Hall
of Fame where his biography credits him for producing “teams
that scaled unprecedented heights that no future organization
in any sport is likely to approach.” The second leader produced
THE CONNECTION CULTURE 
21

spectacular results for a short time until the culture he created
came back to haunt him.
REVIEW, REFLECTION, AND APPLICATION
! A connection culture is an environment that meets our basic
psychological needs for respect,recognition, belonging, auton-
omy, personal growth, and meaning.
! The elements of a connection culture are vision, value, and
voice.
! Vision exists in an organization when everyone is motivated
by the organization’s mission, united by its values, and proud
of its reputation.
! Value exists in an organization when everyone understands
the basic psychological needs of people, appreciates their
positive, unique contributions, and helps them achieve their
potential.
! Voice exists in an organization when everyone seeks the ideas
of others, shares ideas and opinions honestly, and safeguards
relational connections.
! The connection formula is Vision + Value + Voice =
Connection.
! Have you experienced a sense of connection in some work-
places but not in others?
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
22

! As a consumer, have you experienced connection with the
people who work for a company from which you purchased
goods or services? Have there been times you felt a sense of
connection to your fellow citizens? Consider what you can
learn from your personal experiences with connection.
! So what? A connection culture increases connection among
people by increasing the cultural elements of vision, value,
and voice. Leaders should be intentional about creating a
connection culture in order to reap its benefits.
THE CONNECTION CULTURE 
23

S
24
CONNECTION AND THE LEGEND
CHAPTER 4
So often in life, good things bloom from the seeds of hardship. The
personal character of a young teenager who went on to become a
great leader was immeasurably shaped during the Depression
when his family lost their farm in Indiana. His father’s reaction to
the loss was unusual: he wasn’t bitter about it. Instead, his dad
focused on the future and told his children that everything would
be all right. And it was.
During those impressionable years in this leader’s life, he
learned that, like the Depression, some things in life are not in our
control. His father taught him that he should always strive to do
his best at anything he chose to do and not worry about the out-
come. He would later spread that philosophy to countless others.
Another perspective he gained during those formative years
was to value people. By watching his mom and dad and hearing
the stories of faith they taught him, he learned the joy that came
from making people and relationships his focus in life.
The young boy grew up to be an outstanding high school and
college basketball player in a state that was rabid about the game.
After college he married Nell, the love of his life and the only

woman he had ever dated. He taught high school English and
coached basketball until 1943 when he enlisted to serve in the
navy during World War II. When he returned from the war to the
high school in South Bend, Indiana, where he previously taught,
he was offered his old job. Other returning GIs were not, however,
and so he refused the offer because he felt it was wrong for the
school to deny veterans the jobs they had left to serve their coun-
try. Instead, he accepted an offer to become athletic director and
head basketball coach at Indiana State Teachers College.1
A CARING COACH
For the 1946–47 season Indiana State received a postseason invi-
tation to the National Association of Intercollegiate Basketball
(NAIB) national play-offs. After the coach learned that a young
African-American second-string guard on his team, Clarence
Walker, would not be allowed to participate in the tournament
because of the color of his skin, he declined the offer. The follow-
ing season NAIB officials invited Indiana State again, and this time
decided they would allow Clarence to play, provided he didn’t stay
at the hotel with his teammates and wouldn’t be seen publicly with
them. Once again the coach declined. He and Nell thought of all
the young men on the team as extended members of their family
whom they loved, and the coach wasn’t about to allow Clarence to
be humiliated. But Clarence and his family saw it in a different light.
They were excited about the opportunity for him to become the
first African-American player in history to participate in the presti-
gious tournament. So they, along with officials from the NAACP,
approached the coach to persuade him that attending the tourna-
ment would help, not hurt, Clarence and other African-American
CONNECTION AND THE LEGEND
25

players. The coach decided to accept the NAIB’s offer, and the team
packed up to head to the play-offs in Kansas City.
On their way to the tournament, the team bus stopped for
meals. If a restaurant wouldn’t serve Clarence, the coach would
make the team get back on the bus. Often the team had to pick up
food at grocery stores along the way and eat on the bus.
When Clarence finally walked onto the basketball court to
warm up, he appeared to be nearly paralyzed with fear. Many
people in the crowd spotted the courageous young man, and they
began to applaud. Clarence Walker became the first African-
American player to participate in the NAIB play-offs, and Indiana
State made it to the finals, where they lost to Louisville. Because of
Clarence’s courage and his coach’s resolve to stand up for what he
believed in, the NAIB tournament was finally opened to African-
American student-athletes. The following season three teams
brought African-American players with them to the tournament.
John Robert Wooden went on to become head basketball coach
of the UCLA Bruins (1948–75). His fired up teams won more than
80 percent of their games and ten national championships, and had
four perfect seasons. Coach Wooden was the first person in history
to be inducted twice into the Basketball Hall of Fame. In 1961, he
was honored for his achievements as a player at Purdue University
where he was All-American, college player of the year, and a leader
of the Boilermakers’ 1932 National Championship Team. In 1973,
he was honored for his achievements as a coach.
In the summer of 2003, the ninety-two-year-old Wooden
traveled to the White House, where he was awarded the Presiden-
tial Medal of Freedom, America’s highest civilian honor.2 In
December, with many of the players Wooden coached surround-
ing him at the ceremony, UCLA’s Pauley Pavilion was renamed
the Nell and John Wooden Court.
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
26

THE SECRET OF HIS SUCCESS
What was it about Wooden that produced such extraordinary suc-
cess as a student-athlete and then as a coach? Bill Walton, the Hall
of Fame basketball player and television sportscaster who played
for the coach on two national championship teams, identified the
essence of Wooden’s success when he stated,“[Coach Wooden] cre-
ated an environment that people wanted to be a part of.”3
To begin with, that environment included vision. Wooden
instilled a tremendous sense of pride in his players about being a
part of the UCLA basketball team. He taught them, as Bill Walton
wrote, “If you lived up to your responsibilities as a student and a
human being, then you earned the privilege of becoming a mem-
ber of the UCLA basketball team.”4 Integral to meeting his stan-
dards was achieving the character values reflected in what he called
“the Pyramid of Success.” The character values, or blocks of the
pyramid, were industriousness, enthusiasm, friendship, loyalty,
cooperation, self-control, alertness, initiative, intentness, condi-
tion, skill, and team spirit. Wooden taught his players that believ-
ing and behaving in a way consistent with these character values
produced poise and confidence that resulted in competitive great-
ness (that is, the desire to continuously challenge oneself in life).
Patience and faith make up the mortar that holds all of the blocks
together. When the pyramid was built, the person met the stan-
dards that John Wooden believed made him a success and earned
him the right to be called a member of the UCLA basketball team.
Wooden taught and lived out the character values he wanted
his players to adopt. They had a vision to strive for as individuals
and together as a team. Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, one of the greatest
basketball players in history, who played his entire college career
with Wooden, would later write,“Coach Wooden had a profound
CONNECTION AND THE LEGEND
27

influence on me as an athlete, but even greater influence on me as
a human being. He is responsible, in part, for the person I am
today.”5 Bill Walton astutely observed that “we have become John
Wooden ourselves.”6 And in a sense they did by accepting Wooden’s
beliefs, his character values, as their own. As Wooden worked to
reproduce people who shared the values reflected in the pyramid,
the UCLA basketball team became more connected to their coach
and to each other.
Wooden infused the UCLA basketball team environment with
value. It began with respect for everyone, regardless of a person’s
status on the team or in society. The way Wooden stood up for the
returning GIs and Clarence Walker showed that he modeled
respect for others. For much of his career Wooden worked along-
side the student managers as they swept or mopped the basketball
court before practices to set an example that no position was
unimportant. He required even the best players to clean up after
themselves in the locker room and not to expect the student man-
agers to do it. All of his players were to be respectful toward flight
attendants, waitresses and waiters, and hotel workers they encoun-
tered while traveling with the team. He always said, “You’re as
good as anybody, but you’re no better than anybody.”
Integral to Coach Wooden’s view of valuing people was the
notion of helping them reach their potential as basketball players
and as people. Bill Walton described it this way:“You were compet-
ing against an ideal, an abstract standard of excellence defined by
John Wooden.The actual opponents mattered little.It was the ideal
that mattered most.”7 Wooden pushed his players to be the best
they were capable of becoming, running long and demanding prac-
tices. According to Walton, before and after practice, the coach was
calm, but during practice sessions Wooden “prowled the sidelines
like a caged tiger . . . He never stopped moving, never stopped chat-
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
28

tering away. Up and down the court he would pace, always barking
out his pet little phrases . . .‘failing to prepare is preparing to fail . . .
never mistake activity for achievement.’ He liked to say, ‘Make the
effort. Do your best. The score cannot make you a loser when you
do that; it cannot make you a winner if you do less.’”8 If his players
didn’t work hard enough during practice, as hard as he did prepar-
ing for it, he ordered them off the court, then had the student
managers collect the balls, turn off the lights, and lock the doors.
Coach Wooden operated a meritocracy that treated every
player fairly. He didn’t believe in the star system and told his play-
ers, “The star of the team is the team.” Wooden benched Sidney
Wicks, one of the nation’s best players, for a season because he
wasn’t passing to his open teammates. (The following year, a
more selfless Wicks was awarded All-American honors and helped
UCLA win a national championship.) No one’s position was safe
if Wooden felt another player had proven he could perform better
for the team’s sake. At the same time, however, he recognized that
the nonstarters didn’t receive the adulation that starters did. So he
encouraged and affirmed them in practice, and as he said in an
interview in 1996, “I became a little closer with some of my play-
ers [who] didn’t get to play very much.”
Another element in the environment created by Wooden was
voice. He encouraged everyone to adopt an attitude of openness
to ideas and opinions. One of his favorite sayings was “when
everybody thinks alike, nobody thinks.” Wooden typically shared
his opinions and encouraged others to share theirs before he
made most decisions, unless time was of the essence, say, in the
midst of a game. If asked for advice, Wooden would reply,“I don’t
give advice; I give opinions.”
Wooden’s tolerance for others’ views was tested when Bill
Walton wrote a protest letter about the Vietnam War on the UCLA
CONNECTION AND THE LEGEND
29

basketball team stationery, had his teammates sign it, and asked
Wooden if he would sign it too. Although the coach declined to
sign, he allowed Walton to mail the letter to then President
Richard Nixon.
A stark contrast to the connection culture developed by John
Wooden and the UCLA basketball team is the culture described
in the following story of one of the most spectacular falls of a
leader in recent history.
REVIEW, REFLECTION, AND APPLICATION
! John Wooden, the coach with (some would say) the best
record in any sport, created a culture in the UCLA basketball
team that included the elements of vision, value, and voice.
! Over the course of your life thus far, who has connected with
and engaged, or even inspired, you the most? You should
consider your parents, coaches, teachers, instructors, and the
other leaders you have come in contact with as well as your
friends, teammates, and colleagues at work. Why did they
have that effect on you? Were their words or deeds that
affected you aspects of vision, value, or voice?
! So what? Arguably the greatest coach ever in any sport cre-
ated a connection culture, John Wooden was a role model
who embodied vision, value, and voice. If you are a leader,
how do you compare to John Wooden? How do the leaders
in your organization compare to him, and how can they
improve?
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
30

31
D
During the summer of 2003, Howell Raines was on top of the
world. As executive editor of the New York Times, the fifty-nine-
year-old Alabaman held one of the most powerful leadership
positions in all of journalism. After the Times had garnered a
record seven Pulitzer Prizes for its coverage of September 11,
Raines stood on the floor of the newsroom at Forty-third and
Broadway in the heart of Times Square and boldly proclaimed to
the staff that what they did “will be studied and taught as long as
journalism is . . . practiced.”1
Within a year he was fired.
The less-than-two-year tenure of Howell Raines was the sec-
ond shortest for an executive editor in the more than 150-year
history of the New York Times. To understand what led to the fall
of Howell Raines is to understand something basic about leader-
ship and the culture leaders help create.
Raines’s fall wasn’t due to his failure as a newspaperman. As a
reporter, he was among the best in the business, having written a
long list of outstanding articles and books and having received the
coveted Pulitzer Prize.And Raines was determined to be successful.
TROUBLE IN TIMES SQUARE
CHAPTER 5

FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
32
32
He was known as a hard-charging leader who liked to say he
was raising the competitive metabolism of the Times newsroom.
Abundant knowledge of the business and resolve were not the issue.
A CULTURE OF DISCONNECTION
Raines’s leadership style and the culture he created in the news-
room led to his undoing. His demise accelerated with the scandal
and subsequent investigation of the plagiarism and fabrication by
Jayson Blair, one of Raines’s young star reporters. Smelling an
opportunity to get rid of Raines, Times reporters lined up to tes-
tify against the way he ran the newsroom. Accounts of the situa-
tion as reported in the New Yorker and the Wall Street Journal
revealed the following:
•
Employees viewed Raines as inaccessible and arrogant.
•
Employees feared to disagree with Raines or bring him any
bad news.
•
Raines and his small circle of loyalists tightly controlled deci-
sion making and didn’t trust department editors with decisions
that normally would be theirs to make.
•
Raines was perceived as unfairly applying a two-tier system
that allowed stars such as Jayson Blair to skirt the rules while
holding other newsroom employees to stricter reporting and
editing standards.
•
Policies that Raines had put in place regarding transfers and
travel were so unpopular they caused talented reporters and a
bureau chief to leave for other news organizations.

In short, Howell Raines played favorites, denying many people
opportunities to show what they were capable of doing. He cen-
tralized decisions and was perceived as not being open to con-
structive criticism. The people who were not in Raines’s inner
circle felt deeply disconnected. Vision, value, and voice were in
short supply.
It is not my intention to demonize Howell Raines. In fact,
there is much to admire about him. He was awarded the Pulitzer
Prize for a touching story he wrote about the positive influence
of Grady Hutchinson, his family’s African-American housekeeper,
on him as a child growing up in Birmingham, Alabama. Ms.
Hutchinson has said that her relationship with Howell Raines
has been one of the highlights in her life. Raines’s book on the
history of the civil rights struggle shows his desire to make a pos-
itive contribution to the world. I believe that Raines, like many,
suffered from being blind to the effects of his words and actions
on others.
The culture that Raines created was more about power than
principle. People with rank ordered others about. They learned
from Raines that the powerful didn’t need to consider the opin-
ions of others; in fact, it was a sign of weakness to do so. Raines
told colleagues that his father, a successful businessman, had once
advised him that when an employee challenged him, he had to
“win that fight.” Raines created a star system where the favored
few, the stars, were not held to the rigorous journalistic standards
that others were required to meet.
Raines taught that power and privilege were paramount.
Wooden taught that the principles of respect for others and sac-
rifice for the sake of your teammates and the team as a whole
were the highest calling, and only by understanding and living by
those values could you become a winner.
TROUBLE IN TIMES SQUARE
33

WOODEN AND RAINES: DIFFERENT CULTURES . . .
DIFFERENT RESULTS
The culture John Wooden created was a connection culture that
fired up his team’s spirits, and as a result, their performance soared!
UCLA’s unsurpassed record proves it. The culture Howell Raines
created for those who were not in his inner circle was a culture of
disconnection that was spirit numbing at best and spirit crushing
at worst. Over time a culture that results in low connection or dis-
connection will burn out people; it’s just a question of when. It’s no
surprise that the pent-up frustration in the New York Times news-
room led to a mutiny when the investigation over the Jayson Blair
debacle ensued and many of the newsroom employees sensed
Raines was vulnerable. As the Wall Street Journal reported, “In the
end, Mr. Raines’ demise came swiftly . . . he had few . . . allies.”
REVIEW, REFLECTION, AND APPLICATION
! Howell Raines, former executive editor of the New York Times,
achieved success for a while until the culture he created came
back to haunt him. His words and actions made the people he
considered to be stars feel connected and engaged while others
felt disconnected and subsequently pounced on him when he
became politically vulnerable.
! What will your legacy be with your family, your colleagues at
work, and your friends and acquaintances in your commu-
nity? Will you be fondly remembered as a person who fired
up people, or will people revile you for wearing them down,
discouraging or ignoring them?
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
34

! So what? If you are in a culture that has little connection, like
the culture Howell Raines created in the New York Times
newsroom, look for ways to increase connection, or get out
and find a connection culture where you can thrive.
TROUBLE IN TIMES SQUARE
35

36
M
CHAPTER 6
Most organizations today have become masters of task excellence,
that is, the hard, quantitative, and analytically oriented aspects of
business implicit in such areas as Six Sigma (a statistically ori-
ented quality improvement program) and competitive bench-
marking (the practice of comparing objective measures such as
sales, profits, or inventory level to those of one’s competitors).
Unfortunately, organizations that focus on task excellence alone
will fail to meet the basic human psychological needs that maxi-
mize employees’ contributions to the organization.1
More and more leaders are beginning to see that, absent the
connection and engagement that results when these needs are
met, peak performance is not sustainable. With task excellence
alone, success is fleeting.
People are both the problem and the solution. We need one
another to accomplish great things, but we operate toward one
another as if it’s “all about me.” The solution to this problem is
to create a connection culture that will meet our psychological
needs.
THE NEXT STEP IN THE
EVOLUTION OF ORGANIZATIONS

37
STAR SYSTEMS ON STEROIDS
The prevalence and extreme nature of star systems today con-
tribute to widespread employee disconnection and disengagement.
Employees can be regarded as stars, core employees, or strugglers.
Stars are superior performers. They are either a part of senior man-
agement or on track to move up the organization’s hierarchy. Core
employees are valuable contributors but not stars. Strugglers per-
form poorly, some for temporary reasons and others because they
may not fit well in their roles or with the company.
Star systems affect the economic, political, and social aspects
of organizations. Leaders are more likely to favor stars economi-
cally by paying them more; politically by keeping them more
informed, listening to and considering their points of view; and
socially by spending more time with them and treating them as if
they are superior human beings. Be assured, the favoritism is
noticed. The star system is similar to a caste system: the stars are
Brahman or gentry, strugglers are the untouchables or peasants,
and core employees fall somewhere in between. This system
makes most employees feel like second-class citizens.2
Please understand that I do not oppose linking rewards to per-
formance. I do believe, however, that it can be carried too far not
only economically—an issue that the media regularly focuses on—
but also and perhaps more important, politically and socially, espe-
cially in light of the value provided by core employees.
Research by Thomas DeLong at Harvard Business School and
Vineeta Vijayaraghavan of Katzenbach Partners sheds some light
on categorizing employees. Their research has shown that “B
players” (whom I prefer to call core employees) are just as criti-
cal, and often more so, to an organization’s success as its stars.
Core employees comprise the vast majority of an organization’s
THE NEXT STEP IN THE EVOLUTION OF ORGANIZATIONS
37

employees. They are often just as intelligent, talented, and knowl-
edgeable as stars, yet they differ from them in several respects:
•
Core employees are less likely to call attention to themselves.
•
Core employees are less likely to leave their current employers
for greener pastures.
•
Core employees are quietly dedicated to their work and to
their teammates.
Not all core employees are alike. Some core employees are for-
mer stars who now seek greater work/life balance. Others are “go-
to” players who help their colleagues navigate the organization.
Still other core employees are “truth tellers” who, although blunt
at times in their criticism, help assure the organization addresses
important issues that others may be less willing to raise.3
With the prolonged state of employee disengagement and dis-
connection there is good reason to believe that companies are vul-
nerable to losing many core employees in the years ahead. The
reason: core employees feel their ideas and opinions are not
sought or heard, and they are not respected or recognized for their
work. At some level this lack of consideration is discouraging, and
over time they become frustrated. Although they know that
they’re valuable, feeling underappreciated keeps them from put-
ting their hearts into their work.
Other factors contributing to the disconnection and disen-
gagement of core employees has been the stream of high-profile
cases of corporate malfeasance, several consecutive years of down-
sizing, and the compensation differential between the company’s
stars and the rest of the employees. Employee loyalty has waned;
the relationship between most workers and leaders has eroded.
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
38

Whether leaders realize it or not, they are sending the message to
core employees that they are second-class citizens, that share-
holders and the company’s stars are one team and the rest of the
employees are another.
The pendulum has swung too far in the direction of the stars.
Organizations need to treat everyone with dignity and respect within
a meritocracy that allocates important projects to stars while giv-
ing core employees opportunities to prove that they can be stars too.
PUTTING THE CORPUS BACK INTO CORPORATIONS
One organization that balances meritocracy with connecting and
engaging core employees is the United States Marine Corps. Given
its mission, the Marine Corps cannot afford to tolerate suboptimal
performance from any members. To get the best performance out
of everyone, the Marines have adopted inclusive practices to make
all members feel like a part of the team. In the Marine Corps
everyone is considered important, and all complete leadership
training. With this level of expectation and respect for the contri-
bution of all members, it should come as no surprise that in a
McKinsey & Company/Conference Board study of thirty organi-
zations known to have engaged frontline workers, the Marine
Corps was cited as the best.4
The English word corporation is derived from the Latin cor-
pus, which means “body.” When people come together to work
toward a common purpose or to accomplish a common mission,
they can secure state approval to become a legal corporation. This
newly created body is comprised of individuals connected to one
another via the corporate relationship and each with a specific
role to play as a part of the whole.
THE NEXT STEP IN THE EVOLUTION OF ORGANIZATIONS
39

If we are to solve the problems of employee disconnection,
disengagement, and burnout, as well as the societal ills flowing
from them, one means will surely be to put the corpus back into
corporations. In other words, we need to adopt the mind-set that
as members of corporations, we are in community with one
another, linked together so that what damages any member of the
body harms everyone else and, likewise, what strengthens any
member strengthens everyone else. We need to build internal
relationships that create trusted colleagues rather than internal
competitors. We need to channel our competitive energy toward
reaching our individual and corporate potential in the same way
that Coach John Wooden encouraged his players to reach their
individual potential rather than focus on beating a teammate.
Let’s face it, people are complicated. With a connection cul-
ture, I am not advocating having employees standing around,
holding hands, and singing “Kum Ba Yah.” I am not promoting a
warm and fuzzy work environment or employee group therapy
sessions. I know that you may not like all of your fellow workers.
That said, creating a work environment that cultivates healthy
self-esteem and strong working relationships is common sense,
yet uncommon in practice.
Wise leaders are beginning to see the gap between what exists
today and what we all long for. These leaders are ushering in a
new era in the evolution of organizations. One day it will be
widely acknowledged that task excellence is only part of what’s
necessary for organizations to achieve sustainable superior per-
formance. People will eventually understand that the soft issues
that increase connection among people are essential to any
organization that aspires to be the best. It will also be recognized
that star systems carried to extremes can be destructive to long-
term organizational health because they sow disconnection.
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
40

Leaders and organizations that take action to increase connection
will thrive. Many of those that don’t will not survive as their bet-
ter-connected, more-productive, and more-innovative competi-
tors filled with fired up people pass them by. In Part II we will
look more closely at the three elements in a connection culture
that will drive this change.
REVIEW, REFLECTION, AND APPLICATION
! Task excellence is not enough. Organizations must also have
the relationship excellence that results from connection to
achieve sustainable superior performance.
! A star system in an organization usually results in creating a
large class of marginalized core employees who are, in real-
ity, the foundation of the organization.
! The elements in a connection culture—vision, value, and
voice—work in concert to ensure that the foundational
human needs are met in legitimate ways.
! Have the leaders in your organization created a culture of con-
nection that engages people? If you are a leader, do you actively
value people and seek to help them achieve their potential?
! So what? Meeting the basic human psychological needs
increases connection and results in a greater level of fired up
people who are more productive and more innovative. This
is not a “nice to have”; it’s a “must have” in any successful
organization. Without it, workers will, at best, underperform
and, at worst, sabotage the organization.
THE NEXT STEP IN THE EVOLUTION OF ORGANIZATIONS
41


PART II
THE THREE KEYS TO CONNECTING YOUR
TEAM AND LIGHTING THEIR FIRES:
VISION, VALUE, AND VOICE
In Part II you will learn . . .
! how the elements of vision, value, and voice are reflected
in the richer concepts of inspiring identity, human value,
and knowledge flow.
! what the elements of a connection culture look like in an
organization through modern and historical examples.
! how to apply the elements and increase connection in
organizational environments.
43

I
INSPIRE WITH IDENTITY
CHAPTER 7
44
In Warren Bennis and Patricia Ward Biederman’s insightful
book Organizing Genius, they tell the story of America’s race to
make an atomic bomb before the Nazis during World War II.
The Manhattan Project, as it was called, represented one of the
most challenging and significant scientific accomplishments in
history.
The story began in 1939 when Albert Einstein learned from
three Hungarian physicists who had defected to America that the
Nazis were trying to build an atomic bomb. Einstein wrote a letter
to President Franklin Delano Roosevelt warning him that he
believed the Nazis might find a way to do it. Within days of receiv-
ing Einstein’s letter, FDR established an advisory committee to
investigate using atomic energy for national defense.
During 1941 and 1942, research was conducted at four uni-
versities: Columbia, Princeton, Berkeley, and Chicago. By mid-
1942, the project had become the number-one defense priority
with a $2 billion budget. In the fall, soon-to-be Brigadier General
Leslie Groves was appointed to head the project following his
stint building the Pentagon. Groves, a 250- to 300-pound crusty

INSPIRE WITH IDENTITY
45
veteran career officer, began to pull together the people and the
resources to make it happen.
On December 2, 1942, a team led by Enrico Fermi, a brilliant
physicist, successfully created a self-sustaining nuclear reaction in
an unused squash court under the University of Chicago’s football
stadium.It was a pivotal moment that meant the project could shift
to producing an atomic bomb since the concept had been proven.
General Groves identified a tall, gangly thirty-eight-year-old
quantum physicist at Cal Tech, J. Robert Oppenheimer, to be the
technical leader of the scientists and engineers. Although military
intelligence officials objected to Oppenheimer because of his
Communist Party connections, General Groves insisted that he
was the best person for the job. Refusing to back down, the per-
sistent Groves got Oppenheimer approved.1
One scientist on the project was a young genius from Princeton
named Richard Feynman who was to supervise technicians sup-
porting the project. For security reasons, the army did not want
the technicians to know the purpose of the project. As a result, it
was difficult for them to put their hearts into their work. Their
productivity was lackluster, and the quality of their work was dis-
appointing. Feynman asked Oppenheimer to let him inform the
technicians about the project’s purpose. His request approved,
Feynman explained to the technicians what they were working on,
its importance to the war effort, and the value of their contribu-
tion to the overall project.
After the technicians understood the meaning of their work,
Feynman said he witnessed:
Complete transformation! They began to invent ways of doing
it better. They improved the scheme. They worked at night.
They didn’t need supervising in the night; they didn’t need

FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
46
46
anything. They understood everything; they invented several
of the programs that we used . . . my boys really came through,
and all that had to be done was to tell them what it was, that’s
all. As a result, although it took them nine months to do three
problems before, we did nine problems in three months, which
is nearly ten times as fast.2
The technicians’improved productivity and innovation helped
the Allies beat Hitler in the race to make an atomic bomb. On the
morning of July 16, 1945, the Manhattan Project team watched as
the first atomic bomb was exploded in the New Mexico desert.
Their efforts gave the Allies a decisive edge in the war. Regardless of
your personal feelings about the development and use of the
atomic bomb, this bit of history is one clear example of the power
in helping people find meaning in their work.
THE ORGANIZATION’S STORY IS MY STORY TOO
Each one of us has a personal identity, in other words, how we
think about ourselves. This internal identity is shaped by a host of
factors, such as where we grew up, how we were raised, the
schools we attended, and the people and events in our lives that
influenced our beliefs and our aspirations. Our identities are
expressed externally in where we work, what organizations we
belong to (other than work), what we wear, what we drive, where
we live, and so on. Identity influences almost everything we do.
Savvy marketers understand this and shape brands to appeal to
how we like to think of ourselves.
Organizations have identities too. I like to think of identity as
the story of an individual or organization. Some stories, such as

those of the Marine Corps, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, and Apple Computer, provide tremendous inspiration to
the people who are a part of them and who, through their words
and deeds, continue to write new chapters in the identity story of
their organizations.
Part I introduced the terms vision, value, and voice as an easy
way to remember the elements in a connection culture. As we dig
deeper into each element, I want to expand the terms to capture
the full breadth and depth of their significance.
Vision represents the cultural element of inspiring identity. To
be effective here, it’s necessary to go beyond task thinking and
transform the way people think about the organization. The in-
spiring identity of an organization helps to satisfy the sense of
purpose, significance, and pride we all crave. It bears repeating
that unless you inspire people, you have not added this element to
the work environment. And absent inspiration that fires them up,
people just show up for duty.
WE BAND OF BROTHERS
In 1415 King Henry V of England led thirteen thousand of his
men in battle against fifty thousand Frenchmen near the village of
Agincourt in northern France. The young king came to France
because he felt that the French were controlling territory that
rightfully belonged to him. Henry and his small army were there
to take it back. And that’s exactly what they did. Although heavily
outnumbered by nearly four to one, Henry and his men routed
the French forces in one of the greatest battles in English history.
Historian Simon Schama described Henry as “the dark-
haired, pale-faced, unnervingly sober king . . . St. George and a
INSPIRE WITH IDENTITY
47

Galahad wrapped up in one unbeatable package.”3 No doubt
about it, Henry was one capable king on a mission. But how did
he motivate the Englishmen to follow him into a battle when they
were so overwhelmingly outnumbered? William Shakespeare was
fascinated by this question, too, and he wrote about it in the play
Henry V that immortalized Henry and the battle at Agincourt.
According to Shakespeare’s account, Henry’s troops had their
doubts as they looked upon the heavily armored, highly skilled
French lords and knights. King Henry had to do something to give
his troops the resolve to fight and win in the face of enormous odds
against them. As the battle was about to begin, Henry overheard
some fellow Englishmen wishing they could be back in England
rather than fighting the French. Knowing that he needed to get the
best out of his men, he decided to address them. He began by ques-
tioning why anyone would want to miss out on the victory ahead.
He then promised anyone who joined with him that
. . . we in it shall be remember’d,
We few, we happy few, we band of brothers;
For he to-day that sheds his blood with me
Shall be my brother; be he ne’er so vile,
This day shall gentle his condition:
And gentlemen in England now a-bed
Shall think themselves accursed they were not here,
And hold their manhoods cheap whiles any speaks
That fought with us upon Saint Crispin’s day.4
Henry knew, or at least Shakespeare thought he did, that
appealing to the men’s desire for recognition, respect, and mean-
ing in their lives was the key to unleashing their energy. Promising
that anyone who fought alongside him in this glorious battle
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
48

would be considered, in a sense, one of Henry’s “band of broth-
ers,” regardless of how lowly or “vile” a particular soldier was, was
heady stuff for men who believed that they were born into their
stations in life and that the young Henry was appointed by God to
rule England. By fighting alongside Henry, these soldiers believed
they were becoming part of a relatively small number of men who
would always be looked up to for their amazing victory. It gave
them something to be proud of. It would make “somebodies” out
of nobodies by transforming their identities.
Helping people to achieve the respectable status that they
crave is a powerful motivator. King Henry V elevated those who
fought with him from their lowly positions in society, a stigma
that made them feel devalued. By restoring their sense of value
and elevating their status, their identity, Henry tapped into a way
of engaging and energizing his soldiers. King Henry V was so suc-
cessful that by the time of his death from disease seven years later,
he had taken control of half of France.
MEANING MATTERS
Instilling a sense of purpose in the minds of people can transform
them. Dr. Viktor Frankl, the great Viennese psychiatrist and
Holocaust survivor, wrote in his seminal work Man’s Search for
Meaning that the survivors of concentration camps looked to the
future and found meaning in their lives. Without meaning,
people feel empty and apathetic. Frankl explained that most
people find meaning in work or love.5 For the technicians work-
ing on the Manhattan Project, knowing the importance of their
work motivated them, and their productivity increased tenfold.
For the soldiers fighting alongside King Henry V, their victory at
INSPIRE WITH IDENTITY
49

Agincourt assured them a meaningful position in medieval soci-
ety. In the next chapter we will consider several ways to bring
meaning to work.
REVIEW, REFLECTION, AND APPLICATION
! Inspiring identity exists in an organization when everyone is
motivated by the organization’s mission, united by its values,
and proud of its reputation. Individuals have stories about
their identities that influence them. Organizations have iden-
tity stories that influence individuals too.
! After physicist Richard Feynman explained the meaning of
the Manhattan Project to the supporting engineers (that they
were racing against the Nazis to build a nuclear bomb), their
productivity increased nearly tenfold.
! According to Shakespeare, King Henry V defeated the French
at Agincourt in part because he inspired his soldiers to think
of how proud they would be when they returned to England
as victors in this historic battle. He gave them an inspiring
identity.
! According to psychiatrist Viktor Frankl, most people find
meaning in work or love. In your workplace, how do people
find meaning in their work?
! So what? Leaders need to bring meaning to their organiza-
tions because an individual’s work is an important part of his
personal identity.
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
50

CREATE MEANING IN YOUR ORGANIZATION
W
51
Well, you might be thinking, it’s easy to find meaning when you
are racing to save the civilized world from Hitler, but how can I
provide meaning to employees who are making electric motors or
providing financial services? Although it’s not as obvious, it is
achievable. Let me identify a few ways in which leaders can pro-
vide meaning and significance to the work of the people they
lead.
1. Be an innovator. One way to find meaning in work is to
show how you are bringing something new or different to the
marketplace. Harvard Business School’s Michael Porter put it this
way: “In great companies, strategy becomes a cause. That’s
because strategy is about being different. So if you have a really
great strategy, people are fired up: ‘We’re not just another airline.
We’re bringing something new to the world.’”1
In his humorous and fascinating book On Paradise Drive,
astute social critic David Brooks observed this about people who
have a vision to bring something new to the market:
CHAPTER 8

The press concentrates its attention on the remarkable figures,
the dot-com geniuses, the zillionaire investment bankers, or
the paradigm-shifting, over-the-horizon-peering, outside-the-
box-thinking corporate rebels who let their wacky but brilliant
employees scooter down the company hallways while squirting
each other with Super Soaker water cannons. But the real engines
of American capitalism are the people you see in the most un-
remarkable locales—sitting around in the bland office parks or
checking in to the suite hotels . . .
Perhaps one of the people . . . dreams of revolutionizing
supermarket razor displays . . . Maybe others spend their days
thinking about how to reduce glare on cash register displays so
that older employees can read them better; or perhaps they
obsess over how to speed up the receipt printer so that super-
market lines can move a tiny bit faster . . . These are the drivers
of the American economy.2
Brooks goes on to explain how many individuals are driven
by what he refers to as a “Paradise Spell,” a vision of a better
future that propels them to work hard so that they might achieve
it. It is another way of saying that these driven individuals are
motivated to bring something new to the world. Being an inno-
vator is part of their personal story, part of their identity. Do the
members in your organization feel like innovators?
2. Inspire your team to reach a challenging goal. Another way
to fire up the spirit of healthy competition and bring meaning to
work is to give people a challenge or set a goal to be the best
organization in your business at some measure such as revenue,
profit, or client satisfaction. This works especially well if you have
access to benchmarking information that lets you see how your
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
52

organization’s performance compares to your competitors’. Being
the leader of something enhances a person’s identity.
Often leaders try to create internal competition among indi-
viduals within a unit. Although internal competition may moti-
vate employees, it also destroys trust and cooperation. You don’t
want individuals in a unit to perceive each other as competitors
rather than colleagues, especially if successful performance requires
a high degree of teamwork. You want them to focus energy on
external competitors or on individual best efforts. Coach John
Wooden told his basketball players that success is the peace of
mind that comes from knowing you gave your very best effort in
every practice and every game rather than focusing on anything
outside your control. As a result, Wooden’s players relentlessly
pushed themselves to live up to their own personal standards.
In an effort to “stir the pot,” some leaders make individual
performance results available for all to see, thus shaming individ-
uals with poor performance. A better approach is to use perform-
ance measures as benchmarks to identify whether individuals are
in the right role or have performance issues that can be corrected.
I do not mean just looking at quarterly data, however, but taking
into account a longer time frame. Everyone experiences slumps
for one reason or another, and examining only a short period of
time is myopic.
Shaming someone by making his performance numbers
public violates the element of human value (we will discuss it in
later chapters). If a person is not performing after attempts have
been made to help him, it is best to reevaluate the individual’s
skills, temperament, and so forth and make every effort to move
him into the appropriate role. If one doesn’t exist, assist him with
a severance and outplacement package that eases his transition to
another organization. People in your company will see that you
CREATE MEANING IN YOUR ORGANIZATION
53

FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
54
treated the underperformer with dignity and respect, and your
organization will be more appealing to the remaining employees.
3. Communicate your inspiring identity upfront. New employee
orientation often consists of merely a member from each depart-
ment briefly explaining the department’s activities along with a
review of who’s who. Great leaders take the time to invest in new
employees upfront so that they may understand the organization,
its meaning, and their role in it. Educating new members begins
with a well-planned orientation program. The more thorough
understanding people have of their organization, the more they
will feel connected.
As I mentioned earlier, in the mid-to late-1990s, McKinsey &
Company and The Conference Board jointly studied thirty
organizations known to have engaged frontline workers, and the
project team concluded the United States Marine Corps out-
performed all other organizations in motivating its frontline
members. One of the best practices of the Corps is inculcating the
meaning of its work to new recruits during the twelve-week boot
camp at Parris Island, South Carolina. The Marines’ best leaders
teach recruits the values of honor, courage, and commitment.
During boot camp, recruits learn the words and meaning of
the “Marines’ Hymn,” including these key phrases: “we fight our
country’s battles,” “first to fight for right and freedom,” “we have
fought in every clime and place where we could take a gun,” and
“in many a strife, we’ve fought for life.” The recruits are not called
Marines until they have successfully completed the portion of the
boot camp called The Crucible. Various stages of The Crucible
include evaluations that are named after Medal of Honor recipi-
ents. Recruits learn the stories of Medal of Honor recipients such
as Daniel Daly.

During World War I at Belleau Wood in France, Daly—armed
with hand grenades and a pistol—single-handedly attacked and
defeated an enemy machine gun emplacement. Later that same day
and while under enemy attack, Daly brought in wounded from the
battlefield. He would have been awarded the Medal of Honor, but
he already had been awarded two others—the maximum allowed.3
With upfront orientation that includes other similar stories,
it should be no surprise that when you ask a Marine what’s so
special about the Marine Corps, he or she will reply, esprit de
corps, a French phrase meaning the “spirit of the group.” The
Corps’ spirit is the foundation that produces a lifelong commit-
ment reflected in the Marine Corps’ motto, Semper Fidelis (Latin
for “always faithful”).
4. Consistently communicate your inspiring identity. Every
leader should aspire not only to create but also to sustain an
organization and environment where everyone is united by a
common desire to be “always faithful” to the organization’s vision
and its members. We all long to be part of an organization that is
worthy of our heartfelt, sincere commitment. Corporate leaders
need to see themselves as chief spiritual officers, if you will, in the
sense that they are responsible for creating and sustaining the
conditions that foster employee commitment and infusing their
team with a desire to achieve the mission. They can do this by
continuously spreading the vision, mission, and values of the
organization and linking in the minds of employees the com-
pany’s inspiring identity to its current situation, tactical action
plans, and strategy. Abraham Lincoln, FDR, and Winston
Churchill were just a few of the great leaders who kept an inspir-
ing identity in front of the people and called upon them to put
forth the extra effort to accomplish their common goal.
CREATE MEANING IN YOUR ORGANIZATION
55

5. Employ the power of the pen. Historically, great leaders have
used public speaking and writing to persuade people and influ-
ence their behavior. Thomas Paine’s pamphlet Common Sense
had a tremendous effect on starting the American Revolution, as
did Patrick Henry’s “give me liberty or give me death” speech.
Martin Luther King Jr.’s “I Have a Dream” speech and “Letter
from Birmingham Jail” are perhaps two of the most important
pieces of persuasive communications that contributed to the pas-
sage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
In the world of business, Pour Your Heart into It by Howard
Schultz of Starbucks is an outstanding book that tells a compelling
story about a company, its history, and meaning. Clicks and
Mortar by David Pottruck, former CEO of Charles Schwab, and
Terry Pierce is another excellent example in this genre. Steve Jobs’s
speeches to Apple employees inspired them to think differently.
One fine example of a written articulation of a group’s
inspiring identity comes from the U.S. Navy. Here are excerpts
from the USS Montpelier Command Philosophy, written by the
commander of the USS Montpelier, a Los Angeles-class nuclear
attack submarine commissioned in 1993 that has won several of
the navy’s highest awards for its stellar performance:
MONTPELIER COMMAND PHILOSOPHY
Montpelier is a warship, designed to steam into harm’s way and
win. Our flesh and blood bring this ship to life. We are stewards
of one of the most capable warships in the history of mankind.
These thoughts provide a framework for executing that steward-
ship and for building the teamwork that will enable us to fight
and win in war.
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
56

Honesty.Honesty provides the foundation of trust that is essen-
tial to teamwork.I expect and require that you be completely honest
in your communication with your shipmates.I will do the same with
you. At times, this will be painful, but it is extremely important that
we have the facts when making decisions and that our relationships
are based on mutual trust. I pledge not to kill the messenger.
Integrity. Do the right thing; don’t take the expedient path.
If you are not sure what the right thing is, and you have the
opportunity, ask. If you can’t, trust your judgment and training.
This requires a great deal of courage, but if you act honestly and
faithfully in this regard, you will not be second-guessed.
Teamwork. No ship, department, or division is successful as
a one-man show. Teamwork is the key to success. Our actions
must reinforce this concept. If you find yourself thinking about a
problem in the command and the word “they” pops into your
head, think again. “We” will solve problems together. I am not
one of them and neither are you.
Open-Door Policy. Leadership is about setting priorities. If
you have an idea for a better way, suggest it. My door is always
open to discuss your concerns. I trust that you will use the chain
of command when possible.
Caring Leadership. Know your people. Translate your car-
ing into tangible results. Get them off the ship when you can.
Ensure they are ready for advancement. Make a difference in
their lives.
Mistakes. Honest mistakes come with the territory. I will make
some and so will you. The keys to success are establishing enough
backups so that we don’t make a critical mistake and recognizing
and learning from the mistakes that we do make.Your tour will be
filled with many ups and downs. It is not how many times you fall
CREATE MEANING IN YOUR ORGANIZATION
57

that will determine your success.Your honesty,integrity,and deter-
mination to fight on, will.
Fitness and Sleep. Submarining requires stamina. Fitness,
nutrition, and sleep are key to your decision-making. As General
Patton said, “Fatigue makes cowards of us all.” Take care of your
body and your mind. I do not judge you on how long you work
or how long you stay awake, but on how effective you are.
Standards. The standard is excellence in all we do. Aristotle
said, “We are what we repeatedly do. Excellence, then, is a habit.”
Our reputation is determined in a large part due to how we execute
routine evolutions,our personal appearance and the appearance of
our ship. It is the sum of each of our actions. Set the standard.
Fun.Submarining is an extremely challenging and demanding
profession. At times the hours will be long and the work hard, but
it is important that we have fun while fulfilling our responsibilities.
Work/Life Balance and Community. Success at work is
interwoven with success at home. I consider it vital that we balance
our military duties with our roles in the family. Take advantage of
opportunities to make time for your family and work hard to keep
your professional role and your family role in perspective. It is also
important that our families understand the importance of our mis-
sion and that we recognize the sacrifices that our family members
must make in order to fulfill our duties. Service is a team effort. I
will make an effort to create a family environment on board and to
support our families. A successful command has a family atmos-
phere, where every member takes pride in being a part of the team.
Personal Development. I expect every Sailor to be working
towards his personal and professional development, and I will
support your actions in these areas.
Critical Self-Assessment. Our ability to improve is dependent
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
58

on our ability to analyze the causes of our failures and to take
action to address those problems. At times, we will formally
critique events. The intent is to fix the problem, not the blame.
Honesty is critical to this process.
Decision Making. I will not establish a lot of detailed policies
to spell out and legislate decisions on board. I will balance the
long- and short-term needs of each individual, the ship, and the
U.S. Navy. If time allows, I will make every effort to explain my
decision, but there will be times when it is not practical and I
expect you to trust my judgment.
Equality.We swear to support the Constitution of the United
States, which states that all men are created equal. I expect you to
treat each of your shipmates, our families, and our visitors with
dignity and respect.
Ambassadors. Overseas, we are ambassadors of the United
States. At home, we are representatives of the submarine force,
the Navy, and the U.S. Military. Our behavior and actions should
reflect the pride and responsibility we feel as members of an elite
military organization.
Service and Reward. My ultimate goal is that you consider
your service on board one of the most rewarding experiences in
your life. This requires that you resolve to better yourself, your
ship, your shipmates, and your country. Each night when you go to
sleep ask yourself,“What have I done today to make myself a bet-
ter man? How have I made Montpelier a better ship? Have I been
a faithful steward of one of our country’s most valuable assets, this
ship and the outstanding Sailors who fight her?”
These are my thoughts, just words on paper. Our actions
together make them a reality and the key to our success.
CREATE MEANING IN YOUR ORGANIZATION
59

The Montpelier Command Philosophy provides us with a
sense of the leader who wrote it, someone who was direct, honest,
and personally committed to the mission. It is a sincere, authentic
expression of this leader’s beliefs. It addresses the fundamental
issues of inspiring identity.
Effective leaders know that they must provide meaning so
that others will commit to and make sacrifices for the sake of the
mission. To provide meaning, leaders must make an investment
of their time to fully understand it and to communicate it in a
way that reaches the hearts and minds of the people they lead.
The Command Philosophy reflects a great deal of thought and
preparation, and it has the mark of a leader willing to make sac-
rifices for the sake of the mission and for the sake of the people
he leads.
Creating and communicating an inspiring identity to help
people become mission-minded makes a difference in their per-
formance. Great leaders know the importance of connecting people
through a shared identity that inspires them. Leaders who shirk this
responsibility, often because they let the urgent tasks crowd out the
significant ones, fail to fully engage and fire up the people they lead.
REVIEW, REFLECTION, AND APPLICATION
! A successful organization must have a clearly defined iden-
tity that inspires people. A few ways to inspire people include
appealing to their personal identity and the aspects it shares
with the organization’s identity, establishing the value of
your work to clients and/or society, providing a challenge, or
bringing something new to the world.
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
60

! Try to find multiple ways to communicate your organization’s
inspiring identity, including stories, visual depictions, facts
and figures, pithy sayings, and video clips. Doing this will help
you reach people with different thinking and learning styles.
The written word is especially effective because people can
come back to it.
! Share! Share! Share! Keep the inspiring identity in front of
people.
! So what? To increase connection among people at work,
individuals need to see that their organization’s identity adds
something to their personal identity. Can you articulate your
company’s identity in a clear, compelling, and understand-
able fashion? Are there aspects of your company’s identity
that fit with how you like to think about yourself?
CREATE MEANING IN YOUR ORGANIZATION
61

T
62
The next cultural element in a connection culture is value, which
I will refer to as human value as we take a deeper look at this ele-
ment. Human value recognizes that all people have feelings and
that being valued matters to them. It also recognizes that appre-
ciating a person’s talents and helping him achieve his potential
encourages him. He becomes fired up and feels more connected
to the group when he is part of a culture that embraces human
value.
The American Revolution and America’s subsequent eco-
nomic success are vivid historical examples of the power of
human value. King George III’s inability to understand human
value forever connected his legacy to a monumental managerial
blunder: losing the American colonies.
FROM OUTPOST TO EMPIRE
What motivated a ragtag collection of colonial citizen-soldiers
who were woefully ill-equipped and ill-trained to defeat the most
DELETE WHAT DEVALUES
CHAPTER 9

powerful military in the world? One reason was King George
III’s condescension toward the colonists. At the time of the
Revolution, many Englishmen regarded the colonists as inferior.
With that prevailing view the king felt he could throw his con-
siderable weight around and get away with abusing his power. To
raise money to pay the debts incurred by England while defend-
ing the colonies during the French and Indian War, King George
levied taxes on the colonists without their consent. Given the
chip on the colonists’ shoulders resulting from the disdainful
attitude of the English, that was the straw that broke the camel’s
back. The colonists viewed taxation without representation as a
violation of their rights as citizens of the British Empire and
equated it to being treated as slaves by the English king and
Parliament.1 The king’s actions provoked the fury of a people
who already felt scorned. Thanks to King George, the thirteen
separate colonies came together, formed a militia and, with assis-
tance from France and financial resources from Holland, won
their independence.
The brand-new country expanded human value with a series
of actions. With the adoption of the Constitution and the Bill of
Rights, America protected the voting and civil rights of white
males. The nation’s increasing investment in education and public
infrastructure empowered its citizens, giving them greater oppor-
tunities to achieve their potential and realize what would become
known as the American Dream.
The economic opportunity and social mobility increased
engagement and the sense of connection among Americans. They
responded by producing extraordinary economic growth.Historian
Gordon Wood wrote in his Pulitzer Prize-winning book, The
Radicalism of the American Revolution, that in less than fifty years
America went:
DELETE WHAT DEVALUES
63

[from] less than two million monarchical subjects . . . on the
margin of civilization . . . [to] a giant, almost continent-wide
republic of nearly ten million egalitarian-minded bustling
citizens who not only had thrust themselves into the van-
guard of history but had fundamentally altered their society
and their social relationships . . . [Americans] had become,
almost overnight, the most [free], the most democratic, the
most commercially minded, and the most modern people in
the world.2
Today, America is the undisputed global economic leader. In
addition to America’s economy being the largest in the world, it
is a fertile culture for innovation. Of the recent Nobel laureates in
economics, three-fourths reside and work in America. American
movies account for more than 80 percent of global box-office
revenues. American pharmaceutical companies invent more
drugs than all other drug companies outside the USA combined.
America accounts for 40 percent of the world’s technology expen-
ditures, and American venture capital firms are far more numer-
ous than firms outside the USA.3 As it turned out, expanding
human value in America was not only right, it was also wise!
Human value contributed to a modern-day miracle: the transfor-
mation of an outpost of civilization into the most powerful
national economy the world has ever witnessed.
Human value in a culture is, first of all, about treating people
with respect and dignity, and second, about empowering them to
achieve their potential. In the rest of this chapter, I’ll describe how
leaders can remove obstacles in an environment that make people
feel devalued, and in the following chapter, I’ll recommend how
leaders can add elements to an environment that make people
feel valued.
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
64

FIRST, DO NO HARM
In the age-old Hippocratic Oath that physicians take before they
begin to practice medicine, they pledge first to do no harm to
their patients. Likewise, the first step for any leader who wants to
engage his or her people and increase connection is to eliminate
behaviors and attitudes in the culture that do harm to people by
devaluing them. Let’s consider a few areas where you can do this.
1. Eliminate disrespectful, condescending, and rude behavior.
People are devalued when they are subjected to uncivil behavior
in the workplace. Obviously, physical aggression is wrong. Less
obvious is verbal abuse, especially if it is not clear that the instiga-
tor intended to harm the target. Remember the childhood phrase
“sticks and stones may break my bones, but words will never hurt
me”? The truth is, words can and do hurt.
Most of us have witnessed managers berating the views of
lower-ranking employees during meetings. These senior man-
agers may reject others’ ideas without explaining their reasons
why. Likewise, they may assert that their views are obviously
superior without allowing a dialogue on the pros and cons of
their position or on the alternatives. This approach is just one
example of incivility in an organizational culture.
Uncivil behavior can take many forms, including interrupt-
ing someone who is speaking, giving someone the silent treat-
ment, or completely ignoring someone. Generally, any action
meant to humiliate, intimidate, undermine, or destroy a col-
league in the workplace is uncivil and should be forbidden.
Unfortunately, patronizing behavior at work is too com-
mon. A 2001 survey of 1,180 workers found that 71 percent of
them reported experiencing disrespectful, rude, or condescending
DELETE WHAT DEVALUES
65

FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
66
behavior from superiors or coworkers within the last five years.
One out of every four of these workers confronted the offender,
and 75 percent of them experienced retaliation because they
spoke out.4
Disrespectful, condescending, and rude behavior must be
eliminated from the corporate culture if we are to engage and ener-
gize people. When someone consistently exhibits uncivil behavior,
he needs to know that it damages connection and is unacceptable.
It should be made clear that continuing such behavior will bring
about the perpetrator’s removal. A leader who allows someone in
his chain of command to commit uncivil behavior also needs to be
held accountable.
If left unchecked, uncivil behavior in the workplace will
spread. Second-in-command leaders tend to adopt the leadership
practices of their bosses—whether they are civil or uncivil. The
only way to eliminate this corrosive behavior is for leaders to
model civil behavior and take action to remove people who have
proven themselves incapable of reform.
2. Go easy on the criticism. Another devaluing behavior is
excessive criticism. Wise leaders know how to provide useful
input with the goal of improving performance without adding
undue pressure that could contribute to a loss of confidence.
Joe Torre, the phenomenally successful manager of the New
York Yankees, knows to go easy on his players. His approach stems
from personal experience with the frustration that came during
disappointing times in his career as a ballplayer. “I hit .360 one
season, and I hit .240 another year, and I felt I played equally hard
both years,” said Torre in a Fortune magazine article that heralded
him as a model for today’s corporate managers. Former Yankees
superstar Paul O’Neill said this about Torre: “Joe doesn’t put

added pressure on you or act differently toward you because
you’re not hitting well or playing well. Players pick up on these
things.”Yankees pitcher Mike Stanton added,“With Joe you really
don’t have to look over your shoulder, because you’ll lose confi-
dence in yourself long before Joe loses confidence in you. He’ll
say, ‘I remember what you did for me. I remember what you did
for this organization.’” 5
A good leader can take care of those he leads and still be per-
formance-oriented. Task excellence is critical to his success.
Leaders don’t reach the top of their professions by avoiding per-
formance problems. The difference is that they place themselves
in the shoes of their employees to understand how to get things
done in a way that shows appreciation and respect. They improve
tasks by nurturing a healthy work culture that values people and
helps them feel more connected to their team.
3. Minimize unnecessary rules and excessive controls. Unnec-
essary rules and excessive controls devalue people by making them
feel that they are not trusted or respected.A leader who overcontrols
his people will not engage or energize them. Micromanaged
employees are more likely to feel disconnected. Another universal
human need is to have a reasonable degree of autonomy or freedom
to do our work so that we might have a greater sense of control and
experience personal growth as we develop new skills and expertise.
Napoleon was known for micromanaging. After the French
Revolution and the Reign of Terror that succeeded it, Napoleon
restored order to the nation. Unfortunately, he didn’t know when
to limit his controlling tendencies. According to historian James
MacGregor Burns, Napoleon was not a bloodthirsty tyrant but a
control fanatic. He controlled the press, books, theater, workers’
associations, and public demonstrations.6
DELETE WHAT DEVALUES
67

To teach the youth of France to respect the country’s laws, for
example, he took control of French schools from the locals and
hired instructors who were required to teach from the same syllabus
and textbooks. The result of this overcontrolling approach was that
children fled to Catholic schools.And when Napoleon enacted con-
scription for military duty, the lives of soldiers became so draconian
and restrictive that as word spread, it produced “mass resistance
of a sustained, endemic character,” according to historian Isser
Woloch.7 Draft evaders were so desperate, they mutilated them-
selves or escaped over the Pyrenees mountain range to avoid mili-
tary duty. The French did not want to be micromanaged.
French citizens wanted freedom, not an overbearing ruler to
dictate every aspect of their lives.After the deaths of several hundred
thousand French soldiers from the catastrophic campaign in Russia
during 1814 and Napoleon’s later military defeat at Waterloo in
1815, his popular support waned. The self-appointed emperor
learned that many of his supporters were of the fair-weather variety.
In the end the British exiled Napoleon to the island of St. Helena.
In the business world, the destructiveness of an excessively
controlling person was demonstrated in the fall of the Pullman
Palace Car Company in the late 1800s. George Pullman, an entre-
preneur and engineer, created a successful company that built
luxury railcars. As business boomed, Pullman built a company-
owned town for his employees and named it after himself. He
believed that a clean, orderly environment without saloons or
other illicit attractions would produce superior workers. Pullman,
Illinois, had a population of eight thousand people living in 1,400
housing units owned by Pullman and rented to the employees. It
contained a school, a park, a library, a church, and other necessi-
ties of modern life. The company maintained the streets and
lawns. Rent was deducted from employees’ paychecks. To ensure
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
68

that his rules were followed, Pullman hired “spotters” who identi-
fied troublemakers. If any of Pullman’s rules were violated, an
employee could be evicted on ten days’ notice according to the
terms of the rental agreement. Pullman kept his finger on the pulse
of every aspect of his workers’ lives.
Although Pullman thought the workers should be grateful
that he was allowing them to live in a Pullman-built utopia, they
didn’t see it that way. Many complained about the lack of freedom
and often left to visit Chicago’s neighborhoods nearby. In 1893
when the nation experienced a depression, Pullman was forced to
lay off a fifth of his workforce and reduce wages by 25 percent for
the remaining employees. Despite this downturn, workers who
lived in Pullman’s town continued to pay rent at current rates. The
financial squeeze unleashed an underlying torrent of discontent
among workers. The combination of employee disengagement and
reduced pay triggered a backlash. In May 1894, Pullman’s workers
went on strike, and across the country other railroad workers, who
were members of the labor union, joined the strike. After mass
violence erupted and $80 million in property was damaged,
President Grover Cleveland sent federal troops to protect the mail
delivered via railroad, and the courts ordered an end to the strike.8
Eventually, Pullman’s company went bankrupt. Like Napoleon,
Pullman learned the true feelings of the people he led, feelings that
were hidden in good times.
George Pullman’s leadership is an extreme example of a well-
intentioned leader who didn’t understand the people he led. Leaders
can learn from Pullman’s unfortunate experience that controls—
rules, processes, and procedures—should be maintained only if
experience has proven that they are necessary and they produce
benefits for the organization. Clearly, some controls are necessary
and beneficial to ensure efficiency and concentration of effort, but
DELETE WHAT DEVALUES
69

excessive control is a sure way to contribute to employee burnout.
Leaders need to strike the right balance between giving people free-
dom and maintaining a minimum of controls and rules.
4. Eliminate excessive signs of hierarchy. Leaders who display
excessive signs of their power and position, like proud peacocks
showing off their feathers, devalue others. In a sense, their pride
is in competition with everyone else’s pride. When a leader tries
to hog all the trappings of success, he crowds out recognition for
others. Wise leaders err on the side of understatement.
Consider Stan Gault, who led the Rubbermaid Corporation to
become one of the most respected corporations in America.
Shortly after he retired from Rubbermaid, the board of directors
of the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company asked him to take over
the CEO’s job. Goodyear’s performance had suffered, and the
company had taken on a heavy debt load to repurchase stock from
corporate raider Sir James Goldsmith. Gault had to act fast. An
early move was to send several messages to employees that he was
on their side. He linked his pay to the performance of Goodyear
stock, and he declared to all that he was willing to place his faith
in the people of Goodyear and that together they would restore
the company to its former glory.
Gault inherited his predecessor’s office on Goodyear’s famed
Mahogany Row. The office was large and required a considerable
amount of lighting. He immediately unscrewed most of the light
bulbs to cut costs. The word quickly spread at Goodyear. It wasn’t
long before everyone knew that when Gault asked employees to
reduce expenses, he would be sacrificing too.9
Other leaders have taken similar actions. When A. G. Lafley
became the CEO of Procter & Gamble and began its remarkable
turnaround, he reduced the excessive executive office space and
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
70

used the reclaimed space for an employee resource center. When
Charles Schwab had to lay off workers in 2001, he declined to take
any salary that year, provided generous severance packages to laid-
off workers, personally established a $10 million trust to fund laid-
off workers’ education expenses and, in a historical first, granted
them stock options. At Intel Corporation, the former chairman
and CEO Andrew Grove sat in an open cubicle and parked in the
general parking lot like all other employees.
Each of these leaders eschewed excessive signs of hierarchy
and showed by their actions that they were willing to share in the
sacrifice with everyone else. In one interview Carolyn Dewing-
Hommes and I conducted, a person shared her disgust over a
chief financial officer who communicated the need to reduce
travel expenses and yet went against company policy and flew
first class on short trips. Such leaders who are insensitive to
others reduce connection because they create an emotional dis-
tance between themselves and most workers. When workers feel
that leaders are enjoying all the fruits of the company’s success or
are not feeling any pain when times are difficult, they resent it
and feel that selfish leaders are taking advantage of them.
Conversely, leaders who make sacrifices for the good of the team
elevate their employees and acknowledge their value.
5. Get rid of devaluing leaders. Jack Welch, the former head of
General Electric, talks about how much he values the right lead-
ership style and how he believes it affected trust and cooperation
across GE. In GE’s 2000 Annual Report Welch had this to say:
We have to remove . . . the “go-to” manager, the hammer, who
doesn’t share the values, but delivers the numbers . . . on the
backs of people, often “kissing-up and kicking down” during
DELETE WHAT DEVALUES
71

the process. We have to remove these managers because they
have the power in themselves to destroy the open, informal,
trust-based culture we need to win today and tomorrow.
We made our great leap forward when we began removing
[these types of] managers and making it clear to the entire
company why they were asked to leave—not for the usual “per-
sonal reasons” or to “pursue other opportunities,” but for not
sharing our values. Until leaders develop the courage to do
this, people will never have the full confidence that these soft
values are truly real. There are undoubtedly a few [of these
managers] remaining, and they must leave the company,
because their behavior weakens the trust that 600,000 people
have in their leadership.
Over time GE has done just that. The company identified
leaders who didn’t value people, even if they were making their
numbers, and fired them after they had proven that they were
unable or unwilling to change. The devaluing leaders described by
Jack Welch damage the connection with people they are responsi-
ble for and therefore don’t deserve to lead them.
6. Replace devaluing severance procedures. If it becomes neces-
sary to reduce compensation expenses by eliminating positions,
do it in a way that allows people to preserve their dignity. The con-
sulting firm McKinsey & Company helps former employees find
new jobs and stay connected to the firm’s alumni network. Other
companies take a far different approach. They pack up a person’s
belongings, shut off his e-mail access, and have him escorted to the
door. Absent an indication of potential for violence, this approach
is damaging to the employee-employer relationship. People will
take note of how their former colleagues were treated.
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
72

By implementing the suggestions noted here, you will reduce
the elements in an environment that make people feel devalued.
In the next chapter, we’ll look at actions you can take to fire up
people by making them feel valued.
REVIEW, REFLECTION, AND APPLICATION
! Human value exists in an organization when everyone
understands the basic psychological needs of people, appre-
ciates their positive, unique contributions, and helps them
achieve their potential.
! Human value is about treating people with respect and dignity
and empowering them to achieve their potential. America’s
break with England and its subsequent rise as an economic
power demonstrate how human value can have a profound
effect on people.
! Several types of behavior and attitudes in an organization
should be removed because they devalue people. The follow-
ing actions will increase human value.
1. Eliminate disrespectful, condescending, and rude behavior.
2. Go easy on the criticism.
3. Minimize unnecessary rules and excessive controls.
4. Eliminate excessive signs of hierarchy.
5. Get rid of devaluing leaders.
6. Replace devaluing severance procedures.
! Do you recall examples of devaluing behavior that you have
experienced or witnessed at work?
DELETE WHAT DEVALUES
73

! So what? The element of human value can make or break
your success as a leader. When people are devalued, they lose
their motivation to excel at work, and they may want to
retaliate against those who devalue them. By eliminating
devaluing behavior, organizations can increase trust and
cooperation among employees. What have you done lately
to ensure that everyone you are responsible for leading is
consistently treated with the respect and recognition that
bring out the best in them and that you hope for yourself?
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
74

DIAL UP THE VALUE
75
T
The flip side of eliminating behaviors and attitudes that devalue
people is adding elements that enhance people’s value. These
positive measures effectively empower people to achieve their
potential.
David Neeleman, the CEO of jetBlue airlines, is an excellent
example of a leader who adds elements to the workplace environ-
ment that increase employees’sense of being valued. He refers to his
colleagues at jetBlue as fellow “crew members” rather than employ-
ees. He meets with 95 percent of new crew members on their first
day of work.Neeleman makes it a point to know the names and sto-
ries of many people in the jetBlue organization.Each week when he
sets aside a day to fly the airlines’ routes, he connects with the crew
while working alongside them. His actions speak volumes to the
crew about how much he values them.
Here are a few ways you can do this:
1. Make a human connection with as many people as possible.
Leaders need to acknowledge individuals. There’s no easier way to
CHAPTER 10

FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
76
76
show you value people than to learn about them and use their
names when you speak with them. Knowing names and personal
stories helps leaders make a powerful emotional connection with
people in a short time. Leaders from the top down should be
expected to know the stories of the people with whom they fre-
quently come in contact. If you lead a large number of people, you
can make human connections by meeting them, maintaining eye
contact, saying something to them as you pass in the hallway, and
acknowledging what they say to you. When leaders model this
behavior, others will follow suit. Although it sounds so obvious,
many leaders don’t do this.
Connection is increased by helping employees know each
other’s stories too, especially those of people who frequently
interact with each other. One way to learn more about others is
to maintain an intranet-based directory that includes employees’
names, pictures, and any information they feel comfortable shar-
ing such as interests outside of work, favorite books, movies, quo-
tations, and other information that communicates their unique
stories. Giving individuals an opportunity to express themselves
brings the color of human personality into the workplace.
2. Treat and speak to employees as partners. Treating people
below you in your organization’s hierarchy as equals rather than
as inferiors enhances their sense of personal value. Remember,
leaders make eye contact, say hello, and use the person’s name, if
possible, when they walk by an employee. Aloof behavior only
communicates that someone is not worth acknowledging. Treat
employees as partners too. Don’t expect them to do personal
errands for you. Think of others as partners who play different
roles from yours. You will keep them connected and energized as
they sense the respect you show them.

3. Help employees find the right roles. Another way to show
appreciation is to help people better understand their abilities,
temperaments, and values. Each individual is a unique combina-
tion of natural and learned cognitive capabilities. Assessment
tools enable people to identify their skills, temperaments, learn-
ing styles, thinking styles, and values. Providing these resources
to people will help leaders place them in the roles where they
will be most likely to excel. People who excel will be more likely
to receive genuine recognition and respect, and well-deserved
praise is encouraging and strengthens connection.
Although many companies provide personality testing to
selected leaders, few offer it to people throughout the organiza-
tion. Chances are it has been a tool to help those leaders build a
well-balanced team of people based on their personality types.
This is a good start. But more tools should be used if you are seri-
ous about bringing out the best in the people you lead.
Being in a position that fits an employee’s strengths so that he
performs well is essential to give him a sense of value. I refer to
this as the right role. When a person is in the right role, he knows
it and so do his peers because he is good at what he does.
Several factors determine whether someone is in the right
role. One factor is that the job fits well with the individual’s per-
sonality and abilities.
A second factor is that it presents the right degree of chal-
lenge. If our jobs are too easy, we will grow bored. If too difficult,
we will become overly stressed. When we are in the right roles,
however, we become immersed in our work to such an extent that
we become unconsciously absorbed and lose a sense of ourselves
and of the passing time.
Psychologist Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi has conducted exten-
sive research on the subject with participants from around the
DIAL UP THE VALUE
77

world. When the participants’ work provided the right degree of
challenge, they consistently described the feeling of being so
caught up in their work that they lost a sense of self and of time,
a state that Csikszentmihalyi called “flow.”1 His research shows
that being in the right role, a role that creates flow, helps meet the
universal human need for personal growth. In effect, when we are
performing a challenging task that gives us a sense of flow, we are
personally growing. Csikszentmihalyi believes that a person who
is in a state of flow actually feels the sensation that comes when
the brain is making new neural connections. Whatever the case,
the flow that occurs when we are personally growing brings out
the best in us. It fires us up.
A third factor that contributes to being in the right role is that
the job is consistent with the way the individual thinks of herself,
her identity, and her values. The industry, the particular com-
pany, and the specific job all say something about her identity.
When her job is consistent with her identity, she will be more
engaged; when it’s inconsistent with her identity, the job will con-
tribute to her disengagement. When her identity is inconsistent
with the identity of the company—for example, a vegetarian work-
ing at a steakhouse—she is in the wrong place and is unlikely to be
excited about her work.
4. Educate, inform, and listen to employees. Educating,
informing, and listening to employees enhances their sense of
value. If you don’t let people know what you are thinking, if you
don’t inform them and hear their points of view, they’ll probably
assume the worst. When people can’t see the direction they are
headed, they naturally experience anxiety. Conversely, when you
inform and listen to them, they will be grateful that you recog-
nized them and valued their ideas and opinions. With informa-
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
78

tion and understanding comes a greater sense of security and
optimism that the future is bright. We will explore this issue in
greater detail in the chapters ahead.
5. Decentralize decision making. Allowing people to make deci-
sions shows them that you respect their abilities and judgment and
that you value them. Many firms over the last hundred years decen-
tralized decision making. Decentralization gained momentum
when Peter Drucker persuaded Alfred P. Sloan Jr. to decentralize
decision making at General Motors Corporation. It also grew when
manufacturers worldwide began to adopt the Lean Manufacturing
practices of Japanese companies, replacing the overspecialized,
assembly-line mentality with teams that developed broader
knowledge and skills and had greater autonomy. One contributor
to the continued success of Toyota Motor Company and its Lexus
Luxury Division is the higher-quality and lower-cost benefits
resulting from the Toyota Production System. This management
approach combines a high degree of team-based training, auton-
omy, decentralized decision making, and responsibility for contin-
uous improvement.2
Companies have learned from experience that decentralized
decision making improves morale by giving more control to lower-
level employees. It also improves effectiveness when decisions are
made by the people who are closest to the relevant information.
Having more decision-making authority lets people feel more in
control, more respected, and more appreciated. Greater autonomy,
so long as it does not exceed a worker’s level of competence, fires up
people. It leads to a greater sense of connection and engagement.
6. Recognize the human need for work/life balance. Finally, we
all have times when things outside work require our undivided
DIAL UP THE VALUE
79

FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
80
attention. It may be the health of a loved one or our own health.
Leaders need to balance giving employees time off for urgent
needs in their personal lives with being fair to other employees
who have to do more work when a colleague is away.
Encouraging people to get sufficient rest and relaxation outside
work is an important part of keeping people from burning out.
Toward the end of most days, President Franklin Delano Roosevelt
held a gathering for cocktails and poker where the only rule was that
no one could talk politics. He cherished the time to relax and
recharge. It revived his energy level and helped him maintain the
optimism to lead America out of the Depression and through
World War II. It also stimulated his creativity. During a vacation
that some members of the press criticized FDR for taking, the pres-
ident conceived the Lend Lease program to provide military assets
to Great Britain in its hour of need.3
People in the creative professions,including writers,musicians,
and thought leaders, have long recognized the value of rest and
relaxation to stimulate their creativity. Many of them retreat to
quiet and relaxing settings to free themselves from the distractions
of day-to-day life and release their creative energies. Prayer and
meditation are frequently cited as practices that stimulate creativity.
Successful leaders, from America’s founders to Joe Torre,
imbued the culture they were responsible for leading with human
value. Leaders such as Napoleon and George Pullman failed, at
least in part, because they didn’t understand what motivates and
demotivates people. Wise leaders know that applying human
value in the work culture can make a world of difference by con-
necting and firing up people, ultimately affecting their own suc-
cess or failure as leaders.

REVIEW, REFLECTION, AND APPLICATION
! Six ways to increase human value in an organization are as
follows:
1. Make a human connection with as many people as possible.
2. Treat and speak to employees as partners.
3. Help employees find the right role.
4. Educate, inform, and listen to employees.
5. Decentralize decision making.
6. Recognize the human need for work/life balance.
! How does your organization fare in the six ways to increase
human value?
! So what? It’s not enough to get rid of aspects in an organiza-
tion that devalue people. To achieve maximum connection,
you must also increase human value in ways that show
people you want to help them reach their potential at work.
DIAL UP THE VALUE
81

82
I
In June of 2000 the combative Durk Jager resigned as CEO of
Procter & Gamble after a tenure that had lasted only seventeen
months, the shortest in the firm’s 165-year history. When he left
P&G, its stock had declined 50 percent, it had lost $320 million in
the most recent quarter, half of its brands were losing market
share, and the firm was struggling with morale problems.
Jager was replaced by a low-key, quiet, and thoughtful P&G
veteran named A. G. Lafley. Although Jager had questioned the
competence of many P&G employees, Lafley immediately assured
them that he knew they were capable of restoring the marketing
powerhouse to its former greatness. Lafley’s long career in mar-
keting had taught him how to glean insights by listening to P&G’s
customers. Now he sought to do the same by listening to P&G’s
employees. Lafley turned to Jim Stengel, heir apparent to the chief
marketing officer, and asked him to conduct a survey to find out
what employees thought should be done.
Although senior managers were considering several new busi-
ness initiatives at that time, P&G’s employees felt something differ-
ent was needed.They wanted a renewed commitment to marketing,
CHAPTER 11
THREE BENEFITS OF KNOWLEDGE FLOW

THREE BENEFITS OF KNOWLEDGE FLOW
83
83
more time to listen to customers, the results of programs to deter-
mine rewards rather than the quantity of programs launched, and
more disciplined market planning.
After P&G implemented employee suggestions, the number
of employees who strongly agreed with the statement “We’re on
the right track to deliver business results” soared from 18 percent
to 49 percent in just twelve months. And in a little more than two
years after taking over from Jager, Lafley restored P&G to prof-
itability, and the organization experienced a 70 percent increase
in its stock price. Fortune magazine heralded Lafley as the “un-
CEO” for his emphasis on listening and “hearing [P&G employ-
ees] out practically one at a time.”1
Lafley turned P&G around in part because he increased the
cultural element I described earlier as voice. The expanded term
for this element is knowledge flow. There are three primary bene-
fits to stimulating knowledge flow: it increases connection and
fires up people, it helps leaders make better decisions, and it
increases innovation.
Benefit #1:
Knowledge Flow Increases Connection and Fires Up People
Knowledge flow communicates to people with less power in an
organization that they are appreciated and respected enough to be
informed and heard, and that their ideas can make a difference. As
we discussed about human value, the affirmation and inclusion
energizes and engages people. Knowledge flow says that no one has
a monopoly on good ideas; an idea or way of thinking originating
at the bottom of the organization’s hierarchy just may be the one
that helps the organization achieve its mission. The story of A. G.
Lafley’s turnaround of P&G illustrates that knowledge flow can
help restore the confidence, optimism, and energy of employees.

History provides many examples of leaders who reduced knowl-
edge flow to their detriment by marginalizing or eliminating
individuals who held different viewpoints. In every case the people
became disconnected, disengaged, and eventually turned on their
leaders.
The French Jacobin revolutionary leader, Maximilien
Robespierre, is known primarily for instigating the Reign of Terror
in 1793. During that time anyone perceived to be against the
French Revolution was sent to the guillotine. When Robespierre
took control of the Jacobins, the leftist revolutionary group that
overthrew King Louis XVI, he aggressively eliminated anyone who
disagreed with his radical views. Robespierre’s suspicions of others
contributed to his increasing isolation. Ultimately, his former sup-
porters turned on him and sent him to the guillotine in 1794.2
Julius Caesar contributed to his demise by curtailing knowl-
edge flow. Near the end of his life, Caesar treated the Roman
Senate with disrespect, and he became dictatorial. He acted as if
the Senate was a mere advisory council. He became intolerant of
views that differed from his own. In 44 BC a group of republicans
led by Cassius and Brutus murdered Caesar after his behavior led
them to believe that he would abolish the Senate and make him-
self king of the Roman Empire.
Leaders’ careers have advanced or receded over knowledge
flow. One reason that Dwight D. Eisenhower was made Supreme
Allied Commander of Europe during World War II was that he
encouraged knowledge flow by seeking, listening to, and consid-
ering the opinions of others.3 Several legendary military leaders
were passed up for the position because they had reputations for
not listening to others. Generals MacArthur and Patton wouldn’t
listen to the British, and British General Montgomery wouldn’t
listen to the Americans.
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
84

Eisenhower, however, was open-minded and confident with-
out being arrogant or condescending. He displayed these character
traits as he considered one of the most important decisions in his
lifetime: when to launch the D-Day assault and send two hundred
thousand soldiers into harm’s way. General Eisenhower brought
together all fourteen of his direct reports, not to take a vote but to
hear and weigh their points of view. Only afterward did he make
the decision to go.
The attention Eisenhower paid his direct reports helped to
make them more dedicated to him and their common mission.
After he decided to launch the attack, he went out to circulate
among the soldiers and encourage them before they departed.
Eisenhower was on the airfield with the Eighty-second Airborne in
the evening, assuring them that the massive force assembled for the
assault would make them victorious. This action increased knowl-
edge flow. The time with the troops communicated he valued them
too. As word passed among the men that General Eisenhower was
there in person, the troops had a psychological boost going into
one of the most difficult military missions they would ever face.
Benefit #2:
Knowledge Flow Helps Decision Makers Make Better Decisions
Knowledge flow helps organizations improve performance by
leveraging the experience, insight, and information among
people throughout the entire organization. Leaders who don’t
inform and listen to people throughout the organization, espe-
cially those who hold different points of view, are effectively iso-
lating themselves from potentially valuable knowledge that will
contribute to better decision making.
The story of Andrew Grove and Intel illustrates how knowl-
edge flow in a culture improves decision making. In his book
THREE BENEFITS OF KNOWLEDGE FLOW
85

Swimming Across, Grove, the former chairman and CEO of the
microchip powerhouse, recounts his experiences of growing up in
Hungary during the Nazi occupation and under Communist con-
trol following World War II and then immigrating to America.
From these personal experiences Grove developed an appreciation
for an open-minded culture and its benefits, having lived in fascist
and totalitarian environments in which the ruling regime con-
trolled speech, education, and the arts.
As a new student in an American classroom, Grove encoun-
tered a telling contrast to life in Hungary. He was shocked that
American students questioned their instructors. Hungarian stu-
dents were expected to listen to and regurgitate their teachers’views.
One did not dare challenge the powers that be, at least not openly.4
Years later, when Grove rose to head Intel, he promoted an
open-minded culture within the company by encouraging what
he called “constructive confrontation”—people shared opposing
views in a way that their differences would not become personal.
He recognized that people needed to discuss alternative ideas and
viewpoints without letting emotionalism creep in and thereby
break down future communication. Grove also praised what he
called “helpful Cassandras,” the people usually on the front lines
of the business who, because of their strategic sense and proxim-
ity to the marketplace, were early to identify strategic inflection
points that would impact their business. (Cassandra was the
priestess of Greek mythology who used her powers of prophecy
to predict the fall of Troy.)
In his book Only the Paranoid Survive, Grove recounted how
constructive confrontation and helpful Cassandras played a role
in helping him make a major decision in his career: to have Intel
exit the DRAM semiconductor business and focus on micro-
processors. At that time the prevailing view among people at Intel
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
86

THREE BENEFITS OF KNOWLEDGE FLOW
87
87
and in the semiconductor industry was that the discounted prices
offered by Japanese competitors were attributable to dumping
excess inventory. They believed that Japanese firms could not
possibly be making a profit at the prices they were selling DRAMs
in the US market.
A handful of helpful Cassandras at Intel, however, believed
otherwise. In their view, the Japanese firms were actually making
money at the lower prices because their superior quality allowed
them to scrap fewer defective chips. If that was true, Intel was in for
trouble ahead because its quality was far below that of its Japanese
competitors. As the internal debate at Intel progressed and Grove
heard from the helpful Cassandras, he eventually realized that they
were right. Grove made the decision to exit one of Intel’s largest
businesses before it got ugly.
His decision turned out to be prescient. The Japanese took
over the global DRAM market and competitors with higher cost
structures suffered while Intel focused on the lower-volume but
higher-margin microprocessor business. Within a little more than
a decade following Grove’s decision, Intel grew from one of many
competitors in the overall semiconductor market to the largest
nonproprietary manufacturer of semiconductors in the world,
with revenues larger than its next three competitors combined. So
successful were Grove and Intel that Time magazine named him
Man of the Year in 1993.5 By encouraging constructive confronta-
tion at Intel, Andrew Grove increased knowledge flow in the Intel
culture and improved decision making.
Like Andrew Grove, wise leaders as far back as ancient times
warned of the dangers of self-delusion and learned that there is
wisdom in seeking advice. The Greek orator Demosthenes cau-
tioned in the fourth century, “Nothing is easier than self-deceit.
For what each man wishes, that he also believes to be true.” King

Solomon, one of the most revered kings of Israel who was known
for his wisdom, wrote more than thirty admonitions in the book
of Proverbs advising that it is wise to be humble, to seek the
advice and knowledge of others, and to listen to them. Solomon
observed that pride leads to failure and that humility is necessary
for wisdom (Prov. 16:18, 11:2). Leaders should not rely solely on
their own judgment; Solomon stated that the foolish seem confi-
dent in their ways, but the wise seek and consider the advice of
others (Prov. 12:15). More recently, the Scottish philosopher and
historian David Hume declared, “When men are most sure and
arrogant they are commonly most mistaken.”6
Several of America’s founding fathers were especially well-
known for seeking the advice of others. George Washington was a
good listener who sought the opinions of others; he rarely spoke
during most meetings. Like his fellow Virginian, Thomas Jefferson
listened attentively but seldom spoke. Benjamin Franklin was
renowned worldwide for his wisdom, breadth of knowledge, sense
of humor, and tendency to listen more than to speak. During the
twilight of his life, as the Constitutional Convention was conclud-
ing in Philadelphia, he addressed his fellow delegates, and in sup-
port of the newly drafted document he said:
For having lived long, I have experienced many instances of
being obliged, by better information or fuller consideration, to
change opinions even on important subjects which I once
thought right but have found to be otherwise. It is therefore that
the older I grow the more apt I am to doubt my own judgment
and to pay more respect to the judgment of others.7
Ben Franklin’s lifelong experience had taught him that it was
wise to maintain a healthy skepticism about his own views and to
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
88

carefully consider the views of others. Earlier in life, he had writ-
ten an editorial defending free speech and a free press; he noted
that it was wise to let everyone publicly express views and, in
doing so, more likely that the best ideas and courses of action
would emerge from public debate.
During World War II British Prime Minister Winston
Churchill demonstrated his belief that knowledge flow was critical.
Churchill was so concerned about getting accurate information to
enable him to make decisions about the war that he established a
group outside his generals’ command, the Statistical Office, to
provide an independent viewpoint and confirm important facts.
Churchill, an avid student of history, knew the risk to leaders who
didn’t receive accurate assessments, and he feared that his pres-
ence and personality might keep his generals from telling him
bad news.8
According to historian Doris Kearns Goodwin, FDR wanted
to hear many points of view before making decisions, so he delib-
erately appointed people with diverse views to his cabinet. He
also looked for people who were not afraid to challenge him or
each other. The disagreements among his cabinet members often
became a matter of public knowledge. For Roosevelt, it was a
small price to pay, provided it made him a better decision maker.9
When a leader becomes isolated by surrounding himself
with yes-men or by being closed to other viewpoints, he sets
himself up for failure. The list is long of leaders who maintained
false preconceptions until it was too late to change direction. The
Catholic Church of the Middle Ages refused to acknowledge that
the sun, rather than the earth, was the center of the universe
despite Galileo’s proof. This and other challenges to Catholic doc-
trines contributed to a decline in its influence and the rise of
Protestantism and humanism in Europe. (Perhaps this was one
THREE BENEFITS OF KNOWLEDGE FLOW
89

experience that persuaded the Catholic Church to allow at least
some internal debate. In 1760, the church began formally appoint-
ing a person to the role of advocatus diaboli, the “devil’s advocate,”
who would argue against the case for the canonization of an indi-
vidual being considered for sainthood.)
In the year 1520, Montezuma, the last Aztec ruler of Mexico,
mistook the Spanish conquistador Cortés to be the Aztec god
Quetzalcoatl. Cortés demanded that Montezuma hand over his
empire, and he did without putting up any resistance and despite
clear signs that Cortés was not a deity (the Spaniards demanded
gold and worshiped Jesus and the Virgin Mary). Cortés had
fewer than six hundred men, seventeen horses, and ten artillery
pieces at his command compared to Montezuma’s thousands, yet
Montezuma was easily tricked. Montezuma’s failure to fully con-
sider the situation cost him the Aztec Empire and his life when
his own people stoned him.10
Holding on to false preconceptions continues to have nega-
tive consequences. Senior management at Lucent didn’t listen to
scientists who warned of the need to develop a new optical tech-
nology, OC-192, and then watched as Nortel introduced it to
great success in the 1990s. As a result of this and other instances
of management failure, Lucent nearly had to file bankruptcy.11
Before the 1986 launch of the Challenger space shuttle,
some engineers at NASA knew that the O-rings on previous shuttle
flights had shown evidence of damage, yet they rationalized
away the problem. Their doubts didn’t surface until Challenger
exploded. Boston College sociologist Diane Vaughan, in her book
The Challenger Launch Decision, describes NASA’s culture in which
engineers who were aware of the potential problem were reluctant
to bring the issue out into the open. Pressure to meet the launch
schedule and a culture that exalted a “can do” attitude and looked
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
90

down on those who called attention to potential obstacles that were
less than obvious made engineers reluctant to share their concerns,
absent clear-cut evidence of a problem. Unfortunately, not all prob-
lems present themselves in obvious ways.12
Seven years after the Challenger’s loss, some of the same issues
resurfaced when the Columbia space shuttle exploded. Once again
NASA’s senior managers were unaware of NASA engineers’ con-
cerns about damage to the shuttle that occurred upon its launch.
NASA engineers had gone so far as to analyze the potential for dam-
age and had even involved people at the Boeing Corporation with-
out alerting senior management.Rather than aggressively addressing
potential problems as they arose,once again NASA’s culture encour-
aged engineers to move cautiously below the radar screen of senior
management. In essence, the engineers feared to speak candidly to
those in power in part because leaders failed to actively seek out the
engineers’ concerns.13
Investigations into the terrorist attacks on September 11,
2001, indicated that the lack of knowledge flow contributed to
America’s intelligence failure. Poor communication between the
FBI and the CIA and between the FBI field offices and its head-
quarters meant that analysts lacked access to information that
might have helped them spot a pattern of activity suggesting a
potential plot.14 This is another chapter in a long history of
American intelligence failures that should have identified impend-
ing attacks. America failed to see the inevitability of its involve-
ment in World War I until many citizens were killed when a
German U-boat sank the British luxury liner Lusitania. Likewise
in World War II,America failed to understand the emerging threat
of the Axis powers until Pearl Harbor was attacked and more than
two thousand Americans lost their lives.
We’re slow to see changes in the way the world works, even
THREE BENEFITS OF KNOWLEDGE FLOW
91

when the evidence is in front of us. When we refuse to hear and
consider other people’s opinions, we isolate ourselves from
change, and we don’t stand a chance of maintaining a realistic
view. Mark Twain expressed the sentiment well when he said,“It’s
not what you don’t know that hurts you. It’s what you know that
ain’t so.”The bottom line is that when we fail to seek and consider
the views of others, we commit self-sabotage.
Cognitive scientists have begun to understand why it is so
difficult for us to recognize when our views are no longer true.
Their research has revealed that our brains are slow to replace
existing beliefs with new ones because it requires more energy
and effort, more brain power if you will, to process new ideas.
It’s simply easier to allow our brains to work on autopilot and
accept our existing beliefs, even if they are untrue. Only a con-
stant flow of information that challenges our preconceptions
will cause us to question our existing beliefs and consider alter-
native views.15
History teaches us that knowledge is power. It is power pre-
cisely for its usefulness in helping leaders and decision makers
choose optimal courses of action. Knowledge flow in a culture is
the only proven antidote to our human susceptibility to maintain
false preconceptions. Leaders who promote knowledge flow are
deemed wise for their successful decisions and their winning
organizations.
Benefit #3:
Knowledge Flow Increases Creativity and Innovation
The third benefit of knowledge flow is an increase in creativity and
innovation. When knowledge flows vertically up and down the
chain of command and horizontally across an organization, it
empowers people and makes them more effective. Encouraging
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
92

the creative energies of people at all levels can lead to remarkable
results, as the following story from World War II illustrates.
After the Americans landed on the beaches of Normandy on
D-Day and secured their initial positions, they began to push
deeper into France. In June 1944, about ten miles inland, they
approached the Normandy countryside that the French call the
Bocage. This area consisted of plots of land that farmers sepa-
rated with hedgerows rather than fences. The hedgerows were
made of several feet of packed soil topped off with brush and
vines. When a Sherman tank attempted to go over the top of the
hedgerows, the nose of the tank popped up, exposing its thin
underbelly to Nazi antitank fire. Allied military planners had
spent so much time concentrating on the D-Day landings that
they hadn’t fully considered the problems in hedgerow country.
The Sherman tanks’ vulnerability caught everyone by surprise.
At first, the Americans tried blasting the hedgerows open so
the Sherman tanks could then breach the holes created by the
explosions. Unfortunately, the explosions gave the Nazis advance
warning of where the tanks were going. Nearly a month after D-
Day, the Allies were falling behind schedule primarily because of
the problems created by the hedgerows and the adeptness of the
Nazis’ hedgerow defense.
One day, in a discussion between officers and enlisted men,
the idea arose of mounting saw teeth on the front of the tank.
Many of those present laughed at the suggestion. One soldier,
however, took the idea seriously. Sergeant Curtis G. Cullen, a cab
driver from Chicago, immediately designed and built a hedgerow-
cutting device made from steel rails that the Nazis had used to
defend the beaches. When tested, Cullen’s device, backed by the
Chrysler engines powering the Sherman tanks, sliced right through
the hedgerows.16
THREE BENEFITS OF KNOWLEDGE FLOW
93

Sherman tanks mounted with Cullen’s device looked like rhi-
noceroses, so the soldiers began calling them Rhinos.Within days of
the idea’s origination, it was on the desk of General Omar Bradley,
head of the First Army. He attended a demonstration of the Rhino
and immediately ordered five hundred of Cullen’s devices. In
two weeks, 60 percent of the First Army’s Sherman tanks became
Rhinos. In General Bradley’s account of the war, A Soldier’s Story,
he credited the Rhinos for getting the First Army through the
hedgerow country in time to crush the Nazi army in France.17
Commenting on the speed with which the hedgerow-cutting
device moved from idea to implementation, historian Stephen
Ambrose observed:
That didn’t happen in other armies . . . I’m convinced that this
came out of being a participating member in a free society . . .
Rommel did not have a suggestion box outside his door.
Eisenhower did. Bradley did . . . Hitler thought totalitarianism
is by far the most efficient form of government . . . but as
Eisenhower wrote to his brother on September 1, 1939, the day
the war began: “Hitler should beware of the fury of an aroused
democracy.” Well, the U.S. Army of World War II became the
tip of the spear of that aroused democracy. And we just did
wonderfully well.18
The US Army benefited when Sergeant Cullen’s hedgerow-
cutting device idea quickly made its way to General Omar
Bradley, who was open-minded enough to consider and act upon
it. Ultimately, knowledge flow contributed to the Allies’ liberation
of France.
In the business world, innovation often comes from the people
closest to clients and competitors. At Starbucks a store manager in
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
94

West Los Angeles was experimenting with beverages and a blender
she had brought to the store. Her curiosity led to the creation of the
Frappuccino,a frozen drink that became a multi-hundred-million-
dollar business for Starbucks stores and a major new business for a
Starbucks and PepsiCo joint venture to bottle the Frappuccino and
sell it through grocery stores.19
The danger to nations that reduce knowledge flow is appar-
ent throughout history. By isolating themselves and their coun-
tries, the leaders of civilizations have missed opportunities for
innovation and growth. China in 1400 had the best and largest
fleet of ships in the world (over a period of three years the
Chinese built or refitted 1,681 ships). With their enormous fleet,
the Chinese sailed to Indonesia, Arabia, East Africa, and India.
Gradually, however, the Chinese emperor’s attitude toward the
benefits of foreign travel shifted as he favored domestic agricul-
ture over maritime interests. By 1436, the Chinese were diverting
resources from maintaining the ships, and by 1500, anyone who
built a ship with more than two masts was subject to the death
penalty. In 1525, the Chinese authorities ordered all oceangoing
ships to be destroyed and their owners arrested.20
A period of Chinese isolation from the rest of the world began.
At the time of the ships’ destruction, China led the world in inno-
vation. It had developed gunpowder, deep drilling, printing, paper,
porcelain, cast iron, and the compass. China’s isolation, however,
prevented it from knowing about developments beyond its bor-
ders, the ideas and information that had contributed to its high
rate of innovation when Chinese ships were sailing the world. In
recent decades, economic reforms and social freedoms have recon-
nected China to the broader world, resulting in increased Chinese
economic growth.
Like the Chinese civilization, the Arab-Islamic civilization
THREE BENEFITS OF KNOWLEDGE FLOW
95

became isolated in the sixteenth century as its leaders adopted the
view that the world beyond them had little to offer. As a result of
the isolationism adopted by the Chinese and Arab-Islamic civi-
lizations, both began a period of steady decline in innovation and
economic output. Meanwhile, European innovation and output
increased with expanding conquests in the New World and the
opening up of European society following the Enlightenment.
The lack of knowledge flow in the Chinese and Arab-Islamic civ-
ilizations contributed to their fall from being global leaders in
innovation and creativity, just as Europe’s increased knowledge
flow contributed to its rise.
Knowledge flow fires up people by giving them a voice and
meeting the human psychological needs for respect, recognition,
and belonging. By helping leaders make better decisions and
increasing innovation, the last two benefits of knowledge flow
contribute to improving an organization’s performance and, by
doing so, further fire up people. Research has shown that people
who work for better-performing organizations are more engaged
in their work.21 In Chapter 12, we’ll examine specific actions you
can take to increase knowledge flow in your work environment.
REVIEW, REFLECTION, AND APPLICATION
! Knowledge flow exists when everyone in an organization
seeks the ideas of others, shares ideas and opinions honestly,
and safeguards relational connections.
! Knowledge flow in an organization communicates that
people are appreciated and respected, helping to increase
connection and engagement.
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
96

! Knowledge flow helps leaders be their most effective by
leveraging the experience, insight, and information among
people throughout the organization.
! Leaders who fail to seek and consider the opinions of others
eventually will succumb to the negative consequences gener-
ated by false preconceptions.
! Andrew Grove of Intel made one of the best decisions in his
career by encouraging knowledge flow and learning from it.
George Washington, FDR, Winston Churchill, and other sig-
nificant leaders also benefited from a leadership style that
increased knowledge flow.
! The US Army benefited from knowledge flow when Sergeant
Curtis Cullen’s idea for the Rhino tank quickly made its way
to General Omar Bradley in time to help the Allies liberate
France during World War II.
! Cultures that isolate themselves from external knowledge
flow shut off a flow of ideas that increase innovation.
! Knowledge flow in your organization should be sufficiently
robust up and down the chain of command, across depart-
ments and business units, and from outside the organization
so that everyone benefits from an extensive marketplace of
ideas and know-how.
! So what? Knowledge flow is critical to firing up people, help-
ing leaders learn so that they can make better decisions, and
stimulating innovation. Where do you see that knowledge
THREE BENEFITS OF KNOWLEDGE FLOW
97

flow is high and where it is low in your organization? Are
some parts of your organization isolated from knowledge
that might benefit them? Are you and others in your organi-
zation intentional about increasing knowledge flow?
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
98

INCREASE FLOW
99
A
After seeing that leaders who increase knowledge flow benefit
from it and that leaders who don’t risk failure, you might ask
what you can do to ensure that knowledge flow is maximized in
your organization. The following are several steps I recommend
to increase knowledge flow in your culture.
1. Hold ongoing knowledge-flow sessions. Leaders stimulate knowl-
edge flow by regularly holding sessions with employees in which
they share information about important issues facing the organi-
zation and near-term action plans they are considering. The leader
encourages employees to share what they believe is right, what’s
wrong, and what’s missing from his or her thinking. The fre-
quency, length, and size of these sessions can be tailored to partic-
ular segments of employees. Sessions are conducted at all levels of
the organization.
Unlike the typical staged town hall meeting in many organi-
zations, the knowledge flow session is characterized by honest
dialogue. Key to its success is an environment in which partici-
pants feel safe to share their ideas and opinions.
CHAPTER 12

FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
100
Results from knowledge flow sessions are shared with all par-
ticipants, and valuable ideas arising from the sessions are exe-
cuted. Employees feel more connected and become more fired up
as they are informed, they are heard, and they see their ideas
implemented. Because few leaders do this well, it is wise for most
leaders to get outside assistance to design and implement the
knowledge-flow session process as well as see it modeled.
2. Use your intranet to make information easily accessible. Too many
leaders are reluctant to make information available to all employees.
The benefit of making information widely available will far out-
weigh the risk of information leaking to external sources. Leaders

will gain from having more knowledgeable, fired up employees
who feel that leaders respect, value, and trust them enough to
make important information available to them. The Charles
Schwab Corporation makes an extensive number of strategy
and competitive-analysis reports available to all employees on
the firm’s intranet platform dubbed the “Schweb.” The Schweb
is a repository of information ranging from commonly used
forms and contact information to topical reports and business
segment updates.1
McKinsey & Company is another firm that makes an abundant
amount of information available to employees. The firm maintains
a database of previous reports generated by its consultants.
Potentially sensitive contents about clients have been removed
before the reports are posted to the database. McKinsey also main-
tains a database of experts throughout the firm that can be sorted
by area of expertise and by office.2 This practice leverages the vast
unwritten knowledge and experience of McKinsey’s people.
3. Promote a culture of responsiveness. McKinsey & Company has
an informal rule that everyone should return telephone calls
within twenty-four hours. It enables a person who needs knowl-
edge to identify someone who might hold it, contact him, and
have a response within twenty-four hours.3 This practice is a
powerful way to leverage knowledge that might otherwise go
unused for the benefit of the firm.
4. Ask people to be inquisitive. Better-informed employees are
more likely to identify critical pieces of information to solve busi-
ness problems and spot opportunities. I like the term Peter
Drucker once gave to the contributions of educated employees
who shared an opposing point of view. He called it “informed
INCREASE FLOW
101

dissent.”4 Leaders should ask employees to seek to understand
their business, client attitudes, and competitors’ actions so that
they can bring informed dissent to the organization’s decision-
making process. General Electric does this by thinking of and
describing itself as a “learning company.”Among other things, GE
encourages employees to recognize best practices outside the
company and in other business units across GE, all for the pur-
pose of continually strengthening their businesses.
5. Encourage external awareness. When Andrew Grove of Intel
made the bold decision to exit the DRAM memory business and
focus on microprocessors, much of the information that aided his
decision came from external sources noted by Intel employees.
They compiled quality data on Japanese-versus American-made
memories, Japanese manufacturing practices, and other indus-
try-related operations because they wanted to understand their
competitive position and how it might change in the future.
Leaders will benefit by encouraging employees to consider
what external knowledge might be valuable and to seek it out.
This practice will help protect the company from what Harvard
Business School professor Clayton Christensen has called “dis-
ruptive technologies” (new offerings that change your industry’s
paradigm).5 It will also help your company discern opportunities
to be the instigator of disruptive innovation.
6. Increase the diversity of participants. People with diverse knowl-
edge, experiences, abilities, thinking styles, and temperaments see
things differently. Leaders can improve the creativity in a group’s
problem identification and solution seeking by including people
with diverse backgrounds. When holding knowledge flow ses-
sions with groups of employees, be sure to include a mix of people
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
102

from different departments and professional backgrounds, and
make them aware that you are counting on them to offer fresh
perspectives.
7. Seek other views and reward those with the courage to speak up.
Leaders must encourage employees to express their points of view,
especially when they see things in a different light from leaders or
the majority of their colleagues. Typically, individuals who hold
views not aligned with those held by leaders or by the majority of
their colleagues are punished and thought of as troublemakers.6
Socrates, Sir Thomas More, William Wallace, Martin Luther King
Jr., Mahatma Gandhi, Alexander Solzhenitsyn, Nelson Mandela,
and many, many other courageous heroes openly expressed their
views and were imprisoned or killed for doing so.
Machiavelli wrote in the sixteenth century that nothing is
more dangerous than trying to bring about change. According to
research on group conformity, individuals within a group consider
dissenters to be less competent than people who hold the majority
view. That’s why we fear to speak out and do so only in an environ-
ment where trust and honesty are highly valued. For these reasons,
great leaders must not only tolerate the expression of all differing
viewpoints but also encourage it. Leaders would be wise to follow
the example of Andrew Grove, who celebrated people for spotting
strategic inflection points on the horizon. Openly admitting that
“no one has a monopoly on good ideas”and asking people to share
what they believe is “right, wrong, or missing” from your thinking
is a badge of wisdom and courage, not a sign of weakness.
8. Promote a culture of experimentation. From the many ideas gen-
erated in a diverse and open culture with high knowledge flow, it
is not always clear which single idea or course of action is superior.
INCREASE FLOW
103

Great leaders have embraced experimentation as the way to find
ideas that turn out to be the most effective in practice. Experience
is the best teacher. By creating pilot projects to test new ideas, lead-
ers benefit from the additional knowledge brought by experience.
The wisdom of experimentation reminds me of the story of
Thomas Edison performing an extraordinary number of experi-
ments as he sought to develop the light bulb. It is said that as his
assistants grew frustrated with mounting failures, Edison calmed
them by sharing this perspective: “Yes, it’s true that we have
worked long and hard and haven’t found what we’re looking for.
But the results of our work have been excellent. We have a list of
fifty thousand things we know won’t work.”7 We don’t expect
leaders to experience Edison’s high rate of failure before achiev-
ing success. However, to an extent that’s the attitude a leader must
take: we as an organization learn with each completed experi-
ment, and we must strive to take into account the insights from
our failed experiments so that we may improve our batting aver-
age on future decisions and courses of action.
9. Safeguard relational connections. It is important in all com-
munications to be sensitive to the feelings of other people.
Politely asking someone to do something is preferable to giving
orders. Using a respectful tone is better than talking down to
someone. Insensitive communication styles impede knowledge
flow because people will naturally react in a defensive manner.
Individuals who regularly show insensitivity should be made
aware of it and coached to change their behavior. People who are
insensitive in communicating with others may be unaware of it.
Although they may not like hearing it, once they see proof of the
reactions on the part of their colleagues, they will begin to appre-
ciate the need to change.
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
104

INCREASE FLOW
105
105
OBSERVING THE CHAIN OF COMMAND
Critics might label this knowledge-flow approach of informing
people and broadly gathering and considering input as another
form of management by committee. It is not. I am not advocat-
ing that a leader delegate decision making to a committee or
group. I believe in seeking the best ideas and then making deci-
sions that must be followed by all, even the informed dissenters.
This system combines a diversity of ideas with unity of action.
Even after people have expressed their views and the decision
has been made, there will be times when people do not agree. The
duty of dissenters is to respect authority and abide by it to the best
of their ability. A decision-making hierarchy, or chain of command
as some call it, is a system that has been proven to work extremely
well. A decision-making hierarchy defines who is responsible for
decisions and holds that person accountable for the decisions he
makes. It is responsive and efficient because it doesn’t require the
time and effort to achieve consensus from all parties when time is
of the essence. Furthermore, a decision-making hierarchy concen-
trates resources by requiring everybody to act on the decision that
has been made.8
The antithesis of a decision-making hierarchy is direct (or
pure) democracy in which everyone gets a vote on most decisions.
Direct democracy is rare because it takes time to inform everyone
and hear views. It is also problematic because majority viewpoints
are not always well-informed, especially on complex issues. Few
people have the time to delve deeply into every issue so that they
are prepared to make knowledgeable decisions. Direct democracies
have at times produced disastrous results. The direct democracy in
Athens executed one of history’s greatest teachers, Socrates, for
not believing in the Athenian gods. America’s Founding Fathers

rejected direct democracy in favor of a republic, or representative
democracy, that places decision making in the hands of elected
leaders.
One leader who wisely decided against the majority view in
the late 1970s was Donald Regan. Then head of Merrill Lynch, he
decided to launch the first cash management account. Most
people in Merrill Lynch at the time feared the new product would
cheapen the firm’s image and eventually hurt business results. The
product development staff, however, favored it. Regan considered
the views of both sides and decided to go forward. As it turned
out, the cash management account attracted billions of dollars
and millions of new clients to Merrill Lynch. The product became
one of the most popular innovations in financial services history.
It brought many American households into the capital markets
for the first time and provided attractive funding for economic
expansion during the final decades of the twentieth century.9
I believe the optimum solution is a decision-making hierarchy
that includes broad participation and input from others, especially
on the most important decisions facing the organization. This
preserves the benefits of a chain of command by clearly assigning
responsibility and accountability for making decisions while bring-
ing the broad experience, ideas, and opinions of others to the
decision makers’attention. This practice gives participants a greater
sense of ownership in decisions, and it enhances connection.
REVIEW, REFLECTION, AND APPLICATION
! Nine ways to increase and stimulate knowledge flow are as
follows:
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
106

1. Hold ongoing knowledge-flow sessions.
2. Use your intranet to make information easily accessible.
3. Promote a culture of responsiveness.
4. Ask people to be inquisitive.
5. Encourage external awareness.
6. Increase the diversity of participants.
7. Seek other views and reward those with the courage to
speak up.
8. Promote a culture of experimentation.
9. Safeguard relational connections.
! Would your colleagues say you actively seek the views of
others and seriously consider them? Do your colleagues seek
the views of others and seriously consider them?
! So what? When a high degree of knowledge flow exists in
your organization, you can be sure that people are more
engaged, decision makers will make better decisions, and
innovation will be greater, all of which contribute to organi-
zational success.
INCREASE FLOW
107


PART III
THE FIRE STARTS WITH YOU:
Become a Person of Character and Connection to
Ignite the Team Around You
In Part III you will learn . . .
! why connection would never occur if it weren’t for the
right kind of people whose actions increase connection.
! there are three types of people who affect connection:
intentional disconnectors, unintentional disconnectors,
and intentional connectors.
! none of us is perfect and we all need to be intentional
about developing the character strengths that increase
connection.
! others can help us become aware of the blind spots in our
character that decrease connection.
! we improve our character and connection with others by
maintaining high-trust relationships, undergoing peri-
odic relational checkups, and knowing the stories of great
people who exhibited character strengths.

PEOPLE WHO CONNECT
110
MI
In the Introduction of this book I described how my personal
experiences, and in particular my wife’s bouts with cancer, influ-
enced my thinking about connection and organizational culture.
Other events in my life, as well as my study of culture and leader-
ship, have shaped my views about the cultures I want to be a part
of, the type of leaders I want to follow, and the person and leader
I aspire to become.
How about you? What experiences in your life have shaped
your beliefs about work culture and leadership? How about your
experiences growing up, including the way your parents, siblings,
teachers, and coaches treated you? Did some of them inspire you
and others discourage you? How did your friends and peers affect
you? Did some of them bring out the best in you and others bring
out the worst? How have the mentors or leaders you’ve had influ-
enced you?
I sincerely hope that reflecting on these questions will pro-
vide you with insights to guide your journey in life to places and
relationships that will bring out the very best in you personally
and professionally.
CHAPTER 13

OXYGEN FOR THE SOUL
After spending years thinking about and studying the issues of
culture, leadership, and connection, I’m convinced that they are
critical to my personal success and well-being as well as the suc-
cess of any group of people that I am a part of. My family, neigh-
borhood, church, children’s schools, business, town, state, nation,
and the world are affected in positive and negative ways by cul-
ture, leadership, and connection among people.
Unfortunately, because these issues are less tangible, it’s easy
to take them for granted. Tasks and processes are out there in the
open for us to see and quantitatively measure. Connection, like
oxygen, tends to be less obvious. The clearest way we know that
connection is missing is to experience environments where it is in
abundant supply and environments where it isn’t. Only then do
we feel and appreciate the difference.
Unlike oxygen deprivation, the effects of connection depri-
vation take place gradually so that our decline in performance
and well-being can be slow and steady. And therein lies the
danger. Absent an awareness of connection and an appreciation
for its positive effect on our lives, we could be gradually discon-
necting ourselves and not be aware of it until the damage is
done.
The high degree of connection that my family and I experi-
enced with family, friends, and health-care professionals during
the course of Katie’s treatment for cancer woke me up to the con-
nection deficiency in my life. After experiencing that degree of
connection, I cannot return to the imbalanced life I was living
before. Sure, there will be times and seasons when I need to focus
more on tasks and less on relationships, but they shouldn’t be
extended times that drain the life out of me. By asking yourself
PEOPLE WHO CONNECT
111

the questions in Appendix A, you too can begin to consider the
state of connection in the cultures you live in.
WHICH TYPE ARE YOU?
Each of us acts in ways that increase connection at times and
decrease it at others. In general, though, individuals tend to fall
into one of three categories when it comes to connection. We are
intentional disconnectors, unintentional disconnectors, or inten-
tional connectors.
Intentional disconnectors are people who infect others with
beliefs and behaviors that cause disconnection. They mock the
idea that inspiring identity, human value, and knowledge flow are
desirable in and of themselves. They’re selfish and will intention-
ally manipulate people to get their way. Emotionally, they live
alone because they fear being vulnerable and genuine with
others. They may put on a front, a smiling mask, but on the inside
they are gradually becoming empty and depressed souls. Some
intentional disconnectors have serious psychological problems,
and mental health professionals would categorize them as neu-
rotic. Others embrace values that are disconnecting, such as
doing whatever is necessary to get ahead, despite what is com-
monly accepted as right. Believe me, I know from personal experi-
ence that working with an intentional disconnector is a nightmare.
That’s why we need to be aware of them and to stay out of their
destructive paths.
Based on press accounts, it would appear that “Chainsaw Al”
Dunlap, the former CEO of Sunbeam, was an intentional discon-
nector. He relished intimidating people and ruling like a dictator.
As the inevitable consequences of his leadership style played out,
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
112

Sunbeam’s performance woes intensified until Dunlap was dis-
missed.
Unintentional disconnectors represent the majority of people.
Although they believe inspiring identity, human value, and knowl-
edge flow are desirable, they lack sufficient self-knowledge to see
that their behavior reduces connection. They suffer from blind
spots, destructive habits that increase disconnection. They may
order others about as if they were children. Or perhaps they are
unable to consider constructive criticism without turning their
wrath on the messenger. Or maybe they are unable to connect
with the people they lead and are unaware of it.Whatever the case,
unintentional disconnectors decrease connection without realiz-
ing it. For the most part, we drift toward becoming unintentional
disconnectors, and we must exert intentional effort to realize it
and change.
Take me, for example. Early in my career, my supervisor told
me that some people whom I was responsible for leading didn’t
feel I gave them adequate feedback about their performance.
More specifically, they sensed I wasn’t telling them when they did
something that I disliked. Through this feedback, I realized that
by communicating only positive, encouraging aspects of the
employees’ performance, I was not doing what was best for them.
In addition, I needed to be honest with employees when they did
something I disagreed with so that they might learn from the sit-
uation and adjust their behavior. Because people sensed I wasn’t
being completely candid with them, the connection between us
was lessened. Now that I am aware of this blind spot, I’m careful
to tell people when I have qualms about their actions.
My story isn’t unique. Many leaders become aware of their
blind spots and their behaviors that foster disconnection when
they receive constructive feedback from a supervisor or executive
PEOPLE WHO CONNECT
113

coach. With coaching and ongoing processes put in place to
measure their progress, many grow to become better leaders.
When we make a commitment to change and open our-
selves to honest feedback about the effects of our behavior, we
begin the journey to become people who reach our potential
and help others reach theirs. I can’t emphasize enough that we
naturally drift toward becoming unintentional disconnectors,
and the only way to consistently increase connection is to
become intentional about developing into the type of person
who increases it.
Over the course of my life, I have been fortunate to learn
from people who consistently enhance connection. Some have
been leaders in the traditional sense while others have not. I have
personally met some while I have learned about others by study-
ing their lives, reading their letters and speeches, and reviewing
what others have written about them. I’ve recounted a few of
their stories in this book. Still others you would not know because
they are not in the public eye.
Intentional connectors are full of life, a sense of purpose, and
genuine joy compared to most people you meet. Inevitably, they
are wise about themselves and about life. They increase connec-
tion in the cultures of which they are a part because they
embody inspiring identity, human value, and knowledge flow.
They combine a steadfast dedication to reaching performance
excellence and accomplishing their mission while nurturing a
culture that creates connection.
Although there is much to admire in intentional connec-
tors, that doesn’t mean they are perfect. No one is. And that
leads me to a major point that we’ll discuss in the following
chapter.
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
114

PEOPLE WHO CONNECT
115
REVIEW, REFLECTION, AND APPLICATION
! Which of the three types of people who affect connection are
you: an intentional disconnector, unintentional disconnec-
tor, or intentional connector?
! Most of us are unintentional disconnectors and are unaware
that our actions are inconsistent with our values.
! Take a moment and identify one or more intentional con-
nectors in your life. What is it about them that you would
like to emulate?
! So what? We all naturally drift toward becoming unintentional
disconnectors. We must exert intentional effort to develop the
habits that increase connection.

116
B
Becoming an intentional connector requires a personal journey.
No one is perfect. Even great leaders who have made significant
contributions stumble at times. FDR, one of my personal heroes,
failed to get behind federal anti-lynching legislation, interned
innocent Japanese-Americans during World War II, and had an
affair that left his wife, Eleanor, emotionally scarred for life. In
1939, FDR, bowing to anti-Semitism in the USA, refused to allow
entry of the SS St. Louis, and nearly all of its 937 Jewish passen-
gers died in concentration camps when the ship, unable to find a
safe haven, returned to Europe. Even though FDR was responsible
for these actions, we can still admire him for his courage and opti-
mism in facing polio and guiding America through the Depression
and World War II.
THE BATTLE WITHIN
Each of us faces an internal conflict between doing what is right and
what is wrong. In the Bible, the apostle Paul wrote that he wanted
THE JOURNEY TO CONNECTION
CHAPTER 14

to do what was right though often another part of him yearned to
do otherwise. Sigmund Freud wrote of the ongoing conflict inside
us between our desires and our conscience. Responding to the
query in the Times (London): “What is wrong with the world?”
British author G. K. Chesterton simply replied: “Dear Sir, I am.”1
We all can relate to an inner battle. On the one hand, we want
to eat that dessert, but on the other hand, we don’t. We want to tell
the person questioning our viewpoint that he’s nuts, yet we know
better because we might learn something from him, or we might
damage our relationship. We don’t want to take the time to get to
know some of the people we work with, yet we know we should.
In the movie Crash, which won best picture at the 2005
Academy Awards, we see people over the course of a thirty-
six-hour period at their worst and at their best. In one scene, Police
Officer Ryan, played by actor Matt Dillon, abuses his power while
allegedly frisking a woman for concealed weapons. Later in a sepa-
rate incident, he courageously risks his life to pull the same woman
out of a car moments before it explodes. Although Officer Ryan’s
acts are extreme, like him, we also commit some acts that are right
and others that are wrong. It’s just a matter of degree. Put in situa-
tions where constraints on our behavior don’t exist, we might com-
mit acts that we find difficult to imagine today.
If we are honest with ourselves, we know that we are capable of
right and wrong, even good and evil. The personality that is hard-
wired in us at birth, the habits we develop over a lifetime, and the
culture we live in influence our behavior and whether we act in a way
that is right or wrong. For example, people are more likely to share
information with one another if they have trusting temperaments,
they habitually share information with others, and they work in
cultures where others routinely share information.
This is why character development is so important. Character
THE JOURNEY TO CONNECTION
117

helps us to do the right thing even when internal and external
pressures make us want to do otherwise. Martin Luther King Jr.,
Nelson Mandela, Harriet Beecher Stowe, William Wilberforce,
Winston Churchill, and Mahatma Gandhi are just a few notable
leaders who stood against evil despite tremendous pressure to
maintain the status quo. Their character strengths of courage,
compassion, and justice gave them a clear understanding of what
was wrong and the determination to do what was right.
It’s no different in an organization. People who are most
likely to increase inspiring identity, human value, and knowledge
flow in a dog-eat-dog culture do so because they have character
strengths that guide them to do what is right. Character strengths
provide us a moral compass to know what is right and the desire
to do what is right. Without character strengths to guide us, we
are more susceptible to going with the flow of our temperaments,
our habits, and our current culture.
CHARACTER AND CONNECTION
To see how certain character strengths relate to the elements in a
connection culture, consider some leaders highlighted in earlier
chapters and how their character strengths led to actions that
improved connection.
Purpose,optimism,and vitality increase inspiring identity.Steve
Jobs’s desire to find a meaningful purpose for Apple Computer and
his hard work to achieve it reflect these character strengths.The same
could be said for Richard Feynman’s desire to tell engineers the rea-
son for their work on the Manhattan Project.
Kindness and a love of people increase human value. David
Neeleman at jetBlue airlines models these character strengths
when he takes time to meet with 95 percent of jetBlue’s new crew
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
118

members. Howard Schultz at Starbucks shows his concern by
making health-care insurance and stock options available to most
of Starbucks’s employees, many of whom work part time.
Humility, open-mindedness, and curiosity increase knowledge
flow. A. G. Lafley’s continuous seeking of opinions and ideas from
the people at Procter & Gamble is a reflection of these character
strengths. George Washington also had these character strengths:
he was known as a listener who considered others’ views.
When the beliefs and behaviors of people in an organization
live up to the standards of good character I just mentioned, it cre-
ates the inspiring identity, human value, knowledge flow, and ulti-
mately, the connection necessary to become a great organization.
The Character
Connection Thrive Chain diagram shows
clusters of character strengths that specifically link to the ele-
ments in a connection culture.
Research is beginning to confirm that organizations that
advance character strengths experience superior performance.
According to a 2004 Aspen Institute and Booz Allen Hamilton study
of corporate behavior, companies that attained superior finan-
cial results were far more likely to have written value statements
THE JOURNEY TO CONNECTION
119

promoting ethical behavior/integrity, commitment to employees,
honesty and openness, and a drive to succeed (what might also be
called vitality or work ethic).2
Once we accept that character strengths are desirable, we
must ask ourselves how to develop them in ourselves and in the
people we are responsible for. There are several ways to develop
character strengths that will help individuals become intentional
connectors and improve connection in organizations. Let’s take a
look at each of them in the next chapter.
REVIEW, REFLECTION, AND APPLICATION
! Each of us faces an internal struggle between doing what is
right and what is wrong.
! By developing character strengths, we are better able to recog-
nize what is right and have a greater desire to do what is right.
! A person who has good character will increase connection.
The Character Connection Thrive Chain illustrates how
specific clusters of character strengths act to increase the
elements that, in turn, increase connection.
! So what? To increase connection among a group of people
requires that group members have the character strengths—
or beliefs and behaviors—that increase connection. In fact, it’s
essential if we hope to meet our potential and that of our
organizations.
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
120

DEVELOPING CHARACTER STRENGTHS
AND CONNECTION
M
121
Many people today recognize the importance of becoming more
intentional about developing character.A 1999 survey conducted by
Public Agenda, a nonprofit, bipartisan group, found that American
adults ranked “not learning values” as the most significant problem
facing young people today.1 More schools adopted character-build-
ing programs after President Bill Clinton in 1996 called for an
increase in character education, and President George W. Bush
tripled the federal budget for such activities.2
Understanding and embracing character strengths provide
a mental map to guide our behavior. A mental map is a belief
pattern that resides in one’s mind. Our minds are filled with a
variety of mental maps, such as one about what is required to be
healthy, one about how automobiles work, and one about how
the solar system is structured. A mental map about character
strengths gives us a standard that we will aspire to achieve.
In recent years, neuroscientists discovered scientific evidence
supporting the existence of mental maps. At the moment when
we have an insight that constructs a mental map, scientists have
observed the occurrence of high-frequency gamma waves and an
CHAPTER 15

FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
122
122
increase in adrenaline that gives us a feeling of pleasure and boosts
our energy level. They believe that these measurable occurrences
are evidence that the brain is forming a neural connection to record
and help us remember our newly acquired belief.3
In addition to the evidence that supports the formation of
mental maps in our brains, there is compelling evidence that a level
of awareness of character strengths exists in our brains at birth.
This has traditionally been referred to as our “conscience.”The evi-
dence comes from the work of a group of leading psychologist-
scholars who have identified twenty-four character strengths that
have been universally recognized by moral philosophers and reli-
gious thinkers throughout history. These character strengths
include creativity, curiosity, open-mindedness, love of learning,
perspective, bravery, persistence, integrity, vitality, love, kindness,
social intelligence, citizenship, fairness, leadership, forgiveness and
mercy, humility/modesty, prudence, self-regulation, appreciation
of beauty and excellence, gratitude, hope, humor, and spirituality.4
The character strengths are seen across tribes and nations and
across centuries. They are found in Buddhism, Christianity,
Confucianism, Hinduism, Islam, Judaism, and Taoism. Data from
more than thirty nations support their existence. When University
of Illinois professor Ed Diener studied isolated tribes such as the
Masai in Africa and the Inuit in Greenland, he concluded they
readily recognized the twenty-four character strengths.5
This group of psychologist-scholars believes that the prac-
tice of these character strengths improves mental and physical
health, and they have begun a movement—called positive psy-
chology—to encourage people to embrace and practice them.
Led by Martin Seligman, the former president of the American
Psychology Association and a professor of psychology at the

University of Pennsylvania, their early work that identifies the char-
acter strengths was published in 2004 by the American Psychology
Association in Character Strengths and Virtues: A Handbook and
Classification.
Character strengths should be encouraged in organizations
too. Employees who exhibit selfless sacrifices for the sake of the
team, honesty, a strong work ethic, and other character strengths
that benefit the organization should be celebrated and rewarded.
HOW TO DEVELOP THE CHARACTER STRENGTHS OF
INTENTIONAL CONNECTORS
The question of how to develop character strengths has been con-
sidered since antiquity. The following practices improve charac-
ter and increase connection:
1. Develop habits that reflect character strengths. To become
intentional connectors, individuals need to develop the habits that
reflect character strengths. Many intentional connectors exhibit
intentionality and discipline to develop character strengths. Coach
John Wooden’s Pyramid of Success was comprised of traditional
character strengths. So were the Rules of Civility that influenced
George Washington. In The Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin,
the statesman and inventor described the character strengths he
aspired to have and his efforts to improve upon one virtue each
week.6 He wrote that good behavior was difficult to achieve, given
our inclination to do otherwise. The only remedy was to concen-
trate on character development and, through repetition, build the
habits of doing what is right.
DEVELOPING CHARACTER STRENGTHS AND CONNECTIONS
123

Abraham Lincoln developed an understanding of character
from reading the Bible, Shakespeare, biographies of people he
admired (including Washington and Franklin), and the ancient
classics. Lincoln’s strong sense of justice gave him the backbone as
a twenty-three-year old army private to protect an innocent
Native American who wandered into a camp that Lincoln com-
manded during the Blackhawk War. Lincoln stood between the
innocent man and the soldiers who wanted to kill him until they
backed down. Lincoln’s strong moral compass gave him the back-
bone to emancipate slaves and resist the Confederate secession
during the Civil War. In Lincoln’s Virtues, author and historian
William Lee Miller explains that Lincoln’s intentionality in build-
ing character gave him the “moral confidence” to do what was
right despite the overwhelming pressure he faced at times not to.7
2. Build high-trust relationships with people who want to develop
good character. We need to build in checks and balances to protect
us from self-deception, the blind spots that I referred to earlier. The
recognition that we all have blind spots led French political
philosopher Charles-Louis de Secondat, Baron de Montesquieu,
to advocate checks and balances in the governance of nations.
Montesquieu’s 1748 masterpiece,The Spirit of the Laws, influenced
America’s founders to adopt a political system with checks and
balances.8
Good advisors who care enough to give us honest feedback
are one means to help us see our blind spots. During her more
than four-decade reign, Queen Elizabeth I had in Sir William Cecil
a first-rate counselor. Cecil was not only hardworking and stead-
fastly dedicated to the queen; he was also humane and wise.
Although Queen Elizabeth had other advisors, she trusted none
more than Cecil. Even after Cecil’s years of hard work began to
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
124

take their toll on him, the queen continued to rely on his judg-
ment to help her think through matters.9 Unlike Queen Elizabeth,
Frederick the Great (who will be discussed later on) was utterly
alone. He trusted no one. Perhaps this lack of connection and his
emotional isolation played a role in Frederick’s mental and physi-
cal decline.10 Steve Reinemund, chairman of PepsiCo Corporation,
is a more recent example of a leader who has stated publicly that
he has a group of close friends with whom he meets regularly, and
they encourage and challenge him in his responsibilities as a
spouse, father, and leader.11
Spending time with friends who are intentional connectors
gives me the encouragement I need to develop good character.
Because each one of us strives to improve his character, we help
one another. We meet regularly for coffee to talk about what’s
going on in our lives, including our children, our relationships
with our spouses, and our work. Talking through important
issues with these friends helps me see new perspectives and
inspires me to do what’s right.
It’s no coincidence that peer encouragement is a key element
in 12-step programs such as Weight Watchers and Alcoholics
Anonymous.12 These programs have been very effective in helping
people break bad habits. Peer encouragement helps people develop
good habits too.
3. Undertake periodic checkups. Another, more formal way to
become aware of blind spots is a 360-degree performance assess-
ment. The review incorporates the feedback of people we report to
and work alongside along with feedback from those individuals
who report to us. It is an invaluable practice to gauge our strengths
and development needs and to identify any blind spots. Critical to
the effectiveness of this process is honest feedback. If people game
DEVELOPING CHARACTER STRENGTHS AND CONNECTIONS
125

the system because they fear candid feedback will be met with
retaliation, it will become a complete waste of time. The role of the
primary evaluator (the person who summarizes and communi-
cates the results) is especially important since he can work with
those providing feedback to identify issues and communicate them
in a way that will preserve their anonymity. For the more senior-
ranking members of an organization, it may be advisable to bring
in outside advisors to conduct the assessments. Annual 360-degree
reviews are ideal although greater frequency will be necessary if an
individual’s development needs require rapid improvement.
4. Study and celebrate the character of intentional connectors.
During the spring of 2002, I attended a conference in Washington,
D.C., that featured David McCullough, one of my favorite histori-
ans. In his speech about John Adams, McCullough pleaded with the
audience to study history because it is so relevant to our lives today.
In the past I rarely read about history. Inspired by
McCullough’s speech, however, I decided to read his best-selling
book John Adams. To my surprise, I couldn’t put it down. The
accounts of Adams’s life, his courage and determination, and his
struggles made me think about my life. Next, I read the biogra-
phies of many of America’s other founders. Then I began reading
about a wide range of people I admired, including leaders of
nations, armies, businesses, and sports teams, and thought leaders
such as Harriett Beecher Stowe and Mahatma Gandhi. Their life
stories made me more determined to develop my character.
In the past, character was often taught through the trans-
mission of oral and written stories. Public libraries are filled
with books that teach us about character and encourage us in
our character development. Today they are available in compact
disc and downloadable file format for the person who prefers
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
126

DEVELOPING CHARACTER STRENGTHS AND CONNECTIONS
127
listening over reading.13 Make it a point to learn about the sto-
ries of great men and women of the past and present. You won’t
be disappointed.
5. Select, measure, and promote leaders who have character
strengths and who connect. Clearly this is something you will
aspire to. Sometimes, however, your best performers are less than
sensitive to others, and they expect special treatment because they
know they are talented in some respects. When the negative effect
of disconnection on the rest of the team is taken into considera-
tion, it is not worth applying different standards to these leaders.
The character strengths or weaknesses of leaders often ripple
across an association of people to good or ill effect. A leader’s
character has a disproportionate impact because people look to
leaders for guidance. That’s why organizations would do well to
establish processes that select people, especially leaders, with
character strengths. Tests that assess personality attributes are
useful for this purpose and also for identifying leaders who would
benefit from coaching. The Ritz-Carlton Hotel Company admin-
isters a personality assessment to potential employees. Years of
experience have taught the company which personality attributes
are present in their best employees.
In addition to the 360-degree performance assessment, a
periodic measurement of the degree of connection between lead-
ers and their direct reports is important. An employee engage-
ment survey that indicates engagement and connection have
declined provides an early warning system that intervention may
be required, including coaching or training. Employee engage-
ment surveys are typically excellent for this purpose. Employee
satisfaction surveys, however, are generally less effective because
they fail to measure emotional connection.

FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
128
6. Consider insights and solutions that emerge from social net-
work analysis. Another useful tool to identify connection (and
ultimately character) issues is a social network analysis. This
framework attempts to understand the flow of information
throughout an organization by surveying members about whom
they communicate with and what they communicate about. The
results are then aggregated and mapped to pinpoint key patterns
and participants. Karen Stephenson, a leading thinker in the field,
categorizes information flows into six networks: the work net-
work, the social network, the innovation network, the expert
knowledge network, the career guidance or strategic network,
and the learning network. Within each network, Stephenson
describes people as “hubs,”“pulsetakers,” and “gatekeepers.”
Social network analysis identifies people who are key dissem-
inators of knowledge and thus more valuable to the organization.
Equally important, it detects people who are bottlenecks to the
flow of information, thus reducing organizational effectiveness.
Social network analysis has also been used to design work
spaces that maximize the dissemination of knowledge.For example,
a person who serves as a hub and requires input from a broad net-
work can be stationed near an area where people regularly congre-
gate, such as a break area. People whose work is less social in nature
can be situated in areas where fewer people congregate. By under-
standing the communication flows and physically locating people
in areas to optimize connection where it is most needed, the organ-
ization will increase the likelihood that connection will occur and
have a favorable impact on the organization.14
7. Be careful not to develop a self-righteous culture. The danger
of focusing on character is that it can create a culture of legalism
and self-righteousness. Mark Twain alluded to this when he

described some people as “good in the worst sense of the word.”
Any culture that encourages people to develop character must be
on guard to assure that the character strengths of forgiveness,
mercy, and humility are not lost in the desire to improve other
aspects of character. Character strengths are goals for us to aspire
to achieve. In reality, however, we all will fail periodically to live
up to our character aspirations.
Forgiveness, mercy, and compassion should also be extended
to those who lapse into moments of self-righteousness. It can
happen to the best of us. The problem arises when a leader con-
sistently demonstrates that he lacks the self-knowledge that pro-
duces compassion and empathy for others. It is this type of
habitually self-righteous leader who should not be in a position
of leadership.
Now that we have more fully explored the three elements of
a connection culture—inspiring identity, human value, and
knowledge flow—and the character strengths that support them,
let’s learn about twenty leaders and see how they increased con-
nection and fired up people.
REVIEW, REFLECTION, AND APPLICATION
! Leading psychologist-scholars believe that individuals are
mentally and physically healthier when they exhibit behavior
that is consistent with twenty-four universally recognized
character strengths.
! We must all develop habits that reflect character strengths
and increase connection with others.
DEVELOPING CHARACTER STRENGTHS AND CONNECTION
129

! We need high-trust relationships to help us see our blind
spots and encourage us to develop our character.
! We also need periodic checkups, such as 360-degree per-
formance reviews, to identify our blind spots.
! Learning the stories of intentional connectors encourages us
to develop our own character.
! Organizations should select, measure, and promote leaders
who have character strengths and who connect with others.
! Social network analysis can be a useful tool to identify informa-
tion flows and the people who are integral to maintaining con-
nections, and to design work spaces to optimize connection.
! Be on guard not to develop a self-righteous culture. Instead,
be certain that your culture values the character strengths of
forgiveness, mercy, and humility.
! So what? To develop and maintain character strengths is well
worth the effort. You need to develop your character and help
those for whom you are responsible to develop their character.
With 360-degree performance assessments, employee engage-
ment surveys, and social network analysis you can identify
people who increase and decrease connection and understand
how work space might be designed to encourage connection.
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
130

PART IV
LEARN FROM TWENTY GREAT LEADERS
OVER TWENTY DAYS
In Part IV you will learn about twenty great leaders from various
fields who fired up people by increasing connection. In some
examples you will see a leader who relied primarily on one ele-
ment of a connection culture to increase connection, whereas in
other examples you will see a leader who relied on all three ele-
ments. Following each example, you will find a summary of some
practices that increased connection as well as a question or two
that ask you to consider how you might apply their practices in
your organization.
The stories are arranged so that you can read one each busi-
ness day and complete all of them over the course of one month.
Or you can take them at a pace that works best for you. In the
spirit of knowledge flow, you might find it helpful to meet with
other readers to discuss the stories and compare your answers
about how to apply the practices illustrated. Regardless of your
approach, I hope you reflect on how the practices of these leaders
might apply to your life.

132
WEEK 1
DAY 1: FRENCH HERO OF THE
AMERICAN REVOLUTION
Visiting historical sites in the state of Virginia, you might be sur-
prised to see recurring tributes to a Frenchman whose name and
story remain unknown to most Americans today. At Monticello,
Thomas Jefferson’s hilltop home near Charlottesville, you’ll find a
portrait and sculpted bust of the Frenchman. At Mount Vernon,
George Washington’s home on the Potomac River, you’ll learn that
Washington thought of him as a son, and you will find the key to
the Bastille on display, sent by the Frenchman to Washington after
he ordered the notorious Paris prison torn down during the French
Revolution. Perhaps most surprising of all, in the Hall of Presidents
beneath the rotunda of the Virginia capitol where a statue of George
Washington and busts of the other seven Virginia-born presidents
reside, you’ll find a bust of the Frenchman who was neither a pres-
ident nor born in Virginia.
Across America hundreds of landmarks are named after him.
Every year on Independence Day, the American ambassador to
France travels to his gravesite in Paris to replace the American
flag that flies over it. The gravesite is unusual in France for the
Frenchman’s casket and that of his wife lie beneath soil taken
from Bunker Hill outside Boston, Massachusetts, the site of one
of the first battles in the Revolutionary War.
As you might guess, this Frenchman was far from ordinary.
His name is Marie-Joseph-Paul-Yves-Gilbert du Motier de La
Fayette, more commonly known as the Marquis de Lafayette.

Lafayette was one of the wealthiest young men in France. His
early life was not an easy one. His father, a colonel of grenadiers,
was killed in battle when Lafayette was two years old, and his
mother and grandfather died when he was twelve. By fourteen
he had joined the Royal Army, and at sixteen he married Marie-
Adrienne-Françoise de Noailles, a wealthy relative of the French
king.
In his late teens Lafayette became enamored with the cause
of American independence.At a dinner he attended,Lafayette heard
the Duke of Gloucester, a brother of England’s King George III,
share his strong opposition to the English treatment of American
colonists. It seems from that point, Lafayette developed a consum-
ing desire to see the American colonists achieve their independence.
At nineteen Lafayette purchased a ship, named it the Victoire,
and persuaded several French army officers to join him in helping
the Americans. After he arrived in America, Lafayette approached
John Hancock, head of the Continental Congress, and volunteered
his services. In a letter to Hancock, Lafayette, like the signers of the
Declaration of Independence, pledged his “life, his fortune, and his
sacred honor” to American independence. Lafayette was inspired
by America’s cause, and his inspiration led him to make a commit-
ment to do everything he possibly could to achieve it.
Lafayette was commissioned as a major general and eventu-
ally became an aide-de-camp to George Washington. Historian
Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. noted that Lafayette “distinguished
himself militarily . . . was an essential actor in the successful plan
to trap the British Army under General Cornwallis at Yorktown
. . . [and became] an invaluable ally of the American minister to
France, Thomas Jefferson.”
Perhaps most important, when Lafayette went back to France
to secure resources for the Americans, he returned with an army
WEEK 1
133

of four thousand soldiers and a fleet of ships commanded by Count
de Rochambeau. Before Lafayette’s return, the American effort had
been losing steam after suffering several defeats. Lafayette’s pres-
ence, his infectious optimism, and the resources he brought revital-
ized the American effort.
Lafayette had a profound effect on the American military’s
culture during the Revolutionary War. He increased inspiring
identity. He encouraged everyone around him by reiterating
how important the war was for the future of humankind. Later
in life he would comment: “To have participated in the toils and
perils of the unspotted struggle for independence . . . the foun-
dation of the American era of a new social order . . . has been
the pride, the encouragement, the support of [my] long and
eventful life.”
Lafayette increased human value in many ways. He spent
considerable personal wealth to purchase shoes and clothes for
the men in his command. Although he could afford to buy a
house to stay warm, he chose to remain with the soldiers at Valley
Forge during the freezing winter of 1778. He fought alongside the
infantrymen, even dismounting his horse if necessary to be closer
to them. Lafayette treated soldiers with respect.
Lafayette increased knowledge flow by seeking the opinions
of his soldiers, asking them what worked and what didn’t work in
the battles they had fought. He later claimed that the common
soldiers were his greatest teachers. The soldiers were so fond of
Lafayette that they referred to him as “Our Marquis.”
The unlikely story of the French aristocrat fighting with dedi-
cation for their behalf endeared Lafayette to Americans every-
where. Author Harlow Giles Unger described it well when he said,
“[Lafayette] fled from incomparable luxury . . . to wade through
the South Carolina swamps, freeze at Valley Forge, and ride
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
134

through the stifling summer heat of Virginia—as an unpaid vol-
unteer, fighting and bleeding for liberty, in a land not his own, for
a people not his own.”1
For the Marquis de Lafayette’s extraordinary commitment
to America’s cause, America passed a law on January 23, 2002,
posthumously bestowing him with honorary citizenship. Only
five other individuals in America’s history have been honored in
this way.
APPLICATION
Lafayette increased inspiring identity by reminding people of
the importance of the Revolutionary War to the future of
humankind. He increased human value by fighting beside the sol-
diers he commanded and suffering alongside them during the
winter at Valley Forge. Lafayette increased knowledge flow by
seeking the opinions of soldiers and considering their ideas. If
you had been a soldier under Lafayette’s command, which of
these actions would have resonated with you the most? How can
you make them resonate with your colleagues?
DAY 2: RESTORING THE GLORY
Anne Mulcahy, after being appointed the CEO of Xerox and bring-
ing herself up to speed on the company’s situation, shocked Wall
Street by announcing Xerox’s business model was unsustainable.
Her remark caused Xerox stock to drop 26 percent the following day.
Despite her realization that Xerox had serious problems, she
knew from her twenty-seven years at the firm that it could be
WEEK 1
135

revived. Although Xerox’s outside legal and financial advisors
recommended that the firm file for Chapter 11 bankruptcy pro-
tection, Mulcahy refused to because she knew it would discour-
age Xerox employees and make a turnaround even more difficult.
She was determined to lead Xerox back to health. One col-
league observed that her passion and work ethic were driven by
her mission to save Xerox. To that effect, Mulcahy once said, “If
this place is going to fail, it’s not going to be because Anne
Mulcahy slept.”
Mulcahy’s words and deeds effectively created an inspiring
identity for Xerox that might be described as “restoring the glory.”
Her optimism and energy persuaded others that it could be done.
And what a story it would be to revitalize a once great company.
Who wouldn’t want to play a part in that?
Another element in the Xerox culture created by Mulcahy
was human value. Her comments showed she cared about the
people she was responsible for leading. In a remarkably candid
interview with Fortune’s Betsy Morris in 2003, Mulcahy stated
she would wake up some nights thinking about what would hap-
pen to the 96,000 employees who were counting on her if she
failed to save the firm. And when, to keep Xerox afloat she had to
shut down a business she had created and lay off many of the
people she hired, Mulcahy went to meet them face-to-face. She
told them she was sorry, that it had to be done to save the com-
pany, and that it wasn’t their fault. Mulcahy made the tough
decision and carried it out in a way that preserved the dignity of
the people involved.
She also increased knowledge flow at Xerox. Mulcahy visited
with fifty CEOs of client companies and boosted employee
morale by logging one hundred thousand miles to visit Xerox
employees in her first year. She encouraged people to tell her the
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
136

truth, and she listened to them too. According to one of her col-
leagues, she “told us everything, stuff we didn’t want to know . . .
[like how close we were to running out of cash].” Another col-
league remarked, “Part of her DNA is to tell you the good, the
bad, and the ugly.”
She asked them to be committed to the turnaround: “Save
every dollar as if it were your own.” And she rewarded those who
remained at Xerox by refusing to eliminate raises and by extend-
ing small perks such as time off from work on their birthdays. She
allowed Xerox’s top hundred executives to have greater access to
her, and she involved them in major decisions. As a result, ninety-
five of them remained with Xerox throughout the turnaround.
One observer noted,“She was leading by example. Everyone at
Xerox knew she was working hard and that she was working hard
for them.” The press accounts of Anne Mulcahy’s heroic efforts
had to encourage her colleagues. Fortune reported that she hadn’t
had a weekend off in two years, frequently visited three cities a
day, carried her own luggage on flights, and did more cooking on
the Xerox corporate jet than she had at her own home. During
this critical stage to Xerox’s survival and for a season in her life,
Mulcahy was clearly making a personal sacrifice for the sake of
the mission and her Xerox colleagues.
Mulcahy’s optimism and hard work paid off. When she was
named Xerox’s CEO in May 2000, the firm was on the verge of
bankruptcy and its stock had dropped from $63.69 a share to
$4.43. After she took charge, Xerox employees rallied to support
her. Thanks to leadership that strengthened connection among
the people at Xerox, together they restored the company to prof-
itability and positioned it for future growth, leading observers
like Xerox board member and former CEO of Time Warner Nick
Nicholas to proclaim, “The story here is a minor miracle.”1
WEEK 1
137

APPLICATION
Anne Mulcahy increased inspiring identity by holding out a vision
of Xerox as a turnaround story and working hard to achieve it. She
increased human value by being there with employees to console
them when they lost their jobs. She increased knowledge flow by
meeting with employees worldwide and hearing their ideas and
concerns. If you were leading a turnaround situation, which of the
means that Anne Mulcahy used to increase connection would you
focus on, and why?
DAY 3: THE SHOT HEARD AROUND THE WORLD
When the Chicago Bulls NBA team is mentioned, chances are, the
first person you think of is Michael Jordan. What sports fan wasn’t
inspired by arguably the game’s greatest player ever? His last-second
jump shots,airborne dunks,and tenacious defensive coverage made
him a crowd-pleasing favorite.
When Michael Jordan began playing in the NBA, he epito-
mized excellence as an individual contributor. His superhuman
feats during his first five seasons, however, were not enough to
make champions out of the Bulls. Not until Phil Jackson became
head coach and began to influence the young superstar did the
Bulls finally make it to the big game.
Jackson helped Jordan see the need to go beyond being a star
and become what Jackson called a player “who surrenders the
me for the we.” In the context of the Bulls this meant every indi-
vidual playing as a team within the triangle offense that Jackson
taught.
Until that time Jordan felt he needed to win games on his
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
138

WEEK 1
139
own because he didn’t have confidence that his teammates would
perform in the clutch. But a one-man show, even if it was a show
put on by one of the game’s greatest players, was never going to
be enough to get the Bulls to the top. Furthermore, Jordan spent
little time with his teammates and instead hung out with his
entourage that followed him around on the road. Jordan’s self-
reliance and social separation from his teammates made them
feel like supporting actors on the Michael Jordan show.
Phil Jackson could see the problem. So he went to Jordan and
convinced him that the team needed his leadership, which would
require his presence and effort to get to know his teammates per-
sonally. Having Jordan present with the team would increase
human value in the Bulls’s culture. Jordan’s presence and the trust
he would put in his teammates would show he valued them as
basketball players and as people.
Convinced that Jackson was right, Jordan transformed him-
self into a force for connection. He began spending more time
with his teammates on and off the court. Writing about the expe-
rience in his book Sacred Hoops, Phil Jackson observed: “Jordan’s
presence [affected] the psyche of the team . . . he challenged every-
one to step up . . . before practice I often found him working one-
on-one with young players.”
Connection was increased as Phil Jackson increased knowledge
flow. His philosophy is that “I like everyone to feel that they have a
seat at the table.” Jackson knows that keeping people informed and
listening to their viewpoints keeps them feeling connected.
The Bulls’s inspiring identity was increased as Jordan and
Jackson worked together to convince the other Bulls players that
they were a team that deserved the world championship. Jordan
and Scottie Pippen pushed the team to reach a new level of phys-
ical conditioning and preparation, which reinforced the players’

FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
140
beliefs that no team worked as hard or deserved a world champi-
onship more than they did.
Connection was also a part of the Bulls’s identity. Jackson
encouraged his members’ commitment to the team by quoting a
passage from Rudyard Kipling’s The Second Jungle Book. The
quote describes the law of the jungle: “. . . the strength of the pack
is the Wolf. And the strength of the Wolf is the pack.”
Jackson’s Chicago Bulls team accepted his philosophy of
teamwork as a path to basketball greatness. As connection among
the team improved, the Bulls’s success rose to a new level. Begin-
ning in 1991 when the Bulls won their first world championship,
Jordan’s teammates sometimes made dramatic contributions to
the games. In the past, when the score was close at the end of a
game, Jordan always wanted the ball. After Jackson worked with
Jordan, he trusted his teammates to make the big play during sev-
eral pivotal situations.
One such instance occurred in game six of the 1993
championship when the Bulls played the Phoenix Suns. Near the
end of the game, down by a score of 98 to 96, the Bulls came
downcourt, and instead of passing the ball to Jordan, the Bulls got
the ball to John Paxson, who shot and scored a three-point jumper
just before the buzzer went off to win the game. The press hailed
it as “the shot heard around the world.” The following year in the
final championship game against the Utah Jazz, Jordan passed the
ball to his teammate Steve Kerr who hit a jump shot just before the
buzzer to clinch another championship for the Bulls. Over the
course of eight years, the Chicago Bulls won an astounding six
world championship titles.
Michael Jordan went on to become a basketball legend for his
performance as a player and as a part of a basketball dynasty. At
the time of his departure from coaching the Los Angeles Lakers in

2004, Phil Jackson had a career record of 832 wins and 316 losses
(a .725 winning percentage), making him the coach with the best
winning percentage in NBA history. Between coaching the Bulls
and the Lakers, Jackson won nine NBA championships.1
One key to Phil Jackson’s success was that he challenged his
players to become a team by putting the team first. Michael
Jordan responded by humbly making a personal commitment
to his team and teammates rather than continuing as a one-man
show to the detriment of his team’s performance. The resulting
connection among the team and the performance that it made
possible was the catalyst that transformed Jordan from being a
great player into becoming a basketball legend. Ironically, the
selfishness of some of Jackson’s players on the Lakers team kept
him from developing another basketball dynasty in Los Angeles
during his first stint as head coach there. Now that Jackson has
returned to the Lakers, his players are beginning to see the
light. It may be that a second dynasty is in the making for Phil
Jackson.
APPLICATION
Michael Jordan increased inspiring identity by sharing his belief
with his teammates that the Bulls could become world champions
and by personally working hard to achieve it. He increased human
value by getting to know his teammates and taking the time to
mentor younger players. Coach Phil Jackson increased knowledge
flow by letting everyone know they had a seat at the table to share
his ideas. Have you played on a team, or can you think of another
team, that came together like the Bulls did? Is there someone in
your organization that you could encourage or mentor?
WEEK 1
141

DAY 4: SOLDIER OF PEACE
George C. Marshall was one of the most extraordinary individuals
to have lived during the twentieth century. Born in Uniontown,
Pennsylvania, in 1880 and trained at the Virginia Military Institute,
Marshall was a career military man who will forever be remem-
bered for his efforts to promote peace and bring about a strong
connection between America and Western Europe.
Reading the comments of Marshall’s many admirers is awe-
inspiring. Winston Churchill called Marshall “the true organizer
of victory” for his efforts during World War II as army chief of
staff for President Franklin Delano Roosevelt. The British chiefs
of staff sent Marshall a message that read, in part, “Your name
will be honoured among those of the greatest soldiers of your
own or any other country . . . Always you have honoured us by
your frankness, charmed us by your courtesy, and inspired us by
your singleness of purpose and selfless devotion to our common
cause.” President Harry S Truman said Marshall was “the greatest
military man this country has ever produced—or any other
country for that matter . . . the more I see and talk with him, the
more certain I am he is the great one of the age.” Time magazine
named him Man of the Year twice.
As army chief of staff during World War II, Marshall was
credited for building America’s underprepared military infra-
structure so that it would be in a position to win the war. After
Marshall recognized that America was falling seriously behind
Germany in military preparedness, though it would be another
three years before America was attacked, he worked incessantly
to revitalize American military strength. The energy and effort
Marshall put into his work led Senator Henry Stimson to say, “I
have never seen a task of such magnitude performed by a man.”
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
142

Throughout his remarkable career, Marshall’s actions
encouraged connection among people. He increased human
value in several ways. When FDR put the Civilian Conservation
Corps during the Depression under Marshall’s command, he
developed an “absorbing interest” in helping the young men by
educating them and taking care of their health-care needs.
According to Marshall’s biographer, he “kept his men intelligently
occupied . . . giving them tasks that would awaken their interests.”
Married soldiers and their families suffered real economic hard-
ship during the Depression so Marshall started a program that
allowed every military family to pay only fifteen cents a meal. To
avoid the perception that the program was a “condescending
charity,” he and Mrs. Marshall ate the meals too.
One of the best-known examples of Marshall’s passion for
human value was celebrated in the movie Saving Private Ryan
that starred actor Tom Hanks. After learning that James Ryan’s
mother had lost three of her four sons in battle, Marshall sent a
squad to France specifically to retrieve Private Ryan and return
him to America and to his mother.
Perhaps the greatest example of Marshall’s increasing human
value came after World War II when President Truman asked
Marshall to become secretary of state. He accepted the role because
he envisioned the opportunity to remove the causes that led to war.
For two years he set about to persuade Congress and the American
people of the need to provide assistance to the war-torn economies
of Europe where famine and disease were rapidly spreading. That
was no easy task, considering the human inclination to avenge for-
mer enemies rather than help them. To his credit, Marshall knew
that ignoring human suffering was wrong and would lead to bitter
resentment and potentially to a future war. During a commence-
ment speech at Harvard, General Marshall told the world: “Our
WEEK 1
143

policy is directed not against any country or doctrine but against
hunger, desperation, and chaos.” Marshall redirected his tireless
efforts from waging a war to helping the very nations he had fought
against. The Marshall Plan, as the reconstruction effort became
known, was an overwhelming success. You can still visit European
towns where merchants sell postcards that show the destruction
following World War II, in stark contrast to the beauty of these
same towns today.
For his humanitarian actions, he was the first career soldier
to be awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1953. The British were so
moved by the compassion and efforts of Marshall that when he
entered Westminster Cathedral to attend Queen Elizabeth II’s
coronation and people in attendance spotted him, they stood in
his honor.
George Marshall also increased knowledge flow in cultures by
speaking truth to those in power. During World War I in France,
General John “Blackjack” Pershing once criticized then Major
Marshall’s division commander in front of his subordinates over a
mixup that was actually the fault of Pershing’s office. As Pershing
tried to walk away, Marshall refused to let him leave, even grabbing
his arm to stop him, until Pershing heard the truth. The officers
present thought Marshall’s behavior would surely end his career.
To Pershing’s credit,however,he appreciated Marshall’s candor and
courage. Eventually, Pershing promoted Marshall to colonel, mak-
ing him a part of his personal staff, and later promoted him to
become his personal aide.
Another incident shows Marshall’s commitment to openness
and honesty.Years later when Marshall was attending his first con-
ference with FDR, the president asked for his opinion on a subject
that everyone else in the room had already agreed on. To the pres-
ident’s surprise, Marshall opined,“I’m sorry, Mr. President, I don’t
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
144

agree with you at all.” Somewhat surprised, FDR abruptly ended
the meeting. Afterward, Treasury Secretary Henry Morgenthau
approached Marshall and said, “Well, it’s been nice knowing
you.” As it turned out, FDR appreciated Marshall’s integrity and
his willingness to say what he really believed. A little over a year
later, FDR made Marshall the army chief of staff reporting directly
to him.
George Marshall increased knowledge flow by valuing edu-
cation. One theme running throughout his career was an “insa-
tiable desire to learn, to know, [and] to understand.” Stationed in
Tientsin, “he . . . [became] an authority on Chinese civilization,
history, and language . . . [and was] the only American officer
who could examine Chinese witnesses without the aid of inter-
preters.” Marshall’s awareness that Hitler was building a huge
military industrial complex led him to warn of the Nazi threat
and America’s vulnerability.
The inspiring identity that George Marshall spread to others
was one of a dutiful public servant to a worthy country that he
loved. When the time arrived for the Allies to invade Europe,
General Marshall had hoped to be the one to lead the effort as
Supreme Commander of the Allied Forces. The position would
be based in Great Britain. FDR, however, felt he needed General
Marshall with him in Washington, D.C. Although he was person-
ally disappointed, Marshall remained working for the president
as army chief of staff and appointed Dwight D. Eisenhower to the
position of supreme commander of Operation Overlord. While
Marshall served in a less visible but nonetheless important role,
Eisenhower’s success as supreme commander served as a spring-
board to the presidency. It takes an extraordinary personal sense
of one’s duty for someone to make a sacrifice of the magnitude
made by General Marshall.
WEEK 1
145

George Marshall once said, “The less you agree with the
policies of your superiors, the more energy you must direct to
their accomplishment.” This attitude gave FDR confidence that
he could always count on Marshall, and the president expressed
this confidence by saying, “When I disapprove [of Marshall’s
recommendations], I don’t have to look over my shoulder to see
which way he is going . . . I know he is going . . . to give me the
most loyal support as chief of staff that any president could
wish.”1 It takes an uncommon degree of integrity and humility
to do this.
A soldier of peace, George C. Marshall left as a legacy
strengthened connections among the peace-loving nations. His
work laid the foundation for the unprecedented spread of liberty
in the last half of the twentieth century.
APPLICATION
General George C. Marshall increased inspiring identity by
becoming a role model of a soldier-statesman who was dedicated
to his country and worked hard to do his best in the positions he
held. He increased human value by standing up to General
Pershing and defending the men in his command when he felt
they were treated unfairly. General Marshall increased knowledge
flow by learning what was going on outside America so that he
could be prepared to respond to external developments. What
qualities of George Marshall do you see in yourself? FDR said of
Marshall,“I don’t have to look over my shoulder to see which way
he is going . . . I know he is going . . . to give me the most loyal
support as chief of staff that any president could wish.” Would
your supervisor say the same about you?
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
146

DAY 5: HUG YOUR CUSTOMERS™
Mitchells/Richards/Marshs is a retail store phenomenon.In 2002,
the leading menswear retailing magazine named the company
Retailer of the Year. Its two locations in Greenwich and Westport,
Connecticut, about an hour’s drive from New York City, sell an
astounding $65 million in clothing annually. Remarkably, half the
households in those towns have purchased from the company.
The company’s clients include many well-known celebrities such
as the actor Paul Newman and Today Show host Matt Lauer, as
well as the last three CEOs of General Electric and the heads of
IBM, Xerox, Starwood, PepsiCo, JP Morgan, Lehman Brothers,
and many others. Most recently, the firm acquired Marshs in
nearby Huntington, New York.
Surely near the top of the list of factors contributing to its
success is the culture of Mitchells/Richards/Marshs, which
revolves around connection. Mitchells/Richards/Marshs’ man-
agement, employees, customers, and suppliers benefit from the
strong connection that exists among them.
Connection has always been the foundation of Mitchells/
Richards/Marshs. In 1958, Ed Mitchell traded an unfulfilling mar-
keting and advertising career in New York City that was giving him
ulcers for the world of retail. Ed and his wife, Norma, thought
that opening a men’s clothing store in Westport would allow them
to do what they loved, which was connecting with people. They
founded the store based on the belief that it was right to treat
employees like family and customers like friends. Until he died in
January 2004 at the age of ninety-eight, Ed continued to work at the
Westport store several hours each week. Norma, too, had worked at
the store up until her death a decade earlier. Retiring seemed out of
the question to these two who loved connection.
WEEK 1
147

Ed Mitchell’s philosophy is enthusiastically embraced by his
sons, Jack, now the company’s CEO, and Bill, the vice chairman.
Both men embody their father’s love of people. Bill frequently
reminds everyone that “it’s just right to care for people.” Jack is an
energetic, warm-hearted leader who is a natural-born optimist
and encourager. He and Bill are constantly on the move in both
stores, making connections with customers and colleagues.
To bring the Mitchells’ philosophy to life, Jack describes car-
ing for people as giving them a metaphorical hug. He’s even writ-
ten about it in a best-selling book published in 2003, Hug Your
Customers: The Proven Way to Personalize Sales and Achieve
Astounding Results.
Inspiring identity is increased when leaders articulate a com-
mon cause that unites and inspires management and employees
alike. Everyone who has a connection with Mitchells/Richards/
Marshs is proud of what it stands for: a reputation for excellence as
reflected in its first-class employees and high-quality clothing,a pas-
sion for caring about people, and a commitment to giving back to
the community by regularly holding charity fund-raisers in its stores.
Human value pervades the Mitchells/Richards/Marshs culture.
The leaders believe in getting to know associates and customers on
a personal basis (and it’s not uncommon for them to get to know
their family members too). Managers make certain that employees
have time for a life outside of work. They reach out to help associ-
ates in need (a bedside visit in the hospital or a homemade favorite
dessert would not be unusual). Management is flexible to meet
employee needs (such as letting a sixty-five-year-old employee take
a nap during the middle of the day to restore his energy). Because
they care about associates, there have been a few occasions when
managers have told verbally abusive customers to take their busi-
ness elsewhere.
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
148

Mitchells/Richards/Marshs wants customers to feel the stores
are as welcoming as a home, so adults may enjoy a complimentary
in-store espresso bar and children may wait in a comfortable tele-
vision viewing area. Management and associates call customers and
one another by their first names because that’s what friends do. If
a customer has an emergency after hours, they’ll open up the store.
Mitchells/Richards/Marshs’ technology investments keep track of
information on customers including their likes and dislikes.
They make it a practice to travel to their suppliers’ headquar-
ters because it shows they value them, and it’s easier to connect with
people when you meet them face-to-face. Anyone working at
Mitchells/Richards/Marshs who consistently behaves in a way that
is at odds with human value is respectfully shown the door.
In 1995, Mitchells acquired Richards, the premier men’s
clothing store in nearby Greenwich. Typically in acquisitions,
management and employees of the acquirer exert an air of supe-
riority toward management and employees of the acquired. This
acquisition couldn’t have been more different. Out of respect for
their new colleagues at Richards, the Mitchells family maintained
the Richards name and described the deal as a merger of equals,
although it was technically an acquisition. They also maintained
the salary-based compensation structure preferred by the Richards
associates rather than force them to convert to the commission-
based system used at Mitchells. Following the acquisition, Jack’s
sons, Russ and Bob, spent 80 percent of their time at Richards
“hugging” their new colleagues to let them know just how much
they were respected and appreciated. To this day, the Mitchells
still refer to Ed Schachter, the former owner of Richards who con-
tinues to work at the store, as “the Boss.”
Knowledge flow also increases connection at Mitchells/
Richards/Marshs. By encouraging associates to express their
WEEK 1
149

opinions and ideas,management creates a stronger connection with
them. In turn, associates consider each other’s opinions and ideas,
and the connection among them benefits the business. Manage-
ment is intentional about hiring people who are listeners and
learners who seek personal growth, believing these associates will
naturally listen closely to customers and have valuable ideas and
perspectives to share. Mitchells/Richards/Marshs creates a greater
connection with customers by giving many top customers a voice
via the company’s client advisory board.
As Ed Mitchell knew from day one, and Mitchells/Richards/
Marshs’ success goes to show, connecting with people is not only
the right thing to do, it’s the wise thing to do too. And you can be
sure Ed Mitchell’s legacy of connecting with people is in good
hands. Jack and Bill remain extremely active in the business, yet in
many respects have passed the torch to the third generation. The
family has unanimously designated Russ and Bob Mitchell co-pres-
idents and future co-CEOs because “they are superhuggers”certain
to maintain Mitchells/Richards/Marshs commitment to connec-
tion with employees, suppliers, and customers in the years ahead.1
APPLICATION
Mitchells/Richards/Marshs increased inspiring identity by clearly
communicating its values of caring for people and holding high-
profile fund-raisers in its stores for local charitable organizations.
It increased human value by treating employees like family and
customers like friends. Knowledge flow was increased at Mitchells/
Richards/Marshs by hiring people who were good listeners and
learners. What aspects of the Hug Your Customers™philosophy
would work in your organization?
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
150

151
WEEK 2
DAY 6: A MOST UNLIKELY TURNAROUND
One of the greatest turnaround stories in all of history is also one
of the most unlikely. It is the story of Queen Elizabeth I, a twenty-
five-year-old woman who inherited the throne of England in
1558 having no leadership experience, faced prejudice in a time
when women were considered grossly inferior to men, and lived
with frequent threats of death. Despite these obstacles, she over-
came the odds and led her country from near financial ruin to
one of the most powerful kingdoms on earth. She is a timeless
example of how a leader can connect with people and bring out
the best in them.
Elizabeth’s start in life was far from auspicious. She was the
daughter of King Henry VIII and Queen Anne Boleyn. When
Elizabeth was two years old, the king accused her mother of adul-
tery and had her beheaded in the Tower of London. At that time,
Elizabeth lost her title as princess and her position in the line of
succession to the throne. Some years later, however, her step-
mother, Catherine Parr, persuaded King Henry to restore Elizabeth
to the line of succession.
When Elizabeth became queen, England was unstable, and her
chances of success, or even survival, looked dim. First, England was
in a state of severe internal strife between Protestants and Catholics
following the Reformation and Counter-Reformation. Second, its
treasury was nearly empty. Finally, Pope Pius V had declared that
“whoever sends [Queen Elizabeth] out of this world . . . not only
does not sin but gains merit in the eyes of God.” With the pope’s

blessing, plans to kill Elizabeth were hatched by groups in Rome,
France, and Spain.
Despite the dire situation,Queen Elizabeth rose to the occasion.
When word arrived that she had inherited the throne after her step-
sister Queen Mary’s death, Elizabeth slipped the queen’s ring on her
finger, kneeled, and declared Psalm 118:23: The LORD has done this,
and it is marvelous in our eyes.With a sense of divine appointment,
she set out on her long road to restoring England’s glory.
What stands out about Elizabeth’s reign is the strength of her
commitment to her mission and her people. One sign of that
commitment was her rejection of marriage to the love of her life,
Robert Dudley. It was rumored that his terminally ill wife died
from a fall that occurred when Dudley pushed her. If Elizabeth
married Dudley, her leadership would have been compromised.
She chose instead to declare herself “bound unto a husband which
is the Kingdom of England . . . [and she would be pleased if she]
lived and died a virgin.”
Thereafter, Elizabeth became known as the Virgin Queen, a
description that invited comparison to the Virgin Mary. The
queen appears to have encouraged her new image.When Sir Walter
Raleigh wanted to name a colony in North America in her honor,
Elizabeth suggested the name Virginia.
Elizabeth met a military challenge in 1588. King Philip II of
Spain had assembled the Great Armada of 130 ships and thirty
thousand men to attack England and restore it to Catholicism.
Elizabeth, intent upon leading her soldiers, personally went to
Tilbury near the English Channel to join them and await the
Spanish. Her soldiers were mesmerized, to say the least, as she cir-
culated among them. One eyewitness described her as looking like
a “sacred general.”The speech she gave there has been described as
“one of the greatest orations in British history.” In part she said,
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
152

My loving people . . . I am come . . . to live and die amongst you
all. To lay down for God, my kingdom and for my people, my
honour and my blood even in the dust. I know I have the body
of a weak and feeble woman, but I have the heart and stomach
of a King and a King of England too and think it foul scorn that
. . . Spain or any Prince of Europe should dare to invade the bor-
ders of my realm; to which, rather than any dishonour shall
grow by me, I myself will take up arms.
Although many of her subjects had come to adore her for her
steadfast determination to make England great, it was at Tilbury,
according to historian Simon Schama, that Elizabeth became a
national icon. Fortunately, Elizabeth’s readiness to fight was never
tested. Before the Armada could arrive, a combination of the fast
and maneuverable British ships with superior weaponry and the
winds at sea devastated the Armada. The Spanish lost thirty ships
and fifteen thousand men.
Inspiring identity was restored to England under Queen
Elizabeth. Many historians agree that she was admired by her
subjects, many of whom affectionately referred to her as “Good
Queen Bess.” Because the identity of the kingdom was so closely
linked to the ruler’s identity, the English people’s affection for
Queen Elizabeth and her growing stature in the world made them
proud to be her subjects.
Elizabeth increased human value by demonstrating how she
cared for people. When her advisors encouraged her to punish
Catholics, she refused. She chose to dedicate herself wholly to her
people rather than marry the man she loved, and she showed she
was willing to fight alongside her soldiers. At a time when mon-
archs ruled with an iron hand, her actions showed compassion
and a sense of obligation to her subjects.
WEEK 2
153

Although knowledge flow was limited at this point in his-
tory, there is evidence that Queen Elizabeth listened to the advice
of her closest advisors and carefully considered what she learned
before making decisions. Because she was not as quick to rule on
matters before her, or at least not as quick as past rulers, her crit-
ics decried her slower, more measured approach as evidence that
she was a poor leader. In reality, Queen Elizabeth’s thoughtful
approach to making decisions served her and England well.
The increased connection among the English contributed to
a revival of England’s commercial and cultural activity. So suc-
cessful was Queen Elizabeth’s forty-four-year reign that it became
known as England’s Golden Age.1
APPLICATION
Queen Elizabeth I increased inspiring identity by declaring her-
self married to England as a sign of her commitment to her duty.
She increased human value by refusing to punish Catholics who
held views different from her own. She increased knowledge flow
by listening to her advisors and considering their views. Are there
times when you feel you need to work against the conventions of
your time and bring about change? What themes in the Queen
Elizabeth story inspire you?
DAY 7: ENLIGHTENED MONARCH?
As a young man,Prince Frederick II found himself in an unbearable
situation. Living in the Prussian capital of Berlin in the early eigh-
teenth century, Frederick longed for autonomy and independence
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
154

but lived under an autocratic, overbearing father, Frederick I, the
first king of Prussia. The king disapproved of Fredrick’s more
modern ways, so he beat and berated him publicly to force his son
to comply with his wishes.
When the prince was eighteen years old, he and a friend were
apprehended trying to escape to England. To punish his son, the
king made Frederick watch as his friend was beheaded. Out of
these harsh experiences Frederick learned what it felt like to be on
the receiving end of a ruler who abused his power. Unfortunately,
for the time being, there was nothing he could do about it. So he
patiently waited for his hour to arrive.
In 1740, Frederick II assumed the Prussian throne. He seemed
determined to lead in a far different way from that of his father.
Influenced by the writings of John Locke and Cicero, he described
himself as “the first servant of the state.” His actions were truly
revolutionary.
Prussia’s inspiring identity increased with the spread of
Frederick’s image as an enlightened monarch. Under Frederick,
Prussia saw its reputation grow as a European power, which also
increased the cultural element of inspiring identity.
Frederick increased human value in several ways. He lived as
an ascetic in modest accommodations compared to the grand
palaces of most rulers. He established individual protections under
law by expediting the legal process, abolishing torture, and making
death sentences subject to his personal approval. He instituted the
first German law code and educated judges, which led to Prussian
courts gaining the reputation as the fairest courts in Europe. He set
forth a policy of religious toleration. He rebuilt towns and thou-
sands of miles of roads to connect communities. Knowledge flow
increased when he protected freedom of the press and promoted
education for his people.
WEEK 2
155

The results of Frederick’s rule were extraordinary. During the
Seven Years’ War, he successfully defended Prussia from French,
Russian, and Austrian attacks, despite having fewer military
resources. Ultimately, he built Prussia into one of the strongest
states in Europe before he died in 1786.
Historian James MacGregor Burns called him “one of the
most masterful . . . constructive and successful rulers in recent
times.” Voltaire, the French philosopher, described Frederick as
“the Philosopher King.” But his people called him the name by
which he will forever be remembered: Frederick the Great.
Although Frederick realized remarkable success early in his
reign, later on he began to fail as a leader. His insatiable desire for
military conquest in order to achieve personal fame and meet his
dead father’s expectations overcame his desire to help the
people. Eventually, the bloody battles Frederick undertook along
with his sleeplessness and nightmares about his father con-
tributed to his growing sense of hopelessness, despair, and poor
health. As he aged, Frederick’s behavior toward others became
abusive. At one time he had the devotion of the Prussian people,
but by the time of his death in 1786 few mourned him.1
APPLICATION
Frederick the Great increased the inspiring identity of Prussia by
improving his reputation as an effective leader. He increased
human value by making the law courts fair.He increased knowledge
flow by improving education for Prussians. How might you change
the conditions of your workplace environment after you have been
promoted? What might you do differently than your supervisor?
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
156

DAY 8: FIRST IN THEIR HEARTS
Richard Neustadt, Presidential Scholar at Harvard University,
observed the following about George Washington: “It wasn’t his
generalship that made him stand out . . . It was the way he
attended to and stuck by his men. His soldiers knew that he
respected and cared for them, and that he would share their
severe hardships.”
From the time he was a young man, George Washington kept
a personal rule book to remind him of the behavior that he aspired
to live out each day. Many of the rules embody human value and
capture the respect and deference Washington showed for others
throughout his life. Some entries read: “Every action done in com-
pany ought to be done with some sign of respect to those who are
present”; “Speak not when you should hold your peace”; “Use no
reproachful language against anyone”; “Submit your judgment to
others with modesty”;“When another speaks, be attentive”;“Think
before you speak”; and “Be not so desirous to overcome as not to
give liberty to each one to deliver his opinion.”
Like many other great leaders who inspire their followers,
George Washington increased human value in the culture he
was responsible for leading. The historian Edward G. Lengel
described Washington’s leadership during the extraordinarily
cold winter of 1777–78 at Valley Forge as “sacrificial” and noted
that “he took great care in seeing that his soldiers were well
housed.” Historian Henry Steele Commager noted Washington’s
sacrifice for America was supported by the facts that he served as
commander of the Continental Army without pay and was nearly
bankrupt by the time he returned home to Mount Vernon after
serving as the country’s first president. On one occasion when
WEEK 2
157

approached by soldiers who wanted to overthrow the wartime
government and set up Washington to lead the country, he met
with them and made it clear that the thought of overthrowing the
colonial American government was repulsive to him and under
no circumstances would he consider it.
When King George III of England heard the news that
Washington resigned his military commission without seizing
power following the American Revolution’s conclusion, he was
said to have commented, “If it is true, George Washington is the
greatest man in the world.”
The selfless behavior of Washington connected people with
him as their leader because it promoted trust. When a leader
demonstrates that he or she is leading for the sake of the mission
and the people, rather than for self-serving purposes, people nat-
urally become more trusting.
George Washington increased knowledge flow. He had a rep-
utation for being quick to listen and slow to speak. During the
Revolutionary War, Washington listened to the advice of his war
council, a group of soldiers who reported directly to him, and
their advice helped him avoid what would have been costly mis-
takes. During the Constitutional Convention over which he
presided, Washington rarely said a word other than to intervene
and make decisions to break a logjam in the deliberations.
Washington increased inspiring identity. He was committed
to the cause of independence and frequently referred to it as
“our glorious cause.” His love of America and personal sacrifice
for it inspired others. With all the brilliant individuals sur-
rounding him—John Adams, Thomas Jefferson, Benjamin
Franklin, Alexander Hamilton, and others—Washington was the
one to whom they indisputably looked as the greatest leader
among them.1
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
158

Under Washington’s leadership and the culture he helped
create, connection among the colonists united them to defeat the
preeminent military power of their age and set the stage for a new
nation to emerge.
APPLICATION
George Washington increased inspiring identity by telling the
soldiers he led about their “glorious cause.” He increased
human value by sharing in the sacrifices that his soldiers made
during difficult times. He increased knowledge flow by setting
an example for others to be good listeners. Washington was one
of the model leaders of our history. Can you think of a model
leader in our time who inspires you? What qualities do you
admire in that person or would you want to emulate in your work
environment?
DAY 9: RECONNECTING A NATION
An extraordinary historical example of human value occurred fol-
lowing the bloody Civil War in America. It began when the head
of the Confederate Army, General Robert E. Lee, met with the
head of the Union Army, General Ulysses S. Grant, at Appomattox
Courthouse in 1865 to negotiate the terms of the Confederate
Army’s surrender. General Grant demonstrated human value by
allowing the Confederate officers to retain their swords, personal
effects, and horses rather than require them to be surrendered to
the Union Army. He also promised to return the horses of caval-
rymen and artillerists who would need them for their small farms
WEEK 2
159

when they returned to civilian life. And finally, Grant provided
food and water to Lee’s troops who had eaten very little over
recent days.
After the terms of surrender were finalized in a document
signed by the two generals and it was time for Lee to depart,
Grant accompanied Lee out the door. General Lee was beginning
to mount his horse when Grant stepped back, stood at attention,
and saluted him by raising his hat. Watching their commander,
Grant’s officers followed suit. Deeply touched by Grant’s actions,
General Lee turned and raised his hat respectfully to Grant and
his officers as he departed.
Historically, victorious parties plundered their defeated ene-
mies for economic gain and for revenge. As military men and
graduates of the US Military Academy at West Point, Lee and
Grant knew that Grant’s actions were unusual—they exhibited
the sense of respect and dignity implicit in human value. General
Lee never forgot Grant’s benevolence. Some years later, after he
had become the president of Washington College in Lexington,
Virginia, Lee heard a professor denigrate General Grant’s charac-
ter and shot back, “Sir, if you ever speak again disrespectfully of
General Grant in my presence, either you or I will sever his con-
nection with this university!”
Another act that increased human value in the post-Civil War
culture occurred when President Abraham Lincoln called for
magnanimity on the part of all Americans to heal the animosity
between Northerners and Southerners. In his second inaugural
speech Lincoln said,
With malice toward none, with charity for all, with firmness in
the right as God gives us to see the right, let us strive on to fin-
ish the work we are in, to bind up the nation’s wounds, to care
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
160

WEEK 2
161
for him who shall have borne the battle and his widow and his
orphan, to do all which may achieve and cherish a just and last-
ing peace among ourselves and with all nations.
The years following the Civil War were difficult for the South,
but Robert E. Lee helped to bring about healing by setting an
example for others. He swore allegiance to the United States and, as
a result, brought tens of thousands of former Confederate soldiers
back into the Union. On another occasion, General Lee led the
way for white Southerners in an act that reverberated throughout
America. At St. Paul’s Episcopal Church in Richmond, Virginia, an
African-American freedman stunned white parishioners by break-
ing tradition and being the first person to approach and kneel at
the chancel rail to receive Communion. While other whites hesi-
tated, the legendary general approached the rail and knelt beside
the African-American man.1
These words and deeds of Grant, Lee, and Lincoln increased
human value in America at a time when it was needed to recon-
nect its citizens.
APPLICATION
So often in mergers, some of the acquiring company’s employees
act superior to the employees of the acquired company. How
did the respect that General Ulysses S. Grant and his officers
showed to General Robert E. Lee increase human value, and how
can employees of an acquiring company show a similar degree of
respect toward employees of an acquired company? When you
have been in a position of power, or as “victor,” how have you
treated the other side?

DAY 10: CONNECTION TO THE CAUSE
In 1852, a writer living in New Brunswick, Maine, published a
book that would be a catalyst to abolish slavery in America. Her
publisher was not optimistic that the book would sell many
copies, nor was she.
They couldn’t have been more wrong.
According to historian David McCullough, the book made
publishing history, selling ten thousand copies in the first week
and three hundred thousand in the first year. Three presses ran
continuously to keep up with demand. Outside America the book
sold one and a half million copies in a year and eventually was
translated into thirty-seven languages. It is still being read, pon-
dered, and discussed today.
McCullough observed this about the book:
What the book did at the time was to bring slavery out into the
open and show it for what it was, in human terms. No writer
had done that before. Slavery had been argued over in the
abstract, preached against as a moral issue, its evils whispered
about in polite company. But the book made people feel what
slavery was about.
The popularity of Uncle Tom’s Cabin and its effect on readers
took the author by surprise. Huge crowds came out to see her
wherever she spoke. It was said that when President Abraham
Lincoln met Harriett Beecher Stowe, he said, “So this is the little
woman who made this big war.” Pondering the power that writ-
ten stories had on people, she wrote, “For good or for evil, [it] is
a thing which ought most seriously to be reflected on. No one can
fail to see that in our day it is becoming a very great agency.”
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
162

On January 1,
1863,
the day Lincoln signed the
Emancipation Proclamation that freed slaves, Harriett Beecher
Stowe was attending a concert in Boston. When someone in
the crowd announced she was present, the audience gave her a
standing ovation.1
Although Stowe was not a leader in the typical sense, she was
clearly a thought leader. Slavery in America had been hotly debated
and discussed since the founding of the country, and yet slavery
was not abolished until more than eight decades after America
achieved its independence. Stowe’s words made it personal. Key to
her success was her understanding of how Americans who were
sympathetic to the abolition of slavery thought of themselves, in
other words, their inspiring identity. Part of their inspiring identity
was that they were decent, God-fearing people. The life of slavery
described by Stowe was inconsistent with that identity. Likewise,
they saw themselves as people who stood up against oppression. By
writing a story that described conditions they deplored, Stowe
forged an emotional connection among them that rallied them to
make supreme sacrifices for the sake of their shared cause.
APPLICATION
With her book Uncle Tom’s Cabin, Harriett Beecher Stowe touched
the hearts of abolitionists. Her vivid description of the evils of slav-
ery outraged those who thought of themselves as decent people
and moved them to action. Would you have the courage to expose
wrongdoing in your organization? How might you create aware-
ness of a standard practice that you know is wrong?
WEEK 2
163

164
WEEK 3
DAY 11: COMMUNITY CATALYST
In 1982, Howard Schultz, the current chairman and chief global
strategist of Starbucks, left his prestigious job as national sales
manager for a European housewares company to join a small,
Seattle-based coffee roaster and retailer. Starbucks had come to
Schultz’s attention when he noticed the small business was pur-
chasing a disproportionately large number of coffee makers
from his company. When Schultz visited Seattle, he stopped to
check out Starbucks and became intrigued with the possibili-
ties. “I saw Starbucks, not for what it was but for what it could
be,” he said.
The key to Schultz’s vision was simple: create community. The
idea came to him while visiting Milan, Italy, where he observed
people gathering at their neighborhood espresso bars “like an exten-
sion of the front porch, an extension of the home,” he liked to say.
At Starbucks, Schultz saw a means to bring people together in
America, just as espresso bars bring them together in Italy.
Unfortunately, the founders of Starbucks didn’t share Schultz’s
vision and preferred to remain a coffee roaster with a small retail
presence.Schultz’s belief in the idea,however,was so certain that he
eventually left Starbucks in 1985 to start an espresso bar retailer.
Two years later, he bought Starbucks from its owners and merged
it into his small company. Schultz, a passionate, visionary leader,
revolutionized coffee retailing in the USA and is rapidly taking
Starbucks worldwide.
Howard Schultz carefully nurtured an inspiring identity for

the company in the hearts and minds of employees. At first he
told his story and explained in detail how Starbucks would
become an oasis for people as they took time out of their increas-
ingly busy days to stop by for a brief period to relax. As the com-
pany grew by 1997 to more than 1,300 stores and 25,000 partners,
it became impossible for Schultz to reach everyone in person. So
he did the next best thing. He compiled his stories into an inspir-
ing book titled Pour Your Heart into It.
Pour Your Heart into It is a compelling account of the Starbucks
story. Every Starbucks partner who reads it will understand
Starbucks’s history and where it’s headed. The book is filled with
vividly told stories, including Schultz’s vision for creating commu-
nity. By articulating his vision, he transformed their work experi-
ence from selling coffee to a higher calling of creating community
among people.
Schultz brought human value to the Starbucks culture by
paying employees well relative to other retailers, and also provid-
ing generous benefits such as health-care insurance and partici-
pation in the Starbucks stock option plan.
Schultz increased knowledge flow in the Starbucks culture
by making it everyone’s responsibility to share ideas about how
to continuously improve the business. Schultz presented a very
approachable persona that made people comfortable that it was
safe to be honest with him.
Fostering a connection between employees (or “partners,” as
they are known at Starbucks) and customers is an integral part of
the Starbucks experience. Partners are trained to understand how
to make a customer’s visit true to Starbucks’s mission (frontline
employees’ behavior is aligned with the mission to create com-
munity). Habits such as making eye contact with customers,
remembering regular customers’ drink orders, and anticipating
WEEK 3
165

customer needs are developed through orientation and ongoing
training programs.
The results speak for themselves. By 2005, Starbucks had
more than 100,000 partners, 10,801 retail locations, 35 million
customers walking through its doors, and a record $6.4 billion in
revenue during its fiscal year. Its success should come as no sur-
prise given that Starbucks says,“The human connection . . . is the
foundation of everything we do.”1
APPLICATION
Howard Schultz increased inspiring identity by telling the
Starbucks story in writing so that anyone could read it and under-
stand how Starbucks developed its values. He increased human
value by calling employees “partners” and compensating partners
above industry norms. Shultz’s approachable persona increased
knowledge flow because he made it safe for people to be honest
with him. Do you know the inspiring identity of your organiza-
tion? Could you articulate it for yourself and others? Do you feel
that everyone is on the same page?
DAY 12: THE BUSINESS OF THE BODY SHOP
In 1976, Anita Roddick, a thirty-three-year-old housewife,
founded The Body Shop in Brighton, England, to support herself
and her two daughters while her husband embarked on an expe-
dition across the Americas. By the time he returned from the trip
ten months later, she had opened a second location. Today, The
Body Shop can be found in fifty-three countries, and it has grown
to more than two thousand stores.
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
166

What contributed to The Body Shop’s remarkable rise over the
last thirty years? Certainly, several factors are responsible, including
The Body Shop’s culture that increases trust, cooperation, and
esprit de corps among its employees.
Roddick gave The Body Shop an inspiring identity when she
dedicated the organization to “the pursuit of social and environ-
mental change.” Roddick helped people connected to The Body
Shop see how they could use their business to generate revenue
that would be used in part to advance The Body Shop’s values:
eliminate animal testing, support community trade, defend
human rights, activate self-esteem, and protect our planet. For
example, community trade would be advanced when The Body
Shop bought natural hair and skin care products from develop-
ing nations and sold them to customers around the world.
Defending human rights and protecting the environment
could be advanced through The Body Shop’s activities to educate
customers, conserve resources in their day-to-day business, and
organize protests against organizations or nations that behaved in
a way that was counter to The Body Shop’s values. The Body Shop’s
efforts to advance its values included everything from protesting
against the Brazilian embassy in London over its cooperation with
mining companies whose employees introduced diseases that
threatened local tribes, to raising awareness and money to stop
domestic violence.
Because the values of The Body Shop were values that Anita
Roddick cared about, she became a tireless spokesperson and spir-
itual leader of the organization while her husband, Gordon, ran
the day-to-day business operations. Anita was unconcerned about
profit as long as it was sufficient to provide the resources to sup-
port The Body Shop’s cause. Naturally, The Body Shop attracted
employees who shared these values, and that common ground
WEEK 3
167

created a strong sense of connection among employees. When a
reporter for Inc. magazine asked Roddick about the success of The
Body Shop and particularly about the company’s unusual dedica-
tion to its mission, she replied,“[A cause that grabs an employee’s]
imagination . . . produces . . . a sense of passion you simply won’t
find in [most other stores] . . . It’s a way for people to bond to the
company.”
The Body Shop increased human value in its culture through
employee training that emphasized the benefits of its natural
products. The training was informational rather than lessons in
ways to persuade potential customers to buy products.
Knowledge flow increased when Roddick created the com-
pany’s popular in-house newspaper to communicate directly with
the growing number of Body Shop employees around the world.
It contains a mix of articles on the company’s efforts to advance its
mission of social and environmental change as well as poetry, facts
about the environment, and educational stories. Several books
that Roddick has written also increase knowledge flow.
In 2003, Anita Roddick became a Dame of the Order of the
British Empire. In March 2006, L’Oreal agreed to purchase The
Body Shop for £652 million (almost $1.14 billion US dollars).
Dame Anita Roddick announced her intention to remain with
The Body Shop as a consultant (the position she has held in
recent years), and she reconfirmed that she would give her money
to organizations that upheld The Body Shop’s values.1
APPLICATION
Anita Roddick increased The Body Shop’s inspiring identity by
giving it a cause: the pursuit of social and environmental change.
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
168

She increased human value by training employees to understand
The Body Shop’s natural products and the benefits of using its
products. Roddick’s investment of her personal time and atten-
tion to communicate to employees through the company’s popu-
lar newspaper increased knowledge flow. Do you feel inspired
by the vision and values of your organization? Are you working
toward a greater goal than just your day-to-day job?
DAY 13: MORE THAN AN ORACLE
Warren Buffett is widely recognized as an exceptional judge of
corporate value. “The Oracle of Omaha,” as he is known, is
arguably the most successful investor in history. Corporate lead-
ers from Jeffrey Immelt of General Electric to Martha Stewart
make the trek to Omaha, Nebraska, seeking his wisdom. With so
much attention on Buffett’s investment acumen, it’s easy to over-
look another talent: motivating people. It’s one of a host of rea-
sons his investments tend to outperform the market.
The talented managers who run Buffett’s companies remain
with him because he keeps them engaged in their jobs. In Buffett’s
own words, “Charlie [Charlie Munger, Buffett’s longtime business
partner] and I mainly attend to capital allocation and the care and
feeding of our key managers . . . Most of our managers are inde-
pendently wealthy and it’s up to us to create a climate that encour-
ages them to choose working with Berkshire over golfing or fishing.”
A closer look at Buffett shows, at least in part, how he does it.
He imparts an inspiring identity to members of the Berkshire
Hathaway family. The vision he constantly communicates is that
Berkshire companies are well managed and have great people. It’s
not unusual to hear him tell employees to “just keep on doing
WEEK 3
169

what you’re doing . . . we’re never going to tell a .400 hitter to
change his batting stance.” Who wouldn’t be flattered to be
praised by Buffett?
Buffett increases human value in several ways. He is trusting
and forgiving. By investing for long periods in the companies he
owns, Buffett indicates that he trusts his managers. He delegates
decision-making authority, in his own words, “to the point of
abdication.” And when a manager makes an honest mistake, he
keeps it in perspective. One manager who informed Buffett that
his business had to write off $350 million was stunned when
Buffett told him, “We all make mistakes . . . if you didn’t make
mistakes, you can’t make decisions . . . You can’t dwell on them.”
He increases human value by modeling civility and respect
for others. His secretary has said she hasn’t seen him mad once in
the nine years she has worked for him. The one time I met Buffett
at a meeting in New York City, he patiently waited around to
speak with everyone who wanted to meet him. He was attentive
and focused on them, never projecting the slightest hint of self-
importance.
He is confident, yet humble. Buffett knows he’s very good at
what he does, and he projects an easy confidence rather than supe-
riority or arrogance. He credits his managers for his success,
remains plain spoken, works in a modest office, lives in a modest
house, and proclaims thrift as a virtue (the vanity plate on his car
reads “Thrifty”).
Compare Warren Buffett to Donald Trump, for example. It’s
hard to imagine Buffett prominently displaying his name all over
everything he owns or relishing in telling someone “you’re fired.”
Instead of everything being all about him, Buffett insists it’s all
about others. He appears to be guided by the Golden Rule rather
than Machiavelli’s The Prince.
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
170

Given the way Buffett treats people, it should come as no sur-
prise that some private company owners report turning down
more lucrative offers to join the Berkshire family. It is telling that
no manager who sold a company to Buffett has ever left for a com-
petitor, and several continue to work well into their eighties. Put
simply, “people want to work for him,” proclaimed another satis-
fied manager, Rich Santulli, head of NetJets.
Buffett increases knowledge flow by modeling approachability
and candor.At the annual meeting he hosts in Omaha for Berkshire
shareholders, Buffett and Charlie Munger sit on a platform, listen-
ing to shareholder opinions and answering questions for hours on
end. In dealing with his managers he follows the data they provide
him in periodic reports and makes himself available if they want to
talk.1 Buffett writes and speaks with candor, even pointing out mis-
takes he made and what he learned from them.
Leaders would be wise to emulate the way Warren Buffett leads
Berkshire Hathaway. Perhaps we need a book on how the Oracle of
Omaha inspires rather than yet another on how he invests.
APPLICATION
Warren Buffett increased inspiring identity by frequently praising
the employees of companies owned by Berkshire Hathaway, refer-
ring to them as “.400 hitters.” He increased human value by treat-
ing people with respect, giving them autonomy “to the point of
abdication,” and being quick to forgive them if they made an
honest mistake. Buffett increased knowledge flow by personally
being approachable and candid in his public comments. Imagine
working at Berkshire Hathaway. How do you think you would
feel? Is it very different from your current work environment? Is
WEEK 3
171

there anything you could do in your organization to bring about
this kind of engagement?
DAY 14: RITZ-CARLTON CHARACTER AND CULTURE
While I was working on this book my family spent several vaca-
tion days at the Ritz-Carlton Resort on Key Biscayne near Miami.
I have long been a fan of the Ritz-Carlton Hotel Company, hav-
ing stayed there during business trips over the years. I knew from
firsthand experience that Ritz-Carlton connects with its guests.
On this particular trip, I was determined to closely observe the
employees to learn more about the best practices of the company.
One of the first Ritz-Carlton employees we met was Mery
Castelblanco, a gracious, Colombian-born club concierge. Mery
told us about the club and asked about our children. Immediately,
Katie and I were impressed with Mery’s focus on us and her kind,
caring spirit. Throughout our stay, the club staff—Mery, supervi-
sor Marc Rapp, concierge Paul Hoyo, and others—helped us line
up activities for the week. With our frequent interactions, we
learned more about their backgrounds and families, and they
learned more about us.
My impression of the Ritz-Carlton staff was echoed by another
guest, who remarked, “The people here are so nice.” And she was
right. Actually, Ritz-Carlton is intentional about hiring people who
fit that general description. Marco Selva, the resort’s general man-
ager, graciously took time to sit down with me and discuss the
company. He told me that Ritz-Carlton employees are selected
based on a structured talent interview by telephone that identifies
character strengths such as caring and empathy. In addition, poten-
tial employees undergo numerous interviews with current staff
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
172

who provide feedback about whether they would want to work
alongside a particular job candidate.
During our stay at the Ritz-Carlton, I couldn’t help noticing
how the guest experience reflects the cultural element of human
value.For example,whenever I made eye contact with Ritz-Carlton
employees—in an elevator, a hallway, or anywhere else for that
matter—they always greeted me with a smile and a warm hello
and wished me a pleasant day. They seemed to be looking for
opportunities to go the extra mile. Early one morning I was return-
ing to our room with cups of coffee for Katie and me when the
floor’s housekeeper noticed I had my hands full. Right away she set
aside what she was doing and insisted on helping me. She walked
with me to the room and opened the door with her room key so I
wouldn’t risk spilling our coffees. What’s more, she seemed gen-
uinely delighted to help me. It was a small act of kindness but one
that I sincerely appreciated. On another occasion, when we wanted
to pick up a certain DVD at the local Blockbuster to watch in our
room but didn’t have an account, our club concierge Paul Hoyo
contacted Blockbuster and made the arrangements for us to use his
personal account at the store. I could go on and on, but I’m certain
you get the idea.
One secret to the Ritz-Carlton’s success is that the organization
takes good care of its employees. According to Sue Stephenson,
Ritz-Carlton’s head of human relations, guest and employee loyalty
go hand in hand. That’s why Ritz-Carlton is so particular about its
workplace culture and disciplined in maintaining it. Its Employee
Promise states unambiguously:
At The Ritz-Carlton, our Ladies and Gentlemen are the most
important resource in our service commitment to members
and guests. By applying the principles of trust, honesty, respect,
WEEK 3
173

integrity and commitment, we nurture and maximize talent to
the benefit of the individual and the organization. The Ritz-
Carlton fosters a work environment where diversity is valued,
quality of life is enhanced, individual aspirations are fulfilled,
and The Ritz-Carlton mystique is strengthened.
The Ritz-Carlton’s inspiring identity is reflected, first of all, in
the employees’ pride in the company’s reputation for excellence.
Employees are also united by the company’s values that include
treating everyone with dignity and respect, creating pride and joy
in the workplace, continually identifying defects to be corrected,
recording individual guest preferences in the firm’s guest data-
base, taking pride in and care of their personal appearance, using
proper vocabulary, and so on. Each of the preceding values is rep-
resented in “The Ritz-Carlton Basics,” a set of twenty values, one
of which is reviewed each day during a brief session known as the
Daily Lineup that supervisors have with their staff. By continu-
ously reviewing this list of values, Ritz-Carlton keeps them on the
minds of all staff. Each Monday the company’s locations world-
wide celebrate employees who went above and beyond the call of
duty to serve a guest. When I met with Marco Selva, he happily
recounted the story of Miriam Carballo, a receptionist at the front
desk who overheard that a guest family’s car seat had broken and
gave them the car seat her child had outgrown.
At Ritz-Carlton, the cultural element of human value is
reflected in several ways. Beginning on the first day of work, an
employee goes through a two-day orientation led by the hotel’s
training manager. Each hotel’s general manager participates in
these sessions and interacts with the trainees. Each employee also
receives training about his specific job and then recertification
training annually for his position.Ritz-Carlton’s employees have the
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
174

WEEK 3
175
right to be involved in planning work that affects them. The respect
and dignity that Ritz-Carlton aims to provide its guests apply equally
to its employees. Marco Selva told me he periodically asks disrup-
tive or verbally abusive guests to go elsewhere and even arranges
their transportation to a different hotel property at the Ritz-Carlton’s
expense.Emphasizing how much the Ritz-Carlton values its employ-
ees, he told me that “our employees respect that tremendously.”
Knowledge flow is present in the Ritz-Carlton culture. Early
in an employee’s tenure she is asked to share her observations
about how Ritz-Carlton can improve. Furthermore, Marco Selva
and other general managers hold quarterly meetings with all
employees to share performance results (including financial and
ongoing guest-satisfaction survey results) and seek employee
input. White boards are maintained on the walls in the various
departments where ideas to improve are recorded for staff to see.
With the high degree of connection among management,
employees, and guests, it should come as no surprise that Ritz-
Carlton was the first and only hotel to win the prestigious Malcolm
Baldrige National Quality Award and the only service company to
win it twice. After all, the statement that “the genuine care and
comfort of our members and guests is our highest mission”is more
than words on paper at the Ritz-Carlton.1 It’s a way of life.
APPLICATION
Ritz-Carlton increases inspiring identity by upholding values that
its employees personally embrace and by routinely celebrating
employees whose actions embody those values. It increases human
value by having guests leave if they become disruptive or verbally
abusive to an employee.Knowledge flow is increased at Ritz-Carlton

by maintaining white boards in the departments where employees
can record ideas for improvements. What other “to-dos” could you
put on your organization’s list that would bring about this corpo-
rate cohesiveness? What ideas might come out of a brainstorming
session in your organization?
DAY 15: PETER DRUCKER’S KIND OF LEADER
The preeminent management sage, the late Peter Drucker, knew
some of the greatest leaders of our time in business and govern-
ment. If he had been asked to name who he thought was a model
leader, would he have chosen President Dwight D. Eisenhower,
General George C. Marshall, the legendary Alfred P. Sloan Jr. of
General Motors, or one of the many other heads of major com-
panies throughout the world he came to know during his distin-
guished career? It’s an interesting question, given the reach and
influence of Drucker. Periodically in his interviews and writings
you will encounter what may be his highest praise for a person
who, he once said,“could manage any company in America.”Who
is she? Business Week featured her on its cover surrounded by . . .
Girl Scouts. Her name is Frances Hesselbein.
Although she had no daughters, Frances Hesselbein began
her association with the Girl Scouts when she agreed to help with
a troop of thirty Girl Scouts in Johnstown, Pennsylvania, that had
lost its leader. It wasn’t long before Hesselbein’s experience with
Troop 17 developed into a lifelong commitment to Girl Scouting.
Years later she would become CEO of the national organization,
Girl Scouts of the USA.
Hesselbein increased the Girl Scouts’ inspiring identity by
showing women how important it was to reach out to girls, given
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
176

the threats they face such as drugs and teen pregnancy. She helped
women to envision the Girl Scout organization as a professional,
well-managed organization.
Hesselbein’s leadership style, in fact, it seems her purpose in
life, is to bring out the best in the people she meets. Her words and
actions embody human value. She has a high regard for people
that shows she values them. She has written that good leaders have
an “appreciation of their colleagues individually and the dignity of
the work their colleagues do.”Her actions show that she “walks the
talk.” She keeps up with what’s going on in the lives of the people
around her and personally reaches out to them when congratula-
tions or consolation is in order. She invested in improving Girl
Scout leaders’ people skills. On her watch she built a conference
center to train Girl Scout staff. Frances Hesselbein, as a role model
for other leaders across the organization, effectively increased
human value within the Girl Scout culture, and her actions were
multiplied when other leaders adopted her leadership style.
The energetic leader increased knowledge flow by approach-
ing communication in an inclusive way, expanding information
in ever-larger circles across the organization. Rather than lectur-
ing, her style is to ask insightful questions to draw out relevant
issues. In planning and allocating the Girl Scout organization’s
resources, she introduced a circular management process that
involved virtually everyone across the organization.
With Hesselbein as its leader, the Girl Scout organization
thrived. When she assumed the CEO position in 1976, the Girl
Scouts’ membership was falling, and the organization was in a
state of serious decline. She put sound management practices
in place. During her twenty-four-year tenure, Girl Scout mem-
bership quadrupled to nearly three and a half million, diversity
more than tripled, and the organization was transformed into
WEEK 3
177

what Drucker called “the best-managed organization around.”
Hesselbein accomplished the amazing turnaround with a paid
staff of six thousand and 730,000 volunteers.
By the time she resigned from the Girl Scouts in 1990, the
organization’s future was bright. Frances Hesselbein was paid the
ultimate compliment by Drucker when he recruited her to be
the head of the Drucker Foundation (renamed the Leader to Leader
Institute), which is dedicated to carrying out their mutual passion
for strengthening leadership in the social sector.2 It should be no
surprise that the foundation’s influence is rapidly growing world-
wide with Hesselbein leading the effort. After all, the extraordinary
Drucker, who lived to the age of ninety-five, knew a great leader
when he saw one.
APPLICATION
Frances Hesselbein increased inspiring identity by helping Girl
Scouts’ staff see how important their work was to girls in today’s
world. She increased human value by reaching out to people
across the organization to congratulate or console them. She
increased knowledge flow by introducing a management process
that intentionally involved practically everyone in the organiza-
tion. As you move from authority to influence in leading people,
particularly in a volunteer organization, the challenge of inspir-
ing employees increases. How do the elements of inspiring iden-
tity, human value, and knowledge flow allow you to increase your
influence and effectiveness?
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
178

179
WEEK 4
DAY 16: DR. FRED’S INN
In the medical profession, surgeons have a reputation for being
task masters. Most surgeons stay focused on procedures and main-
tain a safe emotional distance from their colleagues and patients. In
the mid-1990s, Dr. Fred Epstein, a world-famous pediatric neuro-
surgeon on staff at the prestigious New York University Medical
Center in New York City, sensed something was wrong with this
way of thinking. He became more convinced after he read a poem
written by Chris Lambert, a seventeen-year-old patient who died
from a malignant brain tumor. Chris wrote about his pain and
struggle against disease and the fear of death. Dr. Epstein, or “Fred”
as his patients and colleagues called him, adored this young man
who was so full of life and had such a big heart. When Fred read
Chris’s poem and his plea for care and sympathy, it broke his heart.
Chris’s words “demolished” Fred, according to his account in
his book If I Get to Five: What Children Can Teach Us About
Courage and Character. Although Fred had done everything he
could to save Chris, he realized that he failed to respond to his
young patient’s plea to meet his deepest need: the need to connect
on an emotional level. Chris’s words made Fred wonder just how
many kids he had failed in this way over the course of his long
career. It also left him with a longing to change and a dream
about what could be.
One afternoon, Fred received a call from the chairman of the
board of trustees at Beth Israel Hospital in New York City. He
offered Fred a blank check to create a new pediatric neuroscience

center. Fred’s vision became the inspiring identity of the Institute
for Neurology and Neurosurgery (the INN). The INN would be a
place where no patient would be turned away, regardless of med-
ical situation or financial resources; where surgeons, nurses, and
other health-care professionals collaborated and connected, and
together they connected with patients and their families; and where
the professionals no longer needed to separate their work and
emotional lives.
In preparing to staff the INN, Fred didn’t want to “persuade”
people to join him. Instead, he found that when he shared his
vision, the inspiring identity of a new kind of pediatric neurology
and neurosurgery center that emphasized caring for the whole
patient, the hearts of many of his colleagues were stirred. Like
Fred, they yearned for a better way to care for their patients. To
Fred’s surprise, 108 highly trained doctors, nurses, and other
health-care professionals followed him to work at the INN.
From the beginning, the INN’s environment was created to
connect people. Human value was increased in the INN’s culture
by reducing the degree of formality, making doctors and staff more
approachable. White coats were banned. Doctors were addressed
by their first names. Doctors, nurses, and other health-care profes-
sionals were encouraged to collaborate with one another rather
than treat doctors as if they were better than everyone else.
Perhaps most important, everyone was encouraged to con-
nect with colleagues, patients, and their families. Doctors, nurses,
and other staff, including members of the cleaning crew, partici-
pated alongside families in interdenominational services, prayer
circles, and physical therapy sessions such as massage and yoga.
Everyone was free to take time to play games with the children or
hold a child’s hand during chemotherapy. Fred provided an excel-
lent example for others to follow. He provided his home number
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
180

181
to the families of patients. Fred and the INN’s chaplain joined
families if they wanted to pray prior to a child’s surgery.
Human value increased when the young patients reached out
to connect with and help one another or to encourage a parent.
Mischa Zimmerman, a teenage patient at the INN who saw the
positive impact of giving his Toy Story video to another young
patient, founded the “Kids Helping Kids” program that encour-
ages teens from schools in the greater New York City area to con-
nect with teens facing health problems.
Knowledge flow increased because of the INN’s informal cul-
ture. The embrace of collaboration also increased knowledge flow
among staff.
After the first six years of the INN’s existence, Fred realized:
“My colleagues and I have reached a paradoxical conclusion: we’ve
become better healers—more compassionate, more resilient, and
more creative problem-solvers.”
Over the course of his career, Dr. Fred Epstein created new
surgical techniques and developed caring means to treat patients.
Through his efforts, thousands of lives were saved, often the
lives of patients that other doctors had deemed terminal. He
published more than 175 scholarly papers, served as president
of the International Society of Pediatric Neurosurgery and the
American Society of Pediatric Surgeons, and was editor in chief
of the Journal of Pediatric Neurosurgery.
In late 2001, when Dr. Epstein suffered a traumatic brain
injury following a fall while on a Sunday morning bike ride near
his home, his colleagues and former patients of the INN rallied to
encourage him through his recovery. Although it was unlikely that
he would perform surgery again, he continued to work at the INN,
concentrating on fund-raising and advancing his vision to merge
state-of-the-art medicine with a caring, healing environment.
WEEK 4

On July 9, 2006, Dr. Epstein died from melanoma.1 His fam-
ily and thousands of patients, colleagues, and friends mourned
him. Dr. Fred Epstein’s example of compassion and courage will
be long remembered.
APPLICATION
Dr. Fred Epstein increased inspiring identity by sharing his vision
for a pediatric neurology and neurosurgery center that emphasized
caring for the whole patient. He increased human value by remov-
ing the formal barriers—such as wearing white coats and using
“doctor” titles—so that patients could more easily connect with
doctors. He increased knowledge flow by getting the INN’s staff to
use first names when addressing one another rather than formal
titles and treating each other as partners in curing illness. If you
were given a blank check to create your own department or center,
what elements would you incorporate? What would be important
to you? What stops you from trying some of these today? Is it a
question of money or the current culture of your organization?
DAY 17: PURPOSE-DRIVEN PASTOR
In the summer of 2005, I was attending a session at the Aspen
Institute, a think tank in Aspen, Colorado, when in walked a parti-
cipant in the panel discussion about fifty of us had gathered to
hear. If I could use only two words to describe this man, they would
be fun and unpretentious, hardly adjectives you would expect to be
used about one of the most influential religious leaders in the
world today. Yet those were the words that came to mind as I
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
182

watched Rick Warren, pastor of Saddleback Community Church
in Orange County, California, and author of the best-selling The
Purpose-Driven Life.
A big man,Warren was dressed in his trademark Hawaiian shirt
that made him look as if he was more likely to be headed to a back-
yard barbeque than to speak at a conference that also featured for-
mer chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and Secretary of State Colin
Powell, AOL founder Steve Case, and PBS newsman Jim Lehrer. I
noticed that they were also in the audience to hear Warren speak.
After briefly saying hello to the other panelists, Pastor Rick, as
most people call him, began to make his way around the room to
greet everyone in attendance, not just the famous people in the
room but each one of us. It was clear from observing Pastor Rick
that he was intentional about connecting with people. I shouldn’t
have been surprised, given the glowing accounts written by social
commentator Malcolm Gladwell and Harvard social capital expert
Robert Putnam about how Warren employs connection to expand
Saddleback Community Church’s ministry.
Today, twenty thousand people on average attend weekly
services at the nondenominational Protestant church. Saddleback
Community Church began in 1980 in a Bible study with seven
people. One factor that helps explain Saddleback Community
Church’s growth is the connection that occurs through its small
group ministry. In these groups, six or seven people meet weekly
in each other’s homes to study the Bible and support and encour-
age each other. In Orange County, where commutes to work are
long and the gated subdivisions are not especially conducive to
giving residents a sense of community, Saddleback Community
Church’s small groups help meet the human need for connection.
The church’s two hundred programs also create connection among
people in the church’s community.
WEEK 4
183

Pastor Rick encourages connection when he speaks at church
services. He teaches people to follow the biblical command to “love
your neighbor as yourself,” which increases human value. He
encourages them to “seek the counsel of others”and “be quick to lis-
ten,slow to speak,and slow to become angry,”both of which increase
knowledge flow. Through the teaching of the church, a person in
the Saddleback community becomes aware of the person (or the
inspiring identity) that he should become.
Saddleback Community Church’s ministry reaches people
around the world through its Web site Pastors.com that provides
resources such as sermon material and sources of encouragement
to ministers. On the average day, Pastors.com gets approximately
four hundred thousand hits. It clearly connects with pastors.
The phenomenal success of The Purpose-Driven Life put Rick
Warren and Saddleback Community Church in the national spot-
light. The book is designed to take a small group of people through
a forty-day course to help them grow spiritually. It was launched by
preselling copies at a discount to Pastor Rick’s network of pastors,who
bought stacks of them for their church members. The book presold
a half million copies and began selling at a half million a month.
The book royalties alone could have made Pastor Rick and his
wife, Kay, extremely wealthy (which might have alienated him
from some in his church and his Pastors.com subscribers). True to
the admonition Warren wrote in his book that greatness is defined
by how much we serve not by how much we receive, and by how
much we give away rather than how much we keep, the Warrens
announced that they would pay back the compensation they had
received from Saddleback Community Church over the years and
begin reverse tithing. In other words, they would give away 90 per-
cent of the royalties and keep a mere 10 percent. That connected
with people too.
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
184

With all of Saddleback Community Church’s success you might
wonder what’s next. Now Rick Warren and the Saddleback
Community Church have set their sights on creating a global move-
ment that mobilizes churches worldwide to feed the poor, heal the
sick, and help the hopeless, a mission infused with human value.1
With his connection-oriented leadership style, I expect we’re just
beginning to see the impact Pastor Rick and his network of pastors
will have on the world.
APPLICATION
Rick Warren increased inspiring identity and human value by
teaching values such as “love your neighbor” that resonated with
Saddleback Community Church members. He increased human
value by mobilizing the church members to take care of fellow
small group members and to reach out to the poor. Knowledge
flow increased at Saddleback Community Church by teaching
people to be disciplined about listening to one another. What do
you do on a day-to-day basis that allows you to intentionally con-
nect with others? Are you aware of your connection with other
people in all aspects of your life? What small steps could you take
that would allow you to connect better with customers?
DAY 18: PATRIOT PLAYBOOK
In recent years, the New England Patriots football team has won
an astounding three National Football League Championships
without a roster of big name stars. A high degree of connection
among the team helps explain why the Patriots have been so
WEEK 4
185

successful. The beliefs and behaviors of head coach Bill Belichick
and quarterback Tom Brady set the tone for the rest of the team
and create trust, cooperation, and esprit de corps.
The inspiring identity that Bill Belichick holds out to the team
is one of achieving perfection through team effort. Similar to the
vision that John Wooden had for his UCLA Bruins basketball team
(see Chapter 4), Belichick has his players thinking about how to
improve themselves and their teammates in order to make the
Patriots the best they can possibly become. He doesn’t rely on emo-
tionalism or stirring up hate against the opposing team. Instead, he
focuses on statistics such as fumbles, interceptions, sacks, pass
completion percentages, and other forms of objective, unambigu-
ous performance measurement. Continuous improvement to reach
perfection is Belichick’s and his players’ relentless goal.
To increase connection among the players, Belichick doesn’t
single out players for punishment. He makes the whole team do
more work when a single player commits an error, which encour-
ages players to help one another.
Belichick emphasizes one intangible factor: his players’ self-
lessness for the sake of the team. He shows no reluctance to bench
egotistical players who act selfish. Belichick has also been willing
to trade a talented player whose salary demands work against
team connection.
Quarterback Tom Brady epitomizes the kind of team player
that Belichick admires. Players around the league admire Brady
for his humility and commitment to his teammates. An enthusi-
astic Dallas Cowboys receiver, Keyshawn Johnson, gushed that
“the guy just turned twenty-eight . . . three Super Bowls at that
age . . . Un-freakin’-believable. And with his attitude, he’s not
done. I bet he’s got three more in him.”
Many of Brady’s attributes increase human value in the Patriots
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
186

culture. In early 2005, Brady stunned sportswriters by accepting a
six-year, $60 million contract that was $38 million below the con-
tract of Indianapolis Colts star quarterback Peyton Manning.
Brady explained that he wanted the team to have the money avail-
able for other players. Sports Illustrated senior writer Peter King
wrote that in covering football for sixteen years he had never seen
anything like that, and “if you think that plays well in the locker
room, you’re right.” Sports Illustrated named Brady its 2005
Sportsman of the Year and noted that Brady’s “greatest achieve-
ment grows out of a generosity of spirit.”When Visa wanted Brady
to pitch its product in a major television advertisement, Brady
insisted that his offensive linemen join him in the ad, or he would
have to pass.
Belichick increased human value on the team by giving his
assistant coaches considerable autonomy in making decisions, and
he increased knowledge flow by communicating with players in
the weekly team captains’ meeting. This marked a considerable
change from Belichick’s time as head coach for the Cleveland
Browns when he was criticized for micromanaging and failing to
communicate.1
With the high level of connection on the New England
Patriots team, it will likely be a force in pro football for many
years to come.
APPLICATION
Bill Belichick increased inspiring identity by holding out to the team
a vision of achieving perfection through team effort. His leadership
style gave assistant coaches autonomy (human value), and he com-
municated regularly with players (knowledge flow). Tom Brady
WEEK 4
187

increased human value by not demanding the highest possible
salary so that more money will be available to keep his teammates
with the Patriots. What steps could you take to be more intentional
in your leadership style to bring about changes?
DAY 19: HIGH-FIVE MOMENTS
In 1998, with $100,000 of their own money, Richard Tait and Whit
Alexander, two former Microsoft employees, decided to create a
new board game. Tait came up with the idea when he and his wife
were playing games at the home of their friends. The couple easily
won Pictionary and were trounced at Scrabble. Pondering how he
felt as the winner of one game and loser of another, Tait thought
it would be ideal to play a game that involved different skills so
that everyone had a chance to shine. That type of game would be
more fun, and it would bring people together rather than alienate
them in a winner-take-all battle. Tait persuaded Alexander to join
him, and together they created the game Cranium.
Cranium became the fastest-selling independent board game
in history, selling more than either Pictionary or Trivial Pursuit
had in its first year. The company (also named Cranium) went on
to shatter industry records by creating games that won the Toy
Industry Association’s Toy of the Year game award four out of the
last five years. It has sold more than 15 million games in ten lan-
guages and thirty countries. In 2005, while the toy industry’s unit
sales were down 6 percent, Cranium’s sales were up 50 percent.
To help fund Cranium’s growth and increase distribution,
Tait and Alexander persuaded CEO Howard Schultz of Starbucks
to invest in the new venture and to distribute the game through
Starbucks locations. Schultz liked the tie-in with Starbucks’s
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
188

mission to create community. Cranium brought people together,
and it increased the connection among them by making everyone
feel like a winner.
Tait and Alexander designed the game based on Harvard pro-
fessor Howard Gardner’s theory of multiple intelligences. Gardner
has identified at least seven forms of intelligence ranging from
musical and linguistic to logical-mathematical. Cranium incorpo-
rates challenges that favor each intelligence in hopes that everyone
will win part of the game and experience a high-five moment.
Connection is the key to Cranium’s success. Take, for example,
Cranium’s Conga, a game that gets players to learn more about
each other, including silly things such as how many marshmallows
fit in someone’s mouth. One New York Times reporter observed,
“When Tait describes the Cranium mission, he often sounds less
like a game maker and more like a sociologist diagnosing the ills
of an atomized society.”Inc. magazine opined that “in their minds
they weren’t selling a game but a social experience.” In the words
of Tait, “we [want] everyone to high-five their teammate at least
once each game . . . I know that’s not a very scientific metric, but
that’s what we’re going for.” Alexander adds, “We want people to
leave a game feeling enriched and better-connected.”
Cranium is just as passionate and intentional about increasing
connection among its employees. Cranium’s inspiring identity is to
bring people together in a world that has less free time and more
distractions that inhibit connection. Another aspect of Cranium’s
inspiring identity is that the company gives back to the community,
frequently donating games to people in need. In addition, every
employee gets ten games to give away to family members and five
to donate to charities. Cranium employees are proud of their com-
pany, not only for its reputation as an innovator but also for its
worthwhile mission and its heart.
WEEK 4
189

Always the passionate leader, Tait reads two hundred cus-
tomer e-mails and letters on an average day and shares some of
them with employees. Celeste Welch wrote about the fun her
family has had playing Cranium’s games after her two-year-old
daughter,Valerie, was diagnosed in 2005 with a brain tumor. Even
during the difficult times, Cranium’s games Cariboo, Hullabaloo,
and Balloon Lagoon kept Valerie, her parents, and her three sis-
ters laughing and smiling. According to Celeste, “[Our kids]
never really went through a time of crying or confusion. Really,
it’s our faith in God that’s getting us through. But the Cranium
games kept that laughter in the house.”
Human value is present in Cranium’s workplace culture. New
employees go through an orientation program to learn more about
Cranium’s values,including its goal to produce every Cranium toy or
game to meet the CHIFF standard (that means it is clever,high qual-
ity,innovative,friendly,and fun).The company throws a Gong Party
for new employees. The company pays 100 percent of employee
health, dental, and vision care premiums. All of the corner offices
with nice views are unoccupied so that everyone can enjoy them.
Each employee chooses his or her own title. Tait’s title is Grand Poo
Bah,and Alexander’s is Chief Noodler.Other fun titles include Edgar
Allen P. O. (the head of purchasing) and Head of the Hive (the head
of public relations who creates buzz about Cranium’s products).
In a culture such as Cranium’s, knowledge flow is high. The
approachable and unpretentious Tait and Alexander exemplify
leaders who are more interested in “getting it right”than personally
“being right.” The collaboration and informality they encourage
make people more likely to share their knowledge with decision
makers.
The high degree of connection that is fostered by Cranium
products and in Cranium’s workplace culture contributes to its
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
190

WEEK 4
191
superior performance and industry leadership. “What Cranium
did was it rewrote the rules,”says toy industry analyst Chris Byrne.
“There’s a warmth . . . from the interpersonal interaction that
comes from Cranium. People are hungry for that kind of connect-
edness.” I couldn’t agree more.1
APPLICATION
In the words of Cranium co-founder and Chief Noodler Whit
Alexander, “we want people to leave a game feeling enriched and
better-connected.” Would you be inspired to work for a company
that aspires to bring people together? Does your organization have
an inspiring mission or values? Are your colleagues proud to work
for your company? If they are, why? If not, is there some aspect of
the company they should be proud of? Could your company help
improve connection in the world?
DAY 20: TRANSFORMING THE CULTURE OF KIM
Nestlé Waters North America sells fifteen brands of water, includ-
ing Arrowhead, Ozarka, Poland Spring, Perrier, and Pellegrino.
It has 7,500 employees. Like many companies, it has experi-
enced a number of mergers and acquisitions that combined
organizations with different cultures. In 1992, Kim Jeffery was
appointed president of Nestlé Waters North America. His chal-
lenge was to create a cohesive culture where everyone felt like a
member of the same team. This was no small challenge given
that the culture Jeffery inherited had been described as “every
man for himself.”

In 1994, Jeffery received a wake-up call from a 360-degree
performance review. While he viewed himself as an engaging
leader who inspired people, the review made it clear that people
thought of him as abrupt and unapproachable. Many feared him.
Kim believed that putting people in jobs they liked, where they
worked alongside people they liked, would bring out the best in
them. He also knew that creating the right culture at Nestlé Waters
was necessary for the organization to prosper. Furthermore, when
the day came for him to leave the firm, he wanted to be sure that a
positive culture would be his legacy.
The performance review let Jeffery know that the reality of his
leadership style didn’t live up to what he desired. He was effectively
committing self-sabotage. Now that he understood the situation,
he committed himself to fix it. Through ongoing constructive feed-
back and executive coaching, Jeffery changed. His change, in turn,
became the catalyst to increase connection.
The inspiring identity that motivates people at Nestlé Waters
North America is the organization’s culture, especially that it is a
place where people are truly valued. Kim’s actions reinforce this
message. On one occasion, he learned that Jorge Crespo, a limo
driver who regularly drove the firm’s employees, had a daughter
who was diagnosed with meningitis and that Jorge didn’t have
insurance to cover the medical costs to treat her. Jeffery wrote a
blank check, gave it to Jorge, and told him to “take care of your
daughter and fill in the amount afterward.”
On his way to interview with Nestlé Waters in 1997, Dimitrios
Smyrnios learned from Jorge how Jeffery helped him pay for his
daughter’s medical treatments. Hearing the story gave Smyrnios a
favorable impression of the company and its president. He subse-
quently joined the firm and is currently vice president of the home
and office division. In 1999, Smyrnios followed Kim’s example. He
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
192

demonstrated how much the Nestlé Waters’ culture values people
when he approved substantial bonuses to employees in the Florida
division despite the division’s underperformance after Hurricane
George hit the state. The generous bonuses were paid to thank
those employees for their tireless efforts to provide bottled water
to hurricane victims.
Employees are proud of the organization’s active involvement
in local community programs such as Kids in Crisis and the Boys
and Girls Club. The firm provides both financial support and vol-
unteers. Jeffery and his wife led a fund-raising campaign that
raised $7.5 million for Kids in Crisis.
Nestlé Waters North America benefits from human value be-
cause it has an informal, friendly culture in which colleagues focus
their competitive energy on external competitors rather than on
one another. Human value is increased by Kim’s belief in work/life
balance. When he isn’t traveling, Jeffery is usually in the office by
8:30 a.m. and home by 6:00 p.m.
Potential new employees are carefully screened to ensure they
share the company’s values. Every potential new hire has to spend
an eight-hour-day riding with a water route delivery person dur-
ing which the candidate is closely scrutinized. Only candidates
who treat everyone with respect, regardless of rank, make the cut
at Nestlé Waters. The firm’s culture is reinforced through training
programs that clarify values and emphasize the personal stories of
participants to help them see where the values apply in their day-
to-day work.
Knowledge flow is present in the firm’s culture because of the
open-door, informal environment and embrace of communica-
tion outside the chain of command. The firm’s training programs
increase knowledge flow by bringing people together from vari-
ous parts of the organization.
WEEK 4
193

Despite aggressive moves into the water market by Pepsi
and Coca-Cola, Nestlé Waters North America continues to lead the
industry with reported revenues of $2.74 billion and 27.9 percent
market share in 2004, the latest year reported. Jeffery and Nestlé
Waters North America have come a long way since the 1994 per-
formance review that set him in motion to improve his organiza-
tion’s culture. In a recent article Jeffery identified connection as
one reason for his organization’s success when he said, “Having a
great culture is a competitive advantage because we have people
pulling all the oars together and a common mission.”1
APPLICATION
Jeffery increased inspiring identity by making Nestlé Waters North
America a company with a reputation for a caring culture. He
increased human value by scrutinizing potential employees to be
certain they showed respect to all people regardless of their rank
in the organization. He increased knowledge flow by embracing
communication outside the chain of command. If you had a 360-
degree performance review today,what do you think it would com-
municate? Would it show that you care about your colleagues and
that you build inspiring identity,human value,and knowledge flow
within your organization? Would you be willing to make the kinds
of changes Kim Jeffery made?
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
194

A
195
A strong sense of connection among people in an organization fires
them up and improves both individual and organizational per-
formance. The lack of connection will gradually burn them out.
Research—by sociologists, psychologists, and neuroscientists—and
anecdotal evidence point to these conclusions. So does research
by well-respected companies such as Gallup and the Corporate
Executive Board that measures engagement and connection in
organizations. The stories of leaders of businesses, nations, sports
teams, and social sector organizations illustrate that connection
boosts performance.
Inspiring identity, human value, and knowledge flow are the
elements in a culture to increase connection and help people
and organizations thrive. These elements meet deeply rooted
human needs for respect, recognition, belonging, autonomy, per-
sonal growth, and meaning. The elements in a culture that create
connection are present when people exhibit the universal character
strengths celebrated by moral philosophers and religious leaders
over the ages.
The historian David McCullough was right when he observed:
BUILD A FIRE THAT LASTS
CONCLUSION

While there are indeed great, often unfathomable forces in his-
tory before which even the most exceptional of individuals
seem insignificant, the wonder is how often events turn upon
a single personality, or the quality we call character.1
The legendary UCLA basketball coach John Wooden made a
keen observation when he stated one of his favorite maxims:“abil-
ity may get you to the top, but only character will keep you
there.”2 The Reverend Martin Luther King Jr. stated in his “I Have
a Dream” speech,“I have a dream that my four little children will
one day live in a nation where they will not be judged by the color
of their skin but by the content of their character.”
Indeed, character development and connection among the
people of the world are critical to our future. So much is at risk if
we ignore them.
The need to increase connection and strengthen character in
the business world could not be greater, given the fact that a mere
quarter of Americans feel connected and engaged at work, we face
an impending labor shortage in some sectors, and the ongoing
globalization of labor threatens the loss of jobs overseas in others.
The benefits of increased productivity and innovation await those
organizations that unleash the power of connection. A connec-
tion culture is truly a win-win outcome for organizations and the
individuals who inhabit them.
WHAT LEGACY WILL YOU LEAVE?
All of us, at some point in our lives, wonder how we will be
remembered. What legacy will we leave? An outstanding example
of an intentional connector I presented earlier was John Wooden.
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
196

Coach Wooden’s legacy and his connection with his players become
clear when you consider Bill Walton’s reflections written in 2000
about the impact that Wooden had and still has on Walton’s life:
[Coach Wooden] taught us life at UCLA . . . I call him on the
phone constantly and go see him as often as possible . . . I always
sit . . . as close as physically possible to this remarkable spirit . . .
at 89 . . . he is still the same teacher, the same positive force, the
same person we would like to become, only better . . . I’ve taken
my kids to his house, the same house he lived in since 1973 . . .
his former players . . . always ask him to let us put a financial
package together for him so he can buy his mansion on a hill . . .
but every time he tells us no. The joy and happiness in John
Wooden’s life comes today, as it always has, from the success
of others. He regularly tells us what he learned from his two
favorite teachers, Abraham Lincoln and Mother Teresa, is
that a life not lived for others is a life not lived . . . I thank
John Wooden every day for his selfless gifts, his lessons, his
time, his vision, and especially his patience. This is why we
call him coach.3
Who wouldn’t want to have a legacy like that! In an interview
a few years ago, Wooden expressed that although he appreciates
the many trophies, awards, and honors he received over his long
and successful career, the trophies he is most proud of are the
men that his former players became.4 In other words, the charac-
ter strengths that Wooden sees today in the men he helped shape
are his legacy and a source of joy to him.
How will your friends and family remember you? How about
your colleagues? If you are a highly visible leader, how will history
remember you? It’s important to consider your legacy early in life
CONCLUSION
197

when there is sufficient time to be intentional about living in a
way that’s consistent with how you want to be remembered. As
Jason Pankau likes to say,“Live with the end in mind.”A life coach
for executives, he frequently finds that many of the people he
coaches reach the latter years of their careers before they realize
they didn’t live with the end in mind. Then they typically try to
repair the damage done from their earlier actions.
How about you? Will you be remembered as an intentional
connector such as John Wooden, George Washington, or Frances
Hesselbein, or will you be remembered as an intentional or unin-
tentional disconnector such as Howell Raines, Al Dunlap, or
Frederick the Great during the latter years of his reign?
Evidence suggests that leaders of enduring organizations take
their legacies seriously. In 1983 Royal Dutch/Shell Group studied
twenty-seven companies that had survived more than one hun-
dred years, were still important in their industries, and continued
to have strong corporate identities. One finding was that managers
of these organizations believed it was important to leave their
organizations in as good as or better shape than when they became
managers. These managers also put a higher priority on people
than on assets. Keeping the team together was more significant to
them than the type of work they did. In fact, each of the twenty-
seven companies had changed its business portfolio at least once.
For example, the chemical company DuPont began as a gunpow-
der company, and Mitsui of Japan began as a drapery shop before
it moved successively into banking, mining, and manufacturing.5
Effectively, these managers thought of themselves as trustees or
stewards, who had a responsibility to the current and future mem-
bers of their work communities. Wise leaders appreciate the con-
tributions of the people in their organizations and therefore have
a sense of stewardship toward those people.
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
198

The root cause of leaders who leave less desirable legacies can
often be traced to a failure of character. Bill Thrall, Bruce McNichol,
and Ken McElrath in their book,The Ascent of a Leader, describe the
pattern of leaders who advance in responsibility without having
developed sufficient character strengths to prepare for leadership.
Many men and women of influence discover that leader-
ship is like a ladder—a challenging and unpredictable climb,
often stable at the bottom and unpredictable and shaky at the
top. From the bottom, life at the top looks appealing, even
alluring, and many leaders attack the ladder with gusto, confi-
dent that they possess what it takes to conquer the rungs.
Yet, when these leaders reach positions of authority,
unforeseen instability begins to surface. Such issues as the pres-
sure of success, the temptation of privilege, the demands of fol-
lowers, and the isolation of leadership leave deep depressions
on the rungs—caused by the white-knuckle grip of the leader.
Many look for a way to stabilize their situation, but too many
leaders come crashing down. And when they land, few are
there to help. Some will even laugh.6
According to one extensive study, more than 70 percent of
leaders do not finish well.7 This should not be a surprise. Absent
strength of character and the self-knowledge that comes from stay-
ing connected with others, leaders set themselves up for failure.
Connection and character protect leaders from falling into
the traps of leadership failure. Manfred F. R. Kets de Vries, the
director of Insead’s Global Leadership Center, professor of lead-
ership development, and practicing psychoanalyst, has devoted
his life to studying CEOs. Kets de Vries has noted that too many
leaders lead lives of chronic imbalance and delude themselves
CONCLUSION
199

into believing they don’t. Habitual imbalance in a leader’s life not
only hurts the leader but also hurts his family and the organiza-
tion he leads. The leader often surrounds himself with yes-men
and becomes blinded by narcissism. These patterns lead to exces-
sive risk taking to ease the feelings of guilt, boredom, and depres-
sion that stalk him. Kets de Vries describes a healthy leader as
someone who, among other things, has “the capacity to establish
and maintain healthy relationships” (in other words, a healthy
leader is an intentional connector).8
The person who becomes relationally isolated and thus lacks
connection with others during his work career will have few fam-
ily members and friends who will want to spend time with him
later in life. The failure to connect with family and friends will
eventually calcify, making it nearly impossible to establish later on.
The absence of connection is taken as rejection, and bitterness can
become permanently attached to the broken relationship. Too
many people succumb to this fate that could have been avoided.
IT BEGINS WITH YOU
In the end, you are the key to increasing connection and avoiding
the fate of those who fail to connect with others. A connection
culture is constructed one person at a time. Each of us has the
responsibility to grow in character and become an intentional
connector. This applies especially to leaders because they are in a
position to be people developers and others may emulate them.
Organizations blessed with such leaders have many other people
in the organization who are intentional connectors too.
My hope is that this book has made a modest contribution
to persuading you and encouraging you to be intentional about
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
200

increasing connection and developing character strengths. May
the words of Edmund Burke, the British statesman and humani-
tarian, encourage each of us in that endeavor:“the only thing nec-
essary for the triumph of evil is for good men to do nothing.”9
Burke’s comments apply to the evils in society as well as the evil
within ourselves. To bring out the best in yourself and others, I
encourage you to put into practice the suggestions offered through-
out this book and to share this book with others who would bene-
fit from its message.
With that, I want to wish you the very best of connections
with your family members, your friends and neighbors, your col-
leagues at work, and your fellow members in society.And may the
strength of these connections bless you and help you maintain
the fire of inspiration, energy, and enthusiasm all of the days of
your life.
REVIEW, REFLECTION, AND APPLICATION
! Good character increases connection, which in turn improves
individual and organizational performance.
! The character of individuals often changes history, and sus-
tainable superior performance isn’t achievable without good
character.
! With low employee engagement and the coming labor short-
age, the time is now to improve the character strengths of
people in organizations and the connection among them.
CONCLUSION
201

! Because few people are intentional about developing character
strengths, most fail to leave a legacy of which they can be gen-
uinely proud. John Wooden is an excellent model to follow. He
developed his character and the character of his basketball
players, many of whom have written in books and articles
about Wooden’s positive impact on them as people.
! What do you want your legacy to be with your family and
friends, your coworkers, and the people in your community?
Are you on course to achieve the legacy you desire? If not,
what must you do to get on course?
! So what? Increasing connection in a culture happens one
person at a time. Just as developing character strengths and
connection requires us to be intentional, developing the
legacy we desire requires intentionality. Will you be inten-
tional, or will you just drift through life? Remember that
when we drift, it is always toward character weakness. Each
of us needs to improve our character and encourage others
to do the same. Our future depends on it.
FIRED UP or BURNED OUT
202

APPENDIX A
QUESTIONS TO ASSESS ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE
AND CONNECTION
Do your closest coworkers know you as a person, including your life
outside work, what’s important to you, and what talents and skills you
possess?
Do your closest coworkers care about you as a person, including
what’s happening in your life outside work?
Do your closest coworkers know the major events in your life that
shaped your beliefs and who you have become?
Do you know the major events in the lives of your closest cowork-
ers and how they shaped their beliefs and who they have become?
What kind of activities could be planned for your team to facilitate
getting to know one another better?
Do your closest coworkers appreciate your strengths?
Do your closest coworkers share their personal trials and triumphs
and support one another?
Do you receive praise and recognition for your work? How?
Do you have someone at work who is a mentor to you and who
wants to help you grow? If not, who would you like to have as a mentor
and why?
Do you feel your supervisor makes certain that you have work that
appropriately challenges your skills? Explain.
What type of training do you receive to help you develop profes-
sionally?
Are you continuously learning and growing at work?
Would you classify your closest coworkers as trusted colleagues or
competitors? What makes you feel one way or the other?
203

Do people at work feel it’s safe to be who they really are, or do they
put on an act to fit in?
How is your compensation determined, and do you feel the process
is fair?
Do you understand how your job performance is assessed, and do
you feel the process is fair?
How often do you receive performance reviews? Are they given with
sufficient regularity and with sufficient substance and clarity to help you
grow?
Are you treated fairly in the areas of compensation, promotions,
job assignments, or other aspects of your job? Explain.
Is your supervisor open with you so that you know what he or she
thinks and believes about work issues that affect you? If you have asked
for more information, how was that request treated?
Does your supervisor consistently seek your opinions, listen to you,
and carefully consider your views before making decisions on important
issues that affect you and your work? Do your coworkers?
Do you consistently seek your coworkers’ opinions, listen to them,
and carefully consider their views before making decisions on impor-
tant issues that affect them and their work?
Are you encouraged to think of ways to improve your organization?
Are you encouraged to stay informed about developments outside
your work environment that affect your organization (for example, devel-
opments in your industry and among your competitors)? What might
you do to keep “your eyes and ears open”?
What is the process at work to systematically keep people informed
and provide them an open, honest, and safe forum to share their views?
How has your organization’s history and important events and sto-
ries shaped what it has become today?
Is there a group that gets together to talk about a vision for the
future as it relates to your work? Does the group include members from
across the organization?
APPENDIX A
204

Have you been a part of a discussion about shared beliefs as they
relate to your workplace (for example, obeying the law, being honest in
communications, helping one another, promptly returning colleagues’
phone calls, etc.)?
Do you and your colleagues share a sense of importance about the
work done by your organization? 
Do you feel your work is important? Why?
Are your colleagues proud of your organization, its reputation, its
work, and its accomplishments? Why?
Do your colleagues have high standards of excellence for their work?
Are some people considered to be and treated like stars and others
thought of and treated like second-class citizens? Explain your answer.
Do any of your coworkers ever make you feel inferior to them? If so,
how?
Do you understand how decisions are made, and do you feel they
are fair? Explain your answer.
What other aspects are right, wrong, or missing in your environ-
ment at work? 
How do you feel about your future in your organization?
Based on your answers to these questions, where do you see areas
that require improvement?
APPENDIX A
205

NOTES
Although I have not counted them, the interviews, books, articles, and speeches I con-
sulted while doing research for this book had to number well over one thousand.
Throughout the book I added notes to give credit to individuals whose ideas influenced
me and where I thought readers might be interested in following up on some of my source
material. I did not note sources where I believed the information was, for the most part,
common knowledge to the average reader of books and periodicals about management
and leadership or readily available in reference materials such as encyclopedias. If there are
any inadvertent errors or misinterpretations of the materials consulted, the sole responsi-
bility is mine.
—Michael Lee Stallard
Introduction
1. Based on surveys of more than one million employees, Gallup research has
reported employee engagement in America has fluctuated between 25 percent
and 29 percent since 2000. See James K. Clifton, “Engaging Your Employees: Six
Keys to Understanding the New Workplace,” http://shrm.org/foundation/engag-
ing.asp, and John H. Fleming, Curt Coffman, and James K. Harter,“Manage Your
Human Sigma,” Harvard Business Review (July-August 2005): 107–14. I chose to
present the 25 percent figure in light of other research (see note 5 below) that
indicates employee engagement may be even lower. Whatever the case, the point
here is that the overwhelming majority of workers are disengaged.
2. David G. Myers, American Paradox: Spiritual Hunger in an Age of Plenty (New
Haven: Yale University Press, 2001).
3. Robert E. Lane, The Loss of Happiness in Market Democracies (New Haven: Yale
University Press, 2000).
4. David Brooks, “One Nation, Slightly Divisible,” Atlantic Online, December 2001,
http://www.theatlantic.com/issues/2001/12/brooks.htm.
5. Corporate Leadership Council, “Driving Performance and Retention Through
Employee Engagement” (Washington, D.C.: Corporate Executive Board, 2004). An
executive summary of the reports is available at http://www.corporateleadership-
council.com/CLC/1,1283,00Public_Display115952,00.html.
6. Several books have influenced my thinking on the different personality types and
the right brain-directed powers of intuition, including the following: Daniel H.
Pink, A Whole New Mind: Why Right-Brainers Will Rule the Future (New York:
Penguin, 2005); David G. Myers, Intuition: Its Powers and Perils (New Haven: Yale
University Press, 2002); Malcolm Gladwell, Blink: The Power of Thinking Without
Thinking (New York: Little, Brown, 2005); David Keirsey, Please Understand Me II:
Temperament, Character, Intelligence (Del Mar: Prometheus Nemesis Book
Company, 1998).
206

7. Otto Kroeger with Janet M. Thuesen, Type Talk at Work: How the 16 Personality
Types Determine Your Success on the Job (New York: Delacorte Press, 1992),
391–98.
8. Betsy Morris, “The Best Place to Work Now,” Fortune, 11 January 2006, 79–84.
9. Regina Fazio Maruca, ed., What Managers Say, What Employees Hear: Connecting
with Your Front Line (So They’ll Connect with Customers) (Westport: Praeger,
2006), 131–32.
10. William C. Taylor and Polly LaBarre, “How Pixar Adds a New School of Thought
to Disney,” New York Times, 29 January 2006, section 3, p. 3.
11. Except where noted, my basis for making the statements in this section comes
from various conversations with individuals who work at these organizations or
who closely monitor their activities.
Chapter 1: The Case for Connection at Work
1. See James K. Harter, Frank L. Schmidt, and Theodore L. Hayes, “Business-Unit-
Level Relationship Between Employee Satisfaction, Employee Engagement, and
Business Outcomes: A Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Applied Psychology 87, no. 2
(2002): 268–79. I will explain in subsequent paragraphs why I believe this study
based on Gallup’s Q12 questionnaire is an excellent indicator of connection.
2. Ibid. The Gallup study performed a meta-analysis on data from surveys con-
ducted between 1992 and 1999. The surveys collectively included 198,524 respon-
dents in 7,939 business units of 36 companies. Gallup used its 12 question Gallup
Workplace Audit that measures employee engagement and compared it to several
business outcomes (i.e., customer satisfaction, productivity, profit, employee
turnover, and accidents). The study concluded that the correlation between
employee engagement and business outcomes was substantial (corrected for inde-
pendent variable measurement error yielded a correlation of .38 between employee
engagement and the set of business outcomes measured). Also note that a subse-
quent study identified the relationship between employee engagement and busi-
ness outcomes goes both ways (i.e., higher business outcomes produce a higher
level of employee engagement), and that the relationship effect of positive busi-
ness outcomes on employee engagement exceeded the effect of employee engage-
ment on business outcomes. This doesn’t surprise me because there is a mutual
relationship between employee engagement and performance. See Benjamin
Schneider, Paul J. Hanges, D. Brent Smith, and Amy Nichole Salvaggio, “Which
Comes First: Employee Attitudes or Organizational Financial and Market
Performance?” Journal of Applied Psychology 88, no. 5 (2003): 836–51.
3. Corporate Leadership Council, “Driving Performance and Retention Through
Employee Engagement.”
4. Hewitt Associates LLC, “The Link Between Employee Retention and Business
Results,” Hewitt Magazine, http://was4.hewitt.com/hewitt/resource/rptspubs
/hewitt_magazine/vol16_iss2/features/ezine.html.
5. Based on surveys of more than one million employees, Gallup research has reported
employee engagement in America has fluctuated between 25 percent and 29 per-
cent. See Clifton, “Engaging Your Employees: Six Keys to Understanding the New
Workplace,” and Fleming, Coffman, and Harter,“Manage Your Human Sigma.”
NOTES
207

NOTES
208
6. Corporate Leadership Council, “Driving Performance and Retention Through
Employee Engagement.”
7. Tom Rath and Donald O. Clifton, How Full Is Your Bucket?: Positive Strategies for
Work and Life (New York: Gallup Press, 2004), 33.
8. Phillip Longman, “The Global Baby Bust,” Foreign Affairs (May-June 2004):
64–79.
9. Ken Dychtwald, Tamara Erickson, and Bob Morison, “It’s Time to Retire
Retirement,” Harvard Business Review (March 2004): 49–57.
10. The American Workplace: Building America’s Workforce for the 21st Century
(Washington, D.C.: Employment Policy Foundation, 2001).
11. Dychtwald, Erickson, and Morison, “It’s Time to Retire Retirement.”
12. Sydney Finkelstein, Why Smart Executives Fail: And What You Can Learn from
Their Mistakes (New York: Portfolio, 2003).
Chapter 2: The Science of Connection
1. Edward M. Hallowell, MD, “The Human Moment at Work,” Harvard Business
Review (January-February 1999): 58–66. Also see Edward M. Hallowell, MD,
Connect: 12 Vital Ties That Open Your Heart, Lengthen Your Life, and Deepen Your
Soul (New York: Pantheon, 1999).
2. Joyce K. Fletcher, Judith V. Gordon, and Jean Baker Miller, “Women and the
Workplace: Applications of a Psychodynamic Theory,” American Journal of
Psychoanalysis 60, no. 3 (2000). Also see the Jean Baker Miller Training Institute
Web site at http://www.wellesley.edu/JBMTI.
3. Most of the physiological effects of connection were sourced from Edward
Hallowell’s excellent book, Connect: 12 Vital Ties That Open Your Heart, Lengthen
Your Life, and Deepen Your Soul, 5–9. For more recent evidence on the impact of
connection with infants see William J. Cromie, “Of Hugs and Hormones,”Harvard
University Gazette, 11 June 1998, http://www.news.harvard.edu/gazette/1998/06.11/
OfHugsandHormon.html.
4. Connection brings about positive emotions that have been determined to
improve decision making and creativity; see Barbara L. Frederickson, “The Value
of Positive Emotions,” American Scientist 91 (July-August 2003): 330–35.
5. An excellent review of the research on the factors that contribute to subjective well-
being can be found at Richard M. Ryan and Edward L. Deci, “On Happiness and
Human Potentials: A Review of Research on Hedonic and Eudaimonic Well-
Being,” ed. S. Fiske, Annual Review of Psychology 52 (Palo Alto: Annual Reviews,
Inc., 2001): 141–66. This article can be accessed at http://www.psych.rochester.edu
/SDT/documents/2001RyanDeci_AnnRev.pdf.
6. A. H. Maslow, “A Theory of Human Motivation,” Psychological Review 50 (1943):
370–96.
7. Ibid.
Chapter 3: The Connection Culture
1. Alan Deutschman, The Second Coming of Steve Jobs (New York: Broadway Books,
2000), 251–53; Stuart Elliott, “Apple Endorses Some Achievers Who ‘Think
Different,’” New York Times, 3 August 1998.

2. Doris Kearns Goodwin, No Ordinary Time: Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt: The
Home Front in World War II (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1994), 340; Encarta
Encyclopedia Online, s.v. “Aircraft Production During World War II,”
http://encarta.msn.com/media_701500594_761563737_1_1/Aircraft_Production
_During_World_War_II.html.
3. Barbara S. Peterson, Blue Streak: Inside jetBlue, the Upstart That Rocked an
Industry (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1994), xiv.
4. Jack Mitchell, Hug Your Customers: The Proven Way to Personalize Sales and
Achieve Astounding Results (New York: Hyperion, 2003), 145–46.
5. Brian Hanessian and Carlos Sierra,“Leading a Turnaround: An Interview with the
Chairman of D&B,” McKinsey Quarterly, no. 2 (2005).
6. Joseph Stallard (head of recruiting and training, Sewell Automotive Corporation),
discussion with the author, December 2005.
7. Beth Belton, “Procter & Gamble’s Renovator-in-Chief,” Business Week Online, 11
December 2002, www.busnessweek.com/bwdaily/dnflash/dec2002/nf20021211_
7599.htm; Robert Berner, “A Catalyst and Encourager of Change,” Business Week
Online, 7 July 2003, http://businessweek.com/print/magazine/content/03_27/
b3840014_mz001.htm; Katrina Booker, “The Un-CEO,” Fortune, 16 September
2002, 88–96; Cliff Peale, “The Lafley Method: Face the Facts, Think Like a
Customer,” Cincinnati Enquirer Online, 9 June 2002, http://www.enquirer.
com/editions/2002/06/09/fin_the_lafley_method.html; James R. Stengel, Andrea
L. Dixon, and Chris T. Allen,“Listening Begins at Home,”Harvard Business Review
(November 2003): 106–16.
Chapter 4: Connection and the Legend
1. Except where noted, the material in this chapter was sourced from John Wooden
and Steve Jamison, My Personal Best: Life Lessons from an All-American Journey
(New York: McGraw-Hill, 2004).
2. Tracy Pierson, “UCLA to Honor John Wooden,” 19 December 2003,
http://www.medaloffreedom.com/JohnRWoodenUCLAFloor.htm.
3. Bill Walton,“John Wooden,Like UCLA,Simply the Best,”http://www.billwalton.com/
wooden.html.
4. Ibid.
5. Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, “Appreciating the Wisdom of Wooden: As a Coach,
Brilliant. As a Man, He Means So Much More,” New York Times, 10 December
2000.
6. Walton, “John Wooden, Like UCLA, Simply the Best.”
7. Ibid.
8. Ibid.
Chapter 5: Trouble in Times Square
1. The material from this chapter was sourced from Ken Auletta, “The Howell
Doctrine,” New Yorker, 26 July 2004; and Matthew Rose and Laurie P. Cohen,
“Amid Turmoil, Top Editors Resign at New York Times,”Wall Street Journal, 6 June
2003.
NOTES
209

NOTES
210
Chapter 6: The Next Step in the Evolution of Organizations
1. Thanks to Mitchell Dickey for sharing his thoughts and white papers on his Tasks +
Relationships = Results model with me that helped shape my thoughts about the
problem of employee disengagement and disconnection.
2. For additional thoughts on star systems see Malcolm Gladwell,“The Talent Myth:
Are Smart People Overrated?” New Yorker, 22 July 2002.
3. Thomas DeLong and Vineeta Vijayaraghavan, “Let’s Hear It for B Players,”
Harvard Business Review (June 2003): 96–102.
4. Jon R. Katzenbach and Jason A. Santamaria, “Firing Up the Front Line,” Harvard
Business Review (May 1999): 107–17.
Chapter 7: Inspire with Identity
1. Facts about the Manhattan Project were sourced from Warren Bennis and Patricia
A. Biederman. Organizing Genius (Reading: Addison-Wesley, 1997), 204–5; Don
E. Beyer, The Manhattan Project: America Makes the First Atomic Bomb (New York:
Franklin Watts, 1991).
2. Richard Feynman, “Los Alamos from Below: Reminiscences 1943–1945,” http://
calteches.library.caltech.edu/14/01/FeynmanLosAlamos.pdf.
3. Simon Schama, A History of Britain: At the Edge of the World, 3500 B.C.–1603 A.D.
(New York: Hyperion, 2000), 266.
4. The Literature Network, King Henry V, Act 4. Scene III, http://www.online-
literature.com/view.php/henryV/21?term=band%20of%20brothers.
5. Viktor E. Frankl, Man’s Search for Meaning: An Introduction to Logotherapy (New
York: Simon & Schuster, 1984), 82–88.
Chapter 8: Create Meaning in Your Organization
1. Keith H. Hammonds, “Michael Porter’s Big Ideas,” Fast Company, February 2001.
2. David Brooks, On Paradise Drive: How We Live Now (and Always Have) in the Future
Tense (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2004), 220–21.
3. United States Marine Corps, History Division, Who’s Who in Marine Corps
History, “Sergeant Major Daniel ‘Dan’ Joseph Daly, USMC (Deceased),”
http://hqinet001.hqmc.usmc.mil/HD/Historical/Whos_Who/Daly_DJ.htm.
Chapter 9: Delete What Devalues
1. Bernard Bailyn, Ideological Origins of the American Revolution (Boston: Harvard
University Press, 1967), 202–4; Barbara W. Tuchman, The March of Folly: From Troy
to Vietnam (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1984), 128–231.
2. Gordon S. Wood, The Radicalism of the American Revolution (New York: Alfred A.
Knopf, 1992), 6–7.
3. Brooks, On Paradise Drive: How We Live Now (and Always Have) in the Future
Tense, 80–81.
4. Lilia M. Cortina, Vicki J. Magley, Jill Hunter-Williams, and Regina Day Langhout,
“Incivility in the Workplace: Incidence and Impact,” Journal of Occupational
Health Psychology 6 (2001): 64–80.
5. Jerry Useem, “A Manager for All Seasons,” Fortune, 30 April 2001.

6. James MacGregor Burns, Transforming Leadership (New York: Atlantic Monthly
Press, 2003), 110–12.
7. Isser Woloch, The New Regime: Transformations of the French Civic Order,
1789–1820s (New York: W. W. Norton, 1994), 432–33.
8. Louis Menand, The Metaphysical Club: A Story of Ideas in America (New York:
Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2001), 289–306.
9. Based on author’s conversations with various officials at Goodyear.
Chapter 10: Dial Up the Value
1. Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience (New York:
Harper & Row, 1990).
2. For the story of how Taiichi Ohno developed Lean Manufacturing (also called the
Toyota Production System), see Maryann Keller,Collision: GM, Toyota, Volkswagen
and the Race to Own the 21st Century (New York: Doubleday, 1993), 154–93.
3. Doris Kearns Goodwin, “Lessons of Presidential Leadership,” Leader to Leader 9
(summer 1998): 23–30.
Chapter 11: Three Benefits of Knowledge Flow
1. Belton, “Procter & Gamble’s Renovator-in-Chief”; Berner, “A Catalyst and
Encourager of Change”; Booker, “The Un-CEO”; Peale, “The Lafley Method: Face
the Facts, Think Like a Customer”; Stengel, Dixon, and Allen, “Listening Begins at
Home”.
2. Burns, Transforming Leadership, 105–8.
3. Roger Mudd, American Heritage: Great Minds of History (New York: John Wiley &
Sons, 1999), 185–96.
4. Andrew S. Grove, Swimming Across (New York: Warner Books, 2002).
5. Andrew S. Grove, Only the Paranoid Survive: How to Exploit the Crisis Points That
Challenge Every Company and Career (New York: Doubleday, 1996); Richard N.
Langlois and W. Edward Steinmueller,“Strategy and Circumstance: The Response
of American Firms to Japanese Competition in Semiconductors, 1980–1995,”
Strategic Management Journal 21 (2000): 1163–73.
6. zaadzbeta, Quotes by David Hume, http://www.zaadz.com/quotes/David_Hume
?page=1.
7. The Debate on the Constitution: Federalist and Antifederalist Speeches, Articles and
Letters During the Struggle Over Ratification (New York: Library Classics of the
United States, 1993), 3–5.
8. Ram Charan and Jerry Useem, “Why Companies Fail,” Fortune, 27 May 2002, 56.
9. Goodwin, “Lessons of Presidential Leadership,” 23–30.
10. Tuchman, The March of Folly: From Troy to Vietnam, 11–14.
11. Charan and Useem, “Why Companies Fail,” 60.
12. Diane Vaughan, The Challenger Launch Decision: Risky Technology, Culture, and
Deviance at NASA (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996), 394-399.
13. David E. Sanger,“Report of Loss of Shuttle Focuses on NASA Blunders and Issues
Somber Warning,” New York Times, 27 August 2003; William Langewiesche,
“Columbia’s Last Flight: The Inside Story of the Investigation—and the
Catastrophe It Laid Bare,” Atlantic Monthly, November 2003, 58–87.
NOTES
211

14. David Johnston, “The Warnings Were There, But Who Was Listening,” New York
Times, 27 July 2003.
15. Howard Gardner, Changing Minds: The Art and Science of Changing Our Own and
Other People’s Minds (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2004), 208; David
Rock and Jeffrey Schwartz, “The Neuroscience of Leadership,” Strategy + Business
(summer 2006): 71–80.
16. Michael D. Doubler, Closing with the Enemy: How GIs Fought the War in Europe,
1944–1945 (Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas, 1995), 31–62; Mudd,
American Heritage Great Minds of History, 195–98. Please note that the sources
report different spellings of Curtis Cullen’s name and different locations for his
hometown (Chicago or New York City).
17. Omar N. Bradley, A Soldier’s Story (New York: Henry Holt, 1951), 342.
18. Mudd, American Heritage: Great Minds of History, 195–98.
19. Based on author’s conversations with Starbucks executives.
20. David S. Landis, The Wealth and Poverty of Nations: Why Some Are So Rich and
Some Are So Poor (New York: W.W. Norton, 1998), 93–98; Dinesh D’Souza, What’s
So Great About America (Washington, D.C.: Regnery, 2002), 50–52.
21. Schneider, Hanges, Smith, and Salvaggio, “Which Comes First: Employee
Attitudes or Organizational Financial and Market Performance?” 836–51.
Chapter 12: Increase the Flow
1. The author was formerly an executive of a wholly owned subsidiary of the Charles
Schwab Corporation and made these observations during the time of his employ-
ment.
2. Ethan M. Rasiel and Paul N. Friga, The McKinsey Mind (New York: McGraw-Hill,
2001), 76–79.
3. Ibid.
4. Daniel A. Wren and Ronald G. Greenwood, Management Innovators: The People
and Ideas That Have Shaped Modern Business (New York: Oxford University Press,
1998), 231.
5. Clayton M. Christensen, The Innovator’s Dilemma: When New Technologies Cause
Great Firms to Fail (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1997), xiv.
6. James Montier, “Are Two Heads Better Than One?” Dresdner Wasserstein
Securities Limited (2004), quoted in John Mauldin, Outside the Box 1, no. 5, 11
October 2004.
7. Richard Dowis, The Lost Art of the Great Speech: How to Write It, How to Deliver It
(New York: AMA Publications, 2000), 161.
8. For an excellent case in defense of hierarchy see Harold J. Leavitt, Top Down: Why
Hierarchies Are Here to Stay and How to Manage Them More Efficiently (Boston:
Harvard Business School Press, 2004).
9. Joseph Nocera, A Piece of the Action: How the Middle Class Joined the Money Class
(New York: Simon & Schuster, 1994), 155–60.
Chapter 14: The Journey to Connection
1. Noah Riner, “’06 Welcomes Class of ’09,” Dartmouth Review, 20 September 2005.
2. Reggie Van Lee, Lisa Fabish, and Nancy McGaw,“The Value of Corporate Values,”
Strategy + Business (Summer 2005).
NOTES
212

Chapter 15: Developing Character Strengths and Connection
1. Public Agenda, 1999, “Kids These Days ’99: What Americans Really Think About
the Next Generation,” 4, (based on Public Agenda’s survey of 1,005 adults).
2. William Damon, Bringing in a New Era in Character Education (Palo Alto: Hoover
Institution Press, 2002), viii.
3. David Rock and Jeffrey Schwartz, “The Neuroscience of Leadership,” Strategy +
Business (Summer 2006): 71–80.
4. Christopher Peterson and Martin E. P. Seligman, Character Strengths and Virtues:
A Handbook and Classification (Washington, D.C.: American Psychological
Association; New York: Oxford University Press, 2004), 51–52; Martin E. P.
Seligman and Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, “Positive Psychology: An Introduction,”
American Psychologist 55 (2000): 5–14.
5. Peterson and Seligman, Character Strengths and Virtues: A Handbook and
Classification, 28n.
6. Benjamin Franklin, The Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin (New York: Random
House, 1950).
7. William Lee Miller, Lincoln’s Virtues: An Ethical Biography (New York: Alfred A.
Knopf, 2002).
8. Charles de Montesquieu, The Spirit of the Laws (New York: Cambridge University
Press, 1989).
9. Carolly Erickson, The First Elizabeth (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1983), 171–73,
315.
10. James R. Gaines, An Evening in the Palace of Reason: Bach Meets Frederick the Great
in the Age of Enlightenment (New York: Fourth Estate, 2005), 248.
11. Steve Reinemund, chairman and CEO, PepsiCo, 7 June 2006 interview by David
Miller, Yale Center for Faith and Culture, Greenwich Leadership Forum,
Greenwich, CT.
12. Malcolm Gladwell,“The Cellular Church,”New Yorker, 12 September 2005, 60–67.
13. Christina Hoff Summers, “How Moral Education Is Finding Its Way Back into
America’s Schools,” in Bringing in a New Era in Character Education, ed. William
Damon (Palo Alto: Hoover Institution Press, 2002), 33.
14. Art Kleiner, “Karen Stephenson’s Quantum Theory of Trust,” Strategy + Business,
issue 29 (fourth quarter 2002), 1–14; also see Malcolm Gladwell, “Designs for
Working: Why Your Bosses Want to Turn Your New Office into Greenwich
Village,” New Yorker, 11 December 2000, 60–70.
Week 1
Day 1: French Hero of the American Revolution
1. The following sources were used in writing this day’s entry: Harlow Giles Unger,
Lafayette (Hoboken: John Wiley & Sons, 2002); Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. and John
S. Bowman, eds., The Almanac of American History (New York: G. P. Putnam’s
Sons, 1983),126.; Marian Klamkin, The Return of Lafayette (New York: Charles
Scribner’s Sons, 1975), 1–7, 193.
Day 2: Restoring the Glory
1. The following sources were used in writing this day’s entry: Betsy Morris, “The
Accidental CEO,” Fortune Online, 9 June 2003, http://www.fortune.com/fortune
NOTES
213

/print/o,115935,457272,00.html; Olga Kharif, “Anne Mulcahy Has Xerox by the
Horns,” Business Week Online, 29 May 2003, http://www.businessweek.com/tech-
nology/content/may23/tc20030529_1642_tc111.htm; Barbara Rose, “Firms
Forced to Raise Offers to Retain Top Talent,” Greenwich Time, 8 January 2006.
Day 3: The Shot Heard Around the World
1. The following sources were used in writing this day’s entry: Phil Jackson and
Hugh Delehanty, Sacred Hoops: Spiritual Lessons of a Hardwood Warrior (New
York: Hyperion, 1995), 15–22; Phil Jackson, The Last Season: A Team in Search of
Its Soul (New York: Penguin Press, 2004), 242–59.
Day 4: Soldier of Peace
1. The following sources were used in writing this day’s entry: Howard Gardner and
Emma Laskin, Leading Minds: An Anatomy of Leadership (New York:
HarperCollins, 1995), 148–63; Carl Joachim Hambro, Nobel Peace Prize
Presentation Speech—George C. Marshall, http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/
peace/laureates/1953/press.html; Charles Colson with Harold Fickett, The Good
Life: Seeking Purpose, Meaning, and Truth in Your Life (Wheaton, IL: Tyndale
House, 2005), 5; Geoffrey C. Ward, American Originals: The Private Worlds of Some
Singular Men & Women (New York: Random House, 1994), 184–90.
Day 5: Hug Your Customers™
1. Based on a series of conversations between the author and Jack Mitchell and from
Jack Mitchell, Hug Your Customers: The Proven Way to Personalize Sales and
Achieve Astounding Results.
Week 2
Day 6: A Most Unlikely Turnaround
1. Schama, A History of Britain: At the Edge of the World, 3500 B.C.–1603 A.D. (New
York: Miramax Books) 331–90.
Day 7: Enlightened Monarch?
1. The following sources were used in writing this day’s entry: Burns, Leadership, 10,
27–28; Gaines, Evening in the Palace of Reason, 194–212, 245–48.
Day 8: First in Their Hearts
1. The following sources were used in writing this day’s entry: Philip Kunhardt Jr.,
Philip Kunhardt III, and Peter W. Kunhardt,“The Heroic Posture,”in The American
President, videocassette (Alexandria, VA: PBS Home Video: Warner Home Video,
2000); George Washington’s Rules of Civility & Decent Behavour In Company and
Conversation, (Bedford, Maine: Applewood Books, 1988); Edward Lengel, e-mail
message to the author, 8 April 2005; Bill Moyers, A World of Ideas, ed. Betty Sue
Flowers (New York: Doubleday, 1989), 8–9, 229; Joseph J. Ellis, His Excellency:
George Washington (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2004), xiv.
NOTES
214

Day 9: Reconnecting a Nation
1. The following sources were used in writing this day’s entry: William J. Bennett,
The Moral Compass: A Companion to The Book of Virtues (New York: Simon &
Schuster, 1995) 687-690; Jay Winik, April 1865: The Month That Saved America
(New York: HarperCollins, 2002), 183–91, 362–63; Ward, American Originals: The
Private Worlds of Some Singular Men & Women.
Day 10: Connection to the Cause
1. David McCullough, Brave Companions: Portraits in History (New York: Prentice
Hall, 1992), 37–51.
Week 3
Day 11: Community Catalyst
1. Howard Schultz and Dori Jones Yang, Pour Your Heart into It: How Starbucks Built
a Company One Cup at a Time (New York: Hyperion, 1997).
Day 12: The Business of The Body Shop
1. The following sources were used in writing this day’s entry: Bo Burlingham,“This
Woman Has Changed Business Forever,” Inc.com, June1990, http://inc.com/mag-
azine/19900601/5201.html; Beth Carney, “Toning Up The Body Shop,” Business
Week Online, 18 May 2005, http://www.businessweek.com/bwdaily/dnflash/
may2005/nf20050518_6631_db016.htm?chan=search.
Day 13: More Than an Oracle
1. The following sources were used in writing this day’s entry: Monica Langley, “In
Tough Times for CEOs, They Head to Warren Buffet’s Table,” Wall Street Journal,
1 November 14, 2003; Susan Pulliam and Karen Richardson, “Warren Buffett
Unplugged,” Wall Street Journal, weekend edition, 12–13 November 2005;
Anthony Bianco,“The Warren Buffett You Don’t Know,”Business Week Online, 15
July 1999,
http://www.businessweek.com/1999/99_27/b3636001.htm?script
Framed; Carol Loomis, “The Value Machine,” Fortune, 20 February 2001,
www.fortune.com/fortune/subs/print/0,15935,373944,00.html; Andy Serwer,
“The 
Oracle 
of
Everything,”
Fortune 
Online,
27 
October 
2002,
http://fortune.com/subs/print/0,15935,389954,00.html; also see the Berkshire
Hathaway’s Owner’s Manual, http://www.berkshirehathaway.com.
Day 14: Ritz-Carlton Character and Culture
1. The following sources were used in writing this day’s entry: Author’s conversa-
tions with and e-mails from Ritz-Carlton employees; http://www.ritzcarlton.com;
Matt Damsker, “Putting on the Ritz,” HR Innovator, March 2004, 37–43.
Day 15: Peter Drucker’s Kind of Leader
1. The following sources were used in writing this day’s entry: John A. Byrne,
“Profiting from the Nonprofits,” Business Week, 26 March 1990, 66–74; Sally
Helgesen, The Female Advantage: Women’s Ways of Leadership (New York:
NOTES
215

Doubleday, 1995), 71–103; Ani Hadjian, “Follow the Leader,” Fortune, 27
November 1995, 96; Frances Hesselbein, “The Power of Civility,” Leader to Leader
5 (Summer 1997), http:www.leadertoleader.org/leaderbooks/121/summer97/
fh.htl.
Week 4
Day 16: Dr. Fred’s INN
1. Fred Epstein, M.D., and Joshua Horwitz, If I Get to Five: What Children Can Teach
Us About Courage and Character (New York: Henry Holt, 2003).
Day 17: Purpose-Driven Pastor
1. Gladwell, “The Cellular Church,” 60–67.
Day 18: Patriot Playbook
1. The following sources were used in writing this day’s entry: Judy Battista,“Patriots
Adhere to Bottom Line to Stay on Top,” New York Times, 8 August 2004; Charles
Stein, “Bill Belichick CEO,” Boston Globe, 28 January 2004; Alex Timiraos, “Pat’s
Coach Talks Leadership at BC,” The Heights, 9 April 2004; Terry McDonell,
“Quality of Effort,” Sports Illustrated, 12 December 2005, 11; Charles P. Pierce,
“The Ultimate Teammate,” Sports Illustrated, 12 December 2005, 76–84.
Day 19: High-Five Moments
1. The following sources were used in writing this day’s entry: Julie Bick,“Inside the
Smartest Little Company in America,” Inc., January 2002, http://inc.com/maga-
zine/20020101/23798.html; Clive Thompson, “The Play’s the Thing,” New York
Times Magazine, 28 November 2004;“The Cranium Story: From Personal Mission
to Global Movement,” http://www.cranium.com; Paula Bock, “Playing for Fun
and Profit,”Seattle Times, 26 May 2006; Stephanie Dunnewind,“Seattle’s Cranium
Is Winning Awards with Innovative, Entertaining Play for All Ages,” Seattle Times,
28 February 2004; Bruce Horovitz, “Cranium Guys Have Their Inner Child on
Speed Dial,” USA Today, 8 May 2006.
Day 20: Transforming the Culture of Kim
1. The following sources were used in writing this day’s entry: Cynthia Coulson,
“Kim Jeffery’s Nestlé Waters Bottles Water Values,” Greenwich Magazine, January
2003, 72–86; also see information at http://www.nestle-watersna.com.
Conclusion: Build a Fire That Lasts
1. McCullough, Brave Companions: Portraits in History (New York: Simon &
Schuster), xiv.
2. John Wooden with Steve Jamison, Wooden: A Lifetime of Observations and
Reflections On and Off the Court (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997), 197.
3. Walton, “John Wooden, Like UCLA, Simply the Best.”
4. Focus on the Family, 2004, “Coach Wooden: Timeless Wisdom,” CD-ROM.
5. Arie de Geus, “The Living Company,” Harvard Business Review (March–April
1997): 51–59.
6. Bill Thrall, Bruce McNichol, and Ken McElrath, The Ascent of a Leader: How 
NOTES
216

NOTES
217
Extraordinary Relationships Develop Extraordinary Character and Influence (San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1999), 17.
7. Dr. J. Robert Clinton, “Listen Up Leaders! Forewarned Is Forearmed!” unpub-
lished study, 1992. E-mail Dr. Clinton at JRClinton@aol.com to request a copy.
8. Diane L. Coutu, “Putting Leaders on the Couch: A Conversation with Manfred F.
R. Kets de Vries,” Harvard Business Review (January 2004): 65–71.
9. WorldofQuotes.com, http://www.worldofquotes.com/author/EdmundBurke/1.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
First, I want to acknowledge the contributions of my coauthors
Carolyn Dewing-Hommes and Jason Pankau. Over the course of
several years of ongoing research and writing, the three of us met
most weeks to discuss our work. Their contributions were invalu-
able. So much so, in fact, that after a certain point I asked them to
be coauthors. Other invaluable contributions came from Katie
Stallard. Her thoughts about how to better communicate our ideas
are reflected throughout this book.
While I was researching and writing this book, my wife,
Katie, was treated for two different types of cancer. Throughout
those periods, our family, friends, and health-care professionals
provided tremendous support and encouragement. As I write in
the Introduction, their connecting with us helped us make it
through a challenging season. No words can express our grati-
tude for their love and support.
Many thanks also go to Don Pape and Alive Communications
who brought our book proposal to Nelson Business. I am grateful
to Brian Hampton at Nelson Business for believing in our book
and assigning it to a talented editor, Bryan Norman. Bryan has
become a trusted advisor and friend. His insights, suggestions,
enthusiasm, and encouragement helped me persevere through the
hard work and long hours to make a book on a complex subject
more understandable and accessible to readers. Paula Major and
Dimples Kellogg also made significant improvements to the book
throughout the copyediting stage, and I thank them for their
contributions.
A book of this sort is to some degree a community project.
Carolyn, Jason, and I owe our thanks to those who shared their
218

experiences and insights with us or otherwise encouraged and sup-
ported us on our journey to write this book. They include Susan
Baisley, Mike Barriere, Hillary Bercovici, Rick Bibb, James Bliss,
Bob Boiarsky, Camille Broderick, Barbara Casey, Deanna
Castellini, Dorothea Cernera, Steve Cohen, Chris Combe, Eric
Cooper, Ian Cron, Robbie de Villiers, Mitchell Dickey, Rich Ditizio,
Matthew Ericksen, Mike Flatley, John Frelinghuysen, Gregory
Furman, Tom Gavin, John Gration, Jerry Gerber, Beth Goldstein,
Dr. Edward Hallowell, Lucy Hedrick, Frances Hesselbein, Carl
Higbie, Vicki Ho, Linda Houston, Elmer and Esther Huh, Mark
Hutchinson, Richard and Sandy Humphrey, Michelle Ian, J.
Pendleton James, Cliff Johnson, Rasheed Kahn, Richard and Leslie
Kaskel, Jennifer Kish, Steve Kerr,Walter Klores, Michael Kostoff, Ed
Lengel, Chip Low, Mark Linsz, Rick Lyons, Tim Mackenzie, Regina
Fazio Maruca, Rob Mathes and family, Dennis McDonnell, Sarah
Meehan, Bruce McNichol, Jack Mitchell, William Molinari, Andrea
Mueller, Richard and Wendy Murphy, David Myers, Michelle
Newton, Joey Pierce, Joe Pine, Russell Reynolds, Jr., Wes Roberts,
Kurt Reisenberg, Alex Rohman, Adam Rosenberg, Ken Runkel,
Cecylia Rutkowska, Larry Sands, Matthew Sawyer, Marco Selva,
Paul D. Speer Jr., Joseph Stallard, John Straus, Mark Taylor, Richard
Tanaka and family, Khiem Ting, Elizabeth Toohey, Neely Towe,
Dan Waters, Tom Wells, Stephanie Whittier, Sean Witty, Keith
Vanderveen, and the staff of Greenwich Library.
I personally would like to thank my wife,Katie,and our daugh-
ters, Sarah and Elizabeth. I would also like to thank Clayton
Dahlman, Dr. Holly Dahlman, Bunny and John Harrison, Russ and
Dorothy Hufstedler, Henry and Barbara Price, Robert Stallard, and
Timothy Stallard.
Carolyn would like to thank her husband, Mark, for his
never-ending support and his honest feedback over the years.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
219

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
220
Also, she would like to thank her three children, Jessica, Daniel,
and Catherine, for their patience and opinions all along the way.
Jason personally would like to thank his wife, Jennifer, and
their children, Jarod, Jaden, Julianne, and Josephine. He would
also like to thank Stanwich Congregational Church.

221
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Michael Lee Stallard is the founder of E Pluribus Partners.
Previously, he was managing director and chief marketing officer
for the US Trust Company, and principal, chief marketing officer
at the global private wealth management business of Morgan
Stanley. The team he assembled and led at Morgan Stanley con-
tributed to doubling the business unit’s revenues over a two-year
period. Earlier in his career, Michael gained broad business expe-
rience in marketing, finance, and business development-related
positions at Texas Instruments, Van Kampen Merritt, and
Barclays Bank, PLC.
Recognized as a thought leader in marketing and engaging
people on the front lines of a business, Michael has spoken at var-
ious organizations, including conferences organized by Fortune
magazine, the World Presidents’ Organization, the American
Bankers Association, the Corporate Executive Board’s VIP
Forum, and the Investment Company Institute. Along with his
colleagues Carolyn Dewing-Hommes and Jason Pankau, he was a
contributor to What Managers Say, What Employees Hear:
Connecting with Your Front Line (So They’ll Connect with
Customers), edited by Regina Maruca, a former senior editor of
Harvard Business Review.
Michael received a BS degree in marketing from Illinois State
University, an MBA from the University of Texas (Permian Basin),
and a JD from DePaul University Law School. He was admitted to
the Illinois bar in 1991.
Carolyn Dewing-Hommes, cofounder and partner at E
Pluribus Partners, spent fifteen years at Citibank working in New
York City, Sao Paulo, London, and Hong Kong. She was selected to
lead a global team, reporting to Citibank’s CEO, which identified

ABOUT THE AUTHORS
222
the best practices of companies worldwide that successfully engaged
their employees, specifically in the area of work/life balance. She
received a BA in political science and languages from Georgetown
University and a master’s degree in economics and international
affairs from Columbia University.
Jason Pankau, a cofounder and partner at E Pluribus Partners,
is president of Lifespring Network, served as an associate pastor at
Stanwich Congregational Church in Greenwich, Connecticut,
where he focused on mentoring and leadership development. He
was involved in starting two churches in Providence and Boston.
He serves as a consultant and life coach to many corporate execu-
tives and pastors. He is sought as a speaker by organizations for his
wisdom in teaching leadership and mentoring leaders. Jason
earned a BS from Brown University in business economics and
organizational behavior/management. Jason earned a Master of
Divinity from Southern Theological Seminary. He is presently
completing a doctorate degree in Christian leadership at Gordon-
Conwell Theological Seminary.
E PLURIBUS PARTNERS
E Pluribus Partners is a Greenwich, Connecticut-based think tank
focused on helping bring about greater connection among man-
agement, employees, and customers. The organization’s name was
derived from the motto of America, E Pluribus Unum, created by
John Adams, Benjamin Franklin, and Thomas Jefferson. It means
in Latin, “out of many, one.” More information about E Pluribus
Partners can be found at www.epluribuspartners.com.

Abdul-Jabbar, Kareem, 27-28
Adams, John, 126, 148
Alexander, Hamilton, 158
Ambrose, Stephen, Rhino tank and, 94
American Paradox, xvii
Apple Computer Company, 17, 47
Arabia, cost of isolationism, 95-96
Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics and, 12
Ascent of a Leader, The, 199
Aspen Institute, 2004 corporate behavior 
study, 119-20
Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin,
The, 123
balance, work/life. See workplace
connection, balance work/life
Belichick, Bill (New England Patriots),
185-88
human value, 187
identity inspiring, 186
knowledge flow, 187
Bennis, Warren, 44
Organizing Genius, 44
Biederman, Patricia Ward, 44
Organizing Genius, 44
Blair, Jayson, plagiarism, 32-34
Bradley, General Omar, 93-94, 97
Rhino tank and, 94, 97
Soldier’s Story, A, 93-94
Brady, Tom (New England Patriots),
185-88
human value, 186-87
identity inspiring, 187
knowledge flow, 187
Brooks, David, xix, 51-52
On Paradise Drive, 51
“Paradise Spell,” 52
Buffett, Warren (Berkshire Hathaway),
169-71
human value, 170, 171
identity inspiring, 171
knowledge flow, 171
Burke, Edmund, 201
Burns, James MacGregor, on Frederick 
the Great, 156
Caesar, Julius, 84
Catholic Church,
devil’s advocate, 90
knowledge flow, 89-90
Challenger Launch Decision, The, 90
Challenger, the
knowledge-flow failure, 90
O-Rings, 90
character
development in young, 119
importance in business 
See also connector categories,
intentional connector
Character Connection Thrive Chain,
The, 21
diagram, 119
Character Strengths and Virtues: A 
Handbook andClassification, 123
Charles Schwab Company, Schweb and,
107
Chesterton, G. K. (personal conflict), 117
China, cost of early isolationism, 95
Churchill, Winston
knowledge flow, 89-90, 97
Civil Rights Act of 1964, 56
Clicks and Mortar, 56
Columbia, The,
knowledge-flow failure, 91
Commager, Henry Steele (on George 
Washington), 157
connection, workplace. See workplace
connection
223
INDEX

connection formula, 21-23
connector, intentional. See connector
categories
connector categories
intentional connector, 114-15,
118-30, 201-2
intentional disconnector, 109, 113, 115
unintentional disconnector, 109,
113-14, 115
conscience, 122
24 character strengths, 122, 129
Corporate Executive Board (connection) 
study, 4, 195
Corporate Leadership Council, xxi
corporation, definition, 39
Crash (movie), 117
Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly, 77-78
“flow” studies, 78
Cullen, Sergeant Curtis G., 93, 97
Rhino tank, 93, 97
Daly, Daniel, US Marines Medal of
Honor, 54-55
de Rochambeau, Count, and Marquis de 
Lafayette, 133
decentralization. See decision-making,
decentralized
decision-making, 58
decentralized, 79-80
democratic, 105-6
hierarchy, 105-6 
See also workplace connection,
knowledge flow
DeLong, Thomas, employee categories, 37
Demosthenes, 87
Diedner, Ed,“positive psychology,” 122
Dilbert, 13
disconnection, employee and.
See workplace disconnection
disconnector, intentional. See
connector categories
disconnector, unintentional.
See connector categories
disengagement, employee. See
workplace disconnection
disinterest, employee. See workplace
disconnection
diversity, advice, 102-3, 107
Drucker, Peter, 70
on Frances Hesselbein, 176-77
“informed dissent,” 101-102
Dun and Bradstreet, 19
Dunlap,“Chainsaw” Al (Sunbeam 
Corporation), 112, 198
Dychtwald, Ken, et al., 5-6
“It’s Time to Retire Retirement,” 5
E Pluribus Partners, xix
multi-year study, xiii
economic success in America, 64
Edison, Thomas, on failure, 103
Einstein, Albert, atomic bomb,
44-46
Eisenhower, Dwight D., 84-85
Elizabeth I, 151-54
Cecil, Sir William, 124
human value, 153
inspiring identity, 151-54
knowledge flow, 154
employee, firing, 72
employee, fitness, 57
employee, types. See connector 
categories
Employment Policy Foundation, on 
shortage of labor, 5
Epstein, Dr. Fred (pediatric
neurosurgeon), 179-82
human value, 180-82
identity inspiring, 180, 182
If I Get to Five, 179
Institute for Neurology and 
Neurosurgery, 180
knowledge flow, 182
failure, employee, 57-58
Fermi, Enrico, and atomic bomb, 44-46
INDEX
224

Feynman, Richard
atomic bomb, 44-46, 50
character, 118
firing, employee, 72
fitness, employee, 57
Frankl, Dr. Victor, 49-50
Man’s Search for Meaning, 49
Franklin, Benjamin
Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin,
123
character development and, 123
knowledge flow and, 88-89
Frappuccino, as employee invention,
94-95
Frederick the Great, 154-56, 196
human value, 155, 156
inspiring identity, 155, 156
isolation, 125
knowledge flow, 155, 156
Freud, Sigmund (personal conflict), 117
fun, for employee, 57
Gallup Organization, xiv-xv
Q-12 study, 3-4
workplace disconnection studies, 3-4,
7, 195
Gardner, Hugh, multiple intelligence
theory, 189
Gault, Stan (Rubbermaid Corporation), 70
George III (poor management), 61-62
Goldsmith, Sir James (corporate raider), 70
Goodwin, Doris Kearns (on Roosevelt), 89
Goodyear Rubber and Tire Company, 70
Grove, Andrew (Intel Corporation), 71,
85-86, 97, 102
constructive confrontation, 86-87
Only the Paranoid Survive, 86-87
Swimming Across, 86
Groves, Brigadier General Leslie, atomic 
bomb, 44-46
Hallowell, Edward (on CEOs), 9
Henry V, 48
speech at Battle of Agincourt, 47-50
Henry, Patrick, Liberty or Death 
(speech), 56
Hesselbein, Frances (Girl Scouts USA),
176-77, 198
human value, 177, 178
identity inspiring, 176-77, 178
knowledge flow, 177, 178
Hug Your Customers: The Proven Way to 
Personalize Sales and Achieve
Astounding Results, 148
human value. See workplace connection,
human value
Hume, David, knowledge flow, 88
idea-sharing. See workplace connection,
knowledge flow
If I Get to Five: What Children Can Teach 
Us About Courage and 
Character, 179
inspiration, employee. See motivation,
employee
integrity. See workplace connection,
fostering
Intranet (employee), 76, 100-101, 107
It’s Time to Retire Retirement, 5-6
Jackson, Phil (Chicago Bulls), 138-41
career record, 141
human value, 139
inspiring identity, 139-40
knowledge flow, 139
and Michael Jordan, 138-41
Phoenix Suns 1993 match, 140
Sacred Hoops, 139
Jager, Durk (Proctor & Gamble), 82
Jefferson, Thomas, 32, 158
knowledge flow, 88
jetBlue (airline), 18-19, 75
Jobs, Steven (as motivator), 17, 56, 118
Jordan, Michael. See Jackson, Phil
Katzenbach Partners, categorizing 
employees, 37
Kerr, Steve (Chicago Bulls), 140
INDEX
225

Kets de Vries, Manfred F. R. (Global 
Leadership Centre), on CEOs, 199
Kim, Jeffrey (Nestle Waters North 
America), 191-94
human value, 193, 194
identity inspiring, 192, 194
knowledge flow, 194
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 56, 196
“I Have a Dream” (speech), 56, 196
“Letter from Birmingham Jail”
(speech), 56
Kipling, Rudyard, 140
Second Jungle Book, The, 140
knowledge flow, chart, 100
labor
baby boom, 7-8
cultures, xv-xvi, 5
shortage effects, 5, 7-8
Lafayette, Marquis de, 132-35
American Revolutionary War, 132-34
human value, 134
identity inspiring, 134
John Hancock’s view, 133
knowledge flow, 134
Lafley, AG (Proctor and Gamble), 20, 70,
82-83
character, 119
Lane, Robert, xviii
Loss of Happiness in Market 
Democracies, The, xviii
leadership (business). See workplace
connection, leadership quality
Lee, General Robert E., 159-61
Confederate surrender, 159-60
human value, 160
Lengel, Richard C. (on George 
Washington), 157
Lincoln, Abraham
character development, 124
Confederate surrender, 160
Lincoln’s Virtues, 124
Loren, Allan (Dun & Bradstreet), 19
Loss of Happiness in Market 
Democracies, The, xviii
Lucent Corporation, loss to Nortel, 90
Lusitania, intelligence failure, 91
Machiavelli, Nicolo (on dissention), 103
Man’s Search for Meaning, 49
management. See workplace connection,
leadership quality
Manhattan Project, 44-46, 118
Marshall, George C., 142-46 
and General Pershing, 144
human value, 143
inspiring identity, 146
knowledge flow, 143-45
Marshall Plan, The, 144
military brilliance, 141-43
Nobel Peace Prize, 1953, 144
Saving Private Ryan (movie), 144
US presidents, 144-45
and Winston Churchill, 142
Marshall Plan. See Marshall, George C.
Maslow, Abraham, 11-12
deficit need theory, 12
McCullough, David, 195-96
on Harriet Beecher Stowe, 162
on John Adams, 126
McKinsey & Company, knowledge 
flow, 101
meaning (USS Montpelier chart), 57-59
meaningfulness, employment.
See workplace connection, fostering
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center,
xvi, 17, 47
Miller, William Lee, 124
Lincoln’s Virtues, 124
mistakes, employee, 57-58
Mitchell, Bob (Mitchells, Richards,
Marshs), 149
Mitchell, Ed (Mitchells, Richards,
Marshs), 148
INDEX
226

Mitchell, Jack (Mitchells, Richards,
Marshs), 19, 148
Hug Your Customers, 148
Mitchell, Russ (Mitchells, Richards,
Marshs), 149
Mitchells, Richards, Marshs, 19, 147-50
inspiring identity, 148
human value, 148-49
knowledge flow, 149-50
Montezuma, poor knowledge flow, 90
motivation, employee, xiii, 48-49 
left-brain management, xxi
micromanagement, 13, 67-70
right-brain management, xxi 
See also workplace connection,
fostering
Mulcahy, Anne (Xerox Corporation),
135-38
human value, 136
inspiring identity, 138
knowledge flow, 136-37
Myers, David, xviii
American Paradox, xviii
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator, xxi
Napoleon, micromanagement, 67-68, 69, 80
Neeleman, David (jetBlue Airlines), 8, 75
character, 118
Neustadt, Richard (on George 
Washington), 157
Nicholas, Nick (on Anne Mulcahy), 137-38
Nicomachean Ethics, 12
9/11, intelligence failure, 91
O’Neill, Paul (New York Yankees), 66-67
Office Space (movie), 13
Office, The (show), 13
On Paradise Drive, 51
Oppenhemer, J. Robert, atomic bomb, 44-46
Organizing Genius, 44
orientation, employees. See workplace 
connection, orientation
Paine, Thomas, 56
Common Sense (pamphlet), 56
Paxson, John (Chicago Bulls), 140
Pearl Harbor, intelligence failure, 91
Pixar University, xiii
Pottruck, David (Charles Schwab), 56
Clicks and Mortar, 56
Pour Your Heart Into It, 56, 165
power (business), abuse, 19, 33
Proctor & Gamble, 20-21
promotion, employee. See rewards,
employee
Public Agenda 1999 survey, 119
public speaking (to employees), 56
Pullman Palace Car Company, 68-69
Pullman, George, micromanagement,
68-69, 80
Purpose Driven Life, The, 183-84
purpose, employee sense. See workplace 
connection, identity
Radicalism of the American Revolution,
The, 63-64
Raines, Howell (New York Times),
31, 198
comparison with John Wooden,
34-35, 123
and Grady Hutchinson, 33
management style of, 32
reading, and character development,
126-27
Regan, Donald (Merrill Lynch), 106
Reinemund, Steve (PepsiCo 
Corporation), 125
Relational-Cultural Theory, 10
respect. See self-esteem
rewards, employee commensurate,
39-40, 123
core (employees), 37-38
promotion, 127-28
star (employees), 37-38, 138-39 
See also motivation, employee
INDEX
227

Ritz-Carlton Hotel Company, 127, 172-74
“Daily Lineup,” 174
employee assessment, 127
employee selection, 172-73
human value, 174-75
identity inspiring, 175-76
knowledge flow, 175
Robespierre, Maximilien, 84
Roddick, Dame Anita (The Body Shop),
166-68
human value, 168
identity inspiring, 167-69
knowledge flow, 169
Roosevelt, Franklin Delano,
17-18, 142, 158
atomic bomb and, 44-45
character flaws, 116
knowledge flow, 89, 97
work breaks, 80
Rubbermaid Corporation, 70
Sacred Hoops, 139
Santulli, Rich (NetJets), on Warren 
Buffett, 171
Schachter, Ed (Richards Clothing), 149
Schama, Simon (on Henry V), 47
Schlesinger, Arthur M. , Jr. (on 
Lafayette), 133
Schultz, Howard (Starbucks), 56, 164-66
character, 119
human value, 165, 166
identity inspiring, 166
knowledge flow, 165, 166
Pour Your Heart Into It (book), 56, 165
Schwab, Charles, 17 
Second Jungle Book, The, 140
Secondat, Baron Charles-Louis de
governance of nations, 124
Spirit of the Laws, The, 124 
self-esteem, 11-14, 40
See also Maslow, Abraham
Seligman, Martin, 122-23
Character Strengths and Virtues, 123
severance pay, 53
Sewell Automotive, 19
Sewell, Carl (Sewell Automotive), 19
Six Sigma, task excellence, 36
sleep, employee, 57
Sloan, Alfred P. (General Motors 
Corporation), 79
Social Network Analysis, 128, 129
Soldier’s Story, A, 93-94
Solomon (knowledge flow), 88
Stanton, Mike (New York Yankees), 67
Stengel, Jim (P&G), 82
Stephenson, Karen (on networking), 128
Stephenson, Sue (Ritz-Carlton Hotel),
173-74
Stimson, Senator Henry (on George C.
Marshall), 142
Stowe, Harriett Beecher, 118, 126, 162-63
Uncle Tom’s Cabin, 162
inspiring identity, 163
surveys, employee satisfaction, 19, 127
Tait, Richard, 188-91
and Alexander Whit, 188
Cranium (game), 188-91
human value, 190
identity inspiring, 191
knowledge flow, 190
Starbucks, 188
team work, workplace. See workplace
connection
“Theory of Human Motivation, A,”
11-12
Thrall, Bill, et al., 199
Ascent of a Leader, The, 199
Torre, Joe (New York Yankees), 66-67, 80
Truman, Harry S (on George C.
Marshall), 142
Twain, Mark, 91
Uncle Tom’s Cabin, 162
INDEX
228

Unger, Harlow Giles (on Lafayette),
134-35
United States Bureau of Labor Statistics,
labor shortage, 5
United States Marine Corps, 39, 47, 54
McKinsey & Company/Conference 
Board study, 39, 54
motivation, 54-55
USS Montpelier Command Philosophy,
56-60
value
business, 18-19
human. See workplace connection,
human value
Vaughan, Diane, 90
Challenger Launch Decision, 90
Vijayaraghavan, Vineeta, employee
categories, 37
vision (business), 17
voice (business), 20-21
Voltaire (on Frederick the Great), 156
Walker, Clarence (Indiana State
basketball), 25-26
Walton, Bill, 27, 28, 29
on John Wooden, 196-97
Warren, Pastor Rick, 182-85
human value, 184
identity inspiring, 184
knowledge flow, 184
Purpose Driven Life, The, 183-84
Washington, George, 132, 157-59, 198 
human value, 157-59
inspiring identity, 158, 159
knowledge flow, 88, 97, 158, 159
Rules of Civility, 123, 157
Welch, Jack (General Electric), 71-72
Whit, Alexander, 188-91
Cranium (game), 188-91
human value, 190
identity inspiring, 191
knowledge flow, 190
and Richard Tait, 188
Starbucks and, 188
Wicks, Sidney (UCLA basketball), 29
Wood, Gordon, 63
Radicalism of the American 
Revolution, 63-64
Wooden, John Robert (UCLA Bruins),
24-30, 34-35, 53, 186, 196, 198
achievements, 26
comparison with Howell Raines, 34-35
management style of, 29, 53
praise for, 26-30
Pyramid of Success and, 27
success, definition of, 53
UCLA and, 34
workplace connection
advantages, xviii-xxiii
balance, work/life, 57, 78-79
challenges and, 52-53
culture of, 16-35, 103-104
decision-making, 78-79
definition, 2-3
failure-handling, 104
fostering, 16-35, 40-41, 44-61
human value, 53, 58, 62-74, 75-81
identity, 44-50, 53, 55-61
importance, 2-14, 195
information sessions, 99-107
innovation, 50-52, 104
job fit, 77-78, 127
knowledge flow, 82-98, 99-107, 128
leadership quality and, 24-34, 56-61,
66-74, 78-79, 101-103, 109
neuroscience, 9-15, 121-22
orientation, 54
psycho-social science, 15
reviewing, 7-8
social network importance, 128 
teamwork, 53, 57 
See also connector categories and
workplace disconnection
INDEX
229

workplace disconnection
anxiety, 78
blind spots, 123-25
criticism, 66-67
culture of silence, 90
effects, 4-5, 9-10, 31-35, 40-41, 111-12
false pre-conceptions, 90, 97
inequality, 70
information hoarding, 84
rudeness, 65-66, 104
self-righteousness, 129-30
shaming, 53-54 
See also workplace connection
written materials (for employees), 56, 61
Zimmerman, Micha, 181
Kids Helping Kids Program, 181
INDEX
230



