FIT A TOILET AND BIDET 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
A good knowledge of plumbing techniques and some 
understanding of building construction would be an 
advantage. 
  
 
 
Be careful not to strain yourself whilst manoeuvring the 
appliances. Ensure that all metal pipes and fittings are cross-
bonded with 6mm2 sheathed earthing wire. Protective 
goggles and gloves may be needed at some stages. 
  
 
 
If you are changing your toilet, you may also want to 
consider re-styling the whole bathroom. 
  
Before taking any action, plan your new installation 
thoroughly. If you have only one toilet in the house, the 
work must be carried out efficiently to minimise the time 
that the amenities are unavailable. If you have any concerns 
about your own ability, ask professionals to carry out the 
work.  
 
2  - Removing the old WC 
Check all goods carefully prior to installation and before the 
old suite is disconnected. 
 
 
 
The first task is to remove the old pan and cistern. With the 
cold supply turned off, flush the toilet to empty the cistern. 
Use a sponge to soak up any surplus water left after 
flushing.  
 
 
 
Disconnect the supply pipe and overflow pipe from the 
cistern. If they are corroded, cut them free. Disconnect or 
cut away the flush pipe. Remove the cistern and any 
brackets fixed to the wall.  
 
 
 
Remove the screws holding the base of the pan to the floor. 
Chip out the old putty sealant or mortar from the soil-pipe 
joint, and work the pan free to remove it.  
 
 
 

If the joint cannot be freed, 
break the pan outlet with a 
hammer and lift the pan 
clear. If the pan is bonded to 
a concrete floor, use a cold 
chisel to free it. Stuff paper 
or old cloth in the pipe. 
Carefully chip out the 
remains of the china from t
soil pipe using the chisel (1).  
he 
 
 
 
Wear protective goggles and gloves during these operations. 
 
 
 
If a wooden floor shows signs of rot, cut out the damaged 
material and replace it with new flooring. Treat the new and 
surrounding wood with preservative.  
 
 
 
3 - Fitting a new close-coupled WC 
 
Toilet cisterns are supplied with a siphon kit and lever handle 
for self assembly (2). The cistern sometimes has two holes in 
the front to enable you to set the lever on the left or right-hand 
side.  
 
 

 
Check that the pan and cistern are level, and pack out as 
required. Mark the positions of the floor and wall fixings. Also 
mark the overflow position. 
 
Assemble the siphon and lever mechanism, following the 
manufacturer's instructions.  
 
Fit the cistern to the pan, using the assembly kit provided with 
the WC. Do not overtighten the fixings.  
 
 
Use a push-fit flexible connector to join the new pan to the soil 
pipe. These are available in straight, off-set, angled and bent 
forms to fit different installations (3a and 3b).  
 
 

 
 
 
Place the WC in the position required to suit the type of 
connector you will need.  
 
 
Push the connector onto the pan outlet, then push the pan into 
position with the connector firmly pressed into the soil pipe.  
 
 
Use a silicone-grease lubricant to make fitting easier.  
 
 
Remove the assembly, then drill 
and plug the wall-fixing holes 
(4). Also drill a hole for the 
21mm (3/4in) overflow pipe, 
allowing for a fall to the outside. 
 
 
For solvent-welded wastepipe joints, use the solvent supplied by
the pipe manufacturer to ensure compatibility. 
 
Refit the assembly and check it is level. Fix the cistern and pan 
with brass screws and flexible washers.  
 
 
Do not use a cement mortar to embed the pan, as this can 
cause stress-cracking in the china.  
 
 
Fit an isolating valve in the water-supply pipe and connect the 
pipe to the float-valve tail with a tap connector.  
 
 
Cut and fit the new overflow pipe, using a connector and elbow 
as required. The end of the overflow should extend beyond the 
face of the wall by at least 100mm (4in).  

 
 
Fit the toilet seat and cover and adjust the fittings to allow the 
urn on the water supply and check the water level in the 
 
nless you are experienced with electrical installations, ask an 
 - Fitting a bidet 
 bidet is relatively straightforward, 
seat to stay up when open.  
 
 
T
cistern - it should be about 25mm (1in) below the overflow
outlet. Adjust the float arm if necessary.  
 
 
U
electrician to fit supplementary bonding to all metal fittings and 
pipework.  
 
 
4 
itting an over-rim supply
F
as the supply and waste plumbing is much the same as for a 
washbasin. Fit the bowl in a similar way to a toilet pan.  
 
 
 
The plumbing for the rim supply type of bidet is more 
 
 - Supply pipes and waste pipes 
ipes.  
ou can use copper supply pipes, connected with soldered or
complicated and is best fitted by a plumber, as it must
comply with water bylaws. 
 
5 
idets are fitted with 12mm (1/2in) taps and p
B
 
 
 
Y
 
compression joints, or plastic pipes that are usually 
connected with push-fit joints. Adapter couplings are
available to join pipes of different materials and sizes.
 
 
 
  
lways follow tap manufacturers' instructions when 
quire 
 
lastic pipe is used for wastes: 32mm (11/4in) for bidets; 
 
 
 
A
connecting supply pipes, as some tap installations re
check valves to be fitted.  
 
 
P
and 21mm (3/4in) for overflows. Solvent-welded joints, 
push-fit connectors or compression joints are used to join
plastic wastepipes.  
 
 

Unless you are connecting to 
existing wastepipes, new 
bidet wastes should be 
connected to a soil-stack w
boss fittings (5).  
ith 
dding-
 
 
 
If a trap cannot be removed 
to provide access to the 
wastepipe, include a ro
eye fitting so that any 
blockages can be cleared (6). 
 

