FIT A BATH AND WASH 
BASIN  
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
A good knowledge of plumbing techniques and some 
understanding of building construction would be an 
advantage. 
  
 
 
Be careful not to strain yourself whilst manoeuvring the 
appliances. Ensure that all metal pipes and fittings are cross-
bonded with 6mm squared sheathed earthing wire. 
Protective goggles, gloves and ear defenders may be needed
for some operations. 
  
 
 
Changing your bath and washbasin gives you the ideal 
opportunity to re-style your whole bathroom. 
  
Plan your new installation thoroughly. If you only have one 
bathroom in the house, the work must be carried out 
efficiently to minimise the time that the amenities are 
unavailable. If you have any concerns, ask professionals to 
carry out the work. The methods described here refer to the 
separate removal and installation of each fitting. However, in
practice it is more convenient to strip out the room first, 
then carry out the new installation. 
 
2  - Preparing the room 
Clear the room of all storage units and fixtures, such as 
towel rails and blinds. If the bath has a shower screen, 
remove it. Take up carpeting, but leave sheet vinyl in place 
until all the fittings have been removed. If you plan to install 
new lighting or an extractor fan, make the alterations at this 
stage.  
 
 
 
The bath and basin are connected to the plumbing by water-
supply pipes and wastepipes. These pipes must be 
disconnected before the fittings can be removed. First shut 
off the hot and cold supply.  
 
 
 
If your house has old lead pipes, make the most of this 
opportunity and ask a plumber to replace them with copper 
or plastic plumbing.  
 
3  - Removing the old bath 
Remove the bath panels to reveal the plumbing. Open the 
taps to drain them, then disconnect the supply pipes. Place a
shallow bowl under the bath trap to catch the water, then 
disconnect the wastepipe.  
 
 
 
If the connectors cannot be unscrewed, saw through the 

pipes. Also, cut through the old bath overflow.  
 
 
 
If the bath has been sealed against the wall with flexible 
sealant, cut through this with a craft knife. Pull the bath out 
from the walls. If the bath has adjustable feet, it may help 
to lower these first.  
 
 
 
Unless a heavy cast-iron bath is worth salvaging, it is easier 
to move it by first breaking it up into manageable pieces. 
Cover the bath with an old blanket and strike it with a club 
hammer. Protective goggles, gloves and ear defenders 
should be worn during this operation.  
 
 
 
Once the bath has been removed, extract the old overflow 
pipe from the wall and repair the hole with mortar and 
plaster. Also, remove old wall tiles and prepare the walls for 
retiling.  
 
 
 
When applying new wall tiles, measure out and cut a groove 
in the plaster to inset the rim of the bath. This ensures a 
good waterproof joint.  
 
4  - Fitting the new bath 
Before fixing a new bath or its panels, remove the protective 
covering and check thoroughly for damage or colour faults. Any 
claims made after the bath is fitted will not be accepted by the 
manufacturer.  
 
 
To add stiffness, most moulded plastic baths have a baseboard 
bonded underneath and a wooden frame bonded beneath the 
rim. A cradle kit is usually supplied for self assembly. Following 
the manufacturer's instructions, fit the cradle legs to the frame 
and baseboard. Also fit the centre support leg, if supplied (1).  
 
 

 
 
Attach the wall-fixing brackets to the underside of the rim-
support frame. Fit hand grip(s) to the rim if supplied.  
 
 
Set the bath upright and fit individual hot and cold taps or a 
mixer-tap set. Attach flexible connecting pipes to the tap tails - 
this allows for any misalignment when you connect up with the 
supply pipes.  
 
 
Fit the overflow outlet and waste 
outlet into the bath. Connect 
them with a combined waste-
and-overflow unit that 
incorporates a deep-seal trap 
(2).  
 
 
Place the bath in the required position and adjust the screw feet 
to set the height and level of the rim so that it can 
accommodate the side panels.  
 
When everything is in place, screw the brackets to the wall and 
the feet to the floor. Connect the supply and wastepipes (see 
below).  
 
 

Fit the bath panels according to 
the manufacturer's instructions 
(3). Use a fine-toothed saw to 
shape the panels around pipes o
to fit the skirting.  
r
 
 
If you are constructing your own bath panel, make it easy to 
remove, so that it provides simple access to plumbing and some
useful long-term storage.  
 
 
Once the walls have been tiled 
(4), waterproof the joint around 
the rim of the bath with silicone 
sealant.  
 
 
After using an acrylic bath, clean it while it is still warm, using 
soapy water. Then wipe it dry. Do not use organic solvents or 
abrasive cleaners. 
 
5 - Fitting a pedestal wash basin 
 
Disconnect the supply pipes from the old taps, using a 
cranked spanner to reach behind the basin. If this proves 
difficult, cut the pipes at a convenient level for connecting 
with the new flexible tap connectors.  
 
 
 
Unscrew the old basin fixings and lift clear. Remove 
supporting brackets from the wall or unscrew the pedestal 
base from the floor.  
 
 
 
Place the new basin on its pedestal base and position it 
against the wall. Mark the fixing points on the wall and floor. 
 
 
 

Drill and fit wall plugs on the 
marks (5). Just drill pilot 
holes for the screws when 
fixing to a wooden floor.  
 
 
 
Make any alterations to the 15mm (1/2in) supply pipes so 
they will be neatly concealed by the pedestal. Fit miniature 
in-line isolating valves for future servicing.  
 
 
 
Fit new taps and a waste outlet in the basin. Check that the 
tap spouts are correctly aligned. Do not over-tighten the 
back nuts. Fit flexible connection pipes to the tap tails. Then 
fit a 32mm (1.25in) waste trap to the waste outlet.  
 
 
 
When fitting taps to a rim made from a thin material (such 
as pressed steel), use a 'top-hat' spacer fitting placed under 
the back nut (6).  
 
 
 
Place the basin on its 
pedestal and fix it in place 
with brass screws. Connect 
the trap to the existing 3
(1.25in) wastepipe. If a new 
waste pipe is required in a 
different position, drill a 
clearance hole through the 
wall with a masonry core 
drill, and install a new pipe 
run (see next section).  
2mm
 
 
 
Connect the flexible tap connectors to the appropriate hot 
and cold supplies. Follow the manufacturer's instructions, as 
some taps require check valves to be fitted. Turn on the 
water supply to test the installation.  
 
 
 
Unless you are experienced with electrical installations, ask 
an electrician to fit supplementary bonding to all metal 
fittings and pipework.  
 
 

 
6  - Supply pipes and wastepipes 
Baths are fitted with 22mm (3/4in) taps and supply pipes; 
basins with 12mm (1/2in) taps and pipes. Monobloc mixer 
taps usually have 10mm (3/8in) tails, and a reducer is 
needed when connecting them to standard pipework.  
 
 
 
You can use copper supply pipes, connected with soldered or 
compression joints, or plastic pipes that are usually 
connected with push-fit joints. Adapter couplings are 
available to join pipes of different materials and sizes.  
 
 
 
Always follow tap manufacturers' instructions when 
connecting supply pipes, as some tap installations require 
check valves to be fitted.  
 
 
 
Plastic pipe is used for wastes: 40mm (1.5in) pipe for baths; 
32mm (1.25in) for washbasins; and 21mm (3/4in) for 
overflows. Solvent-welded joints, push-fit connectors or 
compression joints are used to join plastic wastepipes.  
 
 
 
Unless you are connecting to 
existing wastepipes, new 
bath and basin wastes sh
be connected to a soil-stac
with boss fittings (7).  
ould 
k 
g-
 
 
 
If a trap cannot be removed 
to provide access to the 
wastepipe, include a roddin
eye fitting so that any 
blockages can be cleared (8). 
 

