
W E L C O M E  T O…
Designed to support the way YOU learn and 
where you learn, MindTap is well beyond an 
eBook, assignments or digital supplement, 
a resource center website, a course delivery 
platform, or a Learning Management System. 
MindTap is the first in a new category—
The Personal Learning Experience. 
See for yourself.  
View a MindTap demo at 
www.cengage.com/mindtap.
“This thing is awesome. 
It’s very, very easy to use. 
Your book is right there 
and has easy tabs to go 
through. There are lots 
of extra functions on the 
side such as highlighting 
. . . note taking . . . it even 
reads to you!”
Chris Baggett
Student, Arkansas Tech University
It’s time to 
give YOU something fresh.
13M-AG0596
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Australia • Brazil • Mexico • Singapore • United Kingdom • United States
Werner W. K. Hoeger
Professor Emeritus (Active)
Department of Kinesiology
Boise State University
Sharon A. Hoeger
Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Boise, Idaho
fitness & 
wellness
E L E V E N T H  E D I T I O N
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
       This is an electronic version of the print textbook. Due to electronic rights restrictions,
some third party content may be suppressed. Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed 
content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. The publisher reserves the right 
to remove content from this title at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it. For
valuable information on pricing, previous editions, changes to current editions, and alternate 
formats, please visit www.cengage.com/highered to search by ISBN#, author, title, or keyword for 
materials in your areas of interest.

© 2015, 2013 Cengage Learning
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright  
herein may be reproduced, transmitted, stored, or used in any form  
or by any means, graphic, electronic, or mechanical, including but not  
limited to photocopying, recording, scanning, digitizing, taping, Web  
distribution, information networks, or information storage and retrieval  
systems, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976  
United States Copyright Act, without the prior written permission  
of the publisher.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2013952120
ISBN-13: 978-1-285-73315-9
ISBN-10: 1-285-73315-0
Cengage Learning 
200 First Stamford Place, 4th Floor 
Stamford, CT 06902 
USA
Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized learning solutions  
with office locations around the globe, including Singapore, the United  
Kingdom, Australia, Mexico, Brazil, and Japan. Locate your local office at  
www.cengage.com/global.
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by Nelson Education, Ltd.
To learn more about Cengage Learning Solutions, visit www.cengage.com.
Purchase any of our products at your local college store or at our  
preferred online store www.cengagebrain.com.
Fitness & Wellness, Eleventh Edition
Werner W. K. Hoeger and Sharon A. Hoeger
Product Director: Yolanda Cossio
Product Manager: Aileen Berg
Content Developer: Alexis Glubka
Content Coordinator: Kellie Petruzzelli
Product Assistant:  Chelsea Joy
Media Developer: Stefanie Beeck
Marketing Manager: Lindsy Lettre
Content Project Manager: Tanya Nigh
Art Director: John Walker
Manufacturing Planner: Karen Hunt
Rights Acquisitions Specialist:  
Dean Dauphinais
Production Service and Compositor: 
Graphic World Inc.
Photo and Text Researchers:  
PreMedia Global
Copy Editor: Graphic World Inc.
Illustrator: Graphic World Inc.
Text Designer: RHDZ/Graphic World Inc.
Cover Designer: Denise Davidson
Cover Image: Action Plus/Stone/ 
Getty Images
For product information and technology assistance, contact us at 
Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support, 1-800-354-9706.
For permission to use material from this text or product, submit all  
requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions. 
Further permissions questions can be e-mailed to 
permissionrequest@cengage.com.
Printed in Canada
1  2  3  4  5  6  7  1 7  1 6  1 5  1 4  1 3
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
WCN: 02-200-203

brief contents
CHAPTER 1
Introduction to Physical Fitness 
and Wellness 1
CHAPTER 2
Assessment of Physical 
Fitness 27
CHAPTER 3
Exercise Prescription 57
CHAPTER 4
Evaluating Fitness Activities 99
CHAPTER 5
Nutrition for Wellness 119
CHAPTER 6
Weight Management 147
CHAPTER 7
Stress Management 175
CHAPTER 8
A Healthy Lifestyle 
Approach 199
CHAPTER 9
Relevant Fitness and Wellness 
Issues 231
APPENDIX A: Strength-Training 
Exercises 264
APPENDIX B: Flexibility 
Exercises 272
APPENDIX C: Exercises for the 
Prevention and Rehabilitation of 
Low Back Pain 275
APPENDIX D: Contraindicated 
Exercises  278
APPENDIX E: Selective Nutrient 
Content of Common Foods 281
Notes 295
Answer Key 301
Glossary 302
Index 307
iii
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

v
CHAPTER 1
Introduction to Physical Fitness 
and Wellness 1
Lifestyle, Health, and Quality of Life 3
Importance of Increased Physical Activity 5
2008 Federal Guidelines for Physical Activity 6
Wellness 7
Physical Fitness 8
Health-Related Fitness 8
Skill-Related Fitness 8
Benefits of Physical Fitness 9
National Health Objectives for the Year 2020 12
The Path to Fitness and Wellness 13
Behavior Modification 13
Changing Behavior 14
Motivation and Locus of Control 17
Behavior Modification Principles 19
Self-Analysis 19
Behavior Analysis 19
Goal Setting 19
Social Support 19
Monitoring 19
A Positive Outlook 19
Reinforcement 20
SMART Goals 20
Goal Evaluation 21
A Word of Caution Before You Start Exercise 21
Assess Your Behavior 22
Assess Your Knowledge 22
contents
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
CHAPTER 2
Assessment of Physical 
Fitness 27
Responders Versus Nonresponders 29
Fitness Assessment Battery 29
Health Fitness Standard 29
Physical Fitness Standard 30
Cardiorespiratory Endurance 31
Assessing Cardiorespiratory Endurance 32
Muscular Fitness (Strength and Endurance) 34
Muscular Strength and Muscular Endurance 35
Determining Strength 35
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

vi   C O N T E N T S
Muscular Flexibility 39
Assessing Flexibility 40
Modified Sit-and-Reach Test 40
Finger Touch Test 40
Overall Flexibility Fitness 41
Body Composition 41
Assessing Body Composition 43
Effects of Exercise and Diet on Body Composition 50
Assess Your Behavior 50
Assess Your Knowledge 51
CHAPTER 3
Exercise Prescription 57
Monitoring Daily Physical Activity 58
Readiness for Exercise 60
Exercise Prescriptions 60
Cardiorespiratory Endurance 61
Cardiorespiratory Exercise Prescription 61
Muscular Fitness (Muscular Strength and Muscular 
Endurance) 66
Overload Principle 67
Specificity of Training 67
Muscular Strength-Training Prescription 68
Strength-Training Exercises 73
Strength-Training Exercise Guidelines 73
Core Strength Training 74
Designing Your Own Strength-Training Program 74
Dietary Recommendations for Strength 
Development 74
Flexibility 75
Muscular Flexibility Prescription 75
Designing a Flexibility Program 78
Pilates Exercise System 78
Preventing and Rehabilitating Low Back Pain 79
Effects of Posture 82
Effects of Stress 82
Contraindicated Exercises 82
Getting Started 82
Setting Fitness Goals 83
Assess Your Behavior 85
Assess Your Knowledge 85
CHAPTER 4
Evaluating Fitness Activities 99
Traditional Fitness Activities 100
Walking 100
Jogging 101
Deep-Water Jogging 102
Strength Training 102
Aerobics 102
Swimming 102
Water Aerobics 103
Cycling 104
Cross-Training 105
Cross-Country Skiing 106
Rowing 106
Elliptical Training/Stair Climbing 107
Racquet Sports 107
Yoga 107
New Fitness Trends 107
High-Intensity Interval Training 108
Stability Exercise Balls 109
Core Training 109
Fitness Boot Camp 110
Circuit Training 110
Functional Fitness 110
Zumba 111
Rating the Fitness Benefits of Aerobic Activities 111
Skill-Related Fitness 111
Team Sports 114
Tips to Enhance Your Aerobic Workout 114
Assess Your Behavior 115
Assess Your Knowledge 116
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 5
Nutrition for Wellness 119
The Essential Nutrients 120
Carbohydrates 121
Fats 123
Proteins 124
Vitamins 125
Minerals 125
Water 125
Nutrition Standards 126
Dietary Reference Intakes 126
Daily Values 127
Dietary Guidelines 128
Determining Fat Content in the Diet 129
Balancing the Diet 130
Nutrient Analysis 130
Vegetarianism 132
Nutrient Supplementation 133
Antioxidants 133
Multivitamins 134
Vitamin D 135
Folate 136
Benefits of Foods 136
Probiotics 137
Fish 137
Advanced Glycation End Products 138
Eating Disorders 138
Anorexia Nervosa 139
Bulimia Nervosa 139
Binge-Eating Disorder 140
Treatment 140
2010 Dietary Guidelines for Americans 140
Balancing Calories to Manage Weight 141
Foods and Nutrients to Increase 142
Recommendations for Specific Population 
Groups 142
A Lifetime Commitment to Wellness 142
Assess Your Behavior 143
Assess Your Knowledge 143
CHAPTER 6
Weight Management 147
Tolerable Weight 150
Fad Dieting 151
Principles of Weight Management 152
Energy-Balancing Equation 152
Diet and Metabolism 152
Recommendation 153
Sleep and Weight Management 154
Monitoring Body Weight 155
Exercise and Weight Management 155
The Myth of Spot-Reducing 157
The Role of Exercise Intensity and Duration in 
Weight Management 157
Overweight and Fit Debate 159
	
C O N T E N T S    vii
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Designing Your Own Weight Loss Program 160
Estimating Your Caloric Intake 160
Monitoring Your Diet Through Daily Food Logs 162
Using Low-Fat Entrees 162
Protein Intake 163
Effect of Food Choices on Long-Term Weight 
Gain 163
Behavior Modification and Adherence to a Lifetime 
Weight Management Program 163
You Can Do It! 166
Assess Your Behavior 166
Assess Your Knowledge 167
CHAPTER 7
Stress Management 175
The Mind/Body Connection 176
Sleep and Wellness 177
Stress 178
The Body’s Reaction to Stress 178
Adaptation to Stress 179
Alarm Reaction 179
Resistance 179
Exhaustion/Recovery 179
Thirty-Second Body Scan 180
Behavior Patterns 180
Vulnerability to Stress 182
Sources of Stress 185
Coping with Stress 185
Time Management 185
Relaxation Techniques 189
Physical Activity 189
Progressive Muscle Relaxation 190
Breathing Techniques 192
Mindless Meditation 193
Yoga 193
Tai Chi 194
Visual Imagery 194
Which Technique Is Best? 195
Assess Your Behavior 195
Assess Your Knowledge 196
CHAPTER 8
A Healthy Lifestyle 
Approach 199
A Wellness Lifestyle 200
Spiritual Well-Being 200
Causes of Death 201
Diseases of the Cardiovascular System 201
Types of Cardiovascular Disease and Prevalence 202
Risk Factors for CHD 203
Cancer 214
Guidelines for Preventing Cancer 215
Abstaining from Tobacco 217
Avoiding Excessive Sun Exposure 217
Monitoring Estrogen, Radiation Exposure, and 
Potential Occupational Hazards 219
Physical Activity 219
Other Risk Factors for Cancer 220
Early Detection 221
viii   C O N T E N T S
© Tyler Olson/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chronic Lower Respiratory Disease 221
Accidents 221
Substance Abuse 221
Alcohol 221
Illegal Drugs 222
Treatment for Chemical Dependency 224
Sexually Transmitted Infections 224
HIV/AIDS 224
Guidelines for Preventing STIs 226
Assess Your Behavior 227
Assess Your Knowledge 228
CHAPTER 9
Relevant Fitness and Wellness 
Issues 231
Wellness Behavior Modification Issues 232
Safety of Exercise Participation and Injury 
Prevention 233
Special Considerations for Women 241
Nutrition and Weight Control 246
Exercise and Aging 251
Fitness/Wellness Consumer Issues 254
What’s Next? 258
Assess Your Behavior 261
Assess Your Knowledge 261
APPENDIX A: Strength-Training 
Exercises 264
APPENDIX B: Flexibility 
Exercises 272
APPENDIX C: Exercises for the 
Prevention and Rehabilitation of 
Low Back Pain 275
APPENDIX D: Contraindicated 
Exercises 278
APPENDIX E: Selective Nutrient 
Content of Common Foods 281
Notes 295
Answer Key 301
Glossary 302
Index 307
	
C O N T E N T S    ix
© Rachel Pugina
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Most people go to college to learn how to make a living. 
Making a good living, however, won’t help them unless 
they live a wellness lifestyle that will allow them to enjoy 
what they have. Unfortunately, the current American life-
style does not provide the human body with sufficient 
physical activity to enhance or maintain adequate health. 
As a result, the importance of sound fitness and wellness 
programs has taken on an entirely new dimension.
Science has clearly determined that a lack of physical activity 
is detrimental to health. In fact, the office of the Surgeon 
General has identified physical fitness as a top health priority 
by stating that the nation’s top health goals include exercise, 
increased consumption of fruits and vegetables, smoking 
cessation, and the practice of safe sex. All four of these fun-
damental healthy lifestyle factors are addressed in this book.
Many of the behaviors we adopt in life are a product of our 
environment. Currently, we live in a “toxic” health/fitness 
environment. We are so habituated to our modern-day en-
vironment that we miss the subtle ways it influences our 
behaviors, personal lifestyles, and health each day. The epi-
demic of physical inactivity and obesity that is sweeping 
across America is so harmful to health that it actually in-
creases the deterioration rate of the human body and leads 
to premature aging, illness, and death.
Only about one-half of the adults in the United States meet 
the recommended amount of weekly aerobic physical activ-
ity, whereas less than a fourth meet the guidelines for mus-
cular (strength) fitness. Among those who meet the 
guidelines, many do not reap the full benefits because they 
simply do not know how to implement and stay with a 
sound program that will yield desirable results.
The good news is that lifetime wellness is within the grasp 
of most people. We know that most chronic and debilitat-
ing conditions are largely preventable. Scientific evidence 
has shown that improving the quality and most likely the 
length of our lives is a matter of personal choice.
This book offers you the necessary information to start on 
your path to fitness and wellness by adhering to a healthy 
lifestyle. The information in the following chapters and the 
subsequent activities at the end of each chapter will enable 
you to develop a personal program that promotes lifetime fit-
ness, preventive health care, and personal wellness. The em-
phasis throughout the book is teaching you how to take 
control of your lifestyle habits so that you can do what is nec-
essary to stay healthy and realize your optimal well-being.
What the Book Covers
As you study this book and complete the respective activi-
ties, you will learn to:
• understand the importance of good physical fitness and a 
wellness lifestyle in the achievement of good health and 
quality of life and a more productive and longer life.
• determine whether medical clearance is needed for your 
safe participation in exercise.
• learn behavior modification techniques to help you ad-
here to a lifetime fitness and wellness program.
• assess the health-related components of fitness (cardio­
respiratory endurance, muscular strength and endurance, 
muscular flexibility, and body composition).
• write exercise prescriptions for cardiorespiratory endur-
ance, muscular strength and endurance, and muscular 
flexibility.
• analyze your diet and learn the principles that govern 
sound nutrition.
• develop sound diet and weight-management programs.
• understand stress, lessen your vulnerability to stress, and 
implement a stress management program if necessary.
• implement a cardiovascular disease risk-reduction 
program.
• follow guidelines to reduce your personal risk of develop-
ing cancer.
• implement a smoking cessation program, if applicable.
• understand the health consequences of chemical depen-
dency and irresponsible sexual behaviors and learn 
guidelines for preventing sexually transmitted infections.
• discern between myths and facts of exercise and health-
related concepts.
New in the Eleventh Edition
All nine chapters in the 11th edition of Fitness & Wellness 
have been revised and updated according to recent advances 
published in the scientific literature and information re-
ported at professional health, fitness, wellness, and sports 
medicine conferences. In addition to the individual chapter 
updates listed below, several new figures and photographs 
are included in this edition. The following are the most sig-
nificant chapter updates:
Preface
xi
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xii   P R E F A C E
• All pertinent statistics related to the leading causes 
of death and life expectancy in the United States 
have been brought up to date in Chapter 1, Introduc-
tion to Physical Fitness and Wellness. The number of 
Americans who meet the 2008 federal guidelines of 
aerobic and strength-training activities and the role 
of core values and the environment in being able to 
change lifestyle behaviors are also included in this 
introductory chapter.
• The waist-to-height ratio (WHtR) has been included 
in Chapter 2, Assessment of Physical Fitness. The 
WHtR is a new health risk assessment that is used to 
ascertain the health risks of obesity and appears to 
predict disease risk (including multiple coronary 
heart disease risk factors) and premature mortality 
more effectively than body mass index and waist 
circumference.
• Minor changes were made to Chapter 3, Exercise 
Prescription, to ensure it conformed with the 2011 
American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM) posi-
tion paper on the “Quantity and Quality of Exercise 
for Developing and Maintaining Cardiorespiratory, 
Musculoskeletal, and Neuromotor Fitness in Appar-
ently Healthy Adults” and the newly released ninth 
edition (2014) of the ACSM’s Guidelines for Exercise 
Testing and Prescription. Included also is the princi-
ple of exercise volume under cardiorespiratory en-
durance prescription and new information on  
bacterial-infection back pain.
• Chapter 4, Evaluating Fitness Activities, has been re-
organized into Traditional Fitness Activities and New 
Fitness Trends. Among the new activities included 
are functional fitness, stability exercise balls, body-
weight training, the resurgence of circuit training, 
and high-intensity circuit training (HICT).
• Chapter 5, Nutrition for Wellness, was updated and 
revised to include new material on sugar-sweetened 
beverages and energy drinks; unsaturated fatty acids 
(including omega-3s, omega-6s, and omega-9s);  
the key role of adequate protein intake throughout 
the day for health, physical performance, and 
weight management; complementary proteins for 
vegetarian diets; and red-meat intake and prema-
ture death.
• Important changes related to the recommendations 
and advances in the field regarding weight loss and 
proper weight control were added to Chapter 6, 
Weight Management. The data on the obesity epi-
demic in the United States now includes obesity 
prevalence estimates based on gender, level of educa-
tion, and cultural ethnicity. Enhancements were also 
made to the Principles of Weight Management,  
including a better explanation on the rule of thumb 
that one pound of fat represents 3,500 calories; pop-
ular diets on the market today; a new section on the 
Overweight and Fit Debate (fit and fat); the value of 
having three regular meals and two healthy snacks 
daily; the importance of adequate amount of lean 
protein sources with each meal; and the benefits of 
exercise intensity and interval training.
• Information on the damaging effects of stress on the 
body has been added to Chapter 7, Stress Manage-
ment. A new Hostility Questionnaire to identify  
Type A individuals who maybe at higher risk for  
disease has been added to the chapter.
• The incidence and mortality rates for cardiovascular 
disease and cancer have been bought up to date in 
Chapter 8, A Healthy Lifestyle Approach. Content up-
dates were made to several individual risk factors for 
heart disease and the cancer prevention guidelines. 
The questionnaires for cardiovascular disease and 
cancer prevention presented in Activity 8.1 were also 
revised, and new information on spice (under the 
Substance Abuse section), genital herpes, and  
advances in HIV treatment have all been added to 
the chapter.
• Several new questions and updates to others were 
added to Chapter 9, Relevant Fitness and Wellness Is-
sues. Among new questions included in the chapter 
are topics related to the difficulty in changing dietary 
habits, detox diets, gluten sensitivity, and fish and 
mercury toxicity. Additional updates were included 
in the questions related to energy drinks, advances 
in the prevention and treatment of osteoporosis, and 
exercise and weight loss. 
Ancillaries
• Health MindTap for Fitness & Wellness. In-
stant Access Code, ISBN-13: 978-1-285-77642-2.
• MindTap is well beyond an eBook, a homework so-
lution or digital supplement, a resource center web-
site, a course delivery platform, or a Learning Man-
agement System. More than 70% of students 
surveyed said it was unlike anything they have seen 
before. MindTap is a new personal learning experi-
ence that combines all your digital assets—readings, 
multimedia, activities, and assessments—into a sin-
gular learning path to improve student outcomes.
• Diet & Wellness Plus. The Diet & Wellness Plus 
App in MindTap helps you gain a better understand-
ing of how nutrition relates to your personal health 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

goals. It enables you to track your diet and activity, 
generate reports, and analyze the nutritional value of 
the food you eat! It includes over 55,000 foods in the 
database, custom food and recipe features, the latest 
dietary references, as well as your goal and actual 
percentages of essential nutrients, vitamins, and 
minerals. It also helps you to identify a problem be-
havior and make a positive change. After completing 
the Wellness Profile Questionnaire, Diet & Wellness 
Plus will rate the level of concern for eight different 
areas of wellness, helping you determine the areas 
where you are most at risk. It then helps you put to-
gether a plan for positive change by helping you se-
lect a goal to work toward—complete with a reward 
for all your hard work.
• The Diet & Wellness Plus App is accessed from the 
App dock in MindTap and can be used throughout 
the course for students to track their diet and activ-
ity and behavior change. 
• There are activities and labs in the course that have 
students access the App to further extend learning 
and integrate course content. 
• Instructor Companion Site. Everything you 
need for your course in one place! This collection of 
book-specific lecture and class tools is available on-
line via www.cengage.com/login. Access and down-
load PowerPoint presentations, images, instructor’s 
manual, videos, and more.
• Cengage Learning Testing Powered by 
Cognero. Cengage Learning Testing Powered by 
Cognero is a flexible, online system that allows you to:
• author, edit, and manage test bank content from 
multiple Cengage Learning solutions.
• create multiple test versions in an instant.
• deliver tests from your LMS, your classroom, or 
wherever you want.
• Global Health Watch. Instant Access Code, 
ISBN-13: 978-1-111-37733-5. Printed Access Card, 
ISBN-13: 978-1-111-37731-1. Updated with today’s 
current headlines, Global Health Watch is your one-
stop resource for classroom discussion and research 
projects. This resource center provides access to 
thousands of trusted health sources, including aca-
demic journals, magazines, newspapers, videos, pod-
casts, and more. It is updated daily to offer the most 
current news about topics related to your health 
course.
• Workbook for Becoming Physically Fit:  
A Physical Education Multimedia Course. 
ISBN-13: 978-1-133-49092-0. Becoming Physically 
Fit is a telecourse produced by the DALLAS Tele-
Learning of the LeCroy Center for Educational Tele-
communications. This self-paced course is designed 
to encourage students to improve their personal 
physical fitness and obtain an overall healthier life-
style. Students are asked to make behavioral and 
physical changes to their lifestyle. The successful im-
plementation of these changes serves to motivate 
students to maintain personal fitness, proper nutri-
tion, and lifelong healthy lifestyle choices. For more 
information on the course, visit http://telelearning.
dcccd.edu.
• Careers in Health, Physical Education, 
and Sports, 2e. ISBN-13: 978-0-495-38839-5. 
This unique booklet takes students through the com-
plicated process of picking the type of career they 
want to pursue; explains how to prepare for the tran-
sition into the working world; and provides insight 
into different career paths, education requirements, 
and reasonable salary expectations. A designated 
chapter discusses some of the legal issues that sur-
round the workplace, including discrimination and 
harassment. This supplement is complete with per-
sonal development activities designed to encourage 
students to focus on and develop better insight into 
their futures.
• Walk4Life® Pedometer. ISBN-13: 978-0-495-
01315-0. Provided through an alliance with 
Walk4Life, the Walk4Life Elite Model pedometer 
tracks steps, elapsed time, and distance. A calorie 
counter and a clock are included in this excellent 
class activity and tool to encourage students to track 
their steps and walk toward better fitness awareness.
Acknowledgments
Fitness & Wellness, 11th edition, was made possible 
through the contributions of many individuals. In par-
ticular, we would like to express our gratitude to the re-
viewers of the 11th edition. Their valuable comments 
and suggestions are most sincerely appreciated.
Reviewers for the 11th edition:
Chip Darracott, Georgia Regents University 
Kathy Gieg, Missouri Baptist University
Laurelia Hardy, Georgia Regents University 
Candace Hendershot, University of Findlay
Kevin B. Kinser, Tarrant County College
Linda J. Romaine, Raritan Valley Community College
	
P R E F A C E    xiii
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

William Russell, Missouri Western State University
Staci Jo Smith, Tarrant County College
Reviewers for the 10th edition:
Lisa Augustine, Lorain Community College
Vicki Boye, Concordia University
Michael Dupper, University of Mississippi
Nicholas Farkouh, College of Staten Island
Megan Franks, Lone Star College–North Harris
Misti Knight, Tarrant County College Northwest
Colleen Maloney-Hinds, California State  
University–San Bernadino
Reviewers for the ninth edition:
John Acquavivia, Northern Virginia Community 
College
Leslie K. Hickcox, Portland Community College
Rebecca Kujawa, Mother McAuley High School
Robin Kurotori, Ohlone College
Cathy McMillan, Western Illinois University
Jeff Meeker, Cornell College
Holly J. Molella, Dutchess Community College
Charles Pelitera, Canisius College
Marc Postiglione, Union County College
Andrea Pate Willis, Abraham Baldwin College
Sharon Woodard, Wake Forest University
Brief Author Biographies
Werner W. K. Hoeger is a professor emeritus of the 
Department of Kinesiology at Boise State University. He 
served as a graduate teaching assistant at Brigham 
Young University–Provo and later held faculty appoint-
ments at the University of the Andes in Venezuela and 
the University of Texas of the Permian Basin. He re-
mains active in research and continues to lecture in the 
areas of exercise physiology and physical fitness and 
wellness. During the 2012-2013 academic year, he 
served as an adjunct professor of exercise science at 
Brigham Young University–Hawaii.
Dr. Hoeger completed his undergraduate and master’s 
degrees in physical education at the age of 20 and re-
ceived his doctorate degree with an emphasis in exer-
cise physiology at the age of 24. He is a Fellow of the 
American College of Sports Medicine and also of the  
Research Consortium of the American Alliance for 
Health, Physical Education, Recreation, and Dance. In 
2002, he was recognized as the Outstanding Alumnus 
from the College of Health and Human Performance at 
Brigham Young University. He is the recipient of the first 
Presidential Award for Research and Scholarship in the 
College of Education at Boise State University in 2004. In 
2008, he was asked to be the keynote speaker at the VII 
Iberoamerican Congress of Sports Medicine and Applied 
Sciences in Mérida, Venezuela, and was presented with 
the Distinguished Guest of the City recognition. In 2010, 
he was also honored as the keynote speaker at the West-
ern Society for Kinesiology and Wellness in Reno, 
Nevada.
Dr. Hoeger uses his knowledge and personal experi-
ences to write engaging, informative books that thor-
oughly address today’s fitness and wellness issues in a 
format accessible to students. Since 1990, he has been 
the most widely read fitness and wellness college text-
book author in the United States. He has published a 
total of 58 editions of his nine fitness and wellness- 
related titles. Among the textbooks written for  
Wadsworth/Cengage Learning are Principles and Labs 
for Fitness and Wellness, 12th edition; Lifetime Physical 
Fitness & Wellness, 13th edition; Principles and Labs for 
Physical Fitness, ninth edition; Wellness: Guidelines for a 
Healthy Lifestyle, fourth edition; and Water Aerobics for 
Fitness and Wellness, fourth edition (with Terry-Ann 
Spitzer Gibson).
Dr. Hoeger was the first author to write a college fitness 
textbook that incorporated the “wellness” concept. In 
1986, with the release of the first edition of Lifetime 
Physical Fitness & Wellness, he introduced the principle 
that to truly improve fitness, health, and quality of life 
and to achieve wellness, a person needed to go beyond 
the basic health-related components of physical fitness. 
His work was so well received that every fitness author 
immediately followed his lead.
As an innovator in the field, Dr. Hoeger has developed 
many fitness and wellness assessment tools, including 
fitness tests such as the Modified Sit-and-Reach, Total 
Body Rotation, Shoulder Rotation, Muscular Endur-
ance, Muscular Strength and Endurance, and Soda Pop 
Coordination Tests. Proving that he “practices what he 
preaches,” he was the oldest male competitor in the 
2002 Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City, Utah, at the 
age of 48. He raced in the sport of luge along with his 
then 17-year-old son, Christopher. It was the first time 
in Winter Olympics history that father and son com-
xiv   P R E F A C E
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

peted in the same event. In 2006, at the age of 52, he 
was the oldest competitor at the Winter Olympics in 
Turin, Italy. Most recently, he raced in the 800-, 1,500-, 
and 5,000-meter events in track and field at the 2011 
World Masters Athletic Championships held in Sacra-
mento, California. In 2012, he reached All-American 
standards for his age group by USA Track and Field in 
the 1,500-meter event.
Sharon A. Hoeger is vice president of Fitness & Well-
ness, Inc., of Boise, Idaho. Sharon received her degree in 
computer science from Brigham Young University where 
she was also a member of the intercollegiate gymnastics 
team. She served as an adjunct faculty at the University 
of Texas of the Permian Basin and taught introductory 
computer programming and statistics. She is extensively 
involved in the research process used in retrieving the 
most current scientific information that goes into the 
revision of each textbook. She is also the author of  
the software written specifically for the fitness and well-
ness textbooks. Her innovations in this area since the 
publication of the first edition of Lifetime Physical Fitness 
& Wellness set the standard for fitness and wellness com-
puter software used in this market today.
Sharon is a coauthor in five of the seven fitness and 
wellness titles. She also served as Chef de Mission 
(Chief of Delegation) for the Venezuelan Olympic Team 
at the 2006 Winter Olympics in Turin, Italy.
Husband and wife are extremely active and they have 
been jogging and strength training together for more 
than 37 years. They are the proud parents of five chil-
dren, all of whom are involved in sports and lifetime fit-
ness activities. Their motto: “Families that exercise 
together, stay together.”
	
P R E F A C E    xv
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Introduction to Physical 
Fitness and Wellness
1
Daily physical activity is the 
miracle medication that 
people are looking for. It 
makes you look and feel 
younger, boosts energy, 
provides lifetime weight 
management, improves 
self-confidence and self-
esteem, and enhances 
independent living, health, 
and quality of life. It further 
allows you to enjoy a longer 
life by decreasing the risk of 
many chronic conditions, 
including heart disease, high 
blood pressure, stroke, 
diabetes, some cancers, and 
osteoporosis.
Objectives
• Understand the importance of lifetime 
fitness and wellness.
• Learn the recommended guidelines for 
weekly physical activity.
• Define physical fitness and list components 
of health-related and skill-related fitness.
• Understand the benefits of a 
comprehensive fitness and wellness 
program.
• Learn motivational and behavior 
modification techniques to enhance 
compliance with a healthy lifestyle 
program.
• Learn to write SMART goals to aid with the 
process of change.
• Determine whether medical clearance is 
required for safe participation in exercise.
1
Visit www.cengagebrain.com to access 
course materials and companion resources for 
this text including quiz questions designed to 
check your understanding of the chapter 
contents, activities, labs, and more! See the 
preface on page xi for more information.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
Fitness and Wellness
Last year as a freshman in college I was advised to 
enroll in a general ed fitness and wellness course. I 
played high school sports and thought I knew all 
there was to know about being fit and in shape. As 
the course started, I realized I didn’t really know 
how important it was to exercise regularly and take 
good care of myself. It quickly became my favorite 
class, and I couldn’t wait to try what I was learning. I 
started cardio and strength workouts according to an 
exercise prescription I wrote myself. I didn’t even 
know there was such a thing as an “exercise pre-
scription.” I even stretched once in a while and 
started to eat better. As I became more fit, I started to 
feel better about myself, I 
lost weight, I toned up, I 
had so much more energy, 
and I actually started to en-
joy exercise. It is fun to 
work out! I now know that 
how well I will live the rest 
of my life has a lot to do 
with wellness choices I 
make. My goal is to never 
stop exercising and take 
good care of myself.
© EugeneF/Shutterstock.com
Real Life Story | Jordan’s Experience
Most people believe school will teach them how to make 
a better living. A fitness and wellness course will teach 
you how to live better—how to truly live your life to its 
fullest potential. Real success is about more than money: 
Making a good living will not help you unless you live a 
wellness lifestyle that will allow you to enjoy what you 
have. Your lifestyle is the most important factor affecting 
your personal well-being, but most people don’t know 
how to make the right choices to live their best life.
The benefits of an active and healthy lifestyle have 
been clearly substantiated by scientific evidence linking 
increased physical activity and positive habits to better 
fitness, health, and improved quality of life. Even though 
a few individuals live long because of favorable genetic 
factors, for most people, the quality of life during middle 
age and the “golden years” is more often related to wise 
choices initiated during youth and continued through-
out life.
Based on the abundance of scientific research on 
physical activity and exercise, a distinction has been es-
tablished between physical activity and exercise. Physi-
cal activity is defined as bodily movement produced by 
skeletal muscles that requires the expenditure of energy 
and produces progressive health benefits. Examples of 
physical activity are walking to and from work and the 
store, taking the stairs instead of elevators and escalators, 
gardening, doing household chores, dancing, and wash-
ing the car by hand. Physical inactivity, by contrast, im-
plies a predominantly sedentary lifestyle, characterized 
by excessive sitting throughout most days and a level of 
activity that is lower than that required to maintain good 
health.
Physical activity and exercise lead to less disease, a longer life, and enhanced quality of life.
Photos © Jonathan Hoeger
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3
Chapter 1  Introduction to Physical Fitness and Wellness
Exercise is considered a type of physical activity that 
requires planned, structured, and repetitive bodily 
movement to improve or maintain one or more compo-
nents of physical fitness. A regular weekly program of 
walking, jogging, cycling, aerobics, swimming, strength 
training, and stretching exercises are all examples of 
exercise.
Unfortunately, the current way of life in most devel-
oped nations does not provide the human body with 
sufficient physical activity to maintain adequate health. 
Furthermore, many lifestyle patterns are such a serious 
threat to health that they actually speed up deterioration 
of the human body. In a few short years, lack of wellness 
leads to loss of vitality and gusto for life, as well as pre-
mature morbidity and mortality.
Even though most people in the United States be-
lieve a positive lifestyle has a great impact on health 
and longevity, most do not know how to implement  
a fitness and wellness program that will yield the de-
sired results. Patty Neavill is an example of someone 
who frequently tried to change her life but was unable 
to do so because she did not know how to implement a 
sound exercise and weight control program. At age 24, 
Patty, a college sophomore, was discouraged with her 
weight, level of fitness, self-image, and quality of life in 
general.
She had struggled with weight most of her life. Like 
thousands of other people, she had made many unsuc-
cessful attempts to lose weight. Patty put aside her fears 
and decided to enroll in a fitness course. As part of the 
course requirement, she took a battery of fitness tests at 
the beginning of the semester. Patty’s cardiorespiratory 
fitness and strength ratings were poor, her flexibility clas-
sification was average, she weighed more than 200 
pounds, and she was 41 percent body fat.
Following the initial fitness assessment, Patty met 
with her course instructor, who prescribed an exercise 
and nutrition program such as the one presented in this 
book. Patty fully committed to carry out the prescrip-
tion. She walked or jogged five times a week, worked out 
with weights twice a week, and played volleyball or bas-
ketball two to four times each week. Her daily caloric 
intake was set in the range of 1,500 to 1,700 calories. She 
took care to meet the minimum required amounts from 
the basic food groups each day, which contributed about 
1,200 calories to her diet. The remainder of the calories 
came primarily from complex carbohydrates. At the end 
of the 16-week semester, Patty’s cardiorespiratory fitness, 
strength, and flexibility ratings all improved to the 
“good” category, she lost 50 pounds, and her percent 
body fat dropped to 22.5!
A thank-you note from Patty to the course instruc-
tor at the end of the semester read:
Thank you for making me a new person. I truly ap-
preciate the time you spent with me. Without your kind-
ness and motivation, I would have never made it. It’s great 
to be fit and trim. I’ve never had this feeling before and I 
wish everyone could feel like this once in their life.
  Thank you, Your trim Patty!
Patty never had been taught the principles governing a 
sound weight loss program. She needed this knowledge, 
and, like most Americans who have never experienced 
the process of becoming physically fit, she needed to be 
in a structured exercise setting to truly feel the joy of 
fitness.
Of even greater significance, Patty maintained her 
aerobic and strength-training programs. A year after 
ending her calorie-restricted diet, her weight actually 
increased by 10 pounds—but her body fat decreased 
from 22.5 percent to 21.2 percent. As discussed in Chap-
ter 6, the weight increase is related mostly to changes in 
lean tissue lost during the weight-reduction phase. De-
spite only a slight drop in weight during the second year 
following the calorie-restricted diet, Patty’s 2-year fol-
low-up revealed a further decrease in body fat, to 19.5 
percent. Patty understands the new quality of life reaped 
through a sound fitness program.
1.1  Lifestyle, Health,  
and Quality of Life
Research findings have shown that physical inactivity and 
negative lifestyle habits pose a serious threat to health. 
Movement and physical activity are basic functions for 
which the human organism was created. Advances in 
modern technology, however, have all but eliminated the 
need for physical activity in daily life. Physical activity  
no longer is a natural part of our existence. This epidemic 
of physical inactiv-
ity is the second 
greatest threat to 
U.S. public health 
and 
has 
been 
termed Sedentary 
Death Syndrome, 
or 
SeDS. 
(The 
number-one threat 
is tobacco use—
the largest cause  
of 
preventable 
deaths.)
Today we live 
in an automated 
society. Most of 
the activities that 
Physical activity  Bodily movement 
produced by skeletal muscles that re-
quires energy expenditure and produces 
progressive health benefits.
Exercise  A type of physical activity 
that requires planned, structured, and 
repetitive bodily movement done to im-
prove or maintain one or more compo-
nents of physical fitness.
Sedentary Death Syndrome 
(SeDS)  Deaths that are attributed to 
a lack of regular physical activity.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4
Fitness and Wellness
used to require strenuous physical exertion can be ac-
complished by machines with the simple pull of a handle 
or push of a button. If people go to a store that is only a 
couple of blocks away, most drive their automobiles and 
then spend a couple of minutes driving around the park-
ing lot to find a spot 10 yards closer to the store’s en-
trance. During a visit to a multilevel shopping mall, 
nearly everyone chooses to ride the escalators instead of 
taking the stairs.
Automobiles, elevators, escalators, cell phones, in-
tercoms, remote controls, electric garage door openers—
all are modern-day commodities that minimize the 
amount of movement and effort required of the human 
body.
One of the most significant detrimental effects of 
modern-day technology has been an increase in chronic 
diseases related to a lack of physical activity. These include 
hypertension (high blood pressure), heart disease, diabe-
tes, chronic low back pain, and obesity, among others. 
They sometimes are referred to as hypokinetic diseases. 
(“Hypo” means low or little, and “kinetic” implies mo-
tion.) Lack of adequate physical activity is a fact of mod-
ern life that most people can avoid no longer. According 
to the World Health Organization (WHO), chronic dis-
eases account for almost 60 percent of all deaths world-
wide and 43 percent of the global burden of disease.1 If we 
want to enjoy contemporary commodities and still expect 
to live life to its fullest, a personalized lifetime exercise 
program must become a part of our daily lives.
With the developments in technology, three addi-
tional factors have changed our lives significantly and 
have had a negative effect on human health: nutrition, 
stress, and environment. Fatty foods, sweets, alcohol, 
tobacco, excessive stress, and environmental hazards 
(such as wastes, noise, and air pollution) have detrimen-
tal effects on people’s health.
The leading causes of death in the United States to-
day (see Figure 1.1) are lifestyle-related. About 52 per-
cent of all deaths in the United States are caused by car-
diovascular disease and cancer.2 Almost 80 percent of 
these deaths could be prevented by adhering to a healthy 
lifestyle. The third leading cause of death—chronic lower 
respiratory (lung) disease—is related largely to tobacco 
use. Accidents are the fourth leading cause of death. 
Even though not all accidents are preventable, many are. 
Fatal accidents often are related to abusing drugs and not 
wearing seat belts.
According to Dr. David Satcher, former U.S. surgeon 
general, more than 50 percent of the people who die in 
the United States each year die because of what they do. 
Estimates indicate that more than half of disease is  
lifestyle-related, a fifth is attributed to environmental 
factors, and a tenth is influenced by the health care the 
individual receives. Only 16 percent is related to genetic 
factors. Thus, the individual controls as much as 84 per-
cent of disease and quality of life. The data also indicate 
that most of the deaths that occur before age 65 are pre-
ventable. In essence, most people in the United States are 
threatened by the very lives they lead today.
Based on the most recent data available, the average 
life expectancy in the United States is now 76.3 years for 
men and 81.1 years for women. Based on the WHO data, 
the United States ranks 28th in the world for life expec-
tancy (see Figure 1.2). Between 2000 and 2010, U.S. male 
life expectancy slipped from 18th to 24th in the world and 
The epitome of physical inactivity is to drive around a parking lot for 
several minutes in search of a parking spot 10 to 20 yards closer to 
the store’s entrance.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics, 
National Vital Statistics reports, Deaths: Preliminary Data for 2011, 61:6 
(October 10, 2012).
Figure 1.1
Leading causes of death in the  
United States: 2011.
*Chronic lower
 respiratory disease
Cardiovascular 
diseases
28.9%
Cancer
22.9%
CLRD*
5.7%
Others
37.6%
Accidents
4.9%
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5
Chapter 1  Introduction to Physical Fitness and Wellness
female life expectancy from 28th to 35th. Japan ranks first 
in the world with an overall life expectancy of 82.6 years.
Several factors may account for the current U.S. life 
expectancy ranking: the extremely poor health of some 
groups (such as Native Americans, rural African Ameri-
cans, and the inner-city poor), the obesity epidemic, the 
low level of daily physical activity, the high incidence of 
tobacco use and coronary heart disease, and fairly high 
levels of violence (notably homicides).
Although life expectancy in the United States gradu-
ally increased by 30 years over the past century, scientists 
from the National Institute of Aging believe that in the 
coming decades the average life-span may decrease by as 
much as 5 years. This decrease in life expectancy will be 
related primarily to the growing epidemic of obesity. About 
34 percent of the adult population in the United States is 
obese. Additional information on the obesity epidemic and 
its detrimental health consequences is given in Chapter 5.
1.2  Importance of 
Increased Physical 
Activity
The U.S. surgeon general has stated that poor health as a 
result of lack of physical activity is a serious public health 
problem that must be met head-on at once. Regular 
moderate physical activity provides substantial benefits 
in health and well-being for the vast majority of people 
who are not physically active. For those who are already 
moderately active, even greater health benefits can be 
achieved by increasing the level of physical activity.
Among the benefits of regular physical activity and 
exercise are significantly reduced risks for developing or 
dying from heart disease, stroke, type 2 diabetes, colon 
and breast cancers, high blood pressure, and osteopo-
rotic fractures.3 Regular physical activity also is impor-
tant for the health of muscles, bones, and joints, and it 
seems to reduce symptoms of depression and anxiety, 
improve mood, and enhance one’s ability to perform 
daily tasks throughout life. It also can help control health 
care costs and maintain a high quality of life into old age.
Moderate physical activity has been defined as any 
activity that requires an energy expenditure of 150 calories 
per day, or 1,000 calories per week. The general health 
recommendation is that people strive to accumulate at 
least 30 minutes of physical activity a minimum of 5 days 
per week. Whereas 30 minutes of continuous activity is 
preferred, on days when time is limited, 3 activity sessions 
of at least 10 minutes each provide about half the aerobic 
benefits. Examples of moderate physical activity are walk-
ing, cycling, playing basketball or volleyball, swimming, 
water aerobics, dancing fast, pushing a stroller, raking 
leaves, shoveling snow, washing or waxing a car, washing 
windows or floors, and even gardening.
Because of the ever-growing epidemic of obesity in 
the United States, however, the Institute of Medicine of the 
National Academy of Sciences increased the recommen-
dation to 60 minutes of moderate-intensity physical activ-
ity every day.4 This recommendation was based on evi-
dence indicating that people who maintain healthy weight 
typically accumulate one hour of daily physical activity.
Subsequently, the Dietary Guidelines for Americans 
recommend that up to 60 minutes of moderate- to 
vigorous-intensity physical activity per day may be nec-
essary to prevent weight gain, and between 60 and 90 
minutes of moderate-intensity physical activity daily is 
recommended to sustain weight loss for previously over-
weight people.5
In sum, al-
though health ben-
efits are derived 
with 30 minutes 
per day, people 
with a tendency to 
gain weight need 
to be physically ac-
tive daily for an 
hour to an hour 
and a half to pre-
Chronic diseases  Illnesses that de-
velop and last over a long time.
Hypokinetic diseases  Diseases re-
lated to a lack of physical activity.
Life expectancy  Number of years a 
person is expected to live based on the 
person’s birth year.
Figure 1.2
Life expectancy at birth for selected 
countries as of December 2012.
70
85
90
75
80
65
Switzerland
France
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Spain
United Arabs Emirates
United States
Germany
Mexico
Argentina
Brazil
71
72
75
78
76
79
79
78
80
78
80
Years
*Dark color is men; light color is women.
76
78
77
80
80
81
82
83
83
85
85
85
87
SOURCE: United Nations, Social Indications: Indicators on Health, http://
unstats.un.org/ursd/demographic/products/socind/default.htm. Download 
May 20, 2013.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6
Fitness and Wellness
vent weight gain. And 60 to 90 minutes of activity per day 
provides additional health benefits, including a lower risk 
for cardiovascular disease and diabetes.
1.3  2008 Federal 
Guidelines for Physical 
Activity
Because of the importance of physical activity to our 
health, in October 2008 the U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services issued Federal Physical Activity 
Guidelines for Americans for the first time. These guide-
lines complement the Dietary Guidelines for Americans 
and further substantiate previous recommendations is-
sued by the American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM) 
and the American Heart Association (AHA) in 20076 and 
the U.S. surgeon general in 1996.7 The federal guidelines 
provide science-based guidance on the importance of be-
ing physically active and eating a healthy diet to promote 
health and reduce the risk of chronic diseases. The federal 
guidelines include the following recommendations8:
Adults between 18 and 64 years of age
• 
Adults should do 2 hours and 30 minutes a week of 
moderate-intensity aerobic (cardio-respiratory) 
physical activity, 1 hour and 15 minutes (75 min-
utes) a week of vigorous-intensity aerobic physical 
activity, or an equivalent combination of moderate- 
and vigorous-intensity aerobic physical activity (also 
see Chapter 3). When combining moderate- and  
vigorous-intensity activities, a person could partici-
pate in moderate-intensity activity twice a week for 
30 minutes and high-intensity activity for 20 minutes 
on another two days. Aerobic activity should be per-
formed in episodes of at least 10 minutes long each, 
preferably spread throughout the week.
• 
Additional health benefits are provided by increas-
ing to 5 hours (300 minutes) a week of moderate-
intensity aerobic physical activity, 2 hours and 30 
minutes a week of vigorous-intensity physical ac-
tivity, or an equivalent combination of both.
• 
Adults should also do muscle-strengthening activi-
ties that involve all major muscle groups, per-
formed on two or more days per week.
Older adults (ages 65 and older)
• 
Older adults should follow the adult guidelines. If 
this is not possible due to limiting chronic condi-
tions, older adults should be as physically active as 
their abilities allow. They should avoid inactivity. 
Older adults should do exercises that maintain or 
improve balance if they are at risk of falling.
Children 6 years of age and older and adolescents
• 
Children and adolescents should do 1 hour (60 
minutes) or more of physical activity every day.
• 
Most of the 1 hour or more a day should be either 
moderate- or vigorous-intensity aerobic physical 
activity.
• 
As part of their daily physical activity, children and 
adolescents should do vigorous-intensity activity 
on at least three days per week. They also should 
do muscle-strengthening and bone-strengthening 
activities on at least three days per week.
Pregnant and postpartum women
• 
Healthy women who are not already doing  
vigorous-intensity physical activity should get at 
least 2 hours and 30 minutes (150 minutes) of 
moderate-intensity aerobic activity a week. 
Preferably, this activity should be spread through-
out the week. Women who regularly engage in  
vigorous-intensity aerobic activity or high amounts 
of activity can continue their activity provided that 
their condition remains unchanged and they talk to 
their health care provider about their activity level 
throughout their pregnancy.
The most recent data released in 2013 by the Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) indicate that 
only 19.4 percent of U.S. adults ages 18 and older meet 
the federal physical activity guidelines for both aerobic 
and muscular fitness (strength and endurance) activities, 
whereas 46.1 percent meet the guidelines for aerobic fit-
ness and just 23 percent do so for muscular fitness. An-
Percent
Guidelines met
Women
Men
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Both
sets
Muscle
strengthening
Aerobic
Neither
set
45.7
54.7
42.1
19.1
15.8
23.1
27.0
50.4
Figure 1.3
Percentage of adults who did not  
meet and meet the 2008 federal 
guidelines for physical activity by gender.
SOURCE: http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/series/sr_10/sr10_257.pdf 
(downloaded July 9, 2013)
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7
Chapter 1  Introduction to Physical Fitness and Wellness
other 34 percent of Americans are completely inactive 
during their leisure time (Figure 1.3).
The previous 2007 ACSM and AHA joint statement 
on physical activity recommendations for healthy adults 
states that a greater amount of physical activity that ex-
ceeds the minimum recommendations (given above) 
provides even greater benefits. Such an exercise prescrip-
tion is recommended for individuals who wish to further 
improve personal fitness, reduce the risk for chronic 
disease and disabilities, prevent premature mortality, or 
prevent unhealthy weight gain.9
In conjunction with the above report, the ACSM and 
the American Medical Association (AMA) have launched 
a nationwide Exercise is Medicine program.10 The goal of 
this initiative is to help improve the health and wellness of 
the nation through exercise prescriptions from physicians 
and health care providers: “Exercise is medicine and it’s 
free.” All physicians should be prescribing exercise to all 
patients and should participate in exercise themselves. 
Exercise is considered to be the much-needed vaccine of 
our time to prevent chronic diseases. Physical activity and 
exercise are powerful tools for both the treatment and 
prevention of chronic diseases and premature death.
Do you consciously incorporate physical activity into your 
daily lifestyle? • Can you provide examples? • Do you 
think you get sufficient daily physical activity to maintain 
good health?
Critical Thinking
1.4  Wellness
After the initial fitness boom swept across the United 
States in the 1970s, it became clear that improving physi-
cal fitness alone was not always enough to lower the risk 
for disease and ensure better health. For example, indi-
viduals who run three miles a day, lift weights regularly, 
participate in stretching exercises, and watch their body 
weight can be classified as having good or excellent fit-
ness. If these same people, however, have high blood 
pressure, smoke, are under constant stress, consume too 
much alcohol, and eat too many fatty and processed 
foods, they are exposing themselves to risk factors for 
disease of which they may not be aware.
Good health no longer is viewed as simply the ab-
sence of disease. The notion of good health has evolved 
notably in the past few years and continues to change as 
scientists learn more about lifestyle factors that bring on 
illness and affect wellness. Once the idea took hold that 
fitness by itself would not necessarily decrease the risk 
for disease and ensure better health, the wellness concept 
developed in the 1980s.
Wellness is an all-inclusive umbrella covering a va-
riety of health-related factors. A wellness lifestyle re-
quires the implementation of positive programs to 
change behavior and thereby improve health and quality 
of life, prolong life, and achieve total well-being. To enjoy 
a wellness lifestyle, a person has to practice behaviors 
that will lead to positive outcomes in seven dimensions 
of wellness: physical, emotional, intellectual, social, envi-
ronmental, spiritual, and occupational (Figure 1.4). 
These dimensions are interrelated; one frequently affects 
the others. For example, a person who is “emotionally 
down” often has no desire to exercise, study, go to work, 
socialize with friends, or attend church.
The 
concept 
behind the seven 
dimensions of well-
ness shows that 
high-level wellness 
clearly goes beyond 
optimum 
fitness 
and the absence of 
disease. 
Wellness 
incorporates 
fit-
ness, proper nutri-
tion, stress man-
agement, 
disease 
prevention, social 
support, 
self-
worth, nurturance 
(a sense of being 
needed), spiritual-
ity, personal safety, 
substance control 
Moderate-intensity aerobic physi-
cal activity  Defined as the equivalent 
of a brisk walk that noticeably in-
creases the heart rate.
Vigorous-intensity aerobic physi-
cal activity  Defined as an activity 
similar to jogging that causes rapid 
breathing and a substantial increase in 
heart rate.
Risk factors  Characteristics that 
predict the chances for developing a 
certain disease.
Wellness  The constant and deliber-
ate effort to stay healthy and achieve 
the highest potential for well-being.
Figure 1.4
Dimensions of wellness.
Wellness
Social
Physical
Occupational
Spiritual
Emotional
Environmental
Mental
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

8
Fitness and Wellness
and not smoking, regular physical examinations, health 
education, and environmental support.
For a wellness way of life, individuals must be physi-
cally fit and manifest no signs of disease, and they also 
must avoid all risk factors for disease (such as physical 
inactivity, hypertension, abnormal cholesterol levels, ciga-
rette smoking, excessive stress, faulty nutrition, or careless 
sex). Even though an individual tested in a fitness center 
might demonstrate adequate or even excellent fitness, in-
dulgence in unhealthy lifestyle behaviors will increase the 
risk for chronic diseases and decrease the person’s well-
being. Additional information on wellness and how to 
implement a wellness program is given in Chapter 8.
Unhealthy behaviors contribute to the staggering 
U.S. health care costs. Risk factors for disease carry a 
heavy price tag. Health care costs in the United States 
rose from $12 billion in 1950 to $2.3 trillion in 2008, or 
about 16 percent of the gross domestic product (GDP). 
In 1980, health care costs represented 8.8 percent of the 
gross national product (GNP), and they are projected to 
reach about 20 percent by the year 2015. Based on esti-
mates, 1 percent of Americans account for 30 percent of 
these costs. Half of the people use up about 97 percent of 
the health care dollars.
In terms of yearly health care costs per person, the 
United States spends more per person than any other 
industrialized nation. U.S. health care costs per capita are 
above $8,200 per year. Overall, the U.S. health care sys-
tem ranks only 37th in the world.
One of the reasons for the low overall ranking is the 
overemphasis on state-of-the-art cures instead of preven-
tion programs. The United States is the best place in the 
world to treat people once they are sick, but the system 
does a poor job of keeping people healthy in the first place.
1.5  Physical Fitness
Individuals are physically fit when they can meet both 
the ordinary and the unusual demands of daily life safely 
and effectively without being overly fatigued and still 
have energy left for leisure and recreational activities. 
Physical fitness can be classified into health-related and 
skill-related fitness.
1.5A  Health-Related Fitness  Health-related fit­
ness has four components: cardiorespiratory endurance, 
muscular fitness, muscular flexibility, and body compo-
sition (see Figure 1.5).
	1.	
Cardiorespiratory endurance: the ability of the 
heart, lungs, and blood vessels to supply oxygen to 
the cells to meet the demands of prolonged physi-
cal activity (also referred to as aerobic exercise).
	2.	
Muscular fitness (muscular strength and muscular 
endurance): the ability of the muscles to generate 
force.
	3.	
Muscular flexibility: the achievable range of motion 
at a joint or group of joints without causing injury.
	4.	
Body composition: the amount of lean body mass 
and adipose tissue (fat mass) in the human body.
1.5B  Skill-Related Fitness  Fitness in motor skills 
is essential in activities such as basketball, racquetball, 
golf, hiking, soccer, and water skiing. Good skill-related 
fitness also enhances overall quality of life by helping 
people cope more effectively in emergency situations 
(see Chapter 4). The components of skill-related fitness 
are agility, balance, coordination, power, reaction time, 
and speed (see Figure 1.6).
	1.	
Agility: the ability to change body position and di-
rection quickly and efficiently. Agility is important 
in sports such as basketball, soccer, and racquet-
ball, in which the participant must change direc-
tion rapidly and at the same time maintain proper 
body control.
	2.	
Balance: the ability to maintain the body in equilib-
rium. Balance is vital in activities such as gymnas-
Figure 1.5
Health-related components  
of physical fitness.
© Cengage Learning
Muscular
flexibility
Body
composition
Cardiorespiratory
endurance
Muscular Fitness
(strength and
endurance)
Figure 1.6
Motor skill-related components  
of physical fitness.
Agility
Speed
Balance
Power
Coordination
Reaction
time
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9
Chapter 1  Introduction to Physical Fitness and Wellness
tics, diving, ice skating, skiing, and even football 
and wrestling, in which the athlete attempts to up-
set the opponent’s equilibrium.
	3.	
Coordination: integration of the nervous system 
and the muscular system to produce correct, grace-
ful, and harmonious body movements. This com-
ponent is important in a wide variety of motor ac-
tivities such as golf, baseball, karate, soccer, and 
racquetball, in which hand-eye or foot-eye move-
ments, or both, must be integrated.
	4.	
Power: the ability to produce maximum force in 
the shortest time. The two components of power 
are speed and force (strength). An effective combi-
nation of these two components allows a person to 
produce explosive movements such as required in 
jumping; putting the shot; and spiking, throwing, 
and hitting a ball.
5.	
Reaction time: the time required to initiate a re-
sponse to a given stimulus. Good reaction time is 
important for starts in track and swimming; for 
quick reactions when playing tennis at the net; and 
in sports such as pingpong, boxing, and karate.
6.	
Speed: the ability to propel the body or a part of the 
body rapidly from one point to another. Examples 
of activities that require good speed for success are 
soccer, basketball, stealing a base in baseball, and 
sprints in track.
In terms of preventive medicine, the main emphasis 
of fitness programs should be on the health-related com-
ponents. Skill-related fitness is crucial for success in 
sports and athletics, and it also contributes to wellness. 
Improving skill-related fitness affords an individual more 
enjoyment and success in lifetime sports, and regular 
participation in skill-related fitness activities also helps 
develop health-related fitness. Further, total fitness is 
achieved by taking part in specific programs to improve 
health-related and skill-related components alike.
1.6  Benefits of Physical 
Fitness
The benefits to be enjoyed from participating in a regular 
fitness program are many. In addition to a longer life (see 
Figures 1.7 and 1.8), the greatest benefit of all is that 
physically fit people who lead a positive lifestyle have a 
healthier and better quality of life. These people live life 
to its fullest and have fewer health problems than inac-
tive individuals who also indulge in negative lifestyle 
habits. Compiling an all-inclusive list of the benefits to 
be reaped through participation in a fitness program is a 
challenge, but the list provided in Table 1.1 summarizes 
many of these benefits.
In addition to the benefits listed in Table 1.1, epide-
miological research studies linking physical activity 
habits and mortality rates have shown lower premature 
mortality rates in physically active people. Pioneer work 
in this area demonstrated that, as the amount of weekly 
physical activity increased, the risk of cardiovascular 
deaths decreased.11 In this study, conducted among 
16,936 Harvard alumni, the greatest decrease in cardio-
vascular deaths was observed in alumni who burned 
more than 2,000 calories per week through physical 
activity.
A landmark study subsequently upheld the findings 
of the Harvard alumni study.12 Based on data from 13,344 
individuals who were followed over an average of 8 years, 
the results confirmed that the level of cardiorespiratory 
fitness is related to 
mortality from all 
causes. These find-
ings 
showed 
a 
graded and consis-
tent inverse rela-
tionship between 
physical 
fitness 
and mortality, re-
gardless of age and 
other risk factors.
In essence, the 
higher the level of 
cardiorespiratory 
fitness, the longer 
the life (see Figure 
1.7). The death rate 
from all causes for 
the low-fit men 
Physical fitness  The general capac-
ity to adapt and respond favorably to 
physical effort.
Health-related fitness  A physical 
state encompassing cardiorespiratory 
endurance, muscular strength and en-
durance, muscular flexibility, and body 
composition.
Skill-related fitness  Components of 
fitness important for successful motor 
performance in athletic events and in 
lifetime sports and activities.
Epidemiological  The study of epi-
demic diseases.
Good skill-related fitness enhances success in sports performance.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

10
Fitness and Wellness
was 3.4 times higher than for the high-fit men. For the low-
fit women, the death rate was 4.6 times higher than for the 
high-fit women. The study also reported a greatly reduced 
rate of premature deaths, even at moderate fitness levels, 
which most adults can achieve easily. People gain further 
protection when they combine higher fitness levels with 
reduction in other risk factors such as hypertension, ele-
vated cholesterol, cigarette smoking, and excessive body fat.
Additional research that looked at changes in fitness 
and mortality found a substantial (44 percent) reduction 
in mortality risk when the study participants abandoned 
a sedentary lifestyle and became moderately fit (see Fig-
ure 1.8).13 The lowest death rate was found in people who 
were fit and remained fit, and the highest rate was found 
in men who remained unfit.
Further research in this area substantiated the previ-
ous findings and also indicated that primarily vigorous 
activities are associated with greater longevity.14,15 Vigor-
ous activity was defined as activity that requires a MET 
level equal to or greater than 6 METs (see Chapter 4, 
Table 4.1, page 112). This level represents exercising at an 
energy level of 6 times the resting energy requirement. 
Examples of vigorous activities used in the previous 
study include brisk walking, jogging, swimming laps, 
SOURCE: S. N. Blair et al., “Changes in Physical Fitness and All-Cause 
Morality: A Prospective Study of Healthy Men and Women,” Journal of the 
American Medical Association 273 (1995): 1193–1198.
Figure 1.8
Effects of fitness changes on mortality 
rates.
5
25
45
65
85
105
125
Initial assessment
*Death rates per 10,000 man-years observation.
5-year follow-up
122.0
67.7
39.6
Fit
Unfit
Unfit
Fit
Fit
Unfit
Death
rate 
from
all 
causes*
Figure 1.7
Death rates by physical fitness levels.
Numbers on top of the bars are all-cause death rates per 10,000 person-years of follow-up for each cell: 1 person-year indicates one person who was fol-
lowed up 1 year later.
SOURCE: Based on data from S. N. Blair, H. W. Kohl III, R. S. Paffenbarger, Jr., D. G. Clark, K. H. Cooper, and L. W. Gibbons, “Physical Fitness and All-
Cause Morality: A Prospective Study of Healthy Men and Women,” Journal of the American Medical Association 262 (1989): 2395–2401.
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Men
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Women
Cause of death
        All causes
           Cancer
 Cardiovascular
   Accident
Low
Moderate
High
Fitness category
Cause of death
Low
Moderate
High
Fitness category
        All causes
Cardiovascular
              Cancer
   Accident
64.0
26.3
20.3
24.6
7.8
3.1
20.3
4.7
5.4
5.8
7.3
39.5
16.4
7.4
16.3
9.7
1.0
7.4
2.9
.8
3.9
1.0
1.8
4.8
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11
Chapter 1  Introduction to Physical Fitness and Wellness
squash, racquetball, tennis, and shoveling snow. Results 
also indicated that vigorous exercise is as important as 
maintaining recommended weight and not smoking.
While it is clear that moderate-intensity exercise does 
provide substantial health benefits, the research data shows 
a dose-response relationship between physical activity and 
health. That is, greater health and fitness benefits occur at 
higher duration and/or intensity of physical activity.
Vigorous activities are preferable, to the extent of one’s 
capabilities, because they are most clearly associated with 
better health and longer life. Compared to prolonged 
moderate-intensity activity, vigorous-intensity has been 
shown to provide the best improvements in aerobic capac-
ity, coronary heart disease risk reduction, blood pressure, 
blood glucose control, and overall cardiovascular health.16,17
A word of caution, however, is in order. Vigorous 
exercise 
should  
be 
reserved 
for 
healthy individuals 
who 
have 
been 
cleared to do so 
(see Activity 1.2) 
and who have been 
participating regu-
larly in at least 
moderate-intensity 
activities.
While most of 
the chronic (long-
term) benefits of 
MET  Short for metabolic equivalent, 
represents the rate of energy expendi-
ture while sitting quietly at rest. This 
energy expenditure is approximately  
3.5 milliliters of oxygen per kilogram of 
body weight per minute (mL/kg/min)  
or 1.2 calories per minute for a  
70-kilogram person. A 3-MET activity 
requires three times the energy  
expenditure of sitting quietly at rest.
Table 1.1  Long-Term (Chronic) Benefits of Exercise
Regular participation in exercise
•  improves and strengthens the cardiorespiratory system.
•  maintains better muscle tone, muscular strength, and endurance.
•  improves muscular flexibility.
•  enhances athletic performance.
•  helps maintain recommended body weight.
•  helps preserve lean body tissue.
•  increases resting metabolic rate.
•  improves the body’s ability to use fat during physical activity.
•  improves posture and physical appearance.
•  improves functioning of the immune system.
•  lowers the risk for chronic diseases and illness (including heart disease, stroke, and certain cancers).
•  decreases the mortality rate from chronic diseases.
•  thins the blood so it doesn’t clot as readily (thereby decreasing the risk for coronary heart disease and strokes).
•  helps the body manage cholesterol levels more effectively.
•  prevents or delays the development of high blood pressure and lowers blood pressure in people with hypertension.
•  helps prevent and control type 2 diabetes.
•  helps achieve peak bone mass in young adults and maintain bone mass later in life, thereby decreasing the risk for osteoporosis.
•  helps people sleep better.
•  helps prevent chronic back pain.
•  relieves tension and helps in coping with life stresses.
•  raises levels of energy and job productivity.
•  extends longevity and slows the aging process.
•  improves and helps maintain cognitive function, decreasing the risk for dementia and Alzheimer’s disease.
•  promotes psychological well-being, including higher morale, self-image, and self-esteem.
•  reduces feelings of depression and anxiety.
•  encourages positive lifestyle changes (improving nutrition, quitting smoking, controlling alcohol and drug use).
•  speeds recovery time following physical exertion.
•  speeds recovery following injury or disease.
•  regulates and improves overall body functions.
•  improves physical stamina and counteracts chronic fatigue.
•  reduces disability and helps to maintain independent living, especially in older adults.
•  enhances quality of life: People feel better and live a healthier and happier life.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

12
Fitness and Wellness
exercise are well-established, what many people fail to re-
alize is that there are immediate benefits derived by partici-
pating in just one single bout of exercise. Most of these 
benefits dissipate within 48 to 72 hours following exercise. 
The acute (immediate) benefits, summarized in Table 1.2, 
are so striking that they prompted Dr. William L. Haskell 
of Stanford University to state: “Most of the health benefits 
of exercise are relatively short term, so people should think 
of exercise as a medication and take it on a daily basis.” Of 
course, as you regularly exercise a minimum of 30 minutes 
5 times per week, you will realize the impressive long-term 
benefits listed in Table 1.1.
1.7  National Health 
Objectives for the Year 
2020
Every 10 years, the U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services releases a list of objectives for preventing disease 
and promoting health. Since 1979, the Healthy People ini-
tiative has set and monitored national health objectives to 
meet a broad range of health needs, encourage collabora-
tions across sectors, guide individuals toward making in-
formed health decisions, and measure the impact of our 
prevention activity. Currently, Healthy People is leading the 
way to achieve increased quality and years of healthy life 
and seek to eliminate health disparities among all groups of 
people. The objectives address three important points18:
	1.	
Personal responsibility for health behavior. Individu-
als need to become ever more health conscious. 
Responsible and informed behaviors are the keys to 
good health.
	2.	
Health benefits for all people and all communities. 
Lower socioeconomic conditions and poor health 
often are interrelated. Extending the benefits of 
good health to all people is crucial to the health of 
the nation.
	3.	
Health promotion and disease prevention. A shift 
from treatment to preventive techniques will dras-
tically cut health care costs and help all Americans 
achieve a better quality of life.
Developing these health objectives involves more 
than 10,000 people representing 300 national organiza-
Table 1.2  Immediate (Acute) Benefits of Exercise
You can expect a number of benefits as a result of a single exercise session. Some of these benefits last up to 72 hours following your workout. 
Exercise
•  increases head rate, stroke volume, cardiac output, pulmonary ventilation, and oxygen uptake.
•  begins to strengthen the heart, lungs, and muscles.
•  enhances metabolic rate or energy production (burning calories for fuel) during exercise and recovery—for every 100 calories you burn dur-
ing exercise you can expect to burn another 15 during recovery.
•  uses blood glucose and muscle glycogen.
•  improves insulin sensitivity (decreasing type 2 diabetes risk).
•  immediately enhances the body’s ability to burn fat.
•  lowers blood lipids.
•  improves joint flexibility.
•  reduces low-grade (hidden) inflammation (see page 209 in Chapter 8).
•  increases endorphins (hormones), naturally occurring opioids that are responsible for exercise-induced euphoria.
•  increases fat storage in muscle, which can then be burned for energy.
•  improves endothelial function (endothelial cells line the entire vascular system providing a barrier between the vessel lumen and surrounding 
tissue—endothelial dysfunction contributes to several disease processes, including tissue inflammation and subsequent atherosclerosis).
•  enhances mood and self-worth.
•  provides a sense of achievement and satisfaction.
•  decreases blood pressure the first few hours following exercise.
•  decreases arthritic pain.
•  leads to muscle relaxation.
•  decreases stress.
•  improves brain function.
•  promotes better sleep (unless exercise is performed too close to bedtime).
•  improves digestion.
•  boosts energy levels.
•  improves resistance to infections.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

13
Chapter 1  Introduction to Physical Fitness and Wellness
tions, including the Institute of Medicine of the National 
Academy of Sciences, all state health departments, and 
the federal Office of Disease Prevention and Health Pro-
motion. Figure 1.9 summarizes the key 2020 objectives. 
Living the fitness and wellness principles provided in 
this book will enhance the quality of your life and also 
will allow you to be an active participant in achieving the 
Healthy People 2020 objectives.
1.8  The Path to Fitness 
and Wellness
Current scientific data and the fitness movement that 
began more than three decades ago in the United States 
have led many people to see the advantages of partici-
pating in fitness programs that will improve and main-
tain health. Because fitness and wellness needs vary 
from one person to another, exercise and wellness pre-
scriptions must be personalized for best results. This 
book provides the necessary guidelines for developing 
a lifetime program to improve fitness and promote pre-
ventive health care and personal wellness. As you study 
the book and complete the assignments in each chapter, 
you will learn to
• 
Determine whether medical clearance is required 
for you to participate safely in exercise.
• 
Assess your overall level of physical fitness, includ-
ing cardiorespiratory endurance, muscular fitness 
(strength and endurance), muscular flexibility, and 
body composition.
• 
Prescribe personal programs for total fitness 
development.
• 
Learn behavior modification techniques that will 
allow you to change unhealthy lifestyle patterns.
• 
Develop sound diet and weight-control programs.
• 
Implement a healthy lifestyle program that includes 
prevention of cardiovascular diseases and cancer, 
stress management, and smoking cessation, if 
applicable.
• 
Discern myths from facts pertaining to exercise 
and health-related concepts.
1.9  Behavior Modification
Scientific evidence of the benefits derived from living a 
healthy lifestyle continues to mount each day. Although 
the data are impressive, most people still don’t adhere 
to a healthy lifestyle. To understand why this is so,  
one has to exam-
ine what moti-
vates people and 
what actions are 
required to make 
p e r m a n e n t 
changes in behav-
ior, called behav-
ior modification.
Behavior modification  The process 
used to permanently change negative be-
haviors in favor of positive behaviors that 
will lead to better health and well-being.
Figure 1.9
Selected national health objectives for the year 2020.
© Cengage Learning
• Increase the proportion of persons with health insurance, a usual 
primary care provider, and coverage for clinical preventive services.
• Ensure that all people, including those with illnesses and chronic 
disability, participate daily in meaningful and freely chosen 
recreation, leisure, and physical activity, which directly influences 
well-being and quality of life.
• Reduce the proportion of adults who engage in no leisure-time 
physical activity.
• Increase the proportion of adolescents and adults who meet current 
Federal physical activity guidelines.
• Increase the proportion of adults who are at a healthy weight, and 
reduce the proportion of children, adolescents, and adults who are 
overweight or obese.
• Reduce coronary heart disease and stroke deaths.
• Reduce the mean total blood cholesterol levels among adults and 
the proportion of persons in the population with hypertension.
• Increase the proportion of adults aged 20 years and older who are 
aware of, and respond to, early warning symptoms and signs of a 
heart attack and stroke.
• Reduce the overall cancer death rate and provide counseling about 
cancer prevention.
• Reduce the diabetes death rate and the annual number of new 
cases of diagnosed diabetes in the population.
• Reduce infections caused by key pathogens commonly transmitted 
through food.
• Increase the proportion of sexually active persons who use 
condoms.
• Reduce the rate of HIV transmission among adults and 
adolescents, and reduce the number of deaths resulting from HIV 
infection.
• Increase the proportion of substance-abuse treatment facilities that 
offer HIV/AIDS education, counseling, and support.
• Increase school-based health promotion programs available to 
youth between the ages of 14 and 22 to decrease the rate of 
sexually transmitted diseases and teen pregnancy and to increase 
the proportion of adolescents who abstain from sexual intercourse 
or use condoms if sexually active.
• Reduce tobacco use by adults and adolescents and reduce the 
initiation among children, adolescents, and young adults.
• Reduce average annual alcohol consumption and increase the 
proportion of adolescents who disapprove of substance abuse.
• Increase the proportion, among persons who need alcohol and/or 
illicit drug treatment, of those who receive specialized treatment for 
abuse or dependence.
• Reduce drug-induced deaths.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

14
Fitness and Wellness
Let’s look at an all-too-common occurrence on col-
lege campuses. Most students understand that they 
should be exercising. They contemplate enrolling in a 
fitness course. The motivating factor might be enhanced 
physical appearance, health benefits, or simply fulfill-
ment of a college requirement. They sign up for the 
course, participate for a few months, finish the course—
and stop exercising! Various excuses are offered: too 
busy, no one to exercise with, already have the grade, 
inconvenient open-gym hours, or job conflicts. A few 
months later, they realize once again that exercise is vital 
and repeat the cycle (see Figure 1.10).
The information in this book will be of little value to 
you if you are unable to abandon negative habits and 
adopt and maintain new, healthy behaviors. Before look-
ing at the physical fitness and wellness guidelines, you 
need to take a critical look at your behaviors and life-
style—and most likely make some permanent changes to 
promote your overall health and wellness.
1.9A  Changing Behavior  Change is incredibly 
difficult for most people. Our behaviors are based on our 
core values and actions that are rewarded. Whether we are 
trying to increase physical activity, quit smoking, change 
unhealthy eating habits, or reverse heart disease, it is 
human nature to resist change even when we know that 
change will provide substantial benefits in the near future.
People pursue change when it’s rewarded (for ex-
ample, lower health care premiums if you quit smoking) 
or they start contemplating change when there is a 
change in core values that will make them feel uncom-
fortable with the present behavior(s) or lack thereof (e.g., 
a long and healthy life is more important than smoking). 
Core values change when feelings are addressed. The 
challenge is to find ways that will help people understand 
the problems and solutions in a manner that will influ-
ence emotions and not just the thought process. Once 
the problem behavior is understood and “felt,” the per-
son may become uncomfortable with the situation and 
will be more inclined to address the problem behavior or 
adopt a healthy behavior.
Values are defined as the core beliefs and ideals that 
people have. Values govern behavior as people look to con-
duct themselves in a manner that is conducive to living and 
Healthy Lifestyle Habits
Research indicates that adherence to the following 12 life-
style habits will significantly improve health and extend life:
  1. Participate in a lifetime physical activity program.
  2. Do not smoke cigarettes.
  3. Eat right.
  4. Avoid snacking.
  5. Maintain recommended body weight through adequate 
nutrition and exercise.
  6. Sleep seven to eight hours each night.
  7. Lower your stress levels.
Behavior Modification Planning
  8. Drink alcohol moderately or not at all.
  9. Surround yourself with healthy friendships.
10. Seek to live and work in a healthy environment.
11. Use the mind: Keep your brain engaged throughout life 
to maintain cognitive function.
12. Take personal safety measures to lessen the risk for 
avoidable accidents.
Try It
Look at the list above and indicate which habits are already 
a part of your lifestyle. What changes could you make to 
incorporate additional healthy habits into your daily life?
Figure 1.10
Exercise/exercise dropout cycle.
© Cengage Learning
Contemplate
exercise
Participate 
in exercise
Realize need 
for exercise
Enroll in
fitness course
Find 
excuses for not 
exercising
Course
ends
Consider
fitness course
Stop
exercising
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

15
Chapter 1  Introduction to Physical Fitness and Wellness
attaining goals consistent with their beliefs and what’s im-
portant to them. A person’s values reflect who they are.
Values are established through experience and 
learning, and their development is a lifelong process that 
influences all aspects of life. Personal values are first de-
veloped within family circles, schools, the media, and the 
culture where people grow up and live, according to 
what is acceptable or unacceptable, desirable or undesir-
able, good or bad, and rewarded or ignored/punished. 
Educational experiences play a key role in the establish-
ment of values. Education is power: It provides people 
with knowledge to form opinions and forces them to 
question issues and take stands.
Values are also learned through examples and role 
models. People tend to emulate and adopt behaviors from 
people they admire, look up to, or view as heroes. Role 
models are most often parents, life heroes, siblings, class-
mates, sports figures, or people one sees on television or in 
movies, or reads and hears about through books or other 
media sources. As people look to develop values, they 
typically search for and emulate people of high ethical 
values and accomplishments that make them feel positive 
both about the people whose behaviors they are trying to 
emulate and themselves. Subsequently, the constant and 
habitual repetition of similar actions, behaviors, and ex-
pectations has a powerful conditioning effect on the mind 
and the role of the value for success in life.
Core values change throughout life based on educa-
tion and the environment in which people live. Learning 
and gaining a belief about a particular issue is most critical 
in the establishment of values. For example, individuals 
who lead a sedentary lifestyle and never exercise lack an 
understanding of and don’t experience the myriad benefits 
and vibrant quality of life obtained through fitness partici-
pation. Through a book, class, sports participation, or a 
friend, the person may first be exposed to exercise and an 
active lifestyle. The individual may then seek an environ-
ment wherein he/she can learn and actively participate in 
a physical activity or exercise program. The feelings of 
well-being and increased health, functional capacity, qual-
ity of life, and the education gained about the benefits of 
fitness in turn become the reward for program participa-
tion and lead to the development of the value that daily 
activity is vital for health and wellness. The person, often 
subconsciously, learns to analyze the feelings experienced 
through participation that lead to the development of a 
new value. The value now sways the person’s actions to live 
according to what is important to achieve wellness. This 
feeling of “fitness” often snowballs into the adoption of 
other healthy behaviors that further improve the individ-
ual’s state of well-being. Of utmost importance in the 
maintenance of core values is to live the principles in-
volved to reap the benefits. Thus, a constant and deliberate 
effort is required to be in an environment that rewards the 
behavior(s) the individual is trying to live.
The first step in addressing behavioral change is to 
recognize that indeed a problem exists. Five general cat-
egories of behaviors are addressed in the process of will-
ful change:
	1.	
Stopping a negative behavior
	2.	
Preventing relapse of a negative behavior
	3.	
Developing a positive behavior
	4.	
Strengthening a positive behavior
	5.	
Maintaining a positive behavior
Changing chronic, unhealthy behaviors to stable, 
healthy behaviors is often challenging. Change usually 
does not happen all at once but, rather, is a lengthy pro-
cess with several stages.
The simplest model of change is the two-stage model 
of unhealthy behavior and healthy behavior. This model 
states that either you do it or you don’t. Most people who 
use this model attempt self-change but end up asking 
themselves why they’re unsuccessful: They just can’t do it 
(start and adhere to exercise or quit smoking, for exam-
ple). Their intention to change may be good, but to ac-
complish it, they need knowledge about how to achieve 
change. The following discussion may help.
To aid in this process, psychologists James Prochaska, 
John Norcross, and Carlo DiClemente developed a behav-
ioral change model.19 The model’s five stages are important 
to understanding the process of willful change. The stages of 
change describe underlying processes that people go through 
to change most problem behaviors and adopt healthy behav-
iors. Most frequently, the model is used to change health-
related behaviors such as physical inactivity, smoking, nutri-
tion, weight control, stress, and alcohol abuse.
The five stages of change are precontemplation, con-
templation, preparation, action, and maintenance. A 
sixth stage of change, termination/adoption, was subse-
quently added to this model.
After years of study, researchers found that applying 
specific behavior-change techniques during each stage of 
the model increases the rate of success for change. Un-
derstanding each stage of this model will help you deter-
mine where you are in relation to your personal healthy-
lifestyle behaviors. It also will help you identify techniques 
to make successful changes.
Precontemplation
People in the pre-
contemplation 
stage are not con-
sidering or do not 
want to change a 
specific behavior. 
Precontemplation stage  Stage of 
change in which people are unwilling to 
change their behavior.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

16
Fitness and Wellness
They typically deny having a problem and presently do 
not intend to change. These people are usually unaware 
or underaware of the problem. Other people around 
them, including family, friends, health care practitioners, 
and coworkers, however, identify the problem quite 
clearly.
Precontemplators do not care about the problem 
behavior and might even avoid information and materi-
als that address the issue. They avoid free screenings and 
workshops that could help identify and change the prob-
lem, even if they receive financial incentives for attend-
ing. Frequently, these people actively resist change and 
seem resigned to accept the unhealthy behavior as their 
“fate.”
Precontemplators are the most difficult people to 
reach for behavioral change. They often think that 
change isn’t even a possibility. Educating them about 
the problem behavior is critical to helping them start 
contemplating the process of change. It is said that 
knowledge is power, and the challenge is to find ways to 
help them realize that they will be ultimately responsi-
ble for the consequences of their behavior. Sometimes 
they initiate change only when under pressure from 
others.
Contemplation
In the contemplation stage, people acknowledge that 
they have a problem and begin to think seriously about 
overcoming it. Although they are not quite ready for 
change yet, they are weighing the pros and cons. People 
may remain in this stage for years, but in their mind they 
are planning to take some action within the next six 
months or so. Education and peer support are valuable 
during this stage.
Preparation
In the preparation stage, people are seriously consider-
ing and planning to change a behavior within the next 
month. They are taking initial steps for change and may 
even try it for a short while, such as stopping smoking 
for a day or exercising a few times during this month. In 
this stage, people define a general goal for behavior 
change (say, to quit smoking by the last day of the 
month) and write specific actions to accomplish this goal 
(see the discussion on SMART goals, pages 20–21). Con-
tinued peer and environmental support are recom-
mended during the preparation phase.
Action
The action stage requires the most commitment of time 
and energy by the individual. Here people are actively 
doing things to change or modify the problem behavior 
or to adopt a new health behavior. The action stage re-
quires that the person follow the specific guidelines set 
forth for that specific behavior. For example, a person 
has actually stopped smoking completely, is exercising 
aerobically three times per week according to exercise 
prescription guidelines (see Chapter 3), or is maintain-
ing a healthy diet.
Relapse, in which the individual regresses to a pre-
vious stage, is common during this stage. Once people 
maintain the action stage for six consecutive months, 
they move into the maintenance stage.
Maintenance
During the maintenance stage, the person continues to 
adhere to the behavior change for up to five years. The 
maintenance phase requires continuously adhering to 
the specific guidelines that govern the target behavior 
(for example, complete smoking cessation, aerobic exer-
cise three times per week, or proper stress management 
techniques). At this time, a person works to reinforce the 
gains made through the various stages of change and 
strives to prevent lapses and relapses.
Termination/Adoption
Once a person has maintained a behavior more than five 
years, he or she enters the termination/adoption stage 
without fear of relapse. In the case of negative behaviors 
that have been terminated, this stage of change is re-
ferred to as termination. If the person has adopted a 
positive behavior for more than five years, this stage is 
designated the adoption stage. Many experts believe that 
after this period of time, any former addictions, prob-
lems, or lack of compliance with healthy behaviors no 
longer present an obstacle in the quest for wellness. The 
change has become a part of one’s lifestyle. This phase is 
the ultimate goal for everyone who seeks a healthier 
lifestyle.
Use the form provided in Figure 1.11 to determine 
where you stand in respect to behaviors that you want to 
change or new ones that you wish to adopt. As you fill out 
this form, you will realize that you are at different stages 
for different behaviors. For instance, you may be in the 
termination stage for aerobic exercise and smoking, in the 
action stage for strength training, but only in the contem-
plation stage for a healthy diet. Realizing where you are at 
with respect to different behaviors will help you design a 
better action plan for a healthy lifestyle.
Using the form provided in Activity 1.1, pages  
23–24, select two or three behaviors that you have tar-
geted for the next three months. Developing new behav-
ioral patterns takes time, and trying to work on too many 
components at once most likely will lower your chances 
for success. Start with components in which you think 
you will have a high chance for success.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

17
Chapter 1  Introduction to Physical Fitness and Wellness
What factors do you think keep you from participating in 
a regular exercise program? • How about factors that 
keep you from managing your daily caloric intake?
Critical Thinking
1.9B  Motivation and Locus of Control  
Motivation often explains why some people succeed and 
others do not. Although motivation comes from within, 
external factors are what trigger the inner desire to ac-
complish a given task. These external factors, then, con-
trol behavior.
Understanding locus of control is helpful to the 
study of motivation. People who believe they have con-
trol over events in their lives are said to have an internal 
locus of control. People with an external locus of control, 
by contrast, believe that what happens to them is a result 
of chance or environmental factors and is unrelated to 
their behavior. The latter group often has difficulty get-
ting out of the precontemplation or contemplation 
stages.
Contemplation stage  Stage of change in which people 
are considering changing behavior in the next six months.
Preparation stage  Stage of change in which people 
are getting ready to make a change within the coming 
month.
Action stage  Stage of change in which people are ac-
tively changing a negative behavior or adopting a new, 
healthy behavior.
Relapse  Slipping or falling back into unhealthy 
behavior(s) or failing to maintain healthy behaviors.
Maintenance stage  Stage of change in which people 
maintain behavioral change for up to five years.
Termination/adoption stage  Stage of change in 
which people have eliminated an undesirable behavior or 
maintained a positive behavior for more than five years.
Motivation  The desire and will to do something.
Locus of control  The extent to which a person believes 
he or she can influence the external environment.
Figure 1.11
Identifying your current stage of change.
© Cengage Learning
I currently __________________________________, and I do not intend to change in the foreseeable future.
I currently __________________________________, but I am contemplating changing in the next 6 months.
I currently _______________________________________  regularly but intend to change in the next month.
I currently ________________________________________, but I have done so only within the last 6 months.
I currently ____________________________________________, and I have done so for more than 6 months.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
I currently ______________________________________________, and I have done so for more than 5 years.
STAGES OF CHANGE
1  =  Precontemplation
2  =  Contemplation
3  =  Preparation
4  =  Action
5  =  Maintenance
6  =  Termination/Adoption
Please indicate which response most accurately describes your current ______________________________________
behavior (in the blank space identify the behavior: smoking, physical activity, stress, nutrition, weight control, etc.). 
Next, select the statement below (select only one) that best represents your current behavior pattern. To select the most 
appropriate statement, ﬁll in the blank for one of the ﬁrst three statements if your current behavior is a problem behav-
ior. (For example, you might say, “I currently smoke, and I do not intend to change in the foreseeable future,” or “I 
currently do not exercise, but I am contemplating changing in the next 6 months.”) If you have already started to make 
changes, ﬁll in the blank in one of the last three statements. (In this case, you might say: “I currently eat a low-fat diet, 
but I have done so only within the last 6 months,” or “I currently practice adequate stress management techniques, and I 
have done so for more than 6 months.”) As you can see, you may use this form to identify your stage of change for any 
type of health-related behavior.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

18
Fitness and Wellness
People with an internal locus of control are apt to be 
healthier and have an easier time initiating and adhering 
to a wellness program than those who perceive that they 
have little control and think of themselves as powerless 
and vulnerable. The latter people also are at greater risk 
for illness. When illness does strike, restoring a sense of 
control is vital to regaining health.
Few people have either a completely external or a 
completely internal locus of control. They fall some-
where along a continuum. The more external, the greater 
is the challenge in changing and adhering to exercise and 
other healthy lifestyle behaviors. Fortunately, a person 
can develop a more internal locus of control. Under-
standing that most events in life are not determined ge-
netically or environmentally helps people pursue goals 
and gain control over their lives. Three impediments, 
however, can keep people from entering the preparation 
or action stages: problems of competence, confidence, 
and motivation.
	1.	
Problems of competence. Lacking the skills to get a 
given task done leads to less competence. If your 
friends play basketball regularly but you don’t 
know how to play, you might not be inclined to 
participate. The solution to this problem of compe-
tence is to master the skills you need for participa-
tion. Most people are not born with all-inclusive 
natural abilities, including playing sports.
	
A college professor continuously watched a 
group of students play an entertaining game of bas-
ketball every Friday at noon. Having no basketball 
skills, he was reluctant to play (contemplation 
stage). Eventually, however, the desire to join in the 
fun was strong enough that he enrolled in a begin-
ning course at the college so he would learn to play 
the game (preparation stage). To his surprise, most 
of the students were impressed that he was willing 
to do this. Now, with greater competence, he is able 
to join in on Friday’s “pick-up games” (action 
phase).
	
Another alternative is to select an activity in 
which you are skilled. It may not be basketball, but 
it could be aerobics. And don’t be afraid to try new 
activities. Similarly, if your body weight is a prob-
lem, you could learn to cook low-calorie meals. Try 
different recipes until you find foods you like.
	
Patty’s story at the beginning of this chapter 
exemplifies a lack of competence. Patty was moti-
vated and knew she could do it, but she lacked the 
skills to reach her goal. All along, Patty was fluctu-
ating between the contemplation and action stages. 
Once she mastered the skills, she was able to 
achieve and maintain her goal.
	2.	
Problems of confidence. Problems with confidence 
arise when you have the skills but you don’t believe 
you can get it done. Fear and feelings of inade-
quacy often interfere with the ability to perform 
the task.
	
Don’t talk yourself out of something until you 
have given it a fair try. If the skills are there, the sky 
is the limit. Initially, try to visualize yourself doing 
the task and getting it done. Repeat this several 
times, then actually give it a try. You will surprise 
yourself.
	
Sometimes, lack of confidence sets in when 
the task seems to be insurmountable. In these situ-
ations, dividing a goal into smaller, realistic objec-
tives helps to accomplish the task. You may know 
how to swim, but the goal of swimming a continu-
ous mile could take you several weeks to accom-
plish. Set up your training program so you swim a 
little farther each day until you are able to swim the 
entire mile. If you don’t meet your objective on a 
given day, try it again, reevaluate, cut back a little, 
and, most important, don’t give up.
	3.	
Problems of motivation. With problems of motiva-
tion, both the competence and the confidence are 
there, but individuals are unwilling to change be-
cause the reasons for change are not important to 
them. For example, a person begins contemplat-
ing a smoking cessation program when the rea-
sons for quitting outweigh the reasons for 
smoking.
Many people refrain from physical activity because 
they lack the necessary skills to enjoy and reap the 
benefits of regular participation.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

19
Chapter 1  Introduction to Physical Fitness and Wellness
The lack of knowledge and lack of goals are the 
primary causes of unwillingness to change (precon-
templators). Knowledge often determines goals, and 
goals determine motivation. How badly you want 
something dictates how hard you’ll work at it. Many 
people are unaware of the magnitude of the benefits of 
a wellness program. When it comes to a healthy life-
style, however, there may not be a second chance. A 
stroke, a heart attack, or cancer can have irreparable or 
fatal consequences. Greater understanding of what 
leads to disease may be all that is needed to initiate 
change.
Also, feeling physically fit is difficult to explain un-
less you have experienced it yourself. What Patty ex-
pressed to her instructor—fitness, self-esteem, confi-
dence, health, and quality of life—cannot be conveyed to 
someone who is constrained by sedentary living. In a 
way, wellness is like reaching the top of a mountain. The 
quiet, the clean air, the lush vegetation, the flowing water 
in the river, the wildlife, and the majestic valley below are 
difficult to explain to someone who has spent a lifetime 
within city limits.
1.10  Behavior 
Modification Principles
Over the course of many years, we all develop habits that 
we would like to change at some point. The adage “old 
habits die hard” comes to mind. Acquiring positive be-
haviors that will lead to better health and well-being re-
quires continuous effort. When wellness is concerned, 
the sooner we implement a healthy lifestyle program, the 
greater are the health benefits and quality of life that lie 
ahead. Adopting the following behavior modification 
principles can help change behavior.
1.10A  Self-Analysis  The first step in modifying 
behavior is a decisive desire to do so. If you have no in-
terest in changing a behavior, you won’t do it (precon-
templator). A person who has no intention of quitting 
smoking will not quit, regardless of what anyone says or 
how strong the evidence is against it. As part of your self-
analysis, you may want to prepare a list of reasons for 
continuing or discontinuing the behavior. When the 
reasons for changing outweigh the reasons for not chang-
ing, you are ready for the next step (contemplation 
stage).
1.10B  Behavior Analysis  Now you have to de-
termine the frequency, circumstances, and consequences 
of the behavior to be altered or implemented. If the de-
sired outcome is to consume less unhealthy fats, you first 
must find out what foods in your diet are high in those 
fats, when you eat them, and when you don’t eat them 
(preparation stage). Knowing when you don’t eat fatty 
foods points to circumstances under which you exert 
control of your diet and will help as you set goals.
1.10C  Goal Setting  A goal motivates change in 
behavior. The stronger the goal, or desire, the more mo-
tivated you will be either to change unwanted behaviors 
or to implement new healthy behaviors. The final topic of 
this chapter, SMART goals, will help you write goals and 
prepare an action plan to achieve those goals. This will 
aid with behavior modification.
1.10D  Social Support  Surrounding yourself with 
people who will work toward a common goal with you or 
will encourage you along the way will be helpful. At-
tempting to quit smoking, for instance, is easier when 
the person is around others who are trying to quit as 
well. The person also may get help from friends who 
have quit already. Peer support is a strong incentive for 
behavior change. During this process, people who will 
not be supportive should be avoided. Friends who have 
no desire to quit smoking may tempt the person to 
smoke and encourage relapse. People who achieved the 
same goal earlier might not be supportive either. For in-
stance, someone might say, “I can do six consecutive 
miles.” The response should be, “I’m proud that I can jog 
three consecutive miles.”
1.10E  Monitoring  During the action and mainte-
nance stages, continuous behavior monitoring increases 
awareness of the desired outcome. Sometimes this prin-
ciple in itself is sufficient to cause change. For example, 
keeping track of daily food intake reveals sources of un-
healthy fats in the diet. This can help a person cut down 
gradually or completely eliminate some unhealthy-fat 
foods before consuming them. If the goal is to increase 
daily intake of fruits and vegetables, keeping track of the 
number of servings eaten each day raises awareness and 
may help increase their intake.
1.10F  A Positive Outlook  Having a positive out-
look means taking an optimistic approach from the be-
ginning and believing in yourself. Following the 
guidelines in this chapter will help you pace yourself so 
you can work toward change. Also, you may become 
motivated by looking at the outcomes—how much 
healthier you will 
be, how much bet-
ter you will look, 
or how much far-
ther you can jog.
Goal  The ultimate aim toward which 
effort is directed.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

20
Fitness and Wellness
1.10G  Reinforcement  People 
tend to repeat behaviors that are re-
warded and disregard those that are 
not rewarded or are punished. If you 
have successfully cut down your fat 
intake during the week, reward your-
self by going to a show or buying a new 
pair of shoes. Do not reinforce your-
self with destructive behaviors such as 
eating a high-fat dinner. If you fail to 
change a desired behavior (or to im-
plement a new one), you may want to 
put off buying those new shoes. When 
a positive behavior becomes habitual, 
give yourself an even better reward. 
Treat yourself to a weekend away from 
home, buy a new bike, or get that ten-
nis racket you always wanted.
1.11  SMART Goals
Only a well-conceived action plan will help you attain 
goals. Determining what you want to accomplish is the 
starting point, but to reach your goal you need to write 
SMART goals. The SMART acronym means that goals 
are Specific, Measurable, Acceptable, Realistic, and 
Time-specific.
	1.	
Specific. When writing goals, state in a positive 
manner exactly what you would like to accomplish. 
For example, if you are overweight at 150 pounds 
and at 27 percent body fat, simply stating “I will 
lose weight” is not a specific goal. Instead, rewrite 
your goal to state “I will reduce my body fat to 20 
percent (137 pounds) in 12 weeks.”
	
Be sure to write down your goals. An unwrit-
ten goal is simply a wish. A written goal, in es-
sence, becomes a contract with yourself. Show this 
goal to a friend or an instructor and have him or 
her witness the contract you made with yourself by 
signing alongside your signature.
	
Once you have identified and written down a 
specific goal, write the specific actions that will 
help you reach that goal. These actions are the 
necessary steps required to reach your goal. For 
example, a goal might be to achieve recom-
mended body weight. Several specific actions 
could be to
	 	
(a)	 lose an average of one pound (or one fat per-
centage point) per week.
	 	
(b)	 monitor body weight before breakfast every 
morning.
	 	
(c)	 assess body composition every three weeks.
	 	
(d)	 limit fat intake to less than 25 percent of total 
daily caloric intake.
	 	
(e)	 eliminate all pastries from the diet during this 
time.
	 	
(f)	 walk/jog in the proper target zone for 60 min-
utes, 6 times per week.
	2.	
Measurable. Whenever possible, goals and actions 
should be measurable. For example, “I will lose 
weight” is not measurable, but “I will reduce body 
fat to 20 percent” is measurable. Also note that all 
of the sample specific actions (a) through (f) in 
item 1 above are measurable. For instance, you can 
figure out easily whether you are losing a pound or 
a percentage point per week; you can conduct a nu-
trient analysis to assess your average fat intake; or 
you can monitor your weekly exercise sessions to 
make sure you are meeting this specific objective.
	3.	
Acceptable. Goals that you set for yourself are more 
motivational than goals that someone else sets for 
you. These goals will motivate and challenge you 
and should be consistent with other goals that you 
have. As you set an acceptable goal, ask yourself: 
Do I have the time, commitment, and necessary 
skills to accomplish this goal? If not, you need to 
restate your goal so that it is acceptable to you.
	
In instances where successful completion of a 
goal involves others, such as an athletic team or an 
organization, an acceptable goal must be compati-
ble with those of the other people involved. If a 
team’s practice schedule is set Monday through Fri-
day from 4:00 to 6:00 p.m., it is unacceptable for 
you to train only three times per week or at a dif-
ferent time of the day.
Social support enhances regular participation and the process of behavior modification.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

21
Chapter 1  Introduction to Physical Fitness and Wellness
	
Acceptable goals are also embraced with posi-
tive thoughts. Visualize and believe in your success. 
As difficult as some tasks may seem, where there’s a 
will, there’s a way. A plan of action, prepared ac-
cording to the guidelines in this chapter, will help 
you achieve your goals.
	4.	
Realistic. Goals should be within reach. If you cur-
rently weigh 190 pounds and your target weight (at 
20 percent body fat) is 140 pounds, setting a goal 
to lose 50 pounds in a month would be unsound, if 
not impossible. Such a goal does not allow for the 
implementation of adequate behavior modification 
techniques or ensure weight maintenance at the 
target weight. Unattainable goals only set you up 
for failure, discouragement, and loss of interest.
	
On the other hand, do not write goals that are 
too easy to achieve and that do not challenge you. 
If a goal is too easy, you may lose interest and stop 
working toward it.
	
At times, problems arise even with realistic 
goals. Try to anticipate potential difficulties as 
much as possible and plan for ways to deal with 
them. If your goal is to jog for 30 minutes on 6 
consecutive days, what are the alternatives if the 
weather turns bad? Possible solutions are to jog in 
the rain, find an indoor track, jog at a different 
time of day when the weather is better, or partici-
pate in a different aerobic activity such as station-
ary cycling, swimming, or step aerobics.
	
Monitoring your progress as you move toward 
a goal also reinforces behavior. Keeping an exercise 
log or doing a body composition assessment peri-
odically enables you to determine your progress at 
any given time.
5.	
Time-specific. A goal always should have a specific 
date set for completion. The above example to 
reach 20 percent body fat in 12 weeks is time- 
specific. The chosen date should be realistic but 
not too distant in the future. Allow yourself enough 
time to achieve the goal, but not too much time, as 
this could affect your performance. With a dead-
line, a task is much easier to work toward.
1.11A  Goal 
Evaluation  In addition to the 
SMART guidelines provided above, you should conduct 
periodic evaluations of your goals. Reevaluations are 
vital for success. You may find that after you have fully 
committed and put all your effort into a goal, that goal 
may be unreachable. If so, reassess the goal.
Recognize that you will face obstacles and that you 
will not always meet your goals. Use your setbacks and 
learn from them. Rewrite your goal and create a plan 
that will help you get around self-defeating behaviors in 
the future. Once you achieve a goal, set a new one to 
improve upon or maintain what you have achieved. 
Goals keep you motivated.
In addition to previously discussed guidelines, 
throughout this book you will find information on be-
havioral change. For example, Chapter 3 includes the 
Exercise Readiness Questionnaire, tips to start and ad-
here to an exercise program, and how to set your fitness 
goals; Chapter 4 offers tips to enhance your aerobic 
workout; Chapter 6 gives suggestions on how to adhere 
to a lifetime weight management program; Chapter 7 
sets forth stress management techniques; and Chapter 8 
outlines a six-step smoking cessation plan.
1.12  A Word of Caution 
Before You Start Exercise
Even though exercise testing and participation is rela-
tively safe for most apparently healthy individuals, a 
small but real risk exists for exercise-induced abnormali-
ties in people with a history of cardiovascular problems 
and those who are at higher risk for disease. These peo-
ple should be screened before initiating or increasing the 
intensity of an exercise program.
Before you engage in an exercise program or par­
ticipate in any exercise testing, at a minimum you should 
fill out the Physical Activity Readiness Questionnaire 
(PAR-Q & YOU) found in Activity 1.2. A “yes” answer to 
any of these questions may signal the need for a physi-
cian’s approval be-
fore you partici-
pate. If you don’t 
have any “yes” re-
sponses, you may 
proceed to Chap-
ter 2 to assess your 
current level of 
fitness.
SMART  An acronym for Specific, 
Measurable, Attainable, Realistic, and 
Time-specific goals.
Actions  Steps required to reach a 
goal.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

22
Fitness and Wellness
	 1.	 Bodily movement produced by skeletal muscles is called
	 a.	 physical activity.
	 b.	 kinesiology.
	 c.	 exercise.
	 d.	 aerobic exercise.
	 e.	 muscle strength.
	 2.	 The 2008 Federal Guidelines for Physical Activity state 
that adults between 18 and 64 years of age should
	 a.	 do 2 hours and 30 minutes a week of moderate- 
intensity aerobic physical activity.
	 b.	 do 1 hour and 15 minutes (75 minutes) a week of  
vigorous-intensity aerobic physical activity.
	 c.	 do an equivalent combination of moderate- and  
vigorous-intensity aerobic physical activity listed  
under choices a and b above.
	 d.	 do muscle-strengthening activities that involve all 
major muscle groups on two or more days per week.
	 e.	 All of the above choices are correct.
	 3.	 The leading cause of death in the United States is
	 a.	 cancer.
	 b.	 accidents.
	 c.	 chronic lower respiratory disease.
	 d.	 diseases of the cardiovascular system.
	 e.	 drug-related illness.
	 4.	 The constant and deliberate effort to stay healthy and 
achieve the highest potential for well-being is defined as
	 a.	 health.	
d.	 health-related fitness.
	 b.	 physical fitness.	
e.	 metabolic fitness.
	 c.	 wellness.
	 5.	 Which of the following is not a component of health- 
related fitness?
	 a.	 cardiorespiratory endurance
	 b.	 body composition
	 c.	 agility
	 d.	 muscular strength and endurance
	 e.	 muscular flexibility
	 6.	 Research on the effects of fitness on mortality indicates 
that the largest drop in premature mortality is seen 
between
	 a.	 the average and excellent fitness groups.
	 b.	 the least fit and moderately fit groups.
	 c.	 the good and high fitness groups.
	 d.	 the moderately fit and good fitness groups.
	 e.	 The drop is similar between all fitness groups.
	 7.	 What is the greatest benefit of being physically fit?
	 a.	 absence of disease
	 b.	 a higher quality of life
	 c.	 improved sports performance
	 d.	 better personal appearance
	 e.	 maintenance of ideal body weight
	 8.	 Which of the following is a stage in the behavioral modi-
fication model?
	 a.	 recognition
	 b.	 motivation
	 c.	 relapse
	 d.	 preparation
	 e.	 goal setting
	 9.	 A precontemplator is a person who
	 a.	 has no desire to change a behavior.
	 b.	 is looking to make a change in the next six months.
	 c.	 is preparing for change in the next 30 days.
	 d.	 willingly adopts healthy behaviors.
	 e.	 is talking to a therapist to overcome a problem 
behavior.
	10.	 A SMART goal is effective when it is
	 a.	 realistic.
	 b.	 measurable.
	 c.	 specific.
	 d.	 acceptable.
	 e.	 All are correct choices.
Correct answers can be found on page 301.
Assess Your Knowledge
	1.	
Are you aware of lifestyle factors that may negatively im-
pact your health?
	2.	
Do you accumulate at least 30 minutes of moderate-in-
tensity physical activity five days per week?
	3.	
Do you participate in vigorous-intensity physical activity 
a minimum of two times per week?
	4.	
Do you make a constant and deliberate effort to stay 
healthy and achieve the highest potential for well-being?
Assess Your Behavior
To access course materials, including companion resources, please visit www.cengagebrain.com.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

23
Chapter 1  Introduction to Physical Fitness and Wellness
Activity 1.1: Behavior Modification: Stages of Change
Date
Name
Section
Course
Instructions
Behavior 1: 
 1. I currently 
, and I do not intend to change in the foreseeable future.
 2. I currently 
, but I am contemplating changing in the next 6 months.
 3. I currently 
 regularly but intend to change in the next month.
 4. I currently 
, but I have done so only within the last 6 months.
 5. I currently 
, and I have done so for more than 6 months.
 6. I currently 
, and I have done so for more than 5 years.
 6. I currently 
, and I have done so for more than 5 years.
Stage of change: (see Figure 1.11, page 17). 
Speciﬁc goal and date to be accomplished: 
Principles of behavior modiﬁcation to be used: 
Behavior 2:  
 1. I currently 
, and I do not intend to change in the foreseeable future.
 2. I currently 
, but I am contemplating changing in the next 6 months.
 3. I currently 
 regularly but intend to change in the next month.
 4. I currently 
, but I have done so only within the last 6 months.
 5. I currently 
, and I have done so for more than 6 months.
Stage of change: (see Figure 1.11, page 17). 
Speciﬁc goal and date to be accomplished: 
Principles of behavior modiﬁcation to be used: 
Please indicate which response most accurately describes 
your stage of change for three different behaviors (in the 
blank space identify the behavior: smoking, physical activity, 
stress, nutrition, weight control, etc.). Next, select the 
statement (select only one) that best represents your current 
behavior pattern. To select the most appropriate statement, 
ﬁll in the blank for one of the ﬁrst three statements if your 
current behavior is a problem behavior. (For example, you 
might say, “I currrently smoke and I do not intend to change 
in the foreseeable future,” or “I currently do not exercise, but 
I am contemplating changing in the next 6 months.”)
 
If you have already started to make changes, ﬁll in the 
blank in one of the last three statements. (In this case, you 
might say: “I currently eat a low-fat diet but I have done so 
only within the last 6 months,” or “I currently practice 
adequate stress management techniques and I have done so 
for more than 6 months.”) You may use this technique to 
identify your stage of change for any type of health-related 
behavior.
 
Now write SMART goals (see pages 20–21) and identify 
three behavior modiﬁcation principles (page 14) that will aid 
you with the process of change.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

24
Fitness and Wellness
Behavior 3: 
 1. I currently 
, and I do not intend to change in the foreseeable future.
 2. I currently 
, but I am contemplating changing in the next 6 months.
 3. I currently 
 regularly but intend to change in the next month.
 4. I currently 
, but I have done so only within the last 6 months.
 5. I currently 
, and I have done so for more than 6 months.
 6. I currently 
, and I have done so for more than 5 years.
Stage of change: (see Figure 1.11, page 17). 
Speciﬁc goal and date to be accomplished: 
Principles of behavior modiﬁcation to be used: 
Stages of Change
1
 Precontemplation
 Action
2
 Contemplation
 Maintenance
3
4
5
6
 Preparation
 Termination/Adoption
Self-Reﬂection
In your own words, indicate barriers (what may keep you from changing) that you may encounter during the process of change 
and how can you best prepare to overcome these barriers.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

No changes permitted. You are encouraged to photocopy the PAR-Q but only if you use the entire form. 
1.
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7.  
Has your doctor ever said that you have a heart condition and that you should only do physical activity recommended by a doctor? 
Do you feel pain in your chest when you do physical activity? 
In the past month, have you had chest pain when you were not doing physical activity? 
Do you lose your balance because of dizziness or do you ever lose consciousness? 
Do you have a bone or joint problem (for example, back, knee or hip) that could be made worse by a change in your physical activity? 
Is your doctor currently prescribing drugs (for example, water pills) for your blood pressure or heart condition?  
Do you know of any other reason why you should not do physical activity?    
PAR-Q & YOU
Physical Activity Readiness
Questionnaire - PAR-Q 
(revised 2002)  
If you
answered   
Informed Use of the PAR-Q: The Canadian Society for Exercise Physiology, Health Canada, and their agents assume no liability for persons who undertake physical activity, and if in doubt after
completing this questionnaire, consult your doctor prior to physical activity. 
(A Questionnaire for People Aged 15 to 69)
YES
NO
YES to one or more questions 
NO to all questions 
Talk with your doctor by phone or in person BEFORE you start becoming much more physically active or BEFORE you have a ﬁtness appraisal. Tell your doctor
about the PAR-Q and which questions you answered YES. 
• You may be able to do any activity you want—as long as you start slowly and build up gradually. Or, you may need to restrict your activities to those which are
   safe for you. Talk with your doctor about the kinds of activities you wish to participate in and follow his/her advice.
• Find out which community programs are safe and helpful for you.     
PLEASE NOTE:  If your health changes so that you then answer YES to 
any of the above questions, tell your fitness or health professional. Ask 
whether you should change your physical activity plan. 
NOTE: If the PAR-Q is being given to a person before he or she participates in a physical activity program or a ﬁtness appraisal, this section may be used for legal or administrative purposes. 
Public Health Agency of Canada and the Canadian Society for Exercise Physiology, reproduced by permission of the Canadian Society for Exercise Physiology.
“I have read, understood and completed this questionnaire. Any questions I had were answered to my full satisfaction.” 
NAME
or GUARDIAN (for participants under the age of majority) 
continued on other side... 
Note:  This physical activity clearance is valid for a maximum of 12 months from the date it is completed and becomes invalid if your condition changes so that you would answer YES to any of the seven questions.
© Canadian Society for Exercise Physiology 
Supported by: 
Health
Canada
Santé
Canada
If you answered NO honestly to all PAR-Q questions, you can be reasonably sure that you can: 
• start becoming much more physically active—begin slowly and build up gradually.  This is the safest and 
   easiest way to go.  
• take part in a fitness appraisal—this is an excellent way to determine your basic fitness so that you can
   plan the best way for you to live actively. It is also highly recommended that you have your blood pressure
   evaluated.  If your reading is over 144/94, talk with your doctor before you start becoming much more
   physically active.
DELAY BECOMING MUCH MORE ACTIVE: 
• if you are not feeling well because of a temporary illness such
   as a cold or a fever—wait until you feel better; or 
• if you are or may be pregnant—talk to your doctor before you
   start becoming more active.
DATE
Activity 1.2: Physical Activity Readiness 
Questionnaire (PAR-Q)
Regular physical activity is fun and healthy, and increasingly more people are starting to become more active every day. Being more active is very safe for most people. However, some people 
should check with their doctor before they start becoming much more physically active. 
If you are planning to become much more physically active than you are now, start by answering the seven questions in the box below. If you are between the ages of 15 and 69, the PAR-Q 
will tell you if you should check with your doctor before you start. If you are over 69 years of age, and you are not used to being very active, check with your doctor.
Common sense is your best guide when you answer these questions. Please read the questions carefully and answer each one honestly:  check YES or NO. 
Date
Name
Section
Course
I.
SIGNATURE
WITNESS
SIGNATURE OF PARENT
SOURCE: Physical Activity Readiness Questionaire (PAR-Q) © 2002. Used with permission from the Canadian Society for Exercise Physiology www.csep.ca.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

26
Fitness and Wellness
II.   Do you feel that it is safe for you to proceed with an exercise program? Explain any concerns or limitations that you may 
have regarding your safe participation in a comprehensive exercise program to improve cardiorespiratory endurance, muscu-
lar strength and endurance, and muscular ﬂexibility.
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
III.  In a few words, describe your previous experiences with sports participation, whether you have taken part in a structured ex-
ercise program, and express your own feelings about exercise participation.
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SOURCE: Physical Activity Readiness Questionaire (PAR-Q) © 2002. Used with permission from the Canadian Society for Exercise Physiology www.csep.ca.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Assessment of Physical 
Fitness
2
“The assessment of physical 
fitness helps to determine 
your present fitness levels, 
serves as a starting point and 
provides an incentive to 
exercise, and allows you to 
evaluate progress and 
monitor changes throughout 
the years.”
Objectives
• Identify the health-related components of 
physical fitness.
• Be able to assess cardio­respiratory fitness.
• Understand the difference between 
muscular strength and muscular 
endurance.
• Learn to assess muscular strength.
• Be able to assess muscular flexibility.
• Understand the components of body 
composition.
• Be able to assess body composition.
• Learn to determine recommended body 
weight.
• Learn to assess disease risk based on body 
mass index (BMI) and waist circumference.
27
Visit www.cengagebrain.com to access 
course materials and companion resources for 
this text, including quiz questions designed to 
check your understanding of the chapter 
contents, activities, labs, and more! See the 
preface on page xi for more information.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

28
Fitness and Wellness
I didn’t exercise a whole lot when I was in high 
school. I took a few years off from school to work 
and subsequently to get married. I always watched 
my weight and although not the athletic type, I felt 
that I was in shape. When I came back to school, I 
took a fitness class and the instructor required that 
we do all the health-related fitness tests. I couldn’t 
run a mile-and-a-half, but it really surprised me that 
even for the 1-mile walk test I was only in the fair 
category. My strength and flexibility were fair and 
good, and although my BMI was in the acceptable 
category, my body fat was too high. The results of 
my fitness tests were an eye-opening experience and 
made sense based on my limited exercise time the 
last few years. I was deter-
mined to do something and 
started to exercise accord-
ing to what I learned in 
class. At the end of the 
term, I was proud of my-
self: My body fat was now 
better than the health- 
fitness standard, and I was 
also able to do the mile-
and-a-half test running the 
entire time and scoring in the good category. I am 
proud of my progress, and now in my second year, I 
still exercise regularly at the Student Rec Center.
© Allen/Shutterstock.com
Real Life Story | Jamie’s Fitness Test Results
Daily physical activity is the miracle medication that peo-
ple are looking for. It makes you look and feel younger, 
boosts energy, provides lifetime weight management, im-
proves self-confidence and self-esteem, and enhances inde-
pendent living, health, and quality of life. It further allows 
you to enjoy a longer life by decreasing the risk of many 
chronic conditions, including heart disease, high blood 
pressure, stroke, diabetes, some cancers, and osteoporosis.
The health-related components of physical fit-
ness—cardiorespiratory endurance, muscular fitness 
(strength and endurance), muscular flexibility, and 
body composition—are the topics of this chapter, along 
with basic techniques frequently used to assess these 
components. Through these assessment techniques you 
will be able to determine your level of physical fitness 
regularly as you engage in an exercise program. Fitness 
testing in a comprehensive program is important to:
	1.	
Educate yourself regarding the various fitness 
components.
	2.	
Assess your fitness level for each health-related fit-
ness component and compare the results to health 
fitness and physical fitness standards.
	3.	
Identify areas of weakness for training emphasis.
	4.	
Motivate you to participate in exercise.
	5.	
Use as a starting point for your personalized exer-
cise prescriptions.
	6.	
Evaluate the progress and effectiveness of your 
program.
	7.	
Make adjustments in your exercise prescription, if 
necessary.
	8.	
Reward yourself for complying with your exercise 
program (a change to a higher fitness level is a re-
ward in and of itself).
You are encouraged to conduct at least pre- and post-
exercise program fitness tests. A personal fitness profile is 
provided in Activity 2.1, page 52, for you to record the 
results of each fitness test in this chapter (pre-test). At the 
end of the term, you can use the back of Activity 2.1 (post-
test) to record the results of your post-test.
An exercise tolerance test with 12-lead electrocardio-
graphic monitoring (stress ECG) may be required of some 
individuals prior to exercise.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

29
Chapter 2  Assessment of Physical Fitness
In Chapter 3, you will learn to write personal fitness 
goals for this course (see Activity 3.4, page 95). You 
should base these goals on the actual results of your ini-
tial fitness assessments. As you proceed with your exer-
cise program, you should allow a minimum of eight 
weeks before doing your post-fitness assessments.
As discussed in Chapter 1, exercise testing or exercise 
participation is not advised for individuals with certain 
medical or physical conditions. Therefore, before starting 
an exercise program or participating in any exercise test-
ing, you should fill out the Physical Activity Readiness 
Questionnaire (PAR-Q) given in Chapter 1, Activity 1.2, 
page 25. A “yes” answer to any of the questions suggests 
that you consult a physician before initiating, continuing, 
or increasing your level of physical activity.
2.1  Responders Versus 
Nonresponders
Individuals who follow similar training programs show a 
wide variation in physiological responses. Heredity plays 
a crucial role in how each person responds to and im-
proves after beginning an exercise program. Several 
studies have documented that following exercise train-
ing, most individuals, called responders, readily show 
improvements, but a few, nonresponders, exhibit small 
or no improvements at all. This concept is referred to as 
the principle of individuality.
After several months of cardiorespiratory endur-
ance (aerobic) training, VO2max increases are between 15 
percent and 20 percent, on average, although individual 
responses can range from 0 percent (in a few selected 
cases) to more than 50 percent improvement, even when 
all participants follow exactly the same training pro-
gram. Nonfitness and low-fitness participants, however, 
should not label themselves as nonresponders based on 
the previous discussion. Nonresponders constitute less 
than 5 percent of exercise participants. Some research 
indicates that lack of improvement in cardiorespiratory 
endurance among nonresponders might be related to 
low levels of leg strength. A lower body strength-training 
program has been shown to help these individuals im-
prove VO2max through aerobic exercise.1
Following assessment of cardiorespiratory endur-
ance, if your fitness level is less than adequate, do not let 
that discourage you, but make it a priority to be physically 
active every day. In addition to regular exercise, lifestyle 
behaviors such as walking, taking stairs, cycling to work, 
parking farther from the office, doing household tasks, 
gardening, and doing yard work provide substantial ben-
efits. In this regard, monitoring daily physical activity and 
exercise habits should be used in conjunction with fitness 
testing to evaluate compliance among nonresponders. 
After all, it is through increased daily activity that we reap 
the health benefits that improve quality of life.
2.2  Fitness Assessment 
Battery
No single test can provide a complete measure of physi-
cal fitness. Because health-related fitness has four com-
ponents, a battery of tests is necessary to determine an 
individual’s overall level of fitness. The next few pages 
include descriptions of several tests used to assess the 
health-related fitness components. When interpreting 
the results of fitness tests, two standards can be applied: 
health fitness and physical fitness.
2.2A   Health Fitness Standard  As illustrated 
in Figure 2.1, although fitness (VO2max—see discussion 
of cardiorespiratory endurance on page 31) improve-
ments with a moderate aerobic activity program are not 
as notable, significant health benefits are reaped with 
such a program. Health benefits include a reduction in 
blood lipids; lower blood pressure; weight loss; stress 
release; and lower 
risk for type 2 dia-
betes and cardio-
vascular 
disease, 
certain 
cancers, 
and 
premature 
mortality.
More specifi-
cally, 
improve-
ments 
in 
the  
metabolic profile 
(better insulin sen-
sitivity and glucose 
tolerance and im-
proved cholesterol 
levels) can be no-
table despite little 
or no improve-
ment in aerobic ca-
pacity or weight 
loss. 
These 
im-
provements in the 
metabolic 
profile 
through an active 
lifestyle and mod-
erate physical ac-
tivity are referred 
to as metabolic 
fitness.
Responders  Individuals who exhibit 
improvements in fitness as a result of 
exercise training.
Nonresponders  Individuals who ex-
hibit small or no improvements in fit-
ness as compared to others who un-
dergo the same training program.
Principle of individuality  Training 
concept that states that genetics plays 
a major role in individual responses to 
exercise training and these differences 
must be considered when designing ex-
ercise programs for different people.
Metabolic profile  Result of the as-
sessment of diabetes and cardiovascu-
lar disease risk through plasma insu-
lin, glucose, lipid, and lipoprotein 
levels.
Metabolic fitness  Denotes improve-
ments in the metabolic profile through 
a moderate-intensity exercise program 
despite little or no improvement in 
health-related fitness.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

30
Fitness and Wellness
The health fitness (or criterion-referenced) standards 
used in this book are based on epidemiological data link-
ing minimum fitness values to disease prevention and 
better health. Attaining the health fitness standards re-
quires only moderate amounts of physical activity. For 
example, a 2-mile walk in less than 30 minutes, 5 to 6 
times per week, seems to be sufficient to achieve the health 
fitness standard for cardiorespiratory endurance.
2.2B  Physical Fitness Standard  The physical 
fitness standard is set higher than the health fitness 
standard and requires a more vigorous exercise program. 
Whenever possible, participating in a vigorous exercise 
program is preferable because it provides even greater 
health and fitness benefits.2 Such a program is recom-
mended for individuals who wish to further improve 
personal fitness, reduce the risk for chronic disease and 
disabilities, prevent premature mortality, and prevent 
unhealthy weight gain.
By participating in vigorous exercise, physically fit 
people of all ages have the freedom to enjoy most of life’s 
daily and recreational activities to their fullest potential. 
The current health fitness standards are not enough to 
achieve this goal.
Sound physical fitness gives the individual a level of 
independence throughout life that many people no lon-
ger enjoy. Most older people should be able to carry out 
activities similar to those they conducted in their youth, 
though not with the same intensity. Although a person 
does not have to be an elite athlete, activities such as 
changing a tire, chopping wood, climbing several flights 
of stairs, playing a game of basketball, mountain biking, 
playing soccer with grandchildren, walking several miles 
around a lake, and hiking through a national park re-
quire more than the “average fitness” level of the Ameri-
can people.
If the main objective of the fitness program is to 
lower the risk for disease, attaining the health fitness 
INTENSITY
Moderate
None
Vigorous
High
Low
BENEFITS
BENEFITS
High
Low
HEALTH
FITNESS
Low fitness
Health/metabolic fitness
High physical fitness
Sedentary
Active lifestyle
Active lifestyle and exercise
Figure 2.1
Health and fitness benefits based on type of lifestyle and physical activity program.
© Cengage Learning
Aerobic activities promote cardiorespiratory development and help decrease the risk for chronic diseases.
Photos © Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

31
Chapter 2  Assessment of Physical Fitness
standards may be adequate to ensure better health. But  
if the individual wants to participate in moderate-to-
vigorous fitness activities and further reduce the risk for 
chronic disease and premature mortality, achieving a 
high physical fitness standard is recommended. For the 
purposes of this book, both health fitness and physical 
fitness standards are given for each fitness test. You will 
have to decide your personal objectives for the fitness 
program.
2.3  Cardiorespiratory 
Endurance
Cardiorespiratory endurance is the single most impor-
tant component of health-related physical fitness. The 
exception occurs among older adults, for whom muscu-
lar strength is particularly important. Aerobic exercise is 
especially important in preventing many chronic condi-
tions including diseases of the cardiovascular system, 
diabetes, and even some forms of cancer.
A sound cardiorespiratory endurance program con-
tributes greatly to good health. The typical American is 
not exactly a good role model in terms of cardiorespira-
tory fitness. A poorly conditioned heart that has to pump 
more often just to keep a person alive is subject to more 
wear and tear than a well-conditioned heart. In situa-
tions that place strenuous demands on the heart, such as 
doing yard work, lifting heavy objects or weights, or run-
ning to catch a bus, the unconditioned heart may not be 
able to sustain the strain. Regular participation in aero-
bic activities also helps a person achieve and maintain 
recommended body weight—the fourth component of 
health-related physical fitness.
As a person breathes, part of the oxygen in the air is 
taken up in the lungs and transported in the blood to the 
heart. The heart then pumps the oxygenated blood 
through the circulatory system to all organs and tissues 
of the body. At the cellular level, oxygen is used to con-
vert food substrates, primarily carbohydrates and fats, 
into the energy necessary to conduct body functions, 
maintain a constant internal equilibrium, and perform 
physical tasks.
Some examples of activities that promote cardio­
respiratory endurance, or aerobic fitness, are brisk 
walking, jogging, cycling, rowing, swimming, cross-
country skiing, aerobics, soccer, basketball, and racquet-
ball. Guidelines to develop a lifetime cardiorespiratory 
endurance exercise program are given in Chapter 3, and 
an introduction and description of benefits of leading 
aerobic activities are given in Chapter 4.
Everyone who initiates a cardiorespiratory exercise 
program can expect a number of benefits from training. 
Among these are lower resting heart rate, blood pressure, 
blood lipids (cholesterol and triglycerides), recovery 
time following exercise, and risk for hypokinetic diseases 
(those associated with physical inactivity and sedentary 
living). Simultaneously, cardiac muscle strength and  
oxygen-carrying capacity increase.
Cardiorespiratory endurance is determined by the 
maximal oxygen uptake, or VO2max, the maximum 
amount of oxygen the human body is able to utilize per 
minute of physical activity. This value can be expressed in 
liters per minute (L/min) or milliliters per kilogram  
(2.2 pounds) of body weight per minute (mL/kg/min). 
The relative value in mL/kg/min is used most often  
because it consid-
ers total body mass 
(weight) in kilo-
grams. 
When 
comparing 
two 
individuals 
with 
the same absolute 
value, the one with 
the 
lesser 
body 
mass will have a 
higher 
relative 
value, 
indicating 
that more oxygen 
is available to each 
kilogram 
(2.2 
pounds) of body 
weight. Because all 
tissues and organs 
of the body need 
oxygen to func-
tion, higher oxy-
gen consumption 
indicates a more 
efficient cardiores­
piratory system.
Maximal oxygen uptake (VO2max) can be determined through direct gas 
analysis.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Health fitness standard  The lowest 
fitness requirements for maintaining 
good health, decreasing the risk for 
chronic diseases, and lowering the in-
cidence of muscular/skeletal injuries.
Physical fitness standard  Required 
criteria to achieve a high level of physi-
cal fitness; ability to do moderate-to-
vigorous physical activity without un-
due fatigue.
Cardiorespiratory endur-
ance  Ability of the lungs, heart, and 
blood vessels to deliver adequate 
amounts of oxygen to the cells to meet 
the demands of prolonged physical 
activity.
Maximal oxygen uptake 
(VO2max)  Maximum amount of oxygen 
the human body is able to utilize per 
minute of physical activity.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

32
Fitness and Wellness
While your absolute maximal oxygen uptake remains un-
changed, your relative maximal oxygen uptake can in-
crease without engaging in an aerobic exercise program. 
• How can you accomplish this, and would you benefit 
from doing so?
Critical Thinking
Physical exertion requires more energy to perform 
the activity than sedentary living. As a result, the heart, 
lungs, and blood vessels have to deliver more oxygen to 
the cells to supply the required energy. During prolonged 
exercise, an individual with a high level of cardiorespira-
tory endurance is able to deliver the required amount of 
oxygen to the tissues with relative ease. The cardiorespi-
ratory system of a person with a low level of endurance 
has to work much harder, as the heart has to pump more 
often to supply the same amount of oxygen to the tissues 
and consequently fatigues faster. Hence, a higher capac-
ity to deliver and utilize oxygen (oxygen uptake) indi-
cates a more efficient cardiorespiratory system.
Oxygen uptake, expressed in L/min, is valuable in 
determining the caloric expenditure of physical activity. 
The human body burns about 5 calories for each liter of 
oxygen consumed, and oxygen uptake ranges from about 
.3 to .5 L/min during resting conditions to about 3 L/min 
during maximal exercise for moderately fit individuals 
and over 5 L/min in highly conditioned athletes. During 
aerobic exercise, the average person trains at between 50 
and 75 percent of maximal oxygen uptake. Thus, we burn 
between 1.5 to 2.5 calories/min at rest to a range of 7 to 12 
calories/min during vigorous-intensity aerobic exercise.
Let’s use a practical illustration. A person with a maxi-
mal oxygen uptake of 3.5 L/min who trains at 60 percent of 
maximum uses 2.1 (3.5 3 .60) liters of oxygen per minute 
of physical activity. This indicates that 10.5 calories are 
burned during each minute of exercise (2.1 3 5). If the 
activity is carried out for 30 minutes, 315 calories (10.5 3 
.30) have been burned. Because a pound of body fat repre-
sents 3,500 calories, the previous example indicates that 
this individual would have to exercise for a total of 333 
minutes (3,500 4 10.5) to burn the equivalent of a pound 
of body fat. At 30 minutes per exercise session, approxi-
mately 11 sessions would be required to expend the 3,500 
calories, as long as there is no greater caloric intake (caloric 
compensation) as a result of the exercise program.
2.3A  Assessing Cardiorespiratory Endur-
ance  Even though most cardiorespiratory endurance 
tests probably are safe to administer to apparently healthy 
individuals (those with no heart disease risk factors or 
symptoms), the American College of Sports Medicine 
recommends that men over age 45 and women over age 
55 with an additional heart disease risk factor have a 
physician present for all maximal exercise tests.3
A maximal test is any test that requires the partici-
pant’s all-out or nearly all-out effort, such as the 1.5-Mile 
Run Test or a maximal exercise treadmill test (stress elec-
trocardiogram). For submaximal exercise tests (such as a 
walking test), a physician should be present when testing 
higher-risk and symptomatic individuals, regardless of age.
1.5-Mile Run Test
The test used most often to determine cardiorespiratory 
endurance is the 1.5-Mile Run Test. The fitness category 
is determined according to the time a person takes to 
run or walk a 1.5-mile course. The only equipment nec-
essary to conduct this test is a stopwatch and a track or a 
premeasured 1.5-mile course.
Although the 1.5-Mile Run Test is quite simple to 
administer, a note of caution is in order: As the objective 
is to cover the distance in the shortest time, it is consid-
ered a maximal exercise test. The 1.5-Mile Run Test 
should be limited to conditioned individuals who have 
been cleared for exercise. It is not recommended for un-
conditioned beginners, symptomatic individuals, those 
with known cardiovascular disease or risk factors for 
heart disease, and men over age 45 and women over age 
55. Unconditioned beginners are encouraged to have at 
least 6 weeks of aerobic training before they take the test.
Prior to taking the 1.5-Mile Run Test, you should do a 
few warm-up exercises—some stretching exercises, some 
walking, and slow jogging. Next, time yourself during the 
1.5-Mile Run to see how fast you cover the distance. If you 
notice any unusual symptoms during the test, do not con-
tinue. Stop immediately and see your physician, or retake 
the test after another six weeks of aerobic training. At the 
end of the test, cool down by walking or jogging slowly for 
another three to five minutes. Referring to your perfor-
mance time, look up your estimated VO2max in Table 2.1 
and the corresponding fitness category in Table 2.2.
For example, a 20-year-old female runs the 1.5-mile 
course in 12 minutes and 40 seconds. Table 2.1 shows a 
VO2max of 39.8 mL/kg/min for a time of 12:40. According 
to Table 2.2, this VO2max places her in the good cardio­
respiratory fitness category.
1.0-Mile Walk Test*
The 1.0-Mile Walk Test calls for a 440-yard track (four 
laps to a mile) or a premeasured 1.0-mile course. Body 
weight in pounds must be determined prior to the walk. 
A stopwatch is required to measure total walking time 
and exercise heart rate.
You can proceed to walk the 1-mile course at a brisk 
pace so the exercise heart rate at the end of the test is 
above 120 beats per minute. At the end of the 1.0-mile 
walk, check your walking time and immediately count 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

33
Chapter 2  Assessment of Physical Fitness
your pulse for 10 seconds. You can take your pulse on the 
wrist by placing two fingers over the radial artery (inside 
of the wrist on the side of the thumb) or over the carotid 
artery in the neck just below the jaw next to the voice box.
Next, multiply the 10-second pulse count by 6 to 
obtain the exercise heart rate in beats per minute. Now 
convert the walking time from minutes and seconds to 
minute units. Each minute has 60 seconds, so the sec-
onds are divided by 60 to obtain the fraction of a minute. 
For instance, a walking time of 12 minutes and 15 sec-
onds equals 12 1 (15 4 60), or 12.25 minutes. To obtain 
the estimated VO2max in mL/kg/min for the 1.0-Mile 
Walk Test, plug your values into the following equation:
VO2max 5 88.768 2 (0.0957 3 W) 1 (8.892 3 G) 2 
(1.4537 3 T) 2 (0.1194 3 HR)
where:
	
W	5 weight in pounds
	
G	5 gender (use 0 for women and 1 for men)
	
T	5 total time for the mile walk in minutes
	
HR	5 exercise heart rate in beats per minute at the 
end of the mile walk
Table 2.1  Estimated Maximal Oxygen Uptake  
(in mL/kg/min) for 1.5-Mile Run Test
Time
VO2max
Time
VO2max
Time
VO2max
6:10
80.0
10:30
48.6
14:50
34.0
6:20
79.0
10:40
48.0
15:00
33.6
6:30
77.9
10:50
47.4
15:10
33.1
6:40
76.7
11:00
46.6
15:20
32.7
6:50
75.5
11:10
45.8
15:30
32.2
7:00
74.0
11:20
45.1
15:40
31.8
7:10
72.6
11:30
44.4
15:50
31.4
7:20
71.3
11:40
43.7
16:00
30.9
7:30
69.9
11:50
43.2
16:10
30.5
7:40
68.3
12:00
42.0
16:20
30.2
7:50
66.8
12:10
41.7
16:30
29.8
8:00
65.2
12:20
41.0
16:40
29.5
8:10
63.9
12:30
40.4
16:50
29.1
8:20
62.5
12:40
39.8
17:00
28.9
8:30
61.2
12:50
39.2
17:10
28.5
8:40
60.2
13:00
38.6
17:20
28.3
8:50
59.1
13:10
38.1
17:30
28.0
9:00
58.1
13:20
37.8
17:40
27.7
9:10
56.9
13:30
37.2
17:50
27.4
9:20
55.9
13:40
36.8
18:00
27.1
9:30
54.7
13:50
36.3
18:10
26.8
9:40
53.5
14:00
35.9
18:20
26.6
9:50
52.3
14:10
35.5
18:30
26.3
10:00
51.1
14:20
35.1
18:40
26.0
10:10
50.4
14:30
34.7
18:50
25.7
10:20
49.5
14:40
34.3
19:00
25.4
Adapted from “A Means of Assessing Maximal Oxygen Intake,” by K. H. Cooper, Journal of 
the American Medical Association, 203 (1968), 201–204; Health and Fitness Through 
Physical Activity, by M. L. Pollock (New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1978); and Training for 
Sport Activity, by J. H. Wilmore (Boston: Allyn & Bacon, 1982).
Table 2.2  Cardiorespiratory Fitness Category According to Maximal Oxygen Uptake (in mL/kg/min)
Fitness Category
Gender
Age
Poor
Fair
Average
Good
Excellent
29
24.9
25–33.9
34–43.9
44–52.9
53
30–39
22.9
23–30.9
31–41.9
42–49.9
50
Men
40–49
19.9
20–26.9
27–38.9
39–44.9
45
50–59
17.9
18–24.9
25–37.9
38–42.9
43
60–69
15.9
16–22.9
23–35.9
36–40.9
41
29
23.9
24–30.9
31–38.9
39–48.9
49
30–39
19.9
20–27.9
28–36.9
37–44.9
45
Women
40–49
16.9
17–24.9
25–34.9
35–41.9
42
50–59
14.9
15–21.9
22–33.9
34–39.9
40
60–69
12.9
13–20.9
21–32.9
33–36.9
37
 High physical fitness standard
 Health fitness or criterion-referenced standard
© Cengage Learning
Taking the pulse at the radial artery.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

34
Fitness and Wellness
For example, a woman who weighs 140 pounds 
completed the mile walk in 14 minutes and 39 seconds 
with an exercise heart rate of 148 beats per minute. The 
estimated VO2max is:
	
W	 5 140 lbs.
	
G	 5 0 (female gender 5 0)
	
T	 5 14:39 5 14 1 (39 4 60) 5 14.65 min
	
HR	 5 148 bpm
	VO2max	 5 88.768 2 (0.0957 3 140) 1 (8.892 3 0) 2 
(1.4537 3 14.65) 2 (0.1194 3 148)
	VO2max	 5 36.4 mL/kg/min
As with the 1.5-Mile Run Test, the fitness categories 
based on VO2max are found in Table 2.2. Record your 
cardiorespiratory fitness test results on your fitness pro-
file in Activity 2.1, Pre-Test, page 52.
2.4 Muscular Fitness 
(Strength and Endurance)
Adequate levels of strength enhance a person’s health 
and well-being throughout life. The need for good mus­
cular fitness is not confined to highly trained athletes, 
fitness enthusiasts, or individuals who have jobs that re-
quire heavy muscular work. In fact, a well-planned 
strength-training program leads to increased muscle 
strength and endurance, muscle tone, tendon and liga-
Tips to Increase Daily Physical Activity
Adults need recess, too! There are 1,440 minutes in every day. 
Schedule a minimum of 30 of these minutes for physical activ-
ity. With a little creativity and planning, even the person with 
the busiest schedule can make room for physical activity. For 
many folks, before or after work or meals is often an available 
time to cycle, walk, or play. Think about your weekly or daily 
schedule and look for or make opportunities to be more active. 
Every little bit helps. Consider the following suggestions:
•  Walk, cycle, jog, skate, etc., to school, work, the store, or 
place of worship.
•  Use a pedometer to count your daily steps.
•  Walk while doing errands.
•  Get on or off the bus several blocks away.
•  Park the car farther away from your destination.
•  At work, walk to nearby offices instead of sending e-
mails or using the phone.
•  Walk or stretch a few minutes every hour that you are at 
your desk.
•  Take fitness breaks—walking or doing desk exercises—
instead of taking cigarette breaks or coffee breaks.
•  Incorporate activity into your lunch break (walk to the 
restaurant).
•  Take the stairs instead of the elevator or escalator.
•  Play with children, grandchildren, or pets. Everybody 
wins. If you find it too difficult to be active after work, try 
it before work.
Behavior Modification Planning
•  Do household tasks.
•  Work in the yard or garden.
•  Avoid labor-saving devices. Turn off the self-propelled 
option on your lawnmower or vacuum cleaner.
•  Use leg power. Take small trips on foot to get your body 
moving.
•  Exercise while watching TV (for example, use hand weights, 
stationary bicycle/treadmill/stairclimber, or stretch).
•  Spend more time playing sports than sitting in front of 
the TV or the computer.
•  Dance to music.
•  Keep a pair of comfortable walking or running shoes in 
your car and office. You’ll be ready for activity wherever 
you go!
•  Make a Saturday morning walk a group habit.
•  Learn a new sport or join a sports team.
•  Avoid carts when golfing.
•  When out of town, stay in hotels with fitness centers.
SOURCE: Adapted from Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, Atlanta, 2013.
Try It
Keep a three-day log of all your activities. List the activities 
performed, time of day, and how long you were engaged in 
these activities. You may be surprised by your findings.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

35
Chapter 2  Assessment of Physical Fitness
ment strength, and bone density—all of which help to 
improve and maintain everyday functional physical 
capacity.
Strength is crucial for top performance in daily ac-
tivities such as sitting, walking, running, lifting and car-
rying objects, doing housework, and even enjoying rec-
reational activities. Strength is also valuable in improving 
personal appearance and self-image, developing sports 
skills, promoting stability of joints, and meeting certain 
emergencies in life in which strength is necessary to cope 
effectively.
Muscular strength also seems to be the most impor-
tant health-related component of physical fitness in the 
older-adult population. Whereas proper cardiorespira-
tory endurance helps maintain a healthy heart, good 
strength levels do more to promote independent living 
than any other fitness component. More than anything 
else, older adults want to enjoy good health and function 
independently. Many, however, are confined to nursing 
homes because they lack sufficient strength to move 
about. They usually cannot walk very far, and some have 
to be helped in and out of beds, chairs, and tubs.
Regular strength training also helps control blood 
sugar. Much of the blood glucose from food consump-
tion goes to the muscles, where it is stored as glycogen. 
When muscles are not used, muscle cells may become 
insulin resistant, and glucose cannot enter the cells, 
thereby increasing the risk for type 2 diabetes. Research 
data have clearly shown that a regular strength-training 
program improves blood glucose control in both dia-
betic men and women.
A strength-training program can have a tremendous 
impact on quality of life. Research has shown leg strength 
improvements as high as 200 percent in previously inac-
tive adults over age 90.4 As strength improves, so does 
the ability to move about, the capacity for independent 
living, and life enjoyment during the “golden years.” 
More specifically, good strength enhances quality of life 
in the following ways:
• 
It increases lean (muscle) tissue.
• 
It stresses the bones, preserves bone density, and 
decreases the risk for osteoporosis.
• 
It helps increase and maintain resting metabolism.
• 
It encourages weight loss and maintenance.
• 
It improves balance and restores mobility.
• 
It makes lifting and reaching easier.
• 
It decreases the risk for injuries and falls.
• 
It reduces chronic low back pain and alleviates ar-
thritic pain.
• 
It lowers cholesterol, high blood pressure, and the 
risk for developing diabetes.
• 
It promotes psychological well-being.
Furthermore, with time, regular strength training 
decreases the heart rate and blood pressure response to 
lifting a heavy resistance (a weight). This adaptation re-
duces the demands on the cardiovascular system when 
performing activities such as carrying a child, the gro-
ceries, or a suitcase.
2.4A  Muscular Strength and Muscular En-
durance  Although muscular strength and muscu­
lar endurance are interrelated, the two have a basic 
difference. Muscular strength is the ability to exert max-
imum force against resistance. Muscular endurance (also 
called localized muscular endurance) is the ability of the 
muscle to exert submaximal force repeatedly over a pe-
riod of time. Muscular endurance depends to a large 
extent on muscular strength and to a lesser extent on 
cardiorespiratory endurance. Weak muscles cannot re-
peat an action several times or sustain it for long. Keep-
ing these concepts in mind, strength tests and training 
programs have been designed to measure and develop 
absolute muscular strength, muscular endurance, or a 
combination of the two.
2.4B  Determining Strength  Muscular strength 
usually is determined using the one repetition maxi­
mum (1 RM) technique. Although this assessment gives 
a good measure of absolute strength, it does require a 
basic skill level and a considerable amount of time to 
administer. Muscular endurance commonly is estab-
lished by the number of repetitions an individual can 
perform against a submaximal resistance or by the length 
of time a person can sustain a given contraction.
Muscular 
Endurance Test
We live in a world 
in which muscular 
strength and en-
durance are both 
required, 
and 
muscular endur-
ance depends to a 
large extent on 
muscular strength. 
Accordingly, 
a 
muscular endur-
ance test has been 
selected to deter-
mine the level of 
strength. 
Three 
exercises that help 
assess endurance 
of the upper body, 
Muscular fitness  A term used to de-
fine good levels of both muscular 
strength and muscular endurance.
Resting metabolism  The energy re-
quirement to maintain the body’s vital 
processes in the resting state.
Muscular strength  Ability to exert 
maximum force against resistance.
Muscular endurance  Ability of a 
muscle to exert sub­maximal force re-
peatedly over a period of time.
One repetition maximum  
(1 RM)  The maximal amount of resis-
tance a person is able to lift in a single 
effort.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

36
Fitness and Wellness
lower body, and mid-body muscle groups have been se-
lected for your muscular endurance test. To perform the 
test, you will need a stopwatch, a metronome, a bench or 
gymnasium bleacher 16¼” high, and a partner.
The exercises conducted for this test are the Bench 
Jump, Modified Dip (men) or Modified Push-Up 
(women), and Bent-Leg Curl-Up. Individuals who are 
susceptible to low back injury may do the Abdominal 
Crunch (see discussion on page 37) instead of the Bent-
Leg Curl-Up test. All tests should be conducted with the 
aid of a partner. The correct procedures for performing 
these exercises follow.
Bench Jump
For the Bench Jump, use a bench or gymnasium bleacher 
16¼” high, and attempt to jump up and down on the 
bench as many times as you can in 1 minute. If you can-
not jump the full minute, step up and down. A repetition 
is counted each time both feet return to the floor.
Modified Dip
The Modified Dip is an upper-body exercise that is done 
by men only. Using a bench or gymnasium bleacher, 
place your hands on the bench with the fingers pointing 
forward. Have a partner hold your feet in front of you. 
Bend your hips at approximately 90 degrees (you also 
may use three sturdy chairs; put your hands on two 
chairs placed by the sides of your body and your feet on 
the third chair in front of you).
Next, lower your body by flexing your elbows until 
you reach a 90-degree angle at this joint, and then return to 
the starting position. The repetition does not count if you 
fail to reach 90 degrees. Perform the repetitions to a two-
step cadence (down–up), regulated with a metronome set 
at 56 beats per minute. Perform as many continuous repe-
titions as possible. If you fail to follow the metronome ca-
dence, you can no longer count the repetitions.
Modified Push-Up
Women perform the Modified Push-Up instead of the 
Modified Dip. Lie down on the floor (face down), bend 
your knees (feet up in the air), and place your hands on 
the floor by your shoulders with the fingers pointing 
forward. Your lower body will be supported at the knees 
(rather than the feet) throughout the test. Your chest 
must touch the floor on each repetition.
Perform the repetitions to a two-step cadence (up–
down) regulated with a metronome set at 56 beats per 
minute. Do as many continuous repetitions as possible. 
If you fail to follow the metronome cadence, you cannot 
count any more repetitions.
Bent-Leg Curl-Up
For the Bent-Leg Curl-Up, lie down on the floor, face up, 
and bend both legs at the knees at approximately 100 
degrees. Your feet should be on the floor, and you must 
hold them in place yourself throughout the test. Cross 
your arms in front of your chest, each hand on the op-
posite shoulder.
Modified dip.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Bench jump.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Modified push-up.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

37
Chapter 2  Assessment of Physical Fitness
Now raise your head off the floor, placing your chin 
against your chest. This is the starting and finishing posi-
tion for each curl-up. The back of the head may not come 
in contact with the floor, the hands cannot be removed 
from the shoulders, and neither the feet nor the hips can 
be raised off the floor at any time during the test. The test 
is terminated if any of these four conditions occur. When 
you curl up, your upper body must come to an upright 
position before going back down. The repetitions are 
performed to a two-step cadence (up–down) regulated 
with the metronome set at 40 beats per minute.
For this exercise, you should allow a brief practice 
period of 5 to 10 seconds to familiarize yourself with the 
cadence (the up movement is initiated with the first beat, 
then you must wait for the next beat to initiate the down 
movement; one repetition is accomplished every two 
beats of the metronome). Count as many repetitions as 
you are able to perform following the proper cadence. 
The test is terminated if you fail to maintain the appro-
priate cadence or if you accomplish 100 repetitions. Have 
your partner check the angle at the knees throughout the 
test to make sure that you maintain the 100-degree angle 
as closely as possible.
Abdominal Crunch
The Abdominal Crunch is recommended only for indi-
viduals who are unable to perform the Bent-Leg Curl-Up 
because of susceptibility to low back injury. Exercise 
form must be monitored carefully during the test be-
cause many participants have difficulty maintaining 
proper form during this test. People often slide their 
bodies, bend their elbows, or shrug their shoulders dur-
ing the test. These actions make the test easier and mis-
represent performance. Further, lack of spinal flexibility 
does not allow some individuals to move the required 
(3½”) range of motion. Others are unable to keep their 
heels on the floor during the test. Some research has 
Bent-leg curl-up.
Photos © Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Abdominal crunch.
Photos © Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Abdominal crunch test using a Crunch-Ster Curl-Up Tester.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

38
Fitness and Wellness
questioned the validity of this test as an effective measure 
of abdominal strength or abdominal endurance.5,6 With 
these caveats in mind, the procedure is as follows.
Tape a 3½” 3 30” strip of cardboard onto the floor. 
Lie on the floor in a supine position (face up) with your 
knees bent at approximately 100 degrees and your legs 
slightly apart. Your feet should be on the floor, and you 
must hold them in place yourself throughout the test. 
Straighten your arms, and place them on the floor along-
side your trunk with your palms down and fingers fully 
extended. The fingertips of both hands should barely 
touch the closest edge of the cardboard.
Bring your head off the floor until your chin is 1” to 2” 
away from your chest. Keep your head in this position dur-
ing the entire test. (Do not move your head by flexing or 
extending the neck.) You now are ready to begin the test.
Perform the repetitions to a two-step cadence (up–
down) regulated with a metronome set at 60 beats per 
minute. As you curl up, slide your fingers over the card-
board until your fingertips reach the far end (3½”) of the 
board, then return to the starting position.
Allow a brief practice period of about 10 seconds to 
familiarize yourself with the cadence. Initiate the up 
movement with the first beat and the down movement 
with the next beat. Accomplish one repetition every two 
beats of the metronome. Count as many repetitions as 
you are able to perform while following the proper ca-
dence. You may not count a repetition if your fingertips 
fail to reach the distant end of the cardboard.
Terminate the test if you (a) fail to maintain the ap-
propriate cadence, (b) bend your elbows, (c) shrug your 
shoulders, (d) slide your body, (e) fail to keep your heels 
on the floor, (f) do not keep your chin close to your 
chest, (g) accomplish 100 repetitions, or (h) can no lon-
ger perform the test. Have your partner check the angle 
at the knees throughout the test to make sure you main-
tain the 100-degree angle as closely as possible. For this 
test you also may use a Crunch-Ster Curl-Up Tester, 
available from Novel Products.*
Interpreting the Strength Test
According to the number of repetitions you performed 
on each test item, look up the fitness category for each 
Table 2.3  Muscular Enduring Scoring Table
MEN
WOMEN
Repetitions
Repetitions
Fitness 
Category
Bench 
Jumps
Modified 
Dips
Bent-Leg 
Curl-Ups
Abdominal 
Crunches
Fitness 
Category
Bench 
Jumps
Modified 
Push-Ups
Bent-Leg 
Curl-Ups
Abdominal 
Crunches
Excellent
59
33
52
67
Excellent
49
42
78
50
Good
57–58
28–32
32–51
39–66
Good
43–48
34–41
46–77
35–49
Average
52–56
24–27
26–31
30–38
Average
39–42
29–33
29–45
28–34
Fair
48–51
18–23
18–25
23–29
Fair
33–38
22–28
18–28
22–27
Poor
47
17
17
22
Poor
32
21
17
21
 High physical fitness standard
 Health fitness standard
(Adapted from W. W. K. Hoeger & S. A. Hoeger, Lifetime Physical Fitness & Wellness: A Personalized Program, Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Cengage Learning, 2015).
Table 2.4  Points for Each Test Item Based on Fitness Category
Fitness Category
Points
Excellent
5
Good
4
Average
3
Fair
2
Poor
1
© Cengage Learning
Table 2.5  Muscular Strength/Endurance Fitness Categories  
by Total Points
Total 
Points
Strength Endurance 
Category
13
Excellent
10–12
Good
7–9
Average
4–6
Fair
3
Poor
© Cengage Learning
*Novel Products Inc., Figure Finder Collection, P.O. Box 408, Rocktan, 
IL 61072-0408; (800) 323-5143.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

39
Chapter 2  Assessment of Physical Fitness
exercise in Table 2.3. Next, look up the number of points 
assigned for each test item’s fitness category in Table 2.4. 
Now total the points and determine your overall strength 
endurance fitness category according to the ratings pro-
vided in Table 2.5.
Record the results of your strength tests in Activity 
2.1, Pre-Test, page 52.
2.5  Muscular Flexibility
Flexibility refers to the achievable range of motion at a 
joint or group of joints without causing injury. Most 
people who exercise don’t take the time to stretch. And 
many of those who do stretch don’t stretch properly. 
When joints are not regularly moved through their full 
range of motion, muscles and ligaments shorten in time, 
and flexibility decreases.
Developing and maintaining some level of flexibility 
are important factors in all health enhancement pro-
grams, and even more so as we age. Good flexibility 
promotes healthy muscles and joints. Sports medicine 
specialists believe that many muscular/skeletal problems 
and injuries, especially in adults, are related to a lack of 
flexibility. At times in daily life we have to make rapid or 
strenuous movements we are not accustomed to making. 
A tight muscle that is abruptly forced beyond its normal 
range of motion often leads to injuries.
Improving elasticity of muscles and connective tis-
sue around joints enables greater freedom of movement 
and the individual’s ability to participate in many types 
of sports and recreational activities. Adequate flexibility 
also makes activities of daily living such as turning, lift-
ing, and bending easier to perform. A person must take 
care, however, not to overstretch joints. Too much flexi-
bility leads to unstable and loose joints, which may actu-
ally increase the injury rate.
A decline in flexibility can cause poor posture and 
subsequent aches and pains that lead to limited movement 
of joints. Inordinate tightness is uncomfortable and debili-
tating. Approximately 80 percent of all low back problems 
in the United States stem from improper alignment of the 
vertebral column and pelvic girdle, a direct result of in-
flexible and weak muscles. This backache syndrome costs 
U.S. industry billions of dollars each year in lost produc-
tivity, health services, and workers’ compensation.
Muscular flexibility is highly specific and varies 
from one joint to the other (hip, trunk, shoulder), as well 
as from one individual to the next. Muscular flexibility 
relates primarily to genetic factors and the index of 
physical activity. Beyond that, factors such as joint struc-
ture, ligaments, tendons, muscles, skin, tissue injury, adi-
pose (fat) tissue, body temperature, age, and gender in-
fluence the range of motion about a joint.
On average, women are more flexible than men and 
seem to retain this advantage throughout life. Aging de-
creases the extensibility of soft tissue, decreasing flexibil-
ity in both genders. The most significant contributors to 
loss of flexibility, however, are sedentary living and lack 
of physical activity.
Most experts agree that participating in a regular 
flexibility program has the following benefits.
• 
It helps to maintain good joint mobility.
• 
It increases resistance to muscle injury and soreness.
• 
It prevents low back and other spinal column 
problems.
• 
It improves and maintains good postural 
alignment.
• 
It enhances proper and graceful body movement.
• 
It improves personal appearance and self-image.
• 
It facilitates the development of motor skills 
throughout life.
Flexibility exercises also have been prescribed suc-
cessfully to treat dysmenorrhea7 (painful menstruation), 
general neuromuscular tension (stress), and knots (trig-
ger points) in muscles and fascia. Regular stretching 
helps decrease the aches and pains caused by psychologi-
cal stress and contributes to a decrease in anxiety, blood 
pressure, and breathing rate.8
Further, mild stretching exercises, in conjunction 
with calisthenics, are helpful in warm-up routines to pre-
pare the body for more vigorous aerobic or strength-
training exercises, and as cool-down routines following 
exercise to help the person return to a normal resting 
state. Fatigued muscles tend to contract to a shorter-than-
average resting length, and stretching exercises help fa-
tigued muscles reestablish their normal resting length.
Similar to muscular strength, good range of motion 
is critical in older life. Because of decreased flexibility, 
older adults lose mobility and are unable to perform 
simple daily tasks such as bending forward and turning. 
Many older adults do not turn their head or rotate their 
trunk to look over their shoulder but, rather, step around 
90 degrees to 180 degrees to see behind them.
Physical activity and exercise also can be hampered 
severely by restricted range of motion. Because of the pain 
involved 
during 
activity, older peo-
ple who have tight 
hip flexors (mus-
cles) cannot jog or 
walk very far. A vi-
cious circle ensues, 
because the condi-
tion usually wors-
ens with further 
Flexibility  The achievable range of 
motion at a joint or group of joints 
without causing injury.
Dysmenorrhea  Painful menstruation.
Stretching  Moving the joints beyond 
the accustomed range of motion.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

40
Fitness and Wellness
inactivity. A simple stretching program can alleviate or 
prevent this problem and help people return to an exercise 
program.
2.5A  Assessing Flexibility  Two flexibility tests 
are used to produce a flexibility profile: the Modified Sit-
and-Reach Test and the Finger Touch Test.
2.5B  Modified Sit-and-Reach Test  To per-
form the Modified Sit-and-Reach Test, you will need the 
Acuflex I* sit-and-reach flexibility tester, or you may 
simply place a yardstick on top of a box approximately 
12” high. The test is used to assess hamstring (back of the 
thighs) and low back flexibility. To administer this test:
	1.	
Warm up properly before the first trial.
	2.	
Remove your shoes for the test. Sit on the floor 
with your hips, back, and head against a wall, legs 
fully extended and the bottom of your feet against 
the Acuflex I or the sit-and-reach box.
	3.	
Place your hands one on top of the other, and reach 
forward as far as possible without letting your hips, 
back, or head come off the wall.
	4.	
Another person then should slide the reach indica-
tor on the Acuflex I (or yardstick) along the top of 
the box until the end of the indicator touches the 
tips of your fingers. The indicator then must be 
held firmly in place throughout the rest of the test.
	5.	
Your head and back now can come off the wall, and 
you may reach forward gradually three times, the 
third time stretching forward as far as possible on 
the indicator (or yardstick), holding the final posi-
tion at least two seconds. Be sure to keep the back of 
your knees against the floor throughout the test.
	6.	
Record to the nearest half inch the final number of 
inches you reached.
	7.	
You are allowed two trials, and an average of the 
two scores is used as the final test score.
The percentile ranks and fitness categories for this 
test are given in Tables 2.6 and 2.4, respectively.
2.5C  Finger Touch Test  The Finger Touch Test is 
used to assess shoulder flexibility. The following proce-
dure is used to administer the test:
1.	
Warm up properly by doing a few shoulder 
stretches before beginning this test.
2.	
Bring your right hand over your right shoulder and 
reach down the middle of your back as far down as 
possible with the fingers extended and pointing 
straight down to the ground.
3.	
Simultaneously as you are reaching down your 
back with the right hand, place your left hand be-
hind your lower back with the palm facing out and 
gradually slide the hand with fingers extended as 
far up as possible.
Table 2.6  Modified Sit-and-Reach Scoring Table
Score (inches)
Fitness Category
Men
Women
Excellent
17.25
17.00
Good
15.25–17.00
16.00–16.75
Average
13.75–15.00
14.75–15.75
Fair
11.75–13.50
12.75–14.50
Poor
11.50
12.50
 High physical fitness standard
 Health fitness standard
(Adapted from W. W. K. Hoeger & S. A. Hoeger, Lifetime Physical Fitness & Wellness: A 
Personalized Program, Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Cengage Learning, 2011).
Starting position for modified sit-and-reach test.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Modified sit-and-reach test.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
*The Acuflex I flexibility tests can be obtained from Novel Products 
Inc., Figure Finder Collection, P.O. Box 408, Rockton, IL 61072-0408; 
(800) 323-5143.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

41
Chapter 2  Assessment of Physical Fitness
4.	
The objective of the test is to bring the tips of the 
fingers as close together or overlap as much as pos-
sible behind your back, holding the final reached 
position for two seconds.
5.	
With the aid of a partner, measure to the nearest half 
inch the distance between the tips of the fingers or 
the amount of overlap between the fingers. If you are 
unable to touch or overlap your fingers, the distance 
between the fingers is recorded as a negative score. If 
your fingers touch but do not overlap, the score 
equals zero (0). If the fingers overlap, carefully mea-
sure the amount of overlap and report it as a positive 
score. Conduct the test twice and use an average of 
the two trials as the final score.
6.	
Now repeat the test on the left side (bring the left 
hand over the left shoulder and the right hand be-
hind the lower back). Do two trials and average the 
final score.
7.	
Refer to Tables 2.7 and 2.4 to determine the respec-
tive fitness categories for each side test.
2.5D  Overall Flexibility Fitness  To obtain an 
overall flexibility fitness category, use the Modified Sit and 
Reach fitness category and the best result only (either right 
or left side) for the Finger Touch Test. Total the number of 
points obtained for these two tests (based on each fitness 
category—see Table 2.4) and determine the overall fitness 
category using the guidelines provided in Table 2.8. Record 
your flexibility test results in Activity 2.1, Pre-Test, page 52.
2.6  Body Composition
Obesity is a health hazard of epidemic proportions in the 
United States and most developed countries throughout 
the world. About 68 percent of the adult population in 
the United States is overweight, and 34 percent is obese.
Finger touch test.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Table 2.8  Muscular Flexibility Fitness Categories by Total 
Points
Total Points
Flexibility Category
9
Excellent
7–8
Good
5–6
Average
3–4
Fair
2
Poor
© Cengage Learning
Table 2.7  Finger Touch Scoring Table
Score (inches)
Men
Women
Fitness Category
Right
Left
Right
Left
Excellent
3.25
2.25
4.50
3.75
Good
1.75 to 3.00
0.25 to 2.00
3.25 to 4.25
1.75 to 3.50
Average
20.75 to 1.50
23.75 to 0.00
2.25 to 3.00
1.25 to 1.50
Fair
22.75 to 21.00
25.75 to 24.00
0.50 to 2.00
0.25 to 1.00
Poor
23.00
26.00
0.25
0.00
 High physical fitness standard
 Health fitness standard
SOURCE: W. W. K. Hoeger, Finger Touch Test, Data collected in the Department of Kinesiology, Boise State University, 2010.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

42
Fitness and Wellness
Trends indicate that adults in the United States gain 1 
to 2 pounds of weight per year. Thus, during a span of 40 
years, the average American will have gained 40 to 80 
pounds. Because of the typical reduction in physical activ-
ity in our society, however, the average person also loses a 
half a pound of lean tissue each year. Therefore, this span 
of 40 years has produced an actual fat gain of 60 to 100 
pounds accompanied by a 20-pound loss of lean body 
mass (Figure 2.2). These changes cannot be detected with-
out assessing body composition periodically.
Body composition refers to the fat and nonfat com-
ponents of the human body. The fat component of the 
body usually is called fat mass or percent body fat. The 
nonfat component of the body is termed lean body mass.
Total fat in the human body is classified into two 
types: essential fat and storage fat. Essential fat is the body 
fat needed for normal physiological functions. Essential 
fat constitutes about 3 percent of the total weight in men 
and 12 percent in women (see Figure 2.3). The percentage 
is higher in women because it includes gender-specific fat, 
such as that found in the breast tissue, the uterus, and 
other gender-related fat deposits. Without it, human 
health deteriorates. Storage fat, the body fat stored in adi-
pose tissue, is found mostly beneath the skin (subcutane-
ous fat) and around major organs in the body.
Obesity by itself has been associated with several 
serious health problems and accounts for 15 percent to 
20 percent of the annual mortality rate in the United 
States. It is one of the six major risk factors for coronary 
heart disease. It also is a risk factor for other diseases of 
the cardiovascular system, including hypertension, con-
gestive heart failure, elevated blood lipids, atherosclero-
sis, strokes, thromboembolitic disease, varicose veins, 
and intermittent claudication.
Underweight people, too, have health problems and a 
higher mortality rate. Although the social pressure to be 
thin has waned slightly in recent years, pressure to attain 
model-like thinness is still with us and contributes to the 
gradual increase in incidence of eating disorders (such as 
anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa, discussed in Chap-
ter 5). Extreme weight loss can spawn medical conditions 
such as heart damage, gastrointestinal problems, shrink-
age of internal organs, immune system abnormalities, 
disorders of the reproductive system, loss of muscle tissue, 
damage to the nervous system, and even death.
For many years, people relied on height/weight 
charts to determine recommended body weight, but we 
now know that these tables are highly inaccurate for 
many people. The standard height/weight tables, first 
published in 1912, were based on average weights (in-
cluding shoes and clothing) for men and women who 
obtained life insurance policies between 1888 and 1905. 
The recommended weight on height/weight tables is 
obtained according to gender, height, and frame size. As 
no scientific guidelines are given to determine frame 
size, most people choose their frame size based on the 
column where the weight comes closest to their own!
The proper way to determine recommended weight 
is to find out what percent of total body weight is fat and 
what amount is lean tissue (body composition). Once the 
fat percentage is known, recommended weight can be 
calculated from recommended body fat.
Obesity is related to an excess of body fat. If body 
weight is the only criterion, an individual easily can be 
considered overweight according to height/weight charts, 
Figure 2.2
Typical body composition changes for 
adults in United States.
Body weight
Lean body mass
Fat weight
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
225
200
175
65
55
45
50
60
70
30
40
35
20
25
Weight (lbs)
Age
© Cengage Learning 
Figure 2.3
Typical body composition of adult man 
and adult woman.
Muscle
Essential fat
Storage fat
Male
Female
43%
3%
14%
15%
25%
36%
12%
15%
12%
25%
Bone
Other tissues
© Cengage Learning 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

43
Chapter 2  Assessment of Physical Fitness
yet not be genuinely obese. Typical examples are football 
players, body builders, weight lifters, and other athletes 
with large muscle size. Some athletes who appear to be 20 
or 30 pounds overweight really have little body fat.
At the other end of the spectrum, some people who 
weigh very little and are viewed by many as “skinny” or 
underweight actually can be classified as overweight be-
cause of their high body fat content. People who weigh as 
little as 120 pounds but are more than 30 percent fat 
(about a third of their total body weight) are not rare. 
These people often are sedentary or are dieting constantly. 
Physical inactivity and constant negative caloric balance 
both lead to a loss in lean body mass (see Chapter 6). Body 
weight alone clearly does not always tell the true story.
2.6A  Assessing 
Body 
Composition  Body 
composition can be assessed through several procedures. 
The most common techniques are skinfold thickness; 
girth measurements; bioelectrical impedance; hydrostatic 
or underwater weighing; and to a lesser extent, air dis-
placement, and dual energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA). 
These procedures all yield estimates of body fat; thus, each 
technique may yield slightly different values. Therefore, 
when assessing body composition, the same technique 
should be used for pre- and post-test comparisons.
DXA is most frequently used in research and by 
medical facilities. A radiographic technique, DXA uses 
very low-dose beams of x-ray energy (hundreds of times 
lower than a typical body x-ray) to measure total body 
fat mass, fat distribution pattern (see “Waist Circumfer-
ence” on page 46), and bone density. Many exercise sci-
entists consider DXA to be the standard technique to 
assess body composition.
Hydrostatic or underwater weighing is commonly 
used in exercise physiology and fitness laboratories. In 
essence, a person’s “regular” weight is compared with a 
weight taken underwater. Because fat is more buoyant 
than lean tissue, comparing the two weights can deter-
mine a person’s percent of fat.
Air displacement, a relatively new technique, uses 
computerized pressure sensors to determine the amount 
of air displaced by a person sitting inside an airtight 
chamber. Body volume is calculated by subtracting the 
air volume with the person inside the chamber from  
the volume of the empty chamber. This technique, how-
ever, tends to sig-
nificantly overesti-
mate percent body 
fat, and additional 
research is needed 
to make it an ac-
ceptable technique 
to determine body 
composition.
Bioelectrical 
impedance is much 
simpler to admin-
ister, but its accu-
racy is highly ques-
tionable. In this 
technique, sensors 
are applied to the 
skin and a weak 
Body composition  The fat and non-
fat components of the human body.
Percent body fat (fat mass)  Fat 
component of the body.
Lean body mass  Nonfat component 
of the body.
Essential fat  Body fat needed for 
normal physiological functions.
Storage fat  Body fat stored in adi-
pose tissue.
Recommended body weight  The 
weight at which there appears to be no 
harm to human health.
SOURCE: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2012.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
80
Overweight
Percent
Obese
70
34%
68%
Figure 2.4
Percentage of the adult population  
(20 years and older) that is overweight 
(BMI 25) and obese (BMI 30) in the 
United States.
Hydrostatic weighing technique used for assessing body 
composition.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

44
Fitness and Wellness
(totally painless) electrical current is run through the body 
to estimate body fat, lean body mass, and body water. The 
technique is based on the principle that fat tissue is a less 
efficient conductor of electrical current than lean tissue is. 
The easier the conductance, the leaner the individual. Body 
weight scales with sensors on the surface are also available 
to perform this procedure, but again, the accuracy is highly 
questionable.
The technique discussed in this section is skinfold 
thickness, the most common and practical technique 
available to assess body composition. Three additional 
techniques, not used to assess body composition but 
used to determine excessive body weight, are body mass 
index, waist circumference, and waist-to-height ratio. 
These are also discussed in this section.
Skinfold Thickness
Assessment of body composition is done most frequently 
using skinfold thickness. This technique is based on the 
principle that approximately half of the body’s fatty tis-
sue is directly beneath the skin. Valid and reliable esti-
mates of this tissue give a good indication of percent 
body fat.
The skinfold thickness test is performed with the aid 
of pressure calipers. To reflect the total percentage of fat, 
three sites are measured:
• 
For women: triceps, suprailium, and thigh
• 
For men: chest, abdomen, and thigh
All measurements are taken on the right side of the 
body with the person standing. The correct anatomical 
landmarks for skinfolds are as follows and are also 
shown in Figure 2.5.
• 
Chest: a diagonal fold halfway between the shoul-
der crease and the nipple
• 
Abdomen: a vertical fold about one inch to the 
right of the umbilicus
• 
Triceps: a vertical fold on the back of the upper 
arm, halfway between the shoulder and the arm
• 
Thigh: a vertical fold on the front of the thigh, 
midway between the knee and the hip
• 
Suprailium: a diagonal fold above the crest of the 
ilium (on the side of the hip)
Each site is measured by grasping a double thickness of 
skin firmly with the thumb and forefinger, pulling the 
fold slightly away from the muscle tissue. Hold the cali-
pers perpendicular to the fold, and take the measure-
ments half an inch below the finger hold. Measure each 
site three times, and read the values to the nearest .1 to  
.5 mm. Record the average of the two closest readings as 
the final value. Take the readings without delay to avoid 
excessive compression of the skinfold. Releasing and re-
folding the skinfold is required between readings. Be 
sure to wear shorts, a loose-fitting T-shirt (no leotards), 
and do not use lotion on your skin the day when skin-
folds are to be taken.
After determining the average value for each site, 
percent fat can be obtained by adding together all three 
skinfold measurements and looking up the respective 
values in Table 2.9 for women and Table 2.10 for men. 
You can record your results in Activity 2.1, Pre-Test, page 
52. Then compute your recommended body weight us-
ing the range given in Table 2.11 and the computation 
form in Activity 2.2, page 54.
The recommended percent body fat values given in 
Table 2.11 include essential fat and storage fat, discussed 
previously. For example, the recommended body fat 
range for women under age 30 is 17 percent to 25 per-
cent. This indicates that only 5 percent to 13 percent of 
the total recommended fat is storage fat and the other 12 
percent is essential fat. The recommended range has 
been selected based on research indicating that some 
storage fat is required for optimal health and greater 
longevity.
Skinfold thickness technique used for assessing body composition.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

45
Chapter 2  Assessment of Physical Fitness
The recommended body fat range selected in this 
book incorporates the recommendations of most health 
and fitness experts throughout the United States. If you 
desire to have just one target weight, you may select your 
body weight according to your personal preference, as 
long as it falls within the recommended range. The lower 
end of the range constitutes the physical fitness standard; 
the high end represents the health fitness standard.
Body Mass Index
Another technique scientists use to determine thinness and 
excessive fatness is the body mass index (BMI). This index 
incorporates height and weight to estimate critical fat val-
ues at which the risk for disease increases. BMI is calcu-
lated by dividing the weight in kilograms by the square of 
the height in meters or multiplying your weight in pounds 
by 705 and dividing this figure by the square of the height 
in inches. For example, the BMI for an individual who 
weighs 172 pounds (78 kg) and is 67 inches (1.7 meters) tall 
would be 27 [78 4 (1.7)2] or [172 3 705 4 (67)2].
Because of its simplicity and measurement con­
sistency across populations, BMI is used almost exclu-
sively to determine health risks and mortality rates as-
sociated with excessive body weight. You can compute 
and record your own BMI and recommended body 
weight according to BMI guidelines using the form pro-
vided in Activity 2.2 (pages 54–55). You also can obtain 
your BMI for selected weights and heights by looking it 
up in Table 2.12.
According to the BMI, the lowest risk for chronic 
disease is in the 22 to 25 range (see Table 2.13). Individu-
als are classified as overweight between 25 and 30. BMIs 
above 30 are defined as obesity and below 18.5 as under-
weight. Compared to individuals with a BMI between 22 
and 25, people with a BMI between 25 and 30 (over-
weight) exhibit mortality rates up to 25 percent higher; 
rates for those with a BMI above 30 (obese) are 50 per-
cent to 100 per-
cent higher.9
BMI is a use-
ful tool to screen 
the general popu-
lation, but, similar 
to 
height/weight 
Body mass index (BMI)  An index 
that incorporates height and weight to 
estimate critical fat values at which 
risk for disease increases.
Select the proper anatomical sites. For men, use chest, abdomen,
and thigh skinfolds. For women, use triceps, suprailium, and
thigh skinfolds. Take all measurements on the right side of
the body with the person standing.
Measure each site by grasping a double thickness of skin
ﬁrmly with the thumb and foreﬁnger, pulling the fold
slightly away from the muscular tissue. Hold caliper
perpendicular to the fold, and take the measurement
one-half inch below the ﬁnger hold. Measure each
site three times and read the values to the nearest
.1 to .5 mm. Record the average of the two closest
readings as the ﬁnal value. Take the readings
without delay to avoid excessive compression
of the skinfold. Release and refold the skinfold
between readings.
When doing pre- and post-assessments, conduct
the measurement at the same time of day. The
best time is early in the morning to avoid water
hydration changes resulting from activity or exercise.
Obtain percent fat by adding the three skinfold
measurements and looking up the respective
values.
1.
2.
3.
4.
For example, if the skinfold measurements for an 18-year-old female are:
(a) triceps = 16, (b) suprailium = 4, and (c) thigh = 30 (total = 50),
the percent body fat is 20.6%.
Abdomen
(vertical fold
taken about 1⁄2" 
to 1" to the right
of umbilicus)
Triceps
(vertical fold on
back of upper
arm, halfway
between shoulder
and elbow)
Suprailium
(diagonal fold above
crest of ilium, on the
side of the hip)
Thigh
(vertical fold on
front of thigh,
midway between
knee and hip)
Chest
(diagonal fold
halfway between
shoulder crease 
and nipple)  
Figure 2.5
Anatomical landmarks for skinfold measurements.
© Cengage Learning 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

46
Fitness and Wellness
charts, it fails to differentiate fat from lean body mass or 
where most of the fat is located. Using BMI, strength-
trained individuals and athletes with a large amount of 
muscle mass (such as body builders and football players) 
easily can fall in the moderate- or even high-risk catego-
ries. Therefore, body composition and waist-to-hip ra-
tios are better procedures to determine health risk and 
recommended body weight.
Waist Circumference
Scientific evidence suggests that the way people store fat 
affects their risk for disease. The total amount of body fat 
by itself is not the best predictor of increased risk for 
disease but rather the location of the fat. Android obe­
sity is seen in individuals who tend to store fat in the 
trunk or abdominal area (which produces the “apple” 
shape). Gynoid obesity is seen in people who store fat 
primarily around the hips and thighs (which creates the 
“pear” shape).
Obese individuals with abdominal fat are clearly at 
higher risk for heart disease, hypertension, type 2 dia-
betes (“non–insulin-dependent” diabetes), stroke, 
some types of cancer, dementia, migraines, and dimin-
ished lung function. Evidence also indicates that 
among individuals with a lot of abdominal fat, those 
whose fat deposits are located around internal organs 
(intra-abdominal or visceral fat) rather than subcuta-
neously or retroperitoneally (see Figure 2.6) have an 
even greater risk for disease than those with fat mainly 
just beneath the skin (subcutaneous fat).10 Of even 
greater significance, the results of a recent study that 
followed more than 350,000 people over almost 10 
years concluded that even when body weight is viewed 
as “normal,” individuals with a large waist circumfer-
ence nearly double the risk for premature death.11 Re-
searchers believe that visceral fat secretes harmful in-
flammatory substances that contribute to chronic 
conditions.
Complex scanning techniques to identify individu-
als at risk because of high intra-abdominal fatness are 
costly, so a simple waist circumference (WC) measure, 
designed by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Insti-
tute, is used to assess this risk. WC seems to predict 
abdominal visceral fat as accurately as DXA. A WC of 
more than 40 inches in men and 35 inches in women 
indicates a higher risk for cardiovascular disease, hy-
pertension, and type 2 diabetes (see Table 2.14). Thus, 
weight loss is encouraged when individuals exceed 
these measurements.
How do you feel about your current body weight? • What 
influence does society have on the way you perceive your-
self in terms of your weight? • Do the results from your 
body composition measurements make you feel any dif-
ferent about the way you see your current body weight 
and image?
Critical Thinking
Waist-to-Height Ratio: “Keep your waist circumfer-
ence to less than half your height.”
The waist-to-height ratio (WHtR) is a new health risk 
assessment also used to ascertain the health risks of obe-
sity. The ratio is rapidly gaining popularity in the scien-
tific community as research indicates that it is better 
predictor of health outcomes, including multiple coro-
nary heart disease risk factors, than BMI or WC.12 While 
WC is superior to BMI, two individuals with a similar 
WC (e.g., 43) but of different heights, may not be at the 
same risk for disease, whereas the new WHtR method 
discriminates between individuals of different heights.
A systematic review of the literature that included 31 
research studies, including more than 300,000 adults of 
several ethnic groups, showed that WHtR has significantly 
greater discriminatory power in predicting cardiac and 
metabolic complications as compared to BMI and WC.13 
Another study presented at the 2013 European Congress  
on Obesity compared the effect of abdominal obesity on  
life expectancy in terms of years of life lost. The data  
showed 
that 
a 
30-year-old 
man 
with a BMI greater 
than 40 has a  
years-of-life-lost 
value of 10.5 years 
as compared to 
16.7 years using  
the most severe 
category 
of 
the 
WHtR. A 30-year-
old woman in these 
same 
categories 
loses 5.3 years of 
life using BMI as a 
calculator as com-
pared to 9.5 years 
using WHtR.14
Android obesity  Obesity pattern 
seen in individuals who tend to store 
fat in the trunk or abdominal area.
Gynoid obesity  Obesity pattern seen 
in people who store fat primarily 
around the hips and thighs.
Waist circumference (WC)  A waist 
girth measurement to assess potential 
risk for disease based on intra- 
abdominal fat content.
Waist-to-height ratio (WHtR)  A ra-
tio to determine health risks associated 
with obesity.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

47
Chapter 2  Assessment of Physical Fitness
Table 2.9  Percent Fat Estimates for Women, Calculated from Triceps, Suprailium, and Thigh Skinfold Thickness
Age
Sum of 3 
Skinfolds
Under 22
23 to 27
28 to 32
33 to 37
38 to 42
43 to 47
48 to 52
53 to 57
Over 58
23–25
  9.7
 9.9
10.2
10.4
10.7
10.9
11.2
11.4
11.7
26–28
11.0
11.2
11.5
11.7
12.0
12.3
12.5
12.7
13.0
29–31
12.3
12.5
12.8
13.0
13.3
13.5
13.8
14.0
14.3
32–34
13.6
13.8
14.0
14.3
14.5
14.8
15.0
15.3
15.5
35–37
14.8
15.0
15.3
15.5
15.8
16.0
16.3
16.5
16.8
38–40
16.0
16.3
16.5
16.7
17.0
17.2
17.5
17.7
18.0
41–43
17.2
17.4
17.7
17.9
18.2
18.4
18.7
18.9
19.2
44–46
18.3
18.6
18.8
19.1
19.3
19.6
19.8
20.1
20.3
47–49
19.5
19.7
20.0
20.2
20.5
20.7
21.0
21.2
21.5
50–52
20.6
20.8
21.1
21.3
21.6
21.8
22.1
22.3
22.6
53–55
21.7
21.9
22.1
22.4
22.6
22.9
23.1
23.4
23.6
56–58
22.7
23.0
23.2
23.4
23.7
23.9
24.2
24.4
24.7
59–61
23.7
24.0
24.2
24.5
24.7
25.0
25.2
25.5
25.7
62–64
24.7
25.0
25.2
25.5
25.7
26.0
26.2
26.4
26.7
65–67
25.7
25.9
26.2
26.4
26.7
26.9
27.2
27.4
27.7
68–70
26.6
26.9
27.1
27.4
27.6
27.9
28.1
28.4
28.6
71–73
27.5
27.8
28.0
28.3
28.5
28.8
29.0
29.3
29.5
74–76
28.4
28.7
28.9
29.2
29.4
29.7
29.9
30.2
30.4
77–79
29.3
29.5
29.8
30.0
30.3
30.5
30.8
31.0
31.3
80–82
30.1
30.4
30.6
30.9
31.1
31.4
31.6
31.9
32.1
83–85
30.9
31.2
31.4
31.7
31.9
32.2
32.4
32.7
32.9
86–88
31.7
32.0
32.2
32.5
32.7
32.9
33.2
33.4
33.7
89–91
32.5
32.7
33.0
33.2
33.5
33.7
33.9
34.2
34.4
92–94
33.2
33.4
33.7
33.9
34.2
34.4
34.7
34.9
35.2
95–97
33.9
34.1
34.4
34.6
34.9
35.1
35.4
35.6
35.9
98–100
34.6
34.8
35.1
35.3
35.5
35.8
36.0
36.3
36.5
101–103
35.2
35.4
35.7
35.9
36.2
36.4
36.7
36.9
37.2
104–106
35.8
36.1
36.3
36.6
36.8
37.1
37.3
37.5
37.8
107–109
36.4
36.7
36.9
37.1
37.4
37.6
37.9
38.1
38.4
110–112
37.0
37.2
37.5
37.7
38.0
38.2
38.5
38.7
38.9
113–115
37.5
37.8
38.0
38.2
38.5
38.7
39.0
39.2
39.5
116–118
38.0
38.3
38.5
38.8
39.0
39.3
39.5
39.7
40.0
119–121
38.5
38.7
39.0
39.2
39.5
39.7
40.0
40.2
40.5
122–124
39.0
39.2
39.4
39.7
39.9
40.2
40.4
40.7
40.9
125–127
39.4
39.6
39.9
40.1
40.4
40.6
40.9
41.1
41.4
128–130
39.8
40.0
40.3
40.5
40.8
41.0
41.3
41.5
41.8
Body density is calculated based on the generalized equation for predicting body density of women developed by A. S. Jackson, M. L. Pollock, and A. Ward, reported in Medicine and Science in 
Sports and Exercise, 12 (1980), 175–182. Percent body fat is determined from the calculated body density using the Siri formula.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

48
Fitness and Wellness
Table 2.10  Percent Fat Estimates for Men Calculated from Chest, Abdomen, and Thigh Skinfold Thickness
Age
Sum of 3 
Skinfolds
Under 
19
20 
to 
22
23 
to 
25
26 
to 
28
29 
to 
31
32 
to 
34
35 
to 
37
38 
to 
40
41 
to 
43
44 
to 
46
47 
to 
49
50 
to 
52
53 
to 
55
56 
to 
58
59 
to 
61
Over 
62
  8–10
  .9
 1.3
 1.6
 2.0
 2.3
 2.7
 3.0
 3.3
 3.7
 4.0
 4.4
 4.7
 5.1
 5.4
 5.8
 6.1
11–13
 1.9
 2.3
 2.6
 3.0
 3.3
 3.7
 4.0
 4.3
 4.7
 5.0
 5.4
 5.7
 6.1
 6.4
 6.8
 7.1
14–16
 2.9
 3.3
 3.6
 3.9
 4.3
 4.6
 5.0
 5.3
 5.7
 6.0
 6.4
 6.7
 7.1
 7.4
 7.8
 8.1
17–19
 3.9
 4.2
 4.6
 4.9
 5.3
 5.6
 6.0
 6.3
 6.7
 7.0
 7.4
 7.7
 8.1
 8.4
 8.7
 9.1
20–22
 4.8
 5.2
 5.5
 5.9
 6.2
 6.6
 6.9
 7.3
 7.6
 8.0
 8.3
 8.7
 9.0
 9.4
 9.7
10.1
23–25
 5.8
 6.2
 6.5
 6.8
 7.2
 7.5
 7.9
 8.2
 8.6
 8.9
 9.3
 9.6
10.0
10.3
10.7
11.0
26–28
 6.8
 7.1
 7.5
 7.8
 8.1
 8.5
 8.8
 9.2
 9.5
 9.9
10.2
10.6
10.9
11.3
11.6
12.0
29–31
 7.7
 8.0
 8.4
 8.7
 9.1
 9.4
 9.8
10.1
10.5
10.8
11.2
11.5
11.9
12.2
12.6
12.9
32–34
 8.6
 9.0
 9.3
 9.7
10.0
10.4
10.7
11.1
11.4
11.8
12.1
12.4
12.8
13.1
13.5
13.8
35–37
 9.5
 9.9
10.2
10.6
10.9
11.3
11.6
12.0
12.3
12.7
13.0
13.4
13.7
14.1
14.4
14.8
38–40
10.5
10.8
11.2
11.5
11.8
12.2
12.5
12.9
13.2
13.6
13.9
14.3
14.6
15.0
15.3
15.7
41–43
11.4
11.7
12.1
12.4
12.7
13.1
13.4
13.8
14.1
14.5
14.8
15.2
15.5
15.9
16.2
16.6
44–46
12.2
12.6
12.9
13.3
13.6
14.0
14.3
14.7
15.0
15.4
15.7
16.1
16.4
16.8
17.1
17.5
47–49
13.1
13.5
13.8
14.2
14.5
14.9
15.2
15.5
15.9
16.2
16.6
16.9
17.3
17.6
18.0
18.3
50–52
14.0
14.3
14.7
15.0
15.4
15.7
16.1
16.4
16.8
17.1
17.5
17.8
18.2
18.5
18.8
19.2
53–55
14.8
15.2
15.5
15.9
16.2
16.6
16.9
17.3
17.6
18.0
18.3
18.7
19.0
19.4
19.7
20.1
56–58
15.7
16.0
16.4
16.7
17.1
17.4
17.8
18.1
18.5
18.8
19.2
19.5
19.9
20.2
20.6
20.9
59–61
16.5
16.9
17.2
17.6
17.9
18.3
18.6
19.0
19.3
19.7
20.0
20.4
20.7
21.0
21.4
21.7
62–64
17.4
17.7
18.1
18.4
18.8
19.1
19.4
19.8
20.1
20.5
20.8
21.2
21.5
21.9
22.2
22.6
65–67
18.2
18.5
18.9
19.2
19.6
19.9
20.3
20.6
21.0
21.3
21.7
22.0
22.4
22.7
23.0
23.4
68–70
19.0
19.3
19.7
20.0
20.4
20.7
21.1
21.4
21.8
22.1
22.5
22.8
23.2
23.5
23.9
24.2
71–73
19.8
20.1
20.5
20.8
21.2
21.5
21.9
22.2
22.6
22.9
23.3
23.6
24.0
24.3
24.7
25.0
74–76
20.6
20.9
21.3
21.6
22.0
22.2
22.7
23.0
23.4
23.7
24.1
24.4
24.8
25.1
25.4
25.8
77–79
21.4
21.7
22.1
22.4
22.8
23.1
23.4
23.8
24.1
24.5
24.8
25.2
25.5
25.9
26.2
26.6
80–82
22.1
22.5
22.8
23.2
23.5
23.9
24.2
24.6
24.9
25.3
25.6
26.0
26.3
26.6
27.0
27.3
83–85
22.9
23.2
23.6
23.9
24.3
24.6
25.0
25.3
25.7
26.0
26.4
26.7
27.1
27.4
27.8
28.1
86–88
23.6
24.0
24.3
24.7
25.0
25.4
25.7
26.1
26.4
26.8
27.1
27.5
27.8
28.2
28.5
28.9
89–91
24.4
24.7
25.1
25.4
25.8
26.1
26.5
26.8
27.2
27.5
27.9
28.2
28.6
28.9
29.2
29.6
92–94
25.1
25.5
25.8
26.2
26.5
26.9
27.2
27.5
27.9
28.2
28.6
28.9
29.3
29.6
30.0
30.3
95–97
25.8
26.2
26.5
26.9
27.2
27.6
27.9
28.3
28.6
29.0
29.3
29.7
30.0
30.4
30.7
31.1
98–100
26.6
26.9
27.3
27.6
27.9
28.3
28.6
29.0
29.3
29.7
30.0
30.4
30.7
31.1
31.4
31.8
101–103
27.3
27.6
28.0
28.3
28.6
29.0
29.3
29.7
30.0
30.4
30.7
31.1
31.4
31.8
32.1
32.5
104–106
27.9
28.3
28.6
29.0
29.3
29.7
30.0
30.4
30.7
31.1
31.4
31.8
32.1
32.5
32.8
33.2
107–109
28.6
29.0
29.3
29.7
30.0
30.4
30.7
31.1
31.4
31.8
32.1
32.4
32.8
33.1
33.5
33.8
110–112
29.3
29.6
30.0
30.3
30.7
31.0
31.4
31.7
32.1
32.4
32.8
33.1
33.5
33.8
34.2
34.5
113–115
30.0
30.3
30.7
31.0
31.3
31.7
32.0
32.4
32.7
33.1
33.4
33.8
34.1
34.5
34.8
35.2
116–118
30.6
31.0
31.3
31.6
32.0
32.3
32.7
33.0
33.4
33.7
34.1
34.4
34.8
35.1
35.5
35.8
119–121
31.3
31.6
32.0
32.3
32.6
33.0
33.3
33.7
34.0
34.4
34.7
35.1
35.4
35.8
36.1
36.5
122–124
31.9
32.2
32.6
32.9
33.3
33.6
34.0
34.3
34.7
35.0
35.4
35.7
36.1
36.4
36.7
37.1
125–127
32.5
32.9
33.2
33.5
33.9
34.2
34.6
34.9
35.3
35.6
36.0
36.3
36.7
37.0
37.4
37.7
128–130
33.1
33.5
33.8
34.2
34.5
34.9
35.2
35.5
35.9
36.2
36.6
36.9
37.3
37.6
38.0
38.5
Body density is calculated based on the generalized equation for predicting body density of men developed by A. S. Jackson and M. L. Pollock, British Journal of Nutrition, 40 (1978), 497–504. 
Percent body fat is determined from the calculated body density using the Siri formula.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

49
Chapter 2  Assessment of Physical Fitness
Table 2.11  Recommended Body Composition According to 
Percent Body Fat
Age
Males
Females
29
12–20%
17–25%
30–49
13–21%
18–26%
50
14–22%
19–27%
 High physical fitness standard
 Health fitness or criterion referenced standard
© Cengage Learning
Table 2.12  Body Mass Index
Weight
Height 110 115 120 125 130 135 140 145 150 155 160 165 170 175 180 185 190 195 200 205 210 215 220 225 230 235 240 245 250
5900
21
22
23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49
5910
21
22
23 24 25 26 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 43 44 45 46 47
5920
20
21
22 23 24 25 26 27 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46
5930
19
20
21 22 23 24 25 26 27 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 43 44
5940
19
20
21 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 39 40 41 42 43
5950
18
19
20 21 22 22 23 24 25 26 27 27 28 29 30 31 32 32 33 34 35 36 37 37 38 39 40 41 42
5960
18
19
19 20 21 22 23 23 24 25 26 27 27 28 29 30 31 31 32 33 34 35 36 36 37 38 39 40 40
5970
17
18
19 20 20 21 22 23 23 24 25 26 27 27 28 29 30 31 31 32 33 34 34 35 36 37 38 38 39
5980
17
17
18 19 20 21 21 22 23 24 24 25 26 27 27 28 29 30 30 31 32 33 33 34 35 36 36 37 38
5990
16
17
18 18 19 20 21 21 22 23 24 24 25 26 27 27 28 29 30 30 31 32 32 33 34 35 35 36 37
59100
16
17
17 18 19 19 20 21 22 22 23 24 24 25 26 27 27 28 29 29 30 31 32 32 33 34 34 35 36
59110
15
16
17 17 18 19 20 20 21 22 22 23 24 24 25 26 26 27 28 29 29 30 31 31 32 33 33 34 35
6900
15
16
16 17 18 18 19 20 20 21 22 22 23 24 24 25 26 26 27 28 28 29 30 31 31 32 33 33 34
6910
15
15
16 16 17 18 18 19 20 20 21 22 22 23 24 24 25 26 26 27 28 28 20 30 30 31 32 32 33
6920
14
15
15 16 17 17 18 19 19 20 21 21 22 22 23 24 24 25 26 26 27 28 28 29 30 30 31 31 32
6930
14
14
15 16 16 17 17 18 19 19 20 21 21 22 22 23 24 24 25 26 26 27 27 28 29 29 30 31 31
6940
13
14
15 15 16 16 17 18 18 19 19 20 21 21 22 23 23 24 24 25 26 26 27 27 28 29 29 30 30
© Cengage Learning
SBC
VSC
RTP
© Cengage Learning
Figure 2.6
Visceral (VSC) fat is a greater risk 
factor for heart disease, stroke, 
hypertension, diabetes, and cancer 
than subcutaneous (SBC) or 
retroperitoneal (RTP) fat.
Table 2.13  Disease Risk According to Body Mass Index (BMI)
BMI
Disease Risk
Category
,18.5
Increased
Underweight
18.5–21.99
Low
Acceptable
22.0–24.99
Very low 
Acceptable
25.0–29.99
Increased
Overweight
30.0–34.99
High
Obesity I
35.0–39.99
Very high
Obesity II
.40.0 
Extremely high
Obesity III
© Cengage Learning
Table 2.14  Disease Risk According to Waist Circumference 
(WC)
Men
Women
Disease Risk
.35.5
,32.5
Low
35.5–40.0
32.5–35.0
Moderate
.40.0
.35.0
High
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

50
Fitness and Wellness
WHtR is determined by dividing the waist circum-
ference in inches by the height in inches. As illustrated in 
Table 2.15, a ratio of .4 to .5 indicates the lowest risk for 
disease, whereas less than .4 or between .5 and .7 require 
“care” to decrease health risks, and a ratio of .7 or greater 
requires “action” to conform with the lowest health risk 
category of .4 to .5. An example of the WHtR for a per-
son with a WC of 32 inches and a height of 68 inches 
(5’8”) would be .47 (32 4 68). The findings of many of 
these studies have prompted researchers to promote a 
public health message indicating that you should “keep 
your waist circumference to less than half your height.”
2.7  Effects of Exercise 
and Diet on Body 
Composition
If you engage in a diet and exercise program, you should 
repeat body composition measurements about once a 
month to monitor changes in lean and fat tissue. This is 
important because lean body mass is affected by weight-
reduction programs as well as physical activity. A nega-
tive caloric balance does lead to a decrease in lean body 
mass. These effects will be explained in detail in Chapter 
6. As lean body mass changes, so will your recom-
mended body weight.
Changes in body composition resulting from a weight 
control/exercise program are illustrated by a coed aerobics 
course taught during a 6-week summer term. Students 
participated in aerobic dance routines 4 times a week,  
60 minutes each time. On the first and the last days of 
class, several physiological parameters, including body 
composition, were assessed. Students also were given in-
formation on diet and nutrition and followed their own 
weight control program. At the end of the 6 weeks, the 
average weight loss for the entire class was only 3 pounds. 
When body composition was assessed, however, class 
members were surprised to find that the average fat loss 
was actually 6 pounds, accompanied by a 3-pound in-
crease in lean body mass (see Figure 2.7).
Table 2.15  Health Categories According to Waist-to-Height 
Ratio (WHtR)
Category 
WHtR (Waist/
Height)
Disease Risk
Take Care 
,.4
Increased
Acceptable (OK)
.4–.5
Very low
Take Care
.5–.7
Increased
Take Action 
..7
Highest
Adapted from Expert Panel, "Executive Summary of the Clinical Guidelines on the 
Identification, Evaluation, and Treatment of Overweight and Obesity in Adults," Archives of 
Internal Medicine 158 (1998): 1855–1867.
	1.	
Do you consciously attempt to incorporate as much 
physical activity as possible in your activities of daily liv-
ing (walk, take stairs, cycle, participate in sports and rec-
reational activities)?
	2.	
Are your strength levels sufficient to perform tasks of 
daily living (climbing stairs, carrying a backpack, open-
ing jars, doing housework, mowing the yard) without re-
quiring additional assistance or feeling unusually 
fatigued?
	3.	
Do you know what your percent body fat is according to 
a reliable body composition assessment technique ad-
ministered by a qualified technician?
Assess Your Behavior
To access course materials, including companion resources, please visit www.cengagebrain.com.
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Pounds
Weight loss 
Fat loss 
Lean tissue gain
Figure 2.7
Typical body composition changes as 
a result of a six- to eight-week exercise 
program without an increase in caloric 
intake.
SOURCE: "Fitness Benefits of Aerobic Dance," by W.W.K. Hoeger, Data 
collected at the University of Texas of the Permian Basin, 1985.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

51
Chapter 2  Assessment of Physical Fitness
	 1.	 The metabolic profile is used in reference to
	 a.	 insulin sensitivity.
	 b.	 glucose tolerance.
	 c.	 cholesterol levels.
	 d.	 cardiovascular disease.
	 e.	 All of the above are correct choices.
	 2.	 Cardiorespiratory endurance is determined by
	 a.	 the amount of oxygen the body is able to utilize per 
minute of physical activity.
	 b.	 the length of time it takes the heart rate to return to 
120 bpm following the 1.5-Mile Run Test.
	 c.	 the difference between the maximal heart rate and the 
resting heart rate.
	 d.	 the product of the heart rate and blood pressure at 
rest versus exercise.
	 e.	 the time it takes a person to reach a heart rate be-
tween 120 and 170 bpm during the 1.0-Mile Walk 
Test.
	 3.	 An “excellent” cardiorespiratory fitness rating in mL/kg/
min for young male adults is about
	 a.	 10.
	 b.	 20.
	 c.	 30.
	 d.	 40.
	 e.	 50.
	 4.	 Which of the following parameters is used to estimate 
maximal oxygen uptake according to the 1.0-Mile Walk 
Test?
	 a.	 body weight
	 b.	 gender
	 c.	 total 1.0-mile walk time
	 d.	 exercise heart rate
	 e.	 All of the above are used to estimate VO2max.
	 5.	 The ability of a muscle to exert submaximal force  
repeatedly over time is known as
	 a.	 muscular strength.
	 b.	 plyometric training.
	 c.	 muscular endurance.
	 d.	 isokinetic training.
	 e.	 isometric training.
	 6.	 Indicate which of the following exercises is not used to 
assess muscular endurance in men.
	 a.	 Bench jump
	 b.	 Modified push-up
	 c.	 Bent-leg curl-up
	 d.	 All of the above are used by men.
	 e.	 None of the above are used by men.
	 7.	 Muscular flexibility is defined as
	 a.	 the capacity of joints and muscles to work in a syn-
chronized manner.
	 b.	 the achievable range of motion at a joint or group of 
joints without causing injury.
	 c.	 the capability of muscles to stretch beyond their nor-
mal resting length without injury to the muscles.
	 d.	 the capacity of muscles to return to their proper 
length following the application of a stretching force.
	 e.	 the limitations placed on muscles as the joints move 
through their normal planes.
	 8.	 During the starting position of the Modified Sit-and-
Reach Test
	 a.	 the hips, back, and head are placed against a wall.
	 b.	 you measure the distance from the hips to the feet.
	 c.	 you make a fist with the hands.
	 d.	 you stretch forward as far as possible over the reach 
indicator.
	 e.	 All of the above are correct choices.
	 9.	 Essential fat in women is
	 a.	 3 percent.
	 b.	 5 percent.
	 c.	 10 percent.
	 d.	 12 percent.
	 e.	 17 percent.
	10.	 Which of the following is not a technique used in the  
assessment of body fat?
	 a.	 Hydrostatic weighing
	 b.	 Skinfold thickness
	 c.	 Body mass index
	 d.	 Dual energy x-ray absorptiometry
Correct answers can be found on page 301.
Assess Your Knowledge
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

52
Fitness and Wellness
Section
Course
Date
Name 
Age 
 Male     Female
Body Weight
Test
Test
Fitness
Component
Data
Results
Category
Goal
Cardiorespiratory Endurance
Time
Time
VO2max
VO2max
VO2max
VO2max
1.5-Mile Run 
 : 
 . 
 . 
1.0-Mile Walk 
 : 
Heart Rate
 : 
 . 
 . 
Muscular Fitness (Strength/Endurance)
Reps
Bench Jumps 
Chair Dips / Modiﬁed Push-Ups 
Bent-Leg Curl-Ups / Ab. Crunches 
Overall Fitness Category
Muscular Flexibility
Inches
Modiﬁed Sit-and-Reach (MSR) 
Finger Touch (FT), Right
Finger Touch (FT), Left
Overall Fitness Category 
(use the MSR test plus only one of the FT tests)
BMI/Body Composition
Body Mass Index (BMI) 
Waist Circumference (WC) 
 inches 
Waist-to-Height Ratio (WHtR)
Chest / Triceps 
 mm
Abdominal / Suprailium 
 mm
Thigh 
 mm
Sum of Skinfolds 
 mm
Percent Body Fat
Lean Body Mass
 lbs. 
Instructor Signature
Student Signature
Activity 2.1: Personal Fitness Profile: Pre-Test
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

53
Chapter 2  Assessment of Physical Fitness
Section
Course
Date
Name 
Age 
 Male     Female
Body Weight
Test
Test
Fitness
Component
Data
Results
Category
Goal
Cardiorespiratory Endurance
Time
Time
VO2max
VO2max
VO2max
VO2max
1.5-Mile Run 
 : 
 . 
 . 
1.0-Mile Walk 
 : 
Heart Rate
 : 
 . 
 . 
Muscular Fitness (Strength/Endurance)
Reps
Bench Jumps 
Chair Dips / Modiﬁed Push-Ups 
Bent-Leg Curl-Ups / Ab. Crunches 
Overall Fitness Category
Muscular Flexibility
Inches
Modiﬁed Sit-and-Reach (MSR) 
Finger Touch (FT), Right
Finger Touch (FT), Left
Overall Fitness Category 
(use the MSR test plus only one of the FT tests)
BMI/Body Composition
Body Mass Index (BMI) 
Waist Circumference (WC) 
 inches 
Waist-to-Height Ratio (WHtR)
Chest / Triceps 
 mm
Abdominal / Suprailium 
 mm
Thigh 
 mm
Sum of Skinfolds 
 mm
Percent Body Fat
Lean Body Mass
 lbs. 
Instructor Signature
Student Signature
Activity 2.1: Personal Fitness Profile: Post-Test
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

54
Fitness and Wellness
 Recommended Body Weight According to Percent Body Fat
A. Current Body Weight (BW): 
 lbs.
B. Current Percent Fat (%F): 
 %
C. Fat Weight (FW) = BW × %F* = 
 ×
=
×
=
  
 lbs.
D. Lean Body Mass (LBM) = BW − FW  =
 lbs.
E. Age: 
F. Recommended Fat Percent (RFP) Range (see Table 2.11, page 49): 
 
Low End of Recommended Fat Percent Range (LRFP): 
 % (Physical Fitness Standard)
 
High End of Recommended Fat Percent Range (HRFP): 
 % (Health Fitness Standard)
G. Recommended Body Weight Range:
 
Low End of Recommended Body Weight Range (LRBW) = LBM ÷ (1.0 − LRFP*) 
 
LRBW = 
÷ (1.0 −
 ) =
 lbs.
 
HRBW = 
÷ (1.0 −
 ) =
 lbs.
 
High End of Recommended Body Weight Range (HRBW) = LBM ÷ (1.0 − HRFP*) 
 
Recommended Body Weight Range: 
 to
 lbs.
*Express percentages in decimal form (e.g., 25% = .25) 
Activity 2.2: Recommended Body Weight, Body 
Mass Index (BMI), Waist 
Circumference (WC), and Waist-to-
Height Ratio (WHtR)
Date
Name
Section
Course
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

55
Chapter 2  Assessment of Physical Fitness
Body Mass Index (BMI)*
Post-test
Pre-test
Date: 
Weight (lbs.): 
Height (inches): 
BMI:* 
Disease risk: 
(Table 2.13)
*BMI = [Weight in lbs. × 705 ÷ (Height in inches)2] or 
[Weight in kgs ÷ (Height in meters)2]
Body Composition Conclusions and Goals
Brieﬂy state your feelings about your body composition results and your recommended body weight. Do you plan to reduce your 
percent body fat and increase your lean body mass? If so, indicate how you plan to achieve these goals.
Waist Circumference (WC) and
Waist-to-Height Ratio (WHtR)
Post-test
Pre-test
Date: 
Waist (inches): 
Disease risk: 
(Table 2.14)
WHtR
Disease risk: 
(Table 2.15)
Recommended Body Weight According to BMI
RBW based on BMI = Desired BMI × height (in.) × height (in.) ÷ 705
RBW at BMI of 25 = 
25  × 
× 
÷ 705 =
RBW at BMI of 22 = 
22  ×
×
÷ 705 = 
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Exercise Prescription
3
“Exercise is the closest thing 
we’ll ever get to the miracle 
pill that everyone is seeking. 
It brings weight loss, appetite 
control, improved mood and 
self-esteem, an energy kick, 
and longer life by decreasing 
the risk of heart disease, 
diabetes, stroke, osteoporosis, 
and chronic disabilities.”
—Holly Atkinson
Objectives
• Determine your readiness to start an 
exercise program.
• Learn the factors that govern 
cardiorespiratory exercise prescription: 
intensity, mode, duration, and frequency.
• Understand the variables that govern 
development of muscular fitness 
(muscular strength and muscular 
endurance): mode, resistance, sets, and 
frequency.
• Understand the factors that contribute to 
the development of muscular flexibility: 
mode, intensity, repetitions, and frequency.
• Learn to write personalized 
cardiorespiratory, strength, and flexibility 
exercise programs.
• Be introduced to a program for the 
prevention and rehabilitation of low back 
pain.
• Learn some ways to enhance compliance 
with exercise.
• Be able to write fitness goals.
57
Visit www.cengagebrain.com to access 
course materials and companion resources for 
this text including quiz questions designed to 
check your understanding of the chapter 
contents, activities, labs, and more! See the 
preface on page xi for more information.
© Andresr/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

58
Fitness and Wellness
When I was in elementary school, I played a variety 
of sports, including basketball, baseball, soccer, and 
some football. Later in junior high and high school, I 
pretty much settled for football and baseball. We 
were required to run and lift weights for condition-
ing, and we got all the exercise we needed in our 
school sports’ training program. I did have some 
back trouble on and off, but nothing I couldn’t han-
dle. My cardio and strength levels have always been 
good, and my percent body fat is excellent. I do 
know that my flexibility needs help; but then, us 
guys don’t need to stretch.
Now in college during a basketball class, I came 
down with more back pain. I talked to my instructor 
and discovered that just playing basketball twice a 
week and doing only bench press, squat, arm curl, 
and curl-up exercises was not really a well-rounded 
program. Because I was re-
ally stiff, I started to stretch 
almost every day, added 
jogging two to three times 
per week on days when I 
didn’t play sports, and in-
cluded several additional 
exercises to my strength-
training routine. For back 
health, I also added core 
training exercises and sta-
bility ball exercises. I do these exercises twice a week. 
It has been two years since I started this new exercise 
routine, and for the first time in my life I have been 
free of back pain. I am sleeping better, I have more 
energy, I am doing better in school, and I feel much 
better about myself. I don’t know that it can get any 
better than that!
Fuse/Jupiter Images
Real Life Story | Raul’s Fitness Program
The inspiring story of George Snell from Sandy, Utah, 
illustrates what fitness can do for a person’s health  
and well-being. At age 45, Snell weighed approximately 
400 pounds, his blood pressure was 220/180, he was 
blind because of diabetes he did not know he had, and 
his blood glucose (sugar) level was 487. Determined to 
do something about his physical and medical condition, 
Snell started a walking/jogging program. After about  
8 months of conditioning, he had lost almost 200 pounds, 
his eyesight had returned, his glucose level was down to 
67, and he was taken off medication. Two months later—
less than 10 months after initiating his personal exercise  
program—he completed his first marathon, running a 
course of 26.2 miles!
Research results have established that being physi-
cally active and participating in a lifetime exercise pro-
gram contribute greatly to good health, physical fitness, 
and wellness. Nonetheless, too many individuals who 
exercise regularly are surprised to find, when they take a 
battery of fitness tests, that they are not as conditioned as 
they thought they were. Although these people may be 
exercising regularly, they most likely are not following 
the basic principles of exercise prescription. Therefore, 
they do not reap significant benefits.
To obtain optimal results, all programs must be in-
dividualized. Our bodies are not all alike, and fitness 
levels and needs vary among individuals. The informa-
tion presented in this chapter provides you with the 
necessary guidelines to write a personalized cardiorespi-
ratory, strength, and flexibility exercise program to pro-
mote and maintain physical fitness and wellness. Infor-
mation on weight management to achieve recommended 
body composition (the fourth component of physical 
fitness) is given in Chapter 6.
3.1  Monitoring Daily 
Physical Activity
Almost half of all adults in the United States do not 
achieve the recommended daily amount of physical ac-
tivity. The first step toward becoming more active is to 
carefully monitor daily physical activity. Other than 
monitoring actual time engaged in activity, an excellent 
tool to determine daily physical activity is through the 
use of a pedometer.
Pedometers are small mechanical devices that sense 
vertical body motion and are used to count footsteps. 
Wearing a pedometer throughout the day allows a per-
son to determine the total steps taken in a day. Although 
with less accuracy, some pedometer brands also record 
distance, calories burned, speeds, and actual time of ac-
tivity each day.
A pedometer is a great motivational tool to help in-
crease, maintain, and monitor daily physical activity that 
involves lower body motion (walking, jogging, running). 
Pedometer use will most likely increase in the next few 
years to help promote and quantify daily physical activity.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

59
Chapter 3  Exercise Prescription
Before purchasing a pedometer, be sure to verify its 
accuracy. Many of the free or low-cost pedometers pro-
vided by corporations for promotion and advertisement 
purposes are inaccurate, thus discouraging their use. 
Pedometers also tend to lose accuracy at very slow walk-
ing speeds (30 minutes per mile or less) because the 
vertical movement of the hip is too small to trigger the 
spring-mounted lever arm inside the pedometer to prop-
erly record the steps taken.
You can obtain a good pedometer for about $25, and 
ratings are available online. The most accurate pedome-
ter brands are Yamax, Kenz, New Lifestyles, and 
Walk4Life. To test the accuracy of a pedometer, follow 
these steps: clip the pedometer on the waist directly 
above the kneecap, reset the pedometer to zero, carefully 
close the pedometer, walk exactly 50 steps at your nor-
mal pace, carefully open the pedometer, and look at the 
number of steps recorded. A reading within 10 percent 
of the actual steps taken (45 to 55 steps) is acceptable.
The typical American male takes about 6,000 steps 
per day, whereas women take about 5,300 steps. A gen-
eral recommendation for adults is 10,000 steps per day, 
and Table 3.1 provides specific activity ratings based on 
the number of daily steps taken.
All daily steps count, but some of your steps should 
come in bouts of at least 10 minutes 3 times per day, so 
as to meet the national physical activity recommenda-
tion of accumulating 30 minutes of moderate-intensity 
physical activity in at least 3 10-minute sessions 5 days 
per week. A 10-minute brisk walk (a distance of about 
1,200 yards at a 15-minute-per-mile pace) is approxi-
mately 1,300 steps. A 15-minute mile (1,770 yards) walk 
is about 1,900 steps.1 Thus, some pedometer brands have 
an “aerobic steps” function that records steps taken in 
excess of 60 steps per minute over a 10-minute period of 
time.
If you do not accumulate the recommended 10,000 
daily steps, you can refer to Table 3.2 to determine the 
additional walking 
or 
jogging 
dis-
tance required to 
reach your goal. 
For example, if 
you are a 5’8” tall 
male, and you typ-
ically accumulate 
5,200 steps per 
Pedometer  An electronic device that 
senses body motion and counts foot-
steps. Some pedometers also record 
­distance, calories burned, speeds, and 
time spent being physically active.
Table 3.1  Adult Activity Levels Based on Total Number of Steps 
Taken per Day
Steps per Day
Category
,5,000
Sedentary lifestyle
5,000–7,499
Low active
7,500–9,999
Somewhat active
10,000–12,499
Active
12,500
Highly active
SOURCE: C. Tudor-Locke and D. R. Basset, “How Many Steps/Day Are Enough? Preliminary 
Pedometer Indices for Public Health,” Sports Medicine 34 (2008): 1–8.
Table 3.2  Estimated Number of Steps to Walk or Jog/Run a Mile Based on Gender, Height, and Pace
Pace (min/mile)
Walking
Jogging
Height
20
18
16
15
12
10
8
6
Women
 
 
   
5900
2,371
2,244
2,117
2,054
1,997
1,710
1,423
1,136
5940
2,315
2,188
2,061
1,998
1,943
1,656
1,369
1,082
5980
2,258
2,131
2,005
1,941
1,889
1,602
1,315
1,028
6900
2,202
2,075
1,948
1,885
1,835
1,548
1,261
974
Men
5920
2,310
2,183
2,056
1,993
1,970
1,683
1,396
1,109
5960
2,253
2,127
2,000
1,937
1,916
1,629
1,342
1,055
59100
2,197
2,070
1,943
1,880 
1,862
1,575
1,288
1,001
6920
2,141
2,014
1,887
1,824 
1,808
1,521
1,234
947
Prediction Equations (pace in min/mile and height in inches):
Walking	
Running
Women: Steps/mile 5 1,949 1 [(63.4 3 pace) – (14.1 3 height)]	
Women and Men: Steps/mile 5 1,084 1 [(143.6 3 pace) – (13.5 3 height)]
Men: Steps/mile 5 1,916 1 [(63.4 3 pace) – (14.1 3 height)]
Adapted from W. W. K. Hoeger et al., “One-Mile Step Count at Walking and Running Speeds,” ACSM’s Health & Fitness Journal 12, no. 1 (2008): 14–19.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

60
Fitness and Wellness
day, you would need an additional 4,800 daily steps to 
reach your 10,000-steps goal. You can do so by jogging  
3 miles at a 10-minute-per-mile pace (1,602 steps 3 
3 miles 5 4,806 steps) on some days and you can walk 
2.5 miles at a 15-minute-per-mile pace (1,908 steps 3 
2.5 miles 5 4,770 steps) on other days. If you do not find 
a particular speed (pace) that you typically walk or jog at 
in Table 3.2, you can estimate the number of steps at that 
speed using the prediction equations at the bottom of 
this table.
The first practical application that you can perform 
in this course is to determine your current level of daily 
activity. The log provided in Activity 3.1 (page 87) will 
help you keep a four-day log of all physical activities that 
you do on a daily basis. On this log, record the time of 
day, type and duration of the activity/exercise, and, if 
possible, steps taken while engaged in the activity. The 
results will provide an indication of how active you are 
and will serve to monitor changes in the next few 
months and years.
3.2  Readiness for Exercise
The research data on the benefits of regular physical ac-
tivity and exercise are far too impressive to be ignored. 
All of the benefits of being active, however, do not help 
unless people carry out a lifetime program of physical 
activity. Of greater concern, the majority of the popula-
tion does not exercise regularly, and of those who exer-
cise, only about 20 percent are able to achieve a high 
physical fitness standard. More than half of those who 
start exercising drop out during the first few months of 
the program.
If you are not exercising now, are you willing to give 
exercise a try? The first step is to decide positively that 
you will try. To help you make this decision, look at Ac-
tivity 3.2 (page 89). Make a list of the advantages and 
disadvantages of incorporating exercise into your life-
style. Your list of advantages may include things such as:
It will make me feel better.
My self-esteem will improve.
I will lose weight.
I will have more energy.
It will lower my risk for chronic diseases.
Your list of disadvantages may include:
I don’t want to take the time.
I’m too out of shape.
There’s no good place to exercise.
I don’t have the willpower to do it.
When the reasons for exercise outweigh the reasons 
for not exercising, it will become easier to try.
A questionnaire that may provide answers about 
your readiness to start an exercise program is also in-
cluded in Activity 3.2, page 89. Read each statement 
carefully and circle the number that best describes your 
feelings. Be completely honest in your answers. You are 
evaluated in four categories: mastery (self-control), atti-
tude, health, and commitment. The higher you score in 
any category—mastery, for example—the more impor-
tant that reason is for you to exercise.
Scores can vary from 4 to 16. A score of 12 and 
above is a strong indicator that that factor is important to 
you, whereas 8 and below is low. If you score 12 or more 
points in each category, your chances of initiating and 
sticking to an exercise program are good. If you do not 
score at least 12 points in three categories, your chances 
of succeeding at exercise may be slim. You need to be 
better informed about the benefits of exercise, and re-
training may be helpful. Tips on how to enhance com-
mitment to exercise are provided later in the chapter on 
page 84.
3.3  Exercise Prescriptions
To better understand how overall fitness can be devel-
oped, we have to be familiar with the guidelines that 
govern exercise prescriptions for cardiovascular endur-
ance, muscular fitness (strength and endurance), and 
body flexibility.2 A brief summary of these guidelines is 
provided in the Physical Activity Pyramid given in Fig-
ure 3.1, and they will be explained in detail in the next 
few sections of this chapter.
Good cardiorespiratory fitness is essential to enjoy a good 
quality of life.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

61
Chapter 3  Exercise Prescription
3.4  Cardiorespiratory 
Endurance
A sound cardiorespiratory (CR) endurance program con-
tributes greatly to enhancing and maintaining good 
health. Of the four health-related physical fitness compo-
nents, CR endurance is the single most important—except 
during older age, when strength seems to be more critical. 
Even though certain levels of muscular strength and flex-
ibility are necessary to perform activities of daily living, a 
person can get by without a lot of strength and flexibility. 
A person cannot do without a good CR system, though.
Despite the fact that regular moderate physical ac-
tivity provides substantial health benefits, and the over-
whelming scientific evidence validating the benefits of 
exercise on health, longevity, and quality of life, the ma-
jority of adults in the United States still do not meet the 
minimum recommendations for the improvement and 
maintenance of CR fitness. According to the most recent 
survey released in 2013 by the Centers for Disease Con-
trol and Prevention (CDC), overall, only 46.1 percent of 
adults (50.4 percent of men and 42.1 percent of women) 
in the United States meet the 2008 federal guidelines for 
aerobic physical activity. Furthermore, almost 34 percent 
do not engage in any leisure-time physical activities.
3.4A  Cardiorespiratory Exercise Prescrip-
tion  The objective of aerobic exercise is to improve the 
capacity of the CR system. To accomplish this, the heart 
muscle has to be overloaded like any other muscle in the 
human body. Just as the biceps muscle in the upper arm 
is developed through strength training, the heart muscle 
is exercised to increase in size, strength, and efficiency.
To better un-
derstand how the 
CR system can be 
developed, 
we 
have to be familiar 
with four factors 
involved in aero-
bic exercise: inten-
sity, mode, dura-
Activities of daily living  Everyday 
behaviors that people normally do to 
function in life (cross the street, carry 
groceries, lift objects, do laundry, 
sweep floors).
Physical activity: Accumulate 60–90 minutes of moderate-intensity activity nearly every day.
Cardiorespiratory endurance: Exercise 20–60 minutes 3–5 days/week 
Strength and flexibility: 2–3 days/week
Minimize inactivity
Figure 3.1
Physical activity pyramid.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

62
Fitness and Wellness
tion, and frequency of exercise. First, however, you 
should be aware that the ACSM recommends that indi-
viduals with two or more risk factors for cardiovascular 
disease (men 45 or older and women 55 or older, family 
history, cigarette smoking, sedentary lifestyle, obesity, 
high blood pressure, high LDL cholesterol, low HDL 
cholesterol, or prediabetes) get a medical exam prior to 
vigorous exercise.3 They may, however, initiate a light-
to-moderate intensity exercise program without medical 
clearance. The ACSM has defined vigorous exercise as 
exercise intensity greater than 60 percent of maximal 
capacity.
Intensity of Exercise
Muscles have to be overloaded for them to develop. Just 
as the training stimulus to develop the biceps muscle can 
be accomplished with curl-up exercises, the stimulus for 
the CR system is provided by making the heart pump at 
a higher rate for a certain period of time.
CR development occurs when the heart is working 
between 30 percent and 90 percent of heart rate reserve 
(HRR).4,5 Health benefits are achieved when training at 
a lower exercise intensity, that is, between 30 percent and 
60 percent of the person’s HRR. Even greater health and 
cardioprotective benefits, and higher and faster improve-
ments in CR fitness (VO2max), however, are achieved 
primarily through vigorous-intensity programs, that is, 
at an intensity greater than 60 percent.6 For this reason, 
many experts prescribe exercise between 60 percent and 
90 percent. Intensity of exercise can be calculated easily, 
and training can be monitored by checking your pulse. 
To determine the intensity of exercise or cardiorespira-
tory training zone, follow these steps:
	1.	
Estimate your maximal heart rate (MHR) accord-
ing to the following formula7:
MHR 5 207 2 (.7 3 age)
	2.	
Check your resting heart rate (RHR) sometime in 
the evening after you have been sitting quietly for 
15 to 20 minutes. You may take your pulse for 30 
seconds and multiply by 2, or take it for a full min-
ute. As explained in Chapter 2, you can check your 
pulse on the wrist by placing two or three fingers 
over the radial artery or on the neck by placing 
your fingers over the carotid artery.
	3.	
Determine the heart rate reserve (HRR) by sub-
tracting the resting heart rate from the maximal 
heart rate (HRR 5 MHR 2 RHR).
	4.	
Calculate the training intensities (TIs) at 30, 40, 50, 
60, 70, and 90 percent. Multiply the heart rate re-
serve by the respective .30, .40, .50, .60, .70, and 
.90, and then add the resting heart rate to all 4  
of these figures (for example, 70% TI 5 HRR 3 .70 
1 RHR).
	
Example. The 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, and 90 percent 
TIs for a 20-year-old with a resting heart rate of 68 
beats per minute (bpm) would be as follows:
MHR: 207 2 (.70 3 20) 5 193 bpm
RHR: 5 68 bpm
HRR: 193 2 68 5 125 beats
30% TI 5 (125 3 .30) 1 68 5 106 bpm
40% TI 5 (125 3 .40) 1 68 5 118 bpm
50% TI 5 (125 3 .50) 1 68 5 131 bpm
60% TI 5 (125 3 .60) 1 68 5 143 bpm
70% TI 5 (125 3 .70) 1 68 5 155 bpm
90% TI 5 (125 3 .90) 1 68 5 181 bpm
	
Light-intensity CR training zone: 106 to  
118 bpm
	
Moderate-intensity CR training zone:  
118 to 143 bpm
	
Vigorous-intensity CR training zone:  
143 to 181 bpm
When you exercise to improve the CR system, ide-
ally you should maintain the heart rate between the  
60 and 90 percent training intensities to obtain the  
best development. If you have been physically inactive, 
you should train at around the 30 to 40 percent intensity 
during the first 2 to 4 weeks of the exercise program. You 
Cardiorespiratory endurance is the ability of 
the heart, lungs, and blood vessels to deliver 
adequate amounts of oxygen to the cells to 
meet the demands of prolonged physical 
activity.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

63
Chapter 3  Exercise Prescription
may then increase to a 50 percent to 60 percent training 
intensity for the next four weeks. Thereafter you should 
exercise between the 60 percent and 90 percent training 
intensity.
When determining the training intensity for your 
own program, you need to consider your personal fitness 
goals. Individuals who exercise at around the 50 percent 
training intensity will reap significant health benefits—in 
particular, improvements in the metabolic profile (see 
“Health Fitness Standard,” page 29, and Figure 2.1, page 
30). Training at this lower percentage, however, may 
place you in only the “average” or moderately fit category 
(see Table 2.2, page 33). Exercising at this lower intensity 
does lower the risk for cardiovascular mortality (health 
fitness) but will not allow you to achieve a “good” or 
“excellent” CR fitness rating (the physical fitness stan-
dard). The latter ratings are obtained by exercising closer 
to the 90 percent threshold.
Following a few weeks of training, you may have a 
considerably lower resting heart rate (10 to 20 beats 
fewer in 8 to 12 weeks). Therefore, you should recompute 
your target zone periodically. You can compute your own 
CR training zone by using the form in Activity 3.3, page 
91. Once you have reached an ideal level of CR endur-
ance, training in the 60 to 90 percent range will allow you 
to maintain your fitness level.
Moderate- Versus Vigorous-Intensity Exercise
As fitness programs became popular in the 1970s,  
vigorous-intensity exercise was routinely prescribed for  
all fitness participants. Following extensive research in the 
late 1980s and 1990s, we learned that moderate-intensity 
physical activity provided substantial health benefits— 
including decreased risk for cardiovascular mortality, a 
statement endorsed by the U.S. Surgeon General in 1996.8 
Thus, the emphasis switched from vigorous- to moderate-
intensity training in the mid-1990s. In the 1996 report, the 
surgeon general also stated that vigorous-intensity exercise 
would provide even greater benefits than moderate-inten-
sity activity. Limited attention, however, has been paid to 
this recommendation since the publication of the report.
Vigorous-intensity programs yield higher improve-
ments in VO2max than moderate-intensity programs. 
And higher levels of aerobic fitness are associated with 
lower cardiovascular mortality, even when the duration 
of moderate-intensity activity is prolonged to match  
the energy expenditure performed during a shorter  
vigorous-intensity effort.9 A recent review of several 
clinical studies substantiated that vigorous intensity, as 
compared to moderate-intensity activity, leads to better 
improvements in coronary heart disease risk factors, in-
cluding aerobic endurance, blood pressure, and blood 
glucose control.10
A 2007 joint report by the American College of 
Sports Medicine and the American Heart Association 
indicated that, when feasible, vigorous-intensity physical 
activity is preferable over moderate-intensity because it 
provides greater benefits in terms of personal fitness, 
chronic disease and disability prevention, decreased risk 
of premature mortality, and lifetime weight manage-
ment.11 As a result, the pendulum is again swinging to-
ward vigorous-intensity activity because of the extra 
benefits and increased chronic disease protection.
Monitoring Exercise Heart Rate
During the first few weeks of an exercise program, you 
should monitor your exercise heart rate regularly to 
make sure you are training in the proper zone. Wait until 
you are about 5 minutes into your exercise session before 
taking your first reading. When you check your heart 
rate, count your pulse for 10 seconds and then multiply 
by 6 to get the per-minute pulse rate. Exercise heart rate 
will remain at the same level for about 15 seconds follow-
ing exercise. After 15 seconds, your heart rate will drop 
rapidly. Do not hesitate to stop during your exercise bout 
to check your pulse. If the rate is too low, increase the 
intensity of exercise. If the rate is too high, slow down.
To develop the CR system, you do not have to exer-
cise above the 90 percent rate. From a fitness standpoint, 
training above this percentage will not give extra benefits 
and actually may 
be unsafe for some 
individuals. 
For 
unconditioned 
people and older 
adults, CR train-
ing 
should 
be  
conducted around 
the 50 percent rate 
to discourage po-
tential 
problems 
associated 
with 
vigorous-intensity 
exercise.
Mode of Exercise
The mode of exer-
cise that develops 
the 
CR 
system  
has to be aerobic 
in nature. Aerobic 
exercise involves 
the major muscle 
groups 
of 
the 
body, and it must 
be rhythmic and 
Vigorous exercise  An exercise in-
tensity that is either above 6 METs, 60 
percent of maximal oxygen uptake, or 
one that provides a “substantial” chal-
lenge to the individual.
Heart rate reserve (HRR)  The dif-
ference between the maximal heart rate 
(MHR) and resting heart rate (RHR).
Intensity of exercise  How hard a 
person has to exercise to improve car-
diorespiratory endurance.
Cardiorespiratory training 
zone  The range of intensity at which a 
person should exercise to develop the 
cardio­respiratory system.
Mode of exercise  Form of exercise 
(e.g., aerobic).
Aerobic exercise  Activity that re-
quires oxygen to produce the necessary 
energy to carry out the activity.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

64
Fitness and Wellness
continuous. As the amount of muscle mass involved dur-
ing exercise increases, so does the effectiveness of the 
activity in providing CR development.
Once you have established your CR training zone, 
any activity or combination of activities that will get your 
heart rate up to that training zone and keep it there for 
as long as you exercise will give you adequate develop-
ment. Examples of these activities are walking, jogging, 
swimming, water aerobics, cross-country skiing, rope 
skipping, cycling, racquetball, elliptical training, and 
stationary running or cycling.
The activity you choose should be based on your 
personal preferences—what you enjoy doing most—and 
your physical limitations. Low-impact activities greatly 
decrease the risk for injuries. Most injuries to beginners 
are related to vigorous-impact activities. For individuals 
who have been inactive, general strength conditioning 
also is recommended prior to initiating an aerobic exer-
cise program. Strength conditioning will reduce the inci-
dence of injuries significantly.
The amount of strength or flexibility a person devel-
ops through various activities differs, but in terms of CR 
development, the heart doesn’t know whether you are 
walking, swimming, or cycling. All the heart knows is 
that it has to pump at a certain rate, and as long as that 
rate is in the desired range, your CR fitness will improve. 
From a health fitness point of view, training in the lower 
end of the CR zone will yield optimal health benefits. The 
closer the heart rate is to the higher end of the CR train-
ing zone, however, the greater will be the improvements 
in VO2max (high physical fitness).
Duration of Exercise
The general recommendation is that a person exercise 
between 20 and 60 minutes per session. For vigorous-
intensity exercise, a minimum of 75 total minutes per 
week is recommended, while those in a moderate- 
intensity program should accumulate at least 150 min-
utes per week.
The duration of exercise is based on how hard a 
person trains. The variables are inversely related. If the 
training is done at around 90 percent, 20 minutes of ex-
ercise is sufficient. At about 50 percent intensity, the in-
dividual should train close to 60 minutes. As mentioned 
in the discussion of intensity of exercise previously, un-
conditioned people and older adults should train at 
lower percentages; therefore, the activity should be car-
ried out over a longer time.
Although most experts traditionally have recom-
mended 20 to 60 minutes of continuous aerobic exercise 
per session, evidence suggests that accumulating 30 
minutes or more of moderate-intensity physical activity 
provides substantial health benefits. Research further 
indicates that 3, 10-minute exercise sessions per day 
(separated by at least 4 hours), at approximately 70 per-
cent of maximal heart rate, also produce fitness bene-
fits.12 Although the increases in VO2max with this pro-
gram were only 57 percent of those in a group performing 
one continuous 30-minute bout of exercise per day, the 
researchers concluded that moderate-intensity exercise, 
conducted for 10 minutes 3 times per day, benefits the 
CR system significantly.
Results of this study are meaningful because people 
often mention lack of time as the reason for not taking 
part in an exercise program. Many think they have to 
exercise at least 20 continuous minutes to get any bene-
fits at all. Even though 20 to 60 minutes are recom-
mended, short, intermittent exercise bouts also are help-
ful to the CR system.
The 2008 Federal Guidelines for Physical Activity 
measure duration of exercise in terms of the total quan-
tity of physical activity performed on a weekly basis. Two 
hours and 30 minutes of moderate-intensity aerobic ac-
tivity or 1 hour and 15 minutes of vigorous-intensity 
aerobic activity per week, or an equivalent combination 
of the two are recommended (30 minutes of moderate-
intensity twice per week combined with 20 minutes of 
vigorous-intensity another 2 times per week).
Two hours and 30 minutes per week represents  
the accumulation of 30 minutes of moderate-intensity 
aerobic activity (done in bouts of at least 10 minutes  
long each) per session/day performed 5 days per week, 
whereas 1 hour and 15 minutes is approximately 25 min-
utes of vigorous-intensity aerobic activity done 3 times 
per week. The federal guidelines also indicate that  
5 hours of moderate-intensity activity, or 2 hours and  
30 minutes of vigorous-intensity activity per week provide 
additional benefits. Thus, when possible, people are en-
couraged to go beyond the minimum recommendation.
For people whose goal is weight management, the 
Institute of Medicine of the National Academy of  
Sciences recommends accumulating 60 minutes of  
moderate-intensity physical activity per day,13 whereas 
60 to 90 minutes of daily moderate-intensity activity is 
necessary to prevent weight regain.14 These recommen-
dations are based on evidence that people who maintain 
healthy weight typically accumulate between 1 and 1½ 
hours of daily physical activity. Exercise duration should 
be increased gradually to avoid undue fatigue and  
exercise-related injuries.
If lack of time is a concern, you should exercise daily 
at a vigorous intensity for 30 minutes, which can burn as 
many calories as 60 minutes of moderate-intensity exer-
cise (see “The Role of Exercise Intensity and Duration in 
Weight Management,” Chapter 6, pages 157–159)—but 
only 15 percent of adults in the United States typically 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

65
Chapter 3  Exercise Prescription
exercise at a vigorous-intensity level. Novice and over-
weight exercisers also need proper conditioning prior to 
vigorous-intensity exercise to avoid injuries or cardio-
vascular-related problems.
Exercise sessions always should be preceded by a 5- to 
10-minute warm-up and followed by a 10-minute cool-
down. The purpose of warm-up is to aid in the transition 
from rest to exercise. A good warm-up increases muscle 
and connective tissue extensibility, joint range of motion, 
and enhances muscular activity. A warm-up consists of 
general calisthenics, mild stretching exercises, and walk-
ing/jogging/cycling for a few minutes at a lower intensity 
level than the actual target zone. The concluding phase of 
the warm-up is a gradual increase in exercise intensity to 
the lower end of the target training zone.
In the cooldown, the intensity of exercise is de-
creased gradually to help the body return to near resting 
levels, followed by stretching and relaxation activities. 
Stopping abruptly causes blood to pool in the exercised 
body parts, diminishing the return of blood to the heart. 
This reduced blood return can cause a sudden drop in 
blood pressure, dizziness and faintness, or even the onset 
of cardiac abnormalities. The cool-down phase also helps 
dissipate body heat and aids in the removal of lactic acid 
produced during vigorous-intensity exercise.
Frequency of Exercise
The recommended frequency of exercise for aerobic ex-
ercise is 3 to 5 days per week. When exercising at 60 per-
cent to 90 percent of HRR, three 20- to 30-minute exercise 
sessions per week, performed on nonconsecutive days, are 
sufficient to improve or maintain VO2max. When training 
at lower intensities, exercising 30 to 60 minutes more than 
3 days per week is required. If training is conducted more 
than 5 days a week, further improvements in VO2max are 
minimal. Although endurance athletes often train 6 to  
7 days per week (often twice per day), their training pro-
grams are designed to increase training mileage so they 
can endure long-distance races (6 to 100 miles) at a high 
percentage of VO2max.
For individuals on a weight loss program, the rec-
ommendation is 60 to 90 minutes of light-to-moderate 
intensity activity on most days of the week. Longer exer-
cise sessions increase caloric expenditure for faster 
weight reduction (also see Chapter 6).
Although three exercise sessions per week will 
maintain CR fitness, the importance of regular physical 
activity in preventing disease and enhancing quality of 
life has been pointed out clearly by the American College 
of Sports Medicine, by the U.S. Centers for Disease Con-
trol and Prevention, and by the President’s Council on 
Physical Fitness and Sports. These organizations advo-
cate at least 30 minutes of moderate-intensity physical 
activity at least 5 days per week. This routine has been 
promoted as an effective way to improve health.
These recommendations were subsequently upheld 
by the U.S. Surgeon General in the 1996 “Report on Physi-
cal Activity and Health.” The surgeon general’s report 
states that people can improve their health and quality of 
life substantially by including moderate amounts of physi-
cal activity on most, preferably all, days of the week. Fur-
ther, it states that no one, including older adults, is too old 
to enjoy the benefits of regular physical activity.
To enjoy better health and fitness, physical activity 
must be pursued regularly. According to Dr. William 
Haskell, from Stanford University: “Physical activity 
should be viewed as medication, and, therefore, should 
be taken on a daily basis.” Many of the benefits of exer-
cise and activity diminish within two weeks of substan-
tially decreased physical activity. These benefits are com-
pletely lost within two to eight months of inactivity.
Daily Active Lifestyle
New research indicates that excessive sitting throughout 
most days of the week is a “deadly proposition.” People who 
spend most of the day sitting are canceling out the health 
benefits obtained through physical activity and exercise. 
The human body was created for movement and activity. 
Our society, however, is primarily a sedentary society that 
lulls people into physical inactivity. Most Americans spend 
more than half their waking hours sitting: driving to and 
from work, working at a desk, sitting at the computer, and 
watching television. Studies indicate that people who spend 
most of their day sitting have as much as a 50 percent 
greater risk of dying prematurely from all causes and an 80 
percent greater risk of dying from cardiovascular disease.15 
The data further indicate that death rates are still high for 
people who spend most of their day sitting, even though 
they meet the current minimum moderate-physical activ-
ity recommendations (30 minutes, at least 5 times per 
week).16 Among many other conditions, excessive sitting 
leads to weaker muscles, a sluggish central nervous system, 
increased fatigue, 
decreased insulin 
sensitivity, higher 
blood pressure, de-
creased activity of 
lipoprotein lipase 
(an enzyme that 
breaks down fats in 
the blood), and in-
creased cholesterol, 
LDL 
cholesterol, 
and triglycerides. 
Even if you are 
meeting the exer-
Duration of exercise  Time exercis-
ing per session.
Warm-up  A period preceding exercise 
when exercise ­begins slowly.
Cool-down  A period at the end of an 
exercise session when exercise is ta-
pered off.
Frequency of exercise  How often a 
person engages in an exercise session.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

66
Fitness and Wellness
cise guidelines of physical activity on most days of the 
week, you should not spend most of the remainder of your 
day being sedentary. Thus, people are strongly encouraged 
to incorporate as many physical activities throughout the 
day, at least 10 minutes every waking hour of the day.
To minimize inactivity, look to enhance daily non-
exercise activity thermogenesis (NEAT), or the energy 
expended doing daily activities not related to exercise. 
Examples of such activities include the following:
	1.	
Stand as much as possible while working at home. 
Place your computer on an elevated stand or shelf 
and stand while doing work, writing emails, or 
surfing the Internet. Always stand while answering 
the phone. Standing triples the energy requirement 
of doing a similar activity sitting.
	2.	
Use a standing or a treadmill desk. Perform much 
of your work standing. If at all possible, walk at a 
light intensity level while working at your desk. 
You may find that such practice enhances concen-
tration and work productivity.
	3.	
Use a stability ball for a chair at home and even at 
the office. Such use will enhance body stability, bal-
ance, and abdominal, low back, and leg strength.
	4.	
Whenever feasible, hold “walking” instead of con-
ference room meetings.
	5.	
Walk to coworkers’ offices to discuss matters with 
them instead of using the phone or email.
	6.	
Take intermittent breaks. A 10-minute break every 
hour that you are at the computer to stretch, walk 
around, or talk to coworkers is quite beneficial.
	7.	
Park farther away or get off the subway, train, or bus 
several blocks away from the office. When feasible, 
take the stairs instead of elevators and escalators.
Exercise Volume
A relatively new concept, volume of exercise is the prod-
uct of frequency, intensity, and duration. The recom-
mended absolute minimum volume is an energy expen-
diture of 1,000 calories per week or the equivalent of 150 
minutes of moderate-intensity exercise each week. Vol-
ume can also be measured using a pedometer and 
achieving 10,000 or more steps each day. This minimal 
amount of volume is essential to achieve health benefits. 
A minimum of 75 minutes of vigorous-intensity aerobic 
activity per week (conducted over three nonconsecutive 
days), along with at least 2 additional days of 30 minutes 
each of moderate-intensity physical activity are neces-
sary for substantial fitness benefits.
Training volume is also used as an indicator of exces-
sive exercise. Too much exercise and physical activity lead 
to overtraining, muscle soreness, undue fatigue, shortness 
of breath, and an increase in the risk for injury. Should you 
experience any adverse effects as a result of your physical 
activity/exercise program, downward adjustments are rec-
ommended to the exercise prescription, including the rate 
of exercise progression (discussed next).
Rate of Progression
How quickly an individual progresses through an exercise 
program depends on the person’s health status, exercise 
tolerance, and exercise program goals.17 Initially, only  
3 weekly training sessions of 15 to 20 minutes are recom-
mended to avoid musculoskeletal injuries. You may then 
increase the duration by 5 to 10 minutes per week and the 
frequency so that by the fourth or fifth week you are exer-
cising 5 times per week. Thereafter, progressively increase 
frequency, duration, and intensity of exercise until you 
reach your fitness maintenance goal. All increases in the 
exercise prescription variables should be gradual to mini-
mize the risk of overtraining and injuries.
A summary of the CR exercise prescription guide-
lines according to the American College of Sports Medi-
cine is provided in Figure 3.2. Ideally, to reap both the 
high fitness and the health fitness benefits of exercise, a 
person needs to exercise a minimum of three times per 
week in the appropriate target zone for high fitness 
maintenance, and three to four additional times per 
week in moderate-intensity activities to enjoy the full 
benefits of health fitness. Ideally, all exercise/physical 
activity sessions should last at minimum of 30 minutes. 
The form in Activity 3.4, page 95, is provided to help you 
keep a daily log of your CR (aerobic) activities.
Kate started an exercise program last year as a means to 
lose weight and enhance her body image. She now runs 
more than six miles every day, works out regularly on 
stair-climbers and elliptical machines, strength-trains 
daily, participates in step aerobics three times per week, 
and plays tennis or racquetball twice a week. • Evaluate 
Kate’s program. • What suggestions do you have for 
improvements?
Critical Thinking
3.5  Muscular Fitness 
(Muscular Strength and 
Muscular Endurance)
The capacity of muscle cells to exert force increases and 
decreases according to demands placed upon the muscu-
lar system. If specific muscle cells are overloaded beyond 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

67
Chapter 3  Exercise Prescription
their normal use, such as in strength-training programs, 
the cells increase in size (hypertrophy), strength, or en-
durance, or some combination of these. If the demands 
on the muscle cells decrease, such as in sedentary living 
or required rest because of illness or injury, the cells de-
crease in size (atrophy) and lose strength.
All people need adequate muscular fitness for good 
health, improved functional capacity, and a better quality 
of life. Unfortunately, according to the 2013 survey by 
the CDC, only 27 percent of men and 19 percent of 
women meet the 2008 Federal Physical Activity Guide-
lines for muscular fitness. Worse yet, almost 74 percent 
or nearly 3 out of every 4 American adults, do not par-
ticipate in any type of muscular fitness activity; that is, 
they did not strength train or take a class that required 
some sort of muscular strength activity such as cardio/
strength training, Pilates, boot camp, PX90, CrossFit, or 
even a single push-up during their available leisure time.
3.5A  Overload Principle  The overload princi-
ple states that, for strength or endurance to improve, 
demands placed on the muscle must be increased sys-
tematically and progressively over time, and the resis-
tance (weight lifted) must be of a magnitude significant 
enough to produce development. In simpler terms, just 
like all other organs and systems of the human body, 
muscles have to be taxed beyond their accustomed loads 
to increase in physical capacity.
3.5B  Specificity of Training  Muscular strength 
is the ability to exert maximum force against resistance. 
Muscular endurance (also referred to as localized  
muscular endurance) is the ability of a muscle to exert 
submaximal force 
repeatedly 
over 
time. Both of these 
components 
re-
quire 
specificity 
of training.
As discussed 
later in this sec-
tion, a person at-
tempting to in-
crease 
muscular 
strength needs a 
program of few 
repetitions 
and 
near-maximum 
resistance. To in-
crease 
muscular 
endurance, 
the 
strength-training 
Non-exercise activity thermogene-
sis (NEAT)  Energy expended doing ev-
eryday activities not related to exercise.
Overload principle  Training concept 
holding that the demands placed on a 
body system must be increased 
­systematically and progressively over 
time to cause physiologic adaptation.
Resistance  Amount of weight lifted.
Specificity of training  A principle 
holding that, for a ­muscle to increase 
in strength or endurance, the training 
program must be specific to obtain the 
desired effects.
Moderate- or vigorous-intensity aerobic activity (examples: walking, jogging, stair
climbing, elliptical activity, aerobics, water aerobics, cycling, stair climbing, swimming,
cross-country skiing, racquetball, basketball, and soccer)
30% to 90% of heart rate reserve (the training intensity is based on age, health status,
initial ﬁtness level, exercise tolerance, and exercise program goals)
At least 20 minutes of continuous vigorous-intensity or 30 minutes of moderate-
intensity aerobic activity (the latter may be accumulated in segments of at least 10 minutes in 
duration each over the course of the day) 
3 to 5 days per week for vigorous-intensity aerobic activity to accumulate at
least 75 minutes per week, or 5 days per week of moderate-intensity aerobic activity
for a minimum total of 150 minutes weekly
Accumulate at least 150 minutes of moderate intensity or 75 minutes of vigorous-intensity 
aerobic activity per week. You may also accumulate a minimum of 10,000 steps per day, each
day of the week (at least 70,000 steps per week)
Start with three training sessions per week of 15 to 20 minutes
Increase the duration by 5 to 10 minutes per week and the frequency so that by the fourth or
ﬁfth week you are exercising ﬁve times per week
Progressively increase frequency, duration, and intensity of exercise until you reach your ﬁtness 
goal prior to exercise maintenance
Mode:
Intensity:
Duration:
Frequency:
Volume of
exercise:
Rate of 
progression:
Figure 3.2
Cardiorespiratory exercise prescription guidelines.
SOURCE: Adapted from American College of Sports Medicine, ACSM’s Guidelines for Exercise Testing and Prescription (Philadelphia: Wolters Kluwer/ 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2014) and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2008 Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans, http://health. 
gov/paguidelines, downloaded October 15, 2014.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

68
Fitness and Wellness
program consists primarily of many repetitions at a 
lower resistance. In like manner, to increase isometric 
(static) versus dynamic strength (see the section “Mode 
of Training” that follows), an individual must use the 
corresponding static or dynamic training procedures to 
achieve the appropriate results.
In like manner, if a person is trying to improve a 
specific movement or skill through strength gains, the 
selected strength-training exercises must resemble the 
actual movement or skill as closely as possible.
Periodization
The concept of periodization (variation) entails system-
atically altering training variables over time to keep the 
program challenging and lead to greater strength devel-
opment. Periodization means cycling one’s training ob-
jectives (hypertrophy, strength, and endurance), with 
each phase of the program lasting anywhere from 2 to 12 
weeks. Training variables altered include resistance 
(weight lifted), number of repetitions, number of sets, 
and/or number of exercises performed.
Periodization is popular among fitness participants 
who wish to achieve maximal strength gains. Over the 
long run, for intermediate and advanced participants, 
the periodized approach has been shown to be superior 
to nonperiodized training where participants always use 
the same exercises, sets, and repetitions.
Three types of periodized training, based on program 
design and objectives, are commonly used.18 These are:
	1.	
Classical periodization. Used primarily by individ-
uals seeking maximal strength development. It 
starts with an initial high volume of training using 
low resistances and then gradually switches to a 
lower volume and higher resistances in subsequent 
cycles.
	2.	
Reverse periodization. This model is used by indi-
viduals seeking greater muscular endurance. Unlike 
the classical model, individuals start with high re-
sistances and low volume and subsequently follow 
it with progressive decreases in resistances and in-
creases in training volume.
	3.	
Undulating periodization. This model uses a com-
bination of volumes and resistances within a cycle 
by alternating randomly or systematically among 
the muscular fitness components: strength, hyper-
trophy, power, and endurance. This model com-
pares favorably, and in some cases is superior, to 
the classical and reverse models.
3.5C  Muscular Strength-Training Prescrip-
tion  Similar to the prescription of CR exercise, several 
factors or variables have to be taken into account to im-
prove muscular fitness. These are mode, resistance, sets, 
and frequency of training.
Mode of Training
Two basic training methods are used to improve strength: 
isometric and dynamic. Isometric exercise involves 
pushing or pulling against immovable objects. Dynamic 
exercise involves movement at the joints, such as extend-
ing the knees with resistance (weight) on the ankles.
Although isometric training does not require much 
equipment, it is not a very popular mode of training. 
Strength gains with isometric training are specific to the 
angle of muscle contraction; this type of training re-
mains beneficial in sports such as gymnastics that re-
quire regular static contractions during routines. Isomet-
ric training, however, is a critical component of health 
conditioning programs for the lower back (see “Prevent-
ing and Rehabilitating Low Back Pain,” pages 79–82).
Dynamic exercise (previously referred to as isotonic 
exercise) can be conducted without weights or with free 
Isometric strength training.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Dynamic strength training.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

69
Chapter 3  Exercise Prescription
weights (barbells and dumbbells), fixed-resistance ma-
chines, variable-resistance machines, and isokinetic 
equipment. When performing dynamic exercises with-
out weights (for example, pull-ups, push-ups), with free 
weights, or with fixed-resistance machines, a constant 
resistance (weight) is moved through a joint’s full range 
of motion. The greatest resistance that can be lifted 
equals the maximum weight that can be moved at the 
weakest angle of the joint, because of changes in muscle 
length and angle of pull as the joint moves through its 
range of motion.
As strength training became more popular, new 
strength-training machines were developed. This tech-
nology brought about isokinetic and variable-resistance 
training. These training programs require special ma-
chines equipped with mechanical devices that provide 
differing amounts of resistance, with the intent of over-
loading the muscle group maximally through the entire 
range of motion. A distinction of isokinetic exercise is 
that the speed of the muscle contraction is kept constant 
because the machine provides resistance to match the 
user’s force through the range of motion. Because of the 
expense of the equipment needed for isokinetic training, 
this type of program usually is reserved for clinical set-
tings (physical therapy), research laboratories, and cer-
tain professional sports.
Dynamic training has two action phases: concen-
tric, or positive resistance, and eccentric, or negative 
resistance. In the concentric phase, the muscle shortens 
as it contracts to overcome the resistance. For example, 
during the bench press exercise, when the resistance is 
lifted from the chest to full arm extension, the triceps 
muscle on the back of the upper arm contracts and 
shortens to extend the elbow. During the eccentric phase, 
the muscle lengthens as it contracts. In the case of the 
bench press exer-
cise, the same tri-
ceps muscle con-
tracts to lower the 
resistance during 
elbow flexion, but 
it 
lengthens 
to 
avoid 
dropping 
the resistance.
E c c e n t r i c 
muscle 
contrac-
tions allow us to 
lower weights in a 
smooth, gradual, 
and 
controlled 
manner. Without 
eccentric contrac-
tions, 
weights 
would be dropped 
on the way down. 
Because the same 
muscles 
work 
when you lift and 
lower a resistance, 
you 
should 
be  
sure to always ex-
ecute both actions 
in 
a 
controlled 
manner. Failure to 
do so diminishes 
the benefits of the 
training program 
and increases the 
risk for injuries.
The mode of 
training 
depends 
mainly 
on 
the  
type of equipment 
available and the 
specific 
objective 
of 
the 
training  
program. Dynamic 
training is the most 
popular mode for 
strength training. 
Its primary advan-
tage is that strength 
is gained through 
the full range of 
Periodization  A training approach 
that divides the season into cycles us-
ing a systematic variation in intensity 
and ­volume of training to enhance fit-
ness and performance.
Isometric exercise  Strength train-
ing with muscle contraction that pro-
duces little or no movement.
Dynamic exercise  Strength training 
with muscle contraction that produces 
movement.
Isotonic exercise  See Dynamic 
exercise.
Free weights  Barbells and 
dumbbells.
Fixed-resistance training  Exercise 
with strength-training equipment that 
provides a constant amount of resis-
tance through the range of motion.
Variable-resistance training   
Exercise that utilizes special equipment 
with mechanical devices that provide 
differing amounts of resistance through 
the range of motion.
Isokinetic exercise  Strength train-
ing in which the equipment accommo-
dates resistance to match the user’s 
force through the full range of motion.
Concentric  Shortening of a muscle 
during muscle contraction.
Positive resistance  The lifting, 
pushing, or concentric phase of a repe-
tition during the performance of a 
strength-training exercise.
Eccentric  Lengthening of a muscle 
during muscle contraction.
Negative resistance  The lowering or 
eccentric phase of a repetition during 
the performance of a strength-training 
exercise.
Isokinetic strength training.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

70
Fitness and Wellness
motion. Most daily activities are dynamic in nature. We 
constantly lift, push, and pull objects, which requires 
strength through a given range of motion. Another advan-
tage of dynamic exercise is that improvements are mea-
sured easily by the amount lifted.
Benefits of isokinetic and variable-resistance train-
ing are similar to those of the other dynamic training 
methods. Theoretically, strength gains should be better 
because maximum resistance is applied through the en-
tire range of motion. Research, however, has not shown 
this type of training to be more effective than other 
modes of dynamic training. A possible advantage is that 
specific speeds for a small number of selected sport skills 
can be duplicated more closely with isokinetic strength 
training, which may enhance performance (specificity of 
training). A disadvantage is that the equipment is not 
readily available to everyone.
Plate-loaded barbells (free weights) were the most 
popular weight-training equipment available during the 
first half of the 20th century. Strength-training machines 
were developed in the middle of the century but did not 
become popular until the 1970s. With the advent of, and 
subsequent technological improvements to, these ma-
chines, a stirring debate surfaced over which of the two 
training modalities was better.
Free weights require that the individual balance the 
resistance through the entire lifting motion. Thus, a logical 
assumption could be made that free weights are a better 
training modality because of the involvement of addi-
tional stabilizing muscles needed to balance the resistance 
as it is moved through its range of motion. Research, how-
ever, has not shown any differences in strength develop-
ment between the two exercise modalities. Although each 
modality has pros and cons, the muscles do not know 
whether the source of a resistance is a barbell, a dumbbell, 
a Universal Gym machine, a Nautilus machine, or a sim-
ple cinder block. What determines the level of a person’s 
strength development is the quality of the program and 
the individual’s effort during the training program itself—
not the type of equipment used.
Two additional modes of strength training that have 
gained extensive popularity in recent years are stability 
ball exercises and elastic-band resistive exercises. Stabil-
ity exercises are specifically designed to develop abdomi-
nal, hip, chest, and spinal muscles by addressing core 
stabilization (see page 109) while the exerciser maintains 
a balanced position over the ball. Although the primary 
objective is core strength and stability, many stability 
exercises can be performed to strengthen other body 
areas as well. Elastic bands and tubing can also be used 
for strength training. This type of constant-resistance 
training has been shown to help increase strength, mo-
bility, and functional ability (particularly in older adults) 
and aid in the rehab of many types of injuries. Some of 
the advantages of this type of training include low cost, 
versatility, and use of a large number of exercises to work 
all joints of the body; it also provides a great way to work 
out while traveling.
Resistance
Resistance in strength training is the equivalent of inten-
sity in CR exercise prescription. To stimulate strength 
development, the general recommendation has been to 
use a resistance of approximately 80 percent of the maxi-
mum capacity (1 RM). For example, a person with a  
Stability ball exercises help improve core strength and 
stability.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Elastic-band resistive exercise.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

71
Chapter 3  Exercise Prescription
1 RM of 150 pounds should work with about 120 pounds 
(150 3 .80).
The number of repetitions that one can perform at 
80 percent of the 1 RM varies among exercises. Data in-
dicate that the total number of repetitions performed at 
a certain percentage of the 1 RM depends on the amount 
of muscle mass used (bench press versus triceps exten-
sion) and whether it is a single or multi-joint exercise 
(leg press versus leg curl). In both trained and untrained 
subjects, the number of repetitions is greater with larger 
muscle mass involvement and multi-joint exercises.19
Because of the time factor involved in constantly de-
termining the 1 RM on each lift to ensure that the person 
is indeed working around 80 percent, the accepted rule for 
many years has been that individuals perform between 8 
and 12 repetitions maximum (or 8 to 12 RM zone) for 
adequate strength gains. For example, if a person is train-
ing with a resistance of 120 pounds and cannot lift it more 
than 12 times—that is, the person reaches volitional fa-
tigue at or before 12 repetitions—the training stimulus 
(weight used) is adequate for strength development. Once 
the person can lift the resistance more than 12 times, the 
resistance is increased by 5 to 10 pounds and the person 
again should build up to 12 repetitions. This is referred to 
as progressive resistance training.
Strength development, however, can also occur 
when working with less than 80 percent of the 1 RM. 
Although 8 to 12 RM is the most commonly prescribed 
resistance, benefits do occur when working below 8 or 
above 12 RM. If the main objective of the training pro-
gram is muscular endurance, 15 to 25 repetitions per set 
are recommended. Older adults and individuals suscep-
tible to musculoskeletal injuries are encouraged to work 
with 10 to 15 repetitions using moderate resistances 
(about 50 percent to 60 percent of the 1 RM).
In both young and older individuals, all repetitions 
should be performed at a moderate velocity (about  
1 second concentric and 1 second eccentric), as such 
yields the greatest strength gains. For advanced training, 
varying training velocity between sets, from very slow to 
fast, is recommended.
Elite strength athletes typically work using a 1 to  
6 RM zone but often shuffle training with different num-
bers of repetitions for selected periods (weeks) of time. 
Body builders tend to work with moderate resistance 
levels (60 percent to 90 percent of the 1 RM) and work in 
an 8 to 20 RM zone. A foremost objective of body build-
ing is to increase muscle size. Moderate resistance pro-
motes blood flow to the muscles, “pumping up the 
muscles” (also known as “the pump”) and making them 
look much larger than they do in a resting state.
From a general fitness point of view, working near a 
10-repetition threshold seems to improve overall perfor-
mance most effectively. We live in a dynamic world in 
which muscular strength and endurance are both required 
to lead an enjoyable life. Working in an 8 to 12 RM zone 
produces good results in terms of strength, endurance, and 
muscular hypertrophy. For older and more frail individu-
als (50 to 60 years of age and above), 10 to 15 repetitions of 
moderate to high intensity of effort are recommended.
We must mention here that a certain resistance (for 
example, 50 pounds) is seldom the same on two different 
weight machines, or between free weights and weight 
machines. The industry has no standard calibration pro-
cedure for strength equipment. Consequently, if you lift 
a certain weight with free weights or a given machine, 
you may or may not be able to lift the same amount on a 
different piece of equipment.
Sets
Strength training is done in sets. For example, a person 
lifting 120 pounds 8 times performs one set of 8 repeti-
tions (1/8/120). For general fitness, the recommendation is 
one to three sets per exercise. Some evidence suggests 
greater strength gains using multiple sets as opposed to a 
single set for a given exercise. Other research, however, 
concludes that similar increases in strength, endurance, 
and hypertrophy are derived between single- and multiple-
set strength training, as long as the single set, or at least 
one of the multiple sets, is a heavy (maximum) set per-
formed to volitional exhaustion using an RM zone (for 
example, 9 RM using an 8 to 12 RM zone).20 Strength 
gains may be less-
ened by perform-
ing too many sets.
A 
recom-
mended program 
for beginners is 1 
or 2 light warm-
up sets per exer-
cise using about 
50 percent of the 1 
RM (no warm-up 
sets are necessary 
for 
subsequent  
exercises that use 
the same muscle 
group) 
followed 
by 1 to 3 sets per 
exercise. 
Main-
taining a resis-
tance and effort 
that will tempo-
rarily fatigue the 
muscle (volitional 
exhaustion) in the 
RM zone  A range of repetitions that 
are to be performed maximally during 
one set. For example, an 8 to 12 RM 
zone implies that the individual will 
perform anywhere from 8 to 12 repeti-
tions, but could not perform any more 
following the completion of the final 
repetition (e.g., 9 RM and could not 
perform a 10th repetition).
Progressive resistance training   
A gradual increase of resistance over  
a period of time.
Muscular hypertrophy  An increase 
in muscle mass or size.
Set  The number of repetitions per-
formed for a given exercise.
Repetitions  The number of times a 
movement is performed.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

72
Fitness and Wellness
number of repetitions selected in at least one of the sets 
is critical to achieve optimal progress. Because of the 
lower resistances used in body building, four to eight sets 
can be done for each exercise.
To avoid muscle soreness and stiffness, new partici-
pants ought to build up gradually to the three sets of maxi-
mal repetitions. This can be done by performing only one 
set of each exercise with a lighter resistance on the first 
day. During the second session, two sets of each exercise 
can be done: the first light and the second with the regular 
resistance. During the third session, three sets could be 
performed—one light and two heavy sets. After that, a 
person should be able to do all three heavy sets.
The time necessary to recover between sets depends 
mainly on the resistance used during each set. In strength 
training, the energy to lift heavy weights is derived pri-
marily from the system involving adenosine triphos-
phate (ATP) and creatine phosphate (CP) stored in 
muscle, also known as the phosphagen system. Ten sec-
onds of maximal exercise nearly depletes the CP stores in 
the exercised muscle(s). These stores are replenished in 
about three to five minutes of recovery.
Based on this principle, rest intervals between sets 
vary in length depending on the program goals and are 
dictated by the amount of resistance used in training. 
Short rest intervals of less than two minutes are com-
monly used when one is trying to develop local muscular 
endurance. Moderate rest intervals of two to four min-
utes are used for strength development. Long intervals of 
more than four minutes are used when one is training for 
power development.21 Using these guidelines, individu-
als training for health fitness purposes might allow two 
minutes of rest between sets. Body builders, who use 
lower resistances, should rest no more than one minute 
to maximize the “pumping” effect.
What role should strength training have in a fitness pro-
gram? • Should people be motivated for the health fit-
ness benefits, or should they participate to enhance their 
body image? • What are your feelings about individuals 
(male or female) with large body musculature?
Critical Thinking
To make the exercise program more time-effective, 
two or three exercises that require different muscle 
groups may be alternated. In this way, a person will not 
have to wait two to three minutes before proceeding to a 
new set of a different exercise. For example, the bench 
press, leg extension, and abdominal curl-up exercises 
may be combined so the person can go almost directly 
from one set to the next.
Frequency of Training
Strength training should be done either with a total body 
workout two or three times per week, or more frequently if 
using a split-body routine (upper body one day and lower 
body the next). After a maximum strength workout, the 
muscles should be rested for about 48 hours to allow ade-
quate recovery. If not recovered completely in 2 or 3 days, 
the person most likely is overtraining and therefore not 
reaping the full benefits of the program. In that case, a de-
Select 8 to 10 dynamic strength-training exercises that involve the body’s major muscle
groups and include opposing muscle groups (chest and upper back, abdomen and lower 
back, front and back of the legs)
Sufﬁcient resistance to perform 8 to 12 repetitions maximum for muscular strength and
15 to 25 repetitions to near fatigue for muscular endurance
Older adults and injury prone individuals should use 10 to 15 repetitions with moderate
resistance (50% to 60% of their 1 RM)
2 to 4 sets per exercise with 2 to 3 minutes recovery between sets for optimal strength
development
30 seconds to 2 minutes recovery per set if exercises are alternated that require different
muscle groups (chest and upper back) or between muscular endurance sets
2 to 3 days per week on nonconsecutive days
More frequent training can be done if different muscle groups are exercised on different
days (allow at least 48 hours between strength-training sessions of the same muscle group)
Mode:
Resistance:
Sets:
Frequency:
Figure 3.3
Strength-training guidelines.
SOURCE: Adapted from American College of Sports Medicine, ACSM’s Guidelines for Exercise Testing and Prescription (Philadelphia: Wolters Kluwer/ 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2014).
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

73
Chapter 3  Exercise Prescription
crease in the total number of sets or exercises, or both, 
performed during the previous workout is recommended.
A summary of strength-training guidelines for 
health fitness purposes is provided in Figure 3.3. Signifi-
cant strength gains require a minimum of eight weeks of 
consecutive training. After achieving the recommended 
strength level, one training session per week will be suf-
ficient to maintain the new strength level.
Frequency of strength training for body builders 
varies from person to person. Because body builders use 
moderate resistances, daily or even two-a-day workouts 
are common. The frequency depends on the amount of 
resistance, number of sets performed per session, and 
the person’s ability to recover from the previous exercise 
bout (see Table 3.3). The latter often is dictated by level 
of conditioning.
3.5D  Strength-Training Exercises  Two strength-
training programs, presented in Appendix A, have been 
developed to provide a complete body workout. Only a 
minimum of equipment is required for the first program, 
“Strength-Training Exercises without Weights” (Exer-
cises 1 through 15). This program can be conducted 
within the walls of your own home. Your body weight is 
used as the primary resistance for most exercises. A few 
exercises call for a friend’s help or basic implements from 
around your home to provide greater resistance.
“Strength-Training Exercises with Weights” (Exer-
cises 16 through 27) requires machines such as those 
shown in the various photographs. Some of these exer-
cises can also be performed with free weights.
3.5E  Strength-Training Exercise Guidelines  
As you prepare to design your strength-training pro-
gram, you should keep several guidelines in mind.
	 1.	 Select exercises that will involve all major muscle 
groups: chest, shoulders, back, legs, arms, hip, and 
trunk.
	 2.	 Select exercises that will strengthen the core. Use 
controlled movements and start with light-to- 
moderate resistances (later, athletes may use explo-
sive movements with heavier resistances).
	 3.	 Never lift weights alone. Always have someone 
work out with you in case you need a spotter or 
help with an injury. When you use free weights, 
one to two spotters are recommended for certain 
exercises (e.g., bench press, squats, overhead press).
	 4.	 Prior to lifting weights, warm up properly by per-
forming a light- to moderate-intensity aerobic ac-
tivity (five to seven minutes) and some gentle 
stretches for a few minutes.
	 5.	 Use proper lifting technique for each exercise. The 
correct lifting technique will involve only those mus-
cles and joints intended for a specific exercise. In-
volving other muscles and joints to “cheat” during 
the exercise to complete a repetition or to be able to 
lift a greater resistance decreases the long-term effec-
tiveness of the exercise and can lead to injury (such 
as arching the back during the push-up, squat, or 
bench press exercises). Proper lifting technique also 
implies performing the exercises in a controlled 
manner and throughout the entire range of motion. 
Perform each repetition in a rhythmic manner and at 
a moderate speed. Avoid fast and jerky movements, 
and do not throw the entire body into the lifting mo-
tion. Do not arch the back when lifting a weight.
	 6.	 Maintain proper body balance while lifting. Proper 
balance involves good posture, a stable body posi-
tion, and correct seat and arm/leg settings on exer-
cise machines. Loss of balance places undue strain 
on smaller muscles and leads to injuries because of 
the heavy resistances suddenly placed on them. In 
the early stages of a program, first-time lifters often 
struggle with bar control and balance when using 
free weights. This problem is overcome quickly 
with practice following a few training sessions.
	 7.	 Exercise larger muscle groups (such as those in the 
chest, back, and legs) before exercising smaller 
muscle groups (arms, abdominals, ankles, neck). 
For example, the bench press exercise works the 
chest, shoulders, and back of the upper arms (tri-
ceps), whereas the triceps extension works the back 
of the upper arms only.
	 8.	 Exercise opposing muscle groups for a balanced 
workout. When you work the chest (bench press), 
also work the back (rowing torso). If you work the 
biceps (arm curl), also work the triceps (triceps 
extension).
Table 3.3  Guidelines for Various Strength-Training Programs
Strength-
Training 
Program
Resistance
Sets
Rest 
Between 
Sets*
Frequency 
(workouts 
per week)**
General 
fitness
8–12  
reps max
2–4
2–3 min
2–3
Muscular 
endurance
15–25 reps
2–4
1–2 min
2–3
Maximal 
strength
1–6  
reps max
2–5
3 min
2–3
Body 
building 
8–20 reps 
near max
3–8
Up to  
1 min
4–12
© Cengage Learning
*Recovery between sets can be decreased by alternating exercises that use different  
muscle groups.
**Weekly training sessions can be increased by using a split-body routine.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

74
Fitness and Wellness
	 9.	 Breathe naturally. Inhale during the eccentric phase 
(bringing the weight down), and exhale during the 
concentric phase (lifting or pushing the weight up). 
Practice proper breathing with lighter weights 
when you are learning a new exercise.
	10.	 Avoid holding your breath while straining to lift a 
weight. Holding your breath increases the pressure 
inside the chest and abdominal cavity greatly, mak-
ing it nearly impossible for the blood in the veins 
to return to the heart. Although rare, a sudden 
high intrathoracic pressure may lead to dizziness, a 
blackout, a stroke, a heart attack, or a hernia.
	11.	 Based on the program selected, allow adequate  
recovery time between sets of exercises (see  
Table 3.3).
	12.	 If you experience unusual discomfort or pain, dis-
continue training. The high-tension loads used in 
strength training can exacerbate potential injuries. 
Discomfort and pain are signals to stop and deter-
mine what’s wrong. Be sure to evaluate your condi-
tion properly before you continue training.
	13.	 Use common sense on days when you feel fatigued 
or when you are performing sets to complete fa-
tigue. Excessive fatigue affects lifting technique, 
body balance, muscles involved, and range of  
motion—all of which increase the risk for injury. A 
spotter is recommended when sets are performed 
to complete fatigue. The spotter’s help through the 
most difficult part of the repetition will relieve un-
due stress on muscles, ligaments, and tendons—
and help ensure that you perform the exercise 
correctly.
	14.	 At the end of each strength-training workout, 
stretch out for a few minutes to help your muscles 
return to their normal resting length and to mini-
mize muscle soreness and risk for injury.
3.5F  Core Strength Training  The trunk (spine) 
and pelvis are referred to as the “core” of the body. Core 
muscles include the abdominal muscles (rectus, trans-
versus, and internal and external obliques), hip muscles 
(front and back), and spinal muscles (lower and upper 
back muscles). These muscle groups are responsible for 
maintaining the stability of the spine and pelvis.
Many of the major muscle groups of the legs, shoul-
ders, and arms attach to the core. A strong core allows a 
person to perform activities of daily living with greater 
ease, improve sports performance through a more effec-
tive energy transfer from large to small body parts, and 
decrease the incidence of low back pain.
Interest in core strength-training programs has in-
creased recently. A major objective of core training is to 
exercise the abdominal and lower back muscles in uni-
son. Furthermore, individuals should spend as much 
time training the back muscles as they do the abdominal 
muscles. Besides enhancing stability, core training im-
proves dynamic balance, which is often required during 
participation in physical activity and sports.
Key core-training exercises include the abdominal 
crunch and bent-leg curl-up, reverse crunch, pelvic tilt, 
lateral bridge, prone bridge, supine bridge, leg press, lat 
pull-down, seated back, and back extension (Exercises 4, 
11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 19, 21, 25, and 27 in Appendix A) and 
pelvic clock (Exercise 50 in Appendix C, page 277).
When core training is used in athletic conditioning 
programs, athletes attempt to mimic the dynamic skills 
used in their sport. To do so, they use special equipment 
such as balance boards, stability balls, and foam pads. 
The use of this equipment allows the athletes to train the 
core while seeking balance and stability in a sport- 
specific manner.
3.5G  Designing 
Your 
Own 
Strength- 
Training Program  The pre-exercise guidelines 
outlined in the Clearance for Exercise Participation 
questionnaire (see Activity 1.2, page 25) also apply to 
strength training. If you have any concerns about 
whether your present health status will allow you to 
safely participate in strength training, consult a physi-
cian before you start. Strength training is not advised for 
people with advanced heart disease.
Depending on the facilities available to you, choose 
one of the two training programs outlined in Appendix 
A. Once you begin your strength training, you may use 
the form provided in Activity 3.4, page 95, to keep a rec­
ord of your training program.
The resistance, the number of repetitions, and the 
sets you use with your program should be based on your 
current strength-fitness level and the amount of time 
that you have for your strength workout. If you are train-
ing for reasons other than general health fitness, review 
Table 3.3, page 73, for a summary of the guidelines.
3.5H  Dietary Recommendations for Strength 
Development  Individuals who wish to enhance 
muscle growth and strength during periods of intense 
strength training should increase protein intake to about 
1.5 grams per kilogram of body weight per day. An ad-
ditional energy intake of 500 daily calories is also recom-
mended to optimize muscle mass gain.
The time when carbohydrates and protein are con-
sumed in relation to the strength-training workout also 
plays a role in promoting muscle growth. Studies suggest 
that consuming a pre-exercise snack consisting of a com-
bination of carbohydrates and protein is beneficial to 
muscle development. The carbohydrates supply energy 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

75
Chapter 3  Exercise Prescription
for training, and the availability of amino acids (the 
building blocks of protein) in the blood during training 
enhances muscle building. A peanut butter, turkey, or 
tuna sandwich, milk or yogurt and fruit, or nuts and fruit 
consumed 30 to 60 minutes before training are excellent 
choices for a pre-workout snack.
Consuming a carbohydrate/protein snack immedi-
ately following strength training and a second snack an 
hour thereafter further promotes muscle growth and 
strength development. Post-exercise carbohydrates help 
restore muscle glycogen depleted during training and, in 
combination with protein, induce an increase in blood 
insulin and growth hormone levels. These hormones are 
essential to the muscle-building process.
Muscle fibers also absorb a greater amount of amino 
acids up to 48 hours following strength training. The first 
hour, nonetheless, seems to be the most critical. A higher 
level of circulating amino acids in the bloodstream im-
mediately after training is believed to increase protein 
synthesis to a greater extent than amino acids made 
available later in the day. A ratio of 4-to-1 grams of  
carbohydrates to protein is recommended for a post- 
exercise snack—for example, a snack containing 40 grams 
of carbohydrates (160 calories) and 10 grams of protein 
(40 calories).
3.6  Flexibility
Improving and maintaining good joint range of motion 
throughout life is important in enhancing health and 
quality of life. Nevertheless, fitness participants generally 
have underestimated and overlooked flexibility fitness.
The most significant detriments to flexibility are 
sedentary living and lack of physical activity. As physical 
activity decreases, muscles lose elasticity, and tendons 
and ligaments tighten and shorten. Aging also reduces 
the extensibility of soft tissue, decreasing flexibility.
Generally, flexibility exercises to improve range of 
motion around the joints are conducted following an 
aerobic workout. Stretching exercises seem to be most 
effective when a person is warmed up properly. Cool 
muscle temperatures decrease joint range of motion. 
Changes in muscle temperature can increase or decrease 
flexibility by as much as 20 percent. Because of the effects 
of muscular temperature on flexibility, many people pre-
fer to do their stretching exercises after the aerobic phase 
of their workout.
3.6A  Muscular Flexibility Prescription  The 
overload and specificity of training principles apply to 
development of muscular flexibility. To increase the total 
range of motion of a joint, the specific muscles sur-
rounding that joint have to be stretched progressively 
beyond their accustomed length. The factors of mode, 
intensity, repetitions, and frequency of exercise also can 
be applied to flexibility programs.
Mode of Exercise
There are several modes of stretching that promote 
flexibility:
	1.	
Static (slow-sustained stretching)
	2.	
Passive stretching
	3.	
Ballistic stretching
	4.	
Dynamic stretching
	5.	
Controlled ballistic stretching
	6.	
Proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation (PNF) 
stretching
Although all six modes of stretching are effective in 
developing better flexibility, each has certain advantages.
Static Stretching
With static stretching or slow-sustained stretching, 
muscles are lengthened gradually through a joint’s com-
plete range of motion and the final position is held for a 
few seconds. A slow-sustained stretch causes the muscles 
to relax and thereby achieve greater length. This type  
of stretch causes little pain and has a low risk for injury. 
In flexibility-development programs, slow-sustained 
stretching exercises are the most frequently used and 
recommended.
Passive Stretching
Although similar to static stretching, in passive stretch-
ing, the muscles are relaxed, that is, they are in a passive 
state; and an external force, provided by another person 
or apparatus, is applied to increase the range of motion.
Ballistic Stretching
Ballistic stretch-
ing requires the 
impetus of a mov-
ing body or body 
part to force a joint 
or group of joints 
beyond the nor­-
mal range of mo-
tion. This type of 
stretching requires 
a fast and repeti-
tive bouncing mo-
tion to achieve a 
greater degree of 
stretch. An exam-
ple would be re-
peatedly bouncing 
Static stretching (slow-sustained 
stretching)  Exercises in which the 
muscles are lengthened gradually 
through a joint’s complete range of 
motion.
Passive stretching  Stretching exer-
cises performed with the aid of an ex-
ternal force applied by either another 
individual or an external apparatus.
Ballistic stretching  Stretching exer-
cises performed with jerky, rapid, and 
bouncy movements.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

76
Fitness and Wellness
down and up to touch the toes. Ballistic stretching is the 
least recommended form of stretching. Fitness profession-
als feel that it causes muscle soreness and increases the risk 
of injuries to muscles and nerves. Limited data, however, 
are available to corroborate such effects. This form of 
stretching should never be performed without a previous 
mild aerobic warm-up and only gentle bouncing actions 
are recommended for those who wish to use this mode of 
stretching.
Dynamic Stretching
Speed of movement, momentum, and active muscular 
effort are used in dynamic stretching to increase the 
range of motion about a joint or group of joints. Unlike 
ballistic stretching, it does not require bouncing mo-
tions. Exaggerating a kicking action, walking lunges, and 
arm circles are all examples of dynamic stretching. Re-
search indicates that dynamic stretches are preferable to 
static stretches before athletic competition because dy-
namic stretching does not seem to have a negative effect 
on the athlete’s strength and power. Dynamic stretching 
is beneficial for athletes such as gymnasts, dancers, figure 
skaters, divers, and hurdlers, whose sports activities re-
quire ballistic actions.
Precautions must be taken not to overstretch liga-
ments with ballistic and dynamic stretching. Ligaments 
undergo plastic or permanent elongation. If the stretch-
ing force cannot be controlled—as often occurs in fast, 
jerky movements—ligaments can easily be overstretched. 
This, in turn, leads to excessively loose joints, increasing 
the risk for injuries.
Controlled Ballistic Stretching
Controlled ballistic stretching, that is, exercises that are 
performed through slow, gentle, and controlled ballistic 
movements (instead of jerky, rapid, and bouncy move-
ments), is quite effective in developing flexibility. Prop-
erly performed, this type of stretching can be done safely 
by most individuals.
Proprioceptive Neuromuscular Facilitation
Proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation (PNF) 
stretching is based on a “contract-and-relax” method 
and requires the assistance of another person. The proce-
dure is as follows:
	1.	
The person assisting with the exercise provides ini-
tial force by pushing slowly in the direction of the 
desired stretch. This first stretch does not cover the 
entire range of motion.
	2.	
The person being stretched then applies force in 
the opposite direction of the stretch, against the as-
sistant, who tries to hold the initial degree of 
stretch as close as possible. This results in an iso-
metric contraction at the angle of the stretch.
	3.	
After 5 or 6 seconds of isometric contraction, the 
person being stretched relaxes the target muscle(s) 
completely. The assistant then increases the degree 
of stretch slowly to a greater angle and for the PNF 
technique the stretch is held for 10 to 30 seconds.
	4.	
If a greater degree of stretch is achievable, the iso-
metric contraction is repeated for another 5 or 6 
seconds, after which the degree of stretch is slowly 
increased again and held for 10 to 30 seconds.
If a progressive degree of stretch is used, steps 1 
through 4 can be repeated up to five times. Each isomet-
ric contraction is held for about 6 seconds. The progres-
sive stretches are held for 10 seconds, until the last  
trial, when the final stretched position is held for up to 
30 seconds.
Theoretically, with the PNF technique, the isometric 
contraction helps relax the muscle being stretched, 
which results in lengthening the muscle. Some fitness 
leaders believe PNF is more effective than slow-sustained 
stretching. Another benefit of PNF is an increase in 
strength of the muscle(s) being stretched. Research has 
shown increases in absolute strength and muscular en-
durance when the PNF technique is used. The results are 
consistent in both men and women and are attributed to 
Performance of complex motor skills improves with good 
flexibility.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

77
Chapter 3  Exercise Prescription
the isometric contractions performed during PNF. Dis-
advantages of PNF are (1) more pain, (2) the need for a 
second person to assist, and (3) the need for more time 
to conduct each session.
Intensity of Exercise
When you do flexibility exercises, the intensity of each 
stretch should be only to the point of mild discomfort 
or mild tension at the end of the range of motion. Ex-
cessive pain is an indication that the load is too high 
and may lead to injury. All stretching should be done to 
slightly below the pain threshold. As participants reach 
this point, they should try to relax the muscle being 
stretched as much as possible. After completing the 
stretch, the body part is brought back gradually to the 
starting point.
Repetitions
The time required for an exercise session for develop-
ment of flexibility is based on the number of repetitions 
and the length of time each repetition is held in the final 
stretched position. As a general recommendation, a 
minimum of 10 minutes in duration that include the 
major muscle/tendon units of the body should be per-
formed. Four or more repetitions per exercise should be 
done, holding the final position each time for 10 to 30 
seconds.22 The goal is to achieve 60 seconds of total 
stretching per exercise by adjusting the duration and 
repetitions. Older adults may derive greater improve-
ments when the final stretched position is held for 30 to 
60 seconds.
As flexibility increases, a person can gradually in-
crease the time each repetition is held from 10 to about 
30 seconds. Data indicate that stretching for 15 to 30 
seconds is better to increase range of motion than 
stretching for shorter periods of time and is just as effec-
tive as stretching for longer durations.23 Individuals who 
are susceptible to flexibility injuries should limit each 
stretch to 20 seconds. Pilates exercises are recommended 
for these individuals, as they increase joint stability  
(see the discussion on the Pilates exercise system on  
page 78 in this chapter).
Frequency of Exercise
Flexibility exercises should be conducted a minimum of 
2 or 3 days per week, but ideally 5 to 7 days per week. 
After 6 to 8 weeks of almost daily stretching, flexibility 
can be maintained with 2 to 3 sessions per week, involv-
ing the major muscle/tendon groups of the body and 
doing 4 repetitions for up to a total of 60 seconds for 
each exercise performed. Figure 3.4 summarizes the flex-
ibility development guidelines.
When to Stretch?
Many people do not differentiate a warm-up from  
stretching. Warm-
ing up means start-
ing 
a 
workout 
slowly with walk-
ing, 
cycling, 
or 
slow jogging, fol-
lowed by gentle 
stretching 
(not 
through the entire 
range of motion). 
Stretching implies 
movement of joints 
through their full 
range of motion 
and holding the  
final 
degree 
of 
stretch according 
to recommended 
guidelines.
A 
warm-up 
that progressively 
Dynamic stretching  Stretching exer-
cises that require speed of movement, 
momentum, and active muscular effort 
to help increase the range of motion 
about a joint or group of joints.
Controlled ballistic stretch-
ing  Exercises done with slow, short, 
gentle, and sustained movements.
Proprioceptive neuromuscular  
facilitation (PNF)  Mode of stretch-
ing that uses reflexes and neuromuscu-
lar principles to relax the muscles be-
ing stretched.
Intensity (for flexibility exercises)  
Degree of stretch when doing flexibility 
exercises.
Proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation (PNF) stretching technique: 
(A) isometric phase, (B) stretching phase.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
(a)
(b)
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

78
Fitness and Wellness
increases muscle temperature and mimics movement 
that will occur during training enhances performance. 
For some activities, gentle stretching is recommended in 
conjunction with warm-up routines. Before steady ac-
tivities (walking, jogging, cycling), a warm-up of 3 to 5 
minutes is recommended. The recommendation is up to 
10 minutes before stop-and-go activities (e.g., racquet 
sports, basketball, soccer) and athletic participation in 
general (e.g., football, gymnastics). Activities that re-
quire abrupt changes in direction are more likely to 
cause muscle strains if they are performed without 
proper warm-up that includes mild stretching.
Sports-specific pre-exercise stretching can improve 
performance in sports that require a greater-than- 
average range of motion, such as gymnastics, dance, div-
ing, and figure skating. A few studies suggest that intense 
stretching during warm-up can lead to a temporary, 
short-term (up to 60 minutes) decrease in strength and 
power. Thus, intense stretching conducted prior to par-
ticipating in athletic events that rely on force and power 
for peak performance is not recommended.24,25
In terms of preventing injuries, the best time to 
stretch is controversial. In limited studies on athletic 
populations, the evidence is unclear as to whether 
stretching before or after exercise is more beneficial in 
preventing injury. Additional research is necessary to 
clarify this issue.
In general, unless the activity requires extensive 
range of motion, a good time to stretch is after aerobic 
workouts. Higher body temperature in itself helps to in-
crease the joint range of motion. Muscles also are fa-
tigued following exercise, and a fatigued muscle tends to 
shorten, which can lead to soreness and spasms. Stretch-
ing exercises help fatigued muscles reestablish their nor-
mal resting length and prevent unnecessary pain.
3.6B  Designing a Flexibility Program  To 
improve body flexibility, each major muscle group should 
be subjected to at least one stretching exercise. A com-
plete set of exercises for developing muscular flexibility 
is presented in Appendix B.
You may not be able to hold a final stretched posi-
tion with some of these exercises (such as lateral head 
tilts and arm circles), but you still should perform the 
exercise through the joint’s full range of motion. De-
pending on the number and the length of repetitions, a 
complete workout will last between 15 and 30 
minutes.
Carefully consider the relevance of stretching exercises in 
your personal fitness program throughout the years.  
• How much importance do you place on these exercises? 
• Have any conditions improved through your stretching 
program or have any specific exercises contributed to your 
health and well-being?
Critical Thinking
3.7  Pilates Exercise 
System
Pilates exercises have become increasingly popular in 
recent years. Previously, Pilates training was used pri-
marily by dancers, but now many fitness participants, 
rehab patients, models, actors, and even professional 
athletes are embracing this exercise modality. Pilates 
studios, college courses, and classes at health clubs now 
are available nationwide.
The Pilates training system was originally developed 
in the 1920s by German physical therapist Joseph Pilates. 
The exercises are designed to help strengthen the body’s 
core by developing pelvic stability and abdominal  
control—coupled with focused breathing patterns.  
Pilates exercises are performed either on a mat (floor) or 
with specialized equipment to help increase strength and 
flexibility of deep postural muscles. The intent is to im-
prove muscle tone and length (providing a limber body), 
instead of increasing muscle size (hypertrophy). The ex-
ercises are performed in a slow, controlled, precise man-
ner. Properly performed, Pilates exercises require intense 
concentration. Initial Pilates training should be con-
ducted under the supervision of certified instructors 
with extensive Pilates teaching experience.
Fitness goals of Pilates programs include improved 
flexibility, muscle tone, posture, spinal support, body 
balance, low back health, sports performance, and mind-
Slow-sustained (static), ballistic (dynamic),
or proprioceptive neuromuscular
facilitation (PNF) stretching to include all
major muscle/tendon groups of the body
To the point of mild tension or limits of
discomfort
Repeat each exercise 4 times, holding the
ﬁnal position between 10 and 30 seconds
At least 2 or 3 days per week
Ideally 5 to 7 days per week
Mode:
Intensity:
Repetitions:
Frequency:
SOURCE: Adapted from American College of Sports Medicine, ACSM’s 
Guidelines for Exercise Testing and Prescription (Philadelphia: Wolters 
Kluwer/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2014)
Figure 3.4
Flexibility development guidelines.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

79
Chapter 3  Exercise Prescription
body awareness. The Pilates program also is used to help 
lose weight, increase lean tissue, and manage stress. Al-
though Pilates programs are popular, research is re-
quired to corroborate the benefits attributed to the Pi-
lates training system.
3.8  Preventing  
and Rehabilitating  
Low Back Pain
Few people make it through life without having low back 
pain at some point. An estimated 60 percent to 80 per-
cent of the population has been afflicted by back pain or 
injury. When it comes to back pain, prevention and 
treatment through physical exercise is by far the best 
medicine.
Back pain is caused by (a) physical inactivity,  
(b) poor postural habits and body mechanics, (c) exces-
sive body weight, and/or (d) psychological stress and is 
preventable more than 80 percent of the time. Back inju-
ries are also more common among smokers because 
smoking reduces blood flow to the spine, increasing back 
pain susceptibility.
More than 95 percent of all back pain is related to 
muscle/tendon injury, and only 1 percent to 5 percent is 
related to intervertebral disk damage.26 Usually, back 
pain is the result of repeated micro-injuries that occur 
over an extended time (sometimes years) until a certain 
movement, activity, or excessive overload causes a sig-
nificant injury to the tissues.27
People tend to think of back pain as a problem 
with the skeleton. Actually, the spine’s curvature, align-
ment, and movement are controlled by surrounding 
muscles. The most common reason for chronic low 
back pain is a lack of physical activity. In particular, a 
major contributor to back pain is excessive sitting, 
which causes back muscles to shorten, stiffen, and be-
come weaker.
Deterioration or weakening of the abdominal and 
gluteal muscles, along with tightening of the lower back 
(erector spinae) muscles, brings about an unnatural for-
ward tilt of the pelvis (Figure 3.5). This tilt puts extra 
pressure on the spinal vertebrae, causing pain in the 
lower back. Accumulation of fat around the midsection 
of the body contributes to the forward tilt of the pelvis, 
which further aggravates the condition.
Low back pain frequently is associated with faulty 
posture and improper body mechanics, or body posi-
tions. Incorrect posture and poor mechanics, such as 
prolonged static postures, repetitive bending and push-
ing, twisting a loaded spine, and prolonged (more than 
an hour) sitting with little movement increase strain on 
the lower back and many other bones, joints, muscles, 
and ligaments. Figure 3.6 provides a summary of proper 
body mechanics that promote back health.
Data recently published in 2013 indicate that be-
tween 40 percent and 80 percent of people with long-
term back pain due to a herniated or slipped disk may be 
related to a bacterial infection caused by Propionibacte-
rium acnes.28,29 This infection can lead to swelling and 
tissue damage in the spine. Long-term (100 days) treat-
ment with antibiotics provided significant relief of pain 
and disability for up to a year later in most of these pa-
tients. Additional clinical studies are still required to 
confirm these findings, but people who suffer from per-
sistent back pain should request a blood test to check for 
such a bacterial infection.
In the majority of back injuries, pain is present 
only with movement and physical activity. According to 
the National Institutes of Health (NIH), most back pain 
goes away on its own in a few weeks. A physician 
should be consulted if any of the following conditions 
are present:
• 
Numbness in the legs
• 
Trouble urinating
• 
Leg weakness
• 
Fever
• 
Unintentional 
weight loss
• 
Persistent se-
vere pain 
even at rest
Pilates  Exercises that help strengthen 
the body’s core by developing pelvic 
stability and abdominal control coupled 
with focused breathing patterns.
Figure 3.5
Incorrect (left) and correct (right)  
pelvic alignment.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

80
Fitness and Wellness
A physician can rule out any disk damage, arthritis, 
osteoporosis, a slipped vertebrae, spinal stenosis (nar-
rowing of the spinal canal), or other serious condition. 
For common back pain, he may prescribe proper bed 
rest using several pillows under the knees for leg support 
(Figure 3.6). This position helps relieve muscle spasms 
by stretching the muscles involved. He may also pre-
scribe a muscle relaxant or anti-inflammatory medica-
tion (or both) and some type of physical therapy.
In most cases, an x-ray and MRI are not required 
unless pain lingers for more than four to six weeks. In the 
early stages of back pain, tight muscles and muscle 
spasms tend to compress the vertebrae, squeezing the 
intervertebral disks and revealing apparent disk prob-
lems on an x-ray. In these cases, the real problem is the 
tight muscles and subsequent muscle spasms. A daily 
physical activity and stretching program helps to decom-
press the spine, stretch tight muscles, strengthen weak 
muscles, and increase blood flow (promoting healing) to 
the back muscles.
Time is often the best treatment approach. Even 
with severe pain, most people feel better within days or 
weeks without being treated by health care professionals. 
Up to 90 percent of people will heal on their own. To 
relieve symptoms, you may use over-the-counter pain 
relievers and hot or cold packs. You also should stay ac-
tive to avoid further weakening of the back muscles. 
Low-impact activities such as walking, swimming, water 
aerobics, and cycling are recommended. Once you are 
pain free in the resting state, you need to start correcting 
the muscular imbalance by stretching the tight muscles 
and strengthening the weak ones. Stretching exercises 
always are performed first.
If there is no indication of disease or injury (such as 
leg numbness or pain), a herniated disk, or fractures, 
spinal manipulation by a chiropractor or other health 
care professional can provide pain relief. Spinal manipu-
lation as a treatment modality for low back pain has been 
endorsed by the federal Agency for Health Care Policy 
and Research. The guidelines suggest that spinal manip-
ulation may help to alleviate discomfort and pain during 
the first few weeks of an acute episode of low back pain. 
Generally, benefits are seen in fewer than 10 treatments. 
People who have had chronic pain for more than 6 
months should avoid spinal manipulation until they 
have been thoroughly examined by a physician.
Back pain is considered chronic if it persists longer 
than 3 months. Surgery is seldom the best option, as it 
often weakens the spine. Scar tissue and surgical altera-
tions also decrease the success rate of a subsequent sur-
gery. Only about 10 percent of people with chronic pain 
are candidates for surgery. If surgery is recommended, 
always seek a second opinion. And consider all other op-
tions. In many cases, pushing beyond the pain and par-
ticipating in aggressive physical therapy (“exercise boot 
camps” for back pain) aimed at strengthening the mus-
cles that support the spine are what’s needed to overcome 
the condition. Data from the Physicians Neck & Back 
Clinic in Minneapolis showed that only 3 in 38 patients 
recommended for surgery needed it upon completion of 
a 10-week aggressive physical therapy program.30
Back pain can be reduced greatly through aerobic 
exercise, muscular flexibility exercise, and muscular fit-
ness training that includes specific exercises to strengthen 
the spine-stabilizing muscles. Exercise requires effort by 
the patient, and it may create discomfort initially, but 
exercise promotes circulation, healing, muscle size, and 
muscle strength and endurance. Many patients abstain 
from aggressive physical therapy because they are un-
willing to commit the time required for the program.
In terms of alleviating back pain, exercise is medi-
cine, but it needs to be the right type of exercise. Aerobic 
exercise is beneficial because it helps decrease body fat 
and psychological stress. During an episode of back pain, 
however, people often avoid activity and cope by getting 
more rest. Rest is recommended if the pain is associated 
with a herniated disk, but if your physician rules out a 
serious problem, exercise is a better choice of treatment. 
Exercise helps restore physical function, and individuals 
who start and maintain an aerobic exercise program 
have back pain less frequently. Individuals who exercise 
also are less likely to require surgery or other invasive 
treatments.
Regular stretching exercises that help the hip and 
trunk go through a functional range of motion, rather 
than increasing the range of motion, are recommended. 
That is, for proper back care, stretching exercises should 
not be performed to the extreme range of motion. Indi-
viduals with a greater spinal range of motion also have a 
higher incidence of back injury. Spinal stability, instead 
of mobility, is desirable for back health.
Yoga exercises are particularly beneficial to enhance 
flexibility, and Iyegar yoga in particular has been shown 
to relieve chronic low back pain.31 In fact, yoga may help 
relieve chronic back pain better than conventional medi-
cine. Following 24 weeks of biweekly classes, yoga par-
ticipants had greater improvement in functional disabil-
ity along with a decrease in pain intensity and depression 
related to low back pain. These benefits were still present 
6 months after the end of class participation.
A strengthening program for a healthy back should 
be conducted around the endurance threshold—15 or 
more repetitions to near fatigue. Muscular endurance of 
the muscles that support the spine is more important 
than absolute strength because these muscles perform 
their work during the course of an entire day.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

81
Chapter 3  Exercise Prescription
Standing, lifting, and carrying positions
Incorrect:
Correct:
Incorrect:
Bed posture
Correct:
Bend at 
the knees 
to lean 
forward
Hold and 
carry 
objects 
close to 
the body
Always 
bend at 
the hips 
and 
knees
Stand with 
the aid of 
a footrest
Always use a 
footrest to keep 
the knees higher 
than the hips
Sit close to the 
pedals when 
driving
Avoid severe 
rounding of upper 
back and neck 
while seated
To lean forward, 
bend at the hips 
and keep the 
neck and back as 
straight as possible
Low back pain is caused by (a) physical inactivity, 
(b) poor postural habits and body mechanics, 
(c) excessive body weight, and/or (d) psychological 
stress. To protect your back and avoid debilitating 
low-back strain, you need to use proper body 
mechanics and correct improper body posture. 
Using appropriate body positions and actions in all 
daily activities is vital for back health. The following 
guidelines help avoid unnecessary back strain and 
protect and support your back. 
To learn the correct 
standing posture, stand a 
foot away from a wall and 
place your upper body 
completely straight 
against the wall. You will 
need to tighten the 
abdominal and gluteal 
muscles to do so. Next, 
walk around for a few 
minutes holding this same 
position and at the end 
return to the wall to 
evaluate how well you 
maintained the posture.
Correct sitting position
Most people spend many daily hours sitting. Proper sitting and preventing 
a forward slump is essential for back health. To straighten your back (a) 
put your head back, (b) pull in your chin toward your chest, (c) tighten your 
abdominal muscles, and (d) raise your chest. You should always sit in this 
manner. The following guidelines will also help correct improper sitting 
throughout the day.
A firm mattress is 
recommended for 
proper back support. 
Avoid sleeping flat on 
your back or face 
down with large pillows 
for head support. Lying 
sideways in a fetal 
position with a small 
pillow for head support 
and a small pillow 
between the knees, or 
on your back with the 
knees supported by a 
larger pillow, is best.
When resting, do it right
When at home resting or relaxing, lie flat on your back with a small pillow 
under your neck and with pillows under the knees for support. You may 
also place the lower legs on a chair with your knees bent at 90 degrees. 
This position is also good to relieve back spasms when suffering from 
back pain.
When watching TV or sitting on the floor, do so 
by lying on a straight-back chair covered with 
a firm pillow and a second large pillow under 
the knees.
Correct standing position
Figure 3.6
Proper back care. 
© Cengage Learning 2015
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

82
Fitness and Wellness
Consider your own low back health. • Have you ever had 
episodes of low back pain? If so, how long did it take you 
to recover, and what helped you recover from this 
condition?
Critical Thinking
Several exercises for preventing and rehabilitating 
the backache syndrome are given in Appendix C, pages 
275–277. These exercises can be done twice or more 
daily when a person has back pain. Under normal cir-
cumstances, doing these exercises three or four times a 
week is enough to prevent the syndrome. Using addi-
tional core exercises will further enhance your low back 
management program. Back pain recurs more often in 
people who rely solely on medication, compared with 
people who use both medication and exercise therapy to 
recover.32
3.8A  Effects of Posture  Good posture enhances 
personal appearance, self-image, and confidence; im-
proves balance and endurance; protects against mis-
alignment-related pains and aches; prevents falls; and 
enhances your overall sense of well-being.33 The relation-
ship among different body parts is the essence of posture.
Poor posture is a risk factor for musculoskeletal 
problems of the neck, shoulders, and lower back. Incor-
rect posture also strains hips and knees. Faulty posture 
and weak and inelastic muscles are also a leading cause 
of chronic low back problems.
Adequate body mechanics also aid in reducing 
chronic low back pain. Proper body mechanics means 
using correct positions in all the activities of daily life, 
including sleeping, sitting, standing, walking, driving, 
working, and exercising. Because of the high incidence 
of low back pain, illustrations of proper body mechan-
ics are shown in Figure 3.6. Besides engaging in the 
recommended exercises, you need to continuously 
strive to maintain good posture. As posture improves, 
you frequently become motivated to change other as-
pects, such as muscular strength and flexibility and 
decreasing body fat.
3.8B  Effects of Stress  Psychological stress, too, may 
lead to back pain.34 The brain is “hardwired” to the back 
muscles. Excessive stress causes muscles to contract. Fre-
quent tightening of the back muscles can throw the back 
out of alignment and constrict blood vessels that supply 
oxygen and nutrients to the back. Chronic stress also in-
creases the release of hormones that have been linked to 
muscle and tendon injuries. Furthermore, people under 
stress tend to forget proper body mechanics, placing 
themselves at unnecessary risk for injury. If you are under-
going excessive stress and back pain at the same time, 
proper stress management (see Chapter 7) should be a 
part of your comprehensive back-care program.
3.9  Contraindicated 
Exercises
Most strength and flexibility exercises are relatively safe 
to perform, but even safe exercises can be hazardous if 
they are done incorrectly. Some exercises may be safe for 
you to perform occasionally but, when executed repeat-
edly, could cause trauma and injury. Preexisting muscle 
or joint conditions (old sprains or injuries) can further 
increase the risk of harm when performing certain exer-
cises. As you develop your exercise program, you are 
encouraged to follow the exercise descriptions and 
guidelines given in this book.
A few exercises are not recommended because they 
pose a potentially high risk for injury. These exercises are 
sometimes performed in videotaped workouts and some 
fitness classes. Contraindicated exercises may cause 
harm because of the excessive strain placed on muscles 
and joints—in particular, the spine, lower back, knees, 
neck, or shoulders.
Illustrations of contraindicated exercises are pre-
sented in Appendix D, pages 278–280. Safe alternative 
exercises are listed below each contraindicated exercise 
and are illustrated in Appendix A (strength exercises), 
pages 264–271, and Appendix B (flexibility exercises), 
pages 272–274. In isolated instances a qualified physical 
therapist may select one or a few of the contraindicated 
exercises to treat a certain injury or disability in a care-
fully supervised setting. Unless you are instructed spe-
cifically to use one of these exercises, it is best that you 
select safe exercises from this book.
3.10  Getting Started
Introducing new behaviors into one’s daily routine takes 
most people months or longer to accomplish. A fitness 
program is no exception. Adding exercise to a person’s 
lifestyle may require retraining (behavior modification).
Different things motivate different people to start 
and remain in a fitness program. Regardless of your ini-
tial reason for initiating an exercise program, you now 
need to plan for ways to make your workout fun. The 
psychology behind it is simple: If you enjoy an activity, 
you will continue to do it.
The first few weeks probably will be the most diffi-
cult, but where there’s a will, there’s a way. Once you be-
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

83
Chapter 3  Exercise Prescription
gin to see positive changes, it won’t be as hard. Soon you 
will develop a habit for exercise that will be deeply satis-
fying and will bring about a sense of self-accomplish-
ment. The suggestions in the box on the next page have 
been used by people to help them change behavior and 
adhere to a lifetime exercise program.
While fitness evaluation is important to assess 
changes in physical capacity, attention must be given to 
actual program compliance. Regular physical activity is 
the key to better health and quality of life (see “Health 
Fitness Standard” in Chapter 2, pages 29–30). Exercise 
logs provide the means to carefully document your par-
ticipation in fitness programs and allow you to monitor 
your progress and compare it against previous months 
and years. Activity 3.4, pages 95–98, contains exercise 
log sheets to monitor your CR endurance and muscular 
strength programs. You are strongly encouraged to keep 
a detailed record of all of your activities.
3.11  Setting Fitness Goals
Before you leave this chapter, consider your fitness goals. 
In the last few decades we have become accustomed to 
“quick fixes” with everything from super-fast foods to 
one-hour dry cleaning. Fitness, however, has no quick 
fix. Fitness takes time and dedication, and only those 
who are committed and persistent will reap the rewards. 
As described in Chapter 1, setting realistic fitness goals 
will guide your program. Activity 3.4, page 95, offers a 
goal-setting form that will help you determine your fit-
ness goals. Take the time, either by yourself or with your 
instructor’s help, to fill it out.
As you prepare to write realistic fitness goals, base 
these goals on the results of your initial fitness test (pre-
test). For instance, if your CR fitness category was 
“poor” on the pre-test, you should not expect to im-
prove to the “excellent” category in a little more than 3 
months. Whenever possible, your fitness goals should 
be measurable and time-specific. A goal that simply 
states “to improve my CR endurance” is not as good as 
a goal that states “to improve to the ‘good’ fitness cate-
gory in CR endurance by April 15” or “to run the 1.5-
mile course in less than 11 minutes the week of final 
exams.”
After determining each goal, monitor your progress 
toward your goal regularly. You also will need to write 
measurable actions to accomplish that goal. These ac-
tions provide the actual plan to accomplish your goal. A 
sample of actions to accomplish the previously stated 
goal for development of CR endurance could be:
	1.	
Use jogging as the mode of exercise.
	2.	
Jog at 10:00 a.m. five times per week.
	3.	
Jog around the track in the field house.
	4.	
Jog for 30 minutes each exercise session.
	5.	
Monitor heart rate regularly during exercise.
	6.	
Take the 1.5-Mile Run Test once a month.
You will not always meet your specific actions. If so, 
your goal may be out of reach. Reevaluate your actions 
and make adjustments accordingly. If you set unrealistic 
goals at the beginning of your exercise program, be flexi-
ble with yourself and reconsider your plan of action, but 
do not quit. Reconsidering your plan of action does not 
mean 
that 
you 
have failed. Failure 
comes 
only 
to 
those who stop 
trying, and success 
comes 
to 
those 
who are commit-
ted and persistent.
Contraindicated exercises   
Exercises that are not recommended 
because they pose potentially high risk 
for injury.
Setting realistic goals will help you design and guide your fitness 
program.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

84
Fitness and Wellness
Tips to Enhance Compliance with Your 
Fitness Program
Adults need recess, too! There are 1,440 minutes in every day. 
Schedule a minimum of 30 of these minutes for physical activ-
ity. With a little creativity and planning, even the person with 
the busiest schedule can make room for physical activity. For 
many folks, before or after work or meals is often an available 
time to cycle, walk, or play. Think about your weekly or daily 
schedule and look for or make opportunities to be more active. 
Every little bit helps. Consider the following suggestions:
  1.	Set aside a regular time for exercise. If you don’t plan 
ahead, it is a lot easier to skip. On a weekly basis, us-
ing red ink, schedule your exercise time into your day 
planner. Next, hold your exercise hour “sacred.” Give 
exercise priority equal to the most important school or 
business activity of the day.
  2.	If you are too busy, attempt to accumulate 30 to 60 min-
utes of daily activity by doing separate 10-minute sessions 
throughout the day. Try reading the mail while you walk, 
taking stairs instead of elevators, walking the dog, or rid-
ing the stationary bike as you watch the evening news.
  3.	Exercise early in the day, when you will be less tired and 
the chances of something interfering with your workout 
are minimal; thus, you will be less likely to skip your ex-
ercise session.
  4.	Select aerobic activities you enjoy. Exercise should be 
as much fun as your favorite hobby. If you pick an ac-
tivity you don’t enjoy, you will be unmotivated and less 
likely to keep exercising. Don’t be afraid to try out a 
new activity, even if that means learning new skills.
  5.	Combine different activities. You can train by doing two  
or three different activities the same week. This cross-
training may reduce the monotony of repeating the same 
activity every day. Try lifetime sports. Many endurance 
sports, such as racquetball, basketball, soccer, badmin-
ton, roller skating, cross-country skiing, and body surfing 
(paddling the board), provide a nice break from regular 
workouts.
  6.	Use the proper clothing and equipment for exercise. A 
poor pair of shoes, for example, can make you more 
prone to injury, discouraging you from the beginning.
  7.	Find a friend or group of friends to exercise with. Social in-
teraction will make exercise more fulfilling. Besides, exer-
cise is harder to skip if someone is waiting to go with you.
Behavior Modification Planning
  8.	Set goals and share them with others. Quitting is 
tougher when someone else knows what you are trying 
to accomplish. When you reach a targeted goal, reward 
yourself with a new pair of shoes or a jogging suit.
  9.	Purchase a pedometer (step counter) and build up to 
10,000 steps per day. These 10,000 steps may include 
all forms of daily physical activity combined. Pedometers 
motivate people toward activity because they track daily 
activity, provide feedback on activity level, and remind 
the participant to enhance daily activity.
10.	Don’t become a chronic exerciser. Overexercising can 
lead to chronic fatigue and injuries. Exercise should be 
enjoyable, and in the process you should stop and 
smell the roses.
11.	Exercise in different places and facilities. This will add 
variety to your workouts.
12.	Exercise to music. People who listen to fast-tempo music 
tend to exercise more vigorously and longer. Using head-
phones when exercising outdoors, however, can be dan-
gerous. Even indoors, it is preferable not to use head-
phones so you still can be aware of your surroundings.
13.	Keep a regular record of your activities. Keeping a re-
cord allows you to monitor your progress and compare 
it against previous months and years (see Activity 3.4, 
page 95).
14.	Conduct periodic assessments. Improving to a higher 
fitness category is often a reward in itself, and creating 
your own rewards is even more motivating.
15.	Listen to your body. If you experience pain or unusual dis-
comfort, stop exercising. Pain and aches are an indica-
tion of potential injury. If you do suffer an injury, don’t re-
turn to your regular workouts until you are fully recovered. 
You may cross-train using activities that don’t aggravate 
your injury (for instance, swimming instead of jogging).
16.	If a health problem arises, see a physician. When in 
doubt, it’s better to be safe than sorry.
Try It
The most difficult challenge about exercise is to keep go-
ing once you start. The above behavioral change tips will 
enhance your chances for exercise adherence. In your Online 
Journal or class notebook, describe which suggestions were 
most useful in helping you stick to your exercise program 
and why they are so effective for you.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

85
Chapter 3  Exercise Prescription
	1.	
Do you accumulate at least 30 minutes of moderate- 
intensity physical activity (or higher intensity) a mini-
mum of five days per week?
	2.	
Do you participate in a vigorous-intensity aerobic exer-
cise program for a minimum of 20 minutes at least three 
times per week?
	3.	
Do you engage in an overall strength-training program 
where you perform at least one set of 8 to 12 repetitions 
to near fatigue, using 8 to 10 dynamic exercises that in-
volve the major-muscle groups of the body, a minimum 
of two times per week?
	4.	
Does your exercise program include stretching all major 
joints of the body a minimum of two times per week?
Assess Your Behavior
To access course materials, including companion resources, please visit www.cengagebrain.com.
	 1.	 The vigorous-intensity cardiorespiratory training zone 
for a 22-year-old individual with a resting heart rate of 
68 bpm is
	 a.	 120 to 148.
	 b.	 132 to 156.
	 c.	 138 to 164.
	 d.	 142 to 179.
	 e.	 154 to 188.
	 2.	 Which of the following activities does not contribute to 
the development of cardiorespiratory endurance?
	 a.	 low-impact aerobics
	 b.	 jogging
	 c.	 400-yard dash
	 d.	 racquetball
	 e.	 All of the activities contribute to its development.
	 3.	 The recommended duration for each cardiorespiratory 
training session is
	 a.	 10 to 20 minutes.
	 b.	 15 to 30 minutes.
	 c.	 20 to 60 minutes.
	 d.	 45 to 70 minutes.
	 e.	 60 to 120 minutes.
	 4.	 During an eccentric muscle contraction,
	 a.	 the muscle shortens as it overcomes the resistance.
	 b.	 there is little or no movement during the contraction.
	 c.	 a joint has to move through the entire range of 
motion.
	 d.	 the muscle lengthens as it contracts.
	 e.	 the speed is kept constant throughout the range of 
motion.
	 5.	 The training concept that states that the demands placed 
on a system must be increased systematically and pro-
gressively over time to cause physiological adaptation is 
referred to as
	 a.	 the overload principle.
	 b.	 positive resistance training.
	 c.	 specificity of training.
	 d.	 variable-resistance training.
	 e.	 progressive resistance.
	 6.	 For general fitness, during strength training each set 
should be performed between
	 a.	 1 and 6 reps maximum.
	 b.	 4 and 8 reps maximum.
	 c.	 8 and 12 reps maximum.
	 d.	 8 and 20 reps maximum.
	 e.	 15 and 25 reps maximum.
	 7.	 Which of the following is not a mode of stretching?
	 a.	 proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation
	 b.	 elastic elongation
	 c.	 ballistic stretching
	 d.	 slow-sustained stretching
	 e.	 All are modes of stretching.
	 8.	 When you perform stretching exercises, the degree of 
stretch should be
	 a.	 through the entire arc of movement.
	 b.	 to about 80 percent of capacity.
	 c.	 to the point of mild tension.
	 d.	 applied until the muscle(s) start shaking.
	 e.	 progressively increased until the desired stretch is 
attained.
Assess Your Knowledge
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

86
Fitness and Wellness
	 9.	 Low back pain is associated with
	 a.	 physical inactivity.
	 b.	 faulty posture.
	 c.	 excessive body weight.
	 d.	 improper body mechanics.
	 e.	 All are correct choices.
	10.	 A goal is effective when it is
	 a.	 written.
	 b.	 measurable.
	 c.	 time-specific.
	 d.	 monitored.
	 e.	 All are correct choices.
Correct answers can be found on page 301.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

87
Chapter 3  Exercise Prescription
Date: 
 Day of the Week: 
Number
Time
of Day
Exercise/Activity
Duration
of Steps
Comments
Totals:
Activity category based on steps per day (use Table 3.1, page 59):
Date: 
 Day of the Week: 
Number
Time
of Day
Exercise/Activity
Duration
of Steps
Comments
Totals:
Activity category based on steps per day (use Table 3.1, page 59):
Activity 3.1: Daily Physical Activity Log
Date
Name
Section
Course
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

88
Fitness and Wellness
Brieﬂy evaluate your current activity patterns, discuss your feelings about the results, and provide a goal for the weeks ahead.
 
 
 
 
Date: 
 Day of the Week: 
Number
Time
of Day
Exercise/Activity
Duration
of Steps
Comments
Totals:
Activity category based on steps per day (use Table 3.1, page 59):
Date: 
 Day of the Week: 
Number
Time
of Day
Exercise/Activity
Duration
of Steps
Comments
Totals:
Activity category based on steps per day (use Table 3.1, page 59):
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

89
Chapter 3  Exercise Prescription
List advantages of starting an exercise program.
 1.
 2.
 3.
 4.
 5.
 6.
 7.
 8.
 9.
  10.
List disadvantages of starting an exercise program.
 1.
 2.
 3.
 4.
 5.
 6.
 7.
 8.
 9.
  10.
Activity 3.2: Exercise Readiness
Date
Name
Section
Course
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

90
Fitness and Wellness
Instructions
Carefully read each statement and circle the number that best describes your feelings in each statement. Please be completely 
honest with your answers. 
 1. I can walk, ride a bike (or use a wheelchair), swim, or walk in a shallow pool. 
 2. I enjoy exercise.
 3. I believe exercise can help decrease the risk for disease and premature mortality.  
 4. I believe exercise contributes to better health.
 5. I have previously participated in an exercise program. 
 6. I have experienced the feeling of being physically ﬁt. 
 7. I can envision myself exercising.
 8. I am contemplating an exercise program.
 9. I am willing to stop contemplating and give exercise a try for a few weeks.
 10. I am willing to set aside time at least three times a week for exercise.
 11. I can ﬁnd a place to exercise (the streets, a park, a YMCA, a health club).
 12. I can ﬁnd other people who would like to exercise with me.
13. I will exercise when I am moody, fatigued, and even when the weather is bad.
 14. I am willing to spend a small amount of money for adequate exercise clothing 
(shoes, shorts, leotards, swimsuit).
 15. If I have any doubts about my present state of health, I will see a physician 
before beginning an exercise program.
 16. Exercise will make me feel better and improve my quality of life. 
Scoring Your Test:
Mastery:                      1. 
 5. 
 6. 
 9. 
Attitude:                      2. 
 7. 
 8. 
 13. 
Health:                        3. 
 4. 
 15. 
 16. 
Commitment:            10. 
 11. 
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
=
=
=
=
 12. 
 14. 
This questionnaire allows you to examine your readiness for exercise. You have been evaluated in four categories: mastery 
(self-control), attitude, health, and commitment. Mastery indicates that you can be in control of your exercise program. Attitude 
examines your mental disposition toward exercise. Health measures the strength of your convictions about the wellness beneﬁts of 
exercise. Commitment shows dedication and resolution to carry out the exercise program. Write the number you circled after each 
statement in the corresponding spaces below. Add the scores on each line to get your totals. Scores can vary from 4 to 16. A score of 
12 and above is a strong indicator that that factor is important to you, and 8 and below is low. If you score 12 or more points in each 
category, your chances of initiating and adhering to an exercise program are good. If you fail to score at least 12 points in three 
categories, your chances of succeeding at exercise may be slim. You need to be better informed about the beneﬁts of exercise, and a 
retraining process may be required.
4 
 3 
2 
1
4 
 3 
2 
1
4 
 3 
2 
1
4 
 3 
2 
1
4 
 3 
2 
1
4 
 3 
2 
1
4 
 3 
2 
1
4 
 3 
2 
1
4 
 3 
2 
1
4 
 3 
2 
1
4 
 3 
2 
1
4 
 3 
2 
1
4 
 3 
2 
1
4 
 3 
2 
1
4 
 3 
2 
1
4 
 3 
2 
1
Strongly
Agree
Mildly
Agree
Mildly
Disagree
Strongly
Disagree
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

91
Chapter 3  Exercise Prescription
I. Cardiorespiratory Exercise Prescription
Intensity of Exercise
1. Estimate your own maximal heart rate (MHR)
 
 
 
MHR = 207 − (.70 × age) 
 
 
 
MHR = 207 − (.70 ×
) = 
 bpm
2. Resting heart rate (RHR) = 
 bpm
3. Heart rate reserve (HRR) = MHR − RHR  
 
 
 
HRR =
 beats
4. Training intensity (TI) = HRR × % TI + RHR
 
 
 
30% TI = 
× .30 + 
 bpm
 
 
 
40% TI = 
× .40 + 
 bpm
 
 
 
60% TI =
× .60 + 
 bpm
 
 
 
90% TI =
× .90 + 
 bpm
5.  Cardiorespiratory training zone: Unconditioned individuals, persons in the poor cardiorespiratory ﬁtness category, and older adults
starting an exercise program should use a 30 to 40 percent TI. Individuals in fair and average ﬁtness are encouraged to exercise between
40 and 60 percent TI. Active individuals in the good or excellent categories should exercise between 60 and 90 percent TI.
 
 
Light-intensity cardiorespiratory training zone (30% to 40% TI): 
 to 
 bpm
 
 
Moderate-intensity cardiorespiratory training zone (40% to 60% TI): 
 to 
 bpm
 
 
Vigorous-intensity cardiorespiratory training zone (60% to 90% TI): 
 to 
 bpm
Mode of Exercise:
List any activity or combination of aerobic activities that you will use in your cardiorespiratory 
training program:
Duration of Exercise:  
Indicate the length of your exercise sessions: 
 minutes
Frequency of Exercise: Indicate the days you will exercise: 
Student’s Signature: 
 Date: 
Activity 3.3: Exercise Prescription Forms
Date
Name
Section
Course
=
=
=
=
=
−
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

92
Fitness and Wellness
II. Strength-Training Prescription
Design your own strength-training program using a minimum of eight exercises. Indicate the number of sets, repetitions, and 
approximate resistance that you will use. Also, state the days of the week, time, and facility that will be used for this program.
Strength-training days: M 
 T 
 W 
 Th 
 F 
 Sa 
 Su 
Time of day: 
 Facility: 
 Exercise 
Sets / Reps / Resistance
 1.  
 
 2.  
 
 3.  
 
 4.  
 
 5.  
 
 6.  
 
 7.  
 
 8.  
 
 9.  
 
10.  
 
11.  
 
12.  
 
13.  
 
14.  
 
15.  
 
16.  
 
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

93
Chapter 3  Exercise Prescription
III. Muscular Flexibility Prescription
Perform all of the recommended ﬂ exibility exercises given on pages 75–78. Use a combination of slow-sustained and propriocep-
tive neuromuscular facilitation stretching techniques. Indicate the technique(s) used for each exercise and, where applicable, the 
number of repetitions performed and the length of time that the ﬁ nal degree of stretch was held.
Stretching Schedule (Indicate days, time, and place where you will stretch):
Flexibility-training days: M 
 T 
 W 
 Th 
 F 
 Sa 
 Su 
Time of day: 
Place: 
Stretching Exercises
Length of
Stretching
Technique
Final Stretch
Repetitions
Exercise
Lateral head tilt 
NA*
Arm circles 
NA
Side stretch 
Body rotation 
Chest stretch 
Shoulder hyperextension stretch 
Shoulder rotation stretch 
NA
Quad stretch 
Heel cord stretch 
Adductor stretch 
Sitting adductor stretch 
Sit-and-reach stretch 
Triceps stretch 
*Not Applicable
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

94
Fitness and Wellness
IV. Low Back Conditioning Program
Perform all of the recommended exercises for the prevention and rehabilitation of low back pain given in Appendix C, 
pages 275–277. Indicate the number of repetitions performed for each exercise.
Repetitions
Exercise
Hip ﬂ exors stretch 
Single-knee-to-chest stretch 
Double-knee-to-chest stretch 
Upper and lower back stretch 
Sit-and-reach stretch 
Gluteal stretch 
Back extension stretch 
Trunk rotation and lower back stretch 
Hip ﬂexors stretch
Pelvic clock
Pelvic tilt 
Cat stretch 
Abdominal crunch or abdominal curl-up 
Proper Body Mechanics 
Perform the following tasks using the proper body mechanics given in Figure 3.6 (page 81). Check off each item as you perform 
the task: 
Standing (carriage) position  
Resting position for tired and painful back
Sitting position  
Lifting an object
Bed posture
Behavior Modiﬁcation 
Using Figure 3.6 on page 81, indicate what changes you need to make in daily activities to improve posture and body mechanics
and prevent low back pain. 
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

95
Chapter 3  Exercise Prescription
 I. Instructions
Indicate your general goal for the four health-related components of ﬁtness and write the speciﬁc actions you will use to accomplish
these goals in the next few weeks.
Cardiorespiratory endurance goal: 
Speciﬁc actions:
 1. 
 2. 
 3. 
Speciﬁc actions:
 1. 
 2. 
 3. 
Speciﬁc actions:
 1. 
 2. 
 3. 
Speciﬁc actions:
 1. 
 2. 
 3. 
Muscular strength/endurance goal: 
Muscular ﬂexibility goal: 
Body composition goal: 
 
My signature
 
Today’s date
Witness signature
Date of completion
Activity 3.4: Goal-Setting Form and Exercise Logs
Date
Name
Section
Course
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

96
Fitness and Wellness
 II. Aerobic Exercise Log
 
Date
Body
Weight
Exercise
Heart Rate
Type of
Exercise
Distance
in Miles
Time
Hrs./Min.
Daily
Steps*
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
Total
*Daily steps can be determined using a pedometer.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

97
Chapter 3  Exercise Prescription
 III. Strength-Training Log
 Date
Exercise
*St/Reps/Res = Sets, Repetitions, and Resistance (e.g., 1/10/125 = 1 set of 10 repetitions with 125 pounds)
Section
Course
Name
St/Reps/Res*
St/Reps/Res*
St/Reps/Res*
St/Reps/Res*
St/Reps/Res*
St/Reps/Res*
St/Reps/Res*
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

98
Fitness and Wellness
 III. Strength-Training Log
 Date
Exercise
*St/Reps/Res = Sets, Repetitions, and Resistance (e.g., 1/10/125 = 1 set of 10 repetitions with 125 pounds)
Section
Course
Name
St/Reps/Res*
St/Reps/Res*
St/Reps/Res*
St/Reps/Res*
St/Reps/Res*
St/Reps/Res*
St/Reps/Res*
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Evaluating Fitness 
Activities
4
“To give anything less than 
your best is to sacrifice the 
Gift.”
—Steve Prefontaine
Objectives
• Learn the benefits and advantages of 
selected aerobic activities.
• Learn to rate the fitness benefits of aerobic 
activities.
• Evaluate the contributions of skill-related 
fitness activities.
• Understand the sequence of a standard 
aerobic workout.
• Learn ways to enhance your aerobic 
workouts.
99
Visit www.cengagebrain.com to access 
course materials and companion resources for 
this text including quiz questions designed to 
check your understanding of the chapter 
contents, activities, labs, and more! See the 
preface on page xi for more information.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

100
Fitness and Wellness
The extent of my exercise program was all jogging.  
I like to jog because I ran track my first year in high 
school. Always running, however, was sometimes 
boring, and I wasn’t enjoying it as much as when I 
ran track with friends. Sometimes I dreaded going 
out because I wasn’t motivated to go by myself or it 
was either too cold or too hot to exercise. After en-
rolling in a college fitness and wellness course, we 
were required to try a minimum of five aerobic activ-
ities. I quickly learned that there was more to “exer-
cise life” than running all the time. I really enjoyed 
spinning, swimming, and elliptical training. Doing 
different activities took 
away the monotony of my 
exercise routine and I found 
out that exercise is much 
more fun this way. I also 
discovered that I am exer-
cising longer and more of-
ten than before. I really do 
feel that cross-training is 
the way to go if one feels 
stale or bored of the same 
exercise routine all the time.
© michaeljung/Shutterstock.com
Real Life Story | Sunithas’ Exercise Routine
One of the fun aspects of exercise is the sheer variety of 
activities promoting fitness that are available to you. You 
can select one or a combination of activities for your 
program—your choice should be based on personal en-
joyment, convenience, and availability. A summary of 
the most popular adult physical activities in the United 
States is presented in Figure 4.1. A discussion of tradi-
tional exercise modalities and new trends in fitness ac-
tivities follows next in this chapter.
4.1  Traditional Fitness 
Activities
Most people who exercise pick and adhere to a single 
mode, such as walking, swimming, or jogging. Yet no 
single activity develops total fitness. Many activities con-
tribute to cardiorespiratory development, but the extent of 
contribution to other fitness components is limited and 
varies among the activities. For total fitness, aerobic activi-
ties should be supplemented with strength and flexibility 
exercises. Cross-training can add enjoyment to the pro-
gram, decrease the risk of incurring injuries from overuse, 
and keep exercise from becoming monotonous.
Exercise sessions should be convenient. To enjoy 
exercise, you should select a time when you will not be 
rushed and a location that is nearby. People do not enjoy 
driving across town to get to the gym, health club, track, 
or pool. If parking is a problem, you may get discouraged 
quickly and quit. All of these factors can supply excuses 
not to stick to an exercise program.
4.1A  Walking  The most natural, easiest, safest, and 
least expensive form of aerobic exercise is walking. For 
years, many fitness practitioners believed that walking was 
not vigorous enough to improve cardiorespiratory func-
tioning, but brisk walking at speeds of 4 miles per hour or 
faster does improve cardiorespiratory fitness. From a health 
fitness viewpoint, a regular walking program can prolong 
life significantly (see the discussion of cardiovascular dis-
eases in Chapter 8). Although walking obviously takes 
longer than jogging, the caloric cost of brisk walking is only 
about 10 percent lower than jogging the same distance.
Walking is perhaps the best activity to start a condi-
tioning program for the cardiorespiratory system. Inactive 
people should start with one-mile walks four or five times 
per week. Walk times can be increased gradually by five 
Walking is the most natural aerobic physical activity.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

101
Chapter 4  Evaluating Fitness Activities
minutes each week. Following three to four weeks of con-
ditioning, a person should be able to walk two miles at a 
four-mile-per-hour pace, five times per week. Greater 
aerobic benefits accrue from walking longer and swinging 
the arms faster than normal. Light hand weights, a back-
pack (four to six pounds), or tension belts that add load to 
the upper body (arms) also add to the intensity of walking. 
Because of the additional load on the cardiorespiratory 
system, extra weights or loads are not recommended for 
people who have or are at risk for cardiovascular disease.
Walking in chest-deep water is an excellent form of 
aerobic activity, particularly for people who have leg and 
back problems. Because of the buoyancy of water, indi-
viduals submerged in water to armpit level weigh only 
about 10 percent to 20 percent of their weight outside the 
water. The resistance the water creates as a person walks 
in the pool adds to the intensity of the activity and pro-
vides a good cardiorespiratory workout.
4.1B  Jogging  Next to walking, jogging is one of the 
most accessible forms of exercise. A person can find 
places to jog almost everywhere. The lone requirement 
to prevent injuries is a good pair of jogging shoes.
The popularity of jogging in the United States started 
shortly after publication of Dr. Kenneth Cooper’s first 
Aerobics book in 1968. Jim Fixx’s Complete Book of Run-
ning, listed for 11 weeks in 1977 as No. 1 on the best- 
selling list, further contributed to the phenomenal growth 
of jogging as a fitness activity in the United States.
Jogging three to five times a week is one of the fast-
est ways to improve cardiorespiratory fitness. The risk of 
injury, however—especially in beginners—is higher with 
jogging than walking. For proper conditioning, jogging 
programs should start with 1 to 2 weeks of walking. As 
fitness improves, walking and jogging can be combined, 
gradually increasing the jogging segment until it fills the 
full 20 to 30 minutes.
A word of caution when it comes to jogging: The 
risk of injury increases greatly as speed (running instead 
of jogging) and mileage go up. Jogging approximately 15 
miles per week is sufficient to reach an excellent level of 
cardiorespiratory fitness.
A good pair of shoes is a must for joggers. Many foot, 
knee, and leg problems originate from improperly fitted or 
worn-out shoes. A good pair of shoes should offer lateral 
stability and not lean to either side when placed on a flat 
surface. The shoe also should bend at the ball of the foot, 
not at midfoot. Worn-out shoes should be replaced. After 
500 miles of use, jogging shoes lose about a third of their 
shock absorption capabilities. If you suddenly have prob-
lems, check your shoes first. It may be time for a new pair.
For safety reasons, joggers (and walkers) should fol-
low these precautions:
	1.	
Stay away from high-speed roads.
	2.	
Do not wear headphones so that you can be aware 
of your surroundings. Using headphones may keep 
you from hearing a car horn, a voice, or a potential 
attacker.
	3.	
Go against the traffic so that you can spot and 
avoid all oncoming traffic.
	4.	
Do not wear dark clothes. Reflective clothing or 
fluorescent material worn on different parts of the 
body is highly recommended. A flashlight, particu-
larly an LED light, not only alerts drivers of your 
presence but also helps illuminate the street. Mo-
torists can see a light from a greater distance than 
they can spot the reflective material.
	5.	
Wear a billed cap and clear glasses in the dark. The 
billed cap will hit a branch or other object before 
such hits your head. Clear glasses can protect your 
eyes from unseen objects or insects.
	6.	
Run behind vehicles at intersections. Drivers often 
look only in the direction of oncoming traffic and 
do not look in the opposite direction before pro-
ceeding onto the street.
	7.	
Select different routes. A potential attacker may lay 
in wait if you are predictable in your running route. 
Running with a partner is also preferable because 
there is always strength in numbers. And do not 
wear your hair in a ponytail because it provides an 
easy grip for a potential attacker.
	8.	
Avoid walking or jogging in unfamiliar areas. 
When visiting a new area, always inquire as to safe 
areas to walk or jog.
0
10
20
30
40
50
Strength training
Golf
Swimming
Basketball
Aerobics
Elliptical
Jogging
Cycling (road or stationary)
Stretching exercises
Gardening/yard work
Walking
SOURCE: Adapted from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
Atlanta, 2013.
Figure 4.1
Most popular adult physical activities  
in the United States.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

102
Fitness and Wellness
4.1C  Deep-Water Jogging  An alternative form 
of jogging, especially for injured people, those with 
chronic back problems, and overweight individuals, is 
deep-water jogging—jogging in place while treading 
water. Deep-water jogging is almost as strenuous as jog-
ging on land. In deep-water jogging, the jogging motions 
used on land are accentuated by pumping the arms and 
legs hard through a full range of motion. The participant 
usually wears a flotation vest to help maintain the body 
in an upright position. Many elite athletes train fre-
quently in water to lessen the wear and tear on the body 
caused by long-distance running. These athletes have 
been able to maintain high oxygen uptake values through 
rigorous water jogging programs.
4.1D  Strength Training  Strength training is one 
of the strongest trends in worldwide fitness. More adults 
are embracing strength training to enhance muscular 
fitness, health, functional capacity, and use it to either 
complement their aerobic conditioning, or in some in-
stances as their primary mode of exercise. Worldwide, 
fitness participants strength train to further develop or 
maintain muscular strength and endurance in midlife 
and throughout the aging process.
4.1E  Aerobics  Aerobics is a very popular fitness 
activity for women in the United States. Routines consist 
of a combination of stepping, walking, jogging, skipping, 
kicking, and arm swinging movements performed to 
music. It is a fun way to exercise and promote cardiore-
spiratory development at the same time.
High-impact aerobics (HIA) is the traditional form 
of aerobics. The movements exert a great amount of verti-
cal force on the feet as they contact the floor. Proper leg 
conditioning through other forms of weight-bearing aero-
bic exercises (brisk walking and jogging), as well as strength 
training, is recommended prior to participating in HIA.
HIA is an intense activity, and it produces the high-
est rate of aerobics injuries. Shin splints, stress fractures, 
low back pain, and tendinitis are all too common in HIA 
enthusiasts. These injuries are caused by the constant 
impact of the feet on firm surfaces. As a result, several 
alternative forms of aerobics have been developed.
In low-impact aerobics (LIA), the impact is reduced 
because each foot contacts the surface separately, but the 
recommended intensity of exercise is more difficult to 
maintain than with HIA. To help elevate the exercise heart 
rate, all arm movements and weight-bearing actions that 
lower the center of gravity should be accentuated. Sus-
tained movement throughout the program is also crucial 
to keep the heart rate in the target cardiorespiratory zone.
Step aerobics (SA) is an activity in which partici-
pants step up and down from a bench. Benches range in 
height from 2 to 10 inches. SA adds another dimension 
to the aerobics program. As noted previously, variety 
adds enjoyment to aerobic workouts. SA is considered a 
high-intensity but low-impact activity. The intensity of 
the activity can be controlled easily by the height of the 
bench. Aerobic benches or plates can be stacked together 
safely to adjust the height of the steps. Beginners are 
encouraged to use the lowest stepping height and then 
advance gradually to a higher bench. This will decrease 
the risk for injury. Even though one foot is always in 
contact with the floor or bench during step aerobics, this 
activity is not recommended for individuals with ankle, 
knee, or hip problems.
Other forms of aerobics include a combination of 
HIA and LIA, as well as moderate-impact aerobics 
(MIA). MIA incorporates plyometric training. This type 
of training is used frequently by jumpers (high, long, and 
triple jumpers) and athletes in sports that require quick 
jumping ability, such as basketball and gymnastics. With 
MIA, one foot is in contact with the ground most of the 
time. Participants, however, continuously try to recover 
from all lower-body flexion actions. This is done by ex-
tending the hip, knee, and ankle joints quickly without 
allowing the foot (or feet) to leave the ground. These quick 
movements make the exercise intensity of MIA quite high.
4.1F  Swimming  Swimming, another excellent form 
of aerobic exercise, uses many of the major muscle groups 
in the body. This provides a good training stimulus for the 
heart and lungs. Swimming is a great exercise option for 
individuals who cannot jog or walk for extended periods.
Compared to other activities, the risk of injuries 
from swimming is low. The aquatic medium helps to 
Jogging is one of the most popular forms of aerobic exercise.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

103
Chapter 4  Evaluating Fitness Activities
support the body, taking pressure off bones and joints in 
the lower extremities and the back.
Maximal heart rates during swimming are approxi-
mately 10 to 13 beats per minute (bpm) lower than dur-
ing running. The horizontal position of the body is 
thought to aid blood flow distribution throughout the 
body, decreasing the demand on the cardiorespiratory 
system. Cool water temperatures and direct contact with 
the water seem to help dissipate body heat more effi-
ciently, further decreasing the strain on the heart.
Some exercise specialists recommend that this differ-
ence in maximal heart rate (10 to 13 bpm) be subtracted 
prior to determining cardiorespiratory training intensities. 
For example, the estimated maximal swimming heart rate 
for a 20-year-old would be approximately 180 bpm [207 2 
(.7 3 20) 2 13]. Studies are inconclusive as to whether this 
decrease in heart rate in water also occurs at submaximal 
intensities below 70 percent of maximal heart rate.1
To produce better training benefits during swim-
ming, swimmers should minimize gliding periods such as 
those in the breaststroke and sidestroke. Achieving proper 
training intensities with these strokes is difficult. The for-
ward crawl is recommended for better aerobic results.
Overweight individuals have to swim fast enough to 
achieve an adequate training intensity. Excessive body fat 
makes the body more buoyant, and often the tendency is to 
float along. This may be good for reducing stress and relax-
ing, but it does not greatly increase caloric expenditure to 
aid with weight loss. Walking or jogging in waist- or armpit-
deep water is a better choice for overweight individuals who 
cannot walk or jog on land for an extended period of time.
With reference to the principle of specificity of 
training, cardiorespiratory improvements from swim-
ming cannot be measured adequately with a land-based 
walk/jog test. This is because most of the work with 
swimming is done by the upper body musculature.
Although the heart’s ability to pump more blood 
improves significantly with any type of aerobic activity, 
the primary increase in the ability of cells to utilize oxy-
gen (VO2, or oxygen uptake) with swimming occurs in 
the upper body and not the lower extremities. Therefore, 
fitness improvements with swimming are best assessed 
by comparing changes in distance a person swims in a 
given time, say, 12 minutes.
Participation in sports is a good predictor of adherence to 
exercise later in life. • What previous experiences have 
you had with participation in sports? • Were these experi-
ences positive, and what effect do they have on your cur-
rent physical activity patterns?
Critical Thinking
4.1G  Water Aerobics  Water aerobics is fun and 
safe for people of all ages. Besides developing fitness, it 
provides an opportunity for socialization and fun in a 
comfortable, refreshing setting.
Water 
aero-
bics incorporates 
a combination of 
rhythmic arm and 
leg actions per-
formed in a verti-
cal position while 
submerged 
in 
waist- to armpit-
deep water. The 
vigorous 
limb 
m o v e m e n t s 
against the water’s 
resistance during 
water 
aerobics 
provide the train-
ing stimuli for car-
diorespirator y 
development.
The popular-
ity of water aero-
bics as an exercise 
modality to de-
velop the cardio-
respiratory system 
can be attributed 
to several factors:
	1.	
Water buoy-
ancy reduces 
Aerobics  A series of exercise routines 
that include a ­combination of stepping, 
walking, jogging, skipping, kicking, and 
arm swinging movements performed to 
music.
High-impact aerobics (HIA)   
Exercises incorporating movements in 
which both feet are off the ground at 
the same time momentarily.
Low-impact aerobics (LIA)   
Exercises in which at least one foot is 
in contact with the ground or floor at 
all times.
Step aerobics (SA)  A form of exer-
cise that combines stepping up and 
down from a bench with arm 
movements.
Moderate-impact aerobics 
(MIA)  Aerobics that include plyomet-
ric training.
Plyometric training  A form of exer-
cise that requires ­forceful jumps or 
springing off the ground immediately 
after landing from a previous jump.
Water aerobics offers fitness and fun in an environment relatively low 
in risk for injury.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

104
Fitness and Wellness
weight-bearing stress on joints and thereby lessens 
the risk for injuries.
	2.	
Water aerobics is a more feasible type of exercise 
for overweight individuals and those with arthritic 
conditions who may not be able to participate in 
weight-bearing activities such as walking, jogging, 
and aerobics.
	3.	
Water aerobics is an excellent exercise modality to 
improve functional fitness in older adults (see 
Chapter 9, pages 251–253).
	4.	
Heat dissipation in water is beneficial to obese par-
ticipants who seem to undergo a higher heat strain 
than average-weight individuals.
	5.	
Water aerobics is available to swimmers and non-
swimmers alike.
The exercises used during water aerobics are designed 
to elevate the heart rate, which contributes to cardiorespi-
ratory development. In addition, the aquatic medium 
provides increased resistance for strength improvement 
with virtually no impact. Because of this resistance to 
movement, strength gains with water aerobics seem to be 
better than with land-based aerobic activities.
Another benefit is the reduction of pain and fear of 
injuries common to many people who initiate exercise 
programs. Water aerobics provides a relatively safe envi-
ronment for injury-free participation in exercise. The 
cushioned environment of the water allows patients re-
covering from leg and back injuries, individuals with 
joint problems, injured athletes, pregnant women, and 
obese people to benefit from water aerobics.
As in swimming, maximal heart rates achieved dur-
ing water aerobics are lower than during running. The 
difference between water aerobics and running is about 
10 bpm.2 Further, research comparing physiologic differ-
ences between self-paced treadmill running and self-
paced water aerobics exercise showed that even though 
individuals work at a lower heart rate intensity in water, 
the oxygen uptake level was the same for both treadmill 
and water exercise modalities.3 Apparently healthy peo-
ple, therefore, can sustain land-based exercise intensities 
during a water aerobics workout and experience fitness 
benefits similar to or greater than those acquired during 
land aerobics.4
4.1H  Cycling  Most people learn cycling in their 
youth. Because it is a non-weight-bearing activity, cy-
cling is a good exercise modality for people with lower-
body or lower back injuries. Cycling helps to develop the 
cardiorespiratory system, as well as muscular strength 
and endurance in the lower extremities.
Because cycling is a non-weight-bearing activity, rais-
ing the heart rate to the proper training intensity is more 
difficult. As the amount of muscle mass involved during 
aerobic exercise decreases, so does the demand placed on 
the cardiorespiratory system. The thigh muscles do most 
of the work in cycling, making it harder to achieve and 
maintain a high cardiorespiratory training intensity.
Maintaining a continuous pedaling motion and 
eliminating coasting periods helps the participant 
achieve a faster heart rate. Exercising for longer periods 
also helps to compensate for the lower heart rate inten-
sity during cycling. Comparing cycling to jogging, simi-
lar aerobic benefits take roughly three times the distance 
at twice the speed of jogging. Cycling, however, puts less 
stress on muscles and joints than jogging does, making 
the former a good exercise modality for people who can-
not walk or jog.
The height of the bike seat should be adjusted so the 
knee is flexed at about 30 degrees when the foot is at the 
bottom of the pedaling cycle. The body should not sway 
from side to side as the person rides. The cycling cadence 
also is important for maximal efficiency. Bike tension or 
gears should be set at a moderate level so the rider can 
achieve about 60 to 100 revolutions per minute.
Safety is a key issue in road cycling. More than a 
million bicycle injuries occur each year. Proper equip-
ment and common sense are necessary. A well-designed 
and well-maintained bike is easier to maneuver. Toe clips 
are recommended to keep feet from sliding and to main-
tain equal upward and downward force on the pedals.
Skill is important in both road and mountain cy-
cling. Cyclists must be in control of the bicycle at all 
times. They have to be able to maneuver the bike in traf-
fic, maintain balance at slow speeds, switch gears, apply 
the brakes, watch for pedestrians and stoplights, ride 
through congested areas, and overcome a variety of ob-
stacles in the mountains. Stationary cycling, in contrast, 
does not require special skills. Nearly everyone can do it.
Bike riders must follow the same rules as motorists. 
Many accidents happen because cyclists run traffic lights 
and stop signs. Some further suggestions are as follows:
	 1.	 Select the right bike. Frame size is important. The 
size is determined by standing flatfooted while 
straddling the bike. Regular bikes (road bikes) 
should have a 1- to 2-inch clearance between the 
groin and the top tube of the frame. On mountain 
bikes, the clearance should be about 3 inches. The 
recommended height of the handlebars is about  
1 inch below the top of the seat. Upright handle-
bars are available for individuals with neck or back 
problems. Hard, narrow seats on road or racing 
bikes tend to be especially uncomfortable for 
women. To avoid saddle soreness, use wider and 
more cushioned seats such as gel-filled saddles.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

105
Chapter 4  Evaluating Fitness Activities
	 2.	 Use bike hand signals to let the traffic around you 
know of your intended actions.
	 3.	 Don’t ride side by side with another rider; single 
file is safer.
	 4.	 Be aware of turning vehicles and cars backing out 
of alleys and parking lots; always yield to motorists 
in these situations.
	 5.	 Be on the lookout for storm drains, railroad tracks, 
and cattle guards, which can cause unpleasant sur-
prises. Front wheels can get caught and riders may 
be thrown from the bike if these hazards are not 
crossed at the proper angle (preferably 90 degrees).
	 6.	 Wear a good helmet, certified by the Snell Memo-
rial Foundation or the American National Stan-
dards Institute. Many serious accidents and even 
deaths have been prevented by the use of helmets. 
Fashion, aesthetics, comfort, or price should not be 
a factor when selecting and using a helmet for road 
cycling. Health and life are too precious to give up 
because of vanity and thriftiness.
	 7.	 Wear appropriate clothes and shoes. Clothing 
should be bright, very visible, lightweight, and not 
restrict movement. Cycling shorts are recom-
mended to prevent skin irritation. For greater com-
fort, the shorts have extra padding sewn into the 
seat and crotch areas. They do not tend to wrinkle, 
and they wick away perspiration from the skin. 
Shorts should be long enough to keep the skin 
from rubbing against the seat. Experienced cyclists 
also wear special shoes with a cleat that snaps di-
rectly onto the pedal.
	 8.	 Take extra warm clothing in a backpack during the 
winter months in case you have a breakdown and 
have to walk a long distance for assistance.
	 9.	 Watch out for ice in cold weather. If you see ice on 
car windows, expect ice on the road. Be especially 
careful on and under bridges because they tend to 
have ice even when the roads elsewhere are dry.
	10.	 Use the brightest bicycle lights you can when rid-
ing in the dark, and always keep the batteries well 
charged. For additional safety, wear reflectors on 
the upper torso, arms, and legs so passing motor-
ists are alerted to you. Stay on streets that have 
good lighting and plenty of room on the side of the 
road, even if that means riding an extra few min-
utes to get to your destination.
	11.	 Take a cell phone if you have one, and let someone 
else know where you are going and when to expect 
you back.
Before buying a stationary bike, though, be sure to 
try the activity for a few days. If you enjoy it, you may 
want to purchase one. Invest with caution. If you opt to 
buy a lower-priced model, you may be disappointed. 
Good stationary bikes have comfortable seats, are stable, 
and provide a smooth and uniform pedaling motion. A 
sticky bike that is hard to pedal leads to discouragement 
and ends up being stored in the corner of a basement.
4.1I  Cross-Training  Cross-training combines two 
or more activities. This type of training is designed to 
enhance fitness, provide needed rest for tired muscles, 
Tips for People Who Have Been Inactive 
for a While
• Take the sensible approach by starting slowly.
• Begin by choosing moderate-intensity activities you enjoy 
the most. By choosing activities you enjoy, you’ll be more 
likely to stick with them.
• Gradually build up the time spent exercising by adding a 
few minutes every few days or so until you can comfort-
ably perform a minimum recommended amount of exer-
cise (20 minutes per day).
• As the minimum amount becomes easier, gradually in-
crease either the length of time exercising or the inten-
sity of the activity, or both.
Behavior Modification Planning
• Vary your activities, both for interest and to broaden the 
range of benefits.
• Explore new physical activities.
• Reward and acknowledge your efforts.
SOURCE: Adapted from Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, Atlanta.
Try It
Fill out the cardiorespiratory exercise prescription in Activity 
3.3. In your Online Journal or class notebook, describe how 
well you implement the above suggestions.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

106
Fitness and Wellness
decrease injuries, and eliminate the monotony and burn-
out of single-activity programs. Cross-training may 
combine aerobic and nonaerobic activities such as mod-
erate jogging, speed training, and strength training.
Cross-training can produce better workouts than a 
single activity. For example, jogging develops the lower 
body and swimming builds the upper body. Rowing con-
tributes to upper-body development and cycling builds 
the legs. Combining activities such as these provides 
good overall conditioning and at the same time helps to 
improve or maintain fitness. Cross-training also offers an 
opportunity to develop skill and have fun with differing 
activities.
Speed training often is coupled with cross-training. 
Faster performance times in aerobic activities (running, 
cycling) are generated with speed or interval training. 
People who want to improve their running times often 
run shorter intervals at faster speeds than the actual racing 
pace. For example, a person wanting to run a 6-minute 
mile may run four 440-yard intervals at a speed of 1 min-
ute and 20 seconds per interval. A 440-yard walk/jog can 
become a recovery interval between fast runs.
Strength training is used commonly with cross-
training. It helps to condition muscles, tendons, and liga-
ments. Improved strength enhances overall performance 
in many activities and sports. For example, although 
road cyclists in one study who trained with weights 
showed no improvement in aerobic capacity, the cyclists’ 
riding time to exhaustion improved 33 percent when 
exercising at 75 percent of their maximal capacity.5
4.1J  Cross-Country Skiing  Many people con-
sider cross-country skiing the ultimate aerobic exercise 
because it requires vigorous lower- and upper-body 
movements. The large amount of muscle mass involved 
in cross-country skiing makes the intensity of the activ-
ity high, yet it places little strain on muscles and joints. 
One of the highest maximal oxygen uptakes ever mea-
sured (85 mL/kg/min) was found in an elite cross-coun-
try skier.
In addition to being an excellent aerobic activity, 
cross-country skiing is soothing. Skiing through the 
beauty of the snow-covered countryside can be highly 
enjoyable. Although the need for snow is an obvious 
limitation, simulation equipment for year-round cross-
country training is available at many sporting goods 
stores.
Some skill is necessary to be proficient at cross-
country skiing. Poorly skilled individuals are not able to 
elevate the heart rate enough to cause adequate aerobic 
development. Individuals contemplating this activity 
should seek instruction to be able to fully enjoy and reap 
the rewards of cross-country skiing.
4.1K  Rowing  Rowing is a low-impact activity that 
provides a complete body workout. It mobilizes most 
major muscle groups, including those in the arms, legs, 
hips, abdomen, trunk, and shoulders. Rowing is a good 
form of aerobic exercise, and because of the nature of the 
activity (constant pushing and pulling against resis-
tance), it also promotes strength development.
To accommodate different fitness levels, workloads 
can be regulated on most rowing machines. Stationary 
rowing, however, is not among the most popular forms 
of aerobic exercise. As with stationary bicycles, people 
should try the activity for a few weeks before purchasing 
a unit.
Cross-training enhances fitness, decreases the rate of injuries, and 
eliminates the monotony of single-activity programs.
Photos © Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

107
Chapter 4  Evaluating Fitness Activities
4.1L  Elliptical Training/Stair Climbing  If 
sustained for at least 20 minutes, elliptical training and 
stair climbing are very efficient forms of aerobic exercise. 
Precisely because of the high intensity of stair climbing, 
many people stay away from stairs and instead take esca-
lators and elevators. Many people dislike living in two-
story homes because they have to climb the stairs 
frequently.
Elliptical training and stair climbing are relatively safe 
exercise modalities. Because the feet never leave the climb-
ing surface, they are considered low-impact activities. 
Joints and ligaments are not strained while climbing. The 
intensity of exercise is controlled easily because the equip-
ment can be programmed to regulate the workload.
4.1M  Racquet Sports  In racquet sports such as 
tennis, racquetball, squash, and badminton, the aerobic 
benefits are dictated by players’ skill, the intensity of the 
game, and the length of time spent playing. Skill is neces-
sary to participate effectively in these sports and also is 
crucial to sustain continuous play. Frequent pauses dur-
ing play do not allow people to maintain the heart rate in 
the appropriate target zone to stimulate cardiorespira-
tory development.
Many people who participate in racquet sports do so 
for enjoyment, social fulfillment, and relaxation. For 
cardiorespiratory fitness development, these people sup-
plement the sport with other forms of aerobic exercise 
such as jogging, cycling, or swimming.
If a racquet sport is the main form of aerobic exer-
cise, participants need to try to run hard, fast, and as 
constantly as possible during play. They should not have 
to spend much time retrieving balls (or, in badminton, 
the bird or shuttlecock). Similar to low-impact aerobics, 
all movements should be accentuated by reaching out 
and bending more than usual, for better cardiorespira-
tory development.
4.1N  Yoga  Yoga consists of a system of exercises de-
signed to help align the musculoskeletal system and de-
velop flexibility, muscular fitness, and balance. Yoga is 
also used as a relaxation technique for stress manage-
ment. The exercises involve a combination of postures 
(known as “asanas”) along with diaphragmatic breath-
ing, relaxation, and mediation techniques. Different 
forms of yoga exist, including Anuara, Ashtanga, Bi-
kram, Integral, Iyengar, Kripalu, Kundalini, and Sivana-
nda, Viny, Yogalates, and Yogarobics yoga.
In your own experience with personal fitness programs 
throughout the years, what factors have motivated you 
and helped you the most to stay with a program? • What 
factors have kept you from being physically active, and 
what can you do to change these factors?
Critical Thinking
4.2  New Fitness Trends
Life in the 21st century requires that we participate in 
physical activities that promote and maintain fitness, 
health, and wellness. As people search for proven pro-
grams, fitness trends emerge to achieve these goals. 
Some of the activ-
ity 
trends 
have 
been with us and 
continue to evolve 
to gain popularity 
among 
partici-
pants, 
whereas 
Interval training  A repeated series 
of exercise work bouts (intervals) inter-
spersed with low-intensity or rest 
intervals.
Cross-country skiing requires more oxygen and energy 
than most other aerobic activities.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
In addition to aerobic development, rowing also contributes to good 
strength development.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

108
Fitness and Wellness
others have been recently developed and gained approval 
among fitness enthusiasts. According to the American 
College of Sports Medicine’s Worldwide Survey of Fit-
ness Trends in 2013, among the newest fitness activities 
the following trends have emerged:
4.2A  High-Intensity Interval Training  A 
type of training that is becoming very popular lately is 
high-intensity interval training (HIIT). This aerobic/
anaerobic training modality (80 percent to 90 percent of 
maximal capacity) had primarily been used by athletes, 
but it is now used by fitness participants seeking better, 
faster, and more effective development. Following an ap-
propriate warm-up, HIIT includes high- to very high-
intensity intervals that are interspersed with a low- to 
moderate-intensity recovery phase. Typically, a 1:3, 1:2, 
or 1:1 work-to-recovery ratio is used; the more intense 
the interval, the longer the recovery period. HIIT can be 
performed with a variety of activities, including running, 
cycling, elliptical training, stair climbing, and swim-
ming. You may use the same activity for your entire 
HIIT, or you may use a combination of activities.
Research indicates that additional health and fitness 
benefits are reaped as the intensity of exercise increases. 
HIIT produces the greatest improvements in aerobic ca-
pacity (VO2max) and increases the capability to exercise at 
a higher percentage of that capacity (anaerobic thresh-
old), thus allowing the participant to burn more calories 
during the exercise session.
The data also show that HIIT increases the capacity 
for fat oxidation during exercise. Although the fuel used 
during high-intensity intervals is primarily glucose (car-
bohydrates), molecular changes occur in the muscles 
that increase the body’s capability for fatty acid oxidation 
(fat burning).
Furthermore, following light- to moderate-intensity 
aerobic activity, resting metabolism returns to normal in 
about 90 minutes. Depending on the volume of training 
(intensity and number of intervals performed), with 
HIIT it takes 24 to 72 hours for the body to return to its 
“normal” resting metabolic rate. Thus, a greater amount 
of calories (primarily from fat) are burned up to three 
days following HIIT. While the extra calories burned 
during recovery can make a difference in the long run, 
keep in mind that the most significant factor is the num-
ber of calories burned during the actual HIIT session. 
The extra calories burned during recovery are minimal 
compared to those used during training.
Four training variables impact HIIT. The acronym 
DIRT is frequently used to denote these variables:
D	5	Distance of each speed interval
I	 5	Interval or length of recovery between 
speed intervals
R	 5	Repetitions or number of speed intervals to 
be performed
T	 5	Time of each speed interval
Using these four variables, a person can practically 
design an unlimited number of HIIT sessions.
The intervals consist of a 1:4 down to a 1:1 work-to-
recovery ratio. The more intense the speed interval, the 
longer the required recovery interval. For aerobic inter-
vals (lasting longer than 3 minutes), 1:2, 1:1, or even 
lower ratios are used. For intense anaerobic speed inter-
vals (30 seconds to 3 minutes), recovery intervals that 
last two to four times as long (1:2 to 1:4) as the work 
period are required.
A 1:3 ratio, for example, indicates that you’ll work at 
a fairly high intensity for, say, 30 seconds and then spend 
90 seconds on light- to moderate-intensity recovery. Be 
sure to keep moving during the recovery phase. Perform 
four or five intervals at first, then gradually progress to 
10 intervals. As your fitness improves, you can lengthen 
the high-intensity proportion of the intervals progres-
sively to 1 minute and/or decrease the total recovery 
time.
The following are sample programs performed using 
HIIT:
Five-Minute Very Hard-Intensity Aerobic Intervals
Exercise at a “very hard” rate (about 90 percent of maxi-
mal capacity) for 5 minutes, followed by 5 to 10 minutes 
of recovery at a “light” to “moderate” intensity. Start with 
one interval and work up to three by the third to fifth 
Elliptical training provides a rigorous aerobic workout.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

109
Chapter 4  Evaluating Fitness Activities
training session. Initially, use a 1:2 work-to-recovery ra-
tio. Gradually decrease the recovery to a 1:1 ratio.
Step-Wise Intensity Interval Training
Using 3- to 5-minute intervals, start at a “light” intensity 
rate and progressively step up to the “very hard” intensity 
level (light, moderate, somewhat hard, vigorous, hard, 
and very hard). Start with 3-minute intervals and as you 
become more fit, increase to 5 minutes each. As time al-
lows and you develop greater fitness, you can add a step-
down approach by stepping down to hard, vigorous, 
somewhat hard, moderate, and light.
Fartlek Training
The word fartlek means “speed play” in Swedish. It is an 
unstructured form of interval training where intensity 
(speed) and distance of each interval are varied as the 
participant wishes. There is no set structure, and the in-
dividual alternates intensity (from “somewhat hard” to 
“very hard”) and the length of each speed interval, along 
with the recovery intervals (“light” to “moderate”) and 
length thereof. Total duration of fartlek training is be-
tween 20 and 60 minutes.
Tempo Training
Although no formal intervals are conducted with tempo 
training, the intensity of training qualifies it as an HIIT 
program. Tempo runs involve continuous training be-
tween “vigorous” (70 percent) and “hard” (80 percent) 
for 20 to 60 minutes at a time.
All-out or Supramaximal Interval Training
All-out interval training involves 10 to 20 supramaximal 
or “sprint” intervals lasting 30 to 60 seconds each. De-
pending on the level of conditioning and the length of 
the speed interval, 2 to 5 minutes of recovery at a “light” 
to “moderate” level are allowed.
Cardio/Resistance Training Program
You may use a combination of aerobic and resistance 
training for HIIT. Following a brief aerobic and strength 
training warm-up, select about eight resistance training 
exercises that you can alternate with treadmill running, 
cycling, elliptical training, or rowing. Perform one set of 
8 to 20 RM (based on personal preference) on each exer-
cise followed by 90 seconds of aerobic work after each 
set. You can pace the aerobic intensity according to the 
preceding strength-training set. For example, you may 
choose a “light” intensity aerobic interval following a 10 
RM for the leg press exercise and a “vigorous” aerobic 
interval after a 10 RM arm curl set. Allow no greater re-
covery time (2 to 5 seconds) between exercise modes 
than what it takes to walk from the strength-training 
exercise to the aerobic station (and vice versa).
4.2B  Stability Exercise Balls  A stability exer-
cise ball is a large flexible and inflatable ball used for 
exercises that are specifically designed to develop ab-
dominal, hip, chest, and spinal muscles by addressing 
core stabilization while the exerciser maintains a bal-
anced position over the ball. Particular emphasis is 
placed on correct movement and maintenance of proper 
body alignment to involve as much of the core as possi-
ble. Although the primary objective is core strength and 
stability, many stability exercises can be performed to 
strengthen other body areas as well.
Stability exercises are thought to be more effective 
than similar exercises on the ground. For instance, just 
sitting on the ball requires the use of stabilizing core 
muscles (including the rectus abdominis, and the exter-
nal and internal obliques) to keep the body from falling 
off the ball. Traditional strength-training exercises are 
primarily for strength and power development and do 
not contribute as much to body balance.
When performing stability exercises, choose a ball 
size based on your height. Your thighs should be parallel 
to the floor when you sit on the ball. A slightly larger ball 
may be used if you suffer from back problems. For best 
results, a trained specialist should teach you proper tech-
nique and watch your form while you learn the exercises. 
Individuals who have a weak muscular system or poor 
balance or who are over the age of 65 should perform 
stability exercises 
under the supervi-
sion of a qualified 
trainer.
4 . 2 C   C o r e 
Training  The 
“core” of the body 
consists 
of 
the 
muscles 
that 
High-intensity interval training 
(HIIT)  A training program consisting of 
high- to very high-intensity intervals (80 
percent to 90 percent of maximal capac-
ity) that are interspersed with low- to 
moderate-intensity recovery intervals.
Stability ball exercises can be used to enhance stability, balance, and 
muscular strength.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

110
Fitness and Wellness
stabilize the trunk (spine) and pelvis. Core training em-
phasizes strength-conditioning exercises of all the mus-
cles around the abdomen, pelvis, lower back, and hips. 
These muscles enhance body stability, activities of daily 
living, sport performance, and support the lower back. 
Core conditioning often incorporates the use of stability 
balls, foam rollers, and wobble boards, among other 
pieces of equipment.
4.2D  Fitness Boot Camp  A primarily vigorous-
intensity outdoor/indoor group exercise program, fit-
ness boot camp combines traditional calisthenics, 
running, interval training, strength training (using body 
weight exercises such as push-ups, lunges, pull-ups, bur-
pees, squats), plyometrics, and competitive games to 
develop cardiorespiratory fitness, muscular strength, and 
muscular flexibility and to lose body fat. This program is 
based on military-style training and also aims at devel-
oping camaraderie and team effort. The program (camp) 
typically lasts four to eight weeks. Fitness boot camps are 
challenging, and the group dynamic truly helps to moti-
vate participants.
4.2E  Circuit Training  Circuit training has also 
been around for decades. It was often used to condition 
elite athletes and military personnel in the middle of the 
20th century. Circuit training involves a combination of 
6 to 12 aerobic and bodyweight-training (strength) exer-
cises performed in rapid sequence one after the other, 
with very limited rest between exercise stations. Each 
exercise is performed for a given period of time (10 to 30 
seconds) or by a specified number of repetitions (10 to 
20 repetitions), typically interspaced by short rest peri-
ods of 10 to 30 seconds between exercises. Early on, you 
may use a moderate intensity (less time or repetitions 
per exercise) and allow longer rest (30 seconds) between 
exercises. Over the course of several weeks, you can 
gradually increase the intensity (time and/or repetitions) 
and decrease the rest interval between exercises. The 
exercise-sequence is set in an order that allows for op-
posing muscle groups to alternate between exercise sta-
tions. For instance, push-ups can be followed by step-ups, 
and abdominal crunches. For best results, all major 
muscle groups of the body should be used in each circuit.
Because of the high intensity and limited rest intervals 
used with this type of training, the exercise modality is of-
ten referred to as high-intensity circuit training or HICT.6 
The combination of high-intensity aerobic and body-
weight-strength training, with limited rest between exer-
cises, can elicit similar of greater health and fitness benefits 
in a much shorter period of time than the traditional 20 to 
60 minute sessions. An HICT session involving 12 different 
exercises can be performed in less than 10 minutes per 
circuit. One to three circuits with 2 to 3 minutes rest be-
tween circuits can be performed per training session. 
When time is of the essence and a traditional training ses-
sion is not realistic, an HICT session is recommended.
4.2F  Functional Fitness  Functional fitness in-
volves primarily weight-bearing exercises to develop 
balance, coordination, good posture, muscular fitness, 
and muscular flexibility to enhance the person’s ability to 
perform activities of daily living (walking, climbing 
stairs, lifting, bending) with ease and with minimal risk 
for injuries. The program goal is to “train people for real 
life,” rather than a specific fitness component or a given 
Several modalities of circuit training can be used to enhance overall fitness.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

111
Chapter 4  Evaluating Fitness Activities
event. Functional fitness training often requires use of 
fitness equipment such as stability balls, foam blocks, 
and balancing cushions.
4.2G  Zumba  Zumba is relatively new dance fitness 
program that was created in Colombia by Alberto “Beto” 
Perez in the mid 1990s. Following great popularity in 
Colombia, the Zumba program was brought to the 
United States in 1999. The program is now offered glob-
ally and classes are offered at most health fitness clubs in 
the United States. Zumba combines Latin and interna-
tional music (cumbia, salsa, merengue, reggaeton, tango, 
and rock and roll among others) with dance to develop 
fitness and make exercise fun. The Zumba motto has 
become “Ditch the workout, join the party!” Several 
types of Zumba have been developed, including tradi-
tional Zumba, Zumba Gold, Zumba Toning, Aqua 
Zumba, Zumbatomic, and Zumba Marumba.
4.2H  Rating the Fitness Benefits of Aero-
bic Activities  The fitness contributions of the aero-
bic activities discussed in this chapter vary according to 
the specific activity and the individual. As noted previ-
ously, the health-related components of physical fitness 
are cardiorespiratory endurance, muscular fitness, mus-
cular flexibility, and body composition. Although accu-
rately assessing the contributions to each fitness 
component is difficult, a summary of likely benefits of 
these activities is provided in Table 4.1. Instead of a sin-
gle rating or number, ranges are given for some of the 
categories because the benefits derived are based on the 
person’s effort while participating in the activity.
Regular participation in aerobic activities provides 
notable health benefits, including an increase in cardio-
respiratory endurance, quality of life, and longevity. The 
extent of cardiorespiratory development (improvement 
in VO2max) depends on the intensity, duration, and fre-
quency of the activity. The nature of the activity often 
dictates potential aerobic development. For example, 
jogging is much more strenuous than walking.
The effort during exercise also influences the amount 
of physiological development. The training benefits of 
just going through the motions of a low-impact aerobics 
routine are less than those of accentuating all motions 
(see earlier discussion of low-impact aerobics). Table 4.1 
includes a starting fitness level for each aerobic activity. 
Beginners should start with low-intensity activities that 
have a minimum risk for injuries. In some cases, such as 
in high-impact aerobics and rope skipping, the risk of 
injuries remains high despite adequate conditioning. 
These activities should be used only to supplement train-
ing and are not recommended for beginners or as the 
sole mode of exercise.
Physicians who work with cardiac patients fre-
quently use METs to measure activity levels. One MET 
represents the body’s energy requirement at rest, or the 
equivalent of a VO2 of 3.5 mL/kg/min. A 10-MET activ-
ity requires a 10-fold increase in the resting energy re-
quirement, or approximately 35 mL/kg/min. MET levels 
for a given activity vary according to the individual’s ef-
fort. The harder a person exercises, the higher the MET 
level. The MET ranges for the various activities are in-
cluded in Table 4.1.
The various aerobic activities’ effectiveness in aiding 
weight management also is indicated in Table 4.1. As a 
rule, the greater the muscle mass involved during exer-
cise, the better the results. Rhythmic and continuous 
activities that involve considerable muscle mass are most 
effective in burning calories.
Higher-intensity activities burn more calories as 
well. Increasing exercise time will compensate for lower 
intensities. If carried out long enough (60 to 90 minutes, 
5 to 6 times per week), even brisk walking can be a good 
exercise mode to lose weight. Additional information on 
a comprehensive weight management program is given 
in Chapter 6.
4.3  Skill-Related Fitness
Skill-related fitness is needed for success in athletics and 
effective performance of lifetime sports and activities. 
The components of skill-related fitness, defined in Chap-
ter 1, are agility, balance, coordination, power, speed, 
and reaction time. All of these are important, to varying 
degrees, in sports and athletics.
For example, outstanding gymnasts must achieve 
good skill-related 
fitness in all com-
ponents. 
Signifi-
cant agility is nec-
essary to perform a 
double back som-
ersault with a full 
twist—a skill in 
which the athlete 
must rotate simul-
taneously around 
one axis and twist 
around a different 
one. Static bal-
ance is essential 
for maintaining a 
hand­stand or a 
scale. 
Dynamic 
balance is needed 
Fitness boot camp  A military-style 
vigorous-intensity group exercise train-
ing program that combines calisthen-
ics, running, interval training, strength 
training, plyometrics, and competitive 
games.
High-intensity circuit training   An 
exercise modality that combines high-
intensity aerobic and bodyweight-
strength training exercises with limited 
rest between exercises.
MET  Short for metabolic equivalent, the 
rate of energy expenditure at rest, or the 
equivalent of a VO2 of 3.5 mL/kg/min.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

112
Fitness and Wellness
Table 4.1  Ratings of Selected Activities
Activity
Caloric 
Expenditure 
(cal/hour)4,6
Aerobics
  High-impact aerobics
A
H
3–4
2
4
3
2
4
6–12
450–900
  Moderate-impact aerobics
I
M
2–4
2
3
3
2
3
6–12
450–900
  Low-impact aerobics
B
L
2–4
2
3
3
2
3
5–10
375–750
  Step aerobics
I
M
2–4
2
3–4
3
2
3–4
5–12
375–900
Circuit training
B
M
2–3
3–4
3–4
2
2–3
3–4
5–12
375–900
Cross-country skiing
B
M
4–5
4
4
2
2
4–5
8–16
600–1,200
Cross-training
I
M
3–5
2–3
3–4
2–3
1–2
3–5
6–15
450–1,125
Cycling
  Road 
I
M
2–5
1
4
1
1
3
6–12
450–900
  Stationary 
B
L
2–4
1
4
1
1
3
6–10
450–750
Functional fitness
B
L
2–3
2–3
2–3
2–3
2–3
2–3
5–10
375–750
High-intensity interval training
I
M
4–5
2
3–4
1
1
4–5
8–16
600–1,200
Jogging
I
M
3–5
1
3
1
1
5
6–15
450–1,125
Jogging, deep water
I
L
3–5
2
2
1
1
5
5–12
375–900
Racquet sports
I
M
2–4
3
3
3
2
3
6–10
450–750
Rowing
B
L
3–5
4
2
3
1
4
8–14
600–1,050
Elliptical training/stair climbing
B
L
3–5
1
4
1
1
4–5
8–15
600–1,125
Strength training
B
L
1
4–5
4–5
2–3
2–3
3–4
4–8
300–600
Swimming (front crawl)
B
L
3–5
4
2
3
1
3
6–12
450–900
Walking
B
L
1–2
1
2
1
1
3
4–6
300–450
Walking, water, chest-deep
I
L
2–4
2
3
1
1
3
5–10
375–750
Water aerobics
B
L
2–4
3
3
3
2
3
6–10
450–750
Yoga
B
L
1
1–2
1–2
3–5
3–5
1–3
4–8
300–600
Zumba
B
M
3–4
2
3
3
2
3–4
6–12
450–900
1B 5 Beginner, I 5 Intermediate, A 5 Advanced
2L 5 Low, M 5 Moderate, H 5 High
31 5 Low, 2 5 Fair, 3 5 Average, 4 5 Good, 5 5 Excellent
4Varies according to the person’s effort (intensity) during exercise.
51 MET represents the rate of energy expenditure at rest (3.5 mL/kg/min). Each additional MET is a multiple of the resting value. For example, 5 METs represents an energy expenditure 
equivalent to five times the resting value, or about 17.5 mL/kg/min.
6Varies according to body weight.
© Cengage Learning 2015.
Recommended Starting  
Fitness Level1
Injury Risk2
Potential Cardiorespiratory 
Endurance Development (VO2MAX)3,4
Upper Body Strength  
Development3
Lower Body Strength  
Development3
Upper Body Flexibility 
Development3
Lower Body Flexibility 
Development3
Weight Management3
MET Level4,5,6
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

113
Chapter 4  Evaluating Fitness Activities
to perform many of the gymnastics routines 
(for example, balance beam, parallel bars, pom-
mel horse).
Coordination is important to successfully 
integrate into one routine various skills re-
quiring varying degrees of difficulty. Power 
and speed are needed to propel the body into 
the air, such as when tumbling or vaulting. 
Quick reaction time is necessary in determin-
ing when to end rotation upon a visual clue, 
such as spotting the floor on a dismount.
As with the health-related fitness compo-
nents, the principle of specificity of training 
applies to skill-related components. According 
to this principle, the training program must be 
specific to the type of skill the individual is 
trying to achieve.
Development of agility, balance, coordi-
nation, and reaction time is highly task- 
specific. To attain a certain skill, the individual must 
practice the same task many times. There is little cross-
over learning effect from one skill to another.
For instance, proper practice of a handstand (bal-
ance) eventually will lead to successful performance of 
that skill, but complete mastery of the skill does not en-
sure that the person will immediately be able to transfer 
this mastery to other static balance positions in gymnas-
tics. Power and speed may be improved with a specific 
strength-training program or frequent repetition of the 
specific task to be improved, or both.
The rate of learning in skill-related fitness varies from 
person to person, mainly because these components seem 
to be determined to a large extent by hereditary factors. 
Individuals with good skill-related fitness tend to do better 
and learn faster when performing a wide variety of skills. 
Nevertheless, few individuals enjoy complete success in all 
skill-related components. Furthermore, though skill- 
related fitness can be enhanced with practice, improve-
ments in reaction time and speed are limited and seem to 
be related primarily to genetic endowment.
Although we do not know how much skill-related 
fitness is desirable, everyone should attempt to develop 
and maintain a better-than-average level. This type of fit-
ness is crucial for athletes and also is important in leading 
a better and happier life. Improving skill-related fitness 
affords an individual more enjoyment and success in a 
wider variety of lifetime sports (for instance, basketball, 
tennis, and racquetball) and also can help a person cope 
more effectively in emergency situations. For example:
	1.	
Good reaction time, balance, coordination, and 
agility can help you avoid a fall or break a fall and 
thereby minimize injury.
	2.	
The ability to generate maximum force in a short 
time (power) may be crucial to ameliorate injury or 
even preserve life in a situation in which you may 
be called upon to move a person out of danger or 
lift a heavy object that has fallen.
	3.	
In our society, with an expanding average lifespan, 
maintaining speed can be especially important for 
older adults. Many of them and, for that matter, 
many unfit and overweight young people no longer 
have the speed they need to cross an intersection 
safely before the light changes for oncoming traffic.
Regular participation in a health-related fitness pro-
gram can heighten performance of skill-related compo-
nents, and vice versa. For example, significantly over-
weight people do not have good agility or speed. Because 
participating in aerobic and strength-training programs 
helps take off body fat, an overweight individual who 
loses weight through an exercise program may also im-
prove agility and speed. A sound flexibility program de-
creases resistance to motion around body joints, which 
may increase agility, balance, and overall coordination. 
Improvements in strength definitely help develop power.
Similar to the fitness benefits of the aerobic activities 
discussed previously in this chapter and given in Table 
4.1, the contributions of skill-related activities also vary 
among activities and individuals. The extent to which an 
activity helps develop each skill-related component var-
ies by the effort the individual makes and, most impor-
tant, by proper execution (technique) of the skill (correct 
coaching is highly recommended) and the individual’s 
potential based on genetic endowment. A summary of 
potential contributions to skill-related fitness for selected 
activities is provided in Table 4.2.
A high degree of skill-related fitness is required to participate in elite level 
windsurfing.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc. 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

114
Fitness and Wellness
4.4  Team Sports
Choosing activities that you enjoy will greatly enhance 
your adherence to exercise. People tend to repeat things 
they enjoy doing. Enjoyment by itself is a reward. There-
fore, combining individual activities (such as jogging or 
swimming) with team sports can deepen your commit-
ment to fitness.
People with good skill-related fitness usually partici-
pate in lifetime sports and games, which in turn helps 
develop health-related fitness. Individuals who enjoyed 
basketball or soccer in their youth tend to stick to those 
activities later in life. The availability of teams and com-
munity leagues may be all that is needed to stop contem-
plating and start participating. The social element of 
team sports provides added incentive to participate. 
Team sports offer an opportunity to interact with people 
who share a common interest. Being a member of a team 
creates responsibility—another incentive to exercise be-
cause you are expected to be there. Furthermore, team 
sports foster lifetime friendships, strengthening the so-
cial and emotional dimensions of wellness.
For those who were not able to participate in youth 
sports, it’s never too late to start (see the discussion of 
behavior modification and motivation in Chapter 1). 
Don’t be afraid to select a new activity, even if that means 
learning new skills. The fitness and social rewards will be 
ample.
4.5  Tips to Enhance Your 
Aerobic Workout
A typical aerobic workout is divided into three parts (see 
Figure 4.2):
	1.	
A 5- to 10-minute warm-up phase during which 
the heart rate is increased gradually to the target 
zone
	2.	
The actual aerobic workout, during which the heart 
rate is maintained in the target zone for 20 to 60 
minutes
	3.	
A 10- to 15-minute aerobic/stretching cooldown 
phase when the heart rate is lowered gradually to-
ward the resting level
To monitor the target training zone, you will have to 
check your exercise heart rate. As described in Chapter 
2, the pulse can be checked on the radial or the carotid 
artery. When you check the heart rate, begin with zero 
and count the number of beats in a 10-second period, 
then multiply by 6 to get the per-minute pulse rate. You 
should take your exercise heart rate for 10 seconds rather 
than a full minute because the heart rate begins to slow 
down 15 seconds after you stop exercising.
Feeling the pulse while exercising is difficult. There-
fore, participants should stop during exercise to check the 
pulse. If the heart rate is too low, increase the intensity of 
the exercise. If the rate is too high, slow down. You may 
want to practice taking your pulse several times during the 
day to become familiar with the technique. Inexpensive 
heart rate monitors can also be obtained at sporting goods 
stores or through the Internet. These monitors increase the 
accuracy of monitoring the heart rate during exercise.
For the first few weeks of your program, you should 
monitor your heart rate several times during the exercise 
session. As you become familiar with your body’s response 
to exercise, you may have to monitor the heart rate only 
twice—once at five to seven minutes into the exercise ses-
sion and a second time near the end of the workout.
Another technique sometimes used to determine 
your exercise intensity is simply to talk during exercise 
Table 4.2  Contributions of Selected Activities to Skill-Related 
Components
Activity
Alpine Skiing
4
5
4
2
3
2
Archery
1
2
4
2
3
1
Badminton
4
3
4
2
4
3
Baseball
3
2
4
4
5
4
Basketball
4
3
4
3
4
3
Bowling
2
2
4
1
1
1
Cross-country 
Skiing
3
4
3
2
2
1
Football
4
4
4
4
4
3
Golf
1
2
5
3
1
3
Gymnastics
5
5
5
4
3
3
Ice skating
5
5
5
3
3
3
In-line skating
4
4
4
3
2
4
Judo/karate
5
5
5
4
5
4
Racquetball
5
4
4
4
5
4
Soccer
5
3
5
5
3
4
Table tennis
5
3
5
3
5
3
Tennis
4
3
5
3
5
3
Volleyball
4
3
5
4
5
3
Water skiing
3
4
3
2
2
1
Wrestling
5
5
5
4
5
4
1 5 Low, 2 5 Fair, 3 5 Average, 4 5 Good, 5 5 Excellent
© Cengage Learning
Agility
Balance
Coordination
Power
Reaction Time
Speed
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

115
Chapter 4  Evaluating Fitness Activities
and then take your pulse immediately after that. Learning 
to associate the amount of difficulty when talking with the 
actual exercise heart rate will allow you to develop a sense 
of how hard you are working. Generally, if you can talk 
easily, you are not working hard enough. If you can talk 
but are slightly breathless, you should be close to the target 
range. If you cannot talk at all, you are working too hard.
In its latest guidelines, the American College of Sports 
Medicine (ACSM) recommends at least 10 minutes of 
stretching exercises performed immediately following the 
warm-up phase (prior to exercising in the appropriate 
target zone) or after the cool-down phase.7 The purpose of 
stretching following either the warm-up or the cool-down 
phase is because warm muscles achieve a greater range of 
motion, thus helping enhance the flexibility program. 
While two to three stretching sessions per week are rec-
ommended, near daily stretching is most effective.
If you have difficulty keeping up with your exercise 
program, you may need to reconsider your goals and 
start much more slowly. Behavior modification is a pro-
cess. From a physiological and psychological point of 
view, initially, you may not be able to carry out an exer-
cise session for a full 20 to 30 minutes. For the first 2 to 
3 weeks, therefore, you may just want to take a few 
10-minute daily walks. As your body adapts physically 
and mentally, you may increase the length and intensity 
of the exercise sessions gradually.
Most important, learn to listen to your body. At 
times you will feel unusually fatigued or have much dis-
comfort. Pain is the body’s way of letting you know that 
something is wrong. If you have pain or undue discom-
fort during or after exercise, you need to slow down or 
discontinue your exercise program and notify the course 
instructor. The instructor may be able to pinpoint the 
reason for the discomfort or recommend that you con-
sult your physician. You also will be able to prevent po-
tential injuries by paying attention to pain signals and 
making adjustments accordingly.
Figure 4.2
Typical aerobic workout pattern.
90% HRR*
60% HRR*
40% HRR*
30% HRR*
Time (minutes)
193
181
143
118
106
80
60
Heart rate (beats/min)
0
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
Age=20
MHR=193
RHR=68
*HRR = Heart rate reserve
Resting heart rate
Cool-
down
phase
Stretching phase
Warm-up phase
Maximal heart rate
Vigorous-intensity training zone
Moderate-intensity training zone
Light-intensity training zone
A E R O B I C  P H A S E
5
	1.	
Are you able to incorporate a variety of activities into 
your exercise program?
	2.	
Do you participate in recreational sports as a means to 
further enhance fitness and add enjoyment to your ex-
ercise program?
	3.	
Do you have an alternate plan in case of inclement 
weather (rain/cold) or injury that would keep you 
from your regular training program (jogging, 
cycling)?
Assess Your Behavior
To access course materials, including companion resources, please visit www.cengagebrain.com.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

116
Fitness and Wellness
	 1.	 Using a combination of aerobic activities to develop 
overall fitness is known as
	 a.	 health-related fitness.
	 b.	 circuit training.
	 c.	 plyometric exercises.
	 d.	 cross-training.
	 e.	 skill-related fitness.
	 2.	 The best aerobic activity choice for individuals with leg 
or back injuries is
	 a.	 walking in chest-deep water.
	 b.	 jogging.
	 c.	 step aerobics.
	 d.	 rope skipping.
	 e.	 cross-country skiing.
	 3.	 The approximate jogging mileage to reach the excellent 
cardiorespiratory fitness classification is
	 a.	 5 miles.
	 b.	 10 miles.
	 c.	 15 miles.
	 d.	 25 miles.
	 e.	 50 miles.
	 4.	 To help elevate the exercise heart rate during low-impact 
aerobics, a person should
	 a.	 accentuate arm movements.
	 b.	 sustain movement throughout the program.
	 c.	 accentuate weight-bearing actions.
	 d.	 All of the above are correct choices.
	 e.	 None of the above choices is correct.
	 5.	 Achieved maximal heart rates during swimming are ap-
proximately beats per minute (bpm) lower than during 
running.
	 a.	 2–4
	 b.	 5–9
	 c.	 10–13
	 d.	 14–20
	 e.	 20–25
	 6.	 Fitness boot camp is primarily a _____________ 
activity?
	 a.	 body weight strength-training
	 b.	 interval training
	 c.	 running
	 d.	 competitive games
	 e.	 All of the above are exercise movements in spinning.
	 7.	 HIIT programs
	 a.	 include high to very high-intensity intervals.
	 b.	 require an all-out effort during the entire training 
program.
	 c.	 were developed primarily for body-building athletes.
	 d.	 are low-intensity activity programs.
	 e.	 All are incorrect choices.
	 8.	 An MET represents
	 a.	 the symbol used to indicate that the exercise goal has 
been met.
	 b.	 a unit of measure that is used to express the value 
achieved during the Metabolic Exercise Test.
	 c.	 the Maximal Exercise Time achieved.
	 d.	 the rate of energy expenditure at rest.
	 e.	 All choices are incorrect.
	 9.	 Which of the following is not a component of skill- 
related fitness?
	 a.	 mobility
	 b.	 coordination
	 c.	 reaction time
	 d.	 agility
	 e.	 All are skill-related components.
	10.	 When checking exercise heart rate, one should
	 a.	 continue to exercise at the prescribed rate while 
checking the heart rate.
	 b.	 stop exercising and take the pulse for no longer than 
15 seconds.
	 c.	 exercise at a low-to-moderate intensity.
	 d.	 stop exercise and take the heart rate for a full minute.
	 e.	 All choices are valid ways to check exercise heart rate.
Correct answers can be found on page 301.
Assess Your Knowledge
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

117
Chapter 4  Evaluating Fitness Activities
Cardiorespiratory 
Endurance
Muscular Fitness
Muscular Flexibility
Weight Management
Agility
Balance
Coordination
Power
Reaction Time
Speed
1.
Comments
2.
Comments
3.
Comments
4.
Comments
I.  In the spaces below, provide a list of ﬁve activities in which you have participated during the last 6 months. In addition to ﬁtness 
activities (jogging, aerobics, swimming, strength training), you may list other activities in which you frequently participate that 
require physical effort (for example, walking, cycling, sweeping, vacuuming, gardening).
 
According to your own effort of participation, rate each activity for its health-related and motor skill-related beneﬁts 
(1 = low, 2 = fair, 3 = average, 4 = good, 5 = excellent). Also indicate the frequency and duration of participation (list times 
per week, month, or 6 months) and add comments regarding your personal feelings related to your participation in the respective 
activity (liked it, was fun, too hard, got hurt, need more skill, could do it forever, etc.).
Activity 4.1: My Personal Fitness Program
Date
Name
Section
Course
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

118
Fitness and Wellness
II.  On a separate sheet of paper, keep a 7-day log of all physical activities that you perform. On a daily basis, keep a record of the  
exact minutes throughout the day that you are active and rate each activity according to its intensity (moderate- or vigorous- 
intensity). Total your minutes for each day and compute a daily average for all activities. Attach the log to this activity and then  
answer the following questions:
 
A. Did you exercise aerobically at least 3 times per week for 20 to 30 minutes each session? 
 
 
______  Yes    ______ No
 
B. Did you accumulate an average of 60 minutes of daily physical activity?
 
 
______  Yes    ______ No
 
C. What percentage of your total physical activity was moderate intensity,
 
 
______ % 
and what percentage was vigorous intensity? 
 
 
______ %
III.  According to items I and II above, evaluate your current level of physical activity. State how you feel about your results and 
indicate if your program is primarily conducive to health ﬁ tness or physical ﬁ tness (or neither). Do you deem any changes 
necessary to meet previously stated goals (see Activity 3.4, page 95)?
Cardiorespiratory 
Endurance
Muscular Fitness
Muscular Flexibility
Weight Management
Agility
Balance
Coordination
Power
Reaction Time
Speed
5.
Comments
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Nutrition for Wellness
5
Healthy nutrition significantly 
enhances health and quality 
of life: Preparing most meals 
at home is one of the surest 
ways to eat healthier and 
enjoy a longer, more 
productive, and better life. If 
you feel that you don’t have 
time to cook, or don’t care to 
cook, sooner or later you will 
have to make time to treat 
and care for illness and 
disease.
Objectives
• Define nutrition and describe its 
relationship to health and well-being.
• Learn the functions of nutrients in the 
human body.
• Become familiar with nutrients, food 
groups, and nutrient standards, and learn 
how to achieve a balanced diet through 
the use of the USDA MyPlate guidelines.
• Become familiar with eating disorders and 
with their associated medical problems 
and behavior patterns.
• Identify myths and fallacies regarding 
nutrition.
• Learn the 2010 Dietary Guidelines for 
Americans.
119
Visit www.cengagebrain.com to access 
course materials and companion resources for 
this text including quiz questions designed to 
check your understanding of the chapter 
contents, activities, labs, and more! See the 
preface on page xi for more information.
© inka88/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

120
Fitness and Wellness
My parents didn’t like to cook. They both worked, 
and the last thing on their minds was to fix an eve-
ning meal. We ate a lot of prepackaged meals at home 
or fast foods were brought in for the evening meal. I 
didn’t mind it that much as I enjoyed fast foods a 
whole lot. In our family, we all struggle with weight. 
My parents, now in the early 50s, are pre-diabetic and 
my dad has high blood pressure. I have been working 
for several years, but I am now back part time in 
school. I never really knew much about nutrition until 
I took my lifetime fitness course. My instructor was 
very dynamic and enthusiastic. You could tell that he 
believed and practiced what he was teaching.
As a course requirement, we had to do a three-day 
nutrient analysis. Was that a shock to me! I was con-
suming 42 percent of my calories in the form of fat, 
about a third of them in the form of saturated fat and 
about 4 grams of daily trans fat. My sodium intake 
was over 5,000 milligrams per day, fiber intake was 
only 10 grams per day, and I exceeded my caloric al-
lowance by an approximate 300 daily calories. I knew 
that my diet was partially responsible for my weight 
problem, but I had no clue 
that the way I was eating 
was also seriously increas-
ing my own risk for high 
blood pressure, heart dis-
ease, and even cancer. Al-
though I can still make 
improvements—and I do 
crave fast foods—I make it a 
point to plan my meals and 
shop wisely. I eat many 
fruits, vegetables, and whole grains on most days of 
the week. I limit my consumption of red meat and 
whole milk products, and I get my protein mostly 
from skinless chicken and fish. As much as I crave 
them, I avoid processed and prepackaged foods and I 
no longer eat out often. I have lost 15 pounds this last 
year, I have more energy, and I am sure that health-
wise I am doing much better. I have learned that eat-
ing healthy takes planning and preparation and lots of 
discipline if you are not used to it. I am very happy 
that I took that fitness course—and as far as I am con-
cerned, it has made a difference in my life.
© Tony Wear/Shutterstock.com
Real Life Story | Brandon’s Diet
Good nutrition is clearly linked by scientific studies to 
overall health and well-being. Proper nutrition means 
that one’s diet supplies all the essential nutrients to carry 
out normal tissue growth, repair, and maintenance. It 
also implies that the diet will provide enough substrates 
to produce the energy necessary for work, physical activ-
ity, and relaxation.
Too much or too little of any nutrient can precipi-
tate serious health problems. The typical U.S. diet is  
too high in calories, sugar, saturated fat, trans fat, and 
sodium, and not high enough in whole grains, fruits, 
and vegetables—factors that undermine good health. 
Food availability is not the problem. The problem is 
overconsumption.
According to the office of the U.S. Surgeon General, 
diseases of dietary excess and imbalance are among the 
leading causes of death in the United States. Similar 
trends are observed in developed countries throughout 
the world. In the report, based on more than 2,000 scien-
tific studies, the Surgeon General said that dietary 
changes can bring better health to all Americans. Other 
surveys reveal that, on a given day, nearly half of the 
people in the United States eat no fruit and almost a 
fourth eat no vegetables.
Diet and nutrition often play a crucial role in the 
development and progression of chronic diseases. A diet 
high in saturated fat, trans fat, and cholesterol increases 
the risk for atherosclerosis and coronary heart disease. In 
sodium-sensitive individuals, high salt intake has been 
linked to high blood pressure. As many as 30 percent to 
50 percent of all cancers may be diet-related. Obesity, 
diabetes, and osteoporosis also have been associated 
with faulty nutrition.
5.1  The Essential 
Nutrients
The essential nutrients the human body requires are 
carbohydrates, fats, protein, vitamins, minerals, and wa-
ter. Carbohydrates, fats, proteins, and water are termed 
macronutrients because people need to take in propor-
tionately large amounts daily. Nutritionists refer to vita-
mins and minerals as micronutrients because the body 
requires them in relatively small amounts.
Depending on the amount of nutrients and calories 
they contain, foods can be classified as high-nutrient 
density or low-nutrient density. Foods with high- 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

121
Chapter 5  Nutrition for Wellness
nutrient density contain a low or moderate amount of 
calories but are packed with nutrients. Foods that are 
high in calories but contain few nutrients are of low- 
nutrient density and commonly are called “junk food.”
5.1A  Carbohydrates  Carbohydrates 
are 
the 
major source of calories the body uses to provide energy 
for work, cell maintenance, and heat. They also help 
regulate fat and metabolize protein. Each gram of carbo-
hydrates provides the human body with four calories. 
The major sources of carbohydrates are breads, cereals, 
fruits, vegetables, and milk and other dairy products. 
Carbohydrates are classified as simple carbohydrates and 
complex carbohydrates.
Simple Carbohydrates
Simple carbohydrates (such as candy, soda, and cakes), 
commonly denoted as sugars, have little nutritive value. 
These carbohydrates are divided into two groups:
• 
Monosaccharides (glucose, fructose, and galactose)
• 
Disaccharides (sucrose, lactose, and maltose)
Simple carbohydrates often take the place of more 
nutritive foods in the diet. Until recently, the most sig-
nificant health concerns regarding excessive sugar intake 
included increased caloric intake, weight gain, obesity, 
tooth decay, and lower nutrient intake. Research indi-
cates, however, that regular soft drink consumers in-
crease coronary heart disease risk by more than 25 per-
cent and have about an 80-percent greater risk for 
developing type 2 diabetes. Soda consumption in the 
United States has increased by 500 percent over the past 
50 years. Excessive body weight also increases the risk 
for metabolic complications and heart disease. Most 
12-ounce soft drinks contain about 140 calories. An ex-
cess of 140 daily calories represents a weight gain of al-
most 15 pounds per year (140 3 365 4 3,500).
Excessive added sugar in the diet also raises blood 
fats known as triglycerides, which, along with choles-
terol, clog up the arteries. Additionally, people who con-
sume a sugar-heavy diet run a greater risk for pancreatic 
cancer. Other data indicate that individuals who drink 
more than five sugary soft drinks per week have reduced 
bone density in the hips and more than double joint-
cushioning cartilage loss in the knees.
Other drinks that are loaded with sugar include fruit 
drinks, iced teas, sports drinks, and energy drinks. Cur-
rently, energy drinks are a major health concern in the 
United States. Besides sugar, the caffeine content in these 
drinks can be five times (250 to 500 mg) what’s in a cup 
of coffee (40 to 90 mg). Five deaths have been attributed 
to these energy drinks, most likely due to an irregular 
heartbeat caused by the excess caffeine.
Complex Carbohydrates
Complex carbohydrates are formed when simple carbo-
hydrate molecules are linked together. Three types of 
complex carbohydrates are
• 
starches, found commonly in seeds, corn, nuts, 
grains, roots, potatoes, and legumes.
• 
dextrins, formed from the breakdown of large 
starch molecules exposed to dry heat, such as when 
bread is baked or cold cereals are manufactured.
• 
glycogen, the animal polysaccharide synthesized 
from glucose and found in only small amounts in 
meats. 
Glycogen 
constitutes 
the body’s 
reservoir of 
glucose. Many 
hundreds to 
thousands of 
glucose mole-
cules are 
linked to be 
stored as gly-
cogen in the 
liver and 
muscles. 
When a surge 
of energy is 
needed, en-
zymes in the 
muscle and 
the liver break 
down glyco-
gen and thus 
make glucose 
readily avail-
able for  
energy 
transfor­
mation.
Complex car-
bohydrates 
pro-
vide many valu-
able 
nutrients  
and also are an  
excellent source of 
fiber (also called 
roughage).
Fiber
Fiber is a form of 
complex carbohy-
Nutrition  The science that studies the 
relationship of foods to optimal health 
and performance.
Nutrients  Substances found in food 
that provide energy, regulate metabo-
lism, and help with growth and repair 
of body tissues.
Substrates  Foods that are used as 
energy sources (carbohydrates, fat, 
protein).
Essential nutrients  Carbohydrates, 
fats, protein, vitamins, minerals, and 
water—the nutrients the human body 
requires for survival.
Macronutrients  The nutrients the 
body needs in proportionately large 
amounts; carbohydrates, fats, proteins, 
and water are examples.
Micronutrients  The nutrients the 
body needs in small quantities— 
vitamins and minerals—that serve 
specific roles in transformation of  
energy and body tissue synthesis.
Calorie  The amount of heat necessary 
to raise the temperature of 1 gram of 
water 1°C; used to measure the energy 
value of food and the cost of physical 
activity.
Carbohydrates  Compounds com-
posed of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen 
that the body uses as its major source 
of energy.
Fiber  Plant material that human di-
gestive enzymes cannot digest.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

122
Fitness and Wellness
drate. A high-fiber diet gives a person a feeling of full-
ness without added calories. Dietary fiber is present 
mainly in plant leaves, skins, roots, and seeds. Processing 
and refining foods removes almost all of the natural 
fiber.
In the American diet, the main sources of fiber are 
whole-grain cereals and breads, fruits, vegetables, and 
legumes. Fiber is important in the diet because it de-
creases the risk for cardiovascular disease and cancer. 
Increased fiber intake also may lower the risk for coro-
nary heart disease because saturated fats often take the 
place of fiber in the diet, thus increasing the absorption 
and formation of cholesterol. Other health disorders that 
have been tied to low intake of fiber are constipation, 
diverticulitis, hemorrhoids, gallbladder disease, and 
obesity.
The daily recommended amount of fiber intake for 
adults 50 years and younger is 25 grams for women and 
38 grams for men. Most people in the United States eat 
only 15 grams of fiber per day, putting them at increased 
risk for disease. A person can increase fiber intake by 
eating more fruits, vegetables, legumes, grains, and cere-
als. Research provides evidence that increasing fiber in-
take by 30 grams per day leads to a significant reduction 
in heart attacks, cancer of the colon, breast cancer, diabe-
tes, and diverticulitis. Table 5.1 provides the fiber content 
of selected foods.
Fibers are typically classified according to their solu-
bility in water. Soluble fiber dissolves in water and forms 
a gel-like substance that encloses food particles. This 
property allows soluble fiber to bind and excrete fats 
from the body. Soluble fiber has been shown to decrease 
blood cholesterol and blood sugar levels. Soluble fibers 
are found primarily in oats, fruits, barley, legumes, and 
psyllium.
Insoluble fiber is not easily dissolved in water, and 
the body cannot digest it. This fiber is important because 
it binds water, resulting in a softer and bulkier stool that 
increases peristalsis (involuntary muscle contractions of 
intestinal walls), forcing the stool onward, and allows 
food residues to pass through the intestinal tract more 
quickly. Speeding the passage of food residues through 
the intestines seems to lower the risk for colon cancer, 
mainly because cancer-causing agents are not in contact 
as long with the intestinal wall. Insoluble fiber also is 
thought to bind with carcinogens (cancer-producing 
High-fiber foods are essential in a healthy diet.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Tips to Increase Fiber in Your Diet
•  Eat more vegetables, either raw or steamed.
• Eat salads daily that include a wide variety of vegeta-
bles.
• Eat more fruit, including the skin.
• Choose whole-wheat and whole-grain products.
• Choose breakfast cereals with more than 3 grams of fi-
ber per serving.
• Sprinkle a teaspoon or two of unprocessed bran or 100% 
bran cereal on your favorite breakfast cereal.
• Add high-fiber cereals to casseroles and desserts.
Behavior Modification Planning
• Add beans to soups, salads, and stews.
• Add vegetables to sandwiches: sprouts, green and red 
pepper strips, diced carrots, sliced cucumbers, red cab-
bage, onions.
• Add vegetables to spaghetti: broccoli, cauliflower, sliced 
carrots, mushrooms.
• Experiment with unfamiliar fruits and vegetables col-
lards, kale, broccoflower, asparagus, papaya, mango, 
kiwi, starfruit.
• Blend fruit juice with small pieces of fruit and crushed 
ice.
• When increasing fiber in your diet, drink plenty of fluids.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

123
Chapter 5  Nutrition for Wellness
substances), and more water in the stool may dilute the 
cancer-causing agents, lessening their potency. Sources 
of insoluble fiber include wheat, cereals, vegetables, and 
skins of fruits.
A practical guideline to obtain your fiber intake is to 
eat at least five daily servings of fruits and vegetables and 
three servings of whole-grain foods (whole-grain bread, 
cereal, and rice).
5.1B  Fats  Fats, or lipids, are the most concentrated 
source of energy. Each gram of fat supplies 9 calories to 
the body. Fats, also part of the cell structure, are used as 
stored energy and as an insulator to preserve body heat. 
They absorb shock, supply essential fatty acids, and carry 
the fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E, and K. The main sources 
of dietary fat are whole milk and other dairy products, 
meats, and meat alternatives. Fats are classified into 
simple, compound, and derived fats.
Simple Fats
Simple fats consist of a glyceride molecule linked to one, 
two, or three units of fatty acids. According to the num-
ber of fatty acids attached, simple fats are divided into 
monoglycerides (one fatty acid), diglycerides (two fatty 
acids), and triglycerides (three fatty acids). More than 90 
percent of the weight of fat in foods and more than 95 
percent of the stored fat in the human body is in the form 
of triglycerides.
The length of the carbon atom chain and the amount 
of hydrogen saturation in fatty acids vary. Based on the 
extent of saturation, fatty acids are said to be saturated or 
unsaturated. Unsaturated fatty acids are classified further 
into monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fats. Satu-
rated fatty acids are mainly of animal origin. Unsaturated 
fats are found mostly in plant products.
In saturated fatty acids, the carbon atoms are fully 
saturated with hydrogens; only single bonds link the 
carbon atoms on the chain. These saturated fatty acids 
are more commonly known as saturated fats. Examples 
of foods high in saturated fatty acids are meats, meat fat, 
lard, whole milk, cream, butter, cheese, ice cream, hydro-
genated oils (a process that makes oils saturated), coco-
nut oil, and palm oils. Saturated fats tend to be solids that 
typically do not melt at room temperature. Coconut and 
palm oils are exceptions. In general, saturated fats raise 
the blood cholesterol level. The data on coconut and 
palm oils are controversial, as some research indicates 
that these oils may be neutral in terms of their effects on 
cholesterol.
In unsaturated fatty acids (unsaturated fats), double 
bonds form between the unsaturated carbons. Unsatu-
rated fat is usually liquid at room temperature. It is 
mostly in oils from plants. Try to eat mostly unsaturated 
fats instead of saturated fat. Unsaturated fats are healthy 
fats.
Monounsaturated fat and polyunsaturated fat are 
types of unsaturated fat. Monounsaturated fatty acids 
(MUFA) have only one double bond along the chain. 
Examples are olive, canola, rapeseed, peanut, and ses-
ame oils. Polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) contain 
two or more double bonds between unsaturated  
carbon atoms along the chain. Corn, cottonseed,  
safflower, walnut, 
sunflower, 
and 
soybean oils are 
high in polyun-
saturated fatty ac-
Fats (lipids)  A class of nutrients that 
the body uses as a source of energy.
Table 5.1  Fiber Content of Selected Foods
Food (gm)
Serving Size
Dietary Fiber
Almonds, shelled
1⁄4 cup
3.9
Apple
1 medium
3.7
Banana
1 small
1.2
Beans (red, kidney)
1⁄2 cup
8.2
Blackberries
1⁄2 cup
4.9
Beets, red, canned  
  (cooked)
1⁄2 cup
1.4
Brazil nuts
1 oz
2.5
Broccoli (cooked)
1⁄2 cup
3.3
Brown rice (cooked)
1⁄2 cup
1.7
Carrots (cooked)
1⁄2 cup
3.3
Cauliflower (cooked)
1⁄2 cup
5.0
Cereal
  All Bran
1 oz
8.5
  Cheerios
1 oz
1.1
  Cornflakes
1 oz
0.5
  Fruit and Fiber
1 oz
4.0
  Fruit Wheats
1 oz
2.0
  Just Right
1 oz
2.0
  Wheaties
1 oz
2.0
Corn (cooked)
1⁄2 cup
2.2
Eggplant (cooked)
1⁄2 cup
3.0
Lettuce (chopped)
1⁄2 cup
0.5
Orange
1 medium
4.3
Parsnips (cooked)
1⁄2 cup
2.1
Pear
1 medium
4.5
Peas (cooked)
1⁄2 cup
4.4
Popcorn (plain)
1 cup
1.2
Potato (baked)
1 medium
4.9
Strawberries
1⁄2 cup
1.6
Summer squash (cooked)
1⁄2 cup
1.6
Watermelon
1 cup
0.1
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

124
Fitness and Wellness
ids. Polyunsaturated fat is also the main fat found in 
seafood.
Omega-3, omega-6, and omega-9 are polyunsatu-
rated fats. Omega-3 fatty acids and omega-6 fatty acids 
have gained considerable attention in recent years be-
cause they are essential to human health and cannot be 
manufactured by the body. They have to be consumed in 
the diet. Omega-9 fatty acids are defined as nonessential 
because the body can synthesize them from other foods 
we eat, and we don’t have to depend on direct dietary 
sources to obtain them.
Most critical in the diet are omega-3 fatty acids, 
which provide substantial health benefits. Omega-3 fatty 
acids tend to decrease cholesterol, triglycerides, inflam-
mation, blood clots, abnormal heart rhythms, and high 
blood pressure. They also decrease the risk for heart  
attack, abnormal heart rhythms, stroke, Alzheimer’s  
disease, dementia, macular degeneration, and joint 
degeneration.
Unfortunately, most of the polyunsaturated fatty 
acid consumption in the United States comes from 
omega-6. Once viewed as healthy fats, excessive intake 
may be detrimental to health. Omega-6 fatty acids in-
clude linoleic acid (LA), gamma-linolenic acid (GLA), 
and arachidonic acid (AA). The typical American diet 
contains 10 to 20 times more omega-6 than omega-3 
fatty acids, whereas a ratio of 4 to 1, or lower, is recom-
mended to maintain and improve health. Most omega-6 
fatty acids come in the form of LA from vegetable oils, 
the primary oil ingredient added to most processed 
foods, including salad dressing. LA-rich oils include 
corn, soybean, sunflower, safflower, and cottonseed oils.
Another type of fat, trans fatty acids, has been re-
ceiving a lot of attention in recent years. Hydrogen often 
is added to monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fats 
to increase shelf life and to solidify them so they are 
more spreadable. During this process, called “partial 
hydrogenation,” the position of hydrogen atoms may be 
changed along the carbon chain, transforming the fat 
into a trans fatty acid. Some margarines, spreads, short-
ening, pastries, nut butters, crackers, cookies, frozen 
breakfast foods, dairy products, snacks and chips, cake 
mixes, meats, processed foods, and fast foods contain 
trans fatty acids.
Trans fatty acids are not essential and provide no 
known health benefit. In truth, health-conscious people 
minimize their intake of these types of fats because diets 
high in trans fatty acids increase rigidity of the coronary 
arteries, elevate cholesterol, and contribute to the forma-
tion of blood clots that may lead to heart attacks and 
strokes.
Paying attention to food labels is important because 
the words “partially hydrogenated” and “trans fatty ac-
ids” indicate that the product carries a health risk just as 
high as or higher than that of saturated fat.
Compound Fats
Compound fats are a combination of simple fats and 
other chemicals. Examples are phospholipids, glucolip-
ids, and lipoproteins.
Derived Fats
Derived fats combine simple and compound fats. Sterols 
are an example. Although sterols contain no fatty acids, 
they are considered lipids because they do not dissolve in 
water. The most often mentioned sterol is cholesterol, 
which is found in many foods and is manufactured from 
saturated fats in the body.
5.1C  Proteins  Proteins are used to build and repair 
tissues including muscles, blood, internal organs, skin, 
hair, nails, and bones. They are a part of hormones, en-
zymes, and antibodies, and they help maintain a normal 
balance of body fluids. Proteins can also be used as a 
source of energy, but only if not enough carbohydrates 
are available. The primary sources are meats, meat alter-
natives, milk, and other dairy products.
Proteins are composed of amino acids, containing 
nitrogen, carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen. Because the 
body cannot produce them, 9 of the 20 amino acids are 
called essential amino acids. The other 11, termed non-
essential amino acids, can be manufactured in the body 
if food proteins in the diet provide enough nitrogen. For 
normal body function, all amino acids must be present 
in the diet.
Proteins that contain all the essential amino acids, 
known as “complete” or “higher-quality” proteins, are 
usually of animal origin. If one or more of the essential 
amino acids are missing, the proteins are termed incom-
plete or lower-quality proteins. The essential amino acid 
that is missing in an incomplete protein is called the 
limiting amino acid. All plant products, including grains, 
fruits, vegetables, grains, beans, nuts, and seeds, are in-
complete proteins. The only exceptions of complete pro-
teins found in plant products are soy and quinoa (a 
grain-like crop grown for its edible seed).
Individuals have to take in enough protein to ensure 
nitrogen for adequate production of all amino acids. On a 
vegetarian diet, consumption of a variety of food sources 
is required so that the diet supplies all the essential amino 
acids within a meal or a given day. When different foods 
are consumed, the limiting amino acid in one food can be 
obtained from another food source. This principle is re-
ferred to as complementing proteins. For example, con-
sumption of grains and legumes complement each other. 
Legumes and nuts also complement each other. Nuts and 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

125
Chapter 5  Nutrition for Wellness
grains, however, are not complementary proteins. Soy and 
quinoa, can also be used to complement the limiting 
amino acids in grains, legumes, nuts, and seeds.
A word of caution is in order as to your dietary pro-
tein sources. Several recent research studies provide 
strong evidence that excessive red meat consumption 
increases the risk of premature death, primarily from 
heart disease, stroke, some cancers, and type 2 diabetes. 
Consumption of both unprocessed red meat (beef, pork, 
and lamb) and processed red meat (cold cuts, ham, ba-
con, bologna, sausage, hot dogs) leads to this outcome.
The most compelling evidence comes from a 2012 
study of more than 120,000 people showing a 30 percent 
increased risk of premature death among people who eat 
the most red meat as compared to those who eat the least 
(about a half a serving per day).1 In the study, three 
ounces of unprocessed red meat were considered as one 
serving, but only one ounce of processed red meat was 
viewed as a serving. The mortality rate was highest 
among processed red-meat eaters. Eating just one serv-
ing per day increased the risk between 13 percent (un-
processed) and 20 percent (processed).
The data also indicated that replacing one serving a 
day of red meat with fish, poultry, nuts, beans, low-fat 
dairy, or whole grains decreased the chances of premature 
death in the range of 7 percent to 19 percent. The research-
ers concluded that “The message we want to communicate is 
it would be great if you could reduce your intake of red meat 
consumption to half a serving a day or two to three servings 
a week, and severely limit processed red meat intake.”
The role of protein in the American diet is gaining 
relevance as adequate protein intake with each meal is 
crucial for satiety and weight management and to help 
build, repair, and maintain lean tissue. The latter has 
even greater relevance for people who are physically ac-
tive. Loss of lean tissue with sedentary living, aging, ex-
haustive exercise training, and while dieting (negative 
caloric balance) without proper energy and protein in-
take is inevitable. Loss of lean tissue is never desirable 
because of the decrease in functional physical capacity 
(the ability to perform ordinary and unusual tasks of 
daily living), as well as in the resting metabolic rate.
As an individual, you can prevent or even completely 
reverse such a loss. The recommendation is that we dis-
tribute our protein intake in equal parts throughout the 
day. To do so, determine your daily intake in grams (see 
Table 5.2) and divide by three (meals per day). For exam-
ple, if you weigh 141 pounds (64 kg) and you are physi-
cally active, your total protein intake should be between 64 
and 77 grams per day (64 × 1.0 and 64 × 1.2 or the 
equivalent of 256 to 308 calories derived from protein 
each day—each gram of protein supplies the body with 4 
calories) or 21 to 26 grams of protein per meal.
5.1D  Vitamins  Vitamins function as antioxidants 
and as coenzymes (primarily the B complex), which 
regulate the work of enzymes; and vitamin D even func-
tions as a hormone.
Based on their solubility, vitamins are classified into 
two types: fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E, and K) and water-
soluble vitamins (B complex and C). The body cannot 
manufacture vitamins; they can be obtained only through 
a well-balanced diet. Additional information on the im-
portance of vitamins is presented later in this chapter.
5.1E  Minerals  Minerals serve several important 
functions. They are constituents of all cells, especially 
those in hard parts of the body (bones, nails, teeth). They 
are crucial in maintaining water balance and the acid–
base balance. They are essential components of respira-
tory pigments, enzymes, and enzyme systems, and they 
regulate muscular and nervous tissue excitability.
5.1F  Water  Water, the most important nutrient, is in-
volved in almost every vital body process. Water is used in 
digesting and absorbing food, in the circulatory process, 
in removing waste products, in building and rebuilding 
cells, and in trans-
porting other nu-
trients.
Water is con-
tained in almost 
all foods, but pri-
marily in liquid 
foods, fruits, and 
vegetables. 
Al-
though 
for 
de-
cades the recom-
mendation was to 
consume at least 8 
cups of water per 
day, a panel of sci-
entists of the Insti-
tute of Medicine 
of the National 
Proteins  A class of nutrients that the 
body uses to build and repair body 
tissues.
Amino acids  The basic building 
blocks of protein.
Vitamins  Organic substances essen-
tial for normal bodily metabolism, 
growth, and development.
Antioxidants  Compounds that prevent 
oxygen from combining with other sub-
stances it might damage.
Minerals  Inorganic elements needed 
by the body.
Table 5.2  Recommended Daily Protein Intake
Activity Level
Grams/kg of Body Weight
Sedentary
0.8 g/kg
Physically active
1.0–1.2 g/kg
Athlete
1.2–2.0 g/kg
Weight gain/loss
1.5–2.0 g/kg
© Cengage Learning 2015
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

126
Fitness and Wellness
Academy of Sciences indicated that people are getting 
enough water from liquids (milk, juices, sodas, coffee) 
and the moisture content of solid foods. Caffeine- 
containing drinks are also acceptable as a water source 
because data indicate that people who regularly consume 
such beverages do not have a greater 24-hour urine out-
put than those who don’t.
Most Americans and Canadians remain well hy-
drated simply by using thirst as their guide. An exception 
to this practice, however, is when an individual exercises 
in the heat or does so for an extended time. Water lost 
under these conditions must be replenished regularly, 
without waiting for the onset of thirst.
5.2  Nutrition Standards
Nutritionists use a variety of nutrient standards. The 
most widely known is the Recommended Dietary Allow-
ances (RDA). This is not the only standard, though. Nu-
trition standards include the Dietary Reference Intakes 
and the Daily Values on food labels. Each standard has a 
different purpose and utilization in dietary planning and 
assessment.
5.2A  Dietary Reference Intakes  To help peo-
ple meet dietary guidelines, the National Academy of 
Sciences has developed a set of dietary nutrient intakes 
for healthy people in the United States and Canada, the 
Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs). The DRIs are based 
on a review of the most current research on adequate 
amounts and maximum safe nutrient intakes of healthy 
people. The DRI reports are written by the Food and 
Nutrition Board of the Institute of Medicine in coopera-
tion with scientists from Canada.
Within the umbrella of DRI are four types of refer-
ence values for planning and assessing diets:
	1.	
Estimated Average Requirements (EAR)
	2.	
Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDA)
	3.	
Adequate Intakes (AI)
	4.	
Tolerable Upper Intake Levels (UL)
The type of reference value used for a given nutrient 
and a specific age/gender group is determined according 
to available scientific information and the intended use 
of the dietary standard.
The Estimated Average Requirements (EAR) is the 
amount of nutrient that is estimated to meet the nutrient 
requirement of half the healthy people in specific age and 
gender groups. At this nutrient intake level, the nutri-
tional requirements of the upper 50 percent of the people 
are not met.
The Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDA) set 
forth the daily amount of a nutrient considered adequate 
to meet the known nutrient needs of nearly all healthy 
people in the United States. The RDAs for selected nutri-
ents are presented in Table 5.3. Because the committee 
must decide what level of intake to recommend for ev-
erybody, the RDA is set well above the EAR and covers 
about 98 percent of the population. Stated another way, 
the RDA recommendation for any nutrient is well above 
almost everyone’s actual requirement.
The RDA could be considered a goal for adequate 
intake. The process for determining the RDA depends on 
being able to set an EAR. RDAs are statistically deter-
mined from the EAR values. If an EAR cannot be set, no 
RDA can be established.
When 
data 
are insufficient or 
inadequate to set 
an EAR, an Ade-
quate Intakes (AI) 
value 
is 
deter-
mined instead of 
the RDA. The AI 
value is derived 
from approxima-
tions of observed 
nutrient intakes by 
a group or groups 
of healthy people. 
The AI value for 
children and adults 
is 
expected 
to 
meet or exceed the 
nutritional 
re-
quirements of a 
specific 
healthy 
population.
The Tolerable 
Upper 
Intake 
Levels (UL), which 
eventually will be 
available for all 
nutrients, 
estab-
lish the highest 
level of nutrient 
intake that seems 
to be safe for most 
healthy 
people 
and beyond which 
there is an in-
creased 
risk 
of  
Dietary Reference Intakes 
(DRIs)  Four types of nutrient stan-
dards that are used to establish ade-
quate amounts and maximum safe nu-
trient intakes in the diet: Estimated 
Average Requirements (EAR), 
Recommended Dietary Allowances 
(RDA), Adequate Intakes (AI), and 
Tolerable Upper Intake Levels (UL).
Estimated Average Requirements 
(EAR)  The amount of a nutrient that 
meets the dietary needs of half the 
people.
Recommended Dietary Allow­
ances (RDA)  The daily amount of  
a nutrient (statistically determined 
from the EARs) considered adequate  
to meet the known nutrient needs of  
almost 98 percent of all healthy people 
in the United States.
Adequate Intakes (AI)  The recom-
mended amount of a nutrient intake 
when sufficient evidence is not avail-
able to calculate the EAR and subse-
quent RDA.
Tolerable Upper Intake Levels 
(UL)  The highest level of nutrient  
intake that appears to be safe for most 
healthy people without an increased 
risk of adverse effects.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

127
Chapter 5  Nutrition for Wellness
adverse effects. As intakes increase above the UL, so does 
the risk for adverse effects. Generally speaking, the opti-
mum nutrient range for healthy eating is between the 
RDA and the UL. The established ULs for selected nutri-
ents are presented in Table 5.4.
5.2B  Daily Values  The Daily Values (DVs) are 
reference values for nutrients and food components for 
use on commercial food labels. The DVs are based on a 
2,000-calorie diet and may therefore require adjustments 
depending on an individual’s daily estimated energy 
r e q u i r e m e n t 
(EER) in calories.
For example, 
on a 2,000-calorie 
diet (EER), rec-
ommended carbo-
hydrate intake is 
about 300 grams 
(about 60 percent 
of EER), and fat is 
less than 65 grams 
Table 5.3  Recommended Dietary Allowances and Adequate Intakes for Selected Nutrients
 
Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDA)
Adequate 
Intakes (AI)
Males
14–18
1.2
1.3
16
1.3
400
2.4
1,250
410
900
75
15
15
55
11
1,300
3
5
25
550
19–30 
1.2
1.3
16
1.3
400
2.4
700
400
900
90
15
15
55
8
1,000
4
5
30
550
31–50 
1.2
1.3
16
1.3
400
2.4
700
420
900
90
15
15
55
8
1,000
4
5
30
550
51–70 
1.2
1.3
16
1.7
400
2.4
700
420
900
90
15
15
55
8
1,000
4
5
30
550
.70
1.2
1.3
16
1.7
400
2.4
700
420
900
90
20
15
55
8
1,200
4
5
30
550
Females
14–18 
1
1
14
1.2
400
2.4
1,250
360
700
65
15
15
55
15
1,300
3
5
25
400
19–30 
1.1
1.1
14
1.3
400
2.4
700
310
700
75
15
15
55
18
1,000
3
5
30
425
31–50 
1.1
1.1
14
1.3
400
2.4
700
320
700
75
15
15
55
8
1,000
3
5
30
425
51–70 
1.1
1.1
14
1.5
400
2.4
700
320
700
75
15
15
55
8
1,200
3
5
30
425
.70
1.1
1.1
14
1.5
400
2.4
700
320
700
75
20
15
55
27
1,200
3
5
30
425
Pregnant 
(19–30) 
1.4
1.4
18
1.9
600
*
140
350
770
85
15
15
60
1,000
3
6
30
450
Lactating 
(19–30) 
1.4
1.6
17
2
500
*
*
310
1,300
120
15
19
70
9
1,000
3
7
35
550
*Values for these nutrients do not change with pregnancy or lactation. Use the value listed for women of comparable age.
SOURCE: Reprinted with permission from “Dietary Reference Intakes: Recommended Dietary Allowances and Adequate Intakes, Vitamins,” “Dietary Reference Intakes: Recommended Dietary 
Allowances and Adequate Intakes, Elements,” and “Dietary Reference Intakes for Calcium and Vitamin D,” 2011 by the National Academy of Sciences. Courtesy of the National Academies 
Press, Washington, DC.
Thiamin (mg)
Riboflavin (mg)
Niacin (mg NE)
Vitamin B6 (mg)
Folate (mg)
Vitamin B12 (mg)
Phosphorus (mg)
Magnesium (mg)
Vitamin A (mg)
Vitamin C (mg)
Vitamin D (mg)
Vitamin E (mg)
Selenium (mcg)
Iron (mg)
Calcium (mg)
Fluoride (mg)
Panthothenic acid (mg)
Biotin (mg)
Choline (mg)
Daily Values (DVs)  Reference val-
ues for nutrients and food components 
used in food labels.
Estimated energy requirement 
(EER)  The average dietary energy (ca-
loric) intake that is predicted to main-
tain energy balance in a healthy adult 
of defined age, gender, weight, height, 
and level of physical activity, consis-
tent with good health.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

128
Fitness and Wellness
(about 30 percent of EER) (see Figure 5.1). The vitamin, 
mineral, and protein DVs were adapted from the RDAs. 
The DVs are also not as specific for age and gender 
groups as are the DRIs.
The food label is a good guide for planning a daily 
diet. For example, if the DV for carbohydrates in a given 
meal adds up to only 35 percent, you know that several 
additional high-carbohydrate food items are required 
throughout that day to reach the 100 percent DV. Fur-
ther, if the DV for fat from another food item is 60 per-
cent or 70 percent, you should limit your fat intake dur-
ing the rest of that day.
Both the DRIs and the DVs apply only to healthy 
adults. They are not intended for people who are ill and 
may require additional nutrients or dietary adjustments.
What do the nutrition standards mean to you? • How 
much of a challenge would it be to apply those standards 
in your daily life?
Critical Thinking
5.3  Dietary Guidelines
Most people would like to live life to its fullest, have good 
health, and lead a productive life. One of the ways to do 
this is through a well-balanced diet. As illustrated in Table 
5.5, the recommended guidelines by the National Acad-
emy of Sciences (NAS) state that daily caloric intake should 
be distributed so that 45 percent to 65 percent of the total 
calories come from carbohydrates (mostly complex carbo-
hydrates and less than 25 percent from sugar), 20 to 35 
percent from fat, and 10 to 35 percent from protein.2 These 
ranges offer greater flexibility in planning diets according 
to individual health and physical activity needs.
In addition to macronutrients, the diet must include 
all of the essential vitamins and minerals. The source of fat 
calories is also critical. The National Cholesterol Educa-
tion Program recommends that saturated fat constitute 
less than 7 percent, poly-unsaturated fat up to 10 percent, 
Table 5.4  Tolerable Upper Intake Levels (UL) of Selected  
Nutrients for Adults (19–70 years)
Nutrient
UL per Day
Calcium
2.5 gr
Phosphorus
4.0 gr*
Magnesium
350 mg
Vitamin D
50 mcg
Fluoride
10 mg
Niacin
35 mg
Iron
45 mg
Vitamin B6
100 mg
Folate
1,000 mcg
Choline
3.5 gr
Vitamin A
3,000 mcg
Vitamin C
2,000 mg
Vitamin E
1,000 mg
Selenium
400 mcg
*3.5 gr per day for pregnant women.
SOURCE: Adapted from the National Academy of Sciences, Institute of Medicine. Dietary 
Reference Intakes for Tolerable Upper Intake Levels, Vitamins. Washington D.C.: National 
Academy Press, 2011.
Figure 5.1
Food label using Daily Values.
Nutrition Facts
Serving Size 1 cup (240 ml)
Servings Per Container 4
Amount Per Serving
Calories 120 
Calories from Fat 45
% Daily Value*
Total Fat 5g 
8%
Saturated Fat 3g 
15%
Trans Fat 1g
Cholesterol 20mg 
7%
Sodium 120mg 
5%
Total Carbohydrate 12g 
4%
Dietary Fiber 0g 
0%
Sugars 12g
Protein 8g
Vitamin A 10% 
• 
Vitamin C 
4%
Calcium 
30% 
• 
Iron 
0%
* Percent Daily Values are based on a 2,000
  calorie diet. Your daily values may be
  higher or lower depending on your calorie
  needs:
Calories 2,000 
2,500
Total Fat 
Less than  65g 
Sat Fat 
20g 
Cholesterol 
300mg 
Sodium 
Less than 
Less than 
Less than 
2,300mg 
Total Carbohydrate 
300g 
Fiber 
25g 
80g
25g
300mg
2,300mg
375g
30g
Calories per gram:
Fat  9 
• Carbohydrate  4 
• 
Protein  4
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

129
Chapter 5  Nutrition for Wellness
and monounsaturated fat up to 20 percent of total calories. 
Rating a given diet accurately is difficult without a com-
plete nutrient analysis. You have an opportunity to per-
form this analysis in Activity 5.1, page 145.
The NAS guidelines vary slightly from those previ-
ously issued by major national health organizations, 
which recommend 50 percent to 60 percent of total calo-
ries from carbohydrates, less than 30 percent from fat, 
and about 15 percent from protein. These percentages 
are within the ranges recommended by the NAS. The 
most drastic difference appears in the NAS allowed range 
of fat intake, up to 35 percent of total calories. This 
higher percentage, however, was included to accommo-
date individuals with metabolic syndrome (see Chapter 
8, page 211) who have an abnormal insulin response to 
carbohydrates and may need additional fat in the diet. 
For all other individuals, daily fat intake should not ex-
ceed 30 percent of total caloric intake.
The NAS recommendations will be effective only if 
people consistently replace saturated and trans fatty ac-
ids with unsaturated fatty acids. Such a dietary change 
will require dramatic changes in the typical “unhealthy” 
American diet, which is generally high in red meats, 
whole dairy products, and fast foods—all of which are 
high in saturated and/or trans fatty acids.
5.4  Determining Fat 
Content in the Diet
As illustrated in Figure 5.2, each gram of carbohydrates 
and protein supplies the body with four calories, and fat 
provides nine calories per gram consumed (alcohol 
yields seven calories per gram). In this regard, just look-
ing at the total amount of grams consumed for each type 
of food can be misleading.
For example, a person who consumes 160 grams of 
carbohydrates, 100 grams of fat, and 70 grams of protein 
has a total intake of 330 grams of food. This indicates 
that 30 percent of the total grams of food is in the form 
of fat (100 grams of fat 4 330 grams of total food 3 100).
Almost half of this diet, however, consists of fat calo-
ries. In the diet, 640 calories are derived from carbohy-
drates (160 grams 3 4 calories/gram), 280 calories from 
protein (70 grams 3 3 calories/gram), and 900 calories 
from fat (100 grams 3 9 calories/gram), for a total of 
1,820 calories. If 900 calories are derived from fat, you 
can see that almost half of the total caloric intake is in the 
form of fat (900 4 1,820 3 100 5 49.5 percent).
Realizing that each gram of fat provides 9 calories is a 
useful guideline when figuring the fat content of individ-
ual foods. As shown in Figure 5.3, all you have to do is 
multiply the grams of fat by 9 and divide by the total calo-
ries in that specific food. Multiply that number by 100 to 
Table 5.5  Current and Recommended Intake of Carbohydrate, 
Fat, and Protein Expressed as a Percentage of Total Calories
Current
Recommended*
Carbohydrates
50%
45–65%
Simple
26%
Less than 25%
Complex
24%
20–40%
Fat
34%
20–35%**
Monounsaturated
11%
Up to 20%
Polyunsaturated
10%
Up to 10%
Saturated
13%
Less than 7%
Protein
16%
10–35%
*2002 recommended guidelines by the National Academy of Sciences.
**Less than 30% recommended by most health organizations. Up to 35% may be indi-
cated for people with metabolic syndrome who may need additional fat in the diet.
© Cengage Learning
Figure 5.2
Calories per gram of food.
Carbohydrate
Protein
Fat
Alcohol
4
4
9
7
© Cengage Learning
Figure 5.3
Determining percent calories  
from fat in food.
Percent fat calories = (g of fat × 9)
÷ calories per serving × 100
 5 g of fat × 9 calories per g of fat =
45 calories from fat
 45 calories from fat ÷ 120 calories per
serving × 100 = 38% fat
Serving = 120 calories
Fat = 5 g
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

130
Fitness and Wellness
get the percentage. For example, if a food label lists a total 
of 120 calories and 7 grams of fat, the fat content is 53 
percent of total calories (7 3 9 4 120 3 100). This simple 
guideline can help you decrease fat in your diet.
5.5  Balancing the Diet
Achieving and maintaining a balanced diet is not as dif-
ficult as most people think. The MyPlate healthy eating 
guide in Figure 5.4 contains five major food groups. The 
food groups are vegetables, fruits, grains, protein, and 
dairy.
Vegetables, fruits, whole grains, and low-fat milk 
(and by-products) provide the nutritional base for a 
healthy diet. If you increase the intake of these food 
groups, remember to decrease the intake of low-nutrient-
dense foods to effectively balance caloric intake with en-
ergy needs.
In addition to providing nutrients crucial to health, 
vegetables and fruits are the sole source of phytonutri-
ents (“phyto” comes from the Greek word for plant). The 
main function of phytonutrients in plants is to protect 
them from sunlight. In humans, phytonutrients seem to 
have a powerful ability to block the formation of cancer-
ous tumors. Their actions are so diverse that, at almost 
every stage of cancer, phytonutrients have the ability to 
block, disrupt, slow down, or even reverse the process 
(also see Chapter 8).
These compounds are not found in pills. The mes-
sage here is to eat a diet with ample fruits and vegetables. 
The daily recommended amount of vegetables and fruits 
has absolutely no substitute. People can’t expect to eat a 
poor diet, pop a few pills, and derive the same benefits.
Whole grains are a major source of fiber as well as 
other nutrients. Whole grains contain the entire grain 
kernel (the bran, germ, and endosperm). Examples in-
clude whole-wheat flour, whole cornmeal, oatmeal, 
cracked wheat (bulgur), and brown rice.
Refined grains have been milled, a process that re-
moves the bran and germ. The process also removes fi-
ber, iron, and many B vitamins. Refined grains include 
white flour, white bread, white rice, and degermed corn-
meal. Refined grains are often enriched to add back B 
vitamins and iron. Fiber, however, is not added back.
Dairy (milk and milk products—select low-fat or 
nonfat) can decrease the risk of low bone mass (osteopo-
rosis) throughout life. Besides providing calcium, milk is 
also a good source of potassium, vitamin D, and protein.
The recommendation for poultry, fish, or meat is to 
eat three ounces—and no more than six ounces—daily. 
All visible fat and skin should be trimmed off meats and 
poultry before cooking.
The difficult part for most people is retraining them-
selves to adopt a lifetime healthy nutrition plan. You can 
achieve a balanced diet if you (a) avoid excessive fats, oils, 
sweets, sodium (salt), and alcohol; (b) increase your fiber 
intake; and (c) eat the minimum number of servings rec-
ommended for each of the major groups in MyPlate.
5.6  Nutrient Analysis
To aid you in balancing your diet, Activity 5.1, page 145, 
provides a form for you to record your daily food intake. 
First, make as many copies as the number of days you 
wish to analyze. Whenever you eat something, record the 
food and the amount eaten. Doing this immediately after 
each meal enables you to keep track of your actual food 
intake more easily.
At the end of each day, consult the list of foods in 
Appendix E and record the number of calories for all 
foods consumed. Referring to Activity 5.1, record the 
amount and calories under the respective food groups. If 
you eat twice the amount of a standard serving, double 
the calories and the amount.
You can evaluate the diet by comparing your food 
intake recorded in Activity 5.1 against MyPlate guide-
lines (Figure 5.4). To start the activity, go to www.
choose­myplate.
gov/ and establish 
your 
personal 
Daily Food Plan 
based on your age, 
gender, 
height, 
Phytonutrients  Compounds found in 
vegetables and fruits with cancer-
fighting properties.
Figure 5.4
MyPlate food guide.
SOURCE: USDA, 2011.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

131
Chapter 5  Nutrition for Wellness
weight, and physical activity level. To do so, select the 
‘SuperTracker & Other Tools’ tab and choose ‘Daily Food 
Plans.’ Now click on ‘Daily Food Plan’ at the beginning of 
the text under ‘Daily Food Plans and Worksheets.’ You 
may also go directly to www.choosemyplate.gov. When-
ever you have something to eat, record the food and the 
amount eaten according to the MyPlate standard 
amounts (ounce, cup, or teaspoon—Figure 5.4). Do this 
immediately after each meal so you will be able to keep 
track of your actual food intake more easily. At the end 
of the day, evaluate your diet by checking whether you 
ate the minimum required amounts for each food group. 
If you meet the minimum required servings at the end of 
each day and your caloric intake is in balance with the 
Any food made from 
wheat, rice, oats, 
cornmeal, barley, or 
another cereal grain is 
a grain product. Bread, 
pasta, oatmeal, 
breakfast cereals, 
tortillas, and grits are 
examples of grain 
products.
Grains are divided into 
2 subgroups: whole 
grains and refined 
grains.
All foods made from 
meat, poultry, seafood, 
beans and peas, eggs, 
processed soy 
products, nuts, and 
seeds are considered 
part of the Protein Foods 
Group (beans and peas 
are also part of the 
Vegetable Group).
Select at least 8 ounces 
of cooked seafood per 
week. Meat and poultry 
choices should be lean 
or low-fat. Young 
children need less, 
depending on their age 
and calorie needs. The 
advice to consume 
seafood does not apply 
to vegetarians. 
Vegetarian options in 
the Protein Foods 
Group include beans 
and peas, processed 
soy products, and nuts 
and seeds. 
All fluid milk products 
and many foods made 
from milk are consid-
ered part of this food 
group. Most Dairy 
Group choices should 
be fat-free or low-fat. 
Foods made from milk 
that retain their calcium 
content are part of the 
group. Foods made 
from milk that have little 
to no calcium, such as 
cream cheese, cream, 
and butter, are not. 
Calcium-fortified 
soymilk (soy beverage) 
is also part of the Dairy 
Group.
Recommended Daily Amounts
Women 
Vegetables 
Fruits 
Grains 
Protein 
Dairy
19–30 years old 
2½ cups 
2 cups 
6 oz. equivalents 
5½ oz. equivalents 
3 cups
31–50 years old 
2½ cups 
1½ cups 
6 oz. equivalents 
5 oz. equivalents 
3 cups
51+ years old 
2 cups 
1½ cups 
5 oz. equivalents 
5 oz. equivalents 
3 cups
Men
19–30 years old 
3 cups 
2 cups 
8 oz. equivalents 
6½ oz. equivalents 
3 cups
31–50 years old 
3 cups 
2 cups 
7 oz. equivalents 
6 oz. equivalents 
3 cups
51+ years old  
2½ cups 
2 cups 
6 oz. equivalents 
6½ oz. equivalents 
3 cups
Any fruit or 100% fruit 
juice counts as part of 
the Fruit Group. Fruits 
may be fresh, 
canned, frozen, or 
dried, and may be 
whole, cut-up, or 
pureed.
FRUITS
Any vegetable or 
100% vegetable juice 
counts as a member 
of the Vegetable 
Group. Vegetables 
may be raw or 
cooked; fresh, frozen, 
canned, or 
dried/dehydrated; 
and may be whole, 
cut-up, or mashed.
Vegetables are 
organized into 5 
subgroups, based on 
their nutrient content: 
Dark green 
vegetables, red and 
orange vegetables, 
beans and peas, 
starchy vegetables, 
and other vegetables.
VEGETABLES
GRAINS
PROTEIN
DAIRY
Make half your plate
fruit and vegetables.
Make half your plate
fruit and vegetables.
Make at least half your
grains whole grains.
Choose fish and lean
or low-fat meat and
poultry.
Switch to fat-free or
low-fat (1%) milk.


Figure 5.4
MyPlate food guide. (continued)
SOURCE: USDA, 2011.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

132
Fitness and Wellness
recommended amount, you are taking good steps to a 
healthier you.
In addition to meeting the daily amount guidelines, 
a complete nutrient analysis is recommended to rate 
your diet accurately. A nutrient analysis can pinpoint 
potential problem areas in your diet, such as too much 
fat, saturated fat, cholesterol, sodium, and the like. A 
complete nutrient analysis can be an educational experi-
ence because most people do not realize how detrimen-
tal and non-nutritious many common foods are.
You can also do the analysis by logging on to www.
cengagebrain.com and using the information you have 
recorded already on the form provided in Activity 5.1. 
Up to seven days may be analyzed when using the soft-
ware. Before running the software, fill out the informa-
tion at the top of the form (age, weight, height, gender, 
and activity rating), and make sure the foods are re-
corded by the standard amounts given in the list of se-
lected foods in Appendix E. The analysis also accommo-
dates vegetarianism.
5.7  Vegetarianism
More than 12 million people in the United States follow 
vegetarian diets. Vegetarians rely primarily on foods 
from the grains and fruit and vegetable groups and avoid 
foods from animal sources including the milk, yogurt, 
and cheese and meat groups.
Following are five basic types of vegetarians:
	1.	
Vegans: those who eat no animal products at all
	2.	
Ovovegetarians: those who allow eggs in the diet
	3.	
Lactovegetarians: those who allow foods from the 
milk group
	4.	
Ovolactovegetarians: those who include egg and 
milk products in the diet
	5.	
Semivegetarians: those who do not eat red meat 
but include fish and poultry in addition to milk 
products and eggs in their diets
Well-planned vegetarian diets are healthful, are con-
sistent with the Dietary Guidelines for Americans, and 
can meet the DRIs for nutrients. Vegetarians who do not 
select their food combinations properly, however, can 
develop nutritional deficiencies of protein, vitamins, 
minerals, and even calories. Even more attention should 
be paid when planning vegetarian diets for infants and 
children. Without careful planning, a strictly plant-based 
diet will prevent proper growth and development.
Protein deficiency is a concern in some vegetarian 
diets. Vegans in particular must be careful to eat foods 
that provide a balanced distribution of essential amino 
acids, such as grain products and legumes. Strict vegans 
also need a supplement of vitamin B12. This vitamin is 
not found in plant foods; its only source is animal foods. 
A deficiency of this vitamin can lead to anemia and 
nerve damage.
The key to a healthful vegetarian diet is to eat foods 
with complementary proteins. Most plant-based prod-
ucts lack one or more essential amino acids in adequate 
amounts. For example, both grains and legumes are 
good protein sources, but neither provides all the essen-
tial amino acids. Grains and cereals are low in the amino 
acid lysine, and legumes lack methionine. As noted un-
der Proteins on pages 124–125, grains and legumes 
complement each other and legumes and nuts comple-
ment each other, but nuts and grains are nor comple-
mentary proteins. For example, tortillas and beans, rice 
and beans, rice and soybeans, or wheat bread and pea-
nuts, will complement each other. These complementary 
proteins may be consumed over the course of the day, 
but it is best if they are consumed during the same meal.
MyPlate can also be used as a guide for vegetarians. 
The key is food variety. Most vegetarians today consume 
dairy products and eggs. Meat can be replaced with le-
gumes, nuts, seeds, eggs, and meat substitutes (tofu, 
tempeh, soy milk, and commercial meat replacers such 
as veggie burgers and soy hot dogs). For additional My-
Plate healthy eating tips for vegetarians and ways to get 
enough of the previously mentioned nutrients, go to 
http://www.choosemyplate.gov/.
Consumption of nuts and soy foods, commonly 
used in vegetarian diets, has received considerable atten-
tion in recent years. Although nuts are 70 percent to 90 
percent fat, most of it is unsaturated fat. And research 
indicates that people who eat nuts several times a week 
have a lower incidence of heart disease. Eating 2 to 3 
ounces (about one-half cup) of almonds, walnuts, or 
macadamia nuts a day may decrease high blood choles-
terol by about 10 percent.
Heart-health benefits are attributed to the unsatu-
rated fats and also to other nutrients found in nuts, such 
as vitamin E and folic acid. Nuts are also packed with 
additional B vitamins, calcium, copper, potassium, mag-
nesium, fiber, and phytonutrients. Many of these nutri-
ents are cancer- and cardio-protective.
Nuts do have a drawback: They are high in calories. 
A handful of nuts provides as many calories as a piece of 
cake. Therefore, you should avoid using nuts as a snack. 
Nuts are recommended for use in place of high-protein 
foods such as meats, bacon, and eggs, or as part of a meal 
in fruit or vegetable salads, homemade bread, pancakes, 
casseroles, yogurt, and oatmeal. Peanut butter is also 
healthier than cheese or some cold cuts in sandwiches.
The increasing popularity of soy foods is attributed 
primarily to Asian research that points to less heart disease 
and fewer hormone-related cancers in people who regu-
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

133
Chapter 5  Nutrition for Wellness
larly consume soy foods. The benefits of soy lie in its high 
protein content and plant chemicals, known as isoflavones, 
that act as antioxidants and may protect against estrogen-
related cancers (breast, ovarian, and endometrial).
The compound genistein, one of many phytonutri-
ents in soy, may reduce the risk for breast cancer, and soy 
consumption also may lower the risk for prostate cancer. 
Limited animal studies have suggested an actual increase 
in breast cancer risk. Human studies are still inconclu-
sive but tend to favor a slight protective effect in pre-
menopausal women.
Those who are interested in vegetarian diets should 
consult other resources. A thorough discussion of such 
diets cannot be covered adequately in a few paragraphs.
5.8  Nutrient 
Supplementation
Approximately half of all adults in the United States take 
daily nutrient supplements. Nutrient requirements for 
the body normally can be met by consuming as few as 
1,500 calories per day, as long as the diet contains the 
recommended amounts of food from the different food 
groups.
Most supplements do not seem to provide addi-
tional benefits for healthy people who eat a balanced 
diet. They do not help people run faster, jump higher, 
relieve stress, improve their sexual prowess, cure a com-
mon cold, or boost energy levels. Some of the special 
cases are discussed below.
People should not take megadoses of vitamins and 
minerals. For some nutrients, a dose of five times the 
RDA taken over several months may create problems. 
For others, such a dose may not pose any threat to hu-
man health. With the possible exception of vitamin D 
(see discussion on page 135), vitamin and mineral intake 
should not exceed the ULs. For nutrients that do not 
have an established UL, a person should not take a dos-
age higher than three times the RDA.
Iron deficiency (determined through blood testing) 
is more common in women than men. Iron supplemen-
tation is frequently recommended for women who have 
a heavy menstrual flow. Some pregnant and lactating 
women also may require supplements. The average preg-
nant woman who eats an adequate amount of a variety of 
foods should take a low dose of iron supplement daily. 
Women who are pregnant with more than one baby may 
need additional supplements.
5.8A  Antioxidants  Much research and discussion 
is taking place regarding the effectiveness of antioxidants 
in thwarting several chronic diseases. Although foods 
probably contain more than 4,000 antioxidants, the four 
more studied antioxidants are vitamins E and C, beta-
carotene (a precursor to vitamin A), and the mineral 
selenium (see Table 5.6).
Oxygen is utilized during metabolism to change car-
bohydrates and fats into energy. During this process oxy-
gen is transformed into stable forms of water and carbon 
dioxide. A small amount of oxygen, however, ends up in 
an unstable form, referred to as oxygen free radicals.
Free radicals attack and damage proteins and lipids, 
in particular cell membranes and DNA. This damage is 
thought to contribute to the development of conditions 
such as cardiovascular disease, cancer, emphysema, cata-
racts, Parkinson’s disease, and premature aging. Environ-
mental factors that seem to encourage the formation of 
free radicals include solar radiation, cigarette smoke,  
air pol­lution, radi-
ation, some drugs, 
injury or infec-
tion, and chemi-
cals (such as pesti-
cides), 
among 
others.
The 
body’s 
own defense sys-
tems typically neu-
tralize free radicals 
so they don’t cause 
any damage. When 
free radicals are 
produced 
faster 
Vegetarians  Individuals whose diet 
is of vegetable or plant origin.
Supplements  Tablets, pills, cap-
sules, liquids, or powders that contain 
vitamins, minerals, amino acids, herbs, 
or fiber that are taken to increase the 
intake of these substances.
Megadoses  For most vitamins, 10 
times the RDA or more; for vitamins A 
and D, 5 and 2 times the RDA, 
respectively.
Table 5.6  Antioxidant Nutrients, Sources, and Functions
Nutrient
Good Sources
Antioxidant 
Effect
Vitamin C
Citrus fruit, kiwi fruit, 
cantaloupe, strawberries, 
broccoli, green or red 
peppers, cauliflower, 
cabbage
Appears to inactivate 
oxygen free radicals.
Vitamin E
Vegetable oils, yellow and 
green leafy vegetables, 
margarine, wheat germ, 
oatmeal, almonds, whole-
grain breads, cereals
Protects lipids from 
oxidation.
Beta-
carotene
Carrots, squash, pump-
kin, sweet potatoes, broc-
coli, green leafy 
vegetables
Soaks up oxygen free 
radicals.
Selenium
Seafood, Brazil nuts, 
meat, whole grains
Helps prevent damage 
to cell structures.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

134
Fitness and Wellness
than the body can neutralize them, however, they can 
damage the cells.
Antioxidants work best in the prevention and pro-
gression of disease, but they cannot repair damage that 
has already occurred or cure people with disease. The 
benefits are obtained primarily from food sources them-
selves, and controversy surrounds the benefits of antioxi-
dants taken in supplement form.
For years people believed that taking antioxidant 
supplements could further prevent free-radical damage, 
but a report published in the Journal of the American 
Medical Association indicated that antioxidant supple-
ments actually increase the risk of death.3 Vitamin E, 
beta-carotene, and vitamin A increased the risk of mortal-
ity by 4 percent, 7 percent, and 16 percent, respectively. 
Vitamin C had no effect on mortality, while selenium de-
creased risk by 9 percent. Some researchers, however, have 
questioned the design and conclusions of this report.
Antioxidant Nutrients
Antioxidants are found abundantly in food, especially in 
fruits and vegetables. Unfortunately, most Americans do 
not eat the minimum daily recommended amounts of 
fruits and vegetables.
The RDA for vitamin E is 15 mg or 22 IU (interna-
tional units). Although no evidence indicates that vita-
min E supplementation below the upper limit of 1,000 
mg per day is harmful, little or no clinical research sup-
ports any health benefits. Vitamin E is found primarily 
in oil-rich seeds and vegetable oils. Foods high in vita-
min E include almonds, hazelnuts, peanuts, canola oil, 
safflower oil, cottonseed oil, kale, sunflower seeds, 
shrimp, wheat germ, sweet potato, avocado, and tomato 
sauce. You should incorporate some of these foods regu-
larly in your diet to obtain the RDA.
Studies have shown that vitamin C may offer bene-
fits against heart disease, cancer, and cataracts. People 
who consume the recommended amounts of daily fruits 
and vegetables, nonetheless, need no supplementation 
because they obtain their daily vitamin C requirements 
through diet alone.
Vitamin C is water-soluble, and the body eliminates 
it in about 12 hours. For best results, consume vitamin 
C-rich foods twice a day. High intake of a vitamin C 
supplement, above 500 mg per day, is not recommended. 
The body absorbs very little vitamin C beyond the first 
200 mg per serving or dose. Foods high in vitamin C 
include oranges and other citrus fruit, kiwi fruit, canta-
loupe, guava, bell peppers, strawberries, broccoli, kale, 
cauliflower, and tomatoes.
Beta-carotene supplementation was encouraged in 
the early 1990s. Obtaining the daily recommended dose 
of beta-carotene (20,000 IU) from food sources rather 
than supplements is preferable. Clinical trials have found 
that beta-carotene supplements do not offer protection 
against heart disease or cancer or provide any other 
health benefits. Therefore, the recommendation is to 
“skip the pill and eat the carrot.” One medium raw carrot 
contains about 20,000 IU of beta-carotene. Other foods 
high in beta-carotene include sweet potatoes, pumpkin, 
cantaloupe, squash, kale, broccoli, tomatoes, peaches, 
apricots, mangoes, papaya, turnip greens, and spinach.
Early research on individuals who took 200 micro-
grams (mcg) of selenium daily indicates that it decreased 
the risk for prostate, colorectal, and lung cancers by about 
50 percent and may have also decreased the risk for can-
cers of the breast, liver, and digestive tract. More recent 
research, however, has failed to confirm such benefits and 
experts recommend caution with selenium supplements.
One Brazil nut (unshelled) that you crack yourself 
provides about 100 mcg of selenium. Shelled nuts found 
in supermarkets average only about 20 mcg each.
Based on the current body of research, 100 to 200 
mcg of selenium per day seems to provide the necessary 
amount of antioxidant for this nutrient. A person has no 
reason to take more than 200 mcg daily. In fact, the UL 
for selenium has been set at 400 mcg. Too much sele-
nium can damage cells rather than protect them.
5.8B  Multivitamins  Although much interest has 
been generated in the previously mentioned individual 
supplements, the American people still prefer multivita-
mins as supplements. At present, there is no solid scien-
tific evidence that they decrease the risk of either 
cardiovascular disease or cancer. The most convincing 
data came in a 2009 study on more than 161,000 post-
menopausal women taking multivitamin pills.4 The re-
The best sources for disease-prevention nutrients (antioxidants and 
phytonutrients) are fruits, vegetables, and grains.
ACE STOCK LIMITED/Alamy
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

135
Chapter 5  Nutrition for Wellness
sults showed no benefits in terms of cardiovascular, 
cancer, or premature mortality risk reduction in women 
taking a multivitamin complex for an average of eight 
years compared to those who did not.
If you take multivitamins for general health reasons, 
you may help fill in certain deficiencies, but it doesn’t 
grant you a license to eat carelessly. Multivitamins are 
not magic pills. They don’t provide energy, fiber, or phy-
tonutrients. People who eat a healthy diet, with ample 
amounts of fruits, vegetables, and grains, have a low risk 
of cardiovascular disease and cancer compared to people 
with deficient diets who take a multivitamin complex.
5.8C  Vitamin D  Vitamin D is attracting a lot of at-
tention because research suggests that the vitamin pos-
sesses anti-cancer properties, especially against breast, 
colon, and prostate cancers and possibly lung and diges-
tive cancers. It also decreases inflammation, fighting 
cardiovascular disease, periodontal disease, and athero-
sclerosis. Furthermore, vitamin D strengthens the im-
mune system, controls blood pressure, helps maintain 
muscle strength, decreases the risk for arthritis, prevents 
birth defects, and may help deter diabetes and fight de-
pression; it is also necessary for the absorption of cal-
cium, a nutrient critical for dental health and for building 
and maintaining bones to prevent osteoporosis.
The theory that vitamin D protects against cancer is 
based on studies showing that people who live farther 
north, who have less sun exposure during the winter 
months, have a higher incidence of cancer. Additionally, 
people diagnosed with breast, colon, or prostate cancer 
during the summer months, when vitamin D production 
by the body is at its highest, are 30 percent less likely to 
die from cancer, even 10 years following the initial diag-
nosis. Researchers believe that the vitamin D level at the 
time of cancer onset affects survival rates.
The current recommended daily intake ranges be-
tween 200 and 600 IU (5 and 15 mcg—based on your 
age), an amount believed to be too low for most indi-
viduals, especially during the winter months. The UL has 
been set at 2,000 IU (50 mcg). Experts believe that this 
figure needs revision because there are no data implicat-
ing toxic effects up to 10,000 IU (250 mcg) a day.5
During the winter months, most people in the 
United States living north of latitude 35 degrees (above 
the states of Georgia and Texas) and in Canada are not 
getting enough vitamin D. The body uses ultraviolet B 
rays (UVB) to generate vitamin D. UVB rays are shorter 
than ultraviolet A rays (UVA), so they penetrate the at-
mosphere at higher angles. During the winter season, the 
sun is too far south for the UVB rays to get through.
In 2010, the Institute of Medicine of the National 
Academy of Sciences increased the recommended daily 
intake level of vitamin D to 600 IU for children and adults 
up to 70 years of age. Older adults should get 800 IU per 
day. This level is not as high as vitamin D experts had 
hoped for. Preliminary evidence suggests that we should 
get between 1,000 and 2,000 IU (25 to 50 mcg) per day.6
The most accurate test to measure how much vita-
min D is in your body is through the 25-hydroxyvitamin 
D test. Blood levels should remain between 50 and 80 
ng/mL all year long. To increase your levels, the Vitamin 
D Council recommends that all adults supplement with 
5,000 IU of vitamin D daily for 3 months and then take 
a 25-hydroxyvitamin D test.7 You may then adjust your 
supplement dosage based on your test results, daily sun 
exposure, and the season of the year.
Depending on skin tone and sun intensity, about 15 
minutes of unprotected sun exposure (without sun-
screen) of the face, arms, hands, and lower legs during 
peak daylight hours (10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.—when 
your shadow is shorter than your actual height) gener-
ates between 2,000 and 5,000 IU of vitamin D. Thus, it 
makes no sense that the UL is set at 2,000 when the hu-
man body manufactures more than that in just 15 min-
utes of unprotected sun exposure. The UL of 2,000 IU 
will most likely be revised in the next update of the DRIs.
Good sources of vitamin D in the diet include salmon, 
mackerel, tuna, and sardines. Fortified milk, yogurt, or-
ange juice, margarines, and cereals are also good sources. 
To obtain up to 2,000 IU per day from food sources alone, 
however, is difficult (see Table 5.7). Thus, daily safe sun 
exposure and/or supplementation (especially during the 
winter months) is highly recommended.
The best source of vitamin D is sunshine. UVB rays 
lead to the production on the surface of the skin of inactive 
oil-soluble vitamin D3. The inactive form is then trans-
formed by the liver, and subsequently the kidneys, into the 
Table 5.7  Good Sources of Vitamin D
Food
Amount
IU*
Multivitamins (most brands)
daily dose
400
Salmon
3.5 oz
360
Mackerel
3.5 oz
345
Sardines (oil/drained)
3.5 oz
250
Shrimp
3.5 oz
200
Orange juice (D-fortified)
8 oz
100
Milk (any type/D-fortified)
8 oz
100
Margarine (D-fortified)
1 tbsp
  60
Yogurt (D-fortified)
6–8 oz
  60
Cereal (D-fortified)
3⁄4–1 c
  40
Egg
1
  20
*IU—International units
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

136
Fitness and Wellness
active form of vitamin D. Sun-generated vitamin D is bet-
ter than that obtained from foods or supplements.
Vitamin D3 generated on the surface of the skin, 
however, doesn’t immediately penetrate into the blood. It 
takes up to 48 hours to absorb most of the vitamin. Be-
cause soap is an oil-soluble compound, experts recom-
mend avoiding its use following safe sun exposure, as it 
would wash off most of the vitamin. You may use soap 
for your armpits, groin area, and feet, but avoid doing so 
on the newly sun-exposed skin.
Excessive sun exposure can lead to skin damage and 
skin cancer. It is best to strive for daily “safe sun” expo-
sure, that is, 10 to 20 minutes (based on skin tone and 
sun intensity) of unprotected sun exposure during peak 
hours of the day a few times a week. Generating too 
much vitamin D from the sun is impossible because the 
body generates only what it needs. If you have extremely 
sensitive skin, you may start with five minutes and pro-
gressively increase sun exposure by one minute per day. 
If your skin turns a slight pink following exposure, you 
have overdone it and need to cut back on the time that 
you are out in the sun.
People at the highest risk for low vitamin D levels 
are older adults, those with dark skin, and individuals 
who spend most of their time indoors and get little sun 
exposure. People with darker skin may need 5 to 10 
times the sun exposure of lighter-skinned people to gen-
erate the same amount of vitamin D. The skin’s dark pig-
ment reduces the ability of the body to synthesize vita-
min D from the sun by up to 95 percent.
In the United States and Canada, most of the popu-
lation does not make vitamin D from the sun during the 
winter months when UVB rays do not get through, most 
of the time is spent indoors, and extra clothing is worn 
to protect against the cold. During periods of limited sun 
exposure, you should consider a daily vitamin D3 supple-
ment of up to 2,000 IU per day (some vitamins contain 
vitamin D2, which is a less potent form of the vitamin).
5.8D  Folate  A folate (a B vitamin) supplement has 
been recommended for all premenopausal women. In 
particular, folate supplements are encouraged prior to 
and during pregnancy. This includes women who might 
become pregnant. Studies have shown that high folate 
intake (400 mcg per day) during early pregnancy can 
prevent serious birth defects. Folate also seems to offer 
protection against colon and cervical cancers. In all the 
above instances, supplements should be taken under a 
physician’s supervision.
Increasing evidence indicates that taking 400 mcg of 
folate along with vitamins B6 and B12 prevents heart at-
tacks by reducing homocysteine levels in the blood (see 
Chapter 8). High concentrations of homocysteine accel-
erate the process of plaque formation (atherosclerosis) in 
the arteries. Five servings of fruits and vegetables per day 
usually meet the needs for these nutrients. Currently, 
close to 9 in 10 adults in the United States do not meet 
the recommended 400 mcg of folate per day. Because of 
the critical role of folate in preventing heart disease, 
some experts also recommend a daily vitamin B complex 
that includes 400 mcg of folate.
5.9  Benefits of Foods
In its latest position statement on nutrient supplements, 
the American Dietetic Association stated, “The best  
nutrition-based strategy for promoting optimal health 
and reducing the risk of chronic disease is to wisely 
choose a wide variety of foods. Additional nutrients 
from supplements can help some people meet their nu-
trient needs as specified by science-based nutrition stan-
dards such as the Dietary Reference Intakes.”8
Fruits and vegetables are the richest sources of anti-
oxidants and phytonutrients. Researchers at the U.S. 
Department of Agriculture compared the antioxidant 
effects of vitamins C and E with those of various com-
mon fruits and vegetables. The results indicated that 
three-fourths cup of cooked kale (which contains only 
11 IU of vitamin E and 76 mg of vitamin C) neutralized 
as many free radicals as approximately 800 IU of vitamin 
E or 600 mg of vitamin C supplements. Other excellent 
sources of antioxidants found by these researchers in-
clude blueberries, strawberries, spinach, Brussels sprouts, 
plums, broccoli, beets, oranges, and grapes.
Many people who eat unhealthy diets think they 
need supplementation to balance their diet. This is fal-
lacy about nutrition. The problem here is not necessarily 
a lack of vitamins and minerals, but a diet too high in 
calories, saturated fat, and sodium. Vitamin, mineral, 
and fiber supplements do not supply all of the nutrients 
and other beneficial substances present in food and 
needed for good health.
Wholesome foods contain vitamins, minerals, car-
bohydrates, fiber, proteins, fats, phytonutrients, and 
other substances not yet discovered. Researchers do not 
know if the protective effects are caused by the antioxi-
dants alone, or in combination with other nutrients 
(such as phytonutrients), or by some other nutrients in 
food that have not been investigated yet. Many nutrients 
work in synergy, enhancing chemical processes in the 
body.
Supplementation will not offset poor eating habits. 
Pills are no substitute for common sense. If you think 
your diet is not balanced, you first need to conduct a 
nutrient analysis (see Activity 5.1 on page 145) to deter-
mine which nutrients you lack in sufficient amounts. Eat 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

137
Chapter 5  Nutrition for Wellness
more of them, as well as foods that are high in antioxi-
dants and phytonutrients. After you perform a nutrient 
assessment, a registered dietitian can help you decide 
what supplement(s), if any, might be necessary.
The American Heart Association does not recom-
mend antioxidant supplements until more definite re-
search is available. If you take supplements in pill 
form, look for products that meet the USP (U.S. Phar-
macopoeia) disintegration standards on the bottle. The 
USP symbol suggests that the supplement should com-
pletely dissolve in 45 minutes or less. Supplements that 
do not dissolve, of course, cannot get into the 
bloodstream.
Do you take supplements? If so, for what purposes are 
you taking them—and do you think you could restructure 
your diet so you could do without them?
Critical Thinking
5.9A  Probiotics  Yogurt is rated in the “super foods” 
category because, in addition to being a good source of 
calcium, riboflavin, and protein, it contains probiotics. 
These health-promoting microorganisms live in the in-
testines and help break down foods and prevent disease-
causing organisms from settling in. Probiotics have been 
found to offer protection against gastrointestinal infec-
tions, boost immune activity, and even help fight certain 
types of cancer.
Yogurts are cultured with L. bulgaricus and S. ther-
mophilus probiotics. When selecting yogurt, preferably, 
look for products that also contain L-acidophilus, Bifidus, 
and the prebiotic (substances on which probiotics feed) 
inulin. The latter, a soluble fiber, appears to enhance cal-
cium absorption. Avoid yogurt with added fruit jam, 
sugar, and candy.
5.9B  Fish  Potential contaminants in fish, in particular 
mercury, have created concerns among some people. Mer-
cury, a naturally occurring trace mineral, can be released 
into the air from 
industrial 
pollu-
tion. As mercury 
falls into streams 
and oceans, it ac-
cumulates in the 
aquatic food chain. 
Larger 
fish 
ac­
cumulate 
larger 
amounts of mer-
cury because they 
eat medium and 
small fish. Of par-
Synergy  A reaction in which the re-
sult is greater than the sum of its two 
parts.
Registered dietitian (RD)  A person 
with a college degree in dietetics who 
meets all certification and continuing 
education requirements of the 
American Dietetic Association or 
Dietitians of Canada.
Guidelines for a Healthy Diet
• Base your diet on a large variety of foods.
• Consume ample amounts of green, yellow, and orange 
fruits and vegetables.
• Eat foods high in complex carbohydrates, including at 
least three one-ounce servings of whole-grain foods per 
day.
• Obtain most of your vitamins and minerals from food 
sources.
• Eat foods rich in vitamin D.
• Maintain adequate daily calcium intake and consider a 
bone supplement with vitamin D3.
• Daily protein consumption should be within the recom-
mended amount for your activity level.
• Limit daily fat, trans fat, and saturated fat intake.
Behavior Modification Planning
• Limit meat consumption to less than three ounces per 
day.
• Limit cholesterol consumption to less than 300 mg per 
day.
• Limit sodium intake to 2,300 mg per day.
• Limit sugar intake.
• If you drink alcohol, do so in moderation (one daily drink 
for women and two for men—women with a family or per-
sonal history of breast, esophagus, larynx, rectum, and 
liver cancers are encouraged to abstain from alcohol).
Try It
Carefully analyze the above guidelines and note the areas 
where you can improve your diet. Work on one guideline 
each week until you are able to adhere to all of the above 
guidelines.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

138
Fitness and Wellness
ticular concern are shark, swordfish, king mackerel, pike, 
bass, and tilefish that have higher levels.
The American Heart Association recommends con-
suming fish twice a week. The risk of adverse effects from 
eating fish is extremely low and primarily theoretical in 
nature.9 For most people, eating two servings (up to 6 
ounces) of fish per week poses no health threat. Pregnant 
and nursing women and young children, however, 
should avoid mercury in fish. Farm-raised salmon also 
have slightly higher levels of polychlorinated biphenyls 
(PCBs), which the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency lists as a “probable human carcinogen.”
The best recommendation is to balance the risks 
against the benefits. If you are concerned, consume no 
more than 12 ounces per week of a variety of fish and shell-
fish that are lower in mercury, including canned light tuna, 
wild salmon, shrimp, pollock, catfish, and scallops. A re-
view of more than 200 studies on the effects of fish con-
sumption on health concluded that the benefits exceed the 
potential risks and seafood appears to be the single most 
important food a person can consume for good health.10
5.9C  Advanced Glycation End Products  A 
new area of research in nutrition has to do with advanced 
glycation end products (AGEs), compounds that have 
been implicated in aging, adverse effects, and chronic dis-
eases by increasing oxidation and inflammation. AGEs are 
thought to contribute to the development of atherosclero-
sis, heart disease, diabetes and diabetes-related complica-
tions, kidney disease, osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, 
and Alzheimer’s disease, among others. These compounds 
are produced when glucose combines with proteins, lip-
ids, and other ingredients in foods.
AGEs are found primarily in foods cooked in dry 
heat, at high temperatures, in processed foods, and in 
foods high in fat content. Broiling, grilling, and frying cre-
ate the highest levels of AGEs, whereas braising, steaming, 
stewing, roasting, boiling, and poaching decrease the lev-
els. French-fried potatoes have about eight times the 
amount of AGEs compared with the same amount with a 
baked potato. Fast-food restaurants take advantage of the 
flavor-enhancing effects of AGEs by adding these toxic 
compounds to their foods to increase the foods’ appeal to 
the consumer. The take-home message to the consumer 
here is once again moderation. You do not have to com-
pletely eliminate grilling, frying, and fast foods, but com-
mon sense is vital to maintain good health.
The following guidelines can help you decrease 
AGEs in your diet:
	1.	
Limit cooking meats at high temperatures.
	2.	
Avoid high-fat foods (whole milk products and 
meats).
	3.	
Increase intake of fruits, vegetables, grains, fish, 
and low-fat milk products.
	4.	
Choose unprocessed over processed foods by cook-
ing fresh foods from scratch.
	5.	
Eat at home most of the time and avoid prepack-
aged and fast foods as much as possible.
	6.	
Avoid browning because the process of browning 
sugars and proteins on food surfaces increases the 
formation of AGEs.
5.10  Eating Disorders
Eating disorders are medical illnesses that involve criti-
cal disturbances in eating behaviors thought to stem 
from some combination of environmental pressures. 
These disorders are characterized by an intense fear of 
becoming fat, which does not disappear even after the 
individual has lost extreme amounts of weight. The two 
most common types of eating disorders are anorexia 
nervosa and bulimia nervosa, although binge eating, 
also known as compulsive overeating, is recognized as an 
eating disorder as well.
Most people who have eating disorders are afflicted 
by significant family and social problems. They may lack 
fulfillment in many areas of their lives. The eating disor-
der then becomes the coping mechanism to avoid deal-
ing with these problems. Taking control over their own 
body weight helps them feel that they are restoring some 
sense of control over their lives.
Anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa are common 
in industrialized nations where society encourages low-
calorie diets and thinness. Although frequently seen in 
young women, the majority seeking treatment are be-
tween the ages of 25 and 50. Surveys, nonetheless, indi-
cate that as many as 40 percent of college-age women are 
struggling with an eating disorder.
Eating disorders are not limited to women. Every  
1 in 10 cases exists in men. But because the role of men 
in society and their body image are viewed differently, 
these cases often go unreported.
Individuals who have clinical depression and  
obsessive-compulsive behavior are more susceptible. 
About half of all people with eating disorders have some 
sort of chemical dependency (alcohol and drugs), and a 
majority of them come from families with alcohol and 
drug-related problems. Of reported cases of eating disor-
ders, a large number are individuals who are, or have 
been, victims of sexual molestation.
Eating disorders develop in stages. Typically, indi-
viduals who are already dealing with significant issues in 
life start a diet. At first they feel in control and are happy 
about the weight loss even if they are not overweight. En-
couraged by the prospect of weight loss and the control 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

139
Chapter 5  Nutrition for Wellness
they can exert over their own weight, the individual takes 
dieting to an extreme and often combines it with exhaus-
tive exercise and the overuse of laxatives and diuretics.
Although a genetic predisposition may contribute, 
most cases are environmentally related. The syndrome 
typically emerges following emotional issues or a stress-
ful life event and the uncertainty about the ability to cope 
efficiently. Life experiences that can trigger the syn-
drome might be gaining weight, starting the menstrual 
period, beginning college, losing a boyfriend, having 
poor self-esteem, being socially rejected, starting a pro-
fessional career, or becoming a wife or a mother.
The eating disorder now takes on a life of its own 
and becomes the primary focus of attention for the indi-
viduals afflicted with it. Their self-worth revolves around 
what the scale reads every day, their relationship with 
food, and their perception of how they look each day.
5.10A  Anorexia Nervosa  An estimated 1 per-
cent of the population in the United States is anorexic. 
Anorexic individuals seem to fear weight gain more than 
death from starvation. Furthermore, they have a dis-
torted image of their body and think of themselves as 
being fat, even when they are emaciated.
Anorexics commonly develop obsessive and com-
pulsive behaviors and emphatically deny their condition. 
They are preoccupied with food, meal planning, and 
grocery shopping, and they have unusual eating habits. 
As they lose weight and their health begins to deterio-
rate, anorexics feel weak and tired. They might realize 
they have a problem, but they will not stop the starvation 
and refuse to consider the behavior abnormal.
Once they have lost a lot of weight and malnutrition 
sets in, physical changes become more visible. Typical 
changes are amenorrhea (stopping menstruation), di-
gestive problems, extreme sensitivity to cold, hair and 
skin problems, fluid and electrolyte abnormalities (which 
may lead to an irregular heartbeat and sudden stopping 
of the heart), injuries to nerves and tendons, abnormali-
ties of immune function, anemia, growth of fine body 
hair, mental confusion, inability to concentrate, lethargy, 
depression, dry skin, lower skin and body temperature, 
and osteoporosis.
Following are diagnostic criteria for anorexia 
nervosa:11
• 
Refusal to maintain body weight over a minimal 
normal weight for age and height (weight loss lead-
ing to maintenance of body weight less than 85 
percent of that expected or failure to make ex-
pected weight gain during periods of growth, lead-
ing to body weight less than 85 percent of that 
expected)
• 
Intense fear of gaining weight or becoming fat, 
even though underweight
• 
Disturbance in the way in which one’s body weight, 
size, or shape is perceived; undue influences of 
body weight or shape on self-evaluation; or denial 
of the seriousness of the current low body weight
• 
In postmenarcheal females, amenorrhea (absence 
of at least three consecutive menstrual cycles; a 
woman is considered to have amenorrhea if her pe-
riods occur only following estrogen therapy)
Many of the changes induced by anorexia nervosa 
can be reversed. Individuals with this condition can get 
better with professional therapy, turn to bulimia nervosa, 
or they may die from the disorder. Twenty percent of 
anorexics die as a result of their condition. Anorexia 
nervosa has the highest mortality rate of all psychoso-
matic illnesses today. The disorder, however, is 100 per-
cent curable. But treatment almost always requires pro-
fessional help, and the sooner it is started, the better the 
chances for reversibility and cure.
Therapy consists of a combination of medical and 
psychological techniques to restore proper nutrition, 
prevent medical complications, and modify the environ-
ment or events that triggered the syndrome.
Seldom can anorexics overcome the problem by 
themselves. They strongly deny their condition. They are 
able to hide it and deceive friends and relatives. Based on 
their behavior, many of them meet all of the characteris-
tics of anorexia nervosa, but it goes undetected because 
both thinness and 
dieting are socially 
acceptable. Only a 
well-trained clini-
cian is able to di-
agnose 
anorexia 
nervosa.
5.10B  Bulimia 
Nervosa  Buli-
mia 
nervosa 
is 
more 
prevalent 
than anorexia ner-
vosa. As many as 
one in every five 
women on college 
campuses may be 
bulimic, according 
to some estimates. 
Bulimia 
nervosa 
also is more prev-
alent 
than 
an-
orexia nervosa in 
Advanced glycation end products 
(AGEs)  Derivatives of glucose-protein 
and glucose-lipid interactions that are 
linked to aging and chronic diseases.
Anorexia nervosa  An eating disor-
der characterized by self-imposed star-
vation to lose weight and then main-
tain very low body weight.
Bulimia nervosa  An eating disorder 
characterized by a pattern of binge eat-
ing and purging.
Binge-eating disorder  An eating 
disorder characterized by uncontrolla-
ble episodes of eating excessive 
amounts of food within a relatively 
short time.
Amenorrhea  Cessation of regular 
menstrual flow.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

140
Fitness and Wellness
males, although bulimia is still much more prevalent in 
females.
Bulimics usually are healthy-looking people, well-
educated, and near recommended body weight. They 
seem to enjoy food and often socialize around it. In ac-
tuality, they are emotionally insecure, rely on others, and 
lack self-confidence and self-esteem. Recommended 
weight and food are important to them.
The binge-purge cycle usually occurs in stages. As a 
result of stressful life events or the simple compulsion to 
eat, bulimics engage periodically in binge eating that 
may last an hour or longer.
With some apprehension, bulimics anticipate and 
plan the cycle. Next they feel an urgency to begin, fol-
lowed by large and uncontrollable food consumption, 
during which they may eat several thousand calories (up 
to 10,000 calories in extreme cases). After a short period 
of relief and satisfaction, feelings of deep guilt, shame, 
and intense fear of gaining weight ensue. Purging seems 
to be an easy answer, as the binging cycle can continue 
without fear of gaining weight.
Following are the diagnostic criteria for bulimia 
nervosa:12
• 
Recurrent episodes of binge eating. An episode of 
binge eating is characterized by both of the 
following:
• 
Eating in a discrete period of time (for exam-
ple, within any two-hour period) an amount of 
food that is definitely more than most people 
would eat during a similar period and under 
similar circumstances
• 
A sense of lack of control over eating during 
the episode (a feeling that one cannot stop eat-
ing or control what or how much one is 
eating)
• 
Recurring inappropriate compensatory behaviors 
to prevent weight gain, such as self-induced vomit-
ing; misuse of laxatives, diuretics, enemas, or other 
medications; fasting; or excessive exercise.
• 
The binge eating and inappropriate compensatory 
behaviors both occur, on average, at least twice a 
week for three months.
• 
Self-evaluation is unduly influenced by body shape 
and weight.
The most typical form of purging is self-induced 
vomiting. Bulimics, too, frequently ingest strong laxa-
tives and emetics. Near-fasting diets and strenuous bouts 
of exercise are common. Medical problems associated 
with bulimia nervosa include cardiac arrhythmias, 
amenorrhea, kidney and bladder damage, ulcers, colitis, 
tearing of the esophagus or stomach, tooth erosion, gum 
damage, and general muscular weakness.
Unlike anorexics, bulimics realize their behavior is 
abnormal and feel great shame about it. Fearing social 
rejection, they pursue the binge-purge cycle in secrecy 
and at unusual hours of the day.
Bulimia nervosa can be treated successfully when 
the person realizes that this destructive behavior is not 
the solution to life’s problems. A change in attitude can 
prevent permanent damage or death.
5.10C  Binge-Eating Disorder  Binge-eating dis-
order is probably the most common of the three eating 
disorders. About 2 percent of American adults are af-
flicted with binge-eating disorder in a 6-month period. 
Although most people think they overeat from time to 
time, eating more than one should now and then does 
not mean the individual has a binge-eating disorder. The 
disorder is slightly more common in women than in 
men; three women for every two men have the disorder.
Binge-eating disorder is characterized by uncontrol-
lable episodes of eating excessive amounts of food within 
a relatively short time. The causes of binge-eating disor-
der are unknown, although depression, anger, sadness, 
boredom, and worry can trigger an episode. Unlike bu-
limics, binge eaters do not purge; thus, most people with 
this disorder are either overweight or obese. Following 
are typical symptoms of binge-eating disorder:
• 
Eating what most people think is an unusually 
large amount of food
• 
Eating until uncomfortably full
• 
Eating out of control
• 
Eating much faster than usual during binge episodes
• 
Eating alone because of embarrassment of how 
much food is being consumed
• 
Feeling disgusted, depressed, or guilty after overeating
5.10D  Treatment  Treatment for eating disorders is 
available on most school campuses through the school’s 
counseling center or the health center. Local hospitals 
also offer treatment for these conditions. Many commu-
nities have support groups, frequently led by profes-
sional personnel and often free of charge. All information 
and the identity of the individual are kept confidential so 
the person need not fear embarrassment or repercussion 
when seeking professional help.
5.11  2010 Dietary 
Guidelines for Americans
The 2010 Dietary Guidelines for Americans are intended 
for healthy people two years and older. Due to the dra-
matic increase in obesity, eating, and physical activity 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

141
Chapter 5  Nutrition for Wellness
patterns that are focused on consuming fewer calories, 
making informed food choices and being physically active 
are emphasized to help people attain and maintain a 
healthy weight, reduce their risk of chronic disease, and 
promote overall health. The improved recommendations 
give individuals the necessary information to make 
thoughtful choices of healthier foods in the right portions 
and to complement those choices with physical activity. 
Two key concepts are emphasized in the 2010 guidelines:
• 
Balance calories with physical activity to sustain a 
healthy weight.
• 
Focus on consuming nutrient-dense foods and 
beverages. This includes a greater consumption of 
certain foods and nutrients such as fruits, vegeta-
bles, whole grains, fat-free and low-fat dairy prod-
ucts, and seafood; and decreased consumption of 
foods with sodium (salt), saturated fats, trans fats, 
cholesterol, added sugars, and refined grains.
The 2010 dietary guidelines include 20 key recom-
mendations for the general population and 9 additional 
key recommendations for specific population groups.13 
The recommendations are intended to help people 
choose an overall healthy diet.
5.11A  Balancing Calories to Manage 
Weight
	 1.	 Prevent and/or reduce overweight and obesity 
through improved eating and physical activity 
behaviors.
	 2.	 Control total calorie intake to manage body weight. 
For people who are overweight or obese, this 
means consuming fewer calories from foods and 
beverages.
	 3.	 Increase physical activity and reduce time spent in 
sedentary behaviors.
 4. Maintain appropriate calorie balance during each 
stage of life—childhood, adolescence, adulthood, 
pregnancy and breastfeeding, and older age.
	 5.	 Reduce daily sodium intake to less than 2,300 mil-
ligrams (mg) and further reduce intake to 1,500 mg 
among persons who are 51 and older and those of 
any age who are African American or have hyper-
A healthy diet is a critical component of a healthy lifestyle to prevent 
disease, manage weight, and increase longevity.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Specific Nutrition 
Recommendations in the 
2010 Dietary Guidelines for 
Americans
Increase Consumption of
Fruits and vegetables
Whole grains
Low-fat dairy products
A variety of lean protein choices
Seafood
Healthy fats
Foods high in fiber, calcium, potassium, and vitamin D
Decrease Intake of
Saturated fat
Trans fats
Dietary cholesterol
Sodium
Refined grains
Alcohol
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

142
Fitness and Wellness
tension, diabetes, or chronic kidney disease. The 
1,500-mg recommendation applies to about half of 
the U.S. population, including children and the 
majority of adults.
	 6.	 Consume less than 10 percent of calories from sat-
urated fatty acids by replacing them with monoun-
saturated and polyunsaturated fatty acids.
	 7.	 Consume less than 300 mg per day of dietary 
cholesterol.
	 8.	 Keep trans fatty acid consumption as low as possi-
ble by limiting foods that contain synthetic sources 
of trans fats, such as partially hydrogenated oils, 
and by limiting other solid fats.
	 9.	 Reduce the intake of calories from solid fats and 
added sugars.
	10.	 Limit the consumption of foods that contain re-
fined grains, especially refined grain foods that 
contain solid fats, added sugars, and sodium.
	11.	 If alcohol is consumed, it should be consumed in 
moderation—up to one drink per day for women 
and two drinks per day for men—and only by 
adults of legal drinking age.
5.11B  Foods and Nutrients to Increase  In-
dividuals should meet the following recommendations 
as part of a healthy eating pattern while staying within 
their calorie needs.
	12.	 Increase vegetable and fruit intake.
	13.	 Eat a variety of vegetables, especially dark-green, 
red, and orange vegetables, and beans and peas.
	14.	 Consume at least half of all grains as whole grains. 
Increase whole-grain intake by replacing refined 
grains with whole grains.
	15.	 Increase intake of fat-free or low-fat milk and milk 
products, such as milk, yogurt, cheese, or fortified 
soy beverages.
	16.	 Choose a variety of protein foods, including sea-
food, lean meat and poultry, eggs, beans and peas, 
soy products, and unsalted nuts and seeds.
	17.	 Increase the amount and variety of seafood con-
sumed by choosing seafood in place of some meat 
and poultry.
	18.	 Replace protein foods that are higher in solid fats 
with choices that are lower in solid fats and calories 
and/or are sources of oils.
	19.	 Use oils to replace solid fats where possible.
	20.	 Choose foods that provide more potassium, dietary 
fiber, calcium, and vitamin D, which are nutrients 
of concern in American diets. These foods include 
vegetables, fruits, whole grains, and milk and milk 
products.
5.11C  Recommendations for Specific  
Population Groups
Women Capable of Becoming Pregnant
	1.	
Choose foods that supply hemeiron, which is more 
readily absorbed by the body; additional iron 
sources; and enhancers of iron absorption such as 
vitamin C-rich foods.
	2.	
Consume 400 micrograms (mcg) per day of syn-
thetic folic acid (from fortified foods and/or sup-
plements) in addition to food forms of folate from 
a varied diet.
Pregnant or Breastfeeding Women
	1.	
Consume 8 to 12 ounces of seafood per week from 
a variety of seafood types.
	2.	
Due to their high methyl mercury content, limit 
white (albacore) tuna to 6 ounces per week and do 
not eat the following four types of fish: tilefish, 
shark, swordfish, and king mackerel.
	3.	
If pregnant, take an iron supplement, as recom-
mended by an obstetrician or other health care 
provider.
For Individuals 50 Years and Older
	1.	
Consume foods fortified with vitamin B12, such as 
fortified cereals, or dietary supplements.
Building Healthy Eating Patterns
	1.	
Select an eating pattern that meets nutrient needs 
over time at an appropriate calorie level.
	2.	
Account for all foods and beverages consumed and 
assess how they fit within a total healthy eating 
pattern.
	3.	
Follow food safety recommendations when prepar-
ing and eating foods to reduce the risk of food-
borne illnesses.
Additional information on these guidelines is posted 
at www.DietaryGuidelines.gov/.
5.12  A Lifetime 
Commitment to Wellness
Proper nutrition, a sound exercise program, and quitting 
smoking (for those who smoke) are the three factors that 
do the most for health, longevity, and quality of life. 
Achieving and maintaining a balanced diet is not as dif-
ficult as most people would think. The difficult part for 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

143
Chapter 5  Nutrition for Wellness
most people is retraining themselves to follow a lifetime 
healthy nutrition plan. No single food can provide all the 
necessary nutrients and other beneficial substances in 
the amounts the body needs. A well-balanced diet con-
tains a variety of foods from all food groups, including 
wise selection of foods from animal sources. Food items 
vary, and each item provides different combinations of 
nutrients and other substances needed for good health.
What factors in your life and the environment have con-
tributed to your current dietary habits? • Do you need to 
make changes? • What may prevent you from doing so?
Critical Thinking
Despite ample scientific evidence linking poor di-
etary habits to early disease and mortality rates, many 
people are not willing to change their eating patterns. 
Even when faced with obesity, elevated blood lipids, hy-
pertension, and other nutrition-related conditions, many 
people do not change. They remain in the precontempla-
tion stage of change (see the discussion of behavior 
modification in Chapter 1).
The motivating factor to change one’s eating habits 
seems to be a major health breakdown, such as a heart 
attack, a stroke, or cancer. An ounce of prevention is 
worth a pound of cure. The sooner you implement the 
dietary guidelines presented in this chapter, the better 
will be your chances of preventing chronic diseases and 
reaching a higher state of wellness.
	 1.	 The science of nutrition studies the relationship of
	 a.	 vitamins and minerals to health.
	 b.	 foods to optimal health and performance.
	 c.	 carbohydrates, fats, and proteins to the development 
and maintenance of good health.
	 d.	 the macronutrients and micronutrients to physical 
performance.
	 e.	 kilocalories to calories in food items.
	 2.	 Faulty nutrition often plays a crucial role in the develop-
ment and progression of which disease?
	 a.	 cardiovascular disease
	 b.	 cancer
	 c.	 osteoporosis
	 d.	 diabetes
	 e.	 All are correct choices.
	 3.	 According to MyPlate, daily vegetable consumption is 
measured in
	 a.	 servings.
	 b.	 ounces.
	 c.	 cups.
	 d.	 calories.
	 e.	 All of the above are correct.
	 4.	 The daily recommended amount of fiber intake for 
adults 50 years and younger is
	 a.	 10 grams per day for women and 12 grams for men.
	 b.	 21 grams per day for women and 30 grams for men.
	 c.	 28 grams per day for women and 35 grams for men.
	 d.	 25 grams per day for women and 38 grams for men.
	 e.	 45 grams per day for women and 50 grams for men.
Assess Your Knowledge
	1.	
Are whole grains, fruits, and vegetables the staple of your 
diet?
	2.	
Are you meeting your personal MyPlate recommenda-
tions for daily fruits, vegetables, grains, meat (or sub-
stitutes) and legumes, and milk?
	3.	
Are there dietary changes that you need to implement to 
meet energy, nutrition, and disease risk-reduction guide-
lines and to improve health and wellness? If so, list these 
changes and indicate what you will do to make it happen.
Assess Your Behavior
To access course materials, including companion resources, please visit www.cengagebrain.com.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

144
Fitness and Wellness
	 5.	 Unhealthy fats include
	 a.	 unsaturated fatty acids.
	 b.	 monounsaturated fats.
	 c.	 polyunsaturated fatty acids.
	 d.	 saturated fats.
	 e.	 alpha-linolenic acid.
	 6.	 The daily recommended carbohydrate intake is
	 a.	 45 to 65 percent of the total calories.
	 b.	 10 to 35 percent of the total calories.
	 c.	 20 to 35 percent of the total calories.
	 d.	 60 to 75 percent of the total calories.
	 e.	 35 to 50 percent of the total calories.
	 7.	 The amount of a nutrient that is estimated to meet the 
nutrient requirement of half the healthy people in spe-
cific age and gender groups is known as the
	 a.	 Estimated Average Requirement.
	 b.	 Recommended Dietary Allowance.
	 c.	 Daily Value.
	 d.	 Adequate Intake.
	 e.	 Dietary Reference Intake.
	 8.	 The percent fat intake for an individual who on a given 
day consumes 2,385 calories with 106 grams of fat is
	 a.	 44 percent of total calories.
	 b.	 17.7 percent of total calories.
	 c.	 40 percent of total calories.
	 d.	 31 percent of total calories.
	 e.	 22.5 percent of total calories.
	 9.	 Treatment of anorexia nervosa
	 a.	 almost always requires professional help.
	 b.	 is often accomplished in the home.
	 c.	 is most successful when friends take the initiative to 
help.
	 d.	 requires that the individual be placed in the environ-
ment where the disorder started.
	 e.	 is best done under the supervision of a physician.
	10.	 Which of the following is not a goal of the 2010 Dietary 
Guidelines for Americans?
	 a.	 Increase daily intake of fruits and vegetables, whole 
grains, and nonfat or low-fat milk and milk products.
	 b.	 Reduce the intake of calories from solid fats and 
added sugars.
	 c.	 Increase vegetable and fruit intake.
	 d.	 Increase the amount and variety of seafood consumed 
by choosing seafood in place of some meat and 
poultry.
	 e.	 All are correct choices.
Correct answers can be found on page 301.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

145
Chapter 5  Nutrition for Wellness
Date
Name
Section
Course
Age 
 Weight 
Height 
Gender  M   F 
(Pregnant–P, Nursing–N)
  Sedentary
 Lightly active
 Moderately active
 Very active
 Extremely active
 Activity Rating
(check one): 
Activity 5.1: Nutrient Analysis
Grains (oz.)
Vegetables
(cups)
Fruits (cups)
Oils (tsp.)
Dairy (cups)
Protein
Foods (oz.) 
Fat (gm)
Food*
Calories
No.
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
*See “List of Nutritive Value of Selected Foods” in Appendix E.
 **Multiply the recommended amount of calories by .30 (30%) and divide by 9 to obtain the daily recommended amount of grams of fat.
Deﬁciencies/Excesses
Totals
Food Groups
Daily Goals
(see Figure 3.1)
Recommended Amount: Obtain online at www.choosemyplate.gov based on age, gender, 
weight, height, and activity level (see page 130 for a complete explanation)
**
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Weight Management
6
Physical activity is the 
cornerstone of a sound 
weight management 
program. If you are unwilling 
to increase daily physical 
activity, do not attempt to 
lose weight because most 
likely you won’t be able to 
keep it off.
Objectives
• Recognize myths and fallacies regarding 
weight management.
• Understand the physiology of weight 
control.
• Become familiar with the effects of diet 
and exercise on resting metabolic rate.
• Recognize the role of a lifetime exercise 
program in a successful weight 
management program.
• Learn to write and implement weight 
reduction and weight maintenance 
programs.
• Identify behavior modification techniques 
that help a person adhere to a lifetime 
weight maintenance program.
147
Visit www.cengagebrain.com to access 
course materials and companion resources for 
this text including quiz questions designed to 
check your understanding of the chapter 
contents, activities, labs, and more! See the 
preface on page xi for more information.
© Tyler Olson/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

148
Fitness and Wellness
twice per week. I also had 
to report every Monday 
morning to my instructor 
for a weigh-in and to turn 
in my weekly food and ac-
tivity logs. I signed a con-
tract with the instructor 
that I would adhere to the 
program as prescribed. I 
also talked to my room-
mates so they would un-
derstand what my goal was for the next 15 weeks.  
At the end of the semester, I had lost 10 pounds but 
actually came in at 22.7 percent body fat at  
140 pounds. In essence, because of all my physical 
activity I had gained about 3 pounds of lean tissue 
along with 12 pounds of actual fat loss.
Aidon/JupiterImages
Real Life Story | Megan’s Weight Struggles
A good physical fitness program will include achieving 
and maintaining recommended body weight as a major 
objective. Two terms commonly used in reference to the 
condition of weighing more than recommended are 
overweight and obesity. Obesity levels are established at 
a point at which excess body fat can lead to significant 
health problems.
Obesity is a health hazard of epidemic proportions 
in most developed countries around the world. Accord-
ing to the World Health Organization, an estimated 35 
percent of the adult population in industrialized nations 
is obese. Obesity has been established at a body mass 
index (BMI) of 30 or higher.
The number of people who are overweight and obese 
in the United States has increased dramatically in the past 
two decades, a direct result of physical inactivity and poor 
dietary habits. More than 68 percent of U.S. adults age 20 
and older are overweight (have a BMI greater than 25), 
and 34 percent are obese. More than 120 million people 
are overweight, and 30 million are obese. The prevalence 
of obesity is even higher in ethnic groups, especially Afri-
can Americans and Hispanic Americans.
As illustrated in Figure 6.1, the obesity epidemic 
continues to escalate. Before 1990, not a single state re-
ported an obesity rate above 15 percent of the state’s total 
population (includes both adults and children). By the 
year 2010, not a single state had an obesity rate less than 
20 percent, more than half had an obesity rate equal to or 
greater than 25 percent, including 12 states with a rate 
above 30 percent.
In the past decade alone, the average weight of 
American adults increased by about 15 pounds. Further, 
as the nation continues to evolve into a more mecha-
nized and automated society (relying on escalators, ele-
vators, remote controls, computers, electronic mail, cell 
phones, and automatic-sensor doors), the amount of re-
quired daily physical activity continues to decrease. We 
are being lulled into a high-risk sedentary lifestyle.
As of the end of 2012, the average man weighed in at 
196 pounds and the average woman at 156 pounds. Unfor-
tunately, the human mind has a tremendous capability to 
adapt and accept change, even if it is detrimental to one’s 
health. And so it is with body weight. According to a Gal-
lup poll conducted in November 2012, men now indicate 
their “ideal” body weight is 185 pounds, the highest ever, 
and 14 pounds greater than the 1990 weight as determined 
by this same poll. Women indicate their “ideal” weight to 
be 11 pounds heavier than in 1990, at 140 pounds.
More than a third of the population is on a diet at 
any given moment. People spend about $40 billion yearly 
attempting to lose weight. More than $10 billion goes to 
memberships in weight reduction centers and another 
$30 billion to diet food sales. The total cost attributable 
to obesity-related disease is approximately $117 billion 
per year.
As the second leading cause of preventable death in 
the United States, excessive body weight and physical 
inactivity cause more than 112,000 deaths each year.1 
Obesity is currently more prevalent than smoking  
(19 percent), poverty (14 percent), and problem drink-
Similar to most students, I gained several pounds of 
weight my first year in college. I dieted several times 
but ended up regaining the weight, and then some 
more! I put off taking my fitness class because I 
wanted to lose the weight first and get in shape be-
fore I took the class. My roommate, however, took 
the class the spring semester, and I couldn’t help but 
notice how she had lost weight and looked so much 
better. After finding out more details about the 
course, I made an appointment with the course in-
structor and decided to enroll during the fall semes-
ter. That fall, we assessed my body composition and 
determined that I had 9 pounds to lose to get to  
138 pounds and be at 23 percent body fat. With the 
aid of the instructor, we agreed on a 1,500-calorie 
diet, along with 45 minutes of walking/jogging 5 
times per week and 45 minutes of strength training 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

149
Chapter 6  Weight Management
ing (6 percent).2 Obesity, cigarette smoking, and un-
healthy lifestyle habits are the most critical public health 
problems that we face in the 21st century.
The American Heart Association has identified obe-
sity as one of the six major risk factors for coronary heart 
disease. Obesity is associated with poor health status and 
is a risk factor for hypertension, congestive heart failure, 
high blood lipids, atherosclerosis, stroke, thromboembo-
litic disease, varicose veins, type 2 diabetes, osteoarthri-
tis, gallbladder disease, sleep apnea, asthma, ruptured 
intervertebral disks, and arthritis. Estimates also indicate 
that 14 percent of all cancer deaths in men and 20 per-
cent in women are related to current overweight and 
obesity patterns in the United States.3 Furthermore, obe-
sity is implicated in psychological maladjustment and a 
higher accidental death rate. Extremely obese people 
have worse mental health related to quality of life.
Overweight and obese are not the same thing. Many 
overweight people (people who weigh about 10 to 20 
pounds over the recommended weight) are not obese. 
Although a few pounds of excess weight may not be 
harmful to most people, this is not always the case. Peo-
ple with excessive body fat who have type 2 diabetes and 
other cardiovascular risk factors (elevated blood lipids, 
high blood pressure, physical inactivity, and poor eating 
habits) benefit from losing weight. People who have a 
few extra pounds of weight but are otherwise healthy and 
physically active, exercise regularly, and eat a healthy diet 
may not be at higher risk for disease and early death. 
Such is not the case, however, with obese individuals.
Research indicates that individuals who are 30 or 
more pounds overweight during middle age (30 to 49 
years of age) lose about 7 years of life; whereas being 10 to 
30 pounds overweight decreases the lifespan by about 3 
years.4 These decreases are similar to those seen with to-
bacco use. Severe obesity (BMI greater than 45) at a young 
age, nonetheless, may cut up to 20 years off one’s life.5
Although the loss of years of life is significant, the 
decreased life expectancy doesn’t even begin to address 
the loss in quality of life and increased illness and dis-
ability throughout the years. Even a modest reduction of 
2 to 3 percent can reduce the risk for chronic diseases 
including heart disease, high blood pressure, high cho-
lesterol, and diabetes.6
A primary objective of overall physical fitness and 
enhanced quality of life is to attain recommended body 
composition. Individuals at recommended body weight 
are able to partici-
pate in a wide va-
riety of moderate 
to vigorous activi-
ties without func-
tional limitations. 
These people have 
the freedom to en-
joy most of life’s 
recreational activ-
ities 
and 
reach 
Overweight  Excess body weight when 
compared to a given standard such as 
height or recommended percent body fat.
Obesity  A chronic disease character-
ized by an excessively high amount of 
body fat (about 20 percent above recom-
mended weight or a BMI at 30 or above).
No
data
1985
2000
15–19%
20–24%
<10%
10–14%
Percentages of the total number of people in the respective 
state who are obese.
25–29%
≥30%
2010
Figure 6.1
Incidence of obesity in the United  
States based on BMI 30 or 30 pounds 
overweight: 1990, 2000, and 2009.
SOURCE: Obesity Trends Among U.S. Adults Between 1985 and 2011 
(Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2013).
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

150
Fitness and Wellness
their fullest potential. Excessive body weight does not 
afford an individual the fitness level to enjoy vigorous 
lifetime activities such as basketball, soccer, racquetball, 
surfing, mountain cycling, and mountain climbing. 
Maintaining high fitness and recommended body weight 
gives a person a degree of independence throughout life 
that the majority of people in developed nations no lon-
ger enjoy.
Do you consider yourself overweight? • If so, how long 
have you had a weight problem, what attempts have you 
made to lose weight, and what has worked best for you?
Critical Thinking
6.1  Tolerable Weight
Many people want to lose weight so they will look better. 
That’s a noteworthy goal. The problem, however, is that 
they often have a distorted image of what they would re-
ally look like if they were to reduce to what they think is 
their ideal weight. Hereditary factors play a big role, and 
only a small fraction of the population has the genes for 
a “perfect body.” Tolerable weight is a more realistic 
goal. This is a realistic standard that is not “ideal” but is 
“acceptable.” It is likely to be closer to the health fitness 
standard than the physical fitness standard for many 
people.
The media has a great influence on people’s percep-
tion of what constitutes ideal body weight. Most people 
rely on fashion, fitness, and beauty magazines to deter-
mine what they should look like. The “ideal” body 
shapes, physiques, and proportions shown in these mag-
azines are rare and are achieved through airbrushing and 
medical reconstruction.7 Many individuals, primarily 
young women, go to extremes in an attempt to achieve 
these unrealistic body shapes. Failure to attain a “perfect 
body” often leads to eating disorders.
When people set their own target weight, they 
should be realistic. Attaining the “high physical fitness” 
percent body fat standard shown in Table 2.11 (page 49) 
is extremely difficult for some. It is even more difficult to 
maintain, unless the person makes a commitment to a 
vigorous lifetime exercise program and permanent di-
etary changes. Few people are willing to do that. The 
“moderate” percent body fat category is more realistic for 
many people.
A question you should ask yourself is: Am I happy 
with my weight? Part of enjoying a higher quality of life 
is being happy with yourself. If you are not, you either 
need to do something about it or learn to live with it.
If your percent of body fat is higher than the health 
fitness standard shown in Table 2.11, page 49 (or a BMI 
above 25), you should try to reach and stay in this cate-
gory, for health reasons. This is the category that seems 
to pose no detriment to health.
If you have achieved the health fitness standard but 
would like to be more fit, ask yourself a second question: 
How badly do I want it? Enough to implement lifetime 
exercise and dietary changes? If you are not willing to 
change, you should stop worrying about your weight and 
deem the health fitness standard tolerable for you.
Achieving and maintaining a high physical fitness percent body fat requires a lifetime commitment to regular physi-
cal activity, exercise, and proper nutrition.
Eric Risberg
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

151
Chapter 6  Weight Management
6.2  Fad Dieting
Few people who begin a traditional weight loss program 
(without exercise) are able to lose the desired weight. 
Worse, less than 5 percent of this group is able to keep 
the weight off for a significant time. Traditional diets 
have failed in helping people keep the weight off because 
few diet programs incorporate lifetime changes in food 
selection and overall increases in daily physical activity 
and exercise as the keys to successful weight loss and 
maintenance.
Fad diets continue to deceive people. Capitalizing on 
hopes that the latest diet to hit the market will really work 
this time, fad diets continue to appeal to people of all 
shapes and sizes. These diets may work for a while, but 
their success is usually short-lived. Most of these diets are 
low in calories and deprive the body of certain nutrients, 
generating a metabolic imbalance that can be detrimental 
to health. With many of these diets, a large amount of 
weight loss is in the form of water and protein, not fat.
On a crash diet, close to half of the weight loss is in 
lean (protein) tissue (see Figure 6.2). When the body 
uses protein instead of a combination of fats and carbo-
hydrates as a source of energy, the individual loses 
weight as much as 10 times faster. This is because a gram 
of protein produces less than half the amount of energy 
as fat does. In the case of muscle protein, one-fifth of 
protein is mixed with four-fifths of water. Each pound of 
muscle yields only one-tenth the amount of energy as a 
pound of fat. As a result, most of the weight loss is in the 
form of water, which on the scale, of course, looks good.
Among the popular diets on the market in recent 
years were the low-carbohydrate/high-protein (LCHP) 
diet plans. Although variations exist among them, in 
general, “low-carb” diets limit the intake of carbohydrate-
rich foods. Examples of these diets are the Atkins Diet, 
the Zone, Protein Power, the Scarsdale Diet, the Carb 
Addict’s Diet, and Sugar Busters.
Rapid weight loss occurs during LCHP diets be-
cause the low carbohydrate intake forces the liver to 
produce glucose. The source for most of this glucose is 
body proteins. As mentioned, protein is mostly water; 
thus, weight is lost rapidly. When a person terminates 
the diet, the body 
rebuilds some of 
the protein tissue 
and the person 
quickly 
regains 
some weight.
Tolerable weight  A realistic body 
weight that is close to the health fit-
ness percent body fat standard.
How to Recognize Fad Diets
Fad diets have characteristics in 
common. These diets typically
• are nutritionally unbalanced.
• rely primarily on a single food (for example, grapefruit).
• are based on testimonials.
• were developed according to “confidential research.”
• are based on a “scientific breakthrough.”
• promote rapid and “painless” weight loss.
• promise miraculous results.
• restrict food selection.
• are based on pseudo-claims that excessive weight is 
related to a specific condition such as insulin resis-
tance, combinations or timing of nutrient intake, food 
allergies, hormone imbalances, or certain foods 
(fruits, for example).
• require the use of selected products.
• use liquid formulas instead of foods.
• misrepresent salespeople as individuals qualified to 
provide nutrition counseling.
• fail to provide information on risks associated with 
weight loss and of the diet use.
• do not involve physical activity.
• do not encourage healthy behavioral changes.
• are not supported by the scientific community or na-
tional health organizations.
• fail to provide information for weight maintenance 
upon completion of diet phase.
Figure 6.2
Effects of three forms of diet on fat 
loss.
Adapted from Alive Man: The Physiology of Physical Activity, by R. J. 
Shephard (Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas, 1975): 484–488.
Moderate diet and exercise
0
50
25
75
100
Percent of weight loss in fat
Moderate diet
Near-fasting
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

152
Fitness and Wellness
Research studies indicated that individuals on an 
LCHP (Atkins) diet lose slightly more weight in the first 
few months than those on a low-fat diet.8 The effective-
ness of the diet, however, seemed to dwindle over time. 
In one of the studies, at 12 months into the diet, partici-
pants in the LCHP diet had regained more weight than 
those on the low-fat diet plan.
LCHP diets are contrary to the nutrition advice of 
most national leading health organizations (which recom-
mend a diet low in animal fat and saturated fat and high 
in complex carbohydrates). Without fruits, vegetables, and 
whole grains, high-protein diets lack many vitamins, min-
erals, phytonutrients, and fiber—all dietary factors that 
protect against an array of ailments and diseases.
The major risk associated with long-term adherence 
to LCHP diets might be the increased risk of heart dis-
ease because high-protein foods are also high in fat con-
tent. Low carbohydrate intake also produces loss of vita-
min B, calcium, and potassium. Side effects commonly 
associated with these diets are weakness, nausea, bad 
breath, constipation, irritability, light-headedness, and 
fatigue. Potential bone loss can further accentuate the 
risk for osteoporosis. Long-term adherence to an LCHP 
diet also can increase the risk for cancer. If you choose to 
go on an LCHP diet for longer than a few weeks, let your 
physician know so that he or she may monitor your 
blood lipids, bone density, and kidney function.
Some diets allow only certain specialized foods. If 
people would realize that no “magic” foods provide all 
the necessary nutrients, that a person has to eat a variety 
of foods to be well nourished, the diet industry would 
not be as successful. Most of these diets create a nutri-
tional deficiency, which can be detrimental to health. 
Some people eventually get tired of eating the same thing 
day in and day out and start eating less—which results in 
weight loss. If they achieve the lower weight without 
making permanent dietary changes, however, they gain 
back the weight quickly if they return to their old eating 
habits.
A few diets recommend exercise along with caloric 
restrictions—the best method for weight reduction, of 
course. People who adhere to these programs will suc-
ceed, so the diet has achieved its purpose. Unfortunately, 
if the people do not change their food selection and ac-
tivity level permanently, they gain back the weight once 
they discontinue dieting and exercise.
6.3  Principles of Weight 
Management
Traditional concepts related to weight control have cen-
tered on three assumptions:
	1.	
Balancing food intake against output allows a per-
son to achieve recommended weight.
	2.	
Fat people just eat too much.
	3.	
The human body doesn’t care how much (or little) 
fat is stored.
Although these statements contain some truth, they 
still are open to much debate and research. We now 
know that the causes of obesity are complex and com-
bine genetic, behavior, and lifestyle factors.
6.3A  Energy-Balancing Equation  In keeping 
with the energy-balancing equation, if caloric intake 
exceeds output, the person gains weight; when caloric 
output is more than intake, the individual loses weight. 
Each pound of fat represents 3,500 calories. Therefore, 
theoretically, to increase body fat (weight) by 1 pound, a 
person would have to consume an excess of 3,500 calo-
ries. Equally, to lose 1 pound, the individual would have 
to decrease caloric intake by 3,500 calories. This princi-
ple seems straightforward, but the human body is not 
quite that simple.
The rule of thumb is that a person needs a 3,500- 
calorie deficit to lose a pound of fat. This figure, however, 
is an oversimplification of what really happens. There are 
too many individual, behavior, and lifestyle variables 
that keep weight loss from happening at the same rate 
among individuals, including gender, body composition, 
metabolic rate, and activity level. As will be discussed in 
this chapter, most notably are differences in daily physi-
cal activity and the drop in basal metabolic rate as a 
person loses weight (that is, the body burns fewer calo-
ries as weight is lost). The 3,500-calorie rule, nonetheless, 
is a good guideline to work off when writing weight-loss 
programs.
6.3B  Diet and Metabolism  The genetic instinct 
to survive tells the body that fat storage is vital, and, 
therefore, the body’s weight-regulating mechanism or 
setpoint sets an acceptable fat level for each person. This 
setpoint remains somewhat constant or may climb grad-
ually because of poor lifestyle habits.
Under strict calorie reduction (fewer than 800 calo-
ries per day), the body makes compensatory metabolic 
adjustments in an effort to maintain its fat storage. The 
basal metabolic rate (BMR) may drop dramatically 
against a consistent negative caloric balance, and the 
person may be on a plateau for days or even weeks with-
out losing much weight. When the dieter goes back to 
the normal or even below-normal caloric intake, at 
which the weight may have been stable for a long time, 
he or she quickly regains the fat lost as the body strives 
to restore a comfortable fat level.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

153
Chapter 6  Weight Management
These findings were substantiated by research con-
ducted at Rockefeller University in New York,9 which 
showed that the body resists maintaining altered weight. 
Obese and lifetime nonobese individuals were used in 
the investigation. Following a 10 percent weight loss, in 
an attempt to regain the lost weight, the body compen-
sated by burning up to 15 percent fewer calories than 
expected for the new reduced weight (after accounting 
for the 10 percent loss). The effects were similar in the 
obese and nonobese participants. These results imply 
that after a 10 percent weight loss, a person would have 
to eat less or exercise more to account for the estimated 
deficit of about 200 to 300 daily calories.
In this same study, when the participants were al-
lowed to increase their weight to 10 percent above their 
“normal” body weight (pre-weight loss), the body burned 
10 percent to 15 percent more calories than expected. This 
indicates an attempt by the body to waste energy and re-
turn to the preset weight. The study provides another in-
dication that the body is highly resistant to weight changes 
unless the person incorporates additional lifestyle changes 
to ensure successful weight management. (Methods to 
manage weight will be discussed later in this chapter.)
This research shows why most dieters regain the 
weight they lose through dietary means alone. Let’s use a 
practical illustration: Jim would like to lose some body 
fat and assumes that he has reached a stable body weight 
at an average daily caloric intake of 2,500 calories (no 
weight gain or loss at this daily intake). In an attempt to 
lose weight rapidly, he now goes on a strict low-calorie 
diet (or, even worse, a near-fasting diet). Immediately the 
body activates its survival mechanism and readjusts its 
metabolism to a lower caloric balance.
After a few weeks of dieting at less than 800 calories 
per day, the body now can maintain its normal functions 
at 2,000 calories per day. Having lost the desired weight, 
Jim terminates the diet but realizes the original intake of 
2,500 calories per day will have to be lower to maintain 
the new lower weight. To adjust to the new lower body 
weight, he restricts his intake to about 2,200 calories per 
day. Jim is surprised to find that even at this lower daily 
intake (300 fewer calories), his weight comes back at a 
rate of about 1 pound every 2 to 3 weeks. After the diet 
ends, this new lowered metabolic rate may take several 
months to kick back up to its normal level.
From this explanation, individuals clearly should 
not go on very low calorie diets. Doing so will decrease 
the resting metabolic rate and also will deprive the body 
of basic daily nutrients required for normal function. 
Very low calorie diets should be used only in conjunc-
tion with dietary supplements and under proper medical 
supervision. Furthermore, research indicates that people 
who go on very low calorie diets are not as effective in 
keeping the weight off once they terminate the diet.
6.3C  Recommendation  A daily caloric intake of 
approximately 1,500 calories provides the necessary nu-
trients if they are distributed properly over the basic food 
groups (meeting the daily recommended amounts from 
each group). Of course, the individual will have to learn 
to select healthy foods from among 100-percent whole 
grains, fiber-rich fruits and vegetables, beans, lean pro-
teins, and modest amounts of healthy oils (olive and 
canola) and nuts while on a calorie-restricted plan. Diets 
below 1,500 daily calories may require a multivitamin 
supplement to obtain the daily nutrient requirements.
Under no circumstances should a person go on  
a diet that calls for a level of 1,200 calories or less for 
petite women or 1,500 calories or less for men. Weight 
(fat) is gained over months and years, not overnight. 
Likewise, 
weight 
loss 
should 
be 
gradual, 
not 
abrupt. At 1,200 
calories per day, 
you may require a 
multi­vitamin nu-
trient supplement. 
Your health care 
p r o f e s s i o n a l 
should 
be 
con-
sulted 
regarding 
such a supplement.
Furthermore, 
when a person tries 
to lose weight by 
Energy-balancing equation  A body 
weight formula ­stating that when ca-
loric intake equals caloric output, 
weight remains unchanged.
Setpoint  Body weight and body fat 
percentage unique to each person that 
is regulated by genetic and environ-
mental factors.
Basal metabolic rate (BMR)   
Lowest level of caloric ­intake necessary 
to sustain life.
A wide variety of foods is required to maintain a well-nourished body.
© 2001 PhotoDisc, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

154
Fitness and Wellness
dietary restrictions alone, lean body mass (muscle protein, 
along with vital organ protein) decreases. The amount of 
lean body mass lost depends entirely on the caloric limita-
tion. When a person goes on a near-fasting diet, up to half 
of the weight lost can be lean body mass and the other half, 
actual fat loss. If the diet is combined with exercise, close to 
100 percent of the weight loss is in the form of fat, and lean 
tissue actually may increase (see Figure 6.2). Loss of lean 
body mass is not good because it weakens the organs and 
muscles and slows the metabolism.
Reduction in lean body mass is common in people 
on severely restricted diets. No diet with caloric intakes 
below 1,500 calories will prevent loss of lean body mass. 
Even at this intake level, some loss is inevitable unless the 
diet is combined with exercise. Although many diets 
claim they do not alter the lean component, the simple 
truth is that, regardless of what nutrients may be added 
to the diet, caloric restrictions always prompt a loss of 
lean tissue.
Too many people go on low-calorie diets again and 
again. Every time they do, the metabolic rate slows as 
more lean tissue is lost. People in their 40s and older who 
weigh the same as they did when they were 20 often 
think they are at recommended body weight. During this 
span of 20 years or more, however, they may have dieted 
too many times without exercising. Shortly after termi-
nating each diet, they regain the weight, but much of that 
gain is in fat. Maybe at age 20 they weighed 150 pounds, 
of which only 15 percent was fat. Now, at age 40, even 
though they still weigh 150 pounds, they might be 30 
percent fat (see Figure 6.3, and also Figure 2.2, page 42). 
At recommended body weight, they wonder why they 
are eating so little and still having trouble staying at that 
weight.
Further, data indicate that diets high in fat and re-
fined carbohydrates, near-fasting diets, and perhaps even 
artificial sweeteners, keep people from losing weight and, 
in reality, contribute to fat gain. The only practical and 
sensible way to lose fat weight is to combine exercise  
and a sensible diet high in complex carbohydrates and 
low in fat and sugar.
Because of the effects of proper food management 
on body weight, most of the successful dieter’s effort 
should be spent in retraining eating habits, increasing 
the intake of complex carbohydrates and high-fiber 
foods, and decreasing the consumption of refined carbo-
hydrates (sugars) and fats. This change in eating habits 
will bring about a decrease in total daily caloric intake. 
One gram of carbohydrates provides only four calories as 
contrasted with nine calories per gram of fat. Thus, you 
could eat twice the volume of food (by weight) when 
substituting carbohydrates for fat. Some fat, however, is 
recommended in the diet—preferably polyunsaturated 
and monounsaturated fats. These so-called good fats do 
more than help protect the heart; they help delay hunger 
pangs.
A “diet” cannot be viewed as a temporary tool to aid 
in weight loss but, instead, as a permanent change in eat-
ing behaviors to ensure weight management and better 
health. The role of increased physical activity also must 
be considered because successful weight loss and recom-
mended body composition seldom are attainable with-
out a moderate reduction in caloric intake combined 
with a regular exercise program.
6.3D  Sleep and Weight Management  Ad-
equate sleep is a key component that enhances health 
and extends life. New evidence shows that sleep is also 
140
145
150
155
160
165
170
20
40
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
20
40
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
20
40
Age
Body weight (lbs)
Percent body fat
Lean body mass (lbs)
Age
Age
© Cengage Learning
Figure 6.3
Effects of constant dieting without 
exercise on body weight, percent body 
fat, and lean body mass.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

155
Chapter 6  Weight Management
important to adequate weight management. Sleep depri-
vation appears to be conducive to weight gain and may 
interfere with the body’s capability to lose weight.
Current obesity and sleep deprivation data point 
toward a possible correlation between excessive body 
weight and sleep deprivation. About 68 percent of the 
U.S. population is overweight or obese, and according to 
the National Sleep Foundation, 63 percent of Americans 
report that they do not get eight hours of sleep per night. 
The question must be raised: Is there a connection? Let’s 
examine some of the data.
One of the most recent studies examining this issue 
showed that individuals who get fewer than six hours of 
sleep per night have a higher average BMI (28.3) com-
pared to those who average eight hours per night (24.5).10 
Another study on more than 68,000 women between the 
ages of 30 and 55 found that those who got 5 or fewer 
hours of sleep per night were 30 percent more likely to 
gain 30 or more pounds compared to women who got  
8 hours per night.11
Researchers believe that lack of sleep disrupts nor-
mal body hormonal balances. Ghrelin and leptin are two 
hormones that play a critical role in weight gain and 
weight loss. Ghrelin, produced primarily in the stomach, 
stimulates appetite; that is, the more ghrelin the body 
produces, the more you want to eat. Leptin, produced by 
fat cells, on the other hand, lets the brain know when you 
are full; the more leptin you produce, the less you want 
to eat.
Sleep deprivation has now been shown to elevate 
ghrelin levels and decrease leptin levels, potentially lead-
ing to weight gain or keeping you from losing weight.12 
Data comparing these hormone levels in 5-hour versus 
8-hour sleepers found that the short sleepers had a  
14.9 percent increase in ghrelin levels and a 15.5 percent 
decrease in leptin levels. The short sleepers also had a  
3.6 percent higher BMI than the regular sleepers.13
Based on all these studies, the data appear to indi-
cate that sleep deprivation has a negative impact on 
weight loss or maintenance. Thus, an important compo-
nent to a well-designed weight management program 
should be a good night’s rest (eight hours of sleep).
6.3E  Monitoring Body Weight  A critical com-
ponent to lifetime weight management is to regularly 
monitor your body weight. Get into the habit of weigh-
ing yourself, preferably at the same time of day and 
under the same conditions, for instance, in the morning 
just as you get out of bed. Depending on your body size, 
activity patterns, rehydration level, and dietary intake on 
any given day, your weight will fluctuate by a pound or 
more from one day to the next. You do not want to be 
obsessed with body weight, which can potentially lead to 
an eating disorder, but monitoring your recommended 
body weight (and that is the key: “healthy” recommended 
body weight) on a regular basis allows you to make im-
mediate adjustments in food intake and physical activity 
if your weight increases and stays there for several days. 
Do not adapt and accept the higher weight as your new 
stable weight. Understand that it is a lot easier to make 
sensible short-term dietary and activity changes to lose 1 
or 2 pounds of weight rather than having to make drastic 
long-term changes to lose 10, 20, 50, or more pounds 
that you allowed yourself to gain over the course of sev-
eral months or years. Whenever feasible, you also want 
to do periodic assessments of body composition using 
experienced technicians and valid techniques.
6.4  Exercise and Weight 
Management
A more effective way to tilt the energy-balancing equa-
tion in your favor is by burning calories through physical 
activity. Research indicates that exercise accentuates 
weight loss while on a negative caloric balance (diet) as 
long as you do not replenish the calories expended dur-
ing exercise.
Exercise also seems to exert control over how much 
a person weighs. On average, the typical adult American 
gains 1 to 2 pounds of weight per year. A 1-pound weight 
gain per year represents a simple energy surplus of less 
than 10 calories per day (10 3 365 5 3,650). In many 
cases, most of the additional weight accumulated in 
middle age comes from people becoming less physically 
active. This simple surplus of less than 10 calories per 
day is the equivalent of less than 1 teaspoon of sugar. 
Weight gain is clearly related to a decrease in physical 
activity and an increase in caloric intake. Physical inac-
tivity, however, might very well be the primary cause 
leading to excessive weight and obesity. The human body 
was meant to be physically active and a minimal level of 
activity appears to be necessary to accurately balance 
caloric intake to caloric expenditure. In sedentary indi-
viduals, the body seems to lose control over this fine 
energy balance.
A few individuals will lose weight by participating in 
30 minutes of exercise per day, but most people need 60 
to 90 minutes of daily physical activity for proper weight 
management (the 30 minutes of exercise are included as 
part of the 60 to 90 minutes of physical activity).
Although 30 
minutes of moder-
ate-intensity activ-
ity per day pro-
vides 
substantial 
Lean body mass  Nonfat component 
of the human body.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

156
Fitness and Wellness
health benefits, the Institute of Medicine of the National 
Academy of Sciences recommends that people trying  
to manage their weight accumulate 60 minutes of  
moderate-intensity physical activity most days of the 
week.14 The evidence shows that people who maintain 
recommended weight typically accumulate an hour or 
more of daily physical activity.
As illustrated in Figure 6.4, greater weight loss can 
be achieved by increasing the amount of weekly physical 
activity. Of even greater significance, however, only the 
individuals who remain physically active for more than 
60 minutes per day are able to keep the weight off.
Further, data from the National Weight Control 
Registry (http://www.nwcr.ws/) indicates that individu-
als who have lost at least 30 pounds and kept them off for 
a minimum of 6 years typically accumulate 90 minutes of 
daily activity. Those who are less active gradually regain 
the lost weight. Individuals who completely stop physical 
activity regain almost 100 percent of the weight within 
18 months of discontinuing the weight loss program. 
Thus, if weight management is not a consideration, 30 
minutes of daily activity provides health benefits. To pre-
vent weight gain, 60 minutes of daily activity are recom-
mended; to maintain substantial weight loss, 90 minutes 
may be required.
The most important reason why physical activity 
and exercise are so vital for weight loss maintenance is 
because sedentary living expends no additional energy 
(calories) over the resting metabolic rate. With limited 
physical activity throughout the day, sedentary people 
cannot afford to eat very many calories, perhaps only 
1,000 to 1,200 calories per day. And such a low level of 
energy intake is not sufficient to keep the person from 
constantly feeling hungry. The only choice they now have 
is to go hungry every day, an impossible task to sustain. 
After terminating the diet, in just a few short days, en-
ergy intake climbs with an end result of weight regain. 
Thus, the only logical way to increase caloric intake and 
maintain weight loss is by burning more calories through 
exercise and incorporating physical activity throughout 
daily living.
A combination of aerobic and strength-training ex-
ercises works best in weight loss programs. Aerobic exer-
cise is the best to offset the setpoint, and the continuity 
and duration of these types of activities cause many calo-
ries to be burned in the process. Unfortunately, of those 
individuals who are attempting to lose weight, only a 
small percentage decrease caloric intake and exercise the 
recommended 30 minutes on most days of the week.
Strength training is critical in helping maintain lean 
body mass. Although the increase in BMR (basal meta-
bolic rate) through increased muscle mass is currently 
being debated in the literature and merits further re-
search, data indicate that each additional pound of 
muscle tissue raises the BMR in the range of 6 to 35 calo-
ries per day.15 The latter figure is based on calculations 
that an increase of 3 to 3.5 pounds of lean tissue through 
strength training increased basal metabolic rate by about 
105 to 120 calories per day.16
Most likely, the benefit of strength training goes 
beyond the new muscle tissue itself. Maybe a pound of 
muscle tissue requires only 6 calories per day to sustain 
itself, but as all muscles undergo strength training, they 
undergo increased protein synthesis to build and repair 
themselves, resulting in increased energy expenditure of 
1 to 1.5 calories per pound in all trained muscle tissue. 
Such an increase would explain the 105 to 120 calorie-
BMR increase in some research studies.
To examine the effects of a small increase in BMR 
on long-term body weight, let’s use a very conservative 
estimate of an additional 50 calories per day as a result 
of a regular strength-training program. An increase of 
50 calories represents an additional 18,250 calories  
per year (50 3 365), or the equivalent of 5.2 pounds  
of fat (18,250 4 3,500). This increase in BMR would 
more than offset the typical adult weight gain of 1 to  
2 pounds per year.
This figure of 18,250 calories per year does not in-
clude the actual energy cost of the strength-training 
workout. If we use an energy expenditure of only 150 
calories per strength-training session, done twice per 
week, over a year’s time it would represent 15,600 calo-
ries (150 3 2 3 52) or the equivalent of another 4.5 
pounds of fat (15,600 4 3,500).
Figure 6.4
Approximate decrease in body weight 
based on total weekly minutes of 
physical activity (PA) without caloric 
restrictions.
Adapted from American College of Sports Medicine, “Position Stand: 
Appropriate Physical Activity Intervention Strategies for Weight Loss and 
Prevention of Weight Gain for Adults,” Medicine & Science in Sports 
Exercise 41 (2009): 459–471.
15
10
5
0
Less than 150 min/week
Between 150 and 225 min/week
Between 225 and 420 min/week
0 
3 
6 
9 
12
Weight loss (lbs)
Weeks
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

157
Chapter 6  Weight Management
In addition, although the amounts seem small, the 
previous calculations do not account for the increase in 
metabolic rate following the strength-training workout 
(the time it takes the body to return to its pre-workout 
resting rate—about 2 hours). Depending on the intensity 
and length of training, this recovery energy expenditure 
ranges from 20 to 100 calories following each strength-
training workout.17 All these “apparently small” changes 
make a big difference in the long run.
Although size (inches) and percent body fat both 
decrease when sedentary individuals begin an exercise 
program, body weight often remains the same or might 
even increase during the first couple of weeks after be-
ginning the program. Exercise helps to increase muscle 
tissue, connective tissue, blood volume (as much as 500 
mL, or the equivalent of 1 pound, following the first 
week of aerobic exercise), enzymes and other structures 
within the cell, and glycogen (which binds water). All of 
these changes lead to a higher functional capacity of the 
human body. With exercise, most of the weight loss be-
comes apparent after a few weeks of training, when the 
lean component has stabilized.
One additional benefit of exercise and physical activ-
ity is that it attenuates a person’s predisposition to obesity. 
Genetic epidemiological studies have established that ge-
netic factors play a role in obesity development in our 21st 
century obesogenic environment. Promoting physical ac-
tivity, exercise, and an active lifestyle is especially critical 
for individuals genetically predisposed to obesity.
6.4A  The Myth of Spot Reducing  Research 
has revealed the fallacy of spot reducing or losing cellu-
lite, as some people call the fat deposits that bulge out in 
certain areas of the body. Cellulite is caused by the her-
niation of subcutaneous fat within fibrous connective 
tissue, giving it a padded appearance. Merely doing sev-
eral sets of sit-ups daily will not get rid of fat in the mid-
section of the body. When fat comes off, it does so 
throughout the entire body, not just in the exercised area. 
Although the greatest proportion of fat may come off the 
biggest fat deposits, the caloric output of a few sets of 
sit-ups has almost no effect on reducing total body fat. A 
person has to exercise regularly for extended periods of 
time to really see results.
6.4B  The Role of Exercise Intensity and 
Duration in Weight Management  A hotly 
debated and controversial current topic is the exercise 
volume required for adequate weight management. De-
pending on the degree of the initial weight problem and 
Regular participation in a combined lifetime aerobic and strength-
training exercise program is the key to successful weight 
management.
© Nautilus Sports/Medical Industries, Inc.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Weight Maintenance 
Benefits of Lifetime 
Aerobic Exercise
The authors of this book have 
been jogging together a mini-
mum of 15 miles per week (3 
miles/5 times per week) for the 
past 37 years. Without con-
sidering the additional energy 
expenditure from their regular 
strength-training program and their many other sport 
and recreational activities, the energy cost of this regular 
jogging program over 37 years has been approximately 
Behavior Modification Planning
2,886,000 calories (15 miles 3 100 calories/mile 3 52 
weeks 3 37 years), or the equivalent of 825 pounds of fat 
(2,886,000 4 3,500). In essence, without this 30-minute 
workout 5 times per week, the authors would weigh 967 and 
941 pounds, respectively!
Try It
Ask yourself whether a regular aerobic exercise program is 
part of your long-term gratification and health enhance-
ment program. If the answer is no, are you ready to change 
your behavior? Use the Behavior Change Planner to help you 
answer the question.
© Fitness & Wellness Inc.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

158
Fitness and Wellness
the person’s fitness level, there appears to be a difference 
in the volume of exercise that is most conducive toward 
adequate weight loss, weight loss maintenance, and 
weight management.
We have known for years that compared with vigor-
ous intensity, a greater proportion of calories burned 
during light-intensity exercise are derived from fat. The 
lower the intensity of exercise, the higher the percentage 
of fat utilization as an energy source. During light- 
intensity exercise, up to 50 percent of the calories burned 
may be derived from fat (the other 50 percent from  
glucose [carbohydrates]). With vigorous exercise, only 
30 percent to 40 percent of the caloric expenditure 
comes from fat. Overall, however, you can burn twice as 
many calories during vigorous-intensity exercise and, 
subsequently, more fat as well.
Let’s look at a practical illustration. If you exercised 
for 30 to 40 minutes at light intensity and burned 200 
calories, about 100 of those calories (50 percent) would 
come from fat. If you exercised at a vigorous intensity 
during those same 30 to 40 minutes, you could burn 400 
calories, with 120 to 160 of the calories (30 percent to 40 
percent) coming from fat. Thus, even though it is true 
that the percentage of fat used is greater during light-
intensity exercise, the overall amount of fat used is still 
less during light-intensity exercise. Plus, if you were to 
exercise at a light intensity, you would have to do so 
twice as long to burn the same amount of calories.
Another benefit is that the metabolic rate remains at 
a slightly higher level longer after vigorous-intensity ex-
ercise, so you continue to burn a few extra calories fol-
lowing exercise. Studies indicate that very few calories 
are burned during recovery following a 45-minute  
moderate-intensity (50 percent of maximal capacity) 
exercise session, whereas exercising at or greater than  
70 percent of the maximal capacity for the same 45 min-
utes, the individual will burn an additional 300 to 700 
extra calories after the exercise session. Researchers be-
lieve that the extra caloric expenditure following vigorous 
exercise is because (a) the body uses more fat and less 
carbohydrates following a hard exercise session, and  
(b) additional energy is required to replenish glycogen 
stores used during intense exercise, and (c) hormones re-
leased during vigorous exercise remain high, maintaining 
an elevated metabolism for several hours thereafter.
The previous discussion does not mean that light-
intensity exercise is ineffective. Light-intensity exercise 
provides substantial health benefits, including a decrease 
in premature morbidity among overweight individuals. 
Additionally, beginners are more willing to participate 
and stay with light-intensity programs. The risk of injury 
when starting out is quite low with this type of a pro-
gram. Light-intensity exercise does promote weight loss.
In terms of overall weight loss, there is controversy 
regarding the optimal exercise dose. Initial research indi-
cated that vigorous-intensity exercise triggered more fat 
loss than light- to moderate-intensity exercise. Research 
conducted in the 1990s at Laval University in Quebec, 
Canada, using both men and women participants, 
showed that subjects who performed a high-intensity 
interval-training (HIIT) program lost more body fat 
than participants in a light- to moderate-intensity con-
tinuous aerobic endurance group.18 Even more surpris-
ing, this finding occurred despite the fact that the vigor-
ous-intensity group burned fewer total calories per 
exercise session. The researchers concluded that the “re-
sults reinforce the notion that for a given level of energy 
expenditure, vigorous exercise favors negative energy 
and lipid balance to a greater extent than exercise of low- 
to moderate-intensity. Moreover, the metabolic adapta-
tions taking place in the skeletal muscle in response to 
the HIIT program appear to favor the process of lipid 
oxidation.” If time constraints do not allow much time 
for exercise, to increase energy expenditure, a vigorous 
20- to 30-minute exercise program is recommended.
Recently, it has been suggested that when attempting 
to lose weight, particularly for women, lengthy exercise 
sessions may not be helpful because they actually trigger 
greater food consumption following exercise, whereas 
shorter exercise sessions do not lead to a greater caloric 
intake. Thus, some people think that the potential weight 
reduction effect of lengthy exercise sessions may be at-
tenuated because people end up eating more food when 
they exercise.
A recent 2009 study had postmenopausal women 
exercise at 50 percent of their maximal aerobic capacity 
for about 20 minutes, 40 minutes, or 60 minutes 3 to  
4 times per week.19 On average, the groups lost 3, 4.6, 
and, 3.3 pounds of weight, respectively. The data indi-
cated that the 20- and 40-minute groups lost weight 
closely to what had been predicted, whereas the 60- 
minute group lost significantly less than predicted. The 
researchers concluded that 60 minutes of exercise led 
this group of women to compensate with greater food 
intake, possibly triggered by an increase in ghrelin levels. 
All three groups, nonetheless, exhibited a significant de-
crease in waist circumference, independent of total 
weight lost. Researchers theorize that the biological 
mechanism to maintain fat stores in women is stronger 
than in men.
On the other hand, a 2010 study of more than 
34,000 women who were followed for 13 years, starting 
at an average age of 54, found that on average the women 
gained 6 pounds of weight; but a small group of them 
who reported 60 minutes of almost daily exercise at a 
moderate intensity closely maintained their body 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

159
Chapter 6  Weight Management
weight.20 The exercise routine of the latter group was not 
something new to them, but rather exercise that they had 
been doing for years. While the best exercise dose for 
optimal weight loss may not be a precise science, the re-
search is quite clear that regular exercise is the best pre-
dictor of long-term weight maintenance. The data also 
indicate that even as little as 80 weekly minutes of aero-
bic or strength-training exercise prevents regain of the 
harmful visceral fat.
The take-home message from these studies is that 
when trying to lose weight, initial lengthy exercise ses-
sions (longer than 60 minutes) may not be the best ap-
proach to weight loss, unless you carefully monitor daily 
caloric intake and avoid caloric compensation. The data 
show that people who carefully monitor caloric intake, 
instead of “guesstimating” energy intake, are by far more 
successful with weight loss.
Caloric compensation in response to extensive exer-
cise in overweight individuals may be related to a low 
initial fitness level and the already low caloric intake. 
Overall, inactive people tend to eat fewer calories, and a 
lengthy exercise session may very well trigger a greater 
appetite due to the large negative caloric balance. Re-
search confirms that energy deficit, and not exercise, is 
the most significant regulator of the hormonal responses 
seen in previously inactive individuals who begin an ex-
ercise program.21 In active/fit individuals, lengthy exer-
cise sessions are not at all counterproductive. If such 
were the case, health clubs and jogging trails would be 
full of overweight and obese people.
New research is beginning to look into the role of 
increasing light-intensity ambulation (walking) and 
standing activities (doing some of the work on your feet 
instead of sitting the entire time) on weight loss. In es-
sence, the individual will increase light-intensity physi-
cal activity throughout the day. Light-intensity activities 
do not seem to trigger the increase in ghrelin levels seen 
in previously inactive individuals who undertake long 
moderate- or vigorous-intensity exercise sessions. The 
difference in energy expenditure from increasing light-
intensity activities throughout the day can represent 
several hundred calories. As you achieve a higher fitness 
level, you can combine light-intensity activities per-
formed throughout the day with moderate- and/or  
vigorous-intensity exercise.
The most important reason why physical activity 
and exercise are so vital for weight loss maintenance is 
because sedentary living expends no additional energy 
(calories) over the resting metabolic rate. With limited 
physical activity throughout the day, sedentary people 
cannot afford to eat very many calories, perhaps only 
1,000 to 1,200 calories per day. And such a low level of 
energy intake is not sufficient to keep the person from 
constantly feeling hungry. The only choice they now have 
is to go hungry every day, an impossible task to sustain. 
After terminating the diet, in just a few short days energy 
intake climbs, with an end result of weight regain. Thus, 
the only logical way to increase caloric intake and main-
tain weight loss is by burning more calories through ex-
ercise and incorporating physical activity throughout 
daily living.
If you wish to engage in vigorous-intensity exercise 
to either maintain lost weight or for adequate weight 
management, a word of caution is in order: Be sure that 
it is medically safe for you to participate in such activities 
and that you build up gradually to that level. If you are 
cleared to participate in vigorous-intensity exercise, do 
not attempt to do too much too quickly because you may 
incur injuries and become discouraged. You must allow 
your body a proper conditioning period of 8 to 12 weeks 
or even longer.
Also keep in mind that vigorous intensity does not 
mean high impact. High-impact activities are the most 
common cause of exercise-related injuries. Additional 
information on proper exercise prescription is presented 
in Chapter 3. And remember, when on a weight loss 
program, always carefully monitor your daily caloric in-
take to avoid food overconsumption.
In addition to exercise and food management, sen-
sible adjustments in caloric intake are recommended. 
Most research finds that a negative caloric balance is re-
quired to lose weight. Perhaps the only exception is with 
people who are eating too few calories. A nutrient analy-
sis often reveals that “faithful” dieters are not consuming 
enough calories. These people actually need to increase 
their daily caloric intake (combined with an exercise 
program) to get their metabolism to kick back up to a 
normal level.
6.4C  Overweight and Fit Debate  A hotly 
debated topic in the exercise and medical community is 
the topic most commonly referred to as “fit and fat.” Can 
a person possibly be overweight/obese and still be fit?
Initially, the debate started with research indicating 
that the higher the aerobic fitness level, as measured by 
total treadmill-walking time, the lower the mortality 
rate, regardless of body weight. Most recently, fitness has 
been defined as “accumulating 30 minutes of moderate 
intensity activity on most days of the week.” Many over-
weight people who reach this goal are not predisposed to 
premature death. In fact, data indicate that, on average, 
death rates for thin, but unfit, individuals are twice as 
high as that of obese and “fit” people. Furthermore, look-
ing at every category of body composition, most “unfit” 
people have a higher rate of premature death than “fit” 
individuals. Thus, at least partially, lack of physical activ-
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

160
Fitness and Wellness
ity (fitness), and not the weight problem itself, may be the 
cause of premature death in most overweight people. It’s 
not simply a matter of fitness or fatness, because both obe-
sity and physical inactivity are independent risk factors for 
heart disease, type 2 diabetes, and other chronic ailments.
The results of these studies, nonetheless, are encour-
aging because they show that many overweight/obese 
people who focus on healthy eating and become physi-
cally active can decrease the risk of premature mortality, 
regardless of whether they lose weight or not. Very few 
obese people, however, eat healthy and exercise regularly 
for 30 minutes on most days of the week. Most obese 
people either chose not to exercise or are unable to do so 
because of functional limitations as a result of the exces-
sive body weight.
The answer to the question as to whether a person 
can be fit and fat depends on the definition of fitness. If 
cardiorespiratory fitness is determined by “accumulating 
30 minutes of moderate-intensity activity on most days 
of the week,” then the answer is a definite “yes.” If one 
measures fitness based on maximal oxygen uptake  
(VO2max—see Chapter 2, page 31), the answer is a clear 
“no.” Many fitness experts do not agree with the concept 
of fit and fat. Exercise by itself will not remove all of the 
heart risks of being overweight, but it can blunt them. 
According to Dr. JoAnn Manson of the Harvard Medical 
School, “it’s a rare bird” to find someone who is truly 
overweight and yet truly fit from a cardiorespiratory 
standpoint.
Most nutritionists and exercise scientists agree that 
healthy eating and healthy exercise contribute to healthy 
body weight. There are more than 50 medical condi-
tions—from type 2 diabetes, acid reflux, arthritis, sleep 
apnea, and some types of cancers, that are directly re-
lated to excessive body weight. At this point, most fitness 
leaders do not support the notion that people can enjoy 
vibrant health and good quality of life while being over-
weight or obese.
6.5  Designing Your Own 
Weight Loss Program
6.5A  Estimating Your Caloric Intake  With 
Activity 6.1 (pages 168–169) and Tables 6.1 and 6.2, you 
can estimate your daily energy (caloric) requirement. 
Because this is only an estimated value, individual ad-
justments related to many of the factors discussed in this 
chapter may be necessary to establish a more precise 
value. Nevertheless, the estimated value does offer a be-
ginning guideline for weight control or reduction.
The estimated energy requirement (EER) without 
additional planned activity and exercise is based on age, 
total body weight, height, and gender. Individuals who 
hold jobs that require a lot of walking or heavy manual 
labor burn more calories during the day than those who 
have sedentary jobs (such as working behind a desk). To 
estimate your EER, refer to Table 6.1. For example, the 
EER computation for a 20-year-old man, 71 inches tall, 
who weighs 160 pounds, would be as follows:
	1.	
Body weight in kilograms 5 72.6 kg  
(160 lbs 4 2.2046) 
Height in meters 5 1.8 m (71 3 .0254)
	2.	
EER 5 662  (9.53 3 Age) 1 (15.91 3 BW) 1 
(539 3 Ht) 
EER 5 662  (9.53 3 20) 1 (15.91 3 72.6) 1  
(539 3 1.8) 
EER 5 662  190.6 1 1,155 1 970 
EER 5 2,596
Thus, the EER to maintain body weight for this in-
dividual would be 2,596 calories per day.
The second step is to determine the average number of 
calories this man burns daily as a result of exercise. To get 
this number, he must figure out the total number of min-
utes he exercises weekly and then figure the daily average 
exercise time. For instance, if he cycles at 10 miles per hour 
5 times a week, 60 minutes each time, he exercises 300 
minutes per week (5 3 60). The average daily exercise time 
is 42 minutes (300 4 7, rounded off to the lowest unit).
Next, from Table 6.2, find the energy requirement 
for the activity (or activities) he has chosen for the exer-
cise program. In the case of cycling (10 miles per hour), 
the requirement is .05 calories per pound of body weight 
per minute of activity (cal/lb/min). With a body weight 
of 160 pounds, this man would burn 8 calories each min-
ute (body weight 3 .05, or 160 3 .05). In 42 minutes, he 
burns approximately 336 calories (42 3 8).
The third step is to obtain the estimated total caloric 
requirement, with exercise, needed to maintain body 
weight. To do this, add the typical daily requirement 
(without exercise) and the average calories burned 
through exercise. In our example, it is 2,932 calories 
(2,596 1 336).
Table 6.1  Estimated Energy Requirement (EER) Based on Age, 
Body Weight, and Height (includes activities of independent living 
only and no moderate physical activity or exercise)
Men: EER 5 662 – (9.53 3 Age) 1 (15.91 3 BW) 1 (539 3 HT) 
Women: EER 5 354 – (6.91 3 Age) 1 (9.36 3 BW) 1 (726 3 HT)
BW 5 body weight in kilograms (divide BW in pounds by 2.2046), 
HT 5 height in meters (multiply HT in inches by .0254).
SOURCE: National Academy of Sciences, Institute of Medicine, Dietary Reference Intakes for 
Energy, Carbohydrates, Fiber, Fat, Protein and Amino Acids (Macronutrients) (Washington, 
DC: National Academy Press, 2002).
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

161
Chapter 6  Weight Management
Therefore, this man has to consume fewer than 2,932 
calories daily to lose weight. Because of the many factors 
that play a role in weight control, this is only an estimated 
daily requirement. Furthermore, to lose weight, we cannot 
predict that he will lose exactly 1 pound of fat in 1 week if 
he cuts his daily intake by 500 calories (500 3 7 5 3,500 
calories, or the equivalent of 1 pound of fat).
The daily energy requirement is only a target guide-
line for weight control. Periodic readjustments are neces-
sary because indi-
viduals differ and 
the estimated daily 
cost changes as 
you lose weight 
and modify your 
exercise habits.
To determine 
the target caloric 
Estimated energy requirement 
(EER)  The average dietary energy (ca-
loric) intake that is predicted to main-
tain energy balance in a healthy adult 
of defined age, gender, weight, height, 
and level of physical activity, consis-
tent with good health.
Table 6.2  Caloric Expenditure of Selected Physical Activities
Activity*
Cal/lb/min
Activity*
Cal/lb/min
Activity*
Cal/lb/min
Aerobics
  Moderate 
  Vigorous
  Step aerobics
Archery 
Badminton
  Recreation 
  Competition
Baseball 
Basketball
  Moderate 
  Competition
Bowling
Calisthenics 
Cross-country skiing
  Moderate
  Vigorous
Circuit training
  Moderate
  Vigorous
Cycling (on a level surface)
  5.5 mph
  10.0 mph
  13.0 mph
Dance 
  Moderate 
  Vigorous
0.065
Elliptical training
Stationary cycling
0.095
0.070
0.030
0.038
0.065
0.031
0.046
0.063
0.030
0.033
0.090
0.120
0.070
0.100
0.033
0.050
0.071
0.03
0.055
  Moderate 
  Vigorous 
Golf 
Gymnastics
  Light 
  Heavy 
Handball 
High-intensity interval  
  training
Hiking 
Judo/karate 
Jogging/running  
(on a level surface)
  11.0 min/mile
  8.5 min/mile
  7.0 min/mile
  6.0 min/mile
  Deep water**
Racquetball 
Rope jumping 
Rowing (vigorous) 
Skating (moderate) 
Skiing 
  Downhill 
  Level (5 mph) 
Soccer 
0.07
0.09
0.030
0.03
0.056
0.064
0.120
0.04
0.086
0.070
0.090
0.102
0.114
0.100
0.065
0.06
0.09
0.038
0.06
0.078
0.059
  Moderate 
  Vigorous 
Strength training 
Swimming (crawl)
  20 yds/min
  25 yds/min 
  45 yds/min 
  50 yds/min 
Table tennis 
Tennis 
  Moderate 
  Competition 
Volleyball 
Walking 
  4.5 mph 
  Shallow pool 
Water aerobics
  Moderate 
  Vigorous 
Wrestling 
Zumba
  Moderate
  Vigorous
0.055
0.07
0.05
0.031
0.04
0.057
0.07
0.03
0.045
0.064
0.03
0.045
0.09
0.05
0.07
0.085
0.065
0.095
*Values are for actual time engaged in the activity.
**Treading water.
Adapted from: P. E. Allsen, J. M. Harrison, and B. Vance, Fitness for Life: An Individualized Approach (Dubuque, IA: Wm. C. Brown, 1989). C. A. Bucher and W. E. Prentice, Fitness for College 
and Life (St. Louis: Times Mirror/Mosby College Publishing, 1989). C. F. Consolazio, R. E. Johnson, and L. J. Pecora, Physiological Measurements of Metabolic Functions in Man (New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1963). R. V. Hockey, Physical Fitness: The Pathway to Healthy Living (St. Louis: Times Mirror/Mosby College Publishing, 1989). W. W. K. Hoeger et al., Research conducted at 
Boise State University, 1986–2009.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

162
Fitness and Wellness
intake to lose weight, multiply your current weight by 5 
and subtract this amount from the total daily energy re-
quirement (2,932 in our example) with exercise. For our 
moderately active male example, this would mean 
consuming only 2,132 calories per day to lose weight 
(160 3 5 5 800 and 2,932 – 800 5 2,132 calories).
This final caloric intake to lose weight should not be 
below 1,500 calories for most people. If distributed prop-
erly over the various food groups, 1,500 calories appears 
to be the lowest caloric intake that still provides the nec-
essary nutrients the body needs. A multivitamin com-
plex is recommended for diets that call for less than 
1,500 calories. In terms of percentages of total calories, 
the daily distribution should be approximately 60 per-
cent carbohydrates (mostly complex carbohydrates), less 
than 30 percent fat, and about 12 percent protein.
The time of day when food is consumed also may play 
a part in losing weight. When a person is attempting to 
lose weight, intake should consist of a minimum of 25 
percent of the total daily calories for breakfast, 50 percent 
for lunch, and 25 percent or less at dinner. Breakfast, in 
particular, is a critical meal. Many people skip breakfast 
because it’s the easiest meal to skip. Evidence, however, 
indicates that people who skip breakfast are hungrier later 
in the day and end up consuming more total daily calories 
than those who eat breakfast. Furthermore, regular break-
fast eaters have less of a weight problem, lose weight more 
effectively, and have less difficulty maintaining lost weight.
If most of the daily calories are consumed during 
one meal (as in the typical evening meal), the body may 
perceive that something is wrong and will slow down the 
metabolism so it can store more calories in the form of 
fat. Also, eating most of the calories during one meal 
causes a person to go hungry the rest of the day, making 
it more difficult to adhere to the diet.
6.5B  Monitoring Your Diet Through Daily 
Food Logs  To help you monitor and adhere to your 
diet plan, you may use the daily food intake record form 
in Activity 6.2, pages 170–173. First make a master copy 
so you can make copies as needed in the future. Guide-
lines are provided for 1,200-, 1,500-, 1,800-, and 
2,000-calorie diet plans. These plans have been devel-
oped based on the MyPlate food plan and the Dietary 
Guidelines for Americans to meet the Recommended 
Dietary Allowances. The objective is to meet (not ex-
ceed) the number of servings allowed for each diet plan. 
Each time you eat a serving of any food, record it in the 
appropriate box. Evidence indicates that people who 
monitor daily caloric intake are more successful at weight 
loss than those who don’t self-monitor.
To lose weight, you should use the diet plan that 
most closely approximates your target caloric intake. The 
plan is based on the following caloric allowances for 
these food groups:
• 
Grains: 80 calories per serving
• 
Fruits: 60 calories per serving
• 
Vegetables: 25 calories per serving
• 
Dairy (use low-fat products): 120 calories per 
serving
• 
Protein: Use low-fat (300 calories per serving) fro-
zen entrees or an equivalent amount if you prepare 
your own main dish (see the following discussion)
As you start your diet plan, pay particular attention 
to food serving sizes. Take care with cup and glass sizes. 
A standard cup is 8 ounces, but most glasses nowadays 
contain between 12 and 16 ounces. If you drink 12 
ounces of fruit juice, in essence you are getting two 
servings of fruit because a standard serving is ¾ cup of 
juice.
Read food labels carefully to compare the caloric 
value of the serving listed on the label with the caloric 
guidelines provided above. Here are some examples:
• 
One slice of standard whole-wheat bread has about 
80 calories. A plain bagel may have 200 to 350 cal-
ories. Although it is low in fat, a 350-calorie bagel 
is equivalent to almost 4 servings in the grain 
group.
• 
The standard serving size listed on the food label 
for most cereals is 1 cup. As you read the nutrition 
information, however, you will find that for the 
same cup of cereal, one type of cereal has 120 calo-
ries and another cereal has 200 calories. Because a 
standard serving in the grain group is 80 calories, 
the first cereal would be 1½ servings and the sec-
ond one 2½ servings.
• 
A medium-size fruit is usually considered to be 1 
serving. A large fruit could provide as many as 2 or 
more servings.
• 
In the dairy group, 1 serving represents 120 calo-
ries. A cup of whole milk has about 160 calories, 
compared with a cup of skim milk, which contains 
88 calories. A cup of whole milk, therefore, would 
provide 11⁄3 servings in this food group.
6.5C  Using Low-Fat Entrees  To be more accu-
rate with caloric intake and to simplify meal preparation, 
use commercially prepared low-fat frozen entrees as the 
main dish for lunch and dinner meals (only one entree 
for the 1,200-calorie diet plan—see Activity 6.2, page 
170). Look for entrees that provide about 300 calories 
and no more than 6 grams of fat per entree. These two 
entrees can be used as the protein group selections and 
will provide most of the daily requirement for the body. 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

163
Chapter 6  Weight Management
Along with each entree, supplement the meal with some 
of your servings from the other food groups. This diet 
plan has been used successfully in weight loss research 
programs.22 If you choose not to use these low-fat en-
trees, prepare a similar meal using 3 ounces (cooked) of 
lean meat, poultry, or fish with additional beans, vegeta-
bles, rice, or pasta that will provide 300 calories with 
fewer than 6 grams of fat per dish.
As you record your food choices, be sure to write the 
precise amount for each serving. If you choose to do so, 
you then can run a computerized nutrient analysis to 
verify your caloric intake and food distribution pattern 
(percent of total calories from carbohydrate, fat, and 
protein).
6.5D  Protein Intake  To minimize the loss of lean 
body mass and hunger pangs while dieting, it is ex-
tremely important that you consume sufficient protein 
with each meal. You need to ensure that you are consum-
ing between 1.0 gram and 1.2 grams of protein per kilo-
gram of body weight per day. As explained in Chapter 5 
(Table 5.2, page 152), if you weigh 141 pounds (64 kg) 
and you are physically active, your total daily protein 
intake would be between 64 and 77 grams per day (64 3 
1.0 and 64 3 1.2) or the equivalent of 256 to 308 calories 
from protein every day (64 3 4 and 77 3 4), distributed 
in 21 to 26 grams of protein for each of your daily  
3 meals. High-protein/low-calorie foods include fat-free 
or low-fat dairy products (milk, plain Greek yogurt, and 
cheese), eggs, lean meats and poultry, fish, soybeans and 
soy milk, tofu, quinoa, and beans. To help monitor your 
daily protein intake, you can calculate and record your 
daily intake in Activity 6.2 as well.
6.5E  Effect of Food Choices on Long-Term 
Weight Gain  Although still in its infancy, research 
published in 2011 on more than 120,000 people who 
were evaluated every 4 years over a 20-year period 
showed that food choices have a significant effect on 
weight gain.23 On average, study participants gained 17 
pounds over the course of 20 years. Regardless of other 
lifestyle habits, individuals who consumed unhealthy 
foods gained the most weight, whereas those who made 
healthy food choices gained the least amount of weight. 
Although more research is needed, in this study,  
four-year weight change was most strongly associated 
with the consumption of potato chips, potatoes, sugar-
sweetened beverages, unprocessed and processed red 
meats and inversely associated with the consumption of 
vegetables, whole grains, fruits, nuts, and yogurt. The 
take-home message: Consume more fruits, vegetables, 
whole grains, low-fat dairy products, and nuts (the last in 
moderation because of their high caloric content).
6.6  Behavior Modification 
and Adherence to a 
Lifetime Weight 
Management Program
Achieving and maintaining recommended body compo-
sition is by no means impossible, but it does require de-
sire and commitment. If weight management is to be-
come a priority in life, people must realize that they have 
to transform their behavior to some extent.
Modifying old habits and developing new, positive 
behaviors take time. Individuals who apply the manage-
ment techniques provided in the Behavior Modification 
Planning box (pages 164–165) are more successful at 
changing detrimental behavior and adhering to a positive, 
lifetime weight control program. In developing a retraining 
program, people are not expected to use all of the strategies 
listed but should pick the ones that apply to them.
What behavioral strategies have you used to properly 
manage your body weight? • How do you think those 
strategies would work for others?
Critical Thinking
During the weight loss process, surround yourself with 
people who have the same goals as you do (weight loss). 
Data released in 2007 showed that obesity can spread 
through “social networks.”24 That is, if your friends, siblings, 
“Supersized” portion sizes at restaurants in the United States contrib-
ute to the growing epidemic of obesity.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

164
Fitness and Wellness
Weight Loss Strategies
  1. Make a commitment to change. The first necessary in-
gredient is the desire to modify your behavior. You have 
to stop precontemplating or contemplating change and 
get going! You must accept that you have a problem and 
decide by yourself whether you really want to change. 
Sincere commitment increases your chances for success.
  2. Set realistic goals. The weight problem developed over 
several years. Similarly, new lifetime eating and exer-
cise habits take time to develop. A realistic long-term 
goal also will include short-term objectives that allow 
for regular evaluation and help maintain motivation 
and renewed commitment to attain the long-term goal.
  3. Monitor caloric intake. Keep an accurate daily record of 
food consumption. “If you eat it record it.” People who 
keep accurate food logs are more successful at weight 
loss.
  4. Plan on three small meals and possibly one to two 
snacks each day. Eating less but more often helps keep 
your blood sugar levels steady and avoid hunger pangs. 
Include adequate protein intake with each meal (0.5 to 
0.7 grams of protein per kg of body weight per meal) 
and use primarily high-volume, low-calorie foods. 
Space your meals and snacks so that you eat every 
three to four hours. Snacks need to be nutrient-rich, in-
cluding fruits, vegetables, low-fat/plain yogurt, or a 
small amount of nuts.
  5. Weigh yourself regularly, preferably at the same time of 
day and under the same conditions. Do not adapt and ac-
cept a higher body weight as a new stable weight. Make 
dietary and physical activity adjustments accordingly.
  6. Incorporate exercise into the program. Choosing enjoy-
able activities, places, times, equipment, and people to 
work out with will help you adhere to an exercise pro-
gram. (See Chapters 3 and 4.)
  7. Differentiate hunger and appetite. Hunger is the actual 
physical need for food. Appetite is a desire for food, 
usually triggered by factors such as stress, habit, bore-
dom, depression, availability of food, or just the 
thought of food itself. Developing and sticking to a reg-
ular meal pattern will help control hunger.
  8. Eat less fat. Each gram of fat provides nine calories, 
and protein and carbohydrates provide only four. In es-
sence, you can eat more food on a low-fat diet because 
Behavior Modification Planning
you consume fewer calories with each meal. Most of 
your fat intake should come from unsaturated sources.
  9. Pay attention to calories. Just because food is labeled 
“low-fat” does not mean you can eat as much as you 
want. When reading food labels—and when eating—
don’t just look at the fat content. Pay attention to calo-
ries as well. Many low-fat foods are high in calories.
10. Cut unnecessary items from your diet. Substituting wa-
ter for a daily can of soda would cut 51,100 (140 3 
365) calories yearly from the diet—the equivalent of 
14.6 (51,000 4 3,500) pounds of fat. If you always 
drink water instead of sugar-sweetened beverages 
when thirsty and with your meals, you can do even bet-
ter and decrease caloric intake by an average of 300 
daily calories. Studies also indicate that liquid calories 
do little to suppress hunger.
11. Maintain a daily intake of calcium-rich foods, espe-
cially low-fat or nonfat dairy products.
12. Add foods to your diet that reduce cravings, such as 
eggs; small amounts of red meat, fish, poultry, tofu, 
oils, fats; and nonstarchy vegetables such as lettuce, 
green beans, peppers, asparagus, broccoli, mush-
rooms, and Brussels sprouts. Also increasing the intake 
of low-glycemic carbohydrates with your meals helps 
you go longer before you feel hungry again.
13. Avoid automatic eating. Many people associate certain 
daily activities with eating, for example, cooking, 
watching television, or reading. Most foods consumed 
in these situations lack nutritional value or are high in 
sugar and fat.
14. Stay busy. People tend to eat more when they sit 
around and do nothing. Occupying the mind and body 
with activities not associated with eating helps take 
away the desire to eat. Some options are walking; cy-
cling; playing sports; gardening; sewing; or visiting a 
library, a museum, or a park. You also might develop 
other skills and interests not associated with food.
15. Plan meals and shop sensibly. Always shop on a full 
stomach, because hungry shoppers tend to buy un-
healthy foods impulsively—and then snack on the way 
home. Always use a shopping list, which should include 
whole-grain breads and cereals, fruits and vegetables, 
low-fat milk and dairy products, lean meats, fish, and 
poultry.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

165
Chapter 6  Weight Management
16. Cook wisely:
• Use less fat and fewer refined foods in food preparation.
• Trim all visible fat from meats and remove skin from 
poultry before cooking.
• Skim the fat off gravies and soups.
• Bake, broil, boil, or steam instead of frying.
• Sparingly use butter, cream, mayonnaise, and salad 
dressings.
• Avoid coconut oil, palm oil, and cocoa butter.
• Prepare plenty of foods that contain fiber.
• Include whole-grain breads and cereals, vegetables, 
and legumes in most meals.
• Eat fruits for dessert.
• Stay away from soda pop, fruit juices, and fruit-flavored 
drinks.
• Use less sugar, and cut down on other refined carbohy-
drates, such as corn syrup, malt sugar, dextrose, and 
fructose.
• Drink plenty of water—at least six glasses a day.
17. Do not serve more food than you should eat. Measure 
the food in portions and keep serving dishes away from 
the table. Do not force yourself or anyone else to “clean 
the plate” after they are satisfied (including children af-
ter they already have had a healthy, nutritious serving).
18. Try “junior size” instead of “super size.” People who are 
served larger portions eat more, whether they are hun-
gry or not. Use smaller plates, bowls, cups, and 
glasses. Try eating half as much food as you commonly 
eat. Watch for portion sizes at restaurants as well:  
Supersized foods create supersized people.
19. Eat out infrequently. The more often people eat out, the 
more body fat they have. People who eat out 6 or more 
times per week consume an average of about 300 extra 
calories per day and 30 percent more fat than those 
who eat out less often.
20. Eat slowly and at the table only. Eating on the run pro-
motes overeating because the body doesn’t have 
enough time to “register” consumption and people 
overeat before the body perceives the fullness signal. 
Eating at the table encourages people to take time out 
to eat and deters snacking between meals. After eat-
ing, do not sit around the table but, rather, clean up 
and put away the food to avoid snacking.
21. Avoid social binges. Social gatherings tend to entice 
self-defeating behavior. Use visual imagery to plan 
ahead. Do not feel pressured to eat or drink and don’t 
rationalize in these situations. Choose low-calorie 
foods and entertain yourself with other activities, such 
as dancing and talking.
22. Do not place unhealthy foods within easy reach. Ideally, 
avoid bringing high-calorie, high-sugar, or high-fat 
foods into the house. If they are there already, store 
them where they are hard to get to or see—perhaps 
the garage or basement.
23. Avoid evening food raids. Most people do really well 
during the day but then “lose it” at night. Take control. 
Stop and think. To avoid excessive nighttime snacking, 
stay busy after your evening meal. Go for a short walk; 
floss and brush your teeth, and get to bed earlier. Even 
better, close the kitchen after dinner and try not to eat 
anything 3 hours prior to going to sleep.
24. Practice stress management techniques (discussed in 
Chapter 7). Many people snack and increase their food 
consumption in stressful situations.
25. Get support. People who receive support from friends, 
relatives, and formal support groups are much more 
likely to lose and maintain weight loss than those with-
out such support. The more support you receive, the 
better off you will be.
26. Monitor changes and reward accomplishments. Being 
able to exercise without interruption for 15, 20, 30, or 
60 minutes; swimming a certain distance; running a 
mile—all these accomplishments deserve recognition. 
Create rewards that are not related to eating: new 
clothing, a tennis racquet, a bicycle, exercise shoes, or 
something else that is special and you would not have 
acquired otherwise.
27. Prepare for slip-ups. Most people will slip and occa-
sionally splurge. Do not despair and give up. Reevalu-
ate and continue with your efforts. An occasional slip 
won’t make much difference in the long run.
28. Think positive. Avoid negative thoughts about how dif-
ficult changing past behaviors might be. Instead, think 
of the benefits you will reap, such as feeling, looking, 
and functioning better, plus enjoying better health and 
improving the quality of life. Avoid negative environ-
ments and unsupportive people.
Try It
In your Online Journal or class notebook, answer the follow-
ing questions: How many of the previous listed strategies 
do you use to help you maintain recommended body weight? 
Do you feel that any of these strategies specifically help you 
manage body weight more effectively? If so, explain why.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

166
Fitness and Wellness
or spouse gain weight, you are more likely to gain weight as 
well. People tend to accept a higher weight standard if 
someone they are close to or care about gains weight.
In the study, the social ties of more than 12,000 were 
examined over 32 years. The findings revealed that if a 
close friend becomes obese, your risk of becoming obese 
during the next 2 to 4 years increases 171 percent. The 
risk also increases 57 percent for casual friends, 40 per-
cent for siblings, and 37 percent for the person’s spouse. 
The reverse was also found to be true. When a person 
loses weight, the likelihood of friends, siblings, or spouse 
to lose weight is also enhanced.
Furthermore, the research found that gender plays a 
role in social networks. A male’s weight has a greater ef-
fect on the weight of male friends and brothers than on 
female friends or sisters. Similarly, a woman’s weight has 
a far greater influence on sisters and girlfriends than on 
brothers or male friends. Thus, if you are trying to lose 
weight, choose your friendships carefully: Do not sur-
round yourself with people who either have a weight 
problem or are still gaining weight.
6.7  You Can Do It!
The challenge of taking off excessive body fat and keep-
ing it off for good has no simple solution. Weight man-
agement is accomplished through lifetime commitment 
to physical activity and proper food selection. When 
taking part in a weight reduction program, people have 
to decrease their caloric intake moderately and imple-
ment strategies to modify unhealthy eating behaviors.
Relapses into past negative behaviors are almost in-
evitable. Making mistakes is human and does not mean 
failure. Failure comes to those who give up and do not 
use previous experiences to build upon and, instead, 
develop skills that will prevent self-defeating behaviors 
in the future. Where there’s a will, there’s a way, and those 
who persist will reap the rewards.
	1.	
Are you satisfied with your current body composition 
and quality of life? If not, are you willing to do some-
thing about it. If so, what do you plan to do to reach 
your goal?
	2.	
Are physical activity, aerobic exercise, and strength train-
ing a regular part of your lifetime weight management 
program?
	3.	
Do you weigh yourself regularly and make adjustments 
in energy intake and physical activity habits if your 
weight starts to slip upward?
	4.	
Do you exercise portion control, watch your overall fat 
intake, and plan ahead before you eat out or attend social 
functions that entice overeating?
Assess Your Behavior
To access course materials, including companion resources, please visit www.cengagebrain.com.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

167
Chapter 6  Weight Management
	 1.	 Obesity is defined as a body mass index equal to or 
above
	 a.	 10.
	 b.	 25.
	 c.	 30.
	 d.	 45.
	 e.	 50.
	 2.	 The yearly estimated number of deaths attributed to ex-
cessive body weight and physical inactivity in the United 
States is
	 a.	 28,000.
	 b.	 55,000.
	 c.	 93,000.
	 d.	 112,000.
	 e.	 350,000.
	 3.	 Obesity increases the risk for
	 a.	 hypertension.
	 b.	 congestive heart failure.
	 c.	 atherosclerosis.
	 d.	 type 2 diabetes.
	 e.	 All are correct choices.
	 4.	 Tolerable weight is a body weight
	 a.	 that is not ideal but one that you can live with.
	 b.	 that will tolerate the increased risk of chronic 
diseases.
	 c.	 with a BMI range between 25 and 30.
	 d.	 that meets both ideal values for percent body fat  
and BMI.
	 e.	 All are correct choices.
	 5.	 When the body uses protein instead of a combination of 
fats and carbohydrates as a source of energy,
	 a.	 weight loss is very slow.
	 b.	 a large amount of weight loss is in the form of water.
	 c.	 muscle turns into fat.
	 d.	 fat is lost very rapidly.
	 e.	 fat cannot be lost.
	 6.	 One pound of fat represents
	 a.	 1,200 calories.
	 b.	 1,500 calories.
	 c.	 3,500 calories.
	 d.	 5,000 calories.
	 e.	 None of the above choices is correct.
	 7.	 The mechanism that seems to regulate how much a per-
son weighs is known as
	 a.	 setpoint.
	 b.	 weight factor.
	 c.	 basal metabolic rate.
	 d.	 metabolism.
	 e.	 energy-balancing equation.
	 8.	 The key to successful weight management is
	 a.	 frequent dieting.
	 b.	 very low calorie diets when “normal” dieting doesn’t 
work.
	 c.	 a lifetime physical activity program.
	 d.	 regular low-carbohydrate/high-protein meals.
	 e.	 All are correct choices.
	 9.	 The daily amount of physical activity recommended for 
weight loss maintenance is
	 a.	 15 to 20 minutes.
	 b.	 20 to 30 minutes.
	 c.	 30 to 60 minutes.
	 d.	 60 to 90 minutes.
	 e.	 Any amount is sufficient as long as it is done daily.
	10.	 A daily energy expenditure of 300 calories through phys-
ical activity is the equivalent of approximately pounds of 
fat per year.
	 a.	 12
	 b.	 15
	 c.	 22
	 d.	 27
	 e.	 31
Correct answers can be found on page 301.
Assess Your Knowledge
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

168
Fitness and Wellness
 
 
Current body weight
 .A
B. Estimated energy requirement per day (use Table 6.1, page 160) 
 
C. Selected physical activity (e.g., jogging)* 
D. Number of exercise sessions per week 
E. Duration of exercise session (in minutes) 
F. Total weekly exercise time in minutes (D × E) 
G. Average daily exercise time in minutes (F ÷ 7) 
H. 
 Caloric expenditure per pound per minute (cal/lb/min) of selected physical 
activity (use Table 6.2, page 161) 
I. 
Total calories burned per minute of exercise (A × H) 
J. Average daily calories burned as a result of the exercise program (G × I)  
K. Total daily caloric requirement with exercise to maintain body weight (B + J)  
L.  Number of calories to subtract from daily requirement to achieve a 
negative caloric balance (multiply current body weight by 5)** 
M. Target caloric intake to lose weight (K − L)  
 * If more than one physical activity is selected, you will need to estimate the average daily calories burned as a result of each additional activity (steps C through J) 
and add all of these ﬁ gures to K above.
** This ﬁgure should never be below 1,200 calories for women or 1,500 calories for men. See Activity 6.2 for the 1,200-, 1,500-, 1,800-, and 2,000-calorie diet plans. 
Activity 6.1: Caloric Requirement: Computation Form
Date
Name
Section
Course
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

169
Chapter 6  Weight Management
1. How much effort are you willing to put into reaching your weight loss goal?
 
 
 2. Indicate your feelings about participating in an exercise program. 
 
 
 3.  Will you commit to be more physically active and to participate in a combined aerobic and strength-training program?
Yes 
 No 
  If your answer is “Yes,” proceed to the next question; if you answered “No,” please review Chapters 3 and 6 again. 
 4. Indicate your current number of daily steps: 
 5. List aerobic activities you enjoy or may enjoy doing. 
 
 
 6. Select one or two aerobic activities in which you will participate regularly. 
  
 7. List facilities available to you where you can carry out the aerobic and strength-training programs. 
 
 
 8.  Indicate days and times you will set aside for your aerobic and strength-training program (accumulate 60 to 90 minutes of 
physical activity 6 to 7 days per week, including 3 to 5 weekly sessions of aerobic exercise lasting about 30 minutes each 
and 2 to 3 weekly strength-training sessions). 
  Monday:
  Tuesday:
  Wednesday:
  Thursday:
  Friday:
  Saturday:
  Sunday: 
 9.  Conclusion: Brieﬂy describe whether you think you can meet the goals of your physical activity, aerobic, and strength-training
programs. What obstacles will you have to overcome, and how will you overcome them?
 
 
 
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

170
Fitness and Wellness
Protein: 1 low-fat
frozen entree
Dairy: 2 servings
Fruits: 2 servings
Veggies: 3 servings
Grains: 6 servings
Grains (80 calories/serving): 6 servings
Protein (g)
1
2
3
4
5
6
Vegetables (25 calories/serving): 3 servings
1
2
3
Fruits (60 calories/serving): 2 servings
1
2
Dairy (120 calories/serving, use low-fat milk and milk products): 2 servings
1
2
Low-fat Frozen Entree (300 calories and less than 6 grams of fat): 1 serving
1
Grams of protein consumed with each meal today: Breakfast: _____ g, Lunch: _____ g, Dinner: _____ g
Daily grams of protein intake: Body weight in kg _____ × 1.5 and 2.0 = _____ g to _____ g
1,200 CALORIE DIET PLAN
Instructions:
The objective of the diet plan is to meet (not exceed) the number of servings 
allowed for the food groups listed. Each time that you eat a particular food, record 
it in the space provided for each group along with the amount you ate. Refer to 
the number of calories below to ﬁnd out what counts as one serving for each 
group listed. Instead of the meat, poultry, ﬁsh, dry beans, eggs, and nuts group, 
you are allowed to have a commercially available low-fat frozen entree for your 
main meal (this entree should provide no more than 300 calories and less than 
6 grams of fat). You can make additional copies of this form as needed. 
Activity 6.2: Daily Food Intake Record Form
Date
Name
Section
Course
Source: USDA, 2011.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

171
Chapter 6  Weight Management
Protein: 2 low-fat
frozen entrees
Dairy: 2 servings
Fruits: 2 servings
Veggies: 3 servings
Grains: 6 servings
Grains (80 calories/serving): 6 servings
Protein (g)
1
2
3
4
5
6
Vegetables (25 calories/serving): 3 servings
1
2
3
Fruits (60 calories/serving): 2 servings
1
2
Dairy (120 calories/serving, use low-fat milk and milk products): 2 servings
1
2
2
Two Low-fat Frozen Entrees (300 calories and less than 6 grams of fat): 2 servings
1
Grams of protein consumed with each meal today: Breakfast: _____ g, Lunch: _____ g, Dinner: _____ g
Daily grams of protein intake: Body weight in kg _____ × 1.5 and 2.0 = _____ g to _____ g
1,500 CALORIE DIET PLAN
Instructions:
The objective of the diet plan is to meet (not exceed) the number of servings 
allowed for the food groups listed. Each time that you eat a particular food, record 
it in the space provided for each group along with the amount you ate. Refer to the 
number of calories below to ﬁnd out what counts as one serving for each group 
listed. Instead of the meat, poultry, ﬁsh, dry beans, eggs, and nuts group, you are 
allowed to have two commercially available low-fat frozen entrees for your main 
meal (these entrees should provide no more than 300 calories and less than 6 
grams of fat). You can make additional copies of this form as needed.
Source: USDA, 2011.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

172
Fitness and Wellness
Grains (80 calories/serving): 8 servings
Protein (g)
1
2
3
6
7
4
5
1
2
3
1
2
3
4
5
8
Vegetables (25 calories/serving): 5 servings
Fruits (60 calories/serving): 3 servings
Dairy (120 calories/serving, use low-fat milk and milk products): 2 servings
1
2
2
Two Low-fat Frozen Entrees (300 calories and less than 6 grams of fat): 2 servings  
1
Grams of protein consumed with each meal today: Breakfast: _____ g, Lunch: _____ g, Dinner: _____ g
Daily grams of protein intake: Body weight in kg _____ × 1.5 and 2.0 = _____ g to _____ g
Protein: 2 low-fat
frozen entrees
Dairy: 2 servings
Fruits: 3 servings
Veggies: 5 servings
Grains: 8 servings
1,800 CALORIE DIET PLAN
Instructions:
The objective of the diet plan is to meet (not exceed) the number of servings 
allowed for the food groups listed. Each time that you eat a particular food, record 
it in the space provided for each group along with the amount you ate. Refer to the 
number of calories below to ﬁnd out what counts as one serving for each group 
listed. Instead of the meat, poultry, ﬁsh, dry beans, eggs, and nuts group, you are 
allowed to have two commercially available low-fat frozen entrees for your main 
meal (these entrees should provide no more than 300 calories and less than 6 
grams of fat). You can make additional copies of this form as needed.
Source: USDA, 2011.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

173
Chapter 6  Weight Management
Grains (80 calories/serving): 10 servings
Protein (g)
1
2
3
6
7
4
5
8
9
1
2
3
1
2
4
5
10
Vegetables (25 calories/serving): 5 servings
Fruits (60 calories/serving): 4 servings
3
4
Dairy (120 calories/serving, use low-fat milk and milk products): 2 servings
1
2
2
Two Low-fat Frozen Entrees (300 calories and less than 6 grams of fat): 2 servings  
1
Grams of protein consumed with each meal today: Breakfast: _____ g, Lunch: _____ g, Dinner: _____ g
Daily grams of protein intake: Body weight in kg _____ × 1.5 and 2.0 = _____ g to _____ g
2,000 CALORIE DIET PLAN
Instructions:
The objective of the diet plan is to meet (not exceed) the number of servings 
allowed for the food groups listed. Each time that you eat a particular food, record 
it in the space provided for each group along with the amount you ate. Refer to the 
number of calories below to ﬁnd out what counts as one serving for each group 
listed. Instead of the meat, poultry, ﬁsh, dry beans, eggs, and nuts group, you are 
allowed to have two commercially available low-fat frozen entrees for your main meal (these entrees should provide no more 
than 300 calories and less than 6 grams of fat). You can make additional copies of this form as needed.
Protein: 2 low-fat
frozen entrees
Dairy: 2 servings
Fruits: 4 servings
Veggies: 5 servings
Grains: 10 servings
Source: USDA, 2011.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Stress Management
7
“Stress is the spice of life.”
—Hans Selye
Objectives
• Define stress, eustress, and distress.
• Explain how stress affects health and 
optimal performance.
• Define the two major types of behavior 
patterns or personality types.
• Learn whether you have a hostile 
personality.
• Develop time management skills.
• Identify the major sources of stress in your 
life.
• Define the role of physical exercise in 
reducing stress.
• Learn to use various stress management 
techniques.
175
Visit www.cengagebrain.com to access 
course materials and companion resources for 
this text including quiz questions designed to 
check your understanding of the chapter 
contents, activities, labs, and more! See the 
preface on page xi for more information.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

176
Fitness and Wellness
I have never been one to take life at a slow pace. In 
high school I danced on the drill team, took AP 
courses, and even worked part time for my brother. I 
was also on a local studio’s dance team. I don’t think 
I am a Type A person, but I certainly have led a very 
fast-paced life. To afford college, I needed to get a 
part-time job. I started out by taking 18 credit hours 
my first two semesters. I was getting by on 5 to 6 
hours of sleep per night, I wasn’t exercising, I was 
gaining weight, and I felt extremely stressed all the 
time. There were many times that I felt my heart rac-
ing even when quietly studying at the library. I 
checked my pulse once while lying in bed before go-
ing to sleep and my resting heart rate was 96 beats 
per minute. Near the end of my freshman year, I al-
most had a nervous breakdown. At the health center 
I was referred to the counseling center. It was there 
that I learned that I needed to slow down. The coun-
selor helped me identify the main stressors in my life 
and we worked out a plan to help me slow down.
I realized that I only had 
one life to live and it was up 
to me to live life the best 
possible way that I could. I 
was also encouraged to start 
being more active and eat-
ing right. I took the summer 
off from school, except for 
one class: Lifetime Fitness 
and Wellness. I started to 
exercise and spent time 
learning how to manage stress effectively. For my 
sophomore year, I prioritized my activities—exercise, 
good nutrition, and 7 to 8 hours of sleep each night 
were at the top of my list. I eliminated time killers, 
planned short time-outs each day, and because of my 
part time job, I signed up for only 14 credits each se-
mester. I feel much better, happier, and healthier now. 
My heart rate is down to 64, and my heart has not 
raced since summer, at the end of my freshman year.
© Kurhan/Shutterstock.com
Real Life Story | Vicki’s Fast-Paced Life
Learning to live and get ahead today is not possible with-
out stress. To succeed in an unpredictable world that 
changes with every new day, working under pressure has 
become the rule rather than the exception for most 
people. As a result, stress has become one of the most 
common problems we face. Current estimates indicate 
that the annual cost of stress and stress-related diseases 
in the United States exceeds $100 billion, a direct result 
of health care costs, lost productivity, and absenteeism.
7.1  The Mind/Body 
Connection
A growing body of evidence indicates that virtually every 
illness known to modern humanity—from arthritis to 
migraine headaches, from the common cold to cancer—
is influenced for good or bad by our emotions. To a 
profound extent, emotions affect our susceptibility to 
disease and our immunity. The way we react to what 
comes along in life can determine in great measure how 
we will react to the disease-causing organisms that we 
face. The feelings we have and the way we express them 
can either boost our immune system or weaken it.
Emotions cause physiological responses that can 
influence health. Certain parts of the brain are associated 
with specific emotions and specific hormone patterns. 
The release of certain hormones is associated with vari-
ous emotional responses, and those hormones affect 
health. These responses may contribute to development 
of disease. Emotions have to be expressed somewhere, 
somehow. If they are suppressed repeatedly, as in stress-
ful situations, and/or if a person feels conflict about 
controlling them, they often reveal themselves through 
physical symptoms. These physiological responses may 
weaken the immune system over time.
The immune system patrols and guards the body 
against attackers. This system consists of about a trillion 
cells called lymphocytes (the cells responsible for wag-
ing war against disease or infection) and about a hun-
dred million trillion molecules called antibodies. The 
brain and the immune system are closely linked in a 
connection that allows the mind to influence both sus-
ceptibility and resistance to disease.
A fighting spirit also plays a major role in the recov-
ery from illness. A fighting spirit involves the healthy 
expression of emotions, whether they are negative or 
positive. Many physicians believe that a patient’s attitude, 
especially a fighting spirit, is the underlying factor in 
spontaneous remission from incurable illness. Fighters 
are not stronger or more capable than others—they sim-
ply do not give up easily. They enjoy better health and 
live longer, even when physicians and laboratory tests 
say they should not.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

177
Chapter 7  Stress Management
7.1A  Sleep and Wellness  Sleep is a natural state 
of rest that is vital for good health and wellness. It is an 
anabolic process that allows the body to restore and heal 
itself. During sleep, we replenish depleted energy levels 
and allow the brain, muscles, organs, and various body 
tissues to repair themselves.
Sleep deprivation weakens the immune system, im-
pairs mental function, and has a negative impact on physi-
cal, social, academic, and job performance. Lack of sleep 
also impacts stress levels, mood, memory, behavioral pat-
terns, and cognitive performance. Cumulative long-term 
consequences include an increase in the risk for cardiovas-
cular disease, high blood pressure, obesity, diabetes, and 
psychological disorders. People who get less sleep have a 
threefold increased risk of getting a cold, are more likely to 
develop coronary heart disease earlier in life, increase 
body-wide inflammation, and have higher blood levels of 
the stress hormone cortisol. What most people notice is a 
chronic state of fatigue, exhaustion, and confusion.
Stresswise, getting to bed too late often leads to over-
sleeping, napping, missing classes, poor grades, and dis-
tress. It further increases tension, irritability, intolerance, 
confusion, and may cause depression and life dissatisfac-
tion. Not getting enough sleep can also lead to vehicle ac-
cidents with serious or fatal consequences as people fall 
asleep behind the wheel. More than 40,000 injuries and 
1,500 deaths each year are attributed to sleepy drivers 
(sleepy drivers are just as dangerous as drunken drivers). 
Irregular sleep patterns, including sleeping in on weekends, 
also contribute too many of the aforementioned problems.
Although more than 100 sleep disorders have been 
identified, they can be classified into four major groups:
• 
Problems with falling and staying asleep
• 
Difficulties staying awake
• 
Difficulty adhering to a regular sleep schedule
• 
Sleep-disruptive behaviors (including sleepwalking 
and sleep terror disorder)
College students are some of the most sleep- 
deprived people of all. On average, they sleep about  
6 and a half hours per night and approximately 30 per-
cent report chronic sleep difficulties. Only 8 percent re-
port sleeping 8 or more hours per night. For many stu-
dents, college is the first time they have complete control 
of their schedule, including when they go to sleep and 
how many hours they sleep.
Lack of sleep during school days and pulling all-
nighters interferes with the ability to pay attention, learn, 
process, and retain new information. You may be able to 
retain the information in short-term memory, but most 
likely it will not be there for a cumulative exam or when 
you need it for adequate job performance. Deep sleep 
that takes place early in the night, and a large portion of 
the REM (rapid eye movement) dream sleep that occurs 
near the end of the night, have both been linked to learn-
ing. The brain has been shown to consolidate new infor-
mation for long-term memory while you sleep. Convinc-
ing sleep-deprived students to get adequate sleep is a real 
challenge because they often feel overwhelmed by school, 
work, and even family responsibilities. Students who go 
to sleep early and get about eight hours of sleep per night 
are more apt to succeed.
Compounding the problem is staying up late Friday 
and Saturday nights and crashing the next day. Doing so 
further disrupts the circadian rhythm, the biological 
clock that controls the daily sleep/wake schedule. Such 
disruption influences quantity and quality of sleep and 
keeps people from falling asleep and rising at the neces-
sary times for school, work, or other required activities. 
In essence, the body wants to sleep and be awake at odd 
times of the 24-hour cycle.
A term used to describe the cumulative effect of 
needed sleep that you don’t get is sleep debt. Crashing on 
weekends, although it may help somewhat, does not 
solve the problem. You need to address the problem be-
havior by getting sufficient sleep each night so that you 
can be at your best the next day.
The exact amount of sleep that each person needs 
varies among individuals. Most people require about 
eight hours. According to the National Sleep Founda-
tion, most people get about seven hours of sleep per 
night. Experts believe that the last two hours of sleep are 
the most vital for well-being. Thus, if you need eight 
hours of sleep and you routinely get six, you may be for-
feiting the most critical sleep hours for health and well-
ness. Most students do not address sleep disorders until 
they start to cause mental and physical damage.
While there is no magic formula to determine how 
much sleep you need, if you don’t need an alarm clock to 
get up every morning, you wake up at about the same time, 
and you are refreshed and feel alert throughout the day, 
you most likely have a healthy sleeping habit.
To 
improve 
your sleep pattern, 
you need to exer-
cise discipline and 
avoid staying up 
late to watch a 
movie or leaving 
your homework or 
studying for an 
exam at the last 
minute. As busy as 
you 
are, 
your 
health and well-
being 
are 
your 
Stress  The mental, emotional, and 
physiological response of the body to 
any situation that is new, threatening, 
frightening, or exciting.
Lymphocytes  Immune system cells 
responsible for waging war against 
disease or infection.
Antibodies  Substances produced by 
the white blood cells in response to an 
invading agent.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

178
Fitness and Wellness
most important assets. You only live once. Keeping your 
health and living life to its fullest potential include a 
good night’s rest. Take the following steps to enhance the 
quality of your sleep:
• 
Exercise and be physically active (avoid exercise 
four hours prior to bedtime).
• 
Avoid eating a heavy meal or snacking two to three 
hours before going to bed (digestion increases your 
metabolism).
• 
Limit the amount of time that you spend (primar-
ily in the evening) surfing and socializing on the 
Internet, texting, and watching television.
• 
Go to bed and rise at about the same time each day.
• 
Keep the bedroom cool, quiet, and dark.
• 
Develop a bedtime ritual (meditation, prayer, white 
noise).
• 
Use your bed for sleeping only (do not watch tele-
vision, do homework, or use a laptop in bed).
• 
Relax and slow down 15 to 30 minutes before 
bedtime.
• 
Do not drink coffee or caffeine-containing bever-
ages several hours before going to bed.
• 
Do not rely on alcohol to fall asleep (alcohol dis-
rupts deep sleep stages).
• 
Avoid long naps (a 20- to 30-minute “power nap” is 
beneficial during an afternoon slump without in-
terfering with nighttime sleep).
• 
Have frank and honest conversations with room-
mates if they have different sleep schedules.
• 
Evaluate your mattress every five to seven years for 
comfort and support. If you wake up with aches and 
pains or you sleep better when you are away from 
home, it is most likely time for a new mattress.
7.2  Stress
Every person has an optimal level of stress that is most 
conducive to adequate health and performance. When 
stress levels reach mental, emotional, and physiological 
limits, however, stress becomes distress and the person 
no longer functions effectively.
The body’s response to stress has been the same ever 
since humans were first put on the earth. Stress prepares 
the organism to react to the stress-causing event, called 
the stressor. The difference is the way in which we react 
to stress. Many people thrive under stress. Others under 
similar circumstances are unable to handle it. An indi-
vidual’s reaction to a stress-causing agent determines 
whether stress is positive or negative.
Chronic negative reactions to stress raise the risk for 
many health disorders, including coronary heart disease, 
hypertension, eating disorders, ulcers, diabetes, asthma, 
depression, migraine headaches, sleep disorders, and 
chronic fatigue, and may even play a role in the develop-
ment of certain types of cancer. Crucial in maintaining 
emotional and physiological stability is to recognize 
when stress has a negative effect and to overcome the 
stressful condition quickly and efficiently.
The good news is that stress can be self-controlled. 
Most people have accepted stress as a normal part of 
daily life, and even though everyone has to deal with it, 
few seem to understand it and know how to cope effec-
tively. People should not try to avoid stress entirely, as a 
certain amount is necessary for optimum health, perfor-
mance, and well-being. It is difficult to succeed and have 
fun in life without “hits, runs, and errors.”
7.3  The Body’s Reaction 
to Stress
Dr. Hans Selye, one of the foremost authorities on stress, 
defined it as “the nonspecific response of the human or-
ganism to any demand that is placed upon it.”1 “Nonspe-
cific” indicates that the body reacts in a similar way re-
gardless of the nature of the event that leads to the stress 
response. In simpler terms, stress is the body’s mental, 
emotional, and physiological response to any situation 
that is new, threatening, frightening, or exciting.
The body responds to stress with a rapid-fire se-
quence of physical changes known as fight or flight (see 
Figure 7.1). The hypothalamus activates the sympathetic 
nervous system, and the pituitary gland triggers the re-
lease of catecholamines (hormones) from the adrenal 
glands. These hormonal changes increase heart rate, 
blood pressure, blood flow to active muscles and the 
brain, glucose levels, oxygen consumption, and 
strength—all necessary for the body to either fight or 
flee. In cases of both fight and flight, the body relaxes and 
stress dissipates. If the person is unable to take action, 
however, the muscles tense and tighten instead.
Stress isn’t necessarily bad. Selye further defined 
stress as either eustress or distress. In both cases, the 
nonspecific response is almost the same. In eustress, 
health and performance continue to improve even as 
stress increases. With distress, health and performance 
begin to deteriorate.
Can you identify sources of eustress and distress in your 
personal life during this past year? • Explain your emo-
tional and physical response to each stressor and how 
the two differ.
Critical Thinking
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

179
Chapter 7  Stress Management
7.4  Adaptation to Stress
Human physiology is such that the body continuously 
strives to maintain a constant internal environment. 
This state of physiological balance, known as homeo-
stasis, allows the body to function as effectively as 
possible. When a stressor triggers a nonspecific re-
sponse, homeostasis is disrupted. This reaction to 
stressors, best explained by Selye through the general 
adaptation syndrome (GAS), is composed of three 
stages: alarm reaction, resistance, and exhaustion/
recovery.
7.4A  Alarm Reaction  The alarm reaction is the 
immediate response to a stressor, whether positive or 
negative. During the alarm reaction, the body evokes an 
instant physiological reaction that involves the mobiliza-
tion of systems and processes within the organism to 
minimize the threat to homeostasis (see “Coping with 
Stress,” page 185). If the stressor subsides, the body re-
covers and returns to homeostasis.
7.4B  Resistance  If the stressor persists, the body 
calls upon its limited reserves to build up resistance as it 
strives to maintain homeostasis. For a short while, the 
body copes effectively and meets the challenge of the 
stressor until it can be overcome (see Figure 7.2).
7.4C  Exhaustion/Recovery  If stress becomes 
chronic and intolerable, the body spends its limited re-
serves and loses its ability to cope, entering the exhaustion/
recovery stage. During this stage, the body functions at a 
diminished capacity while it recovers from stress. In due 
time, following an “adequate” recovery period, the body 
recuperates and is able to return to homeostasis. If 
chronic stress persists during the exhaustion stage, how-
ever, immune function is compromised, which can dam-
age body systems and lead to disease.
An example of the stress response through the gen-
eral adaptation syndrome can be illustrated in college test 
performance. As you prepare to take an exam, you experi-
ence an initial alarm reaction. If you understand the mate-
rial, study for the exam, and do well (eustress), the body 
recovers and stress is dissipated. If, however, you are not 
adequately prepared and fail the exam, the resistance stage 
is triggered. You are now concerned about your grade,  
and you remain in the resistance stage until the next exam. 
If 
you 
prepare  
and do well, the 
body recovers. But 
if you fail once 
again and no lon-
ger can bring up 
your grade, ex-
haustion sets in, 
with possible phys-
ical and emotional 
breakdowns as a 
result. Exhaustion 
may be aggravated 
if you are strug-
gling 
in 
other 
courses as well.
The 
exhaus-
tion stage is often 
manifested in ath-
letes and the most 
ardent fitness par-
ticipants. Staleness 
is usually a conse-
quence of over-
training. Peak per-
Stressor  Stress-causing agent.
Fight or flight  A series of physical 
responses activated automatically in 
response to environmental stressors.
Eustress  Positive stress.
Distress  Negative or harmful stress 
under which health and performance 
begin to deteriorate.
Homeostasis  A natural state of equi-
librium. The body attempts to maintain 
this equilibrium by constantly reacting 
to external forces that attempt to dis-
rupt this fine balance.
General adaptation syndrome 
(GAS)  A theoretical model that  
explains the body’s adaptation to  
sustained stress; it includes three 
stages: alarm reaction, resistance,  
and exhaustion/recovery.
Figure 7.1
Physiological response to stress:  
Fight or flight.
Body relaxation
Decrease in health
and performance
No stress release
Increase in:
Heart rate
Blood pressure
Blood glucose
Blood flow to active 
muscles and brain
Oxygen uptake
Strength
General awareness
Hypothalamus
Pituitary gland
Individual
perceives stress
Stressor
Stress release
Activation
of
sympathetic
nervous
system
Brain messages to
Release of
catecho-
lamines
from adrenal
glands
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

180
Fitness and Wellness
formance can be sustained for only about two to three 
weeks at a time. Any attempts to continue intense train-
ing after peaking leads to exhaustion, diminished fitness, 
and mental and physical problems associated with over-
training. Thus, athletes and some fitness participants also 
need an active recovery phase following the attainment 
of peak fitness.
7.4D  Thirty-Second Body Scan  If you are un-
certain as to whether you are experiencing stress at any 
given time, a simple 30-second exercise can help you 
scan the body to raise stress awareness. Ask yourself the 
following 10 questions (you can copy these questions 
onto a card and keep them in your wallet or purse):
• 
Am I clenching my teeth?
• 
Am I furrowing my brow?
• 
Are my shoulders tense?
• 
Am I breathing rapidly?
• 
Am I tapping my fingers?
• 
Do I feel knots in my stomach?
• 
Are my arms, thighs, or calves tight?
• 
Am I nervously bouncing my leg or foot?
• 
Am I curling my toes?
• 
Do I feel uneasiness anywhere else in my body?
The body scan can be performed daily or several 
times a day to help you learn to recognize when you are 
distressed. People are often unaware of stress signals and 
activities that are causing excessive stress. Increasing 
awareness allows you to initiate proper actions to more 
effectively manage stress. An example would be to 
breathe deeply for one to three minutes while doing the 
body scan and repeating positive affirmations (e.g., “I am 
at peace” or “I am calm and relaxed”).
7.5  Behavior Patterns
All too often, individuals bring on stress as a result of 
their characteristic behavior patterns. The two main 
types of behavior patterns are Type A and Type B. 
Figure 7.2
General adaptation syndrome: The body’s response to stress.
Homeostasis
Stressor reaction
Recovery
Illness
Exhaustion/Recovery
Exhaustion
Resistance
Alarm
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Taking time out during stressful life events is vital for 
good health and wellness.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

181
Chapter 7  Stress Management
Each type is based on several characteristics that are 
used to classify people into one of these behavioral 
patterns.
Type A behavior characterizes a primarily hard-
driving, overly ambitious, aggressive, at times hostile 
and overly competitive person. Type A individuals of-
ten set their own goals, are self-motivated, try to ac-
complish many tasks at the same time, are excessively 
achievement-oriented, and have a sense of time ur-
gency. By contrast, Type B behavior is characteristic of 
calm, casual, relaxed, easygoing individuals. Type B 
people take one thing at a time, do not feel pressured or 
hurried, and seldom set their own deadlines.
Over the years, experts have indicated that individu-
als classified as Type A have a significantly higher inci-
dence for disease, especially cardiovascular conditions.2 
Not all typical Type A people, however, are at higher risk 
for disease. Type A individuals who are chronically an-
gry and hostile are at higher risk.3 The questionnaire 
provided in Figure 7.3 can help you determine whether 
you have a hostile personality.
Some experts believe that emotional stress is far 
more likely than physical stress to trigger a heart attack. 
Especially vulnerable are people who are impatient and 
are readily annoyed when they have to wait for someone 
or something—an employee, a traffic light, in a restau-
rant line.
Research also is focusing on individuals who have 
anxiety, depression, and feelings of helplessness when 
they encounter setbacks and failures in life. People who 
lose control of their lives, those who give up on their 
dreams in life, knowing that they could and should be 
doing better, may be more likely to have heart attacks 
than hard-driving people who enjoy their work.
Many of the Type A characteristics are learned be-
haviors. Consequently, if people can learn to identify the 
sources of stress, they can change their behavioral re-
sponses. The main assessment tool to determine behav-
ioral type is the structured interview, in which the inter-
viewee is asked to reply to several questions that describe 
Type A and Type B behavior patterns. The interviewer 
notes the responses to the questions and also mental, 
emotional, and physical behaviors the individual exhib-
its as he or she re-
plies to each ques-
tion. Based on the 
answers and the 
associated behav-
iors, 
the 
inter-
viewer rates the 
person 
along 
a 
continuum rang-
ing from Type A 
to Type B.
Type A  Behavior pattern characteris-
tic of a hard-driving, overambitious, 
aggressive, at times hostile and overly 
competitive person.
Type B  Behavior pattern characteris-
tic of a calm, casual, relaxed, and 
easygoing individual.
Releasing Anger the Healthy Way
•  Recognize the anger for what it is. Don’t be afraid of it 
or try to suppress it.
•  Figure out what made you so angry, then decide whether 
it’s worth being so upset. Chances are that it’s really a 
minor irritation or hassle.
•  Stop before you act. Calm down first. Count to 10, take a 
deep breath, mentally recite the words to a favorite 
verse, or initiate some other distracting and relaxing ac-
tivity. Then get ready to deal with the anger.
•  If you’re ticked off at somebody else, use calm tact to 
say why, without ripping into the other person. Tell him 
or her how you’re feeling and try to negotiate some 
things.
•  Be generous with the other person. Maybe he just failed 
an exam. Maybe she just heard bad news from home. 
Behavior Modification Planning
Maybe he’s having a rotten day. Listen carefully to her 
side of things and try as much as you can to under-
stand.
•  When all else fails, forgive the other person. Everyone 
makes mistakes. Carrying a grudge will hurt you worse 
than it hurts the other person.
From Hoeger/Turner/Hafen, Wellness, 4E. © 2007 Cengage 
Learning.
Try It
If you feel that anger is disrupting your health and relation-
ships, the above actions can help you manage anger and 
restore a sense of well-being in your life. In your Online Jour-
nal or class notebook, list some strategies you can use to 
manage anger, study them each morning, and then evaluate 
yourself every night for the next day.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

182
Fitness and Wellness
7.6  Vulnerability to Stress
A number of factors affect the way in which people handle 
stress. How we deal with these factors actually can in-
crease or decrease vulnerability to stress. The question-
naire provided in Figure 7.4 lists these factors so you can 
determine your vulnerability rating. Many of the items on 
this questionnaire are related to health, social support, 
self-worth, and nurturance (sense of being needed). All of 
the factors are crucial for a person’s physical, social, men-
tal, and emotional well-being. The questionnaire will help 
you identify specific areas in which you can make im-
provements to help you cope more efficiently.
The benefits of physical fitness are discussed exten-
sively in this book. In addition, social support, self-worth, 
and nurturance are essential to cope effectively with stress-
ful life events. These factors play a supportive and protec-
tive role in people’s lives. The more integrated people are in 
society, the less vulnerable they are to stress and illness.
Positive correlations have been found between social 
support and health outcomes. People can draw upon social 
support to weather crises. Knowing that someone else 
Type A individuals with a hostile personality are at higher risk for disease. This questionnaire can help you identify if you have 
a hostile personality. Please circle the number of points that best represents your response to each statement.
 
  
Never 
Occasionally 
Frequently 
Always
 1. I am impatient. 
0 
1 
2 
3
 2. I am easily irritated. 
0 
1 
2 
3
 3. I am argumentative. 
0 
1 
2 
3
 4. I want to have the final word in every discussion. 
0 
1 
2 
3
 5. I attack people verbally. 
0 
1 
2 
3
 6. I am physically aggressive when angry. 
0 
1 
2 
3
 7. I stop before I act when upset. 
3 
2 
1 
0
 8. I manage anger at once—I do not let it build up. 
3 
2 
1 
0
 9. I engage in healthy physical activity when upset or angry. 
3 
2 
1 
0
 10. I am understanding of unplanned surprises. 
3 
2 
1 
0
 11. I keep a journal and contemplate what caused me to be angry. 
3 
2 
1 
0
 12. I give others the benefit of the doubt. 
3 
2 
1 
0
 13. I am a forgiving person. 
3 
2 
1 
0
 14. I use positive responses. 
3 
2 
1 
0
 15. I schedule daily timeouts. 
3 
2 
1 
0
 16. I sleep 7 to 8 hours per night. 
3 
2 
1 
0
Scoring. 
Any number of points  ≥  1 obtained in items 5, 6, or 7 = _____ 
= Hostile Personality
Total points for items 1 to 3 and 8 to 16 = _____ 
A score ≥ 10 points = Hostile Personality
If the scores above indicate that you may have a hostile personality, professional counseling is recommended. The student 
counseling services at your institution may provide health services to help enhance personal growth, manage stress and 
hostile behavior, and develop personal effectiveness and resilience. You are strongly encouraged to take steps to control 
your responses to situations that trigger hostile behavior.
Figure 7.3
Hostility questionnaire.
© Fitness and Wellness, Inc., 2015.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

183
Chapter 7  Stress Management
cares, that people are there to lean on, that support is out 
there, is valuable for survival (or growth) in times of need.4
As you complete the questionnaire, you will notice 
that many of the items describe situations and behaviors 
that are within your own control. To make yourself less 
vulnerable to stress, you will want to improve the behav-
iors that make you more vulnerable to stress. You should 
start by modifying the behaviors that are easiest to 
change before undertaking some of the most difficult 
ones.
Changing a Type A Personality
•  Make a contract with yourself to slow down and take it 
easy. Put it in writing. Post it in a conspicuous spot, 
then stick to the terms you set up. Be specific. Abstracts 
(“I’m going to be less uptight”) don’t work.
•  Work on only one or two things at a time. Wait until you 
change one habit before you tackle the next one.
•  Eat more slowly and eat only when you are relaxed and 
sitting down.
•  If you smoke, quit.
•  Cut down on your caffeine intake, because it increases 
the tendency to become irritated and agitated.
•  Take regular breaks throughout the day, even as brief as 
5 or 10 minutes, when you totally change what you’re 
doing. Get up, stretch, get a drink of cool water, walk 
around for a few minutes.
•  Work on fighting your impatience. If you’re standing in 
line at the grocery store, study the interesting things 
people have in their carts instead of getting upset.
•  Work on controlling hostility. Keep a written log. When do 
you flare up? What causes it? How do you feel at the 
time? What preceded it? Look for patterns and figure out 
what sets you off. Then do something about it. Either 
avoid the situations that cause you hostility or practice 
reacting to them in different ways.
•  Plan some activities just for the fun of it. Load a picnic 
basket in the car and drive to the country with a friend. 
After a stressful physics class, stop at a theater and see 
a good comedy.
•  Choose a role model, someone you know and admire who 
does not have a Type A personality. Observe the person 
carefully, then try out some techniques the person dem-
onstrates.
•  Simplify your life so you can learn to relax a little bit. 
Figure out which activities or commitments you can 
eliminate right now, then get rid of them.
Behavior Modification Planning
•  If morning is a problem time for you and you get too hur-
ried, set your alarm clock half an hour earlier.
•  Take time out during even the most hectic day to do 
something truly relaxing. Because you won’t be used to 
it, you may have to work at it at first. Begin by listing 
things you’d really enjoy that would calm you. Include 
some things that take only a few minutes: Watch a sun-
set, lie out on the lawn at night and look at the stars, 
call an old friend and catch up on news, take a nap, 
sauté a pan of mushrooms and savor them slowly.
•  If you’re under a deadline, take short breaks. Stop and 
talk to someone for 5 minutes, take a short walk, or lie 
down with a cool cloth over your eyes for 10 minutes.
•  Pay attention to what your own body clock is saying. 
You’ve probably noticed that every 90 minutes or so, you 
lose the ability to concentrate, get a little sleepy, and 
have a tendency to daydream. Instead of fighting the 
urge, put down your work and let your mind wander for a 
few minutes. Use the time to imagine and let your cre-
ativity run wild.
•  Learn to treasure unplanned surprises: a friend dropping 
by unannounced, a hummingbird outside your window, a 
child’s tightly clutched bouquet of wildflowers.
•  Savor your relationships. Think about the people in your 
life. Relax with them and give yourself to them. Give up 
trying to control others and resist the urge to end rela-
tionships that don’t always go as you’d like them to.
From Hoeger/Turner/Hafen, Wellness, 4E. © 2007 Cengage 
Learning.
Try It
If Type A describes your personality, pick three of the above 
strategies and apply them in your life this week. At the end 
of each day, determine how well you have done that day and 
evaluate how you can improve the next day.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

184
Fitness and Wellness
Figure 7.4
Stress vulnerability questionnaire.
Strongly
Agree
Strongly
Disagree
Item
Total Points:
Scoring:
*Walk instead of driving, avoid escalators and elevators, or walk to neighboring ofﬁces, homes, and stores.
I try to incorporate as much physical activity* as possible
in my daily schedule.
I exercise aerobically 20 minutes or more at least 3
times per week.
I regularly sleep seven to eight hours per night.
I take my time eating at least one hot, balanced meal a day.
I drink fewer than two cups of coffee (or equivalent) per day.
I am at recommended body weight. 
I enjoy good health.
I do not use tobacco in any form.
I limit my alcohol intake to no more than one (women) or two (men)
drinks per day.
I do not use hard drugs (chemical dependency).
I have someone I love, trust, and can rely on for help if I have
a problem or need to make an essential decision.
There is love in my family.
I routinely give and receive affection.
I have close personal relationships with other people who
provide me with a sense of emotional security.
There are people close by whom I can turn to for guidance
in time of stress.
I can speak openly about feelings, emotions, and problems
with people I trust.
Other people rely on me for help.
I am able to keep my feelings of anger and hostility under control.
I have a network of friends who enjoy the same social activities I do.
I take time to do something fun at least once a week.
My religious beliefs provide guidance and strength to my life.
I often provide service to others.
I enjoy my job (major or school). 
I am a competent worker.
I get along well with coworkers (or students).
My income is sufﬁcient for my needs.
I manage time adequately. 
I have learned to say “no” to additional commitments when I am
already pressed for time.
I take daily quiet time for myself. 
I practice stress management as needed.
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
Mildly
Agree
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
Mildly
Disagree
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
0–30 points . . . . . . . . . . .
31–40 points . . . . . . . . . .
41–50 points . . . . . . . . . .
51–60 points . . . . . . . . . .
≥61 points . . . . . . . . . . . .
Excellent (great resistance to stress)
Good (little vulnerability to stress)
Average (somewhat vulnerable to stress)
Fair (vulnerable to stress)
Poor (highly vulnerable to stress)
SOURCE: From Hoeger/Hoeger, Cengage Advantage Books: Lifetime Physical Fitness and Wellness, 12E. © 2013 Cengage Learning.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

185
Chapter 7  Stress Management
7.7  Sources of Stress
Before addressing techniques that you can use to cope 
more effectively with stress, attempt to identify your cur-
rent life stressors using the stress test provided in Figure 
7.5. This test will help you determine stressors that you 
have encountered recently in your life. Think back over 
this past year and circle the “stress points” listed for each 
event that you experienced during this time. Then total 
the points and determine the amount of stress in your 
life during the past year.
Now, to help you cope more effectively, use the stress 
analysis form provided in Activity 7.1, pages 197–198. 
On this form, record the results of your stress question-
naires and list the stressors that affect you the most in 
your daily life. For each stressor, explain, in the box pro-
vided, the situation(s) under which it occurs, your re-
sponse to it, the impact it is having in your life, and how 
you currently are handling the stressor. Based on what 
you have learned already, also indicate what you can do 
to either avoid the stressor or cope more effectively with 
it in the future. Common stressors in the lives of college 
students are depicted in Figure 7.6.
After completing the exercise in Activity 7.1, pro-
ceed to the discussion of relaxation techniques, pages 
189–195. Once you have learned and mastered some of 
these techniques, return to your stress analysis and re-
evaluate your approach to cope with each stressor.
7.8  Coping with Stress
The ways in which people perceive and cope with stress 
seem to be more important in the development of dis-
ease than the amount and type of stress itself. If individu-
als perceive stress as a definite problem in their lives, 
when it interferes with their optimal level of health and 
performance, several techniques can help in coping more 
effectively.
First, of course, the person must recognize that a 
problem is present. Many people either do not want to 
believe they are under too much stress or they fail to 
recognize some of the typical symptoms of distress. Not-
ing some of the stress-related symptoms will help a per-
son respond more objectively and initiate an adequate 
coping response.
When people have stress-related symptoms, they 
first should try to identify and remove the stressor or 
stress-causing agent. This is not as simple as it may seem 
because in some situations eliminating the stressor is not 
possible or a person may not even know what has caused 
it. If the cause is unknown, keeping a log of the time and 
days when the symptoms arise, as well as the events pro-
ceeding and following the onset of symptoms, might be 
helpful.
For instance, a couple noted that every afternoon 
around six o’clock, the wife became nauseated and had 
abdominal pain. After seeking professional help, both 
were instructed to keep a log of daily events. It soon be-
came clear that the symptoms did not appear on weekends 
but always started just before the husband came home 
from work during the week. Following some personal in-
terviews with the couple, it was determined that the wife 
felt a lack of attention from her husband and responded 
subconsciously by becoming ill to the point at which she 
required personal attention and affection from her hus-
band. Once the stressor was identified, they initiated ap-
propriate behavior changes to correct the situation.
In many instances, however, the stressor cannot be 
removed. Examples of situations in which little or noth-
ing can be done to eliminate the stress-causing agent are 
the death of a close family member, first year on the job, 
an intolerable boss, a change in work responsibility. Nev-
ertheless, stress can be managed through time manage-
ment and relaxation techniques.
7.9  Time Management
The current “hurry-up” style of life is not conducive to 
wellness. The hassles involved in getting through a typi-
cal day often lead to stress-related illnesses. People who 
do not manage their time properly may experience 
chronic stress, fatigue, despair, discouragement, and 
illness.
Based on various national surveys, almost 80 per-
cent of Americans report that time moves too fast for 
them. The younger the respondents, the more they 
struggled with lack of time. Almost half wished they had 
more time for exercise and recreation, hobbies, and 
family.
Healthy and successful people are good time man-
agers, able to maintain a pace of life within their comfort 
zone. In a survey of 1,954 Harvard graduates from the 
School of Business, only 27 percent had reached the 
goals they established in college. Upon graduation, all 
had rated themselves as a superior time manager, and 
now only 8 percent perceived themselves as superior 
time managers. The successful graduates attributed their 
success to “smart work,” not necessarily “hard work.”
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

186
Fitness and Wellness
Figure 7.5
Stress test.
Take the Stress Test
To get a feel for the possible health impact of the various recent changes in your life, think back over the past year
and circle the “stress points” listed for each of the events that you experienced during that time. Then add up your
points. A total score of anywhere from about 250 to 500 or so would be considered a moderate amount of stress. If
you score higher than that, you may face an increased risk of illness; if you score lower than that, consider yourself
fortunate.
Health
An injury or illness that:
kept you in bed a week or more, 
or sent you to the hospital
74
was less serious than that
44
Major dental work
26
Major change in eating habits
27
Major change in sleeping habits
26
Major change in your usual type 
or amount of recreation
28
Work
Change to a new type of work
51
Change in your work hours 
or conditions
35
Change in your responsibilities at work:
more responsibilities
29
fewer responsibilities
21
promotion
31
demotion
42
transfer
32
Troubles at work:
with your boss
29
with your coworkers
35
with persons under your supervision
35
other work troubles
28
Major business adjustment
60
Retirement
52
Loss of job:
laid off from work
68
ﬁred from work
79
Correspondence course to help 
you in your work
18
Home and Family
Major change in living conditions
42
Change in residence:
move within the same town or city
25
move to a different town, city, or state
47
Change in family get-togethers
25
Major change in health or behavior 
of family member
55
Marriage
50
Pregnancy
67
Miscarriage or abortion
85
Gain of a new family member:
birth of a child
66
adoption of a child
65
a relative moving in with you
59
Spouse beginning or ending work
46
Child leaving home:
to attend college
41
due to marriage
41
for other reasons
45
Change in arguments with spouse
50
In-law problems
38
Change in the marital status of your parents:
divorce
59
remarriage
50
Separation from spouse:
due to work
53
due to marital problems
76
Divorce
96
Birth of grandchild
43
Death of spouse
119
Death of other family member:
child
123
brother or sister
102
parent
100
Personal and Social
Change in personal habits
26
Beginning or ending school or college
38
Change of school or college
35
Change in political beliefs
24
Change in religious beliefs
29
Change in social activities
27
Vacation trip
24
New, close, personal relationship
37
Engagement to marry
45
Girlfriend or boyfriend problems
39
Sexual difﬁculties
44
“Falling out” of a close 
personal relationship
47
An accident
48
Minor violation of the law
20
Being held in jail
75
Death of a close friend
70
Major decision about your 
immediate future
51
Major personal achievement
36
Financial
Major change in ﬁnances:
increased income
38
decreased income
60
investment or credit difﬁculties
56
Loss or damage of personal property
43
Moderate purchase
20
Major purchase
37
Foreclosure on a mortgage or loan
58
Total Score:
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

187
Chapter 7  Stress Management
Figure 7.6
Stressors in the lives of college 
students.
Adapted from W. W. K. Hoeger et al., Wellness: Guidelines for a Healthy 
Lifestyle (Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Cengage Learning, 2007).
Academic
competition
Drug
use
College
red tape
Alcohol
use
Religious
conflicts
Time
manage-
ment
Choice 
of major/
future
job
Parental
conflict
Sexual 
pressures
Lack of
privacy
Family
responsi-
bilities
Illness 
and 
injury
Loneliness
Depression
Anxiety
Love/
marriage
decisions
Money
troubles
Social 
alienation,
anonymity
Military
obligations
Regular leisure-time physical activity helps prevent psychological 
burnout.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
termine what you need to accomplish that day and 
that week. Rank your “today” and “this week” tasks 
in three categories: (a) top priority, (b) medium 
priority, and (c) “trash.” Top-priority tasks are 
clearly the most important ones. If you were to 
reap most of your productivity from 30 percent of 
your activities, which would they be? Medium- 
priority activities must be done but can wait a day 
or two. Trash activities are those that are not worth 
your time (for example, cruising the hallways).
	4.	
Use a daily planner to help you organize and sim-
plify your day. In this way you can access your pri-
ority list, appointments, notes, references, names, 
places, phone numbers, and addresses conveniently 
from your coat pocket or purse. Many individuals 
think that planning daily and weekly activities is a 
waste of time. A few minutes to schedule your time 
each day, however, will pay off in hours saved.
	
As you plan your day, be realistic and find 
your comfort zone. Determine what is the best way 
Trying to achieve one or more goals in a limited time 
can create a tremendous amount of stress. The greatest 
demands on our time, nonetheless, frequently are self-
imposed—trying to do too much, too fast, too soon.
Although some time killers, such as eating, sleeping, 
and recreation, are necessary for health and wellness, in 
excess they will cause stress. To make better use of your 
time:
	1.	
Find the time killers. Many people do not know 
how they spend each part of the day. Keep a four- 
to seven-day log, and record your activities at half-
hour intervals. As you go through your typical day, 
record the activities so you will remember all of 
them. At the end of each day, decide when you 
wasted time. You might be shocked by the amount 
of time you spent on the phone, sleeping (more 
than eight hours per night), or watching television.
	2.	
Set long-range and short-range goals. Setting goals 
requires some in-depth thinking and helps put 
your life and daily tasks in perspective. Write down 
three goals that you want to accomplish (a) in life, 
(b) 10 years from now, (c) this year, (d) this month, 
and (e) this week. You may want to file this form 
and review it in years to come.
	3.	
Identify your immediate goals and prioritize them 
for today and this week. Each day, sit down and de-
Planning and prioritizing your daily activities simplifies your days.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

188
Fitness and Wellness
to organize your day. Which is the most productive 
time for work, study, errands? Are you a morning 
person, or are you getting most of your work done 
when other people are quitting for the day? Pick 
your best hours for top-priority activities. Be sure 
to schedule enough time for exercise and relax-
ation. Recreation is not necessarily wasted time. 
You need to take care of your physical and emo-
tional well-being; otherwise, your life will be seri-
ously imbalanced.
	5.	
Take a few minutes each night to figure out how 
well you accomplished your goals that day. Success-
ful time managers evaluate themselves daily. This 
simple task will help you see the entire picture. 
Cross off the goals you accomplished, and carry 
over to the next day those you did not get done. 
You also may realize that some goals can be reclas-
sified as low priority or be trashed.
In addition to the previous steps, the following gen-
eral suggestions can help you make better use of your 
time:
• 
Delegate. When possible, delegate activities that 
someone else can do for you. Having another per-
son type your paper while you prepare for an exam 
might be well worth the expense and your time.
• 
Say “no.” Learn to say no to activities that keep you 
from getting your top priorities done. You can do 
only so much in a single day. Many people are 
afraid to say no because they feel guilty if they do. 
Think ahead, and think of the consequences. Are 
you doing it to please others? What will it do to 
your well-being? Can you handle one more task? 
At some point you have to balance your activities 
and look at life and time realistically.
• 
Protect against boredom. Doing nothing can be a 
source of stress. People need to feel that they are 
contributing and that they are productive members 
of society. It also is good for self-esteem and self-
worth. Set realistic goals, and work toward them 
each day.
• 
Plan ahead for disruptions. Even a careful plan of 
action can be disrupted. An unexpected phone call 
or visitor can ruin your schedule. Planning your re-
Common Symptoms of Stress
•  Headaches
•  Muscular aches (mainly in neck, shoulders, and back)
•  Grinding teeth
•  Nervous tic, finger tapping, toe tapping
•  Increased sweating
•  Increase in or loss of appetite
•  Insomnia
•  Nightmares
•  Fatigue
•  Dry mouth
•  Stuttering
•  High blood pressure
•  Tightness or pain in the chest
•  Impotence
•  Hives
•  Dizziness
•  Depression
•  Irritation
Behavior Modification Planning
•  Anger
•  Hostility
•  Fear, panic, anxiety
•  Stomach pain, flutters
•  Nausea
•  Cold, clammy hands
•  Poor concentration
•  Pacing
•  Restlessness
•  Rapid heart rate
•  Low-grade infection
•  Loss of sex drive
•  Rash or acne
Try It
 If you regularly experience some of the above symptoms, 
use your Online Journal or class notebook to keep a log of 
when these symptoms occur and under what circumstances. 
You may discover that a pattern emerges when you experi-
ence distress in life.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

189
Chapter 7  Stress Management
sponse ahead of time will help you deal with these 
saboteurs.
• 
Get it done. Select only one task at a time, concen-
trate on it, and see it through. Many people do a 
little here, a little there, then do something else. In 
the end, nothing gets done. An exception to work-
ing on just one task at a time is when you are doing 
a difficult task. Rather than “killing yourself,” inter-
change with another activity that is not as hard.
• 
Eliminate distractions. If you have trouble adhering 
to a set plan, remove distractions and trash activi-
ties from your eyesight. Television, radio, comput-
ers, magazines, open doors, or studying in a park 
might distract you and become time killers.
• 
Set aside “overtimes.” Regularly schedule time you 
did not think you would need as overtime to com-
plete unfinished projects. Most people undersched-
ule rather than overschedule time. The result is 
usually late-night burnout! If you schedule over-
times and get your tasks done, enjoy some leisure 
time, get ahead on another project, or work on 
some of your trash priorities. Plan time for you.
• 
Set aside special time for yourself daily. Life is not 
meant to be all work. Use your time to walk, read, 
or listen to your favorite music.
• 
Reward yourself. As with any other healthy behav-
ior, positive change or a job well done deserves a 
reward. We often overlook the value of rewards, 
even if they are self-given. People practice behav-
iors that are rewarded and discontinue those that 
are not.
7.10  Relaxation 
Techniques
Stress management skills are essential to cope effec-
tively and move forward in today’s fast-paced world. 
Although you may reap benefits immediately after en-
gaging in any of the several relaxation techniques de-
scribed in this chapter, several months of regular prac-
tice may be necessary for total mastery. The relaxation 
exercises that follow should not be considered pana-
ceas. If they do not prove to be effective, more special-
ized resources and professional help are indicated. In 
some instances a person’s symptoms may not be caused 
by stress but, rather, may be related to an undiagnosed 
medical disorder.
7.10A  Physical Activity  Physical exercise is one 
of the simplest tools to control stress. Exercise and fitness 
are thought to reduce the intensity of stress and recovery 
from a stressful event. The value of exercise in reducing 
stress is related to several factors, the main one being less 
muscular tension.
Imagine you are distressed after a miserable day at 
work. The job requires eight hours of work with an intol-
erable boss. To make matters worse, it is late and on the 
way home the car in front of you is going much slower 
than the speed limit. The body’s fight-or-flight mecha-
nism is activated. Your heart rate and blood pressure 
shoot up, your breathing quickens and deepens, your 
muscles tense, and all systems say “go.” Under the cir-
cumstances, you can take no action, and the stress will 
not be dissipated because you simply cannot hit your 
boss or the car in front of you. Instead, you could take 
action by “hitting” the tennis ball, the weights, the swim-
ming pool, or the jogging trail. By engaging in physical 
activity, you are able to reduce the muscular tension and 
eliminate the physiological changes that triggered the 
fight-or-flight mechanism.
Physical exercise gives people an overall boost by
• 
Lessening feelings of anxiety, depression, frustra-
tion, aggression, anger, and hostility.
• 
Alleviating insomnia.
• 
Providing an opportunity to meet social needs and 
develop new friendships.
Common Time Killers
• Watching television, listening to radio/music
• Excessive sleeping
• Surfing/socializing on the Internet
• Unnecessary texting, e-mailing
• Daydreaming
• Shopping
• Socializing/parties
• Excessive recreation
• Talking on the telephone
• Worrying
• Procrastinating
• Drop-in visitors
• Confusion (unclear goals)
• Indecision (what to do next)
• Interruptions
• Perfectionism (every detail must be done)
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

190
Fitness and Wellness
• 
Allowing people to share common interests and 
problems.
• 
Developing self-discipline.
• 
Providing the opportunity to do something enjoy-
able and constructive that will lead to better health 
and total well-being.
Further, during vigorous aerobic exercise lasting 30 
minutes or longer, morphine-like substances referred to 
as endorphins are thought to be released from the pitu-
itary gland in the brain. These substances not only act as 
painkillers but also seem to induce the soothing, calming 
effect often associated with aerobic exercise. Research 
has also shown that moderate-intensity exercise has an 
immediate effect on a person’s mood and the effects last 
up to 12 hours following activity. Thus exercise mitigates 
the daily stress the lead to mood alterations. Exercise is 
free and easily accessible to everyone. Pick an activity 
that you enjoy and use it to combat stress, blue moods, 
anxiety, and depression.
Although exercise has enhanced the health and 
quality of life of millions of people, exercise, for a few, 
can become an obsessive behavior with potentially ad-
dictive qualities. Compulsive exercisers often express 
feelings of guilt and discomfort when they miss a day’s 
workout. These individuals sometimes continue to exer-
cise even when they are injured or ill and should get 
proper rest for adequate recovery. Under these circum-
stances, exercise becomes a biological stressor that will 
compromise performance and health. As a biological 
stressor, compulsive exercise or overtraining produces 
both physiological and psychological symptoms. Many 
physical activities (for example, jogging, basketball, aer-
obics) performed at high intensity levels or for unusually 
long periods (overtraining) can be detrimental to a per-
son’s physical and emotional well-being.
Psychological symptoms of overtraining include 
lower motivation, depression, sleep disturbances, in-
creased irritability, and lack of confidence. Physiological 
symptoms include musculoskeletal injuries, lower per-
formance, slower recovery time, chronic fatigue, de-
creased appetite, loss of weight and lean tissue, fat gain, 
increased muscle tension, higher resting heart rate and 
blood pressure, and even ECG abnormalities. If you ex-
perience any of these symptoms, you need to reevaluate 
your exercise program and make adjustments accord-
ingly. People who exceed the recommended guidelines 
for fitness development and maintenance (see Chapters 
3 and 4) are exercising for reasons other than health, and 
some actually may be aggravating an already stressful 
situation.
7.10B  Progressive Muscle Relaxation  One 
of the most popular methods used to dissipate stress is 
progressive muscle relaxation, which enables indi-
viduals to relearn the sensation of deep relaxation. 
Acute awareness of how it feels to progressively tighten 
and relax the muscles releases muscle tension and 
teaches the body to relax at will. Feeling the tension 
during the exercises also helps the person to be more 
alert to signs of distress because this tension is similar 
to that experienced in stressful situations. In everyday 
life, these feelings then can cue the person to do relax-
ation exercises.
Relaxation exercises should be done in a quiet, 
warm, well-ventilated room. The exercises should en-
compass all muscle groups of the body. Most important 
is to pay attention to the sensation you feel each time you 
tense and relax your muscles.
The instructions can be read to the person, or 
memorized, or tape-recorded. You should set aside at 
least 20 minutes to complete the entire sequence. Doing 
the exercises any faster will defeat their purpose. Ideally, 
you should complete the sequence twice a day.
First, stretch out comfortably on the floor, face up, 
with a pillow under your knees, and assume a passive 
attitude, allowing your body to relax as much as possible. 
Then contract each muscle group in sequence, taking 
care to avoid any strain. Tighten each muscle to only 
about 70 percent of the total possible tension to avoid 
cramping or some type of injury to the muscle itself.
Physical activity is an excellent tool to control stress.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

191
Chapter 7  Stress Management
To produce the relaxation effects, pay attention to the 
sensation of tensing and relaxing. Hold each contraction 
about five seconds, then allow the muscles to go totally 
limp. Take enough time to contract and relax each muscle 
group before going on to the next. An example of a com-
plete progressive muscle relaxation sequence is as follows:
	 1.	 Point your feet, curling your toes downward. Study 
the tension in the arches and top of your feet. Hold 
and continue to note the tension, then relax. Re-
peat once again.
	 2.	 Flex the feet upward toward your face, and note the 
tension in your feet and calves. Hold and relax. Re-
peat once more.
	 3.	 Push your heels down against the floor as if bury-
ing them in the sand. Hold and note the tension at 
the back of the thigh. Relax. Repeat once more.
	 4.	 Contract your right thigh by straightening your leg, 
gently raising your leg off the floor. Hold, and 
study the tension. Relax. Repeat with the left leg. 
Hold and relax. Repeat each leg again.
	 5.	 Tense your buttocks by raising your hips ever so 
slightly off the floor. Hold and note the tension. 
Relax. Repeat once again.
 6. Contract your abdominal muscles. Hold them tight 
and note the tension. Relax. Repeat one more time.
	 7.	 Suck in your stomach. Try to make it reach your 
spine. Flatten your lower back to the floor. Hold 
and feel the tension in the stomach and lower back. 
Relax. Repeat once more.
 8. Take a deep breath and hold it, then exhale. Repeat. 
Note your breathing becoming slower and more 
relaxed.
	 9.	 Place your arms at the side of your body and 
clench both fists. Hold, study the tension, and re-
lax. Repeat a second time.
	10.	 Flex the elbows by bringing both hands to your 
shoulders. Hold tight and study the tension in the 
biceps. Relax. Repeat one more time.
	11.	 Place your arms flat on the floor, palms up, and 
push the forearms hard against the floor. Note the 
tension on 
the triceps. 
Hold and re-
lax. Repeat 
once more.
	12.	 Shrug your 
shoulders, 
Progressive muscle relaxation  A 
relaxation technique that involves con-
tracting, then relaxing muscle groups 
in the body in succession.
Characteristics of Good Stress Managers
Good stress managers:
•  are physically active, eat a healthy diet, and get ade-
quate rest every day.
•  believe they have control over events in their life (have 
an internal locus of control, see pages 17–19).
•  understand their own feelings and accept their limita-
tions.
•  recognize, anticipate, monitor, and regulate stressors 
within their capabilities.
•  control emotional and physical responses when dis-
tressed.
•  use appropriate stress management techniques when 
confronted with stressors.
•  recognize warning signs and symptoms of excessive 
stress.
•  schedule daily time to unwind, relax, and evaluate the 
day’s activities.
Behavior Modification Planning
•  control stress when called upon to perform.
•  enjoy life despite occasional disappointments and frus-
trations.
•  look success and failure squarely in the face and keep 
moving along a predetermined course.
•  move ahead with optimism and energy and do not spend 
time and talent worrying about failure.
•  learn from previous mistakes and use them as building 
blocks to prevent similar setbacks in the future.
•  give of themselves freely to others.
•  find deep meaning in life.
Try It
Change for many people is threatening, but often required. 
Pick three of the above strategies and apply them in your 
life. After several days, determine the usefulness of these 
strategies in your physical, mental, social, and emotional 
well-being.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

192
Fitness and Wellness
raising them as high as possible. Hold and note the 
tension. Relax. Repeat once again.
 13. Gently push your head backward. Note the tension 
in the back of the neck. Hold and then relax. Re-
peat one more time.
 14. Gently bring the head against the chest, push for-
ward, hold, and note the tension in the neck. Relax. 
Repeat a second time.
	15.	 Press your tongue toward the roof of your mouth. 
Hold, study the tension, and relax. Repeat once 
more.
 16. Press your teeth together. Hold and study the ten-
sion. Relax. Repeat one more time.
 17. Close your eyes tightly. Hold them closed and note 
the tension. Relax, leaving your eyes closed. Do this 
one more time.
 18. Wrinkle your forehead and note the tension. Hold 
and relax. Repeat one more time.
When time is a factor during the daily routine and 
you are not able to go through the entire sequence, you 
may do only the exercises specific to the area that feels 
most tense. Performing a partial sequence is better than 
not doing the exercises at all. Completing the entire se-
quence, of course, yields the best results.
7.10C  Breathing Techniques  Breathing exer-
cises, too, can be an antidote to stress. These exercises 
have been used for centuries in Asian countries to im-
prove mental, physical, and emotional stamina. In 
breathing exercises the person concentrates on “breath-
ing away” the tension and inhaling fresh air to the entire 
body. Breathing exercises can be learned in only a few 
minutes and require considerably less time than the pro-
gressive muscle relaxation exercises.
As with any other relaxation technique, these exer-
cises should be done in a quiet, pleasant, well-ventilated 
room. Any of the three examples of breathing exercises 
presented here will help relieve tension induced by stress.
Deep Breathing
Lie with your back flat against the floor, and place a pil-
low under your knees, feet slightly separated, with your 
toes pointing outward. (This exercise also may be done 
while sitting up in a chair or standing straight up.) Place 
one hand on your abdomen and the other hand on your 
chest. Breathe in and out slowly so the hand on your 
abdomen rises when you inhale and falls as you exhale. 
The hand on your chest should not move much at all. 
Repeat the exercise about 10 times. Then scan your body 
for tension, and compare your present tension with the 
tension you felt at the beginning of the exercise. Repeat 
the entire process once or twice more.
Sighing
Using the abdominal breathing technique, breathe in 
through your nose to a specific count (such as 4, 5, or 6). 
Now exhale through pursed lips to double the intake 
count (such as 8, 10, or 12). Repeat the exercise eight to 
ten times whenever you feel tense.
Complete Natural Breathing
Sit in an upright position or stand straight up. Breathing 
through your nose, fill your lungs gradually from the 
bottom up. Hold your breath for several seconds. Now 
exhale slowly by allowing your chest and abdomen to 
relax completely. Repeat the exercise 8 to 10 times.
Meditation “101”
More than 700 scientific studies have verified that medi-
tation induces relaxation and alleviates the harmful 
physiological effects of stress. Meditation is a mental ex-
ercise that can bring about psychological and physical 
benefits. Regular meditation has been shown to decrease 
blood pressure, stress, anger, anxiety, fear, negative feel-
ings, and chronic pain, and increase activity in the brain’s 
left frontal region—an area associated with positive emo-
tions.5 The objective of meditation is to gain control over 
one’s attention by clearing the mind and blocking out the 
stressor(s) responsible for the higher tension.
This technique can be learned rather quickly and 
can be used frequently during times of increased stress. 
Initially, choose a room that is comfortable, quiet, and 
free of all disturbances (including telephones). After 
learning the technique, you will be able to meditate just 
about anywhere. A time block of approximately 15 min-
utes, twice a day, is suggested for meditation.
	1.	
Sit in a chair or in a quiet place in an upright posi-
tion with your hands resting either in your lap or 
on the arms of the chair. Close your eyes and focus 
on your breathing. Allow your body to relax as 
much as possible. Do not consciously try to relax 
because trying means work. Rather, assume a pas-
sive attitude and concentrate on your breathing.
	2.	
Allow your body to breathe regularly, at its own 
rhythm, and repeat in your mind the word “one” 
every time you inhale and the word “two” every 
time you exhale. Paying attention to these two 
words keeps distressing thoughts from entering 
into your mind.
	3.	
Continue to breathe in this way about 15 minutes. 
Because the objective of meditation is to bring 
about a hypometabolic (slower metabolism) state 
leading to body relaxation, do not use an alarm 
clock to remind you that the 15 minutes have ex-
pired. The alarm will only trigger the stress re-
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

193
Chapter 7  Stress Management
sponse again, defeating the purpose of the exercise. 
Opening your eyes once in a while to keep track of 
the time is fine, but do not rush or anticipate the 
end of the 15 minutes. This time has been set aside 
for meditation, and you need to relax, take your 
time, and enjoy the exercise.
List the most significant stressor that you face as a  
college student. • What technique(s) have you used to 
manage this situation, and in what way has it helped you 
cope?
Critical Thinking
7.10D  Mindless Meditation  In addition to alle-
viating stress, mindless meditation is frequently used to 
help people relieve chronic pain and increase pain toler-
ance. Chronic pain increases stress hormones that lead a 
person to think that pain is much worse than it really is. 
Research indicates that chronic pain sufferers who use 
this technique not only have greater pain tolerance than 
nonpractitioners, but discomfort is eased by helping the 
brain stop anticipating the pain itself. As pain decreases, 
stress decreases, and the individual is able to sleep better, 
hurt less, and exercise more, all of which lead to greater 
comfort and relaxation.
Slightly different from meditation “101,” these steps 
can be followed to use this technique:
	1.	
Close your eyes, breathe slowly and naturally, and 
focus on the feeling of each inhalation and 
exhalation.
	2.	
Recognize your feelings, thoughts, and body sensa-
tions, but do not dwell on them.
	3.	
Continue to focus on your breathing pattern and 
your feelings for about 15 minutes.
	4.	
Open your eyes and notice your surroundings 
while maintaining a calm and gentle breathing 
pattern.
	5.	
You can now proceed to your daily activity sched-
ule with this peaceful, calm, and serene feeling.
7.10E  Yoga  Yoga is an excellent stress-coping tech-
nique. Yoga is a school of thought in the Hindu religion 
that seeks to help the individual attain a higher level of 
spirituality and peace of mind. Although its philosophi-
cal roots can be considered spiritual, yoga is based on 
principles of self-care.
Yoga practitioners adhere to a specific code of ethics 
and a system of mental and physical exercises that pro-
mote control of the mind and the body. In Western 
countries, many people are mainly familiar with the ex-
ercise portion of yoga. This system of exercises (pos-
tures) can be used as a relaxation technique for stress 
management. The exercises include a combination of 
postures, diaphragmatic breathing, muscle relaxation, 
and meditation that help buffer the biological effects of 
stress.
Western interest in yoga exercises gradually devel-
oped over the last century, particularly since the 1970s. 
People pursue yoga exercises for their potential to dispel 
stress by raising self-esteem, clearing the mind, slowing 
respiration, promoting neuromuscular relaxation, and 
increasing body awareness. In addition, the exercises 
help control involuntary body functions including heart 
rate, blood pressure, oxygen consumption, and meta-
bolic rate. Doing yoga exercises can increase muscular 
flexibility, muscular strength and endurance, and bal-
ance and can lead to a better aligned musculoskeletal 
system.6 Yoga is also used in many hospital-based pro-
grams for cardiac patients to help manage stress and 
decrease blood pressure.
Further, yoga exercises have been used to help treat 
chemical dependency and insomnia and to prevent in-
jury. Research on patients with coronary heart disease 
who practiced yoga (among other lifestyle changes) has 
shown that it slows or even reverses atherosclerosis.7 
These 
patients 
were 
compared 
with others who 
did not use yoga 
as one of the life-
style changes.
There 
are 
many 
different 
styles 
of 
yoga. 
Classes vary ac-
cording to their 
emphasis. 
Some 
Meditation   A mental exercise in 
which the objective is to gain control 
over one’s attention, clearing the mind 
and blocking out stressors.
Yoga  A school of thought in the Hindu 
religion that seeks to help the individ-
ual attain a higher level of spirituality 
and peace of mind.
Yoga exercises help induce the relaxation response.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

194
Fitness and Wellness
styles of yoga are athletic, and others are passive in  
nature. The most popular variety in the Western world  
is hatha yoga, which incorporates a series of static-
stretching postures performed in specific sequences 
(also known as “asanas”) that help induce the relaxation 
response. Participants hold the postures for several sec-
onds while concentrating on breathing patterns, medita-
tion, and body awareness.
Most yoga classes are now variations of hatha yoga, 
and many of the typical stretches used in flexibility exer-
cises today have been adapted from hatha yoga. Exam-
ples include
1.	
integral yoga and viny yoga, which focus on 
gentle/static stretches.
2.	
iyengar yoga, which promotes muscular 
strength and endurance.
3.	
yogalates, incorporating Pilates exercises to in-
crease muscular strength.
4.	
power yoga or yogarobics, a high-energy form 
that links many postures together in a dance-
like routine to promote cardiorespiratory 
fitness.
As with flexibility exercises, the stretches in hatha 
yoga should not be performed to the point of discomfort. 
Instructors should not push participants beyond their 
physical limitations. Similar to other stress management 
techniques, yoga exercises are best performed in a quiet 
place for about 15 to 60 minutes per session. Many yoga 
participants like to perform the exercises daily.
To appreciate yoga exercise, a person has to experi-
ence it. We are only introducing yoga here. Although par-
ticipants can practice yoga exercises with the instruction of 
a book or video, most participants take classes. Many of the 
postures are difficult and complex, and few individuals can 
master the entire sequence in the first few weeks.
Individuals who are interested in yoga exercise 
should initially pursue it under qualified instruction. 
Many universities offer yoga courses, and you also can 
check the phone book for a listing of yoga instructors or 
classes. Yoga courses are offered at many health clubs 
and recreation centers. Because instructors and yoga 
styles vary, you may want to observe a class before en-
rolling. You should look for an instructor whose views 
on wellness parallel your own. There are no national 
certification standards for instructors. If you are new to 
yoga, you are encouraged to compare a couple of instruc-
tors before you select a class.
7.10F  Tai Chi  Tai chi chuan (full name) originated 
in China centuries ago and is practiced today for defense 
training and physical and mental health benefits. The 
martial side, however, is no longer the focus of its prac-
tice, so the activity can be performed by young and old, 
and even the very old. Many fitness practitioners use it in 
conjunction with aerobic and strength training.
Tai chi is often described as “meditation in motion” 
because it is performed with flowing/rhythmic move-
ments that focus heavily on breathing and the slow exe-
cution of its movements. The main objective is to pro-
mote tranquility and reflection through postures that 
combine meditation and dance. The postures are per-
formed in sequences known as “sets” that require con-
centration, coordination, controlled breathing, muscle 
relaxation, strength, flexibility, gait, and body balance.
Research has attributed many health benefits to tai 
chi, including diabetes management, arthritis relief, 
lower blood pressure, faster recovery from heart disease 
and injury, improved strength and flexibility, better sleep, 
and improved physical work capacity. Among older 
adults, improved gait and the capability to perform ac-
tivities of daily living are frequently reported.
Tai chi is frequently used for stress management to 
relieve tension, stress, and anxiety. The mental aspect of 
having to concentrate on leading the movement and pay-
ing attention to detail through the gentle actions dissi-
pates stress. The activity leaves no room to think or 
worry about other problems, thus calming and relaxing 
the mind and body.
To master tai chi, you need initial professional guid-
ance. You are encouraged to join a group or a class avail-
able at many college campuses or community health 
clubs. The class should emphasize fitness and health 
benefits rather than combat techniques. Once you have 
mastered many of the sets available, you can practice the 
activity on your own.
7.10G  Visual Imagery  Visual or mental imagery 
has been used as a healing technique for centuries in 
various cultures around the world. In Western medicine, 
Visual imagery is an effective technique for coping with stress.
©Jonathan Hoeger
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

195
Chapter 7  Stress Management
the practice of imagery is relatively new and not widely 
accepted among health care professionals. Imagery in-
duces a state of relaxation that rids the body of the stress 
that leads to illness. It improves circulation and increases 
the delivery of healing antibodies and white blood cells 
to the site of illness.8
Visual imagery involves the creation of relaxing 
visual images and scenes in times of stress to elicit body 
and mind relaxation. Imagery works by offsetting the 
stressor with the visualization of relaxing scenes such 
as a sunny beach, a beautiful meadow, a quiet moun-
taintop, or some other peaceful setting. If you are ill, 
you can also visualize your white blood cells attacking 
an infection or a tumor. Imagery is also used in con-
junction with breathing exercises, meditation, and 
yoga.
As with other stress management techniques, imag-
ery should be performed in a quiet and comfortable en-
vironment. You can either sit or lie down for the exercise. 
If you lie down, use a soft surface and place a pillow 
under your knees. Be sure that your clothes are loose and 
that you are as comfortable as you can be.
Close your eyes and visualize one of your favorite 
scenes in nature. Place yourself into the scene and visual-
ize yourself moving about and experiencing nature to its 
fullest. Enjoy the people, the animals, the colors, the 
sounds, the smells, and even the temperature in your 
scene. After 10 to 20 minutes of visualization, open your 
eyes and compare the tension in your body and mind at 
this point with how you felt prior to the exercise. You can 
repeat this exercise as often as you deem necessary when 
you are feeling tension or stress.
7.10H  Which Technique Is Best?  Each person 
reacts to stress differently. Therefore, the best strategy to 
alleviate stress depends mostly on the individual. Which 
technique you use does not matter as long as it works. 
You may want to experiment with all of them to find out 
which works best for you. Many people choose a combi-
nation of two or more.
All of the strategies discussed in this chapter help to 
block out stressors and promote mental and physical re-
laxation by diverting the attention to a different, non-
threatening action. Some of the techniques are easier to 
learn and take less time per session. Regardless of which 
technique you select, the time you spend doing stress 
management exercises (several times a day, as needed) is 
well worth the effort when stress becomes a significant 
problem in your life.
People need to learn to relax and take time for  
themselves. What 
makes people ill is 
not stress itself 
but, instead, the 
way they react to 
the stress-causing 
agent. Individuals 
who are diligent 
and start taking 
control of them-
selves find that 
they can enjoy a 
better, 
happier, 
and 
healthier  
life.
Hatha yoga  A yoga style that incor-
porates a series of static-stretching 
postures performed in specific 
sequences.
Imagery  Mental visualization of relax-
ing images and scenes to induce body 
relaxation in times of stress or as an 
aid in the treatment of certain medical 
conditions such as cancer, hyperten-
sion, asthma, chronic pain, and 
obesity.
	1.	
Are you able to channel your emotions and feelings to 
exert a positive effect on your mind, health, and 
wellness?
	2.	
Do you use time management strategies on a regular 
basis?
	3.	
Do you use stress management techniques, and do they 
allow you to be in control over the daily stresses of life?
Assess Your Behavior
To access course materials, including companion resources, please visit www.cengagebrain.com.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

196
Fitness and Wellness
	 1.	 Positive stress is also referred to as
	 a.	 eustress.
	 b.	 poststress.
	 c.	 functional stress.
	 d.	 distress.
	 e.	 physiostress.
	 2.	 Which of the following is not a stage of the general adap-
tation syndrome?
	 a.	 alarm reaction
	 b.	 resistance
	 c.	 compliance
	 d.	 exhaustion/recovery
	 e.	 All are stages of the general adaptation syndrome.
	 3.	 Which of the following behaviors seems to have the 
greatest impact in increasing the risk for illness among 
Type A individuals?
	 a.	 hard-driven
	 b.	 overambitious
	 c.	 chronic hostility
	 d.	 overly competitive
	 e.	 All increase the risk equally.
	 4.	 Effective time managers
	 a.	 delegate.
 b. learn to say “no.”
	 c.	 protect against boredom.
 d. set aside “overtimes.”
	 e.	 do all of the above.
	 5.	 Hormonal changes that occur during a stress response
	 a.	 decrease heart rate.
	 b.	 increase blood pressure.
	 c.	 diminish blood flow to the muscles.
	 d.	 induce relaxation.
	 e.	 sap the body’s strength.
	 6.	 Exercise decreases stress levels by
	 a.	 deliberately diverting stress to various body systems.
	 b.	 metabolizing excess catecholamines.
	 c.	 diminishing muscular tension.
	 d.	 stimulating alpha-wave activity in the brain.
	 e.	 doing all of the above.
	 7.	 Which of the following exercises is included in the pro-
gressive muscle relaxation technique?
	 a.	 pointing the feet
	 b.	 wrinkling the forehead
	 c.	 contracting the abdominal muscles
	 d.	 pressing the teeth together
	 e.	 All of the above exercises are used.
	 8.	 The technique in which a person breathes in through the 
nose to a specific count and then exhales through pursed 
lips to double the intake count is known as
	 a.	 sighing.
	 b.	 deep breathing.
	 c.	 meditation.
	 d.	 autonomic ventilation.
	 e.	 release management.
	 9.	 Meditation
	 a.	 induces relaxation.
	 b.	 alleviates the harmful physiological effects of stress.
	 c.	 can be performed just about anywhere.
	 d.	 incorporates breathing exercises.
	 e.	 includes all of the above statements.
	10.	 Yoga exercises have been used successfully to
	 a.	 stimulate ventilation.
	 b.	 increase metabolism during stress.
	 c.	 slow down atherosclerosis.
	 d.	 decrease body awareness.
	 e.	 accomplish all of the above.
Correct answers can be found on page 301.
Assess Your Knowledge
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

197
Chapter 7  Stress Management
 I. Record your results and stress categories for each questionnaire given in this chapter.
Category
Points
Hostility (see Figure 7.3, page 182): 
                     
_____________________ 
Stress Vulnerability 
(see Figure 7.4, page 184): 
_________ 
_____________________ 
 
(0–30 = Excellent, 31–40 = Good, 
41–50 = Average, 51–60 = Fair, 
≥61 = Poor)
Stress Test (see Figure 7.5, page 186): 
_________ 
_____________________ 
 
(≤249 = low risk, ≥250–500 = 
moderate risk, >500 = high risk)
 II. Life stressor.  In the space provided below, list a stressor you frequently encounter in life. Explain the situation(s) under 
which it occurs, your response to it, the impact it has on your life, and how you are presently handling the stressor. Also indicate 
what you can do to either avoid the stressor or cope with it more effectively in the future.
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Activity 7.1: Stress Analysis
Date
Name
Section
Course
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

198
Fitness and Wellness
III. In your own words, express how life stresses and your personality affect you in your daily life.
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 IV. In the space provided below, list, in order of priority, three behaviors that you would like to change to decrease your vulnerability  
to stress. Brieﬂy indicate how you intend to accomplish these changes.
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 V. Number of current daily steps: 
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A Healthy Lifestyle 
Approach
8
“Exercise can be used as a 
vaccine to prevent disease 
and a medication to treat 
disease. If there were a drug 
with the same benefits as 
exercise, it would instantly 
be the standard of care.”
—Robert Sallis
Objectives
• Understand the importance of 
implementing a healthy lifestyle program.
• Recognize the relationship between 
spirituality and wellness.
• Identify the major risk factors for coronary 
heart disease.
• Be able to differentiate physiological age 
and chronological age.
• Become acquainted with cancer-prevention 
guidelines.
• Learn the health consequences of chemical 
abuse and irresponsible sex.
199
Visit www.cengagebrain.com to access 
course materials and companion resources for 
this text including quiz questions designed to 
check your understanding of the chapter 
contents, activities, labs, and more! See the 
preface on page xi for more information.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

200
Fitness and Wellness
I didn’t go to college right out of high school. I 
worked full time for 20 years, but now at age 38, I 
have decided to pursue a degree in business adminis-
tration. I wasn’t very happy when I found out I had to 
take a Fitness and Wellness for Life course. I tried to 
get out of it, but the department chair would not 
waive or substitute the requirement. Of course, I 
didn’t expect to do well on the fitness tests, but when 
the instructor encouraged us to have a blood lipid 
profile, I thought “at my age I should probably have 
one done.” My total cholesterol was 280, the LDL- 
cholesterol was 220, and my HDL-cholesterol was 
only 30; worse yet, my triglycerides were 480! I was 
also a pack-a-day smoker. I realized then that I was a 
sure candidate for a heart attack. I saw my doctor, and 
when I told him that I was in this fitness/wellness 
class, he asked that rather than medication, I try  
exercise and healthy eating first and see him again in 
three months. He also told me to give up smoking.
Suddenly my fitness/wellness course took on a 
whole new meaning. I went back and reviewed my 
aerobic exercise prescription and faithfully started to 
exercise five to seven days 
per week. I also conducted 
a nutrient analysis and kept 
the nutrition charts right on 
the kitchen counter. I 
learned to read labels and 
drastically cut down on to-
tal fat, saturated fat, and 
trans fats. I also limited 
sweets and alcohol in my 
diet. It took me a year, but I 
finally quit smoking. At the follow-up blood test at 
three months, my total cholesterol was down to 225 
and the triglycerides were at 180. I continued with 
my lifestyle changes and have even done a few 5K 
and 10K races. Now, four years later, I received the 
best graduation present I could get: total cholesterol 
182, LDL-cholesterol 118, HDL-cholesterol 46, and 
triglycerides 96! To celebrate, I ran a 5K that week-
end in 22:48. The fitness and wellness class is the best 
course I had in college, and it has truly given me a 
better chance at a healthier and longer life.
Purestock/JupiterImages
Real Life Story | George’s Health Status
Improving our health—the quality, and most likely the 
length, of our lives—is a matter of personal choice. The 
wellness approach—the combination of a fitness pro-
gram and a healthy lifestyle program—can help accom-
plish these goals.
8.1  A Wellness Lifestyle
Wellness is the constant and deliberate effort to stay 
healthy and achieve the highest potential for well-being. 
Twelve simple lifestyle habits can increase longevity 
significantly:
	 1.	 Be physically active (including exercise).
	 2.	 Do not use tobacco.
	 3.	 Eat a healthy diet.
	 4.	 Avoid frequent high-sugar snacks between meals.
	 5.	 Maintain recommended body weight through 
healthy nutrition and physical activity.
	 6.	 Sleep seven to eight hours each night.
	 7.	 Lower stress levels.
	 8.	 Drink alcohol moderately or not at all.
	 9.	 Surround yourself with healthy relationships.
	10.	 Be informed about the environment and avoid en-
vironmental risk factors.
	11.	 Increase education (more educated people live 
longer).
	12.	 Take personal safety measures.
8.1A  Spiritual Well-Being  There appears to be a 
strong connection between the mind, the spirit, and the 
body. To enjoy a wellness lifestyle, a person has to prac-
tice behaviors that will lead to positive outcomes in all 
dimensions of wellness (see Chapter 1). These dimen-
sions are inter-related; one dimension frequently affects 
the others. For example, a person who is emotionally 
“down” often has no desire to exercise, study, socialize 
with friends, or attend church and may be more suscep-
tible to illness and disease. Because spirituality plays an 
important role and has not been discussed thus far, it 
merits some attention.
The definition of spirituality by the National Inter-
faith Coalition on Aging encompasses everyone because 
it assumes that all people are spiritual in nature. Spiritual 
health provides a unifying power that integrates the 
other dimensions of wellness (see Figure 8.1). Basic 
characteristics of spiritual people include a sense of 
meaning and direction in life, a relationship to a higher 
being, freedom, prayer, faith, love, closeness to others, 
peace, joy, fulfillment, and altruism.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

201
Chapter 8  A Healthy Lifestyle Approach
Although not everyone claims an affiliation with a 
certain religion or denomination, most people in the 
United States believe in God or a universal spirit func-
tioning as God. People, furthermore, believe to a varying 
extent that (a) a relationship with God is meaningful;  
(b) God can grant help, guidance, and assistance in daily 
living; and (c) mortal existence has a purpose. If we accept 
any or all of these statements, attaining spirituality will 
have a definite effect on our happiness and well-being.
The reasons why religious affiliation enhances well-
ness are difficult to determine. Possible reasons include the 
promotion of healthy lifestyle behaviors, social support, 
assistance in times of crisis and need, and counseling to 
overcome one’s weaknesses. At least 200 studies have been 
conducted on the effects of prayer on health. About two-
thirds of these studies have linked prayer to positive health 
outcomes—as long as these prayers are offered with sincer-
ity, humility, love, empathy, and compassion. Some studies 
have shown faster healing time and fewer complications in 
patients who didn’t even know they were being prayed for, 
compared with patients who were not prayed for.1
Altruism—a key attribute of spiritual people—
seems to enhance health and longevity. Studies indicate 
that people who regularly volunteer live longer. Doing 
good for others is good for oneself, especially for the im-
mune system.
The relationship between spirituality and wellness, 
therefore, is meaningful in our quest for a better quality 
of life. As with other parameters of wellness, optimum 
spirituality requires development of the spiritual nature 
to its fullest potential.
8.2  Causes of Death
Of all deaths in the United States, approximately 52 per-
cent are caused by cardiovascular disease (CVD) and 
cancer.2 Close to 80 percent of these deaths could be 
prevented by following a healthy lifestyle. The third and 
fourth leading causes of death—chronic lower respira-
tory disease (CLRD) and accidents—also are prevent-
able, primarily by abstaining from tobacco and other 
drugs, wearing seat belts, and using common sense. 
Most of the underlying causes of death in the United 
States are related to the lifestyle people choose to live (see 
Figure 8.2). Four factors: diet and nutrition, smoking, 
excessive body weight, and physical activity, are respon-
sible for more than 1.7 million deaths annually.
8.3  Diseases of the 
Cardiovascular System
The most preva-
lent degenerative 
conditions in the 
United States are 
cardiovascular 
diseases. Based on 
current vital sta-
tistics, about 30 
percent 
of 
all 
deaths 
in 
the 
United States were 
attributable to dis-
eases of the heart 
and blood vessels.3 
More than 83 mil-
Spirituality  A sense of meaning and 
direction in life, a relationship to a 
higher being; encompasses freedom, 
prayer, faith, love, closeness to others, 
peace, joy, fulfillment, and altruism.
Altruism  True concern for and action 
on behalf of others (opposite of ego-
ism); a sincere desire to serve others 
above one’s personal needs.
Cardiovascular diseases  The array 
of conditions that ­affect the heart and 
blood vessels.
Figure 8.1
Components of spiritual well-being.
God
Spiritual Well-being
Community
Environment
Self
© Cengage Learning
363,991
442,656
234,022
213,669
103,027
88,587
158,431
25,430
Smoking
Diet
(nutrition)
High blood
pressure
High body
mass index
Physical
inactivity
High blood
sugar
Ambient air
pollution
Alcohol
use
High total
cholesterol
Drug
use
678,282
443,000
0
200,000
400,000
600,000
Figure 8.2
Underlying causes of death  
in the United States.
SOURCE: Adapted from C. J. L. Murray, et al., “The State of US Health, 
1990-2010 Burden of Diseases, Injuries, and Risk Factors,' Journal of the 
American Medical Association (July 10, 2013): doi:10.1001/
jama.2013.13805.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

202
Fitness and Wellness
lion people are afflicted by cardiovascular diseases, in-
cluding some 78 million suffering with hypertension, 
more than 15 million with coronary heart disease 
(CHD), and about 715,000 people suffering heart at-
tacks. Close to 800,000 people died from diseases of the 
cardiovascular system in 2009, including almost 400,000 
from CHD (myocardial infarction or heart attack).
8.3A  Types of Cardiovascular Disease 
and Prevalence  Examples of CVD are coronary 
heart disease, heart attack, peripheral vascular disease, 
congenital heart disease, rheumatic heart disease, ath-
erosclerosis, strokes, high blood pressure, and congestive 
heart failure. Table 8.1 provides the estimated prevalence 
and annual number of deaths caused by the major types 
of CVD.
The American Heart Association estimated that the 
cost of heart and blood vessel disease in the United States 
exceeded $312.6 billion in 2009.4 More than half of all 
heart attack deaths occur within an hour of the onset of 
symptoms, before the person reaches the hospital.
Although heart and blood vessel disease is still the 
number one health problem in the United States, the 
incidence declined by almost 46 percent between 1960 
and 2010 (see Figure 8.3). The main reason for this dra-
matic decrease is health education. More people now are 
aware of the risk factors for CVD and are changing their 
lifestyle to lower their potential risk for these diseases.
The heart and the coronary arteries are illustrated in 
Figure 8.4. The major form of CVD is CHD. In CHD, the 
arteries that supply the heart muscle with oxygen and 
nutrients are narrowed by fatty deposits such as choles-
terol and triglycerides. Narrowing of the coronary arter-
ies diminishes the blood supply to the heart muscle, 
which can precipitate a heart attack.
CHD is the single leading cause of death in the United 
States, accounting for approximately 15 percent of all deaths 
and about half of all cardiovascular deaths. More than half 
of the people who died suddenly from CHD had no previ-
ous symptoms of the disease. Further, the risk of death is 
greater in the least educated segment of the population.
What are your feelings about your own risk for diseases of 
the cardiovascular system? • Is this something that you 
need to concern yourself with at this point in your life?  
• Why or why not?
Critical Thinking
Table 8.1  Estimated Prevalence and Yearly Number of Deaths 
from Cardiovascular Disease
Prevalence
Deaths
All forms of cardiovascular 
diseases*
83,600,000
787,931
Coronary heart disease 
15,400,000
**
Heart attack 
  7,600,000
386,324
Stroke 
  6,800,000
128,842
High blood pressure 
77,900,000
61,762***
*Includes people with one or more forms of cardiovascular disease.
**Number of deaths included under heart attack.
***Mortality figures appear to be low because many heart attacks and stroke deaths are 
caused by high blood pressure.
SOURCE: American Heart Association, Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics—2013 Update 
(Dallas, TX: American Heart association, 2013).
Figure 8.3
Incidence of cardiovascular disease  
in the United States for selected  
years, 1900–2010.
SOURCE: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
2000
1980
1960
1940
1920
1900
14.2
18.7
35.6
54.0
49.7
38.8
2010
29.4
Percentage of all deaths
Anterior
descending
coronary artery
Right
coronary
artery
Aorta
artery
Pulmonary
artery
Circumflex
coronary 
artery
Left main
coronary artery
Figure 8.4
The heart and its blood vessels.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

203
Chapter 8  A Healthy Lifestyle Approach
8.3B  Risk Factors for CHD  Following are the 
leading risk factors for the development of CHD:
• 
Physical inactivity
• 
High blood pressure
• 
Excessive body fat
• 
Low HDL-cholesterol
• 
Elevated LDL-cholesterol
• 
Elevated triglycerides
• 
Elevated homocysteine
• 
Inflammation
• 
Diabetes
• 
Abnormal electrocardiograms (ECGs)
• 
Tobacco use
• 
Stress
• 
Personal and family history of CVD
• 
Age
• 
Gender
An important concept in CHD risk management is 
that many of the risk factors are preventable and revers-
ible. Approximately 90 percent of CHD can be prevented 
if people practice healthy lifestyle habits. The above risk 
factors are discussed in the following pages.
Physical Inactivity
Improving cardiorespiratory endurance through aerobic 
exercise has perhaps the greatest impact in reducing the 
overall risk for CVD. In this day and age of mechanized 
societies, we cannot afford not to be physically active. 
Research data on the benefits of aerobic exercise in re-
ducing CVD are too impressive to be ignored.
For habitually sedentary people, sudden heavy-duty 
physical activity, such as shoveling snow or strenuous yard 
work, can trigger a cardiovascular event. The research 
shows that unaccustomed physical exertion increases the 
risk for a cardiovascular incident 50- to 100-fold.
As shown in Figure 8.5, work conducted at the 
Aerobics Research Institute in Dallas showed a much 
higher incidence of cardiovascular deaths in low-fit peo-
ple as compared to moderate- and high-fit people.5 Sci-
entific studies indicate that, when feasible, vigorous- 
intensity activity is preferable because of greater im-
provements in aerobic fitness, blood pressure, glucose 
control, and a larger reduction in CHD risk.
A regular aerobic exercise program helps to control 
most of the major risk factors that lead to heart and 
blood vessel disease. Aerobic exercise will
• 
increase cardiorespiratory endurance.
• 
decrease and control blood pressure.
• 
reduce body fat.
• 
lower blood lipids (cholesterol and triglycerides).
• 
improve HDL-cholesterol (see “Abnormal Choles-
terol Profile” on pages 205–207).
• 
decrease low-grade (hidden) inflammation in the 
body.
• 
help control or decrease the risk for diabetes.
• 
increase and maintain good heart function, some-
times improving certain ECG abnormalities.
• 
encourage smoking cessation.
• 
alleviate stress.
• 
counteract a 
personal his-
tory of heart 
disease.
Also try to 
minimize 
total 
daily sitting time. 
Research data in-
dicate that exces-
sive daily sitting (at 
a desk, commuting 
Coronary heart disease 
(CHD)  Condition in which the arteries 
that supply the heart muscle with oxy-
gen and nutrients are narrowed by fatty 
deposits such as cholesterol and 
triglycerides.
Risk factors  Lifestyle and genetic 
variables that may lead to disease.
Warning Signals of a Heart 
Attack and Stroke
Any or all of the following signs may occur during a heart 
attack or a stroke. If you experience any of these and they 
last longer than a few minutes, call 911 and seek medi-
cal attention immediately. Failure to do so may cause 
irreparable damage and even result in death.
Warning Signs of a Heart Attack
• Chest pain, discomfort, pressure, or squeezing that 
lasts for several minutes. These feelings may go away 
and return later.
• Pain that radiates to the shoulders, neck, or arms
• Chest discomfort with shortness of breath, lighthead-
edness, sweating, nausea, or fainting
Warning Signs of Stroke
• Sudden weakness or numbness of the face, arm, or 
leg—particularly on one side of the body
• Sudden severe headache
• Sudden confusion, dizziness, or difficulty in speech 
and understanding
• Sudden difficulty walking, loss of balance or 
coordination
• Sudden visual difficulty
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

204
Fitness and Wellness
to and from work, eating meals, and watching television) 
increases the risk for cardiovascular disease, obesity, some 
chronic disorders, and premature mortality. The risk is 
increased even among people who complete 30 minutes of 
moderate-intensity physical activity on most days of the 
week but still spend a large part of the day sitting. If your 
job (as most now do) requires that a large portion of the 
day be spent in a sitting position, at least make yourself get 
up and take frequent breaks. Small, creative lifestyle 
changes such as always answering the phone standing; 
walking to the office next door instead of texting, email-
ing, or using the phone; and using stairs instead of eleva-
tors and escalators all make a difference.
In terms of life expectancy, 2012 research involving 
654,827 individuals looking at leisure time physical ac-
tivity of moderate to vigorous intensity and their effects 
on mortality, the results indicated that higher levels of 
physical activity are associated with greater gains in life 
expectancy. People at the highest level of physical activity 
gained 4.5 years in life expectancy and being active and 
normal weight (BMI of 18.5 to 24.9) yielded a gain of 7.2 
years of life as compared to being inactive and obese.6
High Blood Pressure (Hypertension)
Blood pressure should be checked regularly, regardless of 
whether it is elevated or not. Blood pressure is measured 
in milliliters of mercury (mm Hg) and usually expressed 
in two numbers. The higher number reflects the systolic 
blood pressure, the pressure exerted during the forceful 
contraction of the heart. The lower value, diastolic 
blood pressure, is taken during the heart’s relaxation 
phase, when no blood is being ejected.
Ideally, blood pressure is 120/80 or below (see Table 
8.2). Most major health organizations consider all blood 
pressures above 140/90 as hypertension. High blood 
pressure can be controlled with different types of medi-
cations, along with the lifestyle changes described below 
for people with mild hypertension.
Recommended treatment for people with mild hy-
pertension includes regular aerobic exercise, weight con-
trol, a low-salt/low-fat and high-potassium/high-calcium 
diet, lower alcohol and caffeine intake, smoking cessa-
tion, and stress management. People with high blood 
pressure should follow their physician’s advice and stay 
on any prescribed medication.
Adequate potassium intake seems to regulate water 
retention and lower blood pressure slightly. According to 
the Institute of Medicine of the National Academy of Sci-
ences, we need to consume at least 4,700 mg of potas-
sium per day. Most Americans get only half that amount. 
Food items high in potassium include vegetables (espe-
cially leafy green), citrus fruit, dairy products, fish, 
beans, and nuts.
In terms of salt (sodium) intake, data indicate that 
to either prevent or postpone the onset of hypertension, 
and to help some hypertensives control their blood pres-
sure, we should consume less sodium than previously 
recommended. The recommendation now is less than 
1,500 mg of sodium daily for people between 19 and 50 
years of age. The current upper limit (UL) has been set at 
2,300 mg per day. Among Americans and Canadians, 
about 95 percent of men and 75 percent of women ex-
ceed this limit.
Regular physical activity plays a large role in manag-
ing blood pressure. On the average, fit individuals have 
lower blood pressure than unfit people. Aerobic exercise 
of moderate intensity supplemented by strength training 
is recommended for individuals with high blood pres-
sure.7 Data show that strength training provides similar 
reductions in blood pressure as aerobic exercise. Indi-
viduals who discontinue exercise do not maintain the 
0
5
10
15
20
25
High
Moderate
Low
Women
Men
High
Moderate
Low
24.6
7.8
3.1
7.4
2.9
0.8
Fitness Level
*Death rates per 10,000 person-years of follow-up (one person-year 
 indicates one person who was followed up one year later).
Death Rates*
Figure 8.5
Relationship between fitness levels  
and cardiovascular mortality.
SOURCE: S. N. Blair, H. W. Kohl III, R. S. Paffenbarger, Jr., D. G. Clark, K. 
H. Cooper, and L. W. Gibbons, “Physical Fitness and All-Cause Mortality: 
A Prospective Study of Healthy Men and Women,” Journal of the 
American Medical Association 262 (1989): 2395–2401.
Table 8.2  Blood Pressure Guidelines (expressed in mm Hg)
Rating
Systolic
Diastolic
Normal
120
80
Prehypertension
121–139
81–89
Hypertension
140
90
SOURCE: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

205
Chapter 8  A Healthy Lifestyle Approach
benefits. Even in the absence of any significant decrease 
in resting blood pressure, hypertensive individuals who 
exercise have a lower risk of all-cause mortality as com-
pared to hypertensive/sedentary individuals.
Excessive Body Fat
Excessive body fat has been recognized as a factor con-
tributing to coronary heart disease. The American Heart 
Association lists obesity as one of the six major risk fac-
tors for this disease. The other five risk factors are to-
bacco smoke, high blood lipids, physical inactivity, high 
blood pressure, and diabetes mellitus.
For years we have known that where people store fat 
affects risk for disease. People who store body fat in the 
abdominal area rather than the hips and thighs are at 
higher risk for disease. Furthermore, when abdominal 
fat is stored primarily around internal organs (visceral 
fat), disease risk is greater than when abdominal fat is 
stored subcutaneously (beneath the skin).
The best approach to prevent increases in visceral fat 
is through regular exercise. Data on men and women 
who were followed for 6 months showed no visceral fat 
gains in groups that either walked (178 min/week) or 
jogged (120 min/week) an average of 12 miles per week.8 
A sedentary group in this same study actually gained 
almost 9 percent visceral fat during the 6 months, while 
a 20-mile-per-week jogging group (173 min/week) lost  
7 percent visceral fat. Thus, it appears that 30 minutes of 
vigorous exercise 6 times per week is best to properly 
manage visceral fat. Of significant concern, just six 
months of inactivity further increased visceral fat, subse-
quently increasing disease risk.
The causes of obesity are complex, including an  
individual’s combination of genetics, behavior, and life-
style factors. Studies, however, have shown reduction  
in chronic disease risk factors with only a 2 percent to  
3 percent weight loss.
Abnormal Cholesterol Profile
The term blood lipids is used mainly with reference to 
cholesterol and triglycerides. If you never have had a 
blood lipid test, it is highly recommended. The blood test 
measures total cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein 
(HDL) cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cho-
lesterol, and triglycerides. A significant elevation in blood 
lipids has been linked to heart and blood vessel disease.
The general recommendation by the National Cho-
lesterol Education Program (NCEP) is to keep total 
cholesterol levels below 200 mg/dL (see Table 8.3). The 
risk for heart attack increases 2 percent for every 1 per-
cent increase in total cholesterol.9 Approximately 32 mil-
lion American adults have total cholesterol values at or 
above 240 mg/dL.10
Although the average adult in the United States con-
sumes around 500 mg of cholesterol daily, the body actu-
ally manufactures more than that. Saturated fats and 
trans fats (trans-fatty acids) raise cholesterol levels more 
than anything else in the diet. The average saturated fat 
intake in the American diet produces approximately 
1,000 mg of cholesterol per day.11 Because of individual 
differences, some people can have a higher-than-normal 
intake of saturated fats and still maintain normal levels. 
Others, who have a lower intake, can have abnormally 
high levels.
Unsaturated fats are mainly of plant origin and can-
not be converted to cholesterol. Saturated fats are found 
primarily in meats and dairy products. Poultry and  
fish contain less saturated fat than beef does but should 
be eaten in moderation (about 3 ounces per day). In a 
10-year study of more than 500,000 men and women 
over the age of 50, 
those who ate the 
most red meat (an 
average 
of 
4.5 
ounces per day), 
had a much higher 
risk of dying from 
heart disease and 
cancer.12 Of the 
highest red meat 
eaters, men had a 
31 percent higher 
risk of dying dur-
ing 
the 
study  
period, 
whereas 
women 
had 
a  
50 percent higher 
risk of dying from 
heart disease dur-
ing this time. Can-
cer risk was about 
20 percent higher 
among men and 
women who con-
sumed the most 
red meat.
O m e g a - 3 
polyunsaturated 
fatty acids are of 
particular impor-
tance in prevent-
ing heart disease. 
Omega-3-rich fish 
meals (found in 
salmon, tuna, and 
mackerel) not only 
Blood pressure  A measure of the 
force exerted against the walls of the 
vessels by the blood flowing through 
them.
Systolic blood pressure  Pressure 
exerted by the blood against the walls 
of the arteries during the forceful con-
traction (systole) of the heart.
Diastolic blood pressure  Pressure 
exerted by the blood against the walls 
of the arteries during the relaxation 
phase (diastole) of the heart.
Hypertension  Chronically elevated 
blood pressure.
Blood lipids (fat)  Cholesterol and 
triglycerides.
Cholesterol  A waxy substance, tech-
nically a steroid ­alcohol, found only in 
animal fats and oil; used in making 
cell membranes, as a building block for 
some hormones, in the fatty sheath 
around nerve fibers, and in other nec-
essary substances.
High-density lipoprotein (HDL)   
Cholesterol-transporting molecules in 
the blood (good cholesterol).
Low-density lipoprotein (LDL)   
Cholesterol-transporting molecules in 
the blood (bad cholesterol).
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

206
Fitness and Wellness
help lower LDL-cholesterol, triglycerides, but they also 
help raise HDL-cholesterol.13 Because of the cardioprotec-
tive benefits of omega-3 fatty acids, the American Heart 
Association recommends eating oily fish at least twice per 
week.
As important as total cholesterol is, many heart at-
tacks occur in people who have only slightly elevated total 
cholesterol. More significant is the way in which choles-
terol is carried in the bloodstream. Cholesterol is trans-
ported primarily in the form of low-density lipoprotein 
(LDL) cholesterol and high-density lipoprotein (HDL) 
cholesterol. LDL-cholesterol (“bad” cholesterol) tends to 
release cholesterol, which then may penetrate the lining of 
the arteries and speed up the process of atherosclerosis. 
The NCEP guidelines provided in Table 8.3 state that an 
LDL-cholesterol value below 100 mg/dL is optimal.
Foods that contain trans fats, hydrogenated fat, or 
partially hydrogenated vegetable oil should be avoided. 
Studies indicate that these foods elevate cholesterol as 
much as saturated fats do, but even worse, they decrease 
the cardioprotective HDL-cholesterol (see discussion 
that follows). Hydrogen is frequently added to monoun-
saturated and polyunsaturated fats to increase shelf life 
and to solidify them so they are more spreadable. French 
fries, doughnuts, apple fritters, baked foods, pastries, 
biscuits, crackers, pie crusts, pizza crust, stick margarine, 
and spreads often contain trans fats. The label “partially 
hydrogenated” and “trans fat” indicates that the product 
carries a health risk just as high as that of saturated fat.
The American Heart Association (AHA) recom-
mends that people limit trans fat intake to less than 1 
percent of the total daily caloric intake. This amount 
represents about 2 grams of trans fats a day for a 
2,000-calorie diet. Because the Food and Drug Adminis-
tration (FDA) requires that all food labels list the trans 
fat content, you can keep better track of your daily trans 
fat intake by paying attention to food labels.
Unfortunately, the FDA allows food manufacturers to 
label any product that has less than half a gram of trans fat 
per serving as having zero. Be aware that if you eat 3 or 4 
servings of a particular food near a half a gram of trans fat, 
you may be getting your maximum daily allowance  
(1 gram per 1,000 calories of daily caloric intake). Thus, 
you are encouraged to look at the list of ingredients and 
search for the words “partially hydrogenated” as an indica-
tor of hidden trans fats.
In a process known as reverse cholesterol transport, 
HDL particles act as “scavengers,” removing cholesterol 
from the body and preventing plaque from forming in 
the arteries. For this reason, HDL-cholesterol is referred 
to as the “good” cholesterol. The more HDL-cholesterol, 
the better, as it offers some protection against heart dis-
ease. Low levels of HDL-cholesterol could be the best 
predictor of CHD and may be more significant than the 
total cholesterol value.
The recommended HDL-cholesterol values to mini-
mize the risk for CHD are a minimum of 40 mg/dL. HDL-
cholesterol levels above 60 mg/dL actually may reduce  
the risk for CHD. For the most part, HDL-cholesterol is 
determined genetically and women have higher levels 
than men. The female sex hormone estrogen tends to 
raise HDL, so premenopausal women have a much lower 
incidence of heart disease. African American adult men 
have higher HDL values than whites. HDL-cholesterol 
also decreases with age.
Increasing HDL-cholesterol.  Increasing HDL-cholesterol 
lessens the risk for CHD. Habitual aerobic exercise,  
weight loss, niacin, and quitting smoking help raise HDL- 
cholesterol. Drug therapy also may promote higher HDL-
cholesterol levels.
HDL-cholesterol and a regular aerobic exercise pro-
gram clearly are related (vigorous intensity or above  
6 METs, for at least 20 minutes 3 times per week—see 
Chapters 3 and 4). Individual responses to aerobic exer-
cise differ, but generally, the greater the exercise volume, 
the higher the HDL-cholesterol level.
Lowering LDL-cholesterol.  If LDL-cholesterol is higher 
than ideal, it can be lowered with proper nutrition, by 
losing body fat, taking medication, and participating in a 
regular aerobic exercise program.
To decrease LDL-cholesterol, the diet should be low 
in saturated fat, trans fats, and cholesterol. It should also 
be high in fiber. Saturated fat should be replaced by 
Table 8.3  Standards for Blood Lipids
Amount
Rating
Total cholesterol
,200 mg/dL
Desirable
200–239 mg/dL
Borderline high
240 mg/dL
High risk
LDL cholesterol
,100 mg/dL
Optimal
100–129 mg/dL
Near or above optimal
130–159 mg/dL
Borderline high
160–189 mg/dL
High
190 mg/dL
Very high
HDL cholesterol
,40 mg/dL
Low (high risk)
60 mg/dL
High (low risk)
Triglycerides
150 mg/dL
Desirable
150–199 mg/dL
Borderline high
200–499 mg/dL
High
500 mg/dL
High risk
SOURCE: National Cholesterol Education Program.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

207
Chapter 8  A Healthy Lifestyle Approach
monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fats because the 
latter tend to decrease LDL-cholesterol. Exercise is im-
portant, as dietary manipulation by itself is not as effec-
tive in lowering LDL-cholesterol as a combination of diet 
plus aerobic exercise.
To have a significant effect in lowering LDL- 
cholesterol, total daily fiber intake must be in the range 
of 25 to 38 grams per day (see the discussion of fiber in 
Chapter 5); total fat consumption can be in the range of 
30 percent of total daily caloric intake, as long as most of 
the fat is unsaturated fat and the average cholesterol con-
sumption is lower than 200 mg per day.
The incidence of heart disease is low in populations 
in which daily fiber intake exceeds 30 grams per day. The 
fiber intake of most people in the United States averages 
less than 15 grams per day. Fiber, in particular the solu-
ble type, has been shown to lower cholesterol. Soluble 
fiber dissolves in water and forms a gel-like substance 
that encloses food particles. This property helps bind and 
excrete fats from the body. Soluble fibers are found pri-
marily in oats, fruits, barley, legumes, and psyllium.
Psyllium, a grain that is added to some multigrain 
breakfast cereals, also helps lower LDL-cholesterol. As lit-
tle as 3 daily grams of psyllium can lower LDL-cholesterol 
by 20 percent. Commercially available fiber supplements 
that contain psyllium (such as Metamucil) can be used to 
increase soluble fiber intake. Three daily tablespoons will 
add about 10 grams of soluble fiber to the diet.
To lower LDL-cholesterol levels, the following gen-
eral dietary guidelines are recommended:
• 
Minimize the use of simple and refined carbohy-
drates (including sugars) and processed foods.
• 
Consume between 25 and 38 grams of fiber daily, 
including a minimum of 10 grams of soluble fiber 
(good sources are oats, fruits, barley, legumes, and 
psyllium).
• 
Increase consumption of vegetables, fruits, whole 
grains, and beans.
• 
Do not consume more than 200 mg of dietary cho-
lesterol a day.
• 
Consume red meats (three ounces per serving) 
fewer than three times per week and no organ 
meats (such as liver and kidneys).
• 
Do not eat commercially baked foods.
• 
Avoid foods that contain trans fats, hydrogenated 
fat, or partially hydrogenated vegetable oil.
• 
Increase intake of omega-3 fatty acids by eating 
two or three omega-3-rich fish meals per week.
• 
Consume 25 grams of soy protein a day.
• 
Drink low-fat milk (1 percent or less fat, prefera-
bly) and use low-fat dairy products.
• 
Do not use coconut oil, palm oil, or cocoa butter.
• 
Limit egg consumption to fewer than three eggs 
per week (this is for people with high cholesterol 
only; others may consume eggs in moderation).
• 
Use margarines and salad dressings that contain 
stanol ester instead of butter and regular 
margarine.
• 
Bake, broil, grill, poach, or steam food instead of 
frying.
• 
Refrigerate cooked meat before adding to other 
dishes. Remove fat hardened in the refrigerator be-
fore mixing the meat with other foods.
• 
Avoid fatty sauces made with butter, cream, or 
cheese.
• 
Maintain recommended body weight.
Saturated Fat Replacement in the Diet
Once people learned that saturated fats were unhealthy, 
instead of consuming more fruits, vegetables, legumes, 
and grains, many increased consumption of “low-fat” 
simple carbohydrates and refined sugars (low-fat vari­
eties of breads, rolls, cereals, cookies, ice cream, cakes, 
and desserts). Although low in fat, simple carbohydrates  
and refined sugars 
are high in calo-
ries that lead to 
weight gain. The 
data show that ex-
changing refined 
Ample amounts of fiber in the diet decreases heart disease 
risk.
© 2001, photoDisc, Inc.
Atherosclerosis  Fatty/cholesterol 
deposits in the walls of the arteries 
leading to formation of plaque.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

208
Fitness and Wellness
carbohydrates for saturated fat exacerbates blood lipid 
problems, including a higher LDL cholesterol, a reduc-
tion in HDL cholesterol, and higher triglycerides.
Very low-fat diets (less than 25 percent fat) are not 
recommended to lower LDL-cholesterol because they also 
tend to lower HDL-cholesterol and increase triglycerides. 
Experts instead recommend replacing saturated fat with 
monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fats. The latter are 
preferable because they provide greater cardioprotective 
benefits.14 The recommendation is not to limit fat con-
sumption in the diet to an absolute minimum, but to 
maintain total fat intake around 25 percent to 35 percent 
of total calories, with a primary shift toward polyunsatu-
rated fats. To do so, choose fish, nuts, seeds, and vegetable 
oils that are liquid at room temperature (with the excep-
tion of tropical oils including coconut, palm, and palm 
kernel oils). Olive, canola, corn, and soybean oils and nuts 
are sample food items that are high in monounsaturated 
fats and polyunsaturated fats. A specialized nutrition book 
should be consulted to determine food items that are high 
in monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fats.
At present, it is unknown whether the cardioprotec-
tive benefits are the result of limiting saturated fat intake 
or increasing polyunsaturated fat consumption. Another 
2010 review found that consumption of polyunsaturated 
fat in place of saturated fat reduced the incidence of 
heart attacks and cardiac deaths.15 Thus, moderate fat 
intake (not low fat), along with decreased refined carbo-
hydrates and decreased caloric intake in most cases, is 
encouraged. The issue merits further research involving 
clinical trials (rather than observational studies) before 
clear answers can be obtained.
Elevated Triglycerides
Triglycerides, also known as free fatty acids, make up most 
of the fat in our diet and most of the fat that circulates in 
the blood. In combination with cholesterol, triglycerides 
speed up formation of plaque in the arteries. Triglycerides 
are carried in the bloodstream primarily by very low- 
density lipoproteins (VLDLs) and chylomicrons.
Although they are found in poultry skin, lunch 
meats, and shellfish, these fatty acids are manufactured 
mainly in the liver from refined sugars, starches, and al-
cohol. High intake of alcohol and sugars (honey and fruit 
juices included) significantly raises triglyceride levels. To 
lower triglycerides, avoid pastries, candies, soft drinks, 
fruit juices, white bread, pasta, and alcohol. In addition, 
cutting down on overall fat consumption, quitting smok-
ing, reducing weight (if overweight), and doing aerobic 
exercise are helpful measures. Omega-3 fatty acids also 
help, but doses higher than those found in fish are re-
quired. A desirable blood triglyceride level is less than 
150 mg/dL (see Table 8.3, page 206).
Medications to lower blood lipids.  Effective medications 
are available to treat elevated cholesterol and triglycerides. 
Most notable among them are the statins group (Lipitor, 
Mevacor, Pravachol, Lescol, and Zocor), which slow down 
cholesterol production and increase the liver’s ability to 
remove blood cholesterol. They also decrease triglycerides 
and produce a small increase in HDL levels. Other drugs 
effective in reducing LDL-cholesterol are bile acid seques-
trants, which bind cholesterol found in bile acids. Choles-
terol subsequently is excreted in the stools. These drugs 
are often used in combination with statin drugs.
High doses (1.5 to 3 grams per day) of nicotinic acid 
or niacin (a B vitamin) also help lower LDL-cholesterol 
and triglycerides and increase HDL-cholesterol. A fourth 
group of drugs, known as fibrates, is primarily used to 
lower triglycerides.
It is better to lower LDL-cholesterol without medi-
cation because drugs can often cause undesirable side 
effects. People with heart disease often must take  
cholesterol-lowering medication, but it is best if medica-
tion is combined with lifestyle changes to augment the 
cholesterol-lowering effect. In 2012 the FDA added safety 
alerts to the prescribing information of statins. Although 
rare among the millions of people who take these medica-
tions, the adverse effects include memory loss, cognitive 
impairment like forgetfulness and confusion, higher blood 
sugar levels that may lead to a diagnosis of diabetes, and 
muscle pain. Anyone starting treatment with statin drugs 
should be aware of these side effects.
Elevated Homocysteine
Clinical data indicating that many heart attack victims 
have normal cholesterol levels have led researchers to 
look for other risk factors that may contribute to athero-
sclerosis. Although it is not a blood lipid, a high concen-
tration of homocysteine in the blood is thought to en-
hance the formation of plaque and subsequently lead to 
blockage of the arteries. The body uses homocysteine to 
help build proteins and carry out cellular metabolism. 
Homocysteine forms during an intermediate step in the 
creation of another amino acid. This process requires the 
presence of folate and vitamins B6 and B12.
Typically, homocysteine is metabolized rapidly, so it 
does not accumulate in the blood or damage the arteries. 
Many people, however, have high blood levels of homo-
cysteine. This might be attributable to either a genetic 
inability to metabolize homocysteine or a deficiency in 
the vitamins required for its conversion.
Homocysteine is typically measured in micromoles 
per liter (µmol/L). A level below 9.0 µmol/L is desirable, 
while a level above 13.0 µmol/L is viewed as elevated. A 
10-year follow-up study of people with high homocys­
teine levels showed that those individuals with a level 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

209
Chapter 8  A Healthy Lifestyle Approach
above 14.25 µmol/L had almost twice the risk of stroke 
compared with individuals whose level was less than 
9.25 µmol/L.16 Homocysteine accumulation is theorized 
to be toxic because it may
	1.	
damage the inner lining of the arteries (the initial 
step in the process of atherosclerosis).
	2.	
stimulate the proliferation of cells that contribute 
to plaque formation.
	3.	
encourage clotting that may completely obstruct an 
artery.
Keeping homocysteine from accumulating in the 
blood seems to be as simple as eating the recommended 
daily servings of vegetables, fruits, grains, and some 
meat and legumes. Increasing evidence that folate can 
prevent heart attacks has led to the recommendation that 
people consume 400 mcg per day of folate.
Most Americans, however, do not get 400 daily mcg 
of folate. Five daily servings of fruits and vegetables can 
provide sufficient levels of folate and vitamin B6 to re-
move and clear homocysteine from the blood. People 
who consume these five servings are unlikely to derive 
extra benefits from a vitamin B-complex supplement.
Vitamin B12 is found primarily in animal flesh and 
animal products. Vitamin B12 deficiency is rarely a prob-
lem, as one cup of milk or an egg provides the daily re-
quirement. The body also recycles most of this vitamin; 
therefore, it takes years to develop a deficiency.
Inflammation
For years it has been known that inflammation plays a 
role in CHD and that inflammation hidden deep in the 
body is a common trigger of heart attacks, even when 
cholesterol levels are normal or low and arterial plaque is 
minimal. Low-grade inflammation can occur in a variety 
of places throughout the body.
To evaluate ongoing inflammation, physicians have 
turned to C-reactive protein (CRP), a protein whose 
level in the blood increases with inflammation. People 
with elevated CRP are more prone to cardiovascular 
events. The evidence shows that CRP blood levels elevate 
years before a first heart attack or stroke and that indi-
viduals with elevated CRP have twice the risk of a heart 
attack. The risk of a heart attack is even higher in people 
with both elevated CRP and cholesterol, resulting in an 
almost ninefold increase in risk (see Figure 8.6).
Because high CRP levels might be a better predictor 
of future heart attacks than high cholesterol alone, a test 
known as high-sensitivity CRP (hs-CRP), which mea-
sures inflammation in the blood vessels, has been ap-
proved by the FDA. The term “high-sensitivity” was de-
rived from the test’s capability to detect small amounts of 
CRP in the blood. Test results provide a good measure of 
the probability of plaque rupturing within the arterial 
wall. The two main types of plaque are soft and hard. Soft 
plaque is the most likely to rupture. Ruptured plaque 
releases clots into the bloodstream that can lead to a 
heart attack or a stroke. Other evidence has linked high 
CRP levels to high blood pressure and colon cancer. 
Guidelines for hs-CRP levels are given in Table 8.4.
CRP increases with obesity, excessive alcohol intake, 
and high-protein diets. Evidence further indicates that 
high-fat, fast-food meals increase CRP levels for several 
hours following the meals.17 Cooking meat and poultry 
at high temperatures creates damaged proteins (AGEs or 
advanced glycosylation end products) that trigger 
inflammation.
CRP 
levels 
decrease 
with 
statin drugs, exer-
cise, proper nutri-
tion, weight loss, 
quitting smoking, 
and aspirin. With 
weight loss, CRP 
levels 
decrease 
proportionally to 
the 
amount 
of  
fat lost. Omega-3 
fatty acids (found 
in salmon, tuna, 
and mackerel fish) 
inhibit 
proteins 
that cause inflam­- 
mation.
Triglycerides  Fats formed by glycerol 
and three fatty acids.
Chylomicrons  Molecules that trans-
port triglycerides in the blood.
Homocysteine  Intermediate amino 
acid in the interconversion of two other 
amino acids: methionine and cysteine.
C-reactive protein (CRP)  A protein 
whose level in the blood increases with 
inflammation (which may be hidden 
deep in the body); elevation of this pro-
tein is an indicator of potential cardio-
vascular events.
Figure 8.6
Relationships among C-reactive 
protein, cholesterol, and risk for 
cardiovascular disease.
SOURCE: Adapted from P. Libby, P. M. Ridker, and A. Maseri, 
“Inflammation and Atherosclerosis,” Circulation 105 (2002): 1135–1143.
8.7
1.0
4.2
2.2
Low
High
Cholesterol
C-reactive protein
High
Cardiovascular risk
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

210
Fitness and Wellness
A 2008 study on 17,802 apparently healthy men 
and women with LDL-cholesterol below 130 mg/dL but 
CRP levels above 2.0 mg/L showed that a daily dose of 
the statin drug Crestor reduced LDL-cholesterol by 50 
percent; CRP by 37 percent; and the risk of heart attack, 
stroke, and death by 54 percent, 48 percent, and 47 
percent, respectively.18 The results were so impressive 
that researchers stopped the trial halfway through the 
study.
Exercise, weight loss, proper nutrition, and quitting 
smoking are helpful in reducing CRP. Omega-3 fatty ac-
ids inhibit proteins that cause inflammation. Aspirin 
therapy also helps by controlling inflammation.
Diabetes
In people who have diabetes mellitus, the pancreas 
stops producing insulin (or does not produce enough to 
meet the body’s needs) or the cells become resistant to 
the effects of insulin. The role of insulin is to “unlock” the 
cells and escort glucose into the cell. Diabetes affects 
about 27 million people in the United States, and about 
1 million new cases are diagnosed each year. Between 
1980 and 2003, the prevalence of diabetes more than 
doubled.
By the year 2020, diabetes and pre-diabetes are pro-
jected to account for 10 percent of total health care 
spending, with an estimated yearly cost of $500 billion. 
At the current rate of escalation, the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention predicts that by 2050 one of ev-
ery three Americans will have diabetes.
More than 75 percent of people with diabetes mel-
litus die from CVD. Diabetics may have problems me-
tabolizing fats, which can make them more susceptible 
to atherosclerosis, coronary disease, heart attacks, high 
blood pressure, and strokes. Diabetics also tend to have 
lower HDL-cholesterol and higher triglyceride levels.
Chronic high blood sugar can also lead to nerve 
damage, vision loss, kidney damage, and lower immune 
function (making the individual more susceptible to  
infections). Diabetics are 4 times more likely to become 
blind and 20 times more likely than nondiabetics to de-
velop kidney failure. Nerve damage in the lower extremi-
ties makes the person less aware of injury and infection. 
A small untreated sore can lead to severe infection, 
gangrene, and even amputation.
An 8-hour fasting blood glucose level of 126 mg/dL 
or higher on two separate tests confirms a diagnosis of 
diabetes. A level of 126 or higher should be brought to 
the attention of a physician. This guideline has changed 
from previous years, in which a level above 140 had been 
used to diagnose diabetes.
Types of diabetes.  The two types of diabetes are type 1, 
or insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM), and 
type 2, or non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus 
(NIDDM). Type 1 has also been known as “juvenile dia-
betes” because it afflicts mainly young people. With type 
1, the pancreas produces little or no insulin. With type 2, 
the pancreas either does not produce sufficient insulin or 
produces adequate amounts but the cells become insu-
lin-resistant, thereby keeping glucose from entering the 
cell. Type 2 accounts for 90 percent to 95 percent of all 
diabetes cases.
Although diabetes has a genetic predisposition, type 
2 diabetes is related closely to overeating, obesity, and 
lack of physical activity. More than 80 percent of type 2 
diabetics are overweight or have a history of excessive 
weight.
Aerobic exercise helps prevent type 2 diabetes. The 
protective effect is even greater in those with risk factors 
such as obesity, high blood pressure, and family propen-
sity. The preventive effect is attributed to less body fat 
and to better sugar and fat metabolism resulting from 
the regular exercise program. At 3,500 calories of energy 
expenditure per week through exercise, the risk is cut in 
half versus that of a sedentary lifestyle.
Both moderate-intensity and vigorous-intensity 
physical activity have been associated with increased in-
sulin sensitivity and decreased risk for diabetes. The key 
to increase and maintain proper insulin sensitivity is 
regularity of the exercise program. Failure to maintain 
habitual physical activity voids the benefits.
Accumulating evidence indicates that increasing 
physical activity, losing excess weight, and improving 
nutrition is more effective to control diabetes and 
lower CVD risk than relying on drugs to manage the 
disease. Furthermore, research suggests that diabetic 
patients are worse off when medications are used to 
decrease blood sugar levels and blood pressure to nor-
mal or below normal levels. Accordingly, diabetic pa-
tients are strongly encouraged to adopt healthy life-
style factors even if glucose levels are controlled with 
medication. Medications are recommended for dia-
Table 8.4  High-Sensitivity CRP Guidelines
Amount 
Rating
,1 mg/L
Low risk
1–3 mg/L
Average risk
.3 mg/L
High risk
SOURCE: T. A. Pearson, et al. “Markers of Inflammation and Cardiovascular Disease,” 
Circulation 107 (2003): 499–511.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

211
Chapter 8  A Healthy Lifestyle Approach
betic patients with a systolic blood pressure above 140 
mm Hg, but it is only necessary to drive it down to 
about 130 mm Hg.
Metabolic syndrome.  As the cells resist the action of in-
sulin, the pancreas releases even more insulin in an at-
tempt to keep the blood glucose level from rising. A 
chronic rise in insulin seems to trigger a series of abnor-
malities referred to as metabolic syndrome. These ab-
normal conditions include low HDL-cholesterol, high 
triglycerides, and an increased blood-clotting mecha-
nism. Many individuals with metabolic syndrome also 
have high blood pressure. All of these conditions in-
crease the risk for CHD and other diabetic-related con-
ditions (blindness, infection, nerve damage, and kidney 
failure). More than 50 million Americans are afflicted by 
metabolic syndrome.
Individuals with metabolic syndrome have an ab-
normal insulin response to carbohydrates, in particular 
those that are absorbed rapidly (high-glycemic foods). 
Metabolic syndrome research indicates that a low-fat/
high-carbohydrate dietary plan may not be the best for 
prevention of CHD and actually could increase the risk 
for this disease in people with high insulin resistance and 
glucose intolerance. It might be best for these people to 
distribute their daily caloric intake so they derive 45 
percent of their calories from carbohydrates (primarily 
low-glycemic), 40 percent from fat, and 15 percent from 
protein.19 Of the 
40 percent fat cal-
ories, 30 percent 
to 
35 
percent 
should come from 
mono- and poly-
unsaturated 
fats 
and only 5 percent 
to 
10 
percent 
should be pro-
vided by saturated 
fat.
People 
with 
metabolic 
syn-
drome also bene-
fit from weight 
loss 
(if 
over-
weight), exercise, 
and smoking ces-
sation. Insulin re-
sistance drops by 
about 40 percent 
in 
overweight 
people who lose 
20 pounds. Forty-
five minutes of 
daily aerobic ex-
ercise 
enhances 
Diabetes mellitus  A condition in 
which blood glucose is unable to enter 
the cells because the pancreas either 
stops producing insulin or does not 
produce enough to meet the body’s 
needs.
Insulin-dependent diabetes melli-
tus (IDDM or type 1)  A form of dia-
betes in which the pancreas produces 
little or no insulin.
Non-insulin-dependent diabetes 
mellitus (NIDDM or type 2)  A form 
of diabetes in which the pancreas ei-
ther does not produce sufficient insulin 
or it produces adequate amounts but 
the cells become insulin-resistant, 
keeping glucose from entering the cell.
Metabolic syndrome  An array of 
metabolic abnormalities that contribute 
to the development of atherosclerosis 
triggered by resistance to insulin; these 
conditions include low HDL-cholesterol, 
high triglycerides, high blood pressure, 
and an increased blood-clotting 
mechanism.
American Heart Association Diet  
and Lifestyle Recommendations for 
Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction
•  Balance caloric intake and physical activity to achieve or 
maintain a healthy body weight.
•  Consume a diet rich in vegetables and fruits.
•  Consume whole-grain, high-fiber foods.
•  Consume fish, especially oily fish, at least twice a week.
•  Limit your intake of saturated fat to less than 7 percent 
and trans fat to less than 1 percent of total daily caloric 
intake.
•  Limit cholesterol intake to less than 300 mg per day.
•  Minimize your intake of beverages and foods with added 
sugars.
•  Choose and prepare foods with little or no salt.
Behavior Modification Planning
•  If you consume alcohol, do so in moderation.
•  When you eat food that is prepared outside of the home, 
follow the above recommendations.
•  Avoid use of and exposure to tobacco products.
•  Be physically active.
•  Aim for recommended levels of LDL-cholesterol,  
HDL-cholesterol, and triglycerides.
•  Aim for a normal blood pressure.
•  Aim for normal blood glucose levels.
Try It
In your Online Journal or class notebook, record which of the 
above recommendations you fall short on and propose at 
least one thing you could do to improve.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

212
Fitness and Wellness
insulin efficiency by 25 percent. Smoking, on the other 
hand, increases insulin resistance.
Abnormal Electrocardiograms
The electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG) is a recording of 
the electrical impulses that stimulate the heart to con-
tract. ECGs are taken at rest, during the stress of exercise, 
and during recovery. An exercise or stress ECG also is 
known as a graded exercise stress test or a maximal exer-
cise tolerance test. A stress ECG reveals the heart’s toler-
ance to vigorous-intensity activities. Based on the find-
ings, ECGs may be interpreted as normal, equivocal, or 
abnormal.
A stress ECG frequently is used to diagnose coro-
nary heart disease. It also is administered to determine 
cardiorespiratory fitness levels, to screen individuals for 
preventive and cardiac rehabilitation programs, to detect 
abnormal blood pressure response during exercise, and 
to establish actual or functional maximal heart rate for 
purposes of participation in exercise.
Not every adult who wishes to start or continue an 
exercise program needs a stress ECG. No set of guide-
lines can cover all cases when a stress electrocardiogram 
is recommended prior to exercise participation. The test, 
however, is recommended for individuals who are at 
high risk or are known to have cardiovascular, pulmo-
nary, renal, or metabolic disease. Moreover, people feel-
ing unusually winded in response to normal exertion, 
unexplained fatigue, or chest pain, should have the test 
done.
Tobacco Use
Approximately 57 million adults and 3.5 million adoles-
cents in the United States smoke cigarettes. Each day, an 
additional 3,000 people under the age of 18 become 
smokers. Cigarette smoking is the single largest prevent-
able cause of illness and premature death in the United 
States. If we include all related deaths, tobacco is respon-
sible for more than 443,000 unnecessary deaths per year. 
Smoking has been linked to CVD, cancer, bronchitis, 
emphysema, and peptic ulcers.
More than 50,000 of those yearly deaths are non-
smokers who were exposed to secondhand smoke in 
their daily life. Both fatal and nonfatal cardiac events 
increase greatly in people who are exposed to passive 
smoking. Some 37,000 yearly deaths from heart disease 
are attributed to secondhand smoke. Even in regular 
smokers, adaptations to the harmful effects of smoking 
are slight, so the adverse effects are much greater to 
nonsmokers.
In relation to coronary disease, smoking speeds up 
the process of atherosclerosis and also produces a three-
fold increase in the risk of sudden death following a 
myocardial infarction. Smoking increases heart rate 
and blood pressure and irritates the heart, which can 
trigger fatal cardiac arrhythmias. As far as the extra load 
on the heart is concerned, giving up one pack of ciga-
rettes per day is the equivalent of losing between 50 and 
75 pounds of excess body fat! Another harmful effect is 
a decrease in HDL-cholesterol, the “good” type that helps 
control blood lipids.
Pipe and cigar smoking and chewing tobacco also 
increase the risk for heart disease. Even if no smoke is in-
haled, toxic substances are absorbed through the mem-
branes of the mouth and end up in the bloodstream.
Quitting tobacco use is not easy. The addictive prop-
erties of nicotine make quitting difficult, and physical 
and psychological withdrawal symptoms set in. Figure 
8.7 presents a six-step plan to help people stop smoking. 
The risk for CVD starts to decrease the moment a person 
quits smoking. One year after quitting, the risk of CHD 
decreases by half, and within 15 years, the relative risk of 
dying from CVD and cancer approaches that of a life-
time nonsmoker.
Cigarette smoking is the largest preventable cause of 
premature illness and death in the United States. • Do 
you think the government should outlaw the use of to-
bacco in all forms? • Or does the individual have the 
right to engage in self-destructive behavior?
Critical Thinking
Cigarette smoking is the single largest preventable cause of illness 
and premature death in the United States.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

213
Chapter 8  A Healthy Lifestyle Approach
The most important factor in quitting cigarette 
smoking is a desire to do so. Most successful ex- 
smokers have been able to quit on their own, either by 
quitting cold turkey or by using self-help kits available 
from organizations such as the American Cancer Soci-
ety, the American Heart Association, and the American 
Lung Association. Only 3 percent of ex-smokers quit as 
a result of formal cessation programs.
Stress
Stress has become a part of life. People have to  
deal daily with goals, deadlines, responsibilities, and 
pressures. The stressor itself is not what creates the 
health hazard but, rather, the individual’s response  
to it.
The human body responds to stress by produc­- 
ing more catecholamines to prepare the body for  
Electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG)  A recording of the electrical 
activity of the heart.
Stress electrocardiogram (stress ECG)  An exercise test during 
which the workload is gradually increased (until the subject reaches 
maximal fatigue), with blood pressure and 12-lead electrocardio-
graphic monitoring throughout the test.
Chronotropic incompetence  A condition in which the heart rate  
increases slowly during exercise and never reaches maximum.
Myocardial infarction  Heart attack; damage or death of an area 
of the heart muscle as a result of an obstructed artery to that area.
Arrhythmias  Irregular heart rhythms.
Stress  The mental, emotional, and physiological response of the 
body to any situation that is new, threatening, frightening, or exciting.
Stressor  Stress-causing event.
The following six-step plan has
been developed as a guide to help
you quit smoking. The total pro-
gram should be completed in four
weeks or less. Steps one through
four should take no longer than 
two weeks. A maximum of two 
additional weeks are allowed for 
the rest of the program.
amounts of water and fruit juices
and eat low-calorie foods. Replace
the old behavior with new behavior.
You will need to replace smoking
time with new positive substitutes
that will make smoking difﬁcult or
impossible. When you desire a ciga-
rette, take a few deep breaths and
then occupy yourself by doing a
number of things such as talking
to someone else, washing your
hands, brushing your teeth, eating a
healthy snack, chewing on a straw,
doing dishes, playing sports, going
for a walk or bike ride, going swim-
ming, and so on.
If you have been successful and
stopped smoking, a lot of events
still can trigger your urge to smoke.
When confronted with such events,
people rationalize and think, “One
won’t hurt.” It will not work! Before
you know it, you will be back to the
regular nasty habit. Be prepared to
take action in those situations. Find
adequate substitutes for smoking.
Remind yourself of how difﬁcult it
has been and how long it has taken
you to get to this point. As time goes 
on, it will only get easier rather than
worse.
Step One.
Step Two.
Step Three.
                   Decide positively that 
you want to quit. Now prepare a 
list of the reasons why you smoke 
and why you want to quit.
                    Initiate a personal diet
and exercise program. Exercise
and decreased body weight cause a
greater awareness of healthy living
and increase motivation for giving
up cigarettes.
                    Decide on the approach
you will use to stop smoking. You
may quit cold turkey or gradually
decrease the number of cigarettes
smoked daily. Many people have
found that quitting cold turkey is
the easiest way to do it. Although
it may not work the ﬁrst time, after
several attempts, all of a sudden
smokers are able to overcome the
habit without too much difﬁculty.
Tapering off cigarettes can be done 
in several ways. You may start by
eliminating cigarettes that you do
not necessarily need, you can switch
to a brand lower in nicotine or tar
every couple of days, you can smoke
less of each cigarette, or you can
simply decrease the total number 
of cigarettes smoked each day.
                    Set the target date for 
quitting. In setting the target date,
choosing a special date may add a
little extra incentive. An upcom-
ing birthday, anniversary, vacation,
graduation, family reunion—all are
examples of good dates to free your-
self from smoking.
                   Stock up on low-calorie
foods—carrots, broccoli, cauli-
ﬂower, celery, popcorn (butter- and
salt-free), fruits, sunﬂower seeds (in
the shell), sugarless gum, and plenty
of water. Keep such food handy on
the day you stop and the ﬁrst few
days following cessation. Replace it
for cigarettes when you want one.
                 This is the day that you
will quit smoking. On this day and
the ﬁrst few days thereafter, do not
keep cigarettes handy. Stay away
from friends and events that trigger
your desire to smoke. Drink large
Step Four.
Step Five.
Step Six.
Figure 8.7
Six-step smoking cessation approach.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

214
Fitness and Wellness
fight or flight. If the person fights or flees, the body me-
tabolizes the higher levels of catecholamines and is able 
to return to a normal state. If, however, a person is under 
constant stress and is unable to take action (as in the 
death of a close relative or friend, loss of a job, trouble at 
work, or financial insecurity), the catecholamines re-
main elevated in the bloodstream.
People who are not able to relax place a constant 
low-level strain on the cardiovascular system that could 
manifest itself in heart disease. Higher levels of the hor-
mones epinephrine and cortisol in highly stressed people 
may raise blood pressure, elevate blood glucose levels, 
and increase cholesterol by 20 percent to 50 percent.20 
Chronic stress also causes an increase of the brain chem-
ical neuropeptide Y that promotes storage of visceral fat, 
further increasing the risk for type 2 diabetes, heart dis-
ease, some cancers, and body-wide inflammation. In 
addition, when a person is in a stressful situation, the 
coronary arteries that feed the heart muscle constrict, 
reducing the oxygen supply to the heart. If the blood ves-
sels are largely blocked by atherosclerosis, abnormal 
heart rhythms or even a heart attack may follow.
As outlined in Chapter 7, individuals who are under 
a lot of stress and do not cope well with it need to take 
measures to counteract the effects of stress in their lives. 
Identifying and learning how to cope with the sources of 
stress will improve health and quality of life.
Physical activity is one of the best ways to relieve 
stress. When a person takes part in physical activity, the 
body metabolizes excess catecholamines and is able to 
return to a normal state. Exercise also steps up muscular 
activity, which contributes to muscular relaxation.
Personal and Family History
Individuals who have a family history of, or already have 
experienced, cardiovascular problems are at higher risk 
than those who never have had a problem. Although 
there is no way of knowing whether the heart problem 
resulted from a person’s genetic predisposition or simply 
poor lifestyle habits, people with this history are encour-
aged strongly to keep the other risk factors as low as 
possible. Because most risk factors are reversible, the risk 
for future problems decreases significantly. Most risk 
factors are reversible, so by working to reduce your  
risk factors, you can significantly lower your risk of fu-
ture problems.
Age and Gender
Age becomes a risk factor for men over age 45 and 
women over age 55. The greater incidence of heart dis-
ease may stem in part from lifestyle changes as we get 
older (less physical activity, poor nutrition, obesity, and 
so on). Earlier in life, men are at greater risk for CVD 
than women are. Following menopause, the risk for 
women increases. Currently, more women (401,495) 
than men (386,436) die from CVD.21
Young people should not think they are immune 
from heart disease. The process begins early in life. Au-
topsies conducted in people who have died in their 20s 
reveal that many of them already exhibit early stages of 
atherosclerosis. Other studies have found elevated blood 
cholesterol levels in children as young as 10 years old.
Even though the aging process cannot be stopped, it 
certainly can be slowed. The concept of chronological 
age versus physiological age is important in longevity. 
Research indicates a physiological age difference of about 
25 years between physically active and sedentary indi-
viduals. That is, an active 60-year-old person can have 
the body of an average 35-year-old. And 35-year-olds 
often are in such poor condition and health that they 
almost seem to have the body of a 60-year-old. Managing 
risk factors and developing positive lifestyle habits are 
the best ways to slow natural aging.
8.4  Cancer
Cell growth is controlled by deoxyribonucleic acid 
(DNA) and ribonucleic acid (RNA). When nuclei lose 
their ability to regulate and control cell growth, cell divi-
sion is disrupted and mutant cells may develop. Some of 
these cells may grow uncontrollably and abnormally, 
forming a mass of tissue called a tumor, which can be 
either benign or malignant. Although benign tumors 
can interfere with normal bodily functions, they rarely 
cause death.
Cancer causes about 23 percent of all deaths in the 
United States. More than 1.6 million new cases were re-
ported in 2013 and about 580,000 million people died 
from cancer the same year.22 More than 100 types of 
cancer can develop in the body. Cancer cells grow for no 
reason and multiply, destroying normal tissue. If the 
spread of cells is not controlled, death ensues. A cell may 
duplicate as many as 100 times.
Normally, the DNA molecule is duplicated perfectly 
during cell division. In a few cases the DNA molecule is 
not replicated exactly but specialized enzymes repair it 
quickly. Occasionally, cells with defective DNA keep di-
viding and ultimately form a small tumor. As more mu-
tations occur, the altered cells continue to divide and can 
become malignant. A decade or more can pass between 
carcinogenic exposure or mutations and the time cancer 
is diagnosed. A critical turning point in the development 
of cancer is when a tumor reaches about a million cells. 
At this stage it is referred to as carcinoma in situ, when 
it has not spread. Such an undetected tumor may go for 
months or years without any significant growth.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

215
Chapter 8  A Healthy Lifestyle Approach
While encapsulated, a tumor does not pose a serious 
threat to human health. To grow, the tumor requires 
more oxygen and nutrients. In time, a few of the cancer 
cells start producing chemicals that enhance angiogen-
esis. Cells break away from a malignant tumor and, in a 
process called metastasis, migrate through the new 
blood vessels to other parts of the body, where they can 
cause new cancer.
Although the immune system and the blood turbu-
lence destroy most cancer cells, only one abnormal cell 
lodging elsewhere can start a new cancer. These cells also 
will grow and multiply uncontrollably, destroying nor-
mal tissue. Once cancer cells metastasize, treatment be-
comes more difficult. Therapy can kill most cancer cells, 
but a few cells may become resistant to treatment. These 
cells then can grow into a new tumor that will not re-
spond to the same treatment.
As with CVD, cancer is largely preventable. As 
much as 80 percent of all human cancer is related to 
lifestyle or environmental factors (including diet, to-
bacco use, excessive use of alcohol, sexual and reproduc-
tive activity, and exposure to environmental hazards). 
Equally important is that more than 11.7 million Ameri-
cans with a history of cancer were alive in 2007. Cur-
rently, almost 7 in 10 people diagnosed with cancer are 
expected to be alive 5 years from the initial diagnosis.
8.4A  Guidelines for Preventing Cancer  The 
biggest factor in fighting cancer today is health educa-
tion. People need to be informed about the risk factors 
for cancer and the guidelines for early detection. The 
most effective way to protect against cancer is to change 
negative lifestyle habits and behaviors. Activity 8.1, pages 
229–230, includes a questionnaire regarding the risk fac-
tors and preventive measures discussed next.
Research sponsored by the American Cancer Soci-
ety and the National Cancer Institute showed that indi-
viduals who have a healthy lifestyle have some of the 
lowest cancer mortality rates ever reported in scientific 
studies. In a landmark study, a group of about 10,000 
members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day 
Saints in California was reported to have only about one-
third (men) to one-half (women) the rate of cancer mor-
tality of the general white population.23 In this study, the 
investigators looked at three general health habits in the 
participants: lifetime abstinence from smoking, regular 
physical activity, and sufficient sleep. Healthy lifestyle 
guidelines include abstaining from all forms of tobacco, 
alcohol, and drugs, and adhering to a well-balanced diet 
based on grains, fruits, and vegetables, and moderate 
amounts of poultry and red meat.
Additional 2009 data from more than 23,000 Ger-
man participants indicated that people who never 
smoked, had a BMI less than 30, exercised at least 3.5 
hours per week, and consumed a diet rich in fruits and 
vegetables and low in meat, had a 36 percent lower risk 
of cancer.24 The conclusion of the latter two studies is 
that lifestyle is definitely an important factor in the risk 
for cancer.
Making Dietary 
Changes
The 
American 
Cancer Society es-
timates that one-
third of all cancer 
in 
the 
United 
States is related to 
nutrition and lack 
of physical activ-
ity. A healthy diet, 
therefore, is cru-
cial to decrease 
the risk for cancer. 
The diet should be 
predominantly 
vegetarian. Cruci-
ferous vegetables 
(cauliflower, broc-
coli, 
cabbage, 
Brussels sprouts, 
and kohlrabi), tea, 
vitamin 
D, 
soy 
products, calcium, 
and omega-3 fats 
are encouraged. If 
alcohol is used, it 
should be used in 
moderation. Obe-
sity 
should 
be 
avoided.
Brightly col-
ored fruits and 
vegetables are also 
encouraged. These 
fruits and vegeta-
bles contain carot-
enoids and vita-
min C. Lycopene, 
one of the many 
carotenoids 
(a 
phytonutrient—
see discussion that 
follows), has been 
linked to lowered 
risk of cancers of 
Fight or flight  A series of physical 
responses activated automatically in 
response to environmental stresses.
Chronological age  Calendar age.
Physiological age  Age based on the 
individual’s functional and physical 
capacity.
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)   
Genetic substance of which genes are 
made; molecule that bears cell’s  
genetic code.
Ribonucleic acid (RNA)  Genetic 
material involved in the formation of 
cell proteins.
Benign  Noncancerous
Malignant  Cancerous
Cancer  Group of diseases character-
ized by uncontrolled growth and spread 
of abnormal cells into malignant 
tumors.
Carcinoma in situ  Encapsulated 
malignant tumor that is found at an 
early stage and has not spread.
Angiogenesis  Capillary (blood ves-
sel) formation into a tumor.
Metastasis  Movement of bacteria or 
body cells from one part of the body to 
another.
Cruciferous vegetables  Plants  
that produce cross-shaped leaves 
(cauliflower, broccoli, cabbage, 
Brussels sprouts, kohlrabi); these seem 
to have a protective effect against 
cancer.
Carotenoids  Pigment substances 
(more than 600) in plants, about 50 of 
which are precursors to vitamin A;  
the most potent carotenoid is 
beta-carotene.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

216
Fitness and Wellness
the prostate, colon, and cervix. Lycopene is especially 
abundant in cooked tomato products.
The evidence for vitamin D in protecting against 
cancer continues to mount each day. Vitamin D is the 
most powerful regulator of cell growth and keeps cells 
from becoming malignant. The protective effect of vita-
min D appears to be strongest against breast, colon, and 
prostate cancers and possibly lung and digestive cancers. 
You should strive for “safe sun” exposure, that is, 10 to 20 
minutes of unprotected sun exposure, on most days of 
the week between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. 
For people living north of the 35th parallel (above the 
states of Texas and Georgia) in the United States and in 
Canada, with limited sun exposure during the winter 
months, a vitamin D3 supplement of up to 2,000 IUs per 
day is strongly recommended. The cancer-protective 
benefits of this vitamin have already been discussed in 
detail in Chapter 5 (see “Vitamin D,” pages 135–136).
Some researchers also believe that the antioxidant 
effect of vitamins and the mineral selenium helps protect 
the body from free radicals. Antioxidants are thought to 
absorb free radicals before they can cause damage, and 
they also interrupt the sequence of reactions once dam-
age has begun. Research is still required in this area be-
cause a clear link has not been established.
Grains are high in fiber and contain vitamins and 
minerals—folate, selenium, and calcium—that seem to 
decrease the risk for colon cancer. Selenium also protects 
against prostate cancer and possibly lung cancer. Cal-
cium may protect against colon cancer by preventing 
rapid growth of cells in the colon, especially in people 
with colon polyps.
Phytonutrients, antioxidant compounds found ex-
clusively in abundance in fruits and vegetables, seem to 
exert a powerful effect in preventing cancer by blocking 
the formation of cancerous tumors and disrupting the 
process at almost every step of the way. To obtain the 
highest possible protection, fruits and vegetables should 
be consumed several times throughout the day (instead 
of in one meal) to maintain effective phytonutrient levels 
throughout the day. Phytonutrient blood levels drop 
within three hours of consuming the produce.
Polyphenols (a phytonutrient) are cancer-fighting 
antioxidants found in tea. They are known to block the 
formation of nitrosamines and quell the activation of 
carcinogens. Polyphenols also are thought to fight cancer 
by shutting off the formation of cancer cells, turning up 
the body’s natural detoxification defenses, and thereby 
suppressing progression of the disease. Different types of 
tea contain different mixtures of polyphenols. White tea 
appears to have the highest amount, followed by green 
and black tea. Herbal teas do not provide the same ben-
efits as regular tea.
Observational data on tea-drinking habits in China 
showed that people who regularly drank green tea had 
about half the risk for chronic gastritis and stomach can-
cer, and the risk decreased further as the number of years 
of drinking green tea increased. In Japan, where people 
drink green tea regularly but smoke twice as much as 
people in the United States, the incidence of lung cancer 
is half that of the United States.
The antioxidant effect of one of the polyphenols in 
green tea—epigallocatechin gallate, or EGCG—is at least 
25 times more effective than vitamin E and 100 times 
more effective than vitamin C at protecting cells and the 
DNA from damage believed to cause cancer, heart dis-
ease, and other diseases associated with free radicals.25 
EGCG is also twice as strong as the red wine antioxidant 
resveratrol, which helps prevent heart disease.
Although previously viewed as a risk factor, mini-
mal evidence exists that total fat intake affects cancer 
risk. There is far greater evidence that being overweight 
or obese increases cancer risk. Excessive caloric intake 
leads to weight gain and high-fat foods are typically calo-
rie dense. Thus, indirectly, a high-fat diet can increase 
cancer risk through excessive body weight. Fat intake 
should consist primarily of monounsaturated and 
omega-3 fats. Omega-3 fats, found in many types of fish, 
flaxseeds, and flaxseed oil, seem to offer protection 
against colorectal, pancreatic, breast, oral, esophageal, 
and stomach cancers. Omega-3 fats block the synthesis 
of prostaglandins, bodily compounds that promote 
growth of tumors.
Foods high in vitamin C may deter some cancers. Salt-
cured, smoked, and nitrite-cured foods have been associ-
ated with cancers of the esophagus and stomach. Processed 
meats should be consumed sparingly and always with or-
ange juice or other foods rich in vitamin C. Vitamin C 
seems to discourage the formation of nitrosamines.
Cooking protein at high temperature should be 
avoided or done so only occasionally. The data suggest 
that grilling, broiling, or frying meat, poultry, or fish at 
high temperatures to “medium-well” or “well-done” 
leads to the formation of carcinogenic substances known 
as heterocyclic amines (HCAs) and polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons (PAHs). Individuals who prefer their meat 
“medium-well” or “well-done” have a much higher risk 
for colorectal and stomach cancers.
Cooking proteins at high temperatures changes 
amino acids into HCAs that collect on the surface of 
meats. Charring meat increases their formation to an 
even greater extent. PAHs are formed when fat drips 
onto the rocks or coals of the grill. The subsequent fire 
flare-up releases smoke that coats the food with PAHs.
An electric contact grill such as a George Foreman 
grill is preferable when cooking meats because cooking 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

217
Chapter 8  A Healthy Lifestyle Approach
temperatures are easily controlled. When cooking on an 
outdoor grill, line the grill with foil to keep the drippings 
off the rocks or coals. Microwaving the meat for a couple 
of minutes before barbecuing also decreases the risk, as 
long as the fluid released by the meat is discarded. Most 
of the potential carcinogens collect in this solution. For 
an occasional outdoor barbecue, trim off excess fat to 
avoid flare-ups and turn meats over frequently to de-
crease HCA formation. Removing the skin before serv-
ing and cooking at lower heat to “medium” also lowers 
the risk.
Mixing soy protein in powder form with meats also 
seems to decrease the formation of carcinogens when 
cooking meats. Soy foods may help because soy contains 
isoflavones (phytonutrients) that prevent cancer. Cur-
rently, it is not known if the health benefits of soy are 
related to isoflavones by themselves or in combination 
with other nutrients found in soy. Experts caution 
women with breast cancer or a history of this disease to 
limit soy intake because it may stimulate cancer cells by 
closely imitating the actions of estrogen.
Based on the traditional diets of people in China 
and Japan, including children, who regularly consume 
soy foods, there doesn’t seem to be an unsafe level of 
consumption. Soy protein powder supplementation, 
however, may not be safe because this may elevate soy 
protein intake to an unnaturally high level.
People who consume alcohol should do so in mod-
eration because too much alcohol raises the risk for de-
veloping certain cancers, especially when it is combined 
with tobacco smoking or smokeless tobacco. In combi-
nation, these substances significantly increase the risk 
for cancers of the mouth, larynx, throat, esophagus, and 
liver. The combined action of heavy use of alcohol and 
tobacco can increase cancer of the oral cavity 15-fold.
A 2009 study on almost 1.3 million women between 
the ages of 45 and 75, however, indicated that as little as 
one drink of alcohol per day increases a women’s risk of 
cancer by 13 percent, including cancers of the breast, 
esophagus, larynx, rectum, and liver.26 The researchers 
concluded that even low to moderate alcohol consump-
tion increases cancer risk in women and the risks out-
weigh any potential cardioprotective benefits. Based on 
these data, it is estimated that about 30,000 yearly female 
cancers in the United States are due to these low levels of 
alcohol consumption.
Maintaining recommended body weight also is en-
couraged. Obesity has been linked to cancers of the co-
lon, rectum, breast, prostate, endometrium, esophagus, 
and kidney. Obesity may also increase the risk for pan-
creatic, gallbladder, ovarian, thyroid, and cervical can-
cers. Investigators theorize that excess weight raises hor-
mone levels in the body that stimulate tumor growth.
8.4B  Abstaining 
from 
Tobacco  Cigarette 
smoking by itself is a major health hazard. As stated earlier 
in this chapter, if we include all related deaths, smoking is 
responsible for more than 443,000 unnecessary deaths in 
the United States each year. The World Health Organiza-
tion estimates that smoking causes 5 million deaths world-
wide annually. The average life expectancy for a chronic 
smoker is about 15 years less than for a nonsmoker. The 
most prevalent carcinogenic exposure in the workplace is 
cigarette smoke. At least 28 percent of all cancer is tied to 
smoking, and 87 percent of lung cancer is tied to smoking. 
Use of smokeless tobacco can lead to nicotine addiction 
and dependence as well as increased risk for mouth, lar-
ynx, throat, and esophageal cancers.
8.4C  Avoiding Excessive Sun Exposure  
Near daily “safe sun” exposure, that is, 10 to 20 minutes 
of unprotected exposure during peak hours of the day 
(between 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.) is beneficial to 
health, but too much exposure to ultraviolet radiation 
(both UVB and UVA rays) is a major contributor to skin 
cancer. The most common sites of skin cancer are those 
exposed to the sun most often (face, neck, and back of 
the hands). Following are the three types of skin cancer:
	1.	
Basal cell carcinoma
	2.	
Squamous cell carcinoma
	3.	
Malignant melanoma
Nearly 90 percent of the almost 1 million cases of 
basal cell or squamous cell skin cancers reported yearly in 
the United States could have been prevented by protecting 
the skin from the sun’s rays. ACS data indicate that mela-
noma is the most 
deadly, causing ap-
proximately 8,790 
deaths in 2011. 
One in every six 
Americans will de-
velop some type  
of 
skin 
cancer 
eventually.
One to two 
blistering 
sun-
burns can double 
the lifetime risk of 
melanoma, 
even 
more so if the sun-
burn took place 
prior to age 18, 
when cells divide 
at a much faster 
rate than later in 
life. Furthermore, 
Free radicals  Oxygen compounds 
produced in normal metabolism.
Phytonutrients  Compounds found in 
fruits and vegetables that block forma-
tion of cancerous tumors and disrupt 
the process of cancer.
Nitrosamines  Potentially cancer-
causing compounds formed when ni-
trites and nitrates—which are used to 
prevent the growth of harmful bacteria 
in processed meats—combine with 
other chemicals in the stomach.
Carcinogens  Substances that con-
tribute to the formation of cancers.
Melanoma  The most virulent, rapidly 
spreading form of skin cancer.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

218
Fitness and Wellness
nothing is healthy about a “healthy tan.” Tanning of the 
skin is the body’s natural reaction to permanent and ir-
reversible damage from too much exposure to the sun. 
Even brief exposures to sunlight add up to a greater risk 
for skin cancer and premature aging. The tan fades at the 
end of the summer season, but the underlying skin dam-
age does not disappear. People with sensitive skin in 
particular should be extremely careful with sun exposure 
between 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
The stinging sunburn comes from ultraviolet B 
(UVB) rays, which also are thought to be the main cause 
of premature wrinkling and skin aging, roughened/
leathery/sagging skin, and skin cancer. Unfortunately, 
the damage may not become evident until up to 20 years 
later. In contrast, skin that has not been overexposed to 
the sun remains smooth and unblemished, and, over 
time, shows less evidence of aging.
Sun lamps and tanning parlors provide mainly ul-
traviolet A (UVA) rays. Once thought to be safe, they, 
too, are now known to be damaging and have been 
Tips for a Healthy Cancer-Fighting Diet
Increase intake of phytonutrients, fiber, cruciferous veg-
etables, and more antioxidants by
•  eating a predominantly vegetarian diet.
•  eating more fruits and vegetables every day (six to eight 
servings per day maximize anticancer benefits).
•  increasing the consumption of broccoli, cauliflower, kale, 
turnips, cabbage, kohlrabi, Brussels sprouts, hot chili 
peppers, red and green peppers, carrots, sweet potatoes, 
winter squash, spinach, garlic, onions, strawberries, to-
matoes, pineapple, and citrus fruits in your regular diet.
•  eating vegetables raw or quickly cooked by steaming or 
stir-frying.
•  substituting tea and fruit and vegetable juices for coffee 
and soda.
•  eating whole-grain breads.
•  including calcium in the diet (or from a supplement).
•  including soy products in the diet.
•  using whole-wheat flour instead of refined white flour in 
baking.
•  using brown (unpolished) rice instead of white (polished) 
rice.
Behavior Modification Planning
Decrease daily fat intake by 20 percent of total caloric 
intake by
•  limiting consumption of beef and poultry to no more 
than three to six ounces (about the size of a deck of 
cards) once or twice a week.
•  trimming all visible fat from meat and removing skin 
from poultry prior to cooking.
•  decreasing the amount of fat and oils used in cooking.
•  substituting low-fat for high-fat dairy products.
•  using salad dressings sparingly.
•  using only half to three-quarters of the amount of fat re-
quired in baking recipes.
•  limiting fat intake to mostly monounsaturated (olive oil, 
canola oil, nuts, and seeds) and omega-3 fats (fish, 
flaxseed, and flaxseed oil).
•  eating fish once or twice a week.
•  including flaxseed oil in the diet.
Try It
Make a copy of these “Cancer-Fighting Diet” tips and each 
week incorporate into your lifestyle two additional dietary 
behaviors from the above list.
© Cengage Learning
Warning Signals for Cancer
Everyone should become familiar with the following 
warning signs of cancer and bring them to a physician’s 
attention if any are present:
•  Change in bowel or bladder habits
•  Sore that does not heal
•  Unusual bleeding or discharge
•  Thickening or lump in breast or elsewhere
•  Indigestion or difficulty in swallowing
•  Obvious change in wart or mole
•  Nagging cough or hoarseness
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

219
Chapter 8  A Healthy Lifestyle Approach
linked to melanoma. As little as 15 to 30 minutes of ex-
posure to UVA can be as dangerous as a day spent in the 
sun. Similar to excessive exposure to sun, excessive ex-
posure to recreational tanning at a salon causes DNA 
alterations that can lead to skin cancer.
Sunscreen lotion should be applied about 30 minutes 
before lengthy exposure to the sun because the skin takes 
that long to absorb the protective ingredients. Select sun-
screens labeled “broad-spectrum,” as these products block 
both UVA and UVB rays. A sun protection factor (SPF) 
of at least 15 is recommended. SPF 15 means that the skin 
takes 15 times longer to burn than it would with no lotion. 
If you ordinarily get a mild sunburn after 20 minutes of 
noonday sun, an SPF 15 allows you to remain in the sun 
about 300 minutes before burning. Sunscreens with stron-
ger SPF factors are not necessarily better. They should be 
applied just as often and they block only an additional 3 
percent to 4 percent of ultraviolet rays. An SPF 15 is ade-
quate for most people. When swimming or sweating, you 
should reapply waterproof sunscreens more often because 
all sunscreens lose strength when they are diluted.
You have learned about many of the risk factors for major 
cancer sites. • How will this information affect your 
health choices in the future? • Will it be valuable to you, 
or will you quickly forget all you have learned and remain 
in a contemplation stage at the end of this course?
Critical Thinking
If you plan on being out in the sun for a lengthy 
period of time, even better than sunscreen is wearing 
protective clothing, including long-sleeved shirts, long 
pants, and a hat with a two- to three-inch brim all the 
way around. This sun-protection strategy is even more 
critical for fair-skinned individuals who burn readily or 
turn red after only a few minutes of unprotected sun 
exposure, have a large number of moles, or have a per-
sonal or family history of skin cancer risk.
8.4D  Monitoring Estrogen, Radiation Ex-
posure, and Potential Occupational Haz-
ards  Estrogen use has been linked to endometrial 
cancer in some studies. As for exposure to radiation, al-
though x-rays increase the risk for cancer, their benefits 
may outweigh the risk involved, and most medical facili-
ties use the lowest dose possible to keep the risk to a 
minimum. Occupational hazards—such as exposure to 
asbestos fibers, nickel and uranium dusts, chromium 
compounds, vinyl chloride, and bischlormethyl ether—
increase the risk for cancer. Cigarette smoking magnifies 
the risk from occupational hazards.
8.4E  Physical Activity  An active lifestyle has 
been shown to have a protective effect against cancer. 
Although the mechanism is not clear, physical fitness 
and cancer mortality in men and women may have a 
graded and consistent inverse relationship. A daily 
30-minute, moderate-intensity exercise program lowers 
the risk for colon, breast, and uterine cancers between 20 
percent and 50 percent, and vigorous physical activity 
may lower the risk of more aggressive and fatal types of 
prostate cancer.27
Research among 38,410 men followed for an average 
period of 17.2 years indicated a strong inverse relation-
ship between cardiorespiratory fitness and cancer mor-
tality; that is, the lower-fit men had greater cancer deaths 
rates than the higher-fit men.28 A 2009 study on more 
than 2,200 men 49 years of age and older that were fol-
lowed up for more than 35 years found that at least 30 
minutes a day of moderate- to high-intensity physical 
activity is inversely associated with the risk of premature 
death from cancer in men.29 The researchers concluded 
that the activity needed to be at least of moderate inten-
sity to achieve the benefit of reducing overall cancer 
mortality. After 10 years, men who switched from low or 
medium to high 
physical 
activity 
(greater than 5.2 
METs) were found 
to have half the 
risk of dying from 
cancer. There were 
Sun protection factor (SPF)   
Degree of protection offered by ingredi-
ents in sunscreen lotion; at least SPF 
15 is recommended.
Sunburns and tanning pose a risk for skin cancer from overexposure to 
the sun’s ultraviolet rays.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

220
Fitness and Wellness
no changes in mortality rate when switching from a low 
to a medium level of physical activity. Other data suggest 
that in men 65 or older, exercising vigorously at least  
3 times per week decreases the risk for advanced or fatal 
prostate cancer by 70 percent.30
Data on more than 6,300 women indicate that regular 
exercise lowers the risk for breast cancer by up to 40 per-
cent, regardless of race or ethnicity.31 Other studies have 
found similar results. Women who are active throughout 
life also cut their risk for endometrial cancer by about 40 
percent. Those who started exercise in adulthood cut their 
risk by about 25 percent.32 Among women diagnosed with 
breast cancer, those who walk 2 to 3 miles per hour 1 to  
3 times per week are 20 percent less likely to die of the 
disease. Those who walk three to five times per week cut 
their risk in half.33 Researchers believe that the decreased 
levels of circulating ovarian hormones through physical 
activity decrease breast cancer risk.
Regular strength training also contributes to lower 
cancer mortality. A total of 8,677 men between the ages of 
20 and 82 were tracked for more than two decades. The 
data indicated that men who regularly worked out with 
weights and had the highest muscle strength were up to 40 
percent less likely to die from cancer, even among men 
with a higher waist circumference and BMI.34
The risk for other forms of cancer may also decrease, 
but additional research is necessary before definite state-
ments can be made. Growing evidence suggests that the 
body’s autoimmune system may play a role in preventing 
cancer and that moderate exercise improves the autoim-
mune system.
8.4F  Other Risk Factors for Cancer  Contri-
butions to cancer of many of the other much publicized 
factors are not as significant as those just pointed out. 
Intentional food additives, saccharin, processing agents, 
pesticides, and packaging materials currently used in the 
United States and other developed countries seem to 
have minimal consequences. High levels of tension and 
stress and poor coping may affect the autoimmune sys-
tem negatively and render the body less effective in deal-
ing with the various cancers. Chronic stress increases 
cortisol and inflammatory chemicals that sustain cancer 
growth.35
Genetics plays a role in susceptibility in about 10 
percent of all cancers. Most of the effect is seen in the 
early childhood years. Some cancers are a combination 
of genetic and environmental liability; genetics may add 
to the environmental risk of certain types of cancers. 
“Environment” means more than pollution and smoke. 
Lifestyle Factors That Decrease Cancer Risk
Factor	
Function
Physical activity 
Controls body weight, may influence hormone levels, strengthens the immune system
Fiber 
Contains anticancer substances, increases stool movement, blunts insulin secretion
Fruits and vegetables 
Contain phytonutrients and vitamins that thwart cancer
Recommended weight 
Helps control hormones that promote cancer
Healthy grilling 
Prevents formation of heterocyclic amines (HCAs) and polycyclic aromatic hydro-carbons (PAHs), both 
carcinogenic substances
Tea 
Contains polyphenols that neutralize free radicals, including epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG), which 
protects cells and DNA from damage believed to cause cancer
Spices 
Provide phytonutrients and strengthen the immune system
Vitamin D 
Disrupts abnormal cell growth
Monounsaturated fat 
May contribute to cancer cell destruction
Try It
In your Online Journal or class notebook, note ways you can incorporate all of these factors into your everyday lifestyle.
Behavior Modification Planning
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

221
Chapter 8  A Healthy Lifestyle Approach
It incorporates diet, lifestyle-related events, viruses, and 
physical agents such as x-rays and exposure to the sun.
8.4G  Early Detection  Fortunately, many cancers 
can be controlled or cured through early detection. The 
real problem comes when cancerous cells spread because 
they are then difficult to wipe out. Therefore, effective 
prevention and early detection are crucial. Herein lies 
the importance of periodic screening. At home, once a 
month, women should practice breast self-examination 
(BSE), and men, testicular self-examination (TSE). Men 
should pick a regular day each month (for example, the 
first day of the month) to practice TSE, and women 
should perform BSE two or three days after the men-
strual period is over. Once a month you should also 
conduct a skin self-examination to detect possible skin 
cancers. Pay particular attention to areas that are con-
stantly exposed to the sun. Note any changes in the size, 
texture, or color of moles, warts, or other skin marks. If 
you notice any change, contact your physician.
Scientific evidence and testing procedures for pre-
vention and early detection of cancer do change. Studies 
continue to provide new information. The intent of can-
cer prevention programs is to educate and guide indi-
viduals toward a lifestyle that will help prevent cancer 
and enable early detection of malignancy. Regular physi-
cal examinations by your doctor should include screen-
ings recommended by the ACSM for the early detection 
of cancer in asymptomatic people.
Treatment of cancer always should be left to special-
ized physicians and cancer clinics. Current treatment 
modalities include surgery, radiation, radioactive sub-
stances, chemotherapy, hormones, and immunotherapy.
8.5  Chronic Lower 
Respiratory Disease
Chronic lower respiratory disease (CLRD) encom-
passes diseases that limit airflow, such as chronic ob-
structive pulmonary disease, emphysema, and chronic 
bronchitis (all diseases of the respiratory system). The 
incidence of CLRD increases proportionately with ciga-
rette smoking (and other forms of smoked tobacco) and 
exposure to certain types of industrial pollution. In the 
case of emphysema, genetic factors also may play a role.
8.6  Accidents
Accidents rank as the fourth leading cause of death in 
the United States, affecting the total well-being of mil-
lions of Americans each year. Accident prevention and 
personal safety also are part of a health enhancement 
program aimed at achieving a higher quality of life. 
Proper nutrition, exercise, abstinence from cigarette 
smoking, and stress management are of little help if the 
person is involved in a disabling or fatal accident caused 
by distraction, a single reckless decision, or not wearing 
safety belts properly.
Accidents do not always just happen. We sometimes 
cause accidents. Other times we are victims of accidents. 
Although some factors in life—earthquakes and torna-
does for example—are beyond our control, more often 
than not personal safety and accident prevention are a 
matter of common sense. Many accidents result from 
poor judgment and a confused mental state. Frequently 
accidents happen when we are upset, not paying atten-
tion to the task with which we are involved, or abusing 
alcohol and other drugs.
Fatal accidents are often related to abusing drugs 
and not wearing seat belts. Furthermore, with the advent 
of cell phones, 1.6 million car accidents each year are 
caused by drivers using cell phones or reading/sending 
text messages.
Alcohol intoxication is the leading cause of fatal 
automobile accidents. Other drugs commonly abused in 
society alter feelings and perceptions, cause mental con-
fusion, and impair judgment and coordination, greatly 
increasing the risk for accidental morbidity and 
mortality.
8.7  Substance Abuse
Chemical dependencies encompass some of the most 
self-destructive behaviors in society today. Abused sub-
stances include alcohol, hard drugs, and cigarettes (the 
latter has been discussed already in this chapter). Prob-
lems associated with substance abuse include driving 
while impaired, mixing drug prescriptions, family diffi-
culties, and partaking of drugs to improve athletic per-
formance (anabolic steroids). Although all forms of sub-
stance abuse are recognized to be unhealthy, the following 
information focuses on alcohol and on the illegal drugs 
marijuana, cocaine, methamphetamine, heroin, and 
MDMA (ecstasy).
8.7A  Alcohol  
Alcohol use repre-
sents one of the 
most 
significant 
he alt h-relate d 
drug problems in 
the United States 
today. 
Estimates 
indicate that 7 in 
Chronic lower respiratory disease 
(CLRD)  A group of diseases that limit 
airflow, such as chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease, emphysema, and 
chronic bronchitis (all diseases of the 
respiratory system).
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

222
Fitness and Wellness
10 adults, or more than 100 million people 18 years and 
older, are drinkers. Approximately 17 million of them 
abuse alcohol or are alcohol dependent and will struggle 
with alcoholism throughout life. Currently, almost 
90,000 yearly deaths in the United States are due to ex-
cessive drinking.
Alcohol is the number one drug problem among 
college students. According to national surveys, about 61 
percent of full-time college students report using alcohol 
and 39 percent have engaged in binge drinking (con-
sumed five or more drinks in a row). Data indicate that 
more than 1,800 college students between the ages of 18 
and 24 die yearly from alcohol-related unintentional in-
juries, almost 700,000 are assaulted by another student 
who had been drinking, 400,000 have unprotected sex, 
more than 100,000 were too intoxicated to know if they’d 
consented to having sex, and 29 percent admitted driv-
ing while intoxicated.
Alcohol intake impedes peripheral vision, impairs 
the ability to see and hear, decreases reaction time, hin-
ders concentration and motor performance (including 
increased swaying), and causes impaired judgment of 
distance and speed of moving objects. Further, it lessens 
fear, increases risk-taking behaviors, stimulates urina-
tion, and induces sleep. A single large dose of alcohol 
also may decrease sexual function. One of the most un-
pleasant, dangerous, and life-threatening effects of 
drinking is the synergistic action of alcohol when com-
bined with other drugs, particularly central nervous 
system depressants.
Long-term manifestations of alcohol abuse can be 
serious and life-threatening. These conditions include 
cirrhosis of the liver (often fatal); greater risk for oral, 
esophageal, and liver cancer; cardiomyopathy; high 
blood pressure; greater risk for strokes; inflammation of 
the esophagus, stomach, small intestine, and pancreas; 
stomach ulcers; sexual impotence; malnutrition; brain 
cell damage and consequent loss of memory; and depres-
sion, psychosis, and hallucinations. Additional informa-
tion on the physiological effects of alcohol is given in 
Chapter 9.
8.7B  Illegal Drugs  Approximately two-thirds of 
the world’s production of illegal drugs is consumed in 
the United States. More than 22.5 million people in the 
United States use illegal drugs. Each year we spend more 
than $60 billion on illegal drugs.
According to the U.S. Department of Education, 
today’s drugs are stronger and more addictive, posing a 
greater risk than ever before. Drugs lead to physical and 
psychological dependence. If used regularly, they inte-
grate into the body’s chemistry, raising drug tolerance 
and forcing the person to increase the dosage constantly 
for similar results. In addition to the serious health prob-
lems caused by drug abuse, more than half of all adoles-
cent suicides are drug-related.
Furthermore, more than 51 million Americans re-
port nonmedical use of psychotherapeutic drugs at some 
point in their lifetime. In 2011, about 14.6 million 
Americans abused prescription drugs leading to 15,000 
deaths due to an overdose of these drugs. Psychothera-
peutic drugs include any prescription pain reliever, tran-
quilizer, stimulant, or sedative, not including over-the-
counter drugs. The risks associated with psychotherapy 
drug misuse or abuse varies depending on the drug. 
Some of the risks include respiratory depression or ces-
sation, decreased or irregular heart rate, high body tem-
perature, seizures, and cardiovascular failure. Abuse of 
prescription drugs, or using them in a manner other 
than exactly as prescribed, can lead to addictive 
behavior.
Marijuana
Marijuana (pot or grass) is the most widely used illegal 
drug in the United States. Studies in the 1960s indicated 
that the potential effects of marijuana were exaggerated 
and that the drug was relatively harmless. The drug as it 
is used today, however, is as much as 10 times stronger 
than it was when the initial studies were conducted. 
Long-term harmful effects of marijuana use include at-
rophy of the brain leading to irreversible brain damage, 
as well as decreased resistance to infectious diseases, 
chronic bronchitis, lung cancer, and possible sterility and 
impotence.
Cocaine
Similar to marijuana, for many years cocaine was thought 
to be a relatively harmless drug. This misconception 
came to an abrupt halt when two well-known athletes, 
Len Bias (basketball) and Don Rogers (football), died 
suddenly following cocaine overdose.
Sustained cocaine snorting can lead to a constant 
runny nose, nasal congestion and inflammation, and per-
foration of the nasal septum. Long-term consequences of 
cocaine use in general include loss of appetite, digestive 
disorders, weight loss, malnutrition, insomnia, confusion, 
anxiety, and cocaine psychosis (characterized by paranoia 
and hallucinations). Large overdoses of cocaine can end in 
sudden death from respiratory paralysis, cardiac arrhyth-
mias, and severe convulsions. For individuals who lack an 
enzyme used in metabolizing cocaine, as few as two to 
three lines of cocaine may be fatal.
Methamphetamine
Methamphetamine or “meth” is a more potent form of 
amphetamine. Typically it comes as a white, odorless, 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

223
Chapter 8  A Healthy Lifestyle Approach
bitter-tasting powder that dissolves readily in water or 
alcohol. The drug is a potent central nervous system 
stimulant that produces a general feeling of well-being, 
decreases appetite, increases motor activity, and de-
creases fatigue and the need for sleep.
Methamphetamine is easily manufactured with 
over-the-counter ingredients in clandestine “meth labs.” 
The risk of injury in a meth lab is high because poten-
tially explosive environmental contaminants are dis-
carded during production of the drug. Users of metham-
phetamine experience increases in body temperature, 
blood pressure, heart rate, and breathing rate; a decrease 
in appetite; hyperactivity; tremors; and violent behavior. 
High doses produce irritability, paranoia, irreversible 
damage to blood vessels in the brain (causing strokes), 
and risk of sudden death from hyperthermia and convul-
sions if not treated at once.
Chronic abusers experience insomnia, confusion, 
hallucinations, inflammation of the heart lining, 
schizophrenia-like mental disorder, and brain-cell dam-
age similar to that caused by strokes. Physical changes to 
the brain may last months or perhaps permanently. Over 
time, methamphetamine use may reduce brain levels of 
dopamine, which can lead to symptoms of Parkinson’s 
disease. In addition, users frequently are involved in vio-
lent crime, homicide, and suicide. Using methamphet-
amines during pregnancy may cause prenatal complica-
tions, premature delivery, and abnormal physical and 
emotional development of the child.
Heroin
Heroin use has increased in recent years. Common nick-
names for heroin include diesel, dope, dynamite, white 
death, nasty boy, china white, H. Harry, gumball, junk, 
brown sugar, smack, tootsie roll, black tar, and chasing 
the dragon. The most serious health threat to heroin us-
ers today is that they have no way of determining the 
strength of the drug purchased on the street, thus placing 
them at a constant risk for overdose and death. An esti-
mated 15 percent of all drug-related hospital emergency 
room cases involve heroin use.
Heroin use induces a state of euphoria that comes 
within seconds of intravenous injection or within 5 to 15 
minutes when other methods of administration are used. 
The drug is a sedative, so during the initial rush the per-
son has a sense of relaxation and does not feel any pain. 
In users who inhale the drug, the rush may be accompa-
nied by nausea, vomiting, intense itching, and at times 
severe asthma attacks. As the rush wears off, users be-
come drowsy and confused and have reduced cardiac 
function and breathing rate.
A heroin overdose can cause convulsions, coma, and 
death. During an overdose, heart rate, breathing, blood 
pressure, and body temperature drop dramatically. These 
physiological responses can induce vomiting, tighten the 
muscles, and cause breathing to stop. Death is often the 
result of lack of oxygen or choking to death on vomit.
Within four to five hours after the drug is taken, 
withdrawal sets in. Heroin withdrawal is painful and 
may last up to two weeks but could go on several months. 
Symptoms of withdrawal for long-term users include 
red/raw nostrils, bone and muscle pains, muscle spasms 
and cramps, sweating, hot and cold flashes, runny nose 
and eyes, drowsiness, sluggishness, slurred speech, loss 
of appetite, nausea, diarrhea, restlessness, and violent 
yawning. Heroin use also can kill a developing fetus or 
cause a spontaneous abortion.
Symptoms of long-term use of heroin include hal-
lucinations, nightmares, constipation, sexual difficulties, 
impaired vision, reduced fertility, boils, collapsed veins, 
and significantly elevated risk for lung, liver, and cardio-
vascular diseases, including bacterial infections in blood 
vessels and heart valves. Additives in street heroin can 
clog vital blood vessels because they do not dissolve in 
the body and therefore can lead to infections and death 
of cells in vital organs. Sudden infant death syndrome 
(SIDS) is seen more frequently in children born to ad-
dicted mothers.
MDMA (Ecstasy)
MDMA, also known as “ecstasy,” is named for its chemi-
cal structure: 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine. 
Besides ecstasy, other street names for the drug are 
X-TC, E, Adam, and love drug. More than 12.4 million 
persons aged 12 and older have reported using ecstasy at 
least once.
Although MDMA usually is swallowed in the form 
of 1 or 2 pills in doses of 50 to 240 mg, it also can be 
smoked, snorted, or occasionally injected. Because the 
drug is often pre-
pared with other 
substances, users 
have no way of 
knowing the exact 
potency 
of 
the 
drug or additional 
substances found 
in each pill.
MDMA has a 
reputation among 
young people for 
being 
fun 
and 
harmless as long 
as it is used sensi-
bly. MDMA, how-
ever, 
is 
not 
a 
Alcoholism  Disease in which an in-
dividual loses control over drinking al-
coholic beverages.
Synergistic action  The result of 
mixing two or more drugs, the effects 
of which can be much greater than the 
sum of two or more drugs acting by 
themselves.
Cirrhosis  A disease characterized by 
scarring of the liver.
Cardiomyopathy  A disease affecting 
the heart muscle.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

224
Fitness and Wellness
harmless drug. Users may experience rapid eye move-
ment, faintness, blurred vision, chills, sweating, nausea, 
muscle tension, and teeth grinding. Individuals with 
heart, liver, or kidney disease or high blood pressure are 
especially at risk because MDMA increases blood pres-
sure, heart rate, and body temperature; thus, it may lead 
to kidney failure, a heart attack, a stroke, and seizures.
Other evidence suggests that a pregnant woman us-
ing MDMA may find long-term learning and memory 
difficulties in her child. Other long-term side effects, 
lasting for weeks after use, include confusion, depres-
sion, sleep disorders, anxiety, aggression, paranoia, and 
impulsive behavior. Verbal and visual memory may be 
significantly impaired for years after prolonged use.
Spice
Spice is a drug that provides a marijuana-like high, known 
as Spice, K2, Kind, Genie, Summit, potpourri, Yucatan 
Gold, Purple Passion, Train Wreck, or Ultra (among other 
names) and is popular among teenagers and young adults. 
Spice is made of a mixture of herbs sprayed with synthetic 
cannabinoids, compounds similar to the chemical THC 
found in marijuana. The adverse effects of Spice are far 
more dangerous than the side effects of marijuana, includ-
ing seizures, high blood pressure, anxiety attacks, halluci-
nations, nausea, loss of consciousness, and chemical de-
pendency. Some samples tested have been shown to be 
100 times more potent than marijuana.
Inhalant Abuse
Popular among young people is inhalation of the vapors 
or aerosol gases of a wide range of household and indus-
trial chemical products. Also referred to as “huffing” or 
“sniffing glue,” these drugs are taken by volatilization. 
Examples include whipped cream canisters, deodorants 
and hair sprays, glues, nail polish remover, spray paints, 
and lighter and cleaning fluids. About 23 million Ameri-
cans have used inhalants at least once in their lifetime. 
Approximately 13 percent of 8th graders have abused 
inhalants.
Even occasional or single inhalant abuse can be ex-
tremely dangerous. The effects include alcohol-like in-
toxication, euphoria, hallucinations, drowsiness, disinhi-
bition, light-headedness, headaches, dizziness, slurred 
speech, agitation, loss of sensation, belligerence, de-
pressed reflexes, impaired judgment, and unconscious-
ness. As with other drug abuse, users can be injured by 
the harmful effects of the vapors and detrimental intoxi-
cation behavior. More serious consequences include suf-
focation due to lack of oxygen supply, pneumonia, vomit 
aspiration, organ damage (including the brain, liver, and 
kidneys), abnormal heart rhythms, and sudden cardiac 
death. Inhalant abuse leads to a strong need to continue 
their use and these individuals are more likely to initiate 
other drug use and have a higher lifetime prevalence of 
substance abuse.
8.7C  Treatment for Chemical Dependency  
Recognizing the hazards of chemical use, families, teams, 
and communities can assist each other in preventing 
problems, as well as help those who already have prob-
lems with chemical use. Treating chemical dependency 
(including alcohol) seldom is accomplished without pro-
fessional guidance and support. To secure the best avail-
able assistance, people in need should contact a physician, 
their institution’s counseling center, or obtain a referral 
from a local mental health clinic (see yellow pages in the 
phone book).
8.8  Sexually Transmitted 
Infections
As the name implies, sexually transmitted infections 
(STIs) are infections spread through sexual contact. STIs 
have reached epidemic proportions in the United States. 
Of the more than 25 known STIs, some are still incur-
able. More than half of all Americans will acquire at least 
one STI during their lifetime. Each year, about 20 million 
people in the United States are newly infected with STIs, 
and almost half of STIs afflict young people under 25.
Among the leading STIs in the United States are 
HIV (an STI that leads to AIDS—see below), chlamydia, 
gonorrhea, pelvic inflammatory disease, human papillo-
mavirus (HPV), genital herpes, and syphilis. Some of 
these infections are caused by bacterial infection and 
others by viruses. Several STIs can cause infertility and 
irreversible damage to the reproductive system.
8.8A  HIV/AIDS  Human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV) is the most frightening of all STIs because in most 
cases it is fatal if left untreated. There is still no known 
cure and without appropriate treatment, HIV infection 
leads to AIDS or acquired immunodeficiency syn-
drome—the end stage of HIV infection. HIV spreads 
among individuals who engage in risky behavior such as 
having unprotected sex or sharing hypodermic needles. 
When a person becomes infected with HIV, the virus 
multiplies and attacks and destroys white blood cells. 
These cells are part of the immune system, whose func-
tion is to fight off infections and diseases in the body. As 
the number of white blood cells killed increases, the 
body’s immune system breaks down gradually or may be 
destroyed totally. Without a functioning immune sys-
tem, a person becomes susceptible to opportunistic in-
fections or cancers ordinarily not seen in healthy people.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

225
Chapter 8  A Healthy Lifestyle Approach
HIV is a progressive infection. At first, people who 
become infected with HIV might not know they are in-
fected. An incubation period of weeks, months, or years 
may pass during which no symptoms appear. The virus 
may live in the body 10 years or longer before symptoms 
emerge. HIV infection can produce neurological abnor-
malities, leading to depression, memory loss, slower 
mental and physical response time, and sluggishness in 
limb movements that may progress to a severe disorder 
known as HIV dementia.
As the infection progresses to the point at which 
certain diseases develop, the person is said to have AIDS. 
HIV itself doesn’t kill. Nor do people die from AIDS. 
AIDS is the term used to define the final stage of HIV 
infection. Death is caused by a weakened immune sys-
tem that is unable to fight off opportunistic diseases.
No one has to become infected with HIV. At present, 
once infected, a person cannot become uninfected. There 
is 
no 
second 
chance. Everyone 
must protect them­
selves against this 
chronic infection. 
If people do not—
and are so ignorant 
as to believe it  
cannot happen to 
them—they 
are 
putting themselves 
and their partners 
at risk.
HIV is trans-
mitted 
by 
the  
exchange of cellu-
lar body fluids—
blood, 
semen, 
Sexually transmitted infections 
(STIs)  Communicable infections 
spread through sexual contact.
Human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV)  Virus that leads to acquired im-
munodeficiency syndrome (AIDS).
Acquired immunodeficiency syn-
drome (AIDS)  End stage of HIV in-
fection, manifested by any of a number 
of diseases that arise when the body’s 
immune system is compromised by HIV.
Opportunistic infections  Diseases 
that arise in the ­absence of a healthy 
immune system that would fight them 
off in healthy people.
Cold Sores and Genital 
Herpes
One of the most common STIs, genital herpes, is caused 
by the herpes simplex virus (HSV). There are several types 
of HSV that produce different ailments, including genital 
herpes, oral herpes, shingles, and chicken pox. The two 
most common forms of HSV are types 1 and 2. In type 
1—the HSV most often known to cause oral herpes—cold 
sores or fever blisters appear on the lips and mouth. HSV-2 
is better known as the virus that causes genital herpes.
Unknown to most people, HSV-1 can also cause genital 
herpes and an increasing number of genital herpes 
caused by HSV-1 has been found worldwide. Approxi-
mately 100 million Americans older than the age of 
12 are infected with HSV-1. Most of these individuals 
acquired the virus as children. Another 40 million are 
infected with HSV-2. One out of 6 people 14 to 49 years 
old are infected with the type 2 virus. One in five women, 
one in nine men, and one in five adolescents are currently 
infected with genital herpes (HSV-2).
HSV is a highly contagious virus. Victims are most 
contagious during an outbreak and the virus is spread 
by direct skin to skin contact. HSV, nonetheless, can also 
spread through “asymptomatic viral shedding;” that is, 
when there are no visible signs or symptoms of an out-
break. Individuals infected with HSV (oral or genital) may 
shed the virus up to 20 percent of the time when they 
have no other symptoms of infection or visible lesions. 
In the case of HSV-2, transmission often occurs from an 
infected person who does not have a visible sore and may 
not even be aware of such an infection. Presently, herpes 
is incurable and its victims remain infected for life.
Society typically labels HSV-1 infection (cold sores) an 
“acceptable” viral infection, whereas infection with HSV-
2 is viewed as a “bad” infection. The social stigma and 
emotional perspective of genital herpes make it difficult 
to objectively compare it with an oral infection, labeled 
as “just a cold sore” and acceptable to most people. HSV 
types 1 and 2, nonetheless, both cause oral and genital 
herpes. People who have an outbreak of oral herpes 
should not touch their own or someone else’s genitals 
after touching the oral cold sores. Doing so can lead to a 
herpes infection of the genitals (genital HSV-1 infection). 
Oral sex can also result in transmission of HSV from the 
lips to the genitals. Thirty percent of all new cases of 
genital herpes result from HSV-1 infection. A 2011 study, 
however, showed that among college students, HSV-1 
accounts for 78 percent of female and 85 percent of 
male genital herpes infections.* As with other health risk 
factors, prevention is the best medicine when it comes to 
STIs avoidance.
*R. Horowitz, et al., “Herpes Simplex Virus Infection in 
a University Health Population: Clinical Manifestations, 
Epidemiology, and Implications,” The Journal of American 
College Health, 59, no. 2 (2011): 69-74.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

226
Fitness and Wellness
vaginal secretions, and maternal milk. These fluids may 
be exchanged during sexual intercourse, by using hypo-
dermic needles that infected individuals have used previ-
ously, between a pregnant woman and her developing 
fetus, in babies from infected mothers during childbirth, 
less frequently during breastfeeding, and, rarely, from a 
blood transfusion or an organ transplant.
People do not get HIV because of who they are but, 
rather, because of what they do. HIV and AIDS threaten 
anyone, anywhere: men, women, children, teenagers, 
young people, older adults, whites, African Americans, 
Hispanics, homosexuals, heterosexuals, bisexuals, drug-
gies, Americans, Africans, Asians, Europeans. Nobody is 
immune to HIV.
You cannot tell if people are infected with HIV or 
have AIDS simply by looking at them or taking their 
word. Not you, not a nurse, not even a doctor can tell 
without an HIV antibody test. Therefore, every time you 
engage in risky behavior, you run the risk of contracting 
HIV. The two most basic risky behaviors are (a) having 
unprotected vaginal, anal, or oral sex with an HIV- 
infected person and (b) sharing hypodermic needles 
or other drug paraphernalia with someone who is 
infected.
About 1.2 million people in the United States are 
infected with HIV and approximately 20 percent of them 
are unaware of the infection. One in every 260 Ameri-
cans is infected, and about 24 percent of the newly re-
ported cases are women. Through the end of 2008, more 
than 1 million AIDS cases had been diagnosed in the 
United States and dependent areas, and an estimated 
600,000 people had died from the diseases caused by 
HIV. About 80 percent of the people who died are 25 to 
49 years old.
New therapies are preventing AIDS from develop-
ing in a growing number of HIV-infected individuals. 
Professionals, however, disagree as to how many HIV 
carriers actually will develop AIDS. Even if individuals 
have not developed AIDS, they can pass on the virus to 
others, who then could easily develop AIDS. These drugs 
are usually used in combinations, commonly referred to 
as highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) or “AIDS 
cocktails.”
Antiretroviral drugs delay the progress of HIV in-
fection and even keep many people from developing 
AIDS. These drugs have turned HIV infection from an 
almost imminent predecessor of death to a lifelong 
chronic disease. Thanks to advances in the development 
of these drugs, many HIV-infected people can now look 
forward to decades of life. HIV-infected individuals, 
however, must take the drugs every day for the rest of 
their life. In most cases, failure to do so results in the 
virus coming back with full strength. The drugs don’t 
eradicate HIV but rather suppress the virus and make it 
almost undetectable in the blood.
As with anyone who has a serious illness, AIDS pa-
tients deserve respect, understanding, and support. Re-
jection and discrimination are traits of immature, hate-
ful, and ignorant people. Education, knowledge, and 
responsible behaviors are the best ways to minimize fear 
and discrimination.
8.8B  Guidelines for Preventing STIs  With all 
the grim news about STIs, the good news is that you can 
do things to prevent their spread and take precautions to 
keep yourself from becoming a victim. The facts are in: 
The best preventive technique is a mutually monoga-
mous sexual relationship—sex with only one person who 
has sexual relations only with you. That one behavior will 
remove you almost completely from any risk for devel-
oping an STI.
Unfortunately, in today’s society, trust is an elusive 
concept. You may be led to believe you are in a monoga-
mous relationship when your partner actually (a) may be 
cheating on you and gets infected, (b) ends up having a 
one-night stand with someone who is infected, (c) got 
the virus several years ago before the present relationship 
and still isn’t aware of the infection, (d) may not be hon-
est with you and chooses not to tell you about the infec-
tion, or (e) is shooting up drugs and becomes infected. 
In any of these cases, HIV can be passed on to you.
Because your future and your life are at stake and 
because you may never know if your partner is infected, 
you should give serious and careful consideration to 
postponing sex until you believe you have found a life-
time monogamous relationship. In doing so, you will not 
have to live with the fear of catching HIV or other STIs 
or deal with an unplanned pregnancy.
As strange as this may seem to some, many people 
postpone sexual activity until they are married. This is 
the best guarantee against STIs and HIV. Young people 
should understand that married life will provide plenty 
of time for fulfilling and rewarding sex. If you choose to 
delay sex, do not let peers pressure you into having sex. 
Some people would have you believe you are not a real 
man or woman if you don’t have sex. Manhood and 
womanhood are not proved during sexual intercourse 
but, instead, through mature, responsible, and healthy 
choices. Other people lead you to believe that love 
doesn’t exist without sex. Sex in the early stages of a rela-
tionship is not the product of love but is simply the ful-
fillment of a physical, and often selfish, drive. A loving 
relationship develops over a long time with mutual re-
spect for each other.
Teenagers are especially susceptible to peer pressure 
leading to premature sexual intercourse. As a result, 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

227
Chapter 8  A Healthy Lifestyle Approach
about 330,000 U.S. teens gave birth in 2011. Too many 
young people wish they had postponed sex and silently 
admire those who do. Sex lasts only a few minutes. The 
consequences of irresponsible sex may last a lifetime. In 
some cases they are fatal. Then there are those who enjoy 
bragging about their sexual conquests and mock people 
who choose to wait. In essence, many of these conquests 
are only fantasies woven in an attempt to gain popularity 
with peers.
Sexual promiscuity never leads to a trusting, loving, 
and lasting relationship. Mature people respect other’s 
choices. If someone does not respect your choice to wait, 
he or she certainly does not deserve your friendship or, 
for that matter, anything else. There is no greater sex than 
that between two loving and responsible individuals who 
mutually trust and admire each other. Contrary to many 
beliefs, these relationships are possible. They are built 
upon unselfish attitudes and behaviors.
As you look around, you will find people who have 
these values. Seek them out and build your friendships 
and future around people who respect you for who you 
are and what you believe. You don’t have to compromise 
your choices or values. In the end, you will reap the 
greater rewards of a fulfilling and lasting relationship, 
free of AIDS and other STIs.
Also, be prepared so that you will know your course of 
action before you get into an intimate situation. Look for 
common interests and work together toward them. Ex-
press your feelings openly: “I’m not ready for sex; I just 
want to have fun and kissing is fine with me.” If your friend 
does not accept your answer and is not willing to stop the 
advances, be prepared with a strong response. Statements 
such as “Please stop” or “Don’t!” are for the most part inef-
fective. Use a firm statement such as, “No, I’m not willing 
to do it” or “I’ve already thought about this, and I’m not 
going to have sex.” If this still doesn’t work, label the behav-
ior rape: “This is rape, and I’m going to call the police.”
What about those who do not have—or do not de-
sire—a monogamous relationship? Following are some 
risky behaviors that significantly increase the chances of 
contracting an STI, including HIV infection:
	1.	
Multiple or anonymous sexual partners such as a 
pickup or prostitute
	2.	
Anal sex with or without a condom
	3.	
Vaginal or oral sex with someone who shoots drugs 
or engages in anal sex
	4.	
Sex with someone you know who has several sex 
partners
	5.	
Unprotected sex (without a condom) with an in-
fected person
	6.	
Sexual contact of any kind with anyone who has 
symptoms of AIDS or who is a member of a group 
at high risk for AIDS
	7.	
Sharing toothbrushes, razors, or other implements 
that could become contaminated with blood with 
anyone who is, or might be, infected with the HIV 
virus
Avoiding risky behaviors that destroy quality of life 
and life itself is a critical component of a healthy lifestyle. 
Learning the facts so you can make responsible choices 
can protect you and those around you from startling and 
unexpected conditions. Using alcohol moderately (or 
not at all), refraining from substance abuse, and prevent-
ing sexually transmitted infections are keys to averting 
both physical and psychological damage.
	1.	
Is your diet fundamentally low in saturated fats, trans 
fats, and processed meats, and do you meet the daily 
suggested amounts of fruits, vegetables, and fiber?
	2.	
Are you familiar with basic lifestyle guidelines to prevent 
cancer?
	3.	
Is your life free of addictive behavior? If not, will you 
commit right now to seek professional help at your insti-
tution’s counseling center? Addictive behavior destroys 
health and lives—don’t let it end yours.
	4.	
Do you believe in a mutually monogamous sexual rela-
tionship as the best way to prevent STIs? If not, do you 
always take precautions to practice safer sex?
Assess Your Behavior
To access course materials, including companion resources, please visit www.cengagebrain.com.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

228
Fitness and Wellness
	 1.	 Coronary heart disease
	 a.	 is the single leading cause of death in the United 
States.
	 b.	 is the leading cause of sudden cardiac deaths.
	 c.	 is a condition in which the arteries that supply the 
heart muscle with oxygen and nutrients are narrowed 
by fatty deposits.
	 d.	 accounts for approximately 20 percent of all deaths.
	 e.	 All are correct choices.
	 2.	 The risk of heart disease increases with
	 a.	 high LDL-cholesterol.
	 b.	 high HDL-cholesterol.
	 c.	 lack of homocysteine.
	 d.	 low levels of hs-CRP
	 e.	 All are correct choices.
	 3.	 Type 2 diabetes is related closely to
	 a.	 low BMI.
	 b.	 obesity and lack of physical activity.
	 c.	 genetically low homocysteine.
	 d.	 increased insulin sensitivity.
	 e.	 All are correct choices.
	 4.	 Metabolic syndrome is related to
	 a.	 low HDL-cholesterol.
	 b.	 high triglycerides.
	 c.	 increased blood-clotting mechanism.
	 d.	 an abnormal insulin response to carbohydrates.
	 e.	 All are correct choices.
	 5.	 Cancer can be defined as
	 a.	 a process whereby some cells invade and destroy the 
immune system.
	 b.	 an uncontrolled growth and spread of abnormal cells.
	 c.	 the spread of benign tumors throughout the body.
	 d.	 the interference of normal body functions through 
blood flow disruption caused by angiogenesis.
	 e.	 All are correct choices.
	 6.	 Cancer
	 a.	 is primarily a preventable disease.
	 b.	 is often related to tobacco use.
	 c.	 has been linked to dietary habits.
	 d.	 risk increases with obesity.
	 e.	 All are correct choices.
	 7.	 A cancer prevention diet should include
	 a.	 ample amounts of fruit and vegetables.
	 b.	 cruciferous vegetables.
	 c.	 phytonutrients.
	 d.	 soy products.
	 e.	 All are correct choices.
	 8.	 The biggest carcinogenic exposure in the workplace is
	 a.	 asbestos fibers.
	 b.	 cigarette smoke.
	 c.	 biological agents.
	 d.	 nitrosamines.
	 e.	 pesticides.
	 9.	 Treatment of chemical dependency is
	 a.	 primarily accomplished by the individual alone.
	 b.	 most successful when there is peer pressure to stop.
	 c.	 best achieved with the help of family members.
	 d.	 seldom accomplished without professional guidance.
	 e.	 usually done with the help of friends.
	10.	 The best way to protect yourself against sexually trans-
mitted infections is
	 a.	 through the use of condoms with a spermicide.
	 b.	 by knowing about the people who have previously 
had sex with your partner.
	 c.	 through a mutually monogamous sexual relationship.
	 d.	 by having sex only with an individual who has no 
symptoms of STIs.
	 e.	 All of the above choices provide equal protection 
against STIs.
Correct answers can be found on page 301.
Assess Your Knowledge
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

229
Chapter 8  A Healthy Lifestyle Approach
Date
Name
Section
Course
 I. Cardiovascular Disease
 
 
Yes
No
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Evaluation
A “no” answer to any of the above items increases your risk for cardiovascular disease. The greater the number of “no”
responses, the higher the risk for developing cardiovascular disease.
Please indicate lifestyle changes you will implement or maintain to decrease your personal risk for cardiovascular disease.
 
 
 
 
 1. I accumulate between 30 and 60 minutes of physical activity at least ﬁve days per week.......................
Total number of daily steps:                            Total minutes of daily physical activity: 
 2. I exercise aerobically a minimum of three times a week in the appropriate target zone for at least 20 
minutes per session..................................................................................................................................
 3. I am at or slightly below the health ﬁtness recommended percent body fat 
(see Chapter 2, Table 2.11, page 49), or my BMI is below 25....................................................................
 4. My blood lipids are within normal range...................................................................................................
 5. I consume whole-grain foods daily............................................................................................................
 6. I get 25 (women) to 38 (men) grams of ﬁber in my daily diet. ..................................................................
 7. I eat more than ﬁve servings of fruits and vegetables every day. .............................................................
 8. I limit saturated fat, trans fats, and cholesterol in my daily diet. ............................................................
 9. I limit the use of simple carbohydrates (including sugars), reﬁned carbohydrates, and processed foods............
 10. I eat primarily oily/cold-water ﬁsh at least twice per week. .....................................................................
 11. I am not a diabetic....................................................................................................................................
 12. I choose and prepare foods with little or no salt. .....................................................................................
 13. My blood pressure is normal. ....................................................................................................................
 14. I do not smoke cigarettes or use tobacco in any other form. .....................................................................
 15. I manage stress adequately in daily life. ..................................................................................................
 16. I do not have a personal or family history of heart disease.......................................................................
Activity 8.1: Managing Cardiovascular Disease
and Cancer Risks
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

230
Fitness and Wellness
II. Cancer Prevention Questionnaire: Cancer Risk: Are You Taking Control?
Scientists think most cancers may be related to lifestyle and environment—what you eat and drink, whether you smoke, and where  
you work and play. This means that you can help reduce your own cancer risk by taking control of actions in your daily life. 
Yes    No
Evaluation
If you answered yes to most of these questions, congratulations. You are taking control of simple lifestyle factors that will help 
you feel better and reduce your risk for cancer.
Please indicate lifestyle changes you will implement or maintain to decrease your personal risk for cancer:
14 Steps to a Healthier Life and Reduced Cancer Risk 
 1. Are you eating more cruciferous vegetables?
 
 They include broccoli, cauliﬂower, Brussels sprouts, all cabbages, and kohlrabi.
  2. Are high-ﬁber foods included in your diet? 
 3. Do you choose foods with vitamin A?  
 
 Fresh foods with beta-carotene—including carrots, peaches, apricots, squash, and broccoli—are the best 
source, not vitamin pills. 
 4. Is vitamin C included in your diet?  
 
 You’ll ﬁnd it naturally in lots of fresh fruits and vegetables including grapefruit, cantaloupe, oranges, 
strawberries, red and green peppers, broccoli, and tomatoes.  
 5. Do you eat sufﬁcient selenium-bearing foods (ﬁsh, Brazil nuts, whole grains) so you obtain at least 100 mcg 
of selenium per day (but no more than 400 mcg per day)? 
 6. Are you physically active for at least 30 minutes, and do you avoid excessive sitting on most days of the week?
  7. Do you maintain a healthy weight (a BMI between 18.5 and 25)? 
 8. Do you limit salt-cured, smoked, and nitrite-cured foods?
 
 Choose bacon, ham, hot dogs, or salt-cured ﬁsh only occasionally if you like them a lot. 
 9. Do you limit barbecuing and cooking meats at high temperatures to the point that they are “medium well” or 
“well done”? 
 10. Do you smoke cigarettes or use tobacco in any other form?
 11. If you drink alcohol, are you moderate in your intake (no more than 2 drinks per day for men, 1 for women, or none 
at all for women with a family history of breast, esophagus, larynx, rectum, or liver cancers)?
 12. Do you get almost daily “safe sun” exposure (face, arms, and hands) and yet respect the sun’s rays? “Safe sun” 
exposure means 10 to 20 minutes of unprotected sun exposure (without sunscreen) to the face, arms, and hands 
during peak daylight hours on most days of the week (10:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.), but yet you respect the sun’s rays 
(your skin does not turn red, and you do not sunburn). If not, do you take a Vitamin D3 supplement?
 
 Do you protect yourself with sunscreen (at least SPF 15) and wear long sleeves and a hat, especially during 
midday hours if you are going to be exposed to the sun for a prolonged period of time?
 13. Do you have a family history of any type of cancer? 
 
 (If so, you should bring this to the attention of your personal physician.) 
 14. Are you familiar with the seven warning signals for cancer? 
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Relevant Fitness  
and Wellness Issues
9
Lifestyle choices you make 
and live today will affect 
your health, well-being, and 
quality of life tomorrow.
Objectives
• Dispel common misconceptions related to 
physical fitness and wellness.
• Give practical advice and tips regarding 
safety.
• Address some concerns specific to women.
• Clarify additional concepts regarding 
nutrition and weight control.
• Answer some questions regarding wellness 
and aging.
• Provide guidelines related to fitness/
wellness consumer issues.
231
Visit www.cengagebrain.com to access 
course materials and companion resources for 
this text including quiz questions designed to 
check your understanding of the chapter 
contents, activities, labs, and more! See the 
preface on page xi for more information.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

232
Fitness and Wellness
I started gymnastics at a very young age. I partici-
pated in club gymnastics and competed extensively  
at an elite level until I graduated from high school. I 
earned a college scholarship and was looking forward 
to intercollegiate competition. Halfway through the 
fall semester my first year, I suffered a stress (bone) 
fracture in my lower left leg. The bone healed very 
slowly and kept me from competing that year. I was 
devastated because I wanted to compete so badly. At 
the end of the spring semester, I ran into an exercise 
science professor who had also been a gymnast. We 
talked about my injury, and during the conversation it 
came up that now at age 19, I had never menstruated. 
My percent body fat was very low throughout all my 
teenage years and I didn’t really drink that much 
milk. The professor strongly encouraged me to see my 
personal physician during the summer.
After seeing my doctor, I was placed on hormone re-
placement therapy and started to have regular men-
ses. I also discovered that my bone density was quite 
low. My stress fracture re-
curred my sophomore 
and junior years and I 
was never able to com-
pete. I took a Fit for Life 
course my junior year. It 
was at that point I de-
cided that my health 
would be my number one 
priority and I opted to 
end my gymnastics ca-
reer. I gained a few pounds, more along a healthy 
weight guideline. I started to jog and lift weights for 
fitness. My menses stayed regular even after discon-
tinuing hormone replacement therapy. I now know 
that I will need to maintain a lifetime physical activ-
ity program with some form of weight-bearing exer-
cises, along with adequate daily calcium in my diet. I 
also need to monitor the regularity of my menstrual 
cycles and watch my bone density as recommended 
by my doctor.
© Laura Gangi Pond/Shutterstock.com
Real Life Story | Sonia’s Recurrent Stress Fractures
This chapter addresses some of the most frequently 
asked questions about various facets of physical fitness 
and wellness. The answers will further clarify concepts 
discussed throughout the book, as well as put to rest 
several myths that misinform fitness and wellness par-
ticipants. “Q” denotes the question, and “A” designates 
the answer.
9.1  Wellness Behavior 
Modification Issues
Q: If a person is going to do only one thing to improve 
health, what would it be?
A: This is a common question. It is a mistake to think, 
though, that you can modify just one factor and enjoy 
wellness. Wellness requires a constant and deliberate ef-
fort to change unhealthy behaviors and reinforce healthy 
behaviors. Although it is difficult to work on many life-
style changes all at once, being involved in a regular 
physical activity program and proper nutrition are two 
behaviors I would work on first. If you use tobacco in any 
form, or you have any other form of chemical depen-
dency, stop today and seek professional counseling to 
overcome the addictive behavior. Other behavioral 
changes should follow, depending on your lifestyle.
Q: Why is it so hard to change?
A: Change is incredibly difficult for most people. Our 
behaviors are based on our core values. Whether we are 
trying to increase physical activity, quit smoking, change 
unhealthy eating habits, or reverse heart disease, it is hu-
man nature to resist change even when we know that 
change will provide substantial benefits.
Furthermore, Dr. Richard Earle, managing director 
of the Canadian Institute of Stress and the Hans Selye 
Foundation, explains that people have a tendency toward 
pessimism. In every spoken language, there is a ratio of 
three pessimistic adjectives to one positive adjective. 
Thus, linguistically, psychologically, and emotionally, we 
focus on what can go wrong and we lose motivation be-
fore we even start.
Motivation for change comes from within. In most 
instances, neither pressure, nor reasoning, nor fear will 
inspire people to take action. Change in behavior is 
most likely to occur by speaking to people’s feelings. 
Most people start contemplating change when there is 
a change in core values that will make them feel un-
comfortable with the present behavior(s) or lack 
thereof.
Core values change when feelings are addressed. 
The challenge is to find ways that will help people un-
derstand the problems and solutions in a manner that 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

233
Chapter 9  Relevant Fitness and Wellness Issues
will influence emotions and not just the thought pro-
cess. Once the problem behavior is understood and 
“felt,” the person may become uncomfortable with the 
situation and will be more inclined to address the prob-
lem behavior or adoption of a healthy behavior. Dis-
comfort is a great motivator. People tolerate any situa-
tion until it becomes too uncomfortable for them. At 
that point, they seek ways to make changes in their 
lives. It is then that the information presented in this 
book provides the tools to implement a successful plan 
for change.
Keep in mind that when lifestyle changes are ad-
dressed, relationships and friendships may also need to 
be addressed. You need to distance yourself from those 
individuals who share your bad habits (smoking, drink-
ing, unhealthy eating, sedentary lifestyle) and associate 
with people who practice healthy habits. Are you pre-
pared to do so?
Q: Why is it so difficult to change dietary habits?
A: In most developed countries there is an overabun-
dance of food and practically an unlimited number of 
food choices. With unlimited supply and choices, most 
people do not have the willpower, stemming from their 
core values, to avoid overconsumption.
Our bodies were not created to go hungry or to 
overeat. We are uncomfortable overeating and we feel 
even worse when we have to go hungry. Our health 
values, however, are not strong enough to prevent 
overconsumption. The end result: weight gain. Next, 
we restrict calories (go on a diet), we feel hungry, and 
we have a difficult time adhering to the diet. Stated 
quite simply, going hungry is an uncomfortable and 
unpleasant experience. And people do not like to feel 
this way.
To avoid this vicious cycle, our dietary habits (and 
most likely physical activity habits) must change. A ques-
tion you need to ask yourself is: Do you value health and 
quality of life more than food overindulgence? If you do 
not, then the achievement and maintenance of recom-
mended body weight and good health is a moot point. If 
you desire to avoid disease and increase quality of life, 
you have to value health more than food overconsump-
tion. If you have spent the past 20 years tasting and “de-
vouring” every food item in sight, it is now time to make 
healthy choices and consume only moderate amounts 
(portion control) of food at a time. You do not have to 
taste and eat everything that is placed before your eyes. 
If you can make such a change in your eating habits, you 
may not have to worry about another diet throughout 
life.
9.2  Safety of Exercise 
Participation and Injury 
Prevention
Q: What amount of aerobic exercise is optimal to signifi-
cantly decrease the risk for cardiovascular disease?
A: Physical inactivity by itself is a major risk factor for 
cardiovascular disease and often contributes to the  
development of other risk factors such as an increase in  
(a) body fat, (b) LDL-cholesterol, (c) triglycerides, (d) in-
flammation, (e) stress, (f) blood pressure, and (g) risk for 
diabetes, and studies have documented that these risk 
factors have multiple interrelations (see Figure 9.1).
Although a regular aerobic exercise program signifi-
cantly decreases the risk for cardiovascular disease, the 
amount of exercise required to offset the risk cannot be 
pinpointed specifically because of the many individual 
differences (genetic and lifestyle) among people. Re-
search, however, has shed some light on this subject.
One of the earlier studies published in the mid-1980s 
indicated that about 300 calories should be expended daily 
through aerobic exercise to obtain a certain degree of pro-
tection against cardiovascular disease.1 The work alluded 
to in Chapter 8 (see Figure 8.5, page 204) indicated that 
even moderate fitness levels—that is, a caloric expenditure 
of 150 to 200 calories 5 to 7 days per week—can reduce the 
Figure 9.1
Interrelationships among leading 
cardiovascular risk factors.
Te
ns
io
n 
an
d 
st
re
ss
   
   
   
   
   
S
m
o
ki
ng
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 D
ia
be
te
s 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
  
A
bn
or
m
al 
bl
oo
d 
   
   
   
   
Lo
w-
gr
a
de
   
  
Cardio-
vascular
disease
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 O
be
sit
y 
   
   
   
Hi
gh
 b
lo
od
 p
re
ss
ur
e 
   
   
   
   
 P
hy
si
ca
l i
na
ct
iv
it
y 
   
   
   
   
   
   
li
pi
ds
   
   
   
   
   
   
 i
nf
la
m
m
at
io
n
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

234
Fitness and Wellness
incidence of cardiovascular problems substantially.2 
Greater protection, however, is achieved at higher energy 
expenditures and better fitness levels.
For individuals with or at risk for coronary heart 
disease, data suggest that more than 1,400 calories per 
week may have to be expended to improve cardiorespira-
tory fitness; more than 1,500 weekly calories to stop the 
progression of atherosclerotic lesions; and more than 
2,200 calories per week, or the equivalent of 5 to 6 hours 
of weekly exercise, for regression of lesions.3 Keep in 
mind that neither physical activity nor exercise by itself 
provides an absolutely risk-free guarantee against car-
diovascular disease. Overall risk factor management is 
the best approach to disease risk reduction.
Q: At what age should I start concerning myself with 
cardiovascular disease?
A: The disease process for cardiovascular disease, as well 
as cancer, starts early in life as a result of poor lifestyle 
habits. Studies have shown beginning stages of athero-
sclerosis and elevated blood lipids in children as young 
as 10 years old.
Many positive habits can be established early in life. 
If at a young age you learn to avoid excessive calories, 
saturated and trans fats, sweets, salt, and alcohol; to not 
use tobacco; and to participate in physical activity, your 
chances of leading a healthier life are much greater than 
is true with the present generation.
Q: What is more important for good health—aerobic fit-
ness or muscular fitness (good muscular strength)?
A: They are both important. During the initial fitness 
boom in the 1970s and 1980s, the emphasis was placed 
almost exclusively on aerobic fitness. We now know that 
they both contribute to health, fitness, work capacity, 
and overall quality of life. Among others, aerobic fitness 
is particularly important for the prevention of cardiovas-
cular diseases, diabetes, and some types of cancer; 
whereas muscular fitness will build strong muscles and 
bones, helps prevent osteoporosis, decreases the risk for 
low back pain and musculoskeletal injuries, improves 
overall functional capacity, and to a lesser extent also 
contributes to the prevention of cardiovascular disease 
and diabetes.
Q: Should I do aerobic exercise or strength training 
first?
A: Ideally, allow some recovery hours between the two 
types of training. If you can’t afford the time, the training 
order should be based on your fitness goals and prefer-
ences. Unless extremely exhausting, aerobics provides a 
good lead into strength training. Excessive fatigue can 
lead to bad form while lifting and may result in injury. If 
your primary goal is strength development, lift first, as 
you’ll be less fatigued and will end up with a more pro-
ductive workout. On the other hand, if you are trying to 
develop the cardiorespiratory system or enhance caloric 
expenditure for weight loss purposes, heavy lower body 
lifting will make it very difficult to sustain a good cardio 
workout thereafter. Thus, evaluate your goals, and select 
the training order accordingly.
Q: Do big muscles turn into fat when the person stops 
training?
A: Muscle and fat tissue are two completely different 
types of tissue. Just as an apple will not turn into an or-
ange, muscle tissue cannot turn into fat or vice versa. 
Muscle cells increase and decrease in size according to 
your training program. If you train quite hard, muscle 
cells increase in size. This increase is limited in women 
due to hormonal differences compared with men. When 
one stops training, muscle cells again decrease in size. If 
the person maintains a high caloric intake without physi-
cal training, however, fat cells will increase in size as 
weight (fat) is gained.
Individuals who initiate physical activity and exercise habits at a 
young age are more likely to participate throughout life.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

235
Chapter 9  Relevant Fitness and Wellness Issues
Q: What strength-training exercises are best to get an 
abdominal “six-pack”?
A: Most men tend to store body fat around the waist, 
while women do so around the hips. There are, however, 
no “miracle” exercises to spot-reduce. Multiple sets of 
abdominal curl-ups, crunches, reverse crunches, or sit-
ups performed three to five times per week will strengthen 
the abdominal musculature but will not be sufficient to 
allow the muscles to appear through the layer of fat be-
tween the skin and the muscles. The total energy (ca-
loric) expenditure of a few sets of abdominal exercises 
will not be sufficient to lose a significant amount of 
weight (fat). If you want to get a “washboard stomach” 
(or, for women, achieve shapely hips), you need to en-
gage in a moderate to vigorous aerobic and strength-
training program combined with a moderate reduction 
in daily caloric intake (diet).
Q: Can too much exercise be detrimental to health?
A: Moderate exercise training provides many health 
benefits and strengthens immune function. Prolonged, 
intense, and exhaustive exercise, however, can negatively 
affect immune function and result in increased suscepti-
bility to upper respiratory tract infections (common cold 
and influenza) and viral infections. The primary concern 
in this area is with elite endurance athletes who train for 
lengthy periods of time each day. These athletes are more 
susceptible to infections during intense training and 
competition.
From a health fitness point of view, if you overdo 
your exercise session, your body will let you know by 
becoming excessively sore and fatigued. You may now 
have to skip your exercise session for a day or two to 
recover from the overexertion, thus defeating the pur-
pose of having trained so hard. The best guide is to be 
“comfortably sore” following a day of hard training. You 
should never be so sore that you cannot exercise at all 
or are too uncomfortable doing so. Remember to use a 
progressive approach to increase your exercise volume 
and each hard-day of training (being just “comfortably 
sore”) should be followed by a lighter exercise day. With 
few exceptions in athletic instances, back to back hard 
days of training are not recommended to improve 
fitness.
Q: Will exercise help me feel better?
A: Yes. Many studies have found that exercise helps 
people feel better, improves self-esteem and self- 
confidence, relieves stress, and even alleviates depres-
sion. Along with physiological benefits, regular partici-
pation in exercise yields psychological benefits. Hence, a 
lifetime of physical activity is just as important for men-
tal wellness.
What role do physical activity and exercise play in your 
life? • What impact do these have on your emotional 
well-being?
Critical Thinking
Q: Should I exercise when I have a cold or the flu?
A: The most important consideration is to use common 
sense and pay attention to your symptoms. Usually you 
may continue exercise if your symptoms are a runny 
nose, sneezing, or a scratchy throat. But if you have a 
fever or achy muscles, if you are vomiting, have diarrhea, 
or have a hacking cough, you should avoid exercise. Fol-
lowing an illness, be sure to ease back gradually into your 
program. Do not attempt to return at the same intensity 
and duration that you were used to prior to your illness.
Q: How fast does a person lose the benefits of exercise 
after stopping an exercise program?
A: How quickly the benefits of exercise are lost differs 
among the various components of physical fitness and 
also depends on the condition the person achieves be-
fore discontinuing the exercise. Specifically with regard 
to cardiorespiratory endurance, it has been estimated 
that four weeks of aerobic training are completely re-
versed in two consecutive weeks of physical inactivity.
If you have been exercising regularly for months or 
years, two weeks of inactivity will not hurt you as much 
as it will someone who has exercised only a few weeks. 
Generally speaking, within two to three days of aerobic 
inactivity, the cardiorespiratory system starts to lose 
some of its capacity. Flexibility can be maintained with 
two or three stretching sessions per week, and strength is 
maintained with just one maximal training session per 
week.
You should maintain a regular fitness program even 
during traveling and vacation periods. When traveling, 
plan ahead and examine your options before you leave 
home. Many hotels provide in-house fitness facilities. 
Although the equipment often is limited, it’s generally 
sufficient for an adequate cardiorespiratory and strength 
workout. Frequent travelers would benefit from joining a 
nationally franchised health club or a YMCA. In this 
manner, you can continue the same exercise program 
while visiting different cities.
Activities that require a minimum of equipment and 
no facilities, such as walking, jogging, and rope jumping, 
are excellent alternatives for the road. If you are going to 
venture out in a new city, always ask for safe places to jog. 
Nearby parks or a high school track are usually safe and 
help you stay away from traffic and stoplights. The strength-
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

236
Fitness and Wellness
training (without equipment) and flexibility exercises pro-
vided in Appendixes A and B, pages 264–274, can be used 
to maintain your strength and flexibility.
Q: What type of clothing should I wear when I exercise?
A: The type of clothing you wear during exercise is im-
portant. In general, clothing should fit comfortably and 
allow free movement of the various body parts. Select 
clothing according to expected air temperature, humid-
ity, and exercise intensity. Avoid nylon and rubberized 
materials and tight clothes that interfere with the body’s 
cooling mechanism or obstruct normal blood flow. Fab-
rics made from polypropylene, Capilene, Thermax, and 
synthetics are best. These types of fabric wick (draw) 
moisture away from the skin, enhancing evaporation and 
cooling the body. Exercise intensity also is important in 
determining the clothing you wear because the harder 
you exercise, the more heat your body produces.
When exercising in the heat, avoid the hottest time 
of the day, between 11:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Avoid sur-
faces such as asphalt, concrete, and artificial turfs be-
cause they absorb heat, which then radiates to the body. 
(Also see the discussion on exercise in hot and humid 
conditions on pages 238–239).
Only minimal clothing is necessary during exercise 
in the heat, to allow for maximal evaporation. Clothing 
should be lightweight, light-colored, loose-fitting, airy, 
and absorbent. Examples of commercially available 
products that can be used during exercise in the heat are 
Asci’s Perma Plus, Coolmax, and Nike’s Dri-FIT. Double-
layer acrylic socks are more absorbent than cotton and 
help to prevent blistering and chafing of the feet. A 
straw-type hat can be worn to protect the eyes and head 
from the sun. Clothing for exercise in the cold is dis-
cussed on pages 240–241.
For decades, a good pair of shoes has been recom-
mended by most professionals to prevent injuries to 
lower limbs. Shoes manufactured specifically for the 
choice of activity have been encouraged. Shoes should 
have good stability, motion control, and comfortable fit. 
Purchase shoes in the middle of or later in the day when 
feet have expanded and might be one half size larger. For 
increased breathability, shoes with nylon or mesh uppers 
are recommended. Salespeople at reputable athletic shoe 
stores can help you select a good shoe that fits your 
needs.
More recently, a trend has emerged toward barefoot 
running. For most of human history, people ran either 
barefoot or with minimal shoes. As in walking, the mod-
ern running shoe with its bulky padded heel cushion 
allows runners to land on the heel and roll forward to-
ward the ball of the foot. The impact-collision force 
while running is often more than three times the person’s 
body weight. Researchers have observed that joggers/
runners who don’t wear shoes, or use minimal footwear, 
land on the front (ball) or middle of the foot. This mo-
tion induces them to flex the ankle as contact is made 
with the ground, resulting in smaller impact forces than 
ankle strikers. Such running mechanics are thought to 
decrease impact-related repetitive stress injuries.
Some experts believe that the spring in the arch of 
the foot and the Achilles tendon diminish ground im-
pact forces. A good illustration is to compare the impact 
forces generated by landing a jump on the heels versus 
the toes.
Shoeless-running proponents believe that wearing 
cushioned shoes with arch supports alters natural foot-
landing actions, weakening muscles and ligaments and 
rendering feet, ankles, and knees more susceptible to inju-
ries. They recommend wearing a flexible shoe without a 
heel cushion or arch support. This recommendation has 
led to the development of “barefoot running shoes.” These 
“shoes” feature a thin, abrasion-resistant stretch nylon 
with breathable mesh upper material that wraps around 
the entire foot to keep rocks and dirt out. At present, the 
verdict is still out. Data are insufficient to support either 
recommendation (shoe vs. shoeless running). Research is 
now being conducted to determine the best type of foot-
wear to use with repetitive-impact activities.
Q: What time of the day is best for exercise?
A: A person can exercise at almost any time of the day 
except about two hours following a large meal, or the 
noon and early afternoon hours on hot and humid days. 
Many people enjoy exercising early in the morning be-
cause it gives them a good boost to start the day. If you 
have a difficult time sticking to an exercise program, 
early morning exercise is best because the chances of 
some other activity or conflict interfering with your ex-
ercise time are minimal. Some people prefer the lunch 
hour for weight control reasons. By exercising at noon, 
they do not eat as big a lunch, which helps keep down 
daily caloric intake. Highly stressed people seem to like 
the evening hours because of the relaxing effects of 
exercise.
Q: How should acute sports injuries be treated?
A: The best treatment always has been prevention. If an 
activity causes unusual discomfort or chronic irritation, 
you need to treat the cause by decreasing the intensity, 
switching activities, substituting equipment, or upgrad-
ing clothing, such as buying properly fitted shoes.
In cases of acute injury, the standard treatment is 
rest, cold application, compression or splinting (or both), 
and elevation of the affected body part. The applicable 
acronym is RICE:
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

237
Chapter 9  Relevant Fitness and Wellness Issues
R	 5 rest
I	 5 ice application
C	 5 compression
E	 5 elevation
Cold should be applied 3 to 5 times a day for 15 to 
20 minutes at a time during the first 36 to 48 hours, by 
submerging the injured area in cold water, using an ice 
bag, or applying ice massage to the affected part. An 
elastic bandage or wrap can be used for compression. 
Elevating the body part decreases blood flow to it. The 
purpose of these treatment modalities is to minimize 
swelling in the area, which hastens recovery time.
After the first 36 to 48 hours, heat can be used if the 
injury shows no further swelling or inflammation. If you 
have doubts regarding the nature or seriousness of the 
injury (such as suspected fracture), you should seek a 
medical evaluation.
Obvious deformities (such as in fractures, disloca-
tions, or partial dislocations) call for splinting, cold ap-
plication with an ice bag, and medical attention. Never 
try to reset any of these conditions by yourself, as mus-
cles, ligaments, and nerves could be damaged further. 
These injuries should be treated by specialized medical 
personnel. A quick reference guide for the signs or 
symptoms and treatment of exercise-related problems is 
provided in Table 9.1.
Q: What causes muscle soreness and stiffness?
A: Muscle soreness and stiffness are common in indi-
viduals who (a) begin an exercise program or participate 
after a long layoff from exercise, (b) exercise beyond 
their customary intensity and duration, and (c) perform 
eccentric training. The acute soreness that sets in during 
the first few hours after exercise is related to general fa-
tigue caused by chemical waste products that build up in 
the exercised muscles.
The delayed-onset muscle soreness (DOMS) that 
appears several hours after exercise (usually 12 hours or 
so later) and lasts two to four days may be related to 
microtears in muscle tissue, muscle spasms that increase 
fluid retention and thereby stimulate the pain nerve end-
ings, and overstretching or tearing of connective tissue 
in and around muscles and joints.
Two types of contraction accompany muscular ac-
tivity with movement (also see the Chapter 3 discussion 
on mode of training—concentric muscle contraction 
and eccentric muscle contraction—page 69). Concentric 
muscle contraction is a dynamic contraction in which 
the muscle shortens as it develops tension. Eccentric 
muscle contraction is a dynamic contraction in which 
the muscle fibers lengthen while developing tension.
For example, during the arm-curl exercise, the el-
bow flexor muscles (biceps, brachioradialis, and brachia-
lis) shorten as the weight is brought toward the shoulder 
(concentric contraction). On the way down, the muscles 
contract eccentrically as they lengthen while the person 
lowers the weight slowly to the starting position.
As you place your foot on the ground when running, 
the muscles contract eccentrically to absorb the weight of 
the body as you strike the ground. This eccentric contrac-
tion is followed by a concentric contraction of the leg as 
you push off the ground to propel the body forward.
Unlike running, cycling requires only concentric 
contractions of the 
leg muscles as you 
pedal the bicycle. 
Pushing down on 
the 
pedal 
pro-
duces a concentric 
contraction of the 
quadriceps mus-
cles. If you use toe 
clips, pulling the 
Concentric muscle contraction  A 
dynamic contraction in which the mus-
cle shortens as it develops tension.
Eccentric muscle contraction  A 
dynamic contraction in which the mus-
cle lengthens as it develops tension.
Several layers of heat-conserving, lightweight clothing are recom-
mended when exercising outdoors during the winter months.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

238
Fitness and Wellness
pedal back up to the top of the circle produces a concen-
tric contraction of the hamstring muscles.
Eccentric training has been shown to produce more 
muscle soreness than concentric training does. A hard 
running workout, therefore, produces greater muscle 
soreness than a hard cycling workout of similar intensity 
and duration.
To prevent soreness and stiffness, the recommended 
approach is to warm up gradually before physical activity 
and to stretch adequately after exercise. Do not attempt 
to do too much too quickly. If you become sore and stiff, 
you have overdone your workout. In these cases, mild 
stretching, low-intensity exercise to stimulate blood flow, 
and a warm bath can bring relief.
Stretching may be of greatest significance following 
exercise. Tired muscles tend to contract to a length that 
is shorter than normal. By-products of exercise metabo-
lism also may cause muscle spasms. Postexercise stretch-
ing thus can help return a muscle to its normal length.
Q: What causes muscle cramps, and what should be 
done when they occur?
A: Muscle cramps are caused by the body’s depletion of 
essential electrolytes or a breakdown in coordination 
between opposing muscle groups. If you have a muscle 
cramp, first attempt to stretch the muscle(s) involved. In 
the case of the calf muscle, for example, pull your toes up 
toward the knees. After stretching the affected muscles, 
rub them down gently, and finally do some mild exer-
cises requiring the use of those specific muscles.
In pregnant and lactating women and people who 
get very little calcium in the diet, muscle cramps often 
are caused by a lack of this nutrient. Calcium supple-
ments are recommended in these cases and usually re-
lieve the problem. Tight clothing also can cause cramps 
because it restricts blood flow to active muscle tissue.
Q: Why is exercising in hot and humid conditions 
unsafe?
A: When a person exercises, only 30 percent to 40 per-
cent of the energy the body produces is used for me-
chanical work or movement. The rest of the energy (60 
percent to 70 percent) is converted into heat. If this heat 
cannot be dissipated properly because the weather is too 
hot or the relative humidity is too high, body tempera-
ture increases and, in extreme cases, can result in death.
The specific heat of body tissue (the heat required to 
raise the temperature of the body by 1°C) is .38 calories 
per pound of body weight per 1°C (.38 cal/lb/°C). This 
indicates that if no body heat is dissipated, a 150-pound 
Table 9.1  Reference Guide for Exercise-Related Problems
Injury
Signs/Symptoms
Treatment*
Bruise (contusion)
Pain, swelling, discoloration
Cold application, compression, rest
Dislocations/
fractures
Pain, swelling, deformity
Splinting, cold application, seek medical attention
Heat cramps 
Cramps, spasms, and muscle twitching in the 
legs, arms, and abdomen
Stop activity, get out of the heat, stretch, massage the painful area, 
drink plenty of fluids
Heat exhaustion
Fainting, profuse sweating, cold/clammy skin, 
weak/rapid pulse, weakness, headache
Stop activity, rest in a cool place, loosen clothing, rub body with 
cool/wet towel, drink plenty of fluids, stay out of heat for 2–3 days
Heatstroke
Hot/dry skin, no sweating, serious disorientation, 
rapid/full pulse, vomiting, diarrhea, uncon-
sciousness, high body temperature
Seek immediate medical attention, request help and get out of the 
sun, bathe in cold water/spray with cold water/rub body with cold 
towels, drink plenty of cold fluids
Joint sprains
Pain, tenderness, swelling, loss of use, 
discoloration
Cold application, compression, elevation, rest, heat after 36 to  
48 hours (if no further swelling)
Muscle cramps
Pain, spasm
Stretch muscle(s), use mild exercises for involved area
Muscle soreness 
and stiffness
Tenderness, pain
Mild stretching, low-intensity exercise, warm bath
Muscle strains
Pain, tenderness, swelling, loss of use
Cold application, compression, elevation, rest, heat after 36 to 48 
hours (if no further swelling)
Shin splints
Pain, tenderness
Cold application prior to and following any physical activity, rest, 
heat (if no activity is carried out)
Side stitch
Pain on the side of the abdomen below the rib 
cage
Decrease level of physical activity or stop altogether, gradually in-
crease level of fitness
Tendinitis
Pain, tenderness, loss of use
Rest, cold application, heat after 48 hours
*Cold should be applied three to four times a day for 15 minutes. Heat can be applied three times a day for 15 to 20 minutes.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

239
Chapter 9  Relevant Fitness and Wellness Issues
person has to burn only 57 calories (150 3 .38) to in-
crease total body temperature by 1°C. If this person were 
to engage in an exercise session requiring 300 calories 
(about 3 miles running) without dissipating any heat, the 
inner body temperature would increase by 5.3°C, the 
equivalent of going from 98.6 to 108.1°F.
This example clearly illustrates the need for caution 
when exercising in hot or humid weather. If the weather 
is too hot or the relative humidity is too high, body heat 
cannot be lost through evaporation because the atmo-
sphere already is saturated with water vapor. In one in-
stance, a football casualty occurred when the outdoor 
temperature was only 64°F but the relative humidity was 
100 percent. As a general rule, a person must take care 
when air temperature is above 90°F and relative humid-
ity is above 60 percent.
Following are symptoms of and first-aid measures 
for the three major signs of trouble when exercising in 
the heat:
	1.	
Heat cramps. Symptoms include cramps and 
spasms and muscle twitching in the legs, arms, and 
abdomen. To relieve heat cramps, stop exercising, 
get out of the heat, stretch slowly, massage the 
painful area, and drink plenty of fluids (water, fruit 
drinks, or electrolyte beverages).
	2.	
Heat exhaustion. Symptoms include fainting; dizzi-
ness; profuse sweating; cold, clammy skin; weak-
ness; headache; and a rapid, weak pulse. If you de-
velop any of these symptoms, stop and find a cool 
place to rest. Drink cool water only if conscious. 
Loosen or remove clothing, and rub your body 
with a cool/wet towel or ice packs. Place yourself in 
a supine position with legs elevated 8 to 12 inches. 
If you are not fully recovered in 30 minutes, seek 
immediate medical attention.
	3.	
Heatstroke. Symptoms include serious disorienta-
tion; warm, dry skin; no sweating; rapid, full pulse; 
vomiting; diarrhea; unconsciousness; and high 
body temperature. As the body temperature climbs, 
unexplained anxiety sets in. When the body tem-
perature reaches 104°F to 105°F, the individual may 
feel a cold sensation in the trunk of the body, goose 
bumps, nausea, throbbing in the temples, and 
numbness in the extremities. Most people become 
incoherent after this stage. When body temperature 
reaches 105°F to 106°F, disorientation, loss of fine 
motor control, and muscular weakness set in. If the 
temperature exceeds 106°F, serious neurologic in-
jury and death may be imminent.
Heatstroke requires immediate emergency medical 
attention. Request help and get out of the sun and into a 
cool, humidity-controlled environment. While you’re 
waiting to be taken to the hospital’s emergency room, 
you should be placed in a semiseated position, and your 
body should be sprayed with cool water and rubbed with 
cool towels. If possible, cold packs should be placed in 
areas with abundant blood supply, such as the head, 
neck, armpits, and groin. Fluids should not be given if 
you are unconscious.
In any case of heat-related illness, if the person re-
fuses water, vomits, or starts to lose consciousness, call 
for an ambulance immediately. Proper initial treatment 
of heatstroke is critical.
Q: What are the recommended guidelines for fluid re-
placement during prolonged aerobic exercise?
A: The main objective of fluid replacement during pro-
longed aerobic exercise is to maintain the blood volume 
so circulation and sweating can continue at normal lev-
els. Adequate water replacement is the most important 
factor in preventing heat disorders. Drinking about 6 to 
8 ounces of cool water every 15 to 20 minutes during 
exercise seems to be ideal to prevent dehydration. Cold 
fluids are absorbed more rapidly from the stomach.
Commercial fluid-replacement solutions (e.g., Pow-
erade, All-Sport, Gatorade) contain about 6 percent to 8 
percent glucose, which seems to be optimal for fluid ab-
sorption and performance in most cases. Commercially 
prepared sports drinks are recommended especially 
when exercise will be strenuous and carried out for more 
than an hour. For exercise lasting less than an hour, water 
is sufficient to replace fluid loss. The sports drinks you 
select should be based on your personal preference. Try 
different drinks at 6 percent to 8 percent glucose concen-
tration to see which drink you tolerate best and suits 
Fluid and carbohydrate replacement 
is essential during prolonged 
exercise.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

240
Fitness and Wellness
your taste as well. The sugar in these products does not 
become available to the muscles until about 30 minutes 
after drinking a glucose solution.
Drinks high in fructose or with a glucose concentra-
tion above 8 percent will actually slow water absorption 
when you exercise in the heat. Most soft drinks (cola, 
noncola) contain between 10 percent and 12 percent 
glucose, an amount that is too high for proper rehydra-
tion in these circumstances.
For long-distance events, researchers recommend 
that 30 to 60 grams of carbohydrates (120 to 240 calo-
ries) be consumed every hour. This is best accomplished 
by drinking 8 ounces of a 6 percent to 8 percent carbo-
hydrate sports drink every 15 minutes. The percentage of 
the carbohydrate drink is determined by dividing the 
amount of carbohydrates (in grams) by the amount of 
fluid (in milliliters) and multiplying by 100. For example, 
18 grams of carbohydrates in 240 mL (8 oz) of fluid 
yields a drink at 7.5 percent (18 4 240 3 100).
Q: Do energy drinks enhance work capacity?
A: People tend to associate energy with work. If an en-
ergy drink can enhance work capacity, the benefits of 
such drinks would surpass plain thirst-quenching drinks. 
Unlike sports drinks, energy drinks typically contain 
sugar, herbal extracts, large amounts of caffeine, and 
water-soluble vitamins. Consumers are led to believe 
that these ingredients increase energy metabolism, pro-
vide an energy boost, improve endurance, and aid in 
weight loss. These purported benefits have yet to be 
proved through scientific research.
The energy content of many of these drinks is around 
60 grams of sugar and 240 calories in a 16-ounce drink (a 
12.5 percent glucose concentration), with little additional 
nutritive value. If you are going to participate in an intense 
and lengthy workout, the carbohydrate content can boost 
performance and help you get through the workout. If, 
however, you are concerned with weight management, 
240 calories is an extraordinarily large amount of calories 
in a 2-cup drink. Weight gain may be the end result if you 
drink a few of these throughout the day to give you a boost 
while studying or while at work. Sugar-free energy drinks, 
available for the weight-conscious consumer, provide little 
or no energy (calories), although they are packed with 
nervous system stimulants.
The high caffeine content can also have adverse 
health effects. Caffeine intake greater than 400 mg can 
precipitate cardiac arrhythmias, nervousness, irritability, 
and gastrointestinal discomfort. Many of the popular 
energy drinks (Red Bull, Sobe Adrenaline Rush, Full 
Throttle, Rip It Energy Fuel) contain about 80 mg of caf-
feine per 8-ounce cup. If you drink two 16-ounce cans, 
you’ll end up with upward of 300 mg of caffeine through 
these drinks alone. You may also have to consider addi-
tional caffeine intake from other beverages that you 
routinely consume during the day (coffee, tea, sodas).
Consumption of energy drinks has been linked 
with many a rapid heart rate (palpitations and tachycar-
dia), ischemia (lack of blood flow to the heart muscle), 
chest pain, increased blood pressure, tremors, jitters, 
convulsions, agitation, restlessness, gastrointestinal dis-
turbance, increase urination, nausea, dizziness, irrita-
bility, nervousness, syncope (loss of consciousness), 
paraesthesia (tingling or numbing of the skin), insom-
nia, respiratory distress, headaches; and most seriously, 
based on circumstantial evidence, myocardial infarc-
tions and sudden cardiac deaths. At least one sudden 
cardiac death has been reported in a 28-year-old man 
who consumed eight cans of an energy drink contain-
ing 80 mg of caffeine each over a seven-hour span of 
time. Between 2008 and 2012, the Food and Drug Ad-
ministration (FDA) received reports of 13 deaths pos-
sibly linked to the highly caffeinated drink 5-Hour En-
ergy (215 milligrams of caffeine per drink—about two 
cups of coffee) and more than 90 filings of adverse ef-
fects, including more than 30 citing life-threatening 
complications.
Energy drinks manufacturers state that the products 
are safe when used as directed. The potential for exces-
sive use or abuse, however, is real because the FDA does 
not regulate the products. As with most addictive sub-
stances, invariably a sugar and caffeine rush is likely to 
end up in a physiological crash, requiring a subsequent 
larger intake to obtain a similar “physical high,” thus 
augmenting the risk for adverse and life-threatening 
effects.
Q: What precautions must a person take when exercising 
in the cold?
A: The two factors to consider when you exercise in the 
cold are frostbite and hypothermia. In contrast to hot 
and humid conditions, exercising in the cold usually is 
not health threatening because clothing for heat conser-
vation can be selected and exercise itself increases the 
production of body heat.
Most people actually overdress for exercise in the 
cold. Because exercise increases body temperature, a 
moderate workout on a cold day makes you feel that it is 
20° to 30° warmer than the actual temperature. Over-
dressing for exercise can make the clothes damp from 
excessive perspiration. The risk for hypothermia in-
creases when a person is wet or not moving around suf-
ficiently to increase body heat. Initial warning signs of 
hypothermia include shivering, loss of coordination, and 
difficulty in speaking. With a continued drop in body 
temperature, shivering stops, the muscles weaken and 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

241
Chapter 9  Relevant Fitness and Wellness Issues
stiffen, and the person feels elated or intoxicated and 
eventually loses consciousness. To prevent hypothermia, 
use common sense, dress properly, and be aware of envi-
ronmental conditions.
The popular belief that exercising in cold tempera-
tures (32°F and lower) freezes the lungs is false because 
the air is warmed properly in the air passages before it 
reaches the lungs. The threat is not the cold; it’s the wind 
velocity—which affects the chill factor greatly.
For example, exercising at a temperature of 25°F 
with adequate clothing is not too cold, but if the wind is 
blowing at 25 miles per hour, the chill factor lowers the 
actual temperature to 15°F. This effect is even worse if a 
person is wet and exhausted. On windy days, exercise 
(jog, cycle) against the wind on the way out and with the 
wind when you return.
Even though the lungs are not at risk when you ex-
ercise in the cold, your face, head, hands, and feet should 
be protected because they are subject to frostbite. Watch 
for numbness and discoloration—signs of frostbite. In 
cold temperatures, as much as 50 percent of the body’s 
heat can be lost through an unprotected head and neck. 
A wool or synthetic cap, hood, or hat will help to hold in 
body heat. Mittens are better than gloves because they 
keep the fingers together so the surface area from which 
to lose heat is less. Inner linings of synthetic material are 
recommended because they wick moisture away from 
the skin. Avoid cotton next to the skin because, once it 
gets wet—whether from perspiration, rain, or snow—
cotton loses its insulating properties.
Wearing several layers of lightweight clothing is 
preferable to wearing one single, thick layer because 
warm air is trapped between layers of clothes, enabling 
greater heat conservation. As body temperature in-
creases, you can remove layers as necessary. For pro-
longed or long-distance workouts (cross-country skiing 
or long runs), take a small backpack to carry any cloth-
ing you remove. You also can carry extra warm and dry 
clothes in case you stop exercising away from shelter. If 
you remain outdoors following exercise, added clothing 
and continuous body movement are essential.
The first layer of clothes should wick moisture 
away from the skin. Polypropylene, Capilene, and 
Thermax are recommended. Next, a layer of wool, Da-
cron, or polyester fleece insulates well even when wet. 
Lycra tights or sweatpants help to protect the legs. The 
outer layer should be waterproof, wind-resistant, and 
breathable. A synthetic material such as Gore-Tex is 
best so moisture still can escape from the body. A ski 
mask or face mask helps to protect the face. In ex-
tremely cold conditions, petroleum jelly can be used to 
protect exposed skin such as the nose, cheeks, or 
around the eyes.
9.3 Special Considerations 
for Women
Q: What are the physiological differences between men 
and women as related to exercise?
A: Men and women have several basic differences that 
affect their physical performance. On average, men are 
about 3 to 4 inches taller and 25 to 30 pounds heavier 
than women. The average body fat in college males is 
about 12 percent to 16 percent, whereas in college fe-
males it is 22 percent to 26 percent.
Maximal oxygen uptake (aerobic capacity) is about 
15 percent to 30 percent greater in men, caused primar-
ily by their lower body fat content (essential fat), higher 
hemoglobin concentration, and larger heart size. The 
higher hemoglobin concentration allows men to carry 
more oxygen during exercise, which is advantageous 
during aerobic events. A larger heart pumps more blood 
with each stroke, thereby increasing the amount of oxy-
genated blood available to the working muscles.
The quality of muscle in men and women is the 
same. Men, however, are stronger because they have 
more muscle mass and a greater capacity for muscle hy-
pertrophy, the muscle’s ability to increase in size. The 
larger capacity for muscle hypertrophy is related to sex-
specific hormones. Strength differences are significantly 
less, though, when taking into consideration body size 
and composition.
Men also have wider shoulders, longer extremities, 
and a 10 percent greater bone width, except for pelvic 
width. Notwithstanding all these gender differences in 
physiological characteristics, the two sexes respond to 
training in a similar way.
Q: Does participation in exercise hinder menstruation?
A: In some instances highly trained athletes develop oli-
gomenorrhea or 
amenorrhea dur-
ing training and 
c o m p e t i t i o n . 
These conditions 
are often seen in 
extremely 
lean 
women with dis-
ordered eating be-
haviors who en-
gage in strenuous 
physical training 
over a sustained 
time. Amenorrhea 
is often associated 
with lower estro-
Hypothermia  A breakdown in the 
body’s ability to generate heat, result-
ing in body temperature below 95°F.
Hemoglobin  Protein-iron compound 
in red blood cells that transports oxy-
gen in the blood.
Oligomenorrhea  Irregular menstrual 
cycles.
Amenorrhea  Absence (primary 
amenorrhea) or cessation (secondary 
amenorrhea) of normal menstrual 
function.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

242
Fitness and Wellness
gen levels. Lack of estrogen leads to bone loss and a 
subsequent increase in risk for osteoporosis (also see 
question on osteoporosis on pages 243–246).
Primary amenorrhea exists when a girl has reached 
the age of 16 without menstruating or she has gone  
2 years following the development of secondary sex 
characteristics without the onset of menses. Secondary 
amenorrhea is defined as cessation of menses following 
normal menstrual cycles.
At present we do not know whether the disorders 
are caused by physical stress or emotional stress related 
to high-intensity training, excessively low body fat, or 
other factors. Intense training and decreased caloric in-
take (often seen in athletes in an attempt to improve 
performance) appears to hinder the release of hormones 
needed for normal menses.
The combination of disordered eating, secondary 
amenorrhea, and bone mineral disorders is known as the 
female athlete triad (see Figure 9.2). The triad is seen 
most often in highly trained young women who partici-
pate in sports. It is also referred to as the female triad 
because it is seen in some nonathlete women who are 
very lean and extremely active. A woman can have one, 
two, or all three parts of the triad.
The American College of Sports Medicine has is-
sued a position statement on the female athlete triad in-
dicating that these disorders can lead to decreased physi-
cal capacity, illness, and premature death.4 These 
conditions are by no means irreversible. Women who 
stop menstruating because of heavy exercise training 
should seek the advice of a physician. A gradual increase 
in daily caloric intake, slight weight gain, decreased exer-
cise training, maintenance of adequate calcium intake, 
and possible estrogen replacement therapy are all recom-
mended to treat the female athlete triad.
Q: Does exercise help relieve dysmenorrhea?
A: Although exercise has not been shown to either cure 
or aggravate dysmenorrhea, it has been shown to help 
relieve menstrual cramps because it improves circulation 
to the uterus. Particularly, stretching exercises of the 
muscles in the pelvic region seem to reduce and prevent 
painful menstruation that is not the result of a disease.
Q: Is exercising safe during pregnancy?
A: Exercise is beneficial during pregnancy. According to 
the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecolo-
gists (ACOG), in the absence of contraindications, 
healthy pregnant women are encouraged to participate 
in regular moderate-intensity physical activities to con-
tinue to derive health benefits during pregnancy.5 Preg-
nant women, however, should consult with their physi-
cians to ensure there are no contraindications to exercise 
during pregnancy (see box on the next page).
As a general rule, healthy pregnant women can also 
accumulate 30 minutes of moderate-intensity physical 
activity on most, if not all, days of the week. Physical 
activity strengthens the body and helps prepare it for the 
challenges of labor and childbirth.
The average labor and delivery lasts 10 to 12 hours. 
In most cases, labor and delivery are highly intense, 
with repeated muscular contractions interspersed with 
short rest periods. Proper conditioning will better pre-
pare the body for childbirth. Moderate exercise during 
pregnancy also helps to prevent back pain and excessive 
weight gain, and it speeds up recovery following 
childbirth.
The most common recommendations for exercise 
during pregnancy for healthy pregnant women with no 
additional risk factors are as follows:
	 1.	 Do not start a new or more rigorous exercise pro-
gram without proper medical clearance.
Figure 9.2
The female athlete triad.
© Cengage Learning
Disordered Eating
Secondary 
Amenorrhea
Bone Mineral 
Disorders
Primarily 
young 
women
Stress fractures
Low body weight
Low self-esteem
Depression
Fatigue
Anemia
Light- to moderate-intensity exercise is recommended throughout 
pregnancy.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

243
Chapter 9  Relevant Fitness and Wellness Issues
	 2.	 Accumulate 30 minutes of moderate-intensity 
physical activities on most days of the week.
	 3.	 Instead of using heart rate to monitor intensity, ex-
ercise at an intensity level that is perceived between 
“light” and “somewhat hard.” An exertion above 
“somewhat hard” is not recommended during 
pregnancy.
	 4.	 Gradually switch from weight-bearing and high-
impact activities such as jogging and aerobics, to 
non-weight-bearing/lower-impact activities such as 
walking, stationary cycling, swimming, and water 
aerobics. The latter activities minimize the risk of 
injury and may allow exercise to continue through-
out pregnancy.
	 5.	 Avoid exercising at an altitude above 6,000 feet 
(1,800 meters) or scuba diving because these may 
compromise availability of oxygen to the fetus.
	 6.	 Women who are accustomed to strenuous exercise 
may continue in the early stages of pregnancy but 
should gradually decrease the amount, intensity, 
and exercise mode as pregnancy advances (most 
healthy pregnant women, however, slow down dur-
ing the first few weeks of pregnancy because of 
morning sickness and fatigue).
	 7.	 Pay attention to the body’s signals of discomfort 
and distress and never exercise to exhaustion. 
When fatigued, slow down or take a day off. Do 
not stop exercising altogether unless you experi-
ence any of the contraindications for exercise listed 
in the box on this page.
	 8.	 To prevent fetal injury, avoid activities that involve 
potential contact or loss of balance or could cause 
even mild trauma to the abdomen. Examples of 
these activities are basketball, soccer, volleyball, 
Nordic or water skiing, ice skating, road cycling, 
horseback riding, and motorcycle riding.
	 9.	 Do not exercise for weight loss purposes during 
pregnancy.
	10.	 Get proper nourishment (pregnancy requires be-
tween 150 and 300 extra calories per day), and eat 
a small snack or drink some juice 20 to 30 minutes 
prior to exercise.
	11.	 Prevent dehydration by drinking a cup of fluids 20 
to 30 minutes before exercise and drink 1 cup of 
liquid every 15 to 20 minutes during exercise.
	12.	 During the first three months in particular, do not 
exercise in the heat. Wear clothing that allows for 
proper dissipation of heat. A body temperature 
above 102.6°F (39.2°C) can harm the fetus.
	13.	 After the first trimester, avoid exercises that require 
lying on the back. This position can block blood 
flow to the uterus and the baby.
	14.	 Perform stretching exercises gently because hor-
monal changes during pregnancy increase the laxity 
of muscles and connective tissue. Although these 
changes facilitate delivery, they also make women 
more susceptible to injuries during exercise.
Q: What is osteoporosis, and how can it be prevented?
A: Osteoporosis, literally meaning “porous bones,” is a 
condition in which bones lack the minerals required to 
keep them strong. In osteoporosis, bones—primarily 
of the hip, wrist, and spine—become so weak and 
brittle that they 
fracture 
readily. 
The process be-
gins slowly in the 
third and fourth 
decades of life. 
Women are espe-
cially susceptible 
after menopause 
because 
of 
the  
accomp any ing 
loss of estrogen, 
which 
increases 
the rate at which 
bone mass is bro-
ken down.
Female athlete triad  Three interre-
lated disorders—disordered eating, 
amenorrhea, and bone mineral disor-
ders—seen in some highly trained fe-
male athletes.
Dysmenorrhea  Painful menstruation.
Osteoporosis  Softening, deteriora-
tion, or loss of bone.
Estrogen  Female sex hormone; essen-
tial for bone formation and conserva-
tion of bone density.
Contraindications to 
Exercise During Pregnancy
Stop exercise and seek medical advice if you experience 
any of the following symptoms:
• Unusual pain or discomfort, especially in the chest or 
abdominal area
• Cramping, primarily in the pelvic or lower back areas
• Muscle weakness, excessive fatigue, or shortness of 
breath
• Abnormally high heart rate or a pounding (palpita-
tions) heart rate
• Decreased fetal movement
• Insufficient weight gain
• Amniotic fluid leakage
• Nausea, dizziness, or headaches
• Persistent uterine contractions
• Vaginal bleeding or rupture of the membranes
• Swelling of ankles, calves, hands, or face
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

244
Fitness and Wellness
According to the National Osteoporosis Founda-
tion, 10 million Americans (8 million women and 2 mil-
lion men) already have the disease and another 34 mil-
lion have low bone density, placing them at increased 
risk for osteoporosis and bone fractures. About 30 per-
cent of postmenopausal women have osteoporosis, but 
only about 2 percent are actually diagnosed and treated 
for the condition.
Osteoporosis is the leading cause of serious morbid-
ity and functional loss in the elderly population. One of 
every two women and one in eight men over age 50 will 
have an osteoporotic-related fracture at some point in 
their lives. Up to 20 percent of people who have a hip 
fracture die within a year because of complications re-
lated to the fracture. As alarming as these figures are, 
they do not convey the pain and loss of quality of life in 
people who suffer the crippling effects of osteoporotic 
fractures.
Although osteoporosis is viewed primarily as a 
women’s disease, more than 30 percent of all men will be 
affected by age 75. About 100,000 of the yearly 300,000 
hip fractures in the United States occur in men.
Despite the strong genetic component, osteoporosis 
is preventable. Maximizing bone density at a young age 
and subsequently decreasing the rate of bone loss later in 
life are critical to preventing osteoporosis.
Normal hormone levels prior to menopause and 
adequate calcium intake and physical activity through-
out life cannot be overemphasized. These factors are all 
crucial to prevent osteoporosis. The absence of any one 
of these three factors leads to bone loss for which the 
other two factors never completely compensate. Smok-
ing, excessive use of alcohol, and corticosteroid drugs 
also accelerate the rate of bone loss in women and men 
alike. Osteoporosis is also more common in whites, 
Asians, and small-frame people. Figure 9.3 depicts these 
variables.
Bone health begins at a young age. Some experts 
have called osteoporosis a “pediatric disease.” Bone 
density can be promoted early in life by making sure the 
diet has sufficient calcium and participating in weight-
bearing activities. Adequate calcium intake in both 
women and men is also associated with a reduced risk 
for colon cancer. The RDA for calcium is between 1,000 
and 1,300 mg per day (see Table 9.2).
To obtain your daily calcium requirement, get as 
much calcium as possible from calcium-rich foods, in-
cluding calcium-fortified foods. If you don’t get enough, 
you need to make a conscious and deliberate effort to 
reach the RDA. Calcium supplements are no longer rec-
ommended because they may cause more harm than 
good; including a higher risk of heart attack, kidney stones 
Osteoporosis is a major cause of 
functional loss and premature mor-
bidity in older adults.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Figure 9.3
Factors that diminish bone health 
(osteoporosis).
Extensive
use of
corticosteroids
Menopause
(or removal
of ovaries)
Age
over 50
Family
history of
osteoporosis
Heavy
drinking
Physical
inactivity
White
or Asian
Low-calcium
diet
Small
frame
Smoking
BONE
HEALTH
© Cengage Learning
Table 9.2  Recommended Daily Calcium Intake
Age
Amount (gr)
9–18 
1,300
19–50
1,000
51–70 Men
1,000
51–70 Women
1,200
.70
1,200
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

245
Chapter 9  Relevant Fitness and Wellness Issues
in both men and women, and possibly increased risk of 
prostate cancer in men. Calcium obtained from food, has 
not been linked to these negative health risks. Supple-
ments are only warranted in extreme cases, when dietary 
intake from food absolutely does not supply the need.
Table 9.3 provides a list of selected foods and their 
calcium content. Along with adequate calcium intake, tak-
ing 400 to 800 IU of vitamin D daily is the recommenda-
tion for optimal calcium absorption (for overall health 
benefits, 1,000 to 2,000 IU of vitamin D is preferable). 
Close to half of people over 50 are vitamin deficient. With-
out vitamin D1 it is practically impossible for the body to 
absorb sufficient calcium to protect the bones, half of 
people older than 50 are also vitamin D deficient.
Vitamin B12 may also be a key nutrient in the pre-
vention of osteoporosis. Several reports have shown an 
association between low vitamin B12 and lower bone 
mineral density in both men and women. Vitamin B12 is 
found primarily in dairy products, meats, poultry, fish, 
and some fortified cereals. Other nutrients vital for bone 
health are potassium (also neutralizes acid), vitamin K 
(works with bone-building proteins), and magnesium 
(also keep bone from becoming too brittle).
Soft drinks, coffee, and alcoholic beverages can also 
contribute to a loss in bone density if consumed in large 
quantities. The damage may not be caused directly by 
these food items but, rather, because they take the place 
of dairy products in the diet.
Exercise plays a key role in preventing osteoporosis 
by decreasing the rate of bone loss following menopause. 
Active people are able to maintain bone density much 
more effectively than their inactive counterparts. A com-
bination of weight-bearing exercises, such as walking or 
jogging and weight training, is especially helpful.
The benefits of exercise go beyond maintaining bone 
density. Exercise strengthens muscles, ligaments, and 
tendons—all of which provide support to the bones 
(skeleton). Exercise also improves balance and coordina-
tion, which can help prevent falls and injuries.
Current studies indicate that, on average, people 
who are active have denser bone mineral than inactive 
people do. Similar to other benefits of participating in 
exercise, there is no such thing as “bone in the bank.” To 
have good bone health, people need to participate in a 
lifetime exercise program.
Prevailing research also tells us that estrogen is the 
most important factor in preventing bone loss. Lumbar 
bone density in women who have always had regular 
menstrual cycles exceeds that of women with a history of 
oligomenorrhea and amenorrhea interspersed with reg-
ular cycles. Furthermore, the lumbar density of these two 
groups of women is higher than that of women who have 
never had regular menstrual cycles.
For instance, athletes with amenorrhea (who have 
lower estrogen levels) have lower bone mineral density 
than even nonathletes with normal estrogen levels. Stud-
ies have shown that amenorrheic athletes at age 25 have 
the bones of women older than 50. It has become clear 
that sedentary women with normal estrogen levels have 
better bone mineral density than active amenorrheic 
athletes. Many experts believe the best predictor of bone 
mineral content is the history of menstrual regularity.
As a baseline, women age 65 and older should have 
a bone density test to establish the risk for osteoporosis. 
Younger women who are at risk for osteoporosis should 
discuss a bone density test with their physician at meno-
pause. The test also can be used to monitor changes in 
bone mass over time and to predict the risk of future 
fractures. The bone density test is a painless scan requir-
ing only a small amount of radiation to determine bone 
mass of the spine, hip, wrist, heel, or fingers.
Table 9.3  Calcium-Rich Foods
Food
Amount
Calcium 
(mg)
Calories
Beans, red kidney,  
  cooked
1 cup
  70
218
Beet, greens, cooked
1⁄2 cup
  82
  19
Bok choy (Chinese
  cabbage)
1 cup
158
  20
Broccoli, cooked,  
  drained
1 cup
  72
  44
Burrito, bean  
  (no cheese)
1
  57
225
Cottage cheese,  
  2% low-fat
1⁄2 cup
  78
103
Ice milk (vanilla)
1⁄2 cup
102
100
Instant breakfast,
  nonfat milk
1 cup
407
216
Kale, cooked, drained
1 cup
  94
  36
Milk, nonfat, powdered
1 tbs
  52
  15
Milk, skim
1 cup
296
  88
Oatmeal, instant,
  fortified, plain
1⁄2 cup
109
  70
Okra, cooked, drained
1⁄2 cup
  74
  23
Orange juice, fortified
1 cup
300
110
Soy milk, fortified, fat 
  free
1 cup
400
110
Spinach, raw
1 cup
  56
  12
Turnip greens, cooked
1 cup
197
  29
Tofu (some types)
1⁄2 cup
138
  76
Yogurt, fruit
1 cup
372
250
Yogurt, low-fat, plain
1 cup
448
155
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

246
Fitness and Wellness
Various therapy modalities available to prevent and/
or treat osteoporosis should be discussed with a physi-
cian. If you have osteoporosis, lifestyle changes may be 
required, and you may also need medication to prevent 
future fractures. A calcium-rich diet, adequate vitamin 
D, daily exercise, and drug therapy are all treatment 
options.
New medical treatments have been developed and 
continue to evolve to prevent and treat bone loss. The 
newer medications can be classified into two categories: 
antiresorptive and anabolic. Antiresorptive medications 
slow bone loss, but the body still makes new bone at the 
same rate, so bone density may increase. The drugs that 
fall into this category include bisphosphonates, calcito-
nin, denosumab, estrogen agonists/antagonists (also re-
ferred to as selective estrogen receptor modulators, or 
SERMs), and menopausal hormone therapy (MHT). 
Anabolic medications increase the rate of bone forma-
tion. The only FDA approved drug in this category is 
teriparatide, a form of parathyroid hormone.
Menopausal hormone therapy (MHT) may be the 
most effective treatment to relieve acute (short-term) 
symptoms of menopause, such as hot flashes, mood 
swings, sleep difficulties, and vaginal dryness. Due to 
potential health risks, experts recommend that women 
on MHT use the lowest dose that still provides benefits 
and use it for the shortest time needed. Regardless of the 
treatment modality, women should always work with a 
physician to determine the best course of action.
Q: Do women have special needs for iron?
A: Iron is a key element of hemoglobin in blood. The 
RDA of iron for adult women is between 15 and 18 mg 
per day (8 to 11 mg for men). Inadequate iron intake is 
often seen in children, teenagers, women of childbearing 
age, and endurance athletes. If iron absorption does not 
compensate for losses or dietary intake is low, iron defi-
ciency develops.
As many as 50 percent of American women have a 
deficiency of iron. Over time, excessive depletion of iron 
stores in the body leads to iron-deficiency anemia, a 
condition in which the concentration of hemoglobin in 
the red blood cells is lower than it should be; this leads to 
fatigue and headaches, among other symptoms.
Physically active individuals, women in particular, 
have a greater-than-average need for iron. Heavy train-
ing creates a demand for iron that is higher than the 
recommended intake because small amounts of iron are 
lost through sweat, urine, and stools. Mechanical trauma, 
caused by the pounding of the feet on the pavement dur-
ing extensive jogging, may also lead to destruction of 
iron-containing red blood cells.
A large percentage of female endurance athletes are 
reported to have iron deficiency. The blood ferritin lev-
els of women who participate in intense physical training 
should be checked frequently.
The rates of iron absorption and iron loss vary from 
person to person. In most cases, though, people can get 
enough iron by eating more iron-rich foods such as beans, 
peas, green leafy vegetables, enriched grain products, egg 
yolk, fish, and lean meats. Although organ meats, such as 
liver, are especially good sources, they also are high in cho-
lesterol. A list of foods high in iron is given in Table 9.4.
9.4  Nutrition and Weight 
Control
Q: What is the difference between a calorie and a kilo-
calorie (kcal)?
A: A calorie is the unit of measure indicating the energy 
value of food to the person who consumes it. It is also 
used to express the amount of energy a person expends 
in physical activity. Technically, a kilocalorie (kcal), or 
large calorie, is the amount of heat necessary to raise the 
Table 9.4  Iron-Rich Foods
Food
Amount
Iron 
(mg)
Calories
Calories 
from Fat
Beans, red  
  kidney, cooked
1 cup
4.4
218
  4%
Beef, ground lean
3 oz
3.0
186
48%
Beef, sirloin
3 oz
2.5
329
74%
Beef, liver, fried
3 oz
7.5
195
42%
Beet greens,  
  cooked
1⁄2 cup
1.4
  13
—
Broccoli, cooked,  
  drained
1 sm stalk
1.1
  36
—
Burrito, bean
1
2.4
307
28%
Egg, hard-cooked
1
1.0
  72
63%
Farina (Cream of  
  Wheat), cooked
1⁄2 cup
6.0
  51
—
Instant breakfast,  
  whole milk
1 cup
8.0
280
26%
Peas, frozen,  
  cooked, drained
1⁄2 cup
1.5
  55
—
Shrimp, boiled
3 oz
2.7
  99
  9%
Spinach, raw
1 cup
1.7
  14
—
Vegetables, mixed,  
  cooked
1 cup
2.4
116
—
Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

247
Chapter 9  Relevant Fitness and Wellness Issues
temperature of 1 kilogram of water 1° Celsius. For sim-
plicity, people call it a calorie rather than a kcal. For ex-
ample, if the caloric value of a food is 100 calories (that 
is, 100 kcal), the energy in this food would raise the 
temperature of 100 kilograms of water 1° Celsius. Simi-
larly, walking 1 mile would burn about 100 calories 
(again, 100 kcal).
Q: What constitutes ideal body weight?
A: There is no such thing as “ideal” body weight. Health/
fitness professionals prefer to use the terms “recom-
mended” or “healthy” body weight. Let’s examine the 
question in more detail. For instance, 25 percent body fat 
is the recommended health fitness standard for a 40-year-
old man. For the average “apparently healthy” individual, 
this body fat percentage does not constitute a threat to 
good health. Due to genetic and lifestyle conditions, how-
ever, if a person this same age at 25 percent body fat is 
pre-diabetic, pre-hypertensive, and with abnormal blood 
lipids (cholesterol and triglycerides—see Chapter 8), 
weight (fat) loss and a lower percent body fat may be rec-
ommended. Thus, what will work as recommended weight 
for most individuals may not be the best standard for in-
dividuals with disease risk factors. The current recom-
mended or healthy weight standards (based on percent 
body fat or BMI) are established at the point where there 
appears to be a lower incidence for overweight- 
related conditions for most people. Individual differences 
have to be taken into consideration when making a final 
recommendation, especially in people with risk factors or 
a personal and family history of chronic conditions.
Q: What is more important for weight loss—a negative 
caloric balance (diet) or an increase in physical activity?
A: Most of the research shows that weight loss is more ef-
fective when cutting back on calories (dieting) as opposed 
to only increasing physical activity or exercise. Weight loss 
is accelerated, nonetheless, when physical activity is added 
to dieting, as long as the person doesn’t compensate with 
extra food intake following physical activity (a common 
occurrence among people who exercise, as they feel justi-
fied in doing so because they exercised).
During the last few years, there has been a fair 
amount of media distortion stating “exercise makes a 
person fat,” “why most of us believe that exercise makes 
us thinner—and why we are wrong,” and “the myth 
about exercise: of course it’s good for you, but it won’t 
make you lose weight.” There is ample scientific evidence 
that exercise is an important component of a successful 
weight loss program. The problem is that following exer-
cise, many people eat more (particularly more junk 
food).
When attempting to lose weight, initial lengthy ex-
ercise sessions (longer than 60 minutes) by unfit people 
may not be the best approach to weight loss—unless they 
carefully monitor daily caloric intake and avoid caloric 
compensation for the energy expended during exercise. 
In active or fit individuals, lengthy exercise sessions are 
not counterproductive.
Body composition changes are also more effective 
when dieting and exercise are combined while attempt-
ing to lose body weight. Most weight loss when dieting 
with exercise comes in the form of body fat and not lean 
body tissue, a desirable outcome. Weight loss mainte-
nance, however, in most cases is possible only with 60 to 
90 minutes of sustained daily physical activity and exer-
cise. If you are still not convinced that exercise is the best 
approach to weight management, take a look around the 
gym or the jogging trail. If this were the case, wouldn’t 
those who regularly exercise be the fattest?
Q: Are some diets plans more effective than others?
A: The term “diet” implies a negative caloric balance. A 
negative caloric balance means that you are consuming 
fewer calories than those required to maintain your 
current weight. When energy output surpasses energy 
intake, weight loss will occur. Popular diets differ 
widely in the food choices you are allowed to have. The 
more limited the choices, the lower the chances to over-
eat, and thus you will have a lower caloric intake. And 
the fewer the calories that you consume, the greater the 
weight loss. For health reasons, to obtain the variety of 
nutrients the body 
needs, even dur-
ing weight loss 
periods, 
most 
Ferritin  Iron stored in the body.
A wellness lifestyle provides the freedom to live life to its fullest with-
out functional limitations.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

248
Fitness and Wellness
people should not consume fewer than 1,500 calories 
per day. These calories should be distributed over a 
wide range of foods, emphasizing grains, fruits, vegeta-
bles, and small amounts of low-fat animal products or 
fish.
Q: Is light-intensity aerobic exercise more effective in 
burning fat for weight loss purposes?
A: Without a question, vigorous-intensity aerobic exer-
cise is more effective. True, during light-intensity exer-
cise a greater percentage of the energy is derived from 
fat. It is also true that an even greater percentage of the 
energy comes from fat when doing absolutely nothing 
(resting/sleeping). And when one does nothing, as in a 
sedentary lifestyle, one doesn’t burn many calories.
Let’s examine this issue. During resting conditions, 
the human body is a very efficient “fat-burning ma-
chine.” That is, most of the energy, approximately 70 
percent, is derived from fat and only 30 percent from 
carbohydrates. But we burn few calories at rest, about 1.5 
calories per minute compared to 3 to 4 calories during 
light-intensity exercise and 8 to 10 calories per minute 
during vigorous-intensity exercise. As we begin to exer-
cise, and subsequently increase the intensity of exercise, 
we progressively rely more on carbohydrates and less on 
fat for energy, until we reach maximal intensity when 
100 percent of the energy is derived from carbohydrates. 
Even though a lower percentage of the energy is derived 
from fat during vigorous-intensity exercise, the total ca-
loric expenditure is so much greater (twice as high or 
more), that overall the total fat burned is still higher than 
during moderate intensity.
A word of caution, nonetheless: Do not start vigor-
ous-intensity exercise without several weeks of proper 
and gradual conditioning. This advice particularly ap-
plies if such exercise is a high-impact activity. If you 
participate in high-impact activities from the outset, you 
increase the risk of injury and may have to stop exercis-
ing altogether.
Q: Will stretching exercises help me lose weight?
A: The energy (caloric) expenditure of stretching exercises 
is extremely low. In 30 minutes of aerobic exercise you can 
easily burn an additional 250 to 300 calories as compared 
with 30 minutes of stretching. Flexibility exercises help 
develop overall health-related fitness but do not contrib-
ute much to weight loss or weight maintenance.
Q: Does fasting or detox diets “cleanse” the body and rid 
it of toxins and poisons?
A: Popular cleansing, fasting, liquid, and detox diets on 
the market today lead consumers to believe that aid the 
body in removing toxins, and chemicals. It may sound 
like a good concept, but the claims are unsubstantiated 
with no scientific proof to this effect. The notion behind 
these claims is that the body holds onto harmful sub-
stances in the gastrointestinal tract and the lymph sys-
tem. The digestive system, liver, kidneys, and lungs, 
however are very effective at cleansing the body and you 
do not need to stop eating to help the process. If you are 
concerned about your diet and the environment in 
which you live (excess alcohol and caffeine, tobacco use, 
drugs, pesticides, smog, chemicals to grow and prepare 
food, sugar, artificial sweeteners, or unhealthy water), 
you need to make healthy changes in your lifestyle, but 
you do not need cleansing.
Weight loss as a result of one to three days of near 
fasting is primarily due to water loss and not fat loss. 
Your health may improve with a detox diet because these 
diets are highly restrictive in food choices. You can ac-
complish the same results by eating more fruits and 
vegetables, and fewer calories, refined/processed foods, 
and high fat/saturated/trans fat foods.
Q: Can a healthy diet reduce cancer risk?
A: Much research is currently under way to examine the 
effects of foods in preventing and fighting off cancer. 
There is strong scientific evidence that a healthy diet and 
maintenance of recommended body weight reduce can-
cer risk. The current state of knowledge, however, cannot 
indicate that a certain dietary pattern will absolutely re-
duce your cancer risk. Years of research will be required 
to unravel most of this knowledge. Moreover, science 
may never be able to provide conclusive evidence that a 
certain diet will prevent cancer in most cases. Many of 
the foods that are currently recommended in a cancer-
prevention diet, nonetheless, are similar to those encour-
aged to decrease disease risk and enhance health and 
overall well-being. If you are truly adhering to healthy 
dietary guidelines (see Behavior Modification Planning 
box on page 137), you are most likely eating the right 
foods to decrease your cancer risk.
Q: Are fruits and vegetables less nutritious today?
A: The notion that the soil is depleted of nutrients is one 
of those myths that has been hard to rectify. Fruits, veg-
etables, and grains would not be sold or purchased by 
consumers if they contained insufficient nutrition. More-
over, without adequate nutrients in the soil, plants would 
not grow due to insect infestation, disease, and poor 
appearance.
Many other scientists have echoed these words. Pro-
moters of this myth are either misinformed or are not 
telling you the truth. Most of the time, they are simply 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

249
Chapter 9  Relevant Fitness and Wellness Issues
trying to promote supplements for personal financial 
gain.
Q: Are organic foods better than conventional foods?
A: Concerns over pesticides in foods have led many 
people to turn to organic foods. Currently, less than 2 
percent of imported food products are inspected by the 
FDA and domestic food is seldom inspected at all. 
Health risks from pesticide exposure from foods are rela-
tively small for healthy adults. The health benefits of 
produce far outweigh the risks. Children, older adults, 
pregnant and lactating women, and people with a weak 
immune system, however, may be vulnerable to some 
types of pesticides.
Organic crops have to be grown without the use of 
conventional pesticides, artificial fertilizers, human 
waste, or sewage sludge and have been processed without 
ionizing radiation or food additives. Organic livestock is 
raised under certain grazing conditions, using organic 
feed, and without the use of antibiotics and growth 
hormones.
While pesticide residues in organic foods are substan-
tially lower than in conventionally grown foods, organic 
foods can also be contaminated with bacteria, pathogens, 
and heavy metals that pose major health risks. The soil 
itself may become contaminated, or if the produce comes 
in contact with feces of grazing cattle, wild animals or 
birds, farmworkers, or any other source, potentially harm-
ful microorganisms can contaminate the produce.
Q: Are “natural” supplements to boost metabolism safe?
A: Supplements to boost metabolism contain stimulants 
that are harmful to individuals sensitive to such sub-
stances. These stimulants can also cause damage to peo-
ple with metabolic disorders, heart disease, and high 
blood pressure. A physician or registered dietitian should 
be consulted prior to taking such supplements.
Q: Do athletes or individuals who train for long periods 
need a special diet?
A: In general, athletes do not require special supplemen-
tation or any other special type of diet. Unless the diet is 
deficient in basic nutrients, no special, secret, or magic 
diet will help people perform better or develop faster as 
a result of what they eat. As long as the diet is balanced, 
based on a large variety of nutrients from the basic food 
groups, athletes do not require additional supplements. 
Even in strength training and body building, protein in 
excess of 20 percent of total daily caloric intake is not 
necessary.
The main difference between a sedentary person 
and a highly active individual is in the total number of 
calories required daily and the amount of carbohydrate 
intake during bouts of prolonged physical activity. Dur-
ing training, people consume more calories because of 
the greater energy expenditure required as a result of 
intense physical training.
A regular diet should be altered to include about 70 
percent carbohydrates (carbohydrate loading) during 
several days of heavy aerobic training or when a person 
is going to participate in a long-distance event of more 
Vigorous-intensity exercise is by far more effective in producing 
weight (fat) loss, as long as the individual does not compensate by 
eating additional calories following exercise.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

250
Fitness and Wellness
than 90 minutes (marathons, triathlons, road cycling 
races). For events shorter than 90 minutes, carbohydrate 
loading does not seem to enhance performance.
Q: What is gluten sensitivity?
A: Gluten sensitivity falls under an umbrella of adverse 
effects on the body caused by gluten, a protein found in 
wheat, barley, rye, malts, and triticale. Gluten is also used 
as an additive for flavoring and stabilizing food or as a 
thickening agent.
About 1 percent of Americans suffer from celiac 
disease, an autoimmune disorder in genetically predis-
posed people of all ages that damages the lining of the 
small intestine and the ability to absorb nutrients. The 
disease is caused by a reaction to gluten, leading to an 
inflammatory reaction that induces a series of symp-
toms, including vomiting, severe abdominal pain, diar-
rhea, and fatigue. A gluten-free diet is the accepted treat-
ment for individuals with celiac disease.
Many people test negative for celiac disease but ap-
pear to be gluten sensitive. They indicate that they feel 
better when they eliminate gluten from the diet. A  
gluten-free diet, however, is not completely free of glu-
ten; rather, it contains a low, harmless level. Switching to 
a healthy diet often helps gluten-sensitive individuals 
because processed and junk foods tend to have high 
amounts of gluten. Some gluten in the diet may not affect 
these people much.
Q: Should I worry about sugar in my diet?
A: Until recently, the most significant health concerns 
regarding excessive sugar intake included increased 
caloric intake, weight gain, obesity, tooth decay, and 
lower nutrient intake (empty calories with no nutri-
tional benefit whatsoever). Consumption of one or two 
sugar-sweetened beverages per day has been found to 
increase coronary heart disease risk by up to 35 percent 
and regular soft drink consumers have about an 80 
percent greater risk for developing type 2 diabetes. Ex-
cessive body weight increases the risk for metabolic 
syndrome and heart disease. People who consume a 
sugar-heavy diet also run a greater risk for pancreatic 
cancer.
Data indicates that the typical American consumes 
about 475 daily calories from added sugar, the equivalent 
of 30 teaspoons per day. Most people simply cannot af-
ford all those extra daily empty calories. The American 
Heart Association recommends no more than 6 and 9 
daily teaspoons of added sugar for women and men, re-
spectively. Data also indicate that liquid calories (soft 
drinks) do not result in less food consumption during a 
meal.
The American Diabetes Association indicates that 
soft drinks and sweetened drinks are the biggest source 
of sugar in the diet, accounting for 38 percent of all 
added sugar intake (each 12-ounce can of soft drink 
contains about 10 teaspoons of sugar). The soda industry 
generates about 47 gallons of soft drink per year for each 
American. Other drinks that are loaded with sugar in-
clude fruit drinks, iced teas, sports drinks, and energy 
drinks. Plain sugar, candy, and desserts account for an-
other 34 percent of the added sugar intake.
Q: Fish is known to be heart healthy, but should we have 
concerns about mercury toxicity?
A: Fish and shellfish contain high-quality protein, 
omega-3 fatty acids, and other essential nutrients. Data 
indicate that eating as little as six ounces of fatty fish per 
week can reduce the risk of premature death from heart 
disease by one-third and overall death rates by about 
one-sixth. Fish also appears to have anti-inflammatory 
properties that can help treat chronic inflammatory kid-
ney disease, osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, Crohn’s 
disease, and autoimmune disorders like asthma and lu-
pus. Thus, fish is one of the healthiest foods we can 
consume.
Mercury in fish has created concerns among some 
people. Mercury cannot be removed from food. As it ac-
cumulates in the body, it harms the brain and nervous 
system. Mercury is a naturally occurring trace mineral 
that can be released into the air from industrial pollu-
tion. As mercury falls into streams and oceans, it accu-
mulates in the aquatic food chain. Larger fish accumulate 
larger amounts of mercury because they eat medium- 
and small-size fish. Of particular concern are shark, 
swordfish, king mackerel, pike, bass, and tilefish, which 
have higher levels. Farm-raised salmon also have slightly 
higher levels of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), which 
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency lists as a 
“probable human carcinogen.”
The risk for adverse effects from eating fish is ex-
tremely low and primarily theoretical in nature. For 
most people, eating two servings (up to six ounces) of 
fish per week poses no health threat. Pregnant and nurs-
ing women and young children, however, should avoid 
mercury in fish. The best recommendation is to balance 
the risks against the benefits. If you are still concerned, 
consume no more than 12 ounces per week of a variety 
of fish and shellfish that are lower in mercury, including 
canned light tuna, wild salmon, shrimp, pollock, catfish, 
and scallops. And check local advisories about the safety 
of fish caught by family and friends in local streams, riv-
ers, lakes, and coastal areas. Some preventive medicine 
experts now believe that fish is most likely the single 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

251
Chapter 9  Relevant Fitness and Wellness Issues
most important food an individual can consume for 
good health.
Q: Are there specific nutrient requirements for optimal 
development and recovery following exercise?
A: Carbohydrates with some protein appear to be best. 
Protein is recommended prior to and immediately fol-
lowing high-intensity aerobic or strength-training exer-
cise. Intense exercise causes micro-tears in muscle tissue, 
and the presence of amino acids (the building blocks of 
proteins) in the blood contributes to the healing process 
and subsequent development and strengthening of the 
muscle fibers. Protein consumption along with carbohy-
drates also accelerates glycogen replenishment in the 
body after intense or prolonged exercise. Thus, carbohy-
drates provide energy for exercise and replenishment of 
glycogen stores after exercise, while protein optimizes 
muscle repair, growth, glycogen replenishment, and re-
covery following exercise. Aim for a ratio of 4-to-1 
grams of carbohydrates to protein. For example, you may 
consume a snack that contains 40 grams of carbohy-
drates (160 calories) and 10 grams of protein (40 calo-
ries). Examples of good recovery foods include milk and 
cereal, a tuna fish sandwich, a peanut butter and jelly 
sandwich, or pasta with turkey meat sauce.
Q: What do the terms “glycemic index” and “glycemic 
load” mean?
A: The glycemic index (GI) provides a numeric value that 
measures the blood glucose (sugar) response following 
ingestion of individual carbohydrate foods. Carbohydrates 
that are quickly absorbed and cause a rapid rise in blood 
glucose are said to have a high GI. Those that break down 
slowly and gradually release glucose into the blood have a 
low GI. Consumption of high glycemic foods in combina-
tion with some fat and protein, nonetheless, brings down 
the average index. The glycemic load (GL) is calculated by 
multiplying the GI of a particular food by its carbohydrate 
content in grams and dividing by 100. The usefulness of 
the glycemic load is based on the theory that a high-glyce-
mic—index food eaten in small quantities provides a simi-
lar effect in blood sugar rise as consumption of a larger 
quantity of a low-glycemic food. The most accurate source 
of the GI and GL of 750 foods has been published in the 
Journal of Clinical Nutrition at www.ajcn.org/content/ 
76/1/5.full.pdf1html.
Q: What is the difference between antioxidants and 
phytonutrients?
A: Antioxidants, comprising vitamins, minerals, and 
phytonutrients, help prevent damage to cells from highly 
reactive and unstable molecules known as oxygen free 
radicals (see page 216). Antioxidants are found both in 
plant and animal foods, whereas phytonutrients are 
found in plant foods only, including fruits, vegetables, 
beans, nuts, and seeds. The actions of phytonutrients, 
however, go beyond those of most antioxidants. In par-
ticular, they appear to have powerful anticancer proper-
ties. For example, at almost every stage of cancer, phyto-
nutrients can block, disrupt, slow, or even reverse the 
process. In terms of heart disease, they may reduce in-
flammation, inhibit blood clots, or prevent the oxidation 
of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol. People should 
consume ample amounts of plant-based foods to obtain 
a healthy supply of antioxidants, including a wide array 
of phytonutrients.
9.5  Exercise and Aging
Q: What is the relationship between aging and physical 
work capacity?
A: The elderly constitute the fastest-growing segment of 
the population. The number of Americans ages 65 and 
older increased from 3.1 million in 1900 (4.1 percent of 
the population) to about 40 million (13 percent) in 2010. 
By the year 2030, more than 72 million people, or 20 
percent of the U.S. population, are expected to be older 
than 65.
The main objective of fitness programs for older 
adults is to help them improve their functional fitness 
and contribute to healthy aging. This implies the ability 
to maintain functional independence and to avoid dis-
ability. Older adults are encouraged to participate in 
programs that will help develop cardiorespiratory endur-
ance, muscular strength and endurance, muscular flexi-
bility, agility and balance, and motor coordination.
Data on individuals who have taken part in systematic 
physical activity throughout life indicate that these groups 
of people maintain a higher level of functional capacity and 
do not experience the typical declines in later years. From 
a functional point of view, typical sedentary Americans  
are about 25 years older than their chronological age indi-
cates. Thus, an active 60-year-old person can have a work 
capacity similar to 
that of a sedentary 
35-year-old.
Un h e a l t h y 
behaviors precipi-
tate premature ag-
ing. For sedentary 
people, productive 
life ends at about 
age 60. Most of 
these people hope 
Functional fitness  The physical ca-
pacity of the individual to meet ordi-
nary and unexpected demands of daily 
life safely and effectively.
Functional independence  Ability to 
carry out activities of daily living with-
out assistance from other individuals.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

252
Fitness and Wellness
to live to be 65 or 70 and often must cope with serious 
physical ailments. These people stop living at age 60 but 
choose to be buried at age 70! (See the theoretical model 
in Figure 9.4.)
A healthy lifestyle allows people to live a vibrant 
life—physically, intellectually, emotionally, socially ac-
tive, and functionally independent existence—to age 95. 
When death comes to active people, it usually is rather 
quick and not as a result of prolonged illness (see Figure 
9.4). Such are the rewards of a wellness way of life.
Regular participation in physical activity provides 
both physiological and physical benefits to older adults.6 
Cardiorespiratory endurance training helps to increase 
functional capacity, decrease the risk for disease, im-
prove health status, and increase life expectancy. Strength 
training decreases the rate of strength and muscle mass 
loss commonly associated with aging. Among the psy-
chological benefits are preserved cognitive function, re-
duced symptoms and behaviors related to depression, 
and improved self-confidence and self-esteem.
Have you ever considered how you would like to feel and 
what type of activities you would like to carry on after age 
65? • What will it take for you to accomplish your goals?
Critical Thinking
Q: Do older adults respond to physical training?
A: The trainability of older men and women alike and 
the effectiveness of physical activity in enhancing health 
have been demonstrated in prior research. Older adults 
who increase their physical activity experience signifi-
cant changes in cardiorespiratory endurance, strength, 
and flexibility. The extent of the changes depends on 
their initial fitness level and the types of activities they 
select for their training (walking, cycling, strength train-
ing, and so on).
Improvements in maximal oxygen uptake in older 
adults are similar to those of younger people, although 
older people seem to require a longer training period to 
achieve these changes. Declines in maximal oxygen up-
take average about 1 percent per year between ages 25 
and 75. A slower rate of decline is seen in people who 
maintain a lifetime aerobic exercise program.
Results of research on the effects of aging on the 
cardiorespiratory system of male exercisers versus non-
exercisers showed that the maximal oxygen uptake of 
regular exercisers was almost twice that of the nonexer-
cisers.7 The study revealed a decline in maximal oxygen 
uptake, between ages 50 and 68, of only 13 percent in the 
active group compared to 41 percent in the inactive 
group. These changes indicate that about one-third of the 
loss in maximal oxygen uptake results from aging and 
two-thirds of the loss comes from inactivity.
Blood pressure, heart rate, and body weight also 
were remarkably better in the exercising group. Further-
more, aerobic training seems to decrease high blood 
pressure in the older participants at the same rate as in 
young, hypertensive people.
Muscle strength declines by 10 percent to 20 per-
cent between the ages of 20 and 50, but between ages 50 
and 70 it drops by another 25 percent to 30 percent. 
Through strength training, frail adults in their 80s or 
90s can double or triple their strength in just a few 
months. The amount of muscle hypertrophy achieved, 
however, decreases with age. Strength gains close to  
200 percent have been found in previously inactive 
adults older than 90. In fact, research has shown that 
regular strength training improves balance, gait, speed, 
functional independence, morale, depression symp-
toms, and energy intake.8
Although muscle flexibility drops by about 5 percent 
per decade of life, 10 minutes of stretching every other 
day can prevent most of this loss as a person ages. Im-
proved flexibility enhances mobility skills. The latter 
promotes independence because it helps older adults 
successfully perform activities of daily living.
In terms of body composition, inactive adults con-
tinue to gain body fat after age 60 despite the tendency 
toward lower body weight. Sedentary adults gain more 
than 30 pounds of body weight between ages 18 and 55. 
As a result, body fat continues to increase through adult 
life, with a greater tendency toward visceral fat accumula-
tion (especially in men), leading to further increase in risk 
for chronic disease. Regular aerobic activity and strength 
Regular physical activity enhances quality of life and longevity.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

253
Chapter 9  Relevant Fitness and Wellness Issues
training have been shown to help older adults properly 
manage body weight and significantly reduce visceral fat.
Older adults who wish to initiate an exercise pro-
gram are strongly encouraged to have a complete medi-
cal evaluation. Recommended activities for older adults 
include calisthenics, walking, jogging, swimming, cy-
cling, water aerobics, and strength training.
Older people should avoid isometric and very 
high-intensity strength-training exercises. Activities 
that require all-out effort or require participants to hold 
their breath (Valsalva maneuver) tend to lessen blood 
flow to the heart and cause a significant increase in 
blood pressure and the load placed on the heart. Older 
adults should participate in activities that require con-
tinuous and rhythmic muscular activity (about 40 per-
cent to 60 percent 
of functional ca-
pacity). These ac-
tivities 
do 
not 
cause large in-
creases in blood 
pressure or place 
an intense over-
load on the heart.
Activities of daily living  Everyday 
behaviors that people normally do to 
function in life (cross the street, carry 
groceries, lift objects, do laundry, 
sweep floors).
Figure 9.4
Relationships among physical work capacity, aging, and lifestyle habits.
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100
Lifetime active/healthy lifestyle   
Sedentary unhealthy lifestyle   
Implementation of active/healthy 
lifestyle later in life   
100%
Death
Physical work capacity
Age
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

254
Fitness and Wellness
9.6  Fitness/Wellness 
Consumer Issues
Q: How do I protect myself from quackery and fraud in 
the fitness/wellness industry?
A: The rapid growth in fitness and wellness programs 
during the past three decades has spurred quackery and 
fraud. The promotion of fraudulent products has de-
ceived consumers into adopting “miraculous,” quick, and 
easy ways toward total well-being.
Today’s market is saturated with “special” foods, di-
ets, supplements, pills, cures, equipment, books, and 
videos that promise quick, dramatic results. Advertise-
ments for these products often are based on testimonials, 
unproven claims, secret research, half-truths, and quick-
fix statements that the uneducated consumer wants to 
hear. In the meantime, the organization or enterprise 
making the claims stands to reap a large profit from con-
sumers’ willingness to pay for astonishing and spectacu-
lar solutions to problems related to their unhealthy 
lifestyle.
Television, magazine, and newspaper advertise-
ments are not necessarily reliable. For instance, one piece 
of equipment sold through television and newspaper 
advertisements promised to “bust the gut” through 5 
minutes of daily exercise that appeared to target the ab-
dominal muscle group. This piece of equipment con-
sisted of a metal spring attached to the feet on one end 
and held in the hands on the other end. According to 
handling and shipping distributors, the equipment was 
“selling like hotcakes,” and companies could barely keep 
up with consumers’ demands.
Three problems became apparent to the educated 
consumer. First, there is no such thing as spot-reducing; 
therefore, the claims could not be true. Second, five min-
utes of daily exercise burn hardly any calories and, there-
fore, have no effect on weight loss. Third, the intended ab-
dominal (gut) muscles were not really involved during the 
exercise. The exercise engaged mostly the gluteal and lower 
back muscles. This piece of equipment could then be found 
at garage sales for about a tenth of its original cost!
Although people in the United States tend to be firm 
believers in the benefits of physical activity and positive 
lifestyle habits as a means to promote better health, most 
do not reap these benefits because they simply do not 
know how to put into practice a sound fitness and well-
ness program that will give them the results they want. 
Unfortunately, many uneducated wellness consumers are 
targets of deception by organizations making fraudulent 
claims for their products.
Deception is not limited to advertisements. Deceit is 
found all around us. One can find it in newspaper and 
magazine articles, trade books, radio, and television 
shows. To make a profit, popular magazines occasionally 
exaggerate health claims or leave out pertinent informa-
tion to avoid offending advertisers. Some publishers 
print books on diets or self-treatment approaches that 
have no scientific foundation. Consumers should even 
be cautious about news reports of the latest medical 
breakthroughs. Reporters have been known to overlook 
important information or give certain findings greater 
credence than they deserve.
Precautions must also be taken when seeking health 
advice on the Internet. The Internet is full of both cred-
ible and dubious information. The following tips can 
help as you conduct a search on the Internet:
• 
Look for credentials of the person or organization 
sponsoring the site.
• 
Check when the site was last updated. Credible 
sites are updated often.
• 
Check the appearance of the information on the 
site. It should be presented in a professional man-
ner. If every sentence ends with an exclamation 
point, you have good cause for suspicion.
• 
Be cautious if the site’s sponsor is trying to sell a 
product. If so, be leery of opinions posted on the 
site. They could be biased, given that the company’s 
main objective is to sell a product. Credible compa-
nies trying to sell a product on the Internet usually 
reference their sources of health information and 
provide additional links that support their product.
• 
Compare the content of a site to other credible 
sources. The content should compare favorably to 
that of other reputable sites or publications.
• 
Note the address and contact information for the 
company. A reliable company will list more than a 
post office box, an 800 number, and the company’s 
e-mail address. When only the latter information is 
provided, consumers may never be able to locate 
the company for questions, concerns, or refunds.
• 
Be on the alert for companies that claim to be in-
novators while criticizing competitors or the gov-
ernment for being close-minded or trying to keep 
them from doing business.
• 
Watch for advertisers that use valid medical termi-
nology in an irrelevant context or use vague 
pseudo-medical jargon to sell their product.
Not all people who promote fraudulent products 
know they are doing so. Some may be convinced that the 
product is effective. If you have questions or concerns 
about a health product, you may write to the National 
Council Against Health Fraud (NCAHF), P.O. Box 141, 
Fort Lee, NJ 07021. The purpose of this organization is to 
provide consumers with responsible, reliable, evidence-
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

255
Chapter 9  Relevant Fitness and Wellness Issues
driven health information. The organization also moni-
tors deceitful advertising, investigates complaints, and 
offers public information regarding fraudulent health 
claims. You may also report any type of quackery to the 
NCAHF on its Web site at www.ncahf.org/. The site con-
tains an updated list of reliable and unreliable health 
Web sites for the consumer.
Other consumer protection organizations offer to 
follow up on complaints about quackery and fraud. The 
existence of these organizations, however, should not 
give the consumer a false sense of security. The over-
whelming number of complaints made each year to these 
organizations makes it impossible for them to follow up 
on each case individually.
The FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation Research, for 
example, has developed a priority system to determine 
which health fraud product it should regulate first. Prod-
ucts are rated on how great a risk they pose to the con-
sumer. With this in mind, you can use the following list 
of organizations to make an educated decision before 
you spend your money. You can also report consumer 
fraud to these organizations:
• 
Better Business Bureau (BBB). The BBB can tell 
you whether other customers have lodged com-
plaints about a product, a company, or a salesper-
son. You can find a listing for the local office in the 
business section of the phone book, or you can 
check its Web site at www.betterbusinessbureau.
com/.
• 
Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPS). This 
independent federal regulatory agency targets 
products that threaten the safety of American fami-
lies. Unsafe products can be researched and re-
ported on its Web site at www.cpsc.gov/.
• 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). The 
FDA regulates safety and labeling of health prod-
ucts and cosmetics. You can search for the office 
closest to you in the federal government listings 
(blue pages) of the phone book.
Another way to get informed before you make your 
purchase is to seek the advice of a reputable professional. 
Ask someone who understands the product but does not 
stand to profit from the transaction. As examples, a 
physical educator or an exercise physiologist can advise 
you regarding exercise equipment; a registered dietitian 
can provide information on nutrition and weight control 
programs; a physician can offer advice on nutritive sup-
plements. Also, be alert to those who bill themselves as 
“experts.” Look for qualifications, degrees, professional 
experience, certifications, and reputation.
Keep in mind that if it sounds too good to be true, it 
probably is. Fraudulent promotions often rely on testi-
monials or scare tactics and promise that their products 
will cure a long list of unrelated ailments. They use words 
such as quick-fix, time-tested, newfound, miraculous, 
special, secret, all natural, mail-order only, and money-
back guarantee. Deceptive companies move often enough 
that customers have no way of contacting the company 
to ask for a reimbursement.
When claims are made, ask where the claims are 
published. Refereed scientific journals are the most reli-
able sources of information. When a researcher submits 
information for publication in a refereed journal, at least 
two qualified and reputable professionals in the field 
conduct blind reviews of the manuscript. A blind review 
means that the author does not know who will review 
the manuscript and the reviewers do not know who sub-
mitted the manuscript. Acceptance for publication is 
based on this input and relevant changes.
Q: What guidelines should I follow when looking for a 
reputable health/fitness facility?
A: As you follow a lifetime wellness program, you may 
want to consider joining a health/fitness facility. Or if 
you have mastered the contents of this book and your 
choice of fitness activity is one you can pursue on your 
own (walking, jogging, cycling), you may not need to 
join a health club. Barring injuries, you may continue 
your exercise program outside the walls of a health club 
for the rest of your life. You also can conduct strength-
training and stretching programs in your own home (see 
Chapters 3 and 4 and Appendixes A, B, and C).
To stay up to date on fitness and wellness develop-
ments, you probably should buy a reputable and updated 
fitness/wellness book every four or five years. You also 
might subscribe to a credible health, fitness, nutrition, or 
wellness newsletter to stay current. You can also surf the 
Web—but be sure that the sites you are searching are 
from credible and reliable organizations.
If you are contemplating membership in a fitness 
facility, do all of the following:
• 
Make sure that the facility complies with the stan-
dards established by the American College of 
Sports Medicine (ACSM) for health and fitness fa-
cilities. These standards are given in Figure 9.5.
• 
Examine all exercise options in your community—
health clubs/spas, YMCAs, gyms, colleges, schools, 
community centers, senior centers, and the like.
• 
Check to see if the facility’s atmosphere is pleasur-
able and non-
threatening 
to you. Will 
you feel com-
fortable with 
Quackery/fraud  The conscious pro-
motion of unproven claims for profit.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

256
Fitness and Wellness
the instructors and other people who go there? Is it 
clean and well kept up? If the answer is no, this 
may not be the right place for you.
• 
Analyze costs versus facilities, equipment, and pro-
grams. Take a look at your personal budget. Will 
you really use the facility? Will you exercise there 
regularly? Many people obtain memberships and 
have monthly membership dues withdrawn auto-
matically from a local bank account, yet seldom at-
tend the fitness center.
• 
Find out what types of facilities are available: walk-
ing/running track, basketball/tennis/racquetball 
courts, aerobic exercise room, strength-training 
room, pool, locker rooms, saunas, hot tubs, handi-
capped access, and so on.
• 
Check the aerobic and strength-training equipment 
available. Does the facility have treadmills, bicycle 
ergometers, elliptical trainers, cross-country skiing 
simulators, free weights, strength-training ma-
chines? Make sure the facilities and equipment 
meet your activity interests.
• 
Consider the location. Is the facility close, or do 
you have to travel several miles to get there? Dis-
tance often discourages participation.
• 
Check on times the facility is accessible. Is it open 
during your preferred exercise time (for example, 
early morning or late evening)?
• 
Work out at the facility several times before be-
coming a member. Are people standing in line to 
use the equipment, or is it readily available during 
your exercise time?
• 
Inquire about the instructors’ knowledge and quali-
fications. Do the fitness instructors have college de-
grees or professional training certifications from 
organizations such as the ACSM, the American 
Council on Exercise (ACE), the National Strength 
and Conditioning Association (NSCA), or the Na-
tional Academy of Sports Medicine (NASM)? 
These organizations have rigorous standards to en-
sure professional preparation and quality of 
instruction.
• 
Consider the approach to fitness (including all 
health-related components of fitness). Is it well 
rounded? Do the instructors spend time with 
members, or do members have to seek them out 
constantly for help and instruction?
• 
Ask about supplementary services. Does the facility 
provide or contract out for regular health and fit-
ness assessments (cardiovascular endurance, body 
composition, blood pressure, blood chemistry anal-
ysis)? Are wellness seminars (nutrition, weight 
control, stress management) offered? Do these have 
hidden costs?
Q: What should one look for when selecting a personal 
trainer?
A: A personal trainer is an exercise specialist who works 
one on one with an individual and is typically paid by the 
hour or exercise session. A qualified personal trainer can 
help you start and maintain a safe exercise program, 
provide motivation and encouragement, design a time-
effective exercise program, and provide objective health 
fitness information.
Currently, anyone who prescribes exercise can call 
himself/herself a personal trainer without proof of edu-
cation, experience, or certification. Although good train-
ers strive to maximize their own health and fitness, a 
good physique and previous athletic experience do not 
certify a person as a personal trainer.
Because of the high demand for personal trainers, 
more than 200 organizations now provide some type of 
certification to fitness specialists. This has led to great 
confusion by clients on how to evaluate the credentials of 
personal trainers. There is also a clear distinction be-
tween “certification” and a “certificate.” Certification im-
plies that the individual has met educational and profes-
sional standards of performance and competence. A 
certificate is typically awarded to individuals who attend 
a conference or workshop but are not required to meet 
any professional standards.
Currently, no licensing body is in place to oversee 
personal trainers. Thus, becoming a personal trainer is 
easy. At a minimum, personal trainers should have an 
undergraduate degree and certification from a reputable 
organization such as ACSM, ACE, NSCA, or NASM. 
Undergraduate (and graduate) degrees should be con-
ferred in a fitness-related area such as exercise science, 
Figure 9.5
American College of Sports Medicine 
standards for health and fitness 
facilities.
SOURCE: From ACSM’s Health/Fitness Facility Standards and Guidelines 
(Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics, 2006).
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
A facility must have an appropriate emergency plan.
A facility must offer each adult member a preactivity 
screening that is relevant to the activities that will be 
performed by the member.
Each person who has supervisory responsibility must be 
professionally competent.
A facility must post appropriate signs in those areas of a 
facility that present potential increased risk.
A facility that offers services or programs to youth must 
provide appropriate supervision.
A facility must conform to all relevant laws, regulations, 
and published standards.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

257
Chapter 9  Relevant Fitness and Wellness Issues
exercise physiology, kinesiology, sports medicine, or 
physical education. When looking for a personal trainer, 
always inquire about the trainer’s education and certifi-
cation credentials.
Before selecting a trainer, you need to establish your 
program goals. Below are sample questions you need to 
ask yourself and consider when interviewing potential 
trainers prior to selecting one.
• 
Can the potential personal trainer provide you with 
a resume?
• 
What type of professional education and certifica-
tion does the potential trainer possess?
• 
How long has the person been a personal trainer 
and are references available upon request?
• 
Are you looking for a male or female trainer?
• 
What are the fees? Are multiple sessions cheaper 
than a single session? Can individuals be trained in 
groups? Are there cancellation fees if you are not 
able to attend a given session?
• 
How long will you need the services of the personal 
trainer: one session, multiple sessions, periodically, 
or indefinitely?
• 
What goals do you intend to achieve with the guid-
ance of the personal trainer: weight loss, cardiore-
spiratory fitness, strength and/or flexibility fitness, 
improved health, or sport fitness conditioning?
• 
What type of personality are you looking for in the 
trainer—a motivator, a hard-challenging trainer, a 
gentle trainer, or professional counsel only?
As a final word of caution when seeking fitness ad-
vice from a health/fitness trainer via the Internet: Be 
aware that certain services cannot be provided over the 
Internet. An Internet trainer is not able to directly ad-
minister fitness tests, motivate, observe exercise limita-
tions, or respond effectively in an emergency situation 
(spotting, administering first aid or CPR), and thus is not 
able to design the most safe and effective exercise pro-
gram for you.
Q: What factors should I consider before purchasing 
exercise equipment?
A: The first question you need to ask yourself is: Do I 
really need this piece of equipment? Most people buy on 
impulse because of television advertisements or because 
a salesperson convinced them it is a great piece of equip-
ment that will do wonders for their health and fitness. 
With some creativity, you can implement an excellent 
and comprehensive exercise program with little, if any, 
equipment (see Chapters 3 and 4).
Many people buy expensive equipment only to find 
that they really do not enjoy that mode of activity. They 
do not remain regular users. Stationary bicycles (lower 
body only) and rowing ergometers were among the most 
popular pieces of equipment in the 1980s. Most of them 
now are seldom used and have become “fitness furni-
ture” somewhere in the basement.
Exercise equipment does have its value for people 
who prefer to exercise indoors, especially during the 
winter months. It supports some people’s motivation and 
adherence to exercise. The convenience of having equip-
ment at home also allows for flexible scheduling. You can 
exercise before or after work or while you watch your 
favorite television show.
If you are going to purchase equipment, the best 
recommendation is to actually try it out several times 
before buying it. Ask yourself several questions: Did you 
enjoy the workout? Is the unit comfortable? Are you too 
short, tall, or heavy for it? Is it stable, sturdy, and strong? 
Do you have to assemble the machine? If so, how difficult 
is it to put together? How durable is it? Ask for refer-
ences—people or clubs that have used the equipment 
extensively. Are they satisfied? Have they enjoyed using 
the equipment? Talk with professionals at colleges, sports 
medicine clinics, or health clubs.
Another consideration is to look at used units for 
signs of wear and tear. Quality is important. Cheaper 
brands may not be durable, so your investment would be 
wasted.
Finally, watch out for expensive gadgets. Monitors 
that provide exercise heart rate, work output, caloric ex-
penditure, speed, grade, and distance may help motivate 
you, but they are expensive, need repairs, and do not 
enhance the actual fitness benefits of the workout. Look 
at maintenance costs and check for service personnel in 
your community.
Q: What is the greatest benefit of a lifetime wellness 
lifestyle?
A: There are many benefits derived from an active well-
ness lifestyle, including greater functional capacity; good 
health; less sickness; lower health care expenses and time 
under medical supervision; and a longer, more produc-
tive life. Without question, these benefits altogether 
translate into one great benefit: a higher quality of life; 
that is, the freedom to live life to its fullest without func-
tional and health limitations. People go through life 
wishing that they could live without functional limita-
tions. The power, nevertheless, is within each one of us to 
do so. You can ac-
complish such a 
lifestyle by taking 
action today and 
living a wellness 
way of life for the 
rest of your life.
Personal trainer  An exercise spe-
cialist who works one on one with an 
individual and is typically paid by the 
hour or exercise session.   
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

258
Fitness and Wellness
Healthy Lifestyle Guidelines
  1. Accumulate 30 to 60 minutes of moderate-intensity 
physical activity on most days of the week.
  2. Exercise aerobically in the proper cardiorespiratory 
training zone at least three times per week for a mini-
mum of 20 minutes.
  3. Accumulate at least 10,000 steps on a daily basis.
  4. Strength train at least once a week using a minimum 
of eight exercises that involve all major muscle groups 
of the body.
  5. Perform flexibility exercises that involve all major 
joints of the body two to three times per week.
  6. Eat a healthy diet that is rich in whole-wheat grains, 
fruits, and vegetables and is low in saturated and 
trans fats.
  7. Eat a healthy breakfast every day.
  8. Do not use tobacco in any form, avoid second-hand 
smoke, and avoid all other forms of substance abuse.
  9. Maintain healthy body weight (achieve a range be-
tween the high-physical fitness and health/fitness 
standards for percent body fat).
10. Get seven to eight hours of sleep per night.
Behavior Modification Planning
11. Manage stress effectively.
12. Limit daily alcohol intake to two or less drinks per day 
if you are a man or one drink or less per day if you are 
a woman (or do not consume any alcohol at all).
13. Have at least one close friend or relative in whom you 
can confide and to whom you can express your feelings 
openly.
14. Be aware of your surroundings and take personal 
safety measures at all times.
15. Seek continued learning on a regular basis.
16. Subscribe to a reputable health/fitness/nutrition 
newsletter to stay up-to-date on healthy lifestyle 
guidelines.
Try It
Now that you are about to complete this course, evaluate 
how many of the above healthy lifestyle guidelines have 
become part of your personal wellness program. Prepare a 
list of those that you still need to work on and write SMART 
goals and specific objectives that will help you achieve the 
desired behaviors. Remember that each one of the above 
guidelines will lead to a longer, healthier, and happier life.
9.7  What’s Next?
The objective of this book is to provide you with the ba-
sic information necessary to implement your personal 
healthy lifestyle program. Your activities over the last few 
weeks or months may have helped you develop positive 
habits that you should try to carry on throughout life.
Now that you are about to finish this course, the real 
challenge will be a lifetime commitment to fitness and 
wellness. Adhering to the program in a structured set-
ting is a lot easier. Fitness and wellness is a continuous 
process. As you proceed with the program, keep in mind 
that the greatest benefit is a higher quality of life.
Most people who adopt a wellness way of life recog-
nize this new quality after only a few weeks into the 
program. For some people—especially individuals who 
have led a poor lifestyle for a long time—establishing 
positive habits and gaining feelings of well-being might 
take a few months. In the end, however, everyone who 
applies the principles of fitness and wellness will reap the 
desired benefits.
What impact has this course had on your personal fitness 
and healthy lifestyle program? • Have you implemented 
changes that are improving your quality of life?
Critical Thinking
Being diligent and taking control of yourself will 
provide you a better, happier, healthier, and more pro-
ductive life. Be sure to maintain a program based on 
your needs and what you enjoy doing most. This will 
make the journey easier, and you’ll have more fun along 
the way. Once you reach the top, you will know there is 
no looking back. Improving your longevity and quality 
of life now is in your hands. It will require persistence 
and commitment, but only you can take control of your 
lifestyle and thereby reap the benefits of wellness.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

259
Chapter 9  Relevant Fitness and Wellness Issues
Date
Name
Section
Course
I. 
 Explain the exercise program that you implemented in this course. Express your feelings about the outcomes of this program 
and how well you accomplished your ﬁ tness goals.
II.  List nutritional or dietary changes that you were able to implement this term and the effects of these changes on your body 
composition and personal wellness. 
Activity 9.1: Fitness and Wellness Lifestyle 
Self Evaluation
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

260
Fitness and Wellness
III.  List other lifestyle changes that you were able to make this term that may decrease your risk for disease. In a few sentences, 
explain how you feel about these changes and their impact on your overall well-being.
IV.  Please indicate:
Total number of daily steps at the beginning of the course: 
 
Current total number of daily steps: 
 
Total weekly minutes of physical activity at the beginning of the semester: 
 
Current total weekly minutes of physical activity:
V.  Brieﬂ y evaluate this course and its impact on your quality of life. Indicate what you feel will be needed for you to continue to 
adhere to an active and healthy lifestyle.
© Cengage Learning
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

261
Chapter 9  Relevant Fitness and Wellness Issues
	1.	
Has your level of physical activity increased, compared 
with the beginning of the term?
	2.	
Do you participate in a regular exercise program that in-
cludes cardiorespiratory endurance, muscular strength, 
and muscular flexibility training?
	3.	
Is your diet healthier now, compared with a few  
weeks ago?
	4.	
Are you able to take pride in the lifestyle changes that 
you have implemented over the last several weeks? 
Have you rewarded yourself for your accomplishments?
Assess Your Behavior
To access course materials, including companion resources, please visit www.cengagebrain.com.
	 1.	 A regular aerobic exercise program
	 a.	 makes a person immune to heart disease.
	 b.	 significantly decreases the risk for cardiovascular 
disease.
	 c.	 decreases HDL-cholesterol.
	 d.	 increases triglycerides.
	 e.	 All are correct choices.
	 2.	 Change
	 a.	 is difficult for most people to accomplish.
	 b.	 takes place when core values are addressed.
	 c.	 happens when people are uncomfortable with how 
they feel.
	 d.	 is most likely to happen when you associate with peo-
ple who practice healthy habits.
	 e.	 All of the above are correct.
	 3.	 The standard treatment for an acute injury is
	 a.	 rest.
	 b.	 cold application.
	 c.	 compression.
	 d.	 elevation.
	 e.	 All choices apply.
	 4.	 Which of the following recommendations is false regard-
ing exercise during pregnancy?
	 a.	 Women who are accustomed to strenuous exercise 
may continue to do so in the early stages of 
pregnancy.
	 b.	 After the first trimester, women should avoid exer-
cises that require lying on the back.
	 c.	 Exercise above 6,000 feet of altitude is not 
recommended.
	 d.	 Women are encouraged to exercise above a “some-
what hard” exertion level.
	 e.	 Women may accumulate 30 minutes of moderate- 
intensity physical activities on most days of the week.
	 5.	 From a functional point of view, typical sedentary people 
in the United States are about years older than their 
chronological age indicates.
	 a.	 2
	 b.	 8
	 c.	 15
	 d.	 25
	 e.	 50
	 6.	 A person suffering from heatstroke
	 a.	 requires immediate medical attention.
	 b.	 should be placed in a cool, humidity-controlled 
environment.
	 c.	 should be sprayed with cool water and rubbed with 
cool towels.
	 d.	 should not be given fluids if unconscious.
	 e.	 All are correct choices.
	 7.	 Drinking about a cup of cool water every ____ minutes 
seems to be ideal to prevent dehydration during exercise 
in the heat.
	 a.	 5
	 b.	 15 to 20
	 c.	 30
	 d.	 30 to 45
	 e.	 60
	 8.	 Improvements in maximal oxygen uptake in older adults 
(compared with younger adults) as a result of cardio-
respiratory endurance training are
	 a.	 similar.
	 b.	 higher.
	 c.	 lower.
	 d.	 difficult to determine.
	 e.	 nonexistent.
Assess Your Knowledge
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

262
Fitness and Wellness
	 9.	 Osteoporosis is
	 a.	 a crippling disease.
	 b.	 more prevalent in women.
	 c.	 higher in people who were calcium-deficient at a 
young age.
	 d.	 linked to heavy drinking and smoking.
	 e.	 All are correct choices.
	10.	 To protect yourself from consumer fraud when buying a 
new product,
	 a.	 get as much information as you can from the 
salesperson.
	 b.	 obtain details about the product from another 
salesperson.
	 c.	 ask someone who understands the product but does 
not stand to profit from the transaction.
	 d.	 obtain all the research information from the 
manufacturer.
	 e.	 All choices are correct.
Correct answers can be found on page 301.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

263
A	 Strength-Training Exercises
B	 Flexibility Exercises
C	 Exercises for the Prevention and  
Rehabilitation of Low Back Pain
D	 Contraindicated Exercises
E	 Selective Nutrient Content  
of Common Foods
Log on to www.cengagebrain.com to find 
innovative study tools—including pre- and 
post-tests, personalized study plans, activities, 
labs, and the personal change planner.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Appendixes
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Strength-Training Exercises Without Weights
EXERCISE 1  STEP-UP
Action:  Step up and down using a box or chair approximately 12 to 15 
inches high. Conduct one set using the same leg each time you go up 
and then conduct a second set using the other leg. You could also 
alternate legs on each step-up cycle. You may increase the resistance by 
holding a child or some other object in your arms (hold the child or 
object close to the body to avoid increased strain in the lower back).
Muscles Developed:  Gluteal muscles, quadriceps, gastrocnemius, and 
soleus
Photos © Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
A
B
EXERCISE 2  ROWING TORSO
Action:  Raise your arms laterally (abduction) to a horizontal position and bend your 
elbows to 90°. Have a partner apply enough pressure on your elbows to gradually force 
your arms forward (horizontal flexion) while you try to resist the pressure. Next, reverse the 
action, horizontally forcing the arms backward as your partner applies sufficient forward 
pressure to create resistance.
Muscles Developed:  Posterior deltoid, rhombus, and trapezius
EXERCISE 3  PUSH-UP
Action:  Maintaining your body as straight as possible, flex the elbows, lowering the body until you almost touch the floor, then raise 
yourself back up to the starting position. If you are unable to perform the push-up as indicated, you can decrease the resistance by 
supporting the lower body with the knees rather than the feet (see illustration c).
Muscles Developed:  Triceps, deltoid, pectoralis major, erector spinae, and abdominals
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Photos © Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
A
B
C
Strength-Training Exercises
264
Appendix A
Appendix A
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

EXERCISE 4  ABDOMINAL CRUNCH  
AND BENT-LEG CURL-UP
Action:  Start with your head and shoulders off 
the floor, arms crossed on your chest, and 
knees slightly bent (the greater the flexion of 
the knee, the more difficult the curl-up). Now 
curl up to about 30° (abdominal crunch—see 
illustration b) or curl all the way up (bent-leg 
curl-up), then return to the starting position 
without letting the head or shoulders touch 
the floor, or allowing the hips to come off the 
floor. If you allow the hips to rise off the floor 
and the head and shoulders to touch the floor, 
you will most likely “swing up” on the next 
sit-up, which minimizes the work of the 
abdominal muscles. If you cannot curl up with 
the arms on the chest, place the hands by the 
side of the hips or even help yourself up by 
holding on to your thighs (illustrations d and 
e). Do not perform the curl-up exercise with 
your legs completely extended, as this will 
cause strain on the lower back.
Muscles Developed:  Abdominal muscles 
(crunch) and hip flexors (complete curl-up)
EXERCISE 6  MODIFIED DIP
Action:  Place your hands on a box or 
gymnasium bleacher. The feet are supported 
and held in place by an exercise partner. Dip 
down at least a 90° angle at the elbow joint 
and then return to the starting position.
Muscles Developed:  Triceps, deltoid, and 
pectoralis major
NOTE: The bent-leg curl-up exercise should be used only by individuals of at least 
average fitness without a history of lower back problems. New participants and those 
with a history of lower back problems should use the abdominal crunch exercise in its 
place.
Photos © Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
A
B
C
D
E
EXERCISE 5  LEG CURL
Action:  Lie on the floor facedown. Cross the right ankle over the left heel. Apply resistance with your right foot, while you bring the left 
foot up to 90° at the knee joint. (Apply enough resistance so that the left foot can only be brought up slowly.) Repeat the exercise, crossing 
the left ankle over the right heel.
Muscles Developed:   
Hamstrings (and  
quadriceps)
Photos © Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
A
B
Photos © Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
A
B
  Strength-Training Exercises
265
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

EXERCISE 7  PULL-UP
Action:  Suspend yourself from a bar with a pronated grip (thumbs in). Pull your body up until your chin is above the bar, then lower the 
body slowly to the starting position. If you are unable to perform the pull-up as described, either a partner hold your feet to push off and 
facilitate the movement upward—see illustrations c and d.
Muscles Developed:  Biceps, brachioradialis, brachialis, trapezius, and latissimus dorsi
EXERCISE 9  HEEL RAISE
Action:  From a standing position with feet flat on the floor or at the edge of a  
step (a), raise and lower your body weight by moving at the ankle joint only (b).  
For added resistance, have someone else hold your shoulders down as you perform 
the exercise.
Muscles Developed:  Gastrocnemius and soleus
EXERCISE 8  ARM CURL
Action:  Using a palms-up grip, start with the arm completely extended (a), and 
with the aid of a sandbag or bucket filled (as needed) with sand or rocks, curl up 
as far as possible (b), then return to the initial position. Repeat the exercise with 
the other arm.
Muscles Developed:  Biceps, brachioradialis, and brachialis
Photos © Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
B
D
A
C
Photos © Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
B
A
Photos © Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
B
A
266
Appendix A
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

EXERCISE 10  LEG ABDUCTION AND ADDUCTION
Action:  Both participants sit on the floor. The person on the left places the  
feet on the inside of the other participant’s feet. Simultaneously, the person  
on the left presses the legs laterally (to the outside—abduction), while the one 
on the right presses the legs medially (adduction). Hold the contraction for 5 to 
10 seconds. Repeat the exercise at all three angles, and then reverse the pressing 
sequence. The person on the left places the feet on the outside and presses 
inward, while the one on the right presses outward.
Muscles Developed:  Hip abductors (rectus femoris, sartori, gluteus medius and 
minimus) and adductors (pectineus, gracilis, adductor magnus, adductor longus, 
and adductor brevis)
EXERCISE 11  REVERSE CRUNCH
Action:  Lie on your back with arms 
to the sides and knees and hips 
flexed at 90° (a). Now attempt to raise 
the pelvis off the floor by lifting 
vertically from the knees and lower 
legs (b). This is a challenging exercise 
that may be difficult for beginners to 
perform.
Muscles Developed:   
Abdominals
EXERCISE 12  PELVIC TILT
Action:  Lie flat on the floor with the knees bent at about a 90° angle (a). Tilt the pelvis by tightening the abdominal muscles, flattening your 
back against the floor, and raising the lower gluteal area ever so slightly off the floor (b). Hold the final position for several seconds.
Areas Stretched:  Low back muscles and ligaments
Areas Strengthened:  Abdominal and gluteal muscles
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Photos © Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
B
A
Photos © Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
B
EXERCISE 13  LATERAL PLANK
Action:  Lie on your side with legs bent (a: easier version) or straight (b: harder version) and support the upper body with your arm. 
Straighten your body by raising the hip off the floor, and hold the position for several seconds. Repeat the exercise with the other side of 
the body. 
Muscles Developed:  Abdominals (obliques and transversus abdominus) and quadratus lumborum (lower back)
A
B
A
Photos © Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
267
  Strength-Training Exercises
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

EXERCISE 14  PRONE PLANK
Action:  Starting in a prone position on a floor mat, balance yourself on the tips of your toes and elbows while attempting to maintain a 
straight body from heels to toes (do not arch your back—see illustration a). You can increase the difficulty of this exercise by placing your 
hands in front of you and straightening the arms (see illustration b).
Muscles Developed:  Anterior and posterior muscle groups of the trunk and pelvis
Strength-Training Exercises With Weights
EXERCISE 16  ARM CURL
Action:  Using a supinated (palms-up) grip, start with the arms 
almost completely extended (a). Curl up as far as possible (b), then 
return to the starting position.
Muscles Developed:  Biceps, brachioradialis, and brachialis
EXERCISE 15  SUPINE PLANK
Action:  Lie faceup on the floor with the knees bent at about 120°. Do a 
pelvic tilt (Exercise 12, page 267) and maintain the pelvic tilt while you raise 
the hips off the floor until the upper body and upper legs are in a straight 
line. Hold this position for up to 5 seconds.
Areas Strengthened:  Gluteal and abdominal flexor muscles
Photos © Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
B
A
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Photos © Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
B
A
EXERCISE 17  BENCH PRESS
Action:  Lie down on the bench with the head by 
the weight stack, the bench press bar above the 
chest, and place the feet on the bench (a). Grasp 
the bar handles and press upward until the arms 
are completely extended (b), then return to the 
original position. Do not arch the back during this 
exercise.
Muscles Developed:  Pectoralis major, triceps, and 
deltoid
Photos © Nautilus Sports/Medical Industries, Inc.
B
A
268
Appendix A
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

EXERCISE 19  LEG PRESS
Action:  From a sitting position with the knees flexed at about 90° and both feet on the footrest (a), extend the legs fully (b), then return 
slowly to the starting position.
Muscles Developed:  Quadriceps and gluteal muscles
EXERCISE 18  ABDOMINAL CRUNCH
Action:  Sit in an upright position and grasp the handles over your shoulders and crunch forward. 
Slowly return to the original position.
Muscles Developed:  Abdominals
© Nautilus Sports/Medical Industries, Inc.
A
B
Photos © Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
EXERCISE 20  LEG CURL
Action:  Lie with the face down on the 
bench, legs straight, and place the back of 
the feet under the padded bar (a). Curl up to 
at least 90° (b), and return to the original 
position.
Muscles Developed:  Hamstrings
B
A
Photos © Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
EXERCISE 21  LAT PULL-DOWN
Action:  Starting from a sitting position, 
hold the exercise bar with a wide grip (a). 
Pull the bar down in front of you until it 
reaches the base of the neck (b), then return 
to the starting position. 
Muscles Developed:  Latissimus dorsi, 
pectoralis major, and biceps
Photos © Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
B
A
269
  Strength-Training Exercises
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

EXERCISE 22  HEEL RAISE
Action:  Start with your feet either flat on the floor or the front of the feet 
on an elevated block (a), then raise and lower yourself by moving at the 
ankle joint only (b). If additional resistance is needed, you can use a squat 
strength-training machine.
Muscles Developed:  Gastrocnemius and soleus
Photos © Universal Gym
EXERCISE 23  TRICEPS EXTENSION
Action:  Using a palms-down grip, grasp the bar 
slightly closer than shoulder width, and start with the 
elbows almost completely bent (a). Extend the arms 
fully (b), then return to starting position.
Muscles Developed:  Triceps
B
A
Photos © Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
B
A
EXERCISE 24  ROTARY TORSO
Action:  Sit upright into the machine and place the elbows behind the padded bars. Rotate 
the torso as far as possible to one side and then return slowly to the starting position. Repeat 
the exercise to the opposite side.
Muscles Developed:  Internal and external obliques (abdominal muscles)
© Nautilus Sports/Medical Industries, Inc.
270
Appendix A
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

EXERCISE 25  SEATED BACK
Action:  Sit in the machine with your trunk 
flexed and the upper back against the 
shoulder pad. Place the feet under the padded 
bar and hold on with your hands to the bars 
on the sides (a). Start the exercise by pressing 
backward, simultaneously extending the trunk 
and hip joints (b). Slowly return to the original 
position.
Muscles Developed:  Erector spinae and 
gluteus maximus
EXERCISE 26  ROWING TORSO
Action:  Sit in the machine with your arms in front 
of you, elbows bent and resting against the 
padded bars (a). Press back as far as possible, 
drawing the shoulder blades together (b). Return 
to the original position.
Muscles Developed:  Posterior deltoid, 
rhomboids, and trapezius
Photos © Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
B
A
Photos © Nautilus Sports/Medical Industries, Inc.
B
A
EXERCISE 27  BACK EXTENSION
Action:  Place your feet under the ankle rollers and the hips over the padded seat. Start with the trunk in a flexed position and the arms 
crossed over the chest (a). Slowly extend the trunk to a horizontal position (b), hold the extension for 2 to 5 seconds, then slowly flex (lower) 
the trunk to the original position.
Muscles Developed:  Erector spinae, gluteus maximus, and quadratus lumborum (lower back)
Photos © Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
B
A
271
  Strength-Training Exercises
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

EXERCISE 28  LATERAL HEAD TILT
Action:  Slowly and gently tilt the head laterally. Repeat several times to each side.
Areas Stretched:  Neck flexors and extensors and ligaments of the cervical spine
EXERCISE 30  SIDE STRETCH
Action:  Stand straight up, feet separated to shoulder width, and place your hands on your waist. Now 
move the upper body to one side and hold the final stretch for a few seconds. Repeat on the other side.
Areas Stretched:  Muscles and ligaments in the pelvic region
EXERCISE 29  ARM CIRCLES
Action:  Gently circle your arms all the way around. Conduct the exercise in both directions.
Areas Stretched:  Shoulder muscles and ligaments
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
EXERCISE 31  BODY ROTATION
Action:  Place your arms slightly away from your body and rotate the trunk as far as possible, holding the final 
position for several seconds. Conduct the exercise for both the right and left sides of the body. You can also 
perform this exercise by standing about 2 feet away from the wall (back toward the wall), and then rotating  
the trunk, placing the hands against the wall.
Areas Stretched:  Hip, abdominal, chest, back, neck, and shoulder muscles; hip and spinal ligaments
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
EXERCISE 32  SHOULDER STRETCH
Action:  Place your hands on the shoulders of your partner, who will in turn push you down by 
your shoulders. Hold the final position for a few seconds.
Areas Stretched:  Chest (pectoral) muscles and shoulder ligaments
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
272
Flexibility Exercises
Appendix B
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

EXERCISE 33  SHOULDER HYPEREXTENSION STRETCH
Action:  Have a partner grasp your arms from behind by the wrists and slowly push them upward. 
Hold the final position for a few seconds.
Areas Stretched:  Deltoid and pectoral muscles, and ligaments of the shoulder joint
EXERCISE 35  QUAD STRETCH
Action:  Lie on your side and move one foot back by flexing the knee. Grasp the front 
of the ankle and pull the ankle toward the gluteal region. Hold for several seconds. 
Repeat with the other leg.
Areas Stretched:  Quadriceps muscle, and knee and ankle ligaments
EXERCISE 34  SHOULDER ROTATION STRETCH
Action:  With the aid of surgical tubing or an aluminum or wood stick, place the tubing or stick behind 
your back and grasp the two ends using a reverse (thumbs-out) grip. Slowly bring the tubing or stick 
over your head, keeping the elbows straight. Repeat several times (bring the hands closer together for 
additional stretch).
Areas Stretched:  Deltoid, latissimus dorsi, and pectoral muscles; shoulder ligaments
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
EXERCISE 36  HEEL CORD STRETCH
Action:  Assume a push-up position, then bend one knee and stretch the opposite heel 
cord. Hold the stretched position for a few seconds. Alternate legs. You may also perform 
this exercise leaning against a wall or standing at the edge of a step, then stretch the heel 
downward.
Areas Stretched:  Heel cord (Achilles tendon), gastrocnemius, and soleus muscles
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
EXERCISE 37  ADDUCTOR STRETCH
Action:  Stand with your feet about twice shoulder width and place your hands slightly above the 
knee. Flex one knee and slowly go down as far as possible, holding the final position for a few 
seconds. Repeat with the other leg.
Areas Stretched:  Hip adductor muscles
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
273
  Flexibility Exercises
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

EXERCISE 40  TRICEPS STRETCH
Action:  Place the right hand behind your neck. Grasp the right arm above the elbow with the left 
hand. Gently pull the elbow backward. Repeat the exercise with the opposite arm.
Areas Stretched:  Back of upper arm (triceps muscle) and shoulder joint
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
EXERCISE 38  SITTING ADDUCTOR STRETCH
Action:  Sit on the floor and bring your feet in close to you, allowing the soles of the feet to touch each 
other. Now place your forearms (or elbows) on the inner part of the thigh and push the legs downward, 
holding the final stretch for several seconds.
Areas Stretched:  Hip adductor muscles
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
EXERCISE 39  SIT-AND-REACH STRETCH
Action:  Sit on the floor with legs together and gradually reach forward as far as possible. Hold the final 
position for a few seconds. This exercise may also be performed with the legs separated, reaching to each 
side as well as to the middle.
Areas Stretched:  Hamstrings and lower back muscles, and lumbar spine ligaments
274
Appendix B
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

EXERCISE 41  SINGLE-KNEE-TO-CHEST STRETCH
Action:  Lie down flat on the floor. Bend one leg at approximately 100° and gradually pull 
the opposite leg toward your chest. Hold the final stretch for a few seconds. Switch legs 
and repeat the exercise.
Areas Stretched:  Lower back and hamstring muscles, and lumbar spine ligaments
EXERCISE 43  UPPER AND LOWER BACK STRETCH
Action:  Sit on the floor and bring your feet in close to you, allowing the soles of the feet to touch each 
other. Hold on to your feet and gently bring your head and upper chest toward your feet.
Areas Stretched:  Upper and lower back muscles and ligaments
EXERCISE 42  DOUBLE-KNEE-TO-CHEST STRETCH
Action:  Lie flat on the floor and then slowly curl up into a fetal position. Hold for a few seconds.
Areas Stretched:  Upper and lower back and hamstring muscles; spinal ligaments
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
EXERCISE 44  SIT-AND-REACH STRETCH
See Exercise 39, page 275.
EXERCISE 45  GLUTEAL STRETCH
Action:  Sit on the floor, bend the right leg, and place your right ankle slightly above the left knee. 
Grasp the left thigh with both hands and gently pull the leg toward your chest. Repeat the exercise 
with the opposite leg.
Areas Stretched:  Buttock area (gluteal muscles)
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
EXERCISE 46  BACK EXTENSION
Action:  Lie facedown on the floor with the elbows by the chest, forearms on the 
floor, and the hands beneath the chin. Gently raise the trunk by extending the elbows 
until you reach an approximate 90° angle at the elbow joint. Be sure that the forearms 
remain in contact with the floor at all times. Hold the stretched position for a few 
seconds. DO NOT extend the back beyond this point. Hyperextension of the lower 
back may lead to or aggravate an already existing back problem.
Area Stretched:  Abdominal region
Additional Benefit:  Restore lower back curvature
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
275
Exercises for the Prevention and 
Rehabilitation of Low Back Pain
Appendix C
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

EXERCISE 47  TRUNK ROTATION AND LOWER BACK STRETCH
Action:  Sit on the floor and bend the left leg, placing the left foot on the outside 
of the right knee. Place the right elbow on the left knee and push against it. At the 
same time, try to rotate the trunk to the left (counterclockwise). Hold the final 
position for a few seconds. Repeat the exercise with the other side.
Areas Stretched:  Lateral side of the hip and thigh; trunk and lower back
EXERCISE 49  CAT STRETCH
Action:  Kneel on the floor and place your hands in front of you (on the floor) about shoulder width apart. Relax your trunk and lower back 
(a). Now arch the spine and pull in your abdomen as far as you can and hold this position for a few seconds (b). Repeat the exercise four or 
five times.
Areas Stretched:  Low back muscles and ligaments  
Areas Strengthened:  Abdominal and gluteal muscles
EXERCISE 48  HIP FLEXORS STRETCH
Action:  Kneel down on an exercise mat, a soft surface, or place a towel under your knees. 
Raise the left knee off the floor and place the left foot about 3 feet in front of you. Place 
your left hand over your left knee and the right hand over the back of the right hip. 
Keeping the lower back flat, slowly move forward and downward as you apply gentle 
pressure over the right hip. Repeat the exercise with the opposite leg forward
Areas Stretched:  Flexor muscles in front of the hip joint
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
Photos © Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
B
A
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
276
Appendix C
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

EXERCISE 50  PELVIC CLOCK
Action:  Lie faceup on the floor with the knees bent at about 120°. Fully extend the hips as in the 
supine plank (Exercise 15, page 268). Now progressively rotate the hips in a clockwise manner  
(2 o’clock, 4 o’clock, 6 o’clock, 8 o’clock, 10 o’clock, and 12 o’clock), holding each position in an 
isometric contraction for about 1 second. Repeat the exercise counterclockwise.
Areas Stretched:  Gluteal, abdominal, and hip flexor muscles
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
EXERCISE 52  ABDOMINAL CRUNCH OR BENT-LEG CURL-UP
See Exercise 4, page 265.
It is important that you do not stabilize your feet when performing either of these exercises because doing so decreases the work of 
the abdominal muscles. Also, remember not to “swing up” but, rather, to curl up as you perform these exercises.
EXERCISE 51  PELVIC TILT
See Exercise 12, page 267.
277
  Exercises for the Prevention and Rehabilitation of Low Back Pain
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SWAN STRETCH
Excessive strain on the spine; may harm intervertebral disks.
Alternative:  Flexibility Exercise 46, page 275
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
CRADLE
Excessive strain on the spine, knees, and shoulders.
Alternatives:  Flexibility Exercises 46, 35, and 33, pages 275 and 273
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
WINDMILL
Excessive strain on the spine and knees.
Alternatives:  Flexibility Exercises 39 and 47, pages 274 and 276
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
HURDLER STRETCH
Excessive strain on the bent knee.
Alternatives:  Flexibility Exercises 35 and 39, pages 273 and 274
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
THE HERO
Excessive strain on the knees.
Alternatives:  Flexibility Exercises 35 and 48, pages 273 and 274
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
278
Contraindicated Exercises
Appendix D
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

STRAIGHT-LEG SIT-UP
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
HEAD ROLL
May injure neck disks.
Alternative:  Flexibility Exercise 28, page 272
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
ALTERNATING BENT-LEG SIT-UP
DOUBLE-LEG LIFT
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
These exercises strain the lower back.
Alternatives:  Strength Exercises 4 and 18, pages 265 and 269
All three of these exercises cause excessive strain on the spine and may harm disks.
Alternatives:  Strength Exercises 4 and 18, pages 265 and 269
UPRIGHT DOUBLE-LEG LIFT
V-SIT
SIT-UP WITH HANDS BEHIND THE HEAD
Excessive strain on the neck.
Alternatives:  Strength Exercises 4 and 18, pages 265 and 269
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
279
  Contraindicated Exercises
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

DONKEY KICK
Excessive strain on the back, shoulders, and neck.
Alternatives:  Flexibility Exercises 46, 48, and 28, pages 275, 276, and 272
KNEE TO CHEST
Excessive strain on the knee.
Alternatives:  Flexibility Exercises 41 and 42, page 275
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
STANDING TOE TOUCH
Excessive strain on the knee and lower back.
Alternative:  Flexibility Exercise 39, page 274
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
YOGA PLOW
Excessive strain on the spine, neck, and shoulders.
Alternatives:  Flexibility Exercises 39, 41, 42, 43, and 45, pages 274 and 275
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
FULL SQUAT
Excessive strain on the knees.
Alternatives:  Flexibility Exercise 35, Strength Exercises 1 and 19, pages 273, 264, and 269
© Fitness & Wellness, Inc.
280
Appendix D
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Food Description
Qty
Measure
Energy
(cal)
Protein
(g)
Carb
(g)
Dietary 
Fiber
(g)
Fat
(g)
Sat
Fat
(g)
Trans
Fat 
(g)
Cholesterol
(mg)
Almonds, dry roasted, no salt 
added
1⁄4
cup(s)
206
8
7
4
18
1.40
—
0
Apples, raw medium, w/peel
1
item(s)
72
,1
19
3
,1
0.04
—
0
Applesauce, sweetened, canned
1⁄2
cup(s)
97
,1
25
2
,1
0.04
—
0
Apricot, fresh w/o pits
4
item(s)
67
2
16
3
1
0.04
—
0
Apricot, halves w/skin, canned in 
heavy syrup
1⁄2
cup(s)
107
1
28
2
,1
0.01
—
0
Asparagus, boiled, drained
1⁄2
cup(s)
20
2
4
2
0.19
0.06
—
0
Avocado, California, whole,  
w/o skin or pit
1
item(s)
284
3
15
12
26
3.59
—
0
Bacon, cured, broiled, pan fried, or 
roasted
2
slice(s)
68
5
,1
0
5
1.73
0
14
Bagel chips, plain
3
item(s)
130
3
19
1
5
0.50
—
0
Bagel, plain, enriched, toasted
1
item(s)
195
7
38
2
1
0.16
0
0
Banana, fresh whole, w/o peel
1
item(s)
105
1
27
3
,1
0.13
—
0
Beans, black, boiled
1⁄2
cup(s)
114
8
20
7
,1
0.12
—
0
Beans, Fordhook lima, frozen, 
boiled, drained
1⁄2
cup(s)
88
5
16
5
,1
0.07
—
0
Beans, mung, sprouted, boiled, 
drained
1⁄2
cup(s)
13
1
3
,1
,1
0.02
—
0
Beans, red kidney, canned
1⁄2
cup(s)
109
7
20
8
,1
0.06
—
0
Beans, refried, canned
1⁄2
cup(s)
119
7
20
7
2
0.60
—
10
Beans, yellow snap, string or wax, 
boiled, drained
1⁄2
cup(s)
22
1
5
2
,1
0.04
—
0
Beef, chuck, arm pot roast, lean & 
fat, 1⁄40 fat, braised
3
ounce(s)
282
23
0
0
20
7.97
—
84
Beef, corned, canned
3
ounce(s)
213
23
0
0
13
5.25
—
73
Beef, ground, lean, broiled, well
3
ounce(s)
238
24
0
0
15
5.89
—
86
Beef, ground, regular, broiled, 
medium
3
ounce(s)
246
20
0
0
18
6.91
—
77
Beef, liver, pan fried
3
ounce(s)
149
23
4
0
4
1.27
0.17
324
Beef, rib steak, small end, lean, 1⁄40 
fat, broiled
3
ounce(s)
188
24
0
0
10
3.84
—
68
Beef, rib, whole, lean & fat, 1⁄4” fat, 
roasted
3
ounce(s)
320
19
0
0
27
10.71
—
72
Beef, short loin, T-bone steak, lean, 
1⁄4” fat, broiled
3
ounce(s)
174
23
0
0
9
3.05
—
50
Beer
12
fluid ounce(s)
118
1
6
,1
,1
0.00
0
0
Beer, light
12
fluid ounce(s)
99
1
5
0
0
0.00
0
0
Beets, sliced, canned, drained
1⁄2
cup(s)
26
1
6
1
,1
0.02
—
0
Biscuits
1
item(s)
121
3
16
1
5
1.40
0
,1
Blueberries, raw
1⁄2
cup(s)
41
1
10
2
,1
0.02
—
0
Bologna, beef
1
slice(s)
90
3
1
0
8
3.50
—
 20
Bologna, turkey
1
slice(s)
50
3
1
0
4
1.00
—
 20
Brazil nuts, unblanched, dried
1⁄4
cup(s)
230 
 5
4
3
23
5.30
—
 0
Bread, cracked wheat
1
slice(s)
65
2
12
1
1
0.23
—
 0
Bread, French
1
slice(s)
69
2
13
1
1
0.16
—
 0
Bread, mixed grain
1
slice(s)
65
3
12
2
1
0.21
—
 0
Bread, pita
1
item(s)
165
5
33
1
1
0.10
—
 0
Bread, pumpernickel
1
slice(s)
80
3
15
2
1
0.14
—
 0
281
Selective Nutrient Content 
of Common Foods
Appendix E
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Food Description
Qty
Measure
Energy
(cal)
Protein
(g)
Carb
(g)
Dietary 
Fiber
(g)
Fat
(g)
Sat
Fat
(g)
Trans
Fat 
(g)
Cholesterol
(mg)
Bread, rye
1
slice(s)
83
3
15
2
1
0.20
—
 0
Bread, white
1
slice(s)
67
2
13
1
1
0.18
—
 0
Bread, whole wheat
1
slice(s)
128
4
24
3
2
0.37
—
 0
Broccoli, chopped, boiled, drained
1⁄2
cup(s)
27
2
6
3 
,1
0.06
—
 0
Brownie, prepared from mix
1
item(s)
112
1
12
1
7
1.76
—
 18
Brussels sprouts, boiled, drained
1⁄2
cup(s)
28
2
6
2 
,1
0.08
—
 0
Bulgur, cooked
1⁄2 
cup(s)
76
3
17
4 
,1
0.04
—
 0
Buns, hamburger, plain
1
item(s)
120
4
21
1
2
0.47
—
 0
Butter
1
tablespoon(s)
108
,1
,1
0
12
6.13
—
32
Buttermilk, low fat
1
cup(s)
98
8
12
0
2
1.34
—
 10
Cabbage, boiled, drained, no salt 
added
1
cup(s)
33
2
7
3
1
0.08
—
0
Cabbage, raw, shredded
1
cup(s)
17
1
4
2 
,1
0.01
—
 0
Cake, angel food, from mix
1
slice(s)
129
3
29 
,1 
,1
0.02
—
 0
Cake, butter pound, ready to eat, 
commercially prepared
1
slice(s)
291
4
37
,1
15
8.67
—
166
Cake, carrot, cream cheese frosting, 
from mix
1
slice(s)
484
5
52
1
29
5.43
—
60
Cake, chocolate, chocolate icing, 
commercially prepared
1
slice(s)
235
3
35
2
10
3.05
—
27
Cake, devil’s food cupcake, 
chocolate frosting
1
item(s)
120
2
20
1
4
1.80
—
19
Cake, white, coconut frosting, from 
mix
1
slice(s)
399
5
71
1
12
4.36
—
1
Candy, Almond Joy bar
1
item(s)
240
2
29
2
13
9.00
0
3
Candy, Life Savers
1
item(s)
8
0
2
0 
,1
0.00 
0
0 
Candy, M&M’s peanut chocolate 
candy, small bag
1
item(s)
250
5
30
2
13
5.00
—
5
Candy, M&M’s plain chocolate 
candy, small bag
1
item(s)
240
2
34
1
10
6.00
—
5
Candy, milk chocolate bar
1
item(s)
483
8
53
2
28
16.69
—
 22
Candy, Milky Way bar
1
item(s)
270
2
41
1
10
5.00
—
 5
Candy, Reese’s peanut butter cups
2
piece(s)
250
5
25
1
14
5.00
0
3
Candy, Special Dark chocolate bar
1
item(s)
220
2
24
3
13
8.00
0
3
Candy, Starburst fruit chews, 
original fruits
1
package
240
0
48
0
5
1.00
—
0
Candy, York peppermint patty
1
item(s)
170
1
34
1
3
2.00
0
0
Cantaloupe
1⁄2
cup(s)
27
1
7
1 
,1
0.04
—
 0
Carrots, raw
1⁄2
cup(s)
25
1
6
2 
,1
0.02
0
0
Carrots, sliced, boiled, drained
1⁄2
cup(s)
27.29
0.59
6.41
2.33
0.14
0.02
—
 0
Cashews, dry roasted
1⁄4
cup(s)
197
5
11
1
16
3.14
—
 0
Catsup/ketchup
1
tablespoon(s)
14
,1
4
,1
,1
0.01
—
0
Cauliflower, boiled, drained
1⁄2
cup(s)
14
1
3
2 
,1
0.04
— 
0
Celery, stalk
2
item(s)
11
1
2
1 
,1
0.03
—
 0
Cereal, All-Bran
1
cup(s)
160
8
46
20
2
0.00
0
0
Cereal, All-Bran Buds
1
cup(s)
212
6
73
42
3 
— 
0
0
Cereal, Bran Flakes, Post
1
cup(s)
133
4
32
7
1
0.00
—
 0
Cereal, Cap’n Crunch
1
cup(s)
144
2
30
1
2
0.53
—
 0
Cereal, Cheerios
1
cup(s)
110
3
22
3
2
0.00
—
 0
Cereal, Complete wheat bran flakes
1
cup(s)
120
4
31
7
1 
—
0
0
Cereal, Corn Flakes
1
cup(s)
100
2
24
1
0
0.00
0
0
282
Appendix E
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Food Description
Qty
Measure
Energy
(cal)
Protein
(g)
Carb
(g)
Dietary 
Fiber
(g)
Fat
(g)
Sat
Fat
(g)
Trans
Fat 
(g)
Cholesterol
(mg)
Cereal, Corn Pops
1
cup(s)
120
1
28
0
0
0.00
0
0
Cereal, Cracklin’ Oat Bran
1
cup(s)
266
5
47
7
9 
2.70
0
0
Cereal, Cream of Wheat,  
instant, prepared
1⁄2
cup(s)
61
2
13
,1
,1
0.01
0
0
Cereal, Frosted Flakes
1
cup(s)
160
1
37
1
0
0.00
0
0
Cereal, Frosted Mini-Wheats
5
item(s)
180
5
41
5
1
0.00
0
0
Cereal, granola, prepared
1⁄2
cup(s)
299
9
32
5
15
2.76
—
0
Cereal, Kashi puffed
1
cup(s)
70
3
13
2
1
0.00
—
0
Cereal, Life
1
cup(s)
160
4
33
3
2
0.35
—
0
Cereal, Multi-Bran Chex
1
cup(s)
200
4
49
7
2
0.00
0
0
Cereal, Nutri-Grain golden wheat
1
cup(s)
133
4
31
5
1
0.00
—
0
Cereal, oatmeal, cooked  
w/water
1⁄2
cup(s)
74
3
13
2
1
0.19
—
0
Cereal, Product 19
1
cup(s)
100
2
25
1
0
0.00
0
0
Cereal, Raisin Bran
1
cup(s)
190
4
47
8
1
0.00
—
0
Cereal, Rice Chex
1
cup(s)
96
2
22
,1
0
0.00
0
0
Cereal, Rice Krispies
1
cup(s)
96
2
23
0
0
0.00
0
0
Cereal, Shredded Wheat
1
cup(s)
88
3
20
3
1
0.04
—
0
Cereal, Smacks
1
cup(s)
133
3
32
1
1
0.00
—
0
Cereal, Special K
1
cup(s)
110
7
22
1
0
0.00
0
0
Cereal, Total whole grain
1
cup(s)
146
3
31
4
1
0.00
—
0
Cereal, Wheaties
1
cup(s)
110
3
24
3
1
0.00
—
0
Cheese, American, processed
1
ounce(s)
106
6
,1
0
9
5.58
—
27
Cheese, blue, crumbled
1
ounce(s)
100
6
1
0
8
5.29
—
21
Cheese, cheddar, shredded
1⁄4
cup(s)
114
7
,1
0
9
5.96
—
30
Cheese, feta
1
ounce(s)
74
4
1
0
6
4.18
—
25
Cheese, Monterey jack
1
ounce(s)
104
7
,1
0
8
5.34
—
25
Cheese, mozzarella, part skim milk
1
ounce(s)
71
7
1
0
4
2.83
—
18
Cheese, Parmesan, grated
1
tablespoon(s)
22
2
,1
0
1
0.87
—
4
Cheese, ricotta, part skim milk
1⁄4
cup(s)
85
7
3
0
5
3.03
—
19
Cheese, Swiss
1
ounce(s)
106
8
2
0
8
4.98
—
26
Cherries, sweet, raw
1⁄2
cup(s)
46
1
12
2
,1
0.03
—
0
Chicken, broiler breast, meat & 
skin, flour coated, fried
3
ounce(s)
189
27
1
,0.1
8
2.08
—
76
Chicken, broiler drumstick, meat & 
skin, flour coated, fried
3
ounce(s)
208
23
1
,0.1
12
3.11
—
77
Chicken, light meat, roasted
3
ounce(s)
130
23
0
0
3
0.92
—
64
Chicken, roasted (meat only)
3
ounce(s)
142
21
0
0
6
1.54
—
64
Chickpeas or bengal gram, 
garbanzo beans, boiled
1⁄2
cup(s)
134
7
22
6
2
0.22
—
0
Chocolate milk, low fat
1
cup(s)
158
8
26
1
3
1.54
—
8
Cilantro
1
teaspoon(s)
,1
,0.1
,0.1
,0.1
,0.1
0.00
—
0
Cocoa, hot, prepared w/milk
1
cup(s)
193
9
27
3
6
3.58
0.18
20
Coconut, dried, not sweetened
1⁄4
cup(s)
393
4
14
10
38
34.06
—
0
Cod, Atlantic cod or scrod, baked 
or broiled
3
ounce(s)
46
10
0
0
,1
0.07
—
24
Coffee, brewed
8
fluid ounce(s)
9
,1
0
0
0
0.00
0
0
Collard greens, boiled, drained
1⁄2
cup(s)
25
2
5
3
,1
0.04
—
0
Cookies, animal crackers
12
piece(s)
134
2
22
,1
4
1.03
—
0
Cookies, chocolate chip
1
item(s)
140
2
16
1
8
2.09
0
13
283
  Selective Nutrient Content of Common Foods
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Food Description
Qty
Measure
Energy
(cal)
Protein
(g)
Carb
(g)
Dietary 
Fiber
(g)
Fat
(g)
Sat
Fat
(g)
Trans
Fat 
(g)
Cholesterol
(mg)
Cookies, chocolate sandwich, extra 
crème filling
1
item(s)
65
,1
9
,1
3
0.50
1.10
0
Cookies, Fig Newtons
1
item(s)
55
1
10
1
1
0.50
0.50
0
Cookies, oatmeal
1
item(s)
234
6
45
3
4
0.70
0
,.1
Cookies, peanut butter
1
item(s)
163
4
17
1
9
1.65
0
13
Cookies, sugar
1
item(s)
61
1
7
,1
3
0.63
0
18
Corn, yellow sweet, frozen, boiled, 
drained
1⁄2
cup(s)
66
2
16
2
1
0.08
—
0
Cornbread
1
piece(s)
141
5
18
1
5
2.09
0
21
Cornmeal, yellow whole grain
1⁄2
cup(s)
221
5
47
4
2
0.31
—
0
Cottage cheese, low fat,  
1% fat
1⁄2
cup(s)
81
14
3
0
1
0.73
—
5
Cottage cheese, low fat,  
2% fat
1⁄2
cup(s)
102
16
4
0
2
1.38
—
9
Crab, blue, canned
2
ounce(s)
56
12
0
0
1
0.14
—
50
Crackers, cheese (mini)
30
item(s)
151
3
17
1
8
2.81
—
4
Crackers, honey graham
4
item(s)
118
2
22
1
3
0.43
—
0
Crackers, matzo, plain
1
item(s)
112
3
24
1
,1
0.06
—
0
Crackers, Ritz
5
item(s)
80
1
10
1
4
0.50
—
0
Crackers, rye crispbread
1
item(s)
37
1
8
2
,1
0.01
—
0
Crackers, saltine
5
item(s)
65
1
11
,1
2
0.44
0.54
0
Crackers, wheat
10
item(s)
142
3
19
1
6
1.55
—
0
Cranberry juice cocktail
1⁄2
cup(s)
72
0
18
,1
,1
0.01
—
0
Cream cheese
2
tablespoon(s)
101
2
1
0
10
6.37
—
32
Cream, heavy whipping, liquid
1
tablespoon(s)
52
,1
,1
0
6
3.45
—
21
Cream, light whipping, liquid
1
tablespoon(s)
44
,1
,1
0
5
2.90
—
17
Croissant, butter
1
item(s)
231
5
26
1
12
6.59
—
38
Cucumber
1⁄4
item(s)
11
,1
3
,1
,.1
0.03
—
0
Danish pastry, nut
1
item(s)
280
5
30
1
16
3.78
—
30
Dates, domestic, whole
1⁄4
cup(s)
126
1
33
4
,1
0.01
—
0
Distilled alcohol, 90 proof
1
fluid ounce(s)
73
0
0
0
0
0.00
0
0
Doughnut, cake
1
item(s)
198
2
23
1
11
1.70
—
17
Doughnut, glazed
1
item(s)
242
4
27
1
14
3.49
—
4
Egg substitute, Egg Beaters
1⁄4
cup(s)
30
6
1
0
0
0.00
0
0
Eggs, fried
1
item(s)
92
6
,1
0
7
1.98
—
210
Eggs, hard boiled
1
item(s)
78
6
1
0
5
1.63
—
212
Eggs, poached
1
item(s)
74
6
,1
0
5
1.54
—
211
Eggs, raw, white
1
item(s)
17
4
,1
0
,0.1
0.00
—
0
Eggs, raw, whole
1
item(s)
74
6
,1
0
5
1.55
—
212
Eggs, raw, yolk
1
item(s)
53
3
1
0
4
1.59
—
205
Eggs, scrambled, prepared  
w/milk & butter
2
item(s)
203
14
3
0
15
4.49
—
429
Figs, raw, medium
2
item(s)
74
1
19
3
,1
0.06
—
0
Fish fillets, batter coated or 
breaded, fried
3
ounce(s)
197.19
12.46
14.42
0.42
10.44
2.39
—
28.89
Flounder, baked
3
ounce(s)
114
15
,1
,0.1
6
1.15
0
44
Flour, all purpose, white, bleached, 
enriched
1⁄2
cup(s)
228
6
48
2
1
0.10
—
0
Flour, whole wheat
1⁄2
cup(s)
203
8
44
7
1
0.19
—
0
Frankfurter, beef & pork
1
item(s)
174
7
1
1
16
6.14
—
29
Frankfurter, beef
1
item(s)
149
5
2
0
13
5.26
—
24
284
Appendix E
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Food Description
Qty
Measure
Energy
(cal)
Protein
(g)
Carb
(g)
Dietary 
Fiber
(g)
Fat
(g)
Sat
Fat
(g)
Trans
Fat 
(g)
Cholesterol
(mg)
Frankfurter, turkey
1
item(s)
102
6
1
0
8
2.65
—
48
Frozen yogurt, chocolate, soft serve
1⁄2
cup(s)
115
3
18
2
4
2.61
—
4
Frozen yogurt, vanilla, soft serve
1⁄2
cup(s)
117
3
17
0
4
2.46
—
1
Fruit cocktail, canned in heavy 
syrup
1⁄2
cup(s)
91
,1
23
1
,0.1
0.01
—
0
Fruit cocktail, canned in juice
1⁄2
cup(s)
55
1
14
1
,0.1
0.00
—
0
Granola bar, plain, hard
1
item(s)
115
2
16
1
5
0.58
—
0
Grape juice, sweetened, added 
vitamin C, from frozen 
concentrate
1⁄2
cup(s)
64
,1
16
,1
,1
0.04
—
0
Grapefruit juice, pink, sweetened, 
canned
1⁄2
cup(s)
58
1
14
,1
,1
0.02
—
0
Grapefruit juice, white
1⁄2
cup(s)
48
1
11
,1
,1
0.02
—
0
Grapefruit, raw, pink or red
1⁄2
cup(s)
48
1
12
2
,1
0.02
—
0
Grapes, European, red or green, 
adherent skin
1⁄2
cup(s)
55
1
14
1
,1
0.04
—
0
Haddock, baked or broiled
3
ounce(s)
50
11
0
0
,1
0.07
—
33
Halibut, Atlantic & Pacific, cooked, 
dry heat
3
ounce(s)
119
23
0
0
2
0.35
—
35
Ham, cured, boneless, 11% fat, 
roasted
3
ounce(s)
151
19
0
0
8
2.65
—
50
Ham, deli sliced, cooked
1
slice(s)
30
5
1
0
1
0.50
—
15
Honey
1
tablespoon(s)
64
,0.1
17
,0.1
0
0.00
0
0
Honeydew melon
1⁄2
cup(s)
32
,1
8
1
,1
0.03
—
0
Ice cream, chocolate
1⁄2
cup(s)
143
3
19
1
7
4.49
—
22
Ice cream, chocolate, soft serve
1⁄2
cup(s)
177
3
24
1
8
5.17
—
22
Ice cream, light vanilla
1⁄2
cup(s)
109
4
18
,1
3
1.71
—
17
Jams, jellies, preserves, all  
flavors
1
tablespoon(s)
56
,0.1
14
,1
,0.1
0.00
—
0
Jams, jellies, preserves, all  
flavors, low sugar
1
tablespoon(s)
25
,0.1
6
,1
,0.1
0.00
—
0
Kale, frozen, chopped, boiled, 
drained
1⁄2
cup(s)
20
2
3
1
,1
0.04
—
0
Kiwifruit
1
item(s)
53
1
11
3
1
0.02
—
0
Lamb, chop, loin, domestic, lean & 
fat, 1⁄40 fat, broiled
3
ounce(s)
269
21
0
0
20
8.36
—
85
Lamb, leg, domestic, lean & fat, 1⁄40 
fat, cooked
3
ounce(s)
250
21
0
0
18
7.51
—
82
Lemon juice
1
tablespoon(s)
4
,0.1
1
,0.1
0
0.00
—
0
Lemonade, from frozen concentrate
8
fluid ounce(s)
131
,1
34
,1
,1
0.02
—
0
Lentils, boiled
1⁄2
cup(s)
115
9
20
8
,1
0.05
—
0
Lentils, sprouted
1
cup(s)
82
7
17
0
,1
0.04
—
0
Lettuce, butterhead, Boston, or bibb
1
cup(s)
7
1
1
1
,1
0.02
—
0
Lettuce, romaine, shredded
1
cup(s)
10
1
2
1
,1
0.02
—
0
Lobster, northern, cooked, moist 
heat
3
ounce(s)
83
17
1
0
1
0.09
—
61
Macadamias, dry roasted, no salt 
added
1⁄4
cup(s)
241
3
4
3
25
4.00
—
0
Mayonnaise w/soybean oil
1
tablespoon(s)
99
,1
1
0
11
1.64
0.04
5
Mayonnaise, low calorie
1
tablespoon(s)
37
,0.1
3
0
3
0.53
—
4
Milk, fat free, nonfat, or skim
1
cup(s)
83
8
12
0
,1
0.29
—
5
Milk, fat free, nonfat, or skim, w/
nonfat milk solids
1
cup(s)
91
9
12
0
1
0.40
—
5
285
  Selective Nutrient Content of Common Foods
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Food Description
Qty
Measure
Energy
(cal)
Protein
(g)
Carb
(g)
Dietary 
Fiber
(g)
Fat
(g)
Sat
Fat
(g)
Trans
Fat 
(g)
Cholesterol
(mg)
Milk, low fat, 1%
1
cup(s)
102
8
12
0
2
1.54
—
12
Milk, low fat, 1%, w/nonfat milk 
solids
1
cup(s)
105
9
12
0
2
1.48
—
10
Milk, reduced fat, 2%
1
cup(s)
122
8
11
0
5
2.35
—
20
Milk, reduced fat, 2%, w/nonfat 
milk solids
1
cup(s)
125
9
12
0
5
2.93
—
20
Milk, whole, 3.3%
1
cup(s)
146
8
11
0
8
4.55
—
24
Milk, whole, evaporated, canned
2
tablespoon(s)
42
2
3
0
2
1.45
—
9
Milkshakes, chocolate
1
cup(s)
270
7
48
1
6
3.81
—
25
Muffin, English, plain, enriched
1
item(s)
134
4
26
2
1
0.15
—
0
Muffin, English, wheat
1
item(s)
127
5
26
3
1
0.16
—
0
Muffins, blueberry
1
item(s)
160
3
23
1
6
0.87
0
20
Mushrooms, raw
1⁄2
cup(s)
8
1
1
,1
,1
0.02
—
0
Mustard greens, frozen, boiled, 
drained
1⁄2
cup(s)
14
2
2
2
,1
0.01
—
0
Oil, canola
1
tablespoon(s)
120
0
0
0
14
0.97
—
0
Oil, corn
1
tablespoon(s)
120
0
0
0
14
1.73
0.04
0
Oil, olive
1
tablespoon(s)
119
0
0
0
14
1.82
—
0
Oil, peanut
1
tablespoon(s)
119
0
0
0
14
2.28
—
0
Oil, safflower
1
tablespoon(s)
120
0
0
0
14
0.84
—
0
Oil, soybean w/cottonseed oil
1
tablespoon(s)
120
0
0
0
14
2.45
—
0
Okra, sliced, boiled, drained
1⁄2
cup(s)
18
1
4
2
,1
0.04
—
0
Onions, chopped, boiled, drained
1⁄2
cup(s)
47
1
11
1
,1
0.03
—
0
Orange juice, unsweetened, from 
frozen concentrate
1⁄2
cup(s)
56
1
13
,1
,0.1
0.01
—
0
Orange, raw
1
item(s)
62
1
15
3
,1
0.02
—
0
Oysters, eastern, farmed, raw
3
ounce(s)
50
4
5
0
1
0.38
—
21
Oysters, eastern, wild, cooked, 
moist heat
3
ounce(s)
116
12
7
0
4
1.31
—
89
Pancakes, blueberry, from  
recipe
3
item(s)
253
7
33
1
10
2.26
—
64
Pancakes, from mix w/egg & milk
3
item(s)
249
9
33
2
9
2.33
—
81
Papaya, raw
1⁄2
cup(s)
27
,1
7
1
,0.1
0.03
—
0
Pasta, egg noodles, enriched, 
cooked
1⁄2
cup(s)
106
4
20
1
1
0.25
0.02
26
Pasta, macaroni, enriched, cooked
1⁄2
cup(s)
99
3
20
1
,1
0.07
—
0
Pasta, spaghetti, al dente, cooked
1⁄2
cup(s)
95
4
20
1
1
0.05
—
0
Pasta, spaghetti, whole wheat, 
cooked
1⁄2
cup(s)
87
4
19
3
,1
0.07
—
0
Pasta, tricolor vegetable macaroni, 
enriched, cooked
1⁄2
cup(s)
86
3
18
3
,0.1
0.01
—
0
Peach, halves, canned in heavy 
syrup
1⁄2
cup(s)
97
1
26
2
,1
0.01
—
0
Peach, halves, canned in water
1⁄2
cup(s)
29
1
7
2
,0.1
0.01
—
0
Peach, raw, medium
1
item(s)
38
1
9
1
,1
0.02
—
0
Peanut butter, smooth
1
tablespoon(s)
96
4
3
1
8
1.60
—
0
Peanuts, oil roasted, salted
1⁄4
cup(s)
216
10
5
3
19
3.12
—
0
Pear, halves, canned in heavy 
syrup
1⁄2
cup(s)
98
,1
25
2
,1
0.01
—
0
Pear, raw
1
item(s)
96
1
26
5
,1
0.01
—
0
Peas, green, canned, drained
1⁄2
cup(s)
59
4
11
3
,1
0.05
—
0
Peas, green, frozen, boiled, drained
1⁄2
cup(s)
62
4
11
4
,1
0.04
—
0
286
Appendix E
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Food Description
Qty
Measure
Energy
(cal)
Protein
(g)
Carb
(g)
Dietary 
Fiber
(g)
Fat
(g)
Sat
Fat
(g)
Trans
Fat 
(g)
Cholesterol
(mg)
Pecans, dry roasted, no salt added
1⁄4
cup(s)
403
5
8
5
42
3.56
—
0
Pepperoni, beef & pork
1
slice(s)
55
2
,1
0
5
1.77
—
9
Peppers, green bell or sweet, raw
1⁄2
cup(s)
15
1
3
1
,1
0.04
—
0
Pickle relish, sweet
1
tablespoon(s)
20
,0.1
5
,1
,0.1
0.01
—
0
Pickle, dill
1
ounce(s)
5
,1
1
,1
,0.1
0.01
—
0
Pie crust, frozen, ready to bake, 
enriched, baked
1
slice(s)
82
1
8
,1
5
1.69
—
0
Pie crust, prepared w/water, baked
1
slice(s)
100
1
10
,1
6
1.54
—
0
Pie, apple, from home recipe
1
slice(s)
411
4
58
2
19
4.73
—
0
Pie, pecan, from home recipe
1
slice(s)
503
6
64
0
27
4.87
—
106
Pie, pumpkin, from home recipe
1
slice(s)
316
7
41
0
14
4.92
—
65
Pineapple, canned in extra heavy 
syrup
1⁄2
cup(s)
108
,1
28
1
,1
0.01
—
0
Pineapple, canned in juice
1⁄2
cup(s)
75
1
20
1
,0.1
0.01
—
0
Pineapple, raw, diced
1⁄2
cup(s)
37
,1
10
1
,0.1
0.01
—
0
Pinto beans, boiled, drained, no 
salt added
1⁄2
cup(s)
25
2
5
0
,1
0.04
—
0
Pomegranate
1
item(s)
105
1
26
1
,1
0.06
—
0
Popcorn, air popped
1
cup(s)
31
1
6
1
,1
0.05
—
0
Popcorn, popped in oil
1
cup(s)
165
3
19
3
9
1.61
—
0
Pork, ribs, loin, country style, lean 
& fat, roasted
3
ounce(s)
279
20
0
0
22
7.83
—
78
Potato chips, salted
20
item(s)
152
2
15
1
10
3.11
—
0
Potatoes, au gratin mix, prepared 
w/water, whole milk, & butter
1⁄2
cup(s)
106
3
15
1
5
2.94
—
17
Potatoes, baked, flesh & skin
1
item(s)
220
5
51
4
,1
0.05
—
0
Potatoes, baked, flesh only
1⁄2
cup(s)
57
1
13
1
,0.1
0.02
—
0
Potatoes, hashed brown
1⁄2
cup(s)
207
2
27
2
10
1.11
—
0
Potatoes, mashed, from dehydrated 
granules w/milk,  
water, & margarine
1⁄2
cup(s)
122
2
17
1
5
1.27
—
2
Pretzels, plain, hard, twists
5
item(s)
114
3
24
1
1
0.23
—
0
Prune juice, canned
1
cup(s)
182
2
45
3
,0.1
0.01
—
0
Prunes, dried
2
item(s)
40
,1
11
1
,0.1
0.01
—
0
Pudding, chocolate
1⁄2
cup(s)
154
5
23
1
5
2.78
0
35
Pudding, tapioca, ready to eat
1
item(s)
169
3
28
,1
5
0.85
—
1
Pudding, vanilla
1⁄2
cup(s)
116
5
17
,0.1
3
1.31
0
35
Quinoa, dry
1⁄2
cup(s)
318
11
59
5
5
0.50
—
0
Raisins, seeded, packed
1⁄4
cup(s)
122
1
32
3
,1
0.07
—
0
Raspberries, raw
1⁄2
cup(s)
32
1
7
4
,1
0.01
—
0
Raspberries, red, sweetened, frozen
1⁄2
cup(s)
129
1
33
6
,1
0.01
—
0
Rice, brown, long grain, cooked
1⁄2
cup(s)
108
3
22
2
1
0.18
—
0
Rice, white, long grain, boiled
1⁄2
cup(s)
103
2
22
,1
,1
0.06
—
0
Rice, wild brown, cooked
1⁄2
cup(s)
82.81
3.27
17.49
1.47
0.27
0.04
—
0
Roll, hard
1
item(s)
167
6
30
1
2
0.35
—
0
Salad dressing, blue cheese
2
tablespoon(s)
154
1
2
0
16
3.03
—
5
Salad dressing, French
2
tablespoon(s)
143
,1
5
0
14
1.76
—
0
Salad dressing, French, low fat
2
tablespoon(s)
76
,1
10
,1
4
0.36
—
0
Salad dressing, Italian
2
tablespoon(s)
86
,1
3
0
8
1.32
—
0
Salad dressing, Italian, diet
2
tablespoon(s)
23
,1
1
0
2
0.14
—
2
Salad dressing, ranch
2
tablespoon(s)
146
,1
2
,0.1
16
2.32
—
1
287
  Selective Nutrient Content of Common Foods
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Food Description
Qty
Measure
Energy
(cal)
Protein
(g)
Carb
(g)
Dietary 
Fiber
(g)
Fat
(g)
Sat
Fat
(g)
Trans
Fat 
(g)
Cholesterol
(mg)
Salad dressing, thousand island
2
tablespoon(s)
115
,1
5
,1
11
1.59
—
8
Salad dressing, thousand  
island, low calorie
2
tablespoon(s)
62
,1
7
,1
4
0.23
—
,1
Salami, pork, dry or hard
1
slice(s)
52
3
,1
0
4
1.52
—
10
Salmon, broiled or baked w/butter
3
ounce(s)
155
23
0
0
6
1.16
—
40
Salmon, smoked chinook (lox)
2
ounce(s)
66
10
0
0
2
0.52
—
13
Salsa
2
tablespoon(s)
4
,1
1
,1
,0.1
0.00
—
0
Sardines, Atlantic, with bones, 
canned in oil
2
item(s)
50
6
0
0
3
0.36
—
34
Sauerkraut, canned
1⁄2
cup(s)
22
1
5
3
,1
0.04
—
0
Sausage, Italian, pork, cooked
1
item(s)
220
14
1
0
17
6.14
—
53
Sausage, smoked, pork link
1
piece(s)
295
17
2
—
24
8.58
—
52
Scallops, mixed species, breaded, 
fried
3
item(s)
100
8
5
0
5
1.24
—
28
Seaweed, spirulina, dried
1⁄2
cup(s)
22
4
2
,1
1
0.20
—
0
Shrimp, mixed species, breaded, 
fried
3
ounce(s)
205.69
18.18
9.74
0.34
10.43
1.77
—
150.44
Shrimp, mixed species, cooked, 
moist heat
3
ounce(s)
84
18
0
0
1
0.25
—
166
Soda, Coca-Cola Classic cola
12
fluid ounce(s)
146
0
41
0
0
0.00
0
0
Soda, Coke diet cola
12
fluid ounce(s)
2
0
,1
0
0
0.00
0
0
Soda, cola
12
fluid ounce(s)
179
,1
46
0
0
0.00
—
0
Soda, ginger ale
12
fluid ounce(s)
124
0
32
0
0
0.00
0
0
Soda, lemon lime
12
fluid ounce(s)
147
0
38
0
0
0.00
—
0
Soda, root beer
12
fluid ounce(s)
152
0
39
0
0
0.00
0
0
Sour cream
2
tablespoon(s)
51
1
1
0
5
3.13
—
11
Sour cream, fat free
2
tablespoon(s)
24
1
5
0
0
0.00
0
3
Soy sauce
1
tablespoon(s)
10
1
2
0
,0.1
0.00
—
0
Spinach, canned, drained
1⁄2
cup(s)
25
3
4
3
1
0.09
—
0
Spinach, chopped, boiled, drained
1⁄2
cup(s)
21
3
3
2
,1
0.04
—
0
Spinach, raw, chopped
1
cup(s)
7
1
1
1
,1
0.02
—
0
Squash, acorn, baked
1⁄2
cup(s)
57
1
15
5
,1
0.03
—
0
Squash, summer, all varieties, 
sliced, boiled, drained
1⁄2
cup(s)
18
1
4
1
,1
0.06
—
0
Squash, winter, all varieties, baked, 
mashed
1⁄2
cup(s)
38
1
9
3
,1
0.13
—
0
Squid, mixed species, fried
3
ounce(s)
149
15
7
0
6
1.60
—
221
Strawberries, raw
1⁄2
cup(s)
23
,1
6
1
,1
0.01
—
0
Strawberries, sweetened,  
frozen, thawed
1⁄2
cup(s)
99
1
27
2
,1
0.01
—
0
Sugar, brown, packed
1
teaspoon(s)
17
0
4
0
0
0.00
0
0
Sugar, white, granulated
1
teaspoon(s)
15
0
4
0
0
0.00
Sweet potatoes, baked, peeled
1⁄2
cup(s)
90
2
21
3
,1
0.03
—
0
Syrup, maple
1⁄4
cup(s)
209
0
54
0
,1
0.03
—
0
Taco shell, hard
1
item(s)
62
1
8
1
3
0.43
—
0
Tangerine, raw
1
item(s)
37
1
9
2
,1
0.02
—
0
Tea, decaffeinated, prepared
8
fluid ounce(s)
2
0
1
0
0
0.00
0
0
Tea, herbal, prepared
8
fluid ounce(s)
2
0
,1
0
0
0.00
0
0
Tea, prepared
8
fluid ounce(s)
2
0
1
0
0
0.00
0
0
Teriyaki sauce
1
tablespoon(s)
15
1
3
,0.1
0
0.00
0
0
Tofu, firm
3
ounce(s)
80
8
2
1
4
0.50
—
0
288
Appendix E
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Food Description
Qty
Measure
Energy
(cal)
Protein
(g)
Carb
(g)
Dietary 
Fiber
(g)
Fat
(g)
Sat
Fat
(g)
Trans
Fat 
(g)
Cholesterol
(mg)
Tomato juice, canned
1⁄2
cup(s)
21
1
5
,1
,0.1
0.01
—
0
Tomato sauce
1⁄2
cup(s)
46
2
8
2
1
0.18
0
0
Tomatoes, fresh, ripe, red
1
item(s)
22.13
1.08
4.82
1.47
0.24
0.05
—
0
Tomatoes, stewed, canned, red
1⁄2
cup(s)
33
1
8
1
,1
0.03
—
0
Tortilla chips, plain
6
item(s)
142
2
18
2
7
1.43
—
0
Tortillas, corn, soft
1
item(s)
58
1
12
1
1
0.09
—
0
Tortillas, flour
1
item(s)
104
3
18
1
2
0.56
—
0
Tuna, light, canned in oil, drained
2
ounce(s)
113
17
0
0
5
0.87
—
10
Tuna, light, canned in water, 
drained
2
ounce(s)
66
14
0
0
,1
0.13
—
17
Turkey, breast, processed, oven 
roasted, fat free
1
slice(s)
25
4
1
0
0
0.00
0
10
Turkey, breast, processed,  
traditional carved
2
slice(s)
40
9
0
0
1
0.00
—
20
Turkey, roasted, dark meat, meat 
only
3
ounce(s)
159
24
0
0
6
2.06
—
72
Turkey, roasted, light meat, meat 
only
3
ounce(s)
133
25
0
0
3
0.88
—
59
Turnip greens, chopped, boiled, 
drained
1⁄2
cup(s)
14
1
3
3
,1
0.04
—
0
Turnips, cubed, boiled, drained
1⁄2
cup(s)
17
1
4
2
,0.1
0.01
—
0
Vegetables, mixed, canned, drained
1⁄2
cup(s)
40
2
8
2
,1
0.04
—
0
Vinegar, balsamic
1
tablespoon(s)
10
0
2
0
0
0.00
0
0
Waffle, plain, frozen, toasted
2
item(s)
174
4
27
2
5
0.95
—
16
Walnuts, dried black, chopped
1⁄4
cup(s)
193
8
3
2
18
1.05
—
0
Watermelon
1⁄2
cup(s)
23
,1
6
,1
,1
0.01
—
0
Wheat germ, crude
2
tablespoon(s)
52
3
7
2
1
0.24
—
0
Wine cooler
10
fluid ounce(s)
150
,1
18
,0.1
,0.1
0.01
—
0
Wine, red, California
5
fluid ounce(s)
125
,1
4
0
0
0.00
0
0
Wine, sparkling, domestic
5
fluid ounce(s)
105
,1
4
0
0
0.00
0
0
Wine, white
5
fluid ounce(s)
100
,1
1
0
0
0.00
0
0
Yogurt, custard style, fruit  
flavors
6
ounce(s)
190
7
32
0
4
2.00
—
15
Yogurt, fruit, low fat
1
cup(s)
243
10
46
0
3
1.82
—
12
Yogurt, fruit, nonfat, sweetened w/
low-calorie sweetener
1
cup(s)
122
11
19
1
,1
0.21
—
3
Yogurt, plain, low fat
1
cup(s)
154
13
17
0
4
2.45
—
15
VEGETARIAN FOODS
Prepared
Macaroni & cheese (lacto)
8
ounce(s)
181
8
17
,1
9
4.37
0
22
Steamed rice & vegetables (vegan)
8
ounce(s)
265
5
40
3
10
1.84
0
0
Vegan spinach enchiladas (vegan)
1
piece(s)
93
5
15
2
2
0.34
—
0
Vegetable chow mein (vegan)
8
ounce(s)
166
6
22
2
6
0.65
0
0
Vegetable lasagna (lacto)
8
ounce(s)
177
12
25
2
4
1.92
0
10
Vegetarian chili (vegan)
8
ounce(s)
116
6
21
7
2
0.24
0
,1
Vegetarian vegetable soup (vegan)
8
ounce(s)
92
3
14
2
4
0.77
0
0
Boca burger
All American flamed grilled patty
1
item(s)
110
14
6
4
4
1.00
0
3
Boca meatless ground burger
1⁄2
cup(s)
70
11
7
4
1
0.00
—
0
Breakfast links
2
item(s)
100
10
6
5
4
0.00
0
0
Breakfast patties
1
item(s)
80
8
5
3
4
0.00
0
0
289
  Selective Nutrient Content of Common Foods
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Food Description
Qty
Measure
Energy
(cal)
Protein
(g)
Carb
(g)
Dietary 
Fiber
(g)
Fat
(g)
Sat
Fat
(g)
Trans
Fat 
(g)
Cholesterol
(mg)
VEGETARIAN FOODS (continued)
Boca burger (continued)
Vegan original patty
1
item(s)
90
13
4
0
1
0.00
0
0
Gardenburger
Black bean burger
1
item(s)
80
8
11
4
2
0.00
0
0
Chik’n grill
1
item(s)
100
13
5
3
3
0.00
0
0
Meatless breakfast sausage
1
item(s)
50
5
2
2
4
0.00
0
0
Meatless meatballs
6
item(s)
110
12
8
4
5
1.00
0
0
Original
3
ounce(s)
132
7
19
4
4
1.80
0
24
Morningstar Farms
America’s Original Veggie Dog 
links
1
item(s)
80
11
6
1
1
0.00
0
0
Better n Eggs egg substitute
1⁄4
cup(s)
20
5
0
0
0
0.00
0
0
Breakfast links
2
item(s)
80
9
3
2
3
0.50
0
0
Breakfast strips
2
item(s)
60
2
2
1
5
0.50
0
0
Garden veggie patties
1
item(s)
100
10
9
4
3
0.50
0
0
Spicy black bean veggie burger
1
item(s)
150
11
16
5
5
0.50
0
0
MIXED FOODS, SOUPS, SANDWICHES
Mixed Dishes
Bean burrito
1
item(s)
327
17
33
6
15
8.30
0
38
Beef & vegetable fajita
1
item(s)
397
23
35
3
18
5.50
—
45
Chicken & vegetables  
w/broccoli, onion, bamboo 
shoots in soy based sauce
1
cup(s)
287
22
6
1
19
5.13
—
84
Chicken cacciatore
1
cup(s)
266
28
5
1
14
3.98
0
103
Chicken waldorf salad
1⁄2
cup(s)
178
14
6
1
11
1.76
0
42
Fettuccine alfredo
1
cup(s)
247
11
42
1
3
1.61
0
9
Hummus
1⁄2
cup(s)
218
6
25
5
11
1.38
—
0
Lasagna w/ground beef
1
cup(s)
288
18
22
2
15
7.47
0
68
Macaroni & cheese
1
cup(s)
393
15
40
1
19
8.18
—
30
Meat loaf
1
slice(s)
244
17
7
,1
16
6.15
0
85
Potato salad
1⁄2
cup(s)
179
3
14
2
10
1.79
—
85
Spaghetti & meatballs  
w/tomato sauce, prepared
1
cup(s)
330
19
39
3
12
3.90
—
89
Spicy thai noodles (pad thai)
8
ounce(s)
222
9
36
3
6
0.83
0
37
Sushi w/vegetables in seaweed
6
piece(s)
182
3
41
1
,1
0.10
—
0
Tuna salad
1⁄2
cup(s)
192
16
10
0
9
1.58
0
13
Soups
Chicken noodle, condensed, 
prepared w/water
1
cup(s)
75
4
9
1
2
0.65
—
7
Cream of chicken, condensed, 
prepared w/milk
1
cup(s)
191
7
15
,1
11
4.64
—
27
Cream of mushroom, condensed, 
prepared w/milk
1
cup(s)
203
6
15
,1
14
5.13
—
20
Manhattan clam chowder, 
condensed, prepared w/water
1
cup(s)
78
2
12
1
2
0.38
—
2
Minestrone, condensed, prepared 
w/water
1
cup(s)
82
4
11
1
3
0.55
—
2
New England clam chowder, 
condensed, prepared w/milk
1
cup(s)
164
9
17
1
7
2.95
—
22
Split pea
1
cup(s)
85
4
19
2
,1
0.07
0
0
290
Appendix E
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Food Description
Qty
Measure
Energy
(cal)
Protein
(g)
Carb
(g)
Dietary 
Fiber
(g)
Fat
(g)
Sat
Fat
(g)
Trans
Fat 
(g)
Cholesterol
(mg)
MIXED FOODS, SOUPS, SANDWICHES (continued)
Soups (continued)
Tomato, condensed, prepared  
w/milk
1
cup(s)
161
6
22
3
6
2.90
—
17
Tomato, condensed, prepared  
w/water
1
cup(s)
85
2
17
,1
2
0.37
—
0
Vegetable beef, condensed, 
prepared w/water
1
cup(s)
78
6
10
,1
2
0.85
—
5
Vegetarian vegetable, condensed, 
prepared w/water
1
cup(s)
72
2
12
—
2
0.29
—
0
Sandwiches
Bacon, lettuce, & tomato w/
mayonnaise
1
item(s)
349
11
34
2
19
4.54
—
20
Cheeseburger, large, plain
1
item(s)
609
30
47
0
33
14.84
—
96
Cheeseburger, large, w/bacon, 
vegetables, & condiments
1
item(s)
608
32
37
2
37
16.24
—
111
Club w/bacon, chicken, tomato, 
lettuce, & mayonnaise
1
item(s)
555
31
48
3
26
5.94
—
72
Cold cut submarine w/cheese & 
vegetables
1
item(s)
456
22
51
2
19
6.81
—
36
Egg salad
1
item(s)
278
10
29
1
13
2.96
—
217
Hamburger, double patty, large, 
w/condiments & vegetables
1
item(s)
540
34
40
0
27
10.52
—
122
Hamburger, large, plain
1
item(s)
426
23
32
2
23
8.38
—
71
Hot dog w/bun, plain
1
item(s)
242
10
18
2
15
5.11
—
44
Pastrami
1
item(s)
331
14
27
2
18
6.18
—
51
Peanut butter & jelly
1
item(s)
330
11
42
3
15
3.00
—
1
FAST FOOD
Arby’s
Au jus sauce
1
serving(s)
5
,1
1
,0.1
,0.1
0.02
—
0
Beef ’n cheddar sandwich
1
item(s)
480
23
43
2
24
8.00
—
90
Curly fries, medium
1
serving(s)
400
5
50
4
20
5.00
—
0
Market Fresh grilled chicken 
Caesar salad w/o dressing
1
serving(s)
230
33
8
3
8
3.50
—
80
Roast beef deluxe sandwich, light
1
item(s)
296
18
33
6
10
3.00
—
42
Roast beef sandwich, giant
1
item(s)
480
32
41
3
23
10.00
—
110
Roast beef sandwich, regular
1
item(s)
350
21
34
2
16
6.00
—
85
Roast chicken deluxe sandwich, 
light
1
item(s)
260
23
33
3
5
1.00
—
40
Burger King
BK Broiler chicken sandwich
1
item(s)
550
30
52
3
25
5.00
—
105
Croissanwich w/sausage, egg, & 
cheese
1
item(s)
520
19
24
1
39
14.00
1.93
210
Fish Fillet sandwich
1
item(s)
520
18
44
2
30
8.00
1.12
55
French fries, medium, salted
1
item(s)
360
4
46
4
18
5.00
4.50
0
Onion rings, medium
1
serving(s)
320
4
40
3
16
4.00
3.50
0
Whopper
1
item(s)
710
31
52
4
43
13.00
1
85
Whopper w/cheese
1
item(s)
800
36
53
4
50
18.00
2
110
Chick-Fil-A
Chargrilled chicken garden salad
1
item(s)
180
22
9
3
6
3.00
0
70
Chargrilled deluxe chicken 
sandwich
1
item(s)
290
27
31
2
7
1.50
0
70
291
  Selective Nutrient Content of Common Foods
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Food Description
Qty
Measure
Energy
(cal)
Protein
(g)
Carb
(g)
Dietary 
Fiber
(g)
Fat
(g)
Sat
Fat
(g)
Trans
Fat 
(g)
Cholesterol
(mg)
FAST FOOD (continued)
Chick-Fil-A (continued)
Chicken biscuit w/cheese
1
item(s)
450
19
43
2
23
7.00
2.85
45
Chicken salad sandwich
1
item(s)
350
20
32
5
15
3.00
0
65
Chick-n-Strips
4
item(s)
290
29
14
1
13
2.50
0
65
Coleslaw
1
item(s)
210
1
14
2
17
2.50
0
20
Dairy Queen
Banana split
1
item(s)
510
8
96
3
12
8.00
0
30
Chocolate chip cookie dough 
blizzard, small
1
item(s)
720
12
105
0
28
14.00
2.50
50
Chocolate malt, small
1
item(s)
650
15
111
0
16
10.00
0.50
55
Vanilla soft serve
1⁄2
cup(s)
140
3
22
0
5
3.00
0
15
Domino’s
Classic hand tossed pizza
America’s favorite feast, 12”
2
slice(s)
508
22
57
4
22
9.20
—
49
Pepperoni feast, extra pepperoni & 
cheese, 12”
2
slice(s)
534
24
56
3
25
10.92
—
57
Vegi feast, 12”
2
slice(s)
439
19
57
4
16
7.09
—
34
Thin crust pizza
Extravaganzza, 12”
1⁄4
item(s)
425
20
34
3
24
9.41
—
53
Pepperoni, extra pepperoni & 
cheese, 12”
1⁄4
item(s)
420
20
32
2
24
10.46
—
54
Vegi, 12”
1⁄4
item(s)
338
16
34
3
17
7.08
—
34
Ultimate deep dish pizza
America’s favorite, 12”
2
slice(s)
617
26
59
4
33
12.88
—
58
Pepperoni, extra pepperoni & 
cheese, 12”
2
slice(s)
629
26
57
4
34
13.57
—
61
Vegi, 12”
2
slice(s)
547
22
59
4
26
10.19
—
41
In-n-Out Burger
Cheeseburger w/mustard & 
ketchup
1
item(s)
400
22
41
3
18
9.00
—
55
Chocolate shake
1
item(s)
690
9
83
0
36
24.00
—
95
Double-Double cheeseburger w/
mustard & ketchup
1
item(s)
590
37
42
3
32
17.00
—
115
French fries
1
item(s)
400
7
54
2
18
5.00
—
0
Hamburger w/mustard & ketchup
1
item(s)
310
16
41
3
10
4.00
—
35
Jack in the Box
Chicken club salad
1
item(s)
310
28
15
5
16
6.00
0
65
Hamburger
1
item(s)
250
12
30
2
9
3.50
0.88
30
Jack’s Spicy Chicken sandwich
1
item(s)
580
24
53
3
31
6.00
2.81
60
Jumbo Jack hamburger w/cheese
1
item(s)
690
26
60
3
38
16.00
1.55
75
Sourdough Jack
1
item(s)
700
30
36
3
49
16.00
2.98
80
Jamba Juice
Banana berry smoothie
24
fluid ounce(s)
470
5
112
5
2
0.50
—
5
Chocolate mood smoothie
24
fluid ounce(s)
690
16
142
2
8
4.50
—
25
Jamba powerboost smoothie
24
fluid ounce(s)
440
6
103
7
2
0.00
—
0
Orange juice, freshly squeezed
16
fluid ounce(s)
220
3
52
1
1
0.00
—
0
Protein berry pizzaz smoothie
24
fluid ounce(s)
440
20
92
6
2
0.00
—
0
Kentucky Fried Chicken (KFC)
Extra Crispy chicken, breast
1
item(s)
470
34
19
0
28
8.00
4.50
135
Hot & spicy chicken, whole wing
1
item(s)
180
11
9
0
11
3.00
0
60
292
Appendix E
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Food Description
Qty
Measure
Energy
(cal)
Protein
(g)
Carb
(g)
Dietary 
Fiber
(g)
Fat
(g)
Sat
Fat
(g)
Trans
Fat 
(g)
Cholesterol
(mg)
FAST FOOD (continued)
Kentucky Fried Chicken (KFC) (continued)
Original Recipe chicken, drumstick
1
item(s)
140
14
4
0
8
2.00
1
75
Long John Silver’s
Baked cod
1
serving(s)
120
22
1
0
5
1.00
—
90
Batter dipped fish sandwich
1
item(s)
440
17
48
3
20
5.00
—
35
Clam chowder
1
item(s)
220
9
23
0
10
4.00
—
25
Crunchy shrimp basket
21
item(s)
340
12
32
2
19
5.00
—
105
McDonald’s
Big Mac hamburger
1
item(s)
590
24
47
3
34
11.00
1.48
85
Cheeseburger
1
item(s)
330
15
36
2
14
6.00
1.02
45
Chicken McNuggets
4
item(s)
210
10
12
1
13
2.50
1.13
35
Egg McMuffin
1
item(s)
300
18
29
2
12
4.50
0.42
235
Filet-o-fish sandwich
1
item(s)
470
15
45
1
26
5.00
1.11
50
French fries, small
1
serving(s)
210
3
26
2
10
1.50
2.30
0
Fruit ’n yogurt parfait
1
item(s)
380
10
76
2
5
2.00
0.18
15
Hash browns
1
item(s)
130
1
14
1
8
1.50
2
0
Honey sauce
1
item(s)
45
0
12
0
0
0.00
—
0
McSalad Shaker garden salad
1
item(s)
100
7
4
2
6
3.00
—
75
McSalad Shaker grilled chicken 
caesar salad
1
item(s)
100
17
3
2
3
1.50
—
40
Newman’s Own creamy Caesar 
salad dressing
1
item(s)
190
2
4
0
18
3.50
0.29
20
Plain hotcakes w/syrup  
& margarine
3
item(s)
600
9
104
0
17
3.00
4
20
Quarter Pounder hamburger
1
item(s)
430
23
37
2
21
8.00
1.01
70
Quarter Pounder hamburger w/
cheese
1
item(s)
530
28
38
2
30
13.00
1.51
95
Sausage McMuffin w/egg
1
item(s)
450
20
29
2
28
10.00
0.59
255
Vanilla milkshake
8
fluid ounce(s)
254
9
40
0
7
4.28
—
27
Pizza Hut
Pepperoni Lovers stuffed crust 
pizza
1
slice(s)
480
23
44
3
24
11.00
1.05
65
Pepperoni Lovers thin ’n crispy 
pizza
1
slice(s)
270
13
22
2
14
7.00
0.51
40
Personal Pan supreme pizza
1
slice(s)
170
8
19
1
7
3.00
0.95
15
Veggie Lovers stuffed crust pizza
1
slice(s)
370
17
45
3
14
7.00
0.53
35
Veggie Lovers thin ’n crispy pizza
1
slice(s)
190
8
23
2
7
3.00
0.54
15
Starbucks
Cappuccino, tall
12
fluid ounce(s)
120
7
10
0
6
4.00
—
25
Cinnamon spice mocha, tall nonfat 
w/o whipped cream
12
fluid ounce(s)
170
11
32
0
0
0.50
0
5
Frappuccino, tall chocolate
12
fluid ounce(s)
290
13
52
1
5
1.00
—
3
Latte, tall w/nonfat milk
12
fluid ounce(s)
123
12
17
0
1
0.40
0
6
Latte, tall w/whole milk
12
fluid ounce(s)
212
11
17
0
11
6.90
—
46
Macchiato, tall caramel w/whole 
milk
12
fluid ounce(s)
190
6
27
0
7
4.00
—
25
Tazo chai black tea, tall nonfat
12
fluid ounce(s)
170
6
37
0
0
0.00
0
5
Subway
Chocolate chip cookie
1
item(s)
209
3
29
1
10
3.50
1.07
12
Classic Italian B.M.T. sandwich, 6”, 
white bread
1
item(s)
453
21
40
3
24
8.00
0
56
293
  Selective Nutrient Content of Common Foods
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Food Description
Qty
Measure
Energy
(cal)
Protein
(g)
Carb
(g)
Dietary 
Fiber
(g)
Fat
(g)
Sat
Fat
(g)
Trans
Fat 
(g)
Cholesterol
(mg)
FAST FOOD (continued)
Subway (continued)
Meatball sandwich, 6”, white bread
1
item(s)
501
23
46
4
25
10.00
0.75
56
Roast beef sandwich, 6”, white 
bread
1
item(s)
264
18
39
3
5
1.00
0
20
Roasted chicken breast sandwich, 
6”, white bread
1
item(s)
311
25
40
3
6
1.50
0
48
Tuna sandwich, 6”, white bread
1
item(s)
419
18
39
3
21
5.00
—
42
Turkey breast sandwich, 6”, white 
bread
1
item(s)
254
16
39
3
4
1.00
0
15
Taco Bell
7-layer burrito
1
item(s)
530
18
67
10
22
8.00
3
25
Beef burrito supreme
1
item(s)
440
18
51
7
18
8.00
2
40
Grilled chicken burrito
1
item(s)
390
19
49
3
13
4.00
—
40
Taco
1
item(s)
170
8
13
3
10
4.00
0.50
25
Veggie fajita wrap supreme
1
item(s)
470
11
55
3
22
7.00
—
30
CONVENIENCE MEALS
Budget Gourmet
Cheese manicotti w/meat sauce
1
item(s)
420
18
38
4
22
11.00
—
85
Chicken w/fettuccine
1
item(s)
380
20
33
3
19
10.00
—
85
Light beef stroganoff
1
item(s)
290
20
32
3
7
4.00
—
35
Light sirloin of beef in herb sauce
1
item(s)
260
19
30
5
7
4.00
—
30
Light vegetable lasagna
1
item(s)
290
15
36
5
9
1.79
—
15
Healthy Choice
Chicken enchilada suprema meal
1
item(s)
360
13
59
8
7
3.00
—
30
Lemon pepper fish meal
1
item(s)
280
11
49
5
5
2.00
—
30
Traditional salisbury steak meal
1
item(s)
360
23
45
5
9
3.50
—
45
Traditional turkey breasts meal
1
item(s)
330
21
50
4
5
2.00
—
35
Zucchini lasagna
1
item(s)
280
13
47
5
4
2.50
—
10
Stouffer’s
Cheese enchiladas with  
Mexican rice
1
serving(s)
370
12
48
5
14
5.00
—
25
Chicken pot pie
1
item(s)
740
23
56
4
47
18.00
—
65
Homestyle beef pot roast & 
potatoes
1
item(s)
270
16
25
3
12
4.50
—
35
Homestyle roast turkey breast w/
stuffing & mashed  
potatoes
1
item(s)
300
16
34
2
11
3.00
—
35
Lean Cuisine Everyday Favorites 
chicken chow mein  
w/rice
1
item(s)
210
12
33
2
3
1.00
0
30
Lean Cuisine Everyday Favorites 
lasagna w/meat sauce
1
item(s)
300
19
41
3
8
4.00
0
30
Weight Watchers
Smart Ones chicken enchiladas 
suiza entree
1
serving(s)
270
15
33
2
9
3.50
—
50
Smart Ones garden lasagna entree
1
item(s)
270
14
36
5
7
3.50
—
30
Smart Ones pepperoni pizza
1
item(s)
390
23
46
4
12
4.00
—
45
Smart Ones spicy penne pasta & 
ricotta
1
item(s)
280
11
45
4
6
2.00
—
5
Smart Ones spicy Szechuan style 
vegetables & chicken
1
item(s)
220
11
39
3
2
0.50
—
10
294
Appendix E
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 1
	 1.	 World Health Organization, “Global Strategy on Diet, Physi-
cal Activity, and Health,” http://www.who.int/chp/
about/-integrated_cd/en/, downloaded July 12, 2013.
	 2.	 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for 
Health Statistics, “Deaths: Preliminary Data for 2011,” Na-
tional Vital Statistics Reports 61, no. 6 (2012).
	 3.	 American College of Sports Medicine, ACSM’s Guidelines 
for Exercise Testing and Prescription (Philadelphia: Wolters 
Kluwer/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2014).
	 4.	 National Academy of Sciences, Institute of Medicine,  
Dietary Reference Intakes for Energy, Carbohydrates, Fiber,  
Fat, Fatty Acids, Cholesterol, Protein and Amino Acids  
(Macronutrients) (Washington, DC: National Academy 
Press, 2005).
	 5.	 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and De-
partment of Agriculture, Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 
2005 (Washington, DC: DHHS, 2005).
	 6.	 W. L. Haskell et al., “Physical Activity and Public Health: 
Updated Recommendation for Adults from the American 
College of Sports Medicine and the American Heart Asso-
ciation,” Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise 39 (2007): 
1423-1434.
	 7.	 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Physical 
Activity and Health: A Report of the Surgeon General (At-
lanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and 
Health Promotion, 1996).
	 8.	 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, “2008 
Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans,” http://health.
gov/-paguidelines, downloaded October 15, 2008.
	 9.	 See note 6, Haskell.
	10.	 American College of Sports Medicine, “Exercise is Medi-
cine,” www.exerciseismedicine.org/, downloaded July 12, 
2013.
	11.	 R. S. Paffenbarger, Jr., R. T. Hyde, A. L. Wing, and C. H. 
Steinmetz, “A History of Athleticism and Cardiovascular 
Health,” Journal of the American Medical Association 252 
(1984): 491-495.
	12.	 S. N. Blair, H. W. Kohl III, R. S. Paffenbarger, Jr., D. G. 
Clark, K. H. Cooper, and L. W. Gibbons, “Physical Fitness 
and All-Cause Mortality: A Prospective Study of Healthy 
Men and Women,” Journal of the American Medical Associa-
tion 262 (1989): 2395-2401.
	13.	 S. N. Blair, H. W. Kohl III, C. E. Barlow, R. S. Paffenbarger, 
Jr., L. W. Gibbons, and C. A. Macera, “Changes in Physical 
Fitness and All-Cause Mortality: A Prospective Study of 
Healthy and Unhealthy Men,” Journal of the American Med-
ical Association 273 (1995): 1193-1198.
	14.	 I. Lee, C. Hsieh, and R. S. Paffenbarger, Jr., “Exercise In-
tensity and Longevity in Men: The Harvard Alumni 
Health Study,” Journal of the American Medical Association 
273 (1995): 1179-1184.
	15.	 D. P. Swain, “Moderate- or Vigorous-Intensity Exercise: 
What Should We Prescribe?” ACSM’s Health & Fitness 
Journal 10, no. 5 (2007): 7-11.
	16.	 P. T. Williams, “Physical Fitness and Activity as Separate 
Heart Disease Risk Factors: A Meta-analysis,” Medicine & 
Science in Sports & Exercise 33 (2001): 754-761.
	17.	 D. P. Swain and B. A. Franklin, “Comparative Cardiopro-
tective Benefits of Vigorous vs. Moderate Intensity Aerobic 
Exercise,” American Journal of Cardiology 97 (2006): 141-147.
	18.	 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Healthy 
People 2020 (Washington, DC, Office of Disease Prevention 
and Health Promotion, 2010).
	19.	 J. O. Prochaska, J. C. Norcross, and C. C. DiClemente, 
Changing for Good (New York: William Morrow and Co., 
1994).
Chapter 2
	 1.	 R. B. O’Hara et al., “Increased Volume Resistance Train-
ing: Effects upon Predicted Aerobic Fitness in a Select 
Group of Air Force Men,” ACSM’s Health and Fitness Jour-
nal 8, no. 4 (2004): 16-25.
	 2.	 W. L. Haskell et al., “Physical Activity and Public Health: 
Updated Recommendation for Adults from the American 
College of Sports Medicine and the American Heart Asso-
ciation,” Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise 39 (2007): 
1423-1434.
	 3.	 American College of Sports Medicine, ACSM’s Guidelines 
for Exercise Testing and Prescription (Philadelphia: Wolters 
Kluwer/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2010).
	 4.	 W. J. Evans, “Exercise Nutrition and Aging,” Journal of 
Nutrition, 122 (1992), 786-801.
	 5.	 R. Kjorstad, “Validity of Two Field Tests of Abdominal 
Strength and Muscular Endurance,” unpublished master’s 
thesis, Boise State University, 1997.
	 6.	 G. L. Hall, R. K. Hetzler, D. Perrin, and A. Weltman, “Re-
lationship of Timed Sit-Up Tests to Isokinetic Abdominal 
Strength,” Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport 63 
(1992), 80-84.
	 7.	 American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 
“Guidelines of the American College of Obstetricians and 
Gynecologists for Exercise During Pregnancy and the 
Postpartum Period,” British Journal of Sports Medicine 37 
(2003): 6-12.
	 8.	 The Editors, “Stretch Yourself Younger,” Consumer Reports 
on Health 11 (1999): 6-7.
	 9.	 K. M. Flegal, M. D. Carrol, R. J. Kuczmarski, and C. L. 
Johnson, “Overweight and Obesity in the United States: 
Prevalence and Trends, 1960–1994,” International Journal of 
Obesity and Related Metabolic Disorders 22 (1998): 39-47.
	10.	 C. Bouchard, G. A. Bray, and V. S. Hubbard, “Basic and 
Clinical Aspects of Regional Fat Distribution,” American 
Journal of Clinical Nutrition 52 (1990): 946-950; G. Hu et al., 
“Joint Effects of Physical Activity, Body Mass Index, Waist 
Circumference, and Waist-to-Hip Ratio on the Risk of 
Heart Failure,” Circulation 121 (2010): 237-244; D. Canoy et 
al., “Body Fat Distribution and Risk of Coronary Heart 
Disease in Men and Women in the European Prospective 
Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition in Norfolk Co-
hort,” Circulation 116 (2007): 2933-2943; J. P. Després, I. 
Lemieux, and D. Prudhomme, “Treatment of Obesity: 
Notes
295
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

296
Fitness and Wellness
Need to Focus on High Risk Abdominally Obese Pa-
tients,” British Medical Journal 322 (2001): 716-720.
	11.	 T. Pischon et al., “General and Abdominal Adiposity and 
Risk of Death in Europe,” New England Journal of Medicine 
359 (2008): 2105-2120.
	12.	 M. Ashwell, “Charts Based on Body Mass Index and 
Waist-to-Height Ratio to Assess the Health Risks of Obe-
sity,” The Open Obesity Journal 3 (2011): 78-84.
	13.	 M. Ashwell, P. Gunn, and S. Gibson, “Waist-to-Height Ra-
tio Is a Better Screening Tool than Waist Circumference 
and BMI for Adult Cardiometabolic Risk Factors: System-
atic Review and Meta-Analysis,” Obesity Review 13 (2012): 
275-286.
	14.	 M. Ashwell et al., “Waist-to-Height Ratio Is More Accu-
rate than Body Mass Index to Quantify Reduced Life Ex-
pectancy,” Euro Congress Obesity 2013; Abstract T3T4:P.013.
Chapter 3
	 1.	 W. W. K. Hoeger, L. Bond, L. Ransdell, J. M. Shimon, and 
S. Merugu, “One-Mile Step Count at Walking and Run-
ning Speeds,” ACSM’s Health & Fitness Journal 12, no. 1 
(2008): 14-19.
	 2.	 American College of Sports Medicine, “Position Stand: 
Quantity and Quality of Exercise for Developing and 
Maintaining Cardiorespiratory, Musculoskeletal, and Neu-
romotor Fitness in Apparently Healthy Adults: Guidance 
for Prescribing Exercise,” Medicine and Science in Sports and 
Exercise 43 (2011): 1334-1359.
	 3.	 American College of Sports Medicine, ACSM’s Guidelines 
for Exercise Testing and Prescription (Philadelphia: Wolters 
Kluwer/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2014).
	 4.	 See note 3, ACSM.
	 5.	 W. L. Haskell et al., “Physical Activity and Public Health: 
Updated Recommendation for Adults from the American 
College of Sports Medicine and the American Heart Asso-
ciation,” Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise 39 (2007): 
1423-1434.
	 6.	 S. E. Gormley et al., “Effect of Intensity of Aerobic Train-
ing on VO2max,” Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise 40 
(2008): 1336-1343.
	 7.	 R. L. Gellish et al., “Longitudinal Modeling of the Rela-
tionship between Age and Maximal Heart Rate,” Medicine 
& Science in Sports & Exercise 39 (2007): 822-829.
	 8.	 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Physical 
Activity and Health: A Report of the Surgeon General (At-
lanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and 
Health Promotion, 1996).
	 9.	 D. P. Swain, “Moderate- or Vigorous-Intensity Exercise: 
What Should We Prescribe?” ACSM’s Health & Fitness 
Journal 10, no. 5 (2006): 7-11.
	10.	 D. P. Swain and B. A. Franklin, “Comparative Cardio- 
protective Benefits of Vigorous vs. Moderate Intensity 
Aerobic Exercise,” American Journal of Cardiology 97, no. 1 
(2006): 141-147.
	11.	 See note 5, Haskell et al.
	12.	 R. F. DeBusk, U. Stenestrand, M. Sheehan, and W. L. 
Haskell, “Training Effects of Long versus Short Bouts of 
Exercise in Healthy Subjects,” American Journal of Cardiol-
ogy 65 (1990): 1010-1013.
	13.	 National Academy of Sciences, Institute of Medicine,  
Dietary Reference Intakes for Energy, Carbohydrates, Fiber, Fat, 
Protein and Amino Acids (Macronutrients) (Washington, DC: 
National Academy Press, 2002).
	14.	 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Depart-
ment of Agriculture, Dietary Guidelines for Americans 2005 
(Washington, DC: DHHS, 2005).
	15.	 W. Dunstan et al., “Television Viewing Time and Mortal-
ity: The Australian Diabetes, Obesity, and Lifestyle Study 
(AusDiab),” Circulation 121 (2010): 384-391.
	16.	 P. T. Katzmarzyk et al., “Sitting Time and Mortality from 
All Causes, Cardiovascular Disease, and Cancer,” Medicine 
& Science in Sports & Exercise 41 (2009): 998-1005.
	17.	 See note 3, ACSM.
	18.	 American College of Sports Medicine, “Position Stand: 
Progression Models in Resistance Training for Healthy 
Adults,” Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise 41 (2009): 
687-708.
	19.	 W. W. K. Hoeger, D. R. Hopkins, S. L. Barette, and D. F. 
Hale, “Relationship between Repetitions and Selected Per-
centages of One Repetition Maximum: A Comparison be-
tween Untrained and Trained Males and Females,” Journal 
of Applied Sport Science Research 4, no. 2 (1990): 47-51.
	20.	 See note 3, ACSM.
	21.	 W. J. Kraemer and M. S. Fragala, “Personalize It: Program 
Design in Resistance Training,” ACSM’s Health & Fitness 
Journal 10, no. 4 (2006): 7-17.
	22.	 See note 3, ACSM.
	23.	 K. B. Fields, C. M. Burnworth, and M. Delaney, “Should 
Athletes Stretch Before Exercise?” Gatorade Sports Science 
Institute: Sports Science Exchange 30, no. 1 (2007): 1-5.
	24.	 S. B. Thacker, J. Gilchrist, D. F. Stroup, and C. D. Kimsey 
Jr., “The Impact of Stretching on Sports Injury Risk: A Sys-
tematic Review of the Literature,” Medicine & Science in 
Sports & Exercise 36 (2004): 371-378.
	25.	 The Editors, “Should You Stretch Before Exercise?” Gato-
rade Sports Science Institute: Sports Science Exchange 30, no. 
1 (2007).
	26.	 D. B. J. Andersson, L. J. Fine, and B. A. Silverstein, “Mus-
culoskeletal Disorders,” Occupational Health: Recognizing 
and Preventing Work-Related Disease, edited by B. S. Levy 
and D. H. Wegman (Boston: Little, Brown, 1995).
	27.	 M. R. Bracko, “Can We Prevent Back Injuries?” ACSM’s 
Health & Fitness Journal 8, no. 4 (2004): 5-11.
	28.	 H. B. Albert et al., “Antibiotic Treatment in Patients with 
Chronic Low Back Pain and Vertebral Bone Edema (Modic 
type 1 Changes): A Double-Blind Randomized Clinical 
Controlled Trial of Efficacy,” European Spine Journal 22 
(2013): 690-696.
	29.	  H. B. Albert et al., “Antibiotic Treatment in Patients with 
Chronic Low Back Pain and Vertebral Bone Edema (Modic 
Type 1 Changes): A Double-Blind Randomized Clinical 
Controlled Trial of Efficacy,” European Spine Journal 22 
(2013): 697-707.
	30.	 B. W. Nelson et al., “Can Spinal Surgery Be Prevented by 
Aggressive Strengthening Exercise? A Prospective Study 
of Cervical and Lumbar Patients,” Archives of Physical 
Medicine and Rehabilitation 80 (1999): 20-25.
	31.	 K. Williams et al., “Evaluation of the Effectiveness and Ef-
ficacy of Iyegar Yoga Therapy on Chronic Low Back 
Pain,” Spine 34 (2009): 2066-2076.
	32.	 J. A. Hides, G. A. Jull, and C. A. Richardson, “Long-Term 
Effects of Specific Stabilizing Exercises for First-Episode 
Low Back Pain,” Spine 26 (2001): E243-248.
	33.	 The Editors, “Position Yourself to Stay Well,” Consumer 
Reports on Health 18 (February 2006): 8-9.
	34.	 A. Brownstein, “Chronic Back Pain Can Be Beaten,” Bot-
tom Line/Health 13 (October 1999): 3-4.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

297
  Notes and Suggested Readings
Chapter 4
	 1.	 J. L. Christi et al., “Cardiovascular Regulation during 
Head-out Water Immersion Exercise,” Journal of Applied 
Physiology 69 (1990): 657-664; L. M. Sheldahl, F. E. Tristani, 
P. S. Clifford, C. V. Hughes, K. A. Sobocinski, and R. D. 
Morris, “Effect of Head-out Water Immersion on Cardio-
respiratory Response to Dynamic Exercise,” Journal of 
American College of Cardiology 10 (1987): 1254-1258; J. Sve-
denhang and J. Seger, “Running on Land and in Water: 
Comparative Exercise Physiology,” Medicine & Science in 
Sports & Exercise 24 (1992): 1155-1160.
	 2.	 W. W. K. Hoeger, D. Hopkins, and D. Barber, “Physiologic 
Responses to Maximal Treadmill Running and Water Aer-
obic Exercise,” National Aquatics Journal 11 (1995): 4-7.
	 3.	 W. W. K. Hoeger, T. A. Spitzer-Gibson, N. Kaluhiokalani, 
R. K. M. Cardejon, and J. Kokkonen, “A Comparison of 
Physiological Responses to Self-Paced Water Aerobics and 
Self-Paced Treadmill Running,” International Council for 
Health, Physical Education, Recreation, Sport, and Dance Jour-
nal 30, no. 4 (2004): 27-30.
	 4.	 W. W. K. Hoeger, T. S. Gibson, J. Moore, and D. R. Hop-
kins, “A Comparison of Selected Training Responses to 
Low-Impact Aerobics and Water Aerobics,” National 
Aquatics Journal 9 (1993): 13-16.
	 5.	 E. J. Marcinick, J. Potts, G. Schlabach, S. Will, P. Dawson, 
and B. F. Hurley, “Effects of Strength Training on Lactate 
Threshold and Endurance Performance,” Medicine & Sci-
ence in Sports & Exercise 23 (1991): 739-743.
	 6.	 B. Klika and C. Jordan, “High-Intensity Circuit Training Us-
ing Body Weight: Maximum Results with Minimal Invest-
ment,” ACSM’s Health & Fitness Journal 17, no. 3 (2013): 8-13.
	 7.	 American College of Sports Medicine, ACSM’s Guidelines 
for Exercise Testing and Prescription (Philadelphia: Wolters 
Kluwer/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2014).
Chapter 5
	 1.	 A. Pan et al., “Red Meat Consumption and Mortality: Re-
sults from 2 Prospective Cohort Studies,” Archives of Inter-
nal Medicine 172 (2012): 555-563.
	 2.	 National Academy of Sciences, Institute of Medicine. Di-
etary Reference Intakes for Energy, Carbohydrates, Fiber, Fat, 
Protein and Amino Acids (Macronutrients) (Washington, DC: 
National Academy Press, 2002).
	 3.	 G. Bjelakovic et al., “Mortality in Randomized Trials of 
Antioxidant Supplements for Primary and Secondary Pre-
vention,” Journal of the American Medical Association 297 
(2007): 842-857.
	 4.	 M. L. Neuhouser et al., “Multivitamin Use and Risk of 
Cancer and Cardiovascular Disease in the Women’s 
Health Initiative Cohorts,” Archives of Internal Medicine 169 
(2009): 294-304.
	 5.	 “Ride the D Train: Research Finds Even More Reasons to 
Get Vitamin D,” Environmental Nutrition 28, no. 9 (2005):  
1, 4.
	 6.	 “Vitamin D May Help You Dodge Cancer; How to Be Sure 
You Get Enough,” Environmental Nutrition 30, no. 6 (2007): 
1, 4.
	 7.	 Vitamin D Council, “Understanding Vitamin D Cholecal-
ciferol,” http://www.vitamindcouncil.org, downloaded 
July 30, 2009.
	 8.	 American Dietetic Association, “Position of the American 
Dietetic Association: Nutrient Supplementation,” Journal 
of the American Dietetic Association 109 (2009): 2073-2085.
	 9.	 The Editors, “Eating Fish: Rewards Outweigh Risks,” 
Tufts University Health & Nutrition letter (January 2007).
	10.	 D. Mozaffarian and E. B. Rimm, “Fish Intake, Contami-
nants, and Human Health,” Journal of the American Medical 
Association 296 (2006): 1885-1899.
	11.	 American Psychiatric Association, Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders (Washington, DC: APA, 1994).
	12.	 See note 11. American Psychiatric Association.
	13.	 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Dietary Guidelines for Ameri-
cans 2010 (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Of-
fice, 2010).
Chapter 6
	 1.	 A. H. Mokdad, J. S. Marks, D. F. Stroup, and J. L. Gerberd-
ing, “Actual Causes of Death in the United States, 2000,” 
Journal of the American Medical Association 291 (2004): 1238-
1241.
	 2.	 R. Sturm and K. B. Wells, “Does Obesity Contribute as 
Much to Morbidity as Poverty or Smoking?” Public Health 
115 (2001): 229-235.
	 3.	 E. E. Calle et al., “Overweight, Obesity, and Mortality 
from Cancer in a Prospectively Studied Cohort of U.S. 
Adults,” New England Journal of Medicine 348 (2003): 1625-
1638.
	 4.	 A. Peeters et al., “Obesity in Adulthood and Its Conse-
quences for Life Expectancy: A Life-Table Analysis,” An-
nals of Internal Medicine 138 (2003): 2432.
	 5.	 K. R. Fontaine et al., “Years of Life Lost Due to Obesity,” 
Journal of the American Medical Association 289 (2003):  
187-193.
	 6.	 American College of Sports Medicine, “Position Stand: 
Appropriate Physical Activity Intervention Strategies  
for Weight Loss and Prevention of Weight Regain for 
Adults,” Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise 41 (2009): 
459-471.
	 7.	 S. Thomsen, “A Steady Diet of Images,” BYU Magazine 57, 
no. 3 (2003): 20-21.
	 8.	 C. D. Gardner et al., “Comparison of the Atkins, Zone, Or-
nish, and LEARN Diets for Change in Weight and Related 
Risk Factors among Overweight Premenopausal Women,” 
Journal of the American Medical Association 297 (2007): 969-
977; G. D. Foster et al., “A Randomized Trial of a Low-
Carbohydrate Diet for Obesity,” New England Journal of 
Medicine 348 (2003): 2082-2090.
	 9.	 R. L. Leibel, M. Rosenbaum, and J. Hirsh, “Changes in En-
ergy Expenditure Resulting from Altered Body Weight,” 
New England Journal of Medicine 332 (1995): 621-628.
	10.	 A. Eliasson et al., “Sleep Is a Critical Factor in the Mainte-
nance of Healthy Weight,” American Thoracic Society In-
ternational Conference, San Diego, CA (2009).
	11.	 S. Pattel et al., “Sleep Your Way to Weight Loss?” Ameri-
can Thoracic Society International Conference, San Diego, 
CA (2006).
	12.	 K. Knutson, “Impact of Sleep and Sleep Loss on Glucose 
Homeostasis and Appetite Regulation,” Sleep Medicine 
Clinic 2 (2007): 187-197.
	13.	 S. Taheri et al., “Short Sleep Duration Is Associated with 
Reduced Leptin, Elevated Ghrelin, and Increased Body 
Mass Index,” PLoS Medicine 1 (2004): e62. doi:10.1371/-
journal.pmed.0010062.
	14.	 National Academy of Sciences, Institute of Medicine, Di-
etary Reference Intakes for Energy, Carbohydrates, Fiber, Fat, 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

298
Fitness and Wellness
Protein and Amino Acids (Macronutrients) (Washington, DC: 
National Academy Press, 2002).
	15.	 E. T. Poehlman et al., “Effects of Endurance and Resis-
tance Training on Total Daily Energy Expenditure in 
Young Women: A Controlled Randomized Trial,” Journal 
of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism 87 (2002): 1004-
1009; L. M. Van Etten et al., “Effect of an 18-wk Weight-
Training Program on Energy Expenditure and Physical 
Activity,” Journal of Applied Physiology 82 (1997): 298-304; 
W. W. Campbell, M. C. Crim, V. R. Young, and W. J. Ev-
ans, “Increased Energy Requirements and Changes in 
Body Composition with Resistance Training in Older 
Adults,” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 60 (1994): 
167-175; Z. Wang et al., “Resting Energy Expenditure: Sys-
tematic Organization and Critique of Prediction Meth-
ods,” Obesity Research 9 (2001): 331-336.
	16.	 J. R. Karp and W. L. Wescott, “The Resting Metabolic Rate 
Debate,” Fitness Management 23, no. 1 (2007): 44-47.
	17.	 American College of Sports Medicine, ACSM’s Guidelines 
for Exercise Testing and Prescription (Baltimore: Williams & 
Wilkins, 2006).
	18.	 A. Tremblay, J. A. Simoneau, and C. Bouchard, “Impact of 
Exercise Intensity on Body Fatness and Skeletal Muscle 
Metabolism,” Metabolism 43 (1994): 814-818.
	19.	 T. S. Church et al., “Changes in Weight, Waist Circumfer-
ence and Compensatory Responses with Different Doses 
of Exercise Among Sedentary, Overweight Postmeno-
pausal Women,” PLoS ONE 4, no. 2 (2009): e4515. 
doi:10.1371/-journal.pone.0004515.
	20.	 I. Lee et al., “Physical Activity and Weight Gain Preven-
tion,” Journal of the American Medical Association 303 (2010): 
1173-1179.
	21.	 T. A. Hagobian and B. Braun, “Physical Activity and Hor-
monal Regulation of Appetite: Sex Differences and Weight 
Control,” Exercise and Sport Sciences Reviews 38 (2010): 25-30.
	22.	 W. W. K. Hoeger, C. Harris, E. M. Long, and D. R. Hop-
kins, “Four-Week Supplementation with a Natural Dietary 
Compound Produces Favorable Changes in Body Compo-
sition,” Advances in Therapy 15, no. 5 (1998): 305-313;  
W. W. K. Hoeger et al., “Dietary Supplementation with 
Chromium Picolinate/L-Carnitine Complex in Combina-
tion with Diet and Exercise Enhances Body Composition,” 
Journal of the American Nutraceutical Association 2, no. 2 
(1999): 40-45.
	23.	 D. Mozaffarian et al., “Changes in Diet and Lifestyle and 
Long-Term Weight Gain in Women and Men,” New  
England Journal of Medicine 364 (2011): 2392-2404.
	24.	 N. A. Christakis and J. H. Fowler, “The Spread of Obesity 
in a Large Social Network over 32 Years,” New England 
Journal of Medicine 357 (2007): 370-379.
Chapter 7
	 1.	 H. E. Selye, Stress Without Distress (New York: Signet, 
1974).
	 2.	 R. Rosenman, “Do You Have Type ‘A’ Behavior?” Health 
and Fitness (supplement): 1987; H. Friedman, The Self- 
Healing Personality (New York: Henry Holt & Co., 1991).
	 3.	 R. Williams, The Trusting Heart: Great News About Type A 
Behavior (New York: Times Books, Division of Random 
House, 1989).
	 4.	 D. A. Girdano, D. E. Dusek, and G. S. Everly. Controlling 
Stress and Tension (San Francisco: Benjamin Cummings, 
2009).
	 5.	 S. Bodian, “Meditate Your Way to Much Better Health,” 
Bottom Line Health 18 (June 2004): 11-13.
	 6.	 D. Mueller, “Yoga Therapy,” ACSM’s Health & Fitness Jour-
nal 6, no. 1 (2002): 18-24.
	 7.	 S. C. Manchanda et al., “Retardation of Coronary Athero-
sclerosis with Yoga Lifestyle Intervention,” Journal of the 
Association of Physicians of India 48 (2000): 687-694.
	 8.	 M. Samuels, “Use Your Mind to Heal Your Body,” Bottom 
Line/Health 19 (February 2005): 13-14.
Chapter 8
	 1.	 L. Dossey, “Can Spirituality Improve Your Health?” Bot-
tom Line/Health 15 (July 2001): 11-13.
	 2.	 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for 
Health Statistics, National Vital Statistics Reports, Deaths: 
Preliminary Data for 2011, 61, no. 6 (2012).
	 3.	 See note 2, U.S. Department of Health and Human Ser-
vices.
	 4.	 American Heart Association, Heart Disease and Stroke Sta-
tistics: 2013 Update (Dallas, TX: American Heart Associa-
tion, 2013).
	 5.	 S. N. Blair, H. W. Kohl III, R. S. Paffenbarger Jr., D. G. 
Clark, K. H. Cooper, and L. W. Gibbons, “Physical Fitness 
and All-Cause Mortality: A Prospective Study of Healthy 
Men and Women,” Journal of the American Medical Associa-
tion 262 (1989): 2395-2401.
	 6.	 S. C. Moore et al., “Leisure Time Physical Activity of Mod-
erate to Vigorous Intensity and Mortality: A Large Pooled 
Cohort Analysis,” PLOS Medicine 9, no. 11 (2012): e1335. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.001001335.
	 7.	 L. S. Pescatello et al., “Exercise and Hypertension Position 
Stand,” Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise 36 
(2004): 533-553.
	 8.	 C. A. Slentz et al., “Inactivity, Exercise, and Visceral Fat. 
STRRIDE: A Randomized, Controlled Study of Exercise 
Intensity and Amount,” Journal of Applied Physiology 99 
(2005): 1613-1618.
	 9.	 The Editors,”Lipid Research Clinics Program: The Lipid 
Research Clinic Coronary Primary Prevention Trial Re-
sults,” Journal of the American Medical Association 251 
(1984): 351-364.
	10.	 See note 4, American Heart Association.
	11.	 American Heart Association, Heart and Stroke Facts (Dal-
las, TX: AHA, 1999).
	12.	 R. Singa et al., “Meat Intake and Mortality: A Prospective 
Study of Over Half a Million People,” Archives of Internal 
Medicine 169 (2009): 562-571
	13.	 A. E. Buyken et al., “Modifications in Dietary Fat Are As-
sociated with Changes in Serum Lipids of Older Adults 
Independently of Lipid Medication,” Journal of Nutrition 
140 (2010): 88-94.
	14.	 P. W. Siri-Tarino, Q. Sun, F. B. Hu, and R. M. Krauss, 
“Saturated Fat, Carbohydrate, and Cardiovascular Dis-
ease,” The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 91 (2010): 
502-509.
	15.	 D. Mozaffarian, R. Micha, and S. Wallace, “Effects on  
Coronary Heart Disease of Increasing Polyunsaturated Fat 
in Place of Saturated Fat: A Systematic Review of Meta- 
Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials,” PLoS Medicine 
7 (2010): 7:e1000252.
	16.	 “The Homocysteine-CVD Connection,” HealthNews (Octo-
ber 25, 1999).
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

299
  Notes and Suggested Readings
	17.	 “Inflammation May Be Key Cause of Heart Disease and 
More: Diet’s Role,” Environmental Nutrition 27, no. 7 (July 
2004): 1, 4.
	18.	 P. M. Ridger et al., “Rosuvastatin to Prevent Vascular 
Events in Men and Women with Elevated C-Reactive Pro-
tein,” The New England Journal of Medicine 359 (2008): 2195-
2207.
	19.	 G. M. Reaven, T. K. Strom, and B. Fox, Syndrome X: Over-
coming the Silent Killer That Can Give You a Heart Attack 
(New York: Simon & Schuster, 2000).
	20.	 M. Guarneri, “What Most People Don’t Know about 
Heart Disease,” Bottom Line/Health 21 (July 2007): 11-12.
	21.	 See note 4, American Heart Association.
	22.	 American Cancer Society, 2011 Cancer Facts and Figures 
(New York: ACS, 2011).
	23.	 J. E. Enstrom, “Health Practices and Cancer Mortality 
among Active California Mormons,” Journal of the National 
Cancer Institute 81 (1989): 1807-1814.
	24.	 A. S. Ford et al., “Healthy Living is the Best Revenge: 
Findings from the European Prospective Investigation 
into Cancer and Nutrition—Potsdam Study,” Archives of 
Internal Medicine 169 (2009): 1355-1362.
	25.	 N. Ahmad et al., “Green Tea Constituent Epigallocatechin-
3-Gallate and Induction of Apoptosis and Cell Cycle Ar-
rest in Human Carcinoma Cells,” Journal of the National 
Cancer Institute 89 (1997): 1881-1886.
	26.	 N. E. Allen et al., “Moderate Alcohol Intake and Cancer 
Incidence in Women,” Journal of the National Cancer Insti-
tute 101 (2009): 296-305.
	27.	 C. A. Thomson and P. A. Thomson, “Healthy Lifestyle and 
Cancer Prevention,” ACSM’s Health & Fitness Journal 12, 
no. 3 (2008): 18-26
	28.	 S. W. Farrell et al., “Cardiorespiratory Fitness, Different 
Measures of Adiposity, and Cancer Mortality in Men,” 
Obesity 15 (2007): 3140-3149.
	29.	 L. Byberg et al., “Total Mortality after Changes in Leisure 
Time Physical Activity in 50 Year Old Men: 35 Year  
Follow-up of Population Based Cohort,” British Medical 
Journal (2009): 338. doi:10.1136.
	30.	 E. L. Giovannucci, “A Prospective Study of Physical Ac-
tivity and Incident and Fatal Prostate Cancer,” Archives of 
Internal Medicine 165 (2005): 1005-1010.
	31.	 L. Ratnasinghe et al., “Exercise and Breast Cancer Risk:  
A Multinational Study,” Genomic Nanosystems, BioServe 
Biotechnologies, Ltd., Beltsville, MD (2009).
	32.	 C. W. Matthews et al., “Physical Activity and Risk of  
Endometrial Cancer: A Report from the Shanghai Endo-
metrial Cancer Study,” Cancer Epidemiology Biomarkers & 
Prevention 14 (2005): 779-785.
	33.	 M. D. Holmes et al., “Physical Activity and Survival after 
Breast Cancer Diagnosis,” Journal of the American Medical 
Association 293 (2005): 2479-2486.
	34.	 J. R. Ruiz, “Muscular Strength and Adiposity as Predictors 
of Adulthood Cancer Mortality in Men,” Cancer Epidemiol-
ogy, Biomarkers & Prevention 18 (2009): 1468-1476.
	35.	 D. Servan-Schreiber, “The Anticancer Life Plan,” Bottom 
Line Health 23, no. 5 (2009): 1-2.
Chapter 9
	 1.	 R. S. Paffenbarger Jr., R. T. Hyde, A. L. Wing, and C. H. 
Steinmetz, “A Natural History of Athleticism and Cardio-
vascular Health,” Journal of the American Medical Associa-
tion 252 (1984): 491-495.
	 2.	 S. N. Blair, H. W. Kohl III, R. S. Paffenbarger Jr., D. G. 
Clark, K. H. Cooper, and L. W. Gibbons, “Physical Fitness 
and All-Cause Mortality: A Prospective Study of Healthy 
Men and Women,” Journal of the American Medical Associa-
tion 262 (1989): 2395-2401.
	 3.	 R. Hambrecht et al., “Various Intensities of Leisure Time 
Physical Activity in Patients with Coronary Artery Dis-
ease: Effects on Cardiorespiratory Fitness and Progression 
of Coronary Atherosclerotic Lesions,” Journal of the Ameri-
can College of Cardiology 22 (1993): 468-477.
	 4.	 M. K. Torstveit et al., “The Female Athlete Triad: Are Elite 
Athletes at Increased Risk?” Medicine & Science in Sports & 
Exercise 37 (2005): 184-193.
	 5.	 American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 
“Exercise During Pregnancy and the Postpartum Period,” 
ACOG Committee Opinion No. 267, International Journal of 
Gynecology and Obstetrics 77 (2002): 79-81.
	 6.	  American College of Sports Medicine, “Exercise and 
Physical Activity for Older Adults,” Medicine & Science in 
Sports & Exercise 41 (2009): 1510-1530.
	 7.	 F. W. Kash, J. L. Boyer, S. P. Van Camp, L. S. Verity, and J. 
P. Wallace, “The Effect of Physical Activity on Aerobic 
Power in Older Men (A Longitudinal Study),” The Physi-
cian and Sports Medicine 18, no. 4 (1990): 73-83.
	 8.	 See note 6, ACSM.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answer Key
301
Chapter 1
1. a	
2. e	
3. d	
4. c	
5. c	
6. b	
7. b	
8. d	
9. a	
10. e
Chapter 2
1. e	
2. a	
3. e	
4. e	
5. c	
6. b	
7. b	
8. a	
9. d	
10. c
Chapter 3
1. d	
2. c	
3. c	
4. d	
5. a	
6. c	
7. b	
8. c	
9. e	
10. e
Chapter 4
1. d	
2. a	
3. c	
4. d	
5. c	
6. a	
7. e	
8. d	
9. a	
10. b
Chapter 5
1. b	
2. e	
3. c	
4. d	
5. d	
6. a	
7. a	
8. c	
9. a	
10. e
Chapter 6
1. c	
2. d	
3. e	
4. a	
5. b	
6. c	
7. a	
8. c	
9. d	
10. e
Chapter 7
1. a	
2. c	
3. c	
4. e	
5. b	
6. e	
7. e	
8. a	
9. e	
10. c
Chapter 8
1. e	
2. a	
3. b	
4. e	
5. b	
6. e	
7. e	
8. b	
9. d	
10. c
Chapter 9
1. b	
2. e	
3. e	
4. d	
5. d	
6. e	
7. b	
8. a	
9. e	
10. c
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

302
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)  End stage of 
HIV infection, manifested by any of a number of diseases that 
arise when the body’s immune system is compromised by HIV.
Action stage  Stage of change in which people are actively 
changing a negative behavior or adopting a new, healthy 
behavior.
Actions  Steps required to reach a goal.
Activities of daily living  Everyday behaviors that people 
­normally do to function in life (cross the street, carry groceries, 
lift objects, do laundry, sweep floors).
Adequate Intake (AI)  The recommended amount of a nu­trient 
intake when sufficient evidence is not available to calculate the 
EAR and subsequent RDA.
Advanced glycation end products (AGEs)  Derivatives of  
glucose protein and glucose lipid interactions that are linked to 
aging and chronic diseases.
Aerobic exercise  Activity that requires oxygen to produce the 
necessary energy to carry out the activity.
Aerobics  A series of exercise routines that include a 
­combination of stepping, walking, jogging, skipping, kicking, 
and arm swinging movements performed to music.
Alcoholism  Disease in which an individual loses control over 
drinking alcoholic beverages.
Altruism  True concern for and action on behalf of others 
­(opposite of egoism); a sincere desire to serve others above 
one’s personal needs.
Amenorrhea  Absence (primary amenorrhea) or cessation 
­(secondary amenorrhea) of normal menstrual function.
Amino acids  The basic building blocks of proteins.
Android obesity  Obesity pattern seen in individuals who tend 
to store fat in the trunk or abdominal area.
Angiogenesis  Capillary (blood vessel) formation into a tumor.
Anorexia nervosa  An eating disorder characterized by self-
imposed starvation to lose and then maintain very low body 
weight.
Antibodies  Substances produced by the white blood cells in 
response to an invading agent.
Antioxidants  Compounds that prevent oxygen from combin-
ing with other substances it might damage.
Arrhythmias  Irregular heart rhythms.
Atherosclerosis  Fatty/cholesterol deposits in the walls of the 
arteries, leading to formation of plaque.
Ballistic (or dynamic) stretching  Exercises performed using 
jerky, rapid, and bouncy movements.
Basal metabolic rate (BMR)  Lowest level of caloric intake nec-
essary to sustain life.
Behavior modification  The process used to permanently 
change negative behaviors in favor of positive behaviors that 
will lead to better health and well-being.
Benign  Noncancerous.
Binge eating disorder  An eating disorder characterized by 
uncontrollable episodes of eating excessive amounts of food 
within a relatively short time.
Blood lipids  Cholesterol and triglycerides.
Blood pressure  A measure of the force exerted against the 
walls of the vessels by the blood flowing through them.
Body composition  The fat and nonfat components of the 
human body.
Body mass index (BMI)  Incorporates height and weight to 
estimate critical fat values at which risk for disease increases.
Bulimia nervosa  An eating disorder characterized by a 
­pattern of binge eating and purging.
Calorie  The amount of heat necessary to raise the temperature 
of 1 gram of water 1 degree centigrade; used to measure the 
energy value of food and the cost of physical activity.
Cancer  Group of diseases characterized by uncontrolled 
growth and spread of abnormal cells into malignant tumors.
Carbohydrates  Compounds composed of carbon, hydrogen, 
and oxygen that the body uses as its major source of energy.
Carcinogens  Substances that contribute to the formation of 
cancers.
Carcinoma in situ  Encapsulated malignant tumor that is 
found at an early stage and has not spread.
Cardiomyopathy  A disease affecting the heart muscle.
Cardiorespiratory endurance  Ability of the lungs, heart, and 
blood vessels to deliver adequate amounts of oxygen to the 
cells to meet the demands of prolonged physical activity.
Cardiorespiratory training zone  The range of intensity at 
which a person should exercise to develop the cardiorespira­
tory system.
Cardiovascular diseases  The array of conditions that affect 
the heart and blood vessels.
Carotenoids  Pigment substances (more than 600) in plants, 
about 50 of which are precursors to vitamin A; the most potent 
carotenoid is beta-carotene.
Cholesterol  A waxy substance, technically a steroid alcohol, 
found only in animal fats and oil; used in making cell mem-
branes, as a building block for some hormones, in the fatty 
sheath around nerve fibers, and in other necessary ­substances.
Chronic diseases  Illnesses that develop and last over a long 
time.
Chronic lower respiratory disease (CLRD)  A group of 
­diseases that limit air flow, such as chronic obstructive pul­
monary disease, emphysema, and chronic bronchitis (all 
­diseases of the respiratory system).
Chronological age  Calendar age.
Chronotropic incompetence  A condition in which the heart 
rate increases slowly during exercise and never reaches 
­maximum.
Glossary
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

303
  Glossary
Chylomicrons  Molecules that transport triglycerides in the 
blood.
Cirrhosis  A disease characterized by scarring of the liver.
Concentric  Shortening of a muscle during muscle contraction.
Concentric muscle contraction  A dynamic contraction in 
which the muscle shortens as it develops tension.
Contemplation stage  Stage of change in which people are 
considering changing behavior in the next six months.
Contraindicated exercises  Exercises that are not recom­
mended because they pose potentially high risk for injury.
Controlled ballistic stretching  Exercises done with slow, 
short, gentle, and sustained movements.
Cool-down  A period at the end of an exercise session when 
­exercise is tapered off.
Coronary heart disease (CHD)  Condition in which the arteries 
that supply the heart muscle with oxygen and nutrients are nar-
rowed by fatty deposits such as cholesterol and ­triglycerides.
C-reactive protein (CPR)  A protein whose level in the blood 
increases with inflammation (which may be hidden deep in the 
body); elevation of this protein is an indicator of potential car-
diovascular events.
Cruciferous vegetables  Plants that produce cross-shaped 
leaves (cauliflower, broccoli, cabbage, Brussels sprouts, 
­kohlrabi); these seem to have a protective effect against ­cancer.
Daily Values (DVs)  Reference values for nutrients and food 
components used in food labels.
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)  Genetic substance of which 
genes are made; molecule that bears a cell’s genetic code.
Diabetes mellitus  A condition in which blood glucose is 
unable to enter the cells because the pancreas either totally 
stops producing insulin, does not produce enough to meet the 
body’s needs, or the cells become insulin resistant.
Diastolic blood pressure  Pressure exerted by the blood 
against the walls of the arteries during the relaxation phase 
(diastole) of the heart.
Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs)  Four types of nutrient stan-
dards that are used to establish adequate amounts and maxi-
mum safe nutrient intakes in the diet: Estimated Average 
Requirements (EARs), Recommended Dietary Allowances 
(RDAs), Adequate Intakes (AIs), and Tolerable Upper Intake 
Levels (ULs).
Distress  Negative or harmful stress under which health and 
performance begin to deteriorate.
Duration of exercise  Time exercising per session.
Dynamic exercise  Strength training with muscle contraction 
that produces movement.
Dynamic stretching  Stretching exercises that require speed of 
movement, momentum, and active muscular effort to help 
increase the range of motion about a joint or group of joints.
Dysmenorrhea  Painful menstruation.
Eccentric  Lengthening of a muscle during muscle contraction.
Eccentric muscle contraction  A dynamic contraction in which 
the muscle lengthens as it develops tension.
Electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG)  A recording of the electrical 
activity of the heart.
Energy-balancing equation  A body weight formula stating 
that when caloric intake equals caloric output, weight remains 
unchanged.
Epidemiological  The study of epidemic diseases.
Essential fat  Body fat needed for normal physiological 
­functions.
Essential nutrients  Carbohydrates, fats, proteins, vitamins, 
minerals, and water—the nutrients the human body requires 
for survival.
Estimated Average Requirement (EAR)  The amount of a 
nutrient that meets the dietary needs in half the people.
Estimated energy requirement (EER)  The average dietary 
energy (caloric) intake that is predicted to maintain energy 
balance in a healthy adult of defined age, gender, weight, 
height, and level of physical activity, consistent with good 
health.
Estrogen  Female sex hormone; essential for bone formation 
and conservation of bone density.
Eustress  Positive stress.
Exercise  A type of physical activity that requires planned, 
structured, and repetitive bodily movement done to improve 
or maintain one or more components of physical fitness.
Fats (lipids)  A class of nutrients that the body uses as a source 
of energy.
Female athlete triad  Three interrelated disorders—disordered 
eating, amenorrhea, and bone mineral disorders—seen in some 
highly trained female athletes.
Ferritin  Iron stored in the body.
Fiber  Plant material that human digestive enzymes cannot 
digest.
Fight or flight  A series of physical responses activated auto-
matically in response to environmental stressors.
Fitness boot camp  A military-style vigorous-intensity group 
exercise training program that combines calisthenics, running, 
interval training, strength training, plyometrics, and competi-
tive games.
Fixed-resistance training  Exercise with strength-training 
equipment that provides a constant amount of resistance 
through the range of motion.
Flexibility  The achievable range of motion at a joint or group 
of joints without causing injury.
Free radicals  Oxygen compounds produced in normal 
metabolism.
Free weights  Barbells and dumbbells.
Frequency of exercise  How often a person engages in an exer-
cise session.
Functional fitness  The physical capacity of the individual to 
meet ordinary and unexpected demands of daily life safely 
and effectively.
Functional independence  Ability to carry out activities of  
daily living without assistance from other individuals.
General adaptation syndrome (GAS)  A theoretical model that 
explains the body’s adaptation to sustained stress which 
includes three stages: alarm reaction, resistance, and  
exhaustion/recovery.
Goal  The ultimate aim toward which effort is directed.
Gynoid obesity  Obesity pattern seen in people who store fat 
primarily around the hips and thighs.
Hatha yoga  A yoga style that incorporates a series of static-
stretching postures performed in specific sequences.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

304
Fitness and Wellness
Health fitness standard  The lowest fitness requirements for 
maintaining good health, decreasing the risk for chronic dis­
eases, and lowering the incidence of muscular/skeletal injuries.
Health-related fitness  A physical state encompassing cardio-
respiratory endurance, muscular strength and endurance, 
muscular flexibility, and body composition.
Heart rate reserve  The difference between the maximal heart 
rate (MHR) and resting heart rate (RHR).
Hemoglobin  Protein-iron compound in red blood cells that 
transports oxygen in the blood.
High-density lipoprotein (HDL)  Cholesterol-transporting 
molecules in the blood (good cholesterol).
High-impact aerobics (HIA)  Exercises incorporating move-
ments in which both feet are off the ground at the same time 
momentarily.
High-intensity circuit training  An exercise modality that 
combines high-intensity aerobic and bodyweight-strength 
training exercises with limited rest between exercises.
High-intensity interval training (HIIT)  A training program 
consisting of high- to very high-intensity intervals (80 percent 
to 90 percent of maximal capacity) that are interspersed with 
low- to moderate-intensity recovery intervals.
Homeostasis  A natural state of equilibrium. The body 
attempts to maintain this equilibrium by constantly reacting to 
external forces that attempt to disrupt this fine balance.
Homocysteine  Intermediate amino acid in the interconversion 
of two other amino acids: methionine and cysteine.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)  Virus that leads to 
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS).
Hypertension  Chronically elevated blood pressure.
Hypokinetic diseases  Diseases related to a lack of physical 
activity.
Hypothermia  A breakdown in the body’s ability to generate 
heat, resulting in body temperature below 95°F.
Imagery  Mental visualization of relaxing images and scenes to 
induce body relaxation in times of stress or as an aid in the 
treatment of certain medical conditions, such as cancer, hyper-
tension, asthma, chronic pain, and obesity.
Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM or Type 1)  A 
form of diabetes in which the pancreas produces little or no 
insulin.
Intensity (for flexibility exercises)  Degree of stretch when 
doing flexibility exercises.
Intensity of exercise  How hard a person has to exercise to 
improve cardiorespiratory endurance.
Interval training  A repeated series of exercise work bouts 
(intervals) interspersed with low-intensity or rest intervals.
Isokinetic exercise  Strength training method in which the 
speed of the muscle contraction is kept constant because  
the equipment (machine) provides an accommodating resis-
tance to match the user’s force through the full range of 
motion.
Isometric exercise  Strength training with muscle contraction 
that produces little or no movement.
Isotonic exercise  See Dynamic exercise.
Lean body mass  Nonfat component of the body.
Life expectancy  Number of years a person is expected to live 
based on the person’s birth year.
Locus of control  The extent to which a person believes that he 
or she can influence the external environment.
Low-density lipoprotein (LDL)  Cholesterol-transporting mol-
ecules in the blood (bad cholesterol).
Low-impact aerobics (LIA)  Exercises in which at least one 
foot is in contact with the ground or floor at all times.
Lymphocytes  Immune system cells responsible for waging 
war against disease or infection.
Macronutrients  The nutrients the body needs in proportion-
ately large amounts: Carbohydrates, fats, proteins, and water.
Maintenance stage  Stage of change in which people maintain 
behavioral change for up to five years.
Malignant  Cancerous.
Maximal oxygen uptake (VO2max)  Maximum amount of 
oxygen the human body is able to utilize per minute of physi-
cal activity.
Meditation  A mental exercise in which the objective is to gain 
control over one’s attention, clearing the mind and blocking 
out stressors.
Megadoses  For most vitamins, 10 times the RDA or more; for 
vitamins A and D, 5 and 2 times the RDA, respectively.
Melanoma  The most virulent, rapidly spreading form of skin 
cancer.
MET  One “MET,” short for metabolic equivalent, represents the 
rate of energy expenditure while sitting quietly at rest. This  
energy expenditure is approximately 3.5 milliliters of oxygen per 
kilogram of body weight per minute (mL/kg/min) or 1.2 calories 
per minute for a 70-kilogram person. A 3 MET activity requires 
three times the energy expenditure of sitting quietly at rest.
Metabolic fitness  Improvements in the metabolic profile 
through a moderate-intensity exercise program in spite of little 
or no improvement in health-related fitness.
Metabolic profile  Result of the assessment of diabetes and 
cardiovascular disease risk through plasma insulin, glucose, 
lipid, and lipoprotein levels.
Metabolic syndrome  An array of metabolic abnormalities that 
contribute to the development of atherosclerosis triggered by 
resistance to insulin; these conditions include low HDL choles-
terol, high triglycerides, high blood pressure, and an increased 
blood clotting mechanism.
Metastasis  Movement of bacteria or body cells from one part 
of the body to another.
Micronutrients  The nutrients the body needs in small 
­quantities—vitamins and minerals—that serve specific roles in 
transformation of energy and body tissue synthesis.
Minerals  Inorganic elements needed by the body.
Mode of exercise  Form of exercise (e.g., aerobic).
Moderate-impact aerobics (MIA)  Aerobics that include 
­plyometric training.
Moderate-intensity aerobic physical activity  Defined as the 
equivalent of a brisk walk that noticeably increases the heart 
rate.
Motivation  The desire and will to do something.
Muscular endurance  Ability of a muscle to exert submaximal 
force repeatedly over a period of time.
Muscular fitness  A term that is used to define good levels of 
both muscular strength and muscular endurance.
Muscular hypertrophy  An increase in muscle mass or size.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

305
  Glossary
Muscular strength  Ability to exert maximum force against 
resistance.
Myocardial infarction  Heart attack; damage or death of an 
area of the heart muscle as a result of an obstructed artery to 
that area.
Negative resistance  The lowering or eccentric phase of a repe-
tition during the performance of a strength-training exercise.
Nitrosamines  Potentially cancer-causing compounds formed 
when nitrites and nitrates—which are used to prevent the 
growth of harmful bacteria in processed meats—combine with 
other chemicals in the stomach.
Non-exercise activity thermogenesis (NEAT)  Energy 
ex­pended doing everyday activities not related to exercise.
Non–insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM or Type 
2)  A form of diabetes in which the pancreas either does not 
produce sufficient insulin or it produces adequate amounts but 
the cells become insulin-resistant, keeping glucose from enter-
ing the cell.
Nonresponders  Individuals who exhibit small or no improve-
ments in fitness as compared with others who undergo the 
same training program.
Nutrients  Substances found in food that provide energy, regu-
late metabolism, and help with growth and repair of body 
tissues.
Nutrition  The science that studies the relationship of foods to 
optimal health and performance.
Obesity  A chronic disease characterized by an excessively 
high amount of body fat (about 20 percent above recom­
mended weight or a BMI of 30 or above).
Oligomenorrhea  Irregular menstrual cycles.
One repetition maximum (1 RM)  The maximal amount of 
resistance a person is able to lift in a single effort.
Opportunistic infections  Diseases that arise in the absence of 
a healthy immune system that would fight them off in healthy 
people.
Osteopenia  Low bone mass.
Osteoporosis  Softening, deterioration, or loss of bone.
Overload principle  Training concept holding that the 
demands placed on a body system must be increased system-
atically and progressively over time to cause physiological 
adaptation.
Overweight  Excess body weight when compared with a given 
standard such as height or recommended percent body fat.
Passive stretching  Stretching exercises performed with the aid 
of an external force applied by either another individual or an 
external apparatus.
Pedometer  An electronic device that senses body motion and 
counts footsteps. Some pedometers also record distance, calo-
ries burned, speeds, and time spent being physically active.
Percent body fat (fat mass)  Fat component of the body.
Periodization  A training approach that divides the season 
into cycles using a systematic variation in intensity and vol-
ume of training to enhance fitness and performance.
Personal trainer  An exercise specialist who works one-on-one 
with an individual and is typically paid by the hour or exercise 
session.
Physical activity  Bodily movement produced by skeletal mus-
cles that requires energy expenditure and produces 
­progressive health benefits.
Physical fitness  The general capacity to adapt and respond 
favorably to physical effort.
Physical fitness standard  Required criteria to achieve a high 
level of physical fitness; ability to do moderate to vigorous 
physical activity without undue fatigue.
Physiological age  Age based on the individual’s functional 
and physical capacity.
Phytonutrients  Compounds found in fruits and vegetables 
that block formation of cancerous tumors and disrupt the pro-
cess of cancer.
Pilates  Exercises that help strengthen the body’s core by 
developing pelvic stability and abdominal control coupled 
with focused breathing patterns.
Plyometric training  A form of exercise that requires forceful 
jumps or springing off the ground immediately after landing 
from a previous jump.
Positive resistance  The lifting, pushing, or concentric phase of a 
repetition during the performance of a strength-training exercise.
Precontemplation stage  Stage of change in which people are 
unwilling to change their behavior.
Preparation stage  Stage of change in which people are getting 
ready to make a change within the coming month.
Principle of individuality  Training concept stating that genet-
ics plays a major role in individual responses to exercise train-
ing and that these differences must be considered when 
designing exercise programs for different people.
Progressive muscle relaxation  A relaxation technique that 
involves contracting, then relaxing muscle groups in the body 
in succession.
Progressive resistance training  A gradual increase of resis-
tance over a period of time.
Proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation (PNF)  Mode of 
stretching that uses reflexes and neuromuscular principles to 
relax the muscles being stretched.
Proteins  A class of nutrients that the body uses to build and 
repair body tissues.
Quackery/fraud  The conscious promotion of unproven claims 
for profit.
Recommended body weight  The weight at which there 
appears to be no harm to human health.
Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA)  The daily amount 
of a nutrient (statistically determined from the EARs) consid-
ered adequate to meet the known nutrient needs of almost 98 
percent of all healthy people in the United States.
Registered dietitian (RD)  A person with a college degree in 
dietetics who meets all certification and continuing education 
requirements of the American Dietetic Association or 
Dietitians of Canada.
Relapse  Slipping or falling back into unhealthy behavior(s) or 
failing to maintain healthy behaviors.
Repetitions  The number of times a movement is performed.
Resistance  Amount of weight lifted.
Responders  Individuals who exhibit improvements in fitness 
as a result of exercise training.
Resting metabolism  The energy requirement to maintain the 
body’s vital processes in the resting state.
Ribonucleic acid (RNA)  Genetic material involved in the for-
mation of cell proteins.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

306
Fitness and Wellness
Risk factors  Lifestyle and genetic variables that may lead to 
disease.
RM zone  A range of repetitions that are to be performed  
maximally during one set. For example, an 8 to 12 RM zone 
implies that the individual will perform anywhere from 8 to 12 
repetitions but cannot perform any more (e.g., 9 RM and could 
not perform a 10th repetition).
Sedentary Death Syndrome (SeDS)  Deaths that are attributed 
to a lack of regular physical activity.
Set  The number of repetitions performed for a given exercise.
Setpoint  Body weight and body fat percentage unique to each 
person that are regulated by genetic and environmental 
factors.
Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)  Communicable infec-
tions spread through sexual contact.
Skill-related fitness  Components of fitness important for suc-
cessful motor performance in athletic events and in lifetime 
sports and activities.
Slow-sustained stretching  Technique whereby the muscles 
are lengthened gradually through a joint’s complete range of 
motion and the final position is held for several seconds.
SMART  An Acronym for Specific, Measurable, Acceptable, 
Realistic, and Timely.
Specificity of training  A principle holding that for a muscle 
to increase in strength or endurance, the training program 
must be specific.
Spirituality  A sense of meaning and direction in life, a  
relationship to a higher being; encompasses freedom, prayer, 
faith, love, closeness to others, peace, joy, fulfillment, and 
altruism.
Static stretching (slow-sustained stretching)  Exercises in 
which the muscles are lengthened gradually through a joint’s 
complete range of motion.
Step aerobics (SA)  A form of exercise that combines stepping 
up and down from a bench with arm movements.
Storage fat  Body fat stored in adipose tissue.
Stress  The mental, emotional, and physiological response of 
the body to any situation that is new, threatening, frightening, 
or exciting.
Stress electrocardiogram (stress ECG)  An exercise test during 
which the workload is gradually increased (until the subject 
reaches maximal fatigue), with blood pressure and 12-lead 
electro­cardiographic monitoring throughout the test.
Stressor  Stress-causing agent.
Stretching  Moving the joints beyond the accustomed range of 
motion.
Substrates  Foods that are used as energy sources (carbo­
hydrates, fats, proteins).
Sun protection factor (SPF)  Degree of protection offered by 
ingredients in sunscreen lotion; at least SPF 15 is ­recommended.
Supplements  Tablets, pills, capsules, liquids, or powders that 
contain vitamins, minerals, amino acids, herbs, or fiber that are 
taken to increase the intake of these substances.
Synergistic action  The effect of mixing two or more drugs, the 
effects of which can be much greater than the sum of two or 
more drugs acting by themselves.
Synergy  A reaction in which the result is greater than the sum 
of its two parts.
Systolic blood pressure  Pressure exerted by the blood against 
the walls of the arteries during the forceful contraction 
­(systole) of the heart.
Termination/adoption stage  Stage of change in which people 
have eliminated an undesirable behavior or maintained a posi-
tive behavior for more than five years.
Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL)  The highest level of nutri-
ent intake that appears to be safe for most healthy people 
without an increased risk for adverse effects.
Tolerable weight  A realistic body weight that is close to the 
health fitness percent body fat standard.
Triglycerides  Fats formed by glycerol and three fatty acids.
Type A  Behavior pattern characteristic of a hard-driving, over-
ly ambitious, aggressive, at times hostile and overly 
­competitive person.
Type B  Behavior pattern characteristic of a calm, casual, 
relaxed, and easygoing individual.
Variable-resistance training  Exercise that utilizes special 
equipment with mechanical devices that provide differing 
amounts of resistance through the range of motion.
Vegetarians  Individuals whose diet is of vegetable or plant 
origin.
Vigorous exercise  An exercise intensity that is either above 6 
metabolic equivalents (METs) or 60 percent of maximal ­oxygen 
uptake or that provides a “substantial” challenge to the 
individual.
Vigorous-intensity aerobic physical activity  Defined as an 
activity similar to jogging that causes rapid breathing and a 
substantial increase in heart rate.
Vitamins  Organic substances essential for normal bodily 
metabolism, growth, and development.
Waist circumference (WC)  A waist girth measurement to assess 
potential risk for disease based on intra-abdominal fat content.
Waist-to-height ratio (WHtR)  A ratio to determine health 
risks associated with obesity.
Warm-up  A period preceding exercise when exercise begins 
slowly.
Wellness  The constant and deliberate effort to stay healthy 
and achieve the highest potential for well-being.
Yoga  A school of thought in the Hindu religion that seeks to 
help the individual attain a higher level of spirituality and 
peace of mind.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Abdominal crunch
bent-leg, 265
with weights, 269
without weights, 37–38
Accidents, 221
Action stage, 16–17
Actions, 21
Activities of daily living
definition of, 61
flexibility and, 252
NEAT and, 66
Adductor stretch, 273–274
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP), 72
Adequate Intakes (AI), 126–127
Advanced glycation end products 
(AGEs), 138–139
Aerobic exercises
CHD risk control by, 203
CVD risk reduction by, 233
diabetes prevention by, 210
enhancement tips for, 114–115
fluid replacement during, 239–240
frequency of, 65
goal setting log for, 96 (Activity 3.4)
heart rate monitoring during, 63
intensity of, 62–63
lifetime, behavior modification for, 157
moderate-intensity, 7
muscles involved in, 63–64
purpose of, 61
rating benefits of, 111
resistance training with, 109
rowing as, 106
strength training vs., 234
swimming as, 102–103
types of
cross-country skiing, 106
cycling, 104–105
elliptical training, 107
interval training, 107–111
pool based, 103–104
racket sports, 107
rowing as, 106
stair climbing, 107
swimming as, 102–103
yoga, 107
Zumba, 111
vigorous-intensity, 7
volume in, 66
in water, 103–104
workout pattern for, 115
Agility, 8
Aging. See also Older adults
CHD risk and, 214
CVD onset, 234
exercise and, 251–253
habits established at, 234
premature, 251–252
sedentary lifestyle and, 251
types of, 214
AIDS. See HIV/AIDS
Alarm reaction, 179
Alcohol
abuse of, 221–222
diseases linked to, 222
synergistic action of, 222
Alcoholism, 222
All-out interval training, 109
Altruism, 201
Amenorrhea, 139, 241–242
American College of Sports Medicine 
(ACSM)
aerobic fitness recommendations, 115
CR exercise guideline of, 66
exercise recommendations of, 65
female athlete triad position statement 
of, 242
health/fitness facility standards, 256
American Heart Association
fish consumption recommendations, 
138
supplement recommendations, 137
trans fat recommendations of, 206
American Medical Association  
(AMA), 7
Amino acids, 124–125
Android obesity, 46
Anger, 181
Angiogenesis, 215
Anorexia nervosa, 139
Antibodies, 177
Antioxidants
free radical absorption by, 216
functions of, 133
phytonutrients vs., 250
sources of, 133, 134
supplements, 133–134
vitamins as, 125
Arachidonic acid (AA), 124
Arm circles, 272
Arm curl, 266, 268
Arrhythmias, 212–213
Atkins diet, 152
Back extension, 271, 275–276
Back pain
cause of, 79
chronic, 80
exercises for, 80, 82
proper positions for, 81
serious, 79–80
stress and, 82
Balance
definition of, 8
dynamic, 111, 113
importance of, 8–9
Ballistic stretching, 75–76
Basal metabolic rate (BMR)
diets and, 152–153
strength training and, 157
weight management and, 156
Behavior
analysis of, 19
patterns of, 180–182
Behavior modification
definition of, 13
issues, 232–233
motivating factor for, 14
principles of, 19–20
Behavior modification planning
anger management, 181
cancer-fighting diet, 217
changing type A personality, 183
daily physical activity increase, 34
decreasing cancer risk, 220
fitness program compliance tips, 84
healthy diet guidelines, 137
healthy lifestyle guidelines, 258
increasing dietary fiber, 122
lifetime aerobic exercise, 157
for previously inactive people, 105
stress management characteristics, 191
stress symptoms, awareness of, 187
weight loss strategies, 164–165
weight management, 157
Behavioral change model
development of, 15
self-identification quiz for, 17
stages of, 23–24 (Activity 1.1)
Bench jump, 36
Bench press, 268
Bent-leg curl-up, 36–37, 265
Beta-carotene, 134
Better Business Bureau (BBB), 255
Beverages
caffeine in, 121
energy drinks, 240
soft drinks, 121
sugar in, 121
Binge-eating disorder
characterization of, 140–141
definition of, 139
prevalence of, 140
Bioelectrical impedance, 43–44
Blood lipids, 205
Note: Pages numbers in bold are exercises.
307
Index
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

308
Fitness and Wellness
Blood pressure, 204
BMI. See Body mass index (BMI)
BMR. See Basal metabolic rate; Basal 
metabolic rate (BMR)
Body composition
assessment of
behavior and, 50
BMI, 45–46
common techniques, 43–44
knowledge of, 51
skinfold thickness, 44–45
waist circumference, 46, 50
definition of, 42
diet effects on, 50
exercise effects on, 50
recommendations, 49
trends in, 41–42
Body fat
CHD risk and, 205
exercise and, 157
gender-specific, 42
muscle turning to myth, 234
obesity and, 42–43
percentage of, 42
recommended range for, 45
skinfold thickness and, 44
standards for, 150
Body mass index (BMI)
definition of, 45
disease risk and, 49
function of, 45–46
health implications of, 46
for obesity, 148
recommended, 54–55 (Activity 2.2)
strength training and, 46
tables for, 49
Body rotation, 272
Body scan. See Thirty-second body scan
Body weight. See also Weight manage-
ment
ideal, 247
management of, 141–142
recommended, 42–43
standardized tables for, 42
tolerable, 150
Bone health, 244
Boot camps, 110
Breast self-examination, 221
Breathing techniques, 192–193
Bulimia nervosa
characterization of, 140
definition of, 139
prevalence of, 139–140
C-Lycopene, 215–216
C-reactive protein (CRP), 209–210
definition of, 209
high-sensitivity guidelines, 210
levels, reduction of, 209–210
Caffeine
drinks containing, 126
in energy drinks, 240
in soft drinks, 121
Calcium, 244–245
Calories
balancing of, 141–142
burned during vigorous exercise, 158
definition of, 121
expenditures of, 161
in food, calculating, 129
intake of
adjustments to, 159
daily recommends, 153–154
estimating, 160–162
nutrient percentages, 129
post-exercise, 159
target, calculation, 161–162
kilocalorie vs., 246–247
negative balance of, 247
restriction of, 156
Cancer
cell growth in, 214–215
deaths from, 214
definition of, 215
development of, 214–215
early detection of, 221
prevention of
cooking methods, 216–217
dietary choices, 215–218, 248
multivitamins for, 134–135
physical activity, 219–220
research on, 215
strength training, 220
risk for
estrogen use, 219
excessive sun exposure, 217–219
genetic factors, 220–221
managing, 229–230 (Activity 8.1)
occupational hazards, 219
radiation exposure, 219
soy products and, 133
tobacco use, 217
survival of, 215
Carbohydrates
calories in, 154
definition of, 121
post-exercise consumption, 251
strength training and, 74–75
total calorie intake percentage, 129
types of, 121
Carcinogens, 217
Carcinoma in situ, 214–215
Cardiomyopathy, 223
Cardiorespiratory endurance (CE)
assessment of, 32–34
definition of, 31
determination of, 31–32
development of
duration factor in, 64–65
factors involved in, 61–62
frequency factor in, 65
guidelines for, 67
intensity factor in, 62–63
mode factor in, 63–64
rate of progression, 66
factors involved in, 61–62
health-related fitness and, 31
program for, 31
Cardiorespiratory training zone, 62
Cardiovascular disease (CVD). See also 
Coronary heart disease (CHD); 
Stroke
definition of, 201
incidence of, 201–202
onset age, 234
prevalence of, 203
prevention of, 134–135, 233–234
risk factors for
diabetes, 210–211
interrelationships of, 233
managing, 229–230 (Activity 8.1)
obesity, 149
physical inactivity, 203
sleep deprivation, 177
types of, 202
Carotenoids, 215
Cat stretch, 276
Center for Drug Evaluation Research, 255
Centers for Disease Control (CDC) f, 65
Certifications, 256
Change. See also Behavioral change model
in body composition, 50
core values, 232–233
dietary habits, 247–248
difficulty of, 14, 232
friendships and, 233
motivation for, 17–19
values, 14–15
Chemical dependency. See Substance 
abuse
Children
CVD symptoms in, 214, 234
fish consumption by, 138, 250
iron needs of, 246
physical activity guidelines for, 6
protein needs of, 131
vitamin D needs of, 135
Cholesterol. See also High-density 
lipoprotein (HDL); Low-density 
lipoprotein (LDL)
definition of, 205
levels, dietary factors in, 205–206
medications, 208
total, recommendations for, 205
transport of, 206
Chronic diseases
AGEs role in, 138
definition of, 5
nutrition and, 120
technology and, 4
Chronic lower respiratory disease 
(CLRD), 221
Chronological age, 214–215
Chronotropic incompetence, 213
Cirrhosis, 223
Classical periodization, 68
Clothing, 105, 236
Cocaine, 222
Cold sores, 225
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

309
  Index
Commercial fluid-replacement solutions, 
239–240
Complete natural breathing, 192
Complex carbohydrates, 121
Compound fats, 124
Compulsive exercisers, 190
Concentric exercises, 69
Concentric muscle contraction, 237
Consumer Product Safety Commission 
(CPS), 255
Contemplation stage, 16–17
Contraindicated exercises, 82
Control, locus of, 17
Controlled ballistic stretching, 76–77
Cooking methods, 216–217
Cool-down, 65
Coordination, 9, 113
Core strength training, 74, 109–110
Core values, 232–233
Coronary heart disease (CHD)
definition of, 203
hostility and, 182
prevalence of, 202
risk factors for
abnormal cholesterol profile,  
205–207
abnormal ECG/EKG, 212
age, 214
diabetes, 210–212
elevated homocysteine, 208–209
excessive body fat, 205
gender, 214
high blood pressure, 204–205
inflammation, 209–210
metabolic syndrome, 211–212
personal/family history, 214
physical inactivity, 203–204
stress, 213–214
tobacco use, 212–213
CR. See Cardiorespiratory endurance 
(CE)
Cradle, 278
Crash diets, 151
Creatine phosphate (CP), 72
Cross-country skiing, 106
Cross-training, 105–106
CRP. See C-reactive protein (CRP)
Cruciferous vegetables, 215
Curl-up, bent-leg, 36–37, 265
Cycling
benefits of, 104
equipment for, 105
safety suggestions for, 104–105
Daily values, 127–128
Daily values (DV), 127–128
Dairy products, 130–131
Deaths
accident-related, 221
cancer-related, 214
CHD related, 202
leading causes of, 4
obesity related, 148–149
rates of, 10
underlying causes of, 201
Deep breathing, 192
Derived fats, 124
Detox diets, 248
Dextrins, 121
Diabetes mellitus
definition of, 211
health effects of, 210
soft drink consumption and, 121
types of, 210
Diastolic blood pressure, 205–206
Dietary reference intakes (DRI), 126–127
Diets
for athletes, 249–250
balancing of, 130
body composition and, 50
cancer prevention and, 215–218, 248
gluten free, 250
guidelines for, 128–129
habits, 233
healthy, guidelines for, 137
LDL-lowering, 207–208
unhealthy, 136
weight loss
BMR and, 152–153
effectiveness of, 247
exercise with, 154
fads in, 151–152
food choices, 163
metabolism and, 152–153
strategies, 164–165
weight gained following, 153
Dip, 265
Diseases. See also specific conditions
alcohol-related, 222
BMI-associated risks for, 49
inactivity’s effects on, 4
remission from, 176
Distress, 178–179
DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid), 214–215
Donkey kick, 280
Double-knee-to-chest stretch, 275
Double-leg lift, 279
Dual energy X-ray absorptiometry 
(DXA), 43
Duration of exercise, 64–65
Dynamic balance, 111, 113
Dynamic exercise, 68–69
Dynamic stretching, 76–77
Dysmemorrhea, 39
Eating disorders
development of, 138–139
treatment for, 141
types of, 138–141
Eccentric exercise, 69
Eccentric muscle contraction, 237
ECG/EKG. See Electrocardiogram (ECG/
EKG)
Ecstasy. See MDMA
EER. See Estimated energy requirement 
(EER)
Elastic-band resistive exercises, 70
Electric contact grills, 216–217
Electrocardiogram (ECG/EKG), 212–213
Elliptical training, 107
Emotions, 176
Energy drinks, 240
Energy-balancing equation, 152–153
Epidemiological research, 9
Epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG), 216
Essential fat, 42–43
Essential nutrients, 121, 128
Estimated average requirement (EAR), 
126
Estimated energy requirement (EER)
bases of, 127–128
definition of, 127
determination of, 161–162
weight loss program based on, 160–162
Estrogen, 219, 243–244
Eustress, 178–179
Exercise is Medicine program, 7
Exercises. See also Aerobic exercises; 
Physical activity; Strength training; 
Stretching
abnormalities, 21
advantages of, 60
for back pain, 80, 82
behavior assessment, 85
benefits of, 189–190, 235–236
best time for, 236
body composition and, 50
calorie consumption following, 159
clothing for, 236, 241
in cold weather, 240–241
compliance tips, 84
compulsive, 190
contraindicated, 82, 278–280
cool-down for, 65
definition of, 3
duration of, 64–65
equipment for, 257
flexibility and, 39–40
getting started, 82–83
goal setting logs, 95–98 (Activity 3.4)
in hot/humid weather, 238–239
during illness, 235
immediate benefits of, 12
knowledge assessment, 85–86
long-term benefits of, 11
for low-back pain, 275–277
menstruation and, 241–242
mode of, 63–64
osteoporosis prevention by, 245–246
overdoing, 235
during pregnancy, 242–243
prescription forms, 91–94 (Activity 3.3)
readiness for, 60, 89–90 (Activity 3.2)
related-problems from, 236–237
safety issues, 233–241
snacks following, 75
during travel, 235–236
vigorous, 10–11
volume, 66
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

310
Fitness and Wellness
Exercises (continued)
warm-up for, 66
weight loss and, 154
Fad diets, 151–152
Fartlek training, 109
Fasting, 248
Fats
calories in, 154
classification of, 123–124
consumption guidelines, 128–129
definition of, 125
function of, 123
omega-3, 205–206
saturated, 205
total calorie intake percentage, 129
unsaturated, 205
Female athlete triad, 242
Ferritin, 246, 247
Fiber
benefits of, 121–122
classification of, 122–123
definition of, 121
intake of, 122, 207
sources of, 122–123, 130
Fight of flight syndrome
health effects of, 214
hormonal response to, 178
physiological response to, 179
Fighting spirit, 176
Finger touch test, 40–41
Fish
consumption recommendations, 138
contaminants in, 137–138
mercury in, 137, 250
safety guidelines, 250–251
Fitness. See Physical fitness
Fitness boot camps, 110
Five-minute very hard-intensity aerobics, 
108–109
Fixed-resistance machines, 69
Flexibility. See also Stretching
aging and, 252
assessment of, 40–41
benefits of, 39, 75
categories, 41
characterization of, 39
definition of, 39
designing program for, 78
development guidelines, 78
exercise effects on, 39–40
overall, 41
prescription form, 93 (Activity 3.3)
prescriptions, 75–78
Folate, 136
Food and Drug Administration, 255
Food labels, 128, 206
Foods
antioxidant rich, 134
benefits of, 136–137
calcium-rich, 245
consumption guidelines, 131
daily logs, 162
dietary guidelines for, 142
fiber-rich, 123
iron-rich, 246
low-fat, 162–163
nutrient content list, 281–293
organic, 249
protein-rich, 124–125
unlimited choices of, 247
vegetarian, 132–133
Fraud, 254–255
Free radicals
antioxidant effects on, 216
definition of, 217
function of, 133–134
Free weights
definition of, 68–69
plate-loaded, 70
requirements of, 70
Frequency of exercise, 65
Fruits
benefits of, 136
consumption of
guidelines for, 131
long-term weight gain and, 163
nutrients in, 248–249
Full squat, 280
Functional fitness, 110–111, 251
Functional independence, 251
Gamma-linolenic acid (GLA), 124
Gender differences
CHD risk, 214
eating disorders and, 138–141
food guide for, 131
nutrient requirements, 127
physiological, 241
skinfold estimates, 47–48
VOinf2max/inf, 33
General adaption syndrome  
(GAS), 179
Genetics
cancer role of, 220–221
eating disorders role of, 139
exercise response role of, 29
Genistein, 133
Genital herpes, 225
Glucose
glycemic index and, 251
hepatic production of, 151
levels, strength training and, 35
levels, tests for, 210
solutions, 239–240
tolerance, 29
Gluteal stretch, 275
Gluten sensitivity, 250
Glycemic index, 251
Glycemic load, 251
Glycogen, 121
Goal setting
forms and logs for, 95–98  
(Activity 3.4)
principle of, 19
realistic, 83
Goals
definition of, 19
evaluation of, 21
SMART, 20–21
Grains, 130–131
Gyms. See Health/fitness facility
Gynoid obesity, 46
Habits
dietary, 233, 247–248
early life establishment of, 234
healthy lifestyle, 200
Hatha yoga, 194–195
HDL. See High-density lipoprotein  
(HDL)
Head roll, 279
Health care costs, 8
Health fitness standards, 29–30
Health-related fitness, 8–9
Health/fitness facility
ACSM standards, 256
evaluating, guidelines for, 255–256
personal trainers at, 256–257
Healthy lifestyles
aging advantages from, 252
behavior assessment, 227
behavior modification for, 13–14
benefits of, 2, 257
guidelines for, 258
knowledge assessment, 228
steps toward, 200–201
Healthy People initiative, 12–13
Heart attack. See Myocardial infarction
Heart rate reserve (HRR), 62
Heart, anatomy of, 202
Heat cramps, 239
Heat exhaustion, 239
Heat stroke, 239
Heel raise, 266
Heel cord stretch, 273
Helmets, 105
Hemoglobin, 241
The Hero, 278
Heroin, 223
Herpes simplex virus (HSV), 225
High-density lipoprotein (HDL), 205–206
High-impact aerobics (HIA), 102–103
High-intensity interval training (HIIT), 
108–109, 158
HIIT. See High-intensity interval training 
(HIIT)
Hip flexors stretch, 276
HIV/AIDS
definitions of, 225
incidents of, 226
prevention guidelines, 226–227
progression of, 224–225
transmission of, 225–226
treatments for, 226
Homeostasis, 179
Homocystein
accumulation of, 208–209
definition of, 209
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

311
  Index
function of, 208
metabolism of, 208
Hostility questionnaire, 182
Hurdler stretch, 278
Hydrostatic weighing, 43
Hypertension, 204–205
Hypokinetic diseases, 4–5
Hypothermia, 240–241
Imagery, 195
Immune system, 176
Individuality, principle of, 29
Inflammation, 209–210
Inhalant abuse, 224
Injuries
aerobics, 102, 111
cycling, 104
exercise intensity and, 77
lower back
incidence of, 79
posture and, 82
risks for, 64
muscle soreness and, 77
overtraining, 190
prevention of
cross-training, 190
flexibility and, 39
posture and, 82
shoes and, 236
stretching, 78
treatment of, 236–237
weight-lifting, 73
Insoluble fiber, 122–123
Institute of Medicine of the  
National Academy of Sciences, 
64, 156
Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus 
(IDDM), 210–211
Integral yoga, 194
Intensity of exercise
aerobic levels
HIIT, 108–109
moderate-intensive, 7
vigorous, 63
calculation of, 62
CE and, 62–63
controversy over, 157–158
flexibility, 77
metabolic rate and, 158
prescription for, 77–78
research on, 158–159
weight management and, 155–156
Internet health advice, 254
Interval training
definition of, 107
intensity levels, 108–109
speed training and, 106
Iron-rich foods, 246
Isometric exercise, 68–69
Isotonic exercise, 69
Iyengar yoga, 194
Jogging, 101–102
Kilocalorie, 246–247
Knee to chest, 280
Lat pull-down, 269
Lateral bridge, 267
Lateral head tilt, 272
LDL. See Low-density lipoprotein (LDL)
Lean body mass
definition of, 43
exercise and, 155
loss of, 154
protein intake and, 163
Leg abduction/adduction, 267
Leg curl, 265, 269
Leg press, 269
Life expectancy, 4–5
Lifestyles. See also Healthy lifestyles
cancer prevention, 220
death rates and, 4
technology and, 3–4
wellness, 200–201
Lifting posture for, 81
Light-intensity activity, 159
Linoleic acid (LA), 124
Lipids. See Fats
Locus of control, 17–18
Low-carbohydrate/high-protein (LCHP) 
diet plans, 151–152
Low-density lipoprotein (LDL), 205–208
Low-impact aerobics (LIA), 102–103
Lower back
conditioning program, 94 (Activity 3.3)
proper positions for, 81
stress effects on, 82
Lymphocytes, 177
Macronutrients, 120–121
Maintenance stage, 16–17
Marijuana, 222
Maximal heart rate (MHR)
calculation of, 62
comparison of, 31
cycling and, 104
definition of, 31
fitness categories, 33
physical exertion and, 32
during swimming, 103
during water aerobics, 104
Maximal oxygen uptake VOinf2max/inf
exercise frequency based on, 65
exercise intensity based on, 63
in older adults, 252
MDMA, 223–224
Medication
AIDS, 226
cholesterol, 208
consumer protection, 255
CRP levels and, 209
diabetes, 210–211
Meditation, 192–193
Melanoma, 217
Menopausal hormone therapy (MHT), 
246
Menopause, 244
Menstruation, 241–242
Mercury, 137–138, 250
Metabolic equivalents (METs)
activity-specific, 112
definition of, 11
rating exercise with, 111
vigorous exercise and, 10
Metabolic fitness, 29
Metabolic profile, 29
Metabolic syndrome, 211–212
Metabolism
boosting, 249
diet and, 152–153
oxygen use in, 133
Metastasis, 215
Methamphetamine, 222–223
Micronutrients, 120–121
Mind/body connection, 176–178
Mindless meditation, 193
Minerals, 125
Moderate exercise, 63
Moderate-impact aerobics (MIA), 102–103
Moderate-intensity aerobic activity, 7
Modified dip, 265
Modified push-up, 36
Modified sit-and-reach test, 40
Monitoring, 19
Monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFA), 123
Mortality rates
antioxidants and, 134
BMI and, 45
dietary habits and, 139, 143
obesity and, 42
physical activity and, 9–10, 204
strength-training and, 220
Motivation
definition of, 17
for dietary changes, 143
locus of control and, 17–19
pedometers for, 58
for value changes, 232
Motor skills, 8
Multivitamins, 135–135
Muscles
fibers, amino acids and, 75
flexibility of, 75–78
soreness/stiffness of, 237
stabilization of, 70
Muscular endurance
categories for, 38
definition of, 35
need for, 67
periodization training for, 68
tests for
categories, 38
exercises for, 36–38
function of, 35–36
interpretation of, 38–39
scoring table, 38
Muscular fitness
definition of, 35
need for, 34–35, 67
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

312
Fitness and Wellness
Muscular fitness (continued)
periodization training for, 68
quality of life enhancements of, 35
Muscular hypertrophy, 71
Muscular strength
age-related loss of, 252
categories for, 38
definition of, 35
dietary recommendations for, 74–75
physical fitness role, 35
Myocardial infarction
definition of, 213
tobacco use-related, 212
warning signs of, 203
MyPlate, 131–132
Naps, 178
National Academy of Sciences (NAS), 
128–129
National Cholesterol Education Program, 
128–129
National Council Against Health Fraud 
(NCAHF), 254–255
NEAT. See Nonexercise activity thermo-
genesis (NEAT)
Negative resistance, 69
Nitrosamines, 216
Nonexercise activity thermogenesis 
(NEAT), 66
Noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus 
(IDDM), 210–211
Nonresponders, 29
Nutrients
analysis of, 130–132, 145 (Activity 5.1)
antioxidant, 134
common food content list, 281–293
definition of, 121
dietary guidelines for, 142
essential, 120–126, 121, 128
food labels and, 128
in fruits, 248–249
post-exercise, 251
select, ULs for, 128
supplementation, 133–136
in vegetables, 248–249
Nutrition
behavior assessment of, 143
definition of, 121
guidelines for, 141–142
health benefits of, 120
issues in, 246–251
knowledge assessment of, 143–144
for specific groups, 142
standards of, 126–128
wellness and, 142–143
Nuts, 132, 134
Obesity
BMI for, 148
body fat and, 42–43
causes of, 205
CRP-increase and, 209
deaths related to, 148–149
definition of, 149
epidemic of, 5, 148
fitness and, 160
incidence of, 149
sleep deprivation and, 155
social networks and, 163, 166
types of, 46
Older adults. See also Aging
contraindicated exercise for, 253
exercise for, 251–252
flexibility loss of, 252
muscle strength loss in, 252
nutrition for, 142
physical activity guidelines for, 6, 
252–253
vitamin D needs of, 135
Oligomenorrhea, 241–242
Omega-3 fatty acids
cardioprotective benefits of,  
205–206
characterization of, 124
CRP decrease and, 209
food sources, 205–206
Omega-6 fatty acids, 124
One repetition maximum (1 RM)
definition of, 35
muscle mass used in, 70–71
test for, 32–34
Onep 1.5-mile run test, 32
Opportunistic infections, 224–225
Organic foods, 249
Osteopenia, 247
Osteoporosis
definition of, 243
incidence of, 244
in men, 244
prevention of, 244–246
Overload principle, 67
Overtraining, 190
Overweight
definition of, 149
fit and, 159–160
functional limitations of, 149–150
health effects of, 149
swimming and, 103
Oxygen, 133
Passive stretching, 75
Pedometers
accuracy of, 59
benefits of, 58–59
definition of, 59
function of, 58
Pelvic clock, 277
Pelvic tilt, 267, 277
Percent of body fat
definition of, 43
estimates for women, 47
gender differences, 42
Periodization, 68–69
Personal fitness profile, 52–53 (Activity 
2.1)
Personal trainers, 256–257
Physical activity. See also Exercise
based on steps, 59
behavior assessment, 22
blood pressure levels and, 204–2–5
calorie expenditures of, 161
cancer prevention and, 219–220
CHD risk from, 203–204
daily increase tips for, 34
daily log for, 87–88 (Activity 3.1)
definition of, 3
epidemiological research on, 9
examples of, 2
federal guidelines for, 6–7
flexibility and, 39–40
guidelines for, 6
knowledge assessment, 22
monitoring of, 58–60
most popular, 101
PAR-Q, 25–26 (Activity 1.2)
for pregnant/postpartum women,  
6–7
stress reduction with, 189–190
weight management and, 155–156, 247
Physical activity readiness questionnaire 
(PAR-Q), 25–26 (Activity 1.2)
Physical fitness
assessment of
cardiorespiratory endurance, 31–34
comprehensive program, 28
importance of, 28
personal profile, 28
responders/nonresponders, 29
standards for, 29–31
behavior assessment, 115, 261
benefits of, 9–12, 113
bootcamps for, 110
circuit training for, 110
consumer issues, 254–258
core training, 109–110
death rates by, 10
definition of, 9
evaluation of, 83
federal initiative for, 12–13
functional, 110–111
future of, 258
health-related components of, 8, 28
knowledge assessment, 116, 261
lifestyle self-evaluation, 259–260 (Ac-
tivity 9.1)
national objectives for, 13
overweight individuals and, 159–160
path to, 13
personal profile, 52–53 (Activity 2.1)
personal program for, 117–118 (Activity 
4.1)
primary objective of, 149
skill-related
combinations of, 114
components of, 8–9
desirability of, 113
examples of, 111, 113
sports-specific, 114
standards, 30–31, 150–151
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

313
  Index
strength component of, 35
traditional activities for, 100–102
Physical inactivity. See also Sedentary 
lifestyles
CHD risk and, 203, 205
effects of, 2
epitome of, 4
health risks from, 3
minimizing effects of, 66, 235
poor diet and, 148
Physiological age, 214–215
Phytonutrients
antioxidants vs., 250
benefits of, 216
definition of, 217
sources of, 130
Pilates, 78–79
Plyometric training, 102–103
Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), 138, 
250
Polyphenols, 216
Polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA), 
125–126
Positive outlook, 19
Positive resistance, 69
Posture
back pain and, 79
effects of, 82
proper, 81
Potassium intake, 204
Power, 9
Power naps, 178
Power yoga, 194
Precontemplation stage, 15–17
Pregnancy
exercise during, 242–243
folate intake during, 136
nutrient requirements during, 127
nutrition during, 142
Preparation stage, 16–17
President’s Council on Physical Fitness, 
65
Principle of individuality, 29
Probiotics, 137
Progressive muscle relaxation
definition of, 191
environment for, 190
function of, 190
sequence, example of, 191–192
Progressive resistance training, 71
Prone bridge, 268
Proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation 
(PNF), 76–77
Proteins
composition of, 124
definition of, 125
foods rich in, 124–125
function of, 124
intake of
adequate, 125
guidelines, 131
lead body mass and, 163
post-exercise, 251
strength training and, 74–75
total calorie percentage, 129
in vegetarian diet, 124–125
sources of, 125
Psyllium, 207
Pull-up, 266
Push-up, 36, 264
Quackery, 254–255
Quad stretch, 273
Quality of life, 35
Racquet sports, 107
Rapid eye movement (REM), 177
Rapid weight loss, 151
RDA. See Recommended dietary allow-
ance (RDA)
Reaction time, 9
Recommended body weight, 42–43
Recommended dietary allowance (RDA)
for antioxidants, 134
fiber, 122
function of, 126
proteins, 125
for selected nutrients, 127
vitamin D, 135
vitamin E, 134
Refined grains, 130
Registered dietitian (RD), 137
Reinforcement principle, 20
Relapse, 16–17
Relaxation. See Progressive muscle 
relaxation
Repetitions. See also One repetition maxi-
mum (1 RM)
maximal, 77
proper technique and, 73
strength training, 35
stretching, 77
time required for, 77
repro “Report on Physical Activity and 
Health,” 65
Resistance
definition of, 67
negative, 69
positive, 69
progressive program for, 71
recommendations, 70–71
to stressors, 179
Responders, 29
Resting metabolism, 35
Resting posture, 81
Reverse crunch, 267
Reverse periodization, 68
Risk factors
BMI, 49
CHD
abnormal cholesterol profile, 205–207
abnormal ECG/EKG, 212
age, 214
diabetes, 210–212
elevated homocysteine, 208–209
excessive body fat, 205
gender, 214
high blood pressure, 204–205
inflammation, 209–210
personal/family history, 214
physical inactivity, 203–204
stress, 213–214
tobacco use, 212–213
definition of, 7
jogging, 101
melanoma, 217
for obesity, 149
swimming, 102–103
walking, 101
RM zone, 71
RNA (ribonucleic acid), 214–215
Rotary torso, 270
Rowing, 106
Rowing torso, 264, 271
Running, 236
Ruptured plaque release, 209
Saturated fatty acids
chemical structure of, 123
dietary replacement of, 207–208
food sources, 205
Seated back, 271
Sedentary Death Syndrome (SeDS), 3
Sedentary lifestyles. See also Physical 
inactivity
aging and, 251
body fat and, 205
characteristics of, 2
death rate and, 10
dieting and, 43, 156
metabolic rate and, 159
weight management and, 159
Selected estrogen receptor modulators 
(SERMs), 246
Selenium, 134
Self-analysis, 19
Self-evaluation, 259–260 (Activity 9.1)
Set point, 152–153
Sets
definition of, 71
progressive approach to, 72
recommendations, 71–72
Severe obesity, 149
Sexually transmitted infections
incidence of, 224
prevention guidelines, 226–227
types of, 224–226
Shoeless-running program, 236
Shoes, 236
Shoulder hyperextension stretch, 273
Shoulder rotation stretch, 273
Side stretch, 272
Sighing, 192
Simple carbohydrates, 121. See also Sugar
Simple fats, 123
Single-knee-to-chest stretch, 275
Sit-and-reach stretch, 274–275
Sit-and-reach test, 40
Sit-up, 279
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

314
Fitness and Wellness
Sitting adductor stretch, 274
Sitting posture, 81
Skill-related fitness, 8–9
Skinfold thickness measurement
anatomical landmarks for, 44–45
body fat values for, 44
estimates, 47
instrument for, 44
Sleep
cycles, 177
enhancing quality of, 178
patterns, 177
weight management and, 154–155
Sleep debt, 177
Sleep deprivation, 155, 177
Sleep disorders, 177
Slow-sustained stretching, 75
SMART goals, 20–21
Snacks
deterring, 165
nuts as, 132
post-exercise, 75
pre-exercise, 74–75
Social support, 19, 182–183
Sodium intake, 204
Soft drinks, 121
Soluble fiber, 122
Soy products, 132–133
Specificity of training, 67
Speed, 9
Speed training, 106
Spice, 224
Spirituality, 200–201
Sports, 78
Stability-ball exercises, 70, 109
Stair climbing, 107
Standing activities, 159
Standing posture, 81
Standing toe touch, 280
Starches, 121
Static stretching, 75
Step aerobics (SA), 102–103
Step-up, 264
Step-wise intensity interval training, 109
Steps, activity levels, 59
Storage fat, 42–43
Straight-leg sit-up, 279
Strength training. See also Muscular en-
durance; Muscular fitness; specific 
exercises
aerobic exercises vs., 234
ATP-CP system and, 72
BMR and, 157
cancer prevention and, 220
cardio training with, 109
contraindicated exercises, 82
for core muscle group, 74
designing program for, 74
frequency of, 72–73
goal setting log for, 97–98 (Activity 3.4)
guidelines, 72–74
for healthy backs, 80
modes of, 68–70
overload principle, 67
periodization in, 68
Pilates system, 78–79
popularity of, 102
pre-exercise guidelines, 74
prescription form, 92 (Activity 3.3)
progressive approach to, 72
resistance in, 70–71
sets for, 71–72
for six-pack, 235
specificity of, 67–68
with stability balls, 109
weight management and, 156–157
with weights, 73, 268–271
without weights, 73, 264–268
Stress
adaptation of, 179–180
analysis of, 197–198 (Activity 7.1)
awareness of, 180
back pain and, 82
behavior assessment of, 195
behavior patterns, 180–182
coping with, 185
costs of, 176
definition of, 177
emotions and, 176
health effects of, 213
knowledge assessment of, 196
responses to, 178–180
sources of, 185
symptoms of, 187
test for, 186
time management and, 185, 188–189
vulnerability to, 182–184, 184
Stress Electrocardiogram (ECG/EKG), 
212–213
Stress management
characteristics of, 191
techniques for
breathing, 192
meditation, 192–193
muscle relaxation, 190–192
physical activity, 189–190
selection of, 195
tai chi, 194
visual imagery, 194–195
yoga, 193–194
Stressors
in college life, 187
definition of, 179
effects of, 213
physical preparation for, 178
Stretching. See also Flexibility
contraindicated exercises, 82, 278
definition of, 39
exercises, 272–274
frequency of, 77
intensity of, 77
modes of, 75–77
repetitions of, 77
sports-specific, 78
during warm-ups, 77–78
weight loss and, 248
Stroke warning signs, 203
Substance abuse
illegal, 222–224
legal, 221–222
prevalence of, 222
treatment for, 224
Substrates, 121
Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), 
223
Sugar. See also Glucose
in beverages, 121
health risks of, 250
Sun exposure
cancer-induced by, 217–218
damage from, 136
protection from, 219
stinging burns from, 218
tanning by, 217–218
Sun lamps, 218–219
Sun protection factor (SPF), 219
Supine bridge, 268
Supplements. See also Vitamins
antioxidants, 133–134
calcium, 244–245
definition of, 133
limitations of, 136–137
metabolism, 249
Supramaximal interval training, 109
Swan stretch, 278
Swimming, 102–103
Synergistic action, 223
Synergy, 136–137
Systolic blood pressure, 205–206
Tai chi, 194
Tanning, 217–218
Tanning parlors, 218–219
Tea consumption, 216
Tempo training, 109
Termination/adoption stage, 16–17
Testicular self-examination (TSE), 221
Thirty-second body scan, 180
Time killers, 188
Time management
general suggestions for, 189
research on, 185
steps for, 188
Tobacco use
cancer caused by, 217
cessation of, 213
CHD risk of, 212
health risks from, 212–213
prevalence of, 212
Tolerable Upper Intake Levels (UL), 
126–127
Tolerable weight, 150
Toxins, 219
Training volume, 66
Trans fats, 206
Triceps extension, 270
Triceps stretch, 274
Triglycerides, 208
Trunk rotation, 276
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

315
  Index
Tumors
encapsulated, 215
growth of, 214–215
types of, 214
 2010 Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 
141–142
Type A behavior patterns, 180, 183
Type B behavior patterns, 180
UL. See Upper intake levels (UL)
Ultraviolet A rays
artificial sources, 218–219
safe exposure of, 136
vitamin D produced by, 135
Ultraviolet B rays
safe exposure of, 136
sun burns from, 218
vitamin D produced by, 135
Underwater weighing, 43
Unsaturated fatty acids, 123, 205
Upper and lower back stretch, 275
Upper intake levels (UL), 126, 128
Upright double-leg lift, 279
V-sit, 279
Valsalva maneuver, 253
Values
changing of, 15
core, 232–233
establishment of, 15
function of, 14–15
Variable-resistance machines, 69
Vegans, 132
Vegetables
benefits of, 136
consumption of
guidelines, 131
long-term weight gain and, 163
nutrients in, 248–249
Vegetarianism, 132–133
Very low-density lipoproteins (VLDLs), 
208
Very low-fat diets, 208
Vigorous-intensity exercise
calories burned during, 158
definition of, 7
measurement of, 10
moderate vs., 63
precautions for, 11, 159
weight loss and, 248
Viny yoga, 194
Visual imagery, 194–195
Vitamin Binf12/inf, 245
Vitamin Bs, 136
Vitamin C
cancer protection by, 216
RDA for, 134
sources of, 136
Vitamin D, 135–136
Vitamin E, 134
Vitamins
definition of, 125
function of, 125
multi-, 134–135
VOinf2max/inf. See Maximal heart rate 
(MHR)
Waist circumference (WC)
definition of, 46
health implications of, 46
recommended, 54–55 (Activity 2.2)
Waist-to-Height Ratio (WHtR)
categories, 50
determination of, 50
health implications of, 46
recommended, 54–55 (Activity 2.2)
Walking
advantages of, 100–101
deep-water, 101
popularity of, 100
precautions for, 101
Warm-up, 77–78
Warm-ups, 65
Water
importance of, 125
need for, 126
primary sources of, 125–126
walking in, 101
Water aerobics, 103–104
Weather conditions, 240–241
Weight loss programs
EER and, 160–162
effectiveness of, 247
exercise intensity and, 248
food logs for, 162
low-fat entrees in, 162–163
protein intake for, 163
social support and, 163, 166
strategies for, 164–165
Weight management. See also Body weight
behavior assessment, 166
BMR and, 156
caloric intake
computation form, 168–169 (Activity 
6.1)
daily recommends, 153–154
diet plans for, 170–173 (Activity 6.2)
calorie restriction and, 156
exercise role in
behavior modification, 157
duration and, 155–159
intensity and, 155–159
physical activity and, 155–156
strength training, 156–157
fad diets and, 151–152
food choices and, 163
issues in, 246–251
knowledge assessment, 167
lifetime, 163, 166
principles of
caloric recommendations, 153–154
diet and metabolism, 152–153
energy-balancing equation,  
152–153
regular weight monitoring, 155
sleep and, 154–155
Wellness
behavior modification issues,  
232–233
consumer issues, 254–258
definition of, 7
dimensions of, 7–8
future of, 258
knowledge assessment, 261
lifestyle, 200–201
lifestyle self-evaluation, 259–260 (Ac-
tivity 9.1)
nutrition and, 142–143
path to, 13
requirements of, 8
Windmill, 278
Women
body fat in, 42
eating disorders and, 138
food guide for, 131
iron needs of, 246
menstrual disorders among,  
241–242
nutrient requirements of, 127
nutrition recommendations, 142
osteoporosis and, 243–246
physiological differences of, 241
postpartum, 6–7
pregnant, 6–7, 242–243
skinfold estimates for, 47
X-rays, 219
Yoga
for back pain, 80
benefits of, 107, 193
courses in, 194
definition of, 193
styles of, 193–104
Yoga plow, 280
Yogalates, 194
Yogarobics, 194
Yogurt, 137
Zumba, 111
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

WEIGHT (IN POUNDS):
Exercise
Aerobic dancing
Basketball
Bowling
Calisthenics (vigorous)
Cross-country skiing
moderately hilly
indoor machine (11 mph)
Cycling
outdoor (5.5 mph)
outdoor (9.4 mph)
outdoor racing (19 mph)
Schwinn Aerodyne
stationary (moderate tension)
Golf
with cart (90-120 minutes)
no cart (90-120 minutes)
Hiking 4 mph, 20-pound pack
Ice skating
Racquetball
Roller skating/blading
Rope skipping (100 skips/minute)
Rowing (sculling or machine)
Running (jogging)
6 minutes/mile (10 mph)
7 minutes/mile (8.5 mph)
8 minutes/mile (7.5 mph)
9 minutes/mile (6.5 mph)
10 minutes/mile (6 mph)
11 minutes/mile (5.5 mph)
12 minutes/mile (5 mph)
Snow skiing—downhill
Softball
Stair climbing (moderate)
Step aerobics (120 steps/minute)
Swimming
45 minutes/mile
60 minutes/mile
Tennis
doubles
singles
Treadmill
12 minutes/mile
13.5 minutes/mile
Volleyball
competitive
recreational
Walking/race walking
12 minutes/mile (5 mph)
Walking/jogging combination
13.5 minutes/mile (4.5 mph)
Walking
15 minutes/mile (4 mph)
17 minutes/mile (3.5 mph)
20 minutes/mile (3 mph)
30 minutes/mile (2 mph)
Weight training/lifting (light)
110
250
415
180
225
595
330
195
300
505
510
330
145
185
355
275
550
275
560
620
755
685
625
580
535
470
375
300
225
515
550
385
300
225
325
375
330
435
165
435
330
300
250
225
145
270
125
285
470
205
255
675
375
220
340
575
580
375
165
210
405
300
625
300
640
705
860
780
710
660
605
530
425
340
255
600
625
435
335
255
370
425
375
495
185
495
375
345
285
255
165
310
150
340
565
245
305
810
450
260
410
690
695
450
200
255
490
350
750
350
765
845
1030
935
850
790
730
640
510
410
305
750
750
525
405
305
445
510
450
595
225
595
450
415
345
310
200
370
175
395
660
285
360
945
525
305
475
805
810
525
230
295
570
390
875
390
895
990
1200
1090
990
920
850
745
600
480
360
850
875
610
475
360
520
600
525
700
260
700
525
480
400
360
230
430
200
450
750
325
410
1080
600
350
545
920
925
600
265
340
650
425
1000
425
1020
1130
1375
1245
1135
1050
970
850
680
545
410
960
1000
700
540
410
600
680
600
800
300
800
600
550
450
410
265
500
To calculate the
exercise calories
you expend per
hour, find your
“exercise” in the
left column and
your “weight” in
the right column.
In the place
where they inter-
sect is the figure
indicating the
calories burned
per hour. For
example, if you
aerobic dance for
1 hour and weigh
125 pounds, you
will expend 285
calories.
C A L O R I E S  E X P E N D E D  P E R  H O U R
Source: G. Kostas, MPH, RD, The Balancing Act Nutrition and Weight Guide, Dallas, TX, 1993.
Calories 
Spent 
During 
Various
Activities
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

