FITTING A MORTICE LATCH 
If you are reading this because you are about to hang a door, please check 
you have the door round the right way. See our hanging a door project first. 
A mortice latch is the most common of door furniture being fitted to internal 
and external door alike. It is simply a catch with a handle either side. 
 
Flush doors and lightweight hollow  panel doors have lock blocks fitted inside 
them to allow for the lock or other door furniture you wish to fix. The cut away 
picture of a door below shows the frame and lock block which usually extends 
about 200mm either side (up and down) from the centre of the door. 
 

First of all mark the position on the door where you want your handle and 
using a carpenters square, draw a line around the edge and both sides of the 
door, extending about 3 inches into the centre of the door. Draw the line lightly 
so it can be rubbed off later before painting. 
         
 
The image top right shows the line extending toward the middle of the door. 
This serves as a marker for every operation while fitting a mortice latch. On 
the edge of the door, mark the centre of the line. Using a suitable drill, either a 
flat wood bit or an auger bit, ( The diameter of door latches varies so either 
measure yours, or see the fitting instructions on the packet. Common sizes 
are 18mm and 22mm)  drill into the door. Keep the drill absolutely level while 
you drill and if you are using a panelled door as shown above, mark your drill 
bit with a piece of tape to make sure you do not drill too deeply. You can see 
how to do this in our fixing to masonry project. Measure the length of the 
barrel of the latch, including the latch plate itself. 
  
When you have drilled the hole, which should be a couple of mm bigger than the barrel 
diameter, slide the barrel in so the latch plate sites against the edge of the door. The plate 
needs to be "let into" the door edge and this is done by marking round the latch with a sharp 
pencil. Pull out the barrel again and chisel out the insides of the mark you have made to the 

depth of the latch plate (usually 2mm). Be very careful as you are chiselling as the latch plate 
will almost always be very close to the edge of the door. Most hollow doors have a very thin 
cover and it is easy to dislodge this as you cut away. The easiest, surest way to get an even 
cut is to chisel the latch recess as you would a hinge while hanging a door, lots of little cuts to 
the correct depth. Don't forget to leave the pencil line in place or your recess will be cut too 
large. 
            
            
  
When the recess is chiselled out, push in the barrel to fit. The latch plate on some barrels has 
raised edges behind the screw holes. If they are not too deep they can be sunk into he timber 
by tapping the latch plate with a mallet. The best way however is to push the latch plate into 
the recess as shown above right, and mark the centre of the screw holes, then pull it out 
again and drill lightly on the marks, with a 8mm wood bit. This allows the hole edges to sink 
into the timber leaving the latch plate to sit absolutely flush with the edge of the door.  
Pull the barrel out again and hold to the side of the door along the line you have marked.  
Make sure the front of the latch plate is flush with the edge of the door and push your pencil 
through the hole in the barrel. Do this on both side of the door.  

        
       
 
Drill through the door, from both sides. The handle securing plates will be large enough to 
cover a hole which is larger than the bar going through it and in most cases the same drill bit 
can be used which weas used to drill out for the barrel. DO CHECK THIS. 
When the hole is through the door, the barrel can go back in and, using pilot holes, be 
screwed in. The bar is pushed through and the handles slid onto either side. Again, using pilot 
holes, fix the handles. Be extra careful when fixing these handles as, more often than not, the 
screws are slotted heads rather than cross heads and the driver can slip quire easily, 
scratching the handle. 
Now push the door into the opening of the frame. Extend the mark on the door to the front of 
the frame and round into the frame. This line is also the centre of the keep which is the small 
plate which catches the latch as you close the door. 
Put the keep up against the frame, with the centre of the keep in the centre of the mark and 
marl all round the keep with a pencil. Cut out for the keep plate justr as you did for the latch 
plate. Screw the keep into position. Using a 6mm chisel, cut out the centre of the keep, 
through the keep plate, to allow the catch to click in when the door is closed. The fixed keep 
can be seen in the right hand image of those above. 
 

