
 FLOW AT WORK 
 Flow can be defined as the experience of being fully engaged with the task at hand, 
unburdened by outside concerns or worries. Flow is an enjoyable state of effort-
less attention, complete absorption, and focused energy. The pivotal role of flow in 
fostering good performance and high productivity has led psychologists to study 
the features and outcomes of this experience in the workplace, in order to ascertain 
the impact of flow on individual and organizational   well- being, and to identify 
strategies to increase the workers’ opportunities for flow in job tasks. 
 This   ground- breaking new collection is the first book to provide a compre-
hensive understanding of flow in the workplace that includes a contribution from 
the founding father of flow research, Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi. On a conceptual 
level, this book clarifies the features and structure of flow experience, and provides 
 research- based evidence of how flow can be measured in the workplace on an 
empirical level, as well as exploring how it impacts on motivation, productivity, and 
 well- being. By virtue of its rigorous but also practical approach, the book represents 
a useful tool for both scientists and practitioners. The collection addresses a number 
of key issues, including: 
 • 
Core components of how the idea of flow differs from experience in the work 
context 
 • 
Organizational and  task- related conditions fostering flow at work 
 • 
How flow can be measured in the workplace 
 • 
The organizational and personal implications of flow 
 • 
The relationship between task features and flow opportunities at work 
 Featuring contributions from some of the most active researchers in the field,  Flow 
at Work: Measurement and Implications  is an important book in an emerging field of 
study. The concept of flow has enormous implications for organizations as well as 
the individual, and this volume will be of interest to all students and researchers in 
organizational/occupational psychology and positive psychology, as well as prac-
titioners and consultants with an interest in employee motivation and  well- being. 
 Clive Fullagar is a professor at Kansas State University, USA. 
 Antonella Delle Fave  is a professor of psychology at the University of Milano, Italy. 

   Current Issues in Work and Organizational Psychology 
 Series Editor: Arnold B. Bakker 
 Current Issues in Work and Organizational Psychology  is a series of edited books that 
reflect the  state- of- the- art areas of current and emerging interest in the psychologi-
cal study of employees, workplaces, and organizations. 
 Each volume is tightly focused on a particular topic and consists of seven to ten 
chapters contributed by international experts. The editors of individual volumes are 
leading figures in their areas and provide an introductory overview. 
 Example topics include: digital media at work, work and the family, workahol-
ism, modern job design, positive occupational health, and individualized deals. 
 Towards Inclusive Organizations
Determinants of successful diversity management at work 
 Edited by Sabine Otten, Karen Van Der Zee, and Marilynn Brewer 
 Well- being and Performance at Work
The role of context 
 Edited by Marc van Veldhoven and Riccardo Peccei 
 Employee Recruitment, Selection, and Assessment
Contemporary Issues for Theory and Practice 
 Edited by Ioannis Nikolaou and Janneke K. Oostrom 
 Idiosyncratic Deals between Employees and Organizations
Conceptual issues, applications, and the role of coworkers 
 Edited by Matthijs Bal and Denise Rousseau 
 The Psychology of Humor at Work 
 Edited by Christopher Robert 

 FLOW AT WORK 
 Measurement and Implications 
 Edited by Clive Fullagar and 
Antonella Delle Fave 

 First published 2017 
 by Routledge 
 2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN 
 and by Routledge 
 711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017 
 Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business 
 © 2017 selection and editorial matter, Clive Fullagar and Antonella Delle 
Fave; individual chapters, the contributors 
 The right of the editors to be identified as the author of the editorial 
material, and of the authors for their individual chapters, has been asserted 
in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and 
Patents Act 1988. 
 All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or 
utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now 
known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in 
any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing 
from the publishers. 
 Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or 
registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation 
without intent to infringe. 
 British Library  Cataloguing- in-Publication Data 
 A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
 Library of Congress  Cataloging- in-Publication Data 
A catalog record for this title has been requested
 ISBN:  978- 1- 84872- 277-4 (hbk) 
 ISBN:  978- 1- 84872- 278-1 (pbk) 
 ISBN:  978- 1- 31587- 158-5 (ebk) 
 Typeset in Bembo 
 by Apex CoVantage, LLC 

 CONTENTS 
 Preface  
vii
  1 Flow at work: the evolution of a construct 
1
 Clive Fullagar, Antonella Delle Fave, and Steve Van Krevelen 
  2 Measuring flow at work 
28
 Anja  Schiepe- Tiska and Stefan Engeser 
  3 Capturing  within- person changes in flow at work: 
theoretical importance and research methodologies  
50
 Despoina Xanthopoulou 
  4 What predicts flow at work?: theoretical and empirical 
perspectives  
66
 Evangelia Demerouti and Anne Mäkikangas 
  5 Redefining flow at work 
81
 Lucia Ceja and Jose Navarro 
  6 The consequences of flow 
106
 Susana Llorens and Marisa Salanova 
  7 Applications of flow to work 
119
 Giovanni B. Moneta 

vi Contents
  8 Flow in the context of industrial and organizational 
psychology: the case of work motivation  
140
 Patrick Knight and Christopher Waples 
  9 Work, cultures, and the culture of work: flow across 
countries and professions 
157
 Antonella Delle Fave and Marta Bassi 
 10 Will work ever be fun again?  
176
 Sam Spurlin and Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi 
Index 
190

 The chapters in this book are examples of academic debates regarding flow and 
research that attempts to address some of these issues. There are many questions that 
still need to be addressed if flow is to find its way into the pantheon of variables 
that are at the center of the work experience. Nonetheless, we feel that this book 
constitutes a good start. 
 In  Chapter 1 , Clive Fullagar, Antonella Delle Fave, and Steve Van Krevelen out-
line the history, definition, and development of the construct of flow. We place the 
conceptualization of flow into the psychological context of the time, pointing out 
how flow shifted the focus of academic scrutiny away from trying to understand 
why we engage in activities toward an analysis of the actual experience of absorp-
tion. The chapter describes how academic research has applied the construct of flow 
to an understanding of intense and positive involvement in work. The chapter out-
lines congruent theoretical frameworks that broaden our understanding of flow in 
the workplace and identifies organizational and individual predictors and outcomes 
of the experience. We proceed to outline some questions that remain and need to 
be addressed if flow is to establish itself as a central construct in the literature on the 
psychology of work. 
 Chapter 2 , by Anja  Schiepe- Tiska and Stefan Engeser, addresses the issue of mea-
suring flow. These authors start by discussing the  many- faceted complexity of flow 
that raises the issue of whether flow should be measured as a multi- or unidimen-
sional construct. Furthermore, there seems to be some confusion in distinguishing 
between the preconditions, components, and outcomes of the flow experience. The 
chapter considers the strengths and weaknesses of a variety of methodologies that 
have been used to assess flow, including declarative (interviews, surveys, and experi-
ence sampling methods) and nondeclarative (neural and psychophysiological) mea-
sures. The authors point out how these methodologies have produced evidence that 
both supports and refutes theoretical conceptualizations of flow. Specific examples 
 PREFACE 

viii Preface
are provided of scales that have been used by researchers studying flow. The chapter 
concludes with advice to researchers concerning which measurement approach is 
most appropriate according to the research question being addressed. 
 In  Chapter 3  Despoina Xanthopoulou addresses some of the challenges confront-
ing researchers wishing to capture the dynamic nature of flow at work. Although 
flow has  trait- like components, it is predominantly a  state- like construct. The chap-
ter summarizes the empirical evidence that has indicated significant  within- person 
fluctuations in the experience of flow. This is contradictory to much research that 
has studied optimal experience as a “ trait- like” construct and analyzed flow from 
a  cross- sectional,  between- individual perspective. Studying both the within- and 
 between- individual variance in flow has several important theoretical implications. 
First, such research captures the entirety and complexity of the flow experience at 
work. Second, it shifts the focus to understanding the proximal and situational trig-
gers of flow. The chapter concludes by outlining the advantages and disadvantages 
of research methodologies that enable both the trait and state components of flow 
to be captured in the workplace. 
 Evangelia Demerouti and Anne Mäkikangas ( Chapter 4 ) elaborate on the nature 
of the flow experience specifically as it relates to the work context. These authors 
distinguish between the operationalizations of work flow and work engagement. 
These authors expound on four theoretical frameworks that have been used to 
understand the phenomenon of flow at work: (1) the job characteristics model 
(Hackman & Oldham, 1980); (2) the job  demands- resources model (Demerouti, 
Bakker, Nachreiner & Schaufeli, 2001); (3) the  broaden- and-build theory of positive 
emotions (Fredrickson, 1998); and (4) affective events theory (Weiss & Cropanzano, 
1996). These theories are used to develop propositions regarding the relationships 
between work and flow. Finally, Demerouti and Mäkikangas identify some personal, 
work-, and  task- related predictors of optimal experience at work and the implica-
tions these have for both researching flow and crafting the workplace to facilitate 
the flow experience. 
 Lucia Ceja and Jose Navarro ( Chapter 5 ) emphasize a changing picture in how 
we define and study flow at work. They describe  work- related flow as a dynamic 
experience that changes over time and from task to task. Using a nonlinear dynami-
cal systems (NDS) approach, the authors argue that  cross- sectional, static studies of 
flow fail to capture its ever changing and fragile nature. Flow needs to be investi-
gated intrapersonally and longitudinally because of its lack of stasis and homogeneity. 
Based on chaos theory, a NDS model enables us to study the complex, fluctuating, 
and nonlinear properties of flow at work. Defining flow as a dynamic experience 
has practical as well as theoretical implications. Specifically the prediction and mea-
surement of flow become more difficult. The chapter outlines research strategies 
that can be used to study the intrapersonal dynamics of flow over time and provide 
an alternative knowledge of the flow process other than that generated by tradi-
tional linear models. The authors conclude the chapter with a description of how a 
more dynamic understanding of flow at work enables the workplace to be crafted 
to increase flow. The organizational and individual implications of this are discussed. 

Preface ix
 The consequences of flow at the individual and organizational levels are dis-
cussed by Susana Llorens and Marisa Salanova in  Chapter 6 . The authors provide 
an overview of the empirical literature on the topic of flow outcomes and conse-
quences at work. The studies described in the chapter converge in showing that in 
the work domain flow promotes positive mood, active coping, task engagement, job 
satisfaction, creativity, and energy at the individual level. At the organizational level, 
flow supports a positive organizational climate, spontaneity, in- and  extra- role per-
formance, and service quality, as well as team effectiveness and performance. These 
outcomes are triggered by a process of positive cycles, or spirals, so that the positive 
experience of flow enhances the onset of more positive personal and environmental 
resources at work. From this perspective, the phenomenon of emotional contagion is 
also discussed in relation to the transmission of flow experience at work among team 
workers, both vertically or hierarchically, and horizontally among colleagues sharing 
the same task and responsibility. Future research advancements are outlined, and the 
potential of promoting flow at work is discussed in the twofold perspective of improv-
ing individual workers’ quality of life and organizations’ performance and service. 
 In  Chapter 7  Giovanni Moneta explores the strategies that may be adopted by 
organizations to foster employees’ flow at work. Taking into account the empiri-
cal evidence of the match between perceived challenges and skills as the core 
antecedent of flow, Moneta highlights four basic strategies to support the onset 
and maintenance of flow at work in the long run: the first one is the  step- by-step 
increase of challenges, allowing for a smooth and gradual enhancement of the 
person’s skills; the second one is the promotion of teamwork, exploiting the con-
tagious properties of flow that have been identified in several studies. The third 
strategy is the selection of “ flow- ers” (people specifically showing flow prone-
ness on the basis of personality features); the fourth one is the promotion of flow 
metacognition – that is, the individuals’ awareness of the specific conditions and 
prerequisites that allow them to enter flow. The success of the strategy is closely 
related to the constraints of the organizational context in which the intervention 
to promote workers’ flow is conducted. The chapter ends with some reflections 
concerning the necessity to avoid excessive flow at work, based on empirical evi-
dence showing that it can lead to lower job performance, as well as psychophysical 
health problems. Future research directions are proposed, such as the importance 
of studying other positive nonflow states, such as mindfulness, that do not require 
the tunneling of attention typical of flow but were nonetheless found to foster 
employees’  well- being and performance. 
 In  Chapter 8  Patrick Knight and Christopher Waples focus their contribution 
on the convergences between flow theory and the concepts and constructs elabo-
rated within the domain of work motivation. After pointing to the relative lack 
of attention to flow within the domain of organizational psychology research, the 
authors delve into the connections between motivational dimensions of flow – such 
as perceived goals and intrinsic rewards – and the motivation theories prominently 
taken as reference points in organizational psychology. Moving from the empirical 
evidence showing that in order for flow to arise individuals must be engaged in 

x Preface
a task performed in view of clear goals, the chapter discusses some of the constructs 
that may be fruitfully matched with flow theory in order to attain a description of 
motivation at work that encompasses the positive role of flow. To this purpose, the 
chapter offers a thorough examination of the relationship between flow theory and 
four constructs derived from work psychology: goal setting; goal framing; expec-
tancy theory; and  self- efficacy beliefs. At the same time, as highlighted in other 
chapters, the authors emphasize the need to take into account the intrinsic job 
characteristics, and the worker’s flexibility in adjusting to the changing work envi-
ronment and conditions. In the final section, researchers are invited to more deeply 
explore  work- related flow, as a potentially fruitful area of investigation that could 
shed light on the motivational processes of workers, and provide suggestions about 
motivational strategies to promote performance. 
 Chapter 9 , by Antonella Delle Fave and Marta Bassi, addresses two topics that 
have been substantially neglected within flow research and work psychology. The 
first one is the work experience of people engaged in traditional preindustrial jobs. 
The second topic is the interplay between the work experience and the  long- term 
developmental trajectory of the individual, exemplified through data collected 
among immigrants who moved to Europe from non-Western countries. The chap-
ter emphasizes the cultural bias affecting psychological studies, which prominently 
involve workers living in industrial and urban contexts, and generalize the find-
ings to the whole working population. Based on data collected across countries 
and occupations, the authors highlight some peculiarities of the work experience 
reported by people living in rural areas or engaged in  small- scale craft produc-
tion. For example, the paradox of flow at work (low intrinsic motivation in spite 
of engagement) detected in modern jobs does not emerge in traditional occupa-
tions, such as handicrafts and farming, that support higher levels of autonomy and 
creativity. International findings also highlight the meaning and relevance of work 
to the person’s  long- term goals and social identity. This important component of 
work can counterbalance the limited potential for flow characterizing some job 
typologies, promoting the social identity of workers, especially migrant ones. These 
issues are discussed in light of the current challenges faced by work economy at the 
international level. 
 In the final chapter ( Chapter 10 ) Sam Spurlin and Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi 
provide a concise conceptual overview of the history, current challenges, and future 
directions of flow at work. They describe the material and experiential dichotomy 
between work and leisure as the by-product of the industrial transition, leading to 
workers’ alienation, through the disconnection of individual actions from the final 
outcome. The social problems generated by this process, including reduced perfor-
mance and productivity, promoted stakeholders’ awareness of the needs and ideal 
role of the individual worker, leading to the large amount of studies focused on 
job motivations and the development of models aimed at identifying the ideal fit 
between job characteristics and human features. Increasing emphasis has been put 
on the promotion of individual autonomy at work, and the studies on flow con-
firmed the pivotal role of this dimension in fostering workers’  well- being. Other 
dimensions related to flow, such as challenge/skill balance, setting clear goals, and 

Preface xi
getting clear feedback about task progress, represent core aspects that should be con-
sidered in any intervention aimed at fostering the perception of work as a positive 
force and resource in daily life. At the methodological level, the recent advances in 
wearable technology allow for the  self- monitoring of the experiential and physi-
ological dimensions in real time, thus providing invaluable information that can be 
fruitfully used for crafting work to be more meaningful and fulfilling. 

 What motivates us to work? This is a question that has engaged humankind since 
the earliest philosophers. Despite the interest in this fundamental question, there 
have been almost as many answers as there have been thinkers who have considered 
the issue. Even consensus on a definition of work motivation has been elusive, prob-
ably because the concept is so complex. Flow experience (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975), 
one of the most original constructs developed in psychology during the previous 
century, can partially help us answer such a challenging question. Its positive and 
rewarding features, which include deep concentration, involvement, and enjoyable 
absorption in an activity, may shed light on at least one of the driving forces leading 
people to invest massive amounts of energies and resources in the work domain – 
namely, intrinsic motivation. 
 The primary aim of this book is to gather the contributions of different research-
ers who have been trying to delve into the complex issue of flow experience at 
work, its antecedents and its outcomes. In order to fully grasp the contribution of 
flow theory to organizational psychology, we will start with the analysis of its dis-
tinctive motivational component, through a brief historical overview of the devel-
opment of the concept of intrinsic motivation. 
 Intrinsic and extrinsic motivation 
 That individuals might engage in an activity because the activity is perceived as 
rewarding, in and of itself, is a notion that has not always been prevalent in the moti-
vational literature (Deci, 1975). Early understandings of motivation were dominated 
by mechanistic theories, such as psychoanalysis and behaviorism (Pinder, 1984). 
Freud (1915/1927) believed that humans are driven to engage in behaviors by 
basic instincts and the interaction of these instincts with environmental constraints. 
Behavioral approaches emphasized the environmental contingencies that establish 
 1 
 FLOW AT WORK 
 The evolution of a construct 
 Clive Fullagar, Antonella Delle Fave, 
and Steve Van Krevelen 

2 Clive Fullagar et al.
mechanistic associations between stimuli, responses, and reinforcements (Skinner, 
1953, 1971). Essentially behavior can be explained by the organism’s motivation to 
seek out appetitive and pleasant outcomes and to avoid punishing and unpleasant 
consequences. As Hunt (1965) pointed out, it was believed that “without the action 
of such extrinsic  drive- stimuli, organisms [would] presumably become quiescent 
(Freud, 1915; Hull, 1943, p. 194).” The behaviorist emphasis on studying observable 
phenomena, in the interest of developing a scientific psychology, largely excluded 
internal processes as an explanation of what makes individuals engage in certain 
behaviors (Watson, 1913). 
 Woodworth (1918, 1958), in his  behavior- primacy theory, was the first psy-
chologist to postulate that behavior can be  self- perpetuating. He proposed that 
humans are active organisms that can engage in intrinsically motivated behavior and 
that an activity can provide its own drive (Woodworth, 1918). Although Wood-
worth did not specifically study or describe an intrinsic motivational process, he 
planted the seed for later theories, such as Allport’s (1937) notion of “functional 
autonomy.” It was Allport who first stipulated that the drive to engage in an activity 
may become independent from the motive that initiated the activity such that the 
activity becomes  self- motivating. 
 Despite Woodworth’s and Allport’s seminal theories of motivation, behavioral 
and mechanistic frameworks dominated the field until the  mid- 1950s. It was at this 
time that several studies conducted on animals began to recognize the intrinsic com-
ponents of motivation. Specifically, this research demonstrated that animals would 
engage in certain behaviors purely out of curiosity or playful exploration, and in 
the absence of any extrinsic reward or reinforcement (Berlyne, 1955; Butler, 1953; 
Butler & Harlow, 1957; Montgomery, 1954; Myers & Miller, 1954; Welker, 1956). 
These experiments indicated “an independent exploratory motive” (White, 1959, 
p. 298). Over the course of the decade evidence began to accumulate that certain 
kinds of behaviors were not motivated by extrinsic factors. Many animal behaviors 
seemed to be driven by inquisitiveness and a need to explore and to effectively 
interact with the environment (White, 1959). Furthermore, such inquisitive behav-
ior was more likely to occur in the absence of painful stimulation, homeostatic 
needs, and appetitive drives (Hunt, 1965). 
 At about the same time humanistic psychologists, such as Maslow (1954), Rog-
ers (1961), and Laing (1967), were beginning to question some of the basic tenets 
of psychoanalysis and behaviorism. This “third force” in psychology had its roots 
in existential philosophical thought (e.g., Sartre, 1957). In contrast to the deter-
minism of the other two psychological approaches, humanistic psychology pos-
ited that individuals were capable of “free will,” and defined themselves through 
the choices they made. The humanistic psychological perspective was essentially a 
subjective one, attempting to understand behavior through the phenomenological 
lens of the individual. Although many of the principles of humanistic psychology 
were untested at the time, its theoretical framework provided the impetus for the 
development of the notion of intrinsic motivation. For example, Maslow (1954) 
distinguished between the basic motivational drives (“deficiency needs”) for sex, 

Flow at work 3
food, and safety, and the  higher- order drives (“growth needs”) to actualize talents, 
achieve understanding, and fulfill creative potential. Again, the distinction was made 
between extrinsic and intrinsic forms of motivation. 
 It was within this psychological Zeitgeist that the first theories specific to intrin-
sic motivation began to evolve. Many of these theories drew on White’s (1959) 
concept of the need to effectively and competently interact with one’s environ-
ment. The need for competence and  self- determination was the basis for these 
emergent theories. De Charms (1968), for example, believed that the main motivat-
ing force for individuals was the need to be in control of one’s fate and to be per-
sonally effective in changing one’s environment. Deci (1975) conducted research 
indicating that people were motivated to engage in many behaviors out of a need 
for (a) competence (i.e., to control one’s environment and experience mastery); 
(b) relatedness (i.e., to interact and connect with others); and (c) autonomy (i.e., to 
be  self- determining and the causal agent of one’s life). 
 Despite the emergence of these theories of intrinsic motivation, extrinsic moti-
vation was still receiving attention, and researchers attempted to understand and 
articulate the relationship between these two types of motivations (Deci, 1975). 
Behaviorists would argue that extrinsic rewards enhance intrinsic motivation by 
providing secondary reinforcement and increasing resistance to extinction (Aron-
freed, 1968; Keller, 1969). Early animal studies (Davis, Settlage, & Harlow, 1950) 
partially supported this association by showing that monkeys’ intrinsic interest in 
solving a puzzle was initially disrupted by the introduction of extrinsic rewards, but 
then increased at a higher level than prior to the presentation of food. However, de 
Charms (1968) proposed an alternative explanation to this phenomenon, hypoth-
esizing that extrinsic rewards would decrease intrinsic motivation because they shift 
the locus of causality away from the individual to the reward. A series of experi-
ments conducted in the 1970s demonstrated that if individuals were offered mon-
etary rewards for performing an intrinsically motivated activity, intrinsic motivation 
would decrease, particularly if the rewards were made contingent on performance 
(Deci, 1971; Greene, Sternberg, & Lepper, 1976; Lepper, Greene, & Nisbett, 1973; 
Mellstrom & Johannesson, 2008; Rosenfield, Folger, & Adelman, 1980). 
 In the attempt to explain the overjustification effect, several theoretical frame-
works were developed.  Self- perception theory (Bem, 1967) posits that people make 
inferences about their behavior on the basis of external constraints. The use of 
external rewards predisposes individuals to attribute the reason for their own behav-
ior to external contingencies, shifting their explanation from intrinsic to extrinsic 
reasons. Alternatively, cognitive evaluation theory (Deci, 1975) suggests that extrin-
sic rewards, particularly monetary, are perceived as being coercive and detracting 
from the individual’s sense of control. Therefore intrinsic motivation is inhibited 
by external rewards. Consistent with  self- determination theory (de Charms, 1968; 
Deci, 1971), external rewards diminish perceptions of competence, increase external 
perceived locus of causality, and promote disinterest in the activity (Deci & Ryan, 
1985). However, certain kinds of external regulation, such as feedback and praise, 
can facilitate perceived competence, increase a sense of autonomy, and positively 

4 Clive Fullagar et al.
affect intrinsic motivation. Nonetheless, this research further made apparent the 
distinction between intrinsically and extrinsically motivated behavior. 
 “Flow” 
 It was against this intellectual backdrop that Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, a PhD student 
at the University of Chicago, began studying the psychology of creativity. While 
studying artists Csikszentmihalyi became interested in why painters would engage 
in art in the absence of extrinsic rewards, food, drink, and sleep, and despite consid-
erable physical discomfort (Csikszentmihalyi, 2000). In other words, he noticed that 
the creative process of artists seemed entirely intrinsically motivated and he began 
a systematic exploration of the associated experience. In the early 1970s Csikszent-
mihalyi and several graduate students began to interview individuals about their 
subjective experiences in a variety of intrinsically motivated activities, including 
 rock- climbing, chess, dancing, basketball, and surgery. These studies were to form 
the basis of flow theory. 
 Originally, the term  autotelic state  was used to describe this  self- directed optimal 
experience, from the Greek words  auto  (meaning ‘self’) and  telos (meaning ‘goal’). 
The label ‘flow’ derived from the descriptions provided by several interviewees who 
recurrently emphasized the fluid process of playful effort and concentration as like 
being carried along on a stream of water. Csikszentmihalyi defined this dynamic 
state as “the holistic sensation that people feel when they act with total involvement” 
(1975, p. 36). Regardless of the activity surveyed, flow was consistently described as 
a mental state of being totally immersed in, and absorbed by, an enjoyable activity. 
Both qualitative and quantitative research over a variety of work and leisure activi-
ties indicated that the experience of flow consists of the following six components 
(Nakamura & Csikszentmihalyi, 2009): 
 1 
An intense focus and concentration on the task at hand. 
 2 
A merging of action and awareness in that the activity becomes spontaneous 
and automatic. 
 3 
A sense of control over what one is doing. 
 4 
A loss of  self- consciousness and a lack of concern for or about oneself. 
 5 
A transformation of one’s perception of time passing. 
 6 
A sense of enjoyment in the intrinsic motivation of the activity. 
 While these six experiential components are considered essential indicators of 
flow and discussed as discrete entities, it is important to understand that an indi-
vidual experiencing flow is unlikely to be aware of any particular component. The 
indicators of flow are experienced simultaneously, which is to say that flow is a 
holistic experience, a by-product of an individual being consumed in an intrinsi-
cally motivating activity. 
 In line with theories of intrinsic motivation that emphasize regulatory com-
patibility between individual characteristics (e.g., skill level, need for achievement 

Flow at work 5
and dispositional factors) and situational characteristics (e.g., the demands of the 
task, goal clarity, and resources; Keller  & Bless, 2008), three preconditions were 
identified as necessary to induce flow. These may be argued to be structural task 
characteristics rather than components of the subjective experience of flow (Naka-
mura & Csikszentmihalyi, 2009). The first precondition – one of the core tenets 
of flow theory (Csikszentmihalyi, 1990, 1997) – is represented by an optimal bal-
ance between the challenges that individuals perceive in the task and the skills that 
they perceive to possess in performing the task. Typically, both skills and chal-
lenge must be at a moderate to high level to experience flow (Csikszentmihalyi, 
1975; Massimini & Carli, 1988; Massimini, Csikszentmihalyi, & Carli, 1987; Sartori 
et al., 2014). When the task is overly challenging, there is a greater likelihood that 
individuals will experience anxiety and stress (Sartori & Delle Fave, 2014). Flow and 
performance anxiety have been shown to be incompatible and mutually exclusive 
states (Fullagar, Knight, & Sovern, 2013). On the other hand, if the task is too easy, 
there is the tendency for the individual to experience boredom and apathy (Delle 
Fave & Massimini, 2005). The importance of challenge/skill balance in flow theory 
has been empirically supported by several studies (Bassi, Ferrario, Ba, Delle Fave, & 
Viganò, 2012; Delle Fave & Bassi, 2000; Delle Fave & Massimini, 2004, 2005; Delle 
Fave, Bassi, & Massimini, 2003; Eisenberger, Jones, Stinglhamber, Shanock, & Ran-
dall, 2005; Engeser & Rheinberg, 2008; Fullagar et al., 2013; Haworth & Evans, 
1995; Hektner & Asakawa, 2000). However, some of these same studies also showed 
that relatively high levels of flow can be experienced when skills exceed challenge, 
suggesting that the relationship between the challenge of a task and the skills nec-
essary to perform it may be moderated by certain  task- related factors (Engeser & 
Rheinberg, 2008; Fullagar et al., 2013; Hektner & Asakawa, 2000). Specifically, both 
the volitional nature and the perceived importance of the task have been shown 
to be essential moderators. Tasks that are engaged in voluntarily (e.g., practicing a 
musical instrument, knitting, and cooking) may induce flow, even though they may 
not be particularly challenging given the skill level of the performer (Fullagar et al., 
2013; Hektner & Asakawa, 2000). Also, flow can be experienced when the activity 
is not particularly challenging but is important and meaningful to the actor (Eng-
eser & Rheinberg, 2008). 
 A second precondition of flow is that the task should have clear intrinsic and 
proximal goals (Csikszentmihalyi, 1990, 1997). This is consistent with  goal- setting 
theory that stipulates that most human behavior is  goal- directed (Locke, Shaw, 
Saari, & Latham, 1981). A considerable amount of empirical evidence suggests 
that goals are a crucial component of human motivation and are strongly associated 
with the effort, persistence, and direction of  work- related behavior (Pinder, 2008). 
However, there is at least one important distinction between  goal- setting theory 
and flow theory relative to goals.  Goal- setting theory has mostly focused on the 
relation between  extrinsic goals and task and  extra- role performance (Ryan & Deci, 
2000), while flow theory has mostly emphasized  intrinsic  goals and their relation 
to constructs like satisfaction and  well- being (e.g., Sheldon et al., 2004). Waples, 
Knight, and Fullagar (2013) found that establishing extrinsic goals increased 

6 Clive Fullagar et al.
performance on a task, but inhibited the experience of flow. These results cor-
roborate the overjustification effect (Deci, Koestner, & Ryan, 1999, 2001) in that 
they suggest that goals may constitute an external constraint, similar to extrinsic 
rewards that shift an individual’s attention away from the intrinsic enjoyment of 
the task to achieving some external performance demand.  Self- perception theory 
(Bem, 1967) and cognitive evaluation theory (Deci, 1975) propose that extrinsi-
cally imposed goals shift attribution for behavior, and control of behavior, from 
internal to external causes and constraints, and consequently decrease intrinsic 
motivation (Waples et al., 2013). It would seem, therefore, that goals are an impor-
tant precondition to flow, but that these goals must be inherent in the task and not 
externally imposed as a performance criterion. Other empirical evidences (Bassi & 
Delle Fave, 2012b; Delle Fave & Massimini, 2005) further suggest the usefulness of 
distinguishing between goal pursuit (the volitional component of motivation) and 
activity desirability (related to the distinction between intrinsic and extrinsic moti-
vation) in the assessment of flow. This aspect is specifically related to the  so- called 
paradox of flow at work, which will be discussed in detail in the following pages, 
and in several chapters of this volume. 
 The final (and least researched) precondition to flow is that the task should 
provide the individual with clear feedback, particularly with respect to how much 
progress is being made toward achieving the goals inherent in the task (Csikszent-
mihalyi, 1990, 1997). However, to maximize the impact of feedback in facilitating 
flow, it is important that the individual believes that it is his or her own skills, efforts, 
and abilities that are instrumental in the successful performance of the task (Thomas & 
Mathieu, 1994). 
 Flow and work 
 The first conceptualizations of flow were motivated by an interest in understanding 
the enjoyment of creativity and play (Csikszentmihalyi, 2000). In the early 1970s 
psychology, Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi had just started a faculty position at the Uni-
versity of Chicago and realized that extramural funding would be necessary in order 
to develop his program of research. He submitted a grant proposal to the National 
Institute of Mental Health to study playfulness in the context of work satisfaction 
(Csikszentmihalyi, 2000). The outcome of this project was Csikszentmihalyi’s first 
‘flow’ publication,  Beyond Boredom and Anxiety  (subtitled  Experiencing Flow in Work 
and Play ). In this book, Csikszentmihalyi (1975) argued that the distinction between 
leisure and work activities is artificial and that there are many  work- related activities 
that are highly enjoyable and  self- motivating. One of the objectives of the original 
research on flow was to study both play and work activities to ascertain if the same 
intrinsically motivating characteristics pertained to both domains (Csikszentmih-
alyi, 1975). The study included participants engaged in a variety of occupations, 
including surgeons, musical composers, and teachers. 
 This early investigation produced several valuable insights about the nature of 
optimal experience (a synonym of flow) at work. First, the reasons for enjoying 

Flow at work 7
work and leisure activities were remarkably similar. Consistently, and regardless of 
domain, people reported to engage in an activity because it provided (a) a sense 
of enjoyment; (b) the opportunity to use and develop skills; and (c) a structure or 
pattern (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975). Second, the psychological characteristics (intense 
concentration, action/awareness merging, sense of control, loss of  self- consciousness, 
time distortion, and enjoyment) and the preconditions (challenge/skill balance, 
goal clarity, and feedback) of flow were relatively reliable and consistent across all 
the types of activities studied. Third, and perhaps most importantly, regardless of 
whether individuals were climbing mountains, playing chess, or performing surgery, 
they tended to report enjoying those activities that enabled them to challenge the 
limits of their abilities and provide opportunity for their expansion. These early 
findings suggested that the dichotomy between work and leisure activities may be 
arbitrary and perhaps even meaningless. The nature of enjoyable, intrinsically moti-
vating activities is the same regardless of whether those activities are performed at 
work or at leisure. 
 There is growing evidence that workers tend to spend more time in flow during 
work rather than in leisure activities. Some studies show that enjoyment, concen-
tration, activation, and creativity are higher in  work- related flow than in leisure 
activities (Csikszentmihalyi & LeFevre, 1989; Delle Fave & Massimini, 2003; LeFevre, 
1988). This may be due to work having a greater potential to offer tasks that pro-
mote the perception of an optimal balance between high challenges and high skills. 
Nonetheless, an interesting paradox has been revealed about the quality of the flow 
experience at work. Even though workers report experiencing flow more often at 
work, they also report a desire to be doing something other than the  flow- inducing 
work activity (Bassi & Delle Fave, 2012a; Hektner, Schmidt, & Csikszentmihalyi, 
2007). It is possible that social conventions about work and the obligatory nature 
of work may mitigate the positive experience of  flow- inducing work (Csikszent-
mihalyi & LeFevre, 1989). Another possibility is that flow activities at work are 
fatiguing. Debus, Sonnentag, Deutsch, and Nussbeck (2014) found that levels of 
flow decreased steadily throughout the day for workers who started their workday 
in a state of nonrecovery. 
 The paradox of flow at work has also been explained in terms of the two facets 
of motivation described earlier – namely, goal pursuit and activity desirability (Delle 
Fave, 2007; Delle Fave & Massimini, 2005; Haworth & Hill, 1992). Flow is often 
described as an intrinsically motivated,  self- determined state (Keller & Bless, 2008) 
that is disrupted by external regulations and controls. However, work consists of 
both extrinsic and intrinsic motivational conditions. Research has shown that the 
occurrence of flow experience during required work activities is contingent on 
whether individuals want to do them and would not rather be doing something else 
(Haworth & Hill, 1992).  Self- determination theory distinguishes between different 
types of intrinsic and extrinsic motivations and has been used to explain the paradox 
of flow at work. Flow can be experienced in tasks that are compulsory and exter-
nally regulated, if individuals find the task to be meaningful, and to challenge their 
professional abilities (Bassi & Delle Fave, 2012a, 2012b). Consequently, the paradox 

8 Clive Fullagar et al.
of flow at work does not seem to be purely determined by the extent of autonomous 
regulation that the work provides. Optimal experience in the workplace is more 
contingent on the meaningfulness of the work and the opportunity it provides for 
the expression of personal and professional skills. Both the structure of job tasks and 
social dimensions play a role in this aspect, thus raising the issue of possible varia-
tions in the flow paradox based on the typology of occupation under examination, 
especially its potential for creativity,  self- expression and growth, social contribution, 
and competence development. An extensive  cross- cultural comparison between 
different typologies of jobs highlighted that people involved in highly challeng-
ing, socially meaningful, and creative work activities, such as helping professions, 
arts, and crafts, do not report the flow paradox in their work experience (Delle 
Fave, Massimini, & Bassi, 2011; Delle Fave & Bassi, this volume; Delle Fave & Zager 
Kocjan, 2017). 
 A developing framework for ﬂ ow at work 
 Over the last forty years, there has been an increasing interest in the construct of 
flow among both scientists and practitioners. Although the core components of 
flow were found to be remarkably consistent across work contexts, different theo-
retical frameworks have been used to explain flow’s nomological network. The 
most popular model used to identify the characteristics of tasks that generate flow 
is Hackman and Oldham’s (1980) job characteristics model (JCM). This is not 
surprising, given that the model identifies five core characteristics of work tasks 
inducing critical psychological states (CPS) that in their turn influence affective 
and behavioral outcomes (Hackman & Oldham, 1975, 1980). The first character-
istic is  skill variety , which refers to the degree to which the job requires different 
activities and skills to carry out the task;  task identity is the extent to which the 
job requires completion of a whole and identifiable piece of work;  task significance 
indicates the degree to which the job has a meaningful impact on other people; 
 autonomy refers to the extent to which the worker has independent discretion in 
determining the schedule and process of work; and  feedback is the extent to which 
the job provides the worker with information concerning how well he/she is per-
forming. The relationship between these core job characteristics and their affective, 
motivational, and behavioral outcomes is mediated by three CPS: perceived work 
meaningfulness, individual responsibility, and knowledge of results. Findings from 
several studies highlighted both direct and indirect effects of job characteristics on 
CPS and their affective and behavioral outcomes, and the partially mediating role 
of CPS in the relationship between job characteristics and their outcomes (Renn & 
Vandenberg, 1995). 
 Both flow theory and the JCM propose characteristics inherent in work tasks 
that make work meaningful and foster positive experiences. As specified earlier, 
flow preconditions are similar, if not identical, to those outlined by Hackman and 
Oldham (1975, 1980). For example, both theories emphasize (a) that tasks should 
require the exercise of skills, (b) that the activity should be  goal- directed or have task 

Flow at work 9
identity, and (c) the importance of  job- specific feedback. Some researchers suggest 
that flow is a critical psychological state that mediates the relationship between core 
job characteristics and several performance, motivational, and  well- being outcomes. 
For example, Demerouti (2006) found a positive relation between a global measure 
of motivating core job characteristics and flow at work, as well as between flow and 
both  in- role, or  job- specific, and  out- of-role, or citizenship, behaviors. Subsequent 
research (Fullagar & Kelloway, 2009; Maeran & Cangiano, 2013; Nielsen & Cleal, 
2010; Steele & Fullagar, 2009) has empirically validated that specific core job char-
acteristics, such as autonomy, skill variety, task significance, and feedback from the 
task, increase the likelihood that people will experience flow at work. In addition 
Nielson and Cleal (2012) identified role clarity as a stable job characteristic predic-
tive of flow, and planning, problem solving, and evaluation as specific work tasks 
conducive to flow. 
 Another theoretical framework used to understand flow in the workplace is 
the job demands-resources ( JD- R) model (Bakker & Demerouti, 2014; Demer-
outi, Bakker, Nachreiner, & Schaufeli, 2001). The  JD- R model classifies the char-
acteristics of jobs into two general categories: job demands and job resources. 
Demands are physical, psychological, and organizational aspects that are depleting 
and extoll a personal cost. Resources, on the other hand, are those aspects that 
reduce job demands and enhance functioning and stimulate personal growth, 
learning, and development (Bakker  & Demerouti, 2007). Several studies have 
established the positive relationship between job resources and flow. For exam-
ple, social support, opportunities for professional development, and supervisory 
coaching have been found to be positively associated with optimal experience 
(Mäkikangas, Bakker, Aunola,  & Demerouti, 2010). Similarly, a longitudinal 
study conducted among secondary school teachers highlighted that both personal 
resources ( self- efficacy beliefs) and job resources (social support and goal orienta-
tion) facilitate  work- related flow, which in turn builds on personal and organiza-
tional resources, suggesting an upward spiral effect of flow (Salanova, Bakker, & 
Llorens, 2006). This view is consistent with Fredrickson’s (1998, 2001) theory 
proposing that momentary positive affective experiences (e.g., flow) have the abil-
ity to  broaden  thought- action repertoires and  build personal resources, thus engen-
dering upward spirals of  well- being. 
Furthermore, because positive emotional experiences enhance personal 
resources they also increase resilience.   Recent studies showed that the daily experi-
ence of work flow impacts positively on resiliency by reducing the demands of the 
job and facilitating the recovery process (Debus, Sonnentag, Deutsch, & Nussbeck, 
2014). Nonwork recovery was also found to influence flow experiences during 
subsequent workdays (Debus et al., 2014). These studies emphasize the importance 
of blending personal resources and task characteristics as predictors of flow. 
 Much less research has been undertaken on the outcomes of flow. Recently 
Landhäußer and Keller (2012) summarized some of the affective, cognitive, 
and behavioral consequences of optimal experience. Flow, as an experiential 
phenomenon, is characterized by positive affect (e.g., Clarke & Haworth, 1994; 

10 Clive Fullagar et al.
Csikszentmihalyi & LeFevre, 1989; Fullagar & Kelloway, 2009; Shernoff, Csik-
szentmihalyi, Schneider, & Shernoff, 2003). While flow features can be evalu-
ated through  cross- sectional design studies, flow outcomes can be investigated 
only through a longitudinal approach. Fullagar and Kelloway (2009) conducted 
a longitudinal, repeated measures study that tracked architectural students over 
the course of a semester in order to establish the causal,  cross- lagged relation-
ship between flow and positive affect. The results of this study indicated that 
flow was indeed a precursor to positive mood rather than mood being predic-
tive of experiencing flow. Finally, a longitudinal study that tracked  fifty- four 
older adults over seven consecutive days found that quality or intensity of 
the flow experience (rather than frequency) was significantly and positively 
associated with positive affect and life satisfaction (Collins, Sarkisian, & Win-
ner, 2009). 
 Several studies have investigated the consequences of flow in the context of work. 
Engagement in  flow- inducing work activities has been shown to affect worker 
 well- being and organizational functioning. For example, the experience of flow is 
associated with job satisfaction (Bakker, 2008; Maeran & Cangiano, 2013) and posi-
tive mood (Eisenberger et al., 2005; Fullagar & Kelloway, 2009; LeFevre, 1988). Flow 
has also been correlated with both  in- role and  extra- role performance (Demerouti, 
2006; Eisenberger et al., 2005). However, these relationships were found to be mod-
erated by dispositional characteristics, such as the need for achievement (Eisenberger 
et al., 2005), conscientiousness (Demerouti, 2006), and the ability to persevere and 
stay focused on the task (Keller & Bless, 2008). Flow at work has also been found 
to have nonwork repercussions. Specifically, the absorption and enjoyment aspects 
of flow have been found to impact energy after work. Flow’s ability to buffer the 
effects of stress and to facilitate recuperation is moderated by the individual’s ability 
to manage  work- related stress and to detach from work (Demerouti, Bakker, Son-
nentag, & Fullagar, 2012). 
 Of course, the ‘big’ question about the utility of flow in the workplace resides in 
the notion of whether optimal experience is associated with optimal performance. 
Flow has been correlated to athletes’ peak performance (Jackson & Roberts, 1992; 
Jackson, Thomas, Marsh, & Smethurst, 2001; Stein, Kimiecek, Daniels, & Jackson, 
1995). However, the relationship between flow and performance may be an indi-
rect one. For example, the association between flow and sport performance has 
been found to be mediated by the motivation to practice athletic skills (Schüler & 
Brunner, 2009). 
 A few studies have investigated the relationship between flow and per-
formance at work. In an academic setting, flow was found to be predictive 
of successful performance by students in their area of specialization (Csik-
szentmihalyi, Rathunde, & Whalen, 1993). More specific to the workplace, 
flow was found to be associated with optimal performance (Demerouti  & 
Fullagar, 2013), as measured through work colleagues’ ratings of  in- role (per-
ceived expertise) and  extra- role (citizenship behaviors) performance (Demer-
outi, 2006). The relationship between flow and both types of performance 

Flow at work 11
was moderated by conscientiousness. Other studies detected a positive rela-
tionship between skill/challenge balance and supervisor ratings of individual 
work performance. This relationship was moderated by need for achievement 
(Eisenberger et al., 2005). It would appear that the impact of flow on work 
performance may be facilitated by its positive affective components. Positive 
mood has been shown to have a favorable impact on performance in a variety 
of domains (Bolte, Goschke,  & Kuhl, 2003; Fredrickson  & Branigan, 2005; 
Isen, Daubman, & Nowicki, 1987). This is particularly so for tasks requiring 
spontaneity and creativity (Eisenberger  & Rhoades, 2001; George  & Brief, 
1992). The experience of flow in computer interactions has been found to 
foster greater communication effectiveness and other positive work outcomes 
(Webster, Klebe Trevino, & Ryan, 1993). Similarly, a reciprocal relationship 
was detected between the experience of flow and job resources (e.g., auton-
omy, performance feedback, opportunities for promotion) among workers in 
an employment agency (Mäkkikangas, Bakker, Aunola, & Demerouti, 2010). 
These longitudinal studies suggest that the relationships between flow at work, 
personal and organizational resources, and positive work outcomes are recip-
rocal and dynamic, as well as convergent with the literature on positive emo-
tions at work, in spite of the conceptual and structural differences between the 
experience of flow and positive emotions. 
 Experimental studies have also been conducted to explore the relationship 
between flow and performance, but they prominently focused on video games, and 
therefore their ecological validity as applied to performance on more complex 
and extended work tasks is questionable. Moreover, these studies did not provide 
 clear- cut results. In one of them, a marginally significant and positive effect of flow 
on performance was detected (Engeser & Rheinberg, 2008); in another, a negative 
relationship between flow and performance goals (Waples et al., 2013), but in most 
of the other studies flow was not associated with performance (Keller  & Bless, 
2008; Keller & Blomann, 2008; Schiefele & Roussakis, 2006). These mixed results 
may be attributable to both the differences in flow operationalization across these 
studies and the shared choice of task difficulty as primary manipulation, which 
may represent a confounding variable when assessing performance (Landhäußer & 
Keller, 2012). 
 In  Chapter 8 of this book, Knight and Waples argue that imposing external 
performance goals on a task may actually inhibit the flow experience and pro-
duce a negative relationship between flow and performance. The only experi-
mental study that has applied  goal- setting theory to flow found that setting 
external performance goals predictably increased performance on the task but 
detracted from the performer’s experience of flow (Waples et al., 2013). This 
raises the question as to whether flow is necessarily good for work organizations. 
Absorption in a  work- related task to the extent that one loses a sense of time and 
is unconcerned about others’ opinions may not be appropriate in many work 
environments, where deadlines are important and results can often be achieved 
only in teams. There is evidence to suggest that flow has beneficial consequences 

12 Clive Fullagar et al.
for the individual, but the organizational benefits are more uncertain. Further-
more, being engaged in a highly challenging task that requires high skill use for 
extensive periods of time was found to be associated with negative stressful out-
comes (Hektner et al., 2007). More research is needed to ascertain the positive 
and negative consequences of flow both for the individual and the organization, 
and the task, situational, and personal moderators of the two different kinds of 
outcomes. 
 Nonetheless, the predominance of research indicates that flow promotes opti-
mal functioning. Research with students suggests that those who experience flow 
during academic work perform better and are more persistent in their academic 
studies (Bassi, Steca, Delle Fave, & Caprara, 2007; Csikszentmihalyi et al., 1993). 
Adolescents experiencing flow reported higher satisfaction with life, hedonic bal-
ance, and psychological  well- being than their counterparts (Bassi, Steca, Monzani, 
Greco, & Delle Fave, 2014). Flow has also been positively associated with work 
satisfaction (Bryce & Haworth, 2002),  in- role behaviors (Demerouti, 2006), and 
 extra- role behaviors (Demerouti, 2006; Eisenberger et al., 2005). 
 In sum, there is growing evidence that exposure to positive work experiences, 
such as  work- related flow, has beneficial consequences for both the individual 
and the organization (Bringsén, Andersson, Ejlertsson, & Troein, 2012). A saluto-
genic emphasis that focuses on the positive promotion of health is an important 
aspect of positive organizational scholarship and is complementary to the more 
predominant pathogenic perspective that emphasizes stress reduction (Bringsén 
et al., 2012). Researchers, employers, and stakeholders are increasingly aware that 
work needs to be crafted so that individuals can frequently experience positive 
states and increase the meaningfulness of what they do (Berg, Wrzesniewski, & 
Dutton, 2010). Job crafting has been found to be beneficial for the meaningful-
ness of work and work identity (Wrzesniewski & Dutton, 2001), as well as to 
improve job satisfaction, commitment, and performance (Ghitulescu, 2006). Fur-
thermore, job crafting was found to be positively associated with work engage-
ment (Bakker, Tims, & Dirks, 2012). There is some evidence that the process 
of job crafting can induce the flow experience and consequently its subsequent 
positive outcomes (Ko, 2011). 
 Such findings have important practical implications. Organizations wishing to 
enhance employees’ intrinsic motivation and increase optimal work experience are 
 well- advised to enable workers to engage in tasks that require a breadth of skills and 
that instill a sense of autonomy and control. 
 Some remaining questions 
 The early research on flow in the workplace has raised more questions about the 
construct than it has resolved. This book is an attempt to provide some initial 
answers to some of these questions. We would like to end this chapter with what 
we see as the main issues confronting researchers if flow is to establish itself in the 
lexicon of organizational psychological constructs. 

Flow at work 13
 Flow: state or trait? 
 The overarching purpose of positive psychology is to develop a scientific under-
standing of what makes individuals thrive and life more fulfilling (Seligman  & 
Csikszentmihalyi, 2000). It is not surprising therefore that the construct of flow 
is relevant to the movement. Luthans (2002) has termed the application of posi-
tive psychology to the workplace  positive organizational behavior  (POB). He defines 
POB as “the study and application of positively oriented human resource strengths 
and psychological capacities that can be measured, developed, and effectively man-
aged for performance improvement” (Luthans, 2002, p. 58). This definition includes 
several criteria that are important in determining flow’s potential to contribute to 
our understanding of behavior at work. Specifically any POB construct should be 
(a) positive, (b) measurable, (c) useful to promote better performance, and (d) capa-
ble of being developed (Luthans, 2002). We have already established that flow is 
both a positive and measurable psychological state. Later on we will outline research 
that has established its association with optimal performance. To establish whether 
flow is capable of being developed requires determining whether it is a state or a 
trait construct. 
 The identification of the  state- like or  trait- like nature of flow has important 
practical and theoretical implications. If flow is  trait- like, then the implications for 
organizations center around selecting individuals who have a predisposition for opti-
mal experience. If flow is a fluctuating state, then the focus becomes crafting jobs 
to enable individuals to experience flow. It has long been acknowledged that a trait 
is a reliably permanent internal disposition that has a limited potential for devel-
opment (Allport & Odbert, 1936). On the other hand, a state construct is more 
variable and reactive to situational contingencies (Allen & Potkay, 1981). There 
is some debate as to whether flow should be classified as a state or a trait. Con-
ventionally, flow has been defined as a transitory state of mind, existing at a given 
moment in time, and reactive to the nature of the task that is being performed (Full-
agar & Kelloway, 2009; Delle Fave, 2013). Nonetheless, Csikszentmihalyi has made 
reference to an “autotelic personality” (Czikszentmihalyi & Czikszentmihalyi, 
1988, p. 31), hypothesizing individual differences in the propensity to experience 
flow when engaged in challenging tasks. Some measures of flow, such as Bakker’s 
(2005) WOLF inventory, and Jackson and Ecklund’s (2004) Dispositional Flow 
Scale, instruct respondents to rate their tendency to experience flow “in general” 
over a period of time, in an attempt to assess enduring levels of the experience 
flow. However, flow has been prominently investigated as a temporary experience, 
evaluated through  real- time procedures, such as the experience sampling method 
(ESM), whereby participants are required to respond to a short survey that assesses 
their cognitive, emotional, and physical state at a particular moment in time (Hek-
tner et al., 2007). ESM is designed to capture the situational fluctuations in the 
daily experience (inclusive of flow) with minimal recall bias. The experience 
sampling approach presumes that flow is a dynamic state that fluctuates across 
time and activities. One recent study (Fullagar & Kelloway, 2009) that used ESM 

14 Clive Fullagar et al.
to assess momentary vacillations in work flow among architecture students found 
that  within- individual variation accounted for nearly 75% of the overall variance 
in flow. This suggests that flow is more susceptible to situational and  task- related 
characteristics compared to dispositional factors. 
 Studies of flow in a variety of cultures showed that 85% of the participants 
reported flow in their life, regardless of demographic features, such as age, socio-
economic status, level of education, and occupation. No variations were detected 
across groups in the psychological structure of flow experience, while differences 
emerged in the typology of associated activities (for a review, see Delle Fave 
et al., 2011). Another recent study investigating the relationship between flow 
and personality among adolescents showed that, among the big five personality 
traits, only openness to experience predicted flow occurrence, and no personal-
ity factors were predictive of the activity typologies that participants associated 
with flow (Bassi et al., 2014). 
 Nevertheless, individuals may vary in their propensity to regularly experi-
ence flow (Asakawa, 2010; Jackson, Kimiecik, Ford, & Marsh, 1998). Personal-
ity characteristics such as inquisitiveness and aestheticism have been associated 
with flow (Shernoff et  al., 2003). Similarly, a relationship has been  shown 
between flow and intrinsic motivation orientations among teenagers and col-
lege students (Moneta, 2004, 2010) and among Internet chess players (Abu-
hamdeh & Csikszentmihalyi, 2009). The joint investigation of both the trait and 
state properties of flow has highlighted that individual dispositional character-
istics may also moderate the relationship between the nature of the task and 
the experience of flow. For example, individuals who tend to persevere at tasks 
are more likely to be sensitive to the balance between challenge and skill that 
is an important component of  flow- inducing tasks (Keller  & Bless, 2008). 
The need for achievement was found to moderate the relationship between 
 task- related flow and positive emotional and organizational spontaneity (Eisen-
berger et al., 2005). Specifically, tasks that matched challenges with skills were 
associated with positive emotions (feeling energetic, enthusiastic, and happy), 
greater interest in the task and increased involvement in the organization only 
among individuals who had a high need for achievement. A study conducted 
among workers from several occupations showed that conscientiousness mod-
erated the relationship between flow and both  in- role and  extra- role perfor-
mance (Demerouti, 2006). 
 Even though some evidence suggests the existence of an autotelic personality 
type, in that some individuals are more prone to experience flow when confronted 
with a challenging task, the majority of findings indicate that flow is predom-
inantly a  task- related state. This has important practical implications for work 
organizations. Because flow is a  state- like construct, it dynamically changes across 
time and situations. Therefore, it is possible to reshape the workplace and design 
tasks that increase the likelihood of optimal experience. As we have argued earlier, 
such crafting of work has beneficial consequences for both the individual and the 
organization. 

Flow at work 15
 Flow: a collective phenomenon? 
 Most researchers have studied flow at the individual level rather than in social or 
collective settings (Walker, 2010). Typically, optimal experience is researched on 
individuals engaged in isolated activities where they can focus their attention on the 
task at hand, without external distractions interfering with their state of absorption. 
However, in organizations much work is performed in groups or teams. Confronted 
with the increasing complexity of the workplace technology and the need to com-
pete more efficiently and effectively in a rapidly changing global economy, organi-
zations have substantially implemented teamwork (Yang & Guy, 2011). Group work 
represents a more effective way of dealing with complex information and knowl-
edge systems, at the same time increasing worker participation in  decision- making 
(Kozlowski & Ilgen, 2006). 
 Social comparison theory (Festinger, 1954) and social validation theory (Cialdini, 
2009) suggest that cognitions, attitudes, emotions, and behaviors are influenced by 
comparisons with others in a group, such that there is a tendency toward norma-
tive compliance. Yet little research has been undertaken on understanding flow as a 
collective or social phenomenon, and very few studies have investigated collective 
flow in the workplace. 
 Although the preconditions of flow (i.e., challenge/skill balance, goal clarity, and 
feedback) should be similar for both individuals and groups, three studies showed 
that the experience of flow is qualitatively different between the two conditions, 
being more enjoyable in a group rather than a solitary setting (Walker, 2010). This 
was particularly evident for tasks that required group members to be interdepen-
dent, coordinated, and cooperative. Furthermore, in social flow participants reported 
a heightened awareness of what was going on in the group environment, rather 
than an attempt to exclude situational characteristics. This finding suggests that 
in social contexts the individual’s awareness of self becomes subsumed under the 
group awareness (Walker, 2010). There is also recent empirical evidence that flow 
may be enhanced in collective settings by social facilitation and emotional conta-
gion effects (Páez, Rimé, Basabe, Wlodarczyk, & Zumeta, 2015). In the academic 
context, flow has been found to cross over from music teachers to their students 
(Bakker, 2005), and from students’ classmates and instructors in the classroom (Cul-
bertson, Fullagar, Simmons, & Zhu, 2015). Results from a recent longitudinal study 
(Salanova,  Rodríguez- Sánchez, Schaufeli, & Cifre, 2014) confirmed that collective 
flow in work groups is associated with collective efficacy beliefs, including that the 
group is skilled enough to meet the challenges of the task. These findings suggest 
that the same preconditions that are necessary to experience solitary flow are also 
predictive of collective flow, at the same time highlighting similarities and some 
distinct differences between the two conditions at the experiential level. Collective 
flow is “something more than the sum of individuals’ flow experiences” (Salanova 
et al., 2014, p. 450). Given that work groups are an essential part of organizational 
life, many more studies are required on collective flow, in order to understand the 
conditions that foster it, as well as its individual and organizational consequences. 

16 Clive Fullagar et al.
 Flow: fad or folderol? 
 As early as 1927, Kelley warned against the “jangle fallacy” (p. 63) – the tendency to 
use a different term to describe a construct that is no different from one that already 
exists. Dunnette (1966) referred to this as folderol and cautioned against trivial ideas 
packaged as new theories. A fad is a  short- lived idea that has a short history and 
is irreproducible. In order for flow to be recognized as a unique construct in the 
field of work psychology, it is necessary to establish its theoretical consistency and 
independence from other  work- related variables, as well as its specific contribution 
to the understanding of workplace behavior. 
 While research on flow has established that both its preconditions and core 
experiential features are remarkably consistent across work, leisure, and academic 
domains (Delle Fave et al., 2011; Nakamura & Csikszentmihalyi, 2009; Nielson & 
Cleal, 2012), in the organizational domain perhaps the closest conceptual relative to 
flow is work engagement. Indeed in the only published measure of work flow (the 
 WOrk- reLated Flow inventory or  WOLF  ), Bakker (2008) defines flow as consisting 
of three core components: (1)  absorption  or concentrated involvement in the activity, 
(2)  enjoyment  of the activity, and (3)  intrinsic motivation , or the fact that the activ-
ity is rewarding in itself. These components have considerable conceptual over-
lap with the concept of work engagement that is defined as “a positive, fulfilling, 
 work- related state of mind that is characterized by vigor, dedication, and absorption” 
(Schaufeli, Salanova,  González- Romá, & Bakker, 2002, p. 74). However, engagement 
represents a chronic involvement in one’s job as a whole and all of the tasks that it 
entails (Maslach, Schaufeli, & Leiter, 2001), whereas flow is typically described as a 
more acute and intense absorption and involvement with a specific work task (Csik-
szentmihalyi, 1975; Fullagar & Kelloway, 2013; Mills & Fullagar, 2008; Schaufeli & 
Salanova, 2007). Furthermore, engagement is usually operationalized as a relatively 
stable disposition that varies considerably between individuals (Christian, Garza, & 
Slaughter, 2011). However, recent diary studies indicate that there is increasing evi-
dence that work engagement fluctuates considerably from day to day and that as 
much as 50% of the variance in engagement is within person (Bakker, 2014; Son-
nentag, 2003). In comparison flow shows substantial  within- individual variance 
(74%) and relatively less variation between persons (Fullagar & Kelloway, 2009). 
This would suggest that flow is definitely a  state- like variable that fluctuates within 
the day, from activity to activity, and that work engagement may vary on a daily 
basis and is a more enduring, and  long- term, state. 
 Flow should also be conceptually distinguished from three measures of attach-
ment to job and organization – namely, job satisfaction, organizational commitment, 
and job involvement. 
 Job satisfaction  is regarded as an affective and cognitive evaluation about one’s 
job (Weiss, 2002) and is considered an attitudinal variable. Typically it refers to 
the extent to which people like facets of their job, such as their pay, coworkers, 
supervision, working conditions, and so forth (Brief & Weiss, 2002). Even though 
flow and job satisfaction share positive cognitive components, flow also includes 

Flow at work 17
behavioral components related to the task at hand, such as merging of action and 
awareness in a state of effortless attention (Bruya, 2010). Job satisfaction refers to 
a state of satiation whereas flow connotes a state of activation (Macey & Schnei-
der, 2008). Although flow and job satisfaction have been found to be moderately 
correlated (Maeran & Cangiano, 2013), it is not contradictory for a worker to 
experience flow in certain  job- related tasks, and not to feel satisfied with his or 
her job as a whole. 
 As for  organizational commitment , it is predominantly defined as an affective attach-
ment to the organization as an entity (Meyer, Becker, & Vandenberghe, 2004). In 
contrast, flow is a temporary experience of involvement in a specific task, in which 
the referent of attachment is the particular task the individual is engaged in, rather 
than the organization as a whole. 
 Finally,  job involvement  can be defined as “an individual’s psychological iden-
tification with a particular job” (Kanungo, 1982, p. 342). Like flow, it includes a 
component of intrinsic motivation to engage in work. However, job involvement 
is essentially a cognitive belief concerning the extent to which a job is central 
to the individual’s identity. As such, individuals become involved in their jobs 
out of a desire to fulfill  self- esteem needs (Kanungo, 1982). On the other hand, 
tasks that induce flow are intrinsically motivating because individuals enjoy utiliz-
ing and expressing skills that meet the challenges inherent in those tasks. More-
over, contrary to the notion of job involvement, flow is associated with a loss of 
 self- consciousness. 
 Both flow and job involvement have “dark sides.” Extreme levels of job involve-
ment have been termed “workaholism” (Piotrowski & Vodanovich, 2006), a particular 
kind of intense work involvement that has been associated with  obsessive- compulsive 
tendencies (Mudrack, 2004; Naughton, 1987; Oates, 1971). Workaholics tend to 
spend an inordinate amount of time at work, are preoccupied with work when not 
at work, and are driven to work beyond the role requirements of the job (Mudrack & 
Naughton, 2001). Empirical evidence has highlighted the dysfunctional nature of 
workaholism through its association with increased job stress (Burke, 2001; Kanai & 
Wakabayashi, 2001; McMillan, O’Driscoll, Marsh,  & Brady, 2001), performance 
problems at work (Mudrack, 2004; Porter, 1996; Scott, Moore,  & Miceli, 1997), 
impaired nonwork relationships (Robinson, 1999; Scott et al., 1997; Spruell, 1987), 
and increased  work- family conflict (Burke, 2000, 2001; Taris, Schaufeli, & Verho-
even, 2005). 
 The early work with surgeons did reveal a “dark side” to flow. Csikszentmihalyi 
(1975) reports that “one surgeon mentioned that operating is ‘like taking narcot-
ics’; another, that it is like ‘taking heroin’” (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975, p. 138). The 
detrimental role of flow also emerged in a study conducted among musicians suf-
fering from  playing- related injuries. The  flow- related dissociation from body and 
time entailed the risk of engaging in excessively prolonged practice by virtue of 
a lower perception of pain (Guptill, 2012). Musicians in this study described the 
strategies adopted to interrupt or avoid flow in order to protect their own health. 
Nevertheless, flow can be distinguished from workaholism in several ways. First, 

18 Clive Fullagar et al.
workaholism as a form of addiction has been associated with  obsessive- compulsive 
tendencies (Mudrack, 2004), anxiety, and stress (Schaufeli et al., 2002). Flow is 
instead characterized by positive emotions (Fullagar  & Kelloway, 2009), and at 
the physiological level it is identical to joy (De Manzano, Theorell, Harmat, & 
Ullén, 2010). Furthermore, empirical work has shown that flow and anxiety are 
incompatible states. In a study of musicians, it was shown that when flow was at its 
highest, performance anxiety was at its lowest and vice versa (Fullagar et al., 2013). 
Second, a consistent association was detected between workaholism and impaired 
nonwork relationships (see Piotrowski & Vodanovich, 2006, for a review). Flow, 
on the other hand, is a functional type of work engagement and, as such, should 
enhance both work and family roles (Bakker, Petrou, & Tsaousis, 2012; Marks, 
1977; Sieber, 1974), and improve interpersonal relationships (McMillan, Brady, 
O’Driscoll, & Marsh, 2002). 
 Despite these conceptual distinctions between work flow and other  work- related 
constructs, the incremental value of flow over and above these other constructs in 
predicting behavior in the workplace has not been established yet. We see this as an 
important focus for future research. 
 At the methodological level, further efforts are needed to understand the phe-
nomenology of flow in real time, through procedures such as ESM. More specifi-
cally, it is not yet clear how individuals enter flow moving from other experiences, 
or move from flow to other states. Studies are also needed to evaluate whether there 
are predictable patterns of experience fluctuation during a workday, and whether 
there may be a “critical” experiential configuration leading to flow, as suggested by 
preliminary evidence based on nonlinear dynamical system models (Ceja & Navarro, 
2012, this volume). Moreover, in order to clarify the interplay among demographic 
factors, environmental dimensions, traits, and state variables in the occurrence of 
flow on the work context, studies should include multiple measures jointly evalu-
ating these aspects. Finally, more qualitative studies should be conducted, in order 
to give voice to the workers, and to let them highlight components of the work 
experience – especially those concerning  job- related meanings – that have not been 
explored yet, and that could be worth investigating. Although qualitative studies are 
cumbersome and less popular and less scientifically fashionable than quantitative 
ones, psychologists often forget that the reality of human experience is much more 
complex and articulated than the information emerging from numbers. 
 At a more general level, flow research in the domain of work substantially ignores 
a great variety of jobs that people are engaged in worldwide. Most studies on flow 
at work involve office employees, and – to a lesser extent – teachers and health pro-
fessionals. Except for few and scattered studies (briefly summarized by Delle Fave 
and Bassi, this volume) the experience of the vast majority of workers is completely 
overlooked. Widespread and essential jobs, such as agriculture, handicrafts, animal 
husbandry, arts, semiskilled works performed in factory and workshop contexts, 
professional caregiving, domestic aid, and many other occupations, are ignored by 
flow research, and overall by the psychological literature. The reasons for this mas-
sive neglect of the conditions of millions of workers are various, ranging from the 

Flow at work 19
low income and thus low business relevance characterizing many of these jobs 
to their  self- employment nature, not attracting the interest of sponsors. Another 
related problem is the dearth of studies conducted in nonwestern countries, both 
on flow in general and specifically on flow at work. In an increasingly globalized 
world, these problems have to be addressed by psychology as a discipline concerned 
with human functioning. 
 Some concluding remarks 
 After this brief overview of the research on flow at work, and before merging in the 
related findings, we would like to challenge readers with a general warning. As most 
disciplines, psychology provides a unique though specific perspective on human 
behavior and experience, leaving other aspects in the background. Within psychol-
ogy itself, the focus on a single domain – such as work – leaves the other ones in the 
background. This artificial dissection of the human experience may lead to distor-
tions of reality, and it should thus be interpreted with caution. Though important, 
work is not the only relevant domain of individual life. According to WHO’s defi-
nition, quality of life is a multicomponential construct (WHOQOL Group, 2004), 
and balance across life domains is a core component of  well- being. From this per-
spective, people experiencing moderate levels of satisfaction from multiple – and 
salient – life domains are likely to report higher levels of subjective  well- being than 
people experiencing high levels of satisfaction stemming from a single – though 
salient – domain. In other words, it is better to be moderately happy and satisfied in 
multiple life domains than to experience extremely positive feelings in one single 
domain, to the detriment or neglect of the others (Sirgy & Wu, 2009). 
 Work’s contribution to people’s  well- being may thus vary according to the job 
itself, but also to individual values, aspirations, and engagement in different life 
domains, as well as contextual features. The contents and values of a given culture 
are the result of the combined action of individuals who find meaning and oppor-
tunities for  self- expression in the most varied activities and tasks (Delle Fave & 
Bassi, 2014). These people come from different educational backgrounds, have 
different access to job opportunities in their life, may experience health, financial, 
or social difficulties, and are exposed to changes related to life events that can sud-
denly modify their approach to daily activities and life as a whole. Any research 
study or intervention program focused on  well- being at work should not over-
look individual complexity and variability, perhaps the most fascinating and ever-
challenging dimension that researchers and professionals working with humans 
have to deal with. 
 References 
 Abuhamdeh, S., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2009). Intrinsic and extrinsic motivational orienta-
tions in the competitive context: An examination of   person– situation interactions.  Journal 
of Personality ,  77 ,  1615– 1635. 

20 Clive Fullagar et al.
 Allen, B. P., & Potkay, C. R. (1981). On the arbitrary distinction between states and traits. 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ,  41 ,  916– 928. 
 Allport, G. W. (1937).  Personality: A psychological interpretation.  New York: Holt. 
 Allport, G. W., & Odbert, H. S. (1936).  Trait- names: A  psycho- lexical study.  Psychological 
Monographs ,  47 ,  171– 220. 
 Aronfreed, J. (1968).  Conduct and conscience. New York: Academic Press. 
 Asakawa, K. (2010). Flow experience, culture, and  well- being: How do autotelic Japanese 
college students feel, behave, and think in their daily lives?  Journal of Happiness Studies , 
 11 ,  205– 223. 
 Bakker, A. B. (2005). Flow among music teachers and their students: The crossover of peak 
experiences.  Journal of Vocational Behavior ,  66 ,  26– 44. 
 Bakker, A. B. (2008). The  work- related flow inventory: Construction and initial validation 
of the WOLF.  Journal of Vocational Behavior ,  72 ,  400– 414. 
 Bakker, A. B. (2014). Daily fluctuations in work engagement: An overview and current 
directions.  European Psychologist ,  19 ,  227– 236. 
 Bakker, A. B., & Demerouti, E. (2007). The job  demands- resources model: State of the art. 
 Journal of Managerial Psychology ,  22 ,  309– 328. 
 Bakker, A. B., & Demerouti, E. (2014). Job  demands- resources theory. In P. Y. Chen & C. L. 
Cooper (Eds.),  Wellbeing: A complete reference guide  (Vol. III, pp.  37– 64). Chichester, UK: 
 Wiley- Blackwell. 
 Bakker, A. B., Petrou, P.,  & Tsaousis, I. (2012). Inequity in work and intimate relation-
ships: A  spillover- crossover model.  Anxiety, Stress, and Coping: An International Journal ,  25 , 
 491– 506. 
 Bakker, A. B., Tims, M., & Dirks, D. (2012). Proactive personality and job performance: The 
role of job crafting and work engagement.  Human Relations ,  65 ,  1359– 1378. 
 Bassi, M., & Delle Fave, A. (2012a). Optimal experience among teachers: New insights 
into the work paradox.  The Journal of Psychology: Interdisciplinary and Applied, 146, 
 533– 557. 
 Bassi, M., & Delle Fave, A. (2012b). Optimal experience and  self- determination at school: 
Joining perspectives.  Motivation and Emotion ,  36 ,  425– 438. 
 Bassi, M., Ferrario, N., Ba, G., Delle Fave, A., & Viganò, C. (2012). Quality of experience 
during psychosocial rehabilitation: A  real- time investigation with experience sampling 
method.  Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal ,  35 ,  447– 453. 
 Bassi, M., Steca, P., Delle Fave, A.,  & Caprara, G. V. (2007). Academic  self- efficacy 
beliefs and quality of experience in learning.  Journal of Youth and Adolescence ,  36 , 
 301– 312. 
 Bassi, M., Steca, P., Monzani, D., Greco, A., & Delle Fave, A. (2014). Personality and optimal 
experience in adolescence: Implications for  well- being and development.  Journal of Hap-
piness Studies ,  15 ,  829– 843. 
 Bem, D. J. (1967).  Self- perception: An alternative interpretation of cognitive dissonance 
phenomena.  Psychological Review ,  74 ,  183– 200. 
 Berg, J. M., Wrzesniewski, A., & Dutton, J. E. (2010). Perceiving and responding to chal-
lenges in job crafting at different ranks: When proactivity requires adaptivity.  Journal of 
Organizational Behavior ,  31 ,  158– 186. 
 Berlyne, D. E. (1955). The arousal and satiation of perceptual curiosity in the rat.  Journal of 
Comparative and Physiological Psychology ,  48 ,  238– 246. 
 Bolte, A., Goschke, T., & Kuhl, J. (2003). Emotion and intuition: Effects of positive and 
negative mood on implicit judgments of semantic coherence.  Psychological Science ,  14 , 
 416– 421. 

Flow at work 21
 Brief, A. P., & Weiss, H. M. (2002). Organizational behavior: Affect in the workplace.  Annual 
Review of Psychology ,  53 ,  279– 307. 
 Bringsén, Å., Andersson, H. I., Ejlertsson, G., & Troein, M. (2012). Exploring workplace 
related health resources from a salutogenic perspective: Results from a focus group study 
among healthcare workers in Sweden.  Work: Journal of Prevention, Assessment & Rehabilita-
tion ,  42 ,  403– 414. 
 Bruya, B. (2010). Introduction: Toward a theory of attention that includes effortless attention 
and action. In B. Bruya (Ed.),  Effortless attention: A new perspective in the cognitive science of 
attention and action (pp.  1– 28). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
 Bryce, J., & Haworth, J. (2002). Wellbeing and flow in a sample of male and female office 
workers.  Leisure Studies ,  23 ,  249– 263. 
 Burke, R. J. (2000). Workaholism and divorce.  Psychological Reports, 86 ,  219– 220. 
 Burke, R. J. (2001). Workaholism components, job satisfaction, and career progress.  Journal 
of Applied Social Psychology ,  31 ,  2339– 2356. 
 Butler, R. A. (1953). Discrimination learning by rhesus monkeys to visual exploration moti-
vation.  Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology ,  46 ,  95– 98. 
 Butler, R. A., & Harlow, H. H. (1957). Discrimination learning and learning sets to visual 
exploration incentives.  Journal of Genetic Psychology ,  71 ,  591– 593. 
 Ceja, L., & Navarro, J. (2012). ‘Suddenly I get into the zone’: Examining discontinu-
ities and nonlinear changes in flow experiences at work.  Human Relations , 65 (9), 
 1101– 1127. 
 Christian, M. S., Garza, A. S, & Slaughter, J. E. (2011). Work engagement: A quantitative 
review and test of its relations with task and contextual performance.  Personnel Psychology , 
 64 ,  89– 136. 
 Cialdini, R. B. (2009).  Influence, science and practice . New York: William Morrow. 
 Clarke, S. G., & Haworth, J. T. (1994). Flow experience in the daily lives of  sixth- form col-
lege students.  British Journal of Psychology ,  85 ,  511– 523. 
 Collins, A. L., Sarkisian, N., & Winner, E. (2009). Flow and happiness in later life: An investigation 
into the role of daily and weekly flow experiences.  Journal of Happiness Studies ,  10 ,  703– 709. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1975).  Beyond boredom and anxiety: Experiencing flow in work and play. 
San Francisco:  Jossey- Bass. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990).  Flow: The psychology of optimal experience . New York: Harper 
and Row. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1997).  Finding flow . New York: Basic. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2000). Preface to the 25th anniversary edition. In M. Csikszentmihalyi 
(Ed.),  Beyond freedom and boredom: Experiencing flow in work and play (25th anniversary ed., 
pp.  ix– xxviii). San Francisco:  Jossey- Bass. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Csikszentmihalyi, I. S. (1988).  Optimal experience: Psychological studies 
on flow in consciousness. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M., & LeFevre, J. (1989). Optimal experience in work and leisure.  Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology ,  56 ,  815– 822. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M., Rathunde, K., & Whalen, S. (1993).  Talented teenagers: A longitudinal 
study of their development. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
 Culbertson, S. S., Fullagar, C. J., Simmons, M. J., & Zhu, M. (2015). Contagious flow: Ante-
cedents and consequences of optimal experience in the classroom.  Journal of Management 
Education ,  39 ,  319– 349. 
 Davis, R. T., Settlage, P. H.,  & Harlow, H. F. (1950). Performance of normal and 
 brain– operated monkeys on mechanical puzzles with and without food incentive.  Jour-
nal of Genetic Psychology ,  77 ,  305– 311. 

22 Clive Fullagar et al.
 Debus, M. E., Sonnentag, S., Deutsch, W., & Nussbeck, F. W. (2014). Making flow happen: 
The effects of being recovered on  work- related flow between and within days.  Journal of 
Applied Psychology ,  99 ,  713– 722. 
 de Charms, R. (1968).  Personal causation: The internal affective determinants of behavior.  New 
York: Academic Press. 
 Deci, E. L. (1971). Effects of externally mediated rewards on intrinsic motivation.  Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology ,  18 ,  105– 115. 
 Deci, E. L. (1975).  Intrinsic motivation. New York: Plenum Press. 
Deci, E. L., Koestner, R., & Ryan, R. M. (1999). A meta-analytic review of experiments 
examining the effects of extrinsic rewards on intrinsic motivation. Psychological Bulletin, 
125, 627–668.
 Deci, E. L., Koestner, R., & Ryan, R. M. (2001). Extrinsic rewards and intrinsic motivation in 
education: Reconsidered once again.  Review of Educational Research ,  71 ,  1– 27. 
 Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1985).  Intrinsic motivation and  self- determination in human behavior. 
New York: Plenum. 
 Delle Fave, A. (2007). Individual development and community empowerment: Suggestions 
from studies on optimal experience. In J. Haworth & G. Hart (Eds.),   Well- being: Individual, 
community, and societal perspectives (pp.  41– 56). London: Palgrave McMillan. 
 Delle Fave, A. (2013). Past, present and future of flow. In S. A. David, I. Boniwell, & A. Con-
ley Ayers (Eds.),  The Oxford handbook of happiness  (pp.  60– 72). New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press. 
 Delle Fave, A., & Bassi, M. (2000). The quality of experience in adolescents’ daily lives: Devel-
opmental perspectives.  Genetic, Social and General Psychology Monographs ,  126 ,  347– 367. 
 Delle Fave, A., & Bassi, M. (2014). Work and the dynamics of development: An integrated 
model. In C. Biron, R. J. J. Burke, & C. L. Cooper (Eds.),  Creating healthy workplaces 
(pp.  37– 49). Franham, UK: Gower. 
 Delle Fave, A., Bassi, M., & Massimini, F. (2003). Quality of experience and risk perception in 
 high- altitude rock climbing.  Journal of Applied Sport Psychology ,  15 ,  82– 99. 
 Delle Fave, A., & Massimini, F. (2003). Optimal experience in work and leisure among 
teachers and physicians: Individual and  bio- cultural implications.  Leisure Studies, 22 , 
 323– 342. 
 Delle Fave, A., & Massimini, F. (2004). Parenthood and the quality of experience in daily life: 
A longitudinal study.  Social Indicators Research ,  67 ,  75– 106. 
 Delle Fave, A., & Massimini, F. (2005). The investigation of optimal experience and apathy: 
Developmental and psychosocial implications.  European Psychologist ,  10 ,  264– 274. 
 Delle Fave, A., Massimini, F., & Bassi, M. (2011).  Psychological selection and optimal experience 
across cultures: Social empowerment through personal growth . Dordrecht: Springer. 
 Delle Fave, A.,  & Zager Kocjan, G. (2017). The challenges and rewards of creativity: 
 Well- being and the practice of arts and crafts. In L. G. Oades, M. Steger, A. Delle Fave, & 
J. Passmore (Eds.),  The  Wiley- Blackwell handbook of the psychology of positivity and 
 strengths- based approaches at work  (pp. 508–526). London: Wiley & Sons. 
 De Manzano, O., Theorell, T., Harmat, L., & Ullén, F. (2010). The psychophysiology of flow 
during piano playing.  Emotion ,  10 ,  301– 311. 
 Demerouti, E. (2006). Job characteristics, flow, and performance: The moderating role of 
conscientiousness.  Journal of Occupational Health Psychology ,  11 ,  266– 280. 
 Demerouti, E., Bakker, A. B., Nachreiner, F., & Schaufeli, W. B. (2001). The job demands- 
resources model of burnout.  Journal of Applied Psychology ,  86 ,  499– 512. 
 Demerouti, E., Bakker, A. B., Sonnentag, S., & Fullagar, C. J. (2012).  Work- related flow and 
energy at work and at home: A study on the role of daily recovery.  Journal of Organiza-
tional Behavior ,  33 ,  276– 295. 

Flow at work 23
 Demerouti, E., & Fullagar, C. (2013). Experiencing flow in the workplace and what indi-
viduals and organizations can do to foster it. In R. Burke & C. L. Cooper (Eds.),  The 
fulfilling workplace: The organization’s role in achieving individual and organizational health 
(pp.  71– 90). London, UK: Gower. 
 Dunnette, M. D. (1966). Fads, fashions, and folderol in psychology.  American Psychologist ,  21 , 
 343– 352. 
 Eisenberger, R., Jones, J. R., Stinglhamber, F., Shanock, L., & Randall, A. T. (2005). Flow experi-
ences at work: For high need achievers alone?  Journal of Organizational Behavior ,  26 ,  755– 775. 
 Eisenberger, R., & Rhoades, L. (2001). Incremental effects of reward on creativity.  Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology ,  81 ,  728– 741. 
 Engeser, S., & Rheinberg, F. (2008). Flow performance and moderators of  challenge- skill 
balance.  Motivation & Emotion ,  32 ,  158– 172. 
 Festinger, L. (1954). A theory of social comparison processes.  Human Relations ,  7 ,  117– 140. 
 Fredrickson, B. L. (1998). What good are positive emotions?  Review of General Psychology ,  2 , 
 300– 319. 
 Fredrickson, B. L. (2001). The role of positive emotions in positive psychology: The broaden- 
and-build theory of positive emotions.  American Psychologist ,  56 ,  218– 226. 
 Fredrickson, B. L., & Branigan, C. A. (2005). Positive emotions broaden the scope of atten-
tion and  thought– action repertoires.  Cognition and Emotion ,  19 ,  313– 332. 
 Freud, S. (1927). Instincts and their vicissitudes. In J. Strachey (Ed. & Trans.),  Collected papers 
(Vol. 4, pp.  60– 83). London: Hogarth Press. (Original work published in 1915). 
 Fullagar, C., & Kelloway, E. K. (2009). ‘Flow’ at work: An experience sampling approach. 
 Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology ,  81 ,  595– 615. 
 Fullagar, C., & Kelloway, E. K. (2012). New directions in positive psychology: Implications 
for a healthy workplace. In J. Houmount, S. Leka, & R. Sinclair (Eds.),  Contemporary occu-
pational health psychology: Global perspectives on research and practice  (pp.  146– 161). Chich-
ester, UK: Wiley. 
 Fullagar, C. J., Knight, P. A., & Sovern, H. S. (2013). Challenge/skill balance, flow, and per-
formance anxiety.  Applied Psychology: An International Review ,  62 ,  236– 259. 
 George, J. M., & Brief, A. P. (1992). Feeling  good- doing good: A conceptual analysis of the 
mood at  work- organizational spontaneity relationship.  Psychological Bulletin ,  112 ,  310– 329. 
 Ghitulescu, B. E. (2006).  Shaping tasks and relationships at work: Examining the antecedents and 
consequences of employee job crafting . Unpublished doctoral dissertation. University of Pitts-
burgh, Pittsburgh, PA. 
 Greene, D., Sternberg, B., & Lepper, M. R. (1976). Overjustification in a token economy. 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ,  34 ,  1219– 1234. 
 Guptill, C. (2012). Injured professional musicians and the complex relationship between 
occupation and health.  Journal of Occupational Science ,  19 ,  258– 270. 
 Hackman, J. R., & Oldham, G. R. (1975). Development of the job diagnostic survey.  Journal 
of Applied Psychology ,  60 ,  159– 170. 
 Hackman, J. R., & Oldham, G. R. (1980).  Work redesign . Reading, MA:  Addison- Wesley. 
 Haworth, J., & Evans, S. (1995). Challenge, skill and positive subjective status in the daily life of 
a sample of YTS students.  Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology ,  68 ,  109– 121. 
 Haworth, J., & Hill, S. (1992). Work, leisure and psychological  well- being in a sample of 
young adults.  Journal of Community and Applied Social Psychology ,  2 ,  147– 160. 
 Hektner, J., & Asakawa, K. (2000). Learning to like challenges. In M. Csikszentmihalyi & 
B. Schneider (Eds.),  Becoming adult: How teenagers prepare for the world of work (pp.  95– 112). 
New York: Basic Books. 
 Hektner, J., Schmidt, J., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2007).  Experience sampling method: Measur-
ing the quality of everyday life . Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE. 

24 Clive Fullagar et al.
 Hull, C. L. (1943).  Principles of behavior.  New York:  Appleton- Century Crofts. 
 Hunt, J. McV. (1965). Intrinsic motivation and its role in psychological development. In D. 
Levine (Ed.),  Nebraska symposium on motivation  (Vol. 13, pp.  189– 282). Lincoln: University 
of Nebraska Press. 
 Isen, A. M., Daubman, K. A., & Nowicki, G. P. (1987). Positive affect facilitates creative 
problem solving.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ,  52 ,  1122– 1131. 
 Jackson, S. A., & Eklund, R. C. (2004).  The flow scales manual . Morgantown, WV: Fitness 
Information Technology. 
 Jackson, S. A., Kimiecik, J. C., Ford, S., & Marsh, H. W. (1998). Psychological correlates of 
flow in sport.  Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology ,  20 ,  358– 378. 
 Jackson, S. A., & Roberts, G. C. (1992). Positive performance states of athletes: Toward a 
conceptual understanding of peak performance.  The Sport Psychologist ,  6 ,  156– 171. 
 Jackson, S. A., Thomas, P. R., Marsh, H. W., & Smethurst, C. J. (2001). Relationship between 
flow and  self- concept, psychological skills, and performance.  Journal of Applied Sport Psy-
chology ,  13 ,  129– 153. 
 Kanai, A., & Wakabayashi, M. (2001). Workaholism among Japanese  blue- collar employees. 
 International Journal of Stress Management ,  8 ,  129– 145. 
 Kanungo, R. (1982).  Work alienation: An integrative approach. New York: Praeger. 
 Keller, F. S. (1969).  Learning: Reinforcement theory (2nd ed.). New York: Random House. 
 Keller, J., & Bless, H. (2008). Flow and regulatory compatibility: An experimental approach 
to the flow model of intrinsic motivation.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin ,  34 , 
 196– 209. 
 Keller, J., & Blomann, F. (2008). Locus of control and the flow experience: An experimental 
analysis.  European Journal of Personality ,  22 ,  589– 607. 
 Kelley, T. L. (1927).  Interpretation of educational measurements .  Yonkers- on-Hudson, NY: World Book. 
 Ko, I. (2011).  Crafting a job: Creating meaningful experience at work.  Unpublished doctoral dis-
sertation. Claremont Graduate University, Claremont, CA. 
 Kozlowski, S.W.J., & Ilgen, D. R. (2006). Enhancing the effectiveness of work groups and 
teams.  Psychological Science in the Public Interest ,  7 ,  77– 124. 
 Laing, R. D. (1967).  The politics of experience. New York: Ballantine Books. 
 Landhäußer, A., & Keller, J. (2012). Flow and its affective, cognitive, and  performance- related 
consequences. In S. Engeser (Ed.),  Advances in flow research (pp.  65– 86). New York: Springer. 
 LeFevre, J. (1988). Flow and the quality of experience during work and leisure. In M. Csik-
szentmihalyi & I. S. Csikszentmihalyi (Eds.),  Optimal experience: Psychological studies of flow 
in consciousness  (pp.  307– 318). New York: Cambridge University Press. 
 Lepper, M. R., Greene, D., & Nisbett, R. E. (1973). Undermining children’s intrinsic interest 
with extrinsic reward: A test of the ‘overjustification’ hypothesis.  Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology ,  28 ,  129– 137. 
 Locke, E. A., Shaw, K. N., Saari, L. M., & Latham, G. P. (1981). Goal setting and task perfor-
mance.  Psychological Bulletin ,  90 ,  125– 152. 
 Luthans, F. (2002). Positive organizational behavior: Developing and managing psychological 
strengths.  Academy of Management Executive ,  16 (1),  57– 72. 
 Macey, W. H., & Schneider, B. (2008). The meaning of employee engagement.  Industrial and 
Organizational Psychology: Perspectives on Science and Practice ,  1 ,  3– 30. 
 McMillan, L.H.W., Brady, E. C., O’Driscoll, M. P., & Marsh, N. V. (2002). A multifaceted 
study of Spence and Robbins’ (1992) Workaholism Battery.  Journal of Occupational and 
Organizational Psychology ,  75 ,  357– 368. 
 McMillan, L., O’Driscoll, M., Marsh, N., & Brady, E. (2001). Understanding workaholism: 
Data synthesis, theoretical critique, and future design strategies.  International Journal of 
Stress Management ,  8 ,  69– 91. 

Flow at work 25
 Maeran, R., & Cangiano, F. (2013). Flow experience and job characteristics: Analyzing the 
role of flow in job satisfaction.  TPM ,  20 ,  13– 26. 
 Mäkkikangas, A., Bakker, A. B., Aunola, K., & Demerouti, E. (2010). Job resources and flow 
at work: Modelling the relationship via latent growth curve and mixture methodology. 
 Journal Occupational and Organizational Psychology ,  83 ,  795– 814. 
 Marks, S. R. (1977). Multiple roles and role strain: Some notes on human energy, time and 
commitment.  American Sociological Review ,  41 ,  921– 936. 
 Maslach, C., Schaufeli, W. B. & Leiter, M. P. (2001). Job burnout.  Annual Review of Psychology , 
 52 ,  397– 422. 
 Maslow, A. H. (1954).  Motivation and personality. New York: Harper. 
 Massimini, F., & Carli, M. (1988). The systematic assessment of flow in daily life. In M. Csik-
szentmihalyi & I. Csikszentmihalyi (Eds.),  Optimal experience: Psychological studies of flow in 
consciousness (pp.  266– 287). New York: Cambridge University Press. 
 Massimini, F., Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Carli, M. (1987). The monitoring of optimal experi-
ence: A tool for psychiatric rehabilitation.  Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease ,  175 (9), 
 545– 549. 
 Mellstrom, C., & Johannesson, M. (2008). Crowding out in blood donation: Was Titmuss 
right?  Journal of the European Economic Association ,  6 ,  845– 863. 
 Meyer, J. P., Becker, T. E., & Vandenberghe, C. (2004). Employee commitment and moti-
vation: A conceptual analysis and integrative model.  Journal of Applied Psychology ,  89 , 
991–1007. 
 Mills, M. J., & Fullagar, C. J. (2008). Motivation and flow: Toward an understanding of the 
dynamics of the relation in architecture students.  Journal of Psychology ,  142 ,  533– 553. 
 Moneta, G. B. (2004). The flow model of intrinsic motivation in Chinese: Cultural and 
personal moderators.  Journal of Happiness Studies ,  5 ,  181– 217. 
 Moneta, G. B. (2010). Opportunity for creativity in the job as a moderator of the rela-
tion between trait intrinsic motivation and flow in work.  Motivation and Emotion ,  36 , 
 491– 503. 
 Montgomery, K. C. (1954). The role of exploratory drive in learning.  Journal of Comparative 
and Physiological Psychology ,  48 ,  254– 260. 
 Mudrack, P. E. (2004). Job involvement,  obsessive- compulsive personality traits, and worka-
holic behavioral tendencies.  Journal of Organizational Change Management ,  17 ,  490– 508. 
 Mudrack, P., & Naughton, T. (2001). The assessment of workaholism as behavioral tenden-
cies: Scale development and preliminary empirical testing.  International Journal of Stress 
Management ,  8 ,  93– 111. 
 Myers, A. K.,  & Miller, N. E. (1954). Failure to find a learned drive based on hunger: 
Evidence for learning motivated by ‘exploration’.  Journal of Comparative and Physiological 
Psychology ,  47 ,  428– 436. 
 Nakamura, J., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2009). Flow theory and research. In C. R. Snyder & 
S. J. Lopez (Eds.),  Handbook of positive psychology  (pp.  195– 206). New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press. 
 Naughton, T. J. (1987). A conceptual view of workaholism and implications for career 
counseling and research.  Career Development Quarterly ,  14 ,  180– 187. 
 Nielsen, K., & Cleal, B. (2010). Predicting flow at work: Investigating the activities and job 
characteristics that predict flow states at work.  Journal of Occupational Health Psychology , 
 15 ,  180– 190. 
 Oates, W. (1971).  Confessions of a workaholic.  New York: World. 
 Páez, D., Rimé, B., Basabe, N., Wlodarczyk, A., & Zumeta, L. (2015). Psychosocial effects 
of perceived emotional synchrony in collective gatherings.  Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology ,  108 ,  711– 729. 

26 Clive Fullagar et al.
 Pinder, C. C. (1984).  Work motivation: Theory, issues, and applications.  Glenview, IL: Scott, 
Foresman. 
 Pinder, C. C. (2008).  Work motivation in organizational behavior (Second Edition).  New York: 
Psychology Press. 
 Piotrowski, C.,  & Vodanovich, S. J. (2006).  The interface between workaholism and 
 work- family conflict: A review and conceptual framework.   Organization Development 
Journal ,  24 ,  84– 92. 
 Porter, G. (1996). Organizational impact of workaholism: Suggestions for researching the 
negative outcomes of excessive work.  Journal of Occupational Health Psychology ,  1 ,  70– 84. 
 Renn, R. W., & Vandenberg, R. J. (1995). The critical psychological states: An underrepre-
sented component in the job characteristics model research.  Journal of Management ,  21 , 
 279– 303. 
 Robinson, B. (1999). The work addiction risk test: Development of a tentative measure of 
workaholism.  Perceptual & Motor Skills ,  88 , 199. 
 Rogers, C. R. (1961).  On becoming a person. Boston, MA:  Houghton- Mifflin. 
 Rosenfield, D., Folger, R., & Adelman, H. F. (1980). When rewards reflect competence: A 
qualification of the overjustification effect.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ,  39 , 
 368– 376. 
 Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2000).  Self- determination theory and the facilitation of intrinsic 
motivation, social development, and  well- being.  American Psychologist ,  55 ,  68– 78. 
 Salanova, M., Bakker, A. B., & Llorens, S. (2006). Flow at work: Evidence for an upward spiral 
of personal and organizational resources.  Journal of Happiness Studies ,  7 ,  1– 22. 
 Salanova, M.,  Rodríguez- Sánchez, A. M., Schaufeli, W. B.,  & Cifre, E. (2014). Flowing 
together: A longitudinal study of collective efficacy and collective flow among work-
groups.  The Journal of Psychology ,  148 ,  435– 455. 
 Sartori, R.D.G., & Delle Fave, A. (2014). First aid activities and  well- being: The experience 
of professional and volunteer rescuers.  Journal of Social Service Research ,  40 (2),  242– 254. 
 Sartori, R.D.G., Marelli, M., Garavaglia, P., Castelli, L., Busin, S., & Delle Fave, A. (2014). The 
assessment of patients’ quality of experience: Autonomy level and perceived challenges. 
 Rehabilitation Psychology ,  59 (3),  266– 277. 
 Sartre, J. P. (1957).  Existentialism and human emotion. New York: Wisdom Library. 
 Schaufeli, W. B., & Salanova, M. (2007). Work engagement: An emerging psychological 
concept and its implications for organizations. In S. W. Gilliland, D. D. Steiner, & D. P. 
Skarlicki (Eds.),  Research in social issues in management: Vol. 5. Managing social and ethical issues 
in organizations. Greenwich, CT: Information Age. 
 Schaufeli, W. B., Salanova, M.,  González- Romá, V., & Bakker, A. B. (2002). The measure-
ment of engagement and burnout: A  two- sample confirmatory factor analytic approach. 
 Journal of Happiness Studies ,  3 ,  71– 92. 
 Schiefele, U., & Roussakis, E. (2006). Die bedingungen des  flow- erlebens in eine experimen-
tellen spielsituation.  Zeitschrift für Psychologie mit Zeitschrift für angewandte Psychologie und 
Sprache & Kognition ,  214 ,  207– 219. 
 Schüler, J., & Brunner, S. (2009). The rewarding effect of flow experience on performance 
in a marathon race.  Psychology of Sport and Exercise ,  10 ,  168– 174. 
 Scott, K., Moore, K., & Miceli, M. (1997). An exploration of the meaning and consequences 
of workaholism.  Human Relations ,  50 ,  287– 314. 
 Seligman, M.E.P.,  & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2000). Positive psychology: An introduction. 
 American Psychologist ,  55 ,  5– 14. 
 Sheldon, K. M., Elliot, A. J., Ryan, R. M., Chirkov, V., Kim, Y., Wu, C., Demir, M., & 
Sun, Z. (2004).  Self- concordance and subjective  well- being in four cultures.  Journal of 
 Cross- cultural Psychology ,  35 ,  209– 223. 

Flow at work 27
 Shernoff, D. J., Csikszentmihalyi, M., Schneider, B.,  & Shernoff, E. S. (2003). Student 
engagement in high school classrooms from the perspective of flow theory.  School Psy-
chology Quarterly ,  18 ,  158– 176. 
 Sieber, S. D. (1974). Toward a theory of role accumulation.  American Sociological Review ,  39 , 
 567– 578. 
 Sirgy, M. J., & Wu, J. (2009). The pleasant life, the engaged life, and the meaningful life: 
What about the balanced life?  Journal of Happiness Studies ,  10 ,  183– 196. 
 Skinner, B. F. (1953).  Science and human behavior. New York: Free Press. 
 Skinner, B. F. (1971).  Beyond freedom and dignity.  New York: Knopf. 
 Sonnentag, S. (2003). Recovery, work engagement, and proactive behavior: A new look at 
the interface between  non- work and work.  Journal of Applied Psychology ,  88 ,  518– 528. 
 Spruell, G. (1987). Work fever.  Training & Development Journal ,  41 ,  41– 45. 
 Steele, J. P., & Fullagar, C. J. (2009). Facilitators and outcomes of student engagement in a 
college setting.  The Journal of Psychology, 143,   5– 27. 
 Stein, G. L., Kimiecek, J. C., Daniels, J., & Jackson, S. A. (1995). The antecedents of flow in 
recreational sport.  Personality and Social Psychological Bulletin ,  21 ,  125– 135. 
 Taris, T. W., Schaufeli, W. B., & Verhoeven, L. C. (2005). Workaholism in the Nether-
lands: Measurement and implications for job strain and  work- nonwork conflict.  Journal of 
Applied Psychology: An International Review,  54 ,  37– 60. 
 Thomas, K. M., & Mathieu, J. E. (1994). Role of attributions in dynamic  self- regulation and 
goal processes.  Journal of Applied Psychology ,  79 ,  812– 818. 
 Walker, C. J. (2010). Experiencing flow: Is doing it together better than doing it alone? 
 Journal of Positive Psychology ,  5 ,  3– 11. 
 Waples, C. J., Knight, P. A., & Fullagar, C. J. (2013).  The role of goal setting in the emergence 
of flow . Paper presented at the 28th Annual Conference of the Society for Industrial and 
Organizational Psychology, Houston, TX, April  11– 14. 
 Watson, J. B. (1913). Psychology as the behaviorist views it.  Psychological Review ,  20 ,  158– 177. 
 Webster, J., Klebe Trevino, L., & Ryan, L. (1993). The dimensionality and correlates of flow 
in  human- computer interactions.  Computers in Human Behavior ,  9 ,  411– 426. 
 Weiss, H. M. (2002). Deconstructing job satisfaction: Separating evaluations, beliefs and 
affective experiences.  Human Resource Management Review ,  12 ,  173– 194. 
 Welker, W. L. (1956). Some determinants of play and exploration in chimpanzees.  Journal of 
Comparative and Physiological Psychology ,  49 ,  84– 89. 
 White, R. W. (1959). Motivation reconsidered: The concept of competence.  Psychological 
Review ,  66 ,  297– 333. 
 WHOQOL Group. (2004). Can we identify the poorest quality of life? Assessing the impor-
tance of quality of life using the  WHOQOL- 100.  Quality of Life Research ,  13 ,  23– 34. 
 Woodworth, R. S. (1918).  Dynamic psychology. New York: Columbia University Press. 
 Woodworth, R. S. (1958).  Dynamics of behavior.  New York: Holt. 
 Wrzesniewski, A., & Dutton, J. (2001). Crafting a job: Revisioning employees as active craft-
ers of their work.  Academy of Management Review ,  26 ,  179– 201. 
 Yang, S.-B., & Guy, M. E. (2011). The effectiveness of  self- managed work teams in government 
organizations.  Journal of Business Psychology ,  26 ,  531– 541. 

 2 
 MEASURING FLOW AT WORK 
 Anja  Schiepe- Tiska and Stefan Engeser 
 Csikszentmihalyi (1975) was fascinated by artists who spent most of their time 
working on paintings or sculptures while being completely immersed in the activ-
ity. The artists had the feeling that painting and sculpturing were the most impor-
tant things in the world. However, as soon as they had finished their projects they 
lost all interest in their work, put it in a corner, and started a new painting or 
sculpture. How was this possible? Why did they spend most of their time working 
on a project and then lost all interest after they were done? When Csikszentmihalyi 
asked the artists what kind of reward their behavior drove, whether they wanted to 
become rich or famous, they denied it. It seemed that the reward of painting or 
sculpturing came from the activities themselves (Engeser &  Schiepe- Tiska, 2012). 
 After this observation, Csikszentmihalyi tried to capture the phenomenon in 
more detail by conducting  in- depth interviews with other groups of people who 
also reported doing activities without obvious external rewards, such as soccer and 
hockey players, chess players and rock climbers (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975). When 
analyzing the interviews, Csikszentmihalyi found characteristics that were shared 
by the different activities and thus started to describe the common experience as 
the experience of flow. 
 1 The ﬂ ow state and its components 
 Flow is a state “in which people are so intensely involved in an activity that noth-
ing else seems to matter; the experience itself is so enjoyable that people will do 
it even at great cost, for the sheer sake of doing it” (Csikszentmihalyi, 1990, p. 
4). Flow has been conceptualized as a “ holistic  sensation that people feel when 
they act with total engagement” (Csikszentmihalyi, 1998, p. 36). In this sense, it 
is a multifaceted experience, which reflects a combination of different experien-
tial states whose  co- occurrence increase the likelihood of the emergence of flow 

Measuring ﬂ ow at work 29
(Engeser, 2012b;  Engeser  &  Schiepe- Tiska, 2012). The state is characterized by 
six components: (a) merging of action and awareness, (b) centering of attention 
on a limited stimulus field and a high level of concentration, (c) loss of reflective 
 self- consciousness, (d) high sense of control of one’s actions and the demands of the 
environment, (e) experience of coherent and noncontradictory demands for action 
(goals) and clear, unambiguous feedback, and (f ) autotelic nature in the sense that 
there is no need for external goals or rewards and the activity is performed for its own 
sake (Nakamura & Csikszentmihalyi, 2009; see also Engeser &  Schiepe- Tiska, 2012, 
for a discussion of the components). 
 Sometimes, the distortion of temporal experience is added as an additional 
component, which can go in two different directions: typically, experiencing 
flow comes in line with a feeling of time passing faster than normal, but some-
times it can also entail a feeling of time passing slower than normal (Nakamura & 
Csikszentmihalyi, 2009). These two different directions might be one explana-
tion for the finding that distortion of temporal experience seems to be a less 
reliable indicator of flow as compared to the other components (cf. Jackson & 
Eklund, 2002). 
 The components of flow are linked together and depend on each other. For 
example, when managers experience flow while they are negotiating a business deal 
they may be aware of their actions – presenting numbers and arguments, convinc-
ing their counterpart, using rhetorical strategies – but they are not aware of the 
awareness itself; that is, they are not thinking about anything else besides the tasks 
they are accomplishing. This merging is accompanied by a loss of reflective  self-
 consciousness and managers feel completely involved in and absorbed by the situ-
ation. Their full attention is concentrated on closing the deal. Managers may not 
even notice the vibration of their cellphone or the brief presence of their coworkers. 
They feel strong and in control and forget about personal problems. Time flies by, 
and retrospectively, they report that they enjoyed the negotiation itself indepen-
dently of whether they won or lost the deal. 
 As a multifaceted experience, flow cannot be represented by one of these 
components only (Engeser, 2012b; Engeser  &  Schiepe- Tiska, 2012; and Sec-
tion 2.2.3’s questionnaires assessing most/all components of flow). This may be 
further illustrated by the following example. Imagine a doctor who has a patient 
who is always tired. The patient sleeps badly because he/she has problems fall-
ing asleep and wakes up several times a night. The doctor could diagnose a 
sleeping disorder, prescribe medicines, and send the patient home. However, 
a good doctor may also ask how the general state of his/her health is, and whether 
the patient experiences a loss of interest or pleasure and a lack of drive. When the 
patient states these two symptoms in addition, the doctor may consider an affec-
tive disorder as the diagnosis, which would result in different medicines and 
treatments. In this regard, doctors always consider different symptoms in order to 
make a diagnosis. One symptom only may indicate several diseases but the com-
bination of symptoms forms a specific diagnosis. The same applies to flow. For 
example, the component of centering attention on a limited field of stimuli 

30 Anja  Schiepe- Tiska and Stefan Engeser
is also characteristic of a state of high anxiety (Eysenck, 1992). Thus, taking this 
component as a single indicator into account would not clarify what kind of 
state a person experiences. Only the combination with other components would 
explain whether the person experiences flow or anxiety. 
 In addition, some components of flow are repeatedly considered as precon-
ditions of flow instead of components (Fullagar  & Kelloway, 2012; Keller  & 
Landhäußer, 2012; Nakamura & Csikszentmihalyi, 2009). According to Csik-
szentmihalyi (1975), the most important precondition is the balance between 
the demands of an activity (i.e., action opportunities) and the perceived com-
petencies of the person (i.e., action capabilities) to accomplish a task. Most flow 
models are based on this precondition (Moneta, 2012). Empirical data confirm 
that individuals experience more flow in optimal balance conditions com-
pared to easy and difficult conditions (e.g., Abuhamdeh & Csikszentmihalyi, 
2009; Engeser  & Rheinberg, 2008; Keller  & Bless, 2008; Keller  & Blomann, 
2008; Moller, Csikszentmihalyi, Nakamura,  & Deci, 2007). However, studies 
also reveal that a balance does not determine flow per se, but makes it just more 
likely (Baumann, 2012; Engeser & Rheinberg, 2008; Moneta & Csikszentmihalyi, 
1996). For example, individuals do not necessarily experience a high sense of 
control even when demands and skills match. Consequently, we would recom-
mend assessing the component of control as part of the experience of flow in 
order to assure that this component of flow is indeed experienced (cf. Engeser & 
 Schiepe- Tiska, 2012). 
 Another flow component often considered as a condition of flow is that a 
task has clear goals and provides immediate, unambiguous feedback about one’s 
actions (Mannell & Bradley, 1986). Hence, the task provides a structure without 
forcing the individual to reflect on the behavior, and thus a person knows exactly 
what to do next (cf. Engeser &  Schiepe- Tiska, 2012). However, as for challenge/
skill balance, this characteristic makes flow more likely, but does not determine 
it. Individuals do not necessarily experience highly coherent, noncontradictory 
demands for a task that has clear goals and immediate, unambiguous feedback. 
Consequently, we recommend including the experience of coherent, noncontra-
dictory demands as a component of flow as well in order to evaluate if a person 
is experiencing it. The same applies to all other components of flow. 
 In the following sections, we will describe different ways to measure flow. First, 
declarative measures are introduced, beginning with the interview method, which 
was the very first approach to assess flow. However, along with interviews, Csik-
szentmihalyi (1975) already started to develop short questionnaires that captured 
flow. Hence, second, we present questionnaires assessing (a) primarily  demand- skill 
balance, (b) selected components and/or additional components of flow, and 
(c) most/all components of flow. Finally nondeclarative measurement techniques 
will be outlined, such as neural and psychophysiological measures. For each mea-
surement technique, we will present its strengths and weaknesses. 

Measuring ﬂ ow at work 31
 2 Declarative methods to assess ﬂ ow 
 2.1 Interview studies 
 When Csikszentmihalyi started with his research on autotelic activities, he used 
a phenomenological approach by conducting qualitative interviews. His start-
ing point was to explore activities that offered no obvious external rewards. The 
first interviews were conducted with hockey and soccer players, spelunkers, and 
explorers, as well as with a highly trained and successful mountain climber, a 
handball player, and a  long- distance swimmer (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975). Inter-
views were chosen as the method in order to give the respondents enough space 
to answer the questions and to give them the feeling of being in a normal con-
versation. From the wealth of textual descriptions, Csikszentmihalyi (1975) used 
some of the most common, clear, and insightful passages to describe the nature of 
flow experience. 
 For example, with regard to the work domain, surgeons were asked about their 
flow experience during surgeries (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975). Surgeries are episodes 
with a clear beginning and end. They provide a set of action opportunities within 
a limited stimulus field. The activities offer immediate feedback, unambiguous 
criteria of doing right or wrong, and, at the same time, they require high levels of 
concentration. Therefore, the structural characteristics of a surgery increase the 
likelihood of flow. For example, a surgeon who was specialized in corneal trans-
plants described his experience as being “completely absorbed – never bored or 
distracted . . . Everything is important – if you don’t close it the right way, the 
cornea will be twisted and vision will be impaired. . . . It all rests on how precisely 
and artistically you do the operation” (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975, p. 128). 
 Another example for the use of the interview method in the workplace is the 
“good work in business” project (Csikszentmihalyi, 2004). Csikszentmihalyi and his 
colleagues interviewed visionary leaders who showed high achievement in combi-
nation with strong moral achievement (i.e., leaders who followed  long- term goals 
with a social commitment to the society). The interviews lasted two hours and 
participants were asked about their general goals and purposes, beliefs and values, 
and work processes as well as about their formative background, community, and 
family, and how leaders and organizations could support workers to make flow a 
more likely experience at work. 
 Strength : The interview technique produces informative insights with regard 
to the description of flow and the shared characteristics. Moreover, the subjective 
view of participants is assessed. A description of flow is not predefined and thus 
people can describe their individual flow experience (and other experiences) in 
their own words. 
 Weakness : Qualitative data do not easily allow for comparisons between indi-
viduals, and it is more difficult to quantify the influence of the context and other 
variables. Furthermore, in interviews participants report about flow retrospec-
tively. However, flow is characterized by a loss of reflective  self- consciousness and 

32 Anja  Schiepe- Tiska and Stefan Engeser
people are absorbed by the activity. Therefore, it may be hard to remember every 
detail afterwards. A retrospective story may not convey the actual experience as a 
whole that had taken place during the activities. In order to capture flow better, 
a measurement technique is needed that allows for assessing flow more closely to the 
situation in which it is experienced (see the experience sampling method ahead). 
 2.2 Questionnaires 
 Questionnaires with a closed answering format are more structured than inter-
views and ask specific questions about the experience of individuals. An important 
differentiation among  self- report flow measures is which components of flow are 
represented within the items. Three approaches can be differentiated. First, the com-
ponent of challenge/skill balance is central in the questionnaire. Based on the flow 
channel model (see ahead), the demands and skills are assessed in order to quantify if 
individuals are experiencing flow. Second, flow is assessed by selected components. 
Typically, with this approach, new components beyond those presented earlier are 
included in a questionnaire in order to form what the constructors define as flow. 
Third, flow is measured by most or all of its components. In the following, each 
approach will be presented and examples as well as references are provided. 
 2.2.1  Questionnaires assessing ﬂ ow on 
the basis of the  demand- skill balance 
 Most of the questionnaires that assessed flow through the  demand- skill balance were 
based on traditional flow models. For example, the flow channel model (Csikszent-
mihalyi, 1975) states that flow occurs when the demands of a situation are in bal-
ance with the perceived skills of a person. When there is a mismatch and demands 
compared to skills are too high, the individual experiences anxiety. In the case of 
 too- low demands, the experience of boredom is expected. A refinement of the 
model proposes that flow occurs only when demands and skills match on a high 
level (Csikszentmihalyi & Csikszentmihalyi, 1988). This model is known as the 
quadrant model as it specifies four qualitative different states of experience (anxi-
ety, flow, boredom, apathy). A further refinement was provided by Massimini and 
colleagues (Massimini & Carli, 1988; Massimini, Csikszentmihalyi, & Carli, 1987), 
differentiating eight sectors or “channels” (for a review on these models see Moneta, 
2012). Irrespectively of how many states of experience are specified, the match 
between demands and skills indicates whether flow occurs. 
 The measure of flow via the  demand- skill balance is primarily applied in studies 
using the experience sampling method (ESM). The ESM was developed in order to 
feel the “pulse of an inner experience” and to study flow patterns in everyday life 
(Csikszentmihalyi, Larson, & Prescott, 1977). With this method, individuals receive 
signals at random times during waking hours of a usual week. Every time they get 
beeped, participants complete a short questionnaire (see ahead). The ESM provides 
rich, ecological valid data that are assessed in an economic way as researchers can 

Measuring ﬂ ow at work 33
study people’s behavior and emotions directly at work or in their leisure time. ESM 
is particularly valuable when one is interested in how flow is changing across time 
at a  within- person level (e.g., Debus, Sonnentag, Deutsch, & Nussbeck, 2014; Eng-
eser & Baumann, 2014; Fullagar & Kelloway, 2009). As a dynamic, fluctuating state, 
flow can be better captured when it is assessed over a period of time as compared 
to measuring it only once during an activity. Hence, the ESM has become a highly 
valued research method within flow research (cf. Moneta, 2012) as well as for other 
kinds of research questions (e.g., Shiffman, Stone, & Hufford, 2008). 
 The ESM can be used with all kinds of questionnaires (of flow). Besides its great 
advantages, it has the drawback that the assessment as well as the data handling and 
analyses can be  time- consuming and  labor- intensive. However, after the develop-
ment of new technologies for collecting the data, such as smartphones, or multilevel 
techniques for analyzing them, it has become more convenient. In addition, indi-
viduals get beeped during the day (normally seven times that are randomly selected) 
over a defined period of time, and thus researchers are likely to miss low frequent 
activities (Scollon,  Kim- Prieto, & Diener, 2003). 
 The questionnaire that has been originally used with the ESM is the Expe-
rience Sampling Form (ESF; Csikszentmihalyi  & Csikszentmihalyi, 1988). It 
assesses the activity (e.g., the main activity a person is doing), the context (e.g., 
place of the activity, companionship), aspects related to interest and motivation 
(i.e., reasons for engaging in the activity), and affective experiences (e.g., strong, 
happy). Moreover, as depicted in  Figure 2.1 , items that capture aspects of flow 
more closely were also included, and demands (here referred to as challenge) and 
skills are measured. To date, slightly different versions of the ESF exist (see Delle Fave, 
not at 
all
somewhat
quite
very
How well were you concentrating?
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Was it hard to concentrate?
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
How self-conscious were you?
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Did you feel good about yourself?
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Were you in control of the situation?
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Indicate how you felt about your activity.
low
high
Challenges of the activity
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Your skills in the activity
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
 FIGURE 2.1  Flow- related items of an example of the ESF (adapted from Csikszentmih-
alyi & Csikszentmihalyi, 1988, pp.  257– 258) 

34 Anja  Schiepe- Tiska and Stefan Engeser
Massimini, & Bassi, 2011). These versions also have different scale ranges, and 
researchers have to adjust for this if they want to compare the results of studies 
that use different forms of the ESF.  
 Asking individuals about concentration,  self- consciousness, and the feeling of 
control assesses three components of flow. Moreover, feeling good captures the 
autotelic nature of flow. Although the ESF taps some aspects of flow, the decision of 
whether a person experiences flow is based solely on the match between challenge 
and skills (Csikszentmihalyi & Csikszentmihalyi, 1988). To establish this match, for 
example, Csikszentmihalyi and LeFevre (1989) transformed a person’s responses to 
individual  z- scores. When the reported challenges and skills were greater than the 
respondent’s average they were classified as being in the flow context. This kind of 
measure of flow is predominantly found in ESM studies. But not only ESM studies 
rely on measuring flow with the match of demands and skills. For example, a recent 
experimental study by Ulrich, Keller, Hoenig, Waller, and Grön (2013) also assumed 
that flow is experienced when demands and skills match. 
 To date, numerous studies provided rich data that support the flow models (e.g., 
Aellig, 2004; Bassi & Delle Fave, 2012; Csikszentmihalyi & Larson, 1987; Csik-
szentmihalyi & LeFevre, 1989; Delle Fave & Massimini, 2005; Fullagar & Kelloway, 
2009; Massimini et al., 1987; Rheinberg, Manig, Kliegl, Engeser, & Vollmeyer, 2007; 
Schallberger & Pfister, 2001). The match of demands and skills is associated with 
distinct changes in the components of flow (measured with the ESF), and other 
aspects that are additionally assessed with the ESF. Therefore, the balance – as pro-
posed by the models – is highly relevant for subjective experiences. 
 Besides this main finding, other propositions of the models were not supported 
by empirical data. Further, as demands and skills do not entirely determine the expe-
rience of flow, researchers do not know if individuals indeed experience flow when 
both challenges and skills match (at a high level). For example, when according to 
the flow models individuals were expected to experience boredom, they repeatedly 
reported experiences that were associated with positive feelings and with qualities 
related to flow. Moreover, the reliance on only two items in order to assess the bal-
ance is psychometrically problematic, and the calculation of a match is not easy to 
handle (cf. Moneta, 2012). Furthermore, with the ESF, participants rate the  challenge 
of a task instead of the  demands  as it was originally intended by Csikszentmihalyi 
(1975). This is misleading because challenge already implies a subjective assessment 
on the basis of the skills. Thus, a challenge would be a task in which the demands 
match or exceed the skills. These critical points are discussed in depth elsewhere 
(e.g., Delle Fave et al., 2011; Ellis, Voelkl, & Morris, 1994; Engeser & Baumann, 
2016; Keller & Landhäußer, 2012; Moneta, 2012; Rheinberg & Engeser, in press). 
 Strength : The  demand- skill balance is an important dimension with strong rela-
tions to various kinds of subjective experiences that are especially relevant in the 
work context, too. Measuring this balance provides simple but highly relevant 
information. Assessing the two dimensions allows researchers to relate their results 
to the rich body of existing results as most of the studies in the tradition of Csik-
szentmihalyi used this approach. 

Measuring ﬂ ow at work 35
 Weakness : The demands and skills do not entirely determine the experience of 
flow. Thus, relying on the  demand- skill balance to measure flow is problematic. 
Moreover, the reliance on two items in order to assess the balance is psychometrically 
problematic and asking for challenges (instead of demands) could be misleading. 
 2.2.2  Questionnaire assessing selected 
and/or additional components of ﬂ ow 
 The measures presented in this section rest on assessing some components of flow 
via items in a questionnaire. An argument for this approach is that some compo-
nents may be the core of flow and measuring other components would make the 
assessment less valid. A related argument is to keep the questionnaire short. Assess-
ing only some components is also sometimes justified by the finding that the com-
ponents of flow are highly correlated (see Section 2.2.3’s questionnaires assessing 
most/all components of flow). However, these questionnaires have the inherent risk 
of missing important aspects of flow and thus capturing something else. 
 Other measurement approaches assess aspects of flow that are not directly rep-
resented by the components of flow. These aspects are included in the question-
naires in order to distinguish between the components and consequences of flow. 
For example, one aspect that is commonly included in the assessment of flow is 
happiness. Flow is an autotelic experience. It is a  task- intrinsic incentive (Rhein-
berg & Engeser, in press), and individuals do activities in order to enter the flow 
state. However, flow is not the same as happiness. Csikszentmihalyi himself stated, 
“when we are in flow, we are not happy . . . if a rock climber takes time out to 
feel happy while negotiating a difficult move, he might fall to the bottom of the 
mountain” (1997, p. 32). Flow itself is not defined through an affective state (see 
components of flow listed in Section 1). Empirical data confirm that flow and 
happiness are not necessarily experienced at the same time (Engeser & Baumann, 
2016; see also Fullagar & Kelloway, 2009). Aellig (2004; cf. Rheinberg & Engeser, 
in press) showed that flow experience while climbing goes along with the feeling 
of happiness afterwards. Hence, experiencing more flow should go along with a 
happier life in general (cf. Csikszentmihalyi, 1997; Fullagar & Kelloway, 2009). 
Furthermore, Schallberger and Pfister (2001) found a strong association of flow 
with the state of high activation (i.e., arousal) rather than with emotions of hap-
piness (cf. Engeser & Baumann, 2014; Rogatko, 2009). Silvia (2008) found similar 
results and proposed a close link between the curious emotion of interest and the 
concept of flow. 
 An example of a questionnaire that includes happiness is the  WOrk- reLated 
Flow inventory (WOLF; Bakker, 2008). As the name indicates, the questionnaire 
has been designed to assess flow in the work context and it measures absorption, 
work enjoyment, and intrinsic work motivation with several items ( Figure 2.2 ). 
The items that assess absorption may be best understood as a measure of merging 
of action and awareness and a loss of reflective  self- consciousness. Other compo-
nents, such as clear goals and the experience of noncontradictory demands, are not 

36 Anja  Schiepe- Tiska and Stefan Engeser
included. Work enjoyment assesses the experience of the affective quality of work 
(including happiness), which, as we have argued, is not strictly a component of flow. 
Finally, intrinsic work motivation reflects the autotelic part of flow. Irrespectively of 
whether enjoyment should be included in a measure of flow, enjoyment as well as 
intrinsic motivation are represented more strongly in the WOLF than would have 
been expected on the basis of the flow components. The original WOLF started 
to ask individuals to evaluate their experience of work in a summative way on a 
general level. Individuals were thinking about their general work experience when 
answering the items (Bakker, 2005, 2008). This can be problematic because for 
the individual answering the questionnaire the experience of flow and the experi-
ences after flow (consequences – e.g., happiness) cannot easily be separated (see also 
Fullagar & Kelloway, 2009, for a similar argument). Take for example that when 
answering the item “My work gives me a good feeling” it may be unclear for the 
respondent whether this is a feeling that appears after work or whether it means that 
someone generally feels good while working. Other items of the original WOLF 
refer more clearly to an activity itself (e.g., “When I am working, I forget every-
thing else around me.”). Later, the items have been modified such that they refer 
to a corresponding day and thus could be used, for example, in diary studies (e.g., 
Demerouti, Bakker, Sonnentag, & Fullagar, 2012). 
Please indicate how often you experienced each of the statements.
Absorption
When I am working, I think about nothing else.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
I get carried away by my work.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
When I am working, I forget everything else around me.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
I am totally immersed in my work.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Work enjoyment
My work gives me a good feeling.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
I do my work with a lot of enjoyment.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
I feel happy during my work.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
I feel cheerful when I am working.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Intrinsic work motivation
I would still do this work, even if I received less pay.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
I find that I also want to work in my free time.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
I work because I enjoy it.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
When I am working on something, I am doing it for myself.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
I get my motivation from the work itself, and not from the 
reward for it.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
  FIGURE 2.2  The  WOrk- reLated Flow inventory (WOLF; adapted from Bakker, 2008; 1 = 
never, 2 = almost never, 3 = sometimes, 4 = regularly, 5 = often, 6 = very often 7 = always) 

Measuring ﬂ ow at work 37
 Assessing flow in a summative way relates to the discussion of assessing flow on 
a trait level. Here, trait means not the readiness to respond in a certain way but how 
often flow is experienced in a certain domain; people who experience higher frequen-
cies of flow are expected to have a disposition for experiencing flow (e.g., Jackson, 
Martin, & Eklund, 2008). Assessing flow on such a general or trait level instead of the 
state level has the same drawback as interviews: participants are asked to report about 
their flow retrospectively and this could result in some recall bias. The research of Ful-
lagar and Kelloway (2009) suggests that flow is predominantly a state that varies across 
time and situations rather than a trait. Therefore, it results from an interaction between 
incentives in the environment and personal dispositions, such as implicit and explicit 
motives (cf.  Schiepe- Tiska & Engeser, 2012) that may also more closely capture what 
Csikszentmihalyi (1975) referred to as an autotelic personality (see also Baumann, 2012).  
 Another example of assessing flow with selected components is the question-
naire used by Keller and Bless (2008). The questionnaire measures the perceived 
control over an outcome, involvement, and enjoyment. Perceived control is assessed 
with items such as “I had the necessary skill to play the game successfully,” “I knew 
exactly what I had to do,” and “I think I performed well in the game.” The first 
two items represent components of flow, but the last item is more an evaluation 
of performance rather than the experience of the activity itself. Involvement and 
enjoyment are measured with items such as “I was strongly involved in what was 
happening in the game,” “I was thrilled,” and “I would consider buying the game 
for private use.” Involvement represents flow while doing the activity, but buying the 
game may have different reasons besides the experience of the activity itself. 
 Further examples for selective inclusions of components in a flow measure could 
be added (e.g., Schiefele & Raabe, 2011; Ulrich et al., 2013). However, regardless of 
whether readers share the merits and problems we have implied here when assessing 
flow with only some and/or additional components, the aim was to provide some 
basic orientations that enable them to evaluate flow questionnaires by themselves. 
 Strength : Questionnaires concentrate on selected aspects of flow. This allows for 
more tailored or shorter measures, especially for researchers interested in these spe-
cific aspects. If some components of flow are considered as more central than others, 
assessing these components exclusively would warrant higher validity (because less 
central aspects do not affect the scores). 
 Weakness : The main risk is that the measure of flow does not fully represent the 
experience of flow. Moreover, selected components may dominate the assessment 
of flow. If additional components are incorporated, the concept of flow is extended 
beyond its original understanding. 
 2.2.3  Questionnaires assessing most/all 
components of ﬂ ow 
 The final approach to the assessment of flow tries to capture all components. An 
example is the Swedish Flow Proneness Questionnaire (SFPQ; Ullén et al., 2012). 
This questionnaire assesses the subjective sense of concentration,  challenge- skill 

38 Anja  Schiepe- Tiska and Stefan Engeser
balance, explicit goals, clear feedback, sense of control, lack of a sense of bore-
dom, and enjoyment. Although most components presented earlier are included, 
the merging of action and awareness and the loss of reflective  self- consciousness are 
missing. As the name already implies, the questionnaire measures flow in a sum-
mative way with regard to household maintenance, work, and leisure activities (see 
 Figure 2.3 for questions with regard to work activities). 
 When looking at the items, two critical aspects need to be noted. First, the 
absence of boredom does not necessarily imply that individuals experience flow; 
respondents could also be stressed all the time when being at work. Second, hav-
ing a clear picture of what to achieve and how to achieve it could mean that the 
individual is permanently reflecting on his/her behavior which is incompatible 
with the component of loss of reflective  self- consciousness. A similar point could 
be made for the monitoring of performance. In addition, the questionnaire tries to 
assess flow in a summative way (cf. Section 2.2.2). 
 When questionnaires try to assess all components of flow, they also test whether 
the components reflect one or several dimensions that underlie the flow concept. 
The most comprehensive work to examine whether flow is a single or a multi-
faceted experience has been done by Jackson and colleagues (Jackson & Eklund, 
2002; Jackson & Marsh, 1996), who developed a questionnaire that was theoreti-
cally grounded in the multifaceted concept of flow. They started with developing 
a measure of flow state and later they measured flow as a trait as well. The Flow 
State Scale (as well as the Flow Trait Scale) assesses all components by separating the 
component of coherent, noncontradictory demands and feedback into two com-
ponents, and additionally including the  demand- skill balance and transformation of 
When you do something at work, how often does it happen that…
. . . you feel bored?
1
2
3
4
5
. . . it feels as if your ability to perform what you do completely 
matches how difficult it is?
1
2
3
4
5
. . . you have a clear picture of what you want to achieve, and what 
you need to do to get there?
1
2
3
4
5
. . . you are conscious of how well or poorly you perform what you 
are doing?
1
2
3
4
5
. . . you feel completely concentrated?
1
2
3
4
5
. . . you have a sense of complete control?
1
2
3
4
5
. . . what you do feels extremely enjoyable to do?
1
2
3
4
5
  FIGURE 2.3  Swedish Flow Proneness Questionnaire for flow at work (SFPQ; adapted 
from Ullén et al., 2012; 1 = never, 2 = rarely, 3 = sometimes, 4 = often, 5 = every day 
or almost every day) 

Measuring ﬂ ow at work 39
time. Each component is measured with four items, or in the short version (Jackson 
et al., 2008; see  Figure 2.4 ) with one item per component. The scale was developed 
and used mainly in sports contexts (Swann, Keegan, Piggott, & Crust, 2012), but 
could also be used in work (or other) contexts – as has been done by Fullagar and 
Kelloway (2009). 
 Jackson and colleagues tested two statistical models of the flow concept and 
compared them with each other – a  first- order model with nine correlated factors 
representing flow as a single construct and a  nine- factor model with correlated fac-
tors representing flow as a multifaceted construct (Jackson & Marsh, 1996; Marsh & 
Jackson, 1999; Martin & Jackson, 2008). The results showed that both models had 
a good statistical fit. However, the  nine- factor model fitted the data even better than 
the  one- factor model. Beard, Hoy, and Woolfolk Hoy (2010) also replicated this 
structure with a sample of elementary teachers. Therefore, from a conceptual view 
corroborated by factor analyses, flow can be seen as a multifaceted experience (see 
also Section 1, about the flow state and its components). Hence, focusing on one or 
some components misses important aspects of flow experience. 
 The Flow Short Scale developed by Rheinberg, Vollmeyer, and Engeser (2003) 
is another example of a questionnaire that includes all components of flow. The 
scale has been used in various contexts (e.g., Baumann & Scheffer, 2011; Engeser & 
Baumann, 2014; Engeser & Rheinberg, 2008; Reinhardt, Lau, Hottenrott, & Stoll, 
2006; Schüler, Brandstätter, & Sheldon, 2013) and in ESM studies as well (Rheinberg 
et al., 2007). As depicted in  Figure 2.5 , the scale consists of ten items. In addition, 
demands, skills, and the perceived fit of demands and skills can be assessed separately. 
The scale shows high internal consistency, warranted to sum up the items to obtain 
a measure of flow. Nevertheless, factor analyses revealed that two factors could be 
separated (Rheinberg et al., 2003): fluency of performance (items 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9) 
Demands-Skill Balance 
I feel I am competent enough to meet the high demands of the 
situation.
Action-Awareness Merging
I do things spontaneously and automatically without having to 
think.
Concentration 
I am completely focused on the task at hand.
Loss of Self-Consciousness
I am not worried about what others may be thinking of me.
Sense of Control
I have a feeling of total control over what I am doing.
Clear Goals
I have a strong sense of what I want to do.
Unambiguous Feedback
I have a good idea while I am performing about how well I am 
doing.
Transformation of Time
The way time passes seems to be different from normal.
Autotelic Experience
The experience is extremely rewarding.
 FIGURE 2.4  Components and example items of the Flow State Scale (adapted from 
Jackson et al., 2008) 

40 Anja  Schiepe- Tiska and Stefan Engeser
and absorption by the activity (items 1, 3, 6, 10). If individuals score high on both 
aspects, they are considered to experience flow (cf. Engeser, 2012a). An advantage 
of this measure is its brevity. However, the components of flow are assessed with 
only one or two items. In order to evaluate the structure of flow, more items would 
be needed, such as in the questionnaire of Jackson and colleagues presented earlier. 
 Strength : The questionnaires presented here incorporate all components of flow 
and thus represent the construct of flow as defined by Csikszentmihalyi (1975; 
Nakamura & Csikszentmihalyi, 2002). These questionnaires could be used in vari-
ous contexts, including work. Moreover, the short questionnaires can be combined 
with the ESM in order to assess all components of flow. 
 Weakness : If some components of flow are considered more central than others, 
assessing all components reduces the validity of the measure. In addition, assessing all 
components with multiple items lengthens the measure, questioning the applicabil-
ity for all research designs (e.g., for repeated assessments in ESM).  
 3 Nondeclarative methods to assess ﬂ ow 
 With flow being a state of complete involvement in an activity, declarative mea-
sures always have the drawback that the experience of flow needs to be interrupted 
in order to assess flow. As a consequence, people enter a state of  self- reflection 
not 
at all
partly
very 
much
I feel just the right amount of challenge.
My thoughts/activities run fluidly and smoothly.
I don’t notice time passing.
I have no difficulty concentrating.
My mind is completely clear.
I am totally absorbed in what I am doing.
The right thoughts/movements occur of their own accord.
I know what I have to do each step of the way.
I feel that I have everything under control.
I am completely lost in thought.
easy
difficult
Compared to all other activities in which I partake
this one is …
low
high
I think that my competence in this area is ...
too
low
just
right
too
high
For me personally, the current demands are ...
  FIGURE 2.5  The Flow Short Scale (adapted from Engeser, 2012a) 

Measuring ﬂ ow at work 41
and thus flow can be assessed only retrospectively. In contrast, with nondeclarative 
(i.e., procedural or autonomic) methods, flow can be assessed during an activity 
without interrupting it. However, because flow is a subjective experience, these 
methods should be combined with declarative measures of flow in order to vali-
date the results. 
 Some first theoretical attempts addressing nondeclarative measures have dis-
cussed the role of the neurotransmitter dopamine as a correlate of flow (Marr, 
2001) and a  down- regulation of  task- irrelevant processes that relate to the pre-
frontal activity in the brain (Dietrich, 2003, 2004; Goleman, 1997). Empirical 
studies have focused on neuronal (Klasen, Weber, Kircher, Mathiak, & Mathiak, 
2012; Manzano et al., 2013; Ulrich et al., 2013) or psychophysiological mea-
sures, such as heart rate variability (HRV; Keller, Bless, Blomann, & Kleinböhl, 
2011; Manzano, Theorell, Harmat, & Ullén, 2010; Peifer, Schulz, Schächinger, 
Baumann, & Antoni, 2014), facial electromyographic indicators (EMG; Kivi-
kangas, 2006; Manzano et  al., 2010; Nacke  & Lindley, 2009), electrodermal 
activity (Kivikangas, 2006), and cortisol (Keller et al., 2011; Peifer, 2012; Peifer 
et al., 2014). 
 3.1 Neuronal indicators 
 Neuronal studies use positron emission tomography (PET) and functional mag-
netic resonance imaging (fMRI) images in order to examine correlates of flow. 
Manzano et al. (2013) showed that the general proneness for flow at work, in 
leisure activities, and during household maintenance (assessed with the Swed-
ish Flow Proneness Questionnaire; Ullén et al., 2012) is related to the number 
of dopamine  D2- receptors in the dorsal striatum (i.e., putamen and caudate 
nucleus), with the highest correlation for flow at work. This result was also sup-
ported by Ulrich et al. (2013), who, on the one hand, experimentally induced 
flow by establishing a  demands- skill balance, and on the other hand, correlated the 
fMRI images with three flow items assessing enjoyment and perceived challenges/
skills balance. In the balance condition, the neural activation was increased, espe-
cially in the left putamen. The availability of dorsal striatal dopamine receptors 
was found to be associated with better impulse control (Dalley et al., 2007; Dal-
ley, Mar, Economidou, & Robbins, 2008; Pine, Shiner, Seymour, & Dolan, 2010). 
Hence, people who are prone to flow in their daily lives may show better impulse 
control, which can help them structure a situation and direct their attention to 
a limited stimulus field. In line with this evidence, it has been proposed that the 
putamen modulates  stimulus- action coding (Haruno & Kawato, 2006) as well 
as  stimulus- response habit formation (Devan, Hong, & McDonald, 2011), and 
plays an important role in evaluating and guiding ongoing actions toward their 
expected outcomes and directions (Balleine, Delgado, & Hikosaka, 2007; Hori, 
Minamimoto, & Kimura, 2009). Therefore, it may display the process of choos-
ing action opportunities (i.e., challenges) that match the perceived abilities in 
order to structure the activity in such a way that a person always knows what to 

42 Anja  Schiepe- Tiska and Stefan Engeser
do next and gets absorbed in the activity (see  Schiepe- Tiska & Engeser, 2012, for 
a more detailed description). 
 In addition to these results, Ulrich et al. (2013) found a decreased neural activa-
tion in the medial prefrontal cortex in the balance condition. A lesion of this sec-
tion has been found to abolish  self- referential processing (Philippi, Duff, Denburg, 
Tranel, & Rudrauf, 2012). Thus, this result suggests that being in flow goes along 
with a loss of reflective  self- consciousness (see also Goldberg, 2001). 
 Moreover, when comparing the conditions as well as when correlating the fMRI 
data with the selected flow items, a decreased neural activation was observed in the 
left amygdala, a region that is important for emotional coding of environmental 
stimuli (cf. Gottfried, 2011). An increased activation in the amygdala signals the valence 
(i.e., pleasant and unpleasant) rather than the arousal of a stimuli, with the later even 
leading to a decreased activation in the left amygdala (Anders, Eippert, Weiskopf, & 
Veit, 2008). In line with this, Aellig (2004) showed in an ESM study that climb-
ers who experienced flow reported arousal  while  they were climbing and positive 
valence  after they were done climbing. 
 3.2 Psychophysiological measures 
 Also Peifer et al. (2014) also showed that high levels of flow were related to 
medium levels of arousal, as indicated by moderate sympathetic activation (i.e., low 
frequency component of heart rate variability – HRV) and high parasympathetic 
activation (i.e., high frequency component of HRV), the latter additionally indi-
cating decreased cognitive workload (Bernardi et al., 2000). Moreover, high levels 
of flow are linked to moderately elevated cortisol levels (see also Peifer, 2012). 
Peifer et al. (2014) point out that cortisol has been found to facilitate focusing 
and sustaining attention (cf. Peifer, Schächinger, Engeser, & Antoni, 2015; see also 
 Fehm- Wolfsdorf & Nagel, 1996;  Fehm- Wolfsdorf et al., 1993) by providing addi-
tional energy resources (Benedict et al., 2009; Peters et al., 2004). In addition, corti-
sol is related to improved concentration (Born, Hitzler, Pietrowsky, Pauschinger, & 
Fehm, 1989), which is also a component of flow. 
 Strength : With nondeclarative measures, flow can be assessed online without 
interrupting the state. Moreover, micro processes of flow can be examined, such 
as length, intensity, and stability of flow with regard to promoting and hindering 
conditions (see also Peifer, 2012, for a similar argumentation). Data gathered with 
nondeclarative measures provide rich, informative, and objective data that comple-
ment the assessment of flow via  self- report. 
 Weakness : Nondeclarative measures are time- and  resource- consuming because 
usually expensive equipment and additional training of the staff are required. In 
addition, so far, some of the measures can primarily be used in laboratory settings 
and not in applied settings, such as workplaces. To date, the inconsistency of nonde-
clarative indicators prevents from obtaining an accurate assessment of the dynamic 
and subjective experience of flow. 

Measuring ﬂ ow at work 43
 4 Conclusion 
 Which measurement technique a researcher should use depends on the context 
and the research questions he or she wants to answer. We differentiated three main 
approaches: the interview technique, questionnaires (assessing one component, 
selected and/or additional components, most or all components), and nondeclara-
tive measures (neuronal and psychophysiological measures). In addition, we listed 
what are, in our view, the strengths and weaknesses of each approach. This may help 
researchers to evaluate different measures of flow as well as to evaluate flow research 
in general. Moreover, it may facilitate the selection of the best possible measure of 
flow for one’s own empirical research. 
 In sum, interviews are best applied to new kinds of activities, to assess the unique 
subjective experience of individuals, and to discover potential new aspects of expe-
riences (Rheinberg  & Engeser, in press). Questionnaires allow us to assess spe-
cific aspects, and focus on a predefined concept of flow experience. This enables 
researchers to study individual differences quantitatively, and also the influence 
of the context (e.g., different kinds of activities) can be much more easily exam-
ined than with the qualitative approach of interviews. However, the key factor for 
applying questionnaires is that the items have to be selected carefully. We hope that 
we have emphasized how important this selection is and have helped practitioners 
and researchers to evaluate different flow questionnaires. We see the advantages 
of assessing all components of flow. In the case of adding components, research-
ers have to keep in mind that new components need to be carefully related to the 
flow concept and it should be stated explicitly whether these new components are 
part of the flow experience or more closely related preconditions or consequences 
of flow. 
 In addition, we hope that nondeclarative measures, such as neuronal or psycho-
physiological measures, can complement declarative measures in order to assess flow 
“live” during an activity and not only retrospectively or by interrupting this fruitful 
experience. However, when using these kinds of methods, researchers have to keep 
in mind that flow is a subjective state. To date, no nondeclarative measures exist that 
fully represent this subjective experience, and thus assessing flow on the sole basis of 
these measures would not be warranted. Therefore, participants still have to be asked 
whether they are in the flow state. 
 Our presentation does by no means exclude that new or other kinds of mea-
sures of flow could be used. Indeed, the Flow Questionnaire (Csikszentmihalyi & 
Csikszentmihalyi, 1988, pp.  194– 195) is an early measure of flow that might inspire 
other kinds of approaches. Within the Flow Questionnaire, flow is described with 
three quotes and participants are then asked to indicate whether they have ever 
experienced such experiences. This item is used to distinguish between “ flow- ers” 
and “ non- flow-ers.” The flowers are then asked to evaluate their own experiences 
with rating scales (see also Delle Fave et al., 2011; Moneta, 2012). In our classifica-
tion it represents a combination of a qualitative approach and questionnaires that 

44 Anja  Schiepe- Tiska and Stefan Engeser
assess flow with a closed answering format. From our point of view, if possible, a 
combination of different measurement approaches may be the best way to capture 
flow in order to combine the strength of different measures and to explore new 
ways of assessing flow. 
 References 
 Abuhamdeh, S., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2009). Intrinsic and extrinsic motivational orienta-
tions in the competitive context: An examination of  person- situation interactions.  Journal 
of Personality ,  77 ,  1615– 1635. doi:10.1111/j. 1467– 6494.2009.00594.x 
 Aellig, S. (2004).  Über den Sinn des Unsinns:  Flow- Erleben und Wohlbefinden als Anreize für 
autotelische Tätigkeiten [About the sense of nonsense: Flow and  well- being as incentives for 
autotelic tasks] .  Internationale Hochschulschriften [International Thesis]  (Vol. 431). Münster: 
Waxmann. 
 Anders, S., Eippert, F., Weiskopf, N., & Veit, R. (2008). The human amygdala is sensitive to 
the valence of pictures and sounds irrespective of arousal: An fMRI study.  Social Cognitive 
and Affective Neuroscience ,  3 ,  233– 243. doi:10.1093/scan/nsn017 
 Bakker, A. B. (2005). Flow among music teachers and their students: The crossover of peak 
experiences.  Journal of Vocational Behavior ,  66,  26– 44. 
 Bakker, A. B. (2008). The  work- related flow inventory: Construction and initial validation 
of the WOLF.  Journal of Vocational Behavior ,  72 ,  400– 414. doi:10.1016/j.jvb.2007.11.007 
 Balleine, B. W., Delgado, M. R., & Hikosaka, O. (2007). The role of the dorsal striatum 
in reward and  decision- making.  Journal of Neuroscience ,  27 ,  8161– 8165. doi:10.1523/
jneurosci. 1554– 07.2007 
 Bassi, M., & Delle Fave, A. (2012). Optimal experience and  self- determination at school: Join-
ing perspectives.  Motivation and Emotion ,  36 ,  425– 438. doi:10.1007/ s11031– 011– 9268- z 
 Baumann, N. (2012). Autotelic personality. In S. Engeser (Ed.),  Advances in flow research 
(pp.  165– 186). New York: Springer. 
 Baumann, N., & Scheffer, D. (2011). Seeking flow in the achievement domain: The achieve-
ment flow motive behind flow experience.  Motivation and Emotion ,  35 ,  267– 284. 
doi:10.1007/ s11031– 010– 9195– 4 
 Beard, K. S., Hoy, W. K., & Woolfolk Hoy, A. (2010) Academic optimism of individual teach-
ers: Confirming a new construct.  Teaching and Teacher Education ,  26 ,  1136– 1144. 
 Benedict, C., Kern, W., Schmid, S. M., Schultes, B., Born, J., & Hallschmid, M. (2009). 
Early morning rise in  hypothalamic- pituitary-adrenal activity: A role for maintain-
ing the brain’s energy balance.  Psychoneuroendocrinology ,  34 ,  455– 462. doi:10.1016/j.
psyneuen.2008.10.010 
 Bernardi, L.,  Wdowczyk- Szulc, J., Valenti, C., Castoldi, S., Passino, C., Spadacini, G.,  & 
Sleight, P. (2000). Effects of controlled breathing, mental activity and mental stress with or 
without verbalization on heart rate variability.  Journal of the American College of Cardiology , 
 35 ,  1462– 1469. doi:10.1016/ s0735– 1097(00) 00595– 7 
 Born, J., Hitzler, V., Pietrowsky, R., Pauschinger, P., & Fehm, H. L. (1989). Influences of cor-
tisol on auditory evoked potentials (AEPs) and mood in humans.  Neuropsychobiology ,  20 , 
 145– 151. doi:10.1159/000118489 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1975).  Beyond boredom and anxiety . San Francisco, CA:  Jossey- Bass. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990).  Flow: The psychology of optimal experience . New York: Harper 
and Row. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1997).  Creativity: Flow & the psychology of discovery & invention . London: 
Harper & Row. 

Measuring ﬂ ow at work 45
 Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1998).  Finding flow: The psychology of engagement with everyday life . 
New York: Basic Books. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2004).  Good business: Leadership, flow, and the making of meaning . 
New York: Penguin Books. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Csikszentmihalyi, I. (Eds.) (1988).  Optimal experience: Psychological 
studies of flow in consciousness . Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Larson, R. (1987). Validity and reliability of the  experience- sampling 
method.  The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease ,  175 ,  526– 536. doi:10.1097/
 00005053– 198709000–00004 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M., Larson, R.,  & Prescott, S. (1977). The ecology of adolescent 
activity and experience.  Journal of Youth and Adolescence ,  6 ,  281– 294. doi:10.1007/
BF02138940 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M., & LeFevre, J. (1989). Optimal experience in work and leisure.  Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology ,  56 ,  815– 822. doi:10.1037/ 0022– 3514.56.5.815 
 Dalley, J. W., Fryer, T. D., Brichard, L., Robinson, E. S. J., Theobald, D.E.H., Laane, K., . . . 
Robbins, T. W. (2007). Nucleus accumbens D2/3 receptors predict trait impulsivity and 
cocaine reinforcement.  Science ,  315 ,  1267– 1270. doi:10.1126/science.1137073 
 Dalley, J. W., Mar, A. C., Economidou, D., & Robbins, T. W. (2008). Neurobehavioral mech-
anisms of impulsivity:  Fronto- striatal systems and functional neurochemistry.  Microdialysis: 
Recent Developments ,  90 ,  250– 260. doi:10.1016/j.pbb.2007.12.021 
 Debus, M., Sonnentag, S., Deutsch, W., & Nussbeck, F. W. (2014). Making flow happen: 
The effects of being recovered on  work- related flow between and within days.  Journal of 
Applied Psychology, 99 ,  713– 722. doi:10.1037/a0035881 
 Delle Fave, A., & Massimini, F. (2005). The investigation of optimal experience and apa-
thy: Developmental and psychosocial implications.  European Psychologist ,  10 ,  264– 274. 
doi:10.1027/ 1016– 9040.10.4.264 
 Delle Fave, A., Massimini, F., & Bassi, M. (2011).  Psychological selection and optimal experience 
across cultures . New York: Springer. 
 Demerouti, E., Bakker, A. B., Sonnentag, S., & Fullagar, C. J. (2012).  Work- related flow and 
energy at work and at home: A study on the role of daily recovery.  Journal of Organiza-
tional Behavior ,  33 ,  276– 295. doi:10.1002/job.760 
 Devan, B. D., Hong, N. S., & McDonald, R. J. (2011). Parallel associative processing in the 
dorsal striatum: Segregation of  stimulus– response and cognitive control subregions.  Neu-
robiology of Learning and Memory ,  96 ,  95– 120. doi:10.1016/j.nlm.2011.06.002 
 Dietrich, A. (2003). Functional neuroanatomy of altered states of consciousness: The tran-
sient hypofrontality hypothesis.  Consciousness and Cognition ,  12 ,  231– 256. doi:10.1016/
 S1053– 8100(02) 00046– 6 
 Dietrich, A. (2004). Neurocognitive mechanisms underlying the experience of flow.  Con-
sciousness and Cognition ,  13 ,  746– 761. doi:10.1016/j.concog.2004.07.002 
 Ellis, G. D., Voelkl, J. E., & Morris, C. (1994). Measurement and analysis issues with expla-
nation of variance in daily experience using the flow model.  Journal of Leisure Research , 
 26 (4),  337– 356. 
 Engeser, S. (Ed.) (2012a).  Advances in flow research . New York: Springer. 
 Engeser, S. (2012b). Comments on Schiefele and Raabe (2011): Flow is a multifaceted experi-
ence defined by several components.  Psychological Reports ,  111 ,  24– 26. doi:10.2466/04.22.
PR0.111.4. 24– 26 
 Engeser, S., & Baumann, N. (2016). Fluctuation of flow and affect in everyday life: A second 
look at the paradox of work.  Journal of Happiness Studies ,  17 ,  105– 124. 
 Engeser, S., & Rheinberg, F. (2008). Flow, performance and moderators of  challenge- skill 
balance.  Motivation and Emotion ,  32 ,  158– 172. doi:10.1007/ s11031– 008– 9102– 4  

46 Anja  Schiepe- Tiska and Stefan Engeser
 Engeser, S., &  Schiepe- Tiska, A. (2012). Historical lines and an overview of current research 
on flow. In S. Engeser (Ed.),  Advances in flow research (pp.  1– 22). New York: Springer. 
 Eysenck, M. W. (1992).  Anxiety: The cognitive perspective .  Essays in cognitive psychology . Hove: 
Lawrence Erlbaum. 
 Fehm- Wolfsdorf, G., & Nagel, D. (1996). Differential effects of glucocorticoids on human audi-
tory perception.  Biological Psychology ,  42 ,  117– 130. doi:10.1016/ 0301– 0511(95) 05150– 3 
 Fehm- Wolfsdorf, G., Soherr, U., Arndt, R., Kern, W., Fehm, H. L., & Nagel, D. (1993). Audi-
tory reflex thresholds elevated by  stress- induced cortisol secretion.  Psychoneuroendocrinol-
ogy ,  18 ,  579– 589. doi:10.1016/ 0306– 4530(93) 90035- j 
 Fullagar, C. J., & Kelloway, E. K. (2009). Flow at work: An experience sampling approach. 
 Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology ,  82 ,  595– 615. doi:10.1348/0963179
08X357903 
 Fullagar, C., & Kelloway, E. K. (2012). New directions in positive psychology: Implications 
for a healthy workplace. In J. Houmount, S. Leka, & R. Sinclair (Eds.),  Contemporary occu-
pational health psychology: Global perspectives on research and practice  (pp.  146– 161). Chich-
ester, UK: Wiley. 
 Goldberg, E. (2001).  The executive brain: Frontal lobes and the civilized mind . New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
 Goleman, D. (1997).  Emotional intelligence: Why it can matter more than IQ . New York: Bantam. 
 Gottfried, J. A. (Ed.) (2011).  Frontiers in neuroscience: Neurobiology of sensation and reward . Boca 
Raton, FL: CRC Press. 
 Haruno, M., & Kawato, M. (2006). Different neural correlates of reward expectation and reward 
expectation error in the putamen and caudate nucleus during  stimulus- action-reward 
association learning.  Journal of Neurophysiology ,  95 ,  948– 959. doi:10.1152/jn.00382.2005 
 Hori, Y., Minamimoto, T., & Kimura, M. (2009). Neuronal encoding of reward value and 
direction of actions in the primate putamen.  Journal of Neurophysiology ,  102 ,  3530– 3543. 
doi:10.1152/jn.00104.2009 
 Jackson, S. A.,  & Eklund, R. C. (2002). Assessing flow in physical activity: The flow 
state  scale- 2 and dispositional flow  scale- 2.  Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 24 , 
 133– 150. 
 Jackson, S. A., & Marsh, H. W. (1996). Development and validation of a scale to measure 
optimal experience: The Flow State Scale.  Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 18 ,  17– 35. 
 Jackson, S. A., Martin, A. S., & Eklund, R. C. (2008). Long and short measures of flow: The 
construct validity of the  FSS- 2,  DFS- 2, and new brief counterparts.  Journal of Sport and 
Exercise Psychology ,  30 (5),  561– 587. 
 Keller, J., & Bless, H. (2008). Flow and regulatory compatibility: An experimental approach 
to the flow model of intrinsic motivation.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin ,  34 , 
 196– 209. doi:10.1177/0146167207310026 
 Keller, J., Bless, H., Blomann, F., & Kleinböhl, D. (2011). Physiological aspects of flow experi-
ences:  Skills- demand-compatibility effects on heart rate variability and salivary cortisol. 
 Journal of Experimental Social Psychology ,  47 (4),  849– 852. 
 Keller, J., & Blomann, F. (2008). Locus of control and the flow experience: An experimental 
analysis.  European Journal of Personality ,  22 ,  589– 607. doi:10.1002/per.692 
 Keller, J., & Landhäußer, A. (2012). The flow model revisited. In S. Engeser (Ed.),  Advances 
in flow research (pp.  51– 64). New York: Springer. 
 Kivikangas, J. M. (2006).  Psychophysiology of flow experience: An explorative study . Master’s 
thesis. University of Helsinki, Finland. 
 Klasen, M., Weber, R., Kircher, T. T., Mathiak, K. A., & Mathiak, K. (2012). Neural contribu-
tions to flow experience during video game playing.  Social Cognitive and Affective Neurosci-
ence ,  7 ,  485– 495. doi:10.1093/scan/nsr021 

Measuring ﬂ ow at work 47
 Mannell, R. C., & Bradley, W. (1986). Does greater freedom always lead to greater leisure? 
Testing a person× environment model of freedom and leisure.  Journal of Leisure Research , 
 18 (4),  215– 230. 
 Manzano, Ö. de, Cervenka, S., Jucaite, A., Hellenäs, O., Farde, L., & Ullén, F. (2013). Indi-
vidual differences in the proneness to have flow experiences are linked to dopamine 
 D2- receptor availability in the dorsal striatum.  Neuroimage ,  67 ,  1– 6. doi:10.1016/j.
neuroimage.2012.10.072 
 Manzano, Ö. de, Theorell, T., Harmat, L., & Ullén, F. (2010). The psychophysiology of flow 
during piano playing.  Emotion ,  10 ,  301– 311. doi:10.1037/a0018432 
 Marr, A. J. (2001). In the zone: A biobehavioral theory of the flow experience.  Athletic insight: 
The Online Journal of Sport Psychology ,  3 (1), retrieved from: http://www.athleticinsight.
com/Vol3Iss1/Commentary.htm. 
 Marsh, H. W., & Jackson, S. A. (1999 ).  Flow experience in sport: Construct validation of 
multidimensional, hierarchical state and trait responses.  Structural Equation Modelling, 6,  
 343– 371. 
 Martin, A. J., & Jackson, S. A. (2008). Brief approaches to assessing task absorption and 
enhanced subjective experience: Examining ‘short’ and ‘core’ flow in diverse performance 
domains.  Motivation and Emotion, 32 ,  141– 157. 
 Massimini, F., & Carli, M. (1988). The systematic assessment of flow in daily experience. In 
M. Csikszentmihalyi & I. Csikszentmihalyi (Eds.),  Optimal experience: Psychological studies 
of flow in consciousness (pp.  266– 287). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Massimini, F., Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Carli, M. (1987). The monitoring of optimal experi-
ence a tool for psychiatric rehabilitation.  The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease ,  175 , 
 545– 549. doi:10.1097/ 00005053– 198709000–00006 
 Moller, A. C., Csikszentmihalyi, M., Nakamura, J., & Deci, E. L. (2007, February).  Devel-
oping an experimental induction of flow.  Poster presented at the Society for Personality and 
Social Psychology conference, Memphis, TN, USA. 
 Moneta, G. B. (2012). On the measurement and conceptualization of flow. In S. Engeser 
(Ed.),  Advances in flow research (pp.  23– 50). New York: Springer. 
 Moneta, G. B., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1996). The effect of perceived challenges and skills 
on the quality of subjective experience.  Journal of Personality ,  64 ,  275– 310. doi:10.1111/
j. 1467– 6494.1996.tb00512.x 
 Nacke, L., & Lindley, C. (2009). Affective ludology, flow and immersion in a  first- person 
shooter: Measurement of player experience.  Loading. . . ,  3 ,  1– 21. 
 Nakamura, J., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2002). The concept of flow. In C. R. Snyder & S. 
J. Lopez (Eds.),  Handbook of positive psychology  (pp.  89– 105). Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
 Nakamura, J., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2009). Flow theory and research. In C. R. Snyder & 
S. J. Lopez (Eds.),  Handbook of positive psychology  (2nd ed., pp.  195– 206). Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
 Peifer, C. (2012). Psychophysiological correlates of  flow- experience. In S. Engeser (Ed.), 
 Advances in flow research (pp.  139– 164). New York: Springer. 
 Peifer, C., Schulz, A., Schächinger, H., Baumann, N., & Antoni, C. H. (2014). The relation 
of  flow- experience and physiological arousal under stress – Can U shape it?  Journal of 
Experimental Social Psychology ,  53 ,  62– 69. doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2014.01.009 
 Peifer, C., Schächinger, H., Engeser, S.,  & Antoni, C. H. (2015). Cortisol effects on 
 flow- experience.  Psychopharmacology ,  232 ,  1165– 1173. doi:10.1007/ s00213– 014– 3753– 5 
 Peters, A., Schweiger, U., Pellerin, L., Hubold, C., Oltmanns, K. M., Conrad, M., . . . Fehm, 
H. L. (2004). The selfish brain: Competition for energy resources.  Neuroscience and Biobe-
havioral Reviews ,  28 ,  143– 180. doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2004.03.002 

48 Anja  Schiepe- Tiska and Stefan Engeser
 Philippi, C. L., Duff, M. C., Denburg, N. L., Tranel, D., & Rudrauf, D. (2012). Medial PFC 
damage abolishes the  self- reference effect.  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience ,  24 ,  475– 481. 
doi:10.1162/jocn_a_00138 
 Pine, A., Shiner, T., Seymour, B., & Dolan, R. J. (2010). Dopamine, time, and impulsivity in 
humans.  Journal of Neuroscience ,  30 ,  8888– 8896. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI. 6028– 09.2010 
 Reinhardt, C., Lau, A., Hottenrott, K., & Stoll, O. (2006).  Flow- Erleben unter kontrol-
lierter Beanspruchungssteuerung. Ergebnisse einer Laufbandstudie [Flow experience 
under controlled running work load: Results of a laboratory treadmill study.  Zeitschrift 
für Sportpsychologie [Journal of Sports Psychology] ,  13 ,  140– 146. doi:10.1026/ 1612– 5010.
13.4.140 
 Rheinberg, F., & Engeser, S. (in press). Intrinsic motivation and  flow- experience. In J. Heck-
hausen & H. Heckhausen (Eds.),  Motivation and action  (3rd edition). New York: Springer. 
 Rheinberg, F., Manig, Y., Kliegl, R., Engeser, S., & Vollmeyer, R. (2007). Flow bei der Arbeit, 
doch Glück in der Freizeit [Flow during work but happiness during leisure time: Goals, 
 flow- experience, and happiness].  Zeitschrift für Arbeits- und Organisationspsychologie 
[Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology] ,  51 ,  105– 115. doi:10.1026/ 0932– 4089.
51.3.105 
 Rheinberg, F., Vollmeyer, R., & Engeser, S. (2003). Die Erfassung des  Flow- Erleben [Mea-
suring flow]. In J.  Stiensmeier- Pelster & F. Rheinberg (Eds.),  Diagnostik von Selbstkonz-
ept, Lernmotivation und Selbstregulation [Diagnostics of  self- concept, learning motivation, and 
 self- regulation] (pp.  261– 279). Göttingen: Hogrefe. 
 Rogatko, T. P. (2009). The influence of flow on positive affect in college students.  Journal of 
Happiness Studies ,  10 ,  133– 148. doi:10.1037/ t06070– 000 
 Schallberger, U., & Pfister, R. (2001).  Flow- Erleben in Arbeit und Freizeit. Eine Untersu-
chung zum “Paradox der Arbeit” mit der Experience Sampling Method (ESM) Flow 
during work but happiness during leisure time [Flow at work and during leisure: A study 
of the “paradox of work” with the experience sampling method (ESM)].  Zeitschrift für 
Arbeits- und Organisationspsychologie [Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology] ,  45 , 
 176– 187. doi:10.1026// 0932– 4089.45.4.176 
 Schiefele, U.,  & Raabe, A. (2011).  Skills- demands compatibility as a determinant of 
flow experience in an inductive reasoning task.  Psychological Reports ,  109 ,  428– 444. 
doi:10.2466/04.22.PR0.109.5. 428– 444 
 Schiepe- Tiska, A., & Engeser, S. (2012). Flow in  non- achievement situations. In S. Engeser 
(Ed.),  Advances in flow research (pp.  87– 108). New York: Springer. 
 Schüler, J., Brandstätter, V., & Sheldon, K. M. (2013). Do implicit motives and basic psy-
chological needs interact to predict  well- being and flow? Testing a universal hypoth-
esis and a matching hypothesis.  Motivation and Emotion ,  37 ,  480– 495. doi:10.1037/
 t03592– 000  
 Scollon, C. N.,  Kim- Prieto, C., & Diener, E. (2003). Experience sampling: Promises and 
pitfalls, strengths and weaknesses . Journal of Happiness Studies, 4 ,  5– 34. doi:10.1023/
A:1023605205115
 Shiffman, S., Stone, A. A., & Hufford, M. R. (2008). Ecological momentary assessment.  Annual 
Review of Clinical Psychology ,  4 ,  1– 32. doi:10.1146/annurev.clinpsy.3.022806.091415 
 Silvia, P. J. (2008). Interest – The curious emotion.  Current Directions in Psychological Science , 
 17 ,  57– 60. doi:10.1111/j. 1467– 8721.2008.00548.x 
 Swann, C., Keegan, R. J., Piggott, D. C., & Crust, L. (2012). A systematic review of the 
experience, occurrence, and controllability of flow states in elite sport.  Psychology of Sport 
and Exercise, 13 ,  807– 819. 

Measuring ﬂ ow at work 49
 Ullén, F., Manzano, Ö. de, Almeida, R., Magnusson, Patrik, K. E., Pedersen, N. L., Nakamura, 
J., . . . Madison, G. (2012). Proneness for psychological flow in everyday life: Associa-
tions with personality and intelligence.  Personality and Individual Differences ,  52 ,  167– 172. 
doi:10.1016/j.paid.2011.10.003 
 Ulrich, M., Keller, J., Hoenig, K., Waller, C.,  & Grön, G. (2013). Neural correlates of 
experimentally induced flow experiences.  Neuroimage, 86 ,  194– 202. doi:10.1016/j.
neuroimage.2013.08.019 

 3 
 CAPTURING  WITHIN- PERSON 
CHANGES IN FLOW AT WORK 
 Theoretical importance and 
research methodologies 
 Despoina Xanthopoulou 
 Introduction 
 Already in 1975, Csikszentmihalyi defined flow as the “holistic sensation that peo-
ple feel when they act with total involvement” (p. 4). As such, flow is a mental state 
that individuals may experience during any activity of their everyday life. Research 
on flow can be viewed as the landmark that urged scholars to shift their atten-
tion from the study of deficiencies to that of strengths and optimal experiences. 
This positive psychology movement has also affected organizational psychology 
researchers, who now recognize that a balanced approach that takes into account 
both employee weaknesses and optimal functioning can better explain the com-
plexity of organizational phenomena. In this context, the study of flow at work has 
started gaining momentum (Fullagar & Kelloway, 2013). 
 The different conceptualizations of flow that were proposed over the years and 
across life domains converge on three core elements that define this optimal state: 
total absorption in the activity at hand (i.e., the sense that “time flies”), high levels 
of enjoyment (i.e., feelings of happiness), and enhanced intrinsic motivation (i.e., 
activities are partaken in irrespective of external rewards or costs; Bakker, 2008). A 
central assumption is that flow experiences happen suddenly, are of relatively limited 
duration, and exhibit significant variations within the same person (Csikszentmi-
halyi, 1993). This means that although employees may vary from one another in 
terms of how frequently they experience flow or how strong these experiences 
are, the very same employee may experience flow more frequently and/or more 
intensely in certain moments than in other moments (Xanthopoulou, Bakker, & 
Ilies, 2012a). 
 In this chapter, the focus is on the daily experiences of flow at work in an 
attempt to understand the  within- person dynamics of the phenomenon, and to ana-
lyze the psychological processes that explain these  within- employee variations. First, 

Capturing within-person changes in ﬂ ow 51
the concept of flow at work is described with a special emphasis on its dynamic 
nature. Next, the theoretical importance of understanding  within- person fluctua-
tions in flow over and above  between- person differences is analyzed. To this respect, 
a review of studies that investigate the predictors and outcomes of  within- employee 
changes in flow is presented. Finally, the methodological challenges that scholars 
face when studying  within- person fluctuations in  work- related flow are outlined, 
different research protocols are considered, and their advantages and disadvantages 
are discussed. 
 The dynamic nature of ﬂ ow at work 
 Flow is an optimal experience that individuals in general, and employees in partic-
ular, feel when engaging in activities that are intrinsically rewarding (Nakamura & 
Csikszentmihalyi, 2002). Flow is an enjoyable state that is more likely to take place 
when people are involved in challenging activities, while they possess the necessary 
skills to meet these challenges in order to reach  well- defined goals (Csikszentmi-
halyi, 1990). In contrast, when there is a mismatch between challenges and skills, 
individuals are more likely to experience anxiety or boredom. Put differently, 
flow can be experienced during activities that are intrinsically rewarding, where 
perceived challenges and skills are above the person’s average and in balance, and 
where continuous feedback is provided on the process. According to Nakamura 
and Csikszentmihalyi, under these circumstances the optimal experience unfolds 
from moment to moment and has the following characteristics: a) people are so 
concentrated on the task that they forget everything else around them; b) they are 
in total control of their actions; c) they fail to keep track of time; and d) despite 
being functional, they lose their  self- awareness as social actors. 
 Bakker (2005, 2008) defined flow at work as a peak experience that is charac-
terized by intrinsic work motivation, total absorption in the task, and work enjoy-
ment. Accordingly, employees reach flow when they are working on a task they find 
meaningful, when they are so absorbed in the task that they forget everything else 
around them, and when they are happy being busy with the task. For example, a his-
tory teacher is likely to be in flow when she is teaching about a topic she finds very 
interesting and when she is totally concentrated on this task and happy being in 
the class. When the bell rings and the class is over, the teacher will most likely exit the 
flow state since the conditions that allow the experience to take place are no longer 
present. The very same teacher may not experience flow when teaching about the 
same topic to another less receptive audience (e.g., noisy students who distract her 
attention) or when she is teaching about a topic she finds boring. 
 This example illustrates that flow is a dynamic phenomenon that depends on 
momentary, personal, and contextual stimuli (Csikszentmihalyi, 1990). Despite this 
assumption,  work- related flow is often defined and measured as a rather endur-
ing trait (e.g., Demerouti, 2006; Mills & Fullagar, 2008; Salanova, Bakker, & Llo-
rens, 2006). Namely, employees are asked to report on their flow experience “in 
general” and not with respect to the moment that this experience occurs. These 

52 Despoina Xanthopoulou
 between- person studies provide important insights on  who is more likely to reach 
flow, but fail to explain  why and  how the very same employee may be in flow at a 
certain moment and not at another one. This research tradition initiated a dialogue 
about the essence of flow, and whether it is best operationalized as a dispositional 
 trait that exhibits significant  between- person variation or as a momentary  state that 
depends on the situation and may vary significantly within the same person as a 
response to external stimuli (Fullagar & Kelloway, 2009). 
 In line with the trait approach, Csikszentmihalyi (1990) proposed that individu-
als who possess the characteristics of an autotelic personality (i.e., they engage in an 
activity for the intrinsic pleasure of it) have a greater predisposition to experience 
flow. For example, chefs may be asked to recall how frequently they experience flow 
when they are cooking. Those who are intrinsically motivated are more prone to 
reach the optimal experience. In support of the  state  approach, Kimiecik and Stein 
(1992) suggested that reaching the flow state depends not only on one’s dispositions 
but also on the specific characteristics of the situation (e.g., level of challenge during 
the task), as well as on how the person feels or acts with regard to the specific situ-
ation (e.g., level of concentration). Thus, the experience of flow highly depends on 
momentary conditions, and since these conditions are highly fluctuant even within 
the same person, flow should also be expected to exhibit significant  within- person 
variations. Accordingly, a famous chef may experience flow when she is busy with 
preparing a new recipe, but she may not experience flow the next time she pre-
pares this same recipe. Therefore, in order to be able to capture the experience as 
it unfolds and as it changes from one day or moment to the other within the same 
employee, flow should be evaluated frequently over short periods of time and with 
specific  work- related activities as a point of reference (Alliger & Williams, 1993; 
Csikszentmihalyi & Hunter, 2003). 
 Jackson and Eklund (2002) clarified the nature of flow by proposing that it can 
be operationalized best as having both trait and state components. Accordingly, 
 work- related flow is an optimal state that is influenced by momentary conditions 
during work, while employees may vary in the propensity to which they experi-
ence flow (see also Fullagar & Kelloway, 2009). Put differently, a part of the flow 
experience can be explained by dispositional elements, while another part can be 
explained by momentary,  within- employee, situational, and personal states. This 
operationalization seems to better capture the theoretical assumptions that explain 
flow, since it incorporates both the role of the dispositional propensity to reach 
optimal experiences and the role of the characteristics of the activity that one is 
engaged in at a specific moment (Csikszentmihalyi, 1990; Nakamura & Csikszent-
mihalyi, 2002). 
 Findings of studies that examined both between- and  within- person variations 
in flow at work support this complementary view, since significant amounts of 
variance were attributed to both levels of analysis. More specifically, the amount 
of variance that was attributed to  between- person differences ranged from 14% to 
63% ( M = 37%) of the total variance in flow, while the amount of variance that 
was explained by  within- person fluctuations ranged from 27% to 86% ( M = 57%) 

Capturing within-person changes in ﬂ ow 53
of the total variance across studies (Fullagar & Kelloway, 2009; Fullagar, Knight, & 
Sovern, 2013;  Rodríguez- Sánchez, Schaufeli, Salanova, Cifre, & Sonnenschein, 2011; 
Xanthopoulou, 2011; Xanthopoulou, Bakker, Oerlemans,  & Koszucka, 2012b). 
These results indicate that more than  one- third of the total variance in  work- related 
flow is attributable to  within- person changes. This suggests that the state approach 
complements the trait approach, and thus it is imperative to understand the psycho-
logical processes that explain  within- person changes in  work- related flow in order 
to fully grasp these optimal experiences at work. 
 Although some studies indicated that flow exhibits stronger  within- person vari-
ations during nonwork activities than during  work- related activities (Navarro & 
Ceja, 2011),  Rodríguez- Sánchez et al. (2011) showed that the absorption dimension 
of flow exhibited higher  within- person variation when working versus when not 
working. Csikszentmihalyi and LeFevre (1989) in their study among white- and 
 blue- collar workers concluded that employees are three times more likely to expe-
rience flow during  work- related than during leisure activities, since  work- related 
activities seem to be more challenging than nonwork activities. In a similar vein, 
Graham (2008) investigated twenty cohabiting couples who were followed up 
throughout the day for a week. Results showed that  work- related activities were 
more likely to generate flow experiences, followed by household activities. Finally, 
Donner and Csikszentmihalyi (1992) found that on average 44% of time at work 
is time  in  flow. These results suggest that the work context does provide rich 
opportunities for flow experiences to take place, and thus it is important for theory 
development to examine  within- person variability in  work- related flow in more 
depth. 
 The theoretical importance of capturing within-
person variations in ﬂ ow at work 
 How does the study of  within- person variations in  work- related flow add to theory 
development? The main advantage of adopting a complementary  trait- state approach 
in the study of  work- related flow is that it offers the opportunity to observe the 
flow experience when and while it evolves, whether it is moments within workdays 
or workdays within weeks. Taking temporality into consideration permits captur-
ing  intra- individual variability in flow over and above  between- person differences. 
This is important because it helps in documenting when an employee, who may 
or may not have the disposition to experience flow, reaches the flow state. In other 
words, state approaches allow estimating and explaining the  within- person variance 
in flow that is considered to be random error in trait approaches (Ceja & Navarro, 
2011, 2012). 
 On a related note, the study of  within- person variations in  work- related flow 
also helps in describing the phenomenon in a more systematic manner. Although 
flow has been initially depicted as a rather infrequent state that may occur only 
a few times during one’s lifetime (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975),  within- person studies 
suggest that it is not as infrequent as it was initially thought to be, particularly in 

54 Despoina Xanthopoulou
the work context (Ceja & Navarro, 2011, 2012; Csikszentmihalyi & LeFevre, 1989; 
 Rodríguez- Sánchez et al., 2011). The common characteristic of these  within- person 
studies is that multiple measurements are taken over short periods of time. This 
allows capturing the flow experience the moment that it occurs or very close to 
its occurrence. When observations are in close proximity to the examined experi-
ence, assessments are likely to be relatively free from retrospective bias (Ohly, Son-
nentag, Niessen, & Zapf, 2010), and thus the frequency of the phenomenon can be 
estimated more accurately. Let’s consider the following: if we ask employees to rate 
how frequently they experience flow during their work in general, it is likely that 
they may forget optimal experiences of very short duration. Such estimations may 
result in the inaccurate conclusion that flow is a rather uncommon  work- related 
experience. In contrast, if flow is measured frequently and in relation to specific 
activities at work, the chance of missing important information is reduced. Thus, 
the initial impression that flow was rather infrequent could be attributed to misin-
terpretations that were based on findings from studies that treated flow as mainly a 
static phenomenon. 
 It is clear that the study of  within- person variations in  work- related flow adds 
to theory development because it provides more concrete conceptualizations of the 
construct. Another clear advantage of the situational,  within- person approach over 
and above the  between- person approach in the study of flow at work is that the 
former allows collecting rich information about the psychological processes that 
explain the optimal experience.  Between- person studies yield information on the 
enduring predictors and outcomes of  work- related flow. For instance, Csikszentmi-
halyi (1990) suggested that people who are intrinsically motivated are more likely to 
get into the flow state (see also Fullagar, Delle Fave, & Van Krevelen, this volume). 
However, this does not mean that an intrinsically motivated employee experiences 
flow all the time. In order to be able to understand when this person is most likely 
to enter into the flow state and why, it is important to study the momentary condi-
tions that precede the optimal experience, as well as the consequent outcomes. Evi-
dence on the most proximal causes and consequences of momentary  work- related 
flow experiences may explain what it is that triggers the person to enter flow in 
specific moments and not in others. This information helps one to fully understand 
why people experience flow, because these proximal conditions are the ones that 
initiate the psychological processes that generate momentary experiences, over and 
above the related traits (Xanthopoulou et al., 2012a). 
 The study of  within- person changes in  work- related flow is important for theory 
development for one more reason. According to Chen, Bliese, and Mathieu (2005), 
theoretical assumptions that are based on empirical evidence from  between- person 
studies should not be automatically applied at the  within- person level of analy-
sis. This is because the psychological processes that explain  between- person varia-
tions in a phenomenon do not necessarily parallel the psychological mechanisms 
that explain within- person fluctuations in the same phenomenon. The reason 
is that  between- person approaches do not account for the dynamic relationships 
that exist at the  within- person level of analysis, and as a result they provide part of the 

Capturing within-person changes in ﬂ ow 55
truth but not the whole truth. There are empirical findings supporting this view 
with respect to concepts that show significant  within- person fluctuations just like 
flow. For example, there is some preliminary evidence showing that the relationship 
between job demands and work engagement (i.e., a motivational,  work- related state 
that is characterized by high levels of energy, dedication, and absorption) is different 
when engagement is measured as a trait and when it is measured as a state (Xantho-
poulou & Bakker, 2013). Namely, evidence suggests that this relationship is negative 
at the  between- person but positive at the  within- person level of analysis. 
 The foregoing suggests that the psychological mechanisms that explain dynamic 
phenomena may be different depending on the level of analysis and specificity. This 
underscores the necessity to  cross- validate the theoretical assumptions across the 
different levels of analysis, in order to test for potential similarities or differences 
(Chen et al., 2005). Empirical evidence showing that the psychological processes 
explaining  work- related flow are similar at the between- and  within- person level 
favors the homology of the underlying theoretical assumptions, and supports their 
ecological validity across levels of analysis (Chen et al., 2005; Xanthopoulou et al., 
2012a). Rejection of homology underscores the need for theory refinement in a 
way that the dissimilarities across levels are recognized and explained. 
 Work- related ﬂ ow, antecedents, and outcomes: 
Is there homology across levels? 
 Empirical evidence concerning  between- person differences in  work- related flow 
provides important insights on  who is more likely to reach optimal experiences at 
work, and  which are the antecedents and outcomes of trait flow. Mills and Fullagar 
(2008) studied architecture students working on creative projects and found that 
those who were intrinsically oriented to seek out learning experiences were the 
most likely to be in flow. Furthermore, the combination of high levels of intrinsic 
motivation and high levels of need for autonomy increased the chance of experi-
encing flow significantly. In a similar vein, Demerouti (2006) found a positive rela-
tionship between employee conscientiousness and flow at work, while Salanova et 
al. (2006) outlined the positive association between  self- efficacy and flow over time 
in a sample of Spanish teachers. 
 Eisenberger, Jones, Stinglhamber, Shanock, and Randall (2005) conducted two 
 cross- sectional studies among employees from a large retailer in the United States in 
order to test the central assumption that flow is experienced when challenges and 
skills are both high. They found that the combination of high perceived skills and chal-
lenges at work relates to higher levels of flow, but only for  achievement- oriented 
employees. Bakker (2005, 2008) conceptualized flow in the context of the job 
 demands- resources model (Bakker & Demerouti, 2014). In his study among music 
teachers, Bakker (2005) showed that those who were working in resourceful envi-
ronments were more likely to experience a balance between their skills and chal-
lenges, which in turn related to higher flow. In a similar vein, Demerouti (2006) 
showed that employees working in environments characterized by autonomy, skill 

56 Despoina Xanthopoulou
variety, task identity, task significance, and feedback were more likely to experience 
flow. Salanova et al. (2006), as well as Mäkikangas, Bakker, Aunola, and Demerouti 
(2010), further supported the significance of resourceful work environments for 
flow at work over time. Next, Bakker (2008) found that job demands related posi-
tively to the absorption dimension of  work- related flow (since pressure may enhance 
concentration) and negatively to the enjoyment dimension of flow (since chronic 
exposure to demands may induce strain and low levels of pleasure). Finally, the 
positive link between flow and job performance has been supported systematically 
(Bakker, 2008; Demerouti, 2006; Demerouti, Xanthopoulou, Tsaousis, & Bakker, 
2014; Eisenberger et al., 2005). This short review of studies at the  between- person 
level of analysis indicates that employees who are more intrinsically motivated or 
have more challenging and resourceful jobs (i.e., jobs characterized by a balance 
between demands and resources) are more likely to experience flow. Furthermore, 
those who experience flow are better performers. Do these assumptions hold at the 
 within- person level of analysis as well? 
 One of the very first studies that focused on  within- employee changes in flow is 
that of Csikszentmihalyi and LeFevre (1989). These authors followed  seventy- eight 
workers for a week and, by using the experience sampling method, collected about 
seven random reports from each participant throughout each of the days that the 
study took place. Their findings demonstrated that in conditions where both chal-
lenges and skills were greater than the respondents’ average, employees reported 
higher levels of potency, concentration, and creativity. Similarly, Quinn (2005) in 
his experience sampling study among 128 knowledge workers showed that in con-
ditions where employees were experiencing a better balance between challenges 
and skills they were more likely to enter the flow state. The significant role of the 
 skills- challenges balance for  work- related flow at the  within- person level of analysis 
gained further support in the study by Ceja and Navarro (2012). These authors fol-
lowed up sixty employees from various occupations over  twenty- one working days. 
Results based on more than 6,000 momentary reports showed that  work- related 
flow is best described as a state that combines continuous and sudden changes. 
These changes are determined by momentary levels of skills and challenges that 
are responsible for when someone will enter the ‘flow zone’, and how strong this 
experience will be. 
 The findings of the diary study by Fullagar and Kelloway (2009) underscore 
the role of task characteristics for understanding  within- person variations in flow. 
Forty architecture students were followed up over a  fifteen- week semester, while 
they were busy with studio work. Results showed that when academic work was 
characterized by higher levels of skill variety and autonomy than the average, stu-
dents were more likely to experience flow. As concerns the role of job demands, 
the results of a diary study on emotional labor among  thirty- four Polish and sixteen 
Dutch workers (Xanthopoulou et al., 2012b) showed that the emotion regulation 
strategies that employees use daily in order to deal with the emotionally demanding 
conditions at work explain  within- person fluctuations in flow. On the days emotion 
workers were using surface acting (i.e., they were expressing the emotions that were 

Capturing within-person changes in ﬂ ow 57
required by the organization without altering their inner feelings) more frequently 
than usual, they experienced lower levels of flow. In contrast, on days emotion work-
ers were using deep acting (i.e., they were actively attempting to feel the required 
emotions) more frequently, they experienced higher levels of flow. Furthermore, the 
results of a diary study among  forty- five Dutch primary school teachers indicated 
that  time- management (as a dispositional trait) functions as a moderator on the 
relationship between daily workload and daily flow (Xanthopoulou, 2011). Daily 
workload related positively to daily flow only for those employees who were able to 
manage their time effectively, since these employees were less likely to be distracted 
due to their disorganized behavior. 
 The studies that focused on  within- person fluctuations in the optimal experi-
ence showed that being in flow is beneficial for both employees and organizations. 
For instance, Fullagar and Kelloway (2009) found  within- person fluctuations in 
flow to predict positive mood. Demerouti, Bakker, Sonnentag, and Fullagar (2012) 
in their  four- day study among  eighty- three German and Dutch employees found 
that certain dimensions of flow at work (mainly absorption and enjoyment) related 
positively to energy both at the end of the workday and at the end of the evening. 
Also, it was shown that daily recovery during work and detachment after work 
moderated the relationship between flow at work and energy after work. Namely, 
flow facilitated energy particularly for those who were less able to recover during 
work breaks, and those who were more likely to detach from  work- related demands 
after work. In a similar vein, Xanthopoulou et al. (2012b) showed that on days that 
employees experienced higher levels of flow, they also reported a less intense need 
to recover from  work- related demands at the end of the workday and, consequently, 
they recovered from work during leisure time. Finally, Dutch teachers who could 
deal effectively with their daily workload by managing their time well reported 
more frequent states of flow that – due to their resourcefulness – decreased their 
need for recovery after work and increased their feelings of relaxation before going 
to bed (Xanthopoulou, 2011). 
 Considering that daily recovery from work is a positive predictor of subsequent 
job performance (Volman, Bakker, & Xanthopoulou, 2013), the empirical find-
ings on the positive link between momentary flow and recovery imply that flow 
may be beneficial for employee performance at the  within- person level of analysis 
as well. However, there is very limited evidence on the  flow- performance rela-
tionship. Bakker, Oerlemans, Demerouti, Slot, and Ali (2011) conducted a study 
among professional soccer players during specific matches. Results showed that in 
matches that players received higher levels of performance feedback and support 
from their coaches (i.e., more resources), they experienced higher levels of flow 
during the game. In turn, flow during the game related positively to both self- and 
 coach- ratings of performance. 
 The aforementioned studies suggest that the psychological mechanisms that 
explain the relationships of  work- related flow with its antecedents and outcomes 
seem to be quite homologous across levels of analysis. For instance, the balanced 
combination of skills and challenges is a crucial trigger of  work- related flow both 

58 Despoina Xanthopoulou
between (Eisenberger et al., 2005) and within employees (Ceja & Navarro, 2012). 
Furthermore, findings concerning both levels of analysis underscore the role of job 
demands and resources for flow (Bakker, 2005, 2008; Demerouti et al., 2012), and 
agree that employees are likely to experience flow at work when they possess the 
resources that help them to deal effectively with the demanding aspect of challenges. 
Finally, and despite the limited empirical evidence, findings both at the between- 
and the  within- person levels of analysis do support the beneficial effects of flow 
for employee  well- being and job performance. All in all, the existing empirical 
evidence seems to favor the homology of the theoretical assumptions that explain 
flow across levels of analysis. However, the reported studies have one important 
limitation, since none of these really  cross- validates the relationships between flow, 
its antecedents and outcomes at the between- and  within- person levels of analysis 
simultaneously. Therefore, research is needed in order to reach more robust con-
clusions regarding the psychological mechanisms that explain  within- person fluc-
tuations in flow at work and their external validity across levels of analysis. In this 
respect, methods that allow capturing both between- and  within- person variations 
in flow, its causes and consequences (e.g., experience sampling), and under which 
circumstances flow experiences are more likely to occur are of great significance for 
theory development. 
 Methods to capture  within- person changes in ﬂ ow 
 Flow is best operationalized as having both trait and state components. Thus, it 
can be measured as either an enduring disposition or as a fluctuant state (or both), 
depending on the research question of interest (Fullagar & Kelloway, 2009; Jackson & 
Eklund, 2002). In the case where one is interested in explaining  between- person 
differences, flow can be measured as an enduring trait, while if one is interested 
in explaining  within- person changes he or she should (also) measure momentary 
flow (Allen & Potkay, 1981).  Cross- sectional studies or longitudinal studies with 
long time intervals allow capturing  between- employee variations in flow. How-
ever, such designs are of limited use when one is interested in studying flow as a 
dynamic phenomenon that may change substantially within the same person from 
one moment or day to another. The reason is that  one- time measurements or mul-
tiple measurements over long periods of time cannot capture the essence of flow 
and its dependence on momentary individual or situational stimuli. To understand 
 within- person fluctuations in flow at work, complex study designs that track the 
same employees in multiple moments over short periods of time are needed (Graber, 
Laurenceau, & Carver, 2011). 
 Indeed, most studies that concern  within- person changes in  work- related 
flow have applied diary designs (e.g., Demerouti et al., 2012) or experience sam-
pling methods (e.g., Ceja  & Navarro, 2012; Csikszentmihalyi  & LeFevre, 1989; 
 Rodríguez- Sánchez et al., 2011). This is not surprising given the fact that such 
methods allow following up the same employees on a daily basis, and even sev-
eral times during a day, across a short period of time (one or two weeks), while 

Capturing within-person changes in ﬂ ow 59
participants act in their natural settings (e.g., work; Ohly et al., 2010). The main dif-
ference between diaries and experience sampling is that in the first case participants 
are asked to respond to different sets of questions at the different measurements 
throughout a day (e.g., skills and challenges at the beginning of the workday and 
flow in the afternoon), and repeat the same questions over several days. In contrast, 
experience sampling studies usually rely on more frequent and similar assessments 
over the course of a day (Binnewies & Sonnentag, 2013). Nevertheless, both types 
of studies have many things in common that allow stating that diaries are a specific 
form of experience sampling. In what follows, the experience sampling methodol-
ogy is described in more detail and its advantages and disadvantages for the study of 
 work- related flow are discussed. 
 Experience sampling 
 The significance of the experience sampling method (ESM) for capturing flow is 
evident when considering that this method was actually developed by Csikszentmi-
halyi, Larson, and Prescott (1977; see also Larson & Csikszentmihalyi, 1983) for the 
exact purpose of capturing flow experiences. ESM relies on participants’ responses 
to repeated signals (sent through personal digital assistants, blackberries, or smart-
phones) over short periods of time, while engaging in activities in their natural 
setting (e.g., work; Csikszentmihalyi et al., 1977; Oerlemans & Bakker, 2013). For 
instance, in experience sampling studies employees are prompted to provide reports 
on their momentary  work- related flow levels with items such as “Right now, I am 
totally absorbed in the task I perform,” as well as on related experiential states and 
contextual characteristics at fixed, random, or a combination of fixed and random 
intervals during their workday for a period of one to several weeks (for examples, 
see Ceja & Navarro, 2011, 2012). 
 Depending on the research question under study, different experience sampling 
protocols may be adopted (Conner & Lehman, 2012). For instance, if researchers 
are interested in measuring flow experiences at specific moments during a day, 
they may choose   time- based protocols . In  time- based protocols, measurements are 
taken either at standardized times ( interval- contingent; e.g., hourly reports or before 
lunch and at the end of the workday) or at random times, when a signal is deliv-
ered ( signal- contingent; e.g., randomly between five and ten times per day). For 
example, Csikszentmihalyi and LeFevre (1989) asked participants to rate their flow 
experiences as response to seven daily signals or “beeps” coming from electronic 
paging devices that were sent randomly within  two- hour periods. In a similar vein, 
Ceja and Navarro (2012) asked participants to carry a personal digital assistant for 
 twenty- one consecutive workdays during working hours that were programmed 
to beep randomly six times per workday, with intervals of at least eighty minutes 
in between beeps. If one is interested in measuring flow with regard to specific 
events that occur at work (e.g., when interacting with clients or working together 
with colleagues on projects) then   event- based protocols  are more suitable. Of course, 
different types of protocols can be combined if, for instance, one wants to capture 

60 Despoina Xanthopoulou
 work- related flow at random moments during a workday, as well as at predeter-
mined instances (e.g., at the end of the workday), or wants to investigate how ran-
dom flow experiences during the day link to performance and fatigue at the end 
of work. 
 ESM has clear methodological advantages for the study of  work- related flow 
(Fullagar  & Kelloway, 2013), with the first being that it allows estimating both 
between- and  within- employee changes in optimal experiences simultane-
ously (Csikszentmihalyi & Hunter, 2003). Multiple measurements per employee 
throughout a day and over short periods of time allow investigating how flow 
experiences change within the same person from one moment to another, as well as 
from one employee to another. This makes it possible to decompose the between- 
and  within- person variance in flow, and to test both momentary factors that explain 
 within- person variance, as well as dispositional factors that explain  between- person 
variance. In this way, ESM provides the chance to empirically capture the comple-
mentary  trait- state view in the study of dynamic flow experiences. Importantly, 
ESM provides more accurate estimates of trait  work- related flow than  one- time 
measurements since momentary experiences may be averaged across measurement 
occasions (Dimotakis & Ilies, 2013). 
 Of similar importance, ESM allows capturing the flow experience at the 
moment that it occurs, as it evolves, and in the context that it evolves, adding to 
the ecological validity of the observations, while minimizing recall biases. Addi-
tionally, experience sampling studies with multiple measurements during the 
course of a workday and for a number of consecutive days allow researchers to get 
a more accurate picture of the proximal causes and consequences of the optimal 
experience, and develop a greater understanding of the dynamic psychological 
processes that explain flow at work. Furthermore, multiple measurements over 
short periods of time reduce the chance of missing the flow experiences when 
these occur (Kimiecik & Stein, 1992). Another advantage of experience sampling 
is that the duration of the flow experience can be studied in more detail. Finally, 
having multiple measurements over the course of a day enables researchers to 
also estimate causal effects. Namely, it allows investigating whether certain flow 
episodes during work may impact experiences later in the day. For instance, pre-
liminary multilevel analyses from a diary study among thirty Greek employees 
that were followed up for five consecutive workdays, twice per day (i.e., right after 
work and at bedtime), indicated that on days that employees experienced flow 
at work they were more likely to experience flow during their leisure activities, 
because flow at work related negatively to cognitive weariness at the end of the 
shift (Xanthopoulou, 2013). 
 Despite these positive features, experience sampling is not a panacea and has its 
own methodological  trade- offs (Bolger, Davis, & Rafaeli, 2003). Utilizing a research 
design that encompasses multiple measurements throughout a day over a substan-
tial number of days carries the risk of exhausting the study participants. ESM is 
 labor- intensive and can even annoy participants who are already busy with their 
normal workloads. As a result, participants may exhibit low commitment to the 

Capturing within-person changes in ﬂ ow 61
study protocol that may, consequently, lead to missing observations,  low- quality 
data, and high turnover percentages. Furthermore, interrupting (by beeping or 
sending a push message on the smartphone) an employee in the activity that (s)he is 
pursuing in order to fill out a short questionnaire is likely to interfere with his/her 
work tasks or to disrupt the flow experience itself. In other words, ESM may destroy 
the experience that it is designed to measure. 
 These issues can be solved by using  interval- contingent protocols, where 
employees are asked to estimate the degree to which they experience(d) flow 
on specific, predetermined moments during the workday with items like “This 
morning/ evening at work, I was totally absorbed in my task” (for an example 
see Demerouti et al., 2012). The most important advantage of this type of pro-
tocol is that it is less intrusive and limits the likelihood of disrupting flow as it 
evolves, since employees are usually required to report on their experiences just 
after finishing work or during predetermined work breaks (e.g., lunch break). 
Furthermore, this type of protocol is considerably less  labor- intensive because 
participants have to respond only to a short questionnaire once or twice during 
the course of each workday that the study takes place (Oerlemans & Bakker, 
2013). However, an important disadvantage of the  interval- contingent protocols 
is their sensitivity to recall bias that may alter the true nature of the experience 
(Bolger et  al., 2003). This disadvantage could be partly solved if researchers 
design  interval- contingent protocols with more than one measurement during 
the day. For instance, employees could be asked to rate their flow experiences 
at midday (before going to lunch) and at the end of the day (before leaving the 
workplace). 
 Alternative methods 
 ESM has certainly many advantages, but also certain disadvantages when studying 
flow at work. The main problem with  time- based protocols is that flow experi-
ences may be lost (i.e., in  interval- contingent protocols) or interrupted (i.e., in 
 signal- contingent protocols). As concerns  event- based protocols, the main draw-
back is that employees may be unable to comply with the protocol and report on 
their flow experiences after the specific event ends or they may even be unable 
to recognize the event of interest. In this respect, the day reconstruction method 
(DRM; Kahneman, Krueger, Schkade, Schwarz, & Stone, 2004) may be a good alter-
native to study  work- related flow (Diener & Tay, 2014). In the DRM, individuals 
are asked to reconstruct in chronological order all episodes of their day. Episodes are 
defined by start and end time, area of life (e.g., work), and specific interactions that 
occurred (e.g., interactions with clients or colleagues). After reconstructing all epi-
sodes of a particular day, participants are required to rate how they felt with regard 
to each episode (e.g., whether they were in flow). In this way, it is unlikely to miss 
an important flow episode. However, retrospection bias may impact the description 
of the experience. There is no published study where the DRM has been applied 
in order to study  within- employee fluctuations in flow at work. Thus, it would be 

62 Despoina Xanthopoulou
interesting for future studies to test whether the DRM is as useful as the ESM in 
capturing this optimal experience. 
 Despite the fact that initial research on flow was based on qualitative 
 methodologies – and particularly interviews – that contributed significantly in 
defining the concept of flow in general (e.g., Csikszentmihalyi, 1975) and with 
regard to work in particular (Delle Fave  & Massimini, 1988), the vast majority 
of studies on  work- related flow are of quantitative nature (Fullagar & Kelloway, 
2013). Despite the retrospective character of qualitative methods, asking employees 
to describe how they feel and behave when reaching a flow state may prove to be 
useful in better describing what it means to be in flow at work. Such qualitative 
evidence may also help in distinguishing flow from other related  work- related con-
structs (e.g., state work engagement) in a more systematic way. 
 General conclusion 
 With this chapter, the main aim was to designate the theoretical significance 
of studying flow at work as a dynamic phenomenon that may vary within the 
same employee from one moment to the other. Special emphasis was placed on 
the methods that can be employed in order to capture  within- person changes in 
 work- related flow. The study of  work- related flow as a dynamic phenomenon 
contributes to theory development in a number of ways, with the most impor-
tant being the analysis of the psychological processes that explain the proximal 
causes and consequences of flow episodes. In this context, future studies should 
further investigate  within- person variations in the antecedents and outcomes of 
flow in an attempt to test the homology of the flow theory across levels of analy-
sis. Methodological and statistical advancements facilitate the management of 
complicated data sets, allowing researchers to capture  within- employee changes 
in flow in a more elaborate way (Dimotakis & Ilies, 2013; Oerlemans & Bakker, 
2013). Scholars should further consider using hybrid methods (e.g., a combina-
tion of experience sampling, observations, and/or interviews). Despite the diffi-
culty of the endeavor, methodological triangulation would allow collecting even 
richer information that would add to the systematic analysis of  within- person 
variations in  work- related flow. Despite the fact that more work still needs to 
be done in establishing the relationships that explain the antecedents and conse-
quences of flow at work across levels of analysis, this chapter suggests that such 
research is worth pursuing for the advancement of the field of positive organi-
zational behavior. 
 References 
 Allen, B. P., & Potkay, C. R. (1981). On the arbitrary distinction between states and traits. 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ,  41 , 916–928. 
 Alliger, G. M., & Williams, K. J. (1993). Using  signal- contingent experience sampling meth-
odology to study work in the field: A discussion and illustration examining task percep-
tions and mood.  Personnel Psychology ,  46 ,  525– 549. 

Capturing within-person changes in ﬂ ow 63
 Bakker, A. B. (2005). Flow among music teachers and their students: The crossover of peak 
experiences.  Journal of Vocational Behavior ,  66 ,  26– 44. 
 Bakker, A. B. (2008). The  work- related flow inventory: Construction and initial validation 
of the WOLF.  Journal of Vocational Behavior ,  72 ,  400– 414. 
 Bakker, A. B., & Demerouti, E. (2014). Job  demands- resources theory. In P. Y. Chen & C. L. 
Cooper (Eds.),  Work and wellbeing. Wellbeing: A complete reference guide  (Vol. III, pp.  37– 64). 
Chichester, UK:  Wiley- Blackwell. 
 Bakker, A. B., Oerlemans, W., Demerouti, E., Slot, B. B., & Ali, D. K. (2011). Flow and per-
formance: A study among talented Dutch soccer players.  Psychology of Sport and Exercise , 
 12 ,  442– 450. 
 Binnewies, C., & Sonnentag, S. (2013). The application of diary methods to examine work-
ers’ daily recovery during  off- job time. In A. B. Bakker & K. Daniels (Eds.),  A day in the 
life of a happy worker (pp.  72– 85). Hove: Psychology Press. 
 Bolger, N., Davis, A., & Rafaeli, E. (2003). Diary methods: Capturing life as it is lived.  Annual 
Review of Psychology ,  54 ,  579– 616. 
 Ceja, L., & Navarro, J. (2011). Dynamic patterns of flow in the workplace: Characterizing 
 within- individual variability using a complexity science approach.  Journal of Organiza-
tional Behavior ,  32 ,  627– 651. 
 Ceja, L., & Navarro, J. (2012). ‘Suddenly I get into the zone’: Examining discontinuities and 
nonlinear changes in flow experiences at work.  Human Relations ,  65 ,  1101– 1127. 
 Chen, G., Bliese, P. D., & Mathieu, J. E. (2005). Conceptual framework and statistical proce-
dures for delineating and testing multilevel theories of homology.  Organizational Research 
Methods ,  8 ,  375– 409. 
 Conner, T. S., & Lehman, B. J. (2012). Getting started: Launching a study in daily life. In 
M. R. Mehl & T. S. Conner (Eds.),  Handbook of research methods for studying daily life 
(pp.  89– 107). New York: Guilford. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1975).  Beyond boredom and anxiety: Experiencing flow in work and play. 
San Francisco, CA:  Jossey- Bass. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990).  Flow: The psychology of optimal experience.  New York: Harper & 
Row. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1993).  The evolving self. New York: Harper Collins. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Hunter, J. (2003). Happiness in everyday life: The uses of experience 
sampling.  Journal of Happiness Studies ,  4 ,  185– 199. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M., Larson, R. J., & Prescott, S. (1977). The ecology of adolescent activity 
and experience.  Journal of Youth and Adolescence ,  6 ,  281– 294. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M., & LeFevre, J. (1989). Optimal experience in work and leisure.  Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology ,  56 ,  815– 822. 
 Delle Fave, A., & Massimini, F. (1988). Modernization and the changing contexts of flow in 
work and leisure. In M. Csikszentmihalyi & I. Csikszentmihalyi (Eds.),  Optimal experience 
(pp.  193– 213). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
 Demerouti, E. (2006). Job characteristics, flow, and performance: The moderating role of 
conscientiousness.  Journal of Occupational Health Psychology ,  11 ,  266– 280. 
 Demerouti, E., Bakker, A. B., Sonnentag, S., & Fullagar, C. J. (2012).  Work- related flow and 
energy at work and at home: A study on the role of daily recovery.  Journal of Organiza-
tional Behavior ,  33 ,  276– 295. 
 Demerouti, E., Xanthopoulou, D., Tsaousis, I., & Bakker, A. B. (2014). Disentangling task 
and contextual performance: A  multitrait- multimethod approach.  Journal of Personnel Psy-
chology ,  13 ,  59– 69. 
 Diener, E., & Tay, L. (2014). Review of the day reconstruction method (DRM).  Social Indica-
tors Research ,  116 ,  255– 267. 

64 Despoina Xanthopoulou
 Dimotakis, N.,  & Ilies, R. (2013).  Experience- sampling and  event- sampling research. In 
A. B. Bakker & K. Daniels (Eds.),  A day in the life of a happy worker (pp.  85– 99). Hove: 
Psychology Press. 
 Donner, J., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1992). Transforming stress into flow.  Executive Excel-
lence ,  9 ,  16– 17. 
 Eisenberger, R., Jones, J. R., Stinglhamber, F., Shanock, L., & Randall, A. T. (2005). Flow 
experiences at work: For high need achievers alone?  Journal of Organizational Behavior ,  26 , 
 755– 775. 
 Fullagar, C. J., & Kelloway, K. (2009). ‘Flow’ at work: An experience sampling approach. 
 Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology ,  82 ,  595– 615. 
 Fullagar, C. J., & Kelloway, K. (2013).  Work- related flow. In A. B. Bakker & K. Daniels 
(Eds.),  A day in the life of a happy worker (pp.  41– 57). Hove: Psychology Press. 
 Fullagar, C. J., Knight, P. A., & Sovern, H. S. (2013). Challenge/skill balance, flow, and per-
formance anxiety.  Applied Psychology: An International Review ,  62 ,  236– 259. 
 Graber, E. C., Laurenceau,  J- F., & Carver, C. S. (2011). Integrating the dynamics of personal-
ity and close relationship processes: Methodological and data analytic implications.  Journal 
of Personality ,  79 ,  1403– 1439. 
 Graham, J. M. (2008).  Self- expansion and flow in couples’ momentary experiences: An 
experience sampling study.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ,  3 ,  679– 694. 
 Jackson, S. A., & Eklund, R. C. (2002). Assessing flow in physical activity: The flow state 
 scale- 2 and dispositional flow  scale- 2.  Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology ,  24 ,  133– 150. 
 Kahneman, D., Krueger, A., Schkade, D., Schwarz, N., & Stone, A. (2004). A survey method 
for characterizing daily life experience: The day reconstruction method.  Science ,  306 , 
 1776– 1780. 
 Kimiecik, J. C., & Stein, G. L. (1992). Examining flow experiences in sport contexts: Concep-
tual issues and methodological concerns.  Journal of Applied Sport Psychology ,  4 ,  144– 160. 
 Larson, R., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1983). The experience sampling method.  New Directions 
for Methodology of Social and Behavioral Sciences ,  15 ,  41– 56. 
 Mäkikangas, A., Bakker, A. B., Aunola, K., & Demerouti, E. (2010). Job resources and flow at 
work: Modelling the relationship via latent growth curve and mixture model methodol-
ogy.  Journal of Occupational & Organizational Psychology ,  83 ,  795– 814. 
 Mills, M. J., & Fullagar, C. J. (2008). Motivation and flow: Toward an understanding of the 
dynamics of the relation in architecture students.  Journal of Psychology ,  142 ,  533– 553. 
 Nakamura, J., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2002). The concept of flow. In C. R. Snyder & S. J. 
Lopez (Eds.),  Handbook of positive psychology  (pp.  89– 105). New York: Oxford University 
Press. 
 Navarro, J., & Ceja, L. (2011). Dinámicas complejas en el flujo: Diferencias entre trabajo y no 
trabajo [Complex dynamics of flow: Differences between work and  non- work activities]. 
 Revista de Psicología Social ,  26 ,  443– 456. 
 Oerlemans, W.G.M., & Bakker, A. B. (2013). Capturing the moment in the workplace: Two 
methods to study momentary subjective  well- being. In A. B. Bakker (Ed.),  Advances in 
positive organizational psychology (Vol. 1, pp.  329– 346). Bingley, UK: Emerald. 
 Ohly, S., Sonnentag, S., Niessen, C.,  & Zapf, D. (2010). Diary studies in organizational 
research: An introduction and some practical recommendations.  Journal of Personnel Psy-
chology ,  9 ,  79– 93. 
 Quinn, R. (2005). Flow in knowledge work: High performance experience in the design of 
national security technology.  Administrative Science Quarterly ,  50 ,  610– 641. 
 Rodríguez- Sánchez, A. M., Schaufeli, W. B., Salanova, M., Cifre, E., & Sonnenschein, M. 
(2011). Enjoyment and absorption: An electronic diary study on daily flow patterns. 
 Work & Stress ,  25 ,  75– 92. 

Capturing within-person changes in ﬂ ow 65
 Salanova, M., Bakker, A. B., & Llorens, S. (2006). Flow at work: Evidence for an upward spiral 
of personal and organizational resources.  Journal of Happiness Studies ,  7 ,  1– 22. 
 Volman, F. E., Bakker, A. B., & Xanthopoulou, D. (2013). Recovery at home and perfor-
mance at work: A diary study on  self- family facilitation.  European Journal of Work & 
Organizational Psychology ,  22 ,  218– 234. 
 Xanthopoulou, D. (2011, May).  Is the day enough to be happy? Relationship of  time- management 
to daily flow and recovery . Paper presented at the 15th Conference of the European Associa-
tion of Work & Organizational Psychology, Maastricht, The Netherlands. 
 Xanthopoulou, D. (2013).  Job crafting and flow at work and after work: A diary study on the 
role of cognitive weariness . Unpublished manuscript. Thessaloniki: Aristotle University of 
Thessaloniki. 
 Xanthopoulou, D., & Bakker, A. B. (2013). State work engagement: The significance of 
 within- person fluctuations. In A. B. Bakker & K. Daniels (Eds.),  A day in the life of a happy 
worker (pp.  25– 40). Hove: Psychology Press. 
 Xanthopoulou, D., Bakker, A. B., & Ilies, R. (2012a). Everyday working life: Explaining 
 within- person fluctuations in employee  well- being.  Human Relations, 65,   1051– 1069. 
 Xanthopoulou, D., Bakker, A. B., Oerlemans, W.G.M., & Koszucka, M. (2012b, April).  Recov-
ering from emotional labour: A diary study on the role of deep and surface acting.  Paper presented 
at the European Academy of Occupational Health Psychology, Zurich, Switzerland. 

 4 
 WHAT PREDICTS FLOW 
AT WORK? 
 Theoretical and empirical perspectives 
 Evangelia Demerouti and Anne Mäkikangas 
 The construct of “flow” evolved out of the work of Csikszentmihalyi (1975) in 
which he investigated why artists, chess players, dancers, rock climbers, surgeons, 
and many others spend an inordinate amount of time engaged in activities for 
which there was no extrinsic reward. He concluded that it must be the enjoyment 
inherent in the task that was intrinsically motivating the artist to engage in a creative 
process that had no financial benefit and little social recognition (Csikszentmihalyi, 
1975). The finding that individuals may perform activities purely for intrinsic rea-
sons was contradictory to the prevailing psychological paradigm – that behavior 
could be explained only in terms of extrinsic rewards (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975). 
He defined this state as “the holistic sensation that people feel when they act with 
total involvement” (1975, p. 36). The term “flow” arose from the fact that many 
of the people that were interviewed described the state as flowing from moment to 
moment. Csikszentmihalyi (1975) described this state as  autotelic , from the Greek 
words “auto,” meaning self, and “telos,” meaning goal. 
 Most of the research on flow has focused on voluntary leisure and sport-
ing activities. However, research has also shown that the experience of flow 
occurs in  work- related activities (e.g., Csikszentmihalyi, 1975; Csikszentmih-
alyi & LeFevre, 1989; Delle Fave, Massimini, & Bassi, 2011; Demerouti, 2006; 
Fullagar & Kelloway, 2009; Nielsen & Cleal, 2010). The subjective experience 
seems to be consistent across work and play, indicating that it is the quality of 
the experience that is important and not the nature of the activity (Csikszent-
mihalyi, 1988). In this chapter we will focus on the experience of flow at work. 
Specifically, we will (a) exemplify the nature of the subjective experience of 
 work- related flow, (b) present theoretical frameworks that have been used or 
could be used to explain flow and conclude with some propositions, which are 
summarized in  Figure 4.1 , and (c) review the literature on the predictors of flow 

What predicts ﬂ ow at work? 67
at work related to these frameworks. In this way, we hope to inspire researchers 
and practitioners to find ways to stimulate the experience of flow at work and 
in other life domains.  
 Deﬁ ning ﬂ ow at work 
 Csikszentmihalyi (1990) has defined flow as a state in which people are so deeply 
involved in an activity that nothing else seems to matter. Both qualitative and quan-
titative research on flow across a diversity of work and leisure activities has indicated 
that optimal experience consists of six core components (Csikszentmihalyi, 1990, 
1993; Jackson, 1996; Jackson & Marsh, 1996; Nakamura & Csikszentmihalyi, 2002). 
These are (a)  action- awareness merging in that involvement in the activity becomes 
spontaneous or automatic; (b) an intense and complete concentration on the task at 
hand; (c) a sense of control over what one is doing; (d) a loss of  self- consciousness 
or a lack of concern for or about oneself; (e) a transformation of one’s perception of 
time passing; and (f) a sense of enjoyment in the intrinsic motivation of the activity. 
In addition to these, three supplemental components of flow have been identified, 
including (g) balance between the challenge of the activity and the skills necessary 
to perform the activity, (h) clarity of goals inherent in the task, and (i) feedback that 
the task provides that enables monitoring of one’s actions. However, these three 
additional components represent preconditions rather than subjective experience of 
flow (Csikszentmihalyi & Nakamura, 2010; Nakamura & Csikszentmihalyi, 2002, 
2009), and therefore they will be elaborated later on. 
 In the work context, Bakker (2005, 2008) has operationalized the flow expe-
rience with three dimensions: absorption, enjoyment, and intrinsic motivation. 
Job
characteristics
- Job resources
(autonomy)
(Hindering) job
demands
Personal
resources
Positive events
Positive affect
Well-being
and
performance
(P6)
+ (P7)
(P7)
(P7)
+ (P3)
+
+
+
+
+
–
– (P4)
(P5)
+ (P1 & P2 & P3)
Flow at work
 FIGURE 4.1  Model of flow at work 
Note: P1–P7 indicates Propositions 1 to 7.

68 Evangelia Demerouti and Anne Mäkikangas
 Absorption  refers to total concentration and immersion in the activity.  Enjoyment 
means that employees feel happy and make a very positive judgment about the qual-
ity of their working life (cf. Veenhoven, 1984).  Intrinsic motivation  refers to the state 
in which people do what they do “even at great cost, for the sheer sake of doing it” 
(Csikszentmihalyi, 1990, p. 3). Drawing on this operationalization of flow at work, 
Bakker (2005, 2008) developed the  WOrk- reLated Flow inventory (WOLF). 
 Work- related flow, particularly as operationalized by the WOLF, has many con-
ceptual similarities with the concept of work engagement (Schaufeli, Bakker, & 
Salanova, 2006; Schaufeli, Salanova,  Gonzalez- Romá,  & Bakker, 2002). Work 
engagement is defined as “a positive, fulfilling,  work- related state of mind that is 
characterized by vigor, dedication, and absorption” (Schaufeli et al., 2002, p. 74). 
However, whereas work engagement represents relatively stable involvement in 
the wide variety of activities that constitute one’s job, flow is an intense, transient 
involvement in a specific work task (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975; Mills & Fullagar, 2008; 
Schaufeli & Salanova, 2007). Furthermore, work engagement has been operation-
alized varying between but also within individuals; flow has been shown to be a 
predominantly  state- like construct that indicates far greater  within- individual than 
 between- individual variance (Fullagar & Kelloway, 2009). 
 Theoretical frameworks explaining ﬂ ow at work 
 Although the majority of research on flow has focused on such leisure activi-
ties as sports and artistic endeavors, the experience of flow is more likely to 
occur in a work setting. It is at work that the conditions fostering flow are more 
prevalent, such as  goal- directed challenging tasks that require high skill levels 
(Csikszentmihalyi, 1990; Csikszentmihalyi  & LeFevre, 1989; Haworth  & Hill, 
1992; Hektner, Schmidt, & Csikszentmihalyi, 2007). In the following, we will 
present the theoretical frameworks that have been or could be used to explain the 
experience of flow. These frameworks refer to job characteristics, job resources, 
or positive affect. 
 Job characteristics 
 The job characteristics model (JCM) of Hackman and Oldham (1980) suggests that 
intrinsic motivational states occur when work is experienced as meaningful. This 
positive motivational psychological state is generated when jobs have certain core 
characteristics (Hackman & Oldham, 1980). First, the job must have  skill variety , in 
that different skills and talents should be utilized to carry out the work. Second, the 
job should have  task identity  and require the completion of a whole and identifiable 
piece of work. Third, work should have  task significance , meaning that it should have 
a substantial impact on other people or oneself. According to Hackman and Old-
ham (1976), the two most important and necessary job characteristics for generating 
intrinsic motivation are  autonomy  and  feedback . Autonomy refers to the degree of 
discretion, freedom, and independence that an individual has in scheduling work 

What predicts ﬂ ow at work? 69
and determining the procedural aspects of the job. Task feedback is the extent to 
which work activities provide information about the results of performance. Hack-
man and Oldham (1980) suggest that the combined score of these five core char-
acteristics, called motivating potential score, represents an index of how motivating 
the job is designed to be. 
 Csikszentmihalyi (1975, 1990) has argued that flow is a critical psycho-
logical state that is also associated with high levels of intrinsic motivation. 
Indeed, those same characteristics of work that have been associated with 
high levels of motivation have been found to be associated with flow. For 
instance, Demerouti (2006) found that autonomy, skill variety, job feedback, 
task identity, and task significance, combined as a motivating potential score, 
were predictive of flow experiences among employees engaged in a variety 
of work and occupations. Elaborating on this research, Fullagar and Kelloway 
(2009), in a longitudinal study, studied the predictive validity of each of the 
five core job characteristics and found that skill variety and autonomy were 
both significantly and positively associated with flow experiences. Of the five 
job characteristics autonomy seems to be the most consistently and strongly 
related to flow (Bakker, 2005, 2008; Lin & Joe, 2012; Mäkikangas, Bakker, 
Aunola, & Demerouti, 2010; Salanova, Bakker, & Llorens, 2006). This is not 
surprising as employees’ freedom in scheduling their work and in determining 
their work methods has repeatedly been found to increase positive affect (e.g., 
Saavedra & Kwun, 2000) and motivation (Fried & Ferris, 1987). However, the 
relationship between autonomy and flow may be moderated by the nature 
of the work and the organizations studied. Nielsen and Cleal (2010) in an 
experience sampling study found that autonomy and role clarity were more 
significantly associated with flow among elder care managers than accoun-
tancy managers. The authors concluded that the studied organizations varied 
greatly in role clarity and complexity – that is, the possibilities to experience 
flow were different. 
 Proposition 1 : The core job characteristics (skill variety, task identity, task sig-
nificance, autonomy and feedback) are positively related to the experience 
of flow. 
 Proposition 2 : Of the job characteristics, autonomy has the most beneficial effect 
on flow. 
 Job resources 
 Two other theoretical frameworks have been used to understand the anteced-
ents of flow: conservation of resources theory (COR; Hobfoll, 1989) and job 
 demands- resources theory ( JD- R; Bakker & Demerouti, 2014; Demerouti, Bak-
ker, Nachreiner, & Schaufeli, 2001). The central tenet of the COR theory is that 
individuals are motivated to obtain, maintain, and protect personal resources that are 
important to the individual and serve as means to achieve valued outcomes 

70 Evangelia Demerouti and Anne Mäkikangas
(Hobfoll, 2002). These resources include physical possessions (e.g., money, home), 
conditions (e.g., marital status, close social attachments), energies (e.g., knowledge, 
time), and personal characteristics (e.g.,  self- esteem,  self- efficacy). In the work con-
text, the COR theory has been applied to the study of personal resources and psy-
chosocial work characteristics (Hobfoll, Johnson, Ennis, & Jackson, 2003). Personal 
resources are aspects of the self that are generally linked to resilience (Mäkikangas, 
Feldt, Kinnunen, & Mauno, 2013), while job resources refer to the physical, psy-
chological, social, or organizational aspects of the job and thus have both subjec-
tive and objective natures (see Demerouti et al., 2001). By accumulating resources, 
individuals are not only more capable of withstanding stress but also more likely to 
thrive and achieve high levels of subjective  well- being (Lyubomirsky, King, & Die-
ner, 2005). Applied to flow, COR theory would hypothesize that those individu-
als who gain more job and personal resources are more likely to experience high 
levels of  work- related flow (Mäkikangas et al., 2010). Furthermore, the experience 
of positive flow states may initiate a gain cycle of resources (Hobfoll, 1989, 2002) 
that facilitates the accumulation of more job resources. Accordingly, Salanova et al. 
(2006) found in a  two- wave study among teachers that personal resources (i.e., 
 self- efficacy beliefs) and organizational resources (e.g., social support climate and 
clear goals) facilitated  work- related flow over time. Moreover,  work- related flow 
increased personal and organizational resources across time. 
 The  JD- R theory (Bakker & Demerouti, 2014; Demerouti et al., 2001) has 
argued that certain job resources enable the individual to cope with the inherent 
stress of work and also trigger learning, development, positive  well- being, and 
performance. Job resources refer to those physical, psychological, social, or orga-
nizational aspects of the job that are functional in achieving work goals, reduce 
job demands that are associated with physiological and psychological costs, or 
stimulate personal growth, learning, and development (Demerouti et al., 2001). 
In addition to job resources, the theory recognizes that each job also contains job 
demands that refer to those aspects of the job that require sustained effort and 
are therefore associated with certain physiological and/or psychological costs 
(Demerouti et al., 2001). One main difference between the  JD- R theory and 
the JCM is that the former recognizes the importance of other job resources in 
addition to those included in the JCM (i.e., skill variety, task identity, task signifi-
cance, autonomy, and feedback). Indeed, several other job resources than those 
included in the JCM have been found to be conducive to flow. For example, 
flow has been associated with social support, supervisory coaching, and oppor-
tunities for professional development (Bakker, 2005, 2008; Mäkikangas et  al., 
2010). Also, a high degree of social capital and innovative learning climate in the 
organization has been found to increase flow experiences (Fagerlind, Gustavsson, 
Johansson, & Ekberg, 2013). 
 Recently, it was shown that job demands, such as emotional dissonance or man-
aging the relationships with patients, were negatively related to flow and in particu-
lar to intrinsic motivation and enjoyment in a sample of nurses (Zito, Cortese, & 

What predicts ﬂ ow at work? 71
Colombo, 2016). In another study among various professionals, Zito, Bakker, Colombo, 
and Cortese (2015) found that workload was positively related to absorption, which 
is consistent with Csikszentmihalyi (1990), who suggests that this type of job char-
acteristic makes employees absorbed and immersed in their work. However, also 
in this study emotional dissonance was negatively related to enjoyment and intrin-
sic motivation, highlighting that suppressing emotions that do not correspond to 
work reality undermines pleasure and motivation at work. Thus, it seems that job 
demands are related to specific dimensions of flow, and their relationship is more 
often negative (particularly regarding hindering demands; Crawford, LePine,  & 
Rich, 2010). However, job demands and flow can also be positively related when 
the demands are more challenging, like workload (Crawford et al., 2010). Therefore, 
future studies need to look into their relationship more thoroughly. 
 Regarding personal resources, Zito et al. (2015) found that internal locus 
of control and optimism were significantly and positively associated with flow. 
Specifically, internal locus of control was positively correlated with the three 
dimensions of flow, indicating that this personality orientation could enhance the 
optimal experience at work in all its forms. On the contrary, dispositional opti-
mism was found to be related to enjoyment and intrinsic motivation, but rather 
weakly to absorption. 
 Another proposition of  JD- R theory is that job demands and resources interact 
in predicting occupational  well- being. Two forms of interactions have been stud-
ied: (1) job resources may buffer the impact of job demands on strain, and (2) job 
demands may amplify the impact of job resources on motivation. This latter form 
of interaction is relevant for flow as it has been found that it is predictive of work 
engagement of which the absorption dimension resembles flow. Specifically, Bak-
ker, Hakanen, Demerouti, and Xanthopoulou (2007) found that supervisor sup-
port, innovativeness, appreciation, and organizational climate were important job 
resources for teachers that helped them cope with demanding interactions with 
students and be engaged in their work. Thus, work engagement is more often 
experienced when demands and resources are both high. Similarly, Bakker, Van 
Veldhoven, and Xanthopoulou (2010) found that task enjoyment and organizational 
commitment were the result of combinations of different and high job demands 
and job resources. From the components of flow, task enjoyment and commit-
ment were highest when employees were confronted with challenging and stimu-
lating tasks, and simultaneously had sufficient resources (e.g., performance feedback, 
 high- quality relationships with colleagues). 
 Proposition 3 : Job and personal resources have mutual positive relationships with 
flow over time such that resources trigger flow and flow, in its turn, triggers 
the accumulation of resources. 
 Proposition 4 : (Hindering) job demands are negatively related to flow. 
 Proposition 5 : Flow is more often experienced in jobs that combine high job 
resources with high (but affordable) job demands. 

72 Evangelia Demerouti and Anne Mäkikangas
 Positive affect 
 Two theories are relevant to clarify the role of affect in flow at work: broaden-and-
build theory of positive emotions (B&B theory; Fredrickson, 1998, 2001) and the 
affective events theory (AET; Weiss & Cropanzano, 1996). The B&B theory pro-
poses that positive emotions have a twofold adaptive function. First, they broaden 
our current awareness and  thought- action repertoires. Second, they help us to build 
skills and resources in the long run and have a lasting impact on our psychological 
and physical  well- being (Fredrickson, 1998). Research with the B&B theory shows 
that momentary experiences of positive emotions can build enduring psychological 
resources and trigger upward spirals toward emotional  well- being. Thus, positive 
emotions make people not only feel good at the moment but also feel good in the 
future (Fredrickson & Joiner, 2002). Accordingly, positive experiences (e.g., flow at 
work) build people’s enduring personal resources (Salanova et al., 2006). In a similar 
vein, flow was found to be significantly and positively associated with energy after 
work, particularly if individuals were not able to recover from stress during work 
breaks but were able to detach from work at home (Demerouti, Bakker, Sonnen-
tag, & Fullagar, 2012). It would appear that flow states induce positive emotions 
and these emotions counteract the side effects of negative emotional arousal (Fred-
rickson & Levenson, 1998), increase life satisfaction, and improve overall  well- being 
(Fredrickson et al., 2008). 
 The B&B theory has been used as a framework to study the development of high 
levels of flow over time. Building on B&B theory, Ceja and Navarro (2011) found 
that the development of the flow state followed a chaotic, unpredictable pattern. The 
link between positive emotions and unpredictability has been demonstrated empiri-
cally at different levels of analyses. Fredrickson and Branigan (2005) found that 
people induced to experience positive emotions reported a wider array of impulses 
to act in the moment, which made their behavior harder to predict. Furthermore, 
Fredrickson and Losada (2005) found that human flourishing is associated with 
nonrepetitive, innovative, and flexible interactions with the environment. Therefore, 
employees who experience high levels of flow at work are likely to be less predict-
able, as they seek novelty and opportunities for action and they are adaptable and 
flexible. 
 According to Weiss and Cropanzano’s (1996) affective events theory (AET), the 
work environment exerts its influence on momentary experiences and behavior 
through specific work events, such as attaining one’s goals or receiving a reward. 
According to AET, events are defined as significant happenings that produce a 
change in circumstances and “generate an emotional reaction or mood change in 
people” (p. 31). The theory differentiates positive events that are  goal- congruent 
(e.g., receiving praise) and negative events that are incongruent with  work- related 
goals (e.g., personal failures). Events are situational antecedents of affect and trans-
mit their influence on flow through the affective reaction on the part of the individ-
ual (Bledow, Schmitt, Frese, & Kühnel, 2011; Weiss & Cropanzano, 1996). Positive 

What predicts ﬂ ow at work? 73
events yield positive mood and increase the willingness to invest effort, including 
the tendency to experience flow; negative events are associated with negative mood 
and decrease enthusiasm and thus also the tendency to experience flow. If people 
receive praise by their supervisor for a task they are working on, the subsequent 
increase in positive mood should be supportive of flow experiences. In contrast, an 
event such as becoming aware of a failure is incongruent with people’s goals and 
should disrupt the experience of flow. Moreover, AET predicts that personality has 
a substantial impact on which affective states are experienced and on how people 
typically feel. 
 AET suggests that features of work (e.g., autonomy, supervisory support, work 
overload) might have an impact on the experience of affect and other outcomes 
(of which flow could be one) in two ways (Wegge, Van Dick, Fisher, West, & 
Dawson, 2006; Weiss & Cropanzano, 1996). First, these features might function as 
inputs in cognitive processes (e.g., in  actual- target value comparisons) that indi-
viduals conduct to determine the “fit” between their job and their personal val-
ues, motives, or desires. In addition, the features might influence the occurrence 
of specific events during work (e.g., conflicts with customers), which, in turn, 
stimulate different emotions. The second way in which job features might have 
an impact on judgments of one’s work (of which flow is an example) is via their 
impact on the occurrence of specific events during work, which, in turn, stimu-
late different emotions. These insights can be applied to the study of flow as flow 
represents an experience close to situations or events. Moreover, flow includes 
judgmental aspects (cf. enjoyment dimension of flow according to Bakker’s con-
ceptualization; 2005, 2008). 
 Proposition 6 : The experience of state positive affect during flow moderates 
(strengthens) the enduring favorable effect of flow on  well- being and behav-
ior (e.g., job performance). 
 Proposition 7 : Work characteristics influence the occurrence and/or judgment 
of positive events, which consequently influence positive affect and flow 
(mediation). Specifically, work characteristics like job resources influence 
positive events in a favorable way. 
 The predictors of ﬂ ow 
 There is general consensus that flow is characterized by intrinsic motivation (Keller & 
Bless, 2008; Keller & Blomann, 2008). Consequently, there must be a compatibility 
between individual characteristics, such as skill level and need for achievement, and 
situational characteristics, such as the demands of the task and available resources. In 
the following, we will focus on the preconditions of flow according to flow theory 
as well as to other research findings on the predictors of flow that cannot be catego-
rized within the frameworks presented earlier. 

74 Evangelia Demerouti and Anne Mäkikangas
 Preconditions of ﬂ ow 
 Flow theory has consistently identified three situational or  task- specific precondi-
tions that are necessary for flow to be experienced (Nakamura & Csikszentmih-
alyi, 2002). Perhaps the most important precondition of flow is that the challenges 
(action opportunities) that are perceived in the task should match with the skills 
(action capabilities) that are necessary to perform the task (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975, 
1990, 1997). However, the level of  challenges and skills is also essential. In order 
to experience flow, the perceived challenges and skills should be at a moderate to 
high level (Bassi, Ferrario, Ba, Delle Fave, & Viganò, 2012; Sartori et al., 2014), 
while when their level is low the individual is likely to experience apathy (Csik-
szentmihalyi, 1975). When challenges exceed perceived skills, anxiety is likely 
to arise while an overskilled performer for the task might experience boredom. 
The necessity of balance between perceived challenge and skill has been generally 
supported by research evidence (Eisenberger, Jones, Stinglhamber, Shanock, & 
Randall, 2005; Fullagar, Knight, & Sovern, 2009; Hektner & Asakawa, 2000; Llo-
rens, Salanova, & Rodríguez, 2013). Nonetheless, there are some contradictions 
with flow theory. Several studies (e.g., Engeser & Rheinberg, 2008; Fullagar et al., 
2009; Haworth & Evans, 1995; Hektner & Asakawa, 2000) have shown that tasks 
low in challenge and exceeded by skill level are often conducive to flow rather 
than boredom. These findings would suggest that the relationship between flow 
and challenge/skill balance may be moderated by the characteristics of the task 
being studied. 
 Flow is also facilitated by tasks that have  clear and proximal goals  (Csikszentmihalyi, 
1990, 1997). This is consistent with  goal- setting theory and is based on the premise 
that all human behavior is  goal- directed (Locke, Shaw, Saari, & Latham, 1981). Both 
 goal- setting theory and flow theory emphasize that goals should be both challeng-
ing and specific in order to direct attention and action (Csikszentmihalyi, Abu-
hamdeh, & Nakamura, 2005; Latham & Locke, 1991; Locke et al., 1981). However, 
it is important to note that the purpose of goals as conceptualized by Locke and 
colleagues on the one hand and by Csikszentmihalyi on the other is not equivalent. 
Csikszentmihalyi views the role of goals as “channeling attention” (Csikszentmih-
alyi et al., 2005), not as an objective or end to which people strive, as in goal the-
ory (Locke, 1968). For Csikszentmihalyi goals focus attention on the task at hand, 
thereby filtering out extraneous stimuli from the individual’s consciousness and 
promoting room for the experience of flow. In line with this reasoning, Demerouti, 
Bakker, and Fried (2012) found that an increase in role clarity was positively related 
to the enjoyment and concentration components of flow. Alternatively, Delle Fave 
and Massimini (2005) showed that the interplay between wishing to do the activity 
and the relevance of the activity to future goals shapes the daily experience of flow 
in productive activities. 
 The final precondition to optimal experience according to flow theory is task 
feedback (Csikszentmihalyi, 1990, 1997). Feedback is an integral component 
of goal setting (Locke et al., 1981) and flow (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975), in that 

What predicts ﬂ ow at work? 75
without it intrinsic goals cannot sustain motivation and enhance flow. Feedback 
is particularly important for the more difficult and challenging tasks that are 
associated with flow. The role of feedback in the experience of flow has been 
studied within the JCM and the  JD- R model and was confirmed in several stud-
ies mentioned earlier. 
 Other predictors of ﬂ ow 
 Nielsen and Cleal (2010) found three specific work activities to be associated with 
flow at work: planning, problem solving, and evaluation. Each one of these activi-
ties provided individuals with the opportunity to use skills and to create structure 
and clarity in the job. In addition, the combinations of psychological demands and 
decision latitude based on the  demand- control model (Karasek, 1979; Karasek & 
Theorell, 1990) have been used to explain flow at work. It was found that employ-
ees in active (high psychological demands, high decision latitude) and  low- strain 
jobs (low psychological demands, high decision latitude) experienced more flow 
than employees working in passive jobs (low psychological demands, low decision 
latitude) and  high- strain jobs (high psychological demands and low decision lati-
tude) (Fagerlind et al., 2013). Again these results highlighted the importance of job 
control/autonomy for flow, as mentioned also before. 
 Personal resources relating especially to personal resiliency were mentioned as 
important predictors for flow in many of the theories presented earlier (i.e., AET; 
Weiss & Cropanzano, 1996; B&B theory; Fredrickson, 1998, 2001; COR theory; 
Hobfoll, 1989). Although the role of personality has been mainly depicted to be 
a moderating factor between job characteristics and flow, it has also been shown 
to directly predict flow. For example, it has been shown that from the big five 
personality traits, emotional stability and conscientiousness together explained 
22% of the variance in flow (Ullén et al., 2012). Hence, personality traits along 
with other personality dispositions, such as optimism (Beard & Hoy, 2010) and 
 self- efficacy (Salanova et al., 2006), are important facilitators of flow. Also the 
temporal pacing style that individuals use to deal with deadlines has been related 
to flow. Gevers and Demerouti (2013) in a weekly study on flow found that 
leaders’ temporal reminders related positively with task absorption for individu-
als who scored high rather than low on the deadline action pacing style (i.e., 
those who work a lot on an assignment right before the deadline approaches). 
However, leaders’ temporal reminders inhibited task absorption for those who 
work steadily on an assignment (i.e., steady action pacing style) and those 
who work a lot on an assignment at the beginning and at the end of the duration 
(i.e.,  U- shaped action pacing style). 
 Finally, it is worth noticing that the role of intelligence (Ullén et al., 2012), cog-
nitive capacity (Percival, Crous, & Schepers, 2003), and level of global functioning 
(Bassi et al., 2012) for flow experiences has been also investigated. However, no 
persuasive evidence for such positive relationships was found. Therefore, it could be 
concluded that situational factors (i.e., job characteristics) combined with suitable 

76 Evangelia Demerouti and Anne Mäkikangas
energy level (Mäkikangas et al., 2010) and available personal resources are the most 
important determinants for flow at work. Another conclusion based on the litera-
ture is that flow can be experienced in any kind of job (if specific conditions are 
present) rather than only in jobs with high requirements and ranking. 
 Conclusion 
 In this chapter, we have introduced several theories that are useful in explaining 
flow at work. Two of these theories (i.e., JCM and  JD- R) focus specifically on 
the role of job characteristics for  well- being and motivation at work, while the 
other three (i.e., AET, B&B, COR) focus more broadly on explaining  context- free 
 well- being by underlying the role of different individual resources and/or positive 
emotions. Based on these theories and also empirical results presented in this chap-
ter, we delineated several propositions for future research on flow at work. The most 
important propositions are the following: 
 1 
Job resources – especially autonomy – are positively related to flow. 
 2 
Flow is more often experienced in jobs that combine a high level of job 
resources with high (but affordable) job demands. 
 3 
Positive events (at work) trigger positive emotions and flow and consequently 
enhance  well- being and positive future work behavior. 
 4 
Flow has a reciprocal relationship with job and personal resources. 
 To further understand flow at work, we need to use innovative study designs 
that focus especially on the  short- term nature of flow. First, diary designs should 
be emphasized. Second, flow should be investigated simultaneously by using the 
traditional experience sampling method and questionnaires in order to understand 
flow better in a work context. Third, the moderating and mediating associations 
between job characteristics, personal resources, and flow should be further investi-
gated by taking into account the nature of the job and type of business. Fourth, the 
role of personality as well as personal goals for flow experiences should be further 
investigated. 
 With this chapter we attempted to put flow on the research agenda by zooming 
in on the factors that contribute to flow at work. By discussing various theoreti-
cal frameworks that can be used or are already used to explain flow, we hope that 
we inspire researchers and practitioners to develop ways to enhance flow at work, 
as flow represents an experience that should be stimulated in organizations. Flow at 
work represents an important phenomenon of organizational practice that deserves 
more attention than it currently receives. We suggested several possible mechanisms 
and predictors that are beneficial for the experience of flow. The next step would be 
to develop interventions that stimulate flow experiences and to justify the effectiveness 
of such interventions. As has been shown, flow at work is significant for organizations 
and warrants consideration in the future from both scientists and practitioners alike. 

What predicts ﬂ ow at work? 77
 References 
 Bakker, A. B. (2005). Flow among music teachers and their students: The crossover of peak 
experiences.  Journal of Vocational Behavior ,  66 ,  26– 44. 
 Bakker, A. B. (2008). The  work- related flow inventory: Construction and initial validation 
of the WOLF.  Journal of Vocational Behavior ,  72 ,  400– 414. 
 Bakker, A. B., & Demerouti, E. (2014). Job demands – resources theory. In P. Y. Chen & C. 
L. Cooper (Eds.),  Wellbeing: A complete reference guide. Vol. III: Work and wellbeing (pp.  37– 64). 
Chichester, UK:  Wiley- Blackwell. 
 Bakker, A. B., Hakanen, J. J., Demerouti, E., & Xanthopoulou, D. (2007). Job resources 
boost work engagement, particularly when job demands are high.  Journal of Educational 
Psychology ,  99 ,  274– 284. 
 Bakker, A. B., Van Veldhoven, M.J.P.M.,  & Xanthopoulou, D. (2010). Beyond the 
 demand- control model: Thriving on high job demands and resources.  Journal of Personnel 
Psychology ,  9 ,  3– 16. 
 Bassi, M., Ferrario, N., Ba, G., Delle Fave, A., & Viganò, C. (2012). Quality of experience 
during psychosocial rehabilitation: A  real- time investigation with experience sampling 
method.  Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal ,  35 ,  447– 453. 
 Beard, K. S., & Hoy, W. K. (2010). The nature, meaning, and measure of teacher flow in 
elementary schools: A test of rival hypotheses.  Educational Administration Quarterly ,  46 , 
 426– 458. 
 Bledow, R., Schmitt, A., Frese, M., & Kühnel, J. (2011). The affective shift model of work 
engagement.  Journal of Applied Psychology ,  96 ,  1246– 1257. 
 Ceja, L., & Navarro, J. (2011). Dynamic patterns of flow in the workplace: Characterizing 
 within- individual variability using a complexity science approach.  Journal of Organiza-
tional Behavior ,  32 ,  627– 651. 
 Crawford, E. R., LePine, J. A., & Rich, B. L. (2010). Linking job demands and resources to 
employee engagement and burnout: A theoretical extension and  meta- analytic test.  Journal 
of Applied Psychology ,  95 ,  834– 848. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1975).  Beyond freedom and anxiety. San Francisco, CA:  Jossey- Bass. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1988). Introduction. In M. Csikszentmihalyi & I. S. Csikszentmihalyi 
(Eds.),  Optimal experience: Psychological studies of flow in consciousness (pp.  3– 14). New York: 
Cambridge University Press. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990).  Flow: The psychology of optimal experience.  New York: Harper & 
Row. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1993).  The evolving self. New York: Harper & Row. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1997).  Finding flow: The psychology of engagement with everyday life.  New 
York: Basic Books. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M., Abuhamdeh, S., & Nakamura, J. (2005). Flow. In A. J. Elliot & C. S. 
Dweck (Eds.),  Handbook of competence and motivation  (pp.  598– 608). New York: Guilford 
Press. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M., & LeFevre, J. (1989). Optimal experience in work and leisure.  Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology ,  56 ,  815– 822. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Nakamura, J. (2010). Effortless attention in everyday life: A system-
atic phenomenology. In B. Bruya (Ed.),  Effortless attention: A new perspective in the cognitive 
science of attention and action (pp.  179– 190). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
 Delle Fave, A., & Massimini, F. (2005). The investigation of optimal experience and 
apathy: Developmental and psychosocial implications.  European Psychologist ,  10 , 
 264– 274. 

78 Evangelia Demerouti and Anne Mäkikangas
 Delle Fave, A., Massimini, F., & Bassi, M. (2011). Work: A paradox in flow research. In A. 
Delle Fave, F. Massimini, & M. Bassi (Eds.),  Psychological selection and optimal experience 
across cultures (pp.  155– 175). Amsterdam: Springer. 
 Demerouti, E. (2006). Job characteristics, flow, and performance: The moderating role of 
conscientiousness.  Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 11,  266– 280. 
 Demerouti, E., Bakker, A. B., & Fried, Y. (2012). Work orientations in the job  demands–
resources model.  Journal of Managerial Psychology ,  27 ,  557– 575. 
 Demerouti, E., Bakker, A. B., Nachreiner, F., & Schaufeli, W. B. (2001). The job  demands-resources 
model of burnout.  Journal of Applied Psychology ,  86 ,  499– 512. 
 Demerouti, E., Bakker, A. B., Sonnentag, S., & Fullagar, C. (2012).  Work- related flow and 
energy at work and at home: A study on the role of daily recovery.  Journal of Organiza-
tional Behavior ,  33 ,  276– 295. 
 Eisenberger, R., Jones, J. R., Stinglhamber, F., Shanock, L., & Randall, A. T. (2005). Flow 
experiences at work: For high need achievers alone?  Journal of Organizational Behavior ,  26 , 
 755– 775. 
 Engeser, S., & Rheinberg, F. (2008). Flow performance and moderators of  challenge- skill bal-
ance.  Motivation & Emotion ,  32 ,  158– 172. 
 Fagerlind, A.-C., Gustavsson, M., Johansson, G.,  & Ekberg, K. (2013). Experience of 
 work- related flow: Does high decision latitude enhance benefits gained from job 
resources?  Journal of Vocational Behavior ,  83 ,  161– 170. 
 Fredrickson, B. L. (1998). What good are positive emotions?  Review of General Psychology ,  2 , 
 300– 319. 
 Fredrickson, B. L. (2001). The role of positive emotions in positive psychology: The 
 broaden- and-build theory of positive emotions.  American Psychologist ,  56 ,  218– 226. 
 Fredrickson, B. L., & Branigan, C. (2005). Positive emotions broaden the scope of attention 
and  thought- action repertoires.  Cognition and Emotion ,  19 ,  313– 332. 
 Fredrickson, B. L., Cohn, M. A., Coffey, K. A., Pek, J., & Finkel, S. M. (2008). Open hearts 
build lives: Positive emotions, induced through  loving- kindness meditation, build con-
sequential personal resources.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ,  95 ,  1045– 1062. 
 Fredrickson, B. L., & Joiner, T. (2002). Positive emotions trigger upward spirals toward emo-
tional  well- being.  Psychological Science ,  13 ,  172– 175. 
 Fredrickson, B. L., & Levenson, R. W. (1998). Positive emotions speed recovery from the 
cardiovascular sequelae of negative emotions.  Cognition and Emotion ,  12 ,  191– 220. 
 Fredrickson, B. L., & Losada, M. F. (2005). Positive affect and the complex dynamics of 
human flourishing.  American Psychologist ,  60 ,  678– 686. 
 Fried, Y., & Ferris, G. R. (1987). The validity of the job characteristics model: A review and 
a  meta- analysis.  Personnel Psychology ,  40 ,  287– 322. 
 Fullagar, C., & Kelloway, E. K. (2009). “Flow” at work: An experience sampling approach. 
 Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology ,  81 ,  595– 615. 
 Fullagar, C., Knight, P. K., & Sovern, H. (2009).  Flow and Performance Anxiety.  Paper presented 
at the 24th Annual Conference of the Society for Industrial and Organizational Psychol-
ogy, New Orleans, LA, April  2– 4, 2009. 
 Gevers, J. M. P., & Demerouti, E. (2013). How supervisors’ reminders relate to subordinates’ 
absorption and creativity.  Journal of Managerial Psychology ,  28 ,  677– 698. 
 Hackman, J. R., & Oldham, G. R. (1976). Motivation through the design of work.  Organiza-
tional Behavior and Human Performance, 16,  250– 279. 
 Hackman, J. R., & Oldham, G. R. (1980).  Work redesign. Reading, MA:  Addison- Wesley. 
 Haworth, J., & Evans, S. (1995). Challenge, skill and positive states in the daily life of a sample 
of YTS students.  Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology ,  68 ,  109– 121. 

What predicts ﬂ ow at work? 79
 Haworth, J., & Hill, S. (1992). Work, leisure and psychological  well- being in a sample of 
young adults.  Journal of Community and Applied Social Psychology ,  2 ,  147– 160. 
 Hektner, J., & Asakawa, K. (2000). Learning to like challenges. In M. Csikszentmihalyi & B. 
Schneider (Eds.),  Becoming adult: How teenagers prepare for the world of work  (pp.  95– 112). 
New York: Basic Books. 
 Hektner, J. M., Schmidt, J., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2007).  Experience sampling method: Mea-
suring the quality of everyday life . Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE. 
 Hobfoll, S. E. (1989). Conservation of resources: A new attempt at conceptualizing stress. 
 American Psychologist ,  44 ,  513– 524. 
 Hobfoll, S. E. (2002). Social and psychological resources and adaptation.  Review of General 
Psychology ,  6 ,  307– 324. 
 Hobfoll, S. E., Johnson, R. J., Ennis, N., & Jackson, A. P. (2003). Resource loss, resource 
gain, and emotional outcomes among inner city women.  Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology ,  84 ,  632– 643. 
 Jackson, S. A. (1996). Toward a conceptual understanding of the flow experience in elite 
athletes.  Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport ,  67 ,  76– 90. 
 Jackson, S. A., & Marsh, H. W. (1996). Development and validation of a scale to measure 
optimal experience: The flow state scale.  Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology ,  18 ,  17– 35. 
 Karasek, R. (1979). Job demands, job decision latitude, and mental strain: Implications for job 
redesign.  Administrative Science Quarterly, 24 ,  285– 308. 
 Karasek, R., & Theorell, T. (1990).  Healthy work: Stress, productivity, and the reconstruction of 
working life. New York: Basic Books. 
 Keller, J., & Bless, H. (2008). Flow and regulatory compatibility: An experimental approach to 
the flow model of intrinsic motivation.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin ,  34 ,  196– 209. 
 Keller, J., & Blomann, F. (2008). Locus of control and the flow experience: An experimental 
analysis.  European Journal of Personality ,  22 ,  589– 607. 
 Latham, G. P., & Locke, E. A. (1991).  Self- regulation through  goal- setting.  Organizational 
Behavior and Human Decision Processes ,  50 ,  212– 247. 
 Lin, C.-P.,  & Joe, S.-W. (2012). To share or not to share: Assessing knowledge sharing, 
 inter- employee helping, and their antecedents among online knowledge workers.  Journal 
of Business Ethics ,  108 ,  439– 449. 
 Llorens, S., Salanova, M.,  & Rodríguez, A. M. (2013). How is flow experienced and by 
whom? Testing flow among occupations.  Stress and Health ,  29 ,  125– 137. 
 Locke, E. A. (1968). Toward a theory of task motivation and incentives.  Organizational Behav-
ior and Human Performance ,  3 ,  157– 189. 
 Locke, E. A., Shaw, K. M., Saari, L. M., & Latham, G. P. (1981). Goal setting and task perfor-
mance:  1969– 1980.  Psychological Bulletin, 90,  125– 152. 
 Lyubomirsky, S., King, L. A., & Diener, E. (2005). The benefits of frequent positive affect: 
Does happiness lead to success?  Psychological Bulletin ,  131 ,  803– 855. 
 Mäkikangas, A., Bakker, A. B., Aunola, K., & Demerouti, E. (2010). Job resources and flow 
at work: Modeling the relationship via latent growth curve and mixture model methodol-
ogy.  Journal of Occupational Health Psychology ,  83 ,  795– 814. 
 Mäkikangas, A., Feldt, T., Kinnunen, U.,  & Mauno, S. (2013). Does personality mat-
ter? Research on individual differences in occupational  well- being. In A. Bakker 
(Ed.),  Advances in positive organizational psychology  (Vol. 1, pp.  107– 143). Bingley, UK: 
Emerald. 
 Mills, M. J., & Fullagar, C. J. (2008). Motivation and flow: Toward an understanding 
of the dynamics of the relation in architecture students.  Journal of Psychology ,  142, 
 533– 553. 

80 Evangelia Demerouti and Anne Mäkikangas
 Nakamura, J., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2002). The concept of flow. In C. R. Snyder & J. S. 
Lopez (Eds.),  Handbook of positive psychology  (pp.  89– 105). New York: Oxford University 
Press. 
 Nakamura, J., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2009). Flow theory and research. In C. R. Snyder & 
S. J. Lopez (Eds.),  The Oxford handbook of positive psychology (2nd ed., pp.  195– 206). New 
York: Oxford University Press. 
 Nielsen, K., & Cleal, B. (2010). Predicting flow at work: Investigating the activities and job 
characteristics that predict flow states at work.  Journal of Occupational Health Psychology , 
 15 ,  180– 190. 
 Percival, G., Crous, F., & Schepers, J. M. (2003). Cognitive potential and job complexity as 
predictors of flow.  South African Journal of Industrial Psychology ,  29 ,  60– 71. 
 Saavedra, R., & Kwun, S. K. (2000). Affective states in job characteristics theory.  Journal of 
Organizational Behavior ,  21 ,  131– 146. 
 Salanova, M., Bakker, A., & Llorens, S. (2006). Flow at work: Evidence for an upward spiral 
of personal and organizational resources.  Journal of Happiness Studies ,  7 ,  1– 22. 
 Sartori, R.D.G., Marelli, M., Garavaglia, P., Castelli, L., Busin, S., & Delle Fave, A. (2014). The 
assessment of patients’ quality of experience: Autonomy level and perceived challenges. 
 Rehabilitation Psychology ,  59 ,  267– 277. 
 Schaufeli, W. B., Bakker, A. B., & Salanova, M. (2006). The measurement of work engage-
ment with a short questionnaire: A  cross- national study.  Educational and Psychological Mea-
surement, 66 ,  701– 716. 
 Schaufeli, W. B., & Salanova, M. (2007). Work engagement: An emerging psychological 
concept and its implications in organizations. In S. W. Gilliland, D. D. Steiner, & D. P. 
Skarlicki (Eds.),  Research in social issues management  (pp.  135– 177). Greenwich, CT: Infor-
mation Age. 
 Schaufeli, W. B., Salanova, M.,  González- Romá, V., & Bakker, A. B. (2002). The measure-
ment of engagement and burnout: A confirmative analytic approach.  Journal of Happiness 
Studies ,  3 ,  71– 92. 
 Ullén, F., de Manzano, Ö., Almeida, R., Magnusson, P. K. E., Pedersen, N. L., Nakamura, 
J., Csikszentmihalyi, M.,  & Madison, G. (2012). Proneness for psychological flow in 
everyday life: Associations with personality and intelligence.  Personality and Individual 
Differences ,  52 ,  167– 172. 
 Veenhoven, R. (1984).  Conditions of happiness . Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer. 
 Wegge, J., Van Dick, R., Fisher, G. K., West, M. A., & Dawson, J. F. (2006). A test of basic 
assumptions of affective events theory (AET) in call centre work.  British Journal of Man-
agement ,  17 ,  237– 254. 
 Weiss, H. M., & Cropanzano, R. (1996). Affective events theory: A theoretical discussion of 
the structure, causes and consequences of affective experiences at work.  Research in Orga-
nizational Behavior ,  18 ,  1– 74. 
 Zito, M., Bakker, A. B., Colombo, L., & Cortese, C. G. (2015). A  two- step study for the 
Italian adaptation of the  work- related flow (Wolf) inventory: The  I- Wolf.  TPM: Testing, 
Psychometrics, Methodology in Applied Psychology ,  22 ,  553– 570. 
 Zito, M., Cortese, C. G., & Colombo, L. (2016). Nurses’ exhaustion: The role of flow at work 
between job demands and job resources.  Journal of Nursing Management ,  24 ,  E12– E22. 

 Freeman Dyson, a renowned theoretical physicist, describes the process of entering 
flow as a sort of struggle: 
 I have to always force myself to write, and also to work harder at a sci-
ence problem. You have to put blood, sweat, and tears into it first. And it is 
awfully hard to get started. I think most writers have this problem. I mean, 
it’s part of the business. You may work very hard for a week producing the 
first page. That’s really blood, tears, and sweat, and there is nothing else to 
describe it. You have to force yourself to push and push with the hope that 
something good will come out. And you have to go through that process 
before it really starts to flow easily, and without that preliminary forcing and 
pushing probably nothing would ever happen. So, I think that is what dis-
tinguishes it from just having a good time. You really enjoy the activity once 
you are really in the flowing phase, but you have to overcome some sort of 
a barrier to get there. 
 (Csikszentmihalyi, 1997, p. 117) 
 It is this same struggle that employees face in their everyday experience at work, 
as they must be continually responding to motivational forces, such as entropy or 
equilibrium, and instability or the enjoyment that comes from confronting new 
challenges. The force of entropy is more primitive and tends to be stronger. This 
force gives employees pleasure when they are comfortable, when they can relax, 
when they can get away with feeling good without expending energy (Csikszent-
mihalyi, 1997). Entropy leads the employee to a zone of stable equilibrium. If 
employees did not have this space of equilibrium or  built- in regulator, they could 
easily become burned out and would lack the necessary strength to develop their 
daily work activities. 
 5 
 REDEFINING FLOW AT WORK 
 Lucia Ceja and Jose Navarro 

82 Lucia Ceja and Jose Navarro
 Nevertheless, employees have also the urge to master new challenges and stretch 
their skills to the utmost (Csikszentmihalyi, 1997). This force leads employees into 
a zone of expansive instability, such as the “flowing” zone described by Freeman 
Dyson. Without this expansive force, employees would remain in the “equilibrium” 
zone, where they tend to repeat  work- related activities the same way they have done 
it in the past. The expansive force leads employees to experience flow and therefore 
high levels of creativity (Csikszentmihalyi, 1996), performance (Demerouti, 2006), 
and  well- being (Fullagar & Kelloway, 2009).  Work- related flow can be defined as a 
sudden moment where everything “just clicks,” or a state of being in the zone, when 
affective and cognitive modes are perfectly synchronized, giving rise to employees’ 
greatest performances and personal bests (Csikszentmihalyi, 1990). 
 Work- related flow is a developmental and dynamic phenomenon that undergoes 
continuous changes over time (Rathunde & Csikszentmihalyi, 2006). Every flow 
experience contributes to the growth of the self (Delle Fave, Massimini, & Bassi, 
2011; Massimini & Delle Fave, 2000). After every episode of flow, employees are 
a little different from what they were before. Their consciousness contains fresh 
information about the new skills they have developed – for instance in the forego-
ing example, Freeman Dyson, after passing the barrier of entropy and facing the 
challenge of solving a science problem, is likely to go away with a proud knowledge 
that he has finally gained a better understanding of his subject of study. To con-
tinue providing optimal experiences, flow activities must be constantly recreated 
and Freeman Dyson’s struggle to find flow emerges every time employees visualize 
new opportunities for action. 
 Csikszentmihalyi (1990) states that disequilibrium between challenges and skills 
is inevitable and needs to be continually addressed by the employee. In other words, 
coping with work events unfolds dynamically over time, so the same work activity 
may be a source of distress or positive challenge at different times. In the simplest 
terms, an employee transforms boredom into flow by finding new challenges and 
overcomes anxiety by building on new skills. This process proceeds in the direction 
of greater complexity, creating highly unstable realities. 
 The definition of flow has changed very little since Csikszentmihalyi’s original 
formulation in 1975, and there is strong agreement among researchers on the defini-
tion itself. At the same time the models of flow, in conjunction with its measurement 
methods, are changing, and modifications of the flow theory are starting to emerge 
(Moneta, 2012). In this sense, when  work- related flow is studied longitudinally over 
short periods of time (e.g., days, weeks, and months), it presents continuous fluctua-
tions and changes (Fullagar & Kelloway, 2009). Likewise, several studies have found 
that flow at work tends to behave in a nonlinear manner (e.g., Ceja & Navarro, 
2011; Guastello, Johnson, & Rieke, 1999). Ergo, a new  mind- set for understanding 
 work- related flow has started to emerge; this new  mind- set considers nonlinearity 
and discontinuous change that employees experience in their everyday struggle of 
transitioning between a nonflow state (e.g., boredom or anxiety) and the flow state. 
 The present chapter aims to contribute to the development of this new  mind- set 
for understanding  work- related flow as a highly dynamic process, by integrating 

Redeﬁ ning ﬂ ow at work 83
concepts of nonlinear dynamical systems (NDS) theory with the study of flow. 
In our view, new approaches to study flow that consider its dynamic nature are 
necessary for at least two reasons. First, although research on  work- related flow 
has focused on  intra- individual variation, most research is based on methods that 
focus on variation between subjects. There is growing evidence that developmental 
processes, such as flow, are nonergodic processes, which are better studied using 
 person- specific dynamic models (Molenaar & Campbell, 2009). Second, findings 
from physiology, psychology, and management have shown that certain properties 
of nonlinear systems, notably chaotic dynamics and catastrophic changes, are indica-
tive of health, innovation, and creativity. Hence it becomes relevant to understand 
the dynamic nature of chaos to understand the behavior of optimal experiences at 
work, such as flow. 
 Overall, the present chapter will describe how the integration of NDS theory 
with the study of flow can represent an important step for understanding optimal 
experience at work, as a nonequilibrium condition where abrupt and discontinuous 
changes naturally emerge. Similarly, this enriched conceptualization of  work- related 
flow can have important implications for organizational practice. For instance, man-
agers can increase optimal experience at work by designing interventions according 
to a nonlinear model of  work- related flow. We will organize the chapter as follows. 
We will start off by outlining why flow can be considered as a nonergodic process 
and therefore it is important to study the  intra- individual variation of flow using 
 person- specific dynamic models. Next, we will give an overview of NDS theory 
and potential applications to questions in  work- related flow, and the relevance of 
NDS methods for developing  person- specific dynamic models. Finally, we will 
discuss the implications that this nonlinear conceptualization has for research and 
organizational practice. 
 Flow as a nonergodic process 
 Although the value of flow at work is being actively explored and scholars have 
provided valuable insights regarding its main components, research has mainly been 
focused on variation between people (Ceja & Navarro, 2012). The overreliance 
on interindividual variation is not unique to  work- related flow scholarship; rather, 
it is common to most research areas in psychology (Molenaar, 2004; Molenaar & 
Campbell, 2009; Roe, 2013). 
 Interindividual variation is used to derive statistics (e.g., means, correlations) 
that characterize the state of affairs in the population of subjects. In other words, 
the statistics concerned are obtained by pooling across people; this is a key hall-
mark of interindividual variation. Nowadays in psychology most statistical meth-
ods are centered on the analysis of interindividual variation, regardless of whether 
the data are collected  cross- sectionally, longitudinally, or using multilevel designs 
(Molenaar & Campbell, 2009). It seems natural and reasonable to infer that con-
clusions about the state of affairs at the population level can imply general find-
ings that apply to each individual person in the population. Nonetheless, applying 

84 Lucia Ceja and Jose Navarro
the findings obtained by grouping individual scores to determine the behavior of 
a single person involves a shift in level (a change from the interindividual varia-
tion to that of  intra- individual variation in time and place). Based on the classical 
ergodic theorems, a classic branch of mathematics originally motivated by prob-
lems of statistical physics, Molenaar and Campbell (2009) argue that this shift in 
level is not valid for most cases in psychology, especially when we are dealing with 
developmental processes. 
 The classical ergodic theorems provide two rigorous conditions under which a 
shift in level from interindividual variation to that of  intra- individual variation is 
possible and vice versa (Molenaar, 2004), thus allowing to define a phenomenon 
as  ergodic . First, the same statistical model should apply to the data of all subjects in 
the population, suggesting a homogeneity in the study population. Second, the data 
must be stationary. More specifically, the data should have invariant statistical char-
acteristics over time (i.e., it must have constant mean, variance, etc.). Accordingly, if 
either one (or both) of the conditions is not met, the psychological process we are 
dealing with is  nonergodic  (Molenaar & Campbell, 2009). Therefore the structure of 
its interindividual variation will differ from its structure at the  intra- individual level 
of analysis. For all  nonergodic  psychological process, the results obtained in standard 
analysis of interindividual variation will not apply at the level of  intra- individual 
variation and the other way around. 
 The question that concerns us here is whether flow can be considered an ergo-
dic or a nonergodic process. In order to provide an answer to this question, we will 
review whether the process of  work- related flow meets both ergodic conditions: 
 homogeneity and  stationarity . 
 Condition 1: homogeneity 
 The first condition for considering flow as an ergodic process is that each person 
in the population has to follow the same statistical model – that is, there has to be 
homogeneity in the population. In other words, the dynamics of the main variables 
describing the data should be invariant across subjects. For example, according to 
the flow theory, flow is greatly predicted by the balance between perceived chal-
lenges and skills (Fullagar et  al., 2009; Moneta  & Csikszentmihalyi, 1996). The 
homogeneity condition for  ergodicity  implies that the regression coefficients of chal-
lenge, skill, and the balance of the two must be invariant across people. However, 
when we look at empirical examples we find that the effects of challenge and skill 
and the balance between the two differ across individuals (Moneta & Csikszentmi-
halyi, 1996), so that, for instance, balance between challenges and skills is a strong 
predictor of flow for some individuals, while for other individuals this balance does 
not predict flow or even has a negative effect on the experience of the individual. 
Likewise, the effects of challenge, skill, and balance have been found to be linked 
to personality traits – such as achievement orientation, trait intrinsic motivation, 
and interdependent  self- construal (Eisenberger, Jones, Stinglhamber, Shanock, & 
Randall, 2005; Moneta, 2004). Therefore, one of the main tenets of the flow model 

Redeﬁ ning ﬂ ow at work 85
appears to be fully applicable only to some individuals. We have here a clear exam-
ple of the violation of the homogeneity condition for being able to consider flow 
an ergodic process. More specifically, the  intra- individual models appear to differ 
between subjects regarding how the balance between challenge and skill affects the 
flow experience of employees. 
 In an unpublished research (i.e., Paredes, 2012) that we have conducted measuring 
challenge and skill during  twenty- one consecutive working days in a sample of sixty 
workers (6,981 registers obtained), we found that these two critical variables for the 
flow theory show different correlation values across individuals (Table 5.1). In this 
way, there are participants in which there is a positive correlation between challenge 
and skills; there are participants who present a negative correlation between these 
variables; and, finally, there is also a third group of participants in which these vari-
ables are unrelated. These results provide a clear evidence of the nonhomogeneity 
across subjects in flow at work. 
 Condition 2: stationarity 
 The second condition for ergodicity is that flow should have constant statistical 
characteristics over time (i.e., stationarity). In other words, the statistical parameters 
of the data, such as standard deviation and mean, should remain invariant across all 
time points. Molenaar and Campbell (2009) state that prime examples where this 
condition is violated are developmental processes, which almost by definition have 
statistical characteristics that change across data points. In this sense, Rathunde and 
Csikszentmihalyi (2006) define flow as a developmental process, due to the fact that 
every flow experience contributes to the growth of the self. After every episode 
of flow, employees are a little different from what they were before, as they have 
increased their skill level regarding a specific task. 
 When we look at empirical findings from research using longitudinal ESM data, 
we find that  work- related flow is highly unstable and strongly dependent upon 
situational conditions (e.g., Fullagar & Kelloway, 2009; Guastello, Johnson, et al., 
1999). In a study of  work- related flow, Ceja and Navarro (2009) used the standard 
deviation value and the mean squared successive difference (MSSD; Von Neumann, 
Kent, Bellison, & Hart, 1941) to assess variations in response over time, such as fluc-
tuations in the flow components. The authors chose to use the MSSD since they 
 TABLE 5.1  Distribution of participants according to  within- person correlations between 
challenge and skills (adapted from Paredes, 2012) 
Correlation
Number of 
participants
% of 
participants
Average value of 
the correlation
SD value of 
the correlation
Positive
12
20
0.504
0.236
Negative
33
55
–0.465
0.193
No correlation
15
25
–0.008
0.101

86 Lucia Ceja and Jose Navarro
were interested in the variability over time of the flow variables; the range of the 
scale used was from 0 to 100. The results from this study are shown in  Table 5.2 . 
 In  Table 5.2  we can observe the average number of records per participant 
(N = 20 participants), minimum and maximum per flow measure, 1 and the mean 
value and standard deviation. In this case the standard deviation gives us informa-
tion on the persistence of flow or its stability; as we can see all standard deviations 
and MSSD values are high, showing instable behavior for all variables. 
 Likewise, Ceja and Navarro (2009) found that when time series coming from 
both measures of flow (measure 1 and measure 2) were presented in line graphs 
(an example of measure 1 and 2 is shown in  Figure 5.1 ), fluctuating dynamics are 
revealed.  
 Likewise, Fullagar and Kelloway (2009) found that 74% of the overall variance 
in  work- related flow can be attributed to  intra- individual variation. Similarly, a 
study by  Rodríguez- Sánchez et al. (2011) found a curvilinear daily flow pattern, 
with lower levels of flow during working hours and higher levels of flow at the end 
of the day. All these studies demonstrate that the concept of flow denotes change 
and evolution over time. Hence, it becomes clear that flow is a nonstationary 
  TABLE 5.2 Descriptive statistics from the time series (adapted from Ceja & Navarro, 2009) 
Variable
Number of 
records per 
participant
Minimum
Maximum
M
SD
MSSD
Flow measure 1
119
0
49.30
9.28
7.98
50.40
Flow measure 2
119
0
100
64.96
22.61
55.24
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1
7
13
19
25
31
37
43
49
Flow measure 1
Flow measure 2
55
61
Time
Scale (0–100)
67
73
79
85
91
97 103 109 115
  FIGURE 5.1  Measures of flow 1 and 2 (adapted from Ceja & Navarro, 2009) 

Redeﬁ ning ﬂ ow at work 87
process – the associations among variables characterizing flow change in time. This 
is a clear violation of the stationarity condition for ergodicity: constant statistical 
parameters of the data over time. 
 As we can see from the foregoing analysis, flow can be considered a clear example 
where the two conditions for ergodicity – homogeneity of population and invariant 
statistical characteristics over time – are not met, and therefore we are talking about 
a nonergodic process (i.e., its structure of interindividual variation differs from its 
structure of  intra- individual variation). Because flow appears to be a  person- specific 
process (i.e., the flow process obeys  person- specific dynamic models), its analysis 
must be based on  intra- individual variation (Hamaker, 2012). 
 For this kind of process the nonlinear dynamical systems (NDS) theory offers 
a wide variety of methods that focus on  within- person dynamics (e.g., Guas-
tello, Koopmans, & Pincus, 2009). Therefore, in our view, the NDS approach 
has a great deal to contribute to theory and empirical work on flow, as it exam-
ines  person- specific models across time. More specifically, this approach gives us 
tools to assess the complexity of each person’s fluctuating behavior respecting the 
nonergodic characteristics of  work- related flow. It can also help researchers in 
tackling individual differences in the pattern or shape of a participant’s variations. 
Whether assessing the quantity – or the quality and style – of a person’s changes, 
the focus is on finding indexes of  intra- individual change that can be related to 
optimal levels of flow. The following section will tackle the second objective of 
this chapter: to explore the utility of NDS theory to enhance our understanding 
of  work- related flow. 
 NDS theory: a promising approach to studying 
the dynamics of  work- related ﬂ ow 
 The NDS approach, also known as complexity theory, emerged during the 1960s 
from different theoretical and empirical approximations (e.g., general systems the-
ory, chaos theory, fractal geometry, catastrophe theory, fuzzy sets theory; e.g., Guas-
tello, 2002). These theories come from a wide variety of disciplines that share a 
common interest: the study of specific characteristics of complex systems, such as 
the existence of nonlinearity and deterministic chaos, fractal structures, catastrophic 
changes, and fuzzy boundaries (Munné, 2005). They propose a systemic view in 
which variables relate with one another continuously in a nonlinear way. This way, 
variables are antecedents and consequences simultaneously, generating emerging 
properties through their interaction. These types of systems are denominated as 
complex adaptive systems (Navarro, 2005). 
 Psychologists in general have shown increased interest in the application of NDS 
theory to the study of human processes and they obtained important empirical 
outcomes, predominantly in developmental (e.g., Smith  & Thelen, 1993), social 
(e.g., Nowak & Vallacher, 1998), and organizational psychology (e.g., Guastello 
et al., 2009). The application of NDS models to positive organizational processes 
is not too plentiful; nonetheless, the link between nonlinear change and positive 

88 Lucia Ceja and Jose Navarro
psychology has been demonstrated theoretically (Schuldberg, 2006, 2007), as well 
as in empirical studies that have examined positive organizational behaviors like 
high work motivation (Arrieta, Navarro,  & Vicente, 2008) and, more recently, 
 work- related flow (Ceja & Navarro, 2009, 2011; Guastello, Johnson, et al., 1999; 
Navarro & Ceja, 2011). For a revision about the relations between nonlinear dynam-
ics and positive organizational behavior see Navarro and  Rueff- Lopes (2015). 
 Overall, there is evidence to suggest that complexity, change, and nonlinearity 
are integral to employee  well- being. In other words, the relationship between work 
and employee flourishing is not strictly linear and stable over time; on the contrary, 
employee  well- being seems to be rather unpredictable, with sudden, discontinuous, 
or unexpected changes (Schuldberg, 2006, 2007). Hence, NDS theory offers an 
interesting framework from which to study positive psychological processes like 
flow at work, providing an alternative perspective to the current prevailing para-
digm, which emphasizes linear change (i.e., the overuse of techniques based on the 
general linear model assume the idea of proportionality and gradual change in the rela-
tions among variables). There are two key concepts of NDS theory that, in our 
view, can open interesting avenues for future research on  work- related flow: chaotic 
behavior and catastrophic changes. 
 Chaos and  work- related ﬂ ow 
 Chaos refers to a particular nonlinear dynamic, and it can be viewed as a centerpiece 
of NDS theory (Guastello, 2002). The chaos phenomenon was discovered by Lorenz 
(1963) largely by chance while he was developing his work on weather forecast-
ing, and it was later coined by Li and Yorke (1975). It can be defined as “aperiodic 
bounded dynamics in a deterministic system with sensitive dependence on initial 
conditions” (Kaplan & Glass, 1995, p. 27). According to Tsonis (1992), the concept 
of chaos underlies two fundamental epistemological truths in science. First, appar-
ently random behavior (e.g., epidemic dynamics, behavior of stock market prices) is 
actually the result of simple deterministic rules. In other words, deterministic laws 
can produce behavior that appears random. Second, a chaotic phenomenon is best 
modeled using nonlinear techniques, such as recurrence analysis and catastrophe 
models, to name a few, which usually work with time series. 
 Chaotic behavior shows various fundamental characteristics (Guastello, 2002; 
Kaplan & Glass, 1995). First, chaotic behavior is unpredictable; this is to say that the 
dynamic never passes the same point twice. The unpredictability of chaotic behav-
ior makes it resemble a random dynamic, especially when using techniques that are 
unable to capture the nonlinear structure of the dynamic (e.g., traditional linear 
statistical techniques). Second, chaotic behavior displays sensitivity to initial condi-
tions, which means that even mild and brief inputs at a specific point in time can 
have important consequences in the long run. This property is also known as the 
butterfly effect. For example, in weather forecasting, seemingly trivial inputs – such 
as the flap of a butterfly’s wings in one region of the world – can disproportionally 
determine weather conditions in another place (Lorenz, 1993). The sensitivity to 

Redeﬁ ning ﬂ ow at work 89
the initial conditions is connected to the unpredictability of the dynamic in the long 
term. Third, chaotic dynamics exhibit clear boundaries, meaning that the dynamic 
stays within a confined range of values. Fourth, chaotic behavior is deterministic, 
meaning that it is regulated by simple deterministic equations. 
 The discovery of chaos has important implications for work and organiza-
tional psychology. For instance, the notion of prediction takes on new aspects 
when seen through the lens of chaos. As stated before, one of the main char-
acteristics of chaos is that it is unpredictable in the long term. Hence, what 
organizational scholars thought was simple becomes complex, and questions 
arise regarding measurement, predictability, and verifications of classic theories 
regarding organizational behavior. In compensation, phenomena that appear ran-
dom or stochastic may in fact be following simple rules. More specifically, a great 
part of the  within- individual variability observed in organizational behavior that 
was previously conceived as random error can now be identified as obeying 
deterministic rules. 
 The last few decades have been fruitful for NDS theory in terms of the develop-
ment and improvement of different methodologies for identifying and measuring 
deterministic chaos, such as the recurrence analysis, the surrogate data analysis, the 
Lyapunov exponents, the Kolmogrov entropy, the Hurst exponents, and catastrophe 
modeling, to name a few. These techniques allow researchers to identify the type of 
dynamic (i.e., chaotic, linear, or random) underlying in time series, and to know the 
amount of variables involved in the dynamic (see Heath, 2000;  Ramos- Villagrasa & 
 García- Izquierdo, 2011). 
 Based on the fruitful advancements of NDS methodologies for identifying and 
measuring chaos in time series, examples of chaotic behavior have been detected 
among different disciplines (e.g., for the physical sciences, see Prigogine & Stengers, 
1984; meteorology, see Lorenz, 1993; organizational behavior, see Guastello, 2002, 
or Navarro & Arrieta, 2010; physiology, see Freeman, 1991; psychology, see Barton, 
1994, or Guastello et al., 2009). The manifestation of chaos in a wide variety of 
fields supports the universality of chaos proposed by Cvitanovic (1989), who sug-
gested that chaotic behavior is universal and therefore can be observed in a wide 
variety of phenomena across all scientific disciplines, meaning that different systems 
are governed by the same rules – for example, the same rules can be operating in 
physiological systems and organizational behavior. One of these universal rules is 
the appearance of variability of behavior in healthy systems. 
 Healthy variability in the workplace 
 Following the principle of the universality of chaos and of particular relevance to 
research on  work- related flow, there is an intriguing and controversial literature 
in physiology suggesting that specific characteristics of complex systems – mainly 
chaos – are related to  well- being and optimal organ functioning (e.g., Freeman, 
1991; Goldberger, 1991). More specifically, there is strong evidence demonstrating 
the existence of chaos in the cardiac (Goldberger, 1991) and neurological (Freeman, 

90 Lucia Ceja and Jose Navarro
1991) systems of healthy patients, in contrast to unhealthy patients, who show peri-
odic or linear dynamics in both cardiac and neurological systems. 
 Based on these findings, organizational psychologists have also found a link 
between chaos and  well- being (for a revision see Navarro &  Rueff- Lopes, 2015). 
For example, Arrieta et al. (2008) demonstrated empirical evidence of chaos in 
the intraperson variability of highly motivated employees. Three pioneering stud-
ies on  work- related flow showed similar results; when employees’ time series were 
analyzed, most employees revealed nonlinear or chaotic behavior, whereas linear 
dynamics were the exception (Ceja & Navarro, 2009, 2011; Guastello, Johnson, 
et al., 1999). Ceja and Navarro (2011), for instance, demonstrated that higher lev-
els of flow are associated with chaotic behavior, whereas linear behavior is associ-
ated with feeling anxious, and apathy is linked to random behavior. The authors 
conclude that there may be such a thing as “healthy nonlinear variability,” and a 
decrease in such nonlinearity may indicate a decrease in employee  well- being. 
 In light of the foregoing findings, understanding the structure and behavior of 
chaos may provide further insights regarding employee  well- being and can open 
new directions for future research on  work- related flow. It appears that flow behaves 
mainly in a chaotic manner; therefore, NDS methodologies (e.g., recurrence plots, 
surrogate data, catastrophe modeling) that are able to describe and model chaotic 
behavior have a great deal to contribute to theory and empirical work on flow. 
Such methodologies can substitute, in some cases, or complement, in others, clas-
sical linear approaches by offering new tools with which scholars are able to study 
and model the linear and nonlinear evolution of  work- related flow in an integrative 
manner. In this sense, it is important that future studies continue to examine the 
pattern of change observed in the  intra- individual variability of flow. 
 An important question that would benefit from further conceptual development 
as well as empirical research is what variables are responsible for the emergence of dif-
ferent dynamical patterns (i.e., chaotic, random, or linear) observed in  work- related 
flow. Ceja and Navarro (2011) found that high levels of the core components of flow 
(e.g., balance of perceived challenge and skill, merging of action and awareness) are 
associated with the emergence of chaotic behavior. Likewise, employees’ job features 
such as more seniority, longer job tenures, a  full- time job contract, low flexibility of 
working hours, and a typical weekly schedule are linked to chaotic behavior. Future 
research could explore in more detail these findings. For instance, it seems that pro-
ductive organizational behavior (e.g., to experience flow at work) requires specific 
boundaries in labor conditions in order to contain these creative outbursts. Studies 
exploring organizational facilitators of  work- related flow, distinguished in previous 
flow research (e.g., Bakker, 2005; Demerouti, 2006), and their association with chaotic 
behavior may also help to shed further light on this issue. Likewise, recent studies 
recognize work engagement as a primary condition for experiencing  work- related 
flow (Moneta, 2010). Hence, it may be interesting to further study the role of work 
engagement in the emergence of chaos in the intraperson variability of flow. 
 Overall, future research is needed to clarify the dynamic patterns underlying 
 work- related flow across time; the variables responsible for the emergence of dis-
tinct dynamical patterns, especially the emergence of chaotic patterns; and the role 

Redeﬁ ning ﬂ ow at work 91
of other related constructs (e.g., work engagement, mindfulness) in the relationship 
between chaos and flow. 
 Catastrophe theory and ﬂ ow: modeling abrupt 
and discontinuous change 
 It has been demonstrated that  work- related flow presents continuous fluctuations, 
generally nonlinear, across time (Ceja & Navarro, 2009, 2011; Guastello, Johnson, 
et al., 1999). Based on the catastrophe theory, Ceja and Navarro (2012) modeled for 
the first time the abrupt and discontinuous changes observed in the process of flow 
at the  intra- individual level. Catastrophe theory (Thom, 1975; Zeeman, 1977) offers 
an alluring approximation for modeling the fluctuating reality of  work- related flow. 
It is interested in describing and modeling the discontinuities that can appear in the 
evolution of a system. A catastrophe can be understood as abrupt or drastic changes 
that emerge as a consequence of small changes in the external conditions (Guastello, 
1987). Catastrophe theory has been successfully used in different areas of work and 
organizational psychology, such as accidents involving health care workers (e.g., 
Guastello, Gershon, & Murphy, 1999), work motivation (e.g., Guastello, 1987, 2002), 
employee turnover (e.g., Sheridan, 1985), personnel selection (e.g., Guastello, 1982), 
workplace bullying (Escartín, Ceja, Navarro,  & Zapf, 2013), and organizational 
change (e.g., Bigelow, 1982), among others. 
 More specifically, catastrophe theory provides an adequate conceptual frame-
work as well as the mathematical tools for studying and modeling the possible 
nonlinear relationships between control parameters or independent variables and 
order parameters or dependent variables. There are seven elementary catastrophe 
models, whose degree of complexity depends upon the number of order (depen-
dent variable) and control (independent variable) parameters. The cusp catastro-
phe model, one of the simplest and most widely used, explains the discontinuous 
change between two stable states of behavior by means of two control parameters 
and one order parameter.  Work- related flow has been recently modeled as a cusp 
catastrophe (Ceja & Navarro, 2012; Navarro & Ceja, 2011; see  Figure 5.2 ). 
 FIGURE 5.2  Cusp catastrophe model (left panel) and traditional linear regression 
model (right panel) of flow experiences at work (adapted from Ceja & Navarro, 2012; 
Navarro & Ceja, 2011) 

92 Lucia Ceja and Jose Navarro
 To illustrate the topographic differences between a cusp catastrophe model of 
flow and a traditional linear regression model, we show in  Figure 5.2 both models. 
In the left panel of  Figure 5.2  the cusp catastrophe model of flow is shown, which 
describes the change in the order parameter or dependent variable (i.e., flow: aver-
age of enjoyment, interest, and absorption) as a result of the interaction between 
perceived challenge and skill. In the right panel of  Figure 5.2  a traditional linear 
regression model is shown containing the same set of variables. What differenti-
ates both models is the fold shown in the catastrophe model, which indicates that 
for given values of the independent variables the dependent variable can present 
discontinuous or abrupt changes within the cusp region (represented by the fold 
region), whereas in the traditional linear regression this fold is not considered and 
sudden or abrupt changes are considered as outliers or noise in the data, and there-
fore this information is not included in the model. 
 Due to the topographic differences in the linear and nonlinear models, Ceja and 
Navarro (2012) hypothesized that a cusp catastrophe model could better capture the 
complexity and nonlinearity of the relationship between  challenge- skill balance and 
 work- related flow, compared to a linear regression model. Indeed, this was the case; 
findings from this study supported the better performance of the cusp catastrophe 
model over its linear counterpart (see  Table 5.3 ) as shown by the lower AIC c  and 
BIC and higher R 2 indexes presented by the catastrophe model. The authors sug-
gest that the superiority of the cusp catastrophe model for modeling flow is due to 
 TABLE 5.3  Fit statistics for linear, logistic, and cusp models (adapted from Ceja & Navarro, 2012) 
Linear
Logistic
Cusp
Flow
AICc
978.95∗∗
503.47
265.46∗∗
BIC
989.71∗∗
516.79
281.16∗∗
R2
.23
.44
.39
Enjoyment
AICc
1031.31∗∗
363.70
361.07∗∗
BIC
1031.79∗∗
376.94
332.72∗∗
R2
.19
.47
.45
Interest
AICc
1018.69∗∗
981.09
267.05∗∗
BIC
1026.02∗∗
1001.33
282.64∗∗
R2
.24
.38
.42
Absorption
AICc
994.54∗∗
785.73
245.95∗∗
BIC
1005.09∗∗
799.05
261.51∗∗
R2
.20
.35
.49
 Note: The AIC, BIC, and R 2 were calculated as the average of all participants. The trimmed mean was 
used in order to eliminate outliers or extreme observations, discarding 5% of the values at the high and 
low ends. AIC c = Aikaike information criterion corrected; BIC = Bayesian information criterion. 
 N = 6,981 logs across 60 participants. The  chi- square likelihood ratio test was calculated for the AIC c 
 and BIC indexes.  ∗∗  p < .0001. 

Redeﬁ ning ﬂ ow at work 93
its capacity to model both linear and nonlinear relationships as well as gradual and 
discontinuous changes in an integrative way. Likewise, Navarro and Ceja (2011) 
examined the application of a cusp catastrophe model to modeling flow in work 
and nonwork activities; the results demonstrated the better performance of the cusp 
catastrophe model over its linear counterpart (i.e., linear regression model) in both 
domains. Moreover, Ceja and Navarro (2012) found that perceived challenge plays 
an especially important role in the dynamics of flow, as it indicates the number of 
discontinuities in employees’  work- related flow. 
 In view of the foregoing findings, flow at work seems to present discontinuous as 
well as continuous changes across time. Therefore, catastrophe theory appears to be 
an adequate approximation for modeling this combination of changes. Moreover, 
it enriches our capacity to understand, characterize, and integrate different pat-
terns of change (e.g., gradual and continuous as well as abrupt or discontinuous). 
In our view, future research on  work- related flow should continue examining the 
application of the different models proposed by catastrophe theory (e.g., elementary 
cuspoids; see Guastello, 1987) to study changes in flow among different employee 
populations. 
 There are three interesting avenues for future research in this area. First, further 
research is needed to compare the performance of catastrophe models to that of 
more traditional statistical linear approaches (i.e., linear regression analysis, HLM, 
growth curve modeling). Second, perceived challenge seems to be the variable 
responsible for the emergence of bifurcations. In other words, perceived challenge 
appears to present a threshold beyond which two divergent behaviors are possible 
(i.e., low and high levels of flow). Hence, future research is needed to examine the 
role of challenge and other variables (e.g., dimensions of flow, organizational facili-
tators of flow) as determinants of the phase transitions as employees move into and 
out of an optimal experience. Likewise, it would be interesting to study whether 
the specific values of perceived challenge at which the bifurcation point is created 
are distinct for each employee or whether similarities in terms of threshold can be 
found between different employees. Third, an interesting area for future research 
may be to study situation- and  person- related predictors of the sudden and abrupt 
changes observed in  work- related flow over time. On the whole, research in this 
area will surely add valuable information to the flow theory. 
 In the following section we will describe several approaches for assessing 
 intra- individual variability in  work- related flow relying on NDS theory. After-
wards, we will propose some important implications for practitioners as well. 
 Implications for academics and practitioners 
 At the beginning of this chapter we argued that flow can be considered as a noner-
godic developmental process. This suggests that our analyses should be framed in 
a  within- person approach that examines how the process of flow unfolds within 
individuals across time. Likewise we have presented the utility of the NDS approach 
for studying the dynamic behavior of flow over time, emphasizing chaotic dynamics 

94 Lucia Ceja and Jose Navarro
and catastrophic changes as two fruitful concepts that may contribute to the devel-
opment of a new  mind- set for understanding  work- related flow as a highly dynamic 
process. This section will be focused on the implications that the incorporation of 
this new  mind- set, framed in the NDS approach, can have for the work developed 
by flow scholars and practitioners. 
 Implications for ﬂ ow research: NDS methodologies 
for analyzing  within- person data 
 Since the 1970s, the methodologies of NDS and their applications to social research 
have exploded (Guastello  & Gregson, 2011). Specialist journals (e.g., nonlinear 
dynamics, psychology, and life sciences) and books (e.g., Guastello & Gregson, 2011; 
Heath, 2000; Kaplan & Glass, 1995) provide us with methods and applications of the 
behavioral sciences that are useful for studying the intricate and constantly chang-
ing nature of flow. In this sense, as flow scholars, we have in our hands an array of 
useful methodologies that can help us examine flow data with new lenses. In this 
section we will suggest a  step- by-step basic procedure for assessing and modeling 
intraperson dynamics in  time- series data. It is important to emphasize that the 
methodologies described here require a minimum set of data. For example, we have 
worked with at least 100 observations taken over time for each of the individuals 
being studied. However, with a minor amount of registers (thirty or forty) some of 
the techniques that we have used can be applied. In any case, the longer the time 
series, the better the accuracy of the results. 
 Likewise, it is important to note that using NDS methodologies does not mean 
that we should throw away all that we know about flow. Instead, it indicates a 
remarkable opportunity to go beyond what we already know about  work- related 
flow and build on new models from variables we know well, incorporating non-
linear dynamics. Up until now the traditional linear approaches, grounded on the 
generalized linear model (GLM), have considered nonlinear dynamics as random 
noise. Likewise, although our approach in the present chapter is quantitative, quali-
tative designs using an NDS approach are also feasible, and several organizational 
behavior scholars are actively involved in performing qualitative studies from an 
NDS approach (e.g., Langley, Smallan, Tsoukas, & Van den Ven, 2013). 
 In  Figure 5.3 , a procedure of time series analyses using NDS methodologies that 
has been used in several studies (e.g., Ceja & Navarro, 2009, 2011, 2012; Arrieta 
et al., 2008;  Ramos- Villagrasa &  García- Izquierdo, 2011) is described. The process 
starts by producing line graphs of flow indexes against time for each participant 
separately (see first column in  Figure 5.4 ). This will give us a  within- subject per-
spective that will enable us to observe the presence or absence of regular patterns 
in the dynamics of flow over time. Visual inspection of flow indices against time is 
helpful to describe the dynamics of time series and it is needed before attempting 
more complicated analyses (Chatfield, 1996). For those participants for whom this 
preliminary visual inspection shows that their time series are mainly linear or nearly 
linear, a traditional approach based on the GLM is recommended (e.g., ARIMA 

Redeﬁ ning ﬂ ow at work 95
 FIGURE 5.3  Procedure of time series analyses used in the study (adapted from Ramos- 
Villagrasa &  García- Izquierdo, 2011) 
Time series
Linear
Nonlinear
Preliminary visual exploration
(Deciding if a linear or
nonlinear approach is suitable)
Traditional linear approaches
grounded on the Generalized Linear
Model (GLM)
Maximum Lyapunov exponent
(quantitative procedure to
discriminate between linear and
chaotic patterns)
Linear Pattern
ARIMA models, etc.
Catastrophe models, nonlinear
neural networks, etc.
Prediction capacity
Total
Zero
Chaotic Pattern
Random Pattern
The data cannot be further
modeled
Pattern identification using NDS
analysis techniques
Visual Recurrence Analysis
(graphical procedure to identify
linear, chaotic, and random
patterns)
Surrogate data analysis
(quantitative validation of
detected patterns)
models). However, for those cases where the line graphs show instable or nonlinear 
dynamics and it is challenging to discriminate between linear and nonlinear behav-
ior, the use of NDS methodologies is advised. 
 Once we have visually assessed the nature of our time series and we detect 
unstable dynamics, we can go further and conduct a deeper analysis of patterning of 

 FIGURE 5.4  Line graphs (left) and recurrence plots (right). The top row shows a lin-
ear dynamic, the middle row a chaotic dynamic, and the lower row shows a random 
dynamic pattern. Adapted from Ceja & Navarro (2011) 

Redeﬁ ning ﬂ ow at work 97
trajectories, the paths defined by each participant’s data set, allowing us to uncover 
the dynamic patterns (e.g., linear, chaotic, or random) underlying the  time- series 
data. In this chapter we will describe three NDS techniques that assess dynamic 
patterns in  time- series data: maximum Lyapunov exponent, recurrence analysis, 
and surrogate data testing. In our view the three techniques presented here should 
be used together so the researcher can achieve a more precise examination of the 
 intra- individual variability of flow (as chaotic, linear, or random), by integrating 
results from the three techniques. 
 The maximum Lyapunov exponent is a quantitative indicator of the dynamic 
patterns underlying time series. The Lyapunov exponent is based on a concept of 
entropy, which is the rate at which information that allows forecast of a variable  y is 
lost (Kaplan & Glass, 1995). In the case of a linear pattern, the maximum Lyapunov 
exponent is zero or less; otherwise, it could be chaotic or random. However, it is 
important to note that the Lyapunov exponent can overestimate chaos because for 
some cases it is not sensitive enough to discriminate between chaos and random 
behavior. In the cases of random patterns, Lyapunov exponents become very large, 
and this may be an indicator of random patterning in the data. Likewise, finding a 
pure linear pattern in a time series is very unlikely, increasing the risk of accepting a 
case as nonlinear when it is actually following a linear pattern. In order to continue 
our analysis further we suggest using also recurrence plots. Lyapunov exponents can 
be calculated in R using fNonlinear or RTisean packages. 
 The recurrence analysis is based on the study of possible recurrences in a time 
series. A recurrence is a sequence of events that repeats itself across time (Marwan, 
Romano, Thiel, & Kurths, 2007). The NDS offers a powerful tool for the charac-
terization of recurrence called  recurrence plots.  A recurrence plot is a square matrix, 
in which the matrix elements correspond to those times at which  time- series data 
recur (columns and rows indicate a certain pair of times). More specifically, the 
recurrence plot reveals all the times when the phase space trajectory of the data 
visits roughly the same area in the phase space (Heath, 2000). The recurrence plot 
enables us to characterize the dynamic underlying the  time- series as linear, chaotic, 
or random. A free and useful software for applied recurrence plots is included in 
the fNonlinear package in R. 
 In  Figure 5.4  we show line graphs (left) and recurrence plots (right) of flow data 
obtained from the study by Ceja and Navarro (2011). The first row of figures rep-
resents a linear dynamic; in this type of dynamic the recurrence plot shows an image 
in which all the data points are clearly concentrated in a few specific areas. This can 
be interpreted as the system passing several times through the same positions, which 
indicates that the dynamic is very regular and stable. 
 The middle row represents a chaotic dynamic; in this case the recurrence plot 
exhibits a uniform tone of upward marked diagonals called “recurrences” parallel 
to the main diagonal. These recurrences are sequences of values that are repeated 
within the system in a similar way at different periods of time that characterizes a 
chaotic time series. The last row represents a random dynamic; in this case any result 
is possible and many points appear across the graph. There is a lack of structure, 

98 Lucia Ceja and Jose Navarro
showing the absence of any recurrence. Although the visual recurrence approach 
is very useful, it presents an important challenge: the visual interpretation of recur-
rence plots requires some experience and for some cases it may be difficult to dis-
tinguish between random and chaotic dynamic patterns; hence the  decision- making 
can be very subjective. 
 Both Lyapunov exponent and recurrence analysis enable scholars to perform a 
preliminary discrimination between linear, chaotic, or random patterns underlying 
time series. Nevertheless, it is important to use a third quantitative technique to 
clarify further the dynamic pattern underlying the time series. This third technique 
is called  surrogate data analysis  (Schreiber & Schmitz, 2000). Surrogate data analysis 
is used to verify the randomness of time series. The logic behind the surrogate 
data is very simple: starting from the original time series, this procedure enables 
the creation of random series, which conserve the same statistical properties (e.g., 
mean, variance, and structure of  auto- correlation) as the original series, but remove 
nonlinear dependency (Kugiumtzis, 2002). Afterwards, a hypothesis contrast is con-
ducted between the original series and the surrogate data, with the objective of 
ruling out that the original time series is also random (see Heath, 2000). The pro-
cedure is implemented in the TISEAN software (surrogates command) now also 
available in R (RTisean package). Readers interested in learning more about the 
basic concepts behind the surrogate data analysis are advised to review the work by 
Dolan and Spano (2001) and Heath (2000). 
 After carefully assessing the nature of the  intra- individual variability using line 
graphs, Lyapunov exponent, recurrence analysis, and surrogate data analysis, for 
those cases in which the dynamic pattern is characterized as nonlinear or chaotic, 
a further step can be to develop dynamic models to match the empirical data. This 
is an area where there is a good deal of room for fruitful research on  work- related 
flow. In this sense, catastrophe theory approach has been extensively applied in the 
social sciences (Bigelow, 1982; Guastello, 1995; Guastello, Gershon et al., 1999) and 
more recently in  work- related flow (Ceja & Navarro, 2012) for modeling the dis-
continuities in nonlinear or chaotic data. To analyze the fit of the cusp catastrophe 
model to the flow data there are several powerful techniques available to flow schol-
ars, such as the multivariate GEMCAT (see Lange, McDade, & Oliva, 2001; Oliva, 
Desarbo, Day, & Jedidi, 1987) or the polynomial regression technique (see Guas-
tello, 1982, 1987). Nonetheless, we recommend using the R cusp package (Gras-
man, van der Maas, & Wagenmakers, 2009). This method implements and extends 
Cobb’s maximum likelihood approach (Cobb & Watson, 1980; Cobb, Koppstein, & 
Chen, 1983) and makes it easy to fit the cusp catastrophe model to real flow data 
and compare it with linear and logistic regression models. It is important to note 
that considering the nonergodic nature of flow data, the fit of each model (i.e., cusp 
catastrophe, linear, and logistic) should be done individually for each study partici-
pant (i.e., case per case). 
 Summing up, results of preliminary visual explorations using line graphs can serve 
us to verify the stability of flow over time. Subsequently, if our data shows unsta-
ble behavior across time, NDS techniques, such as Lyapunov exponent, recurrence 

Redeﬁ ning ﬂ ow at work 99
analysis, and surrogate data analysis, can help us to determine the type of dynamic 
pattern (i.e., linear, chaotic, or random) underlying the flow data and select the most 
suitable methodology for modeling our data. More specifically if the data shows lin-
ear behavior we can use more traditional linear approaches, such as ARIMA models 
or other related ones. However, if the flow data behaves in a nonlinear manner, flow 
scholars can use NDS modeling techniques, such as catastrophe models. Finally if 
the data shows random behavior, no modeling of the flow data can be conducted. 
 Overall, flow can be considered a nonergodic process; thus, it is better studied 
using  person- specific dynamic models. In this sense, techniques based on NDS can 
help flow scholars to incorporate in their research the nonlinearity and discontinu-
ous change that employees experience in their everyday struggle of transitioning 
between nonflow states (e.g., boredom or anxiety) and the flow state. It is important 
to emphasize that  between- subjects designs can also be used; however, they should be 
based on the  intra- individual analysis of single cases. For instance, flow scholars can 
study clusters of participants presenting different dynamic patterns (e.g., linear, cha-
otic, or random). In a study on  work- related flow, Ceja and Navarro (2011) found 
that high levels of flow are associated with the chaotic pattern, whereas other states 
of consciousness are associated with linear and random patterns. Future research on 
flow can continue this line of research and examine the variables associated with the 
emergence of different dynamic patterns in flow at work. We are hopeful that new 
developments in the study of flow at work will have more widespread applications 
of  NDS- based methods. 
 Implications for practitioners: incorporating nonlinear 
dynamics of ﬂ ow to organizational practice 
 A growing number of organizations are aligning work and culture with the  principles 
of flow, considering the main tenets of the flow theory to create working conditions 
that allow their employees to experience flow (e.g., balance between challenges and 
skills, clear goals, unambiguous feedback, autonomy, space for deep concentration). 
Some examples are Microsoft, Gallup, Ericsson,  Media- Saturn Group, Patagonia, and 
Toyota, which have discovered that creating a  flow- friendly work environment that 
helps individuals flourish can increase productivity and satisfaction at work (Pink, 
2009). 
 Csikszentmihalyi (1996) argues that without flow there is no creativity, and in 
today’s business world, innovation and creativity are a requirement to succeed. “To 
stay competitive, we have to lead in the world  in- person creativity. People with 
high flow never miss a day. They never get sick. Their lives are just better and they 
are more productive,” says Jif Clifton, CEO of the Gallup Organization. 2 Cheng 
and Van de Ven (1996) found that the creative processes in organizations exhibit 
chaotic patterns. In other words, learning in chaotic conditions is an expanding and 
diverging process of discovering possible action alternatives, while learning under 
stable periodic conditions is a narrowing and converging process. Hence, it appears 
that flow and creative processes emerge under chaotic conditions, meaning that 

100 Lucia Ceja and Jose Navarro
instability and variability in organizational contexts can be regarded as  flow- friendly 
work conditions. 
 Utho Creusen, former chief human resources officer of  Media- Saturn Group, 
received an excellence in practice award by the Gallup International Positive Insti-
tute in 2006 for institutionalizing concepts of flow in his company. Utho explains 
that opportunity and freedom within a work role are needed to experience flow. 
This is difficult when roles conform to a standardized template. Hence, it is impor-
tant to allow some flexibility within roles no matter how structured the working 
environments. It is always important that individuals have certain degree of flex-
ibility to be able to craft their jobs. 3 
 Likewise, at Patagonia, former CEO Michael Crooke argues that the experience 
of flow can be extended from the Patagonia workforce to all stakeholders if they 
derive a joyful experience from the company (Perschel, 2010). Crook implemented 
an annual company assessment to measure the degree of  work- related flow employ-
ees experience in their daily activities, including items such as how free employees 
are to use their own time (sense of control), whether they experience a balance 
between their job demands and their skills ( challenge- skill balance), and whether 
they are able to stay focused in one task at a time (deep concentration). Crooke 
has been celebrated for building Patagonia into one of the world’s most recognized, 
successful, and socially responsible brands (Persche, 2010). 
 Stefan Falk, former vice president at Ericsson, adopted flow concepts to 
engage employees at his company (Pink, 2009). Impressed by the results, Falk 
developed a  flow- based culture in 2003 when he joined Green Cargo, one of 
Scandinavia’s largest transport and logistics companies. At Green Cargo, Csik-
szentmihalyi’s book on flow is required reading for all managers as part of a 
training program. With the objective of establishing clear goals and unambiguous 
feedback (two of the antecedents of flow), employees and managers meet and 
negotiate  three- month contracts and organize feedback sessions once a month. A 
year following this implementation, Green Cargo substantially increased its profits 
(Pink, 2009). 
 Another example of how companies use the flow theory to enhance the experi-
ence of their clients is Microsoft applying the concepts of flow to give Windows 
users a more engaging and joyful experience. Its objective is to make its products a 
pleasure to use. Likewise, Microsoft is currently conducting research on how flow 
might improve the lives and productivity of software engineers (Pink, 2009). 
 As we have seen in the foregoing examples, enhancing  work- related flow can 
be neither costly nor difficult for organizations. For instance, monitoring the flow 
experiences of employees to develop  person- specific interventions to enhance 
flow at work may be really powerful. NDS methodologies can give practitioners 
a more dynamic view of flow, where variability and abrupt changes are seen as a 
positive and healthy behavior. In this sense, practitioners should be careful with 
employees who show stable dynamics of flow (e.g., they never enter the flow zone 
or they never leave the flow zone), as stable dynamics appear to be associated with 
low levels of flow at work (e.g., Ceja & Navarro, 2011). 

Redeﬁ ning ﬂ ow at work 101
 Likewise, as we have shown throughout the chapter, practitioners can bene-
fit from the NDS approach for understanding  work- related flow as a dynamic 
and unique process that is different for each individual. This should be viewed as 
a fundamental management tool, and can guide organizations in the creation of 
 individual- specific interventions that consider the dynamic pattern of each indi-
vidual (chaotic, random, or linear) and the characteristics of the work context. With 
this information in mind, designing individual job positions or entire work envi-
ronments following the concept and dynamics of flow will likely result in higher 
 well- being for all stakeholders in organizations. 
 Conclusions 
 Our conclusions can be framed in three main “ take- home” messages. First, flow should 
be considered a nonergodic process, meaning that we need to study it at the intra-
individual level of analysis. Once we can describe the dynamic of flow at the 
 intra- individual level, we might be able to group individuals in clusters following 
same dynamic patterns. 
 Second, flow should be considered a nonlinear process. This means that we need 
to study it going beyond the techniques that the generalized linear model provides 
us with. More specifically, we should apply nonlinear techniques to obtain better 
results in our research. 
 Finally, flow should be present in the agenda of managers and human resource 
professionals. The experience of flow represents one of the purest manifestations of 
intrinsic motivation, and motivation is a key determinant of performance at work. 
Additionally, intrinsic motivation enhances employee  well- being. One of the classic 
paradoxes for human resource professionals is taking care of employee motivation 
and  well- being while enhancing organizational productivity – this can be managed 
by paying attention to the dynamics of flow at work. Definitely, taking care of 
employees’ flow is a serious business. 
 Notes 
 1 In Ceja and Navarro (2009) two flow measures were used: measure 1 was the balance 
of challenges and skills, and measure 2 involved the average of enjoyment, interest, and 
absorption. 
 2 Is Your Organization Creative Enough? (2006). A Q&A with Jim Clifton, CEO of Gal-
lup and author of  The Coming Jobs War .  Gallup Business Journal , May 11, 2006. Personal 
interview with Utho Creusen at the Gallup Positive Psychology summit, 2008. 
 3 Personal interview with Utho Creusen at the Gallup Positive Psychology summit, 2008. 
 References 
 Arrieta, C., Navarro, J., & Vicente, S. (2008). Factores asociados a la emergencia de patrones 
diferenciales de la motivación en el trabajo [Variables related to the emergence of differ-
ential patterns in work motivation].  Psicothema ,  20 ,  745– 752. 

102 Lucia Ceja and Jose Navarro
 Bakker, A. B. (2005). Flow among music teachers and their students: The crossover of peak 
experiences.  Journal of Vocational Behavior ,  66 ,  26– 44. 
 Barton, S. (1994). Chaos,  self- organization, and psychology.  American Psychologist ,  49 ,  5– 14. 
 Bigelow, J. (1982). A catastrophic model of organizational change.  Behavioral Science ,  27 , 
 26– 42. 
 Ceja, L., & Navarro, J. (2009). Dynamics of flow: A nonlinear perspective.  Journal of Happi-
ness Studies ,  10 ,  665– 684. 
 Ceja, L., & Navarro, J. (2011). Dynamic patterns of flow in the workplace: Characterizing 
 within- individual variability using a complexity science approach.  Journal of Organiza-
tional Behavior ,  32 ,  627– 651. 
 Ceja, L., & Navarro, J. (2012). “Suddenly I get into the zone”: Examining discontinuities 
and nonlinear changes in flow experiences at work.  Human Relations ,  65 (9),  1101– 1127. 
 Chatfield, C. (1996).  The analysis of time series: An introduction . New York: Chapman & Hall. 
 Cheng, Y. T., & Van de Ven, A. H. (1996). Learning the innovation journey: Order out of 
chaos?  Organization Science ,  7 (6),  593– 614. 
 Cobb, L., Koppstein, P., & Chen, N. (1983). Estimation and moment recursion relations 
for multimodal distributions of the exponential family.  Journal of the American Statistical 
Association ,  78 ,  124– 130. 
 Cobb, L.,  & Watson, B. (1980). Statistical catastrophe theory: An overview.  Mathematical 
Modelling ,  1 ,  311– 317. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1975).  Beyond boredom and anxiety: Experiencing flow in work and play . 
San Francisco, CA:  Jossey- Bass. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990).  Flow: The psychology of optimal experience . New York: Harper 
and Row. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1996).  Creativity: Flow and the psychology of discovery and invention. 
New York: HarperPerennial. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1997).  Finding flow: The psychology of engagement with everyday life . 
New  York: Basic Books. 
 Cvitanovic, P. (1989).  Universality in chaos . Bristol, UK: Adam Hilger. 
 Delle Fave, A., Massimini, F., & Bassi, M. (2011).  Psychological selection and optimal experiences 
across cultures. Social empowerment through personal growth . London, UK: Springer. 
 Demerouti, E. (2006). Job characteristics, flow, and performance: The moderating role of 
conscientiousness.  Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 11 ,  266– 280. 
 Dolan, K. T., & Spano, M. L. (2001). Surrogate for nonlinear time series analysis.  Physical 
Review ,  64 ,  1– 4. 
 Eisenberger, R., Jones, J. R., Stinglhamber, F., Shanock, L., & Randall, A. T. (2005). Flow 
experiences at work: For high need achievers alone?  Journal of Organizational Behavior ,  26 , 
 755– 775. 
 Escartín, J., Ceja, L., Navarro, J., & Zapf, D. (2013). Modeling workplace bullying behaviors 
using catastrophe theory.  Nonlinear Dynamics, Psychology, and Life Sciences ,  17 (4),  493– 515. 
 Freeman, W. J. (1991). The physiology of perception.  Scientific American, 264,  78– 85. 
 Fullagar, C. J., & Kelloway, K. (2009). “Flow” at work: An experience sampling approach. 
 Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology ,  82 ,  595– 615. 
 Fullagar, C., & Kelloway, E. K. (2013). Work related flow. In A. B. Bakker & K. Daniels 
(Eds.),  A day in the life of a happy worker . Hove Sussex: Psychology Press,  41– 57. 
 Goldberger, A. L. (1991). Is the normal heartbeat chaotic or homeostatic?  News in Physiologi-
cal Sciences ,  6 ,  87– 91. 
 Grasman, R. P. P. P., van der Maas, H. L. J., & Wagenmakers, E. J. (2009). Fitting the cusp 
catastrophe in R: A cusp package primer.  Journal of Statistical Software ,  32 (8),  1– 27. URL 
http://www.jstatsoft.org/v32/i08 

Redeﬁ ning ﬂ ow at work 103
 Guastello, S. J. (1982). Moderator regression and the cusp catastrophe: Application of 
 two- stage personnel selection, training, therapy and program evaluation.  Behavioral Sci-
ence ,  27 ,  259– 272. 
 Guastello, S. J. (1987). A butterfly catastrophe model of motivation in organizations: Academic 
performance.  Journal of Applied Psychology ,  72 ,  165– 182. 
 Guastello, S. J. (2002).  Managing emergent phenomena: Nonlinear dynamics in work organizations. 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
 Guastello, S. J., Gershon, R. R. M., & Murphy, L. R. (1999). Catastrophe model for the 
exposure to  blood- borne pathogens and other accidents in health care settings.  Accident 
Analysis and Prevention ,  31 ,  739– 749. 
 Guastello, S. J., & Gregson, R.A.M. (2011).  Nonlinear dynamical systems analysis for the behav-
ioral sciences using real data. Florida: CRC Press Taylor & Francis. 
 Guastello, S. J., Johnson, E. A., & Rieke, M. (1999). Nonlinear dynamics of motivational 
flow.  Nonlinear Dynamics Psychology and Life Sciences ,  3 ,  259– 273. 
 Guastello, S. J., Koopmans, M., & Pincus, D. (Eds.) (2009).  Chaos and complexity in psychology: 
The theory of nonlinear dynamical systems. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
 Hamaker, E. L. (2012). Why researchers should think “ within- person”. A paradigmatic 
rationale. In M. R. Mehl & T. S. Conner (Eds.),  Handbook of research methods for studying 
daily life (pp.  43– 61). New York: The Guilford Press. 
 Heath, R. A. (2000).  Nonlinear dynamics: Techniques and applications in psychology . Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum. 
 Kaplan, D., & Glass, L. (1995).  Understanding nonlinear dynamics. New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Kugiumtzis, D. (2002). Surrogate data test on time series. In A. Soofi and L. Cao (Eds.),  Mod-
elling and forecasting financial data, techniques of nonlinear dynamics  (pp.  267– 282). Norwell, 
MA: Kluwer Academic. 
 Lange, L., McDade, S., & Oliva, T. A. (2001). Technological choice and network externalities: 
A catastrophe model analysis of firm software adoption for competing operating systems. 
 Structural Change and Economic Dynamics, 12 ,  9– 57. 
 Langley, A., Smallan, C., Tsoukas, H., Van den Ven, A. H. (2013). Process studies of change 
in organization and management: Unveiling temporality, activity and flow.  Academy of 
Management Journal ,  56 (1),  1– 13. 
 Li, T. Y., & Yorke, J. A. (1975). Period three implies chaos.  The American Mathematical Monthly , 
 82 ,  985– 992. 
 Lorenz, E. N. (1963). Deterministic  non- periodic flow.  Journal of Atmospheric Science, 20 , 
 130– 141. 
 Lorenz, E. N. (1993).  The essence of chaos . Seattle: University of Washington Press. 
 Marwan, N., Romano, M. C., Thiel, M., Kurths, J. (2007). Recurrence plots for the analysis 
of complex systems.  Physics Reports ,  438 ,  237– 329. 
 Massimini, F., & Delle Fave, A. (2000). Individual development in a  bio- cultural perspective. 
 American Psychologist ,  55 ,  24– 33. 
 Molenaar, P.C.M. (2004). A manifesto on psychology as ideographic science: Bringing the 
person back into scientific psychology, this time forever.  Measurement ,  2 (4),  201– 218. 
 Molenaar, P.C.M., & Campbell, C. G. (2009). The new  person- specific paradigm in psychol-
ogy.  Current Directions in Psychological Science ,  18 (2),  112– 117. 
 Moneta, G. B. (2004). The flow experience across cultures.  Journal of Happiness Studies ,  5 (2), 
 115– 121. 
 Moneta, G. B. (2010). Flow in work as a function of trait intrinsic motivation, opportunity 
for creativity in the job, and work engagement. In S. L. Albrecht (Ed.),  The handbook of 
employee engagement: Perspectives, issues, research and practice  (pp.  262– 269). Cheltenham, UK: 
Edward Elgar. 

104 Lucia Ceja and Jose Navarro
 Moneta, G. B. (2012). On the measurement and conceptualization of flow. In S. Engeser 
(Ed.),  Advances in flow research (pp.  23– 50). New York: Springer. 
 Moneta, G. B., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1996). The effect of perceived challenges and skills 
on the quality of subjective experience.  Journal of Personality ,  64 ,  275– 310. 
 Munné, F. (2005). Qué es la complejidad? [What’s complexity?].  Encuentros de Psicología Social , 
 3 ,  6– 17. 
 Navarro, J. (2005). La psicología social de las organizaciones desde la perspectiva de la com-
plejidad. Revisión y estado actual de una relación prometedora [The social psychology of 
organizations from a complexity approach. A review of the state of play of a promising 
relationship].  Encuentros en Psicología Social ,  3 ,  78– 87. 
 Navarro, J., & Arrieta, C. (2010). Chaos in human behavior: The case of work motivation. 
 The Spanish Journal of Psychology ,  13 ,  244– 256. 
 Navarro, J., & Ceja, L. (2011). Dinámicas complejas en el flujo: Diferencias entre trabajo y no 
trabajo [Complex dynamics of flow: Differences between work and nonwork activities]. 
 Revista de Psicología Social ,  26 (3),  443– 456. 
 Navarro, J., &  Rueff- Lopes, R. (2015). Healthy variability in organizational behavior: Empir-
ical evidences and new steps for future research.  Nonlinear Dynamics in Psychology and Life 
Sciences ,  19 ,  529– 552. 
 Nowak, A., & Vallacher, R. R. (1998). Toward computational social psychology: Cellular 
automata and neural network models of interpersonal dynamics. In S. J. Read & L. C. 
Miller (Eds.),  Connectionist models of social reasoning and social behavior  (pp.  277– 311). Mah-
wah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
 Oliva, T., Desarbo, W., Day, D., & Jedidi, K. (1987). GEMCAT: A general multivariate meth-
odology for estimating catastrophe models.  Behavioral Science ,  32 ,  121– 137. 
 Paredes, K. C. (2012).  The interplay between perceived challenge and skill: Csikszentmihalyi’s theory 
vs Lazarus theory . Master’s thesis. Tutors: J. Navarro & L. Cardoso. University of Barce-
lona and University of Coimbra. Unpublished work. 
 Perschel, A. (2010).  Work- life flow: How individuals, Zappos, and other innovative compa-
nies achieve high engagement.  Global Business and Organizational Excellence , July/August, 
pp.  17– 30. 
 Pink, D. H. (2009).  Drive: The surprising truth about what motivates us. London, UK: CanonGate. 
 Prigogine, I., & Stengers, S. (1984).  Order out of chaos.  New York: Heinemann. 
 Ramos- Villagrasa, P. J., &  García- Izquierdo, A. L. (2011). Técnicas de análisis de patrones 
caóticos: Revisión de estudios empíricos en psicología [Techniques for analyzing chaotic 
patterns: A review of empirical studies in psychology].  Anales de Psicología ,  27 ,  239– 248. 
 Rathunde, K., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2006). The developing person: An experiential per-
spective. In R. M. Lerner and W. Damon (Eds.),  Handbook of child psychology: Theoretical 
models of human development (Vol. 1, 6th ed., pp.  465– 515). New York: Wiley. 
 Rodríguez- Sánchez, A. M., Schaufeli, W., Salanova, M., Cifre, E.,  & Sonnenscheinb, M. 
(2011). Enjoyment and absorption: An electronic diary study on daily flow patterns. 
 Work & Stress ,  25 (1),  75– 92. 
 Roe, R. A. (2013). Performance, motivation and time. In A. Shipp & Y. Fried (Eds.),  Time and 
work. Vol. 1: How time impacts individuals  (pp.  63– 110). London, UK: Routledge/Taylor & 
Francis. 
 Schreiber, T., & Schmitz, A. (2000). Surrogate time series.  Physica D ,  142 ,  346– 382. 
 Schuldberg, D. (2006). Complicato, ma non troppo: A small nonlinear model and the good 
life. In A. Delle Fave (Ed.),  Dimensions of  well- being   (pp.  552– 566). Milan: FrancoAngeli. 
 Schuldberg, D. (2007). Nonlinear dynamics of positive psychology: Parameters, models, 
and searching for a systems summum bonum. In A. D. Ong & M.H.M. van Dulmen 

Redeﬁ ning ﬂ ow at work 105
(Eds.),  Oxford handbook of methods in positive psychology  (pp.  423– 436). New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
 Sheridan, J. (1985). A catastrophe model of employee withdrawal leading to low job perfor-
mance, high absenteeism, and job turnover during the first year of employment.  Academy 
of Management Journal ,  28 ,  88– 109. 
 Smith, L. B., & Thelen, E. (1993).  A dynamic systems approach to development: Applications. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
 Thom, R. (1975).  Structural stability and morphogenesis. Reading, MA: Benjamin. 
 Tsonis, A. R. (1992).  Chaos: From theory to applications. New York: Plenum Press. 
 Von Neumann, J., Kent, R. H., Bellison, R. H., & Hart, B. I. (1941). The mean square suc-
cessive difference.  Annual Math Statistics ,  12 ,  153– 162. 
 Zeeman, E. C. (1977).  Catastrophe theory: Selected papers  1972– 1977.  Reading, MA: 
Addison-Wesley. 

 Introduction 
 The concept of flow in organizational settings is receiving an increasing amount of 
attention from researchers, most of their studies being focused on modern organi-
zations. One of the reasons for this growing interest is the driving force of positive 
psychology, which can be defined as the scientific study of optimal human func-
tioning, the aim of which is to build positive qualities – that is, virtues and strengths 
(Seligman & Csikszentmihalyi, 2000, p. 5). Specifically in the work context, posi-
tive organizational psychology (POP) is conceptualized as the scientific study of the 
healthy and optimal functioning of persons and groups in the organizations, as well as 
the effective management of psychosocial  well- being at work and the development 
of healthy organizations. Its objective is to describe, explain, and predict the opti-
mal functioning in these contexts and to amplify and potentiate the psychosocial 
 well- being and the quality of job and organizational life (Salanova, Martínez, & Llo-
rens, 2005, 2014). This positive approach has yielded interesting findings about pos-
itive psychosocial emotions and experiences, such as flow, in work contexts (Bakker, 
2005; Llorens, Salanova, & Rodríguez, 2013; Salanova, Bakker, & Llorens, 2006). 
 Previous research on flow at work has made it possible to identify different key 
aspects related to the concept, theoretical models, and measurement. Accordingly, 
research has identified: (1) the dimensionality of flow experiences at work; (2) the 
distinction between flow experiences and their prerequisites; and (3) the differ-
ences in the frequency of flow experience among occupations (see, e.g., Llorens 
et al., 2013). 
 In this chapter, we provide an overview of the main research that has inves-
tigated the organizational and individual consequences of flow at work. In par-
ticular, we will discuss the impact of flow on  well- being, other personal and job 
resources, and job performance. We will also outline research that has investigated 
 6 
 THE CONSEQUENCES OF FLOW 
 Susana Llorens and Marisa Salanova 

The consequences of ﬂ ow 107
the relationship between flow and  well- being and the contribution that flow at 
work can make to the emerging field of positive organizational behavior. 
 What is ﬂ ow at work? 
 About the concept of ﬂ ow at work 
 Traditionally, flow has been described as an experience occurring while perform-
ing any activity that makes people feel good and motivated because they are doing 
something worthwhile for its own sake. However, this concept has been improved 
so as to adapt it to other contexts, such as art, sports, daily activities, leisure, or study 
(e.g., Csikszentmihalyi, 2003; Csikszentmihalyi & LeFevre, 1989; Delle Fave & Bassi, 
2000; Delle Fave & Massimini, 2005). Adapted to these contexts, flow “tends to 
occur when a person’s skills are fully involved in overcoming a challenge that is 
just about manageable. Optimal experiences usually involve a fine balance between 
one’s ability to act and the available opportunities for action” (Csikszentmihalyi, 
1997, p. 30). 
 The application of the  concept  to work settings reveals that, of course, flow could 
be experienced there in a similar manner. In work settings, flow is conceptualized 
as an optimal experience that is characterized by three structural dimensions: enjoy-
ment (i.e., the emotional component), absorption (i.e., the cognitive component), 
and intrinsic interest (i.e., the motivational component). 
 Focused on work,  enjoyment  refers to a positive judgment about (Bakker, 2008) 
the quality of working life (see also Veenhoven, 1984). The state of being fully con-
centrated and engrossed in one’s work, whereby time passes quickly and one has dif-
ficulties detaching oneself from work, characterizes  absorption  (Ghani & Deshpande, 
1994; Lutz & Guiry, 1994; Moneta & Csikszentmihalyi, 1996).  Intrinsic interest  refers 
to the need to perform a certain  work- related activity with the aim of experiencing 
inherent pleasure and satisfaction in it (cf. Deci & Ryan, 1985; Moneta & Csik-
szentmihalyi, 1996; Trevino & Webster, 1992). Intrinsically motivated employees are 
continuously interested in the work they are involved in (Harackiewicz & Elliot, 
1998), and they want to continue their work and are fascinated by the tasks they 
perform (Csikszentmihalyi, 1997) (for a recent review see Llorens et al., 2013). 
 A great deal of empirical research has found this  three- dimensional  structure of 
flow at work , which is characterized by enjoyment, absorption, and intrinsic inter-
est, in different samples of workers, such as teachers (Bakker, 2005; Salanova et al., 
2006), employees of small and  medium- sized companies (Demerouti, 2006), and 
line managers (Nielsen & Cleal, 2010), as well as information and communication 
technology users (students and workers; Rodríguez, Schaufeli, Salanova, & Cifre, 
2008). Despite this consistence, research has pointed to the existence of just two 
(enjoyment and absorption) rather than three dimensions of the flow experience 
at work (Ghani & Deshpande, 1994; Rodríguez, Cifre, Salanova, & Åborg, 2008; 
Skadberg & Kimmel, 2004). For example, multigroup confirmatory factor analyses 

108 Susana Llorens and Marisa Salanova
(MCFA) provided evidence that flow experience is composed of only two related 
but different dimensions – namely, enjoyment and absorption – in different work 
settings (tile workers and secondary school teachers, Llorens et al., 2013), tested by 
the WOLF Inventory (Bakker, 2001). The  two- dimensional model fitted the data 
better than the  three- dimensional one. 
 A model of ﬂ ow at work 
 If there is some mismatch as regards the dimensionality of flow in work contexts, 
another relevant question refers to the  conditions needed to promote  flow at work. 
Although originally there was some confusion about the experience of flow and its 
prerequisites (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975, 1990, 1997), researchers are now aware of the 
need to distinguish the flow experience itself from its prerequisites and its conse-
quences (Bassi & Delle Fave, 2012b; Chen, Wigand, & Nilan, 1999; Guo & Poole, 
2009; Kawabata & Mallett, 2011; Keller & Bless, 2008; Keller & Blomann, 2008; 
Mesurado, 2009; Pearce, Ainley, & Howard, 2005). Applied to work contexts, the 
 model of flow at work  emerges as an alternative allowing us to differentiate between 
the experience and the antecedents of flow at work (Llorens et al., 2013). 
 Based on the  flow channel model  (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975) and the  experience 
fluctuation model  (EFM) developed in previous studies (e.g., Csikszentmihalyi & 
Csikszentmihalyi, 1988; Delespaul, Reis,  & de Vries, 2004; Delle Fave  & Bassi, 
2000; Delle Fave & Massimini, 2005; Eisenberger, Jones, Stinglhamber, Shanock, & 
Randall, 2005; Massimini, Csikszentmihalyi, & Carli, 1987), this model of flow 
in work settings assumes that employees would experience flow more frequently 
when their job demands are perceived as highly challenging, but they also believe 
that they have the skills to cope with the demands (Llorens et al., 2013). Specifically, 
the model of flow at work assumes that the flow experience at work is a subjective 
experience. The model replicates the EFM by identifying eight areas (“channels”) 
which represent eight experiences (i.e., arousal, control, relaxation, boredom, apa-
thy, worry, anxiety, and flow). Like in the EFM, in this model flow is characterized 
by the perception of high challenges and high skills in terms of intensity. In line 
with the previous models, in this model of flow at work, high levels of perceived 
skills and high levels of perceived challenges are necessary prerequisites to experi-
ence flow (Salanova et al., 2006). Thus workers who, regardless of their occupa-
tion, perceive a balance between high levels of challenge and skills in their jobs, 
experience flow more frequently than others who perceive different combinations 
between challenge and skills (for more details, see Llorens et al., 2013). 
 The measurement of ﬂ ow at work 
 The study of flow at work has an important tradition. Some studies have inves-
tigated flow at work by evaluating the intensity of antecedents and experiential 
components using the experience sampling method (ESM; Csikszentmihalyi & 
LeFevre, 1989; Delle Fave  & Massimini, 2005) and the Flow Questionnaire 

The consequences of ﬂ ow 109
(Bassi & Delle Fave, 2012a). Another approach is based on  single- administration 
retrospective instruments, which test frequency rather than intensity of flow and 
its prerequisites (see Bakker, 2001, 2008; Mäkikangas, Bakker, Aunola, & Demer-
outi, 2010; Salanova et al., 2006). 
 To this purpose, Bakker developed an instrument to assess the experience of flow 
at work, the  so- called  WOrk- reLated Flow inventory (WOLF; Bakker, 2001, 2008). 
This  single- administration retrospective instrument allows for assessing the fre-
quency of the flow experience over the last six months on a  seven- point scale from 
0 (“never”) to 6 (“every day”). The sixteen items test the three dimensions of the 
flow experience at work, -– that is, enjoyment (four items), absorption (six items), 
and intrinsic interest (six items). Lately, a short form of WOLF was developed, with 
ten items referring to the dimensions of enjoyment (four items), and absorption (six 
items) (see Llorens et al., 2013). 
 Consequences of ﬂ ow at work 
 In addition to the experience, prerequisites, and measurement of flow at work, there 
is also empirical evidence regarding the consequences of flow at work. Although 
fewer studies were conducted on this aspect, in the following pages we outline the 
most significant consequences of flow at work, which we have classified into three 
main categories:  well- being, resources, and job performance. 
 How does ﬂ ow enhance  well- being at work? 
 Different research studies have highlighted the relevance of flow in the development 
of  well- being at work. Generally speaking, results give evidence for the direct and 
positive impact of flow on subjective  well- being “ by fostering the experience of happi-
ness in the here and now ” from a hedonic perspective (Moneta, 2004, p. 116). We con-
sistently found that flow is positively related to subjective  well- being and positive 
emotions (Bloch, 2002), positive mood (Fullagar & Kelloway, 2009), active coping 
and commitment (Salanova, Martínez, Cifre, & Schaufeli, 2005), less burnout (Lavi-
gne, Forest, &  Crevier- Braud, 2012), task engagement (Ainley, Enger, & Kennedy, 
2008), job satisfaction (Maeran & Cangiano, 2013), and high energy levels (Demer-
outi, Bakker, Sonnentag, & Fullagar, 2012). 
 Specifically, a phenomenological analysis of interviews carried out on a sample 
of  thirty- six employees of a public organization highlighted that flow experiences 
are associated with a good quality of life in modern everyday existence (Bloch, 
2002). Accordingly, flow “ appeared as pervasive states coloring the interviewees’ world of 
action, feeling and thinking. These states were characterized by specific experience of reality, of 
self and of time ” (p. 120). In this context flow plays the role of a framework for the 
development of more positive and specific emotions and feelings, such as joy, ecstasy, 
excitement, happiness, and pride. 
 Similarly, in a longitudinal study aimed at investigating the experience of forty 
architecture students by means of ESM over a semester, hierarchical linear modeling 

110 Susana Llorens and Marisa Salanova
showed that flow is related to subjective  well- being and positive mood (Fullagar & 
Kelloway, 2009). More specifically, students who experienced higher values of flow 
in terms of intensity reported being momentarily in a more positive mood in terms 
of hedonic  well- being. 
 In another study conducted on 770 workers from different occupational sectors 
(education, production sectors), higher frequency of the dimensions of flow (higher 
perceived competence, absorption, and intrinsic satisfaction) was related to the 
perception of a more positive environment, psychosocial  well- being, and reduced 
 ill- being. More specifically, flow at work was positively related to the perception 
of more job resources at work (i.e., autonomy, feedback, and task variety) and psy-
chosocial  well- being in terms of active coping and organizational commitment, but 
negatively related to burnout (exhaustion and cynicism) and anxiety. Workers who 
experience flow at work more frequently therefore seem to perceive a better job 
context with more job resources and experience better  well- being – that is, a greater 
frequency of active coping behaviors, more commitment to the organization, and 
lower levels of burnout and anxiety related to the task (Salanova, Martínez, Cifre, 
et al., 2005). 
 Flow has also been negatively related to burnout in two independent studies on 
Canadian workers (Lavigne et al., 2012). In Study 1, a  cross- sectional design and 
path analysis were used with 113 young workers to show the mediating role of flow 
at work between harmonious passion and burnout, especially in the dimensions 
of inefficacy and cynicism. Results suggested that the more harmonious passion is 
reported at work, the higher frequency of flow is experienced. As a consequence, 
less burnout (i.e., cynicism and inefficacy) is observed. In the second longitudi-
nal study with 325 participants working for the Quebec government, harmonious 
passion for work was positively related to flow experiences at work as reported 
six months later and after controlling for Time 1’s flow experiences (in terms of 
concentration, control, and autotelic experience’s intensity). Thus, flow experiences 
at work at Time 2 were negatively related to inefficacy, cynicism, and emotional 
exhaustion at work at Time 2. That is, the more flow is experienced in terms of 
intensity, the less burnout is found. 
 Applied to the learning context, a study with a preprofessional sample of 
secondary school students aged between fifteen and eighteen years showed that 
higher ratings of challenge and skill are positively related to another indicator 
of  well- being: task engagement (Ainley et al., 2008). Results showed that flow 
groups experienced, as a consequence, more engagement and focusing through-
out the task compared to the  non- flow groups working on a short learning 
activity – that is, a writing task using an interactive computer program called 
“Between the Lines.” 
 Satisfaction at work (as a measure of  well- being) has also been claimed to be a 
consequence of flow at work. Maeran and Cangiano (2013) developed a model of 
flow where this psychological state was considered critical in redesigning interven-
tions in the workplace in order to promote job satisfaction. Their results showed the 
strong impact of flow as a key predictor of job satisfaction. 

The consequences of ﬂ ow 111
 Another diary study examined the moderating role of both recovery efforts at work 
(i.e., a process that repairs the negative effects of strain) and detachment from work 
in the relationship between flow experience at work and energy perceived when the 
work is finished (Demerouti et al., 2012). In a sample of  eighty- three participants, 
multilevel analyses revealed the benefits of flow for (1) increasing the energy after 
work when employees failed to recover during work breaks, and (2) increasing the 
levels of vigor in the employees at the end of the day when they left the workplace. 
Generally speaking, flow is a positive experience that produces benefits for employ-
ees’  well- being. The impact of flow is a key element for employees’ levels of energy 
after work and at the end of the day when at home, particularly the dimensions of 
enjoyment and absorption (Demerouti et al., 2012). 
 To sum up, taking into account research about the positive effects of flow on 
 well- being and following the ‘ broaden- and-build theory’ (Fredrickson, 2001), we 
suggest, by analogy with positive emotions, that flow produces this positive effect 
since (1) it allows people to broaden their momentary  thought– action repertories 
and build resilience (Fredrickson, 1998, 2001; Fredrickson & Branigan, 2005), and 
(2) in a similar way to positive emotions, flow could regulate negative emotions 
(Fredrickson, Mancuso, Branigan, & Tugade, 2000) and foster positive spirals of 
 well- being (Fredrickson & Joiner, 2002). 
 Flow and other personal and job resources 
 Further expanding the analogy with Fredrickson’s  broaden- and-build theory, 
flow states could generate more positive resources at work (i.e., personal and job 
resources) through different kinds of positive spirals, such as the emotional conta-
gion of flow (Bakker, 2005), organizational climate and efficacy beliefs (Salanova 
et al., 2006), social support, opportunities for professional development, supervisory 
coaching (Mäkikangas et al., 2010), and finally flow prerequisites – that is, challenge 
and skills over time (Rodríguez, Salanova, Cifre, & Schaufeli, 2011). 
 In a similar line, a study on a sample of music teachers and their students (Bakker, 
2005) provided evidence in favor of the emotional contagion of the flow experi-
ence. Specifically, a positive relationship between the frequency of music teachers’ 
flow experiences and the frequency of flow among their students was detected. It 
seems that “this flow contagion occurs because of the automatic imitation of cheer-
ful and happy teachers, but also the more conscious crossover of teachers’ dedication 
to their work.” Hence, one of the consequences of flow is that flow causes flow 
(Bakker, 2005, p. 38). 
 Furthermore, there is a large body of research that shows reciprocal effects 
between job and personal resources and flow, thereby suggesting the development 
of positive cycles or spirals. In fact, these studies offer evidence in favor of the notion 
that job resources and flow mutually influence each other: resources enhance flow, 
but flow also promotes job resources. The positive relationships of flow with orga-
nizational and personal resources at work emerged in a longitudinal study with 
secondary school teachers (Salanova et al., 2006). More specifically, results showed 

112 Susana Llorens and Marisa Salanova
a reciprocal influence between the flow experience and organizational resources 
(in terms of climate orientation indicators, such as social support, innovation, rules, 
and goals) and personal resources (i.e., efficacy beliefs) over time. That is, organiza-
tional and personal resources tested at the beginning of the academic year (Time 1) 
facilitated  work- related flow at work eight months later, at the end of the academic 
year (Time 2). Findings also showed that the frequency of flow (i.e., frequency in 
absorption, enjoyment, and intrinsic work motivation) at work tested at Time 1 
had a positive influence on personal and organizational resources at Time 2. In fact, 
this study showed that flow develops over time when personal and organizational 
resources are available, and also that the experience of flow in the present influences 
the gaining of organizational and personal resources in the future by generating a 
positive spiral over time. 
 Similarly, a longitudinal study conducted over three months on 335 employ-
ees from an employment agency based on latent growth curve and mixed model 
analyses showed that job resources (i.e., social support, opportunities for profes-
sional development, and supervisory coaching) were positively related to flow at 
work. Thus, these findings suggest that: (1) the frequency of job resources and flow 
are positively related to each other over time, and (2) their changes over time again 
provide evidence for mutual cycles of change (Mäkikangas et al., 2010). 
 These reciprocal relationships were also detected between flow and its 
prerequisites – that is, challenge and skills – over time. In a  two- wave longitudinal 
study conducted among 258 secondary school teachers, results showed that the 
flow experience was a consequence and also an antecedent of perceived challenge 
and skills (Rodríguez et al., 2011). More specifically, the higher the frequency of 
prerequisites (perceived high challenge and skills) of flow at Time 1, the higher the 
frequency of flow over time, which in turn increases the frequency of the prerequi-
sites (high challenge and skills) in a positive cycle. 
 Flow as a driver of performance 
 The fact that flow plays a key role across life domains (for a review see Delle Fave, 
Massimini, & Bassi, 2011; Massimini & Delle Fave, 2000) and in the development of 
 well- being and resources is clear, but there is also empirical evidence that flow could 
enhance positive results in terms of performance, such as organizational spontaneity 
(Eisenberger et al., 2005), in- and  extra- role performance (Bakker, 2008), creative 
performance (MacDonald, Byrne, & Carlton, 2006; Yan, Davison, & Mo, 2013), 
service quality (Kuo & Ho, 2010), and group performance from a collective point of 
view (Admiraal, Huizenga, Akkerman, & Dam, 2011; Aubé, Brunelle, & Rousseau, 
2014; Bakker, Oerlemans, Demerouti, Slot, & Ali, 2011). 
 However, some studies suggested that the association of flow with greater posi-
tive mood and higher performance specifically emerged among workers reporting 
a high need for achievement (Eisenberger et al., 2005). A study conducted among 
sales employees and sales support employees revealed that employees in the flow 
context (high values of both skills and challenges) experience greater positive mood 

The consequences of ﬂ ow 113
(e.g., the extent to which workers felt happy at work) and organizational spontane-
ity (e.g., the extent to which employees looked for ways to improve the effectiveness 
of their work) than other combinations of skill and challenge only when employees 
have a high need for achievement (i.e., achievement orientation, such as working to 
improve one’s skills and desiring frequent feedback). 
 On the other hand, in a study of 1,346 employees distributed in seven samples 
from different occupational groups and companies, flow experience was related to 
job satisfaction, and to job performance in its two dimensions:  in- role (i.e., formal 
work performance) as well as  extra- role (i.e., behavior that exceeds normal task ful-
fillment by going the extra mile) performance. In this respect, it seems that happy 
employees who get “into the flow” at work are also more satisfied and perform 
better in their role and  extra- role behaviors (Bakker, 2008). 
 Flow has also been connected to a specific type of performance, namely creative 
performance. Flow is an experience of an activity as being intrinsically rewarding, 
under which “individuals tend to be curious, cognitively flexible, willing to take 
risks, and persistent in the face of barriers – characteristics that should facilitate the 
development of new and potentially useful ideas” (Baera, Oldhama, & Cummings, 
2003, p. 571). To evaluate these aspects, a study was carried out among  forty- five 
university students who worked on a group composition task during three meetings 
(MacDonald et al., 2006). The completed compositions were recorded and rated for 
quality and creativity by the participants and by a group of  twenty- four specialists 
in music education. Using an Experience Sampling Form (ESF; Csikszentmihalyi & 
Csikszentmihalyi, 1988) the results showed that as group flow increased, so did the 
rating for creativity given by the specialists. Also, specialists rated the compositions 
of those groups that experienced higher values of flow more positively than those 
provided by the groups who experienced lower values of flow. 
 Data collected from 232 users of Web 2.0 virtual communities were used to test 
a model where the flow experience (i.e., perceived enjoyment and attention focus) 
mediates the relationship between knowledge sharing behavior (i.e., knowledge 
seeking and knowledge contributing) and employee creativity at work (Yan et al., 
2013). Findings showed that both types of knowledge behaviors can lead to a state 
of flow and can further result in creativity at work. 
 Group flow and group performance have also been studied, and the results 
are consistent with those obtained for individual contexts. In a study involving 
 eighty- five teams of college students who participated in a project management 
simulation, flow predicted 12% of the variance in team performance, and this rela-
tionship was fully mediated by members’ commitment to team goals (Aubé et al., 
2014). Furthermore, the exchange of information among the members played a 
crucial role in increasing team performances. Specifically, the more team members 
communicated while doing their work, the stronger the relationship between flow 
and team performance. 
 In another study on collective measures, results from structural equation model-
ing in a  two- wave longitudinal lab on 250 participants working in  fifty- two groups 
showed that collective efficacy beliefs predict collective flow (tested in terms of 

114 Susana Llorens and Marisa Salanova
frequency) over time in a reciprocal relationship. These results highlighted the role 
of collective flow in increasing collective efficacy beliefs in a gain cycle over time 
(Salanova, Rodríguez, Schaufeli, & Cifre, 2014). 
 Another study, combining survey and experimental methods where participants 
played a paddleball game, gave evidence for the impact of collective flow. Results 
showed that social flow experiences were perceived as more enjoyable compared to 
solitary flow experiences. Specifically, participants who played in interdependent 
teams reported more joy in flow than individuals performing less interdependently 
or alone (Walker, 2010). 
 Finally, a positive relationship between team flow and team performance was 
detected among soccer teams (Bakker et al., 2011). Multilevel analyses revealed 
that environmental resources (autonomy, social support from the coach, and per-
formance feedback) were positively related to flow, which in turn was positively 
related to the performance of each player in the team during the match. These 
findings suggest that certain characteristics of flow at the team level (in terms of 
transformation of time, clear goals, autotelic experience) appear when the match 
results in a draw or is won than when the match is lost. Furthermore, results showed 
that performance feedback and support from the coach predicted flow during the 
soccer game, which in turn was positively related to self- and  coach- ratings of 
performance. 
 Conclusions 
 The main aim of this chapter was to provide an overview of the research investigat-
ing the organizational and individual consequences of flow at work. Specifically, the 
chapter discussed the impact of flow on  well- being, resources, and job performance. 
The relationship between flow and  well- being and the contribution that flow at 
work can make to the emerging field of positive organizational behavior were also 
addressed. Throughout the chapter we have summarized the state of the art of the 
concept, models, and measurement of flow at work according to recent research 
in the field. There is empirical evidence in favor of the idea that investing orga-
nizational and job resources is the key to enhance flow at work and consequently 
to achieve higher  well- being, more resources, and better performance. Different 
positive consequences of flow have been shown to be mainly oriented toward these 
three aspects. 
 The main conclusions of the chapter are the following: (1) the concept of flow 
as an optimal experience can be transposed in the work contexts, within the theo-
retical framework of positive psychology at work; (2) the model of flow at work, 
which assumes that flow is experienced when both  high challenges and skills are 
perceived, constitutes a reliable way to differentiate between the experience and 
the antecedents of flow at work; (3) the WOLF inventory is one way to test flow 
at work where frequency rather than intensity of flow is tested to capture the 
essence of flow at work; (4) flow is positively related to subjective  well- being and 
positive emotions, positive mood, active coping, commitment, task engagement, 

The consequences of ﬂ ow 115
job satisfaction, energy levels, and the good life in modern everyday existence; 
(5) through positive cycles, spirals, or emotional contagion, the flow experience 
also enhances the perception of more positive (personal and  job- related) resources 
at work; particularly, flow is positively related to organizational climate, task and 
social resources, efficacy beliefs, and also more flow (flow causes flow); (6) flow is 
also responsible for the development of performance in terms of organizational 
spontaneity, in- and  extra- role performance, creative performance, service quality, 
and group performance, and (7) finally, recent research gives evidence in favor of the 
relevance of social (or collective) flow. 
 These are the main contributions of this chapter dealing with the consequences 
of flow in work settings. We plan to further expand our research, focusing on ways 
to promote job environments that allow employees to experience positive experi-
ences such as flow. This positive experience will foster other positive consequences 
at work – that is, employees’  well- being, better perceptions of job and personal 
resources in the work contexts, and better performance in a general way. 
 References 
 Admiraal, W., Huizenga, J., Akkerman, S., & Dam, G. T. (2011). The concept of flow in col-
laborative  game- based learning.  Computers in Human Behavior ,  27 ,  1185– 1194. 
 Ainley, M., Enger, L., & Kennedy, G. (2008). The elusive experience of flow: Qualitative and 
quantitative indicators.  International Journal of Educational Research ,  47 ,  109– 121. 
 Aubé, C., Brunelle, E., & Rousseau, V. (2014). Flow experience and team performance: The 
role of team goal commitment and information exchange.  Motivation and Emotion ,  38 , 
 120– 130. 
 Baera, M., Oldhama, G. R., & Cummings, A. (2003). Rewarding creativity: When does it 
really matter.  The Leadership Quarterly ,  14 ,  569– 586. 
 Bakker, A. B. (2001).  Questionnaire for the assessment of  work- related flow: The WOLF.  Utrecht 
University, The Netherlands: Department of Social and Organizational Psychology, The 
Netherlands. 
 Bakker, A. B. (2005). Flow among music teachers and their students: The crossover of peak 
experiences.  Journal of Vocational Behaviour ,  66 ,  26– 44. 
 Bakker, A. B. (2008). The  work- related flow inventory: Construction and initial validation of 
the WOLF.  Journal of Vocational Behavior ,  72 ,  400– 414. 
 Bakker, A. B., Oerlemans, W., Demerouti, E., Slot, B. B., & Ali, D. K. (2011). Flow and per-
formance: A study among talented Dutch soccer players.  Psychology of Sport and Exercise , 
 12 ,  442– 450. 
 Bassi, M., & Delle Fave, A. D. (2012a). Optimal experience among teachers: New insights 
into the work paradox.  Journal of Psychology: Interdisciplinary and Applied ,  146 ,  533– 557. 
 Bassi, M., & Delle Fave, A. D. (2012b). Optimal experience and  self- determination at school: 
Joining perspectives.  Motivation and Emotion ,  36 ,  425– 438. 
 Bloch, C. (2002). Moods and the quality of life.  Journal of Happiness Studies ,  3 ,  101– 128. 
 Chen, H., Wigand, R. T., & Nilan, M. S. (1999). Optimal experience of Web activities.  Com-
puters in Human Behaviour ,  15 ,  585– 608. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1975).  Beyond boredom and anxiety . San Francisco, CA:  Jossey- Bass. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990).  Flow: The psychology of optimal experience . New York: Harper & 
Row. 

116 Susana Llorens and Marisa Salanova
 Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1997).  Finding flow: The psychology of engagement with everyday life . New 
York: HarperCollins. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2003).  Good business: Leadership, flow and the making of meaning.  London: 
Coronet Books. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Csikszentmihalyi, I. S. (1988).  Optimal experience: Psychological studies 
on flow in consciousness . New York: Cambridge University Press. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M., & LeFevre, J. (1989). Optimal experience in work and leisure.  Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology ,  56 ,  815– 822. 
 Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1985).  Intrinsic motivation and  self- determination in human behaviour . 
New York: Plenum Press. 
 Delespaul, P., Reis, H., & de Vries, M. (2004). Ecological and motivational determinants of 
activation: Studying compared to sports and watching TV.  Social Indicators Research ,  67 , 
 129– 143. 
 Delle Fave, A., & Bassi, M. (2000). The quality of experience in adolescents’ daily lives: Devel-
opmental perspectives.  Genetic, Social, and General Psychology Monographs ,  126 ,  347– 367. 
 Delle Fave, A., & Massimini, F. (2005). The relevance of subjective  well- being to social 
policies: Optimal experience and tailored intervention. In F. Huppert, N. Baylis, & 
B. Keverne (Eds.),  The science of  well- being  (pp.  379– 402). New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press. 
 Delle Fave, A., Massimini, F., & Bassi, M. (2011).  Psychological selection and optimal experience 
across cultures . Dordrecht: Springer Science. 
 Demerouti, E. (2006). Job characteristics, flow and performance: The moderating role of 
conscientiousness.  Journal of Occupational Health Psychology ,  11 ,  266– 280. 
 Demerouti, E., Bakker, A. B., Sonnentag, S., & Fullagar, C. (2012).  Work- related flow and 
energy at work and at home: A study on the role of daily recovery.  Journal of Organiza-
tional Behavior ,  33 ,  276– 295. 
 Eisenberger, R., Jones, J. R., Stinglhamber, F., Shanock, L., & Randall, A. T. (2005). Flow 
experiences at work: For high need achievers alone?  Journal of Organizational Behavior ,  26 , 
 755– 775. 
 Fredrickson, B. L. (1998). What good are positive emotions?  Review of General Psychology: 
Special Issue: New Directions in Research on Emotion ,  2 ,  300– 319. 
 Fredrickson, B. L. (2001). The role of positive emotions in positive psychology: The 
 broaden- and-build theory of positive emotions.  American Psychologist: Special Issue ,  56 , 
 218– 226. 
 Fredrickson, B. L., & Branigan, C. (2005). Positive emotions broaden the scope of attention 
and  thought– action repertoires.  Cognition and Emotion ,  19 ,  313– 332. 
 Fredrickson, B. L., & Joiner, T. (2002). Positive emotions trigger upward spirals toward emo-
tional  well- being.  Psychological Science ,  13 ,  172– 175. 
 Fredrickson, B. L., Mancuso, R. A., Branigan, C., & Tugade, M. M. (2000). The undoing 
effect of positive emotions.  Motivation and Emotion ,  24 ,  237– 258. 
 Fullagar, C., & Kelloway, E. K. (2009). Flow at work: An experience sampling approach. 
 Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology ,  82 ,  595– 615. 
 Ghani, J. A., & Deshpande, S. P. (1994). Task characteristics and the experience of optimal 
flow in  human- computer interaction.  The Journal of Psychology ,  128 ,  381– 391. 
 Guo, Y. M., & Poole, M. S. (2009). Antecedents of flow in online shopping: A test of alterna-
tive models.  Information Systems Journal ,  19 ,  369– 390. 
 Harackiewicz, J. M., & Elliot, A. J. (1998). The joint effects of target and purpose goals on 
intrinsic motivation: A mediational analysis.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin ,  24 , 
 657– 689. 

The consequences of ﬂ ow 117
 Kawabata, M., & Mallett, C. J. (2011). Flow experience in physical activity: Examination of 
the internal structure of flow from a  process- related perspective.  Motivation and Emotion , 
 35 ,  393– 402. 
 Keller, J., & Bless, H. (2008). Flow and regulatory compatibility: An experimental approach 
to the flow model of intrinsic motivation.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin ,  34 , 
 196– 209. 
 Keller, J., & Blomann, F. (2008). Locus of control and the flow experience: An experimental 
analysis.  European Journal of Personality ,  22 (7),  589– 607. 
 Kuo, T. H., & Ho, L. A. (2010). Individual difference and job performance: The relationships 
among personal factors, job characteristics, flow experience, and service quality.  Social 
Behavior and Personality ,  38 ,  531– 552. 
 Lavigne, G. L., Forest, J.,  &  Crevier- Braud, L. (2012). Passion at work and burnout: A 
 two- study test of the mediating role of flow experiences.  European Journal of Work and 
Organizational Psychology ,  21 ,  518– 546. 
 Llorens, S., Salanova, M.,  & Rodríguez, A. M. (2013). How is flow experienced and by 
whom? Testing flow among occupations.  Stress and Health ,  29 ,  125– 137. 
 Lutz, R. J., & Guiry, M. (1994).  Intense consumption experiences: Peaks, performances and flow . 
Paper presented at the Winter Marketing Educators’ Conference, St. Petersburg, FL. 
 MacDonald, R., Byrne, C., & Carlton, L. (2006). Creativity and flow in musical composition: 
An empirical investigation.  Psychology of Music ,  34 ,  292– 306. 
 Maeran, R., & Cangiano, F. (2013). Flow experience and job characteristics: Analyzing the 
role of flow in job satisfaction.   TPM- Testing, Psychometrics, Methodology in Applied Psychol-
ogy ,  20 ,  13– 26. 
 Mäkikangas, A., Bakker, A. B., Aunola, K., & Demerouti, E. (2010). Job resources and flow at 
work: Modelling the relationship via latent growth curve and mixture model methodol-
ogy.  Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology ,  83 ,  795– 814. 
 Massimini, F., Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Carli, M. (1987). The monitoring of optimal expe-
rience: A tool for psychiatric rehabilitation.  Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease ,  175 , 
 545– 549. 
 Massimini, F., & Delle Fave, A. (2000). Individual development in a  bio- cultural perspective. 
 American Psychologist ,  55 ,  24– 33. 
 Mesurado, B. (2009). Comparación de tres modelos teóricos explicativos del constructo 
experiencia óptima o flow [Comparing three theoretical explanatory models of the flow 
construct].  Interdisciplinaria ,  26 ,  121– 137. 
 Moneta, G. B. (2004). The flow experience across cultures.  Journal of Happiness Studies ,  5 , 
 115– 121. 
 Moneta, G. B., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1996). The effect of perceived challenges and skills 
on the quality of subjective experience.  Journal of Personality ,  64 ,  275– 310. 
 Nielsen, K., & Cleal, B. (2010). Predicting flow at work: Investigating the activities and job 
characteristics that predict flow states at work.  Journal of Occupational Health Psychology , 
 15 ,  180– 190. 
 Pearce, J. M., Ainley, M., & Howard, S. (2005). The ebb and flow of online learning.  Comput-
ers in Human Behavior ,  21 ,  745– 771. 
 Rodríguez, A. M., Cifre, E., Salanova, M., & Åborg, C. (2008). Technoflow among Spanish 
and Swedish students: A confirmatory factor multigroup analyses.  Anales de Psicología ,  24 , 
 42– 48. 
 Rodríguez, A. M., Salanova, M., Cifre, E., & Schaufeli, W. B. (2011). When good is good: 
A virtuous circle of  self- efficacy and flow at work among teachers.  Revista de Psicología 
Social ,  26 ,  427– 441. 

118 Susana Llorens and Marisa Salanova
 Rodríguez, A. M., Schaufeli, W. B., Salanova, M., & Cifre, E. (2008). Flow experiences among 
information and communication technology users: A confirmatory factorial analysis. 
 Psychological Reports ,  102 ,  29– 39. 
 Salanova, M., Bakker, A., & Llorens, S. (2006). Flow at work: Evidence for a gain spiral of 
personal and organizational resources.  Journal of Happiness Studies ,  7 ,  1– 22. 
 Salanova, M., Martínez, I. M., Cifre, E., & Schaufeli, W. B. (2005). ¿Se pueden vivir experien-
cias óptimas en el trabajo? Analizando el flow en contextos laborales [Can optimal expe-
riences at work be experienced? Analysing flow in laboral contexts].  Revista de Psicología 
General y Aplicada ,  58 ,  89– 100. 
 Salanova, M., Martínez, I. M., & Llorens, S. (2005). Psicología Organizacional Positiva. In F. 
J. Palací (Ed.),  Psicología de la Organización  (pp.  349– 376). Madrid: Pearson,  Prentice- Hall. 
 Salanova, M., Martínez, I. M., & Llorens, S. (2014). Una mirada más “positiva” a la salud 
ocupacional desde la Psicología Organizacional Positiva en tiempos de crisis: aportaciones 
desde el equipo de investigación WONT.  Papeles del Psicólogo ,  35 ,  22– 30. 
 Salanova, M., Rodríguez, A. M., Schaufeli, W., & Cifre, E. (2014). Flowing together: A lon-
gitudinal study of collective efficacy and collective flow among workgroups.  The Journal 
of Psychology ,  148 ,  435– 445. 
 Seligman, M.E.P.,  & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2000). Positive psychology: An introduction. 
 American Psychologist ,  55 ,  5– 14. 
 Skadberg, Y. X., & Kimmel, J. R. (2004). Visitors’ flow experience while browsing a web site: 
Its measurement, contributing factors and consequences.  Computers in Human Behaviour , 
 20 ,  403– 422. 
 Trevino, L. K., & Webster, J. (1992). Flow in  computer- mediated communication.  Commu-
nication Research ,  19 ,  539– 573. 
 Veenhoven, R. (1984).  Conditions of happiness . Dordrecht: Kluwer. 
 Walker, C. J. (2010). Experiencing flow: Is doing it together better than doing it alone? 
 Journal of Positive Psychology ,  5 ,  3– 11. 
 Yan, Y., Davison, R. M., & Mo, C. (2013). Employee creativity formation: The roles of 
knowledge seeking, knowledge contributing and flow experience in Web 2.0 virtual 
communities.  Computers in Human Behavior ,  29 ,  1923– 1932. 

 In the early 1970s, Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi interviewed surgeons, rock climb-
ers, composers, dancers, chess players, and athletes, asking them to report their 
experience when they engaged in the most challenging phases of their preferred 
endeavors, and he reported the findings in the seminal book  Beyond Boredom and 
Anxiety (1975/2000). The interviews produced a wealth of textual descriptions 
that, although coming from persons with different backgrounds and working in 
different domains, shared six main themes: (1) focused  concentration  on the present 
activity, with centering of attention on a narrow stimulus field (e.g., “When I start, 
I really do shut out the world”), (2)  merging of action and awareness  (“I am so involved 
in what I am doing . . . I don’t see myself as separate from what I am doing”), (3)  loss 
of  self- consciousness (e.g., “I am less aware of myself and my problems”, (4)  sense of 
control over one’s own actions (e.g., “I feel immensely strong”), (5)  unambiguous 
feedback  from the activity (e.g., “You don’t feel you have all sorts of different kinds 
of demands, often conflicting, upon you”), and (6)  autotelic experience  – that is, the 
sense that the activity is an end in itself, and hence runs independently of external 
rewards (e.g., “The act of writing justifies poetry”). Csikszentmihalyi named  flow 
the simultaneous enactment of these six themes, and set out to search for its origins 
and consequences. In the early 1990s, Csikszentmihalyi (1996) investigated through 
interviews the experiences that  ninety- one outstanding individuals had prior to 
conceiving novel ideas and seeing them recognized by peers as innovations. Intense 
and recurrent flow at work emerged as the main theme underlying each innovation 
across the domains of science, art, and business. 
 In the past two decades, researchers in the fields of organizational psychology 
and management have increasingly focused on the occurrence of flow in the work 
context across a wide range of occupations and organizational contexts, including 
scientists (Quinn, 2005), medical doctors (Delle Fave & Massimini, 2003), software 
engineers (Debus, Sonnentag, Deutsch, & Nussbeck, 2014), and school teachers 
 7 
 APPLICATIONS OF FLOW 
TO WORK 
 Giovanni B. Moneta 

120 Giovanni B. Moneta
(Salanova, Bakker,  & Llorens, 2006). They identified important antecedents of 
flow at work, including individual difference components (e.g., Eisenberger, Jones, 
Stinglhamber, Shanock, & Randall, 2005), work environment characteristics (e.g., 
Mäkikangas, Bakker, Aunola, & Demerouti, 2010), and the additive or interactive 
effects of the two (e.g., Bakker, 2005; Moneta, 2012b; Salanova et al., 2006). Schol-
ars also identified important consequences of flow at work, including enhanced 
employee psychological  well- being (Debus et al., 2014; Fullagar & Kelloway, 2009) 
and enhanced job performance (e.g., Demerouti, 2006; Eisenberger et al., 2005), in 
general, and creative contributions to work (Csikszentmihalyi, 1996), in particular. 
These findings have raised interest among scholars, managers, and employees in the 
possibility of modifying the existing work environments and management processes 
to foster flow for individual workers, teams of workers engaged in a common work 
project, and entire organizations. 
 The present chapter focuses on the role of flow in organizations and the strate-
gies organizations could adopt to redesign the work environment in order to foster 
their employees’ experience of flow at work. Because the research findings on flow 
do not translate directly and easily into applications, this chapter is exploratory 
in essence, and it highlights both the promises of the field and its most pressing 
unanswered questions. This chapter is divided into two parts. The first part outlines 
and critically reviews a selection of research on flow that is directly relevant to any 
organizational intervention. The second part outlines four promising strategies that 
organizations can adopt to foster their employees’ flow at work. 
 The nature of ﬂ ow at work 
 Antecedents and indicators of ﬂ ow 
 Although the core concept of flow remained stable since its inception, the models 
and operationalizations of flow that researchers developed changed substantially 
over time. In particular, there is still a lively debate on the number of distinct facets 
or dimensions of flow. On one extreme, Schiefele and Raabe (2011) described flow 
simply as absorption – that is, as a state of being deeply immersed in an activity. On 
the other extreme, Jackson and Csikszentmihalyi (1999) described flow as a state 
characterized by nine components. Six of them are the components that Csikszent-
mihalyi (1975/2000) identified from the onset of flow research and were listed 
at the beginning of this chapter: concentration, merging of action and awareness, 
loss of  self- consciousness, sense of control, unambiguous feedback, and autotelic 
experience. The remaining three components emerged in more recent research: 
 dynamic balance between challenge and skill ,  clear proximal goals , and  loss of  time- awareness 
or time acceleration.  Other researchers adopted somewhat intermediate definitions of 
flow that include from three (e.g., Moneta, 2012a) to eight facets (e.g., Engeser & 
 Schiepe- Tiska, 2012). These differences are important for any attempt to modify 
the work environment in order to enhance flow. In particular, the number of fac-
ets used to define flow determines the number of ultimate target variables for an 

Applications of ﬂ ow to work 121
intervention: only one based on Schiefele and Raabe’s (2011) definition of flow, up 
to nine based on Jackson and Csikszentmihalyi’s (1999) definition of flow. 
 A strictly linked and equally lively debate concerns the functional relation 
between the hypothesized components of flow. Jackson and Csikszentmihalyi 
(1999) have regarded the nine components of flow as correlated dimensions of 
the flow construct that can trade off in determining the intensity of flow. Other 
researchers have instead argued that only some of the nine components are  indicators 
of flow – that is, experiences that can be caused by flow – whereas the remain-
ing are  antecedents of flow – that is, experiences that can cause flow. For example, 
Quinn (2005) proposed and tested a  chained- mediation model of flow for knowl-
edge workers in the field of national security in which flow is defined solely by the 
indicator of merging of action and application, whereas loss of  self- consciousness 
and sense of control are defined as consequences of flow, and the remaining com-
ponents of Jackson and Csikszentmihalyi’s (1999) taxonomy play various roles as 
antecedents of flow or other consequences of antecedents of flow. Several defini-
tional models of flow have been proposed in recent years (e.g., Kawabata & Mallet, 
2011; Moneta, 2012a). Hoffman and Novak (2009) identified and compared thirty 
definitional models of flow that various authors had proposed over the years, and 
concluded that what they all have in common is a distinction of characteristics of 
flow into the three categories of (a) antecedents of flow, (b) expressions of flow, 
and (c) effects of flow. In all, the separation of variables into indicators of flow and 
antecedents of flow is important for any attempt to modify the work environment 
in order to enhance flow. In particular, while the key indicators of flow – arguably, 
absorption and concentration – may not be intervened upon directly in organi-
zational settings, at least some of the antecedents of flow appear to be appropriate 
target variables for organizational interventions. 
 The  challenge- skill balance 
 The original flow model (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975/2000) posited that the flow state 
is more likely to occur and is more intense when there is an equivalent ratio of 
perceived challenges from the activity to perceived skills in carrying out the activ-
ity, and both variables are high. Empirical studies using the experience sampling 
method (ESM; Csikszentmihalyi  & Larson, 1987; Csikszentmihalyi, Larson,  & 
Prescott, 1977) have corroborated that perceived challenge and skill, and their rela-
tive balance, are the most robust predictors of flow (e.g., Massimini, Csikszentmih-
alyi, & Carli, 1987; Pfister, 2002), and particularly so in achievement contexts (e.g., 
Moneta & Csikszentmihalyi, 1996). Moreover, it was found that the effects of chal-
lenge, skill, and their balance are linked to personality traits, such as trait intrinsic 
motivation and interdependent  self- construal (Moneta, 2004), and situational vari-
ables, such as goals, interests, importance of the activity, and state intrinsic motivation 
(Csikszentmihalyi, Abuhamdeh, & Nakamura, 2005; Delle Fave & Massimini, 2005; 
Ellis, Voelkl, & Morris, 1994; Fong, Zaleski, & Leach, 2015; Inkinen et al., 2014; 
Rheinberg, Manig, Kliegl, Engeser, & Vollmeyer, 2007). Therefore, the perception of 

122 Giovanni B. Moneta
challenges and skills when engaged in work tasks appears to be the core variables for 
organizational interventions aiming at fostering flow in the workplace. 
 The focus on challenges and skills may at first glance appear reductive. Yet, 
as Keller and Landhäußer (2012) argued, the other two flow characteristics that 
researchers have most often regarded as antecedents of flow – clear goals and imme-
diate and unambiguous feedback – are implicitly incorporated in the construct of 
 challenge- skill balance. Clarity of goals entails that the worker is given clear task 
instructions and understands the nature and structure of the task. Immediate and 
unambiguous feedback presupposes that the goals of the task are clear, and entails 
that the worker receives prompt and accurate diagnostic information on how fast 
his progress toward the goal is. As such, a worker can construe meaningful percep-
tions of the challenges from the task and the skills possessed to tackle them only if 
he has clear goals and receives accurate and prompt feedback on his actions. This 
argument strengthens the idea that workers’ perceived challenges and skills should 
be the primary target of organizational interventions. 
 The emphasis of flow theory is on perception of challenge and skill. What is 
the relationship between subjective and objective challenges and skills? Abuhamdeh 
and Csikszentmihalyi (2009, 2013) investigated variations in subjective experience 
while playing chess in expert chess players. Using objective measures of the abil-
ity and performance of chess players, these studies found significant but moderate 
relationships between subjective and objective challenges and skills. For example, 
the correlation between perceived challenges in a game and relative chess rating 
(i.e., the difference in chess rating between the player and his opponent) was –.39, 
and the correlation between perceived skills in a game and relative performance 
(i.e., the difference in pieces still present on the chessboard between the player and 
his opponent) was .33 (Abuhamdeh & Csikszentmihalyi, 2013). Also considering 
the contextual differences between professional chess playing and work and the 
unique psychological makeup of expert chess players, these preliminary findings 
suggest prudence in applying the flow model to work using objective measures of 
challenges and skills. 
 Can organizations intervene in and “tune” their employees’ levels of perceived 
challenges and skills in an average workday? In principle, it seems possible to induce 
a reduction or augmentation of an employee’s level of perceived challenges by 
changing the level of difficulty of the work task or assigning the employee to a 
different task of the appropriate level of difficulty. By the same token, it seems 
possible to induce a growth in perceived skills through training and other personal 
and professional development programs. In an educational context, Moneta and 
Csikszentmihalyi (1999), based on the application of linear multilevel regression 
models to ESM student data, proposed that in order to foster students’ flow, teaching 
should aim at tuning the difficulty level in different ways depending on the phase 
of the learning process: in the initial phase teachers should provide opportunities 
for  challenge- skill balance (easy beginning), and in the ending phase they should 
provide opportunities for imbalance toward greater challenges (difficult ending). 
By analogy, could managers foster their employees’ flow just by dosing the level of 

Applications of ﬂ ow to work 123
task difficulty throughout the various phases of a work project? In order to answer 
this question one needs to delve deeper into the processes that govern variations of 
subjective experience and the emergence of flow at work. 
 Flow as a nonlinear dynamic process 
 In the past two decades or so, researchers modeled daily variations of subjective 
experience (e.g., concentration, absorption, or enjoyment) over perceived challenges 
and skills as a linear process. More recently, Ceja and Navarro (2009, 2011, 2012) 
argued that the variations of subjective experience at work – and hence the occur-
rence of flow – conform to nonlinear dynamic models, and provided empirical 
evidence in support of their claim ( Chapter 5  of this book presents an extensive 
coverage of nonlinear dynamical systems theory, their models and findings). Lin-
ear models assume that the change of outcome variables (e.g., concentration) as a 
function of the change of predictor variables (i.e., challenges and skills) is smooth 
and continuous. In contrast, nonlinear models assume that as the system (e.g., the 
worker) departs from an equilibrium point its behavior will become increasingly 
unstable and turbulent to the extent that change in the outcome variable as a func-
tion of predictor variables becomes abrupt and discontinuous. The simplest instance 
of such abrupt changes is provided by Ceja and Navarro’s (2012; Navarro & Ceja, 
2011) cusp catastrophe model of flow, which is shown in  Figure 7.1 .  Figure 7.1 
(a ) highlights the edge of the cusp, which is the source of instability in this model. 
When “walking” on the edge of the cusp, a worker faces a bifurcation: a minimal 
fluctuation of his levels of challenges and skills may result in either a sharp improve-
ment of subjective experience or a sharp deterioration of subjective experience, and 
the probability of either outcome is about 50%. This means that when in the cusp 
zone, the approach to the flow state is an inherently unstable process that could 
fail abruptly, and its instability is not due to random error but to a deterministic 
mechanism. The bottom line is that, based on this model, the occurrence of flow 
at work in the cusp zone is unpredictable although it is deterministic. In particular, 
being in the cusp zone implies both the highest probability of experiencing flow 
suddenly and the highest probability of experiencing the opposite of flow suddenly, 
and hence the greatest variability of outcomes. 
 How does the nonlinearity of flow influence the way a worker can enter flow 
at work?  Figure 7.1 (b ) shows the two extreme cases: smooth pathway and trouble-
some pathway to flow. On the one hand, the smooth pathway begins with low chal-
lenges and low skills, proceeds by just increasing skills until the point the worker feels 
extremely skillful in handling low challenges, and finally proceeds by just increasing 
challenges to reach the  high- challenge,  high- skill state of flow. On the other hand, the 
troublesome pathway begins with high challenges and low skills, and proceeds by just 
increasing skills until the point the worker can progress toward the flow state only if 
he somehow manages to “climb” the steep inner wall of the cusp. As such, the smooth 
passage to flow avoids the instability of the cusp, the troublesome pathway faces it fully, 
and any other path in between the two faces intermediate levels of instability. 

  FIGURE 7.1  Cusp catastrophe model of flow experiences at work showing (a) the bifur-
cation edge, and (b) smooth and troublesome pathways to flow (adapted from Ceja & 
Navarro, 2012, Navarro & Ceja, 2011) 

Applications of ﬂ ow to work 125
 Taken at face value, the model would suggest that the safest and most efficient 
way for managers to foster flow in their employees is to keep them in a cottoned 
practice state for a long time before asking them to engage fully in a complex work 
task. However, this is not possible for two reasons. First, the safe pathway belongs 
more to the educational context – with the caveat that it borders on  spoon- feeding – 
than to the organizational context, wherein training, professional development, and 
managerial support are more tightly constrained to the need of producing results 
rapidly and efficiently under the pressure of strong competition. Second, Ceja and 
Navarro (2012) found that workers who are more often in the cusp zone have 
more flow at work than those who are less often in the cusp zone. This they inter-
preted as evidence that perceived challenges play the key role in triggering flow. As 
such, both organizational and psychological reasons indicate that any organizational 
intervention aimed at fostering employees’ flow should guide them to reach flow 
through troublesome pathways that involve staying in and closely around the cusp 
zone. The key implication is that, because the cusp zone yields maximal instability, 
any such intervention will result in high failure rates. In simple words, if an organi-
zation wants flow, it has to accept the risk and cost of frequent failure. 
 Is ﬂ ow for all workers? 
 Given that entering flow at work appears to be a troublesome endeavor, any plan 
for an organizational intervention should deal with the sticky issues of whether 
every worker (a) can enter flow at work, and (b) likes entering flow at work. Mos-
ing et al. (2012) estimated the heritability of flow proneness, meant as individual 
differences in how often people experience flow in their daily lives, in a sample 
of Swedish identical twins, and found that the heritability across the domains of 
work, maintenance, and leisure is moderate (.29–.35) and is explained by the same 
genetic factors across the three domains. These findings imply that a small but 
relevant proportion of the population cannot enter flow in general, and at work 
in particular. These “ non- flow-ers” cannot be identified when flow is measured 
using scaled items, simply because even low scores obtained on absorption and con-
centration items would be automatically interpreted as “low flow” as opposed to 
“nonflow.”  Non- flow-ers, instead, can be identified using the Flow Questionnaire 
(Csikszentmihalyi & Csikszentmihalyi, 1988), which proposes definitions of flow 
and asks respondents to recognize them and describe the situations and activities in 
which they experience flow. Confronted with extreme descriptions of absorption 
and concentration (e.g.,“I think that the phone could ring, and the doorbell could 
ring or the house burn down or something like that. When I start I really do shut 
out the world”), a sizeable number of respondents state that they never had such 
experiences. For example, 32.7% of respondents in a sample of British workers from 
a wide range of occupations reported never having had flow experiences even if 
these were described in moderate language. As such, the answer to the first sticky 
question is that, no matter how effective it might be, an organizational intervention 
will not be able to foster flow in all participating employees. The key implication 

126 Giovanni B. Moneta
of this impossibility is that organizational interventions on flow may marginalize a 
proportion of employees and create false expectations. 
 Although at least two of three workers experience flow, how many of them do 
experience it at work? Moneta (2012b) used the Flow Questionnaire to ask  flow- ers 
to list freely up to five activities in which they experienced flow, and to pick the one 
that best represented the proposed flow descriptions. The chosen  flow- conducive 
activities were then coded by independent judges into the “work” or “leisure” 
categories. Findings showed that more than 58% of the  flow- ers had the most rep-
resentative flow experiences in leisure activities. These findings suggest that a wide 
proportion of the working population is a potential target for organizational inter-
ventions aimed at “converting” them from the flow of leisure to the flow of work. 
However, there are three main reasons why not all leisure  flow- ers can be converted. 
First, the occurrence of flow at work is likely to depend heavily on the incentives 
inherent to the specific work tasks an employee is assigned to, as well as to that 
employee’s job as whole: in a number of cases a poor  worker- job matching cannot 
be improved within the organization by, for example, assigning the worker to differ-
ent tasks. Second, the cusp catastrophe model of flow implies that experiencing flow 
at work requires being frequently in the unstable cusp zone, wherein downturns and 
failure to reach flow are frequent: only some employees have the hardiness to with-
stand the inherent instability that is required for flow to occur. Finally, a number of 
leisure  flow- ers chose jobs that do not require them to be in flow: for them the job 
functions as a resting platform to project into  flow- conducive leisure activities – 
such as  rock- climbing, sailing, alpine skiing, or scuba diving – on the weekends 
and holidays. Therefore, the answer to the second sticky question is that there is a 
sizeable proportion of the work population who would be capable of experiencing 
flow at work but on whom any organizational intervention would hardly sort out 
the intended effect, and might even produce undesirable consequences. 
 Organizational strategies to enhance ﬂ ow at work 
 Strategy 1:  worker- job matching 
 Numerous studies have identified personality traits that influence the occurrence 
of flow at work either directly or indirectly, by moderating the relation between 
antecedents of flow and flow, and between flow and performance. Organizations 
can profitably use these traits when making the decision to hire new employees, and 
when planning the professional development and allocation to work tasks of their 
employees. We will consider here a selection of two traits that link in well with clas-
sic theories of motivation: achievement motivation and intrinsic motivation. 
 Achievement motivation is seeking success in competition with a standard of 
excellence (McClelland, Atkinson, Clark, & Lowell, 1953), wherein the standard 
can be internal (i.e., competition is with self) and/or external (i.e., competition is 
with others). The need of achievement stems from the enjoyment of the experi-
ence of doing better, and entails seeking situations in which to have such experience 

Applications of ﬂ ow to work 127
(McClelland, 1985). Two studies unveiled the powerful influence achievement 
motivation has on the occurrence of flow and its consequences for performance. 
Eisenberger et al. (2005) administered the ESM to a sample of employees from 
an electronics and appliances retailer in the United States, and examined how the 
combinations of perceived challenges and skills at work influenced the employees. 
They found that only for employees with high need for achievement the combi-
nation of high challenge and high skill (i.e., the “flow zone”) yielded scores of 
positive mood, task interest, and organizational spontaneity – an important facet of 
performance in that organizational context – that were higher than in any other 
combination of challenge and skill. Demerouti (2006) investigated the relation 
between the experience of flow – measured using the  Work- Related Flow Inven-
tory (WOLF; Bakker, 2008) – and  other- rated  in- role and  extra- role performance 
in a worker sample from mixed occupations in the Netherlands. She found that 
conscientiousness – a broad trait that incorporates achievement motivation as a key 
facet – was an important moderator to the extent that there was a relation between 
flow and performance only for employees who scored high on conscientiousness. 
Taken together, the findings of these studies indicate that (a) achievement moti-
vation moderates the relation between the main antecedents of flow and flow in 
such a way that only highly motivated employees “utilize” the flow zone to enter 
flow, and (b) achievement motivation moderates the relation between flow and job 
performance in such a way that only highly motivated employees “utilize” flow to 
enhance performance. 
 Intrinsic motivation is the tendency to engage in tasks because one finds them 
interesting, challenging, and enjoyable (Deci & Ryan, 1985; Ryan & Deci, 2000) 
and a key predictor of creative achievement (Amabile, 1996). When measured as 
a trait in the work context (Amabile, Hill, Hennessey, & Tighe, 1994), intrinsic 
motivation is the tendency to be driven by the engagement of novel and challeng-
ing work. Based on  self- determination theory (Deci & Ryan, 1985; Ryan & Deci, 
2000), one would expect trait intrinsic motivation to be conducive to flow at work. 
However, based on the social psychology approach to creativity (Amabile, 1996), 
one would expect such relation to be conditional on the job providing plenty of 
 open- ended problems, for which creativity is both possible and desirable. Moneta 
(2012b) used the Flow Questionnaire to measure flow at work in a sample of highly 
educated British workers from a wide range of occupations, and found (a) that 
opportunity for creativity in the job moderates the relation between motivation 
and the probability of experiencing flow in work relative to not experiencing flow 
at all, in such a way that intrinsic motivation is positively associated with flow for 
high opportunity, and it is less associated with flow for low opportunity, and (b) that 
opportunity moderates the relation between motivation and the probability of expe-
riencing flow in work relative to experiencing flow in leisure, in such a way that 
intrinsic motivation is positively associated with flow in work for high opportunity, 
and it is negatively associated with flow in work for low opportunity. The findings 
of this study indicate that intrinsic motivation can be “channeled” into flow only 
if the job provides ample opportunity to do creative work, and that workers with low 

128 Giovanni B. Moneta
intrinsic motivation are more likely to experience flow if the job provides them 
with limited opportunity for creativity. 
 The found moderation patterns can be interpreted within the framework of 
Lazarus and Folkman’s (1984)  person- environment ( P- E) fit theory, which pos-
tulates that a worker will be more likely to experience positive outcomes, such 
as high job satisfaction and engagement, if there is a consonance between worker 
and work environment. In particular, there is high  P- E fit when a worker provides 
what the work environment needs ( demand- ability fit) and the work environment 
provides what a worker needs ( need- supply fit). As such, the implication of the 
found moderation patterns for organizations is that flow can be enhanced at work 
by matching workers’ motivational profiles with job characteristics. In particular, 
highly  achievement- oriented employees should be assigned to tasks wherein they 
can frequently experience the combination of high challenges and high skills (i.e., 
the flow zone); based on Atkinson’s (1957) model of achievement motivation these 
are tasks that yield a clear distinction between success and failure, and are of medium 
difficulty (i.e., the probability of success is about 50%). Workers with low intrinsic 
motivation should be assigned to  algorithmic  tasks, in which they are given before-
hand a complete set of steps for completing the task, and completing the task is only 
a question of carrying out the steps (Amabile, 1996). Finally, workers with high 
intrinsic motivation should be assigned to  heuristic tasks, in which discovering the 
steps for completing the task is part of the task itself (Amabile, 1996). Because flow 
and performance have a multifactorial etiology, these abstract  person- job match-
ing principles should be traded off with other factors, such as employees’ skills and 
expertise. 
 Strategy 2: applying and developing the progress 
principle to team ﬂ ow 
 Because most intellectually challenging and creative work being done in contem-
porary organizations occurs in team projects, it is important to consider the role of 
flow in teams. To varying degrees, teams require communication and collaboration 
among members. This raises the issue of whether flow, which was originally defined 
within an individualistic phenomenology that depicts the person as separate from 
nearly everything but the task at hand, can be applied to the understanding of team 
work. A fast answer to the question can be found in sports. For example, Bakker et al. 
(2011) investigated the effects of flow on performance in soccer players from talented 
teams in the Netherlands. The soccer players completed the Flow State Scale (Jack-
son & Eklund, 2002), which is designed specifically for sport activities, with reference 
to a specific match, and the coaches rated the performance of each of their players in 
that match. The average flow score in a team (i.e., flow at the team level) was higher 
in drawn and won matches than it was in lost matches, and it correlated with the 
average coach rating of performance in the team (i.e., performance at the team level). 
Therefore, flow – although it is commonly viewed as a solitary experience – appears 
to be a team resource and a promoter of team performance. 

Applications of ﬂ ow to work 129
 In large corporations, teams are typically constituted by a group of peers and a 
supervisor who is responsible for keeping the team project on target to comple-
tion and for liaising with upper management throughout the process. Amabile and 
Kramer (2011) conducted a unique longitudinal study of  twenty- six such project 
teams from seven companies within three industries (consumer products, chemicals, 
and  high- tech) in the United States. According to top managers in the companies, 
creativity was both possible and desirable in each of the teams’ projects. The study 
did not focus on and did not assess flow, but it provides invaluable suggestions on 
how team flow is created and maintained for the full duration of a team project. 
 Based on both quantitative and qualitative analyses of more than 11,000 daily 
reports provided by the team members, Amabile and Kramer (2011) developed a 
model of both individual and team performance. At the worker level, the model 
posits that individual performance in every workday is a function of workday 
events. Workday events influence perceptions about the organization, its manag-
ers, the work being done, and the extent to which work is accomplished, and fos-
ter positive or negative emotions. Perceptions and emotions go hand in hand and 
influence each other, so that, for example, an instance of positive leader behavior 
may foster positive affect, which in turn may foster a positive appraisal of manage-
ment. Perceptions and emotions conjointly influence work motivation, including 
the identification of goals, the determination to pursue them, and the way they are 
pursued. Finally, the whole workday inner life – including the perceptions, emo-
tions, and motivation lived in the course of a workday – determines the individual 
performance on that workday. 
 How does good performance on a single workday evolve into good  long- term 
performance for the team as a whole? By focusing on specific project teams that 
demonstrated remarkable resilience and performance, Amabile and Kramer (2011) 
discovered that making real, meaningful progress in the team project day after day 
boosts  long- term performance by enhancing  work- related emotions, perceptions of 
the team and the organization, and hence work motivation, to create that virtuous 
cycle that exemplifies the  progress principle . The progress principle essentially states 
that uninterrupted, stepwise progress feeds inner work life, which in turn fosters 
more progress, leading to an upward spiral. The perception of progress includes 
breakthroughs, small wins, goal completion, and demonstrable progress toward 
goal completion. In a workday there might be many different kinds of positive 
events, but what the progress principle states is that only the perception that real 
and meaningful progress was made in the team project work has the power to boost 
 long- term performance. The bottom line is: what matters is progress, not just pleas-
ant emotions. 
 The best team leaders acted promptly on project setbacks in order to prevent 
a vicious cycle that runs opposite to the progress principle. They achieved this by 
providing  catalysts , such as: (1) setting clear  short- term and  long- term goals, includ-
ing both direction and meaning of work, (2) allowing autonomy, with the aim of 
supporting intrinsic motivation and creativity, (3) providing resources, (4) giving just 
enough time to complete the work (but not too much time), (5) helping with work 

130 Giovanni B. Moneta
when one needs it, (6) learning from both problems and successes, and (7) allowing 
ideas to flow freely within the team. Reading between the lines of Amabile and 
Kramer’s (2011) study with the lens of the nonlinear catastrophe model of flow, it 
would appear that the best team leaders actually fostered their subordinates’ flow by 
providing clear goals and unambiguous and immediate feedback on a daily basis, 
which in turn enabled workers’ construal of accurate perceptions of challenges and 
skills. Moreover, by directly helping team members in difficulty and by encourag-
ing free flow of ideas among them in problem solving, it would appear that the best 
leaders supported directly and indirectly the team members when they were in the 
turbulent “flow” zone, which entails the highest risk of setback. Finally, it would 
appear that the best leaders, through these strategies, ensured that individual team 
members held coordinated goals that were well integrated with the overarching 
goal of the team project. In all, this reading of the progress principle advances that 
teams are more likely to keep on track and achieve their project goals creatively if 
their team members are frequently in flow and their flow states are coordinated and 
synergistic. From this perspective, team leaders are good insofar as they are able to 
make the synergism of flow in the team happen. 
 Is flow contagious? A wide literature under the rubric of  emotional contagion – 
“The tendency to automatically mimic and synchronize facial expressions, vocaliza-
tions, postures and movements with those of another person and, consequently, to 
converge emotionally” (Hatfield, Cacioppo, & Rapson, 1994, p. 5) – indicates that 
emotions can transfer to one another when people interact verbally or nonverbally. 
Flow cannot be defined as an emotion. However, ESM studies found that momen-
tary flow states are typically followed by heightened positive affect (e.g., Engeser & 
Baunmann, 2016; Fullagar & Kelloway, 2009), so that flow might spread because its 
consequent emotions do and, in turn, foster flow. Moreover, in structured relations 
involving individuals with varying levels of expertise, the  flow- performance link 
may foster modeling, so that the flow of models might spread because its conse-
quent success is noticed and emulated. It is therefore likely that flow crosses over 
people who work in interaction with one another. Bakker (2005) investigated the 
relationship between the experience of flow – measured using the  Work- Related 
Flow Inventory (WOLF; Bakker, 2008) – of music teachers and of their students, and 
found a positive and moderate correlation (.35). As such, flow appears to be conta-
gious at least in artistic endeavors involving dyads with different levels of expertise. 
 Structured teams with a supervisor and  teacher- student dyads involve power 
relations such that the responsibility for collective flow resides heavily on a leader’s 
shoulders. Does collective flow require such hierarchical relations? Sawyer (2006, 
2007) consistently found that this is not the case. He started addressing the ques-
tion by observing jazz ensembles in Chicago in the 1980s, and then extended his 
findings to improv theater groups, sports teams, and finally business teams. These 
groups come to existence spontaneously, with people joining in and dropping out 
at virtually any point in time throughout the life of the team. Team members have 
generally equal status, except for they become rapidly aware of differences in skills 
among their team members. These nonhierarchical,  distributed teams were found to 

Applications of ﬂ ow to work 131
be extremely successful in a variety of contexts. However, the success of such teams 
was found to heavily depend on three main factors. First, the team project should 
have a somewhat unpredictable outcome, rather than a firm endpoint. There of 
course must be a goal, and it should be sufficiently focused and narrow to allow 
that team members understand whether they are making progress, but  open- ended 
enough to allow for creative problem solving. Second, the team task must have a 
 moment- to-moment contingency structure, such that every action by a team mem-
ber depends on the prior action by the same or other team member. This ensures 
that the team is working as whole rather than as a group of isolated individuals 
who may also be in flow, but each on a different planet. Third, any team member’s 
action at any given point in time can be later modified by the same and other team 
members. This allows for progressive modifications of both problem solving and 
problem finding, in that the team can modify or sharpen the goals of the project 
pending on results and the progress made. The last two requirements imply that, in 
order to function, a distributed team must be collaborative, with each member con-
tributing equally and hence holding equal status in practice. Sawyer (2006, 2007) 
presented ample evidence that if these core requirements are fulfilled, distributed 
teams develop and maintain team flow for the duration of the project, and by capi-
talizing on continued team flow tend to produce more creative team project output. 
 Because flow has been typically viewed as a solitary experience in indi-
vidual endeavors, one might question whether collective flow is as fulfilling and 
 growth- generating as individual flow is. Walker (2010) was the first to discover 
that flow experienced in social interaction is more enjoyable than flow experienced 
in social isolation. Paez, Rimé, Basabe, Wlodarczyk, and Zumeta (2015) replicated 
Walker’s (2010) finding using correlational data gathered in two group activities – 
spontaneous folkloric dance and experimentally induced protest demonstration – 
and found, in addition, that group flow is associated with group efficacy. Salanova, 
Rodríguez, Schaufeli, and Cifre (2014) replicated Walker’s (2010) finding using 
 two- wave data gathered in experimental conditions involving a simulated work 
task, and found, in addition, that group flow and group efficacy have a reciprocal 
longitudinal relation, such that more group flow fosters more group efficacy, and 
vice versa. These studies indicate that collective flow in various contexts, including 
work, is highly enjoyable and builds up psychological resources at least as much as 
individual flow does. Therefore, group flow represents a new target variable for 
organizational interventions. 
 Organizations can foster team flow and hence creativity at work informally – for 
example, by facilitating free exchange of information and spontaneous collabora-
tion in the corridor as opposed to the committee meeting room. They can also 
introduce formal programs that allow for the spontaneous creation of distributed 
teams. For example, Google allows its engineers to devote up to 20% of their paid 
work time on a project of their own liking, and this program has produced spon-
taneously a variety of applications that were eventually picked up by management 
and implemented, such as Google News and AdSense for Content. This program 
is not formally collaborative, but it could be made explicitly so in a variety of 

132 Giovanni B. Moneta
organizational contexts. If introduced as optional, a formal collaborative program 
would allow for  self- selection, and hence avoid the risks inherent in pressuring 
people toward flow and creativity. 
 Strategy 3: selection of work  ﬂ ow- ers 
 Up to this point, we have considered strategies that can be implemented in ideal 
organizational contexts, wherein companies are profitable and well positioned in 
their markets, and have plenty of resources to invest for the professional develop-
ment and retention of their employees. However, since the outbreak of the world-
wide economical recession in 2008, the scenario for companies and their employees 
has drastically deteriorated across the board, and there has been a fast growth in the 
number of  start- up companies.  Start- up companies confront difficulties in posi-
tioning themselves in the markets, have shortage of funds, staff, and competencies, 
and hold a limited temporal outlook for development because they face a high risk 
of sudden merging or failure. What recruitment strategy should these companies 
adopt? One plausible emergency strategy is, other things being equal, to select work 
 flow- ers – that is, persons who experience more flow at work no matter what. Based 
on  self- determination theory (Deci & Ryan, 1985; Ryan & Deci, 2000) one would 
expect work  flow- ers to be comparatively more intrinsically motivated and hence 
more flexible and resilient in a  non- autonomy-supporting environment. Moreover, 
based on the phenomenology of flow as a state of deep concentration on a limited 
field of stimuli that isolates and buffers the person from the surrounding environ-
ment, one would expect work  flow- ers to engage more in work and perform better 
particularly when the work conditions are adverse. 
 De Fraga and Moneta (2016) conducted a pilot correlational study on a multi-
cultural sample of 177 workers of mixed occupations to test the broad conjecture 
that flow functions as a buffer and makes a worker less sensitive to perceptions of 
the work environment. As a starting point of the investigation they adopted the 
 self- determination model of work engagement, which has been corroborated in 
both individualist and collectivist cultures (e.g., Deci et al., 2001). The model posits 
that perceived managerial autonomy support fosters satisfaction of intrinsic psycho-
logical needs – autonomy, competence, and relatedness – and, in turn, satisfaction 
of these needs fosters work engagement and  well- being. De Fraga and Moneta 
hypothesized that flow at work would moderate (1) the positive relation between 
perceived managerial autonomy support and work engagement, in such a way that 
for persons with more flow at work the relation would be weaker, and (2) the posi-
tive relation between perceived managerial autonomy support and satisfaction of 
the intrinsic psychological needs, in such a way that for persons with more flow at 
work all three relations would be weaker. Flow was measured using the Flow Short 
Scale (FSS; Engeser & Rheinberg, 2008). Regression analysis using a set of Hayes’s 
(2013) moderated mediation models supported hypothesis 1, showing that there is 
no association between perceived managerial autonomy support and work engage-
ment for workers with high levels of flow at work. The analysis also supported 

Applications of ﬂ ow to work 133
hypothesis 2 but limitedly to the needs of competence and relatedness, showing that 
the positive relation between perceived managerial autonomy support and these 
needs is weaker for workers with higher levels of flow at work. In all, these find-
ings support the broad conjecture that work  flow- ers are more capable of engaging 
in work when the work environment is less than ideal. As such, work  flow- ers are 
attractive candidates for companies that are in dire straits. 
 Strategy 4: fostering the metacognition of ﬂ ow 
 A final and crucial question affecting any  flow- enhancing intervention in the work-
place is whether and to what extent flow can be  self- regulated. It is well known that 
when people read about flow or respond to flow questionnaires, they generally rec-
ognize flow in their life experiences and construe it as a very positive phenomenon. 
Nevertheless, how many can make flow happen at will in their average workday? If 
workers were able to decide when it is time to rest and when it is time to venture 
into the “flow zone,” and were able to proactively seek clarity of goals and unam-
biguous feedback when these do not come to them, would the managerial work 
become more “agile,” strategic, and effective? Moreover, if there were individual 
differences in workers’ ability to make flow happen, could we learn the lesson from 
those championing flow and use it to coach the others? These questions raise the 
possibility for organizations to intervene on and enhance the natural predisposition 
workers have to enter flow at work. 
 There is ample but anecdotal evidence suggesting that eminent intellectuals 
know how and when to enter and exit flow in their work endeavors. Currey (2013) 
provided some sharp and hilarious portraits of the daily rituals famous artists used 
to perform in order to drive themselves into the flow of art making. Among them, 
Ernest Hemingway is arguably the one who developed the deepest insight in the 
function and use of flow exit: “I had learned already never to empty the well of 
my writing, but always stop when there was still something there in the deep part 
of the well, and let it refill at night from the springs that fed it” (Hemingway, 2004, 
pp.  15– 16); and in the use of resting time: “All I must do now was stay sound and 
good in my head until morning when I would start to work again” (Hemingway, 
2004, p. 45). He also had a clear understanding that when in flow it is difficult 
to evaluate the quality of one’s own work: “I was sure this was a very good story 
although I would not know truly how good until I read it over the next day” 
(Hemingway, 2004, p. 4). In sum, Hemingway and other outstanding intellectual 
workers who lived before the term flow was introduced had a clear understanding 
of the usefulness of flow for their work, of how to get into it, how to get out of it at 
the appropriate time, and how to alternate flow and rest in their daily work sched-
ule in order to maximize their work performance. What about “normal” workers? 
 Wilson and Moneta (2012) used the Flow Questionnaire to perform textual 
analyses of flow descriptions in a British worker sample from a wide range of 
occupations using  open- ended questions that were developed by Massimini, Csik-
szentmihalyi, and Delle Fave (1988). The questions concerned how the flow state 

134 Giovanni B. Moneta
started, how it felt during the activity, and how they kept the flow state going. 
The qualitative analysis of the textual data revealed that respondents with high job 
responsibilities, such as operating surgeons, were the most aware of the benefits of 
being in flow while engaged in complex and risky job tasks, and were believed to be 
able to activate and use flow at will to cope with difficult situations. These findings 
suggest that at least workers in  high- responsibility jobs have a metacognition of flow 
that helps them to enter flow when the situation requires it. 
 Metacognition refers to the knowledge and beliefs about one’s own cognitive 
regulation and the capability to deconstruct and understand them through reflec-
tion and problem solving (Flavell, 1979). The study of metacognitions has been 
applied in the fields of clinical psychology (Wells, 2009; Wells & Matthews, 1994) 
and positive psychology (Beer & Moneta, 2010, 2012). The development and appli-
cation of metacognitive therapy (MCT; e.g., Wells, 2009) has shown that interven-
ing on metacognitive beliefs can be more effective than intervening on the content 
of those beliefs. For example, changing one’s beliefs about the uncontrollability of 
worry can be more effective in reducing anxiety than trying to prevent one from 
worrying. By analogy, it is possible that strengthening one’s beliefs that flow is useful 
and can happen at will can be more effective in fostering flow than trying to foster 
flow by means of external influence. The development and initial application of 
the Flow Metacognitions Questionnaire (FMQ; Wilson & Moneta, 2016) indicate 
that  flow- specific metacognitions predict the intensity of flow in work better than 
measures of maladaptive and adaptive metacognitions, and the frequency of flow in 
work better than established measures of flow intensity. As such, metacognition is a 
candidate target for  flow- enhancing interventions. 
 Although the study of  flow- specific metacognitions is still at an early stage, orga-
nizations may consider fostering awareness of and insight into the causes and con-
sequences of variations in subjective experience at work.  Chapter 5  of the present 
book explains that the estimation of nonlinear dynamic flow models requires appli-
cations of the ESM that last for at least three weeks. Such applications could also be 
used to conduct metacognitive interventions using the technique of event history 
analyses. Event history analysis is used to discern whether and to what extent a 
certain class of events influences the subsequent behavior of one or more outcome 
variables, which in this instance could be flow and some facets of job performance. 
Encouraging employees to engage in the history analysis of their own streams of 
experiential data, coupled with insight coming from the statistical analysis of their 
personal data, could result in more flow at work indirectly, by enhancing a worker’s 
 flow- specific metacognitions. 
 Conclusion 
 The first section of the chapter proposed that it is possible to foster employ-
ees’ flow at work by means of organizational interventions. However, a range of 
research findings converges in indicating that it is an inherently complex endeavor, 
is risky, and is subject to constraints. The section highlighted the importance of 

Applications of ﬂ ow to work 135
specifying the operationalization of flow and the model of flow on which to base 
an intervention, as well as the need of drawing a detailed map of the constraints 
of the organizational context within which an intervention is conducted. The 
second section of the chapter focused on four interesting organizational strategies 
that have the potential to tackle the task at the appropriate level of complexity. 
These were sorted from solidly grounded in empirical research to more specula-
tive. In order to evaluate the effectiveness of these and other organizational strate-
gies there is the need to conduct randomized clinical trials with relatively long 
 follow- ups. 
 This chapter did not explicitly cover a paramount issue. No matter how moti-
vated and supported they might be, workers would risk extinction if they were in 
flow at all times. In particular, workers who are in a state of poor recovery in the 
morning tend to experience less flow later in the workday (Debus et al., 2014). 
Moreover, excessive flow is deemed detrimental to one’s own health to such an 
extent that workers at times devise strategies to disrupt it in order to recover from 
exhaustion (e.g., Guptill, 2012). As such, excessive flow at work might be an instance 
of “too much of a good thing” (Grant & Schwartz, 2011), and even lead to lower 
job performance. Arguably, workers need breaks in which they restore the energy 
needed for a new task engagement. Research has not yet identified the best type 
of rest, ranging from chatting with colleagues about sports to shifting attention to 
more creative work tasks, and the optimal alternation between flow and other states 
at work. Among the nonflow states, one should consider other optimal states, such 
as mindfulness, which do not require the tunneling of attention typical of flow but 
were nonetheless found to foster employees’  well- being and performance (e.g., Reb, 
Narayan, & Chaturvedi, 2014). A shift of research focus from single optimal states 
to optimal sequences of states, including flow, holds a great potential for enhancing 
employees’  well- being and performance. 
 References 
 Abuhamdeh, S., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2009). Intrinsic and extrinsic motivational orienta-
tions in the competitive context: An examination of  person– situation interactions.  Journal 
of Personality ,  77 ,  1615– 1635. 
Abuhamdeh, S., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2012). Attentional involvement and intrinsic moti-
vation. Motivation and Emotion, 36(3), 257–267.
 Abuhamdeh, S., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2013). The importance of challenge for the enjoy-
ment of intrinsically motivated,  goal- directed activities.  Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin ,  38 ,  317– 330. 
 Amabile, T. M. (1996).  Creativity in context . Boulder, CO: Westview Press. 
 Amabile, T. M., Hill, K. G., Hennessey, B. A., & Tighe, E. (1994). The Work Preference 
Inventory: Assessing intrinsic and extrinsic motivational orientations.  Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology ,  66 ,  950– 967. 
 Amabile, T. M., & Kramer, S. J. (2011).  The progress principle: Using small wins to ignite joy, 
engagement, and creativity at work . Boston: Harvard Business Review Press. 
 Atkinson, J. W. (1957). Motivational determinants of  risk- taking behavior.  Psychological 
Review ,  64 ,  359– 372. 

136 Giovanni B. Moneta
 Bakker, A. B. (2005). Flow among music teachers and their students: The crossover of peak 
experiences.  Journal of Vocational Behavior, 66,  26– 44. 
 Bakker, A. B. (2008). The  Work- Related Flow Inventory: Construction and initial validation 
of the WOLF.  Journal of Vocational Behavior, 72,  400– 414. 
 Bakker, A. B., Oerlemans, W., Demerouti, E., Bruins Slot, B., & Karamat Ali, D. (2011). Flow 
and performance: A study among talented Dutch soccer players.  Psychology of Sport and 
Exercise ,  12 ,  442– 450. 
 Beer, N., & Moneta, G. B. (2010). Construct and concurrent validity of the Positive Meta-
cognitions and Positive  Meta- Emotions Questionnaire.  Personality and Individual Differ-
ences ,  49 ,  977– 982. 
 Beer, N., & Moneta, G. B. (2012). Coping and perceived stress as a function of positive 
metacognitions and positive  meta- emotions.  Individual Differences Research ,  10 ,  105– 116. 
 Ceja, L., & Navarro, J. (2009). Dynamics of flow: A nonlinear perspective.  Journal of Happi-
ness Studies ,  10 ,  665– 684. 
 Ceja, L., & Navarro, J. (2011). Dynamic patterns of flow in the workplace: Characterizing 
 within- individual variability using a complexity science approach.  Journal of Organiza-
tional Behavior ,  32 ,  627– 651. 
 Ceja, L., & Navarro, J. (2012). “Suddenly I get into the zone”: Examining discontinuities and 
nonlinear changes in flow experiences at work.  Human Relations ,  65 ,  1101– 1127. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1975/2000).  Beyond boredom and anxiety: Experiencing flow in work and 
play (2nd ed.). San Francisco:  Jossey- Bass. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1996).  Creativity: Flow and the psychology of discovery and invention . New 
York: Harper & Collins. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M., Abuhamdeh, S., & Nakamura, J. (2005). Flow. In A. J. Elliot & C. S. 
Dweck (Eds.),  Handbook of competence and motivation (pp.  598– 608). New York: Guilford. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Csikszentmihalyi. I. (1988).  Optimal experience: Psychological studies of 
flow in consciousness . Cambridge: University Press. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Larson, R. (1987). Validity and reliability of the  experience- sampling 
method.  The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease ,  175 ,  526– 536. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M., Larson, R., & Prescott, S. (1977). The ecology of adolescent activity 
and experience.  Journal of Youth and Adolescence ,  6 ,  281– 294. 
 Currey, M. (2013).  Daily rituals: How artists work.  New York: Knopf. 
 Debus, M. E., Sonnentag, S., Deutsch, W., & Nussbeck, F. W. (2014). Making flow happen: 
The effects of being recovered on  work- related flow between and within days.  Journal of 
Applied Psychology ,  99 ,  713– 722. 
 Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1985).  Intrinsic motivation and  self- determination in human behavior . 
New York: Plenum Press. 
 Deci, E. L., Ryan, R. M., Gagné, M., Leone, D. R., Usunov, J., & Kornazheva, B. P. (2001). 
Need satisfaction, motivation, and  well- being in the work organizations of a former East-
ern bloc country.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin ,  27 ,  930– 942. 
 De Fraga, D., & Moneta, G. B. (2016). Flow at work as a moderator of the  self- determination model 
of work engagement. In L. Harmat, F. Ørsted Andersen, F. Ullén, F. J. Wright, & G. Sadlo (Eds.), 
 The flow experience: Empirical research and applications  (pp.  105– 123). New York: Springer. 
 Delle Fave, A., & Massimini, F. (2003). Optimal experience in work and leisure among teach-
ers and physicians: Individual and  bio- cultural implications.  Leisure Studies ,  22 ,  323– 342. 
 Delle Fave, A., & Massimini, F. (2005). The investigation of optimal experience and apathy: 
Developmental and psychosocial implications.  European Psychologist ,  10 ,  264– 274. 
 Demerouti, E. (2006). Job characteristics, flow, and performance: The moderating role of 
conscientiousness.  Journal of Occupational Health Psychology ,  11 ,  266– 280. 

Applications of ﬂ ow to work 137
 Eisenberger, R., Jones, J. R., Stinglhamber, F., Shanock, L., & Randall, A. T. (2005). Flow 
experiences at work: For high need achievers alone?  Journal of Organizational Behavior ,  26 , 
 755– 775. 
 Ellis, G. D., Voelkl, J. E., & Morris, C. (1994). Measurements and analysis issues with expla-
nation of variance in daily experience using the Flow model.  Journal of Leisure Research , 
 26 ,  337– 356. 
 Engeser, S., & Baunmann, N. (2016). Fluctuation of flow and affect in everyday life: A second 
look at the paradox of work.  Journal of Happiness Studies ,  17 ,  105– 124. 
 Engeser, S., & Rheinberg, F. (2008). Flow, moderators of  challenge- skill-balance and perfor-
mance.  Motivation and Emotion ,  32 ,  158– 172. 
 Engeser, S., &  Schiepe- Tiska, A. (2012). Historical lines and an overview of current research. 
In S. Engeser (Ed.),  Advances in flow research (pp.  1– 22). New York: Springer. 
 Flavell, J. H. (1979). Metacognition and cognitive monitoring: A new area of 
 cognitive- developmental inquiry.  American Psychologist, 34,  906– 911. 
 Fong, C. J., Zaleski, D. J., & Leach, J. K. (2015). The  challenge– skill balance and antecedents 
of flow: A  meta- analytic investigation.  The Journal of Positive Psychology ,  10 ,  425– 446. 
 Fullagar, C. J., & Kelloway, K. (2009). “Flow” at work: An experience sampling approach. 
 Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology ,  82 ,  595– 615. 
 Grant, A. M., & Schwartz, B. (2011). Too much of a good thing: The challenge and oppor-
tunity of the inverted U.  Psychological Science ,  6 ,  61– 76. 
 Guptill, C. (2012). Injured professional musicians and the complex relationship between 
occupation and health.  Journal of Occupational Science ,  19 ,  258– 270. 
 Hatfield, E., Cacioppo, J. T., & Rapson, R. L. (1994).  Emotional contagion . New York: Cam-
bridge University Press. 
 Hayes, A. F. (2013).  Introduction to mediation, moderation, and conditional process analysis: A 
 regression- based approach . New York: Guilford Press. 
 Hemingway, E. (2004).  A moveable feast . Reading, UK: Arrow Boks. 
 Hoffman, D. L., & Novak, T. P. (2009). Flow online: Lessons learned and future prospects. 
 Journal of Interactive Marketing ,  23 ,  23– 34. 
 Inkinen, M., Lonka, K., Hakkarainen, K., Muukkonen, H., Litmanen, T., &  Salmela- Aro, K. 
(2014). The interface between core affects and the  challenge- skill relationship.  Journal of 
Happiness Studies ,  15 ,  891– 913. 
 Jackson, S. A., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1999).  Flow in sports: The keys to optimal experiences 
and performances . Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics. 
 Jackson, S. A., & Eklund, R. C. (2002). Assessing flow in physical activity: The Flow State 
 Scale- 2 and Dispositional Flow  Scale- 2.  Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology ,  24 , 
 133– 150. 
 Kawabata, M., & Mallet, C. J. (2011). Flow experience in physical activity: Examination of 
the internal structure of flow from a  process- related perspective.  Motivation and Emotion , 
 35 ,  393– 402. 
 Keller, J., & Landhäußer, A. (2012). The flow model revisited. In S. Engeser (Ed.),  Introduction 
to flow research (pp.  51– 64). New York: Springer. 
 Lazarus, R. S., & Folkman, S. (1984).  Stress, appraisal and coping.  New York: Springer. 
 McClelland, D. C. (1985).  Human motivation. Glenview, IL: Scott Foresman. 
 McClelland, D. C., Atkinson, J. W., Clark, R. A., & Lowell, E. L. (1953).  The achievement 
motive . New York:  Appleton- Century-Crofts. 
 Mäkikangas, A., Bakker, A. B., Aunola, K., & Demerouti, E. (2010). Job resources and flow 
at work: Modelling the relationship via latent growth curve and mixture model method-
ology.  Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology ,  83 ,  795– 814. 

138 Giovanni B. Moneta
 Massimini, F., Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Carli, M. (1987). The monitoring of optimal experi-
ence: A tool for psychiatric rehabilitation.  The Journal of Nervous and Mental Diseases ,  175 , 
 545– 549. 
Massimini F., Csikszentmihalyi M., Delle Fave A. (1988). Flow and biocultural evolution. In 
M. Csikszentmihalyi, I. Csikszentmihalyi (Eds.), Optimal experience.Psychological Studies of 
Flow inconsciousness (pp. 60–81). New York: Cambridge University Press.
 Moneta, G. B. (2004). The flow model of state intrinsic motivation in Chinese: Cultural and 
personal moderators.  Journal of Happiness Studies ,  2 ,  181– 217. 
 Moneta, G. B. (2012a). On the measurement and conceptualization of flow. In S. Engeser 
(Ed.),  Advances in flow research (pp.  23– 50). New York: Springer. 
 Moneta, G. B. (2012b). Opportunity for creativity in the job as a moderator of the relation 
between trait intrinsic motivation and flow in work.  Motivation and Emotion ,  36 ,  491– 503. 
 Moneta, G. B., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1996). The effect of perceived challenges and skills 
on the quality of subjective experience.  Journal of Personality ,  64 ,  275– 310. 
 Moneta, G. B., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1999). Models of concentration in natural environ-
ments: A comparative approach based on streams of experiential data.  Social Behavior and 
Personality ,  27 ,  603– 637. 
 Mosing, M. A., Magnusson, P.K.E., Pedersen, N. L., Nakamura, J., Madison, G., & Ullén, 
F. (2012). Heritability of proneness for psychological flow experiences.  Personality and 
Individual Differences ,  53 ,  699– 704. 
 Navarro, J., & Ceja, L. (2011). Dinámicas complejas en el flujo: Diferencias entre trabajo y 
no trabajo [Complex dynamics of flow: Differences between work and nonwork activi-
ties].  Revista de Psicología Social ,  26 (3),  443– 456. 
 Páez, D., Rimé, B., Basabe, N., Wlodarczyk, A., & Zumeta, L. (2015). Psychosocial effects of 
perceived emotional synchrony in collective gatherings.  Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology ,  108 ,  711– 729. 
 Pfister, R. (2002).  Flow im alltag: Untersuchungen zum quadrantenmodell des  flow- erlebens und zum 
konzept der autotelischen perso ¨nlichkeit mit der Experience Sampling Method (ESM)  [ Flow in 
everyday life: Studies on the quadrant model of flow experiencing and on the concept of the autotelic 
personality with the experience sampling method (ESM) ]. Bern: Peter Lang. 
 Quinn, R. W. (2005). Flow in knowledge work: High performance experience in the design 
of national security technology.  Administrative Science Quarterly ,  50 ,  610– 641. 
 Reb, J., Narayan, J., & Chaturvedi, S. (2014). Leading mindfully: Two studies on the influ-
ence of supervisor trait mindfulness on employee  well- being and performance.  Mindful-
ness ,  5 ,  36– 45. 
 Rheinberg, F., Manig, Y., Kliegl, R., Engeser, S., & Vollmeyer, R. (2007). Flow bei der Arbeit, 
doch Glück in der Freizeit. Zielausrichtung, Flow und Glücksgefühle [Flow during work 
but happiness during leisure time: Goals,  flow- experience, and happiness].  Zeitschrift für 
Arbeits und Organisationspsychologie ,  51 ,  105– 115. 
 Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2000).  Self- determination theory and the facilitation of intrinsic 
motivation, social development, and  well- being.  American Psychologist ,  55 ,  68– 78. 
 Salanova, M., Bakker, A. B., & Llorens, S. (2006). Flow at work: Evidence for an upward spiral 
of personal resources and organizational resources.  Journal of Happiness Studies ,  7 ,  1– 22. 
 Salanova, M., Rodríguez, A. M., Schaufeli, W. B., & Cifre, E. (2014). Flowing together: A 
longitudinal study of collective efficacy and collective flow among workgroups.  The Jour-
nal of Psychology ,  148 ,  435– 455. 
 Sawyer, R. K. (2006).  Explaining creativity: The science of human innovation . New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
 Sawyer, R. K. (2007).  Group genius: The creative power of collaboration . New York: Basic Books. 

Applications of ﬂ ow to work 139
 Schiefele, U., & Raabe, A. (2011).  Skill- demands compatibility as a determinant of flow expe-
rience in an inductive reasoning task.  Psychological Reports ,  109 ,  428– 444. 
 Walker, C. J. (2010). Experiencing flow: Is doing it together better than doing it alone?  The 
Journal of Positive Psychology ,  5 ,  3– 11. 
 Wells, A. (2009).  Metacognitive therapy for anxiety and depression . New York: Guilford. 
 Wells, A.,  & Matthews, G. (1994).  Attention and emotion: A clinical perspective . Hove, UK: 
Erlbaum. 
 Wilson, E. E., & Moneta, G. B. (2012). Flow as a way of coping: A qualitative study of the 
metacognitions of flow (pp.  133– 150). In B. Molinelli & V. Grimaldo (Eds.),  Handbook of 
the psychology of coping: New research.  Hauppauge, NY: Nova Science. 
 Wilson, E. E., & Moneta, G. B. (2016). The Flow Metacognitions Questionnaire (FMQ): A 
two factor model of flow metacognitions.  Personality and Individual Differences ,  90 ,  225– 230. 

 Flow is a subjective state experienced when individuals are completely absorbed in 
an enjoyable activity. It comprises an exclusive, intense concentration on the task 
at hand, and subsequent enhancement of subjective experience (Csikszentmihalyi, 
1975). Although limited, there is evidence that flow may be associated with posi-
tive organizational outcomes (Eisenberger, Jones, Stinglhamber, Shanock, & Ran-
dall, 2005) and work performance (Demerouti, 2006). As evidenced by the current 
volume, we are witnessing the emergence of interest in incorporating flow into the 
work psychology literature. 
 However, it can be argued that, to date, the concept of flow has not garnered 
significant attention in industrial and organizational psychology (I/O) research and 
theory, at least in the United States. The term “flow” does not appear in the sub-
ject indices of three separate handbooks of I/O psychology published since 2003 
(Weiner, Borman, Ilgen, & Klimoski, 2003; Weiner, Schmitt, & Highhouse, 2013; 
Zedeck, 2011). A search for “flow” in the titles and abstracts of all programs and 
presentations at the annual conferences of the Society for Industrial and Organiza-
tional Psychology from 2003 to 2014 reveals only twelve poster presentations (Cul-
bertson, Fullagar, Simmons, & Zhu, 2014; Eisenberger, Jones, Shanock, & Teglund, 
2004; Freeman, Waples, Fullagar, & Knight, 2011; Fullagar, 2006; Fullagar & Kello-
way, 2008; Fullagar, Knight, & Sovern, 2009; Ross, Wood, & Keiser, 2014; Rupayana, 
2009; Sackett, Schmidt, & Shanock, 2007; Waples, Knight, & Fullagar, 2013; Waples, 
Stetzer, & Knight, 2014, Waples, Stetzer, Knight, Sackett, & Fullagar, 2012), nine of 
which, incidentally, had authors associated with a single academic department. A 
 PsychINFO  search for the terms “flow” or “optimal experience” in the titles of arti-
cles published in the leading academic journal in I/O, the  Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy , found no hits as of June 2014. The same was true for  Academy of Management 
Journal ,  Academy of Management Review ,  Organizational Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes , and  Personnel Psychology.  Three articles meeting these search criteria were 
 8 
 FLOW IN THE CONTEXT 
OF INDUSTRIAL AND 
ORGANIZATIONAL 
PSYCHOLOGY 
 The case of work motivation 
 Patrick Knight and Christopher Waples 

The case of work motivation 141
found in the  Journal of Organizational Behavior  (Ceja & Navarro, 2011; Demerouti, 
Bakker, Sonnentag, & Fullagar, 2012; Eisenberger et al., 2005), two in the  Journal of 
Occupational and Organizational Psychology  (Fullagar & Kelloway, 2009; Mäkikangas, 
Bakker, Aunola, & Demerouti, 2010), and two in the  Journal of Occupational Health 
Psychology (Demerouti, 2006; Nielsen & Cleal, 2010). Of course, research on flow at 
work has been published in other outlets, but the topic has had sparse exposure in 
the “mainstream” I/O literature. Although flow has gained acceptance in other spe-
cializations within psychology, it does not seem to be making substantial headway 
among I/O psychologists, despite its status as an established construct. 
 There are several possible explanations for the lack of attention devoted to flow 
in the I/O literature. One is that flow is conceptually similar to other constructs, 
specifically engagement, which I/O psychologists have studied for years (Rupayana, 
2009), raising questions about the necessity of studying another variable. While 
there are similarities between flow and engagement, and this may explain some 
reluctance to study flow among I/O researchers, we believe that the specific compo-
nents of flow described by Csikszentmihalyi provide adequate conceptual distinc-
tion between it and other constructs. For example, Newman, Joseph, and Hulin 
(2010; Harrison & Newman, 2013) argue that popular measures of engagement 
(e.g., Schaufeli, Salanova,  González- Romá, & Bakker, 2002) actually assess general 
job affect. Flow, while incorporating what Csikszentmihalyi (1990) calls an  autotelic 
experience , or a sense that the task provides an intrinsically satisfying experience, also 
includes several experiential dimensions that are conceptually distinct from affect. 
It is interesting that a recent review of burnout and engagement research (Bakker, 
Demerouti, &  Sanz- Vergel, 2014) fails to mention flow, suggesting that its authors, 
who have each published numerous articles on flow, also see a clear distinction 
between flow and engagement. 
 It is our contention that flow has failed to attract the attention of I/O researchers 
at least in part because the bulk of flow research has not explicitly considered the 
construct’s relevance and implications for established  work- behavior theories. Con-
sequently, the possible relationships between flow and many  work- related psycho-
logical constructs have been neither conceptualized nor tested. That is, the question 
of where flow falls in relationship with such constructs, and how it contributes to 
our understanding of their impact on work behavior, needs to be more thoroughly 
and systematically explored. Building upon this conclusion, this chapter presents a 
few examples of how the construct of flow might contribute to the understanding 
of the operation and limitations of established I/O theories, as well as how such 
theories might expand the understanding of the operation and limitations of flow. 
 Work motivation 
 A prime candidate for understanding the potential role of flow in work behav-
ior is motivation theory. Research has shown flow to be related to performance 
(e.g., Eisenberger et al., 2005), which may be attributable to its proposed ties to 
motivation (Nakamura  & Csikszentmihalyi, 2002). To date, discussion of flow’s 

142 Patrick Knight and Christopher Waples
implications for work motivation has been largely limited to Deci and Ryan’s 
(2000)  self- determination theory. In the following sections, we discuss the nature of 
motivation, the current status of work motivation theory, and how the constituent 
components of flow might help us better understand worker motivation (and vice 
versa). We do not attempt to consider every possible relationship between work 
motivation and flow, but hope to illustrate some of the possible links between the 
two constructs. 
 Motivation  is defined as the process that determines the direction, intensity, and 
persistence of behavior (Kanfer, Chen,  & Pritchard, 2008; Mitchell  & Daniels, 
2003). That is, a useful motivation theory should explain the specific tasks in which 
a person engages, the amount of effort expended in performing those tasks, and the 
duration of the person’s engagement in those tasks. In the context of work, motiva-
tion theories are thus focused on understanding factors that determine why workers 
engage (or fail to engage) in specific  work- related tasks, the effort (typically con-
ceptualized as time and resources expended) applied to those tasks, and the degree 
to which they maintain engagement in the tasks across time. 
 Csikszentmihalyi (1990) has described tasks that invoke flow as being intrinsi-
cally rewarding. Such tasks lead to internal states that serve as reinforcement for 
performing the tasks. That is, flow is thought to motivate individuals through the 
association between its positive experiential features at the cognitive and emotional 
levels and the antecedent performance of the  flow- inducing task. The most obvi-
ous example of this process might be the potentially reinforcing properties of flow 
as an autotelic experience. The positive and enjoyable experience associated with 
performing  flow- inducing tasks can be expected to motivate people to continue 
to engage in those tasks. Similar reinforcing effects might be expected from expe-
riencing other aspects of flow, such as  action- awareness merging, a strong sense of 
control, or a loss of  self- consciousness. While the reinforcing potential of the flow 
experience is logical and compelling, work motivation theory and research over the 
past several decades have largely abandoned purely operant explanations in favor 
of cognitive approaches, that strive to document the mental processes that explain 
motivation and performance. We believe that for flow theory to contribute to the 
work motivation literature, its implications for the processes included in modern 
motivation theories must be examined. 
 Over the last several decades a number of compelling theories of work moti-
vation have been proposed and tested, ranging from behavioral approaches (e.g., 
Komaki, Coombs, & Shepman, 1991; Skinner, 1990) to more complex perspec-
tives, such as cognitive (e.g., Vroom, 1964) and  trait- based (Kanfer & Heggestad, 
1997, 2000) theories. These theories have traditionally been treated as competing 
explanations for motivated work behavior. Recently, however, Schmidt, Beck, and 
Gillespie (2013) argued that the research literature on work motivation has come to 
be dominated by  goal- based theories, and that many established motivational con-
structs can be understood and integrated via their relationships with goal processes. 
This perspective provides a relevant and convenient framework for examining 
the relationship between motivation and flow in the workplace. By considering the 

The case of work motivation 143
ways in which flow might be associated with different components of the goal pro-
cess, the possible contributions of flow to work motivation theory may be clarified. 
 Goal setting and ﬂ ow 
 Goal processes in motivation can be divided into  goal setting  and  goal striving  com-
ponents (Lewin, Dembo, Festinger, & Sears, 1944; Schmidt et al., 2013). Of these, 
research in I/O psychology has traditionally focused on goal setting, or the manner 
by which performance goals are established. In particular, the  goal- setting theory of 
Locke and Latham (1990, 2002) has been the focus of extensive empirical research, 
with consistent and supportive findings.  Goal- setting theory states that specific, 
difficult goals will result in higher performance than less difficult or less specific 
goals. It is believed that difficult and specific goals focus attention and effort on 
a task, while providing clear performance standards that serve to determine task 
persistence (Locke & Latham, 2002; Locke, Shaw, Saari, & Latham, 1981). When 
accompanied by adequate feedback, difficult, specific goals have indeed been con-
sistently found to result in higher performance than no goals, easy goals, or vague, 
“ do- your-best” goals. 
 Goal setting appears to be a logical avenue by which to incorporate flow into 
work motivation theory. Csikszentmihalyi (1997; Nakamura & Csikszentmihalyi, 
2002), in describing the nature of flow, included three factors that can be consid-
ered not as aspects of the subjective flow experience but rather as preconditions that 
encourage or contribute to the experience of flow. These include   challenge- skill bal-
ance ,  clear goals , and  unambiguous feedback . These conditions are determined, wholly 
or in part, by task characteristics or situational factors, and define circumstances 
under which flow is most likely to emerge. 
 Specifically,   challenge- skill balance  exists when task demands and individual capa-
bilities are matched, so people can effectively cope with those demands (Csikszent-
mihalyi, 1990). That is, either the challenge presented by the task must be tailored 
to the skill of the individual, or the skill of the individual appropriately enhanced 
when tasks are too demanding. To maximize flow, both challenge and skill should 
be “personally high” (Jackson & Marsh, 1996, p. 18).  Clear goals  refer to a per-
son having “a strong sense of what he or she is going to do” (Jackson & Marsh, 
1996, p. 19). Prescriptively, flow might be encouraged by establishing appropriate 
goals in advance, or by clarifying and emphasizing cues intrinsic to task perfor-
mance.  Unambiguous feedback  refers to information by which individuals can judge 
their progress. When tasks provide this information, flow experiences should be 
enhanced. External feedback is necessary for tasks lacking intrinsic feedback. 
 The potential relationships among the performance benefits of goal setting and 
the subjective experience of flow can be seen in the apparent parallels between the 
preconditions for flow and the prescriptions of  goal- setting theory.  Challenge- skill 
balance is analogous to  goal- setting’s recommendation that goals should be dif-
ficult yet attainable. The requirement in flow theory for clear goals is similar to 
goal setting’s prescription that goals be specific. Finally, both theories emphasize 

144 Patrick Knight and Christopher Waples
the importance of performance feedback. It therefore seems logical to expect that 
circumstances designed to enhance task performance through setting specific, dif-
ficult goals would also promote the onset of the experience of flow during the 
performance of those tasks. Further, given the  well- established relationship between 
goal setting and task performance, one would expect a positive relationship between 
flow and performance. 
 These hypotheses were tested by Waples, Knight, and Fullagar (2013), using 
an experimental design that required participants to perform a standardized task, 
once with specific, difficult goals (tailored to individual skill levels) and once with 
 do- your-best (DYB) goals. The goal conditions were counterbalanced, with half of 
the participants first performing a trial with the goal, and half performing a DYB 
trial first. The expected effect of goal setting was found, with higher performance in 
trials with specific, difficult goals. The predicted positive relationship between flow 
and performance was also obtained. (This latter effect, while encouraging, was based 
on retrospective measures of flow, which could have been influenced by participants’ 
knowledge of their performance.) 
 Unexpectedly, flow was  lower on trials with difficult, specific goals than on DYB 
trials. Further analyses showed that participants who operated under DYB goals first 
had uniformly high flow across both trials, but those who were given specific, diffi-
cult goals first had substantially lower flow on their first trial. The flow experienced 
by this latter group was higher on the second trial, where they were given DYB 
goals, but their reported flow levels never reached those of the  DYB- first partici-
pants. Waples et al. (2013) suggested that the inhibition of flow in the presence of 
goals early in the task is consistent with substantial research on the overjustification 
effect (e.g., Deci, Koestner, & Ryan, 1999, 2001). This literature demonstrates the 
negative effect of external constraints (e.g., performance rewards) on both interest 
in and intrinsic motivation to perform a task. One explanation for the effects of 
external constraints, derived from  self- perception theory (Bem, 1967), is that exter-
nal constraints shift an individual’s attribution for his or her behavior from internal 
to external causes, resulting in a decrease in intrinsic motivation and interest. Spe-
cific goals may represent an external constraint similar to extrinsic rewards. If so, 
participants performing the initial trial with specific goals may have been less likely 
to experience flow because their attention was focused on external performance 
demands, rather than the intrinsic aspects of the task. Alternately, those participants 
who had first performed under DYB conditions, and had already experienced rela-
tively high levels of flow, did not suffer a reduction in flow once goals were intro-
duced in the second set. Considering effects on performance, however, Waples et al. 
found that an early experience of high flow was related to increased performance 
on later trials, even in the absence of specific goals. 
 This study, the only one we are aware of to examine the relationship between 
goal setting and flow, suggests complex relationships. It may be that initial perfor-
mance goals inhibit the experience of flow while performing a task, but that after 
flow has been experienced it has a positive association with performance. Further 
research on these relationships might help anchor flow theory to mainstream work 

The case of work motivation 145
motivation theory, and perhaps provide ways to improve the implementation of 
goal setting. 
 Goal striving and ﬂ ow 
 Goal- setting theory is concerned with the way in which performance goals are 
established, and the effects of goals on task performance. Goal setting has argu-
ably been the primary focus of work motivation research for three decades. More 
recently, in an effort to better understand the cognitive mechanisms by which goals 
operate, there has been increasing attention paid to the investigation of  goal striving , 
as manifested in  self- regulation processes that operate as individuals strive to accom-
plish goals across time (Schmidt et al., 2013). This research is based on the principles 
of control theory (e.g., Lord, Diefendorff, Schmidt, & Hall, 2010), which describes 
a “discrepancy reduction loop,” by which goals help define a desired state to which 
individuals compare their current status. If the current status is discrepant with the 
goal, behavior intended to reduce that discrepancy is initiated, and the efficacy of 
that behavior is assessed by comparing the resulting state to the goal. This process 
continues as long as goal discrepancy exists. 
 Certain experiential aspects of flow (Csikszentmihalyi, 1997) might be affected 
by and affect the  self- regulation process described earlier. Specifically,  self- regulation 
requires careful monitoring of the discrepancy between current and desired (goal) 
states. Such monitoring necessitates awareness not only of immediate task perfor-
mance but also of the goal state and of the effects of task behavior on changes to 
the current state. Three of the dimensions of flow would seem to have implica-
tions for the ability of individuals to engage in effective  self- regulation. These are 
(1)  a ction- awareness  merging , which occurs when involvement in a task becomes so 
deep that there is no awareness of the self as being separate from the task; (2)  concen-
tration on the task at hand , which results in a feeling of total focus or concentration on 
the task; and (3)  loss of  self- consciousness  , which manifests as a loss of concern for the 
self, and “becoming one with the activity” (Jackson & Marsh, 1996, p. 21). 
 It could be hypothesized that these dimensions of the flow experience, by 
enhancing the individual’s awareness of and engagement in the task, would facilitate 
 self- regulation. Certainly, when these aspects of flow are present it can be expected 
that the status of current task performance will be foremost in the awareness of the 
individual. However, task awareness is only one aspect of the  self- regulation pro-
cess. It may be that in experiencing flow people become less aware of situational 
constraints, such as goals, and fail to monitor the status of goal discrepancy as they 
perform job tasks. This would be analogous to Waples et al.’s (2013) suggestion that 
goals might focus attention on external constraints, thereby serving to distract from 
the task and hindering the onset of flow. If flow served to reduce awareness of per-
formance goals and goal discrepancy, it might follow that  goal- setting effects would 
be mitigated by the experience of flow. 
 One aspect of  self- regulation that has been found to be related to both motiva-
tion and attitudes is the rate at which goal discrepancy is reduced. Rapid reduction 

146 Patrick Knight and Christopher Waples
in goal discrepancy has been found to be associated with several positive outcomes, 
including positive mood (Lawrence, Carver, & Scheier, 2002), greater satisfaction and 
higher performance expectations (Chang, Johnson, & Lord, 2010), greater mental 
focus and reduced downward goal revision (Elicker et al., 2010). As with the general 
 self- regulation process, it is not clear whether the experience of flow, through greater 
cognitive and affective involvement with the task, would enhance the effects of rapid 
discrepancy reduction, or if it would instead interfere with the accurate perception of 
discrepancy reduction by inhibiting attention to external constraints. 
 Goal framing 
 Another example of a  goal- process variable that might help us to understand the 
possible role of flow in motivation is  goal framing . Whereas goal setting addresses 
how goal levels are determined, and  self- regulation processes aim to explain how 
individuals monitor progress toward goals, goal framing examines the manner by 
which goals are presented to, or understood by, individuals. The framing of a goal 
does not have implications for the goal itself, but rather how the goal is represented. 
Multiple goal frames have been suggested, the most common involving the distinc-
tion between  approach goals  and  avoidance goals  (Carver & Scheier, 1998). Approach 
goals involve discrepancy reduction, and are typical of the goals conceptualized in 
most  goal- setting and  self- regulation research. Avoidance goals, on the other hand, 
involve  increasing discrepancy, or circumventing unwanted states. As outlined earlier, 
it is possible that goals may affect, positively or negatively, the development of flow. 
If so, whether goals are framed as approach or avoidance goals may moderate any 
such effects. Specifically, it would seem that the requirement for clear goals in the 
flow literature is couched in terms of approach goals. The effects of avoidance goals, 
and the avoidance of unwanted consequences, have not been addressed in the flow 
literature to date. 
 Perhaps more relevant to the experience of flow is the distinction between  preven-
tion goals and  promotion  goals (Higgins, 1997). Prevention goals are framed in terms 
of fulfilling duties and obligations, whereas promotion goals are framed in terms of 
achieving ideal outcomes. Compared to promotion goals, prevention goals have 
been associated with working more slowly and the minimization of mistakes 
(Förster, Higgins, & Bianco, 2003), as well as enhanced goal commitment (Shah & 
Higgins, 1997). Prevention goals have also been associated with a greater ability to 
subdue thoughts of competing goals (Shah, Friedman, & Kruglanski, 2002). Taken 
together, these findings suggest that describing goals using a prevention frame will 
promote several of the dimensions of the flow experience described by Csikszent-
mihalyi (1997), including concentration on the task at hand and a sense of control. 
 Expectancy theory and ﬂ ow 
 Schmidt et al.’s (2013) argument that goal processes provide a general framework for 
modern work motivation theory is compelling. However, there are  well- established 
motivation theories that do not focus primarily on performance goals, and which 

The case of work motivation 147
may have implications for the application of flow to work behavior. One such 
cognitively based approach is expectancy theory (e.g., Vroom, 1964), to which we 
now turn to further explore the potential relationships between flow and work 
motivation. 
 Expectancy refers to “the perceived likelihood that an action will lead to a par-
ticular outcome” (Schmidt et al., 2013, p. 318). Though having been a continuing 
topic of interest among motivation researchers for nearly a century (Lewin, 1935; 
Tolman, 1932), expectancy has found widespread application to the world of work 
primarily as a result of Vroom’s (1964) conceptualization of expectancy theory. 
Sometimes referred to as  valence- instrumentality-expectancy (VIE) theory, on the 
basis of its key components, the core elements of Vroom’s theory have remained 
largely unchanged since its inception, and suggest that an individual’s expected 
motivational force can be predicted by using a multiplicative function of his or her 
related perceptions of valence, instrumentality, and expectancy. 
 Valence  is typically framed as a perceived property of a given outcome and, as a 
function of anticipated satisfaction, ranges from positive (expected to satisfy) to neg-
ative (expected to dissatisfy; Vroom, 1964). To the extent that the collective valence 
of considered outcomes is positive (negative), an individual can be expected to be 
more likely to experience motivation to approach (avoid) the associated behavior or 
task. Though VIE theory was, in its original conceptualization, focused on extrinsic 
outcomes, early revisions to the theory suggested the addition of valences associ-
ated with intrinsic outcomes (Galbraith & Cummings, 1967; House, 1971, 1996). 
House (1971, 1996) argued in support of two unique types of intrinsic valences 
that warranted inclusion under a more broadly conceived notion of the construct: 
(1) intrinsic valence associated with  goal- directed behavior, and (2) intrinsic valence 
associated with  work- goal accomplishment. It is the former that offers an appealing 
connection to flow theory. 
 The autotelic characteristic of the flow experience has long been one of the 
theory’s defining elements (Csikszentmihalyi, 1990). Appreciating task completion 
for its own sake, regardless of corresponding extrinsic outcomes, is consistent with 
the development of positive intrinsic valence perceptions. It follows that, over time, 
assessments of task valence would be positively influenced simply by experiencing 
flow while performing the task. Assuming that other components of the VIE model 
are held constant, flow can be expected to increase motivation to perform tasks 
from which it emerges. 
 Instrumentality  was Vroom’s (1964) most obvious addition to earlier forms of 
expectancy theory. It refers to the perceived relationship between task perfor-
mance and receipt of secondary outcomes (e.g., pay, promotion). Conceptually, 
positive instrumentality is characterized by the perception that successful task per-
formance will lead to receiving a given outcome. Although, as a perceptual con-
struct, instrumentality remains a subjective assessment, it is perhaps most strongly 
affected by externally established structures (e.g., compensation mechanisms, trust 
in management). Such sensitivity to external forces makes instrumentality distinct 
from valence and expectancy, which are both more strongly rooted in individual 

148 Patrick Knight and Christopher Waples
preferences and interpretations. Historically, it has been precisely that sensitivity 
that has provided an opportunity for organizational management to create systems that 
foster motivation via greater clarity regarding the relationship between performance 
and rewards (House, 1971, 1996). 
 Similarly, creating an environment in which the prerequisite conditions for flow 
emergence have been met represents an opportunity for management to foster flow 
in the workplace (Nakamura & Csikszentmihalyi, 2002). While there are many 
antecedents of instrumentality perceptions (see Sims, Szilagyi, & McKemey, 1976), 
some overlap would seem to exist with the preconditions for flow. In particular, the 
availability of performance feedback and goal clarity are both required precondi-
tions for flow and antecedents of perceived instrumentality (Nakamura & Csik-
szentmihalyi, 2002; Sims et al., 1976; Teas, 1981). By improving feedback processes 
and ensuring clear goal structures, management has an opportunity to clarify the 
relationship between task performance and outcomes (i.e., instrumentality), and 
simultaneously to enhance the likelihood of flow. 
 Expectancy , as defined previously, refers to the perceived likelihood of an action 
leading to an outcome. More specifically, as it relates to task performance, expec-
tancy refers to the likelihood that a given level of effort will lead to a given level of 
performance (Schmidt et al., 2013; Vroom, 1964). That is, expectancy reflects the 
degree to which performance is believed to depend on the individual’s discretion-
ary effort, as opposed to perceiving that external forces determine the likelihood 
of successful task performance. For some tasks, expectancy will be naturally high 
(e.g., physical tasks), while for others, it is likely to be lower, due to the influence of 
external constraints (e.g., retail sales). Nevertheless, as for valence and instrumental-
ity, the determination is internal and subjective. 
 Of the three elements of VIE theory, flow is conceptually most similar to 
expectancy. As a state of effortful task immersion, flow occurs during the very 
 effort- to-performance conversion that drives subsequent expectancy perceptions 
(Csikszentmihalyi, 1990). For a repeated task, reflection on previous experience 
should prompt consideration of flow characteristics.  Action- awareness merging is 
strongly associated with automation of  task- relevant behaviors (Jackson & Marsh, 
1996), which should serve to clarify the relationship between effort and perfor-
mance. Similarly, having previously perceived oneself as being in firm control of task 
elements can be expected to encourage a greater sense of  self- determination with 
regard to future task completion (Sims et al., 1976). 
 In combination, expectancy, instrumentality, and valence summarize a system of 
cognitive evaluation targeting anticipated progression from effort to performance 
(expectancy), performance to outcome (instrumentality), and outcome to personal 
interests (valence). At each step of the evaluation process, flow has the potential for 
involvement. It is possible that, by fostering the emergence of flow, one should be 
able to increase performance motivation via the tenets of expectancy theory. 
 Before leaving this discussion, it should be noted that since flow is a momen-
tary experience, and therefore necessarily assessed retrospectively, the predictive, 
 future- oriented nature of expectancy may constitute a challenge when considering 

The case of work motivation 149
the intersection of flow and expectancy theories. However, the repetitiveness of 
tasks in typical work settings allows for the influence of previous experiences on 
subsequent thoughts and behaviors. Accordingly, the cognitions associated with 
each element of expectancy theory may be affected by earlier task experiences (e.g., 
flow state emergence). 
 Flow and  self- efﬁ cacy  
 As mentioned earlier, in addition to cognitive approaches to understanding motiva-
tion, such as goal theories and expectancy theories, there has been growing interest 
in examining the role of individual differences in work motivation (e.g., Kanfer & 
Heggestad, 1997, 2000). One of the most widely studied individual variables in the 
motivation literature has been  self- efficacy. Understanding the relationships between 
 self- efficacy and the components of the flow experience would help anchor flow 
theory more strongly within the motivation literature. 
 Self- efficacy refers to “beliefs in one’s capabilities to mobilize the motivation, 
cognitive resources, and courses of action needed to meet given situational demands” 
(Wood & Bandura, 1989, p. 408). Initially devised as an explanatory mechanism 
for behavioral change (Bandura, 1977),  self- efficacy has seen consistent applica-
tion to mainstream motivational theories since its conceptualization (Bandura, 1986, 
1997; Locke & Latham, 2002). Within goal setting theory alone,  self- efficacy has 
been identified as a key moderator and mediator, while carrying its own note-
worthy direct effects. Generally speaking, increases in  domain- specific  self- efficacy 
are thought to promote greater motivation and greater performance, though some 
recent research has identified potential downfalls of heightened  self- efficacy beliefs 
(see Schmidt et al., 2013, for a brief review). 
 Though there has been relatively little overlap between their respective bodies of 
literature,  self- efficacy perceptions and the experience of flow seem to have inter-
esting implications for one another.  Self- efficacy, like expectancy theory, consists 
of  future- oriented cognitive appraisal (Bandura, 1997). Accordingly, its integration 
with flow theory is complicated by the issue of temporal precedence. Though we 
have attempted to delineate the manner in which  self- efficacy and flow may influ-
ence each other, it should be noted that the interplay between these constructs has 
been conceptualized as reciprocal across task repetitions (e.g., Salanova, Bakker, & 
Llorens, 2006). 
 Research on  self- efficacy in the context of goal setting has consistently found 
support for a positive relationship between  self- efficacy and willingness to accept 
challenging goals (Locke  & Latham, 1990, 2002). For  self- set goals, those with 
high self-efficacy have been found to set more challenging goals than those with low 
 self- efficacy, and for assigned goals,  self- efficacy has been positively related to goal 
commitment. By broadening the level of challenge an individual sees as within reach 
of personal skill levels,  self- efficacy has the potential to increase the range of tasks 
for which the  challenge- skill balance precondition of flow is met. In this manner, 
 self- efficacy increases the likelihood of experiencing flow across a variety of tasks. 

150 Patrick Knight and Christopher Waples
 As experience with a given task increases and efficacy perceptions become more 
accurately refined, the necessity for additional information about task progress and 
performance is attenuated by knowledge garnered from that previous experience 
(Gist & Mitchell, 1992). It follows that, as experience accumulates and  self- efficacy 
increases, the perceived need for external task feedback would be reduced. By 
reducing that perceived need, the flow precondition that task performance feedback 
be available becomes more easily met. Consequently, as experience and efficacy 
increase, flow emergence becomes more likely. 
 Flow, on the other hand, can be expected to enhance efficacy perceptions as a 
function of its characteristics. Of flow’s established characteristics, four are consis-
tent with increased  self- efficacy:  action- awareness merging, sense of control, intense 
task concentration, and a loss of  self- consciousness. All four of these elements are 
consistent with task mastery processes that underlie development of  self- efficacy 
(Bandura, 1997). 
 The proposed positively reciprocal nature of  self- efficacy and flow emergence 
bears striking similarity to the “upward spiral” described by  broaden- and-build 
theory (Fredrickson, 2001). While  broaden- and-build is focused more specifically 
on the continuity of positive emotional experiences, the theory also details the 
role of accumulated personal resources as a mechanism for resilience in the face 
of obstacles.  Self- efficacy itself may represent one such personal resource (Salanova 
et al., 2006) that can effectively buffer against stress and promote  well- being (Ban-
dura, 1997). In a broader study of the relationship between flow and the availability 
of resources (both organizational and personal), Salanova et al. (2006) found support 
for the reciprocity of flow and  self- efficacy. In particular, the authors found that 
while  self- efficacy did indeed predict flow state emergence, the influence of flow 
on  self- efficacy was greater still. 
 Flow and job characteristics 
 As efforts to integrate flow with the workplace have evolved, exploration of the 
intersection of flow and Hackman and Oldham’s (1976) job characteristics model 
(JCM) has begun (Demerouti, 2006; Nielsen & Cleal, 2010). On the surface, the JCM 
seems to offer an excellent framework for designing jobs to encourage the emer-
gence of flow, as the antecedents of flow essentially describe task characteristics. 
 The JCM’s core characteristics have conceptual similarity with both the ante-
cedents of flow and elements of the flow experience. Starting with the most similar 
characteristics, feedback is an essential component in both flow theory and the JCM. 
In both cases, it includes the availability of  task- relevant feedback as a function of 
performing the task (Csikszentmihalyi, 1990; Hackman & Oldham, 1976). Auton-
omy, in the JCM, would seem to underlie one’s sense of control during flow, at least 
to the extent that an individual perceives control over his or her own  task- related 
behaviors. Perceptions of task identity, “the degree to which the job requires doing 
a whole and identifiable piece of work” (Oldham & Hackman, 2010, p. 464), and 
task significance are arguably similar to Csikszentmihalyi’s (1990) prerequisite sense 

The case of work motivation 151
of goal clarity. Even skill variety, “the degree to which the job requires a variety of 
different activities . . . involving the use of a number of different skills and talents 
of the person” (Oldham & Hackman, 2010, p. 464), has been argued to be concep-
tually similar to  challenge- skill balance in flow theory (Demerouti, 2006). 
 Given such similarities, application of the JCM in pursuit of greater flow emer-
gence among employees would seem to be a viable option. Findings regarding 
the relationship between job characteristics and flow have been mixed, however. 
While Demerouti (2006) found a positive relationship between the JCM’s formu-
laic motivating potential score (MPS) and flow, others found that more generic job 
characteristics (e.g., cognitive demands, influence) were unrelated to flow experi-
ences (Nielsen & Cleal, 2010). Regardless of these minor inconsistencies, the general 
motivational benefits of enhanced JCM core characteristics and their potential for 
increasing a job’s capacity for inducing flow make such implementations appealing 
on both fronts. 
 Flow and alternative performance criteria 
 In examining the potential relationships between flow and established processes in 
work motivation theory, it became evident that the complex and dynamic nature 
of modern work may have implications for the role of flow in understanding work 
behavior. Several aspects of the flow experience suggest a very high level of con-
centration and engagement in a specific task, on which workers strive to achieve 
specific goals, framed in one of several possible ways. These aspects of flow include 
 action- awareness merging, concentration on the task at hand, a sense of control, 
and loss of  self- consciousness (Csikszentmihalyi, 1997). Clearly, workers who are 
experiencing flow are very focused on a specific task, and tend to filter out stimuli 
and information that are extraneous to performance of that task. The extent of this 
concentration is illustrated by another experiential flow characteristic, the transfor-
mation of time, in which the perception of time itself is altered, with the sense of 
time slowing, accelerating, or becoming irrelevant (Jackson & Marsh, 1996). 
 While this sort of intense engagement in a task may indeed be positively associated 
with performance on that task, contemporary models of work go beyond consider-
ation of individual tasks when defining work performance. At the most basic level, it 
must be acknowledged that workers perform multiple tasks, each with its own goal 
or goals, which need to be monitored simultaneously for effective  self- regulation 
(Lord & Levy, 1994). The sort of intense concentration on, and absorption in, the 
performance of a single task, as typified by flow, may at best make it difficult for 
workers to regulate their behavior with respect to other tasks. While it may be the 
case that there are times when a single task becomes the exclusive focus of a worker’s 
job, such instances are most certainly the exception in modern society. 
 The importance of monitoring multiple tasks or objectives is illustrated by the 
construct of  adaptive performance  (Pulakos, Arad, Donovan, & Plamondon, 2000), 
which involves the capability to adjust behavior to changing circumstances in the 
workplace. Adaptability has probably always been an important skill, but as both 

152 Patrick Knight and Christopher Waples
the complexity of work and the rate at which jobs evolve have increased in recent 
decades, not only being able to adapt but also being able to monitor circumstances 
that cue the need for adaptation have become critical. Pulakos et al. (2000) went 
beyond the obvious issues stemming from increasingly complex and changing work, 
and presented a taxonomy of adaptive performance with eight distinct factors. 
Some of these factors (e.g., handling work stress, solving problems creatively) do not 
necessarily require ongoing regulation processes, but some of the others do imply 
a level of vigilance that may be difficult to maintain while deeply immersed in a 
task (e.g., dealing with uncertain and unpredictable work situations, demonstrating 
interpersonal adaptability). Of course, while it may be the case that experiencing 
flow could limit adaptability by reducing  self- regulation processes, it is also possible 
that effects could operate in the opposite direction, with working in an environ-
ment that requires a high degree of adaptability limiting the development of flow. 
 Another alternative criterion of work performance that has received a great deal 
of attention in the I/O research literature in recent years is  citizenship behavior . These 
are behaviors that are not part of workers’ core task responsibilities, but rather sup-
port the environment within which core tasks are carried out (Borman & Motow-
idlo, 1993; Organ, 1997). Such behaviors as volunteering, persisting with enthusiasm, 
and helping coworkers when they are in need are common examples of organi-
zational citizenship. Proposed explanations for citizenship behaviors have included 
social exchange (e.g., Cropanzano & Mitchell, 2005), prosocial dispositional orienta-
tions (e.g., De Dreu & Nauta, 2009), and impression management (Rioux & Penner, 
2001). Whatever the reasons that workers engage in citizenship behaviors, however, 
it would seem to be necessary that they regularly monitor the social environment of 
the workplace in order to be aware of needs or opportunities for citizenship. As with 
adaptive behaviors, it seems reasonable to speculate that experiencing flow, and the 
intense absorption in a task that accompanies flow, might limit a worker’s ability to 
adequately engage in this monitoring. Clearly, the implications for the development 
of flow of the alternative (nonwork task) performance criteria that permeate the 
experience of modern workers should be studied and understood more fully. 
 Conclusion 
 In this chapter, we have attempted to describe some of possible areas of com-
monality between established work motivation theories and constructs and Csik-
szentmihalyi’s (1990) theory of flow. The specific issues that we have raised are far 
from exhaustive, but illustrate the potential for flow theory to contribute to the 
understanding of work motivation. We began our discussion by documenting the 
relative lack of attention that flow has garnered in the I/O psychology literature, 
which we attributed to a general failure to make explicit links between flow and 
established work motivation constructs. Increased attention to flow in the main-
stream I/O research literature is likely to materialize when the utility of considering 
flow for better understanding worker motivation and performance has been more 
fully demonstrated. Flow researchers, however, should take advantage of the vast 

The case of work motivation 153
existing work motivation literature when considering the motivational implications 
of workers’ optimal experience. Work motivation is a “mature” area of inquiry, in 
which current research generally extends and clarifies accepted theories (Schmidt 
et al., 2013). Flow has the potential to expand our understanding of work motiva-
tion when considered in light of these theories. 
 References 
 Bakker, A. B., Demerouti, E., &  Sanz- Vergel, A. I. (2014). Burnout and work engagement: 
The  JD- R approach.  Annual Review of Organizational Psychology and Organizational Behav-
ior ,  1 ,  389– 411. 
 Bandura, A. (1977).  Self- efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of behavioral change.  Psychologi-
cal Review ,  84 ,  191– 215. 
 Bandura, A. (1986).  Social foundations of thought and action: A  social- cognitive theory.  Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
 Bandura, A. (1997).   Self- efficacy: The exercise of control.  New York: Freeman. 
 Bem, D. J. (1967).  Self- perception: An alternative interpretation of cognitive dissonance 
phenomena.  Psychological Review ,  74 ,  183– 200. 
 Borman, W. C., & Motowidlo, S., J. (1993). Expanding the criterion domain to include 
elements of contextual performance. In N. Schmitt & W. C. Borman (Eds.),  Personnel 
selection in organizations (pp.  71– 98). San Francisco:  Jossey- Bass. 
 Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F. (1998).  On the  self- regulation of behavior . New York: Cambridge 
University Press. 
 Ceja, L., & Navarro, J. (2011). Dynamic patterns of flow in the workplace: Characterizing 
 within- individual variability using a complexity science approach.  Journal of Organiza-
tional Behavior ,  32 ,  627– 651. 
 Chang, C.-H., Johnson, R. E., & Lord, R. G. (2010). Moving beyond discrepancies: The 
importance of velocity as a predictor of job satisfaction and motivation.  Human Perfor-
mance ,  23 ,  58– 80. 
 Cropanzano, R.,  & Mitchell, M. S. (2005). Social exchange theory: An interdisciplinary 
review.  Journal of Management ,  31 ,  874– 900. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1975).  Beyond freedom and anxiety. San Francisco, CA:  Jossey- Bass. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990).  Flow: The psychology of optimal experience.  New York: Harper & 
Row. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1997).  Finding flow: The psychology of engagement with everyday life.  New 
York: Basic Books. 
 Culbertson, S., Fullagar, C., Simmons, M., & Zhu, M. (2014, May).  Contagious flow: Antecedents 
and consequences of classroom optimal experience . Poster session presented at the 29th Annual 
Conference of the Society for Industrial and Organizational Psychology, Honolulu, HI. 
 Deci, E. L., Koestner, R., & Ryan, R. M. (1999). A  meta- analytic review of experiments 
examining the effects of extrinsic rewards on intrinsic motivation.  Psychological Bulletin , 
 125 ,  627– 668. 
 Deci, E. L., Koestner, R., & Ryan, R. M. (2001). Extrinsic rewards and intrinsic motivation in 
education: Reconsidered once again.  Review of Educational Research ,  71 ,  1– 27. 
 Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (2000). The “what” and “why” of goal pursuits: Human needs 
and the  self- determination of behavior.  Psychological Inquiry ,  11 ,  227– 268. 
 De Dreu, C. K. W., & Nauta, A. (2009). Getting stuck or stepping back: Effects of obstacles 
and construal level in the negotiation of creative solutions.  Journal of Applied Psychology , 
 94 ,  542– 548. 

154 Patrick Knight and Christopher Waples
 Demerouti, E. (2006). Job characteristics, flow, and performance: The moderating role of 
conscientiousness.  Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 11 ,  266– 280. 
 Demerouti, E., Bakker, A. B., Sonnentag, S., & Fullagar, C. J. (2012).  Work- related flow and 
energy at work and at home: A study on the role of daily recovery.  Journal of Organiza-
tional Behavior ,  33 ,  276– 295. 
 Eisenberger, R., Jones, J., Shanock, L., & Teglund, A. (2004, April).  High skill and challenge at 
work: Optimal experience for whom?  Paper presented at the 19th Annual Conference of the 
Society for Industrial Organizational Psychology, Chicago. 
 Eisenberger, R., Jones, J. R., Stinglhamber, F., Shanock, L., & Randall, A. T. (2005). Flow 
experiences at work: For high need achievers alone?  Journal of Organizational Behavior ,  26 , 
 755– 775. 
 Elicker, J. D., Lord, R. G., Ash, S. R., Kohari, N. E., Hruska, B. J., McConnell, N. L., & Med-
vedeff, M. E. (2010). Velocity as a predictor of performance satisfaction, mental focus, and 
goal revision.  Applied Psychology: An International Review ,  59 ,  495– 514. 
 Förster, J., Higgins, E. T., & Bianco, A. T. (2003). Speed/accuracy decisions in task per-
formance:  Built- in  trade- off or separate strategic concerns?  Organizational Behavior and 
Human Decision Processes ,  90 ,  148– 164. 
 Fredrickson, B. L. (2001). The role of positive emotions in positive psychology: They broaden 
and build theory.  American Psychologist ,  56 ,  218– 226. 
 Freeman, T., Waples, C., Fullagar, C., & Knight, P. (2011, April).  Timelessness and flow . Poster 
session presented at the 26th Annual Conference of the Society for Industrial and Orga-
nizational Psychology, Chicago. 
 Fullagar, C. (2006, May).  “Flow” among architecture students: Promoting  well- being at work . Poster 
session presented at the 21st Annual Conference of the Society for Industrial and Orga-
nizational Psychology, Dallas, TX. 
 Fullagar, C., & Kelloway, E. K. (2008, April).  “Flow”: State or trait?  Poster session presented at 
the 23rd Annual Conference of the Society for Industrial and Organizational Psychology, 
San Francisco. 
 Fullagar, C., & Kelloway, E. K. (2009). “Flow” at work: An experience sampling approach. 
 Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology ,  82 ,  595– 615. 
 Fullagar, C., Knight, P., & Sovern, H. (2009, April).  Flow and performance anxiety . Poster session 
presented at the 24th Annual Conference of the Society for Industrial and Organizational 
Psychology, New Orleans, LA. 
 Galbraith, J., & Cummings, L. L. (1967). An empirical investigation of the motivational 
determinants of past performance: Interactive effects between instrumentality, valence, 
motivation, and ability.  Organizational Behavior and Human Performance ,  2 ,  237– 257. 
 Gist, M. E., & Mitchell, T. R. (1992).  Self- efficacy: A theoretical analysis of its determinants 
and malleability.  Academy of Management Review ,  17 , 183. 
 Hackman, J. R., & Oldham, G. R. (1976). Motivation through the design of work: Test of a 
theory.  Organizational Behavior and Human Performance ,  16 ,  250– 279. 
 Harrison, D. A., & Newman, D. A. (2013). Absence, lateness, turnover and retirement: Nar-
row and broad understandings of withdrawal and behavioral engagement. In I. B. Weiner 
(Series Ed.), N. W. Schmidt, & S. Highhouse (Vol. Eds.),  Handbook of psychology. Vol. 12: 
Industrial and organizational psychology (2nd ed., pp.  262– 291). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 
 Higgins, E. T. (1997). Beyond pleasure and pain.  American Psychologist ,  52 ,  1280– 1300. 
 House, R. J. (1971). A path goal theory of leader effectiveness.  Administrative Science Quarterly , 
 16 ,  321– 339. 
 House, R. J. (1996).  Path- goal theory of leadership: Lessons, legacy and a reformulated the-
ory.  The Leadership Quarterly ,  7 ,  323– 352. 
 Jackson, S. A., & Marsh, H. (1996). Development and validation of a scale to measure opti-
mal experience: The Flow State Scale . Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology ,  18 ,  17– 35. 

The case of work motivation 155
 Kanfer, R., Chen, G., & Pritchard, R. D. (2008). The three C’s of work motivation: Context, 
content, and change. In R. Kanfer, G. Chen, & R. D. Pritchard (Eds.),  Work motivation: 
Past, present, and future (pp.  1– 16). New York: Psychology Press. 
 Kanfer, R., & Heggestad, E. D. (1997). Motivational traits and skills: A  person- centered per-
spective.  Journal of Applied Psychology, 79 ,  826– 835. 
 Kanfer, R., & Heggestad, E. D. (2000). Individual differences in trait motivation: Develop-
ment of the Motivational Trait Questionnaire (MTQ).  International Journal of Educational 
Research ,  33 ,  751– 776. 
 Komaki, J., Coombs, T., & Shepman, S. (1991). Motivational implications of reinforcement 
theory. In R. M. Steers & L. W. Porter (Eds.),  Motivation and work behavior  (pp.  87– 107). 
New York:  McGraw- Hill. 
 Lawrence, J. W., Carver, C. S., Scheier, M. F. (2002). Velocity toward goal attainment in 
immediate experience as a determinant of affect.  Journal of Applied Social Psychology ,  32 , 
 788– 802. 
 Lewin, K. (1935).  A dynamic theory of personality.  New York:  McGraw- Hill. 
 Lewin, K., Dembo, T., Festinger, L., & Sears, P. (1944). Level of aspiration. In J. M. Hunt 
(Ed.),  Personality and the behavior disorders (pp.  333– 378). Oxford, UK: Ronald Press. 
 Locke, E. A., & Latham, G. P. (1990).  A theory of goal setting and task performance.  Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
 Locke, E. A., & Latham, G. P. (2002). Building a practically useful theory of goal setting and 
task motivation: A  35- year odyssey.  American Psychologist ,  57 ,  705– 717. 
 Locke, E. A., Shaw, K. N., Saari, L. M., & Latham, G. P. (1981). Goal setting and task perfor-
mance:  1969– 1980.  Psychological Bulletin ,  90 ,  125– 152. 
 Lord, R. G., Diefendorff, J. M., Schmidt, A. M., & Hall, R. G. (2010).  Self- regulation at 
work.  Annual Review of Psychology ,  61 ,  548– 568. 
 Lord, R. G., & Levy, P. E. (1994). Moving from cognition to action: A control perspective. 
 Applied Psychology: An International Review ,  43 ,  335– 398. 
 Mäkikangas, A., Bakker, A. B., Aunola, K., & Demerouti, E. (2010). Job resources and flow 
at work: Modelling the relationship via latent growth curve and mixture model method-
ology.  Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology ,  83 ,  795– 814. 
 Mitchell, T. R., & Daniels, D. (2003). Motivation. In I. B. Weiner (Series Ed.), W. C. Bor-
man, D. R. Ilgen, & R. J. Klimoski (Vol. Eds.),  Handbook of psychology. Vol. 12: Industrial 
and organizational psychology (pp.  225– 254). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 
 Nakamura, J., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2002). The concept of flow. In C. R. Snyder & S. J. 
Lopez (Eds.),  Handbook of positive psychology  (pp.  89– 105). New York: Oxford University 
Press. 
 Newman, D. A., Joseph, D. L., & Hulin, C. L. (2010). Job attitudes and employee engagement: 
Considering the attitude “ A- factor”. In S. Albrecht (Ed.),  The handbook of employee engage-
ment: Perspectives, issues, research and practice  (pp.  43– 61). Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar. 
 Nielsen, K., & Cleal, B. (2010). Predicting flow at work: Investigating the activities and job 
characteristics that predict flow states at work.  Journal of Occupational Health Psychology , 
 15 ,  180– 190. 
 Oldham, G. R., & Hackman, J. R. (2010). Not what it was and not what it will be: The 
future of job design research.  Journal of Organizational Behavior ,  31 ,  463– 479. 
 Organ, D. W. (1997). Organizational citizenship behavior: It’s construct  clean- up time. 
 Human Performance ,  10 ,  85– 97. 
 Pulakos, E. D., Arad, S., Donovan, M. A., & Plamondon, K. E. (2000). Adaptability in the 
workplace: Development of a taxonomy of adaptive performance.  Journal of Applied Psy-
chology ,  85 ,  612– 624. 
 Rioux, S. M., & Penner, L. A. (2001). The causes of organizational citizenship behavior: 
A motivational analysis.  Journal of Applied Psychology ,  86 ,  1306– 1314. 

156 Patrick Knight and Christopher Waples
 Ross, S., Wood, K., & Keiser, H. (2014, May).  Predicting optimal experience (flow): Individual 
differences versus task characteristics . Paper presented at the 29th Annual Conference of the 
Society for Industrial and Organizational Psychology, Honolulu, HI. 
 Rupayana, D. (2009 April).  Engagement and flow: Different degrees of the same?  Paper presented 
at the 24th Annual Conference of the Society for Industrial and Organizational Psychol-
ogy, New Orleans, LA. 
 Sackett, A., Schmidt, P., & Shanock, L. (2007, April).  Goals, performance and time: Applying goal 
setting to flow theory . Paper presented at the 22nd Annual Conference of the Society for 
Industrial and Organizational Psychology, New York. 
 Salanova, M., Bakker, A. B., & Llorens, S. (2006). Flow at work: Evidence for an upward spiral 
of personal and organizational resources.  Journal of Happiness Studies ,  7 ,  1– 22. 
 Schaufeli, W. B., Salanova, M.,  González- Romá, V., & Bakker, A. B. (2002). The measurement 
of engagement and burnout: A two sample confirmatory factor analytic approach.  Journal 
of Happiness Studies ,  3 ,  71– 92. 
 Schmidt, A. M., Beck, J. W., & Gillespie, J. Z. (2013). Motivation. In I. B. Weiner (Series 
Ed.), N. W. Schmidt, & S. Highouse (Vol. Eds.),  Handbook of psychology. Vol. 12: Industrial 
and organizational psychology (2nd ed., pp.  311– 340). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 
 Shah, J. Y., Friedman, R., & Kruglanski, A. W. (2002). Forgetting all else: On antecedents and 
consequences of goal shielding.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ,  83 ,  1261– 1280. 
 Shah, J., & Higgins, E. T. (1997). Expectancy value effects: Regulatory focus as determinant 
of magnitude and direction.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73,  447– 458. 
 Sims, H. P., Szilagyi, A. D., & McKemey, D. R. (1976). Antecedents of  work- related expec-
tancies.  Academy of Management Journal ,  19 ,  547– 559. 
 Skinner, B. F. (1990). Can psychology be a science of mind?  American Psychologist ,  45 , 
 1206– 1211. 
 Teas, R. K. (1981). An empirical test of models of salespersons, job expectancy, and instru-
mentality perceptions.  Journal of Marketing Research ,  18 ,  209– 226. 
 Tolman, E. C. (1932).  Purposive behavior in animals and men.  New York:  Appleton- Century. 
 Vroom, V. H. (1964).  Work and motivation . New York: Wiley. 
 Waples, C., Knight, P., & Fullagar, C. (2013, April).  The role of goal setting in the emergence of 
flow . Paper presented at the 28th Annual Conference of the Society for Industrial and 
Organizational Psychology, Houston, TX. 
 Waples, C., Stetzer, M., & Knight, P. (2014, May).  The role of competition in the emergence of 
flow . Paper presented at the 29th Annual Conference of the Society for Industrial and 
Organizational Psychology, Honolulu, HI. 
 Waples, C., Stetzer, M., Knight, P., Sackett, A., & Fullagar, C. (2012, April).   Challenge- skill bal-
ance and flow: An experimental examination of imbalance . Paper presented at the 27th Annual 
Conference of the Society for Industrial and Organizational Psychology, San Diego, CA. 
 Weiner, I. B. (Series Ed.), Borman, W. C., Ilgen, D. R., & Klimoski, R. J. (Vol. Eds.) (2003). 
 Handbook of psychology. Vol. 12: Industrial and organizational psychology.  Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 
 Weiner, I. B. (Series Ed.), Schmitt, N. W., & Highhouse, S. (Vol. Eds.) (2013).  Handbook of 
psychology. Vol. 12: Industrial and organizational psychology (2nd ed.). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 
 Wood, R., & Bandura, A. (1989). Impact of conceptions of ability on  self- regulatory mech-
anisms and complex decision making.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ,  56 , 
 407– 415. 
 Zedeck, S. (Ed.) (2011).  APA handbook of industrial and organizational psychology . Washington, 
DC: American Psychological Association. 

 Introduction 
 As shown in the other chapters of this volume, work does not merely represent a 
means of subsistence; it can be a source of optimal experience, enriching one’s life 
and contributing to the community prosperity. A growing amount of studies high-
light that work is a relevant source of both meaning and opportunities for personal 
growth and skill development which individuals can seize based on their predispo-
sitions, interests, previous experience, and personal goals (Delle Fave & Bassi, 2009; 
Page &  Vella- Brodrick, 2009). Investigating the cultural and individual components 
of the work experience can thus have important consequences for individuals, com-
munities, organizations, and nations at large. 
 To this purpose, the present chapter will adopt an integrated theoretical approach, 
addressing the interplay between cultures and individuals in the phenomenology 
of flow at work. Based on this framework, we will illustrate findings obtained in 
diverse cultural contexts, but also across occupations, paying attention to similarities 
and differences in  flow- related tasks and associated quality of experience within 
the work domain. We will also discuss flow at work in relation to future goals 
in the  long- term perspective of psychological selection (Massimini & Delle Fave, 
2000). Finally, we will focus on migration, addressing the role of work in promoting 
flow, as well as sociocultural adjustment and psychological adaptation. 
 Culture and psychological selection 
 According to Bates and Plog (1990), a “culture is a system of shared beliefs, values, 
customs, behaviors, and artifacts that the members of a society use to cope with 
their world and with one another, and that are transmitted from generation to 
generation through learning” (p. 7). This broad definition subsumes two important 
 9 
 WORK, CULTURES, AND 
THE CULTURE OF WORK 
 Flow across countries and professions 
 Antonella Delle Fave and Marta Bassi  

158 Antonella Delle Fave and Marta Bassi
aspects of culture that are of interest for our analysis of flow at work. The first one is 
represented by the structural and historical variations that may be identified within 
and across cultures. The second aspect refers to the individual’s active interplay with 
the opportunities and values characterizing the cultural environment. 
 Cultures are  meaning- making evolutionary systems, representing sets of rules 
and values that offer solutions to universal problems related to the biological and 
cultural survival of individuals and communities (Kluckhohn & Strodtbeck, 1961; 
Massimini & Calegari, 1979). Work represents one of these problems, which are 
classified in three main categories: community survival and livelihood; production, 
circulation, and transmission of cultural information among community members; 
and development and application of values, rules, and norms that influence the 
community structure and organization (Massimini & Delle Fave, 2000; Csikszent-
mihalyi & Massimini, 1985). Work is included within the category of community 
survival. Although all human communities share the same universal problems, a 
remarkable variety of solutions can be detected across societies according to eco-
logical, historical, and cultural peculiarities. For example, access to specific jobs may 
be related to demographic features, such as gender or social status. Variations may 
also occur in terms of emphasis or priority placed on a given problem with respect 
to other universal problems. In some countries free health care and education are 
basic rights of all citizens, independent of their occupation, while in other countries 
access to learning and/or medical services depends on job position and income. 
Cultural differences may further emerge according to historical events and pro-
cesses. Today’s instability in the global economic situation, leading some countries 
to face financial crises and other countries to thrive (Awad, 2009), poses new chal-
lenges to workers, organizations, and professionals who are in charge of  well- being 
promotion at the workplace. 
 The second important aspect subsumed in the definition of culture reported 
earlier is that individuals undergo a lifelong learning process of enculturation (Her-
skovitz, 1948) through which they acquire the values of their community. These 
values become essential constituents of individuals’ daily experience and behav-
ior: research studies have highlighted the role of cultural values in directing indi-
viduals’ attention to environmental and contextual stimuli (Hedden et al., 2002), 
influencing the expression of personal feelings, and shaping goals and motivations 
(Markus & Kitayama, 1991). Likewise, a great amount of evidence was gathered 
on the role of cultures in fostering opportunities for growth and  self- expression 
in daily behavior, as well as the development and cultivation of culturally relevant 
personal skills (Bond, 2013; Vaalsiner, 2007). However, besides being influenced 
by culture, individuals are active agents in the interaction with their environment, 
giving rise to a process that Csikszentmihalyi and Massimini (1985) defined as psy-
chological selection. 
 Psychological selection results from the individuals’ differential investment of 
attention and resources in the information available in their environment. In this 
process, a prominent role is played by two specific factors: the quality of experience 
associated by individuals to the daily activities and information available to them in 

Work, cultures, and the culture of work 159
the environment, and the personal  long- term meaning they attribute to this infor-
mation (Delle Fave, 2009). These two factors are often combined. A wide range 
of studies have highlighted that individuals preferentially cultivate activities, values, 
and relationships according to their potential association with optimal experience. 
However, the association of an activity with flow does not guarantee its mean-
ingfulness for the person. People often report optimal experience in recreational 
leisure that is surely beneficial in the short run, but not relevant to lifelong goals. 
The dimension of meaningfulness and  long- term goals has been recently included 
in studies on flow (Delle Fave & Massimini, 2005).  Cross- cultural findings have 
highlighted that individuals more frequently report flow in tasks and domains that 
they perceive as relevant and coherent with their own world outlook, life goals, and 
core beliefs (Delle Fave, 2007). 
 The replication of meaningful  flow- related activities (or optimal activities) over 
time has important consequences for single individuals and their communities (Mas-
simini & Delle Fave, 2000; Nakamura & Csikszentmihalyi, 2003). At the personal 
level, the cultivation of these activities brings about growth in complexity: in order 
to replicate the experience, the individual will look for increasing challenges and 
consequently refine the personal skills and abilities necessary to face them (Csik-
szentmihalyi & Csikszentmihalyi, 1988). From this perspective, optimal experience 
can also influence individuals’  long- term life trajectories (Delle Fave, Massimini, & 
Bassi, 2011). At the cultural level, individuals learn and exchange information with 
others. Through the selection, replication, and transmission of specific optimal activi-
ties, each person can contribute to the  long- term shaping of her culture, helping to 
preserve certain values as well as bringing about innovative cultural changes. 
 Over the last three decades, this broad theoretical framework has guided our 
investigation of flow across cultures and has been increasingly refined based on 
constantly incoming empirical evidence (Delle Fave et al., 2011; Massimini & Delle 
Fave, 2000). In the following paragraphs we will summarize some of the findings 
collected by our research group on flow in the domain of work, together with 
results deriving from other research projects. 
 Work, values, and meaning 
 As briefly outlined in the previous pages, among the universal problems humans 
have to face, work is recognized as a fundamental concern that contributes to the 
survival of any community (Massimini & Calegari, 1979).  Culture- specific solu-
tions to the work problem have brought about an extensive gamut of economic sys-
tems, differently regulating means of production, access to work, and labor division. 
At the same time,  cross- cultural variations exist in the weight attributed to work 
 vis- à-vis other human problems. They can provocatively be reflected in today’s dif-
ferential investment in work policies, with some nations devoting more resources to 
war plans than to economic development. 
 Nonetheless, empirical findings showed that, at the personal level, work uni-
versally represents an extremely important value. This result stems from a large 

160 Antonella Delle Fave and Marta Bassi
international investigation among participants from seven countries (Delle Fave, 
Brdar, Wissing,  &  Vella- Brodrick, 2013). Through the  self- report questionnaire 
Eudaimonic and Hedonic Happiness Investigation (EHHI), participants were asked 
to report the three most meaningful things in their lives – that is, sources of mean-
ing – and then to explain why each of these things was meaningful to them. As 
concerns the most meaningful things, work was mentioned by 44% of the respon-
dents, ranking second to family (that was acknowledged as meaningful by 84% of 
the participants). In particular, and in line with a  project- oriented conceptualization 
of meaning (Emmons, 2005), answers mainly referred to the relevance of work as 
an opportunity for personal growth, competence development, and satisfaction. 
Differences emerged among linguistic/cultural groups, identified as Romance, 
Germanic, and Slavic (Delle Fave, Wissing, Brdar,  Vella- Brodrick, & Freire, 2013), 
with a significantly higher percentage of Romance and Slavic participants provid-
ing answers referring to the intrinsic value and meaningfulness of work, while 
Germanic respondents more frequently quoted satisfaction with work. Globally, 
however, only a limited percentage of participants referred to the extrinsic value 
of work, such as job stability and security. Motives underlying the perceived work 
meaningfulness were in line with these findings. Work was described as a basic 
constituent of individual life, making life worth living, and giving rise to feelings of 
personal expressiveness. 
 Work cultures: a neglected topic in ﬂ ow research 
 Work has been identified as a privileged opportunity for optimal experience 
(Bassi & Delle Fave, 2012; Csikszentmihalyi & LeFevre, 1989; Delle Fave & Mas-
simini, 2003; Hektner, Schmidt, & Csikszentmihalyi, 2007). Previous chapters have 
summarized research investigating the job conditions and resources favoring flow 
at work. However, studies were primarily carried out in Western countries, which 
by and large share similar postindustrial service economies, work histories, and 
policies, paying little attention to cultural differences, in particular those concern-
ing individualistic versus collectivistic features (Hofstede, 1980; Smith & Bond, 
1999; Triandis, Chan, Bhawuk, Iwao, & Sinha, 1995), which are reflected – even 
if not deterministically – in the social structure, including work organization and 
rules, workers’ rights and duties, job and career opportunities, and income distribu-
tion (Kagitçibasi, 1997). 
 Moreover, even in the case of  cross- cultural research, a disproportionately large 
amount of studies in the work domain involve office employees and factory workers, 
while other categories of workers are ignored. The two only exceptions are teachers 
and health professionals, whose work experience has been recently explored in rela-
tion to flow (Bakker, 2005; Bassi & Delle Fave, 2012; Bringsén, Ejlertsson, & Ander-
sson, 2011; Delle Fave & Massimini, 2003; Rodríguez, Salanova, Cifre, & Schaufeli, 
2011; Salanova, Bakker, & Llorens, 2006). In contrast, traditional work activities, 
such as farming and handicrafts, but also semiskilled and unspecialized jobs directly 
related to industry production have been substantially neglected, in spite of the fact 

Work, cultures, and the culture of work 161
that they represent the basic subsistence means for the vast majority of people and 
communities on the planet. 
 It is also interesting to notice that overall in the psychological literature activities 
such as gardening, farming, arts, and crafts are prominently considered hobbies or 
rehabilitation practices, and are therefore investigated within the domain of leisure, 
occupational therapy, and psychiatric and physical rehabilitation (Harris, 2008). Several 
studies have shown the positive features of the experience associated with handicrafts 
and their  well- being related outcomes among people diagnosed with mental disor-
ders, adopting flow either as a theoretical point of reference for interpreting narratives 
(Caddy, Crawford, & Page, 2012; Griffiths, 2008; Reynolds, Vivat, & Prior, 2008) or as 
an empirical measure (Bassi, Ferrario, Ba, Delle Fave, & Viganò, 2012). Studies in occu-
pational therapy have emphasized the positive physical and psychological consequences 
of participation in arts and crafts to preserve identity,  self- esteem, and  well- being after 
retirement (Reynolds, 2009) or after migration (Boerema, Russell, & Aguilar, 2010). 
This approach is culturally biased, in that it conveys the disguised ideological assump-
tion that workers are  per antonomasia  company employees, executive officers, or factory 
workers. Such an assumption is clearly reflected in the common language, in that the 
term “working class” originally refers to these restricted categories of citizens. 
 A quick exploration of PsychINFO shows that other disciplines within the social 
sciences have been paying more attention to farmers and artisans. This is par-
ticularly true of anthropology, sociology, and economics. Researchers from these 
domains have investigated the quality of life and  well- being of farmers and handi-
craftsmen from a variety of perspectives. Economists have investigated the impact 
of fair trade practices on these workers’  well- being (Bacon, 2005; Becchetti, Castri-
ota, & Solferino, 2011). Other studies have highlighted the importance of relying 
on the expertise of farmers and artisans to develop intervention aimed at their 
 well- being promotion (Brookfield & Gyasi, 2009; Doshi, 1990; Nederlof & Dan-
gbégnon, 2007). Sociologists and anthropologists have focused on the relationship 
between traditional work and social status, addressing issues related to gender (Pren-
tice, 2012;  Soni- Sinha, 2011), ethnic minorities (Portisch, 2009), and cultural tran-
sitions (Gowlland, 2012; Karides, 2005; Sayce, Ackers, & Greene, 2007; Wherry, 
2008). However, studies exploring the positive work experiences of these popula-
tions, including flow, are completely missing. 
 Empirical evidence of ﬂ ow at work across 
cultures and occupations 
 In order to shed light on the relationship between the specific features of different 
jobs and flow occurrence, we will now summarize and further analyze the find-
ings obtained from studies conducted by our research group among participants 
belonging to different western and nonwestern societies and work contexts (Delle 
Fave et al., 2011). 
 We will merge results provided by 767 adult participants, 308 women and 
459 men, aged  15– 78 (average age  thirty- five). Among them, 251 (32.7% of the 

162 Antonella Delle Fave and Marta Bassi
sample) belonged to nonwestern, prominently Asian cultures: India, Indonesia, 
Iran, Philippines, West Africa (Ivory Coast and Ghana), North Africa (Morocco 
and Tunisia), and Somalia. In this sample,  thirty- eight Africans and  thirty- four 
Asians were  first- generation immigrants living in Italy. This group also comprised 
sixty Rom Gypsies, settled in Italy but preserving their original language, lifestyle, 
and values: they lived in camps located in city outskirts, following a separation 
pattern of acculturation. Nonwestern participants were involved in various jobs: 
 forty- one were craftsmen, nineteen were  self- employed as shopkeepers and trad-
ers,  twenty- four worked as helping professionals (teachers, social workers), seven-
teen were clerks and finance consultants, sixteen were factory workers, eighteen 
were employed as housemaids, seventeen were postgraduate and PhD students, 
 sixty- three were housewives, and  twenty- seven (twelve African immigrants and 
fifteen Rom participants) were irregularly employed as nonskilled workers. The 
western sample comprised 516 Italian participants (67.3% of the sample), liv-
ing in urban and rural areas, and engaged in a variety of traditional and modern 
jobs. More specifically, the group included 150 factory workers,  sixty- five office 
employees, seventy production and sales managers, 103 postgraduate students and 
researchers in the areas of mathematics, physics, and engineering,  seventy- eight 
craftsmen (prominently tailors, knitters, carpenters, goldsmiths, and hairdressers), 
and fifty weavers running family textile enterprises. Among the factory workers, 
fifty lived in an area of northwest Italy in which most families integrate wage with 
the income derived from agriculture; they owned or had rented small land plots, 
and devoted a relevant part of their time to farming. 
 Participants were administered the Flow Questionnaire (FQ; Delle Fave & Mas-
simini, 1988) and the Life Theme questionnaire (LT; Delle Fave, 2004; Delle Fave & 
Massimini, 1988). The FQ consists of both scaled items and  open- ended questions 
inquiring about participants’ flow experience. In particular, participants are asked 
to read quotations describing optimal experience, to report whether they have ever 
had such experience, and, if so, to list the associated activities. Participants are then 
invited to select from their list the activity associated with the most intense and 
pervasive flow states, and to rate the related experience on  0– 8 scaled items. Items 
investigate the levels of challenges and skills perceived in the situation, as well as 
the level of cognitive, affective, and motivational variables: involvement, wish to 
do the activity, excitement, ease of concentration, enjoyment, concentration, relax-
ation, control of the situation, perception of clear feedback from the ongoing task 
and of clear goals in performing it (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975; Csikszentmihalyi & 
Csikszentmihalyi, 1988). The LT expands the focus on participants’ psychological 
selection, posing a number of  open- ended questions about positive and negative life 
influences, current challenges, future goals, and major life accomplishments. 
 Data analysis highlighted specific features of flow activities and experience across 
cultures and professions. Overall, the activity categories associated with flow were 
substantially similar among western and nonwestern participants. The majority of 
answers referred to leisure activities and productive tasks, and this trend was confirmed 
in the distribution of the prominent optimal activities selected by the participants. 

Work, cultures, and the culture of work 163
 As reported in  Table 9.1 , work (including paid jobs, as well as unpaid activities 
at home) and leisure (comprising sports, hobbies, reading, and media use) largely 
predominated. A significant  between- group difference was, however, detected con-
cerning leisure, quoted by a lower percentage of nonwestern participants (Fisher’s 
exact test = 0.0069). This difference, consistent with previous studies (Delle Fave 
et al., 2011), can be related to cultural variations in the amount of time devoted to 
work and leisure, and in the availability of leisure opportunities. It can be also con-
nected to different conceptualizations of work and leisure (Delle Fave & Massimini, 
1988; Csikszentmihalyi, 1990): for example, in traditional contexts work activities 
are often not restricted to specifically identified spaces and timetables; they can 
be shared with other family or community members, thus allowing for develop-
ment and implementation of social connections, and they serve a variety of needs, 
ranging from biological survival to competence development and  self- actualization 
(Delle Fave & Bassi, 2014). By contrast, in industrial and postindustrial societies 
work activities primarily take place in  well- defined space and time compartments, 
becoming synonymous with duty and constraint. People prominently look at work 
as instrumental to earn a living, whereas the preferential domain to pursue full 
 self- actualization is represented by leisure, through which one can express and 
develop personal talents and competences, and engage in creative activities. 
 Flow and the work paradox: recurrent phenomenon 
or  job- related feature? 
 Differences between work and leisure as perceived opportunities for flow were 
identified by other researchers as well. These differences emerged in particular as 
concerns the features of the flow experience associated with these two domains. 
 TABLE 9.1  Percentage distribution of the activity categories associated with the most perva-
sive optimal experiences 
Activity categories
Western N a (%)
Nonwestern N a (%)
Work
141 (32.19)
 77 (36.32)
Study
31 (7.08)
 14 (6.60)
Volunteering
5 (1.14)
  1 (0.47)
Social relations
16 (3.65)
  5 (2.36)
Leisure
202 (46.12)
 74 (34.90)
Family interactions
29 (6.62)
 22 (10.38)
Thoughts, introspection
5 (1.14)
  8 (3.77)
Religious practices
6 (1.60)
 10 (4.72)
Other
3 (0.69)
  1 (0.47)
Total N
438 (100.0)
212 (100.0)
 a N of participants (each participant could select only one flow activity) 

164 Antonella Delle Fave and Marta Bassi
Several studies highlighted that, during work, flow is characterized by significantly 
high values of cognitive variables (e.g., concentration, control of the situation, clear 
feedback from the activity), and perceived clear goals; however, variables related to 
affect (e.g., enjoyment) and intrinsic motivation (e.g., wish to do the activity) score 
below or around average (Csikszentmihalyi & LeFevre, 1989; Haworth & Hill, 1992; 
Rheinberg, Manig, Kliegel, Engeser, & Vollmeyer, 2007). This phenomenon was 
defined as the work paradox. 
 The work paradox also emerged from the studies conducted by our research 
group (Delle Fave & Massimini, 2005) and from the data presented here. As shown 
in  Table 9.2 , a comparison between flow at work and flow in other activities high-
lighted that, at the motivational level, work was associated with significantly higher 
values of goal pursuit, but with lower values of intrinsic desirability. However, this 
was true only of western participants. The detection of this cultural difference led 
us to further explore the findings, taking into account the potential role of the 
specific work tasks selected by the participants in shaping their flow experience. 
The job variety that characterizes our sample allowed us to analyze flow experience 
at work across occupations. This decision was also based on evidence obtained in 
previous studies (Bassi & Delle Fave, 2012; Delle Fave & Massimini, 2003), showing 
  TABLE 9.2  Optimal experience associated with work and other activities among western and 
nonwestern participants 
Western participants
Nonwestern participants
Work
(N=141)a
Other
(N=297)a
Z (p)
Work
(N=76)a
Other 
(N=135)a
Z (p)
M (SD)
M (SD)
M (SD)
M (SD)
Involvement
6.6 (1.3)
6.7 (1.5)
7.3 (1.2)
7.4 (1.2)
Clear feedback
7.0 (1.3)
6.7 (1.7)
7.4 (1.2)
7.2 (1.4)
Wish to do the 
activity
6.9 (1.6)
7.3 (1.4)
Z=3.9, 
p <.0001
7.1 (1.7)
7.4 (1.5)
Excitement
7.5 (1.1)
7.5 (1.0)
7.8 (0.7)
7.8 (0.7)
Ease of concentration
5.9 (2.5)
6.1 (2.4)
7.3 (1.5)
7.2 (1.5)
Enjoyment
6.9 (1.4)
6.9 (1.6)
7.6 (1.0)
7.5 (1.2)
Concentration
6.6 (1.6)
6.2 (2.0)
7.2 (1.2)
7.1 (1.5)
Relaxation
6.2 (2.2)
6.4 (2.1)
7.2 (1.5)
7.1 (1.8)
Clear goals
7.3 (1.2)
6.7 (1.9)
Z=2.8, 
p <.006
7.7 (1.0)
7.4 (1.3)
Z=2.1, 
p <.04
Control of situation
6.8 (1.4)
6.5 (1.8)
7.4 (1.1)
7.3 (1.2)
Challenges
6.7 (1.3)
6.5 (1.7)
6.7 (1.8)
6.1 (2.5)
Skills
6.8 (1.3)
6.4 (1.6)
Z=2.3, 
p <.03
6.7 (1.6)
6.4 (1.9)
 a  N of participants 

Work, cultures, and the culture of work 165
that among highly skilled professionals, such as teachers and physicians, the levels of 
intrinsic motivation and activity desirability associated with work tasks are high and 
not significantly different from those reported in other flow activities. The work 
paradox thus does not seem to apply to these professional categories. 
 Moving from these premises, we investigated which particular work activities 
were selected as occasions for the most pervasive optimal experiences by the par-
ticipants in our widely heterogeneous sample. 
 As reported in  Table 9.3 , a significantly higher percentage of both western and 
nonwestern participants (68.1% and 83.1% respectively) prominently referred to tra-
ditional work, such as farming, handicrafts, and housework (mainly cooking and 
sewing), while modern office and factory work were selected by a minority of par-
ticipants in both groups (Fisher’s exact test = 0.0168). As shown in  Table 9.3 , during 
traditional work activities flow was characterized by higher values of affective vari-
ables (excitement, enjoyment, and relaxation), and by a more autonomous pattern 
of behavioral regulation (wish to do the activity and effortless concentration). These 
results suggest that the work paradox can be a characterizing feature of factory and 
office work, which indeed represent the vast majority of the occupations in which 
this phenomenon was detected and subsequently confirmed in the flow literature. 
 These results also provide additional insight into the separation between work 
and leisure domains characterizing industrial and postindustrial societies (Parker, 
1997). Such separation surely calls into play social and organizational factors, but also 
psychological ones. In particular, in traditional societies work provides individuals 
 TABLE 9.3 Optimal experience during traditional and modern work activities 
Traditional work 
(N=160)a
Modern work
(N=58)a
Z (p)
M (SD)
M (SD)
Involvement
7.0 (1.3)
6.7 (1.4)
Clear feedback
7.3 (1.1)
6.9 (1.6)
Wish to do the activity
7.2 (1.5)
6.3 (1.9)
Z=3.0, p <.003
Excitement
7.7 (0.8)
7.2 (1.4)
Z=3.0, p <.003
Ease of concentration
6.7 (2.0)
5.6 (2.7)
Z=2.7, p <.007
Enjoyment
7.3 (1.1)
6.8 (1.6)
Z=2.1, p <.04
Concentration
6.9 (1.5)
6.7 (1.6)
Relaxation
6.9 (1.7)
5.7 (2.5)
Z=3.1, p <.003
Clear goals
7.5 (1.1)
7.3 (1.3)
Control of situation
7.1 (1.2)
6.7 (1.5)
Challenges
6.7 (1.5)
6.7 (1.4)
Skills
6.8 (1.4)
6.7 (1.4)
 a  N of participants 

166 Antonella Delle Fave and Marta Bassi
with opportunities for flow experiences that are globally optimal, at the cognitive, 
affective, and motivational levels. Traditional activities clearly differ according to the 
local cultural heritage, but they all present common characteristics of complexity 
and challenge. They require dexterity and imply a definite visible outcome (a crop, 
a woolen sweater, a carved table). In modern jobs, the standardization of behavior 
and of its products inevitably leads to restrictions in individual initiative and to a 
decrease in the variation of activity structure and outcomes. Consumption prevails 
on transformation and effective use of environmental resources (Oskamp, 2000). By 
contrast, creativity, autonomy, and skill development favor optimal experiences at 
work (Delle Fave et al., 2011). 
 These considerations are further supported by a closer examination of the flow 
activities selected by a subsample of the western workers, sharing the same cultural 
background but involved in different occupations, such as office and factory work, hand-
icrafts, and weaving ( Table 9.4 ). Although the vast majority of participants in all groups 
(ranging from 74 to 91%) reported optimal experiences in their lives, the percentage of 
participants associating work with the most pervasive flow experiences steadily declined 
from 58.2 for artisans to 15.3 for clerks. The predominance of traditional work activities 
among factory workers is due to the answers provided by participants who, besides their 
daily job as blue collars, derived part of their income from farming, classified as tradi-
tional work. Among women employed as factory workers, clerks, and executives the 
traditional work activities associated with flow prominently included cooking. 
 The better quality of experience reported by participants during traditional work 
tasks can be finally related to the value of these activities in relation to personal and 
cultural meanings. Traditional jobs are often transmitted by parents or relatives, thus 
contributing to the preservation and strengthening of family ties, as well as of the 
workers’ personal and cultural identities (Nelson, LaBat, & Williams, 2005). 
 Work- related goals: a key component 
of psychological selection 
 As reported in  Table 9.2  and  Table 9.3 , the experience associated with work is over-
all characterized by high values of perceived goals across job categories. Pursuing 
clear goals through the task at hand thus represents a core component of flow at 
  TABLE 9.4  Distribution of traditional and modern work activities selected as occasions of 
pervasive optimal experiences across occupations 
Artisans
Weavers
Factory workers
Executives
Clerks
Traditional work Na (%)
38 (56.7)
18 (48.6)
36 (26.2)
2 (3.7)
 2 (3.4)
Modern work Na (%)
1 (1.5)
1 (2.8)
21 (15.4)
14 (25.9)
 7 (11.9)
Total flow at work Na (%)
39 (58.2)
19 (51.4)
57 (41.6)
16 (29.6)
 9 (15.3)
Total flow
67 (85.9)
37 (74.0)
137 (91.3)
54 (77.1)
59 (90.8)
 a N of participants (each participant could select only one flow activity) 

Work, cultures, and the culture of work 167
work. Moving from the momentary experience to the  long- term perspective, the 
specific role of  work- related goals in orienting the lifelong process of psychological 
selection was investigated in the present sample through the LT, by inviting partici-
pants to list their most important future goals. As shown in  Table 9.5 , 44.1% of the 
participants in the total sample identified work as a relevant goal. This percentage 
included both people who associated work with pervasive flow experiences and 
people who did not. These results were confirmed also when the analyses were run 
on the western and nonwestern subgroups separately. They suggest that the associa-
tion of work with flow is not a necessary prerequisite to the identification of work 
as a goal. 
 These findings are consistent with those obtained through the Eudaimonic 
and Hedonic Happiness Investigation, described in the previous pages (Delle Fave, 
Wissing, et al., 2013), in which work was acknowledged as a prominent future 
goal, second only to family, by participants across countries. The role of work as 
a component of psychological selection can thus be related – on the one hand – 
to the complex structure of some jobs and their potential in fostering flow through 
the recruitment of individual attention and concentration. On the other hand, the 
manifold roles of work in the lifelong perspective – as a culturally shared value, as a 
means to satisfy family needs, and as a major pathway to achieve social integration – 
can further strengthen its relevance for individual well-being (when it is associated 
with flow) or counterbalance its structural and experiential limitations (when it is 
not associated with flow). 
 Migration and work: promoting integration 
through ﬂ ow 
 In the last few decades the number of people leaving their native countries in search 
of better life opportunities abroad has steadily increased. Finding a job is the first 
step to settling down and earning a living in the new land. In the migration process, 
individuals carry cultural values that deeply shape their expectations, adjustment 
opportunities, and  well- being in the new country. The new environment poses a 
number of challenges, first of which is acculturation – that is, the process of change 
 TABLE 9.5  Percentage of participants who identified work as a goal and/or as an occasion 
for pervasive flow 
Work as occasion of 
pervasive flow Na (%)
Work not occasion of 
pervasive flow N (%)
Total
Work as a goal
92 (42.2)
246 (44.8)
338
Work not a goal
126 (57.8)
303 (55.2)
429
Total
218 (100.0)
549 (100.0)
767
 a N of participants (each participant could select only one flow activity) 

168 Antonella Delle Fave and Marta Bassi
in collective and individual behaviors that allows a minority group to interact with 
the norms and habits of a dominant social system (Berry & Sam, 1997). 
 Among the various acculturation strategies that have been identified (Berry, 
1997), the most adaptive one is integration, through which acculturating individu-
als acquire values and behaviors of the dominant culture while preserving their 
own traditions and habits. This strategy fosters flexibility and complexity in both 
individuals and cultural systems (Delle Fave & Massimini, 1999). 
 A prerequisite of integration is sociocultural adjustment (Ward, 2001), by which 
migrating individuals acquire new skills and behaviors through learning and inter-
action with host citizens. Key predictors of sociocultural adjustment are the length 
of residence in the new country, the relationships with host nationals, the immigrant 
status (having a residence permit versus being “illegal”), and the education level 
(Ward & Kennedy, 1994; Zlobina, Basabe, Paez, & Furnham, 2006). Integration is 
also related to psychological adaptation (Searle & Ward, 1990) – namely, individuals’ 
emotional  well- being, satisfaction, and  self- actualization. 
 In this domain, research has primarily focused on the mental and psychosomatic 
disorders related to migration (Finch & Vega, 2003; Kazarian & Evans, 2001), while 
a much more limited amount of studies have explored the positive consequences of 
migration on perceived  well- being ( Jasinskaja- Lahti, Liebkind, Jaakkola, & Reuter, 
2006; Phinney, Horenczyk, Liebkind, & Vedder, 2001). Among them, the studies 
conducted by our research group on flow among immigrants cast some light on this 
complex social and psychological phenomenon. 
 Migration indeed represents a fracture in individual daily habits and life trajec-
tory. As concerns flow, migrants may not be able to practice the activities they 
associated with optimal experience in their native country. Nevertheless, the host 
environment can provide new challenges, and thus new opportunities for flow that 
can contribute to individuals’  well- being and successful acculturation (Delle Fave 
et al., 2011; Fianco & Delle Fave, 2006). Results derived from  first- generation immi-
grants settled in Italy from African, Asian, and Latin American countries, as well as 
from Eastern Europe (Delle Fave & Bassi, 2009), underlined the role of the socio-
cultural components of adaptation in providing participants with opportunities to 
experience flow. More specifically, and consistent with previous studies (Zlobina 
et al., 2006), length of stay in Italy, immigrant status, cultural distance between the 
homeland and the hosting country, and support from a social and family network 
played a crucial role in this process. In addition, a pervasive component of socio-
cultural adaptation that emerged from our study was access to job opportunities. 
 Although participants’ main reason for migration was search for a job and higher 
standard of living for themselves and their families, not all of them had achieved 
this goal at the time they were enrolled in our study. Moreover, many participants 
who could rely on a stable job – especially women from South America and Eastern 
Europe – were occupied in activities characterized by lower skill complexity and 
social status, compared to those they practiced in their homeland. This problem is 
relatively common among migrants, and especially among women (Suto, 2009). 
They are often employed in unskilled and  part- time jobs, but they also frequently 

Work, cultures, and the culture of work 169
leave to their husbands the role of family earners, investing their resources in family 
responsibilities and domestic chores (Meares, 2010; Purkayastha, 2005). This deci-
sion is partially related to the financial constraints that prevent immigrant families 
from getting domestic help to manage housework and daily parental commitments. 
 In spite of these constraints, many of the participants were able to exploit their 
jobs to acquire competences and build interpersonal relations facilitating their inte-
gration process at the linguistic, social, and cultural levels. This was, however, not 
true of the African men included in the study, who earned a living through pre-
carious and temporary occupations not only different from the traditional work 
activities they performed at home, but also low in complexity and requiring unspe-
cialized skills, thus preventing these participants from building new competencies 
or refining existing ones. These differences in employment status were reflected 
in the perceived opportunities for flow at work. While Indians, South Americans, 
and Eastern Europeans prominently associated optimal experience with work tasks, 
leisure was the major flow domain for Africans. 
 Although most participants’ work conditions were far from being adequate, the 
results deriving from their answers to the Life Theme questionnaire showed that 
work was globally perceived as an important current challenge and future life goal. 
However, Africans quoted as their prominent goal finding a stable job in the short 
term, whereas participants in other groups – who had already achieved a relatively 
stable job position – mentioned  long- term objectives, such as career advancement 
or improvement of work conditions. For African participants finding a job repre-
sented a means to satisfy basic survival needs, a substantial prerequisite to pursue 
the more complex and autonomously regulated goals identified by the other immi-
grants (Sheldon, Ryan, Deci, & Kasser, 2004). 
 Further evidence concerning, on the one hand, the role of work features in 
shaping flow experience and, on the other hand, the manifold role of work for 
migrants comes from the data collected among two groups of women working 
in Italian hospitals as registered nurses,  thirty- one Italians and  twenty- five Eastern 
Europeans. The large majority ( fifty- two, 92.9%) reported flow in their lives. Out of 
them, fourteen participants (26.9%) selected their job as opportunity for pervasive 
optimal experiences; however, most of them belonged to the migrant group (ten 
participants, 41.7% of the  twenty- four Eastern Europeans who identified flow in 
their lives), while only four were Italians (14.3% of the  twenty- eight participants 
reporting flow in this group). This difference was statistically significant (Fisher’s 
exact test = 0.0332). As concerns the features of optimal experience reported at 
work and during other activities, the findings presented in  Table 9.6  confirm previ-
ous studies suggesting that the work paradox does not apply to highly complex and 
socially relevant jobs. For these nurses, optimal experience at work was character-
ized by significantly higher levels of concentration and lower levels of relaxation, 
compared with flow in other activities. 
 These findings are consistent with those obtained in a recent study conducted 
among Finnish health professionals (Vivoll Straume  & Vitterso, 2012), showing 
that complex work tasks promote eudaimonic dimensions of  well- being – such as 

170 Antonella Delle Fave and Marta Bassi
inspiration and absorption. They also confirm the potential of work in promoting 
 well- being after migration, especially when job opportunities are adequate to the 
migrants’ skills and competences. 
 No cultural difference was instead detected in the percentage of nurses report-
ing their job as a  long- term goal (45.2% of the Italians and 32% of the Eastern 
Europeans). This result further supports the findings derived from the international 
studies described in the previous pages, showing the  long- term role of work as 
a component of the psychological selection process, not necessarily related to its 
association with flow. 
 Conclusions 
 Work represents a highly challenging research topic in psychology, due to the vari-
ety of its manifestations, and its manifold valences at the individual, social, and 
cultural levels. In this chapter we attempted to illustrate some of the aspects of work 
that support its role in the promotion of individual and community  well- being, 
with specific reference to its potential in fostering flow and  long- term goal setting. 
 We have also highlighted some of the still unexplored areas in the domain of 
work psychology. In particular, very little information is presently available on 
the work experience of people involved in traditional activities, such as farming and 
handicrafts, while researchers have privileged studies conducted among employees 
working in factories and tertiary sector companies, in which office and automated 
  TABLE 9.6  Optimal experience associated with work and other activities among nurses from 
Italy and Eastern Europe 
Work (N=14)a
Other (N=38)a
Z (p)
M (SD)
M (SD)
Involvement
6.9 (1.1)
7.0 (1.3)
Clear feedback
7.0 (1.0)
6.3 (1.5)
Wish to do the activity
5.4 (2.7)
6.6 (2.0)
Excitement
7.2 (1.3)
7.5 (0.8)
Ease of concentration
6.4 (1.7)
5.5 (2.1)
Enjoyment
6.9 (1.3)
6.6 (1.4)
Concentration
7.4 (0.9)
5.5 (2.4)
Z=3.0, p< .005
Relaxation
6.5 (1.2)
7.3 (1.0)
Z=2.4, p < .02
Clear goals
7.4 (0.9)
6.6 (1.7)
Control of situation
6.4 (1.3)
6.1 (2.0)
Challenges
6.6 (1.1)
6.6 (1.5)
Skills
6.7 (1.2)
6.4 (1.6)
 a  N participants (each participant could select only one flow activity) 

Work, cultures, and the culture of work 171
tasks are prominent. The international economic crisis affecting large productive 
sectors (from industries to public services, finance, administration, and consulting) 
and the increasing dissatisfaction with the rhythms and rituals of postindustrial life 
manifested by citizens of affluent countries are bringing this neglected issue back 
to the attention of psychologists. Gardening, handicrafts, and creative activities are 
becoming increasingly popular as ways to escape the constraints of daily life, but 
also as opportunities to strengthen individual identity and social belongingness, and 
to identify new sources of income and survival (Dickie, 2003; Jalas, 2006). Yet psy-
chologists pay very little attention to the job and life experience of the millions of 
people who, not only in distant countries and cultures but also in Europe, Northern 
America, and Australia, invest their skills and resources in agriculture, handicrafts, 
and other traditional occupations. The investigation of these topics, however, requires 
broadening the “work culture” notion, and reintegrating in it a remarkable though 
neglected component: the “workmanship of risk” (Schwalbe, 2010), as opposed to the 
“workmanship of certainty,” that today’s crisis calls into play. The former is related to 
the openness needed in the craft practice (referred to both material and intellectual 
creations), which entails a creative and flexible interaction with both the raw materi-
als and the tools used to transform them into products – be they objects or symbolic 
outcomes. The latter is related to the faithful reproduction of material or intellectual 
objects, following specific rules that guarantee the outcome quality and characteris-
tics. This expansion in perspective is indeed necessary if we want to successfully cope 
with the new challenges that the growing number of unemployed and disaffected 
workers is posing to psychology researchers and clinical practitioners. 
 From a different perspective, the international economic crisis severely affecting 
the industrial sector entails serious consequences for the  blue- collar workers directly 
employed in production tasks. Yet, within the broad domain of modern jobs, this 
category of workers is substantially neglected by psychologists, in spite of its key 
role in the industrial productivity chain. In the light of the social and economic 
transformations taking place worldwide, a fairer and more exhaustive investigation 
of the diversity of problems and resources characterizing the work context cannot 
be further postponed. 
 References 
 Awad, I. (2009).  The global economic crisis and migrant workers: Impact and response  (2nd ed.). 
Genève: International Labour Organization. 
 Bacon, C. (2005). Confronting the coffee crisis: Can fair trade, organic, and specialty coffees 
reduce  small- scale farmers vulnerability in Northern Nicaragua?  World Development ,  33 , 
 497– 511. 
 Bakker, A. B. (2005). Flow among music teachers and their students: The crossover of peak 
experiences.  Journal of Vocational Behaviour ,  66 ,  26– 44. 
 Bassi, M., & Delle Fave, A. (2012). Optimal experience among teachers: New insights into 
the work paradox.  Journal of Psychology ,  146 ,  533– 557. 
 Bassi, M., Ferrario, N., Ba, G., Delle Fave, A., & Viganò, C. (2012). Quality of experience 
during psychosocial rehabilitation: A  real- time investigation with experience sampling 
method.  Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal ,  35 ,  447– 453. 

172 Antonella Delle Fave and Marta Bassi
 Bates, D. G., & Plog, F. (1990).  Cultural anthropology . New York:  McGraw- Hill. 
 Becchetti, L., Castriota, S., & Solferino, N. (2011). Development projects and life satisfac-
tion: An impact study on fair trade handicraft producers.  Journal of Happiness Studies ,  12 , 
 115– 138. 
 Berry, J. W. (1997). Immigration, acculturation, and adaptation.  Applied Psychology: An Inter-
national Review ,  46 ,  5– 34. 
 Berry, J. W., & Sam, D. L. (1997). Acculturation and adaptation. In J. W. Berry, M. H. 
Segall, & C. Kagitçibasi (Eds.),  Handbook of  cross- cultural psychology. Vol. 3: Social behavior and 
applications (pp.  1– 49). Needam Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon. 
 Boerema, C., Russell, M., & Aguilar, A. (2010). Sewing in the lives of immigrant women. 
 Journal of Occupational Science ,  17 ,  78– 84. 
 Bond, M. H. (2013). The  pan- culturality of  well- being: But how does culture fit into the 
equation?  Asian Journal of Social Psychology ,  16 ,  158– 162. 
 Bringsén, A., Ejlertsson, G., & Andersson, I. H. (2011). Flow situations during everyday 
practice in a medical hospital ward. Results from a study based on experience sampling 
method.  BMC Nursing ,  10 , 3. doi:10.1186/ 1472- 6955- 10- 3 
 Brookfield, H., & Gyasi, E. A. (2009). Academics among farmers: Linking intervention to 
research.  Geoforum ,  40 ,  217– 227. 
 Caddy, L., Crawford, F., & Page, A. C. (2012). Painting a path to wellness: Correlations 
between participating in a creative activity group and improved measured mental out-
come.  Journal of Psychiatric and Mental Health Nursing ,  19 ,  327– 333. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1975).  Beyond boredom and anxiety.  New York: Wiley. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990).  Flow: The psychology of optimal experience . New York: Harper & Row. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Csikszentmihalyi, I. (Eds.) (1988).  Optimal experience: Psychological 
studies of flow in consciousness . New York: Cambridge University Press. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M., & LeFevre, J. (1989). Optimal experience in work and leisure.  Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology ,  56 ,  815– 822. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Massimini, F. (1985). On the psychological selection of  bio- cultural 
information.  New Ideas in Psychology ,  3 ,  115– 138. 
 Delle Fave, A. (2004). A feeling of wellbeing in learning and teaching. In M. Tokoro & 
L. Steels (Eds.),  A learning zone of one’s own (pp.  97– 110). Amsterdam: IOS Press. 
 Delle Fave, A. (2007). Individual development and community empowerment: Suggestions 
from studies on optimal experience. In J. Haworth & G. Hart (Eds.),   Well- being: Individual, 
community, and societal perspectives (pp.  41– 56). London: Palgrave McMillan. 
 Delle Fave, A. (2009). Optimal experience and meaning: Which relationship?  Psychological 
Topics: Special Issue on Positive Psychology ,  18 ,  285– 302. 
 Delle Fave, A., & Bassi, M. (2009). Sharing optimal experiences and promoting good com-
munity life in a multicultural society.  Journal of Positive Psychology ,  4 ,  280– 289. 
 Delle Fave, A., & Bassi, M. (2014). Work and the dynamics of development: An integrated 
model. In C. Biron, R. J. Burke, & C. L. Cooper (Eds.),  Creating healthy workplaces: Stress 
reduction, improved  well- being, and organizational effectiveness  (pp.  37– 50). Franham, UK: Gower. 
 Delle Fave, A., Brdar, I., Wissing, M., &  Vella- Brodrick, D. (2013). Sources and motives for 
personal meaning in adulthood.  Journal of Positive Psychology, 6 ,  517– 529. 
 Delle Fave, A., & Massimini, F. (1988). Modernization and changing contexts of flow in 
work and leisure. In M. Csikszentmihalyi & I. Csikszentmihalyi (Eds.),  Optimal experi-
ence: Psychological studies of flow in consciousness  (pp.  193– 213). New York: Cambridge 
University Press. 
 Delle Fave, A., & Massimini, F. (1999).  Inter- cultural relations: A challenge for psychology. 
In A. Delle Fave & F. Meli (Eds.),  Modernization and cultural identity  (pp.  11– 22). Milan: 
Edizioni Dell’Arco. 

Work, cultures, and the culture of work 173
 Delle Fave, A., & Massimini, F. (2003). Optimal experience in work and leisure among 
teachers and physicians: Individual and  bio- cultural implications.  Leisure Studies ,  22 , 
 323– 342. 
 Delle Fave, A., & Massimini, F. (2005). The investigation of optimal experience and apathy: 
Developmental and psychosocial implications.  European Psychologist ,  10 ,  264– 274. 
 Delle Fave, A., Massimini, F., & Bassi, M. (2011).  Psychological selection and optimal experience 
across cultures: Social empowerment through personal growth . Dordrecht, NL: Springer. 
 Delle Fave, A. Wissing, M. Brdar, I.  Vella- Brodrick, D., & Freire. T. (2013). Perceived meaning 
and goals in adulthood: Their roots and relation with happiness. In A. Waterman (Ed.), 
 The best within us: Positive psychology perspectives on eudaimonic functioning  (pp.  227– 247). 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
 Dickie, V. A. (2003). Establishing worker identity: A study of people in craft work.  American 
Journal of Occupational Therapy ,  57 ,  250– 362. 
 Doshi, B. V. (1990). Planning for a community: Vidyadhar Nagar.  International Social Science 
Journal ,  42 ,  387– 394. 
 Emmons, R. A. (2005). Striving for the sacred: Personal goals, life meaning and religion. 
 Journal of Social Issues ,  61 ,  731– 745. 
 Fianco, A., & Delle Fave, A. (2006). Donne migranti e qualità dell’esperienza soggettiva: Uno 
studio con experience sampling method [Migrant women and quality of subjective expe-
rience: A study with experience sampling method].  Passaggi ,  11 ,  101– 122. 
 Finch, B. K., Vega, A. W. (2003). Acculturation stress, social support, and  self- rated health 
among Latinos in California.  Journal of Immigrant Health ,  5 ,  109– 117. 
 Gowlland, G. (2012). Learning craft skills in China: Apprenticeship and social capital in and 
artisan community of practice.  Anthropology & Education Quarterly ,  43 ,  358– 371. 
 Griffiths, S. (2008). The experience of creative activity as a treatment medium.  Journal of 
Mental Health ,  17 ,  49– 63. 
 Harris, E. (2008). The meanings of craft to an occupational therapist.  Australian Occupational 
Therapy Journal ,  55 ,  133– 142. 
 Haworth, J., & Hill, S. (1992). Work, leisure and psychological  well- being in a sample of 
young adults.  Journal of Community and Applied Social Psychology ,  2 ,  147– 160. 
 Hedden, T., Park, D. C., Nisbett, R. E., Ji, L., Jing, Q., & Jiao, S. (2002). Cultural variation in ver-
bal versus spatial neuropsychological function across the lifespan.  Neuropsychology ,  16 ,  65– 73. 
 Hektner, J., Schmidt, J., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2007).  Experience sampling method: Measur-
ing the quality of everyday life . Thousand Oaks: SAGE. 
 Herskovitz, M. J. (1948).  Man and his works: The science of cultural anthropology . New York: Knopf. 
 Hofstede, G. (1980).  Culture’s consequences: International differences in  work- related values . 
London: SAGE. 
 Jalas, M. (2006). Making time: The art of loving wooden boats.  Time & Society ,  15 ,  343– 363. 
 Jasinskaja- Lahti, I., Liebkind, K., Jaakkola, M., & Reuter, A. (2006). Perceived discrimination, 
social support networks, and psychological  well- being among three immigrant groups. 
 Journal of  Cross- Cultural Psychology ,  37 ,  293– 311. 
 Kagitçibasi, C. (1997). Individualism and collectivism. In J. W. Berry, M. H. Segall, & C. 
Kagitçibasi (Eds.),  Handbook of  cross- cultural psychology .  Vol. 3: Social Behavior and Applica-
tions (pp.  1– 49). Needam Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon. 
 Karides, M. (2005). Whose solution is it? Development ideology and the work of 
 micro-entrepreneurs in Caribbean context.  International Journal of Sociology and Social 
Policy ,  25 ,  30– 62. 
 Kazarian, S. S., & Evans, D. R. (2001).  Handbook of cultural health psychology . San Diego, CA: 
Academic Press. 
 Kluckhohn, F., & Strodtbeck, F. (1961).  Variants in value orientation . New York: Row Peterson. 

174 Antonella Delle Fave and Marta Bassi
 Markus, R., & Kitayama, S. (1991). Culture and the self: Implications for cognition, emotion, 
and motivation.  Psychological Review ,  98 ,  224– 253. 
 Massimini, F., & Calegari, P. (1979).  Il contesto normativo sociale [The social normative context] . 
Milan: Angeli. 
 Massimini, F., & Delle Fave, A. (2000). Individual development in a  bio- cultural perspective. 
 American Psychologist ,  55 ,  24– 33. 
 Meares, C. (2010). A fine balance: Women, work and skilled migration.  Women’s Studies 
International Forum ,  33 ,  473– 481. 
 Nakamura, J., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2003). The construction of meaning through vital 
engagement. In C. Keyes & J. Haidt (Eds.),  Flourishing (pp.  83– 104). Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association Books. 
 Nederlof, E. S., & Dangbégnon, C. (2007). Lessons from  farmer- oriented research, experi-
ence from a West African soil fertility management project.  Agriculture and Human Values , 
 24 ,  369– 387. 
 Nelson, N. J., LaBat, K. L., & Williams, G. M. (2005). More than “just a little hobby”: 
Women and textile art in Ireland.  Women’s Studies International Forum ,  28 ,  328– 342. 
 Oskamp, S. (2000). A sustainable future for humanity?  American Psychologist ,  55 ,  496– 508. 
 Page, K. M., &  Vella- Brodrick, D. A. (2009). The “what”, “why” and “how” of employee 
 well- being.  Social Indicators Research ,  90 ,  441– 458. 
 Parker, S. (1997). Work and leisure futures: Trends and scenarios. In J. T. Haworth (Ed.), 
 Work, leisure, and  well- being (pp.  180– 191). London: Routledge. 
 Phinney, J. S., Horenczyk, G., Liebkind, K., & Vedder, P. (2001). Ethnic identity, immigration, 
and  well- being: An interactional perspective.  Journal of Social Issues ,  57 ,  493– 510. 
 Portisch, A. O. (2009). Techniques as a window onto learning, Kazakh women’s domestic 
textile production in Western Mongolia.  Journal of Material Culture ,  14 ,  471– 493. 
 Prentice, R. (2012). “No one ever showed me nothing”: Skill and  self- making among Trini-
dadian garment workers.  Anthropology & Education Quarterly ,  43 ,  400– 414. 
 Purkayastha, B. (2005). Skilled migration and cumulative disadvantage: The case of highly 
qualified Asian Indian immigrant women in the US.  Geoforum ,  36 ,  181– 196. 
 Reynolds, F. (2009). Taking up arts and crafts in later life: A qualitative study of the expe-
riential factors that encourage participation in creative activities.  The British Journal of 
Occupational Therapy ,  72 ,  393– 400. 
 Reynolds, F., Vivat, B.,  & Prior, S. (2008). Women’s experiences of increasing subjective 
 well- being in CFS/ME through  leisure- based arts and crafts activities: A qualitative study. 
 Disability and Rehabilitation: An International, Multidisciplinary Journal ,  30 ,  1279– 1288. 
 Rheinberg, F., Manig, Y., Kliegel, R., Engeser, S., & Vollmeyer, R. (2007). Flow bei der Arbeit, 
doch Glück in der Freizeit. Zielausrichtung, Flow und Glückgefühle [Flow during work 
but happiness during leisure time: Goals, flow experience and happiness].  Zeitschrift für 
Arbeits- und Organisationspsychologie ,  3 ,  105– 115. 
 Rodríguez, A. M., Salanova, M., Cifre, E., & Schaufeli, W. B. (2011). When good is good: 
A virtuous circle of  self- efficacy and flow at work among teachers.  Revista de Psicología 
Social ,  26 ,  427– 441. 
 Salanova, M., Bakker, A., & Llorens, S. (2006). Flow at work: Evidence for a gain spiral of 
personal and organizational resources.  Journal of Happiness Studies ,  7 ,  1– 22. 
 Sayce, S., Ackers, P., & Greene, A. M. (2007). Work restructuring and changing craft identity: 
The tale of the disaffected weavers (or what happens when the rug is pulled from under 
your feet).  Work, Employment, and Society ,  21 ,  85– 101. 
 Schwalbe, M. (2010). In search of craft.  Social Psychology Quarterly ,  73 ,  107– 111. 
 Searle, W., & Ward, C. (1990). The prediction of psychological and sociocultural adjustment 
during  cross- cultural transitions.  International Journal of Intercultural Relations ,  14 ,  449– 464. 

Work, cultures, and the culture of work 175
 Sheldon, K. M., Ryan, R. M., Deci, E. L., & Kasser, T. (2004). The independent effects of 
goal contents and motives on  well- being: It’s both what you pursue and why you pursue 
it.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin ,  30 ,  475– 486. 
 Smith, P. B., & Bond, M. H. (1999).  Social psychology across cultures . Boston: Allyn & Bacon. 
 Soni- Sinha, U. (2011). Invisible women: A study of jewellery production in West Bengal, 
India.  Journal of Gender Studies ,  20 ,  105– 123. 
 Suto, M. (2009). Compromised careers: The occupational transition of immigration and 
resettlement.  Work – A Journal of Prevention Assessment & Rehabilitation ,  32 ,  417– 429. 
 Triandis, H. C., Chan, D.K.S., Bhawuk, D., Iwao, S., & Sinha, J.B.P. (1995). Multimethod 
probes of allocentrism and idiocentrism.  International Journal of Psychology ,  30 ,  461– 480. 
 Vaalsiner, J. (2007). Personal culture and conduct of value.  Journal of Social, Evolutionary, and 
Cultural Psychology ,  1 ,  59– 65. 
 Vivoll Straume, L., & Vitterso, J. (2012). Happiness, inspiration and the fully functioning 
person: Separating hedonic and eudaimonic  well- being in the workplace.  The Journal of 
Positive Psychology ,  7 ,  387– 398. 
 Ward, C. (2001). The A, B, Cs of acculturation. In D. Matsumoto (Ed.),  The handbook of 
culture and psychology (pp.  411– 445). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Ward, C., & Kennedy, A. (1994). Acculturation strategies, psychological adjustment, and 
 socio- cultural competence during  cross- cultural transitions.  International Journal of Inter-
cultural Relations ,  18 ,  329– 343. 
 Wherry, F. F. (2008).  Global markets and local crafts: Thailand and Costa Rica compared . Baltimore: 
John Hopkins University Press. 
 Zlobina, A., Basabe, N., Paez, D., & Furnham, A. (2006). Sociocultural adjustment of immi-
grants: Universal and group predictors . International Journal of Intercultural Relations ,  30 , 
 195– 211. 

 What is work? 
 The question seems purely rhetorical – immersed as we are everyday in the hustle 
and bustle of workers around us, from the sanitation truck loading our trash at 
dawn to the waitresses in the restaurant at night; and in between these our own 
work at desks or in schools, hospitals, construction sites, or boardrooms – we 
certainly know what work is. Yet as with many other aspects of life, familiarity 
with a given phenomenon does not imply understanding it. So is it with work: 
generally we assume that it is a necessary evil one has to put up with, something 
to get rid of as soon as possible so we can enjoy ourselves doing something else – 
watching TV, playing an electronic game, or, if nothing better is available, gazing 
outside the window. 
 Most scientific analysis of the work experience, conducted by psychologists or 
sociologists, takes the existence of work as a given, and tries to understand how it 
affects the individuals who are doing it. Until recently, however, little systematic 
attention has been paid to what is actually meant by “work.” In this chapter, we shall 
start by taking a closer look at some of the characteristics that make work either a 
positive or a negative human experience, before considering suggestions for imple-
menting conditions leading to more positive work experiences. 
 First of all, work is not a stable, unchanging process. Under favorable conditions 
it can be the best part of life; under badly designed social conditions it can be an 
almost unendurable burden. We do not have any way of knowing how our ances-
tors living 20,000 years ago or earlier experienced work. But the work of anthro-
pologists who have observed contemporary groups of  hunter- gatherers have often 
remarked that in these “primitive” societies men and women seem to enjoy what-
ever work they have to do to survive – and that for them, the distinction between 
what we would call “work” and what we would call “leisure” – such as dancing, 
 10 
 WILL WORK EVER 
BE FUN AGAIN? 
 Sam Spurlin and Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi 

Will work ever be fun again? 177
playing music, telling stories around the campfire – was practically nonexistent 
( Evans- Pritchard, 1974; Sahlins, 1972; Turnbull, 1961). A man on a hunt did not 
think of himself as living any differently than when he was beating the drums at the 
evening dance. Both the “work” and the music were expressions of different aspects 
of his selfhood, motivated by real needs he could not help feeling. 
 It took a long time for work to become an alienated experience. What made it so 
was the evolution of technology that allowed people to accumulate food like grains 
and cereals, which could be stored without spoilage; in turn, this allowed some sec-
tions of the population to become  full- time soldiers, others to farm  full- time, or to 
become masons, carpenters, servants, and scribes. Society turned from a democratic 
group made of people who all did the same thing for a living to an increasingly dif-
ferentiated workforce held in place by the armies of despotic tyrants. 
 As technologies advanced, so did opportunities for the exploitation of labor. 
Some of the worst cases occurred during the Industrial Revolution of the eigh-
teenth and nineteenth centuries, when the small farmers and craftsmen of England, 
Germany, the United States, and pretty much elsewhere in the “developed world” 
were no longer able to make a living selling their products against the bigger 
and faster machines that took over the economy. It was quite usual for a former 
 farm- boy not quite eight years old in Manchester in the 1700s to have to get out 
of bed by three or four in the morning, rush to the  cotton- mills without breakfast, 
and then work for ten or twelve hours, stoking the furnaces that provided steam 
for the mechanical weaving looms. If the boy was lucky, he lived to become a 
man; however, for him “work” would remain anathema forever (Scitovsky, 1976; 
Thompson 1963). 
 Fortunately, the labor movements across the industrialized world eventually 
redressed some of the most inhuman aspects of this situation. It still exists in coun-
tries recently colonized by the expansion of the capitalist economy, like Indone-
sia or the Philippines. But by and large, even though most of the workers of the 
industrial world cannot experience their work as an extension of what is best in 
themselves – as a hunter or a farmer could – the conditions under which they work 
are immeasurably better than what they have been in some of the worst periods of 
human history. 
 In reality some of the most satisfying and meaningful moments of life happen 
when we are working (Csikszentmihalyi, 2003; Csikszentmihalyi & LeFevre, 1968). 
The reason for it is not difficult to find. Living organisms are built for extracting 
energy from the environment, and when they are allowed to do it well, they usu-
ally feel a deep sense of satisfaction, or even enjoyment. Bees living in a mountain 
meadow full of flowers might lazily flit in the sun, while still filling their hive with 
fine nectar. An arctic wolf might have to travel exhausting trails for many days and 
never find any food that it needs for its survival. But no matter how hard an animal 
has to work, it is difficult to say that it finds the struggle stressful or boring. In fact, 
most animals – at least those that are close enough to us to observe and interpret – 
are at their best when engaged in what we would call “work” – that is, when they 
practice the activity that makes it possible for them to survive. 

178 Sam Spurlin and Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi
 Thinkers across the ages have remarked that living things are at their best when 
they do what they specifically adapted to do. The poet and philosopher Dante 
Alighieri expressed this idea best, about 700 years ago: 
 For in every action . . . the main intention of the agent is to express his own 
image; thus it is that every doer, whenever he does, enjoys ( delectatur ) the 
doing. Because everything that is, desires to be, in doing the doer unfolds his 
being, and so enjoyment naturally follows. 
 (Alighieri, 1921 [1317] Book 1,  Chap. 13 , our translation) 
 In a less poetic vein, the recently developed discipline of positive psychology 
is reaching similar conclusions. Individuals have different strengths –  twenty- four 
according to Peterson and Seligman (2004) – and when they are using their strengths 
they not only are more efficient but also feel more positive moods. A good example 
was quoted in the recent obituary of Richard Grossman, a physician specializing in 
the treatment of burn victims, whose “fierce dedication” to his work and the new 
techniques he developed for alleviating the pain of his patients had become legend-
ary. When he was asked what led him to become so addicted to such grueling work, 
he did not mention the good he was accomplishing, but simply answered, “You 
develop a skill, and you want to use it” (Nelson, 2014). Dante Alighieri would have 
understood. But this is true not only of professionals or other fortunate individuals. 
People involved in seemingly simple farming chores, who apparently would have 
very little to enjoy about their work, are often as eloquent about what they do for a 
living as a poet or a physician. “I still take care of the cows and tend the orchard,” 
says a sixty-two-year-old woman living in the Italian Alps. “I feel special satisfaction 
in caring for the plants: I like to see them grow day by day. It is very beautiful.” Or, a 
fifty-year-old farmer from the same village: “For me to work means taking care of 
the fields and the animals. Especially the animals . . . I had other jobs in France, but 
I am glad I came back . . . I like to be close to them. It gives me a lot of satisfaction” 
(Delle Fave & Massimini, 1988, p. 197, 199). 
 And yet, surveys around the world keep showing that “work” is often disliked 
and rarely found satisfying by most adults. Despite improved working conditions, 
something is still clearly lacking. It is still very rare for workers to feel that their job 
is an expression of their best qualities, that it is a meaningful activity, that it is  fun . 
Where can we look for ideas that can change this state of affairs? 
 Reconstructing enjoyable work 
 Autonomy at work has emerged as one of the main variables responsible for posi-
tive organizational outcomes.  Self- determination theory (SDT; Ryan & Deci, 2000) 
and the job characteristics model (Hackman & Oldham, 1975) both include it as 
a component of their respective models. In terms of  self- determination theory, 
 autonomy  is included as a basic component of motivation along with  relatedness and 
 competence . The theory has been productively used as a basis and justification in 

Will work ever be fun again? 179
many organizational studies seeking to unravel the connections between individual 
motivation and positive organizational outcomes (Gagné & Deci, 2005; Greguras & 
Diefendorff, 2009; Ryan & Deci, 2000). 
 The job characteristics model provides a framework for thinking about the rela-
tionship that connects individuals to the specific characteristics of jobs. Auton-
omy is one of five characteristics that Hackman and Oldham include in their 
model. Nielsen and Cleal (2010) showed that the core job characteristics included 
in the job characteristics model – including autonomy – are positively related to 
 work- related flow. Additionally, Saavedra and Kwun (2000) have linked autonomy 
to positive affect at work, and Fried and Ferris (1987) have made a connection 
between autonomy and motivation. Autonomy orientation and autonomy support 
within an organization have also been linked to an increase in prosocial activities 
(Gagné, 2003). More generally, Demerouti (2006) has shown that motivating job 
characteristics (including autonomy) are positively related with flow at work and 
that conscientiousness moderates the relationship between flow at work and job 
performance. 
 While there are certainly individual differences that make autonomy more 
salient to some people than to others (Ryan & Deci, 2006), it has been well estab-
lished that it is often a vital trait of engaged, motivated, and productive employees 
(Spector, 1986; Stone, Deci, & Ryan, 2009). In addition to the support offered by 
several decades of organizational psychology research, the importance of auton-
omy is spreading across the public consciousness as well. Several organizational 
trends highlight its importance across industries. For example, many companies are 
embracing the  cost- saving benefits of remote and virtual teams. Allowing employ-
ees to work from home and utilizing information technology that makes immediate 
communication among dispersed teams possible help companies attract the best tal-
ent. For many employees, the option of working from home full- or  part- time is a 
crucial consideration when looking at available jobs. Even within more traditional 
organizations there has been a movement toward  self- managing teams, open floor 
plan offices, and  results- only work environments (ROWE) – all of which place a 
greater focus on autonomy in making decisions about work. 
 There is also a growing class of workers who are forgoing traditional employment 
entirely and crafting independent careers built around their own entrepreneurial 
efforts. Entrepreneurship is growing in popularity, as success stories like Facebook 
and the  start- up culture of Silicon Valley convince more and more people to try 
building their own product or service instead of working for someone else. Even 
freelancing, traditionally viewed as the unfortunate result of a weak labor market or 
the inability to land a  full- time job, is becoming an important part of the economy 
and a career many people are consciously choosing and embracing. In each of these 
cases, increase in autonomy is perhaps the hallmark characteristic that best describes 
the reason why this is happening in each of these organizational activities. 
 The impulse may be to assume that an increase in autonomy across the board, 
from traditional employees and organizational structures to the growth of inde-
pendent work, is an unquestionable step in a positive direction. As Deci and Ryan 

180 Sam Spurlin and Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi
have clearly articulated in their SDT, autonomy (along with relatedness and com-
petency) is one of the key motivational factors. However, one should also analyze 
the flip side of this expansion in autonomy. By definition, greater autonomy means 
a reduction in supervision and management. In a world where workers are given 
more autonomy and responsibility can productivity be kept high, quotas met, and 
standards maintained? If greater autonomy leads to more motivated and productive 
employees, then why hasn’t this change happened already? 
 It’s obviously a gross oversimplification to view an increase in autonomy as a 
 cure- all for organizational and economic woes. There is a necessary role for manage-
ment, leadership, and supervision in most, if not all, industries. However, the increase 
in autonomy that is being viewed across the spectrum of productive activity, from  self- 
managing manufacturing teams to  white- collar telecommuters working from home 
offices, to entrepreneurship, and to the individuals selling their experience and skills 
on a shifting basis as freelancers, cannot be denied. How can this trend be effectively 
used to not only increase work and life satisfaction of workers but also allow orga-
nizations to be productive and profitable? Do these two forces, employee  well- being 
and profitability, have to be in opposition to each other? 
 In a world where autonomy is moving toward a more primary role in the way we 
think about how jobs and organizations are structured, we are suggesting that flow 
will play a growing and important role. Workers who are given more autonomy 
in the way they approach and complete their work will have more control over how 
they can find flow at work. Some who enjoy working alone will have a chance to 
do so; those who enjoy working early in the morning can wake up early and quit at 
midday; those who hate some aspect of their job might have a chance to delegate it 
to someone who enjoys doing it. 
 Workers who are in control of how to do their job are likely to spend more of 
their time at work in flow, be more engaged in what they do, and work at their 
peak capacity. Being in flow while doing your primary job is likely to set off a posi-
tive cascade where increasing challenges must be found to match increasing skills. 
This constant positive pressure is what should keep productivity high, quotas and 
standards met, and workers satisfied, happy, and committed to their organizations. 
Very simply, a fully engaged worker is not looking to shirk responsibilities, steal time 
from the organization, or otherwise find ways to cut corners. When it becomes a 
flow experience, work becomes more like a game – a game where cheating is not 
an option, because it would destroy the point of the activity. Challenges are sought, 
skills are consciously developed, and job tasks and responsibilities are tweaked to 
allow individuals to lose themselves completely in the task at hand. 
 The growing trend of autonomy in the workplace may be a major contribut-
ing factor to people finding work fun again. With flow rising to an increased 
level of importance as part of a more autonomous work style, what is the role of 
the organization in this new reality? One could be tempted to simply argue that 
an organization that wants to harness the best of its more autonomous employees 
must simply get out of the way and let them do what they must to find greater flow 
in work. However, that would be an oversimplified way to conceptualize the role of 

Will work ever be fun again? 181
the organization. Instead, organizations can take active roles in providing the envi-
ronment, resources, and support that allow workers to find flow more easily. 
 To start, this could simply be providing professional development opportunities 
to teach employees about how to find enjoyment in their work. The first step to 
employees finding more flow in work is increasing their understanding of what it 
is and how to find it. Secondly, organizations can explicitly support employees by 
talking about  flow- inducing and  flow- blocking components of the work during 
performance reviews and other opportunities where managers or leaders can hear 
from employees. Managers can help employees figure out ways to overcome the 
parts of their job that seem to be resulting in boredom, anxiety, or any other nega-
tive states. Finally, organizations can provide the resources to allow employees the 
opportunity to develop their skills and provide more challenging opportunities. A 
likely consequence of being in flow is that the skills of employees will constantly 
grow. In order to remain in flow, employees need to have greater challenges on 
which they can utilize their increasing skills. Organizations that fail to provide for 
the growth of their employees will likely experience an unmotivated workforce as 
boredom and apathy set in. 
 Building ﬂ ow into the future of work 
 We know that work is trending toward greater autonomy in many different ways. 
Traditional organizations are frequently adopting flatter hierarchies and giving real 
 decision- making authority to  self- managing teams. Outside the world of organi-
zational work, independent workers, such as freelancers, solopreneurs, and contrac-
tors, are creating viable and rewarding careers. Given this increase in autonomy 
across various work modalities, how can individuals use flow theory to increase 
their  well- being at work? 
 This question falls under the purview of job crafting research. Job crafting 
refers to the idea that individuals can deliberately and consciously alter their jobs 
in ways that align better with their skills and interests (Wrzesniewski & Dutton, 
2001). A robust body of research has emerged from this initial idea, with researchers 
investigating the role personality plays in predicting job crafting behaviors (Bakker, 
Tims, & Derks, 2012), the impact of job crafting on the proactive behaviors of 
dyads (Bakker,  Rodríguez- Muñoz, & Sanz Vergel, 2016), the relationship between 
job crafting and job performance (Tims, Bakker, & Derks, 2015), its impact on 
meaningfulness (Berg, Dutton, & Wrzesniewski, 2013) and work engagement, to 
name but a few areas of inquiry (Tims, Bakker, Derks, & van Rhenen, 2013). The 
goal of this chapter is not to comprehensively review the extant job crafting litera-
ture but to simply ask about the inevitable importance of this concept in the highly 
autonomous future we are both predicting and already observing. What does job 
crafting based on flow look like in a world where workers have  ever- increasing 
autonomy over the what, where, and how of work? 
 There are three major components to keep in mind when trying to create the 
possibility of finding flow in any activity: clear goals and a sense of progress, prompt 

182 Sam Spurlin and Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi
and appropriate feedback, and a balance between challenge and skill (Csikszentmih-
alyi, 1990). Having clear goals allows an individual to have a sense of purpose while 
working. Immediate feedback allows for the adjustment of effort toward an overall 
sense of progress. Finally, the balance between challenge and skill allows an indi-
vidual to work without entering the realm of anxiety (when the situation is more 
challenging than the current skill level will tolerate) or boredom (when the situa-
tion is less challenging than the current skill level). In the world of highly autono-
mous work, individuals have control over how they approach and structure their 
work and environment to support these three conditions of the flow experience. 
 Goals and progress 
 The first condition for having flow at work is the ability to set one’s goals – not 
necessarily the  long- range goals, but the  moment- by-moment goals that need to 
be met as the task proceeds in order to achieve the overall goal of the enterprise. 
In every activity we have studied, the flow experienced by the actor is contingent 
not on the overall goal but on the enjoyment experienced from overcoming the 
obstacles presented by the task along the way. The main enjoyment of a musician 
does not come from reaching the end of the song he is playing, but by playing each 
note and each chord as well as he can. The main enjoyment of a rock climber usu-
ally comes from each move, each small progress she makes on the rock, not from 
reaching the end of the climb. Similarly, to improve the quality of the work experi-
ence what matters most is not the ultimate goal of the task but how we can organize 
the ways needed to reach it. 
 In any job, there are several variables that can be modified so as to define more 
clearly how the task ought to be done. The first, of course, is what product or 
service the worker is expected to provide. This decision in a contemporary work 
setting run along traditional lines is likely to remain a  top- down decision dictated 
by management and unions, and not directly by the worker himself. However, the 
details of how the task is to be accomplished leave an enormous latitude to the 
worker. And, as the architect Mies van der Rohe used to say, “God is in the details.” 
 In the first place, as far as the worker is concerned, the goal might be very differ-
ent from what the job description stipulates. As Wrzesniewski and Dutton (2001) 
have shown, one cleaning woman at a hospital might describe her task as keeping the 
patient’s bed and bathroom clean, while another hired to do the same job describes it 
as making the patient happy and comfortable in her hospital room. Not surprisingly, 
the second woman is likely to find her job more challenging and rewarding – even 
though she essentially goes through the same motions as the first one. 
 Middle- level managers often report that what they like least about their job is hav-
ing to turn in weekly written reports to their superiors, which are  time- consuming 
to write, boring to read, and rarely noticed or commented upon by the boss. It does 
not take too much effort, however, to make these managers see that if they redefine their 
task as that of writing a little essay that concisely but accurately describes what 
their team has accomplished, and turn the routine report into an elegant personal 

Will work ever be fun again? 183
statement, then the dread task becomes a  win- win proposition: the writer will enjoy 
it more, and so will the reader. Perhaps the report will even lead to some actionable 
improvement in the workflow of the organization. 
 In traditional organizational contexts goals were usually handed down from an 
authority figure or supervisory position. Tasks were clear and goals were clearly 
defined every step of the way. Progress against some sort of externally imposed 
quota was the primary concern for both management and the employee. However, 
as autonomy increases across many work modalities this highly directed and regi-
mented approach to goals and progress is shifting to the purview of the individual 
worker or  self- managed team. How are decisions about goals made when an increase 
in autonomy means there is no longer a boss or supervisor dictating specific goals for 
employees to execute? 
 Self- leadership, the process by which individuals control their own behavior 
through behavioral and cognitive strategies, may become a much more prominent 
factor in the highly autonomous work of the future (Manz, 1986).  Self- leadership is 
generally broken into three types:  behavior- focused strategies, natural reward strate-
gies, and cognitive thought pattern strategies. These strategies all revolve around 
the conscious decisions individuals make about how to structure and interact with 
their work and environment in order to achieve their goals. In a work environ-
ment where autonomy is very prevalent the successful utilization of  self- leadership 
strategies becomes even more important. Breevaart, Bakker, and Demerouti (2014) 
found support for this concept with a study that showed maternity nurses who used 
daily  self- leadership behaviors had greater work engagement via the mechanism of 
greater resourcefulness of the daily work environment (i.e., more skill variety, feed-
back, and developmental opportunities). 
 Individuals need to be able to set their own goals and gauge their progress without 
the guiding hand of an external supervisor. Knowledge of flow and the conditions that 
lead to it becomes a powerful piece of knowledge for the independent worker trying 
to figure out how to best work with little supervision and a seemingly endless array 
of possibilities in terms of strategies and behavior. Flow is found as goals are set so as 
to provide a sense of progress while working in a highly autonomous environment. 
 For example, the solopreneur who can break a nebulous goal, like “Start a profit-
able company,” into concrete and ultimately doable goals is likely to find more flow 
than the individual who has not clearly defined any specific goals. This goal setting 
and progress checking must be an individually motivated activity in a work envi-
ronment where supervision is limited. Without it the pervading feeling of workers 
in the future, regardless of specific industry, is likely to be one of dull frustration as 
they encounter amorphous goal after amorphous goal. 
 Feedback 
 Another primary component of finding flow is timely feedback. Immediate feed-
back allows the individual to make slight alterations to behavior that guide progress. 
For the  flow- engaged rock climber that feedback is simply the fact they are still 

184 Sam Spurlin and Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi
clinging to the rock face and making progress toward the summit. For the pianist, 
the feedback of hearing a wrong note allows changes to be made and skills devel-
oped. For the highly supervised worker, this feedback may come in the form of 
praise or criticism from an  ever- vigilant boss, customers, or coworkers. True, in the 
world of highly autonomous work, external feedback is often lacking. 
 In many cases, the sources of feedback are highly dependent on the type of work. 
In manufacturing and other industries where physical products are manipulated and 
created, feedback can be generated visually or through quality control processes. 
Highly skilled workers may be able to create feedback for themselves by simply 
observing the final product. In a modern manufacturing facility the assembly line 
approach may divorce the individual worker from any sense of actionable feedback 
because the result of their work is not clearly observable and the overall task identity 
is nonexistent. For this reason many manufacturing facilities have shifted production 
from a pure division of labor model to  self- managed teams that are involved in pro-
duction from the beginning to the end. Teams of this nature can receive the feedback 
of observing and testing the final product, which provides valuable information for 
future work, or from the other team members (e.g., Bakker, 2005; Walker, 2010). 
 It is clear how making things can provide tangible sources of feedback, but what 
about the realm of knowledge work? Knowledge workers rarely produce physical 
products and can spend the entirety of their workday sitting in front of comput-
ers. In this context, feedback needs to be generated by the individual. The ultimate 
source of feedback is that which is generated by the expert who is competent to 
judge what it takes to do his job well. A master worker knows when he or she is 
creating excellent or mediocre work. In a highly autonomous work environment, 
this master worker has the freedom to monitor his or her physical and mental 
energy. Knowing when work is beginning to suffer and taking the proper course 
of action to rectify the slip in quality, whether taking a power nap or moving to a 
less taxing activity, are the mark of a master worker. Master workers are able to find 
flow in their work because they can find  real- time, meaningful feedback on their 
own progress. When the feedback begins to show a decline in quality, autonomous 
workers can decide how to best use their time and attention to be productive. Feed-
back is no longer the purview of the higher levels of the organizational hierarchy, 
but an  intra- individual process for making decisions about how to work. 
 Balancing challenge and skill 
 In order to find flow one must find the balance between the perceived opportunities 
for action – or challenge – an activity offers and the skills related to that activity 
one has at one’s disposal. Autonomy in work provides a great amount of leeway 
for making adjustments to bring these two characteristics into alignment. Whereas 
 low- autonomy work situations often result in individuals having much greater skill 
than needed for a particular situation, thus resulting in boredom, high autonomy 
allows individuals to tweak the amount of perceived challenge and ideally find flow 
in a larger proportion of their work. 

Will work ever be fun again? 185
 Finding the flow “channel” and staying in it for as long as possible has the added 
bonus of allowing the individual to improve his or her skill in a certain domain. As 
workers improve their skills, they must find greater challenges in order to continue 
experiencing flow. Many nonautonomous work situations do not give individuals 
an opportunity to increase the challenge of their work once they have acquired the 
necessary amount of skill to no longer make it a flow activity. On the other hand, a 
highly autonomous job, whether working for an organization or as an independent 
professional, may allow the individual to seek out and engage with  higher- challenge 
situations as they develop their skills. 
 For example, a new digital design freelancer may find the process of completing 
simple logo creation assignments a very challenging endeavor. The process of find-
ing a small client, such as a local retail store, developing a logo, incorporating feed-
back, and eventually delivering a final product may be incredibly  flow- inducing. 
However, as the freelancer gains skill in each of these areas he may feel compelled 
to find more challenging assignments and larger clients in the future. By noticing 
when he is and is not experiencing flow in his current work, he can make better 
decisions about how to grow his business and engage in more challenging, and 
ultimately more rewarding, work. 
 To remain in flow, a person should not be distracted by stimulation that is irrel-
evant to the task at hand. Some people can concentrate better when they work 
alone in a quiet and neutral space, while others are more efficient in focusing when 
there are people moving around and there is background noise. A  one- size- fits- all 
workplace is certainly easier to set up and probably cheaper, but is likely to waste 
a great deal of the attention of the workers – which after all, is the most important 
asset the organization possesses – distracting them with boredom induced by soli-
tude, or with anxiety due to unexpected social intrusions. The same applies to the 
surroundings: some persons can concentrate better in minimalist spaces without 
any visual distraction; others can focus better amid the clutter of personal objects 
and images. 
 Applying the perspective of flow theory to the workplace of the future suggests 
one basic conclusion: in order to achieve the best results, we should create produc-
tive organizations that can make the best use of the psychic energy of its members, 
while at the same time endeavoring to make the process of work as enjoyable, 
meaningful, and engaging as possible. If the worker experiences flow at work, he or 
she will focus mental energy on the task – thus achieving organizational goals – and 
at the same time feel that the energy is well spent because  it is fun . 
 Measurement and the future of ﬂ ow at work 
 While organizations have an important role in the support and development of flow 
among employees, individuals also have the opportunity to take on greater respon-
sibility in making their work a more enjoyable expression of their strengths and 
values. As autonomy continues to increase in the organizational setting, employees 
can take an increasing role in their  day- to-day experience of work. The problem 

186 Sam Spurlin and Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi
is very often workers might feel a general sense of dissatisfaction with their job, 
without knowing what it is that they feel. We seldom have an objective sense of 
our inner lives – of what it is that bothers us, and why. Yet if we want to achieve 
flow at work, it is necessary to have reasonably accurate information about how the 
activities, the people, and the tasks that make up our job affect us. Only then can 
we begin to change the parameters of the job, and find out, by trial and error, what 
might make it better. 
 One way this could be done in the near future – short of difficult and time-
consuming training in systematic introspection – could be achieved through the 
application of “wearable technology.” Wearable technology refers to the growing 
class of technological gadgets embedded within everyday objects or adorning our 
bodies. They are full of sensors that passively monitor and record various aspects of 
our physiology and environment. Over the next several years, wearable technology 
is likely to be one of the largest areas of innovation in consumer electronics. We 
are already seeing the vanguard of this movement with products like Google Glass, 
a computer/glasses hybrid. Smart watches are being developed (e.g., the Apple 
Watch) which allow individuals to have access to various forms of data easily acces-
sible on their wrist instead of on a phone in their pocket; or in the case of Hitachi, 
on electronic chips worn on a necklace. Even smartphones are entering the realm of 
wearable technology with their ability to track movement. Smartphone app devel-
opers and accessory creators have released heart rate monitors,  GPS- based running 
assistants, and a multitude of other gadgets that can monitor changes in the body 
and present the user with that information. 
 The measurement of flow has always had a relationship with technology as early 
ESM studies utilized programmable beepers at a time when that was highly unusual 
in psychological research (see Csikszentmihalyi & LeFevre, 1989). Then study par-
ticipants had to be given the beeper and trained in its use in order to record their 
data. Now, the vast majority of potential participants in flow studies, especially in 
the realm of  white- collar knowledge work, already carry a smartphone of their 
own. The use of mobile apps like PACO to facilitate data collection has made ESM 
studies easier and cheaper to initiate. 
 However, the even greater potential lies in the ability of individual users to track 
their own experience over time with their own smartphones or other wearable tech. 
There is no reason an app could not be created today that makes it easy for individu-
als to set up an  ESM- like  self- study that would allow them to track how often and 
under what conditions they experience flow. In this scenario, the app facilitates their 
ability to track and manage their own experience of flow at work. The combina-
tion of the knowledge of what flow is, why it’s beneficial, actual data on when the 
individual does and does not experience flow, and the latitude to make changes in 
aspects of his or her work environment could unlock the potential for individuals 
to experience more flow at work. 
 Looking into the future a little bit further could unlock an even easier way for 
individuals to track flow throughout the day. Traditional ESM studies have always 

Will work ever be fun again? 187
struggled with the fact that they require the participant to shift attention from 
whatever they were doing in the moment to the survey they are being prompted to 
respond to about what they are doing in that moment. Ironically, the measurement 
of flow can actually disrupt the experience itself. Wearable technology that moni-
tors the body for biological markers can help work around this challenge. Imagine 
that a worker puts on his  technology- infused glasses that measure his brain waves 
and a  technology- infused shirt that monitors his skin conductance, heart rate, and 
several other biological markers as he gets ready for work in the morning. He goes 
through the day experiencing varying levels of stress, affect, flow, and boredom 
while wearable technology sits silently in the background, recording data. At the 
end of the day he opens the flow app on his smartphone (which is able to com-
municate with a calendar that records what he was doing and who he was with at 
specific points of the day) and is presented with an  easy- to-understand visualization 
of his flow levels throughout the day. He learns that he experienced a high level 
of flow during the morning drive into the office (except when he was cut off a 
few miles away and silently fumed for the rest of the trip). The meeting which he 
prepared for very well turned out to be another  high- flow activity during the day, 
whereas the emergency meeting later in the day in which he felt unprepared was 
another low point. With an understanding of what flow is and what factors affect 
whether he experiences it, his wearable technology and smartphone application 
offer a nearly limitless way to tweak experience at work to be more  flow- like. 
 Conclusion 
 The last several pages have explored what the future may look like. Our predictions 
are based on sound evidence, but predicting the future is a difficult endeavor for any-
body, particularly empirically minded scientists. If our predictions about the future 
of work are correct – that autonomy will continue to grow in importance and the new 
class of “independent workers” will move more and more into the spotlight – then 
it stands to reason that flow will continue to have an important role in designing 
and crafting work to be more meaningful and fulfilling. 
 The world of work holds the potential to be a great source of  well- being in 
the lives of individuals, or a great source of sorrow, drudgery, and exploitation. 
The experience of work itself has evolved and gone through cycles that have 
mapped onto the social evolution of the human species. Our hope is that work 
can move once again toward an intrinsically rewarding and motivating source of 
 self- expression for an increasing number of people. Learning about the antecedents 
to flow,  self- monitoring our personal data with the astonishing advances in wear-
able technology, and then crafting our jobs based on that information are a series 
of steps in the direction of experiencing work as a positive force in life. Indeed, in 
the future we might perhaps turn Dante’s insight into reality, and work will once 
again provide the ultimate enjoyment that comes from expressing our images, and 
unfolding our beings. 

188 Sam Spurlin and Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi
 References 
 Alighieri, D. [1317 (1921)]  De Monarchia . Firenze: Rostagno. Book 1, Chapter 13. Carpenter. 
Bakker, A. B. (2005). Flow among music teachers and their students: The crossover of peak 
experiences. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 66, 26–44.
 Bakker, A. B.,  Rodríguez- Muñoz, A., & Vergel, A.I.S. (2016). Modelling job crafting behav-
iours: Implications for work engagement.  Human Relations ,  69 (1),  169– 189. 
 Bakker, A. B., Tims, M., & Derks, D. (2012). Proactive personality and job performance: The 
role of job crafting and work engagement.  Human Relations ,  65 (10),  1359– 1378. 
 Berg, J. M., Dutton, J. E., & Wrzesniewski, A. (2013). Job crafting and meaningful work. 
 Purpose and Meaning in the Workplace ,  81– 104. 
 Breevaart, K., Bakker, A. B., & Demerouti, E. (2014). Daily  self- management and employee 
work engagement.  Journal of Vocational Behavior ,  84 (1),  31– 38. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990).  Flow: The psychology of optimal experience . New York: Harper 
Collins. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2003).  Good business . New York: Viking. 
 Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Le Fevre, J. (1989). Optimal experience in work and leisure.  Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 56 (5),  815– 822. 
 Delle Fave, A., & Massimini, F. (1988). Modernization and the changing context of flow in 
work and leisure. In M. Csikszentmihalyi & I. S. Csikszentmihalyi (Eds.),  Optimal expe-
rience: Psychological studies of flow in consciousness  (pp.  192– 213). New York: Cambridge 
University Press. 
 Demerouti, E. (2006). Job characteristics, flow, and performance: The moderating role of 
conscientiousness.  Journal of Occupational Health Psychology ,  11 ,  266– 280. 
 Evans- Pritchard, E. E. (1974).  Nuer religion . New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Fried, Y., & Ferris, G. R. (1987). The validity of the job characteristics model: A review and 
 meta- analysis.  Personnel Psychology ,  40 ,  287– 322. 
 Gagné, M. (2003). The role of autonomy support and autonomy orientation in the engage-
ment of prosocial behavior.  Motivation and Emotion ,  27 ,  199– 223. 
 Gagné, M., & Deci, E. L. (2005).  Self- determination theory and work motivation.  Journal of 
Organizational Behavior ,  26 (4),  331– 362. 
 Greguras, G. J., & Diefendorff, J. M. (2009). Different fits satisfy different needs: Link-
ing  person- environment fit to employee commitment and performance using self- 
determination theory.  Journal of Applied Psychology ,  94 (2), 465. 
 Hackman, J. R., & Oldham, G. R. (1975). Development of the job diagnostic survey.  Journal 
of Applied Psychology ,  60 (2), 159. 
 Manz, C. C. (1986).  Self- leadership: Toward an expanded theory of  self- influence processes 
in organizations.  The Academy of Management Review ,  11 (3),  585– 600. 
 Nelson, V. J. (2014). A. Richard Grossman: A specialist in burn treatment.  Los Angeles Times , 
March 15, Section AA1, p. 1. 
 Nielsen, K., & Cleal, B. (2010). Predicting flow at work: Investigating the activities and job 
characteristics that predict flow states at work.  Journal of Occupational Health Psychology , 
 15 (2),  180– 190. doi:10.1037/a0018893 
 Peterson, C., & Seligman, M. E. (2004).  Character strengths and virtues: A handbook and classifica-
tion . New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2000).  Self- determination theory and the facilitation of intrinsic 
motivation, social development, and  well- being.  American Psychologist ,  55 (1), 68. 
 Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2006).  Self- regulation and the problem of human autonomy: 
Does psychology need choice,  self- determination, and will?  Journal of Personality ,  74 , 
 1557– 1586. doi:10.1111/j. 1467– 6494.2006.00420.x 

Will work ever be fun again? 189
 Saavedra, R., & Kwun, S. K. (2000). Affective states in job characteristics theory.  Journal of 
Organizational Behavior ,  21 ,  120– 132. 
 Sahlins, M. D. (1972).   Stone- Age economics . Chicago: Aldine Press. 
 Scitovsky, T. (1976).  The joyless economy . New York: Random House. 
 Spector, P. E. (1986). Perceived control by employees: A  meta- analysis of studies concerning 
autonomy and participation at work.  Human Relations ,  39 (11),  1005– 1016. doi:10.1177/
001872678603901104 
 Stone, D. N., Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (2009). Beyond talk: Creating autonomous moti-
vation through  self- determination theory.  Journal of General Management ,  34 (3),  75– 91. 
 Thompson, E. P. (1963).  The making of the English working class.  New York: Viking. 
 Tims, M., Bakker, A. B., & Derks, D. (2015). Job crafting and job performance: A longitudi-
nal study.  European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology ,  24 (6),  914– 928. 
 Tims, M., Bakker, A. B., Derks, D., & van Rhenen, W. (2013). Job crafting at the team and 
individual level: Implications for work engagement and performance.  Group & Organiza-
tion Management ,  38 (4),  427– 454. 
 Turnbull, C. M. (1961).  The forest people . Garden City, NY: Doubleday. 
Walker, C. J. (2010). Experiencing flow: Is doing it together better than doing it alone? 
Journal of Positive Psychology, 5, 3–11.
 Wrzesniewski, A., & Dutton, J. E. (2001). Crafting a job: Revisioning employees as active 
crafters of their work.  Academy of Management Review ,  26 (2),  179– 201. 

 INDEX 
 Note: Italicized page numbers indicate a figure on the corresponding page. Page numbers 
in bold indicate a table on the corresponding page. 
 absorption and flow 68 
 academic implications for flow 93–101, 
 95 ,  96 
 action-awareness merging 145 
 adaptive performance 151–2 
 affective events theory (AET) 72–3 
 Alighieri, Dante 178, 187 
 alternative methods of flow 61–2 
 alternative performance criteria 151–2 
 antecedents and indicators of flow 120–1 
 assessment questionnaires of flow 30 
 autonomy 8, 68–9, 178–83 
 autotelic state/experience 4, 13–14, 36, 141 
 balance in flow 30;  see also challenge-skill 
balance 
 behavior-primacy theory 2 
 between-person differences 52–4 
 Beyond Boredom and Anxiety 
(Csikszentmihalyi) 6, 119 
 broaden-and-build theory of positive 
emotions (B&B theory) 72, 111, 150 
 catastrophe theory  91 , 91–3,  92 
 centering attention component 29–30 
 challenge ratings in tasks 34 
 challenge-skill balance 121–3, 143 
 chaos and flow at work 88–9 
 chaotic dynamic 97 
 citizenship behavior 152 
 clear goals 30, 74, 143 
 Clifton, Jif 99 
 cognitive evaluation theory 6 
 collective flow 114 
 conceptualization of expectancy theory 147 
 conservation of resources theory (COR) 
69–70 
 Creusen, Utho 100 
 critical psychological states (CPS) 8 
 Crooke, Michael 100 
 cross-cultural variation 159, 160 
 Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly: flow, defined by 
50, 119; flow as critical psychological state 
69; “good work in business” project 31; 
intrinsic motivation 54; introduction 4, 6, 
28; organizational practices 99–101; theory 
of flow 152; work-related flow 51–2 
 cultures/culture of work: conclusions 
170–1; empirical evidence of 161–7,  163 ; 
introduction 157; migration and work 
167–70,  170 ; paradox of 163–6,  164 , 
 165 ,  166 ; psychological selection 157–9; 
work, values, and meaning 159–60; 
work cultures 160–1; work-related goals 
166–7,  167 
 cusp catastrophe model  91 , 91–3, 123, 126 
 day reconstruction method (DRM) 61–2 
 declarative measures of flow 30, 31–40, 33, 
 36 ,  38 ,  39 ,  40 

Index 191
 demand-control model 75 
 demand ratings in tasks 34 
 demand-skill balance 32–5,  33 
 discrepancy reduction loop 145 
 Dispositional Flow Scale 13 
 do-your-best (DYB) goals 144 
 Dyson, Freeman 81–2 
 emotional contagion 130 
 employee conscientiousness and flow 55 
 enjoyment and flow 37, 68, 107 
 enjoyment of work  see work enjoyment 
 entropy force 81–2 
 ergodic theorems 84 
 Eudaimonic and Hedonic Happiness 
Investigation (EHHI) 160, 167 
 event-based protocols 59 
 expectancy theory 146–9 
 experience fluctuation model (EFM) 108 
 Experience Sampling Form (ESF)  33 , 
33–4, 113 
 experience sampling method (ESM): 
challenge-skill balance 121; momentary 
vacillations in work flow 13–14; 
overview 32–4, 59–61; stationarity 85; 
well-being and 109–10; work enjoyment 
186–7 
 extrinsic motivation 1–4, 6–7 
 Falk, Stefan 100 
 feedback 8, 68 
 first-generation immigrant studies 162 
 flow: absorption and 68; academic 
implications for 93–101,  95 ,  96 ; 
alternative methods of 61–2; antecedents 
and indicators of 120–1; assessment 
questionnaires 30; balance in 30; 
collective flow 114; defined 50; employee 
conscientiousness and 55; enjoyment 
and flow 37, 68, 107; goal setting 
143–5; healthy variability in 89–91; 
heritability of 125; metacognition of 
133–4; momentary flow and recovery 
57; practitioner implications 93–101,  95 , 
 96 ; preconditions of 74–5; psychological 
selection 157–9; questionnaires in 
measuring 32–40, 33,  36 ,  38 ,  39 ,  40 ; 
self-efficacy and 149–50; subjective 
experience 5; task in 30; well-being and 
109–11, 170, 180;  see also WOrk-reLated 
Flow inventory 
 flow at work: challenge-skill balance 121–3; 
chaos and 88–9; collective phenomenon 
15; concluding remarks 19; defined 
67–8, 120–1; developing framework for 
8–12; fad or folderol 16–19; intrinsic and 
extrinsic motivation 1–4; introduction 
1; overview 4–8; remaining questions 
12; state  vs. trait 13–14;  see also within-
person changes at work 
 flow at work, applications in organizations: 
antecedents and indicators of 120–1; 
conclusion 134–5; introduction 119–20; 
metacognition of flow 133–4; nature 
of 120–6; nonlinear dynamic models 
18, 123–5,  124 ; selection of workers 
132–3; strategies for 126–34; worker 
demographics 125–6 
 flow at work, consequences: conclusions 
114–15; defined 107–8; as driver of 
performance 112–14; introduction 
106–7, 120; measurement of 108–9; 
model of 108; overview 109–14; personal 
and job resources 111–12; well-being 
and 109–11 
 flow at work, measuring: components of 
28–30; conclusion 43–4; declarative 
measures of flow 30, 31–40, 33,  36 , 
 38 ,  39 ,  40 ; interview studies 31–2; 
introduction 28; nondeclarative measures 
30, 40–2; questionnaires 32–40, 33,  36 , 
 38 ,  39 ,  40 
 flow at work predictors: conclusion 76; 
flow at work, defined 67–8; introduction 
66–7,  67 ; job characteristics 68–9; job 
resources 69–71; other predictors 75–6; 
overview 73–5; positive affect of 72–3; 
preconditions of flow 74–5; theoretical 
frameworks 68–73 
 flow at work redefined: academic and 
practitioner implications 93–101,  95 , 
 96 ; catastrophe theory  91 , 91–3,  92 ; 
chaos and 88–9; conclusions 101; 
healthy variability 89–91; homogeneity 
84–5; introduction 81–3; nonergodic 
process 83–7,  86 ; nonlinear dynamical 
systems (NDS) theory 83, 87–93,  91 ,  92 ; 
stationarity 85–7,  86 ,  86 
 flow channel model 108 
 “flowing” zone 82, 133 
 Flow Metacognitions Questionnaire 
(FMQ) 134 
 Flow Questionnaire (FQ) 43, 125–6, 162 
 Flow Short Scale (FSS) 39–40,  40 , 132 
 Flow State Scale 38–9,  39 , 128 
 functional autonomy notion 2 
 functional magnetic resonance imaging 
(fMRI) 41 

192 Index
 Gallup International Positive Institute 100 
 Gallup Organization 99 
 generalized linear model (GLM) 94–5 
 goals: clear goals 30, 74, 143; do-your-best 
(DYB) goals 144; framing of 146; 
long-range goals 182; moment-by-
moment goals 182; prevention goals 146; 
progress toward 182–3; promotion goals 
146; setting of 143–5; striving for 145–6; 
work-goal accomplishment 147; 
work-related goals 166–7,  167 
 goal-setting theory 11, 142–6, 149 
 “good work in business” project 31 
 Green Cargo 100 
 Grossman, Richard 178 
 healthy variability in flow 89–91 
 heritability of flow 125 
 high parasympathetic activation 42 
 homogeneity 84–5 
 humanistic psychology 2 
 industrial and organizational psychology 
(I/O) research: alternative performance 
criteria 151–2; conclusion 152–3; 
expectancy theory 146–9; goal 
framing 146; goal setting 143–5; goal 
striving 145–6; introduction 140–1; 
job characteristics 150–1; self-efficacy 
149–50; work motivation 141–3 
 Industrial Revolution 177 
 instrumentality in expectancy theory 
147–8 
 interindividual variation 83 
 interval-contingent protocols 61 
 interview studies 31–2 
 intrinsic motivation: challenge-skill 
balance 121; employee experiences 54; 
introduction 1–4; job characteristics 
model 68, 71; WOLF inventory 36 
 involvement measures 37 
 job characteristics model (JCM) 8, 68–71, 
75, 150–1 
 job crafting 12 
 job-demands-resources (JD-R) model 9, 
69–71, 75 
 job resources 69–71 
 job-specific feedback 9 
 linear multilevel regression models 122 
 long-range goals 182 
 low-autonomy work situations 184–5 
 Lyapunov exponent 97 
 managerial autonomy support 132 
 meaning-making evolutionary systems 158 
 mean squared successive difference (MSSD) 
85–6 
 metacognition of flow 133–4 
 Microsoft 100 
 moderate sympathetic activation 42 
 momentary flow and recovery 57 
 momentary vacillations in work flow 
13–14 
 moment-by-moment goals 182 
 motivating potential score (MPS) 151 
 motivation: defined 142; extrinsic 
motivation 1–4, 6–7; work motivation 
141–3;  see also intrinsic motivation 
 multigroup confirmatory factor analyses 
(MCFA) 107–8 
 National Institute of Mental Health 6 
 neuronal indicators 41–2 
 nondeclarative measures of flow 30, 40–2 
 nonergodic process 83–7,  86 , 98 
 nonhierarchical, distributed teams 
130–1 
 nonlinear dynamical systems (NDS) 
theory: implications for 94–9,  95 , 
 96 ; organizational practices 99–101; 
overview 87–93,  91 ,  92 ; work-related 
flow and 83 
 nonlinear dynamic models 18, 123–5,  124 
 obsessive-compulsive tendencies 17 
 organizational practices 99–101 
 organizational spontaneity 112–13 
 parasympathetic activation 42 
 Patagonia 100 
 person-specific dynamic models 99 
 positive emotional experiences 72, 
111, 150 
 positive organizational behavior (POB) 13 
 positron emission tomography (PET) 41 
 practitioner implications for flow 93–101, 
 95 ,  96 
 preconditions of flow 74–5 
 prevention goals 146 
 progress principle 129 
 promotion goals 146 
 psychological selection in flow 157–9 
 psychophysiological measures 42 
 qualitative data measures 31–2 
 questionnaires in measuring flow 32–40, 33, 
 36 ,  38 ,  39 ,  40 

Index 193
 recurrence plots 97 
 reflective self-consciousness 29, 35 
 regression analysis 132 
 results-only work environments (ROWE) 179 
 self-determination theory 3, 7, 132, 178 
 self-efficacy and flow 149–50 
 self-leadership 183 
 self-perception theory 3, 6 
 skills-challenges balance 56 
 skill variety 8, 68 
 smartphones 186–7 
 smart watches 186 
 social comparison theory 15 
 social validation theory 15 
 sociocultural adjustment predictors 168 
 start-up companies 132 
 stationarity 85–7,  86 ,  86 
 stimulus-action coding 41 
 strength ratings 31, 34, 37, 40, 42 
 subjective experience of flow 5 
 supervisor dyads 130 
 surrogate data analysis 98 
 Swedish Flow Proneness Questionnaire 
(SFPQ) 37–8,  38 
 task identity/significance: clear and 
proximal goals 30, 74; introduction 8; job 
characteristics model 68, 150 
 teacher-student dyads 130 
 temporal experience distortion 29 
 three-dimensional structure of flow at work 107 
 time-based protocols 59 
 TISEAN software 98 
 two-wave data 131 
 unambiguous feedback 143 
 valence-instrumentality-expectancy (VIE) 
theory 147–8 
 weakness ratings 31–2, 35, 40, 42 
 wearable technology 186–7 
 well-being and flow 109–11, 170, 180 
 within-person changes at work: alternative 
methods of flow 61–2; conclusion 62; 
dynamic nature of 51–3; experience 
sampling 59–61; homology across levels 
55–8; introduction 50–1; methods of 
capturing 58–62; theoretical importance 
53–5 
 WOLF inventory 13 
 work cultures 160–1;  see also cultures/
culture of work 
 work enjoyment: balancing challenge 
184–5; building flow into 181–2; 
conclusion 187; feedback for 183–4; 
goals and progress toward 182–3; 
introduction 176–8; measurement of 
185–7; reconstruction of 178–81 
 work-goal accomplishment 147 
 WOrk-reLated Flow inventory (WOLF): 
flow experience with 108, 109, 130; 
frequency  vs. intensity 114; intrinsic 
motivation 68; questionnaires 35–6,  36  
 World Health Organization (WHO) 19 

