
FOOD
SAFETY

Selected Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY 
WORLD ISSUES
Series
Adoption, Barbara A. Moe
Chemical and Biological Warfare, Al Mauroni
Childhood Sexual Abuse, Karen L. Kinnear
Conﬂicts over Natural Resources, Jacqueline Vaughn
Domestic Violence, Margi Laird McCue
Energy Use Worldwide, Jaine L. Moan and Zachary A. Smith
Genetic Engineering, Harry LeVine III
Gun Control in the United States, Gregg Lee Carter
Human Rights Worldwide, Zehra F. Kabasakal Arat
Illegal Immigration, Michael C. LeMay
Intellectual Property, Aaron Schwabach
The Internet and Society, Bernadette H. Schell
Mainline Christians and U.S. Public Policy, Glenn H. Utter
Mental Health in America, Donna R. Kemp
Nuclear Weapons and Nonproliferation, Sarah J. Diehl and 
James Clay Moltz
Policing in America, Leonard A. Steverson
Sentencing, Dean John Champion
U.S. Military Service, Cynthia A. Watson
World Population, Geoffrey Gilbert
For a complete list of titles in this series, please visit 
www.abc-clio.com.

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting
point for research by high school and college students, scholars,
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople,
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies,
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will
find the information they need in order to have a better
understanding of the social, political, environmental, and
economic issues facing the world today.


FOOD
SAFETY
A Reference Handbook
Second Edition
Nina E. Redman
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Santa Barbara, California 
Denver, Colorado 
Oxford, England

Copyright © 2007 by ABC-CLIO, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior
permission in writing from the publishers.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Redman, Nina.
Food safety : a reference handbook / Nina E. Redman. — 2nd ed.
p.
cm. 
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-59884-048-3 (hard copy : alk. paper) — 
ISBN 978-1-59884-049-0 (ebook)
1. Food adulteration and inspection—Handbooks, manuals, etc.
2. Food industry and trade—Safety measures—Handbooks, manuals,
etc.
I. Title. 
TX531.R44 2007
363.19’26—dc22
2007005642
11
10
09
08
07
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an ebook. 
Visit www.abc-clio.com for details.
ABC-CLIO, Inc.
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116–1911
This book is printed on acid-free paper
Manufactured in the United States of America.

Contents
Preface, xi
1
Background and History, 1
History, 1
USDA, 3
Risk Assessment, 4
Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points (HACCP), 5
International Food Safety, 7
Beyond Regulation, 9
Epidemiology and Foodborne Illnesses, 10
Bacteria and Food, 11
Campylobacter, 12
Listeria, 13
Salmonella, 15
E. coli, 17
E. coli O157:H7, 17
Shigella, 20
Yersinia, 20
Staphylococcus, 20
Clostridium perfringens, 21
Bacillus cereus, 22
Parasites, 22
Viruses, 24
Hepatitis A, 24
Noroviruses, 25
Aﬂatoxins, 25
Mad Cow Disease, 26
vii

Food Safety at the Consumer Level, 29
Eating Out Safely, 31
References, 32
2
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions, 35
Food Additives, Contaminants, and 
Packaging, 35
Olestra, 36
Aspartame/NutraSweet, 37
Benzene, 38
Acrylamides, 39
Mercury in Fish, 40
Salmon, 43
Carbon Monoxide in Meat Packaging, 44
Plastic Containers and Packaging, 45
Antibiotics, 46
Pesticides, 51
Growth Hormones in Beef Cattle, 55
Recombinant Bovine Growth Hormone, 57
Genetically Engineered Food, 58
Irradiation, 61
Bioterrorism, 63
References, 71
3 
Special U.S. Issues, 77
Factory Farming, 77
Human Health Impacts for Those Living in Close
Proximity to CAFOs, 85
Avian Flu, 88
How the Flu Virus Works, 89
Person-to-Person Transmission, 92
Precautions against Inﬂuenza, 95
Effects on Other Crops, 95
Legislation, 98
Technical Solutions, 99
Other Solutions, 100
References, 104
4 
Chronology, 109
viii
Contents

5 
Biographical Sketches, 129
Rachel Carson, 129
Ann Cooper, 130
Ronnie Cummins, 132
Nancy Donley, 132
Patricia Grifﬁn, 133
Fritz Haber, 134
Mary Heersink, 135
Sir Albert Howard, 136
Fred Kirschenmann, 137
Alice Lakey, 138
Antoni van Leeuwenhoek, 139
Stuart Levy, 140
Howard Lyman, 141
Helen McNab Miller, 142
Marion Nestle, 143
Michael Osterholm, 144
Louis Pasteur, 144
Stanley Prusiner, 146
John Robbins, 146
Joel Salatin, 147
Upton Sinclair, 148
John Snow, 149
David Theno, 151
Harvey Wiley, 153
Craig Wilson, 154
6 
Data and Documents, 157
Model Food Code of 2005, 160
Annex 4: Management of Food Practices—Achieving
Active Managerial Control of Foodborne Illness Risk
Factors, 160
Bioterrorism Act of 2002, 178
Subtitle A—Protection of Food Supply, 179
Efﬂuent Guidelines and Standards for Concentrated Animal
Feeding Operations , 185
IV. CAFO Roles and Responsibilities, 194
Bad Bug Book, 195
Campylobacter jejuni, 196
References, 199
Contents
ix

7
Directory of Organizations, 201
Nonproﬁt, Trade, and Professional Organizations, 201
International Agencies , 223
National Agencies (Canada and United States), 224
Canada, 224
United States, 225
State Organizations, 228
8 
Resources, 251
Books, 252
Reference Works, 252
Animal Products, 255
Bioterrorism, 257
Consumer Resources, 259
Epidemiology, 260
Farming, 261
Food Additives, Toxins, and Contaminants, 263
Foodborne Diseases, 265
Food Safety in Commercial Applications, 268
Food Safety Law and Policy, 270
Genetically Modiﬁed Foods, 275
History, 278
Inﬂuenza, 280
Microbiology of Foods, 281
Pesticides and Antibiotics, 283
Journals and Periodicals, 285
Nonprint Resources, 287
Databases, 287
General Databases, 288
Specialized Databases, 289
Free Internet Databases, 290
Videos and DVDs, 291
Glossary, 299
Index, 305
About the Author, 331
x
Contents

Preface
S
ince the first edition of this book, many new food safety
threats have emerged. For example, use of the Hazard Analy-
sis and Critical Control Points system (HACCP) has greatly
improved meat safety, but intensive livestock production has
meant that manure is increasingly contaminating fresh produce,
as was seen by the contamination of spinach with E. coli O157:H7
in 2006. These same intensive farming methods have created
new vectors for disease such as avian ﬂu. Every sector of society
was affected by the 2001 bombing of the World Trade Center, and
food safety was no exception. New laws now regulate the food
industry to provide better food defense. Each section of this new
edition has been completely revised with the most current infor-
mation as of late 2006.
Chapter 1 outlines the regulatory history of the food indus-
try, has background information about the most common food-
borne illnesses caused by bacteria, parasites, viruses, aﬂatoxins,
bovine spongiform encephalopathy, epidemiology, HACCP, and
international food safety, and ends with a discussion of how con-
sumers can eat safely at home and in restaurants. Chapter 2 ex-
amines other food safety threats, including the additives and
contaminants aspartame, olestra, acrylamide, benzene, mercury
in ﬁsh, and PCBs in salmon. It also discusses carbon monoxide in
meat packaging, pesticides, growth hormones in cattle, geneti-
cally modiﬁed foods, irradiation, antibiotics in animal feeds and
the problems of antibiotic resistance and bioterrorism. Chapter 3
focuses on how U.S. farming methods affect food safety and the
environment. The food industry has a great impact on the envi-
ronment and human health, and people face increasing threats
from diseases that both humans and animals can contract, such
as avian ﬂu, and from increased air and water pollution.
xi

Chapter 4 presents a chronology of important events in food
safety history from ancient times to the present. Chapter 5 has bi-
ographical sketches of prominent people in the food safety ﬁeld.
Improving food safety is a result of the combined efforts of food
safety activists, legislators, food technologists, epidemiologists
who track the sources of disease, scientists who discover better
ways to process food, and companies that dedicate themselves to
producing and serving safe food. The people I’ve chosen are rep-
resentative of the kinds of people working on food safety today
and in the past. Chapter 6 contains facts and statistics about food
safety issues, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration’s Model
Food Code of 2005 regarding designing Hazard Analysis and Criti-
cal Control Points (HACCP) plans, excerpts from the Bioterrorism
Act of 2002 as it pertains to food safety, the Environmental Pro-
tection Agency’s final rules regarding confined animal feeding
operations, and a sample entry from the FDA’s Bad Bug Book, an
online encyclopedia about foodborne illness. Chapter 7 is a direc-
tory of food safety organizations and agencies, including indus-
try trade groups, activist organizations, and federal, state, and
international governmental organizations concerned with food
safety. Chapter 8 is an annotated bibliography of books, journals,
databases, and video consumer and technical resources. A glos-
sary of frequently used terms is included at the end.
I’d like to thank the libraries of the University of California
for their generosity in allowing access to materials, including the
libraries at the University of California, San Diego, Irvine, Berke-
ley, and Davis.
My editor, Dayle Dermatis, has been especially helpful and
patient.
My family and friends have offered encouragement and sug-
gestions. My sons, Max and Jackson, have been patient when I’ve
needed to work and have provided computer assistance when
their mom couldn’t figure out what to do. Thanks to my hus-
band, Steve, for preparing delicious meals and giving lots of sup-
port and encouragement.
xii
Preface

1
Background and History
E
xperts disagree about whether food is safer today than in the
past, but they agree that ensuring safe food has become more
complex than at any other point in history. Although we have
solved many of the food safety challenges of the past, new prob-
lems have developed. We farm, live, and eat differently than we
did in the past, and this creates new niches for foodborne ill-
nesses to occupy. This chapter provides food safety history, back-
ground on U.S. regulatory structure, information about major
foodborne illnesses, and consumer tips for illness prevention.
History
As food safety issues have changed, so have society’s methods
for making food as safe as possible. Before manufacturing, tra-
ditional farming practices and preserving techniques were used
to ensure safe food. During the industrial revolution, food be-
gan to be processed and packaged. Lacking regulation, manu-
facturers were free to add whatever they liked to their
products. Sweepings from the floor were included in pepper,
lead salts were added to candy and cheese, textile inks were
used as coloring agents, brick dust was added to cocoa, and
copper salts were added to peas and pickles. (Borzelleca 1997,
44) In the 1880s, women started organizing groups to protest
the conditions at slaughterhouses in New York City and adul-
terated foods in other parts of the country. In 1883, Harvey W.
Wiley, chief chemist of the U.S. Agricultural Department’s Bu-
reau of Chemistry, began experimenting with food and drug
1

adulteration. He started a “poison squad,” which consisted of
human volunteers who took small doses of the poisons used in
food preservatives of the time. Wiley worked hard to get legis-
lation passed to regulate what could go into food. Meanwhile,
Upton Sinclair spent several weeks in a meat packing plant in-
vestigating labor conditions and turned his discoveries into a
book, The Jungle, published in 1906. Although the focus of that
book was the conditions immigrants experienced in the early
twentieth century, there were graphic descriptions of the filth
and poor hygiene in packing plants. These descriptions of
packing plants—not the poor working conditions of immi-
grants—caught the public’s attention. People began complain-
ing to Congress and to President Theodore Roosevelt. Pressure
was also mounting from foreign governments that wanted
some assurances that food imported from the United States was
pure and wholesome. Two acts were passed in 1906, the Pure
Food and Drug Act and the Beef Inspection Act, to improve
food safety conditions.
Regulation came only in response to problems: outbreaks
and health hazards were followed by new laws. In 1927, the
U.S. Food, Drug, and Insecticide Administration (the name was
shortened to the Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, in
1930) was created to enforce the Pure Food and Drug Act. How-
ever, in 1937, over 100 people died after ingesting a contami-
nated elixir. The act proved to have penalties that were too
light, and the laws were superseded in 1938 by the Pure Food,
Drug, and Cosmetics Act. This act prohibited any food or drug
that is dangerous to health to be sold in interstate commerce.
The Public Health Service Act of 1944 gave the FDA authority
over vaccines and serums and allowed the FDA to inspect
restaurants and travel facilities. In 1958, concern over cancer
led to the adoption of the Delaney Amendments, which ex-
panded the FDA’s regulatory powers to set limits on pesticides
and additives. Manufacturers had to prove that additives and
pesticides were safe before they could be used. The Fair Pack-
aging and Labeling Act of 1966 standardized the labels of prod-
ucts and required that labels provide honest information. The
next major act was the Food Quality Protection Act of 1996. It
set new regulations requiring implementation of Hazard
Analysis and Critical Control Points (HACCPs) for most food
processors. (HACCP is a process where a manufacturing or
2
Background and History

processing system is analyzed for potential contamination, and
systems are put in place to monitor and control contamination
at crucial steps in the manufacturing process.) The Food Qual-
ity Protection Act also changed the way acceptable pesticide
levels are calculated. Now total exposure from all sources must
be calculated.
USDA
Growing in parallel to the FDA was the U.S. Department of
Agriculture (USDA). The USDA is responsible for the safety of
most animal products. In the 1890s, some European govern-
ments raised questions about the safety of U.S. beef. Congress
assigned the USDA the task of ensuring that U.S. beef met Euro-
pean standards. In 1891, the USDA started conducting ante-
mortem and postmortem inspections of livestock slaughtered in
the United States and intended for U.S. distribution. The USDA
began using veterinarians to oversee the inspection process,
with the goal of preventing diseased animals from entering the
food supply.
During World War II more women entered the workforce
and consumption of fast food increased. Ready-to-eat foods like
processed hams, sausages, soups, hot dogs, frozen dinners, and
pizza increased dramatically. The 1950s saw large growth in
meat and poultry processing facilities. New ingredients, new
technology, and specialization increased the complexity of the
slaughter and processing industry. Slaughterhouses went from
being small facilities to large plants that used high-speed pro-
cessing techniques to handle thousands of animals per day. As a
result, food technology and microbiology became increasingly
important tools to monitor safety. The Food Safety and Inspec-
tion Service, the inspection arm of the USDA, grew to more than
7,000 inspectors. But because of the growth in the number of ani-
mals slaughtered and processed, it became impossible to indi-
vidually inspect each carcass. Without individual inspection,
governments and processors must rely on risk-assessment tech-
niques and HACCP to manage these risks. Inspectors must now
focus on the production line for compliance, and processing
techniques must be strong to compensate for the lack of individ-
ual inspection. (Schumann et al. 1997, 118)
USDA
3

Risk Assessment
Risk assessment is a formal extension of the type of analysis each
of us does every day when we take risks such as driving a car,
walking across the street, using an old stove, exercising, or play-
ing sports. Even though these things pose small risks of injury or
even death, we take the risks because the beneﬁts of the activi-
ties—getting to where we want to go, eating hot food, enjoying
ourselves—are high compared to the relatively small chance of
harm. Foods pose similar risks. There are several types of food
risks. Eating too much of certain types of foods, such as fats, can
be harmful. Eating spoiled or contaminated food can be very
dangerous, even deadly. Pesticides and food additives can also
pose risks. Risk assessment is the process of evaluating the risks
posed and determining whether a food ingredient or pesticide
can safely be consumed in the amounts likely to be present in a
given food.
In order to compute risks, scientists must consider both the
probability and the impact of contracting the disease. A disease
with high probability, but little impact, is of less concern than a
disease with high probability and high impact. The object is to
either reduce the probability of contracting the disease or the
severity of impact. Either action will reduce risk. To evaluate
risks, a four-step process is used: hazard identification, expo-
sure assessment, dose-response assessment, and risk characteri-
zation.
During the first step, hazard identification, an association
between a disease and the presence of a pathogen in a food is
documented. For example, contracting dysentery is associated
with eating chickens contaminated with Campylobacter jejuni, a
type of bacteria. Information may be collected about conditions
under which the pathogen survives, grows, causes infection, and
dies. Data from epidemiologic studies is used along with surveil-
lance data, challenge testing, and studies of the pathogen.
After the hazard is identiﬁed, exposure is assessed. This step
examines the ways in which the pathogen is introduced, distrib-
uted, and challenged during production, distribution, and con-
sumption of food. Exposure assessment takes the hazard from
general identification to all the specific process-related expo-
sures. For example, chickens might become exposed to c. jejuni
by drinking unchlorinated water or from other chickens on the
farm; the carcass might be exposed during defeathering or on the
4
Background and History

processing line; the number of pathogens may be reduced in
number during the chilling step and increase in number during
the packaging step. By examining potential exposure points, the
pathogen population can be traced and the likelihood of it reach-
ing the consumer can be estimated.
The third step, dose-response assessment, determines what
health result is likely to occur when the consumer is exposed to
the pathogen population determined in the exposure assessment
step. This step can be very difficult because there may not be
good data about what levels of pathogen exposure have health
consequences. Another significant factor is the strength of the
immune system of the particular consumer. Immune-compro-
mised populations, such as young children, the elderly, AIDS pa-
tients, and chemotherapy patients, may react to lower exposure
levels and have more severe health consequences.
Risk characterization, the ﬁnal step, integrates the informa-
tion from the previous steps to determine the risk to various
populations and particular types of consumers. For example,
children in general may have a different level of risk exposure
than children who consume three or more glasses of apple juice
per day. Computer-modeling techniques are often used in this
step to ease the computational burden of trying many different
scenarios. (Lammerding and Paoli 1997) With so many variables,
risk assessment does not produce exact, unequivocal results. At
best it produces good estimates of the impact of a given
pathogen on a population; at worst it over- or underestimates the
impact.
Hazard Analysis and
Critical Control Points (HACCP)
HACCP is a method of improving food safety developed by
Pillsbury for NASA in the late 1950s. HACCP requires deter-
mining food safety hazards that are likely to occur and using
that knowledge, establishing procedures at critical points to en-
sure safety. HACCP can be applied at any point in the food cy-
cle from field to fork. The steps, which are modified for each
setting, include analyzing the setting for potential problem ar-
eas, examining inputs to the system such as suppliers, deter-
mining prevention and control measures, taking action when
Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points (HACCP)
5

criteria aren’t met, and establishing and maintaining record-
keeping procedures. Some settings require microbial testing for
bacteria.
HACCP is very adaptable to different settings. Rangeland
where cattle graze can be managed with HACCP techniques to
prevent cattle wastes, which may contain parasites and other po-
tential pathogens, from entering water supplies. The techniques
used in this setting include managing stocking rates of cattle to
maintain enough vegetative cover, excluding calves from areas
directly adjacent to reservoirs, locating water and supplemental
feed away from stream channels, maintaining herd health pro-
grams, and controlling wild animal populations, such as of deer
and feral pigs, that might contaminate the water supply. Regular
testing of streams will indicate whether the measures are work-
ing, and whether further safeguards need to be undertaken.
Fruit and vegetable producers who grow foods that are of-
ten served raw must be especially careful. Their HACCP plans
must include worker hygiene plans such as rules for regular
handwashing and supplying clean ﬁeld toilets, adequately com-
posted manure so that pathogens from animal wastes are not
spread, testing of incoming water sources, and control of wild
animal populations to ensure contaminants are not infecting pro-
duce. (Jongen 2005)
In a manufacturing plant, HACCP is very compatible with
good manufacturing practices (GMPs) that include proper sani-
tation procedures. HACCP takes GMPs a step further by looking
at other potential problem areas. For example, a juice producer
following GMPs emphasizes fruit washing, plant cleanliness,
and strict adherence to sanitary policies and procedures. To im-
plement HACCP, the plant adds pasteurization to some prod-
ucts, ensures a cold-chain by making sure the product always
stays cold, and performs microbial testing to make sure the pro-
cedures are working.
Jack in the Box restaurants has developed HACCP to a
highly reﬁned system since the 1993 Escherichia coli outbreak that
resulted from tainted meat from one of its suppliers. Now the
restaurant chain does extensive microbial testing—testing the
ground beef off the production line every 15 minutes. The distri-
bution company has installed time- and temperature-recording
boxes that record the temperature in the delivery trucks to en-
sure that the beef is always stored at the proper temperature.
(Steinauer 1997)
6
Background and History

In retail food service operations such as restaurants, cafete-
rias, and in-store deli counters, recipes and procedures must be
examined to make food as safe as possible. This examination
could result in changing a recipe to ensure that foods that are
added raw are chopped in a separate place from other items that
are chopped before cooking. Suppliers are carefully examined,
food is maintained at the proper temperature, and the length of
time foods are left out is closely monitored. For example, a policy
that unsold chicken nuggets will be thrown out every half hour
might be implemented with a timer that beeps on the half hour.
Employees might have to initial a log stating that they had dis-
posed of unsold food.
HACCP has been mandatory since the 1970s for the low-
acid canned food industry and went into effect for domestic and
imported seafood processing in 1997. Meat and poultry proces-
sors had to implement HACCP plans in January 2000. Since re-
quiring producers to implement HACCP plans, the USDA’s
Food Safety and Inspection Service (FSIS) and the FDA have
used HACCP as a powerful tool to monitor contaminant levels
and require changes to plans in order to reduce hazards. For ex-
ample, in late 2003, after the FSIS required ready-to-eat-food
processors to improve their HACCP plans, the FSIS released
data showing that regulatory samples showed a 70 percent de-
cline in the number of samples testing positive for Listeria mono-
cytogenes. And in October 2002, the FSIS required all raw beef
processing plants to reassess their HACCP plans to reduce the
prevalence of E. Coli O157:H7 bacteria in ground beef. As a re-
sult, 62 percent of the plants made major changes to their pro-
cessing lines. Percentages of regulatory samples testing positive
dropped almost two-thirds from 0.86 percent in 2000 to 0.32 per-
cent in 2003. (U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food Safety and
Inspection Service 2004)
International Food Safety
Every industrialized country has agencies similar to the FDA
and USDA, many with stricter regulations than those of the
United States. In the European Union, food irradiation and ge-
netically modiﬁed foods are looked upon with suspicion, antibi-
otics in animal feed are banned, and regulations regarding
animal feeds and viral contamination are much more stringent
International Food Safety
7

than in the United States. On an international level, the World
Health Organization (WHO), an agency of the United Nations, is
very concerned with food safety worldwide. In 1983, an expert
committee on food safety was convened by the WHO and Food
and Agricultural Organization (FAO) of the UN. The committee
concluded that illness due to contaminated food is perhaps the
most widespread health problem in the contemporary world and
an important cause of reduced economic productivity. Food-
borne diseases are a major contributor to the estimated 1.5 billion
annual episodes of diarrhea in children under ﬁve. These diar-
rheal illnesses cause more than 1.8 million premature deaths
each year. The WHO has many safety-related programs to pro-
mote awareness, prevention, and control of food safety risks as-
sociated with biological and chemical contamination of foods. It
sponsors conferences on topics related to food safety, such as a
workshop in 2006 on new risk-management strategies for micro-
biological food safety. It also participates in the Codex Alimenta-
rius Commission established in 1962 jointly with FAO. The
purpose of the commission is to establish international standards
for food to both ensure food safety and to facilitate trade. (World
Health Organization 2006) For example, the commission
adopted standards in 2003 on how to assess risks to consumers
from foods derived from biotechnology.
Food is also regulated at regional and local levels. In the
United States, individual states regulate agriculture, including
the use of pesticides, and state health departments track food-
borne diseases. County health departments are responsible for
inspecting food service establishments and frequently close
restaurants that are not complying with health codes.
In addition to public agencies, there are many nongovern-
mental organizations that are working to improve food safety
either through promoting regulation or through research and
promotion of improved food safety practices. The Center for
Science in the Public Interest, publisher of the Nutrition Action
Healthletter, lobbies on behalf of consumers. One of its achieve-
ments has been a federal law that sets standards for health
claims on food labels and provides full and clear nutrition in-
formation on nearly all packaged foods. Pesticide Action Net-
work North America (PANNA) works to replace pesticides
with ecologically sound alternatives worldwide. Partly through
their efforts, the pesticide Lindane, a neurotoxin, was banned in
2006 by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Trade
8
Background and History

organizations, such as the National Restaurant Association,
promote food safety through certification programs, training,
and education.
Beyond Regulation
Although manufacturers, processors, and restaurants all want to
produce food cheaply and efﬁciently, they also have strong eco-
nomic reasons for making safe products. If a product gets re-
called, as happened with 27 million pounds of poultry products
in 2002 following an outbreak of listeriosis, loss goes far beyond
the lost revenue from the unsold product. Consumer conﬁdence
in the product must be reestablished before sales will resume to
their normal level.
One of the most highly studied cases of foodborne illness oc-
curred in 1993 when an E. Coli O157:H7 outbreak occurred in
which four children died after eating Jack in the Box hamburg-
ers. The company knew its business would not recover from an-
other serious food safety episode. They implemented a
state-of-the-art HACCP system with far more stringent require-
ments than state and federal regulations. This system included
microbial testing that went far beyond what any similar business
was doing at the time. (Steinauer 1997) Hudson Foods, the com-
pany that processed the E. Coli O157:H7–tainted hamburger that
was sold to Jack in the Box restaurants was dismantled and sold
after the incident.
But companies do not just react after an outbreak or recall.
Food service businesses around the world know that their cus-
tomers depend on safe food. Legal Sea Foods, a restaurant chain
founded in Boston, knows that the purity of its seafood is a ma-
jor selling point with its customers. So it established an in-house
laboratory where microbiological testing ensures that the
seafood they buy from vendors is safe. HACCP plans have been
implemented in all their restaurants, so between the inspection
at their receiving facility and serving a restaurant patron, every
step is monitored for possible contamination. (Berkowitz and
Doerfer 2003)
In Los Angeles, the health department implemented a grad-
ing system for restaurants. At inspection, the health inspector
goes through a checklist. If 90 to 100 percent of the items are in
compliance, the restaurant receives an “A”; 80 to 89 percent is a
Beyond Regulation
9

“B”; 70 to 79 percent is a “C”; and anything lower than 70 per-
cent gets a numeric score. A restaurant that scores less than 60
twice within a year is subject to closure. These grades, on a sign
about 8 by 10 inches, must be posted prominently on restaurants
and is usually posted on a window next to the front door. Since
this system was implemented, emergency room visits by cus-
tomers declined 13 percent. (Simon et al. 2005)
Restaurants are so anxious to get and keep As that they 
have turned to food safety consulting firms for help. National
Everclean, based in Calabasas, California, sets up HACCP pro-
grams and then conducts surprise inspections to make sure that
procedures are being followed. Many of their inspectors are vet-
erans of health departments and know what to look for. Their in-
spectors deduct points for unsafe conditions and report to
restaurant management. Many restaurant managers’ bonuses are
tied to these scores, so there is a lot of incentive to follow safe
food practices. An outbreak is a worst-case scenario, but as
people eat more of their meals away from home, they need to be
able to depend on the consistent safety of the foods they eat.
Restaurants and other food service businesses that provide con-
sistently safe food establish consumer conﬁdence and keep or in-
crease their business. (Dickerson 1999)
Epidemiology and Foodborne Illnesses
Most of what is known about foodborne illnesses started with
epidemiology, the study of disease in a population. John Snow, a
London physician, used deductive reasoning, research, and in-
terviews in the 1880s to determine the cause of a cholera epi-
demic that had killed more than 500 people in one week.
Scientists used Snow’s techniques to investigate primarily infec-
tious disease until the 1920s, when the ﬁeld broadened to include
clusters of all factors that apply to the incidence of disease
among people.
Epidemiological techniques have improved over the years.
In the 1970s, Dr. Paul Blake developed the case-control method.
This method compares those who became ill with closely
matched individuals who stayed well. By examining what those
who became ill did differently from those who stayed well, the
source of infection can often be revealed. In the case of foodborne
illness, an ill person is questioned about where and what they ate
10
Background and History

and matched as closely as possible in age, health status, and eat-
ing patterns to someone who stayed well in an effort to pinpoint
differences.
In the United States, the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) works to help treat and prevent disease at the
national level, and has increased its scope to lend epidemiologi-
cal assistance worldwide because of the overlap between the de-
veloped and less developed worlds. The people who pick and
pack fruits and vegetables in foreign countries that are imported
to the United States are handling the U.S. food supply. If foreign
workers have illnesses that can be transmitted through food,
their illnesses have a direct bearing on our health.
Foodborne illness is most often linked to bacteria, but there
are other agents that can cause foodborne illness, including
viruses, parasites, prions, and molds. Bacterial illness is the most
prevalent, but viruses and parasites are being spread through
food more commonly than in the past. Each type of disease agent
has different characteristics that must be considered when imple-
menting food safety strategies.
Bacteria and Food
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimate that 79
percent of foodborne illness is caused by bacteria. Bacteria, small
microorganisms that do not have a nucleus, can replicate in food,
water, or in other environmental media. Some bacteria do not
grow well in cold temperatures, while others ﬂourish. Some bac-
terial strains are extremely virulent, causing infection with as lit-
tle as two bacteria. Other bacteria must be present in large
numbers to cause any problems. The most common way food-
borne bacterial illness is transmitted is the fecal-oral route, where
fecal matter from an animal or person contaminates foodstuffs.
This contamination could result from inadequate handwashing,
fecal matter from animals being transferred to meat during the
slaughter or processing steps, or even unsterilized manure being
used to fertilize crops. Harmful bacteria can also be carried in an-
imals and, even without fecal contamination, can be present in
meat or eggs.
One of the most helpful tools scientists have developed to
investigate bacterial illnesses is DNA ﬁngerprinting. Each strain
of bacteria has a unique genetic fingerprint. By comparing
Bacteria and Food
11

bacteria from ill persons with bacteria from suspected foods, it
is possible to deﬁnitively conclude whether that particular food
is the causative agent of the disease. This tool has helped health
departments tremendously to trace the source of infection and
limit outbreaks. The following sections provide specific details
about the major bacterial illnesses.
Campylobacter
Campylobacter jejuni causes more foodborne illness in the world
than any other bacteria, virus, or parasite, but most people have
never heard of it. In a majority of cases where a speciﬁc pathogen
can be identiﬁed as a source of foodborne illness, C. jejuni is the
source. It was ﬁrst identiﬁed in fetal tissue of aborted sheep in
1913, but was not isolated from stool samples of patients with di-
arrhea until 1972. It is so prevalent because it spreads so easily
among chickens. One contaminated bird in an otherwise Campy-
lobacter-free ﬂock can result in contamination of the entire ﬂock
within seven days. (Ketley and Konkel 2005) The most common
vehicle for transmission is raw or undercooked poultry, but it can
also occur in untreated drinking water, raw milk, and barbecued
pork or sausage, where the meat may be cooked at low tempera-
tures for long periods of time, or may become cross-contaminated
by basting brushes, etc. Most cases are relatively minor, causing
loose stools. More severe cases result in diarrhea, fever, and ab-
dominal cramping. People who are immune compromised are es-
pecially susceptible to getting campylobacteriosis. One study of
AIDS patients showed they got the illness at a rate thirty-nine
times higher than the general population. Much more rarely
(about 1 in 1,000 cases) Campylobacter can cause bacteremia (bacte-
ria gets into the bloodstream), hepatitis, pancreatitis, septic arthri-
tis (bacteria gets into the joints and causes stiffening), and
Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS). GBS starts with fever, malaise,
nausea, and muscular weakness. It affects the peripheral nervous
system, especially the roots of the spinal cord that face the front of
the body. The paralysis that follows may be mild or may require
the patient to be placed on a ventilator to avoid respiratory fail-
ure. There is no treatment for the disease besides providing sup-
portive care. Most people recover within a few weeks or months.
However, the paralysis can last for many months or even be per-
manent. Twenty percent of victims have a permanent disability
and 5 percent die of GBS. (Altekruse et al. 1999)
12
Background and History

Reiter’s syndrome, a form of infectious arthritis, is some-
times caused by Campylobacter. Generally affecting older people,
it causes pain and swelling of the joints and tendons and inﬂam-
mation of the tendons. Typically, it occurs in discrete episodes
that last weeks to months. It may disappear after one episode or
it may recur and become a chronic illness.
Although the number of cases of campylobacteriosis that re-
sult in serious illnesses like Reiter’s syndrome and GBS are less
than 1 percent of cases, the large number of people that contract
the illness each year (over 2 million in the United States alone)
means that thousands (20,000 each year in the United States) will
suffer serious results. (Altekruse et al. 1999)
Campylobacter is prevalent in food animals, like poultry, cat-
tle, pigs, sheep, and shellﬁsh, and pets, like cats and dogs. How-
ever, it rarely causes disease in these animals. For example, C.
vibrio lives in the intestines of chickens without causing any
harm to the chicken. Meat becomes contaminated when it comes
in contact with fecal matter from an infected chicken. Because
chickens live in close quarters today, with ﬂocks as large as tens
of thousands of birds, an infection of campylobacteriosis can eas-
ily spread to other chickens. Mostly the disease is spread, how-
ever, during the transportation and slaughter steps. With
assembly-line processing, the carcasses are handled together,
which results in cross-contamination. A 2002 study showed that
82 percent of all chicken meat in stores is contaminated with
Campylobacter. (Ketley and Konkel 2005)
Recent legislation improving food safety in chicken process-
ing plants may be starting to show some results. A 28 percent de-
cline in the number of Campylobacter-related illnesses was
reported between 1996 and 2003, according to the CDC. Both the
USDA and the FDA have instituted regulations requiring
HACCP programs. (U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food Safety
and Inspection Service 2004) However, consumers must continue
to be vigilant to prevent illness.
Listeria
Listeria monocytogenes was discovered in the 1920s. It is a particu-
larly pernicious bacteria found in soil and water that can survive
refrigerator temperatures and even freezing. It can be found on
some vegetables as well as on meat and dairy products. In 2002
an outbreak was traced to poultry products from Wampler
Bacteria and Food
13

Foods. Pilgrim’s Pride, the parent company, recalled 27 million
pounds of meat. (Burros 2002)
Heat kills Listeria, so foods that are consumed right after
cooking are not at risk. But Listeria can grow in relatively low-
temperature environments such as under refrigeration. If
processed or ready-to-eat foods become contaminated after they
are prepared, but before they reach the consumer, they can de-
velop sufﬁcient levels of contamination to sicken consumers. In
the United States, 2,500 cases of listeriosis, the disease L. monocy-
togenes causes, are reported annually. Many more people proba-
bly get the disease, but in a form so mild they are never
diagnosed and treated. The bacteria can live easily in the intesti-
nal tract of animals without harming them, and it has been found
in at least thirty-seven mammalian species, both domestic and
feral. Some studies suggest that 1 to 10 percent of humans may
be intestinal carriers of L. monocytogenes. (U.S. Food and Drug
Administration 2005)
Listeria can cause septicemia, meningitis, encephalitis, and
intrauterine or cervical infections in pregnant women that may
cause miscarriages or stillbirths. It appears to be able to pass
through the placenta to the child, so that even if an infected child
survives childbirth, it may die shortly after birth. The symptoms
of listeriosis are usually inﬂuenza-like, including chills and fever.
It may also cause gastrointestinal symptoms such as nausea,
vomiting, and diarrhea. One of the challenges of tracing sources
of the bacteria is its relatively long incubation period. Many
cases take weeks to show up, increasing the range of possible
tainted foods.
Of the 2,500 cases reported annually in the United States,
about 500 die. If the disease is caught early enough, it can be eas-
ily treated with antibiotics. The people most at risk are AIDS pa-
tients who contract listeriosis at 300 times the rate of people with
normal immune systems. People with cancer or kidney disease,
and the elderly, also have increased risk. Pregnant women are
twenty times more likely to get the disease, but it is their infants
in utero that suffer the serious effects of the disease. Healthy
adults and children occasionally get infected with Listeria, but it
rarely turns into serious illness. (U.S. Food and Drug Adminis-
tration 2005)
The last three major outbreaks in the United States came
from processed meats, which killed 7 in 2002 and 15 in 1998 (Bur-
14
Background and History

ros 2002), and from soft Mexican cheese in the 1980s, when 142
contracted the disease and 46 died. (Fox 1997, 274) Vegetables
grown in soil contaminated with Listeria (probably from manure
in fertilizer) are another common carrier of the bacteria. Ready-
to-eat foods are often consumed without further cooking. Al-
though processed food is generally pasteurized, if there are
problems at the processing plant, the food can become contami-
nated after pasteurization.
To avoid illness from Listeria, immune-compromised people
should avoid packaged meats unless they are served steaming
hot and soft cheeses like Brie, Camembert, blue-veined cheeses,
and Mexican-style cheese. Following the outbreak of listeriosis
and recall of poultry products in 2002, the FSIS concluded that
further regulation was required to ensure that ready-to-eat-food
processors were preventing contamination by L. monocytogenes.
In 2003 new rules went into effect requiring processors to update
and develop better HACCP plans. In a survey of 1,400 proces-
sors, 87 percent had changed their operations to more effectively
control L. monocytogenes, including testing for Listeria in the plant
environment, using antimicrobial agents, and using post-lethal-
ity treatments. Total recalls declined signiﬁcantly in 2004, as did
the number of cases of foodborne illness. (U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Food Safety and Inspection Service 2004)
Salmonella
Salmonella is the second most common source of food poisoning
in the United States after Campylobacter. It generally causes sud-
den headache, diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting, and the illness of-
ten persists for several days. Symptoms may be minor or severe,
causing dehydration or even death. The CDC estimates there are
2 to 4 million cases each year resulting in 500 to 1,000 deaths.
(U.S. Food and Drug Administration 2005)
Salmonella is most often associated with raw eggs and un-
dercooked poultry. A 2006 USDA study found 16 percent of un-
cooked chickens were contaminated with the bacteria. (Center
for Science in the Public Interest 2006) The bacteria live harm-
lessly in the intestines of chickens. During the slaughter and pro-
cessing steps, the bacteria often contaminate the carcasses.
In 1999, alfalfa sprouts were implicated in an outbreak 
of salmonellosis centered in Oregon and Washington, where
Bacteria and Food
15

twenty-one people became ill. The seeds had become contami-
nated with the bacteria. If the seeds are contaminated, the entire
sprout becomes contaminated at the systemic level. (See Chapter
3 for more about plant contamination.) Salmonella has also
caused outbreaks in other fruits and vegetables including toma-
toes, cantaloupes, and fresh orange juice, although most cases
are caused by raw or undercooked eggs. In 2005 Cold Stone
Creamery’s cake-batter ice cream caused illness in Washington,
Ohio, Oregon, and Minnesota. (Business Wire 2005) A much
larger outbreak was also isolated to ice cream in 1994, when the
CDC estimated 224,000 developed salmonellosis. Although the
company used no eggs in its products, independent contractors
who delivered the milk to the plant backhauled eggs in the
trucks without properly washing the trucks between loads. The
company had to recall the ice cream and subsequently purchased
its own trucks to ensure product safety. (Fox 1997, 175–177) Al-
though outbreaks attract media attention, 80 percent of salmo-
nellosis occurs as individual cases, not outbreaks. (World Health
Organization 2005)
Unfortunately, some strains of Salmonella are becoming re-
sistant to antibiotics. Studies show that this both increases the
rate of infection from Salmonella, and increases the likelihood
that treatment for the disease will be ineffective. (World Health
Organization 2005) But there is hope for a vaccine in the future.
Scientists at the University of California, Santa Barbara have dis-
covered that Salmonella bacteria carry a gene called dam that
serves as an on/off switch for a variety of weapons used by the
bacteria to produce disease when it infects humans. If the bacte-
ria does not have the dam gene, it will provoke an immune re-
sponse, and therefore could be used as a vaccine. Mice were
immunized with the damless Salmonella and all survived a dose
of pathogenic S. typhimurium 10,000 times the normal dose re-
quired to kill at least half the animals.
The dam gene is also found in many other harmful bacteria
including Vibrio cholerae (which causes cholera), Yersinia pestis
(which causes plague), Shigella, Haemophilus influenzae (which
causes meningitis), and the bacteria that causes syphilis. It 
will take a long time to produce a vaccine that is safe for hu-
mans, but the vaccine could be used to treat cattle and chickens.
If those animals were no longer able to host the bacteria, it
would significantly improve the safety of the food supply. (Ma-
han 2006)
16
Background and History

E. coli
Escherichia coli is a type of bacteria that thrives in our intestines
and helps digest food. Most strains are beneﬁcial, but a few re-
lease harmful toxins that can cause great discomfort and even
death. There are four classes of E. coli that cause illness in hu-
mans: enteroinvasive, enteropathogenic, enterotoxigenic, and the
most toxic, O157:H7.
Enteropathogenic E. coli primarily strikes infants and causes
bloody or watery diarrhea. It affects bottle-fed infants more often
than breast-fed babies, and occurs most frequently in less devel-
oped countries with inadequate access to safe drinking water. It
can have a mortality rate of 50 percent in countries where ade-
quate medical treatment is unavailable.
Enteroinvasive E. coli is a highly potent strain of E. coli, with
an infective dose of as few as ten microorganisms. The organisms
invade the cells lining the intestine and cause dysentery. Symp-
toms include blood and mucous in the stool, abdominal cramps,
diarrhea, vomiting, fever, chills, and malaise. Although the infec-
tion usually only lasts twelve to seventy-two hours, occasionally
it can lead to hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) (see the discus-
sion under E. coli O157:H7). It can occur in hamburger and dairy
products, but one cruise ship outbreak was attributed to potato
salad.
Enterotoxigenic E. coli causes gastroenterisis, or “traveler’s
diarrhea.” It occurs in infants in less developed countries and
travelers from industrialized countries. This strain has symp-
toms of watery diarrhea, abdominal cramps, low-grade fever,
nausea, and malaise. It takes quite a large dose to produce ill-
ness. Approximately 100 million to 10 billion individual bacteria
are required. This is not a big source of foodborne illness in the
United States—only four outbreaks have ever been recorded
here, including one on board a cruise ship. Countries with high
sanitary standards and practices generally have little experience
of the disease, but it can be spread by infected food handlers.
Dairy products and semisoft cheeses are the most often contami-
nated. (U.S. Food and Drug Administration 2005)
E. coli O157:H7
E. coli O157:H7 was first isolated in 1982 when forty-seven
people in Michigan and Oregon became violently ill. The
Bacteria and Food
17

bacterium contained a few strands of genetic material that
caused it to produce a Shigella-type toxin. Scientists believe the
toxin first destroys blood vessels in the intestines, causing
bloody diarrhea. Bloody diarrhea is the most telling symptom of
this type of E. coli infection. Most people experience bloody diar-
rhea and abdominal pain and recover, but about 2 to 7 percent
develop hemolytic uremic syndrome. Although rare up until the
1980s, HUS is a disease of the blood and kidneys that is now the
leading cause of kidney failure in U.S. and Canadian children.
HUS develops when the toxin penetrates the intestinal wall and
passes into the bloodstream. Once in the bloodstream, the toxin
damages vessels throughout the body. (Jay, Loessner, and
Golden 2005)
When the E. coli toxins enter the bloodstream, they shred
cells. The debris clogs the kidneys. After the kidneys fail, other
organs are affected, including the heart, lungs, and central ner-
vous system. There is no cure. In fact, treatment with antibiotics
is thought to exacerbate the condition because the antibiotics kill
beneficial bacteria, leaving more resources for the E. coli
O157:H7. Antibiotics can also weaken the toxic E. coli bacteria
causing it to release more toxins. Only the symptoms of the dis-
ease can be treated; the kidneys can be supported with dialysis
and damaged organs can be repaired. About 5 percent of people
who contract HUS die, and many survivors of the disease are left
with lasting problems such as diabetes, kidney damage, visual
impairment, or a colostomy. (Kluger 1998)
E. coli O157:H7 is most commonly associated with cattle. It
does not harm the 1 to 2 percent of cattle that carry the bacteria in
their intestines. (Jay, Loessner, and Golden 2005) Transmission of
the bacteria can occur during the slaughter process. Sometimes
fecal matter from the intestines contaminates the meat. If the
meat is ground to make hamburger, the bacteria is spread
throughout the meat. Since most meat made into hamburger is
pooled from many animals, contamination from one carcass can
infect large batches of meat. Heat kills the bacteria. If a steak is
contaminated, it will only be contaminated on the edges. The
bacteria will be destroyed in the cooking process, even if the
steak is not cooked all the way through. Since contamination can
occur throughout the entire hamburger patty, a burger must be
thoroughly cooked and reach an internal temperature of 160 de-
grees Fahrenheit to be safe.
18
Background and History

The bacteria can also be transmitted in other ways. Water
contaminated with cattle feces has been implicated in several
outbreaks of E. coli O157:H7 that were traced to fruits and veg-
etables. Unpasteurized milk can also be a source of the strain.
Occasionally cattle feces get into a municipal water supply. It has
also struck at daycare centers; usually one child gets the infection
and it spreads to the other children. Altogether the CDC esti-
mates that 73,000 people in the United States become ill from E.
coli O157:H7 annually and of those 61 die, mostly children and
the elderly. (U.S. Food and Drug Administration 2005)
Perhaps the most highly publicized outbreak occurred when
hamburgers served at Jack in the Box restaurants were contami-
nated. Five hundred people became ill and four children died.
The largest outbreak occurred in Japan in 1996 when radishes
were contaminated. More than 9,500 people became ill and 12
children died. Most E. coli O157:H7 outbreaks occur during the
summer months—perhaps because people are more likely to eat
at backyard barbecues and eat more fruits and vegetables. In
2002 E. coli contaminated locally produced apple juice in Ger-
many, causing sixty-four cases, and caused twenty-four cases in
North Wales, where it somehow contaminated cotton candy. (Jay,
Loessner, and Golden 2005)
Due to problems caused by E. coli O157:H7, the FSIS ordered
all beef plants to reexamine their food safety plans in 2002 to ad-
dress the threat. As a result, a majority of plants had to alter their
practices, but recalls went down to six in 2004 (from twenty-one
in 2002), illness was down 36 percent, and there was a 43 percent
decline in contamination of ground beef. (E. Coli 2005)
Researchers at the National Institutes of Health have been
working to develop a vaccine against E. coli O157:H7 that could
be administered to cattle or to people. Clinical trials have been
conducted on adults and young children. The trials showed that
the vaccine is safe and effective for children and adults. Phase-
three trials will involve giving vaccine to infants as part of their
regular vaccine cycle. It’s not clear whether the vaccine will work
in cattle because antibodies may not be able to reach the bacteria.
In cattle, the E. coli O157:H7 bacteria swim freely in the intestine
instead of attaching to the intestinal wall as they do in humans.
Since antibodies circulate in the bloodstream, the intestinal wall
receives the antibodies but the contents of the intestine do not.
(Escherichia Coli Vaccine 2006)
Bacteria and Food
19

Shigella
Shigella causes a little less than 10 percent of all foodborne illness
in the United States. It is widespread worldwide and is very vir-
ulent: as few as ten cells can cause infection. Shigellosis (the dis-
ease caused by shigella) usually strikes between twelve and ﬁfty
hours after the contaminated food is consumed. It can cause ab-
dominal pain, cramps, diarrhea, fever, and vomiting. On rare oc-
casions it can cause Reiter’s syndrome, reactive arthritis, and
hemolytic uremic syndrome. It is often found in prepared salads,
raw vegetables, milk, other dairy products, and poultry. (U.S.
Food and Drug Administration 2005)
Yersinia
There are three pathogenic species of Yersinia. Y. pestis causes
the plague and is not transmitted through food. Y. enterocolitica
and Y. pseudotuberculosis cause gastrointestinal problems, in-
cluding abdominal pain, diarrhea, and vomiting. Yersinia infec-
tions often mimic appendicitis and can sometimes result in
unnecessary surgery. The bacteria can also cause infections in
wounds, joints, and the urinary tract. Y. pseudotuberculosis is
very rare in the United States but occurs more frequently in Ja-
pan, Scandinavia, and other parts of northern Europe. Strains
of Y. enterocolitica can be found in meats, including beef, pork,
lamb, oysters, and fish, and also in raw milk. Although most
people recover quickly from yersiniosis, about 2 to 3 percent
develop reactive arthritis. (U.S. Food and Drug Administration
2005)
Staphylococcus
Foods that require lots of handling during preparation and are
kept at slightly elevated temperatures after preparation, includ-
ing prepared egg, tuna, macaroni, potato, and chicken salads,
and bakery products like cream-filled pastries, are frequently
carriers of Staphylococcus aureus. It can also appear in meats,
poultry, and dairy products. S. aureus is nearly always present on
the skin, and present in about half of healthy adults and nearly
all children in the nasal passages. The rate is even higher among
hospital workers. S. aureus can survive in air, dust, sewage,
20
Background and History

water, milk, food equipment, and on environmental surfaces. Be-
cause it is so prevalent, it is difﬁcult to prevent the transmission
of the disease even with careful handling practices. The usual
course of the disease is very rapid onset of symptoms including
nausea, vomiting, and abdominal cramping. Symptoms gener-
ally last about two days. Although the number of reported cases
is relatively low (usually less than 10,000 per year in the United
States), the actual number is probably much higher since many
cases go unreported because the duration of the illness is very
short, and the symptoms are not that severe. (U.S. Food and
Drug Administration 2005)
Clostridium perfringens
Clostridium perfringens is an anaerobic bacteria present in the
environment and in the intestines of both humans and domes-
tic and feral animals. Since the bacteria are so prevalent, most
foods are contaminated with it, especially animal proteins such
as meat. However, it takes millions of bacterial cells to cause ill-
ness. Bacterial cells double every twenty to thirty minutes, so a
single bacterium can reach over a trillion cells in twenty-four
hours if the conditions are favorable. (The bacterial danger
zone for optimal reproduction is considered 40 to 140 degrees
Fahrenheit.) The small amounts of C. perfringens in foods do not
cause any problems unless the food is not cooled down quickly
enough or stored properly if it is prepared too long before serv-
ing. Outbreaks occur most commonly in institutional settings
like hospitals, school cafeterias, prisons, and nursing homes
where food is prepared several hours before serving. C. perfrin-
gens is one of the most commonly reported foodborne illnesses
in the United States. The CDC estimates that about 10,000 cases
occur each year. The illness typically starts eight to twenty-two
hours after consumption of contaminated food. It causes in-
tense abdominal cramps and diarrhea that usually lasts about
twenty-four hours. Occasionally the diarrhea lasts up to two
weeks. It rarely causes complications unless the patient be-
comes dehydrated. There is one serious strain of the bacteria,
Type C, that causes pig-bel disease, where the patient suffers
from necrosis in the intestines and septicemia, but it is quite
rare in the United States. (U.S. Food and Drug Administration
2005)
Bacteria and Food
21

Bacillus cereus
Bacillus cereus like C. perfringens is present in the environment
and requires large numbers of bacterial cells to cause infection. It
has two major strains: one causes diarrhea within six to ﬁfteen
hours of consumption of tainted food; the other causes nausea
and vomiting within a half hour to six hours after ingestion. The
diarrheal type is often misdiagnosed as C. perfringens, and the
type that causes nausea and vomiting is often mistaken as S. au-
reus infection. A wide variety of foods can harbor the bacteria.
The diarrheal type favors meats, milk, vegetables, and ﬁsh, while
the vomiting-type illness is most often associated with rice prod-
ucts such as fried rice, but it can also occur on starchy foods like
potatoes, pasta, and casseroles. Both types of illness are generally
not serious, except in young children, older adults, and others
who are immune compromised and may not have the stamina to
combat the associated dehydration. (U.S. Food and Drug Admin-
istration 2005)
Parasites
Parasites, small microscopic animals that need a host to survive,
are transmitted through the fecal-oral route. They live in the in-
testines of humans and other animal hosts. They are excreted in
the feces and enter a new host through feces-contaminated
drinking water, contaminated water on produce, manure used as
fertilizer, carcasses that become contaminated during the slaugh-
ter process, and poor personal hygiene of food handlers. Unlike
bacteria, which often take large numbers to cause infection, a sin-
gle parasite can cause illness. Since parasites are relatively stable
in the environment, difficult to kill, and little affected by food
processing and storage techniques that discourage bacteria, they
are challenging to eliminate from food. (Jaykus 1997)
Perhaps the best-known parasite in the United States is
Trichinella spiralis, a small roundworm found in raw pork that
causes trichinosis. The life cycle of T. spiralis is similar to many
other parasitic infections: a human eats undercooked pork and
also unknowingly ingests the encapsulated larvae of the para-
site. The coating is digested in the stomach and small intestine,
freeing the larvae to invade the lining of the small intestine. It be-
comes an adult within a week. Sometimes the adult worm
22
Background and History

deposits larvae in the lymphatic system, where the larvae enter
the bloodstream and can thus be spread throughout the body.
Usually the larvae concentrate in the muscles of the diaphragm,
eyes, neck, throat, larynx, and tongue. Eventually, the larvae cap-
sules become calciﬁed. Very few infected people have sufﬁcient
symptoms to recognize the disease. Early symptoms include di-
arrhea, vomiting, and nausea. These can be followed by pain,
stiffness, swelling of muscles, and swelling in the face. Thiaben-
dazole effectively kills the parasites in the digestive tract, and
anti-inﬂammatory drugs can ease the symptoms. (U.S. Food and
Drug Administration 2005)
Although Trichinella has been well understood for years, it
does not cause as much foodborne illness as three other para-
sites: Giardia lamblia, Cryptosporidium parvum, and Cyclospora.
These waterborne parasites can be transferred to food from in-
fected food handlers or from contaminated water used to irrigate
or wash fruits or vegetables. Five outbreaks of giardiasis have
been traced to food contamination from infected food handlers.
The organism prefers moist, cool conditions. The largest food-
borne outbreak of giardiasis occurred when twenty-four out of
thirty-six people who consumed macaroni salad at a picnic be-
came ill. The disease causes diarrhea that generally lasts one to
two weeks. However, it can become chronic and last for months
or even years. If it does become chronic, it is difficult to treat.
(U.S. Food and Drug Administration 2005)
Cryptosporidium infects many herd animals, such as cows,
goats, and sheep, and has also caused outbreaks in apple cider
and homemade chicken salad. It usually causes watery diarrhea
that lasts two to four days, but it can also cause coughing and
low-grade fever accompanied by severe intestinal distress. After
conducting studies using blood analysis techniques, experts con-
cluded that 80 percent of the population in North America has
had cryptosporidiosis. Although it is a relatively minor problem
for most healthy individuals, it can be fatal to immune-compro-
mised populations such as AIDS patients. (U.S. Food and Drug
Administration 2005)
Cyclospora cayentanensis is a one-celled parasite that was ﬁrst
discovered in 1977. It caused a major outbreak in 1996 affecting
over 1,400 people. The outbreak was traced to raspberries im-
ported from Guatemala and fresh basil. The berries were most
likely contaminated when they were sprayed with insecticides or
fungicide that was mixed with water containing the parasites’
Parasites
23

eggs, called oocysts. The parasite causes watery diarrhea and in-
testinal cramps that can last for weeks. It generally takes about
one week from infection for symptoms to appear and can be
treated with sulfa drugs. Typically symptoms go away and then
return. The parasite tends to appear most frequently on produce.
Washing produce can help, but usually does not completely
eliminate the problem. Some delicate fruits, such as raspberries,
have many crevices that the oocysts can stick to. (U.S. Food and
Drug Administration 2005)
Another source of parasites is raw seafood. The Japanese
suffer from high rates of nematode infection resulting from high
rates of consumption of raw ﬁsh. It occurs less frequently in the
United States, where raw ﬁsh consumption is moderate. One of
the worms, Eustrongylides sp., can be seen with the naked eye and
causes septicemia. Other worms are much smaller. Well-trained
sushi chefs are good at spotting the large parasites, but other
techniques are necessary to protect against the smaller ones.
Blast freezing is one of the techniques that kills parasites.
The USDA Retail Food Code requires freezing for all fish that
will be consumed raw. The exception is tuna, which rarely con-
tains parasites. Often ﬁsh get parasites from eating smaller ﬁsh
that have the parasites. Fish raised in captivity and fed ﬁsh pel-
lets rarely have parasites. High-acid marinades do not affect par-
asites, so they should not be used as a substitute for cooking or
freezing. (Parseghian 1997)
Viruses
Viruses, like parasites, pose great problems for food safety be-
cause they are environmentally stable, are resistant to many of
the traditional methods used to control bacteria, and have low
infectious doses. So virtually any food can serve as a vehicle for
transmission. It’s not clear just how pervasive foodborne viral ill-
nesses are, partly because viruses are difﬁcult to test for.
Hepatitis A
The most common viral diseases spread by food are hepatitis A
and noroviruses. Hepatitis A is a relatively mild hepatitis that
causes a sudden onset of fever, malaise, nausea, abdominal dis-
comfort, and loss of appetite, followed by several days of jaundice.
24
Background and History

Hepatitis A virus is excreted in the feces of infected people, and
contamination can occur if food handlers are not rigorous about
personal hygiene. Cold cuts and sandwiches, fruit and fruit juices,
milk and dairy products as well as vegetables, salads, shellﬁsh,
and iced drinks have often been implicated in outbreaks. The incu-
bation period of ten to ﬁfty days is so long that it can be difﬁcult to
locate the source of infection. It is also communicable between in-
dividuals, making it hard to know whether the transmission was
person-to-person contact or foodborne. The incidence of the dis-
ease in developing countries is not particularly high because of the
high levels of exposure to the virus in childhood. (U.S. Food and
Drug Administration 2005)
Noroviruses
Noroviruses, the name given to a group of viruses that include
the Norwalk virus, cause a mild, self-limiting gastroenteritis
with symptoms of nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal
pain. It has been widely reported on cruise ships, where it is of-
ten spread by person-to-person contact or from infected food
handlers. It is also associated with shellfish and salad ingredi-
ents. Raw or inadequately steamed oysters and clams are often
associated with noroviruses. Experts estimate that one-third of
viral gastroenteritis is caused by noroviruses. Symptoms gener-
ally develop twenty-four to forty-eight hours after consuming
contaminated food and last twenty-four to sixty hours. Compli-
cations are rare. (U.S. Food and Drug Administration 2005)
Aﬂatoxins
Over one hundred dogs died early in 2006 from Diamond-brand
dog food contaminated by aflatoxins. The dogs suffered from
loss of appetite, yellow whites of the eyes, yellow gums, yellow
skin, and severe, persistent vomiting combined with bloody di-
arrhea, discolored urine, and fever. (Aflatoxin Poisoning 2006)
Aflatoxins are naturally occurring toxic byproducts from the
growth of Aspergillus flavus fungi that grow on grains and
groundnuts such as corn, wheat, barley, oats, rice, and peanuts.
The toxins are most likely to develop if tropical conditions, like
high temperatures, high humidity, and rains, occur during har-
vest. Improper storage conditions also contribute to the fungi
Aﬂatoxins
25

proliferation. Aﬂatoxins are a sporadic problem for U.S. farmers,
depending on the weather conditions at harvest. Crops in the
southern United States are most often at risk. Aﬂatoxicosis is rare
in the United States, but it is very difficult to diagnose. There
have been some outbreaks of aﬂatoxicosis in other parts of the
world, however. In 1974 a large outbreak occurred in 150 differ-
ent villages in northwestern India. Some 397 people were af-
fected and 108 died as a result of contaminated corn. The
symptoms included high fever, rapidly progressing jaundice,
edema of the limbs, pain, vomiting, and swollen livers. A smaller
outbreak occurred in Kenya in 1982. Twenty people were admit-
ted to the hospital, and of those 60 percent died. (U.S. Food and
Drug Administration 2005) Although these outbreaks are rela-
tively rare, low-level exposure to the toxin has carcinogenic ef-
fects on the liver. For this reason, the FDA imposes strict limits
on the amount of aﬂatoxins allowable in products in the human
food supply. Because the toxins may also be present in cows’
milk if the cow consumes contaminated grains, there are restric-
tions on the amount of aﬂatoxins permitted in cattle feed. (Kil-
man 2005)
In West Africa and Southeast Asia, liver cancer is a signiﬁ-
cant problem. Experts believe that the high rates of liver cancer
are associated with aflatoxins that contaminate crops when
weather conditions or improper food storage create conditions
for aflatoxin growth. Studies also show that young children
growing up in areas with higher levels of aﬂatoxins have stunted
growth compared to areas with lower levels of aflatoxin expo-
sure. (Gong et al. 2004)
Mad Cow Disease
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) is a disease that
strikes cows causing them to develop spongy areas in their
brains and suffer neurological damage. When the disease was
first noticed in the United Kingdom in 1986, some cows were
found staggering around in circles, hence the name mad cow
disease. As of 2006, more than 184,000 cows in 35,000 different
herds had been diagnosed with the disease and more than 4 mil-
lion had been destroyed in an attempt to wipe out the disease.
(U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 2006) In addi-
26
Background and History

tion to the toll on cattle, humans began developing a related dis-
ease, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, at earlier ages than normal and
in increasing numbers and severity.
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) was first described in the
1920s by Hans Gerhard Creutzfeldt and Alfons Jakob. Symptoms
can include loss of coordination, personality changes, mania, and
dementia. People usually die within a year or two of diagnosis. It
generally affects about one in 1 million people age ﬁfty or older
through spontaneous means or as an inherited condition. Very
rarely, it has been contracted through infected tissues (such as
corneas) that were transplanted, from contaminated surgical in-
struments, or by injection of growth hormones that were derived
from CJD-infected pituitary extracts. In 1995, scientists in the
United Kingdom identiﬁed a new type of CJD called new variant
CJD (nvCJD). This new type strikes mostly younger people and
the brain tissue of its victims looks exactly like the brain tissue of
cows that die of BSE.
As epidemiologists studied nvCJD, they began to suspect a
species-to-species transfer was taking place. People who had
consumed brain or spinal tissue from cows were getting the dis-
ease. Although the incubation period can be as long as twenty to
twenty-five years, it appears the risk is greatest to those who
contract it before the age of ﬁfteen. As of late 2005, 185 people
from eleven countries have been diagnosed with nvCJD. Most of
these (158) were from the United Kingdom. (Easton 2005) Epi-
demiologists now think that the total number of cases that will
occur will be in the range of 240 to 540. (Pennington 2003) It
seems likely that the cows got the disease from eating sheep
brains contaminated with scrapie, a similar disease found in
sheep. Sheep’s brain tissue is rendered into cattle feed.
The most widely accepted theory is that BSE is a prion dis-
ease. A prion is a protein molecule that instead of forming a spi-
ral like a telephone cord, forms a straight ﬁber. This deformed
protein molecule then attaches to a healthy protein molecule
and it becomes a straight ﬁber also. The two molecules then split
apart and go on to attack other healthy protein molecules. Be-
cause these straight ﬁbers cannot be organized correctly by the
cell, the cell eventually dies. Some people may be more suscepti-
ble to the infection than others. Scientists think that there may
be a genetic variation in the coding for a particular amino acid
(proteins are made up of amino acid chains) at the DNA level. If
Mad Cow Disease
27

this variation is present, then the person is more likely to be af-
fected by a prion if he is exposed. (Pennington 2003) The prion
is resistant to common sterilization methods, including bleach,
boiling, alcohol, exposure to chemical agents, and irradiation.
Even after burning infected tissue, the prion can still be detected
in the ashes. In a test on cows, as little as one quarter of a tea-
spoon of the transmission agent given as feed caused BSE. (Wa-
verly 1998)
The primary reason BSE spread was the inclusion of ren-
dered animal protein in feed. In order to raise cattle quickly, it is
necessary to feed them large amounts of protein. Proteins de-
rived from vegetables are less dense and can be more expensive
than rendered animal proteins. Cows fed grass, hay, alfalfa, and
other forage produce just 10 to 50 pounds of milk per day,
whereas cows given supplements of animal fats, bonemeal,
blood, and meat protein can produce as much as 130 pounds per
day. From 1987 to 1996, the number of dairy cows in the United
States dropped by 11 percent while production increased 8 per-
cent due to breeding, hormones, drugs, and specialized feeds. In
the United Kingdom, where there is less farming of hay and
other grains for cattle, it is estimated that cows received as much
as four pounds per day of rendered animal protein. These animal
products are derived from sick, diseased animals and leftovers
from the slaughterhouses. For example, the backbones and heads
of cattle are sent to the rendering plant where they are boiled and
ground up and then sold as animal protein. This practice
amounts to cannibalism for the cows. Human cannibalism can
lead to a transmissible spongiform encephalopathy (TSE) similar
to CJD called kuru. The United Kingdom has worked hard to
reestablish the safety of its beef industry, and now has very strict
rules to prevent further cattle and humans from becoming in-
fected. One of the policies was the ban of ruminant-to-ruminant
feeding.
As of 2006, three cows in the United States have been diag-
nosed with BSE. All three of these cows were born before the ru-
minant-to-ruminant feed ban went into effect in the United
States in 1997. Further safeguards were implemented by the
Food Safety and Inspection Service in 2003 to prevent BSE from
infecting U.S. herds and to prevent prions from entering the food
supply. One of the ﬁrst signs of the disease in cattle is an inability
to stand. Current rules prohibit nonambulatory cows from enter-
ing the human food supply.
28
Background and History

Since the disease is spread through consumption of nervous
system tissue, other regulations have been established to limit
the amount of exposure to these tissues. One concern is ad-
vanced meat recovery systems. In these systems, a mechanical
process uses hydraulic pressure to force extra meat off the car-
cass. The resulting ﬁller is used for hamburger, pizza toppings,
and hot dogs. The Food Safety and Inspection Service is testing
advanced meat recovery systems to ensure that no central ner-
vous system tissue is getting into the human food supply. A 2002
USDA study found that 35 percent of meat from advanced recov-
ery systems was tainted with nervous system tissue. (Blakeslee
and Burros 2003) Some processors are abandoning the systems
because it is so difﬁcult to produce meat that is not tainted with
nervous system tissue. Another regulation bans the sale of speci-
ﬁed risk materials for human consumption. Materials include the
brain, skull, eyes, trigeminal ganglia, spinal cord, vertebral col-
umn, and dorsal root ganglia in cows that are more than thirty
months old. These materials are banned because they could har-
bor the disease before the cow is symptomatic. Captive bolt stun-
ning, a method of stunning the animal before slaughter, was also
banned to eliminate the possibility of central nervous system tis-
sue getting forced into the circulatory system of cattle. (U.S. De-
partment of Agriculture, Food Safety and Inspection Service
2005)
Food Safety at the Consumer Level
Although outbreaks of foodborne illness on cruise ships or at
restaurants receive a lot of media attention, most foodborne ill-
ness occurs because of improper food handling at home. Yet with
an understanding of the causes of foodborne illness, and adher-
ence to a few simple rules, the hazards can largely be prevented.
Experts believe bacteria cause 79 percent of all foodborne illness.
Bacteria thrive at temperatures of 40 to 140 degrees Fahrenheit,
and multiply rapidly if they are in this danger zone for too long.
Bacteria doubles every twenty to thirty minutes, and a single
bacterium can multiply to become trillions of bacteria in just
twenty-four hours. Bacteria thrive on protein, which is com-
posed of amino acids that are a prime nutrient source. The foods
most likely to cause illness are animal proteins such as milk,
eggs, meat, and ﬁsh. Not only are they concentrated sources of
Food Safety at the Consumer Level
29

protein, but most animals harbor bacteria that get transferred to
foods in the slaughter and processing steps. Some bacteria are
extremely virulent such as the E. coli O157:H7 that can cause ill-
ness with only a few microbes. But most bacteria present on food
at the time of purchase are insufﬁcient in number to cause illness
unless they are given the opportunity to multiply via unsafe han-
dling techniques. Keeping animal proteins outside the danger
zone of 40 to 140 degrees Fahrenheit is crucial. Food safety ex-
perts suggest leaving them in this temperature zone no longer
than four hours. This maximum time begins when the animal
protein leaves the store counter and includes the time it takes to
transport it home from the store, bring it to a safe temperature in
the refrigerator, prepare it, wait before serving, and get leftovers
wrapped and back in the refrigerator. (Duyff 2002)
The Partnership for Food Safety Education launched the
FightBac! consumer food safety campaign in 1997 to simplify the
food safety message into four steps: clean, separate, cook, and
chill to keep food safe from harmful bacteria. The first step,
clean, includes handwashing, surface cleaning, and washing
produce. Handwashing is a critical part of safe food handling.
Nearly half of all foodborne illnesses are caused by inadequate
handwashing. Hands should be washed before handling food.
During preparation, hands should be washed after handling ani-
mal proteins and before handling something that will not be
cooked before serving, after handling garbage, and after taking a
break from kitchen activities. It should also be done after com-
pleting food preparations. The Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention recommend the following procedure for proper
handwashing:
1. Wet your hands and apply liquid or clean bar soap.
2. Rub hands together vigorously and scrub all surfaces.
Continue for ten to ﬁfteen seconds—about the length 
of a short tune. The soap combined with the scrubbing
action dislodges the germs.
3. Rinse well and dry your hands.
Besides washing hands, surfaces need to be cleaned to stop
contamination. So if raw meat comes in contact with a kitchen
surface, it needs to be cleaned thoroughly with hot soapy water
afterward. Produce should be washed under cold running
30
Background and History

water. Even foods in modified atmospheric packaging (pre-
washed bags of lettuce, for example) should be washed.
One of the major ways bacteria can spread in a kitchen is
through cross-contamination. If uncooked eggs or meat come in
contact with something that is going to be consumed uncooked,
such as salad, the normal cooking step that would adequately
kill the bacteria is eliminated. So anything that could transfer
bacteria from meat to foods that are ready to eat, such as salad or
bread, needs to be thoroughly cleaned before it is reused (e.g.,
hands, cutting boards, knives, and kitchen counters).
The third FightBac! step is cook. Meat should be tested for
doneness with a meat thermometer. Put the thermometer in the
thickest part of the meat and check that it has reached an internal
temperature of 145 degrees Fahrenheit for a beef roast and ﬁsh,
and 160 degrees Fahrenheit for ground meats and poultry. It is
particularly important for ground meats to be thoroughly
cooked inside since bacteria get mixed throughout ground
meats, and cooking on the outside is insufﬁcient to kill bacteria
that are inside the burger or loaf.
Inadequate chilling, the subject of the fourth FightBac! step,
causes many foodborne illnesses. The Centers for Disease Con-
trol and Prevention considers it the leading cause of foodborne
illness in restaurant settings. Keeping foods chilled, ensuring
that refrigerators are set below 40 degrees Fahrenheit, and
promptly chilling leftovers prevent bacteria from being in the
danger zone for too long. Soups and other large containers of
cooked foods need to be chilled in shallow containers to ensure
that the food cools quickly enough.
Eating Out Safely
In addition to being careful at home, consumers can eat more
safely in restaurants by taking a few precautions: (1) wash your
hands or use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer (readily available
in small bottles that can be kept in a purse or glove compart-
ment) before consuming restaurant meals; (2) observe the restau-
rant environment before choosing to eat there. If local health
department ratings are unavailable, note whether the employees
are well groomed and whether the bathrooms are clean and well
maintained; and (3) ensure all leftovers are refrigerated within
two hours or throw them away.
Food Safety at the Consumer Level
31

References
Aflatoxin Poisoning Claims at Least 100 Dogs, Cornell Reports. 2006.
DVM 37: 1.
Altekruse, Sean F., Norman J. Stern, Patricia I. Fields, and David L.
Swerdlow, Campylobacter Jejuni—An Emerging Foodborne Pathogen.
1999. Emerging Infectious Diseases 5: 28–35.
Berkowitz, Roger, and Jane Doerfer. 2003. The New Legal Sea Foods Cook-
book. New York: Broadway Books.
Blakeslee, Sandra, and Marion Burros. 2003. Danger to Public is Low,
Experts on Disease Say. New York Times, December 24, A19.
Borzelleca, Joseph. 1997. Food-Borne Health Risks: Food Additives, Pes-
ticides, and Microbes. In Nutrition Policy in Public Health, ed. Felix Bron-
ner. 33–67. New York: Springer Publishing Company.
Burros, Marion. 2002. Listeria Roulette: Delays in Federal Testing Regu-
lations Leave Consumers at Risk of Contracting Potentially Lethal Food
Poisoning. South Florida Sun-Sentinel, December 5, Food Section, 5.
Business Wire. 2005. Marler Clark LLP PS: Press Advisory—Cold Stone
Creamery Salmonella Typhimurium Outbreak. July 2, 1. Proquest: Doc-
ument ID 862092141.
Center for Science in the Public Interest. 2006. Government Testing of
Chicken Shows Dramatic Jump in Salmonella in 2005. February 23, 2006.
Center for Science in the Public Interest. http://www.cspinet.org/
new/200602231.html (accessed February 2007).
Dickerson, Marla. 1999. Private Health Auditors Are Serving Diners,
Restaurants. Los Angeles Times, April 7, C1, C6.
Duyff, Roberta Larson. 2002. American Dietetic Association Complete Food
and Nutrition Guide. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons.
E. Coli O157:H7 Incidence Drops 43 Percent in 2004. 2005. Journal of Envi-
ronmental Health 68: 43.
Easton, Pam. 2005. Man Who Lived Here Has Human Form of Mad
Cow: Ofﬁcial Says It’s Not a Safety Issue for Texas. Houston Chronicle,
November 22, B7. 
Escherichia Coli Vaccine: E. Coli O157:H7 Speciﬁc Vaccine is Safe and Im-
munogenic in Children. 2006. Obesity, Fitness and Wellness Week, March
25, 659.
Fox, Nicols. 1997. Spoiled: The Dangerous Truth About a Food Chain Gone
Haywire. New York: Basic Books. 
Gong, Yunyun, Assomption Hounsa, Sharif Egal, Paul  C. Turner, Anne
E. Sutcliffe, Andrew J. Hall, Kitty Cardwell, and Christopher P. Wild.
32
Background and History

2004. Postweaning Exposure to Aflatoxin Results in Impaired Child
Growth: A Longitudinal Study in Benin, West Africa. Environmental
Health Perspectives 112: 1334–1338.
Jay, James M., Martin J. Loessner, and David A. Golden. 2005. Modern
Food Microbiology. 7th ed. New York: Springer Science.
Jaykus, Lee-Ann. 1997. Epidemiology and Detection as Options for Con-
trol of Viral and Parasitic Foodborne Disease. Emerging Infectious Disease
3: 529–540.
Jongen, Wim, ed. 2005. Improving the Safety of Fresh Fruit and Vegetables.
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Ketley, Julian M., and Michael E. Konkel, eds. 2005. Campylobacter: Mole-
cular and Cellular Biology. Norfolk, UK: Horizon Bioscience.
Kilman, Scott. 2005. Midwest Grain, Milk Tested for Toxin. Wall Street
Journal, October 21, Eastern edition, B2.
Kluger, Jeffrey. 1998. Anatomy of an Outbreak. Time, August 3, 56–62.
Koutkia, Polyxeni, Eleftherios Mylonakis, and Timothy Flanigan. 1997.
Enterohemorrhagic Escherichia Coli O157:H7—An Emerging Pathogen.
American Family Physician 56: 853–856.
Lammerding, Anna M., and Greg M. Paoli. 1997. Quantitative Risk As-
sessment: An Emerging Tool for Emerging Foodborne Pathogens.
Emerging Infectious Disease 3: 483–487.
Mahan, Michael. 2006. Current Research: Michael J. Mahan. Department
of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of Cali-
fornia, Santa Barbara. http://www.lifesci.ucsb.edu/mcdb/faculty/
mahan/research/research.html (accessed February 2007).
McAfee, Mark. 1998. Valley Grown Food Safety Procedures Recognized
Nationally. The Business Journal Serving Fresno and the Central San Joaquin
Valley December 14, 27.
Parseghian, Pam. 1997. Cook Up Safety Precautions When Serving Raw
Fish. Nation’s Restaurant News 31: 33.
Pennington, T. Hugh. 2003. When Food Kills: BSE, E. Coli, and Disaster Sci-
ence. New York: Oxford University Press.
Schumann, Michael S.,Thomas D. Schneid, B. R. Schumann, and Michael
J. Fagel. 1997. Food Safety Law. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Simon, Paul A., Phillip Leslie, Grace Run, Ginger Zhe Jin, Roshan Re-
porter, Arturo Aguirre, and Jonathan E. Fielding. 2005. Impact of
Restaurant Hygiene Grade Cards on Foodborne-Disease Hospitaliza-
tions in Los Angeles County. Journal of Environmental Health 67: 32–38.
Steinauer, Joan. 1997. Natural Born Killers. Incentive 171: 24–29.
References
33

U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food Safety and Inspection Service.
2005. FSIS Further Strengthens Protections Against Bovine Spongiform
Encephalopathy (BSE). http://www.fsis.usda.gov/Fact_Sheets/FSIS
_Further_Strengthens_Protections_Against_BSE/index.asp (accessed
Febuary 2007).
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food Safety and Inspection Service.
2004. Fulﬁlling the Vision: Updates and Initiatives in Protecting Public
Health. http://www.fsis.usda.gov/About_FSIS/Fulﬁlling_the_Vision/
index.asp (accessed February 2007).
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention. 2006. BSE (Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy,
or Mad Cow Disease.) http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dvrd/bse/index
.htm (accessed March 2007).
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 2005. Foodborne Pathogenic Mi-
croorganisms and Natural Toxins Handbook. http://vm.cfsan.fda.gov/
~mow/intro.html (accessed February 2007).
Waverly, Ken S. 1998. Irradiation and Mad Cow Disease: What! Me
Worry? Countryside and Small Stock Journal 82: 105.
World Health Organization. 2006. Food Safety.  http://www.who.int/
foodsafety/en/ (accessed February 2007).
World Health Organization. 2005. Fact Sheet Number 139: Drug Resis-
tant Salmonella. http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs139/
en/ (accessed February 2007).
34
Background and History

2
Problems, Controversies,
and Solutions
B
esides bacteria, viruses, and parasites, there are other poten-
tial sources of foodborne illness, including pesticides, hor-
mones in milk and cattle, overuse of antibiotics in farm
animals, genetically engineered plants, food additives, packag-
ing materials, and contaminants.
Food Additives, Contaminants, 
and Packaging
Before the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) ap-
proves a new food additive or ingredient, its safety must be
demonstrated. Animal feeding studies are performed to deter-
mine safety. Large doses are fed to a small number of rats to
see whether they develop cancer or other diseases. Olestra and
aspartame (marketed as Equal or NutraSweet) have caused the
most debate in recent years. However, many more additives
are used, some of which are inert, but some of which are un-
healthy. Besides additives, there are also dangerous com-
pounds which form in cooking or storage, such as acrylamides
and benzene, and contaminants that migrate into foods like
mercury and PCBs into fish and bisphenol A (BPA), which mi-
grates from certain plastic containers. Many of the additives
and contaminants are unexpected by-products of new technol-
ogy and processes.
35

Olestra
Olestra, the fat substitute, was first synthesized at Procter &
Gamble in 1968 by researchers looking for a way to increase pre-
mature babies’ fat intake. Chemically, olestra is a table sugar (su-
crose) molecule to which as many as eight fatty acid residues are
attached. The molecule is so large and fatty that it cannot be bro-
ken down by the intestinal enzymes and absorbed by the body.
Since it cannot be absorbed by the body, it did not work as a
weight-gain product for babies, so instead is used as an indi-
gestible fat substitute. Although it can be used to make low-calo-
rie foods, researchers soon discovered that eating even small
amounts, such as the quantity in one ounce of potato chips,
could cause digestive problems like diarrhea, abdominal cramp-
ing, gas, and fecal incontinence. Because it is such a bulky fat
molecule, fat soluble vitamins such as vitamins A, D, E, and K
and some plant nutrients (phytochemicals) called carotenoids
(like beta-carotene found in many vegetables including carrots
and lycopene found in tomatoes) are attracted to it in the intes-
tine and are excreted with the olestra instead of being absorbed
by the body. These carotenoids are one of the beneﬁts of eating
fruits and vegetables and appear to prevent cancers and other
degenerative diseases. So even if a person did not experience in-
testinal distress from eating olestra, there would be negative nu-
trition consequences from having vitamin absorption reduced.
Originally Procter & Gamble envisioned many applications
for olestra, but due to the negative effects, they sought approval
for savory snack foods ﬁrst. In 1996 the FDA approved olestra for
savory snacks such as chips, crackers, and tortilla chips, but be-
cause of the adverse effects, products had to carry a label that
said “This product contains olestra. Olestra may cause abdomi-
nal cramping and loose stools. Olestra inhibits the absorption of
some vitamins and nutrients. Vitamins A, D, E, and K have been
added.” Procter & Gamble test marketed fat-free Pringles;
Nabisco test marketed Wheat Thins and Ritz Crackers; and Frito-
Lay started the Wow line of chips. Consumer complaints began
to roll into the FDA. The FDA had received almost 20,000 com-
plaints about olestra by 2002, more than all other consumer com-
plaints about other food additives combined. (Center for Science
in the Public Interest 2006)
In 2003 Procter & Gamble lobbied the FDA to remove the
warning label for foods containing olestra. The FDA granted the
36
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

request despite lobbying by consumer groups that wanted the la-
bels to stay. Frito-Lay changed the name of its Wow chips to
Light in 2004 and removed the warning label. Olestra is still
listed in the ingredient list, and a small Olean logo is located on
the front of the package.
The Center for Science in the Public Interest (CSPI) is sup-
porting a consumer lawsuit ﬁled in 2006 against Frito-Lay to re-
store the warnings, even though the FDA has ruled that the
warnings do not need to be there. CSPI claims that Frito-Lay en-
gaged in deceptive marketing practices when it renamed the
Wow line, but Frito-Lay says it renamed the brand to be more de-
scriptive of the contents. (Mohl 2006)
Even if olestra has serious problems as a fat substitute, one
interesting potential use for the substance has been found.
Olestra seems to bind to PCBs and dioxin in the body causing
these toxins to be excreted. A study of mice looks promising, and
there is a case report of olestra potato chips being used to reverse
pesticide poisoning. An Australian man was exposed to high lev-
els of the pesticide Aroclor at work. Under the supervision of re-
searchers at the University of Western Australia in Perth, he was
fed 16 grams (about half an ounce) of olestra chips daily for two
years. The concentration of Aroclor in his fatty tissue dropped
from 3,200 parts per million to 56 parts per million, and his phys-
ical symptoms disappeared. (Potera 2005)
Aspartame/NutraSweet
Aspartame, sold under the brand NutraSweet, was discovered
accidentally by a scientist at Searle in 1965 who was testing new
drugs for gastric ulcers and licked his ﬁngers before picking up a
piece of paper. (Bilger 2006) Aspartame turned out not to be a
good ulcer drug, but it has become a well-received sweetener
that has found its way into more than 6,000 processed foods in-
cluding sodas, desserts, candy, and yogurt.
There have been some concerns, however, about the safety
of aspartame. Some people have reported dizziness, hallucina-
tions, and headaches after drinking diet sodas made from aspar-
tame. An independent study conﬁrmed that aspartame can cause
headaches in some individuals. Another study found a link be-
tween aspartame and cancer. A group of 1,900 rats were fed
doses of aspartame over the course of their lifetimes at rates
equivalent to a human drinking six or seven cans of diet soda per
Food Additives, Contaminants, and Packaging
37

day and another group at even lower doses. In the rats consum-
ing the larger dose, the study found statistically significant in-
creases in lymphomas, leukemias, and other cancers. There were
even small increases in cancer among the low-dose recipients.
(Safety of Aspartame 2006) A human epidemiological study eval-
uated 500,000 men and women between the ages of fifty and
sixty-nine over a ﬁve-year period. The researchers found no dif-
ference in leukemias, lymphomas, and brain tumors between the
group of aspartame consumers and the non-aspartame con-
sumers. (Cancer Research 2006) The human study was limited in
two ways. Unlike the rat study which followed the rats until they
died a natural death, the study participants were not truly el-
derly, and did not consume aspartame over their entire lifetimes.
Also the diets were not monitored, but were based on question-
naires, which can be unreliable.
Aspartame is probably safe, especially in moderate quanti-
ties like one packet of Equal or one diet soda per day, but indi-
viduals who experience headaches or people with the rare
disease phenylketonuria (PKU) should avoid it.
Benzene
Benzene is an organic chemical found in smog and gasoline. It
can cause leukemia at high levels of consumption. It occurs nat-
urally in some foods like meat, eggs, and bananas. In the early
1990s, scientists discovered that benzene can form in soft drinks
that contain both ascorbic acid (vitamin C) and sodium ben-
zoate (a preservative) if the soft drink is exposed to high heat.
The FDA worked with manufacturers at that time to reformulate
their beverages so that the drinks would not pose a safety risk.
(Beckman 2006)
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has set a
limit of 5 parts per billion (ppb) of benzene for drinking water,
and beverages must follow that standard. The FDA conducts a
total diet study to determine levels of contaminants and nutri-
ents in a wide variety of foods. The analytical procedures are de-
signed to detect multiple pesticide residues, industrial
chemicals, and levels of both toxins and nutrients found in
foods. Benzene levels are calculated as part of these tests. When
the FDA evaluated its data from the 1995 to 2001 diet study, it
found beverage levels that were substantially above the EPA
level of 5 ppb.
38
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

In response to these results, the FDA’s Center for Food
Safety and Applied Nutrition (CFSAN) surveyed soft drinks
speciﬁcally for benzene. CFSAN found negligible levels of ben-
zene in the vast majority of samples tested. The FDA is investi-
gating why the discrepancy between the total diet study results
and the speciﬁc CFSAN study occurred, but it believes that the
method for measuring benzene (the soft drinks were boiled) in
the total diet study may have affected the results. (Benzene 
in Soft 2006) The CFSAN study did show elevated benzene levels
in ﬁve sodas: Safeway Select Diet Orange Soda, AquaCal Straw-
berry Flavored H2O Beverage, Crystal Light Sunrise Classic Or-
ange, Giant Light Cranberry Juice Cocktail, and Crush
Pineapple. Kraft Foods, maker of Crystal Light products,
stopped shipments and reformulated, as did Safeway. (Zhang
2006)
Independent consumers also began conducting tests for
benzene and a class action lawsuit was ﬁled against Polar’s Diet
Orange Dry and In Zone Brands’ BellyWashers in Florida and
Massachusetts. The tests showed 9 ppb in the Orange Dry drink
and 69 ppb in the Belly Washers beverage. Zone Brands decided
to quit adding vitamin C to their beverages to reduce the ben-
zene. (Beckman 2006)
Acrylamides
In 2002 scientists in Sweden were conducting a study of an in-
dustrial pollutant, known carcinogen, and human neurotoxin
known as acrylamide. When they tested their control group, they
discovered their controls already had high levels of acrylamides
in their systems and the source was traced to foods. Acrylamides
are used to manufacture grout, adhesives, and to separate solid
sewage from water. They also develop in some foods as a result
of heating the naturally occurring amino acid asparagine in the
presence of sugars or starches to about 250 degrees Fahrenheit.
Many foods are affected, but the most prevalent dietary sources
are from French fries and potato chips. (Warner 2005)
The EPA considers acrylamides to be very dangerous, set-
ting the safe level of consumption at almost zero. Drinking water
is allowed to have 0.5 ppb. French fries and potato chips contain
considerably more at 466 ppb for a vending-machine-sized bag
of potato chips or 401 ppb for a small serving of McDonald’s
french fries. (Solovitch 2005) Under California Proposition 65,
Food Additives, Contaminants, and Packaging
39

companies are required to warn consumers if their products con-
tain carcinogens. The California Attorney General filed suit in
August 2005 against McDonald’s, Wendy’s, Burger King, KFC,
and several potato chip manufacturers to make these companies
post signs warning consumers that french fries and potato chips
contain carcinogens.
The FDA is waiting for the results of a large-scale experi-
ment to be concluded in 2007 before doing a thorough risk as-
sessment. But there have been a few epidemiological studies
and they have not shown an increased cancer risk from con-
sumption. From both a nutrition and food safety point of view,
consuming fried, starchy foods such as french fries and potato
chips in moderation is a prudent course until more deﬁnitive re-
search is available.
Mercury in Fish
Mercury, a toxic metal, makes its way into our oceans from the
atmosphere. Mercury is emitted by some natural processes, but it
mostly enters the atmosphere from mining and smelting of min-
eral ores, combustion of fossil fuels, incineration of wastes, and
from the use of mercury itself. Mercury is extremely hazardous
and causes both neurological and heart problems. In the 1800s
hatmakers used mercury in the shaping process and developed
neurological symptoms including trembling and twitching.
These symptoms, which people associated with madness, led to
the term mad as a hatter. A disaster in the 1950s made people think
about the dangers of mercury in ﬁsh. In the Japanese ﬁshing vil-
lage of Minamata, local cats began to stumble around, and some
went into the bay and drowned. Later, dozens of people died,
and women gave birth to babies with severe disabilities and neu-
rological problems. The cause of the tragedy was traced to a
nearby chemical plant that had dumped tons of mercury into the
bay. The fish became contaminated by the mercury, as did the
cats and humans who ate the fish. However, the dangers from
low levels of contamination were not well understood until the
1960s. The FDA set guidelines for permissible levels of mercury
in 1969. (Hawthorne and Roe 2005)
Mercury is a chemical which bioaccumulates, so older ﬁsh,
and ﬁsh that live higher on the food chain, have higher concen-
trations of mercury in their systems. In 2004 the EPA and FDA is-
sued a joint warning statement about fish. Children, pregnant
40
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

women, and women of childbearing age are advised to avoid
shark, swordﬁsh, king mackerel, and tileﬁsh because of high lev-
els of mercury and to eat no more than 12 ounces of fish per
week total. Further, the agencies recommend that this group of
consumers eat only low-mercury fish such as shrimp, canned
light tuna, pollock, and catﬁsh. Albacore tuna is higher in mer-
cury and should be avoided by this group.
Many people do not think that the warnings go far enough.
Three other types of ﬁsh—grouper, orange roughy, and marlin—
have even higher levels of mercury than albacore. The FDA’s rec-
ommendations regarding light tuna also cause controversy.
Skipjack tuna is low in mercury, but yellowﬁn, a species high in
mercury is also packed as light tuna. The joint warning also does
not follow the EPA guidelines. The EPA concluded that a person
could safely ingest 0.1 micrograms of mercury per kilogram of
body weight, yet the recommendations could easily put people
above the EPA’s ﬁgures. For example, if a 161-pound woman, the
average weight of women of childbearing age in the United
States, consumed 12 ounces of lobster in one week, she would be
exposed to double the EPA limit, and if she ate 12 ounces of or-
ange roughy, she would be exposing herself to three times the
EPA limit.
Many states have issued their own safety warnings to fur-
ther protect their citizens. Washington State reviewed the FDA’s
data and concluded that women of childbearing age and chil-
dren younger than six should not eat fresh or frozen tuna at all,
and should limit their canned tuna consumption based on body
weight. California requires supermarkets to post warnings in
their stores, and Wisconsin and Minnesota recommend at-risk
groups limit consumption of halibut, tuna steak, and canned al-
bacore to two meals per month. (Hawthorne and Roe 2005)
Complicating the safety issues are the known beneﬁts of ﬁsh
consumption. Many studies have shown beneﬁts to the cardio-
vascular system, including fewer heart attacks and strokes. The
beneﬁts come from the consumption of omega-3 fatty acids. One
study, conducted in Finland, was designed to quantify the role of
methyl mercury from ﬁsh in the development of heart disease.
The investigators tested over 1,800 Finnish men, aged forty-two
to sixty, for hair mercury, body mass index, and fatty-acid con-
centrations in blood. A careful dietary analysis was done based
on the daily food records the participants kept following training
by a nutritionist. The subjects were followed for 14 years. During
Food Additives, Contaminants, and Packaging
41

that time, 525 of the participants died, including 257 (49 percent)
of whom died of cardiovascular disease. The investigators also
tracked all cardiovascular-related diagnoses and events such as
chest pain and nonfatal heart attacks. The study showed a large
range of hair mercury concentrations, including undetectable
levels in 3.3 percent  of the subjects. The investigators found that
mercury concentration levels were strongly correlated to fish
consumption. The fish consumption of the highest third was
more than two times higher than that of the bottom third. A spe-
cial analysis method (the Cox Proportional Hazards Model) was
used to adjust the data for participant age, family history of heart
disease, body mass index, blood pressure, alcohol and tobacco
use, and overall diet (e.g., ﬁber, saturated fat, and antioxidant in-
take) as well as high-density lipoproteins (HDL), low-density
lipoproteins (LDL), selenium, docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), and
eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA). DHA and EPA are the omega-3
fatty acids that are found in ﬁsh and are beneﬁcial for the heart.
The study showed that each milligram increase in hair mercury
led to an 11 percent increase in the risk of an acute coronary
event and to a 13 percent increased risk of death from coronary
heart disease. This increase in risk was despite the increased lev-
els of the omega-3s DHA and EPA. The men with the highest lev-
els of DHA and EPA also had the highest levels of mercury,
which suggests that the presence of mercury negates the beneﬁts
of the EPA and DHA. Additionally, the study showed that partic-
ipants who had higher levels of EPA and DHA but had low hair
mercury concentrations had decreased rates of acute coronary
events, cardiovascular and heart diseases, and death. So consum-
ing ﬁsh species with little or no mercury concentrations is beneﬁ-
cial and should be encouraged. (Levenson and Axelrad 2006)
The FDA has struggled to come up with a message that is
relatively accurate, yet simple enough for consumers to imple-
ment. Pregnant women cut their overall ﬁsh consumption by 17
percent in 2001 when the FDA first advised limiting fish con-
sumption for that group. The Harvard Center for Risk Analysis,
in a study funded by the U.S. Tuna Foundation, determined that
if all Americans cut their ﬁsh consumption by 17 percent, there
would be 8,000 more deaths annually from heart disease and
stroke. Also, pregnant women who eliminate ﬁsh from their di-
ets entirely do not pass on the cognitive beneﬁts of consuming
fish to their unborn children. It appears that a mother’s con-
sumption of ﬁsh during pregnancy has a greater positive effect
42
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

on cognitive development than a child eating fish. So the goal
should be to ﬁnd ways to encourage consumers to eat ﬁsh that
are low in mercury. (For Most, Health Beneﬁts Outweigh Risks
2006) A handy fish mercury calculator is available at
http://www.gotmercury.org. Enter body weight of consumer,
ﬁsh type, and number of ounces into the calculator and it will
determine whether the amount falls within the safety range
based on the EPA’s guidelines. The Monterey Bay Aquarium
publishes a Seafood Watch Guide (available online at
http://www.montereybayaquarium.org), and Oceans Alive
(http://www.oceansalive.org) publishes a list of recommended
servings per month of various species based on mercury, pesti-
cides, and PCB contamination.
Salmon
Salmon is the third most popular ﬁsh food in the United States
behind canned tuna and shrimp. Ninety percent of the salmon
consumed is farm raised. (Burros 2005b) In 2003, the Environ-
mental Working Group tested farm-raised salmon for PCBs, an
industrial pollutant and known carcinogen. These tests revealed
that while wild salmon PCB levels averaged 5 ppb, farmed
salmon levels averaged 27 ppb. EPA guidelines recommend eat-
ing ﬁsh with PCB levels that are no higher than 4 to 6 ppb, based
on consuming two ﬁsh meals per week. (Burros 2003a) In follow-
up studies, including a large study funded by the Pew Charitable
Trust’s Environment Program, scientists found large differences
in contaminant levels between farmed and wild salmon. The
Pew study sampled about 700 salmon from around the world
and analyzed them for more than ﬁfty contaminants, including
PCBs and two other persistent pesticides, dieldrin and
toxaphene. All three of these contaminants have been associated
with increased liver and other cancer risk. Using EPA guidelines,
the scientists determined how much salmon could be consumed
before cancer risks increased to at least 1 in 100,000. For the most
contaminated ﬁsh, from farms in Scotland and the Faroe Islands,
that amounted to 55 grams of uncooked salmon per month,
about a quarter of a serving. The cleanest ﬁsh are raised in Chile
and the state of Washington. One serving can be consumed per
month without increasing cancer risk.
Farmed salmon are fed a diet of fish meal, made from
ground up small ﬁsh. This meal is high in ﬁsh oil to help the ﬁsh
Food Additives, Contaminants, and Packaging
43

increase their weight. In fact, farmed salmon is higher in omega-
3 fatty acids than wild salmon because wild salmon eat a variety
of ﬁsh, many of which are low in fat. Unfortunately, PCBs bioac-
cumulate in fats, and the more fat the ﬁsh consumes, the greater
the concentration of PCBs in the ﬁsh. Fish farms have been work-
ing to develop new feeds that are low in contaminants, and are
experimenting with using transgenic canola oil which is a pre-
cursor to omega-3s. (Stokstad 2004)
The American Heart Association recommends consuming
168 to 336 grams of ﬁsh per week to confer the beneﬁts of omega-
3 fatty acids in reducing the risk of sudden cardiac death after a
heart attack. Scientists need to perform a thorough analysis
weighing the risks of eating contaminated ﬁsh versus the bene-
ﬁts from the omega-3s similar to the study done regarding mer-
cury and omega-3s. Some experts believe that the cardiovascular
beneﬁts of eating ﬁsh outweigh the cancer risks for people with
cardiovascular disease. (Stokstad 2004)
Given the popularity of salmon, the Pew study generated
controversy when it suggested that consumers eat no more than
one serving of farmed salmon per month. Further, it’s sometimes
impossible to tell whether salmon in stores is farmed or wild
without laboratory tests that determine whether the characteris-
tic salmon color is naturally occurring (wild salmon are pink be-
cause of the krill they eat) or from dyes.
Carbon Monoxide in Meat Packaging
Modified atmospheric packaging has been used to package
meats since 1980 to maintain the appearance of meat while it sits
in grocers’ meat cases. Packages are injected with carbon diox-
ide, nitrogen, and very small (0.4 percent) amounts of carbon
monoxide. The carbon monoxide binds with the muscle tissue
and gives it a rosy appearance. Without this treatment, the iron
in the meat binds with oxygen from the air and creates a brown
color on the surface of the meat. Although carbon monoxide is
toxic to humans in large quantities, the small amounts used in
packaging are considered harmless by the FDA.
Consumer groups complain that this practice takes away
one of consumers’ tools for determining freshness: appearance.
Grocers would like consumers to rely more on expiration dates
on packages since meat can still be safe to eat even after it has
browned due to oxidation. There is a lot of meat that is still
44
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

wholesome, and has not exceeded its expiration date, but must
be sold at a discount or discarded because it has developed a
brown color. The Cattlemen’s Beef Board estimates that retailers
lose over $1 billion annually because of brown color.
A 2001 study conducted at Utah State University showed
that color is not a good indicator of freshness or safety because
the bacteria that spoil meat do not affect color. Color is not a
good indicator of taste either. Consumers strongly prefer red-col-
ored meat, but, in a taste test, after steaks were cooked, they
could not tell the difference between the red- and brown-colored
meat. (Woolston 2006)
Four studies have shown that shoppers select meat by color.
Currently, labeling of carbon monoxide–treated beef is not re-
quired, but the packaging looks different. The meat is packed in
deep white or black plastic containers, and the package is tightly
sealed, with clear plastic on top which does not touch the meat.
This plastic bears the U.S. Department of Agriculture Inspection
seal. There is also a use- or freeze-by date that can be as long as
fourteen days from the date of purchase. The long shelf life is a
result of the special packaging.
Some members of Congress are putting pressure on the FDA
and have introduced measures in Congress to ban the practice if
the FDA does not act. (Burros 2006) The European Union banned
the practice in 2001 because, although the carbon monoxide does
not pose a risk as long as the meat is kept cold, if the meat inad-
vertently becomes warmer, the “presence of CO [carbon monox-
ide] may mask visual evidence of spoilage.” (Weiss 2006)
Consumers should consult labels regarding expiration dates and
make sure meats are refrigerated promptly and kept chilled until
cooked.
Plastic Containers and Packaging
Some chemicals mimic hormones at even low doses. Certain pes-
ticides have been found to disrupt sexual development and af-
fect tumor growth and development. New research suggests that
certain chemicals used in the manufacture of food containers
may have endocrine-disrupting effects as well.
Bisphenol A (BPA) is a chemical used in making hard, clear
polycarbonate plastics formed into baby bottles, water bottles,
and other food and beverage containers. If the containers are
heated, cleaned with harsh detergents, or exposed to high-acid
Food Additives, Contaminants, and Packaging
45

food or drinks, BPA can leach from the container into the food. In
fact, BPA has been detected in nearly every human tested in the
United States from infants to adults. Many government-spon-
sored studies suggest that even at low doses BPA mimics estro-
gen, blocks testosterone, and harms laboratory animals. Because
the effects can be quite subtle, and because the chemicals are so
ubiquitous, it has been difﬁcult for the EPA to set an appropriate
dose level. Unfortunately, there is not a good manufacturing sub-
stitute for BPA at this time. At a minimum, consumers should
avoid using harsh detergents on, storing high-acid foods in, or
heating foods in polycarbonate containers, especially baby bot-
tles. (Cone 2005)
The substance in plastic wrap that makes it cling, di(2-ethyl-
hexyl)adipate (DEHA), is a suspected carcinogen. When plastic
wrap is used to cover food and then heated, the plasticizer
DEHA can leach into foods. Consumers should avoid heating
foods in plastics as much as possible. Waxed paper and paper
plates make good substitutes for plastic wraps in the microwave.
Microwave containers made of polystyrene can also bleed chem-
icals when overheated. (Wolke 2002)
Antibiotics
Antibiotics are the most effective tool ever developed for ﬁghting
infection. These drugs act directly on bacteria (but not viruses),
destroying them, or inhibiting their growth. However, bacteria
are continually evolving new strains, so new drugs may be re-
quired to disable the infection. Overuse of antibiotics has created
many more-resistant strains of bacteria. This overuse has come
about not only from over- or wrongly prescribed use in human
patients but also from use for growth promotion purposes in an-
imals. When a bacterial strain becomes resistant, a new drug
must be tried, increasing the length, severity, and expense of ill-
ness. Keep Antibiotics Working, a group working to decrease an-
tibiotic overuse, estimates that resistant bacterial infections
increase healthcare costs by $4 billion per year. (Keep Antibiotics
Working 2006)
Tuberculosis (TB) offers a well-documented illustration of
how drug-resistant strains can affect severity, treatment, and costs.
Drug-resistant strains of TB began to emerge when TB patients
failed to complete the three- to six-month courses of antibiotic
therapy or they were prescribed the wrong drugs. Multidrug-
resistant TB strains began to show up in the 1980s and now there is
46
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

a “virtually untreatable” strain that is resistant to ﬁve classes of an-
tibiotic drugs. There are three other classes of antibiotics that can
still be used, but they are more toxic, less effective, and more ex-
pensive. It can take as long as two years to treat multidrug-resis-
tant TB, and surgery to remove diseased portions of the lung may
be required. Mortality is also greater with multidrug-resistant TB.
The normal mortality rate for TB is 5 to 6 percent, but it increases
to 20 percent for multidrug-resistant TB and to 33 percent for those
with extensively drug-resistant TB. (Maugh 2006)
Salmonella and Campylobacter, the two leading causes of
foodborne illness, have become increasingly drug resistant, lead-
ing to more and longer illnesses and increased severity for those
who do become ill. Because Salmonella and Campylobacter are
such common bacteria, it is relatively easy for them to become re-
sistant. For example, antibiotic use (even for an unrelated cause)
in both humans and animals affects the intestinal tract, making it
more susceptible to infection from certain bacterial strains be-
cause antibiotics kill not only disease-causing bacteria, but also
the normal bacterial ﬂow. If a person takes a drug for an unre-
lated reason (e.g., a sinus infection), the combination of the ef-
fects of the drug increasing susceptibility to infection and the
presence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria from the consumption of
a food animal contaminated with the resistant strain can cause
the human to develop an infection. In the United States it is esti-
mated that there are 30,000 more infections, 300 more hospital-
izations, and 10 more deaths each year because salmonella has
become resistant. People infected with antibiotic-resistant salmo-
nella are more likely to have a bloodstream infection or die
within ninety days of specimen collection than control groups
with nonresistant infections. Further, a Danish study found that
the death rate for people with multidrug-resistant infections was
ten times higher in the two years following specimen collection
than for the general public. (World Health Organization 2005)
History
In 1949 Dr. Thomas Jukes, then director of Nutrition and Physiol-
ogy Research at Lederle Pharmaceutical Company, discovered
that animals fed small doses of antibiotics gained weight faster.
In the early 1950s farmers began to incorporate antibiotics into
livestock feed to both promote growth, and thus cut production
costs, and also to treat subclinical diseases—diseases that do not
cause obvious symptoms but nevertheless are taxing to the ani-
mal. Use of antibiotics remained strong, and according to a 2001
Food Additives, Contaminants, and Packaging
47

report, approximately 70 percent of the 24.5 million pounds of
antibiotics used in the United States are administered to live-
stock for nontherapeutic purposes. (Union of Concerned Scien-
tists 2001) However, scientists began to realize that the use of
antibiotics in this way was not without consequences. In 1969 the
Swann Committee in England recommended that antibiotics
only be used to treat animals when prescribed by a veterinarian.
Further, the report stated that penicillin and tetracycline should
not be used at subtherapeutic doses for growth promotion. In the
early 1970s, most Western European countries banned the two
drugs for livestock use, but the United States did not. Since the
Swann report, many other research bodies have made similar
conclusions about antibiotic use in livestock including the Na-
tional Research Council Committee on Drug Use in Food Ani-
mals, which identified uses of antibiotics in food animals that
could enhance development of antimicrobial resistance and its
transfer to pathogens that cause human disease. (Swartz 2002)
How Bacterial Strains Become Resistant
Bacteria multiply rapidly, doubling every half hour if conditions
are right. However, bacteria occupy niches, and there is compe-
tition between various types of bacteria to occupy a given niche.
(A niche could be a certain part of the intestine, or stomach, etc.)
If a strain of bacteria has a desirable trait, it will proliferate more
rapidly than a strain without that trait. For example, bacteria
that grow over a wider temperature range have an advantage
over bacteria that only thrive in temperatures with little varia-
tion. Antibiotic resistance (also called antimicrobial resistance) is
an extremely desirable trait because it is advantageous in all
niches. With this kind of trait, the strain has not only a local ad-
vantage but also an almost universally overwhelming advan-
tage. So bacteria with this trait can disseminate through many or
even all niches it has exposure to. Therefore, a treated animal,
treated human, portion of the environment, or even a group en-
vironment, like an intensive care unit, daycare center, or a cattle
feedlot, can become one big niche instead of several niches.
(O’Brien 2002)
Bacteria also have the ability to swap traits. Resistance 
to antibiotics is a speciﬁc trait that causes bacteria to make a spe-
cific protein that inactivates the antibiotic or circumvents the
otherwise damaging effect of the drug. The instructions for mak-
ing specific proteins are encoded in the genes. Unfortunately,
48
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

resistance genes often get encoded in genetic elements that are
outside the chromosomes, or extrachromosonal. Some extrachro-
mosonal elements are plasmids, which are self-replicating dou-
ble strands of DNA. Some of the plasmids are able to transfer
themselves to other bacterial cells. This makes the previously un-
resistant bacteria resistant to antibiotics. In any given individual,
human or animal, such a pattern of developing resistance would
be unlikely since it requires a rare mutational or recombinational
event to take place at each step in the process. However, when
large populations of food animals receive antibiotics regularly
over time, resistance occurs at a high rate.
Several studies show that antibiotic use in animals leads to
resistance in humans. For example, a study conducted in the
1970s tested chickens and humans that lived on a farm both be-
fore and after tetracycline-enhanced feed was given to the ﬂock.
Within a week, fecal samples from the chickens showed in-
creased tetracycline resistance. After the chickens had been fed
medicated feed for three to ﬁve months, fecal samples from the
humans living at the farm showed that 80 percent of their E.coli
(normal bacteria that live in human and other mammal intestines
and aid digestion) were resistant compared to 7 percent in the E.
coli of humans living on neighboring farms.
However, the presence of this symbiotic relationship be-
tween E. coli and mammals also means that there is an ever-pre-
sent bacterial host should an undesirable trait such as antibiotic
resistance arrive. There is evidence that E. coli may be spreading
resistance between animals and humans. In studies from Spain
and Taiwan, where an antibiotic class known as fluoro-
quinolones are used in commercial poultry production, a large
percentage of the chicken carcasses now carry ﬂuoroquinolone-
resistant E. coli bacteria. Humans from those countries also have
increased resistance. Children are not given fluoroquinolones,
but they have become resistant to them as well, indicating that
the resistance is coming from the chickens. (O’Brien 2002) In 1985
a multidrug-resistant salmonella strain was traced by genetic
study from human infections to hamburger consumption at fast
food restaurants, to meat processing plants, and ﬁnally back to
the dairy farm where the cattle were raised. The strain contained
a single large plasmid which gave the strain resistance to several
different antibiotics. (Swartz 2002)
Perhaps the most disheartening aspect of the problem of an-
tibiotic resistance is the speed with which it can occur. In 1995
Food Additives, Contaminants, and Packaging
49

fluoroquinolones were approved for use in poultry farming in
the United States against the advice of the Centers for Disease
Control (CDC). Very quickly resistance to the drugs rose in hu-
mans from almost nothing to 18 percent. (Burros 2002) This drug
class is used to treat severe gastrointestinal tract infections in hu-
mans. One human drug in the class, ciproﬂoxacin, is used to treat
anthrax. The FDA estimates that each year more than 10,000 pa-
tients experience a campylobacter infection that does not re-
spond to fluoroquinolone treatment because of the use of
fluoroquinolones in poultry production. In 2000 the World
Health Organization (WHO) published The WHO Global Strategy
for the Containment of Resistance in Animals Intended for Food, in
which it recommended the following:
1. Prelicensing evaluation should include considerations of
resistance of potential public health signiﬁcance.
2. Prescriptions should be obligatory for all antimicrobials
used for disease control.
3. National systems to monitor antimicrobial use in food
animals should be developed and implemented.
4. Systems for monitoring of resistance should be devel-
oped and implemented nationally, to support timely cor-
rective action.
5. Guidelines should be developed for veterinarians to re-
duce overuse and misuse of antimicrobials.
6. Use of antimicrobial growth promoters should be termi-
nated or rapidly phased out.
The European Union decided to phase out antimicrobials in
food for growth promotion. The ﬁnal phase went into effect in
2006, and now drugs are no longer allowed. In Denmark, where
use of antibiotics in healthy animals was banned years earlier,
farmers were able to reduce their use of antibiotics by over 50
percent (some antibiotics are still needed to treat sick animals),
and the costs of additional feed were minimal. (Wegener 2002)
The National Academy of Sciences estimated that eliminating
antibiotics in healthy animals would cost consumers ﬁve to ten
dollars annually in higher food costs. (Keep Antibiotics Working
2006)
In the United States, the FDA banned the use of fluoro-
quinolones for animals in 2005. (FDA Announces Final Decision
2005) But many groups like the American Medical Association, the
50
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

American Pediatrics Association, and the American Public Health
Association, as well as more than 350 consumer, environmental,
and sustainable agriculture groups, do not think the FDA went far
enough. Two consortium groups, Keep Antibiotics Working and
the Alliance for the Prudent Use of Antibiotics, put together a Sen-
ate bill in 2005 to ban the use of seven classes of antibiotics for
growth promotion that are used to treat humans: penicillins, tetra-
cyclines, macrolides, lincosamides, streptogramins, aminoglyco-
sides, and sulfonamides. It would also restrict any use of a drug
that subsequently became important in human medicine. Sick ani-
mals could still be treated with the drugs when prescribed by a
veterinarian.
By the end of 2006, four of the nation’s top chicken produc-
ers, representing 38 percent of the total chicken market, have
stopped using antibiotics for growth promotion. Tyson Foods,
Gold Kist, Perdue Farms, and Foster Farms also restrict antibiotic
use for routine disease prevention. McDonald’s Corporation and
other large-scale purchasers, such as Bon Appetit Management
Company, the fourth largest food service company in the United
States (the company services colleges and universities as well as
corporate food service operations), were part of the impetus to re-
duce antibiotic use. McDonald’s required all suppliers worldwide
to eliminate antibiotics used for growth promotion by December
2005. The industry was able to adapt to the change by using
hardier breeds and improved husbandry practices. Tyson Foods
improved its housing and preventative health programs to lessen
the chance that the chickens would get sick in the first place.
Tyson was able to lessen its antibiotic use by 93 percent, from
853,000 pounds in 1997 to 59,000 pounds in 2004. (Weise 2006)
Pesticides 
The U.S. Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act
(FIFRA) deﬁnes pesticides as “any substance or mixture of sub-
stances intended for preventing, repelling, or mitigating any in-
sects, rodents, nematodes, or fungi, or any other forms of life
declared to be pests.” This deﬁnition includes substances or mix-
tures intended for use as plant regulators, defoliants, or desic-
cants. Pesticides are an integral part of U.S. agricultural practice,
and 35 to 45 percent of all pesticides produced worldwide are
used in the United States. (Borzelleca 1997)
Pesticides
51

There are more than 865 active ingredients registered as pes-
ticides in the United States. These are formulated into thousands
of pesticide products. The EPA estimates there are 350 different
pesticides that are used on the foods we eat and to protect our
homes and pets. (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 2006)
Pesticides can be naturally occurring substances such as nicotine,
pyrethrum (found in chrysanthemums,) hellebore, rotenone, and
camphor, or synthetically produced substances such as inorganic
chemicals, metals, metallic salts, organophosphates, carbamates,
and halogenated hydrocarbons.
Pesticides work in many different ways to kill pests. Stom-
ach poisons kill when ingested; in-contact poisons kill when they
are touched; and fumigants kill when the substance is breathed.
Residual poisons attack when they are applied to the surface of
pests. Some pesticides inhibit metabolic function or reproduction
of pests, some mimic hormones, some destroy cells, and some
are physical poisons such as sulfur or lime that kill cells indis-
criminately by physical means such as suffocation. Unfortu-
nately, most pesticides are not selective and affect the same target
organ in the pest the farmer is trying to destroy as in nontarget
species (people and animals). (Borzelleca 1997) Pesticides also
tend to concentrate. In an experiment on dichlorodiphenyl-
trichloroethane (DDT), DDT was applied to a lake at 0.02 parts
per million (ppm). Within a year plankton showed concentra-
tions of 10 ppm, little ﬁsh showed 900 ppm, and ﬁsh-eating birds
showed 2,000 ppm. Pesticides accumulate in fatty tissue in ani-
mals, and the runoff from pesticides gets into groundwater.
(Waltner-Toews 1992)
Before a company can market a pesticide in the United
States, it must demonstrate to the Food and Drug Administration
that it is safe. The FDA determines what concentration levels of a
pesticide or its breakdown products are safe. The tolerance lev-
els, the amount allowed to be present on food at harvest, were
adjusted by the 1996 Food Quality Protection Act to be based on
what levels are safe for children. The FDA sets these levels by
studying toxicological data and safety ﬁeld trials, and by consid-
ering the economic impact of the use of the pesticide. Some of the
questions it considers are: What happens to the chemical during
processing? Does the chemical concentration break down? Are
the new products it forms safe? The FDA also uses total diet
studies, where foods are gathered from a complete daily diet,
chemically analyzed, and the total diet is compared to tolerance
52
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

levels for various chemicals. These studies can be quite helpful
because pesticide levels are often reduced during processing, re-
ﬁning, storage, and food preparation. Therefore the total effect of
pesticides might aggregate to unsafe levels, or might have been
signiﬁcantly mitigated by the processing steps.
Some researchers have criticized the methodology used by
the EPA and the FDA to determine pesticide safety because it is
limited to testing for cancer, reproductive outcomes, mutations,
and neurotoxicity. This testing is done by feeding large amounts
of pesticides to animals to determine what constitutes a lethal
dose, and whether birth defects occur in the offspring. However,
the EPA does not mandate studies at the concentration levels ex-
perienced by humans. Many effects of pesticide use are subtle,
including neurodevelopmental effects that alter brain growth
and development. Further, the EPA does not consult the scientiﬁc
peer-reviewed literature of studies done on pesticides, but relies
on the manufacturer’s gross feeding studies instead. For exam-
ple, one meta-study analyzed the results of sixty-three separate
studies that showed that certain pesticides affect the thyroid.
(The thyroid controls brain development, intelligence, and be-
havior.) Yet the EPA has not acted to ban any pesticides due to
thyroid affects. (Colborn 2006)
Studies of various body ﬂuids (e.g., blood, urine, amniotic
fluid, semen) taken from people in both urban and rural areas
have shown the presence of pesticides. Some of these are known
to be persistent pollutants like organophosphates, but other pes-
ticides not known for their persistence are accumulating in hu-
man bodies. Due to the vast number of combinations of pesticide
ingredients, it is difﬁcult to know what the effects of any given
pesticide are. Some pesticides get studied extensively, while oth-
ers are not studied much at all. The longer a pesticide has been
on the market, the more likely that studies will have been re-
ported in refereed journals. Complicating the problem further,
many chemicals combine (for example, two different pesticides
that enter the body on different crops) or their breakdown prod-
ucts in the body are different and either more or less lethal than
the original product.
Organophosphates are a large group of pesticides that in-
clude malathion, oxydemetonmethyl, dimethoate, and naled.
These pesticides are used in the Salinas Valley in California, as
well as throughout the United States. One study conducted in
the Salinas Valley examined the relationship between levels of
Pesticides
53

organophosphate breakdown products in the mother’s urine
with the neurodevelopment of her infant. The test for the break-
down products covered about 80 percent of the organophos-
phates used in the Salinas Valley. Infants were given the
Brazleton neonatal behavior assessment scale which tests habitu-
ation, orientation, motor performance, range of state, autonomic
stability, and reflexes. The infants were sixty-two days old or
younger and showed greater numbers of abnormal reflexes as
the concentration level of breakdown products in their mother’s
urine increased.
One pesticide used in the Salinas Valley during the period of
the study, and in use from 1965 to 2005, was chlorpyrifos (CPF).
It is an organophosphate which has been studied extensively to
determine what kinds of neurological effects it causes. In high
doses, CPF acts as a nerve poison causing overstimulation of the
peripheral nervous system leading to tremors, convulsions, and
death. Scientists at Duke University, led by Theodore Slotkin,
showed that at low doses CPF alters prenatal development of the
brain, and that the fetus and embryo are sensitive to doses much
lower than would cause damage in an adult. The toxin affects the
brain in many different ways, including damaging neurons that
can lead to behavioral changes in adolescents and adults, attack-
ing the glial cells that provide nourishment and structural sup-
port in the brain, and impairing DNA from binding to
transcription factors which modulate cell replication and differ-
entiation and are critical for memory. Serotonin disruption also
occurs.
Other studies show that the combination of pesticide ingre-
dients can be more toxic than when the ingredients are encoun-
tered individually. A 2004 study showed that polychlorinated
biphenyls (PCBs) acted differently when alone or combined with
organophosphates. Very low doses of the chemicals together de-
layed the opening of the ear, geotaxis (movement in response to
gravity), grip strength, and eventually affected mortality,
growth, thyroid function, and neurobehavioral development.
(Colborn 2006)
Although the FDA and EPA regulate pesticides used in this
country, one of the most disturbing aspects of pesticide produc-
tion is that pesticides that have been banned from use in the
United States continue to be manufactured in the United States
and sold abroad. In many less-developed countries, the regula-
tory infrastructure doesn’t exist to require testing, labeling, and
54
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

product review of imported pesticides. Pesticide poisoning is
common among foreign farmworkers, and ironically many of the
pesticides come back to the United States in the form of residues
on imported produce.
A prudent pesticide strategy must include an evaluation of
need and consider the following: (1) the possibility of avoiding
use of the pesticide or using smaller quantities; (2) the safety of
production workers and applicators of the pesticide; (3) the
safety of consumers of the product, including potentially sensi-
tive segments of the population; (4) the interactions of pesticides
with other chemicals, including drugs, nutrients, and other
chemicals; (5) environmental and ecological concerns, including
groundwater and surface water contamination, and effects on
wildlife; (6) persistence (how long it stays in the environment),
bioaccumulation (how it concentrates in species other than the
target, as illustrated by the DDT experiment), and how it might
alter the balance of nature. There are also risk-beneﬁt considera-
tions, including the economic aspects of increasing food produc-
tion per acre, decreasing food losses during storage, and
destroying vectors of disease such as the aﬂatoxins that grow on
untreated peanuts. Pesticides require careful, judicious study so
that they can be used safely. (Borzelleca 1997)
Growth Hormones in Beef Cattle
Besides pesticides, there are many drugs used in agriculture that
are controversial. These drugs, like pesticides, help increase
yields. Since the 1950s, growth hormones have been used to in-
crease meat production. Three naturally occurring hormones—
estridiol, progesterone, and testosterone—and their synthetic
equivalents—zeranol, melengestrol acetate, and trenbolone—are
injected into calves’ ears as time-release pellets. This implant un-
der the skin causes the steers to gain an extra two to three
pounds per week and saves up to $40 per steer in production
costs, because the steers gain more weight with the same amount
of feed. Two-thirds of U.S. cattle are treated with hormones, but
the European Union banned the practice in 1988 and bans im-
ported beef unless it is certiﬁed hormone-free. (Raloff 2002)
There is wide disagreement about whether the practice is
safe. Hormone-like chemicals (DDT, PCB, dioxin, etc.) in large
enough concentrations or at critical points in fetal development
Growth Hormones in Beef Cattle
55

disrupt functioning of the natural hormones in both animal and
human bodies. The U.S. government has been studying the
endocrine disruptive effects of certain estrogenic (estrogen-
producing) pesticides and food contaminants known as xenoe-
strogens (substances that behave like estrogens), but has only
begun to study the effects of hormones in meat and its impact for
food safety and the environment. There has been escalating inci-
dence of reproductive cancers in the United States since 1950.
Breast cancer is up 55 percent; testicular cancer, 120 percent; and
prostate cancer, 190 percent. No one knows the cause of these can-
cers, but even subtle shifts in quantities of hormones may con-
tribute to the problem. A study conducted at Ohio State
University showed that human breast cancer cells experienced
significant growth when combined with beef from zeranol-
treated cows. This increased growth occurred even when the level
in the beef was as much as thirty times lower than the government-
established safe level. (CBS News 2003) Besides cancer, other
estrogenic effects may include reduction in male fertility and
early puberty. When exposed to higher than normal doses of es-
trogen through birth control pills or hormone replacement ther-
apy in menopause, women experience somewhat higher risks of
breast cancer and other tumors.
However, it is difﬁcult to say whether the added hormones
in the beef are causing additional cancer cases, or whether the
causes are from something else entirely, such as eating a diet rich
in animal protein. The hormones in meat are trace amounts. An
adult male produces about 136,000 nanograms of estrogen every
day. There are 4 nanograms of estrogen in a 6-ounce serving of
beef if it has been treated with estrogen, and 3 nanograms of es-
trogen in untreated beef. Other dietary sources of estrogenic
compounds include soy oil with 28,000 nanograms per table-
spoon, eggs with 45 times more estrogenic compounds than a
quarter-pound hamburger, and even beer has more estrogenic
compounds than meat. (Schwarcz 2006)
The European Commission Scientiﬁc Committee for Veteri-
nary Measures Relating to Public Health concluded that adverse
effects from hormones include developmental, neurobiological,
genotoxic, and carcinogenic effects. They further concluded that
existing studies do not point to any clear tolerance level, and
thus banned the hormones outright. (European Commission
Finds 1999) The U.S. beef industry argues that the natural hor-
mone levels in the aging bulls and dairy cows used for beef in
56
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Europe can be many times higher than from steers treated with
hormones.
Perhaps of more importance than the effect of increased hor-
mone levels from the meat itself are the downstream effects of
treating cows with hormones. About 10 percent of the hormone
dose that a cow receives is excreted in the feces. This means that
agricultural runoff contains the hormones, which then contami-
nate streams and eventually drinking water and other food.
Studies of fish living downstream from feedlots have revealed
deformities such as reduced head size and reproductive conse-
quences like reduced testes size, which results in lower sperm
count. (Raloff 2002)
Recombinant Bovine Growth Hormone
Similar controversy surrounds recombinant bovine growth hor-
mone (rBGH), also called recombinant bovine somatotropin
(rBST), administered to dairy cattle to help them produce more
milk. Developed by the Monsanto Corporation and marketed
under the name Posilac, it has generated a lot of debate since it
was approved by the FDA in 1993. The United States is the only
major industrialized nation to approve rBGH. Health Canada,
the food and drug regulatory arm of the Canadian government,
rejected rBGH in early 1999 and stirred up more controversy in
the process. They rejected the drug after careful review of the
same data that was submitted to the U.S. Food and Drug Admin-
istration, finding that it did not meet standards for veterinary
health and might pose food safety issues for humans.
The hormone is injected into the pituitary gland of dairy
cows every two weeks because it can increase milk production
by as much as 15 percent. Unfortunately, it increases the rate of
mastitis (an infection of the udder) by 25 percent, increases the
rate of infertility in cattle 18 percent, and the rate of lameness 50
percent. (Hess 1999) Because the cows are sicker, they are dosed
more heavily with antibiotics, which exacerbates the problem of
antibiotic use in animals (see above).
The mechanism by which rBGH works may also create dan-
gerous hormones for people consuming the dairy products from
treated cows. As a by-product, rBGH causes cows to produce
more insulin growth factor 1 (IGF-1). IGF-1 is present in milk at
higher levels in cows that take rBGH. IGF-1 causes cells to di-
vide. Elevated levels have been associated with higher rates of
Growth Hormones in Beef Cattle
57

breast, colon, and prostate cancer. Studies show that IGF-1 sur-
vives the digestion process, and the added levels in milk may
cause additional cancers in humans. As part of the Nurses
Health Study conducted by Harvard University, researchers ana-
lyzing the study data concluded that “the results raise the possi-
bility that milk consumption could influence cancer risk by a
mechanism involving IGF-1.” (Burros 2005a)
The ninety-day feeding study that was done to establish
rBGH safety indicated that 20 to 30 percent of the rats fed a very
high dose of rBGH developed antibodies to rBGH, which sug-
gests that they had absorbed it into their bodies. Monsanto scien-
tists claimed that the rats had not absorbed it into their
bloodstreams. Some male rats also developed cysts on their thy-
roids and increased mononuclear infiltration in the prostate.
(Bellow 1999) Although these studies do not in themselves indi-
cate that rBGH will harm human health, they indicate that fur-
ther long-term studies are needed to determine whether it is safe.
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) estimates that
approximately 22 percent of the dairy cows in the United States
are treated with rBGH, but FDA rules do not permit a dairy to
declare its milk rBGH free. Only milk labeled organic is assured
to have no rBGH. Most milk is pooled so almost all the U.S. milk
supply has at least traces of rBGH.
Genetically Engineered Food
Drugs are one tool farmers use to improve yields, and genetic
engineering is another. Since ancient times farmers have looked
for ways to increase yields. Three-inch-long corncobs grown by
native Americans in Arizona have been replaced by the 10- and
12-inch ears we see today. People saved seeds from successful
plants, created hybrids, and enriched soil among other methods
of enhancing yields. Even since the 1960s, agriculture has be-
come so much more efﬁcient that it would take ten million more
square miles of land to produce the same amount of crops we
have today using the techniques of the 1960s. (Shapiro 1999)
Acreage planted on a global basis is no longer increasing be-
cause of development for other purposes and due to climatic
change. The United Nations estimates that in 2025 world popu-
lation will be 1.31 times the population of the year 2000, thus in-
creasing population from 6.18 billion in 2000 to 8.15 billion in
58
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

2025. Without more agricultural acreage, growing food effi-
ciently becomes increasingly important. (Chen and Tseng 2006)
The latest method of improving productivity is genetic engi-
neering: the transfer of DNA from organisms of one species into
organisms of a different species.
These DNA transfers can be used to make crops pest-resis-
tant, unaffected by herbicides, or with enhanced nutritional qual-
ities. For example, Monsanto inserted a bacterium into potatoes
that causes the potato to be starchier. These starchier potatoes ab-
sorb less fat during frying, creating lower-fat french fries and
potato chips. Monsanto is also currently experimenting with soy-
beans to change the type of oil found in soybeans to the omega-3
fatty acids found in ﬁsh, but without the ﬁsh taste, giving con-
sumers the possibility of getting the health beneﬁts of omega-3s
without consuming ﬁsh. The American Heart Association recom-
mends consumers eat two servings of fish weekly, yet only 17
percent of the U.S. population eats that much ﬁsh. (Melcer 2006) 
Genetically engineered corn seeds have a gene from the bac-
teria Bacillus thuringiensis, or Bt. This gene makes the corn plant
produce a toxin in all its tissues, including the edible grain, thus
killing the insects that feed on the corn, including the European
corn borer that eats its way into the stalk and weakens the plant.
Fields planted with the altered corn produce 6 to 8 percent
greater yields on average. However, the presence of this toxin
harms more than the insects it is designed to repel. Scientists at
Cornell University determined that pollen from genetically engi-
neered Bt corn can kill Monarch butterﬂies, and there is evidence
that soil microorganisms may be damaged as well. (Yoon 1999)
Long-term animal feeding studies are needed to determine what
kinds of consequences the presence of these toxins may have.
Monsanto, the agriculture bioengineering giant, and maker
of the herbicide Roundup, markets Roundup Ready Soybeans.
These seeds are resistant to Roundup, so the herbicide can be
sprayed on the crops, killing the weeds and leaving the soybeans
intact. The hope is that fewer herbicides can be used to control
weeds, which would make the crops cheaper to grow and put
fewer chemicals into the soil and groundwater. This reduction in
herbicide use could also mean fewer chemical residues on food.
Opponents of genetic engineering fear that these techniques
will have only short-term benefits and that “superweeds” will
develop which will require the use of more toxic and greater
quantities of herbicides. If superweeds develop, they could
Genetically Engineered Food
59

crowd out indigenous plants and thus impair biodiversity. Ge-
netically modiﬁed crops are also difﬁcult to contain to one area
because cross-pollination occurs with neighboring ﬁelds planted
with the same crop. So one variety of corn planted next to a dif-
ferent variety will be cross-pollinated, causing the resultant crop
in the two ﬁelds to be a mixture of the two varieties. For organic
farmers or farmers exporting to Europe or Japan, this type of
cross-pollination poses real problems. They cannot get their
crops certiﬁed as free of genetically modiﬁed organisms (GMOs).
It also poses problems for people who ﬁnd themselves allergic to
genetically modified crops. It is impossible to know whether a
new strain will cause allergies because new proteins are being
created. Although scientists can tell what the protein sequence
looks like, it is the way the protein folds up on itself (its tertiary
structure) that determines whether it will cause an allergic reac-
tion, and that is unknown until the completed product is tested
with animal feeding studies. (Nestle 2003) When a crop that pro-
duces a known allergen mixes with a crop that does not produce
an allergen, there is allergen potential in the previously unaller-
genic crop. For example, in 1996, Pioneer Hi-Bred International
(now part of DuPont) developed a soybean with a gene from the
Brazil nut to enhance the protein content of soybeans. Testing
showed that people who were allergic to Brazil nuts were also al-
lergic to the new soybeans. (Friends of the Earth 2006)
The FlavrSavr tomato, which was one of the earliest and
most publicized genetically engineered products, was not a re-
sounding commercial success and caused some to raise the issue
of “faux freshness.” If the tomato is engineered to have a long
shelf life, will a consumer actually be purchasing an old tomato
that looks fresh but has long since lost its nutritional value?
In the United States, the FDA ruled in May of 1998 that food
labeled organic could not be grown from genetically engineered
seeds. In Europe, genetically engineered foods have met with
great resistance. The European Union (EU) refused to approve
any new types of GMOs between 1998 and 2004. However, the
World Trade Organization (WTO) has determined that the Euro-
pean Union’s failure to embrace GMOs is a trade violation be-
cause it is based on prejudice or preference rather than science.
Most EU member countries believe that research on GMOs is in-
sufﬁcient to conclude that they are safe for consumption and the
environment. Speciﬁcally, opinion polls among Europeans show
that individuals are concerned that GMOs can make them sick
60
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

and that farming of GMOs may limit biodiversity. In 2002, the
European Union created the European Food Safety Authority to
evaluate GMO products. However, many member nations were
unhappy with the methodology used by the food safety agency
to determine product safety; the nations believed that the agency
relied too heavily on industry data to reach its conclusions. Con-
sequently, member nations did not accept the recommendations
of the food safety agency and continued to ban GMOs. In 2006,
the European Commission instructed the agency to rely more
heavily on the scientiﬁc data national governments are using to
determine product safety. If member nations view the agency as
trustworthy, it may succeed in building confidence in GMOs.
(Miller and von Reppert-Bismark 2006)
So far scientific studies have not shown major problems
with genetically engineered foods, but there may be long-term,
unforeseen consequences when the environment is changed. In
many other areas, changes in the ways food is grown and
processed have created niches for harmful bacteria and viruses.
Genetic engineering has much to offer in increasing the amount
of food available to the world’s expanding population, but the
process should be carefully reviewed and tested to avoid creat-
ing new food risks and environmental catastrophes.
Irradiation
Just as science has brought us new food production techniques, it
has also brought new food safety strategies, such as irradiation.
Irradiation is the process of subjecting food to electron beams or
gamma rays to kill bacteria. The radiation damages the bacteria
so that it cannot reproduce. By killing the bacteria, spoilage is
also delayed. The amount of radiation is not enough to make the
food radioactive, only to kill bacteria. Currently irradiation is
used to sterilize medical supplies and cosmetics and a limited
number of foods.
To irradiate food with gamma rays, the following process is
used: 
1. Metal carriers are loaded with boxes of food.
2. The carriers slide along an overhead monorail into a
chamber containing radioactive cobalt, which is stored
in a pool of water.
Irradiation
61

3. Hydraulic arms lift the cobalt out of the water pool ex-
posing the boxes to gamma rays. Depending on the type
of food, the duration of exposure varies. Frozen chicken
takes as long as 20 minutes to irradiate; raw meat takes
longer.
4. Once the food has been irradiated, the boxes slide out
the opposite side and are loaded onto trucks for ship-
ping to distributors or directly to restaurants and super-
markets. (Gunther 1994)
Irradiation is the only way to kill E. coli O157:H7 besides
heat. After the four deaths of children from E. coli O157:H7 that
were traced to Jack in the Box restaurants in 1993, enthusiasm for
irradiation grew and the USDA approved irradiation of beef in
1999. Irradiation raises the cost of meat by up to 20 cents per
pound. (Gersema 2003)
Under congressional mandate, the USDA announced in 2003
that it would allow school districts to purchase irradiated beef for
school cafeterias. There was not much interest in the irradiated
meat though because of the increased cost and because parent
groups were unhappy with its inclusion. In addition, sanitarians
at school districts believed that their procedures were sufﬁcient to
safely handle beef without irradiation. In 2004, the USDA was ex-
plicitly forbidden from requiring irradiated meats in school
lunches, and the USDA could not subsidize irradiated meats at a
different level than regular meats, nor could it offer them to the
states without the states speciﬁcally asking for them. (King 2004)
Meat producers have been cautious about introducing irra-
diated beef because of the added cost and because it can darken
meat and change the flavor enough to be noticeable. High-fat
foods can develop a rancid smell. Irradiated food must be
marked with the Radura symbol or it must say irradiated on the
food label. The marketing departments of the grocery and meat
trade organizations have found that considerable education of
consumers is needed before they will accept irradiated food. The
FDA expanded the deﬁnition of pasteurization in 2004 to be “any
process, treatment, or combination thereof that is applied to food
to reduce the most resistant microorganism(s) of public health
signiﬁcance to a level that is not likely to present a public health
risk under normal conditions of distribution and storage.” (Sug-
arman 2004) This new deﬁnition allows irradiated food to be la-
beled “pasteurized” as well as food sterilized by a host of new
62
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

and old technologies such as pulsed electric ﬁelds, ohmic heat-
ing, high-pressure processing, and regular cooking processes.
However, the word irradiation would still have to appear, as in
“pasteurized with irradiation.” Market demand will have to be
seen in order for investment to be made in the large-scale facili-
ties that would be needed to process large quantities of food.
Besides increased cost and potential reduction of food taste,
there are several drawbacks to irradiation. When the food is
bombarded with radiation, some of the electrons are freed and
attach to other atoms forming new compounds, some of which
are harmful, like benzene and formaldehyde. Free radicals called
unidentiﬁed radiolytic particles are also present. No one knows
exactly what effect these particles might have. Many generations
of rats have been fed irradiated food without any ill effects. The
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the World Health
Organization, and the FDA all endorse the safety of irradiation.
However, in 2002, the European Parliament placed a moratorium
on almost all irradiated food after examining four peer-reviewed
studies which showed adverse effects from consuming irradi-
ated foods. In one of the studies rats were injected with a sub-
stance that produces colon cancer. Some of the rats were then fed
with one of the by-products of irradiation, 2-alklycyclobutanone
(2-ACB). The rats fed the 2-ACB developed three times as many
tumors, and the tumors were larger and more complex, than the
rats that were injected with the cancer-producing substance but
not fed the 2-ACB. (Burros 2003b)
There is also signiﬁcant vitamin loss from irradiation. Vita-
mins A, B1, B3, B6, B12, C, E, and K and folic acid are affected. In
some foods, as little as 10 percent of the vitamins are destroyed,
but in others it can be as high as 50 percent. If irradiated foods
become a major part of people’s diets, overall nutritional quality
will suffer. And while irradiation kills most bacteria, it does not
affect viruses, and any bacteria that get onto food after treatment
suddenly have a food supply without any competitors. This cre-
ates the potential for very toxic food. (Fox 1998)
Bioterrorism
Since the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, all sectors of the
United States have considered vulnerability to terrorism, and the
food industry is no exception. Food and the agricultural industry
Bioterrorism
63

do provide a potential avenue for terrorist attacks, although no
one knows how likely such an event is to occur. Some researchers
think it would be unlikely to occur, but others think there is po-
tential for bioterror depending on the objectives terrorists were
trying to achieve.
A very interesting case of food-related bioterrorism occurred
in The Dalles, Oregon, in 1984. The Dalles is a small farming
community of about 11,000 residents, located near the Columbia
River. In 1981, followers of Bhag Wan Shree Rajneesh purchased
a ranch in Wasco County, where The Dalles is located, with the
intent of building an international headquarters for the guru.
The group incorporated as a town called Rajneeshpuram in or-
der to circumvent local zoning ordinances and thus build their
facilities as they wished. Their township was challenged in court,
and the sect was prevented from building as they planned. The
group believed that the outcome of the November 6, 1984, elec-
tions for Wasco County commissioners would have an effect on
whether they would be able to get their zoning petitions ap-
proved. Their strategy was to sicken a signiﬁcant portion of the
local population to limit the turnout in the election. They be-
lieved they could affect the outcome of the elections by keeping
substantial numbers of people away from the polls.
Members of the group purchased stocks of Salmonella ty-
phimurium from a biological supply house, which they propa-
gated. In two episodes from September 9 to September 18, 1984,
and September 19 to October 10, 1984, group members visited lo-
cal restaurants and placed bacteria in salad bars on various sal-
ads, in blue cheese dressing, and in some creamers. At least 751
people contracted S. typhimurium and 45 people had to be hospi-
talized. It appears that the two episodes were trial runs for a con-
tamination nearer the time of the election.
One of the most interesting aspects of the case is that it was
not identiﬁed as an act of intentional food contamination until
over a year after the events happened. When the outbreak began,
local and state health authorities acted quickly and traced the
source of the infection to the salad bars. They closed all the salad
bars on September 25, and in so doing closed off the group’s vec-
tor for spreading the bacteria. The CDC was called in and the
outbreak was thought to have been the result of sick workers in-
adequately washing their hands. Certain aspects of the salad
bars made the contamination persist: the holding temperatures
may have permitted further propagation of the bacteria, foods
64
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

were re-served, and the addition of old products on top of new
products allowed the S. typhimurium to persist for several days.
There also may have been intentional cross-contamination by
group members.
Although intentional contamination was considered early in
the investigation, it was rejected because there was no apparent
motive. There was concern in The Dalles about potential election
fraud, but since the outbreak occurred too early to affect the elec-
tion, the incident was not linked in the investigators’ minds to
the election. No one claimed responsibility for the attacks, nor
was any disgruntled employee identiﬁed. Law enforcement ofﬁ-
cers investigated a few questionable behaviors that were noted
by restaurant employees, but there was no recognizable pattern
of unusual behavior. By considering the epidemic exposure
curves, it appeared that the salad bars were contaminated multi-
ple times during a several-week period. This indicated that a
sustained source of S. typhimurium was necessary. This is more
likely to occur from a sick employee than from multiple sabotage
attempts.
Another factor that confused the investigators was that a
few restaurant employees got sick before the restaurant patrons.
This would tend to indicate that the employees were the source of
the disease rather than fellow victims. Also, the historical paucity
of instances when deliberate contamination with bacterial agents
had occurred suggested that this was more likely a typical out-
break, and many outbreaks never get isolated to a particular
source.
When the Rajneesh commune collapsed in 1985, the Federal
Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and the Oregon Public Health Lab-
oratory investigated the clinic and lab facilities at Rajneeshpu-
ram. A sample seized at the facility’s medical center lab on
October 2, 1985, matched the outbreak strain. A confession by
one of the members of the group provided further clues about
the plot. On March 19, 1986, two commune members were in-
dicted for conspiring to tamper with consumer products by poi-
soning food in violation of the federal antitampering laws; they
pled guilty in April 1986. They were subsequently sentenced to
four and a half years in prison. (Torok et al. 1997)
Another case of intentional contamination occurred in 1996
when twelve laboratory workers at a large Texas medical center
contracted Shigella dysenteriae after eating muffins and dough-
nuts left in their break room. During the night and morning shift
Bioterrorism
65

change on October 29, 1996, an unsigned e-mail from a supervi-
sor’s computer appeared on lab computer screens inviting
coworkers to eat pastries in the lab break room. Twelve workers
ate the pastries, and all twelve developed diarrhea; four workers
had to be hospitalized, with an average stay of four days, and
five others were treated in emergency rooms, some with intra-
venous ﬂuids.
Investigation of the lab storage freezer suggested that the
reference culture of S. dysenteriae type 2 had been disturbed. The
culture was stored in a low-temperature storage system for mi-
croorganisms. Each Microbank vial holds twenty-five porous
doughnut-shaped beads that can be impregnated with microor-
ganisms. The vial containing the S. dysenteriae only contained
nineteen beads, although it was reportedly never used. An un-
eaten mufﬁn was contaminated with the same strain of S. dysen-
teriae as the reference culture. This particular strain is uncommon
in the United States. The researchers investigated other possible
sources of contamination, including a lab accident or contamina-
tion during commercial handling, but concluded that the most
likely occurrence was intentional tampering by someone with
access to the freezer, lab skills to culture the organism from the
beads and inoculate the pastries, and access to the locked break
room. The dosage on each pastry was not determined, but 
S. dysenteriae causes illness with as little as 10 to 100 organisms.
As a result of this occurrence, the medical center imple-
mented several security measures. The lab freezer is kept locked
and must be unlocked by a supervisor to gain entry. Stock cul-
ture labels no longer identify microorganisms by name—a nu-
merical system is used instead. (Kolavic et al. 1997)
These two incidents illustrate how bioterrorism can occur. In
each of these cases, the food products were tainted right before
serving. This time frame results in the most concentrated effect;
however, the risk of detection for the perpetrator is high, and the
number of people that can be affected is low. Each of these inci-
dents used agents that were meant solely to induce illness and
not death. This method also reduced the risk to the perpetrators
since accidental self-contamination would not be lethal.
Assessing the risk and preventing potential bioterrorist at-
tacks involves consideration of desired outcomes. Is the intent to
create fear and panic? Kill large numbers of people? Create eco-
nomic losses? Disturb research? How much risk are the terrorists
willing to assume?
66
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Agricultural and food chain assaults do not have the imme-
diacy and impact of human-directed atrocities such as bombings.
The impacts are delayed, and may lack a single focus-point for
media attention. The hostility and panic surrounding the Sep-
tember 11 attacks were derived in part by the drama of the sui-
cide bombings, whereas agricultural terror and food tampering
are slower to get going but can still be quite devastating.
Although less dramatic, assaults on agricultural targets have
the potential for creating social upheaval and undermining the
government’s economic base. This disorder could occur if the
food supply were disrupted, even from nonterrorist-related ac-
tivity. For example, when one cow was found to be contaminated
with bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) in Washington
State, the beef industry was severely affected, partly because of
mishandling by the USDA, which permitted the cow to be
processed before the test results had been reported. Later, 255
“animals of interest” that may have been on the same farm were
euthanized, as were an additional 701 cows that may have had
contact with the affected cow. An additional 2,000 tons of meat
and bonemeal were removed from the marketplace and put in a
landﬁll because of the possibility that it may have been contami-
nated. The value of beef and beef products dropped, with an im-
mediate drop in the price of feeder and live cattle by 20 percent.
As a precaution, beef products in key West Coast markets were
removed, 4 percent of the U.S. public stopped eating beef com-
pletely, and another 16 million consumers reduced their con-
sumption. Loss estimates of nearly $10 billion were projected,
with an estimated $3 billion in reduced sales per year for the
people who stopped eating beef, and about $6 billion for those
who reduced their consumption. And while the United States
beef market bounced back, the export market has yet to fully re-
cover. (Rascoe and Bledsoe 2005)
There was nothing intentional about this incident, but one of
the factors that contributed to the scope of the response is the
zoonotic nature of BSE. Zoonotic diseases can cross the species
barrier and therefore cause illness in both animal and human
species. While it would be difﬁcult and time-consuming to trans-
fer BSE to U.S. cows for the purpose of creating panic or causing
damage to the beef market, there are other pathogens that would
be easy to transport. For example, a parasite, the Cochliomyia ho-
minivorax maggot, otherwise known as the New World screw-
worm, feeds in the living tissue of warm-blooded animals and
Bioterrorism
67

causes screwworm myiasis, a disease that is fatal to animals in
seven to ten days if left untreated. Cattle are easily infected be-
cause the female maggot can deposit as many as 400 eggs in a
single laying in a range of wounds, such as tick bites, cuts, and
lesions from dehorning or castration. The maggots can easily
reach urban areas because the ﬂies can travel up to 200 miles on
wind currents. (Chalk 2004)
New World screwworm has been a recurrent problem in the
United States, so cattle ranchers routinely dehorn and castrate
animals when the maggots that carry the disease aren’t active.
The United States releases sterile male ﬂies to mate with the fe-
males when it is conducting an eradication program. Were the
screwworm to be reintroduced in this country, the Center for
Food Security and Public Health at Iowa State University esti-
mates that it would cost $540 million in production losses and
$1.3 billion to eradicate them. These estimates do not account for
any medical costs for humans should the ﬂies get into populated
areas. (Screwworm Myiasis 2004)
Even nonzoonotic pathogens have great potential for eco-
nomic disruption and may lessen public support and conﬁdence
in the government. For example, foot and mouth disease, which
was eradicated from the United States in 1929 (U.S. Department
of Agriculture, Animal and Plant Inspection Service 2002), is eas-
ily spread. And while most animals survive, they are severely
debilitated, which limits milk and meat production. The disease
is viral and quite hardy in the environment. It can persist for up
to a month in contaminated fodder or the environment. If foot
and mouth disease were to spread unchecked, the economic im-
pact could reach billions of dollars in the ﬁrst year alone. Deer
and other wildlife could become infected easily, and wildlife
could be a source of reinfection of livestock. The fact that U.S.
farms are so concentrated with thousands of animals on single
farms makes it easy to create a lot of havoc with a small amount
of risk.
Further up the food processing ladder are packing plants
that process fruits and vegetables and small-scale manufacturers,
especially those that specialize in ready-to-eat meats or aggre-
gated foodstuffs such as premade sandwiches. Since these facili-
ties don’t generally have uniform biosecurity methods, don’t use
heat in processing (a step that would kill bacteria), and the prod-
uct won’t be cooked by the consumer, bacteria such as salmo-
nella, E. coli O157:H7, botulism, or chemical contaminants such
68
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

as pesticides could be introduced and have a huge consequence
to people. (Chalk 2004)
To counter these risks, the World Health Organization
(WHO) has identiﬁed four main strategies for mitigating terror-
ist threats to food: prevention, surveillance, preparedness, and
response. Many prevention policies can be undertaken as an ex-
tension of good manufacturing practices and Hazard Analysis
and Critical Control Point (HACCP) plans at the producer level
coupled with inspection programs and safeguarding of chemical,
biological, and radionuclear agents at the plant and governmen-
tal levels. A HACCP plan could be modiﬁed to include not only
safeguards to prevent natural biological hazards like bacterial
contamination but also prevention of intentional contamination.
The WHO has identified several common sense measures
that would greatly enhance food security, but are low cost and
easy to implement for most producers.
1. Know the source of raw materials.
2. Train employees in food safety and security procedures.
3. Check the premises for signs of product tampering.
4. Check all facility areas regularly, including toilets, main-
tenance closets, personal lockers, and storage areas, for
concealed packages and other anomalies.
5. Eliminate potential hiding places in facilities.
6. Maintain up-to-date ﬂoor plans, and store in a secure
location to give to local ﬁre ofﬁcials.
7. Provide adequate lighting both inside and outside the
facility.
8. Account for all keys to the facility.
9. Watch for unusual employee behaviors such as staying
after the employee’s shifts, coming in early, or consult-
ing ﬁles outside of his areas of expertise.
10 . Handle mail carefully.
11. Maintain data security.
12. In addition to good plant security practices, animal feed
security must be considered. (World Health Organiza-
tion 2002)
Controlling access, using tamper-resistant or tamper-
evident systems such as tape or wax seals, and keeping records
so that tracing and recall of animal feeds can occur all enhance
food security at the product level. The FDA created industry
Bioterrorism
69

recordkeeping requirements in 2004 so that in the event of an
outbreak officials will be able to track the source of the food.
(Alonso-Zaldivar 2004)
At the governmental level, surveillance is essential for rapid
detection of a foodborne disease outbreak. Ideally surveillance
systems detect small clusters of illness rapidly. There are two
types of surveillance, active and passive. In passive surveillance,
in order for a disease outbreak to get noticed by the CDC or
health department, a chain of events must occur:
1. Exposure of the general public
2. Person becomes ill
3. Person seeks medical attention
4. Specimen is obtained
5. Laboratory tests for the organism
6. Laboratory conﬁrms the case
7. Report to Health Department/CDC
Public health departments watch for trends based on lab re-
ports. In active surveillance, public health authorities do regular
studies of sample areas looking for disease trends and out-
breaks. In the United States, the CDC operates FoodNet, an ac-
tive surveillance system that works with over 650 clinical labs
located in ten FoodNet sites. These labs test stool samples look-
ing for certain types of foodborne illness. FoodNet’s catchment
area currently represents about 15 percent of the U.S. population
and has geographical diversity. Information is collected on ten
enteric bacterial and parasitic infections and on hemolytic ure-
mic syndrome (HUS). (For more information on HUS see the
section on E. coli O157:H7 in Chapter 1.) FoodNet information is
transmitted electronically to the CDC. (U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention 2006)
In addition, the CDC has an intense surveillance system for
botulism which it carries out with state health departments. If a
clinician suspects a patient has botulism and needs botulinum
antitoxin treatment, he or she notifies the state health depart-
ment. CDC epidemiologists are on call at all times to provide
clinical consultation, arrange for testing of specimens, and when
the diagnosis is probable, to release the antitoxin for patient
treatment. One case of botulism is treated as a public health
emergency, and an immediate epidemiological investigation is
70
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

conducted to identify and treat any additional patients, ﬁnd the
source, and eliminate the food vehicle by seizure or recall.
The CDC also coordinates a network of public health and
regulatory laboratories that do molecular subtyping of certain
foodborne pathogens. Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis is a
method used to generate a unique DNA pattern (or genetic
fingerprint) for foodborne pathogens obtained from clinical
specimens or food products. The patterns are transmitted elec-
tronically between labs so that strains can be compared. If the
strains are indistinguishable, it suggests a common source may
be involved. All fifty states and public health labs in Canada
participate. (Sobel, Khan, and Swerdlow 2002)
Another CDC program is the salmonella outbreak detection
algorithm. Salmonella isolates are serotyped and transmitted to
the CDC where a computerized algorithm compares the count
each week of each salmonella serotype to historical data by state
and region. The algorithm has helped detect several large, dif-
fuse, and multistate outbreaks that otherwise might not have
been detected. (Sobel, Khan, and Swerdlow 2002)
If an outbreak is detected, it may not be immediately appar-
ent whether it is intentional or unintentional. An intentional out-
break often includes unusual relationships between individuals,
unusual time and place of the outbreak, or unusual pathogens or
food vehicles. If odd circumstances point toward intentional cont-
amination, law enforcement is involved. The CDC operates the
Epidemic Intelligence Service, which consults with local public
health departments and sends a rapid response team if necessary.
If a bioterrorism attack reached national disaster status, the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) would have
overall responsibility. As the response to Hurricane Katrina
demonstrated, FEMA is not as well prepared as it might be.
However, Congress passed legislation in 2006 to improve the
way FEMA responds to disasters, and hopefully a stronger, bet-
ter-prepared agency will result.
References 
Alonso-Zaldivar, Ricardo. 2004. The Nation, Food Supply Is Secure from
Bioterrorism, FDA Says; New Rules Require Firms to Keep Records So
That Contamination May Be Traced Back to Its Source. Los Angeles Times,
December 7, A 17.
References
71

Beckman, Mary. 2006. Soft Drink with a Twist of Benzene? Los Angeles
Times, April 24, F3.
Bellow, Daniel. 1999. Vermont: The Pure Food State: How Farmers and
Citizens Fought the Use of Monsanto’s Hormone for Cows. The Nation,
March 8, 18–21.
Benzene in Soft Drinks. 2006. US Federal News Service, Including State
News, April 14. Proquest, Document ID 1020884851.
Bilger, Burkhard. 2006. The Search for Sweet. The New Yorker, May 22,
40–46.
Borzelleca, Joseph. 1997. Food-Borne Health Risks: Food Additives, Pes-
ticides, and Microbes. In Nutrition Policy in Public Health, ed. Felix Bron-
ner. New York: Springer Publishing Company.
Burros, Marion. 2006. Stores React to Meat Reports. New York Times,
March 1, F1.
Burros, Marion. 2005a. A Hormone for Cows. The New York Times, No-
vember 9, F10.
Burros, Marion. 2005b. Stores Say Wild Salmon, But Tests Say Farm
Bred. New York Times, April 10, A1.
Burros, Marion. 2003a. Farmed Salmon Said to Contain High PCB Lev-
els. Oakland Tribune, November 12, A1. 
Burros, Marion. 2003b. Questions on Irradiated Food. New York Times,
October 15, F6.
Burros, Marion. 2002. Poultry Industry Quietly Cuts Back on Antibiotic
Use. New York Times, February 10, A1.
Cancer Research; Epidemiology Study Shows No Risk Between Aspar-
tame and Cancer. 2006. Medical Letter on the CDC and FDA, April 26, 32.
CBS News. 2003. Link Eyed Between Beef and Cancer. http://www
.cbsnews.com/stories/2003/05/20/eveningnews/main554857.shtml
(accessed April 28, 2006).
Center for Science in the Public Interest. 2006. The Facts about Olestra.
http://www.cspinet.org/olestra/ (accessed May 30, 2006).
Chen, Chi-Chung, and Wei-Chun Tseng. 2006. Do Humans Need
GMOs? A View of the Global Trade Market. Journal of American Academy
of Business, Cambridge 1: 147–155.
Chalk, Peter. 2004. Hitting America’s Soft Underbelly: The Potential Threat
of Deliberate Biological Attacks Against the U.S. Agricultural and Food Indus-
try. Santa Monica, CA: Rand Corporation.
Colborn, Theo. 2006. A Case for Revisiting the Safety of Pesticides: 
A Closer Look at Neurodevelopment. Environmental Health Perspectives
1: 10–17.
72
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Cone, Marla. 2005. Study Cites Risk of Compound in Plastic Bottles; Re-
port Urges the EPA to Restrict Bisphenol A, Found Widely in Liquid and
Food Containers. Los Angeles Times, April 13, A10.
European Commission Finds Growth Hormones in Meat Pose Risk.
1999. Journal of Environmental Health 4: 34.
FDA Announces Final Decision About Veterinary Medicine. July 
28, 2005. FDA News. http://www.fda.gov/bbs/topics/news/2005/
new01212.html (accessed February 2007).
For Most, Health Benefits Outweigh Risks of Eating Fish. 2006. Tufts
University Health and Nutrition Letter 1: 4–5.
Fox, Nicols. 1998. Irradiation: Will it Make Our Food Safe to Eat? Vege-
tarian Times, March, 74–80.
Friends of the Earth. 2006. Organic, Not Genetically Engineered: Health
Risks Associated with GE Foods. http://www.foe.org/camps/comm/
safefood/gefood/factsheets/healthriskfacts.html (accessed February
2007).
Gersema, Emily. 2003. School Lunches to Add Irradiated Beef; Safety
Beneﬁts Cited, But Critics Say Cancer Risk Not Ruled Out. Chicago Sun-
Times, May 30, A8. 
Gunther, Judith Anne. 1994. The Food Zappers. Popular Science, January,
72–78.
Hawthorne, Michael, and Sam Roe. 2005. U.S. Safety Net in Tatters;
Seafood Shoppers Are at Risk for Mercury Exposure as Regulators Ig-
nore Their Own Experts, Issue Flawed Warnings, and Set Policies Aid-
ing Industry. Chicago Tribune, December 12, A1.
Hess, Glenn. 1999. Canada Rejects Bovine Growth Hormone; Monsanto
Vows to Appeal the Decision. Chemical Market Reporter, January 25, 1–2.
Keep Antibiotics Working. 2006. Antibiotic Resistance—An Emerging
Public Health Crisis. http://www.keepantibioticsworking.com (ac-
cessed February 2007).
King, Paul. 2004. Congressional Bill to Restrict USDA’s Marketing of Ir-
radiated Foods to Schools. Nation’s Restaurant News 28: 4–5.
Kolavic, Shellie, Akiko Kimura, Shauna Simons, Laurence Slutsker,
Suzanne Barth, and Charles Haley. 1997. An Outbreak of Shigella Dysen-
teriae Type 2 Among Laboratory Workers Due to Intentional Food Cont-
amination. Journal of the American Medical Association 5: 396–398.
Levenson, Cathy, and Donald Axelrad. 2006. Too Much of a Good
Thing? Update on Fish Consumption and Mercury Exposure. Nutrition
Reviews 3: 139–145.
Maugh, Thomas. 2006. The Nation; Virulent Drug-Resistant TB Strain
Emerges. Los Angeles Times, March 24, A18.
References
73

Melcer, Rachel. 2006. Scientists Work to Fatten Up Soybeans with the
Good Stuff: Monsanto, Others Try to Add Beneﬁts of Omega-3s to New
Foods. St. Louis Post-Dispatch, April 12, C1.
Miller, Scott, and Juliane von Reppert-Bismark. 2006. EU Seeks to
Toughen Reviews of Genetically Modified Foods. Wall Street Journal,
April 13, A10.
Mohl, Bruce. 2006. Nutrition Group Seeks Warning Labels for Olestra;
But State Law May Help Frito-Lay if Lawsuit is Filed. Boston Globe, Janu-
ary 5, E3.
Nestle, Marion. 2003. Safe Food: Bacteria, Biotechnology, and Bioterrorism.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
O’Brien, Thomas. 2002. Emergence, Spread, and Environmental Effect of
Antimicrobial Resistance: How Use of an Antimicrobial Anywhere Can
Increase Resistance to Any Antimicrobial Anywhere Else. Clinical Infec-
tious Diseases Supplement 3: 78–84.
Potera, Carol. 2005. Olestra’s Second Wind. Environmental Health Per-
spectives 8: A518.
Raloff, Janet. 2002. Hormones: Here’s the Beef. Science News, January 5,
10–12.
Rascoe, Barbara, and Gleyn Bledsoe. 2005. Bioterrorism and Food Safety.
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Safety of Aspartame. 2006. New York Times, February 21, A18.
Schwarcz, Joe. 2006. Is Growth Hormone Ban Science or Politics? The
Gazette, Montreal, Quebec, March 25, J11.
Screwworm Myiasis. 2004. Center for Food Security and Public Health Iowa
State University. http://www.cfsph.iastate.edu/DiseaseInfo/notes/
Screwworm.pdf (accessed February 2007).
Shapiro, Robert. 1999. “How Genetic Engineering Will Save Our
Planet.” Futurist 33, no.4 (April 1999): 28–9.
Sobel, Jeremy, Ali Khan, and David Swerdlow. 2002. Threat of a Biologi-
cal Terrorist Attack on the US Food Supply: The CDC Perspective. The
Lancet 9309: 874–880.
Solovitch, Sara. 2005. One Chemical, Many Foods. Los Angeles Times, De-
cember 19, F1.
Stokstad, Erik. 2004. Toxicology: Salmon Survey Stokes Debate about
Farmed Fish. Science, January 9, 154–155.
Sugarman, Carole. 2004. Pasteurization Redeﬁned by USDA Committee.
Food Chemical News 30: 21–22.
Swartz, Morton. 2002. Human Diseases Caused by Foodborne Pathogens
of Animal Origin. Clinical Infectious Diseases Supplement 3: 111–122.
74
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Torok, Thomas, Robert Tauxe, Robert Wise, John Livengood, Robert
Sokolow, Steven Mauvais, Kristin Birkness, Michael Skeels, John Horan,
and Laurence Foster. 1997. A Large Community Outbreak of Salmonel-
losis Caused by Intentional Contamination of Restaurant Salad Bars.
Journal of the American Medical Association 5: 389–395.
Union of Concerned Scientists. 2001. Estimates of Antimicrobial 
Abuse in Livestock. http://www.ucsusa.org/food_and_environment/
antibiotics_and_food/hogging-it-estimates-of-antimicrobial-abuse
-in-livestock.html (accessed February 2007).
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Animal and Plant Health Inspection
Service. 2002. Fact Sheet: Foot and Mouth Disease. http://www.aphis
.usda.gov/lpa/pubs/fsheet_faq_notice/fs_ahfmd.html (accessed Feb-
ruary 2007).
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food Safety and Inspection Service.
2004. Fulfilling the Vision: Updates and Initiatives in Protecting Public
Health. http://www.fsis.usda.gov/About_FSIS/Fulfilling_the_Vision/
index.asp (accessed February 2007).
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention. 2006. FoodNet Surveillance—What Is Food-
Net? http://www.cdc.gov/foodnet/surveillance_pages/whatisfood
net.htm (accessed February 2007).
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2006. Pesticides: Topical and Chem-
ical Fact Sheets: Assessing Health Risks from Pesticides. http://www
.epa.gov/opp00001/factsheets/riskassess.htm (accessed February 2007).
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 1999. Foodborne Pathogenic Microor-
ganisms and Natural Toxins Handbook. http://vm.cfsan.fda.gov/~mow/
intro.html (accessed February 2007).
Waltner-Toews, David. 1992. Food, Sex and Salmonella: The Risks of Envi-
ronmental Intimacy. Toronto: NC Press Ltd. 
Warner, Melanie. 2005. California Wants to Serve a Health Warning with
That Order. New York Times, September 21, C1.
Wegener, Henrik. 2002. Veterinary Issues Contributing to Antimicrobial
Resistance. In Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference of Drug Reg-
ulatory Authorities (ICDRA), 24–27. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health
Organization.
Weise, Elizabeth. 2006. “Natural” Chickens Take Flight. USA Today, Jan-
uary 24, D5.
Weiss, Rick. 2006. FDA Is Urged to Ban Carbon Monoxide Treated Meat.
The Washington Post, February 20, A1.
Wolke, Robert. 2002. Plastic Rap. The Washington Post, November 13, F1. 
References
75

Woolston, Chris. 2006. The Meat Looks Fresh, But Is It? Los Angeles
Times, March 13, F3.
World Health Organization. 2005. Fact Sheet Number 139: Drug Resis-
tant Salmonella. http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs139/
en/ (accessed February 2007).
World Health Organization. 2002. Terrorist Threats to Food: Guidance for
Establishing and Strengthening Prevention and Response Systems. Geneva,
Switzerland: World Health Organization.
Yoon, Carol Kaesuk. 1999. Altered Corn May Imperil Butterfly, Re-
searchers Say. New York Times, May 20, A1.
Zhang, Jane. 2006. Politics and Economics: FDA Finds Five Beverages
Contain High Benzene Levels. Wall Street Journal, May 20, A4. 
76
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

3
Special U.S. Issues
Factory Farming
When people imagine farming, many consider images from tele-
vision commercials or scenes from a car window of pastoral
acreage dotted with cows, or perhaps memories of a grandparent
or neighbor who kept chickens or pigs. The reality is much dif-
ferent from those images of the past. Over 40 percent of the
world’s meat supply, and more than double that percentage in
the United States, is grown on large-scale feeding operations
where thousands of animals are housed in a relatively small area.
(Nierenberg 2005) These farms, called confined animal feeding
operations (CAFOs), are creating a whole slew of environmental,
health, nutrition, and food safety problems, not only in the meat
they produce, but also for the food raised nearby, such as lettuce
and other crops.
Farming used to be conducted on a much smaller scale. But
as populations grew, methods that produced greater yields were
needed. Farming was also inﬂuenced by business thinkers who
advocated economies of scale, and as in many businesses, some-
times large-scale production is more cost-effective than small-
scale production. Other factors, such as increased demand for
meat and certain agricultural policies, spurred changes in agri-
cultural methods.
Throughout most of human history, meat was an occasional
treat. People relied on grains, legumes, fruits, and vegetables for
the majority of their calories and ate meat when the hunt was
good or as a condiment to their plant-based diet when it was
available. Until midway through the twentieth century, beef,
77

pork, chicken, and even eggs were considered luxuries and were
eaten on special occasions or in small quantities to enhance the
ﬂavor of other foods. Cookbooks from the 1880s and early twen-
tieth century focused on stretching small amounts of meats over
several meals. (Nierenberg 2005)
Meat would never have become a prevalent part of our diets
had scientists not discovered ways to grow grains abundantly
and cheaply enough that there was enough extra to feed to ani-
mals. This production advance did not happen until well into the
twentieth century, but the discovery process began long before
when nineteenth-century scientists discovered that nitrogen was
the key to healthy, plentiful crop yields. Although carbon is con-
sidered the building block of life and contributes polymerized
sugars and alcohols that form wet tissues, nitrogen is present in
nearly all cells. It is an important part of chlorophyll, which
helps plants synthesize sunlight into energy, and it is present in
nucleotides, which make up RNA and DNA, the genetic material
that tells our bodies how to make proteins. Plants with rich nitro-
gen supplies develop deep green leaves, have increased size, and
have enriched protein content. Without adequate nitrogen,
plants have leaves that are yellow or pale; show slow, stunted
plant growth; and have depressed protein content in their seeds.
Humans rely on protein for many cellular functions, although
many Americans consume far more protein than is nutritionally
necessary. (Smil 2001)
When scientists discovered the importance of nitrogen, they
looked for outside sources that could be added to fields to en-
hance production. In traditional agriculture, nitrogen enters the
soil through manure, from planting legumes (legumes harbor
special bacteria in their roots that ﬁx nitrogen), and from com-
posting crop residues such as plant stalks back into the soil.
However, there are many competing uses for crop residues, in-
cluding burning it for fuel, using it as a building material or bed-
ding for animals, and as substrate for growing mushrooms.
European and American farmers interested in enhancing crop
yields in the nineteenth century began to import Chilean nitrate
in the 1840s and bat guano from around the world since it is very
nitrogen rich.
Still scientists worried that existing stores of nitrogen-rich
substances would run out, and they worked on developing a
process to fix nitrogen. Nitrogen is naturally present in the at-
mosphere (it makes up 80 percent of the atmosphere), but it is
78
Special U.S. Issues

present in the form N2, two nitrogen atoms bonded together.
This bond is very difﬁcult to break, and unbroken, single nitro-
gen atoms are not available to become part of an organic com-
pound that is useful to cells. Only lightning naturally splits N2.
Scientists targeted ammonia (one nitrogen atom attached to three
hydrogen atoms, NH3) as a prime way of making nitrogen avail-
able for use in agriculture. Many scientists in various labs
worked for over ﬁfty years trying to ﬁnd a way to synthesize am-
monia. Finally, in 1909, Fritz Haber, a young German scientist,
discovered the right combination of high temperature and pres-
sure, gas circulation, and a metal catalyst and was able to pro-
duce ammonia. Shortly thereafter, Carl Bosch was able to make
Haber’s process commercially viable and the Haber-Bosch pro-
cess was used to synthesize vast quantities of ammonia, much of
which was used for weapons by the Germans in World War I. In
1919, Germany signed the Versailles Treaty, which resulted in a
technology transfer of the Haber-Bosch process to factories out-
side Germany. The ﬁrst U.S. plant began producing ammonia in
1921. (Smil 2001)
So much ammonia was produced that chemical fertilizers
enhanced with nitrogen became very prevalent, creating what
was called the Green Revolution in the 1960s when crop yields
increased substantially worldwide. Today ammonia is generally
converted to ammonium nitrate, ammonium sulfate, calcium ni-
trate, or urea before it is used as fertilizer. Scientists estimate that
half of all nitrogen reaching crops is due to the synthesis of am-
monia, and that without this innovation, the earth would not be
able to support 40 percent of the world’s population. (Smil 2001)
The greater yields and the ability to farm land that was previ-
ously thought not to be arable enabled the earth to support a
much greater population, but also enabled wealthier countries to
put more meat in their diets as there were more crops available
to use as animal feed.
Besides scientific developments that encouraged higher
yields, there were economic and political developments that
changed farming from multicrop farms of the past to the highly
productive specialized farms of today. In the 1920s, a farmer living
in Delmarva, Maryland, Mrs. Cecile Steele, ordered 50 chicks to
supplement her ﬂock of laying hens. When she received 500 chicks
instead, she decided to keep the hens and build a small shed to
raise them indoors. Instead of raising them to lay eggs, she
decided to raise them for meat. (At the time, chicken meat was a
Factory Farming
79

by-product of the laying industry, and chickens were not raised
speciﬁcally for meat.) She was able to sell the chickens for $0.62
per pound, much more than she could have earned had she kept
them as part of her egg business. Soon other farmers in her neigh-
borhood began emulating her example, and the region developed
into a thriving chicken-producing area. (Nierenberg 2005)
In 1936, John Tyson, a truck driver from Arkansas, picked up
a load of 500 chickens and drove them 600 miles north to
Chicago instead of taking them to the local slaughterhouse. His
action broke the bond between local farmers and slaughter-
houses, showing slaughterhouses they didn’t have to buy the
birds closest to them to get the best price. Tyson went on to buy
feed plants, start hatcheries, contract with producers, and build
processing plants. Tyson’s business is called vertically integrated
because it is involved in each step of production. Tyson Foods
owns each of its millions of chickens from before they hatch to
the day they are slaughtered. It is now the largest chicken pro-
ducer in the United States. (Nierenberg 2005)
U.S. farm policy also had the effect of encouraging large-
scale farming. During the Great Depression of the 1930s, 25 per-
cent of the population lived on farms. When farm prices dropped
55 percent between 1929 and 1933 and farm failures increased
from 5 per 1,000 in the early 1920s to 38 per 1,000 in 1932, the fed-
eral government stepped in to help the farmers. The New Deal
programs included production controls and price supports, sub-
sidized food distribution, export subsidies, subsidized farm
credit, conservation of land and water resources, crop insurance
and direct payments, and expanded agricultural research and ex-
tension services.
With price supports, the government would ensure that
farmers received an above-market price for their grains by buy-
ing some of the farm product and storing it, or distributing it in
surplus programs to schools and other nonproﬁt agencies. Price
supports lead to production increases, since a farmer is compen-
sated based on production, and greater production means more
income. At times the United States government has warehoused
large surpluses under this policy. For example, from 1984 to
1986, the U.S. government had 2.5 billion pounds of dairy prod-
ucts stored in the form of butter, cheese, and powdered milk.
This policy had the effect of keeping food prices artiﬁcially high
and farm income stable, but it also meant supply was out of sync
with demand. (Pasour and Rucker 2005)
80
Special U.S. Issues

In the early 1970s, a large quantity of U.S. grain was sold to
Russia. A subsequent crop failure caused a grain shortage in the
United States. President Nixon’s then Secretary of Agriculture,
Earl Butz, an agricultural economist from Purdue University,
came up with the idea of letting the price of grain follow the mar-
ket price, while subsidizing farmers via direct payments. This
policy had the effect of increasing corn production while driving
down prices. Suppose corn costs $2.50 per bushel to grow and
sells for $1.45 per bushel. Since farmers get supplemented based
on the number of bushels they produce, they must produce as
much as possible to survive ﬁnancially. Thus simple economics
has the effect of promoting farming methods that maximize pro-
duction rather than maintaining and improving the land.
There was an attempt in 1996 to retool the farm subsidy pro-
gram away from direct payments. Only 2.5 percent of the U.S.
population farms today, and the programs are expensive. (As of
2006, costs to subsidize corn production are $5 billion per year.)
(Pollan 2006) However, the program has been largely reestab-
lished in recent years. Surpluses continue to be a problem, even
though 47 percent of cereal grains are exported. Although the
program supports U.S. farmers, exporting subsidized grain has
worldwide impacts. U.S. corn sold below the true cost of produc-
tion has impoverished farmers who are not subsidized in other
parts of the world, such as Mexico. (Halpin 2005)
Cheap corn has also affected livestock farming. In tradi-
tional farming, a farmer grew multiple crops that complemented
each other. For example, a farmer might grow vegetables, grains,
and meats. The grains could be fed to the cows or pigs, and the
manure in turn could be used to fertilize the vegetables and
grains. In this way the agricultural system was said to be
“closed” environmentally. The land was productive, it could ab-
sorb the farm wastes without causing air or water pollution, and
it was renewable.
But intensive farming methods have different requirements.
Chickens, when raised in small quantities, were fed table scraps
and hunted and pecked for insects that were attracted by manure.
But in large numbers, there are not sufﬁcient table scraps and the
chickens must be fed special feeds. Chickens raised indoors do
not get enough sunlight to metabolize calcium properly, so the
feed must be supplemented with vitamin D and cod liver oil. Be-
cause the birds live in close proximity to each other, antibiotics are
often necessary to keep the birds healthy. (Nierenberg 2005)
Factory Farming
81

Cattle that used to be raised on grassy pastures are now al-
most exclusively raised in feedlots and are fed corn instead of
grass or hay. Farmers have become proﬁcient at bringing cattle to
market much more quickly. A conventionally raised grass-fed
cow used to take four to ﬁve years to get to market. In the 1950s,
the time was reduced to two to three years, and today cattle
reach full size and are slaughtered at fourteen to sixteen months.
This production increase has been accomplished by switching
the cow’s diet from grass to corn.
Unfortunately, this adaptation causes nutritional and food
safety problems for humans, such as fattier cattle with fewer
omega-3 fatty acids and more likelihood of harboring and trans-
mitting E. coli O157:H7, and health problems for the cattle.
The two primary problems experienced by cattle are bloat
and acidosis. When cows eat grass, fermentation occurs in the
rumen, which is the ﬁrst large compartment of the cow’s stom-
ach where cellulose is broken down. If a cow gets insufficient
roughage in the diet, a layer of foamy slime forms in the rumen
and traps gases. The rumen then inﬂates and presses against the
animal’s lungs. Rumen content normally has a neutral pH, but it
can become acidic, causing bloat, acidosis, pneumonia, feedlot
polio, ulcers, rumenitis, and liver disease. The cattle can only tol-
erate the corn diet for about 150 days. Approximately 15 to 30
percent of cattle have abscessed livers at the time of slaughter.
Cattle are regularly fed the antibiotic rumensin to buffer the pH
of the rumen and prevent acidosis and bloat, and tylosin, a type
of erythromycin, to reduce liver infection. Without a steady diet
of these drugs, cattle experience a high death rate on feedlots.
(Pollan 2006) Hog production also requires heavy doses of an-
tibiotics to combat diseases caused by stress and easily trans-
ferred due to close conﬁnement.
The close quarters and feeding practices of factory farms
cause many hardships for the animals and strain the capacity for
safe food production due to the use of drugs and the contact be-
tween meat and animal feces in the slaughter areas. But a further
threat to the environment and safe food and water comes from
the number of animals being raised so intensively on relatively
small pieces of land. On a hog farm, each hog produces 1.9 tons
of waste annually, enough to ﬁll the back of a standard pickup
truck. Multiply this by a few thousand hogs and the farm has a
major waste problem.
82
Special U.S. Issues

Conventionally, animal waste was considered to be rela-
tively benign. In fact, manure is generally considered a “soil
builder” because it contributes so much to soil quality. Manure
reduces nitrate leaching, reduces soil erosion and runoff, in-
creases soil carbon and reduces atmospheric carbon levels (po-
tentially reducing global warming), reduces energy demands for
natural gas intensive-nitrogen fertilizers, reduces demand for
commercial phosphorous fertilizers, and improves productivity
of cropping systems. However, animal manure has substantially
greater “pollution strength” than human waste because human
waste is diluted with large quantities of clean water. So even if
animal wastes were diverted to municipal waste treatment facili-
ties, the systems would be insufﬁcient to handle the waste. (Les-
son 1: Principles of Environmental Stewardship 2003)
In hog farming, hogs are counted in family units, so one
sow, farrow to ﬁnish, means one sow with twenty piglets raised
until the piglets mature and are slaughtered. Based on the
amount of nitrogen and phosphorus that is produced by each
sow, farrow to ﬁnish, one acre of land could be fertilized with ni-
trogen and three acres of land could be supplied with phospho-
rus. Therefore, if a farmer was using the manure as fertilizer, he
would spread the product from one sow over three acres and
supplement his acreage with additional nitrogen to avoid
putting too much phosphorus into the soil. Since large hog,
dairy, chicken, and cattle operations do not have anywhere near
enough acreage to spread the resulting manure on, there is a
massive disposal problem that has been addressed through
spraying of manure on acreage, pumping wastes directly into the
ground, and creating waste lagoons.
But waste is not always adequately managed. In the 1990s a
study by the U.S. Geological Survey showed that as many as
one-third of all the wells in the chicken-producing region of
Maryland and Delaware exceeded the U.S. Environmental Pro-
tection Agency’s (EPA’s) standards for nitrate allowable in drink-
ing water. The 600 million chickens in the area produce about 750
million tons of manure, as much as a city of four million people.
Animal manure contains more than 150 pathogens that are
associated with risks to humans, including the six human
pathogens that account for more than 90 percent of food- and
waterborne diseases: Salmonella, E. coli, Giardia, Campylobacter,
Cryptosporidium parvum, and Listeria monocytogenes. If these
Factory Farming
83

pathogens come in contact with a drinking-water supply or are
used for irrigation of fruits and vegetables, they can easily cause
human disease. In Walkerton, Ontario, Canada, manure from a
feedlot got into the municipal water supply in the spring of 2000,
sickened over 1,000 people, and killed four from E. coli O157:H7.
(Nierenberg 2005)
Heavy metals such as copper and zinc are present in ma-
nure, as is a tremendous amount of organic matter. Organic mat-
ter supports both aerobic and anaerobic microorganisms. But
microorganism growth depletes oxygen if it occurs in groundwa-
ter. This oxygen would otherwise be consumed by ﬁsh and other
freshwater and saltwater organisms. Manure contamination of
water sources has led to massive ﬁsh kills, especially when ma-
nure lagoons are not well contained. North Carolina went from
producing 2.6 million hogs per year in 1987 to over 10 million
hogs per year in 2004. (Barringer 2004) These hogs generate over
19 tons of waste annually. On June 22, 1995, the wall of an artiﬁ-
cial waste lagoon located at a pig operation in North Carolina
gave way, spilling more than 23 million gallons of pig urine and
feces across several ﬁelds, a road, and into the New River. Mil-
lions of ﬁsh and other aquatic organisms died. A few weeks later
some 8 million gallons of poultry waste flowed down a North
Carolina creek into the Northeast Cape Fear River. Later that
year almost a million gallons of pig waste trickled through a net-
work of tidal creeks into the Cape Fear Estuary. Then in 1998 and
1999, strong hurricanes brought massive flooding to the North
Carolina coast, drowning thousands of pigs and releasing mil-
lions of gallons of lagoon wastes, killing yet more ﬁsh. (Mallin
2000) All told, animal wastes total 3.3 trillion pounds in the
United States each year. (Six Arguments for a Greener Diet 2007)
There is also a signiﬁcant amount of air pollution emitted by
farm animals. The San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution District (Cali-
fornia) estimates that cows emit 19.3 pounds of airborne pollu-
tants each year (A Malodorous Fog 2005) in the form of ammonia,
hydrogen sulﬁdes, nitrogen oxides, volatile organic compounds,
and particulate matter. Cattle and other livestock emit 19 percent
of all methane, a greenhouse gas. The pollution problem is exac-
erbated for rural areas bordering on suburban areas that have sig-
nificant auto emissions, such as Riverside County, east of Los
Angeles. When nitrogen oxides from auto emissions pass over the
airborne ammonia from the dairies, particulate-laden smog is cre-
ated that is the worst in the nation. (Wilson 2004)
84
Special U.S. Issues

Human Health Impacts for Those 
Living in Close Proximity to CAFOs
Living in close proximity to conﬁned animal feeding operations
(CAFOs) has a negative impact on both the health and ﬁnances
of nearby residents. A Sierra Club study found that property val-
ues for properties close to hog farms declined as much as 30 to 40
percent after the neighboring hog farms became operational.
(Weida 2000) Much of this decline can be attributed to the odor
the manure emits. Odor can be hard to measure objectively, how-
ever, making it difﬁcult to regulate. More than 100 chemicals can
make up a smell, and current electronic sensors are neither sensi-
tive nor sophisticated enough to quantify or describe the odors.
Although the EPA regulates other environmental impacts of
CAFOs (see below), odor regulation is left to state and local au-
thorities. (Clayton 2005)
Some studies indicate that the odors and gases from the ma-
nure cause physical and emotional symptoms for the people liv-
ing in close proximity to large livestock operations. These
symptoms can include annoyance and depression as well as nau-
sea, vomiting, headache, shallow breathing, coughing, sleep dis-
turbances, and loss of appetite. One study of residents living
near hog operations in North Carolina used a profile of mood
states questionnaire to determine whether residents’ moods
were worse than a control group’s. The sixty-five adjectives/
feelings fell into six groups: tension/anxiety, depression/
dejection, anger/hostility, vigor/activity, fatigue/inertia, and
confusion/bewilderment. Residents ﬁlled out a questionnaire on
four days when the odor was noticeable. Control subjects ﬁlled
out questionnaires on two separate days. The control group
scored higher on the vigor/activity feelings, and the residents
living near hog farms scored higher on tension/anxiety, 
depression/dejection, anger/hostility, fatigue/inertia, and
confusion/bewilderment. This small study suggests that living in
close proximity to a manure lagoon causes a diminution in emo-
tional quality of life. (Schiffman, Miller, Suggs, and Graham 1994)
Another study showed higher levels of respiratory system
symptoms that indicate inﬂammation of the bronchi and bronchi-
oles or chronic bronchitis and hyperreactive airways, including
the presence of sputum, cough, shortness of breath, wheezing,
and chest tightness. A second cluster of symptoms included nau-
sea, weakness, dizziness, and fainting. These symptoms may be
Factory Farming
85

caused by the continuous low levels of endotoxins (toxins in bac-
teria) and hydrogen sulfide. A third cluster of symptoms,
headaches and plugged ears, is associated with chronic sinusitis.
The fourth cluster of burning eyes, runny nose, and scratchy
throat is associated with mucous membrane irritation. These
symptoms are most likely caused by irritant gases and particu-
lates. All of these symptoms are reported at higher levels by
people who work at CAFOs. (Thu et al. 1997) Further, asthma
may be aggravated by strong odors. To regulate odors, a state or
municipality can choose a few components that are easily mea-
sured. For example, Minnesota has decided to use hydrogen sul-
fide as a proxy measure for CAFO emissions, and requires
CAFOs to increase odor control measures when hydrogen sulﬁde
levels get too high. (Kirkhorn 2002)
Contaminants that get into drinking water are also a cause
for concern. Many rural areas use well water, which is not al-
ways tested as frequently as municipal water supplies. In the
past twenty-five years, the incidence of non-Hodgkin’s lym-
phoma (NHL) has increased over 70 percent and has increased
more rapidly in rural than urban areas. Certain pesticides have
been linked to NHL risk, but they do not explain all of the in-
crease. Nitrate, a breakdown product of both nitrogen fertilizers
and animal wastes that makes its way into wells, is associated
with an up to threefold increase in the odds of contracting NHL.
(Ward et al 1996)
Concentrated manure sources can also transfer antibiotic re-
sistance to groundwater, which can then get into water supplies.
Although transmission of drug resistance from tainted food has
been researched more thoroughly, one study found that antibi-
otic-resistant bacteria could be transmitted through soil and wa-
ter near CAFOs using antibiotics. Antibiotics are poorly
absorbed by feedlot animals, and it is estimated that 25 to 75 per-
cent of administered antibiotics are excreted in animal feces and
can persist in the soil after the manure is spread on a field.
Groundwater constitutes about 40 percent of the water used in
public water supplies and provides 97 percent of the water used
by the rural population in the United States. So if the groundwa-
ter is contaminated with antibiotic-resistant bacteria, it is easy for
the resistance to be transferred to people and pets. Some studies
have shown that substances found in animals wastes, such as
ammonia and fecal bacteria, are still present at activated levels
up to 100 meters downstream from the waste lagoons. Using
86
Special U.S. Issues

special techniques to determine the genetic ﬁngerprint of tetracy-
cline-resistant genes in groundwater, researchers were able to
match these genes to resistance genes for tetracycline found in a
manure lagoon nearby. The data suggest that the presence of the
tetracycline-resistant genes is due to seepage and movement of
groundwater under lagoons. (Chee-Sanford et al. 2001) Lagoons
are allowed to seep up to 0.036 inches per day, so even a legally
compliant lagoon poses a hazard. (Weida 2000)
The combination of animals living in close quarters, heavy
use of antibiotics, and large quantities of waste is providing a
hospitable environment for the creation of new diseases and may
be making certain diseases foodborne that were previously ac-
quired in other ways. Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are one of
the most common infectious diseases among women. Nearly one
in three women have at least one UTI requiring the use of antibi-
otics by the age of twenty-four, and almost half have had at least
one episode during their lifetime. Although generally not
thought of as a community-acquired disease (a disease that is
contracted because of contact with others in a speciﬁc area, e.g.,
at a hospital), there have been instances of disease clusters
caused by the same strain of E. coli bacteria. (This determination
can be made by performing genetic fingerprinting tests on the
bacteria present in infected urine.) A multistate occurrence of
UTIs in 1999–2000 was caused by E. coli strains belonging to a
single clonal group resistant to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
(TMP-SMZ). This resistant strain was ﬁrst identiﬁed in a cow in
1988, suggesting that the UTI outbreak was caused by a food-
borne illness. It had the effect of doubling the number of TMP-
SMZ–resistant cases during the study period at the University of
California, Berkeley. (Ramchandani et al 2005)
In developing countries, many high-density farms have
been started with even lower environmental regulation than for
U.S. farms. Many of these farms have lower hygiene standards,
do not use many antibiotics for the animals since they are ex-
pensive, and have human populations living in close proximity.
A viral outbreak of the Nipah virus at the Leong Seng Nam hog
farm in Ipoh, Malaysia, in 1998–1999 had a devastating impact
on the hogs and people living nearby. It started with the pigs
and quickly spread to humans, killing 40 percent of the 247
who caught it. No one is sure how the pigs contracted Nipah,
but fruit bats eating fruit over the pigpens may have dropped
some of their fruit into the pens. The pigs may have eaten fruit
Factory Farming
87

contaminated by the bats and contracted the disease. According
to Dr. Peter Daszak, a parasitologist and executive director of
the consortium studying the origin of the Nipah virus, “In the
case of almost every emerging disease, complex human
changes to the environment drive emergence.” (Fritsch 2003)
Avian Flu
Avian flu is another animal disease that affects human health
and is exacerbated by highly concentrated farming practices. The
disease has been around for centuries and was called the fowl
plague because of its almost 100 percent mortality among chick-
ens and some other birds, including ducks. In birds, swollen
heads, reddish legs, and watery eyes are the most common
symptoms. It can spread from farm to farm and decimate entire
ﬂocks. (Nierenberg 2005)
As of September 2006, the current outbreak that began in Asia
in 2003 had killed millions of chickens (including 140 million that
were killed to prevent the spread of disease), thousands of migra-
tory birds, and infected over 200 people, with a mortality rate for
humans of 55 percent. (U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Pre-
vention 2006a) The United Nations Food and Agriculture Organi-
zation (FAO) believes that the spread of avian ﬂu may have been
facilitated by the rapid scaling up of poultry and pig operations
and the massive geographic concentration of livestock in China,
Vietnam, and Thailand. In East and Southeast Asia, six billion
birds are raised for food, and the birds are often raised in close
proximity to major population centers. China alone has two billion
birds. Ducks are more apt to spread the disease since they remain
symptom-free for a longer period than chickens and they also
cover more area. The rapid move toward larger farms has not been
accompanied by government regulation and farmers have often
followed traditional livestock practices on a larger scale rather
than adopting hygiene and safety precautions suited to larger op-
erations. When the latest outbreak occurred, the U.S. Department
of Agriculture (USDA) moved rapidly to educate U.S. farmers,
and farmers readily adopted new practices because they could tell
the consequences could potentially ruin their businesses. In Thai-
land, farmers raising chickens for export adopted new procedures,
but domestic chicken producers did not, and the Thai government
does not have the resources to enforce new production codes.
88
Special U.S. Issues

Swine living in close proximity to chickens is also a prob-
lem. Inﬂuenzas that spread to humans are present in both birds
and swine. If birds and swine are raised near each other, there is
a chance that the viruses can swap traits, a process called re-
assortment. According to Michael Osterholm, director of the
Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy at the Univer-
sity of Minnesota, “It’s clear that Southeast Asia poses the great-
est risk of a new virus unfolding and coming forward as a
pandemic strain. Darwin could not have created a more efﬁcient
re-assortment laboratory if he tried.” (Sipress 2005)
How the Flu Virus Works
Viruses are spheres that have a central core containing genetic
material. This core is covered by another layer, called the capsid.
It may also have a third layer known as the envelope. Both the
capsid and the envelope are made up of viral proteins called
antigens. When a virus infects a cell, it turns its host into a bio-
logical factory, making more copies of the virus and eventually
causing the cell to burst, spilling virus into surrounding tissue.
After the cell is infected, it takes some of the viral materials (anti-
gens) and displays them on the outside of the cell. The presenta-
tion of the viral antigen takes place on an area of the cell called
the major histocompatibility complexes platform one (MHC-1).
If the antigen displayed on the MHC-1 is recognized by a T-cell, a
specialized type of white blood cell that develops in the thymus
gland, the T-cell will kill the cell before the infected cell can re-
produce. By using the information from the MHC-1, the body
can distinguish between its own healthy cells and foreign in-
vaders.
Viruses can also be attacked by B-cells. B-cells make anti-
bodies. If a virus has antigens on its surface that the body has
antibodies for, the antibodies will bind to the antigens and
cause the viral cells to clump together. This clumping makes
the virus incapable of infecting healthy cells. Since human
bodies store memory B-cells for diseases and infections they
have already had, viruses must constantly mutate in order to
evade detection in the body. Viruses put different antigens in
their capsid coats so that the body’s immune system will not
recognize them. If a healthy person is infected with a virus
their body does not recognize, it can take two to three weeks
before the immune system responds with specific antibodies to
Avian Flu
89

kill the virus. (This is called a specific immune response.)
While the body is learning the virus, the virus is invading
healthy cells and causing them to make more viruses. When
the cells die, they spill their contents, releasing prostaglandins
and leukotrienes which stimulate pain and inflammation. The
inflammation encourages white blood cell production to in-
crease. The body has other, nonspecific ways of responding to
infections, such as increased body temperature, but there is of-
ten tissue damage that occurs with these nonspecific re-
sponses. And while this response can be effective, it is not very
rapid, and may not be fast enough to prevent the virus from
causing damage to the body. (Silverthorn 2004)
Vaccines introduce the body to viral antigens so that the
body can develop antibodies without being sickened. There are
three types of inﬂuenza: A, B, and C. Only A and B cause illness
in humans, and A is more severe than B. Although many viral in-
fections are called ﬂu, inﬂuenza is a very speciﬁc disease that di-
rectly attacks the respiratory system only. It becomes quite
dangerous if it penetrates the lungs deeply. Other parts of the
body are affected by influenza indirectly, causing muscle and
joint aches, headaches, and prostration.
Inﬂuenza strains are named for the types of proteins (or anti-
gens) that appear on the surface of the virus. H5N1 is the strain of
avian inﬂuenza that is currently killing birds and humans with
close bird contact. Often just a few proteins get shufﬂed in a new
viral strain, so if someone has memory B-cells to even one of 
the antigens present, their immune system will be able to detect
the virus and disable it before they get sick. Occasionally, how-
ever, such as in 1918, almost all of the antigens change, and then
massive numbers of people get infected. In 1918, about 50 percent
of the people exposed to the new inﬂuenza virus became ill. The
virus killed about 675,000 in the United States and as many as 100
million worldwide. Surprisingly, many older adults did not con-
tract the ﬂu in 1918—it was more devastating to young people.
Scientists speculate that the older people had antibodies to the
1918 strain from a previous epidemic. (Barry 2005)
Since viruses are constantly mutating, vaccines with speciﬁc
antibodies cannot be made until the exact nature of the virus is
known. Before each ﬂu season, scientists must determine which
strains are the most prevalent; they generally choose two strains
to make vaccines against. Then the time-consuming process of
90
Special U.S. Issues

individually inoculating chicken eggs begins. Developed in the
1940s, this process produces vaccine in several months.
There are several drawbacks to using this process to make
vaccines: there is a long lag time from production order to ﬁn-
ished product; it is labor intensive and therefore expensive to in-
dividually prepare each chicken egg; and if large segments of the
chicken population become infected with avian ﬂu, the egg sup-
ply will be severely compromised. There are also other supply
problems. In 2004, the U.S. vaccine supply was cut in half when
the British government shut down Chiron Corporation’s Liver-
pool facility because it found bacteria in Chiron’s vaccine. About
80 million doses are prepared annually for the U.S. market
(enough for about 27 percent of the population), but the United
States has set a goal of having production capacity to prepare
enough vaccine for all Americans within six months of ordering
the vaccine. As of 2006, it is unclear how long it will take to reach
full production capacity, but it could take until 2011. (That Miss-
ing Vaccine Capacity 2006)
Research is being conducted to improve and increase vac-
cine production. Scientists are attempting to ﬁnd ways to make
vaccine without using chicken eggs because production times
could be shortened and the process could be independent of the
chicken egg supply. Toward this goal, the U.S. government
awarded more than $1 billion in 2006 to various pharmaceutical
and biotech companies to develop cell-based inﬂuenza vaccine
technologies that could produce vaccine in as little as nine to
twelve weeks.
The massive investment appears to be paying off. Baxter
International announced in July 2006 that it had initiated clini-
cal trials for a cell-based technology vaccine that could reduce
production time compared to using hen eggs. The company is
testing various doses of the vaccine coupled with alum as an
adjuvant, a chemical used to strengthen the efficacy of the
virus. (Avian Influenza: Baxter Initiates Study with Cell-Based
Candidate H5N1 Pandemic Vaccine 2006) Novavax announced
that it is in preclinical testing of a vaccine that uses technology
which allows scientists to create a particle nearly identical to
the virus, but does not have the virus’s genetic material for
replication or infection. When the body is inoculated, these par-
ticles attach to cells and trigger a natural immune response,
sometimes from a single dose, that is capable of protecting
Avian Flu
91

against viral infection. (Avian Influenza: Novavax Succeeds in
Making Vaccine Against New Mutation of Bird Flu 2006)
GlaxoSmithKline has been working to develop an adjuvant
to accompany a killed version of the H5N1 influenza virus. In
clinical tests, scientists were able to successfully inoculate people
against the virus using 3.8 micrograms of the H5N1 antigen. An-
nual ﬂu shots generally use 15 micrograms. A National Institutes
of Health study conducted in 2005 showed that it took 90 micro-
grams of H5N1 to produce an immune response, and then only
50 percent of the study group was protected. If this new adjuvant
is effective, it could effectively quadruple the production capac-
ity since the amount of vaccine in the typical annual dose would
stretch four times as far. (Brown 2006)
Other companies are working to develop a universal in-
ﬂuenza vaccine. The idea behind the universal vaccine is to cre-
ate antibodies to parts of the virus that do not vary from year to
year. If such a vaccine were created, people could be immunized
once and would be protected indefinitely. A British company,
Acambis, has chosen to concentrate its research on the M2 pro-
tein that sits on the outer layer of the inﬂuenza virus but is un-
derneath the more prominent proteins bodies react to. An Israeli
company, BiondVax Ltd., has developed a vaccine that uses sev-
eral fragments of inﬂuenza viral protein that did not vary in all
the twentieth-century influenza pandemic strains. Preliminary
animal studies at BiondVax show promise. A third company, Dy-
navax Technologies, located in Berkeley, California, uses genetic
material located at the center of the virus. Dynavax’s technology
seems to bolster traditional vaccine technologies: in preclinical
studies, animals that received this vaccine plus a regular in-
fluenza vaccine showed a stronger immune response to in-
fluenza infection than the animals that received the traditional
vaccine only. Universal vaccines are promising technologies, al-
though it is unlikely that they will be available and through the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) regulatory cycle in
the near future. (Healy 2005)
Person-to-Person Transmission
Although the avian inﬂuenza virus is very transmissible among
birds and chickens, it is (as of 2006) not readily transmissible
from chickens to humans or from humans to humans. The
people who have been infected from chickens have had very
92
Special U.S. Issues

close contact with chickens and their feces, often living in close
proximity to the birds. While there have been a few cases of per-
son-to-person transmission, the cases have involved people who
have had close contact with the infected person, such as care-
givers to infected relatives.
In order for a strain to have the potential to create a pan-
demic, it must mutate in a way that makes it easily transmissi-
ble. For example, it might become airborne or easily
transmissible by touch, so that casual contact or proximity to an
infected person could result in illness. If the virus mutates in
this way, it may also mutate in such a way that it becomes less
virulent. In an average year, 36,000 people die of inﬂuenza in the
United States. If a pandemic were to occur, it is estimated that as
many as one-third of the U.S. population could become infected,
two million people may die, and 40 percent of the workforce
may be out sick or staying home to care for others in their
households. It is estimated that up to eight million people might
die worldwide. (Barry 2005)
In the summer of 2006, the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) reported on some experiments it conducted
on transmissibility of H5N1. Using ferrets (which are susceptible
to inﬂuenza in the same way that humans are susceptible to in-
ﬂuenza) and a specially designed caging system, scientists were
able to simulate viral transmission by respiratory droplets ex-
pelled when people sneeze or cough. They combined surface-
like protein genes from the avian H5N1 inﬂuenza virus and the
internal genes from the human virus H3N2 (the most commonly
contracted inﬂuenza virus). They found that the combined virus
was not able to transmit efficiently, and they were not able to
cause as severe a disease as H5N1 on its own. The study was lim-
ited in that the H5N1 virus was the strain that was active in 1997
(it may have mutated to be easier to re-assort since then) and that
every possible genetic combination was not tried. However, it
suggests that it may be difﬁcult for sufﬁcient mutations to occur
to produce an easily transmissible and virulent virus. (U.S. Cen-
ters for Disease Control and Prevention 2006b)
Should a pandemic strain emerge that is readily transmissi-
ble between humans, surveillance that rapidly detects it, fol-
lowed by aggressive use of antivirals and vaccines, if available,
has the potential to extinguish an epidemic before it sickens sig-
niﬁcant numbers of people. One strategy, targeted antiviral pro-
phylaxis (TAP), works against the disease by giving antiviral
Avian Flu
93

medications to people who may have had close contact with in-
dex cases. Without antivirals, an enzyme, neuraminidase, breaks
the bonds that hold the virus particles to the outside of the in-
fected cell. When the enzyme breaks the bonds, the new viruses
that have been made inside the cell are set free. Tamiﬂu and Re-
lenza are kinds of neuraminidase inhibitors, so they prevent the
enzyme from breaking the bond, and thus trap the virus inside
the cell, so the spread of infection is limited. But antivirals must
be taken within 48 hours of infection or they won’t work. A sim-
ulation with antivirals showed that if 80 percent of identiﬁable
contacts were treated prophylactically with antivirals for four
weeks, inﬂuenza transmission could be temporarily halted. The
same result occurred when 50 percent of the population was vac-
cinated. With eight weeks of TAP treatment, the epidemic was
extinguished, as it was when 80 percent of the children in the
model population were vaccinated. (Knobler et al 2005)
However, surveillance in Southeast Asia is weak, and the Se-
vere Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) outbreak showed the
world that illness is only an international airplane ﬂight away.
Antiviral supply is also problematic. At this writing there is in-
sufﬁcient supply of antivirals, and it is unclear whether antivi-
rals would be accessible at the right time and place. Individual
countries have sought to stockpile the vaccines and antivirals,
but a better strategy might be for the World Health Organization
(WHO) to have a substantial reservoir available to administer as
it sees ﬁt, because it would have a better chance of halting the
disease should it emerge in an underprepared country. For ex-
ample, when the WHO attempted to use antiviral prophylaxis in
an early Asian H5N1 outbreak, the organization’s order was not
delivered for two weeks, and then it was limited to 6,000 doses.
This delivery was too few doses—and too late arriving—to have
averted a pandemic had it been imminent. (Knobler et al 2005) 
Should a pandemic occur, healthcare systems would be chal-
lenged to supply sufﬁcient healthy healthcare workers, as well as
equipment such as ventilators for the sickest patients. Hospitals
have been challenged to work as efﬁciently as possible in recent
years for economic reasons and have very little surge capacity. So
if many more people are sick than normal, there are insufﬁcient
facilities to provide high levels of care. For example, a severe sea-
sonal inﬂuenza outbreak in Los Angeles that occurred in 2001 re-
quired more hospital beds than the city could supply. (Knobler et
al 2005)
94
Special U.S. Issues

Precautions against Inﬂuenza
Aside from vaccines, consistent and proper handwashing tech-
nique is the most important step individuals can take to protect
themselves (see Chapter 1). Should the virus become widespread
in poultry, it is conceivable that chicken meat might potentially
be contaminated with the virus. Eating uncooked chicken conta-
minated with the H5N1 virus killed more than 140 tigers in the
Thailand Zoo. However, as long as poultry (and eggs) are thor-
oughly cooked and cooking surfaces uncontaminated, there will
not be a risk of infection.
Effects on Other Crops
Besides providing an avenue for diseases to emerge, the manure
load from both the quantity of farm animals and the concen-
trated way in which they are raised is also affecting the safety of
fruits and vegetables, products that were once thought to have
relatively few contamination problems from foodborne microor-
ganisms. Foodborne illness attributable to fruits and vegetables
has increased dramatically, and some of the increase can be at-
tributed to higher rates of consumption, salad bars (since there
are opportunities for greater contamination from patrons and
cross-contamination), improved surveillance, global and cen-
tralized production facilities, and more vulnerable populations
(such as children, the elderly, and immune-compromised indi-
viduals). But the prevalence of human pathogens that come in
contact with the soil and water used for growing produce is a
source of great concern, especially since there is usually no de-
contamination step like heat where fruits and vegetables are
concerned.
Sewage (of animal or human origin) is the most significant
source of human pathogens that reach water, soil, and vegeta-
bles. If untreated manure or sewage is used directly on crops,
vegetables and fruits are easily contaminated. For this reason,
the EPA specifies that all fertilizers derived from manure may
not have fecal coliform counts, salmonella, or enteric viruses
above a certain level. If untreated manure does get into a veg-
etable farm from stray cattle, wild animals, or birds, pathogens
in the manure can persist for varying lengths of time depend-
ing on temperature, solid content, pH, bacterial concentration,
Effects on Other Crops
95

aeration, and whether the manure sits in one place or is dis-
persed. E. coli O157:H7 can survive in moist cow manure for
over seventy days at 50 degrees Celsius (122 degrees Fahren-
heit); salmonella also survives well under moist, cold condi-
tions, but Campylobacter jejuni only lasts about three days in
manure. Enteric viruses can last up to four months under these
conditions.
Irrigation water is one of the most signiﬁcant sources of con-
tamination in fruit and vegetable production. Irrigation water
can be contaminated by sewage spills, runoff from CAFOs,
storm-related contamination (as when manure lagoons overﬂow
during storms), illicit discharge of waste, and uncontrolled ani-
mals that get into irrigation water. With repeated exposure, let-
tuce irrigated with water contaminated by E. coli O157:H7 will
accumulate the bacteria, making the lettuce especially harmful to
consumers if the contamination occurred within seven days of
harvest. Even recycling municipal wastewater, which has been
done in many countries including Australia, Germany, Israel,
Spain, and the United States, increases the risk of human
pathogen transfer to produce, and has caused onions and garlic
to have elevated levels of salmonella and E. coli bacteria.
Certain fruits and vegetables are more prone to contamina-
tion than others, and certain types of foodborne illness are more
frequently associated with fruits and vegetables. Salmonella, E.
coli O157:H7, Shigella, noroviruses, Listeria monocytogenes, and
pathogenic protozoa (such as Cryptosporidium parvum, Giardia
lamblia, Cyclospora cayentanensis, and Toxiplasma gondii) cause the
most fruit and vegetable contamination. In general root crops are
more susceptible to contamination than leaf crops, like lettuce.
Although several recent foodborne illness outbreaks on lettuce
and a serious E. coli O157:H7 outbreak caused by spinach from
the Salinas Valley in California (known as the “salad bowl of the
world”) have prompted state and federal authorities to closely
examine the farming practices to determine the cause of the out-
breaks, regulators speculate that birds or dust may be spreading
viruses to these crops.
Sprouted seeds cause more outbreaks of foodborne illness
than any other fruit or vegetable because high temperatures (25
to 30 degrees Celsius or 77 to 86 degrees Fahrenheit) and high
humidity are used during the sprouting process. When sprouts
are contaminated, it is most often the seeds themselves that be-
come contaminated. Unfortunately, no decontamination process
96
Special U.S. Issues

for seeds has so far been effective at controlling foodborne
pathogens.
Fruits with high-acid content, such as citrus and apples, are
less susceptible to contamination than low-acid fruits, such as
melon. Berries are problematic because of all the surfaces. They
are also fragile and difﬁcult to clean.
Once a pathogen makes contact with the soil, its survival de-
pends on what characteristics it favors. Some microorganisms
like cold, some like heat, some like moisture, while some favor
dry conditions. Some pathogens like L. monocytogenes, B. cereus,
and C. botulinum ﬂourish in soil; it is one of their natural habitats
and their spores can survive there indefinitely. Some bacteria,
such as E. coli O157:H7, survive longer if they are in close prox-
imity to the root area of plants, called the rhizosphere, but this
afﬁnity only occurs with certain types of plants. Soil characteris-
tics can either enhance or interfere with pathogen growth. For
example, if the soil is rich in copper, its antimicrobial properties
will discourage certain bacteria. (Jongen 2005)
How the plant interacts with the pathogen determines
whether it will be a likely carrier of foodborne illness. Obviously,
the pathogen must survive until it is consumed in order to cause
illness. One of the hardest places for the pathogen to survive is
on the aerial parts (called the phyllosphere) of a plant, where
there is high exposure to ultraviolet radiation and the tempera-
ture and humidity fluctuate. Many human pathogens are not
particularly adapted to the phyllosphere. However, if contami-
nation occurs shortly before harvest, pathogens can persist.
Pathogens can also sometimes enter plants through the
stomata (natural openings that water and nutrients pass
through), between grooves in the epidermal cells, and through
cut edges, perhaps caused by spoilage bacteria or fungi. Bacteria
can also reside in the internal structures of undamaged plants, al-
though this is harder for a pathogen to accomplish. Generally
this occurs in the root structure, and occasionally in the aerial
portion of the plant. If a pathogen is able to penetrate a plant,
surface treatment of the plant, such as a chemical wash, as is
done with prepackaged salad greens, will not have any effect on
the presence of the pathogen. (Jongen 2005)
Produce growers have embraced the Hazard Analysis and
Critical Control Points (HACCP) system as a way of controlling
pathogens that get to fruit and vegetables in both the growing
and processing steps. Food scientists are continually studying
Effects on Other Crops
97

new processes and chemicals that might be used to make food
safer. The challenge is to ﬁnd ways of ensuring safety that do not
damage the produce. Among the treatments being tested are or-
ganic acids such as acetic and lactic acids; systemic plant inocula-
tion to prevent internal contamination; various antimicrobials,
detergents, and alcohols; heat treatments such as hot water, va-
por heat, hot dry air, far infrared radiation (between visible and
microwave portions of the electromagnetic spectrum), and ra-
diofrequency heating; and antimicrobial films and coatings.
Since microorganisms thrive in varied environments, one of the
challenges is to ﬁnd processes that both limit target microorgan-
isms while not giving a competitive advantage to other undesir-
able microorganisms. (Beier, Pillai, Phillips, Ziprin 2004)
Legislation
In 1972 the Clean Water Act was passed and the EPA imple-
mented rules for CAFOs prohibiting them from discharging ani-
mal wastes into water supplies. This regulation, called the
no-discharge rule, encouraged the use of manure lagoons when
local ﬁelds could not contain the waste. In 2003 the EPA updated
the rules to reﬂect the changing nature and size of the CAFO in-
dustry. In its new set of regulations, which regulates close to 60
percent of manure produced in the United States, CAFOs that
are over a certain size or located in an environmentally fragile lo-
cation must obtain permits that set out speciﬁc requirements to
protect water quality, including discharge limits, management
practices, and recordkeeping requirements. In order to help the
industry move away from lagoons and toward more environ-
mentally friendly options, the EPA is offering another compli-
ance option called the voluntary alternative performance
standard (VAP) that encourages CAFOs to develop creative ways
to manage waste. The CAFO could come up with alternative
ways to manage waste as long as environmental performance
standards are met. For example, a large multisite swine facility in
northern Missouri has switched to a waste treatment facility in-
corporating transfer from existing lagoons and a six-step process
to treat waste. (Sweeten, Miner, and Auvermann 2003) Another
company, Premium Standard Farms of Kansas City, is using per-
meable membranes (called biocaps) that significantly reduce
odor, combined with air dams to deﬂect and disperse the smell.
98
Special U.S. Issues

At another one of their farms, the company is building a fertilizer
plant to convert the hog wastes into small, dry fertilizer pellets.
(Clayton 2005)
In an effort to address air pollution at CAFOs, the EPA has
entered into agreements with a large percentage of existing
CAFOs to levy a small ﬁne to cover past air pollution excesses in
exchange for monitoring rights. The EPA will study existing
CAFOs and use the results of the studies to develop new air pol-
lution regulations for the future.
Technical Solutions
As the manure problem has expanded, some communities have
worked to develop regional facilities to process manure. Tillam-
ook, Oregon, and Tulare, California, already have large manure
composting operations. In West Bend, Iowa, the Max Yield Coop-
erative, with 3,500 members and annual sales of almost $100 mil-
lion, is studying the feasibility of a central manure processing
facility to process the manure produced by the 80,000 hogs living
within a four to eight mile radius. The centralized anaerobic diges-
tion facility would make soil conditioners by adding solid waste
products such as wood chips, pallets, and green wastes to the ma-
nure. The manure would be collected and transported to the cen-
tral digester, where it would be screened and clariﬁed. Once in the
digester, the manure would be combined with other methane-rich
feedstocks to generate heat. The high temperatures would cook
the manure for three to ﬁve days, killing pathogens and producing
methane gas. The methane would be used to generate electricity
or converted into methanol for biodiesel. In the process being
studied, solids and nutrients are separated, and then combined
with solid waste bulking agents that  help facilitate further break-
down, stabilize the nutrients, and add value to the end product as
a commercial fertilizer. Studies of German facilities show that this
process is capable of reducing the nutrient losses into the ground-
water table from 95 percent to 5 percent. Better processing these
wastes is particularly attractive to the state of Iowa, both for envi-
ronmental quality reasons and since manure could supply 25 per-
cent of Iowa’s grain farmers’ nutrient needs. (Norwood 2005)
Some farmers have already addressed the manure problem
and use the manure as a moneymaker. A dairy farmer in
Minnesota uses a methane digester to transform the 20,000
Technical Solutions
99

gallons of manure generated each day from his dairy cows to
power his 1,000-acre farm and seventy nearby homes. Since he is
using methane to produce electricity (which means fewer green-
house gases in the atmosphere), he can also sell the environmen-
tal credits on the Chicago Climate Exchange. (The Chicago
Climate Exchange is a voluntary market for trading emissions
credits. In Europe and Japan these markets are necessary so that
companies which create more pollution than is allowable under
the Kyoto Protocols can purchase environmental credits from
companies that generate less pollution than they are permitted.)
(Breslau 2006)
Other Solutions
Besides technical solutions, addressing global meat demand and
switching to more sustainable agriculture methods have the
most potential to improve food safety and ensure human health.
As of 2002, the global average annual per capita meat supply
(calculated by the aggregation of national food balance sheets) is
about 38 kilograms, carcass weight. But in affluent countries
such as the United States and those in northern Europe, it is close
to 125 kilograms per year, and in less developed countries, it is
about 27 kilograms per year. Cereal grains are increasingly being
used to feed animals instead of people. In 1900 just over 10 per-
cent of the world’s grain harvest was used to feed animals; by
1950 it had reached 20 percent; and it was over 40 percent by the
late 1990s. (Smil 2002)
It is hard to imagine how affluent countries in the West
might reduce their demand for meat short of an anti-meat fad
diet with the impact of the Atkins diet. People have a taste for
meat, and as income goes up, so does meat consumption. Prepar-
ing a plant-centered meal is often more labor intensive than a
meat-centered one, and fast food restaurants will continue to
serve predominantly meat-based meals as long as their cus-
tomers demand them. Cheap, subsidized grain is an economic
incentive in this country that favors meat production. Also the
fact that large farms have not had to pay the true costs of clean-
ing up the pollution they cause keeps meat artiﬁcially cheap.
But there are some ways that animal protein consumption
patterns might change to be more environmentally friendly and
sustainable in the long term. Rather than preaching strictly
100
Special U.S. Issues

vegetarian diets, many environmental organizations are empha-
sizing gradual shifts, such as meatless Mondays, as a way to de-
crease consumption. The Center for Science in the Public Interest
launched a campaign directed at changing eating habits as a way
to improve the health of individuals and the planet. Visitors to its
Website can enter the servings per week of various foodstuffs
they consume and get an environmental picture of how their diet
impacts the environment with number of pounds of manure pro-
duced, greenhouse gases, and so forth. (Six Arguments for A
Greener Diet 2006)
For those who want to continue to consume animal prod-
ucts, they may want to consider that some animal products are
more resource intensive than others. One measure of resource
consumption is the relative efﬁciency of animal products. Rela-
tive efﬁciency can be measured by calculating the percentage of
cereal protein converted to animal protein when an animal con-
sumes grains. Milk is the most efﬁcient conversion, with 40 per-
cent of cereal proteins converted to animal protein. Other
conversions are carp (farmed) at 30 percent, eggs at 30 percent,
chicken at 20 percent, pork at 10 percent, and beef at only 4 per-
cent. So eating less beef and more chicken, eggs, and dairy prod-
ucts would lessen the environmental toll while still allowing
people to consume animal products. Genetic engineering is also
being used to develop breeds of chickens, pigs, and cattle that
gain weight with less feed and produce less manure. (Smil 2002)
The goal of sustainable agriculture is to change agricultural
techniques to continue to feed the world’s people while preserv-
ing natural resources. Pursuing the goal often means a return to
local, regional, and seasonal food supplies because transporting
foods great distances depletes fossil fuels and contributes to
global warming. For example, it takes 435 calories of fossil fuel to
ﬂy one 5-calorie strawberry from California to New York. It also
means reducing the use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides and
finding alternative methods to increase yields. (Cooper and
Holmes 2000)
Many modern farming techniques represent short-term
thinking, often creating a short-term gain while compromising a
long-term resource. For example, monocropping, growing the
same crop in the same ﬁeld year after year, saves time and ex-
pense but strips the soil of essential nutrients and requires inten-
sive use of chemical herbicides and pesticides. In time, flavor
and nutrition suffer as well. Conventional farming is depleting
Other Solutions
101

the topsoil at a rate of 3 billion tons annually, or one-sixteenth
inch per year. Without intervention, it takes 300 to 1,000 years to
create an inch of topsoil. With careful stewardship, using natural
fertilizers and organic matter, an inch of topsoil can be restored
in about thirty years. (Cooper and Holmes 2000)
In the 1960s, the organic agriculture movement started as a
rebellion against the Green Revolution brought about by use of
chemical fertilizers in farming. The threefold goals of the organic
movement were based on earth-sparing ideals and nutrition.
They included changing production to be chemical free, chang-
ing distribution to concentrate on local food and food coopera-
tives, and changing consumption to be based on whole grains
and minimally processed foods. In 2006, the organic food busi-
ness was an $11 billion industry in the United States, out of a to-
tal $500 billion for the entire food industry. In the process of
growing and expanding, most organic agriculture has adopted
many of the conventional distribution, consumption, and farm-
ing techniques while remaining chemical free.
Horizon and Aurora Dairies operate CAFOs but with
strictly organic inputs. Whole Foods, a large retailer of natural
and organic foods, deals mostly with large processors because
they use a regional distribution system similar to the rest of the
grocery industry. It is easier and cheaper for grocery chains to
transact business with a few large suppliers rather than smaller
farms because it takes less time and personnel than dealing with
many suppliers. Large suppliers in turn often find themselves
monocropping, albeit with organic inputs, to meet contract de-
mands. Poultry producers are generally large scale, and free
range may be a matter of semantics. At one farm, the chickens
can go outside for the last few weeks of their lives, if they ﬁnd
the small door on the edge of the coop.
These modern organic producers represent middle ground
between the more environmentally taxing conventional agricul-
ture and the more sustainable practices of small-scale local farm-
ing. Small farms are actually more productive on an acre-per-acre
basis, but they may require more intensive management, and the
farmer may need to work harder to ﬁnd markets for his products
at farmer’s markets, co-ops, and restaurants. (Pollan 2006)
Michael Pollan, in his book The Omnivore’s Dilemma, writes
about a farm in Swoope, Virginia, that embraces sustainability
principles. When Joel Salatin’s father purchased 550 acres 
in 1961, the acreage was badly eroded and the soil had been
102
Special U.S. Issues

exhausted by a succession of tenant farmers growing corn.
Salatin’s father gradually worked the farm with natural grasses,
including white and red clover, orchard grass, foxtail, fescues,
bluegrass, timothy, lupines, plantain, dandelion, and Queen
Anne’s lace. Over time, the Salatins built the farm to its current
state using rotational grazing techniques that support beef, pig,
chicken, turkey, egg, and rabbit production in ways that enrich
the soil instead of depleting it. Using portable electric fencing,
Salatin moves his cattle almost daily from one area to another so
that they are consuming just the top of the grass. When the cattle
move to another area, the grass is left alone for a few days while
the cow patties dry up slightly and the ﬂy larvae develop. Then
Salatin brings in the chickens that eat the ﬂy larvae and distrib-
ute the cow manure, in the process killing the insects and spread-
ing the manure so that it fertilizes the grass. By rotating the
animals throughout the farm—for example, keeping chickens on
the ﬂoor of the rabbit house—Salatin is able to eliminate many
pollution problems, increase the flavor of his products, reduce
his reliance on fossil fuels, and only needs to purchase a few out-
side inputs. He buys some corn and other elements of chicken
feed and greensand to redeposit calcium that is lost in the cycle.
Otherwise, his land is self-sustaining and has become lush and
productive as a result of his intensive farming. His animals are
very healthy and do not require constant drug inputs to stay that
way. (Pollan 2006)
Scientiﬁc evidence is also showing that traditional farming
methods are not producing crops that are as nutritious as organi-
cally produced crops. In 1840, Baron Justus Liebig, a German
chemist, discovered that the elements nitrogen, potassium, and
phosphorous were essential elements for plant growth. His dis-
covery can be likened to the discovery that human nutrition is
dependent on fats, carbohydrates, and protein. Although hu-
mans do depend on these macronutrients, they do not tell the
whole story. Vitamins, and as we have learned in the last twenty
years, phytonutrients such as lycopene and various antioxidants,
make the difference between staying alive and good health.
When farmers enrich their soils with nitrogen, potassium, and
phosphorus, they are maintaining basic plant health, but they are
not supplying the biological resources to grow the most nutrient-
dense crops possible. In 2003, at the University of California,
Davis, scientists grew crops using several different methods and
then tested their nutritional content. Identical varieties of corn,
Other Solutions
103

strawberries, and blackberries grown in neighboring plots had
higher concentrations of vitamins and phytochemicals when
they were grown using the methods of organic agriculture. (Pol-
lan 2006)
Historically, civilizations that abuse their soils collapse; sus-
tainable agriculture can prevent collapse from happening. How-
ever, consumers must learn that long-term sustainable
agriculture is economically viable, especially when the true cost
of food is properly accounted. A cheap fast food meal is not
nearly so cheap when all the costs are taken into account, includ-
ing the environmental cost of raising meat on a CAFO, the sub-
sidy of the corn paid by the taxpayer, and the increased
healthcare costs from eating something raised with chemicals
and that is excessively fatty. But consumers will have to demand
better, safer food, and the U.S. government will need to change
the subsidy structure and rethink certain policies which favor
large producers over small, if the average consumer is going to
decide to purchase sustainable food.
References
Avian Influenza: Baxter Initiates Study with Cell-Based Candidate
H5N1 Pandemic Vaccine. 2006. Biotech Business Week, July 31, 26. 
Avian Influenza: Novavax Succeeds in Making Vaccine Against New
Mutation of Bird Flu. 2006. Vaccine Weekly, August 30, 7.
Barringer, Felicity. 2004. A Search for Pearls of Wisdom in the Matter of
Swine. New York Times, July 7, A12.
Barry, John M. 2005. The Great Influenza: The Epic Story of the Deadliest
Plague in History. New York: Viking Penguin.
Beier, Ross C., Suresh D. Pillai, Timothy D. Phillips, and Richard L.
Ziprin, eds. 2004. Preharvest and Postharvest Food Safety: Contemporary Is-
sues and Future Directions. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing.
Breslau, Karen. 2006. It Can Pay to Be Green; Cleaner Air Means Proﬁts
at the Climate Exchange. Newsweek, May 22, 45.
Brown, David. 2006. Bird Flu Vaccine Shows Promise. Washington Post,
July 27, A11.
Chee-Sanford, J. C., R. I. Aminov, I. J. Krapac, N. Garrigues-Jean, and R.
I. Mackie. 2001. Occurrence and Diversity of Tetracycline Resistance
104
Special U.S. Issues

Genes in Lagoons and Groundwater Underlying Two Swine Production
Facilities. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 67: 1494–1502.
Clayton, Mark. 2005. A Big Stink Over Odors; Mounting Wastes and
Suburban Sprawl Sharpen Conﬂicts Over Bad Smells. Christian Science
Monitor, June 9, Features section, 13.
Cooper, Ann, and Lisa M. Holmes. 2000. Bitter Harvest: A Chef’s Perspec-
tive on the Hidden Dangers in the Foods We Eat and What You Can Do About
It. New York: Routledge.
Fritsch, Peter. 2003. Deadly Riddle: Scientists Search for Human Hand
Behind Jungle Virus; Did Asia’s “Flying Fox” Bat, Forced from Its Habi-
tat, Trigger Nipah Outbreak?—The Impact of a Massive Fire. Wall Street
Journal, June 19, A1.
Halpin, Darren, ed. 2005. Surviving Global Change?: Agricultural Interest
Groups in Comparative Perspective. Hampshire, England: Ashgate Pub-
lishing Limited.
Healy, Melissa. 2005. Many Forms of Flu: One Vaccine? Los Angeles
Times, November 14, F1.
Jongen, Wim, ed. 2005. Improving the Safety of Fresh Fruit and Vegetables.
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Kirkhorn, Steven R. 2002. Community and Environmental Health Ef-
fects of Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations. Minnesota Medicine
This publication is not paginated. 
Knobler, Stacey L., Alison Mack, Adel Mahmoud, and Stanley M.
Lemon, eds. 2005. The Threat of Pandemic Inﬂuenza: Are We Ready?; Work-
shop Summary. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Lesson 1: Principles of Environmental Stewardship. 2003. Livestock and
Poultry Environmental Stewardship Curriculum. Ames, IA: Midwest Plan
Service, Iowa State University.
Mallin, Michael. 2000. Impacts of Industrial Animal Production on
Rivers and Estuaries. American Scientist 88: 26–37.
A Malodorous Fog (Editorial). 2005. The New York Times, August 7, Sec-
tion 4,  1.
Nierenberg, Danielle. 2005. Happier Meals: Rethinking the Global Meat In-
dustry; World Watch Paper 171. Washington, DC: Worldwatch Institute.
Norwood, John. 2005. Solving the Problem of Managing Liquid Manure.
Biocycle (May) 46: 5, 65–69.
Pasour, E. C., and Randall R. Rucker. 2005. Plowshares and Pork Barrels:
The Political Economy of Agriculture. Oakland, CA: The Independence In-
stitute.
References
105

Pollan, Michael. 2006. The Omnivore’s Dilemma: A Natural History of Four
Meals. New York: Penguin Press.
Ramchandani, Meena, Amee R. Manges, Chitrita DebRoy, Sherry P.
Smith, James R. Johnson, and Lee W. Ril. 2005. Possible Animal Origin
of Human Associated, Multi-Drug Resistant, Uropathogenic Escherichia
coli. Clinical Infectious Diseases 40: 251–257.
Schiffman, Susan S., Elizabeth Sattely Miller, Mark S. Suggs, and Brevick
G. Graham. 1994. The Effect of Environmental Odors Emanating from
Commercial Swine Operations on the Mood of Nearby Residents. Brain
Research Bulletin 37: 369–375.
Silverthorn, Dee Unglaub. 2004. Human Physiology: An Integrated Ap-
proach. 3rd ed. San Francisco: Benjamin Cummings. 
Sipress, Alan. 2005. As SE Asian Farms Boom, Stage Set for a Pan-
demic; Conditions Ripe for Spread of Bird Flu. The Washington Post,
February 5, A1.
Six Arguments for A Greener Diet. Center for Science in the Public Inter-
est. http:www.cspinet.org/EatingGreen/index.html (accessed February
2007). 
Smil, Vaclav. 2002. Eating Meat: Evolution, Patterns, and Consequences.
Population and Development Review 28: 599–639.
Smil, Vaclav. 2001. Enriching the Earth: Fritz Haber, Carl Bosch, and the
Transformation of World Food Production. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sweeten, John, Ron Miner, and Brent Auvermann. 2003. CAFO Fact
Sheet Number 7: Alternative Treatment Systems. Livestock and Poultry
Environmental Stewardship Curriculum. Ames, IA: Midwest Plan Service,
Iowa State University. 
That Missing Vaccine Capacity (Editorial). 2006. New York Times,
May 5, A22.
Thu, Kendall, Kelly Donham, Randy Ziegenhorn, Stephen Reynolds, Pe-
ter S. Thorne, Peryasamy Subramanian, Paul Whitten, and Jason
Stookesberry. 1997. A Control Study of the Physical and Mental Health
of Residents Living Near a Large-Scale Swine Operation. Journal of Agri-
cultural Safety and Health 3: 13–26.
U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2006a. Avian In-
ﬂuenza: Current Situation. http://www.cdc.gov/ﬂu/avian/outbreaks/
current.htm (accessed February 2007).
U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2006b. CDC Press
Briefing: Study on Transmissibility of Avian Flu H5N1 in an Animal
Model. http://www.cdc.gov/od/oc/media/transcripts/t060728.htm
(accessed February 2007). 
106
Special U.S. Issues

Ward, Mary H., Steven D. Mark, Kenneth P. Cantor, Dennis D. Weisen-
burger, Adolfo Correa-Villasenor, and Shelia Hoar Zahm. 1996. Drinking
Water Nitrate and the Risk of Non-Hodgkin’s Lymphoma. Epidemiology
7: 465–471.
Weida, William J. 2000. Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations and the
Economics of Efficiency. A Grace Factory Farm Project Report. New York:
Global Resource Action Center for the Environment.
Wilson, Janet. 2004. AQMD Moves to Corral Cow Pollution. Los Angeles
Times, June 17, B1.
World Health Organization. 2006. Avian Inﬂuenza: Food Safety Issues.
http://www.who.int/foodsafety/micro/avian/en/index1.html (ac-
cessed February 2007). 
References
107


4
Chronology
6000 BC
Neolithic man is growing crops and keeping food an-
imals captive. Food is salted and cooled to preserve it
for later consumption.
ca. 750–
Old Testament book of Leviticus offers a whole series 
687 BC
of food and hygiene rules to protect the Israelites.
(The kosher dietary laws prevent mixing of meat and
milk. If these are mixed at warm temperatures, it cre-
ates an idyllic culture medium for potentially lethal
bacteria. It is unknown whether these rules were
based on food safety knowledge or were adopted for
other reasons.)
AD 1206
King John of England prohibits adulteration of bread.
1265
Assize of Bread and Ale of 1265 prohibits British mer-
chants from using chalk instead of ﬂour and water-
ing down beer.
1266
English law enacted that prohibits the practice of
short-weighting customers and selling unsound meat.
1822
Frederick C. Marcus, a German chemist living in
London, publishes A Treatise on Adulteration of Food
and Culinary Poisons. A pirated version appearing in
the U.S. reveals that many common foodstuffs are
adulterated.
109

1866
Corn syrup is discovered. Acid is used to break down
cornstarch into glucose. Corn syrup becomes the ﬁrst
inexpensive domestic substitute for cane sugar.
1872
England enacts Adulteration of Food or Drink Act
with stiff penalties for violations, including six
months hard labor for the second offense. This act is
not modernized until 1955, when the Food and Drug
Act is passed.
1880s
Women’s groups around the United States begin to
organize for pure food, drink, and drugs. In 1884, ﬁf-
teen Beekman Hill women declare war on New York
City’s slaughterhouse district, a tangle of fifty-five
broken-down wooden sheds that reek with ﬁlth from
accumulated refuse and slaughter. Through the
women’s persistence, lawsuits, and negotiations with
the Health Department, the slaughterhouses are
cleaned up in the early 1890s. Also in 1884, the
Women’s Christian Temperance Union teaches
classes to delegates at its national convention in Bat-
tle Creek, Michigan, on how to rid American homes
of dangerous and adulterated food, drink, and drugs.
1883
U.S. Tea Act of 1883 attempts to prevent sale of adul-
terated teas. The law proves to be useless because it
sets no standards and no method of enforcement.
1890
First American food inspection law is enacted. Al-
though this act beneﬁts consumers, it is established
by merchants trying to convince foreign companies
that American foods are safe.
1897
Tea Importation Act of 1897 makes it illegal to import
tea that is inferior in purity, quality, and fitness for
consumption.
1902
Harvey Wiley, director of the Bureau of Chemistry,
starts a “poison squad” to test common food addi-
tives. Volunteer testers are fed a carefully controlled
diet to test for adverse effects. One at a time, a
110
Chronology

different additive is incorporated into the diet in
high quantities.
1906
The Jungle by Upton Sinclair is published. The book
details the unsanitary practices of the meat-packing
industry. Six months after publication, the Pure Food
and Drug Act and the Beef Inspection Act are passed.
Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906, administered
by the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Bureau of
Chemistry, provides the basic legal and institutional
frameworks for latter-day food safety laws. Laws
prohibit the shipment in interstate commerce of
foods that are adulterated by any of several defini-
tions including food that is spoiled, contaminated
with ﬁlth, derived from diseased animals, or contain-
ing unsafe substances.
Federal Meat Inspection Act, administered by
the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), requires
continuous, on-site factory inspection by government
inspectors using sight, smell, and touch to detect un-
safe meat.
1910
The Insecticide Act marks the federal government’s
ﬁrst attempt to regulate pesticides.
1913
The Gould Amendment of the Food and Drug Act re-
quires net contents must be stated on the label.
1914
The Federal Trade Commission Act establishes the
Federal Trade Commission (FTC) and empowers it to
monitor food advertising.
1918
Influenza virus emerges and spreads around the
world, killing more people than any other outbreak
of disease in human history. Epidemiologists believe
675,000 U.S. deaths occurred; total U.S. population at
the time was 105 million. Estimates of worldwide
deaths range from 21 million to 100 million. The
virus, H1N1, is currently found in swine.
Chronology
111

1920s
French scientists discover irradiation preserves food.
Mrs. Cecile Steele, a resident of the Delmarva re-
gion of eastern Maryland, mistakenly receives a ship-
ment of 500 chicks instead of the 50 she ordered and
raises them, selling the meat for a hefty proﬁt. News
of her success spreads quickly, positioning the region
to be a center of U.S. broiler production until just af-
ter World War II.
1923
Filled Milk Act prohibits the sale of milk to which
fats or oils, other that milk fats, have been added.
1927
Federal Milk Importation Act establishes regulations
on importation of milk and cream into the United
States to protect public health.
1930
USDA Bureau of Chemistry is renamed the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA).
1936
John Tyson (founder of Tyson Foods) picks up a load
of 500 chickens and drives them 600 miles north to
Chicago, bypassing the local slaughterhouses and
thus breaking the tight bond between local farmers
and slaughterhouses. From now on, slaughterhouses
don’t have to buy the birds closest to them to get the
best prices.
1938
Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (FDCA) gives
the FDA authority to perform plant inspections, es-
tablish standards of identity for individual food
products, and certify colors. (Colors are divided into
categories based on whether they can be used in
food, drugs, and cosmetics [F,D, and C colors], or just
drugs and cosmetics, or cosmetics only.) The act also
grants the FDA the right to seek injunctions in federal
court against violators of the law.
1939
Swiss chemist Paul Muller recognizes the value of
dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) as a potent
nerve poison that will work on insects, ushering in a
new era in agricultural pesticides. DDT is successfully
112
Chronology

used during World War II to kill malaria-causing in-
sects. Muller wins the Nobel Prize for his work in
1948, but realizes the harm DDT can do to the envi-
ronment, to wildlife, and to humans because of its
persistence.
1940s
U.S. Army begins testing irradiation of common
foods.
1940
FDA becomes part of the U.S. Federal Security
Agency.
1947
Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act
(FIFRA) establishes criteria used to evaluate the
safety of pesticides. Pesticides must now be licensed,
proven effective, and hazards must be accurately la-
beled. This law is primarily a labeling law and only
applies to pesticides used to produce goods sold in
interstate commerce.
1949
Dr. Thomas Jukes, then director of nutrition and
physiology research at Lederle Laboratories, a divi-
sion of American Cyanamid, discovers that animals
fed small doses of antibiotics gain weight faster.
Early 
Farmers begin feeding livestock antibiotics subthera-
1950s
peutically to prevent and treat subclinical disease
(diseases that don’t cause evident symptoms but are
nonetheless taxing to the animal) and to promote
growth. By 1954, American farmers are using 245
tons of antibiotics each year in livestock feed.
1953
FDA becomes a separate entity in the U.S. Depart-
ment of Health, Education, and Welfare. This depart-
ment is later renamed the Department of Health and
Human Services.
1954
Miller Amendment to the Federal Drug and Cos-
metic Act allows the FDA to establish tolerances for
“economic poisons,” or pesticides, on agricultural
products like fruit, vegetables, and grains.
Chronology
113

1956
The Chicago Board of Trade institutes a grading sys-
tem for corn, making corn a commodity.
Late
Pillsbury Corporation, under contract from the Na-
1950s
tional Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA),
develops the Hazard Analysis and Critical Control
Points (HACCP) system to protect astronauts from
foodborne illness. HACCP, as originally conceived by
Pillsbury, included (1) identiﬁcation and assessment
of hazards associated with growing/harvesting to
marketing/preparation; (2) determination of the criti-
cal control points to control any identiﬁable hazard;
and (3) establishment of systems to monitor critical
control points.
1957
Poultry Products Inspection Act of 1957 requires
poultry products be wholesome, unadulterated,
properly marked, labeled, and packaged. Poultry is
now subject to the same inspection criteria as beef; it
must be continuously monitored and inspected in the
factory.
The first commercial use of irradiation takes
place in Stuttgart, Germany, where the process is
used to preserve spices.
Asian flu, caused by the H2N2 virus, creates a
violent pandemic.
1958
Food Additives Amendment to the FDCA empowers
the FDA to prohibit additives to food that have not
been adequately tested to establish safety. In effect,
the FDA also has premarket review and approval au-
thority over chemical additives in foods. This amend-
ment includes the Delaney Clause (after the
congressman responsible for its inclusion) which
states that no additive will be deemed safe if any
quantity of the additive is found to cause cancer in
humans or any animal species. As part of this amend-
ment, irradiation is regulated as a food additive
rather than a preservation process. Therefore, irradia-
tion must meet a higher standard of proof before it
will be declared safe.
114
Chronology

Humane Slaughter Act requires cattle and pigs
to be rendered senseless to pain before being shack-
led, hoisted, thrown, cast, or cut. The act only applies
to animals whose meat is sold to the federal govern-
ment, but in practice the act is applied in all commer-
cial plants.
1959
Germany passes a law banning irradiation, and the
machine used to process spices in Stuttgart is dis-
mantled.
1960s
Scientists working at Keio University’s School of
Medicine in Japan, including Tsutomo Watanabe and
Stuart Levy, discover that antibiotic drug resistance is
a transferable trait between different strains of bacte-
ria. For example, a strain of Salmonella that is resistant
to penicillin can pass on this resistance to a strain of
Campylobacter.
“Green Revolution” increases crop yields due to
use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides around the
world.
Pigs and cows begin to be raised on factory
farms.
1960
Color Additives Amendment creates uniform pre-
testing requirements for food. Previously the FDA
could not set limits on the amounts of color that
could be used. This act requires the FDA to consider
the probable consumption levels of the color, cumu-
lative effects, substances formed as a result of con-
sumption of the color, safety factors, and potential
carcinogenicity.
1961
The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and
the World Health Organization (WHO), both agen-
cies of the United Nations, establish the Codex Ali-
mentarius Commission to set standards for food
production, including technical specifications and
good manufacturing practices. The purpose of the
standards is to facilitate trade between nations and
ensure safe food.
Chronology
115

1962
Silent Spring by Rachel Carson is published. Carson, a
marine biologist, describes the environmental dam-
age caused by DDT in the environment.
1963
Irradiation is approved by the FDA to control insects
in wheat and wheat powder.
1964
The FDA approves irradiation to extend the shelf life
of white potatoes.
1966
Fair Packaging and Labeling Act stipulates all food
labels must contain the same basic information, in-
cluding common or usual name of product, name
and address of manufacturer, ingredients in order of
weight, net weight, and a statement that the product
contains artiﬁcial color or ﬂavor, if any.
1967
A complete revision of the 1906 act, the Wholesome
Meat Act, requires meat be wholesome, unadulter-
ated, properly marked, labeled, and packaged. All
cattle, sheep, swine, and goats must be inspected
prior to slaughter. Previous legislation applied to
meat sold in interstate commerce only. Now state in-
spection standards must be at least equal to federal
standards. Additionally, the Department of Agricul-
ture has the power to seize unsafe meat, and federal
regulators may examine company records.
1968
Poultry Products Act extends federal poultry inspec-
tion standards to poultry produced and sold within
the same state. In 1968, 87 percent of poultry was fed-
erally inspected. This act extends inspection to the re-
maining 13 percent. 
Hong Kong ﬂu, the H3N2 virus, spreads world-
wide with large numbers of infection but low rates of
death.
1970s
NASA adopts irradiation to sterilize food for astro-
nauts.
Livestock Revolution, similar to Green Revolu-
tion of the 1960s, increases meat production through
factory farming techniques around the world.
116
Chronology

1970
Egg Products Inspection Act stipulates eggs must be
wholesome, not adulterated, and properly labeled
and packaged. Egg products must be continuously
monitored and inspected in the factory.
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
FAO, WHO, and the Organization for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD) create the Inter-
national Project in the Field of Food Irradiation to
sponsor a worldwide research program on the whole-
someness of irradiated foods.
The Environmental Protection Agency is created.
Regulation of pesticides is transferred from the
USDA to the new agency.
Cyclamate, a type of artificial sweetener, is
banned by FDA. At the time, it was thought to cause
bladder cancer and damage to the testes. Later re-
search suggests that it does not cause cancer directly,
but increases the potency of other carcinogens.
1971
The Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points con-
cept is presented to the public for the ﬁrst time at the
1971 National Conference on Food Protection.
1972
Federal Environmental Pesticide Control Act (revised
FIFRA) requires all pesticides be registered with the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). This in-
cludes pesticides that were previously excluded be-
cause they were not used on foodstuffs sold across
state lines. This legislation makes it easier to ban haz-
ardous pesticides, and imposes penalties for improper
use. Law divides pesticides into two categories: gen-
eral use and restricted use. Restricted use pesticides
must be clearly labeled, and can only be used by certi-
ﬁed applicators.
DDT is banned in the U.S. except for use in ex-
treme health emergencies.
1973
About one ton of polybrominated biphenyl (PBB), 
a closely related but much more toxic chemical 
than polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB), is mistakenly
added to cattle feed in Michigan. It is estimated that
virtually all the citizens of Michigan and some of the
Chronology
117

citizens of other states consumed the substance ei-
ther in dairy products or meat.
Earl Butz, President Nixon’s second secretary of
Agriculture and an agricultural economist from Pur-
due, restructures the agriculture support program
from a system of loans to direct payments to farmers.
This has the effect of encouraging farmers to grow as
much corn as possible on their land, while stabilizing
corn prices for corn used in corn products and in ani-
mal feeds.
1974
Safe Drinking Water Act: the EPA is directed to estab-
lish national standards setting the maximum allow-
able levels for certain chemical and bacteriological
pollutants for water systems serving more than 25
customers.
1976
Red dye number one and number two are banned by
the FDA. Red dye number one is found to cause liver
cancer, and red dye number two is found to be a pos-
sible carcinogen.
1977
The FDA bans saccharin because many animal stud-
ies show that it causes cancer of the bladder. Other
studies show it may also cause other cancers. In 1977
saccharin is the primary sweetener in diet soft drinks
and a number of other artificially sweetened prod-
ucts, and the American public is outraged at the ban.
However, before the ban can take effect, Congress in-
tervenes. Saccharin continues to be available, but
must carry a warning notice. An interesting conse-
quence of these actions is a weakening of public sup-
port for the Delaney Clause, which does not permit
cancer-causing food additives in any amount.
1979
Diethylstilbestrol (DES) is banned for use in cattle.
Other growth hormones may still be used.
1980
As a result of the research started in 1970, the joint
IAEA, FAO, WHO, and OECD Expert Committee on
the Wholesomeness of Irradiated Foods concludes
that the irradiation of any food commodity up to an
118
Chronology
1973
(cont.)

overall dose of 10 kG presents no toxicological haz-
ard. Therefore, toxicological testing of foods so
treated is no longer required.
National Academy of Sciences issues a report en-
titled “The Effects on Human Health of Subtherapeu-
tic Use of Antibiotics in Animal Feed.” The report
states that almost half of the antibiotics manufac-
tured in the United States are fed to animals, but the
Academy is unable to determine from existing re-
search whether antibiotics in animal feed harms hu-
man health.
1981
Aspartame, the artiﬁcial sweetener marketed under
the names NutraSweet and Equal, is approved by the
FDA for use in drinks, mixes, desserts, and cold cere-
als. It is 200 times sweeter than sugar, and one tea-
spoon has one-tenth of a calorie.
1983
The FDA approves irradiation for spices and dry veg-
etable seasonings to kill insects and bacteria.
1984
The EPA asks the National Academy of Sciences to
explore the level of protection that law and regula-
tion provide against cancer risks from pesticide
residues in food. The Academy forms the Delaney
Committee to address this question.
Food-related bioterrorism occurs in The Dalles,
Oregon, when followers of Bhag Wan Shree Rajneesh
intentionally poison local salad bars with salmonella
to keep people from voting in a local election.
1985
The largest-ever Salmonella outbreak occurs in Illi-
nois. The source is traced to a milk plant where one
day’s output was incorrectly pasteurized. Over
200,000 people are affected and four die.
Nearly 1,000 people in several western states
and Canada are poisoned by residues from the pesti-
cide Temik in watermelons. Symptoms include nau-
sea, vomiting, blurred vision, and muscle weakness.
Some become gravely ill and suffer grand mal
seizures and cardiac irregularities. At least two still-
births result from the poisoning.
Chronology
119

A subcommittee of the Food Protection Commit-
tee of the National Academy of Sciences issues a re-
port on microbiological criteria strongly endorsing
HACCP. The report recommends that both regulators
and industry use HACCP because it is the most effec-
tive and efﬁcient means of assuring the safety of the
food supply.
The FDA approves low-dose irradiation to con-
trol Trichinella in pork.
1986
First cases of bovine spongiform encephalopathy
(BSE) are conﬁrmed in the United Kingdom. The dis-
ease is nicknamed “mad cow disease” because the
cows stagger around as if drunk, become belligerent,
and die.
FDA approves irradiation for fruits and vegeta-
bles. It is used both to control insects and to slow the
ripening of fruits and vegetables.
1987
National Academy of Sciences issues a report on pes-
ticides entitled “Regulating Pesticides: The Delaney
Paradox.” The Delaney Committee ﬁnds that nearly
all registrations for pesticide use on food crops are set
using a risk-benefit balancing-standard contained
within the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Roden-
ticide Act (FIFRA). Using this standard does not pro-
tect the public from significant health risk. The
higher Delaney standard, which requires that strict
limits be placed on pesticides suspected of inducing
cancer, are used in only 3 percent of cases. Using this
data, it is estimated that there will be an additional 1
million cancer cases over a seventy-year period.
1988
Pesticide Monitoring and Improvements Act requires
a computerized monitoring system for the FDA to
record, summarize, and evaluate results of its pro-
gram for monitoring food products for pesticide
residues.
An expert scientiﬁc advisory panel to the secre-
taries of Agriculture, Commerce, Defense, and Health
and Human Services, the National Advisory Commit-
tee on Microbiological Criteria for Foods (NACMCF),
120
Chronology
1985
(cont.)

is convened. Part of the mission of NACMCF is to
promote adoption of HACCP principles.
The British government appoints a committee to
assess any possible risk to human health from BSE in
cattle. At the committee’s recommendation, a ban is
placed on feeding animal-derived protein to rumi-
nants like cattle, and farmers must report suspected
cases of BSE. Over 2,000 conﬁrmed cases of BSE are
reported in 1988.
1989
CBS broadcasts “A is for Apple” on the news maga-
zine 60 Minutes. The broadcast publicizes the Natural
Resources Defense Council report “Intolerable Risk:
Pesticides in Our Children’s Food.” The report and
news story focus on the dangers, particularly to chil-
dren, of the pesticide Alar, a growth regulator used
on apples. Uniroyal, the maker of Alar, voluntarily
withdraws the pesticide from the U.S. market, and
the EPA bans the pesticide.
Over 7,000 cows are conﬁrmed with BSE in the
United Kingdom.
Two grapes in a shipment from Chile are discov-
ered with cyanide. The cyanide was injected into the
grapes at too small a dose to cause any harm, even to
a small child. The FDA imposes a ban on Chilean
fruit that lasts for ﬁve days.
1990s
As many as one-third of all wells in the chicken-
producing region along Maryland’s lower Eastern
Shore and in southern Delaware exceed the EPA’s
safe drinking water standards for nitrate, according
to a study by the U.S. Geological Survey.
1990
Sanitary Food Transportation Act prohibits the prac-
tice of shipping food in trucks or railcars that had
earlier been used to transport potentially hazardous
materials.
Nutrition Labeling and Education Act man-
dates the nutrition facts label on food products in-
cludes standardized serving size, servings per
container, calories from fat, and amounts of other
food nutrients.
Chronology
121

Organic Production Act defines what is meant
by the term organic and sets standards for what can
be labeled organic in the United States.
Over 14,000 cows confirmed with BSE in the
United Kingdom. Twenty-six countries ban the im-
port of British cattle and beef.
1991
Over 25,000 new cases of BSE confirmed in British
cows.
1992
The ﬁrst industrial irradiation facility designed exclu-
sively for food processing opens in Tampa, Florida,
and the FDA approves irradiation for poultry.
BSE is successfully transmitted by injection to
animals from seven mammalian species, including
pigs and monkeys. Over 35,000 new cases of BSE are
conﬁrmed in the United Kingdom.
1993
Widespread outbreak of Escherichia coli O157:H7 bac-
teria. The source is traced to tainted beef served pri-
marily at Jack in the Box restaurants. Some 732
people become ill; 195 are hospitalized and 4 chil-
dren die.
FDA approves recombinant bovine growth hor-
mone (rBGH) marketed under the name Posilac. The
drug, made by Monsanto, boosts milk production 5
to 20 percent.
Two British farmers, whose herds were infected
with BSE, die of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD).
National Academy of Sciences releases the re-
port “Pesticides in the Diets of Infants and Children.”
The Academy concludes that fetuses, infants, and
children are more susceptible than adults to toxic
pesticides because their internal organs are still de-
veloping and their enzymatic, metabolic, and im-
mune systems may provide less natural protection
than those of adults.
1994
Vermont becomes the ﬁrst state in the nation to man-
date labeling for dairy products from cows injected
with rBGH. The International Dairy Foods Associa-
tion sues Vermont stating that “the mandatory
122
Chronology
1990
(cont.)

labeling of milk products derived from supple-
mented cows will have the inherent effect of causing
consumers to believe that such products are different
from and inferior to milk products from unsupple-
mented cows.” Although Vermont wins in District
Court, the Circuit Court suspends the state law on
appeal.
1995
The FDA adopts the HACCP approach to seafood in-
spection.
Ninth Circuit of the U.S. Court of Appeals dis-
misses lawsuit against CBS by apple growers claim-
ing that the 1989 60 Minutes broadcast warning of
potential health hazards was false.
The wall of an artiﬁcial waste lagoon gives way
at a pig farm in North Carolina, spilling 24 million
gallons of putrefying urine and feces across several
ﬁelds, one road, and into the New River. Millions of
fish and other aquatic organisms die. A few weeks
later, 9 million gallons of poultry waste ﬂow down a
North Carolina creek into the Northeast Cape Fear
River. A few months later, 1 million gallons of pig
waste trickle through a network of tidal creeks into
the Cape Fear Estuary.
1996
A group of cattlemen from Texas sue Oprah Winfrey
and Howard Lyman for food disparagement. The
cattlemen claim that the two disparaged beef on the
Oprah Winfrey Show.
After ten people under the age of forty-two die
of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, a disease that generally
strikes much older adults, the UK Secretary of State
for Health, Stephen Dorell, tells the House of Com-
mons that the most likely cause of these cases is ex-
posure to BSE from eating beef.
The FDA approves olestra (Olean), Procter &
Gamble’s controversial indigestible fat for use in
salty foods. Olestra has been proven to cause diar-
rhea, cramps, and other adverse effects.
New USDA regulations require microbial testing
for beef and poultry products. The regulations re-
duce the allowable levels of various bacteria.
Chronology
123

Animal Medicinal Drug Use Clarification Act
gives veterinarians the authority to prescribe medica-
tions intended for use in other species. Although the
American Veterinary Medical Association supports
the bill, Food Animals Concerns Trust opposes, citing
concerns that untested drugs used in food animals
could harm humans in the form of drug residues.
Regulations require well-established veterinarian-
client-patient relationships, documentation, and ac-
countability when medications are prescribed under
this act.
Food Quality Protection Act repeals the Delaney
Clause, which stated that any substance that in-
creased cancer in any dosage must not be sold. The
new law permits chemical residues provided they do
not cause more than one additional cancer case for
each 1 million people. In addition, all exposures to
pesticides must be shown to be safe for infants and
children.
1997
Sixteen people become ill from eating hamburger
patties containing E. coli O157:H7. Some 25 million
pounds of hamburger are recalled.
Food Safety: From Farm to Table, A National Food
Safety Initiative, A Report to the President is released. It
calls for an interagency response to food safety is-
sues, declares foodborne illness a significant public
health problem, and calls for a new early warning
surveillance system.
As part of the initiative, the Active Foodborne
Disease Surveillance System, or FoodNet, is estab-
lished. An interagency network of the CDC, USDA,
FDA, and states participating in CDC’s Emerging In-
fections program, the network conducts population-
based active surveillance of seven bacterial
foodborne pathogens (Salmonella, Campylobacter, E.
coli O157:H7, Listeria, Yersinia, and Vibrio). Using sur-
veys of laboratories, physicians, and the population,
the network aims to determine the magnitude of di-
arrheal illnesses and the proportion attributable to
food.
124
Chronology
1996
(cont.)

The CDC establishes another network, the Na-
tional Molecular Surveillance Network (PulseNet), in
collaboration with state health departments. Taking
advantage of technology that allows subtyping of E.
coli O157:H7, PulseNet traces and detects routes of
pathogen transmission up to five times faster than
earlier epidemiological surveillance methods.
Stanley Prusiner, the developer of the prion the-
ory, receives the Nobel Prize in Medicine or Physiol-
ogy. According to Prusiner, prions are protein strands
that can distort other protein strands, causing certain
types of neurological diseases. Prions are a com-
pletely different type of infectious agent from bacte-
ria, fungi, viruses, and parasites. Prusiner believes
prions are the transmission agents for Creutzfeldt-
Jakob disease, kuru, scrapie in sheep, BSE, and per-
haps Alzheimer’s disease.
FDA ban on ruminant-to-ruminant feeding goes
into effect. Cattle can no longer be fed rendered
sheep or goats. However, cattle can still eat rendered
horse, dog, cat, pig, chicken, turkey, or blood or fecal
material from cows or chickens.
FDA approves irradiation of beef and more in-
tensive use of irradiation for pork and poultry.
Canadian government consolidates all federally
mandated food inspection and quarantine services
into a single food inspection agency, the Canadian
Food Inspection Agency (CFIA). The goal of the new
agency is to harmonize standards among federal,
provincial, and municipal governments and make
the process more efﬁcient.
USDA completes implementation of HACCP for
meat and poultry.
Ben and Jerry’s, the ice cream manufacturer,
Stonyﬁeld Farm, Whole Foods Market, and Organic
Valley Foods reach a settlement with the state of Illi-
nois allowing food producers to state on their labels
that their dairy products are rBGH free.
Avian inﬂuenza H5N1 jumps the species barrier
from chickens to humans in Hong Kong, killing six of
the eighteen people infected. Public health officials
Chronology
125

order all 1.2 million chickens in Hong Kong to be
slaughtered.
1998 and 
Strong hurricanes bring a series of massive ﬂoods to
1999
the North Carolina seaboard, drowning thousands of
pigs and unleashing millions of gallons of lagoon
wastes.
1998
The jury ﬁnds in favor of Howard Lyman and Oprah
Winfrey in the suit ﬁled against them by a group of
Texas cattlemen claiming that the two disparaged
beef on the Oprah Winfrey Show in 1996.
1999
Twenty-one people die, five women miscarry, and
seventy others are sickened when a Sara Lee–owned
meat plant becomes contaminated with Listeria. Fif-
teen million pounds of hot dogs and cold cuts are re-
called.
National Academy of Sciences warns that use of
antibiotics in food animals, particularly for subthera-
peutic use, increases antibiotic-resistant bacteria,
making it more difﬁcult to treat disease in humans.
The Academy calculates that eliminating the use of
these drugs would cost consumers about $10 each
per year.
2000
Irradiated beef becomes available.
Foods that have been genetically modified,
grown with sewage sludge, or treated with irradia-
tion can no longer be labeled organic.
Over 1,000 people become ill and four die from
E. coli O1547:H7 when the municipal water system in
Walkerton, Ontario, Canada, becomes contaminated
with runoff from a nearby feedlot.
2001
World Health Organization cites antibiotic resistance
as one of three major public health threats of the
twenty-first century and develops a global action
plan to contain antibiotic resistance. The General As-
sembly of 125 nations pledges efforts to contain the
problem.
126
Chronology
1997
(cont.)

Japan requires all cattle raised in Japan to be
tested for BSE before slaughter.
The World Trade Center is bombed, killing
more than 2,700 people. Bioterrorism affecting the
food and agriculture sectors becomes a subject of
speculation.
2003
Influenza virus H7N7 appears in poultry farms in 
the Netherlands, Belgium, and Germany. It infects
eighty-two people and kills one. Nearly 30 million
poultry and some swine are killed to halt the spread
of infection.
First U.S. cow infected with BSE is discovered in
Washington State, causing meat to be pulled from
key markets and costing the U.S. beef industry $3.2 to
$4.7 billion in 2004 alone, according to a study at
Kansas State University.
Japan bans U.S. beef imports to protect con-
sumers from exposure to cows infected with BSE.
2004
FDA implements recordkeeping requirements for all
foods and items that come in contact with food so
that should a bioterrorism incident occur, the source
can be traced.
2005
French researchers discover that a goat slaughtered
in 2002 tested positive for BSE.
A second U.S. cow that was slaughtered in 2004
is found to have been infected with BSE. This cow
never entered the human or animal food supply.
United States begins using the more accurate
Western Blot test for BSE.
Vietnam imposes a ban on live poultry markets
and begins requiring farms to convert to factory-style
farming methods in ﬁfteen cities and provinces in an
effort to control avian inﬂuenza.
FAO and OIE (Office International des Epi-
zooties or World Organization for Animal Health),
ﬁnding that culling the chicken population is ineffec-
tive for controlling the spread of avian inﬂuenza, rec-
ommend not using culling as a primary means of
Chronology
127

control, but instead recommend vaccination of chick-
ens, which is effective but also expensive. 
2006
Bagged spinach from California contaminated with
E. coli O157:H7 kills three and sickens over 200 in a
multistate outbreak. The outbreak is traced to cattle
living in an adjacent ﬁeld.
Prepackaged lettuce from California used at
Taco Bell and Taco John restaurants causes another E.
coli O157:H7 outbreak sickening more than 150
people.
A bacteriophage (a virus that attacks bacteria)
that kills the bacteria Listeria monocytogenes is ap-
proved for use in packaged foods to prevent contam-
inated packages from causing disease.
128
Chronology
2005
(cont.)

5
Biographical Sketches
Rachel Carson (1907–1964)
Rachel Carson grew up on a 65-acre parcel of land 15 miles north
of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Her father, an aspiring real estate
developer, bought the parcel with the intention of subdividing it,
but Pittsburgh grew in another direction, which kept the land
mostly undeveloped. Carson spent her childhood roaming the
countryside and writing stories. At the age of ten, she won a
prize for a story from St. Nicholas Magazine.
In college Carson majored in English until her junior year,
when her love of nature won out and she switched to zoology.
After college she went to work for the Bureau of Fisheries (now
part of the Department of Fish and Game) writing radio scripts
about ﬁshery and marine life.
In 1936, Carson took the civil service exams for Junior
Aquatic Biologist. She scored higher than everyone else who ap-
plied and became the ﬁrst female biologist ever hired by the Bu-
reau of Fisheries. She had many duties, but continued to write,
eventually becoming the editor in chief of the Information Divi-
sion. On the advice of her boss, Carson submitted one of the
pieces she had written for the Bureau to Atlantic Monthly. The
magazine accepted the story, and she began to write for publica-
tion. Her ﬁrst book, Under the Sea-Wind, was published in 1941.
In 1945, the pesticide dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT)
became available for civilian use. It had been used during World
War II in the Paciﬁc Islands to kill malaria-causing insects and as
a delousing powder in Europe. Considered a wondrous sub-
stance by many, the inventor of DDT was awarded the Nobel
129

Prize. As part of the commercialization process, many DDT tests
were conducted. Carson had observed a series of tests near her
home in Maryland, and approached The Reader’s Digest proposing
an article about the tests. The magazine did not think the subject
merited an article and Carson returned to her other writing.
Carson’s next book, The Sea Around Us, was published in
1951. It described the origins and geologic aspects of the sea. It
won the John Burroughs Medal, the National Book Award, and
stayed on the New York Times best-seller list for eighty-one
weeks.
In 1958, Carson received a letter from her friend Roger
Owens Huckins. Huckins owned a private bird sanctuary in
Duxbury, Massachusetts. One day he had found dead and dying
birds a few days after a massive, unannounced spraying of DDT.
Carson began researching DDT, spending four years consulting
with biologists and chemists, and reviewing massive amounts of
data and documentation. She wrote Silent Spring, carefully de-
scribing how DDT entered the food chain and accumulated in
the fatty tissues of animals, including humans, causing cancer
and genetic damage. She concluded that DDT and other pesti-
cides had irrevocably harmed birds and animals and had conta-
minated the entire world food supply.
Silent Spring was ﬁrst serialized in The New Yorker in 1962.
Readers all over America became alarmed, and the chemical in-
dustry responded sharply. Ironically, this response only drew
more attention to Carson’s work. Carson had meticulously docu-
mented her ﬁndings; the book included ﬁfty-ﬁve pages of notes
and a list of experts who had read and approved the manuscript.
President John F. Kennedy instructed the President’s Science Ad-
visory Committee to examine the issues raised in the book. The
committee’s report supported the conclusions of the book and
vindicated Carson. Silent Spring became a best-seller. DDT re-
ceived close scrutiny from the U.S. government and was eventu-
ally banned. Carson died of breast cancer in 1964.
Ann Cooper (1953–)
Ann Cooper dropped out of high school to become a ski bum.
She hitched a ride to Telluride, Colorado, and took a job in a
restaurant to support her lifestyle. Eventually she started a bak-
130
Biographical Sketches

ing business with another woman. At twenty-six, she decided to
make a career of cooking and entered the Culinary Institute of
America, where she graduated with honors. She cooked for vari-
ous restaurants and the Holland America Cruise Line before
working for the Putney Inn in Vermont. It was there that she be-
came interested in sustainable agriculture and food safety issues.
She wrote Bitter Harvest in 2000. After writing the book, she was
approached by the Ross School in East Hampton, New York, to
become their chef. Although she didn’t see herself as a “lunch
lady,” she was intrigued by the opportunity to bring the princi-
ples of sustainable agriculture to the next generation. Using the
mantra “Regional, Organic, Sustainable, and Seasonal,” she
transformed the menu to include natural, unprocessed ingredi-
ents that were about 65 percent organic. Cooper hoped that other
student cafeterias would follow her example, but most thought it
could only be done at a private school such as Ross.
So in 2005 Cooper took a position with the Berkeley, Califor-
nia, school district to transform the school lunch program. Her
salary is paid by the Chez Panisse Foundation. Berkeley is a so-
cioeconomically diverse community and the existing lunch pro-
gram featured nachos, Tater Tots, chicken nuggets, pizza, and
corn dogs. Cooper is working to transform that. One of the
biggest hurdles is the food she receives from the U.S. Depart-
ment of Agriculture (USDA) commodity program. She has had
to work with food preordered by the school’s last food service
administrator, and is trying to use the program to acquire health-
ier food. Cooper has worked with the students to ﬁnd healthier
versions of pizza and nachos they’ll eat, while also incorporating
fresh fruits and vegetables. She has brought hormone-free milk
to the district and has changed the menu from 95 percent
processed to 95 percent from scratch. She has also had to teach
the existing staff to cook. Before the staff opened packages and
warmed up the contents. But Cooper and the Berkeley School
District believe that if they can teach children to appreciate
healthy food, the children will be less likely to become obese,
they will have fewer health problems, and it will lead to more
sustainable agricultural practices.
Cooper sits on the USDA Organic Standards Board, and is
advocating an increase in funding for the national school lunch
program so that money is available to bring higher quality food
to children.
Biographical Sketches
131

Ronnie Cummins (1946–)
Ronnie Cummins has been an activist since 1967 in a variety of
movements, including human rights, antiwar, antinuclear, labor,
and consumer issues. In the early 1990s, Cummins turned his at-
tention to food safety, sustainable agriculture, organic food stan-
dards, and genetically modiﬁed foods. He has been director of
the Beyond Beef Campaign, the Pure Food Campaign, and the
Global Days of Action Against Genetic Engineering.
Cummins is the national director of the Organic Consumers
Association, a nonproﬁt public-interest organization working to
build a healthy, safe, and sustainable system of food production
and consumption in the United States and the world. He believes
consumers’ struggle for safe food is about more than staying
healthy; it is about whether people in the United States control
the democratic process or whether corporations do. Perhaps be-
cause of this belief, he is most effective as a grassroots organizer.
In 1998, Cummins organized the Save Organic Standards Cam-
paign to pressure the USDA to strengthen the regulatory deﬁni-
tion of what is meant by the term “organic.” The USDA received
more comments on this topic than on any other in recent history.
As a result of the campaign, the USDA announced in 2000 that
foods could not be labeled organic if they had been genetically
modiﬁed. Cummins directs campaigns to bring attention to Fair
Trade products, get Starbucks to quit using milk from cows
treated with rBGH, and change the farm subsidy system so that
organic producers get their fair share of subsidies.
A frequent writer, Cummins has written many articles for
the alternative press, several children’s books on Cuba and Cen-
tral America, and a book on genetically modiﬁed food designed
to help consumers avoid genetically engineered products at the
grocery store.
Nancy Donley (1954–)
Nancy Donley lost her son Alex to hemolytic uremic syndrome
(HUS) that he contracted from eating a hamburger tainted with
E. coli O157:H7. Alex was six years old and died quickly, just four
days after eating the meat. Donley, who had never been involved
in any political organization before, heard about Safe Tables Our
Priority (STOP) from a pediatrician who treated her son.
132
Biographical Sketches

She quickly joined and began lobbying for STOP. With the
determination that netted her a degree in marketing after eleven
years of night school, Donley, along with Mary Heersink and
others at STOP, pursued legislation and policy changes that have
improved the safety of the U.S. food supply. STOP is largely
credited with obtaining the 1997 USDA policy change requiring
Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP) proce-
dures and microbial testing on meats. STOP continues to work
on food safety issues with special focus on food safety issues that
affect children. One of their lobbying efforts is banning carbon
monoxide in meat packaging. For many years Donley was the
unpaid president of STOP in addition to her job as a real estate
broker. She has served on the National Advisory Committee on
Meat and Poultry, and won the Golden Carrot Award from the
Consumer Federation of America. She still serves on the board
and makes media appearances for STOP.
Patricia Grifﬁn (1949–)
Patricia Grifﬁn graduated from the University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine and completed her internship at the Univer-
sity’s medical center and her residency in gastroenterology at
Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston. After completing a
variety of research fellowships in gastroenterology, Grifﬁn went
to work for the Epidemic Intelligence Service (EIS) of the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
As an officer in the EIS, Griffin did extensive fieldwork
throughout the United States as well as in Thailand, Kenya,
Lesotho, Brazil, Guatemala, Zambia, and Japan. In the 1980s, she
became intrigued by E. coli O157:H7 and began conducting re-
search. In 1983, another scientist, Mohamed Karmali, proposed
that hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) was linked to exposure
to E. coli O157:H7. The syndrome was ﬁrst recognized in 1955,
and many possible causes had been proposed. Grifﬁn began call-
ing pediatric nephrologists to ask them to look for the pathogen
in their patients’ stools. Although doctors were not very recep-
tive to looking for E. coli O157:H7, Grifﬁn persisted because she
believed that the pathogen was an important cause of bloody di-
arrhea.
In 1987, Marguerite Neill and Phillip Tarr did a study in
Seattle showing that most cases of HUS were related to E. coli
Biographical Sketches
133

O157:H7. Griffin then directed the CDC’s efforts to control the
disease, informing physicians of the connection to E. coli
O157:H7, working with labs to test for the pathogen, and follow-
ing up on cases around the country. In 1993, when the western
states epidemic occurred, Grifﬁn had the knowledge of the dis-
ease and the skills of an epidemiologist to identify the probable
cause of the outbreak. Grifﬁn and members of Safe Tables Our
Priority (STOP) campaigned successfully to make infection with
E. coli O157:H7 a disease that must be reported to health depart-
ments. Griffin is now director of the Foodborne and Diarrheal
Diseases Branch of the CDC and an adjunct professor of Medi-
cine and Public Health at Emory University.
Fritz Haber (1868–1934)
Fritz Haber was born into a prominent family in Breslau, Ger-
many. He attended a classical grammar and high school, St. Eliz-
abeth’s, and while there he did many chemistry experiments. He
earned degrees at the University of Heidelberg, the University of
Berlin, and the Technical School at Charlottenburg. After univer-
sity, he went to work in his father’s chemical business and took
some other short-term positions before settling as a professor of
chemical technology at Karlsruhe University. At Karlsruhe, he
worked on many different chemical processes—inventing the
glass electrode, ﬁnding ways to combust carbon monoxide and
hydrogen (although not in commercially viable ways), and
studying the ﬂame in Bunsen burners.
Because there was such a commercial need for a source of ni-
trates (Germany was importing 33 percent of its nitrates from
Chile) for enriching the soil, Haber worked intermittently on the
problem of converting nitrogen from the atmosphere into ammo-
nia which could be utilized by plants. (Nitrogen is very stable in
the form N2 [two nitrogen atoms bonded together], but to be
available for use by plant cells, it needs to be able to combine one
atom at a time.) Haber had all but given up on the problem when
a fellow scientist, Walther Nernst (a prominent chemist who won
the Nobel Prize in 1920), publicly attacked his research methods
at a scientiﬁc meeting. Haber became morose, and then obsessed
with ﬁnding a way to solve the problem.
Haber succeeded in 1905, ﬁnding the right combination of
temperature, pressure, and a metal catalyst, and shortly there-
134
Biographical Sketches

after, Bosch found a way to make the process commercially vi-
able. This discovery allowed the Germans to become indepen-
dent of Chile’s nitrate supply. Nitrate chemical fertilizers have
become so important that they allow the earth to support ap-
proximately 40 percent of the population that would otherwise
not exist.
Haber believed strongly in the maxim “A scientist belongs
to his country in times of war, and to all mankind in times of
peace.” This maxim led Haber to work diligently for the German
war effort during World War I. Haber had the idea of using poi-
son gas to break the stalemate when both sides were stuck in the
trenches, and he directed the ﬁrst gas attack in military history.
For this reason, many protested when Haber won the Nobel
Prize for ﬁxing nitrogen in 1918.
After World War I, Haber invented the ﬁredamp whistle for
protection of miners and made other important chemical discov-
eries. He also tried to extract gold from seawater, with the idea
that Germany could use the process to pay its war reparations. In
1933, the Nazis were coming to power, and they forced all of
Haber’s Jewish colleagues to resign from the Institute at Karl-
sruhe. Haber, also a Jew, resigned in solidarity with his col-
leagues. He died shortly thereafter, in 1934.
Mary Heersink (b. ?–)
Mary Heersink led a typical suburban life as a mother of four
children until 1992, when one of her sons ate undercooked ham-
burger at a Boy Scouts outing and developed hemolytic uremic
syndrome (HUS). HUS is a complication that can develop from
poisoning by E. coli O157:H7. Marnix Heersink, Heersink’s hus-
band and an ophthalmologist, probably saved his son’s life by
researching HUS and connecting his son’s doctors to a hematolo-
gist familiar with the disease. Although Damion Heersink’s case
was severe, he made an impressive recovery.
During the five weeks Damion spent in the hospital,
Heersink began to research the cause of the illness. She read
widely about the syndrome and its causes, and became infuri-
ated that USDA standards and procedures were not sufﬁcient to
prevent tainted meat from entering the food supply. She began to
network with other parents of children suffering from HUS, fax-
ing medical articles to the parents of sick children, and formed
Biographical Sketches
135

Safe Tables Our Priority (STOP) with other victims of foodborne
illness.
She worked tirelessly for STOP, appearing before commis-
sions, traveling overseas to investigate other countries’ practices,
meeting with USDA ofﬁcials, and giving interviews to the news
media. Largely through the efforts of Heersink and the other par-
ents of STOP, the USDA changed the meat handling laws in 1996,
which went into effect in 1997, to incorporate Hazard Analysis
and Critical Control Points (HACCP), which requires microbial
testing and performance standards for fresh and processed
meats and poultry.
Sir Albert Howard (1873–1947)
Sir Albert Howard, now considered the father of modern organic
agriculture, was an agricultural researcher in England in 1905.
He was sent to Bengal in 1905 to establish an agricultural re-
search base. Although his mission was to help the native Indians,
he learned more about agriculture from the natives than he
taught them in the twenty-ﬁve years he was there.
Howard observed that the healthiest plants and animals
were raised using the most traditional farming methods, and
that healthy plants and animals started with rich soils. He con-
sidered pests to be “nature’s professors” of good husbandry be-
cause they were indicators of bad management and they were
the best way to identify mistakes and apply corrective manage-
ment. He believed that diseases in plants, animals, and people
could all ultimately be traced to the health of the soil.
While in India, he reﬁned the native techniques into what is
called the “Indore” method of composting, named for the region
where he developed the method. In the method, piles or pits of
manure are layered with dry matter to facilitate aeration, and
then the piles are physically turned every month or so. This
causes aerobic decomposition via passive aeration. The rural
Chinese have a similar technique. This technique spread to
British tea and coffee plantations throughout Africa, Asia, and
the Caribbean, and it’s the ﬁrst thing that agricultural volunteers
with the Peace Corps are taught.
To test his beliefs that good husbandry would prevent dis-
ease, Howard designed some experiments in which he raised
livestock in as healthy a manner as possible and then exposed
136
Biographical Sketches

the livestock to diseased cattle to see what would happen. One
of the diseases he exposed them to was foot and mouth disease,
a very communicable disease that has caused massive destruc-
tion of cattle in the United Kingdom. Howard found that almost
none of his cattle became infected with foot and mouth, which
led him to believe that foot and mouth disease is a disease of
malnutrition.
In 1940, he wrote An Agricultural Testament, which summed
up his beliefs about sustainable agriculture and is considered by
some to have launched the organic farming agricultural move-
ment. The book covers the nature and management of soil fertil-
ity and describes composting.
Fred Kirschenmann (1935–)
Fred Kirschenmann grew up on the North Dakota farm his fa-
ther started in 1930. As an adult, he left the farm and became a
professor of religious history. While teaching in 1970, he was
very impressed by a student’s essay about how farming with
heavy nitrogen fertilizers was causing deterioration of the soil.
Six years later, in 1976, Kirschenmann’s father, Ted, suffered a
heart attack. Fred offered to come home and run the farm pro-
vided he could convert it to organic agriculture.
All of Kirschenmann’s neighbors thought organic farming
wouldn’t work, but he persisted. Using a variety of techniques,
including crop rotation, composting cattle manure to use as fer-
tilizer, planting legumes to build the soil, and not planting sun-
ﬂowers in the blackbirds’ ﬂight path, Kirschenmann was able to
make the farm a commercial success. At 3,100 acres, it is one of
the largest commercial organic farms in the country. It is also a
very productive farm, with per acre yields the same or better
than surrounding conventionally farmed ﬁelds.
Kirschenmann’s success combining large-scale farming with
sustainable, organic practices that are economically viable has
given a huge boost to organic farming, even interesting the
USDA in his methods. Conventional farmers are beginning to
adopt some of the methods of sustainable agriculture, reducing
their dependency on pesticides that cause pollution, are danger-
ous to farm workers, and are potentially harmful to consumers.
In 2000, Kirschenmann gave up day-to-day management of
the farm and returned to academia at Iowa State University,
Biographical Sketches
137

where he directs the Leopold Center for Sustainable Agriculture.
The research and educational center, funded by Iowa fees on ni-
trogen fertilizer and pesticides, develops sustainable agriculture
practices that are both profitable and conserving of natural re-
sources. In 2006, he was appointed to the National Commission
on Industrial Farm Animal Production operated by the Johns
Hopkins School of Public Health and funded by Pew Charitable
Trusts. The Commission is conducting a two-year examination of
key aspects in the farm animal industry.
Alice Lakey (1857–1935)
Alice Lakey was born in Shanesville, Ohio. Her father was a
Methodist minister and an insurance broker. Alice’s mother died
when Lakey was six years old. She attended public school until
the age of fourteen, when her father hired a private tutor for her.
Lakey had a talent for singing and moved to Europe, performing
on many occasions in the United Kingdom. After nearly ten
years of living abroad, she returned to the United States for
health reasons. A few years after her return, she and her father
moved to Cranford, New Jersey. She was active in many civil
causes in Cranford, including successfully encouraging the city
fathers to establish a school, ﬁre department, and baby clinic.
When her father became ill, Lakey was unable to find
unadulterated foods for him or herself. She joined the Domestic
Science Unit of the Village Improvement Association and became
president shortly thereafter. In 1903, Lakey wrote to Secretary of
Agriculture James Wilson to get literature and a recommenda-
tion of someone who could speak to the club. He suggested Har-
vey Wiley (see also separate biographical entry), then a chemist
for the U.S. Department of Agriculture and the most active gov-
ernment worker interested in food purity issues. Wiley was ac-
tively trying to improve food standards. The connection with
Wiley may have been what inspired Lakey to work on her goals
at the national level; in 1904, she persuaded the Cranford Village
Improvement Association and the New Jersey Federation of
Women’s Clubs to petition Congress to enact the pure food and
drug bill.
In an effort to broaden support for the bill, Lakey ap-
proached the National Consumer’s League to support the pure
food cause. The League decided to investigate the conditions
138
Biographical Sketches

under which food was prepared and the working conditions of
the food workers. Lakey was appointed to head the investigation
committee in 1905.
The committee became known as the Pure Food Committee.
The group created an activist network of the nation’s pure food,
drink, and drug advocates, forming a coalition of members from
many organizations. Using the information from the Pure Food
Committee, the League was able to articulate deﬁnite consumer
objectives and speak with authority for U.S. consumers.
Lakey and Wiley met with President Roosevelt in 1905 to
urge his support for the pure food bill. Roosevelt told the pair
that he would support the bill if they obtained signed letters to
Congress. Lake and others inﬂuenced over one million women to
write letters supporting the bill.
After the bill passed in 1906, Lakey continued to work for
pure food issues, pressuring Congress to fund the agency to en-
force the act and to pass the pure milk bill. She continued this
work until 1919, when her father died and she took his place as
the manager of the trade journal he founded, Insurance.
Lakey was the first woman to be listed in Who’s Who and
was named to the National Academy of Social Sciences for her
work. She died of heart failure in 1935.
Antoni van Leeuwenhoek (1623–1723)
Antoni van Leeuwenhoek was a Dutch tradesman with no
higher education. Nevertheless, he became interested in micro-
scopes and began making his own. The microscopes of the day
were compound (made of more than one lens, similar to micro-
scopes of today), but their magnification was only twenty to
thirty times. Leeuwenhoek ground his own lenses and made mi-
croscopes by mounting the lens in a hole in a brass plate. The
specimen was mounted on a sharp stick that was mounted up in
front of the lens. The position and focus was adjusted with two
screws. As the microscope was very small, approximately 3 to 4
inches, it had to be held close to the eye and was difﬁcult to use.
However, using his well-made lenses and special lighting
techniques that he never revealed, Leeuwenhoek was able to
magnify objects over 200 times. He took great interest in looking
at objects with his microscope and discovered bacteria, free-liv-
ing and parasitic microscopic protists, sperm cells, blood cells,
Biographical Sketches
139

microscopic nematodes, and rotifers, as well as many other or-
ganisms.
The prevailing theory of the time was that low forms of ani-
mal life could appear spontaneously. Leeuwenhoek studied the
weevils in granaries and was able to show that weevils are grubs
hatched from eggs deposited by winged insects and not bred
from wheat. At one point he examined the plaque from his teeth
and was disturbed at the abundant life living in his mouth. In
1673, Leeuwenhoek started writing to the Royal Society of Lon-
don describing his discoveries. Not much of an artist, he hired an
illustrator to draw the microbes he saw. Although he had no for-
mal scientiﬁc training, the Royal Society was so pleased with his
discoveries that they made him a full-ﬂedged member.
Leeuwenhoek continued working up until shortly before his
death in 1723. He is considered the father of microbiology.
Stuart Levy (1938–)
Stuart Levy graduated from Williams College and went on to at-
tend the University of Pennsylvania Medical School. After re-
ceiving a Public Health Service fellowship, he took a year off
from medical school to study radiation genetics in Paris. While
there, he learned about the work of Tsutomu Watanabe at Keio
University in Tokyo. Watanabe was just starting to discover
transferable bacterial resistance to antibiotics. Levy went back to
medical school, but took several months off after his third year to
study in Tokyo with Watanabe. He graduated from medical
school in 1965, completed a residency at Mount Sinai Hospital in
New York, and did postdoctoral research at the National Insti-
tutes of Health.
Levy continued to study bacterial resistance. Some bacteria
become resistant by acquiring resistance from other bacterial
cells, but Levy was interested in how speciﬁc mutations in the
bacterial cell cause it to develop pumps in its outer membrane to
pump antibiotics, biocides, and other substances that would en-
danger the bacteria out of the cell. This process is called efﬂux.
Levy and his team discovered the ﬁrst antibiotic efﬂux mecha-
nism that used ATP (adenosine triphosphate) for pumping and
efﬂux protein for tetracycline. (ATP is generated in the mitochon-
dria of cells and is a high-energy compound that cells use for
processes that require energy.)
140
Biographical Sketches

Besides researching antibiotic resistance at Tufts University
School of Medicine, Levy has been active in solving the problem
of resistance in many ways. Levy is president of the Alliance for
the Prudent Use of Antibiotics, which was established in 1981 to
strengthen society’s defenses against infectious diseases by pro-
moting appropriate use of antibiotics in agriculture and in hu-
man use. He has written two editions of The Antibiotic Paradox:
How Misuse Destroys Their Curative Powers, which explains antibi-
otic resistance to the lay public. He founded Paratek Pharmaceu-
ticals, where he is working on ways to modify tetracycline to
circumvent resistance mechanisms, thereby making the drug ef-
fective again, and also looking at ways to make drugs that could
control the “master switch” present in many gram-negative bac-
teria that confers multiple antibiotic resistance in such bacteria as
Salmonella, E. coli, and Shigella.
Howard Lyman (1938–)
Howard Lyman was born in Montana and grew up on his fam-
ily’s organic dairy farm with his brother, Dick. He attended Mon-
tana State University, studying agriculture, including the
business aspects of running a farm and using chemical fertilizers
to boost productivity. After college Lyman joined the army. Ly-
man liked the army, but his brother was dying of Hodgkin’s dis-
ease and their father was getting too old to run the farm by
himself, so Lyman returned home to run the farm.
After studying the farm’s books, Lyman decided that the or-
ganic dairy operation was not proﬁtable enough. He decided to
use deficit financing to expand the acreage of the farm and to
convert to chemical-based farming techniques.
He gradually increased his grain yield and started a feedlot
operation, buying cattle and raising them for slaughter, Although
he increased his acreage forty-fold and increased his crop yields
dramatically, it was almost impossible to make the farm prof-
itable; the chemicals were expensive to use, and each year he had
to use more chemicals and antibiotics to achieve the same result.
The $5 million-a-year operation was taking a profound toll on the
farm. The soil, once rich, loamy, and worm-ﬁlled, was crumbly
and thin as sand. The worms were gone and the trees were dying.
In 1979, Lyman was diagnosed with a tumor on his spinal
column. Facing probable paralysis, Lyman committed himself to
Biographical Sketches
141

restoring his family’s farm to the way it was. During his long re-
cuperation he planned a strategy. He began using integrated pest
management (IPM) techniques. IPM is a combination of organic
farming methods and chemical techniques. Sprays are used in
combination with nonchemical techniques, such as using beneﬁ-
cial insects like ladybugs to eat unwanted pests.
Lyman ran for Congress in 1982. Toward the end of the cam-
paign, the bank foreclosed on his farm. Lyman lost the election
by a small margin and was forced to sell off most of his holdings.
In 1983, he began working for the Montana Farmer’s Union
and went to Washington, D.C., as a lobbyist for them in 1987.
While in Washington, Lyman successfully lobbied for the Na-
tional Organic Standards Act and for funds to ﬁnance the act’s
administration.
In 1990, Lyman became a vegetarian for environmental, hu-
manitarian, and health reasons. He served as president of the In-
ternational Vegetarian Union and was invited to appear on the
Oprah Winfrey Show in 1996. While on the show, Lyman discussed
ruminant-to-ruminant feeding (the practice of sending leftovers
from the slaughter process to rendering plants and feeding the
rendered animal protein to cattle) and its link to mad cow dis-
ease. After the show aired, Lyman and Winfrey were sued for
food disparagement by a group of Texas cattle ranchers. The jury
decided in favor of Lyman and Winfrey in 1998.
Since the suit, Lyman founded Voice for a Viable Future, a
campaign to educate people about sustainable agriculture and
the dangers of current methods of food production. He has writ-
ten two books and has produced three documentaries.
Helen McNab Miller (1862–1949)
Helen McNab Miller was born in Zanesville, Ohio, and studied
at Stanford University, the University of Nevada, and the Uni-
versity of Missouri. A home economist at the Agricultural Col-
lege in Columbia, Missouri, Miller had a strong professional
interest in food purity issues.
As a member of the General Federation of Women’s Clubs
(GFWC), she was known as an energetic club woman and be-
came chair of the pure food subcommittee. As part of her work
as a home economist, she worked with many government ofﬁ-
cials and committees on pure food, drink, and milk issues. This
142
Biographical Sketches

government experience was rare among women at the time and
gave Miller a unique ability to help the club set and accomplish
politically viable goals. Miller advocated ﬁrm but fair legislation.
She was described as an accomplished speaker with a carefully
modulated voice.
When President Roosevelt told Alice Lakey and Harvey Wi-
ley to produce letters to Congress in support of the pure food
legislation, Miller was assigned the task of soliciting letters from
the midwestern United States. At the GFWC biennial convention
in St. Paul in June 1906, Miller requested that each delegation
send telegrams to their representatives in the House and Senate,
the Speaker of the House, and to President Roosevelt urging
swift passage of the pure food bill. After Miller read a summary
of the terrible state of food, drugs, and alcohol in the United
States, the telegrams poured into Washington.
After the bill passed, Wiley named Lakey and Miller as out-
standing leaders of the crusade. Miller continued to work on
food purity issues, securing the passage of the pure milk bill in
Missouri in 1907. She later moved to Kalispell, Montana. Little is
known about the remainder of her life.
Marion Nestle (1936–)
Marion Nestle attended high school in Los Angeles and then
went to the University of California, Berkeley. She was always
interested in food, but at the time, the only way to study food
was by studying agriculture, so she chose to earn a bachelor’s
degree in microbiology, a master’s degree in public health, and a
doctorate in molecular biology. She started her career in acade-
mia at Brandeis University on the biology faculty, but after being
assigned to teach a nutrition class to undergraduates, her interest
in nutrition led her to a ten-year stint at the University of Califor-
nia, San Francisco, as the associate dean of the School of Medi-
cine, where she taught nutrition to medical students, residents,
and practicing physicians. In 1986, she became senior nutrition
policy advisor in the U.S. Department of Health and Human Ser-
vices and editor of the 1988 Surgeon General’s Report on Nutrition.
As the Paulette Goddard Professor in the Department of Nutri-
tion, Food Studies, and Public Health at New York University,
Nestle is a frequent and outspoken member of U.S. government
panels that make decisions about dietary guidelines, is a member
Biographical Sketches
143

of the FDA’s Food Advisory Committee, and has served on the
board of the Center for Science in the Public Interest.
Nestle has been able to use her insights about how policy is
made to advocate for safer and more nutritious food for con-
sumers. She has a particular talent for making food safety and
nutrition information simple enough for the average consumer.
She has written several books, and believes that a locus of public
health, public policy, and journalism will be needed to combat
obesity and promote sustainable agriculture.
Michael Osterholm (1953–)
After earning his Ph.D. at the University of Minnesota, Michael
Osterholm went to work for the Minnesota Department of
Health. He worked in various positions, becoming the state epi-
demiologist in 1985. In his position as chief, Osterholm improved
the level of surveillance in Minnesota, creating a reporting sys-
tem more advanced than those in most other states. He led many
investigations of outbreaks of foodborne disease and did exten-
sive research in epidemiology. His team was ﬁrst to call attention
to the changing epidemiology of foodborne illness.
While Osterholm was the chair of the Emerging Infections
Committee of the Infectious Disease Society of America, Oster-
holm became an expert not only in foodborne illness but also bi-
ological terrorism and antimicrobial resistance. He currently
serves as the associate director of the U.S. Department of Home-
land Security’s National Center for Food Protection and Defense,
in addition to directing the Center for Infectious Disease Re-
search and Policy at the University of Minnesota, where he is
also a professor in the school of public health.
Osterholm has written a book about bioterrorism, and is a
frequent public speaker about bioterrorism and pandemic in-
ﬂuenza preparedness.
Louis Pasteur (1822–1895)
Louis Pasteur, the son of a tanner, spent his boyhood in France
drawing. It was not until later that he developed an interest in
144
Biographical Sketches

science, earning a bachelor’s degree in science in 1842, fol-
lowed by master’s and doctorate degrees in 1845 and 1847, re-
spectively.
In 1854, Pasteur became dean of the new science faculty at
the University of Lillie. As dean, he introduced programs to cre-
ate a bridge between science and industry, including taking his
students to factories, supervising practical courses, and starting
evening classes for young workmen. Perhaps because of the con-
nections he made to industry, a businessman inquired about pro-
ducing alcohol from grain and beet sugar. This inquiry began his
study of fermentation.
In 1857, Pasteur announced that fermentation was the re-
sult of the activity of minute organisms. If fermentation failed,
it was because the necessary organism was missing or unable to
grow properly. As he continued his research, Pasteur proved
that food decomposes when placed in contact with germs pre-
sent in the air. He discovered that spoilage could be prevented
if the microbes already present in foodstuffs were destroyed
and the sterilized material was protected against later contami-
nation.
A practical man, Pasteur applied his theory to food and
drinks, developing a heat treatment called pasteurization. He
was able to aid the French wine industry that was trying to solve
the problem of wine going sour when it was transported, and his
process eliminated the serious health threats of bovine tuberculo-
sis, brucellosis, and other milkborne diseases.
Pasteur’s interest in bacteria also led him to study
diseases. After he had determined the natural history of an-
thrax, a fatal disease of cattle, he concluded that anthrax was
caused by a particular bacillus. He suggested giving anthrax
in a mild form to animals to inoculate them against a more
severe reaction. He tested his hypothesis on sheep, inoculat-
ing twenty-five with a mild case of anthrax. A few days later
he inoculated the same twenty-five plus twenty-five untreated
sheep with a virulent strain of the bacteria. He left ten sheep
completely untreated. As Pasteur believed would happen, the
twenty-five sheep who had been vaccinated survived, but the
twenty-five who were given the virulent bacteria died. Pasteur
continued to study diseases and was able to develop vaccines
for chicken cholera, smallpox, and rabies before his death 
in 1895.
Biographical Sketches
145

Stanley Prusiner (1942–)
Stanley Prusiner was born in Des Moines, Iowa, and went to the
University of Pennsylvania, where he earned a bachelor’s degree
in 1964 and a medical degree in 1968. He started a residency at
the University of California, San Francisco (UCSF) in neurology,
intending to enter private practice after graduation. One of his
patients died of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) and Prusiner
decided to stay at UCSF instead of entering private practice.
Over the course of his research, Prusiner determined that an
abnormal protein, which he dubbed a prion (for proteinaceous
infectious particle), caused the infection. The prion was a previ-
ously unrecognized infectious agent, different from bacteria,
viruses, and parasites. A prion is a protein that has the same
amino acids as a normal protein, but is shaped differently. It is
the different shape that Prusiner believes causes certain brain
disorders, including other spongiform encephalopathies like
kuru, a disease of human cannibals, scrapie in sheep, and bovine
spongiform encephalopathy (BSE). In 1984, Prusiner and his
group identiﬁed ﬁfteen amino acids at the end of the prion pro-
tein. This discovery was enough for other labs to identify the
gene for producing the prion protein in both healthy and in-
fected mice and hamsters.
In 1992, Prusiner, with Charles Weissmann of the University
of Zurich, was able to show that lab mice stripped of the prion
gene became immune to prion-linked diseases. Although some
scientists didn’t believe that the deformed prion was the infec-
tious agent, in 1997 Prusiner was awarded the Nobel Prize for
Medicine or Physiology. He continues to do research on prions as
the director of the Institute for Neurodegenerative Diseases at
the University of California, San Francisco. In addition, Prusiner
founded and is chairman of InPro, a biotechnology company that
has commercialized prion disinfectant and diagnostic products
(such as tests for BSE and scrapie) that he developed in his lab 
at UCSF.
John Robbins (1947–)
John Robbins, the only son of one of the founders of the Baskin-
Robbins ice cream empire, was groomed from childhood to
take over the family business. Early in his college career at the
146
Biographical Sketches

University of California, Berkeley, Robbins decided that he
didn’t want to work for the family business, in part because he
felt high-fat ice creams contributed to the ill health of Ameri-
cans. He walked away from the extensive wealth and position
his family offered to pursue his own ideas. After a stint as a
psychotherapist, Robbins became interested in the way animals
were raised for food, the health consequences of the typical
American diet, and the environmental consequences of eating
animal products. Robbins wrote Diet for a New America in 1987
to explain his beliefs. In the book, Robbins describes how food
choices affect human health, showing that vegetarians suffer
from heart disease at lower rates than meat eaters. The book
was an international best seller and was nominated for a
Pulitzer Prize.
He founded Earth-Save Foundation, an organization de-
voted to helping protect the environment through encouraging
others to adopt a plant-based diet. He continues to write about
how diet can improve the earth and result in healthy aging, and
he is a frequent speaker.
Joel Salatin (b. ?–)
Joel Salatin is a third-generation organic farmer. His parents
farmed in Venezuela until they lost their farm for political rea-
sons, and then returned to their native United States. In 1961,
they purchased 550 acres that had been a tenant farm in Swoope,
Virginia. The land was rough and hilly and had been so over-
worked with corn that the farm was too unproductive to support
the family. So Salatin’s parents worked in town to make a living,
as they worked to bring the land back to its natural state.
While in high school, Salatin began raising chickens follow-
ing a “pastured poultry” model. Believing that the land and the
animals can occupy complementary niches, Salatin modiﬁed and
refurbished some old rabbit cages and put chicks in the cages. As
chicken manure collected underneath the cages, Salatin moved
the cages to other areas of the farm. He sold his chickens in the
unregulated “curb” market. (Regulations governing poultry and
other animal products are much more stringent today.)
Salatin attended Bob Jones University and earned a degree
in English. When he returned to Virginia, he took a job on the lo-
cal newspaper and saved his money with the intent of returning
Biographical Sketches
147

to farming. In 1980, he and his wife were able to move to the
farm, and by being very frugal, were able to survive the early
lean years until the farm became more ﬁnancially successful.
Salatin has used the concepts of using his animals to enrich
the soil and relationship marketing to turn Polyface Farm into a
thriving, sustainable, and profitable enterprise. His animals
move around continually so as not to overgraze and exhaust the
soil, and he comes up with innovative strategies to make his ani-
mals do the work. For example, during the winter, he feeds his
cows hay in the barn, and instead of mucking out the barn, lay-
ers their straw bedding with wood chips and leaves to minimize
leaching and vaporization. He also throws some whole corn in
the layers. Over the winter, the corn ferments. In the spring,
Salatin moves the cows out to the pasture and moves the pigs
into the barn. The pigs root for the fermented corn, thereby aerat-
ing the compost pile and initiating aerobic decomposition.
Salatin has spared himself the labor of moving the manure out of
the barn, and instead gets the pigs to help him ﬁnish the com-
post. Strategies like these help Salatin save on equipment and
fossil fuels and give the pigs exercise.
Salatin also prides himself on the taste of the products his
farm produces. People drive from miles around to purchase
eggs, chicken, and other products that have more ﬂavor because
of the animals’ varied diet and exercise. He also sells to buying
clubs and restaurants that pay a premium for his products be-
cause they are so ﬂavorful. Salatin calls this “relationship mar-
keting.” He sees himself in relationships with the people who
purchase his products. Salatin has written several books about
organic agriculture.
Upton Sinclair (1878–1968)
Upton Sinclair was born in Baltimore, Maryland. Although both
his parents came from middle and upper middle-class back-
grounds, his father was an unsuccessful salesman. His lack of
success propelled the family into poverty. Sinclair lived in bug-
ridden boarding houses with his parents and later alternated be-
tween this environment and Baltimore society with his mother’s
well-off relatives. Sinclair’s father turned more and more to alco-
hol, and Sinclair was often sent to bars to retrieve his father. The
contrast between his luxurious existence with his relatives and
148
Biographical Sketches

the poverty he saw with his parents led to a great social aware-
ness and a desire to increase social justice. After completing col-
lege at eighteen, he became a hack writer of young men’s
adventure stories. He was interested in social issues, however,
and his early serious novels began to show evidence of his con-
version to socialism.
In 1904, Sinclair was commissioned by a widely circulating
socialist weekly, Appeal to Reason, to investigate labor conditions
in the Chicago stockyards. With a $500 stipend, he spent seven
weeks in Chicago and returned to Princeton, New Jersey, to write
The Jungle. The novel documented alarmingly unsanitary condi-
tions in the Chicago stockyards and the hard life of the immi-
grants who worked there. In 1905, it was serialized in Appeal to
Reason. Although enormously popular in serial form, Sinclair
had a difﬁcult time getting the novel published in book form. It
was rejected by several book publishers, and Sinclair prepared to
publish it himself. Doubleday ﬁnally agreed to publish it if the
conditions Sinclair wrote about could be adequately docu-
mented. They sent a lawyer to Chicago who was able to substan-
tiate Sinclair’s ﬁndings.
In 1906, The Jungle was published. Within two months it was
selling in the United Kingdom and had been translated into sev-
enteen languages. People were outraged at the lax standards for
processing meat. The publicity that Sinclair created was enough
to get the pure food and drug bill and the beef inspection bill
passed. This legislation had originally been proposed in 1902,
but it took public sentiment and pressure from President Roo-
sevelt to get the bill passed in 1906.
In Sinclair’s later life, he continued to write novels about a
variety of social issues. He ran for state ofﬁce in California, run-
ning for governor in 1934 with the slogan “End Poverty in Cali-
fornia.” He was narrowly defeated, and retired from politics.
Although Sinclair wrote about many social issues, he is best
known for The Jungle; he had more impact on the food safety is-
sue than any other issue.
John Snow (1813–1858)
John Snow was born to working-class parents in York, England.
He apprenticed to be a doctor in Newcastle at the age of fourteen.
Even as an apprentice he was known for his keen observations
Biographical Sketches
149

and the extensive notebooks he kept ﬁlled with scientiﬁc theories
and observations. When he was eighteen, a cholera epidemic
struck England killing 50,000 people. Dr. Hardcastle, Snow’s su-
pervising doctor, was overwhelmed with patients and sent Snow
to help the coal miners in a nearby town. But Snow had only
bloodletting, laxatives, and brandy as available treatment op-
tions, and these had no effect.
At twenty-three, Snow entered the Hunterian School of
Medicine in the Soho area of London. The Hunterian School had
shifted to a science-based curriculum emphasizing chemistry,
anatomy, and physiology as important medical tools. After
medical school, Snow started a practice in Soho instead of re-
turning to his hometown, as was the traditional way to start a
practice. As a result, his practice grew slowly. He occupied his
time doing medical research, studying respiration, asphyxia-
tion, and carbon monoxide poisoning. In 1846, news of the med-
ical value of ether to induce unconsciousness reached England,
and Snow was intrigued about the possibilities for surgery.
Snow began a systematic study of many species of animals and
human surgery patients using precise doses of ether and chloro-
form to determine safe levels of use. He became the leading
practitioner of anesthesiology in his day, and even anesthetized
Queen Victoria in 1853 for the birth of her eighth child.
Aside from his considerable contributions to anesthesiology,
Snow is also considered the father of epidemiology. Another ma-
jor cholera epidemic broke out in London in 1848. Snow was con-
vinced that cholera was waterborne and caused by tiny parasites
in the water and not by poison gases (called miasmas at the time)
that most scientists and policy makers believed caused the dis-
ease. Although the discovery of the microscope in the 1600s
showed that microscopic life existed, the germ theory was not
well established until the 1860s when Louis Pasteur conducted
his experiments.
Snow did not have the means to show the cause of the dis-
ease, so he systematically traced the path of the disease. In 1848,
Snow discovered that the first victim arrived on September 22
from Hamburg via ship and died a few days later in a rooming
house. The second victim fell ill after renting the same room that
the ﬁrst victim had occupied. Snow suspected that the room had
not been cleaned and that the parasites had been transferred on
the bed linens.
150
Biographical Sketches

Although Snow had a lot of anesthesia patients, he also
treated many cholera patients, and noted that their symptoms
began in their digestive tracts. This observation indicated to
Snow that cholera was likely food- or waterborne, because if it
was caused by gases, the ﬁrst symptoms to appear would likely
have been in the respiratory system.
Snow collected data on where the cholera victims lived,
where they got their water, and other factors. He published the
results in the pamphlet “On the Mode of Communication of
Cholera.” So as not to antagonize his readers, Snow downplayed
the parasite theory and instead indicated the cause was an un-
known poison that could multiply in water. The pamphlet was
largely ignored, so Snow gave lectures to try to generate support
for his ideas, while continuing to gather data that showed how
the pattern of disease was linked to particular water supplies. By
the time the epidemic had run its course, 50,000 people were
dead throughout Great Britain.
When cholera reemerged in 1853, Snow traced water sup-
plies from two water companies that drew their water from the
Thames. One of them was near an area of sewage outﬂows and
one was upstream of the sewage outﬂows. Although it was difﬁ-
cult to determine which water company served which customers,
Snow was able to show that the water company that drew from
the sewage-tainted section of the Thames accounted for 334 cases,
while the upstream water supply accounted for only 14.
During the same epidemic, Snow noted that many of the
cases occurred near the Broad Street pump. He recommended re-
moving the pump handle (and was able to convince the ofﬁcials
to do so), even though ofﬁcials could not believe it was the water
causing the disease. Later he was vindicated when it was deter-
mined that sewage from a nearby cesspool was leaking into the
well supplying the pump.
Snow’s ideas were still not well accepted when he died of a
stroke in 1858, but he is revered today as the father of epidemiol-
ogy and his methods are still studied.
David Theno (1950–)
David Theno grew up in rural northern Illinois, raising farm an-
imals. Although he was planning to be a veterinarian, he found
Biographical Sketches
151

himself enjoying the blend of science and business in the Ani-
mal Sciences and Foods Group at the University of Illinois.
When he was invited to stay for a doctorate degree within the
group, he skipped veterinary school and earned a Ph.D. in mus-
cle biology in 1977. As a food technologist implementing new
technologies, Theno earned the reputation as an effective trou-
bleshooter. Within a few years he was working at Armour Foods
as the director of product quality and technology, where he ap-
plied a troubleshooter’s eye to continually making food process-
ing safer.
At Foster Farms in the 1980s, Theno developed and imple-
mented the first comprehensive Hazard Analysis and Critical
Control Points (HACCP) system in the poultry industry and was
able to decrease Salmonella counts to less than one-third the
counts at other plants.
Theno started a consulting business, designing and imple-
menting HACCP systems for companies all over the country.
When tainted hamburger served at Jack in the Box restaurants
in 1993 sickened hundreds and killed four toddlers, Theno was
asked to take over food safety operations. By 1994, Jack in the
Box, under Theno’s direction, had implemented HACCP stan-
dards that exceeded the Model Food Code of the Food and
Drug Administration. Today, Jack in the Box leads the fast food
industry in food safety. The restaurant chain achieved this posi-
tion through both Theno’s technical knowledge and his ability
to design systems where workers, often low skilled, feel a sense
of personal responsibility for serving a safe product. Theno
credits the high level of integrity in the corporate cultures of the
companies where he has worked. These companies commit to
“doing it right, not just doing a good enough job,” said Theno.
Theno’s HACCP system at Jack in the Box continues to
evolve; every six months new procedures are designed with in-
put from the restaurant managers. But the system hasn’t just im-
proved food safety at the company. Jack in the Box invites others
in the industry to visit and learn from their HACCP system.
Theno is on the USDA’s National Advisory Committee on Micro-
biological Criteria for Foods, the National Cattlemen’s Beef Asso-
ciation’s Beef Industry Food Safety Council, and the National
Livestock and Meat Board’s Blue Ribbon Task Force for “Solving
the E. coli O157:H7 Problem.”
152
Biographical Sketches

Harvey Wiley (1844–1930)
Harvey Wiley was born in a log cabin on a frontier Indiana farm.
His father, Preston Wiley, was a teacher at a subscription school.
Wiley began going to school at age four and learned to read
through his father’s instruction. He attended Hanover College
and served in the army during the U.S. Civil War. Wanting to be-
come a doctor to help people, Wiley enrolled in medical school,
where he became interested in preventative medicine. He be-
lieved that an essential part of living a healthy life was eating
healthful food. He also believed that moderate eating was im-
portant for health.
Wiley demonstrated a talent for analytical chemistry in col-
lege and medical school, and never practiced medicine. He
earned a doctorate degree in chemistry from Harvard University
and became a researcher and professor at Northwestern Chris-
tian College and Purdue University. At Northwestern Christian,
Wiley taught chemistry with student labs, something novel at
that time. At Purdue University, Wiley became the state chemist
for Indiana and studied the syrup and sugar produced by the hy-
drolysis of cornstarch. This corn sugar was frequently used as a
cheap adulterant for cane and maple syrup products. At that
time there were no regulations requiring accurate labeling of
contents. Wiley lobbied the Indiana state legislature to require
manufacturers to label contents.
In 1883, Wiley was offered an appointment with the U.S. De-
partment of Agriculture as a chemist. He was hired to help estab-
lish a U.S. sugar industry, but he continued to be interested in
food purity issues. Mainly through his work, pure food bills
were introduced in Congress throughout the 1880s and 1890s,
but none passed. One of the leading chemists of the day, he
helped found the Association of Ofﬁcial Analytical Chemists in
1891, which still offers an award in his name.
In 1902, Wiley organized a volunteer team of healthy young
men called “The Poison Squad” who volunteered to eat all their
meals in Wiley’s special kitchen. Wiley gave the men large doses
of the preservatives and adulterants in common use at the time
to determine what ill effects they might cause. Testing one sub-
stance at a time, Wiley was able to demonstrate the unhealthful
effects of many substances.
Biographical Sketches
153

The Poison Squad garnered considerable publicity. Upton
Sinclair’s book The Jungle came out in 1906 exposing the unsani-
tary conditions in the nation’s meat packing plants. The steady
pressure from Wiley, coupled with increasing public pressure,
led to the passage of the Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906. Wiley
was appointed to oversee the administration of the act and
stayed in government service until 1912.
Recruited by Good Housekeeping in 1912, Wiley set up the
magazine’s Bureau of Foods, Sanitation, and Health. He lobbied
for tougher government inspection of meat, pure butter unadul-
terated by water, and unadulterated wheat ﬂour, which growers
were mixing with other grains. At Good Housekeeping, his bureau
analyzed food products and published its findings. They gave
the Good Housekeeping “Tested and Approved” seal to those prod-
ucts that met their standards of purity.
Before his death in 1930 at the age of eighty-six, Wiley au-
thored a number of books; contributed to the passage of the ma-
ternal health bill, which allocated federal funds for improved
infant care; and helped secure legislation to keep reﬁned sugar
pure and unadulterated.
Craig Wilson (1948–)
Craig Wilson was working at Frigoscandia in Redmond, Wash-
ington, in 1993 when four children died and many more got sick
from eating tainted hamburger at Jack in the Box restaurants.
Some of the children were friends of his own children. Frigoscan-
dia manufactures equipment for a variety of applications, in-
cluding food processing. Wilson understood the mechanism of
the E. coli O157:H7 poisoning: bacteria that are often present in
the gut of cows had gotten onto the carcass during processing
and had tainted pounds of hamburger when the carcass was
ground up. E. coli O157:H7 is so virulent that as little as one bac-
terial organism can cause illness. If bacteria from one animal con-
taminate a carcass, it can affect thousands of pounds of meat,
because hamburger is processed in such large batches.
Wilson decided that what was needed was a better way to
treat carcasses so that even if some bacteria got onto the carcass,
the bacteria could be killed before the meat was ground up. Wil-
son came up with the idea of steaming the carcasses in a quick
154
Biographical Sketches

burst. The process would be long enough to kill any bacteria con-
taminating the surface but not long enough to cook the meat.
Wilson approached one of Frigoscandia’s customers, Cargill,
one of the largest meat processors in the world. Cargill’s Jerry
Leising worked with Wilson, and together they approached
Randy Phebus at Kansas State University. The three of them
were able to turn Wilson’s idea into a commercially viable pro-
cess. Wilson stayed at Frigoscandia until 1998, when he joined
Costco as the director of food safety.
At Costco, Wilson has involved the entire company in food
safety. Every Costco employee must take a basic food safety
training course, and managers take a 22-hour home-study course
followed by a four-hour in-house training and exam. Costco’s
food safety manual is online so that every department has access
to the manual should a food safety question arise. Wilson has
taken care to make sure that every section of the manual is un-
derstandable to the high school graduates that Costco hires. In
many cases, Costco uses more stringent standards than the U.S.
government requires. Costco maintains a quality assurance labo-
ratory in Washington State, where the microbiological quality of
food product samples is tested from all over the country. Food
quality specialists also do thorough audits of their vendors to en-
sure that safety is a priority. They work with vendors who are
having difﬁculties, pointing them at resources that can help them
improve. Costco’s program has been so successful and innova-
tive that food safety ofﬁcials from the states of Washington, Ore-
gon, and Michigan use the company’s program as part of their
training.
Biographical Sketches
155


6
Data and Documents
B
elow are some selected facts about foodborne illness that
were current as of 2006 unless otherwise noted. They are
meant to provide a snapshot look at foodborne illness. There
is more detailed information on each of these subjects in Chap-
ters 1 through 3.
Number of people affected by foodborne illness each year
in the United States: 76 million illnesses, 300,000 hospital-
izations, and 5,000 deaths 
Disease trends for selected foodborne illnesses are illus-
trated in Fig. 6.1
Percentage of foodborne illnesses caused by bacteria: 
79 percent (U.S. Food and Drug Administration 2005)
Most common cause of foodborne illness: Campylobacter 
jejuni (ibid.)
Annual number of cases of foodborne illness caused by 
C. jejuni: 2 million (ibid.)
Percentage of chicken packages in retail stores contami-
nated by C. jejuni according to a 2002 study: 82 (Ketley and
Konkel 2005) 
Percentage of cases of C. jejuni requiring medical treatment
that are resistant to ﬂuoroquinolone, the antibiotic of choice:
18 (Swartz 2002) 
Number of bacterial cells required to cause an infection of
E. coli O157:H7: as few as 10 (U.S. Food and Drug Adminis-
tration 2005)
157

158
Data and Documents
Recalls in the United States are illustrated in Fig. 6.2
Percentage of cases of E. coli O157:H7 that lead to serious
kidney problems (hemolytic uremic syndrome [HUS]): 2–7
(Jay, Loessner, and Golden 2005) 
Amount of foodborne illness caused by inadequate hand-
washing: nearly half (Duyff 2002) 
Food additive that has received more consumer complaints
than any other in history: olestra (Center for Science in the
Public Interest 2006a)
Percentage of salmon that is farm raised: 90 (Burros 2005)
Amount of PCBs in wild salmon: 5 ppb (Burros 2003)
Amount of PCBs in farmed salmon: 27 ppb (ibid.)
Amount of antibiotics used in the United States each year:
24.5 million pounds (Union of Concerned Scientists 2001) 
Percentage of antibiotics used as growth promoters for ani-
mals who are not sick: 70 (ibid.) 
2.0
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
1996–1998 1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
Vibrio
Salmonella
Campylobacter
Listeria
STEC 0157
Relative rate
Year
FIGURE 6.1
Relative Rates Compared with 1996–1998 Baseline Period of Laboratory-
Diagnosed Cases of Infection—Foodborne Diseases Active Surveillance Network, 
United States, 1996–2005
Source: U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Note: STEC 0157 is a shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli.

Additional annual healthcare costs from antibiotic-resistant
infections in the United States: $4 billion (Keep Antibiotics
Working 2006)
Percentage of worldwide acreage planted with genetically
modiﬁed organisms:  7 (International Service for the Acqui-
sition of Agri-Biotech Applications 2006)
Percentage of U.S. corn grown from genetically modiﬁed va-
rieties: 45 (Consumer Choice and ‘Frankenstein Foods’ 2006)
Percentage of U.S. soybeans grown from genetically modi-
ﬁed varieties: 85 (ibid.) 
Amount of manure produced each year at concentrated ani-
mal feeding operations (CAFOs): 500 million tons (Center
for Science in the Public Interest 2006b)
Amount of human waste produced each year: 150 million
tons (ibid.)
Number of people who die each year from inﬂuenza in the
United States: 36,000 (Barry 2005) 
Data and Documents
159
FIGURE 6.2
Number of Recalls in the United States
Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food Safety and Inspection Service.
Note: Contains data collected through June 30, 2004.
FY 2000
FY 2001
FY 2002
FY 2003
FY 2004
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Number of recalls

Number of people who died in the 1918 inﬂuenza
pandemic in the United States: 675,000 (ibid.)
Number of people who died in the 1918 inﬂuenza
pandemic worldwide: 21 to 100 million (ibid.) 
Model Food Code of 2005
The purpose of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Model
Food Code of 2005 is to assist all levels of government involved in
regulating the retail and food service segments of industry by providing
a scientiﬁc and legal basis for regulation. This excerpt, taken from An-
nex 4 of the code, explains the rationale and procedures one would fol-
low to establish a Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points
(HACCP) plan in a restaurant or other retail food establishment. The
entire table of contents of Annex 4 is included, as are sections 1 through
3. The actual code contains much more speciﬁc detail about food, man-
agement and personnel, equipment, plumbing, and other concerns. The
code can be accessed online at http://www.cfsan.fda.gov/~dms/
foodcode.html#get05 or type “FDA Model Food Code” into a search
engine.
Annex 4: Management of Food Practices—
Achieving Active Managerial Control of
Foodborne Illness Risk Factors
1.
Active Managerial Control
2. Introduction to HACCP
3. The HACCP Principles
4. The Process Approach—A Practical Application of HACCP at
Retail to Achieve Active Managerial Control
5. FDA Retail HACCP Manuals
6. Advantages of  Using the Principles of HACCP
7. Summary
8. Acknowledgments
9. Resources and References
1. Active Managerial Control
(A) What is the common goal of operators and regulators of retail food
and food service establishments and what is presently being done to
achieve this goal?
160
Data and Documents

The common goal of operators and regulators of retail and food ser-
vice establishments is to produce safe, quality food for consumers. Since
the onset of regulatory oversight of retail and food service operations,
regulatory inspections have emphasized the recognition and correction
of food safety violations that exist at the time of the inspection. Recurring
violations have traditionally been handled through reinspections or en-
forcement activities such as ﬁnes, suspension of permits, or closures. Op-
erators of retail and food service establishments routinely respond to
inspection ﬁndings by correcting violations, but often do not implement
proactive systems of control to prevent violations from recurring. While
this type of inspection and enforcement system has done a great deal to
improve basic sanitation and to upgrade facilities in the United States, it
emphasizes reactive rather than preventive measures to food safety.
Additional measures must be taken on the part of operators and
regulators to better prevent or reduce foodborne illness. Annex 5 of the
Food Code provides additional information on conducting risk-based in-
spections. It should be reviewed in conjunction with the material found
in this Annex to better understand the role of the regulator in facilitat-
ing active managerial control by the operator.
(B) Who has the ultimate responsibility for providing safe food to
the consumer? 
The responsibility of providing safe food to the consumer is shared
by many people in every stage in the production of food, including con-
sumers themselves. Since most consumers receive their food from retail
and food service establishments, a signiﬁcant share of the responsibility
for providing safe food to the consumer rests with these facilities. Work-
ing together with regulatory authorities, operators of retail and food ser-
vice establishments can make the greatest impact on food safety.
(C) How can foodborne illness be reduced?
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Surveil-
lance Report for 1993–1997, “Surveillance for Foodborne-Disease Out-
breaks—United States,” identiﬁes the most signiﬁcant contributing
factors to foodborne illness. Five of these broad categories of contribut-
ing factors directly relate to food safety concerns within retail and food
service establishments and are collectively termed by the FDA as “food-
borne illness risk factors.” These ﬁve broad categories are:
•
Food from unsafe sources
•
Inadequate cooking
•
Improper holding temperatures
•
Contaminated equipment
•
Poor personal hygiene
In 1998, the FDA initiated a project designed to determine the inci-
dence of foodborne illness risk factors in retail and food service estab-
lishments. Inspections focusing on the occurrence of foodborne illness
Model Food Code of 2005
161

risk factors were conducted in establishments throughout the United
States. The results of this project were published in the 2000 Report of the
FDA Retail Food Program Database of Foodborne Illness Risk Factors, com-
monly referred to as the “FDA Baseline Report.” The baseline report is
available from the FDA through the following Website: http://www
.cfsan.fda.gov/~dms/retrsk.html. The data collection project was
repeated in 2003 and the results were published in the 2004 FDA Report
on the Occurrence of Foodborne Illness Risk Factors in Selected Institutional
Foodservice, Restaurant, and Retail Food Store Facility Types. This second
report is available from the FDA through the following Website:
http://www.cfsan.fda.gov/~dms/retrsk2.html. An additional data col-
lection project is planned for 2008.
The CDC surveillance report and the results from the FDA base-
line report and second data collection project support the concept that
operators of retail and food service establishments must be proactive
and implement food safety management systems that will prevent,
eliminate, or reduce the occurrence of foodborne illness risk factors. By
reducing the occurrence of foodborne illness risk factors, foodborne ill-
ness can also be reduced.
(D) How can the occurrence of foodborne illness risk factors be 
reduced?
To effectively reduce the occurrence of foodborne illness risk fac-
tors, operators of retail and food service establishments must focus
their efforts on achieving active managerial control. The term “active
managerial control” is used to describe industry’s responsibility for de-
veloping and implementing food safety management systems to pre-
vent, eliminate, or reduce the occurrence of foodborne illness risk
factors.
Active managerial control involves the purposeful incorporation
of speciﬁc actions or procedures by industry management into opera-
tions in order to attain control over foodborne illness risk factors. It em-
bodies a preventive rather than reactive approach to food safety
through a continuous system of monitoring and veriﬁcation.
There are many tools that can be used by industry to provide ac-
tive managerial control of foodborne illness risk factors. These tools
must be proactively evaluated using an inspection process designed to
assess the degree of active managerial control that retail and food ser-
vice operators have over the foodborne illness risk factors. In addition,
regulators must assist operators in developing and implementing vol-
untary strategies to strengthen existing industry systems to prevent the
occurrence of foodborne illness risk factors. Elements of an effective
food safety management system may include the following:
•
Certiﬁed food protection managers who have shown a proﬁ-
ciency in required information by passing a test that is part of
an accredited program
162
Data and Documents

•
Standard operating procedures (SOPs) for performing critical
operational steps in a food preparation process, such as cooling
•
Recipe cards that contain the speciﬁc steps for preparing a food
item and the food safety critical limits, such as ﬁnal cooking
temperatures, that need to be monitored and veriﬁed
•
Purchase speciﬁcations
•
Equipment and facility design and maintenance
•
Monitoring procedures
•
Record keeping
•
Employee health policy for restricting or excluding ill 
employees
•
Manager and employee training
•
Ongoing quality control and assurance
•
Speciﬁc goal-oriented plans, like Risk Control Plans (RCPs),
that outline procedures for controlling foodborne illness risk
factors
A food safety management system based on Hazard Analysis and
Critical Control Point (HACCP) principles contains many of these ele-
ments and provides a comprehensive framework by which an operator
can effectively control the occurrence of foodborne illness risk factors.
2. Introduction to HACCP
(A) What is HACCP and how can it be used by operators and regula-
tors of retail food and food service establishments?
Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP) is a system-
atic approach to identifying, evaluating, and controlling food safety
hazards. Food safety hazards are biological, chemical, or physical
agents that are reasonably likely to cause illness or injury in the absence
of their control. Because an HACCP program is designed to ensure that
hazards are prevented, eliminated, or reduced to an acceptable level be-
fore a food reaches the consumer, it embodies the preventive nature of
active managerial control.
Active managerial control through the use of HACCP principles is
achieved by identifying the food safety hazards attributed to products,
determining the necessary steps that will control the identiﬁed hazards,
and implementing ongoing practices or procedures that will ensure 
safe food.
Like many other quality assurance programs, HACCP provides a
commonsense approach to identifying and controlling problems that
are likely to exist in an operation. Consequently, many food safety man-
agement systems at the retail level already incorporate some, if not all,
of the principles of HACCP. Combined with good basic sanitation, a
solid employee training program, and other prerequisite programs, a
food safety management system based on HACCP principles will pre-
vent, eliminate, or reduce the occurrence of foodborne illness risk
Model Food Code of 2005
163

factors that lead to out-of-control hazards. HACCP represents an im-
portant tool in food protection that small independent businesses as
well as national companies can use to achieve active managerial control
of risk factors. The Food Code requires a comprehensive HACCP plan
when conducting certain specialized processes at retail, such as when a
variance is granted or when a reduced oxygen packaging method is
used. However, in general, the implementation of HACCP at the retail
level is voluntary. The FDA endorses the voluntary implementation of
food safety management systems based on HACCP principles as an ef-
fective means for controlling the occurrence of foodborne illness risk
factors that result in out-of-control hazards.
While the operator is responsible for developing and implement-
ing a system of controls to prevent foodborne illness risk factors, the
role of the regulator is to assess whether the system the operator has in
place is achieving control of foodborne illness risk factors. Using
HACCP principles during inspections will enhance the effectiveness of
routine inspections by incorporating a risk-based approach. This ap-
proach helps inspectors focus their inspection on evaluating the effec-
tiveness of food safety management systems implemented by industry
to control foodborne illness risk factors.
The principles of HACCP are also an integral part of the draft
FDA’s Recommended Voluntary National Retail Food Regulatory Pro-
gram Standards. For regulatory program managers, the use of risk-
based inspection methodology based on HACCP principles is a viable
and practical option for evaluating the degree of active managerial con-
trol operators have over the foodborne illness risk factors. The complete
set of program standards is available from the FDA through the follow-
ing Website: http://www.cfsan.fda.gov/~dms/ret-toc.html.
(B) What are the seven HACCP principles?
In November 1992, the National Advisory Committee on Microbi-
ological Criteria for Foods (NACMCF) deﬁned seven widely accepted
HACCP principles that explained the HACCP process in great detail. In
1997, NACMCF reconvened to review the 1992 document and compare
it to current HACCP guidance prepared by the CODEX Committee on
Food Hygiene. Based on this review, NACMCF again endorsed
HACCP and deﬁned HACCP as a systematic approach to the identiﬁca-
tion, evaluation, and control of food safety hazards. Based on a solid
foundation of prerequisite programs to control basic operational and
sanitation conditions, the following seven basic principles are used to
accomplish this objective:
Principle 1: Conduct a hazard analysis
Principle 2: Determine the critical control points (CCPs)
Principle 3: Establish critical limits
Principle 4: Establish monitoring procedures
Principle 5: Establish corrective actions
164
Data and Documents

Principle 6: Establish veriﬁcation procedures
Principle 7: Establish recordkeeping and documentation 
procedures
This Annex provides a brief overview of each of the seven princi-
ples of HACCP. A more comprehensive discussion of these principles is
available from the FDA by accessing the NACMCF guidance document
on the FDA Webpage at: http://www.cfsan.fda.gov/~comm/nacm-
cfp.html. Following the overview, a practical scheme for applying and
implementing the HACCP principles in retail and food service estab-
lishments is presented.
(C) What are prerequisite programs?
In order for an HACCP system to be effective, a strong foundation
of procedures that address the basic operational and sanitation condi-
tions within an operation must ﬁrst be developed and implemented.
These procedures are collectively termed “prerequisite programs.”
When prerequisite programs are in place, more attention can be given
to controlling hazards associated with the food and its preparation. Pre-
requisite programs may include such things as:
•
Vendor certiﬁcation programs
•
Training programs
•
Allergen management
•
Buyer speciﬁcations
•
Recipe/process instructions
•
First-in ﬁrst-out (FIFO) procedures
•
Other standard operating procedures (SOPs)
Basic prerequisite programs should be in place to protect products
from contamination by biological, chemical, and physical food safety
hazards; control bacterial growth that can result from temperature
abuse; and maintain equipment.
Additional information about prerequisite programs and the types
of activities usually included in them can be found in the FDA’s retail
HACCP manuals or by accessing the NACMCF guidance document on
the FDA Website.
3. The HACCP Principles
(A) Principle 1: Conduct a Hazard Analysis.
(1) What is a food safety hazard? A hazard is a biological, chemi-
cal, or physical property that may cause a food to be unsafe for human
consumption.
(2) What are biological hazards? Biological hazards include bacter-
ial, viral, and parasitic microorganisms. See Table 1 for a listing of se-
lected biological hazards. Bacterial pathogens comprise the majority of
conﬁrmed foodborne disease outbreaks and cases. Although cooking
Model Food Code of 2005
165

destroys the vegetative cells of foodborne bacteria to acceptable levels,
spores of spore-forming bacteria such as Bacillus cereus, Clostridium bot-
ulinum, and Clostridium perfringens survive cooking and may germinate
and grow if food is not properly cooled or held after cooking. The tox-
ins produced by the vegetative cells of B. cereus, C. botulinum, and
Staphylococcus aureus may not be destroyed to safe levels by reheating.
Post-cook recontamination with vegetative cells of bacteria such as Sal-
monellae and Campylobacter jejuni is also a major concern for operators of
retail and food service establishments.
Viruses such as norovirus, hepatitis A, and rotavirus are directly
related to contamination from human feces. Recent outbreaks have also
shown that these viruses may be transmitted via droplets in the air. In
limited cases, foodborne viruses may occur in raw commodities conta-
minated by human feces (e.g., shellﬁsh harvested from unapproved,
polluted waters). In most cases, however, contamination of food by
viruses is the result of cross-contamination by ill food employees or un-
clean equipment and utensils. Unlike bacteria, a virus cannot multiply
outside of a living cell. Cooking as a control for viruses may be ineffec-
tive because many foodborne viruses seem to exhibit heat resistance ex-
ceeding cooking temperature requirements. Obtaining food from
approved sources, practicing no bare hand contact with ready-to-eat
food as well as proper handwashing, and implementing an employee
health policy to restrict or exclude ill employees are important control
measures for viruses.
Parasites are most often animal host-speciﬁc, but can include hu-
mans in their life cycles. Parasitic infections are commonly associated
with undercooking meat products or cross-contamination of ready-to-
eat food with raw animal foods, untreated water, or contaminated
equipment or utensils. Like viruses, parasites do not grow in food, so
control is focused on destroying the parasites and/or preventing their
introduction. Adequate cooking destroys parasites. In addition, para-
sites in ﬁsh to be consumed raw or undercooked can be destroyed by
effective freezing techniques. Parasitic contamination by ill employees
can be prevented by proper handwashing, no bare hand contact with
ready-to-eat food, and implementation of an employee health policy to
restrict or exclude ill employees.
(3) What are chemical hazards? Chemical hazards may be natu-
rally occurring or may be added during the processing of food. High
levels of toxic chemicals may cause acute cases of foodborne illness,
while chronic illness may result from low levels.
The Code of Federal Regulations (CFR)
(http://www.access.gpo.gov/nara/cfr/cfr-table-search.html), Title 21
Food and Drugs, provides guidance on naturally occurring poisonous or
deleterious substances, within 21 CFR Part 109, Unavoidable Contami-
nants in Food for Human Consumption and Food Packaging Material,
166
Data and Documents

Model Food Code of 2005
167
TABLE 6.1
Selected Biological Hazards Found at Retail,
along with Their Associated Foods and Control Measures
Biological Hazard
Associated Foods
Control Measures
Bacteria
Bacillus cereus
Meat, poultry, starchy foods 
Cooking, cooling, cold
(rice, potatoes), puddings, soups, 
holding, hot holding
cooked vegetables
Campylobacter jejuni 
Poultry, raw milk
Cooking, handwashing, prevention 
of cross-contamination  
Clostridium botulinum 
Vacuum-packed foods, reduced 
Thermal processing (time plus
oxygen packaged foods, under-
pressure), cooling, cold holding,
processed canned foods, garlic-in-
hot holding, acidification and 
oil mixtures, time/temperature 
drying, other methods
abused baked potatoes/
sautéed onions 
Clostridium perfringens
Cooked meat and poultry, cooked 
Cooling, cold holding, reheating,
meat and poultry products 
hot holding 
including casseroles and gravies 
E. coli O157:H7 (other 
Raw ground beef, raw seed
Cooking, no bare-hand contact 
Shiga toxin-producing 
sprouts, raw milk, unpasteurized
with RTE foods, employee health
E. coli) 
juice, foods contaminated by
policy, handwashing, prevention
infected food workers via
of cross-contamination, 
fecal-oral route  
pasteurization or treatment of 
juice
Listeria monocytogenes
Raw meat and poultry, fresh soft 
Cooking, date marking, cold
cheese, paté, smoked seafood, deli 
holding, handwashing, prevention
meats, deli salads 
of cross-contamination
Salmonella spp.
Meat and poultry, seafood, eggs, 
Cooking, use of pasteurized eggs,
raw seed sprouts, raw vegetables,
employee health policy, no bare- 
raw milk, unpasteurized juice
hand contact with RTE foods, 
handwashing, pasteurization or 
treatment of juice
Shigella spp. 
Raw vegetables and herbs, other 
Cooking, no bare-hand contact 
foods contaminated by infected 
with RTE foods, employee health 
workers via fecal-oral route
policy, handwashing 
continues

and 21 CFR Part 184, Direct Food Substances Afﬁrmed as Generally
Recognized as Safe. The CFR also provide allowable limits for many of
the chemicals added during processing; these are found in 21 CFR Part
172, Food Additives Permitted for Direct Addition to Food for Human
Consumption.
168
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.1, continued
Selected Biological Hazards Found at Retail,
along with Their Associated Foods and Control Measures
Biological Hazard
Associated Foods
Control Measures
Bacteria
Staphylococcus aureus 
RTE PHF foods touched by bare 
Cooling, cold holding, hot holding, 
hands after cooking and further 
no bare-hand contact with RTE 
time/temperature abused
food, handwashing
Vibrio spp.
Seafood, shellfish
Cooking, approved source, 
prevention of cross-contamination, 
cold holding 
Parasites
Anisakis simplex
Various fish (cod, haddock, fluke, 
Cooking, approved source, 
Pacific salmon, herring, flounder, 
prevention of cross-contamination,
monkfish)
cold holding 
Taenia spp.
Beef and pork
Cooking
Trichinella spiralis
Pork, bear, and seal meat
Cooking
Viruses
Hepatitis A and E
Any food contaminated by infected 
Approved source, no bare-hand
worker via fecal-oral route
contact with RTE food, minimizing 
bare-hand contact with foods not 
RTE, employee health policy, 
handwashing
Other viruses (Rotavirus, 
Any food contaminated by infected
No bare-hand contact with RTE
Norovirus, Reovirus)
worker via fecal-oral route
food, minimizing bare-hand 
contact with foods not RTE, 
employee health policy, 
handwashing 
RTE:  ready-to-eat 
PHF:  potentially hazardous food

The FDA’s Compliance Policy Guidelines also provide information
on naturally occurring chemicals (http://www.fda.gov/ora/compliance
_ref/cpg/default.htm). Examples include sections:
•
540.600 Fish, Shellﬁsh, Crustaceans, and Other Aquatic
Animals – Fresh, Frozen or Processed – Methyl Mercury
•
555.400 Foods – Adulteration with Aﬂatoxin
•
570.200 Aﬂatoxin in Brazil Nuts, .375 Peanuts and Peanut
Products, and .500 Pistachio Nuts
Table 2 of this Annex provides additional examples of chemical
hazards, both naturally occurring and added.
(4) Which food allergens are food safety hazards? Recent studies
indicate that more than 11 million Americans suffer from one or more
food allergies. A food allergy is caused by an allergen, a naturally oc-
curring protein in a food or a food ingredient. For unknown reasons,
certain individuals produce immunoglobulin E (IgE) antibodies speciﬁ-
cally directed to food allergens. When these sensitive individuals ingest
sufﬁcient concentrations of foods containing these allergens, the aller-
genic proteins interact with IgE antibodies and elicit an abnormal im-
mune response. A food allergic response is commonly characterized by
hives or other itchy rashes, nausea, abdominal pain, vomiting and/or
diarrhea, wheezing, shortness of breath, and swelling of various parts
of the body. In severe cases, anaphylactic shock and death may result.
Many foods, with or without identiﬁable allergens, have been re-
ported to cause food allergies. However, the FDA believes there is sci-
entiﬁc consensus that the following foods can cause a serious allergic
reaction in sensitive individuals; these foods account for 90 percent or
more of all food allergies:
•
Milk
•
Eggs
•
Fish (such as bass, ﬂounder, or cod)
•
Crustacean shellﬁsh (such as crab, lobster, or shrimp)
•
Tree nuts (such as almonds, pecans, or walnuts)
•
Wheat
•
Peanuts
•
Soybeans
Consumers with food allergies rely heavily on information con-
tained on food labels to avoid food allergens. Every year the FDA re-
ceives reports from consumers who have experienced an adverse
reaction following exposure to a food allergen. Frequently these reac-
tions occur either because product labeling does not inform the con-
sumer of the presence of the allergenic ingredient in the food or because
of the cross-contact during processing and preparation of a food with
an allergenic substance not intended as an ingredient of the food.
Model Food Code of 2005
169

170
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.2
Common Chemical Hazards Found at Retail,
along with Their Associated Foods and Control Measures 
Chemical Hazard
Associated Foods
Control Measures
Scombrotoxin
Primarily associated with tuna 
Check temperatures at receiving; 
fish, mahi-mahi, blue fish, 
store at proper cold holding
anchovies bonito, mackerel; also 
temperatures; buyer specifications: 
found in cheese
obtain verification from supplier 
that product has not been 
temperature abused prior to arrival 
in facility.
Ciguatoxin 
Reef fin fish from extreme 
Purchase fish from approved
SE United States, Hawaii, and  
sources. Fish should not be
tropical areas; barracuda, jacks, 
harvested from an area that is
king mackerel, large groupers,  
subject to an adverse advisory. 
and snappers 
Tetrodoxin
Puffer fish (fugu; blowfish)
Do not consume these fish.
Mycotoxins 
Corn and corn products, peanuts
Check condition at receiving; do
Aflatoxin 
and peanut products, cottonseed,
not use moldy or decomposed food.
milk, and tree nuts such as Brazil 
nuts, pecans, pistachio nuts, and 
walnuts. Other grains and nuts 
are susceptible but less prone to 
contamination. Apple juice 
products. 
Patulin 
Buyer Specification: Obtain 
verification from supplier or 
avoid the use of rotten apples 
in juice manufacturing. 
Toxic Mushroom Species
Toxic mushroom species, including Do not eat unknown varieties
numerous varieties of wild 
or mushrooms from unapproved
mushrooms
source.
Shellfish toxins 
Molluscan shellfish from NE 
Ensure molluscan shellfish are:
Paralytic shellfish 
and NW North American coastal
From an approved source; and 
poisoning (PSP) 
regions; mackerel, viscera of
Properly tagged and labeled.
lobsters and Dungeness, tanner, 
and red rock crabs 
Diarrhetic shellfish 
Molluscan shellfish from Japan, 
poisoning (DSP) 
western Europe, Chile, New 
Zealand, eastern Canada

Model Food Code of 2005
171
Chemical Hazard
Associated Foods
Control Measures
Neurotoxin shellfish 
Molluscan shellfish from
poisoning (NSP) 
Gulf of Mexico 
Amnesic shellfish 
Molluscan shellfish from NE 
poisoning (ASP) 
and NW coasts of North America; 
viscera of Dungeness, tanner, 
red rock crabs and anchovies 
Pyrrolizidine alkaloids
Plant foods containing these 
Do not consume food or medicinals 
alkaloids. Most commonly found 
contaminated with these alkaloids.
in members of the Borginaceae, 
Compositae, and Leguminosae 
families.
Phytohaemagglutinin 
Raw red-kidney beans 
Soak in water for at least 5 hours.
(undercooked beans may be  
Pour away the water. 
more toxic than raw beans) 
Boil briskly in fresh water, with
occasional stirring, for at least 
10 minutes.  
Added Chemicals
Environmental 
Any food may become
Follow label instructions for use
contaminants:  
contaminated.
of environmental chemicals. Soil
pesticides, fungicides, 
or water analysis may be used to 
fertilizers, insecticides, 
verify safety.
antibiotics, growth hormones 
PCBs
Fish
Comply with fish advisories.
Prohibited substances 
Numerous substances are
Do not use chemical substances
(21 CFR 189)
prohibited from use in human 
that are not approved for use
food; no substance may be used 
in human food.
in human food unless it meets 
all applicable requirements of 
the FD&C Act. 
Toxic elements/compounds
Mercury
Fish exposed to organic 
Pregnant women/women of 
mercury: shark, tilefish, king 
childbearing age/nursing mothers
mackerel and swordfish
and young children should not eat
Grains grown with mercury-
shark, swordfish, king mackerel or 
containing fungicides
tilefish because they contain high 
levels of mercury.   
Do not use mercury-containing
fungicides on grains or animals.
continues

172
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.2, continued
Common Chemical Hazards Found at Retail,
along with Their Associated Foods and Control Measures 
Chemical Hazard
Associated Foods
Control Measures
Toxic elements/compounds
Copper
High-acid foods and beverages
Do not store high-acid foods in
copper utensils; use backflow 
prevention device on beverage 
vending machines.
Lead
High-acid food and beverages
Do not use vessels containing lead.
Preservatives and 
Food Additives
Sulfiting agents (sulfur 
Fresh fruits and vegetables,
Sulfiting agents added to a
dioxide, sodium and 
shrimp, lobster, wine 
product in a processing plant 
potassium bisulfite, sodium 
must be declared on labeling.
and potassium metabisulfite)
Do not use on raw produce in 
food establishments.
Naturally Occurring
Nitrites/nitrates 
Cured meats, fish, any food
Do not use more than the
Niacin 
exposed to accidental 
prescribed amount of curing
contamination, spinach 
compound according to labeling
Meat and other foods to which 
instructions. Sodium nicotinate
sodium nicotinate is added 
(niacin) is not currently approved 
for use in meat or poultry with or 
without nitrates or nitrites.
Flavor enhancer mono-
Asian or Latin American food
Avoid using excessive amounts
sodium glutamate (MSG)
Chemicals used in retail 
Any food could become
Address through SOPs for proper
establishments (e.g., 
contaminated
labeling, storage, handling, and
lubricants, cleaners, 
use of chemicals; retain Material
sanitizers, cleaning 
Safety Data Sheets for all chemicals.
compounds, and paints) 
Allergens
Foods containing 
Use a rigorous sanitation regime
or contacted by:
to prevent cross-contact between
Milk, Eggs, Fish,
allergenic and non-allergenic
Crustacean shellfish,
ingredients. 
Tree nuts, Wheat,
Peanuts, Soybeans

In August 2004, the Food Allergen Labeling and Consumer Protec-
tion Act (Public Law 108–282, Title II) was enacted, which deﬁnes the
term “major food allergen.” The deﬁnition of major food allergen,
adopted for use in the Food Code, is consistent with the deﬁnition in the
Food Allergen Labeling and Consumer Protection Act. The following
requirements are included in the law:
•
For foods labeled on or after January 1, 2006, food manufactur-
ers must identify in plain language on the label of the food any
major food allergen used as an ingredient in the food, includ-
ing a coloring, ﬂavoring, or incidental additive.
•
FDA is to conduct inspections to ensure that food facilities
comply with practices to reduce or eliminate cross-contact of a
food with any major food allergens that are not intentional in-
gredients of the food.
•
Within eighteen months of the date of enactment of the law
(i.e., by February 2, 2006), FDA must submit a report to Con-
gress that analyzes the results of its food inspection ﬁndings
and addresses a number of speciﬁc issues related to the pro-
duction, labeling, and recall of foods that contain an unde-
clared major food allergen.
•
Within two years of the date of enactment of the new law (i.e.,
by August 2, 2006), FDA must issue a proposed rule, and
within four years of the date of enactment of the law (i.e., by
August 2, 2008), FDA must issue a ﬁnal rule to deﬁne and per-
mit the use of the term “gluten-free” on food labeling.
•
FDA is to work in cooperation with the Conference for Food
Protection (CFP) to pursue revision of the Food Code to pro-
vide guidelines for preparing allergen-free foods in food
establishments.
(5) What are physical hazards? Illness and injury can result from
foreign objects in food. These physical hazards can result from contami-
nation or poor procedures at many points in the food chain from har-
vest to consumer, including those within the food establishment.
(6) What is the purpose of the hazard analysis principle? The pur-
pose of hazard analysis is to develop a list of food safety hazards that
are reasonably likely to cause illness or injury if not effectively
controlled.
(7) How is the hazard analysis conducted? The process of conduct-
ing a hazard analysis involves two stages:
1.
Hazard identiﬁcation
2.
Hazard evaluation
Hazard identiﬁcation can be thought of as a brainstorming ses-
sion. This stage focuses on identifying the food safety hazards that
Model Food Code of 2005
173

might be present in the food given the food preparation process used,
the handling of the food, the facility, and general characteristics of the
food itself. During this stage, a review is made of the ingredients used
in the product, the activities conducted at each step in the process, the
equipment used, and the ﬁnal product and its method of storage and
distribution, as well as the intended use and consumers of the product.
Based on this review, a list of potential biological, chemical, or physical
hazards is made at each stage in the food preparation process.
In stage two, the hazard evaluation, each potential hazard is
evaluated based on the severity of the potential hazard and its likely
occurrence. The purpose of this stage is to determine which of the po-
tential hazards listed in stage one of the hazard analysis warrant con-
trol in the HACCP plan. Severity is the seriousness of the
consequences of exposure to the hazard. Considerations made when
determining the severity of a hazard include understanding the im-
pact of the medical condition caused by the illness, as well as the
magnitude and duration of the illness or injury. Consideration of the
likely occurrence is usually based upon a combination of experience,
epidemiological data, and information in the technical literature. Haz-
ards that are not reasonably likely to occur are not considered in a
HACCP plan. During the evaluation of each potential hazard, the
food, its method of preparation, transportation, storage, and persons
likely to consume the product should be considered to determine how
each of these factors may influence the likely occurrence and severity
of the hazard being controlled.
Upon completion of the hazard analysis, a list of signiﬁcant haz-
ards that must be considered in the HACCP plan is made, along with
any measure(s) that can be used to control the hazards. These control
measures are actions or activities that can be used to prevent, eliminate,
or reduce a hazard. Some control measures are not essential to food
safety, while others are. Control measures essential to food safety like
proper cooking, cooling, and refrigeration of ready-to-eat, potentially
hazardous foods (time/temperature control) are usually applied at
critical control points (CCPs) in the HACCP plan. The term control
measures is used because not all hazards can be prevented, but virtu-
ally all can be controlled. More than one control measure may be re-
quired for a speciﬁc hazard. Likewise, more than one hazard may be
addressed by a speciﬁc control measure (e.g., proper cooking).
(B) Principle 2: Determine the critical control points (CCPs).
(1) What is a critical control point? A critical control point (CCP) is
a point or procedure in a speciﬁc food system where loss of control may
result in an unacceptable health risk. Control applied at this point is es-
sential to prevent or eliminate a food safety hazard or reduce it to an ac-
ceptable level. Each CCP will have one or more control measures to
assure that the identiﬁed hazards are prevented, eliminated, or reduced
174
Data and Documents

to acceptable levels. Common examples of CCPs include cooking, cool-
ing, hot holding, and cold holding of ready-to-eat potentially haz-
ardous foods (time/temperature control). Due to vegetative and spore-
and toxin-forming bacteria that are associated with raw animal foods, it
is essential that the proper execution of control measures occurs at each
of these operational steps to prevent or eliminate food safety hazards or
reduce them to acceptable levels.
(2) Are quality issues considered when determining CCPs? CCPs
are only used to address issues with product safety. Actions taken on
the part of the establishment, such as ﬁrst-in ﬁrst-out (FIFO) or refriger-
ating nonpotentially hazardous foods (time/temperature control), are
to ensure food quality rather than food safety and therefore should not
be considered as CCPs unless they serve a dual-purpose of ensuring
food safety.
(3) Are the CCPs the same for everyone? Different facilities
preparing similar food items may identify different hazards and de-
termine different CCPs. These differences can be due to each facility’s
layout, equipment, selection of ingredients, and processes employed.
In mandatory HACCP systems, there may be rigid regulatory require-
ments regarding what must be designated a CCP. In voluntary
HACCP systems, hazard control may be accomplished at CCPs or
through prerequisite programs. For instance, one facility may decide
that it can best manage the hazards associated with cooling through a
standardized procedure in its prerequisite programs rather than at a
CCP in its HACCP plan. One tool that can be used to assist each facil-
ity in the identification of CCPs unique to its operation is a CCP deci-
sion tree.
(C) Principle 3: Establish critical limits.
(1) What is a critical limit and what is its purpose? A critical limit
is a prescribed parameter (e.g., minimum and/or maximum value) that
must be met to ensure that food safety hazards are controlled at each
CCP. A critical limit is used to distinguish between safe and unsafe op-
erating conditions at a CCP. Each control measure at a CCP has one or
more associated critical limits. Critical limits may be based upon factors
like temperature, time, moisture level, water activity, or pH. They must
be scientiﬁcally based and measurable.
(2) What are examples of critical limits? One example of critical
limits is the time/temperature parameters for cooking chicken (165°F
for 15 seconds). In this case, the critical limit designates the minimum
criteria required to eliminate food safety hazards or reduce them to an
acceptable level. The critical limit for the acidiﬁcation of sushi rice, a
pH of <4.6, sets the maximum limit for pH necessary to control the
growth of spore- and toxin-forming bacteria. Critical limits may be de-
rived from regulatory standards such as the FDA Food Code, other ap-
plicable guidelines, performance standards, or experimental results.
Model Food Code of 2005
175

(D) Principle 4: Establish monitoring procedures.
(1) What is the purpose of monitoring? Monitoring is the act of ob-
serving and making measurements to help determine if critical limits
are being met and maintained. It is used to determine whether the criti-
cal limits that have been established for each CCP are being met.
(2) What are examples of monitoring activities? Examples of mon-
itoring activities include visual observations and measurements of
time, temperature, pH, and water activity. If cooking chicken is deter-
mined to be a CCP in an operation, then monitoring the internal tem-
perature of a select number of chicken pieces immediately following
the cook step would be an example of a monitoring activity. Alterna-
tively, the temperature of an oven or fryer and the time required to
reach an internal temperature of 165 degrees Fahrenheit could also be
monitored.
(3) How is monitoring conducted? Typically, monitoring activities
fall under two broad categories:
•
Measurements
•
Observations 
Measurements usually involve time and temperature but also in-
clude other parameters, such as pH. If an operation identiﬁes the acidi-
ﬁcation of sushi rice as a CCP and the critical limit as the ﬁnal pH of the
product being < 4.6, then the pH of the product would be measured to
ensure that the critical limit is met.
Observations involve visual inspections to monitor the presence or
absence of a food safety activity. If date marking is identiﬁed as a CCP
in a deli operation for controlling Listeria monocytogenes in ready-to-eat
deli meats, then the monitoring activity could involve making visual in-
spections of the date marking system to monitor the sell, consume, or
discard dates.
(4) How often is monitoring conducted? Monitoring can be per-
formed on a continuous or intermittent basis. Continuous monitoring is
always preferred, when feasible, as it provides the most complete infor-
mation regarding the history of a product at a CCP. For example, the
temperature and time for an institutional cook-chill operation can be
recorded continuously on temperature recording charts.
If intermittent monitoring is used, the frequency of monitoring
should be conducted often enough to make sure that the critical limits
are being met.
(5) Who conducts monitoring? Individuals directly associated with
the operation (e.g., the person in charge of the establishment, chefs, and
departmental supervisors) are often selected to monitor CCPs. They are
usually in the best position to detect deviations and take corrective ac-
tions when necessary. These employees should be properly trained in
the speciﬁc monitoring techniques and procedures used.
176
Data and Documents

(E) Principle 5: Establish corrective actions.
(1) What are corrective actions? Corrective actions are activities
that are taken by a person whenever a critical limit is not met. Discard-
ing food that may pose an unacceptable food safety risk to consumers
is a corrective action. However, other corrective actions, such as fur-
ther cooking or reheating a product, can be used provided food safety
is not compromised. For example, a restaurant may be able to continue
cooking hamburgers that have not reached an internal temperature of
155 degrees Fahrenheit for 15 seconds until the proper temperature is
met. Clear instructions should be developed detailing who is responsi-
ble for performing the corrective actions, the procedures to be fol-
lowed, and when.
(F) Principle 6: Establish veriﬁcation procedures.
(1) What is veriﬁcation? Veriﬁcation includes those activities,
other than monitoring, that determine the validity of the HACCP plan
and show that the system is operating according to the plan. Validation
is a component of veriﬁcation which focuses on collecting and evaluat-
ing scientiﬁc and technical information to determine if the HACCP
system, when properly implemented, will effectively control the haz-
ards. Clear instructions should be developed detailing who is responsi-
ble for conducting veriﬁcation, the frequency of veriﬁcation, and the
procedures used.
(2) What is the frequency of veriﬁcation activities? What are some
examples of veriﬁcation activities? Veriﬁcation activities are conducted
frequently, such as daily, weekly, monthly, and include the following:
•
Observing the person doing the monitoring and determining
whether monitoring is being done as planned
•
Reviewing the monitoring records to determine if they are
completed accurately and consistently
•
Determining whether the records show that the frequency of
monitoring stated in the plan is being followed
•
Ensuring that corrective action was taken when the person
monitoring found and recorded that the critical limit was 
not met
•
Validating that the critical limits are achieving the desired
results of controlling the identiﬁed hazard
•
Conﬁrming that all equipment, including equipment used for
monitoring, is operated, maintained, and calibrated properly
(G) Principle 7: Establish recordkeeping and documentation
procedures. 
(1) Why are records important? Documenting the activities in a
food safety management system can be vital to its success. Records pro-
vide documentation that appropriate corrective actions were taken
when critical limits were not met. In the event that an establishment is
Model Food Code of 2005
177

implicated in a foodborne illness, documentation of activities related to
monitoring and corrective actions can provide proof that reasonable
care was exercised in the operation of the establishment. Documenting
activities provides a mechanism for verifying that the activities in the
HACCP plan were properly completed. In many cases, records can
serve a dual purpose of ensuring quality and food safety.
(2) What types of records are maintained as part of a food safety
management system? There are at least ﬁve types of records that could
be maintained to support a food safety management system:
•
Records documenting the activities related to the prerequisite
programs
•
Monitoring records
•
Corrective action records
•
Veriﬁcation and validation records
•
Calibration records
Source: U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 2005. Model Food Code.
http://www.cfsan.fda.gov/~dms/foodcode.html#get05 (accessed Feb-
ruary 2007). 
Bioterrorism Act of 2002
Following the terrorist attack on the World Trade Center in 2001, Con-
gress looked at ways that the United States might be vulnerable to
terrorism and enacted legislation to safeguard the nation. The Bioter-
rorism Act of 2002 (PL 107–188) established procedures for prepared-
ness and response planning, developing national stockpiles and
countermeasures, improving state, local, and hospital preparedness, en-
hancing controls of dangerous biological agents and toxins, and pro-
tecting food, drug, and water supplies.
The food defense portions of the act require producers to register
with the government and maintain records so that if food does get cont-
aminated, it can be traced back to the source. It also tightened import
laws and provides for more inspection.
The entire act can be obtained from federal document depositories
found in selected university and many large public libraries, or online
at http://www.fda.gov/oc/bioterrorism/PL107-188.html. Alterna-
tively, entering the title or law number (PL107–188) into a search en-
gine should produce links to the law. Below is the table of contents of
Title III pertaining to the food supply, and Sections 301, 302, 305,
306, and 313.
178
Data and Documents

Title III—Protecting Safety and Security of Food and 
Drug Supply
Subtitle A—Protection of Food Supply
Sec. 301. Food safety and security strategy.
Sec. 302. Protection against adulteration of food.
Sec. 303. Administrative detention.
Sec. 304. Debarment for repeated or serious food import violations.
Sec. 305. Registration of food facilities.
Sec. 306. Maintenance and inspection of records for foods.
Sec. 307. Prior notice of imported food shipments.
Sec. 308. Authority to mark articles refused admission into United
States.
Sec. 309. Prohibition against port shopping.
Sec. 310. Notices to States regarding imported food.
Sec. 311. Grants to States for inspections.
Sec. 312. Surveillance and information grants and authorities.
Sec. 313. Surveillance of zoonotic diseases.
Sec. 314. Authority to commission other Federal ofﬁcials to conduct
inspections.
Sec. 315. Rule of construction.
Subtitle A—Protection of Food Supply
Sec. 301. Food safety and security strategy.
(a) In General.—The President’s Council on Food Safety (as established
by Executive Order No. 13100) shall, in consultation with the Secretary
of Transportation, the Secretary of the Treasury, other relevant Federal
agencies, the food industry, consumer and producer groups, scientiﬁc
organizations, and the States, develop a crisis communications and ed-
ucation strategy with respect to bioterrorist threats to the food supply.
Such strategy shall address threat assessments; technologies and proce-
dures for securing food processing and manufacturing facilities and
modes of transportation; response and notiﬁcation procedures; and risk
communications to the public.
(b) Authorization of Appropriations.—For the purpose of imple-
menting the strategy developed under subsection (a), there are autho-
rized to be appropriated $750,000 for ﬁscal year 2002, and such sums as
may be necessary for each subsequent ﬁscal year.
Sec. 302. Protection against adulteration of food.
(a) Increasing Inspections for Detection of Adulteration of Food.—
Section 801 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 381)
is amended by adding at the end the following subsection:
Bioterrorism Act of 2002 
179

(h)(1) The Secretary shall give high priority to increasing the num-
ber of inspections under this section for the purpose of enabling the
Secretary to inspect food offered for import at ports of entry into the
United States, with the greatest priority given to inspections to detect
the intentional adulteration of food.
(b) Improvements to Information Management Systems.—Section
801(h) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, as added by sub-
section (a) of this section, is amended by adding at the end the follow-
ing paragraph: 
(2) The Secretary shall give high priority to making necessary im-
provements to the information management systems of the Food and
Drug Administration that contain information related to foods im-
ported or offered for import into the United States for purposes of im-
proving the ability of the Secretary to allocate resources, detect the
intentional adulteration of food, and facilitate the importation of food
that is in compliance with this Act.
(c) Linkages with Appropriate Public Entities.—Section 801(h) 
of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, as amended by subsec-
tion (b) of this section, is amended by adding at the end the following
paragraph:
(3) The Secretary shall improve linkages with other regulatory
agencies of the Federal Government that share responsibility for food
safety, and shall with respect to such safety improve linkages with the
States and Indian tribes (as deﬁned in section 4(e) of the Indian Self-
Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 450b(e))).
(d) Testing for Rapid Detection of Adulteration of Food.—Section
801 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, as amended by 
subsection (a) of this section, is amended by adding at the end the
following:
(i)(1) For use in inspections of food under this section, the Secre-
tary shall provide for research on the development of tests and sam-
pling methodologies—
(A) whose purpose is to test food in order to rapidly detect the
adulteration of the food, with the greatest priority given to detect the
intentional adulteration of food; and
(B) whose results offer signiﬁcant improvements over the available
technology in terms of accuracy, timing, or costs.
(2) In providing for research under paragraph (1), the Secretary
shall give priority to conducting research on the development of tests
that are suitable for inspections of food at ports of entry into the United
States.
(3) In providing for research under paragraph (1), the Secretary
shall as appropriate coordinate with the Director of the Centers for Dis-
ease Control and Prevention, the Director of the National Institutes of
Health, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, and
the Secretary of Agriculture.
180
Data and Documents

(4) The Secretary shall annually submit to the Committee on En-
ergy and Commerce of the House of Representatives, and the Commit-
tee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate, a report
describing the progress made in research under paragraph (1), includ-
ing progress regarding paragraph (2).
(e) Assessment of Threat of Intentional Adulteration of Food.—
The Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting through the Com-
missioner of Food and Drugs, shall ensure that, not later than six
months after the date of the enactment of this Act 
(1) the assessment that (as of such date of enactment) is being con-
ducted on the threat of the intentional adulteration of food is com-
pleted; and
(2) A report describing the ﬁndings of the assessment is submitted
to the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of Represen-
tatives and to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pen-
sions of the Senate.
(f) Authorization of Appropriations.—For the purpose of carrying
out this section and the amendments made by this section, there are au-
thorized to be appropriated $100,000,000 for ﬁscal year 2002, and such
sums as may be necessary for each of the ﬁscal years 2003 through 2006,
in addition to other authorizations of appropriations that are available
for such purpose.
Sec. 305. Registration of food facilities.
(a) In General.—Chapter IV of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic
Act (21 U.S.C. 341 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the 
following:
Sec. 415. Registration of food facilities.
(a) Registration.—
(1) In general.—The Secretary shall by regulation require that any
facility engaged in manufacturing, processing, packing, or holding food
for consumption in the United States be registered with the Secretary.
To be registered—
(A) for a domestic facility, the owner, operator, or agent in charge
of the facility shall submit a registration to the Secretary; and
(B) for a foreign facility, the owner, operator, or agent in charge of
the facility shall submit a registration to the Secretary and shall include
with the registration the name of the United States agent for the facility.
(2) Registration.—An entity (referred to in this section as the “reg-
istrant”) shall submit a registration under paragraph (1) to the Secre-
tary containing information necessary to notify the Secretary of the
name and address of each facility at which, and all trade names under
which, the registrant conducts business and, when determined neces-
sary by the Secretary through guidance, the general food category (as
identiﬁed under section 170.3 of title 21, Code of Federal Regulations)
of any food manufactured, processed, packed, or held at such facility.
Bioterrorism Act of 2002
181

The registrant shall notify the Secretary in a timely manner of changes
to such information.
(3) Procedure.—Upon receipt of a completed registration de-
scribed in paragraph (1), the Secretary shall notify the registrant of the
receipt of such registration and assign a registration number to each
registered facility.
(4) List.—The Secretary shall compile and maintain an up-to-date
list of facilities that are registered under this section. Such list and any
registration documents submitted pursuant to this subsection shall not
be subject to disclosure under section 552 of title 5, United States Code.
Information derived from such list or registration documents shall not
be subject to disclosure under section 552 of title 5, United States Code,
to the extent that it discloses the identity or location of a speciﬁc regis-
tered person.
(b) Facility.—For purposes of this section:
(1) The term “facility” includes any factory, warehouse, or estab-
lishment (including a factory, warehouse, or establishment of an im-
porter) that manufactures, processes, packs, or holds food. Such term
does not include farms; restaurants; other retail food establishments;
nonproﬁt food establishments in which food is prepared for or served
directly to the consumer; or ﬁshing vessels (except such vessels en-
gaged in processing as deﬁned in section 123.3(k) of title 21, Code of
Federal Regulations).
(2) The term “domestic facility” means a facility located in any of
the States or Territories.
(3)(A) The term “foreign facility” means a facility that manufac-
tures, processes, packs, or holds food, but only if food from such facility
is exported to the United States without further processing or packag-
ing outside the United States.
(B) A food may not be considered to have undergone further pro-
cessing or packaging for purposes of subparagraph (A) solely on the
basis that labeling was added or that any similar activity of a de min-
imis nature was carried out with respect to the food.
(c) Rule of Construction.—Nothing in this section shall be con-
strued to authorize the Secretary to require an application, review, or li-
censing process.
(b) Prohibited Acts.—Section 301 of the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 331), as amended by section 304(d) of this Act,
is amended by adding at the end the following:
(bb) The failure to register in accordance with Section 415.
(c) Importation; Failure to Register.—Section 801 of the Federal
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, as amended by section 304(e) of this
Act, is amended by adding at the end the following subsection:
(l)(1) If an article of food is being imported or offered for import
into the United States, and such article is from a foreign facility for
182
Data and Documents

which a registration has not been submitted to the Secretary under sec-
tion 415, such article shall be held at the port of entry for the article, and
may not be delivered to the importer, owner, or consignee of the article,
until the foreign facility is so registered. Subsection (b) does not autho-
rize the delivery of the article pursuant to the execution of a bond while
the article is so held. The article shall be removed to a secure facility, as
appropriate. During the period of time that such article is so held, the
article shall not be transferred by any person from the port of entry into
the United States for the article, or from the secure facility to which the
article has been removed, as the case may be.
(d) Electronic Filing.—For the purpose of reducing paperwork and
reporting burdens, the Secretary of Health and Human Services may
provide for, and encourage the use of, electronic methods of submitting
to the Secretary registrations required pursuant to this section. In pro-
viding for the electronic submission of such registrations, the Secretary
shall ensure adequate authentication protocols are used to enable iden-
tiﬁcation of the registrant and validation of the data as appropriate.
(e) Rulemaking; Effective Date.—Not later than 18 months after
the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Hu-
man Services shall promulgate proposed and ﬁnal regulations for the
requirement of registration under section 415 of the Federal Food,
Drug, and Cosmetic Act (as added by subsection (a) of this section).
Such requirement of registration takes effect—
(1) upon the effective date of such ﬁnal regulations; or
(2) upon the expiration of such 18-month period if the ﬁnal regula-
tions have not been made effective as of the expiration of such period,
subject to compliance with the ﬁnal regulations when the ﬁnal regula-
tions are made effective.
Sec. 306. Maintenance and inspection of records for foods.
(a) In General.—Chapter IV of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic
Act, as amended by section 305 of this Act, is amended by inserting be-
fore section 415 the following section:
Sec. 414. Maintenance and inspection of records.
(a) Records Inspection.—If the Secretary has a reasonable belief
that an article of food is adulterated and presents a threat of serious ad-
verse health consequences or death to humans or animals, each person
(excluding farms and restaurants) who manufactures, processes, packs,
distributes, receives, holds, or imports such article shall, at the request
of an ofﬁcer or employee duly designated by the Secretary, permit such
ofﬁcer or employee, upon presentation of appropriate credentials and a
written notice to such person, at reasonable times and within reason-
able limits and in a reasonable manner, to have access to and copy all
records relating to such article that are needed to assist the Secretary in
determining whether the food is adulterated and presents a threat of
Bioterrorism Act of 2002
183

serious adverse health consequences or death to humans or animals.
The requirement under the preceding sentence applies to all records re-
lating to the manufacture, processing, packing, distribution, receipt,
holding, or importation of such article maintained by or on behalf of
such person in any format (including paper and electronic formats) and
at any location.
(b) Regulations Concerning Recordkeeping.—The Secretary, in
consultation and coordination, as appropriate, with other Federal de-
partments and agencies with responsibilities for regulating food safety,
may by regulation establish requirements regarding the establishment
and maintenance, for not longer than two years, of records by persons
(excluding farms and restaurants) who manufacture, process, pack,
transport, distribute, receive, hold, or import food, which records are
needed by the Secretary for inspection to allow the Secretary to identify
the immediate previous sources and the immediate subsequent recipi-
ents of food, including its packaging, in order to address credible
threats of serious adverse health consequences or death to humans or
animals. The Secretary shall take into account the size of a business in
promulgating regulations under this section.
(c) Protection of Sensitive Information.—The Secretary shall take
appropriate measures to ensure that there are in effect effective proce-
dures to prevent the unauthorized disclosure of any trade secret or con-
ﬁdential information that is obtained by the Secretary pursuant to this
section.
(d) Limitations.—This section shall not be construed—
(1) to limit the authority of the Secretary to inspect records or to re-
quire establishment and maintenance of records under any other provi-
sion of this Act;
(2) to authorize the Secretary to impose any requirements with re-
spect to a food to the extent that it is within the exclusive jurisdiction of
the Secretary of Agriculture pursuant to the Federal Meat Inspection
Act (21 U.S.C. 601 et seq.), the Poultry Products Inspection Act (21
U.S.C. 451 et seq.), or the Egg Products Inspection Act (21 U.S.C. 1031 
et seq.);
(3) to have any legal effect on section 552 of title 5, U.S. Code, or
section 1905 of title 18, U.S. Code; or
(4) to extend to recipes for food, ﬁnancial data, pricing data, per-
sonnel data, research data, or sales data (other than shipment data re-
garding sales).
(b) Factory Inspection.—Section 704(a) of the Federal Food, Drug,
and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 374(a)) is amended—
(1) in paragraph (1), by inserting after the ﬁrst sentence the follow-
ing new sentence: In the case of any person (excluding farms and
restaurants) who manufactures, processes, packs, transports, distrib-
utes, holds, or imports foods, the inspection shall extend to all records
and other information described in section 414 when the Secretary has a
184
Data and Documents

reasonable belief that an article of food is adulterated and presents a
threat of serious adverse health consequences or death to humans or
animals, subject to the limitations established in section 414(d);
(2) in paragraph (2), in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), by
striking ‘‘second sentence’’ and inserting ‘‘third sentence”.
(c) Prohibited Act.—Section 301 of the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 331) is amended—
(1) in paragraph (e)—
(A) by striking ‘‘by section 412, 504, or 703’’ and inserting ‘‘by sec-
tion 412, 414, 504, 703, or 704(a)’’; and
(B) by striking ‘‘under section 412’’ and inserting ‘‘under section
412, 414(b)’’; and
(2) in paragraph (j), by inserting: ‘‘414,’’ after ‘‘412,’’.
(d) Expedited Rulemaking.—Not later than 18 months after the
date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall promulgate pro-
posed and ﬁnal regulations establishing recordkeeping requirements
under subsection 414(b) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
(as added by subsection (a)).
Sec. 313. Surveillance of zoonotic diseases.
The Secretary of Health and Human Services, through the Commis-
sioner of Food and Drugs and the Director of the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, and the Secretary of Agriculture shall coordi-
nate the surveillance of zoonotic diseases.
Source: U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 2002. Bioterrorism Act
of 2002. http://www.fda.gov/oc/bioterrorism/PL107-188.html (ac-
cessed February 2007). 
Efﬂuent Guidelines and Standards for
Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations
In February 2003, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
published ﬁnal rules regulating concentrated animal feeding operations
(CAFOs). Three times as much manure as human waste is generated
each year from livestock, and these new regulations affect the manage-
ment of 60 percent of all farm manure. This excerpt contains the sum-
mary of the rule, a list of acronyms and their deﬁnitions, and some of
the questions and answers that are recorded in the Federal Register re-
garding the rule. Please note that since this is a series of excerpts, some
of the numbering and lettering doesn’t make sense. For example, there
are Bs with no As. The original document numbering and lettering was
left in should you want to place it in the complete document. The entire
Efﬂuent Guidelines and Standards for CAFOs
185

document can be found in federal document depositories located in se-
lected university and many large public libraries or at http://
www.epa.gov/fedrgstr/EPA-WATER/2003/February/Day-12/
w3074.pdf. It can also be found by typing CAFO and EPA into a search
engine.
Environmental Protection Agency
40 CFR Parts 9, 122, 123, and 412
[FRL-7424–7]
RIN 2040–AD19 February 12, 2003
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit Regulation
and Efﬂuent Limitation Guidelines and Standards for Concentrated 
Animal Feeding Operations (CAFOs)
Agency
Environmental Protection Agency.
Action
Final rule.
Summary
Today’s ﬁnal rule revises and clariﬁes the Environmental Protection
Agency’s (EPA) regulatory requirements for concentrated animal feed-
ing operations (CAFOs) under the Clean Water Act. This ﬁnal rule will
ensure that CAFOs take appropriate actions to manage manure effec-
tively in order to protect the nation’s water quality. Despite substantial
improvements in the nation’s water quality since the inception of the
Clean Water Act, nearly 40 percent of the Nation’s assessed waters
show impairments from a wide range of sources. Improper manage-
ment of manure from CAFOs is among the many contributors to re-
maining water quality problems. Improperly managed manure has
caused serious acute and chronic water quality problems throughout
the United States. Today’s action strengthens the existing regulatory
program for CAFOs.
The rule revises two sections of the Code of Federal Regulations
(CFR), the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
permitting requirements for CAFOs (Sec. 122) and the Efﬂuent Limita-
tions Guidelines and Standards (ELGS) for CAFOs (Sec. 412). The rule
establishes a mandatory duty for all CAFOs to apply for an NPDES
permit and to develop and implement a nutrient management plan.
The efﬂuent guidelines being ﬁnalized today establish performance ex-
pectations for existing and new sources to ensure appropriate storage of
manure, as well as expectations for proper land application practices at
the CAFO. The required nutrient management plan would identify the
site-speciﬁc actions to be taken by the CAFO to ensure proper and ef-
fective manure and wastewater management, including compliance
with the Efﬂuent Limitation Guidelines. Both sections of the rule also
186
Data and Documents

contain new regulatory requirements for dry-litter chicken operations.
This improved regulatory program is also designed to support and
complement the array of voluntary and other programs implemented
by the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), EPA, and the States that
help the vast majority of smaller animal feeding operations not ad-
dressed by this rule. This rule is an integral part of an overall federal
strategy to support a vibrant agriculture economy while at the same
time taking important steps to ensure that all animal feeding operations
manage their manure properly and protect water quality. EPA believes
that these regulations will substantially beneﬁt human health and the
environment by assuring that an estimated 15,500 CAFOs effectively
manage the 300 million tons of manure that they produce annually. The
rule also acknowledges the States’ ﬂexibility and range of tools to assist
small- and medium-size AFOs.
Dates
These ﬁnal regulations are effective on April 14, 2003.
Addresses
The administrative record is available for inspection and copying at the
Water Docket, located at the EPA Docket Center (EPA/DC) in the base-
ment of the EPA West Building, Room B-102, at 1301 Constitution Ave.,
NW, Washington, DC. The administrative record is also available at
http://www.regulations.gov. The docket number is OW-2002–0025.
The rule and key supporting materials are also electronically available
on the Internet at http://cfpub.epa.gov/npdes/afo/cafoﬁnalrule.cfm.
List of Acronyms
AFO—animal feeding operation
BAT—best available technology economically achievable
BCT—best conventional pollutant control technology
BOD—biochemical oxygen demand
BPJ—best professional judgment
BMP—best management practice
BPT—best practicable control technology currently available
CAFO—concentrated animal feeding operation
CFR—Code of Federal Regulations
CFU—colony forming units
CNMP—comprehensive nutrient management plan
CSREES—USDA’s Cooperative State Research, Education, and 
Extension Service
CWA—Clean Water Act
CZARA—Coastal Zone Act Reauthorization Amendments
ELG—efﬂuent limitations guideline
EMS—environmental management system
EPA—Environmental Protection Agency
EQIP—Environmental Quality Incentives Program
Efﬂuent Guidelines and Standards for CAFOs
187

FAPRI—Food and Agricultural Policy Research Institute
FR—Federal Register
ICR—Information Collection Request
NODA—Notice of Data Availability
NOI—notice of intent
NPDES—National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
NRCS—USDA’s Natural Resources Conservation Service
NRDC—Natural Resources Defense Council
NSPS—new source performance standards
NTTAA—National Technology Transfer and Advancement Act
NWPCAM—National Water Pollution Control Assessment Model
OMB—U.S. Ofﬁce of Management and Budget
POTW—publicly owned treatment works
RFA—Regulatory Flexibility Act
SBA—U.S. Small Business Administration
SBAR (panel)—Small Business Advocacy Review Panel
SBREFA—Small Business Regulatory Enforcement Fairness Act
SRF—State Revolving Fund
TMDL—total maximum daily load
TSS—total suspended solids
UMRA—Unfunded Mandates Reform Act
USDA—U.S. Department of Agriculture
WWTP—wastewater treatment plant
B. Why Is EPA Revising the Existing Efﬂuent Guidelines and
NPDES Regulations for CAFOs?
Despite more than 25 years of regulation of CAFOs, reports of dis-
charge and runoff of manure and manure nutrients from these opera-
tions persist. Although these conditions are in part due to inadequate
compliance with and enforcement of existing regulations, EPA believes
that the regulations themselves also need revision. The ﬁnal regulations
being announced today will reduce discharges that impair water qual-
ity by strengthening the permitting requirements and performance
standards for CAFOs. These changes are expected to mitigate future
water quality impairment and the associated human health and ecolog-
ical risks by reducing pollutant discharges from facilities that conﬁne a
large number of animals in a single location. EPA’s revisions to the ex-
isting regulations also address the changes that have occurred in the an-
imal production industries in the United States since the development
of the existing regulations. The continued trend toward fewer but larger
operations, coupled with greater emphasis on more intensive produc-
tion methods and specialization, is concentrating more manure nutri-
ents and other animal waste constituents within some geographic areas.
These large operations often do not have sufﬁcient land to effectively
use the manure as fertilizer. Furthermore, there is limited land acreage
188
Data and Documents

near the CAFO to effectively use the manure. This trend has coincided
with increased reports of large-scale discharges from CAFOs, as well as
continued runoff that is contributing to the signiﬁcant increase in nutri-
ents and resulting impairment of many U.S. water bodies. Finally,
EPA’s revisions to the existing regulations will make the regulations
more effective for the purpose of protecting or restoring water quality.
The revisions will also make the regulations easier to understand and
better clarify the conditions under which an AFO is a CAFO and, there-
fore, subject to the regulatory requirements of today’s ﬁnal regulations.
C. What Are the Environmental and Human Health Concerns As-
sociated with Improper Management of Manure and Wastewater at
CAFOs?
This section provides a brief summary of the environmental and
human health concerns associated with the improper management of
manure and wastewater at CAFOs. It is intended to provide the neces-
sary context for discussions in subsequent sections of this preamble. In-
formation is provided on the amount of manure generated by animal
agriculture and the areas of the country where the amount of manure
generated by these operations is considered excess at the farm and
county levels as deﬁned in analyses by USDA. This information is criti-
cal to framing the action EPA is taking today. A detailed discussion of
the environmental and human health impacts is presented in Section
VII of this preamble, entitled Environmental Beneﬁts of the Final Rule.
Livestock and poultry manure, if not properly handled and managed
by the CAFO, can contribute pollutants to the environment and pose a
risk to human and ecological health. EPA’s administrative record for
this ﬁnal rule includes estimates of the amount of manure and excess
nutrients generated each year by CAFOs and provides information on
the types of pollutants known to be present in animal manure and
wastewater. The administrative record also documents the potential en-
vironmental problems associated with CAFOs, based on States report-
ing water quality impairment attributable to agricultural and animal
production, survey data that show human and ecological health risks
associated with these pollutants, and documented cases linking these
risks to the discharge and runoff of pollutants from livestock and poul-
try facilities. More information is provided in the 2001 proposed rule
(66 FR 2972–2974 and 66 FR 2976–2984) and other support documents
referenced in the proposal and in the administrative record for this ﬁnal
rule. The administrative record contains information on the scientiﬁc
and technical literature, as well as available survey and monitoring
data, to corroborate the Agency’s ﬁndings.
1. How Do the Amounts of Animal Manure Compare to Human
Waste? USDA estimates that operations that conﬁne livestock and poul-
try animals generate about 500 million tons of manure annually (as ex-
creted). This compares to EPA estimates of about 150 million tons (wet
Efﬂuent Guidelines and Standards for CAFOs
189

weight) of human sanitary waste produced annually in the United
States, assuming a U.S. population of 285 million and an average waste
generation of about 0.518 tons per person per year. By this estimate, all
conﬁned animals generate 3 times more raw waste than is generated by
humans in the United States. As a result of today’s action, EPA is regu-
lating close to 60 percent of all manure generated by operations that
conﬁne animals. Of the estimated amount of nutrients generated by
these operations that is in excess of cropland needs, EPA’s regulation
will account for nearly 70 percent of manure generated by these
operations.
2. What Are ‘‘Excess Manure Nutrients’’ and Why Are They an In-
dication of Environmental Concern? An analysis developed by USDA
provides a means to consider the potential environmental risk from
conﬁned livestock and poultry manure based on the amount of ‘‘ex-
cess’’ manure nutrients generated by CAFOs. USDA deﬁnes ‘‘excess
manure nutrients’’ on a conﬁned livestock farm as manure nutrient pro-
duction that exceeds the capacity of the crop to assimilate the nutrients.
USDA’s analysis of 1997 Census of Agriculture data indicates that a
considerable portion of the manure nutrients generated at larger animal
production facilities exceeds the crop nutrient needs, both at the farm
and local county levels. Given consolidation trends in the industry to-
ward larger-sized operations that tend to have less available land on
which to spread manure, the amount of excess manure nutrients being
produced has been rising. Among the principal reasons for the farm-
level excess of nutrients generated is inadequate land for utilizing ma-
nure. USDA data show that the amount of nutrients, and the amount of
excess nutrients, produced by conﬁned animal operations rose about 20
percent from 1982 to 1997. During that same period, cropland and pas-
tureland controlled by these farms declined from an average of 3.6 acres
in 1982 to 2.2 acres per 1,000 pounds live weight of animals in 1997.
The combination of these factors has contributed to an increase in
the amount of excess nutrients produced at these operations. Larger-
sized operations with 1,000 or more animals exceeding 1,000 pounds
accounted for the largest share of excess nutrients in 1997. Roughly 60
percent of the nitrogen and 70 percent of the phosphorus generated by
these operations must be transported off-site. By sector, USDA esti-
mates that operations that conﬁne poultry account for the majority of
on-farm excess nitrogen and phosphorus. Poultry operations account
for nearly one-half of the total recoverable nitrogen, but on-farm use is
able to absorb less than 10 percent of that amount. In 1997 poultry oper-
ations accounted for about two-thirds of the total excess on-farm nitro-
gen. About half of the estimated on-farm excess phosphorus was
generated by poultry. This is attributable to not only the limited land
area for manure application but also the generally higher nutrient con-
tent of poultry manure compared to the manure of most other farm
190
Data and Documents

animals, as reported in the scientiﬁc literature. Dairies and hog opera-
tions are the other dominant livestock types shown to contribute to ex-
cess on-farm nutrients, particularly phosphorus. The regions of the
United States that show the largest increase in excess nutrients between
1982 and 1997 are the Southeast and the Mid-Atlantic. The excess
amounts are mostly the result of the number and concentration of large
poultry and hog operations in those regions. These operations generate
high nutrient concentrations and often have the smallest land area per
animal unit for manure application in the United States. USDA’s analy-
sis also indicates which counties have the potential for excess manure
nutrients deﬁned as manure nutrients produced in a county in excess of
the assimilative capacity of crop- and pastureland in that county. (The
analysis includes counties that have nutrient levels that exceed the as-
similative capacity for all of the crop- and pastureland in the county, as
well as those counties where half of the county’s total nitrogen or phos-
phorus could be provided by manure from conﬁned animal opera-
tions.) The counties with potential excess manure nitrogen totaled 165
counties across the United States in 1997; the counties with potential ex-
cess manure phosphorus totaled 374 counties. The areas of particular
concern for potential county-level excess manure nutrients are in North
Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, Arkansas, California, Mary-
land, Delaware, Pennsylvania, Virginia, and Washington. If current
trends in the livestock and poultry industry continue, more manure
will be produced in areas without the physical capacity to agronomi-
cally use all the nutrients contained in that manure. USDA’s analysis is
reported in ‘‘Conﬁned Animal Production and Manure Nutrients’’
(Agriculture Information Bulletin 771) and also in ‘‘Conﬁned Animal
Production Poses Manure Management Problems’’ in the September
2001 issue of USDA’s Agricultural Outlook. Both are available at USDA’s
Website at http://www.ers.usda.gov/. Additional documentation on
how this analysis was conducted is in USDA’s ‘‘Manure Nutrients Rela-
tive to the Capacity of Cropland and Pastureland to Assimilate Nutri-
ents: Spatial and Temporal Trends for the United States,’’ December
2000, available at
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/technical/land/pubs/manntr.html. These
documents are also available in the administrative record for today’s ﬁ-
nal rule (i.e., docket number W-00–27).
3. What Pollutants Are Present in Animal Manure and Waste-
water? Pollutants most commonly associated with animal waste in-
clude nutrients (including ammonia), organic matter, solids, pathogens,
and odorous compounds. Animal waste can also be a source of salts
and various trace elements (including metals), as well as pesticides, an-
tibiotics, and hormones. These pollutants can be released into the envi-
ronment through discharge or runoff if manure and wastewater are not
properly handled and managed.
Efﬂuent Guidelines and Standards for CAFOs
191

4. How Do These Pollutants Reach Surface Water? Pollutants in
animal waste and manure can enter the environment through a number
of pathways. These include surface runoff and erosion, overﬂows from
lagoons, spills and other dry-weather discharges, leaching into soil and
groundwater, and volatilization of compounds (e.g., ammonia) and
subsequent redeposition on the landscape. As documented in the ad-
ministrative record, pollutants from animal manure and wastewater
can be released from an operation’s animal conﬁnement area, treatment
and storage lagoons, and manure stockpiles, and from cropland where
manure is often land-applied.
5. How Is Water Quality Impaired by Animal Manure and Waste-
water? Agricultural operations, including CAFOs, now account for a
significant share of the remaining water pollution problems in the
United States, as reported in the National Water Quality Inventory:
2000 Report (hereafter the ‘‘2000 Inventory’’). This report, prepared
every 2 years under Section 305(b) of the Clean Water Act, summa-
rizes States’ reports of impairment to their water bodies and the sus-
pected sources of those impairments. A more comprehensive
discussion of the results of the 2000 Inventory is included in Section
VII of this preamble. EPA’s 2000 Inventory data indicate that the agri-
cultural sector, including crop production, pasture and range grazing,
concentrated and confined animal feeding operations, and aquacul-
ture, is the leading contributor of pollutants to identified water qual-
ity impairments in the nation’s rivers and streams. This sector is also
the leading contributor in the nation’s lakes, ponds, and reservoirs.
Agriculture is also identified as the fifth leading contributor to identi-
fied water quality impairments in the nation’s estuaries. The inven-
tory does not allow a comprehensive breakout of water quality
impairments attributable to CAFOs, but EPA’s data show that water
quality concerns tend to be greatest in regions where crops are inten-
sively cultivated and where livestock operations are concentrated. The
leading pollutants impairing surface water quality in the United
States as identified in the 2000 survey data include nutrients,
pathogens, sediment/siltation, and oxygen-depleting substances.
These pollutants can originate from a variety of sources, including the
animal production industry. The 2000 Inventory provides a general in-
dication of national surface water quality. While concerns have some-
times been raised about the comparability and consistency of these
data across States, the report highlights in a general way the magni-
tude of water quality impairment from agriculture and the relative
contribution compared to other sources. Moreover, the findings of this
report are consistent with other reports and studies conducted by
government and independent researchers that identify CAFOs as an
important contributor of surface water pollution, as summarized in
the administrative record for this rulemaking.
192
Data and Documents

6. What Ecological and Human Health Impacts Have Been
Caused by CAFO Manure and Wastewater? Among the reported envi-
ronmental problems associated with animal manure are surface water
(e.g., lakes, streams, rivers, and reservoirs) and groundwater quality
degradation, adverse effects on estuarine water quality and resources
in coastal areas, and effects on soil and air quality. The scientiﬁc litera-
ture, which spans more than 30 years, documents how this degrada-
tion can contribute to increased risk to aquatic and wildlife
ecosystems; an example is the large number of ﬁsh kills in recent years.
Human and livestock animal health can also be affected by excessive
nitrate levels in drinking water and exposure to waterborne human
pathogens and other pollutants in manure. The administrative record
provides more detailed information on the scientiﬁc and technical re-
search to support these ﬁndings. Section VII of this document provides
additional information concerning the adverse impacts of pollutants
associated with manure in surface water. Both ecological and human
health impacts are addressed.
F. What Are the Major Elements of This Final Rule? Where Do I
Find the Speciﬁc Requirements?
This section provides a very brief summary of the major elements
of this ﬁnal rule and a brief index on where each of the requirements is
located in the ﬁnal regulations. The regulations for the NPDES permit
program are in Part 122 of Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
These NPDES regulations include requirements that apply to all point
sources, including CAFOs. The national efﬂuent limitations guidelines
for CAFOs are in Part 412 of Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
This summary is not a replacement for the actual regulations.
1. NPDES Regulations for CAFOs. Overall, this ﬁnal rule main-
tains many of the basic features and the overall structure of the 1976
NPDES regulations with some important exceptions. First, all CAFOs
have a mandatory duty to apply for an NPDES permit, which removes
the ambiguity of whether a facility needs an NPDES permit, even if it
discharges only in the event of a large storm. In the event that a large
CAFO has no potential to discharge, today’s rule provides a process for
the CAFO to make such a demonstration in lieu of obtaining a permit.
The second signiﬁcant change is that large poultry operations are cov-
ered, regardless of the type of waste disposal system used or whether
the litter is managed in wet or dry form. Third, under this ﬁnal rule, all
CAFOs covered by an NPDES permit are required to develop and im-
plement a nutrient management plan. The plan would identify prac-
tices necessary to implement the ELG and any other requirements in
the permit and would include requirements to land-apply manure, lit-
ter, and process wastewater consistent with site-speciﬁc nutrient man-
agement practices that ensure appropriate agricultural utilization of the
nutrients.
Efﬂuent Guidelines and Standards for CAFOs
193

2. Efﬂuent Limitations Guidelines Requirements for CAFOs.
Existing sources: The ﬁnal ELGs published today will continue to
apply to only large CAFOs, historically referred to as operations with
1,000 or more animal units, although the requirements for existing
sources and new sources are different for certain animal sectors. In the
case of existing sources, the ELGs will continue to prohibit the dis-
charge of manure and other process wastewater pollutants, except for
allowing the discharge of process wastewater whenever rainfall events
cause an overﬂow from a facility designed, constructed, and operated
to contain all process wastewaters plus the runoff from a 25-year, 24-
hour rainfall event. In addition, the ELGs that require land application
at the CAFO must be at rates that minimize phosphorus and nitrogen
transport from the ﬁeld to surface waters in compliance with technical
standards for nutrient management established by the Director. The
ELGs also establish certain best management practice (BMP) require-
ments that apply to the production and land application areas.
New sources: For new large beef and dairy operations, the ELGs
establish production area requirements that are the same as those for
existing sources. In the case of large swine, veal, and poultry operations
that are new sources, a new zero discharge standard is established. The
rule also clariﬁes that where waste management and storage facilities
are designed, constructed, operated, and maintained to contain all ma-
nure, litter, and process wastewater, including the runoff and direct pre-
cipitation from a 100-year, 24-hour rainfall event, and is operated in
accordance with certain other requirements, this will satisfy the new
standard. Land application requirements for both groups are identical
to those established for existing sources.
IV. CAFO Roles and Responsibilities
A. Who Is Affected by This Rule?
1. What Is an AFO? In today’s ﬁnal rule, EPA is retaining the deﬁnition
of an animal feeding operation (AFO) as it was deﬁned in the 1976 reg-
ulation at 40 CFR 122.23(b)(1). An animal feeding operation means a lot
or facility (other than an aquatic animal production facility) where the
following conditions are met: (1) Animals have been, are, or will be sta-
bled or conﬁned and fed or maintained for a total of 45 days or more in
any 12-month period, and (2) crops, vegetation, forage growth, or post-
harvest residues are not sustained in the normal growing season over
any portion of the lot or facility. (Note: EPA is making a typographical
correction to the AFO deﬁnition. The comma between vegetation and
forage growth had been inadvertently dropped from the 1976 ﬁnal rule
in subsequent printings of the Federal Register.)
Source: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2003. National Pol-
lutant Discharge Elimination System Permit Regulation and Efﬂuent
194
Data and Documents

Limitation Guidelines and Standards for Concentrated Animal Feeding
Operations (CAFOs). http://www.epa.gov/npdes/regulations/cafo
_fedrgstr.pdf (accessed January 28, 2007).
Bad Bug Book
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Center for Food Safety and
Applied Nutrition has created the Bad Bug Book, an online, frequently
updated summary of the causes of foodborne illnesses. Each cause in-
cludes the nature of the disease, including symptoms, onset time, infec-
tive dose, relative frequency of disease, and selected disease outbreaks.
Bad Bug Book
195
TABLE 6.3
Summary of CAFO Size Thresholds for All Sectors 
Animal
Large CAFO
Medium CAFO
Small CAFO
Cattle or cow/calf pairs
1,000 or more
300–999
Less than 300
Mature dairy cattle
700 or more
200–699
Less than 200
Veal calves
1,000 or more
300–999
Less than 300
Swine (weighing over 
2,500 or more
750–2,499
Less than 750
55 pounds)
Swine (weighing less 
10,000 or more
3,000–9,999
Less than 3,000
than 55 pounds)
Horses
500 or more
150–499
Less than 150
Sheep or lambs
10,000 or more
3,000–9,999
Less than 3,000
Turkeys
55,000 or more
16,500–54,999
Less than 16,500
Laying hens or broilers 
30,000 or more
9,000–29,999
Less than 9,000
(liquid manure-handling 
system)
Chickens other than laying 
125,000 or more
37,500–124,999
Less than 37,500
hens (other than liquid 
manure-handling system)
Ducks (other than liquid 
30,000 or more
10,000–29,999
Less than 10,000
manure-handling system)
Ducks (liquid manure-handling 
5,000 or more
1,500–4,999
Less than 1,500
system)

When viewed online, links are provided to the Centers for Disease Con-
trol and Prevention’s Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report and rele-
vant abstracts available on Medline, the National Library of Medicine’s
online medical database. The document can be viewed online at
http://vm.cfsan.fda.gov/~mow/intro.html.
The following is a sample entry from the Bad Bug Book for Cam-
pylobacter jejuni, the most common foodborne illness.
Campylobacter jejuni
Name of the Organism
Campylobacter jejuni (formerly known as Campylobacter fetus subsp. je-
juni). Campylobacter jejuni is a Gram-negative slender, curved, and
motile rod. It is a microaerophilic organism, which means it has a re-
quirement for reduced levels of oxygen. It is relatively fragile, and sen-
sitive to environmental stresses (e.g., 21% oxygen, drying, heating,
disinfectants, acidic conditions). Because of its microaerophilic charac-
teristics the organism requires 3 to 5% oxygen and 2 to 10% carbon
dioxide for optimal growth conditions. This bacterium is now recog-
nized as an important enteric pathogen. Before 1972, when methods
were developed for its isolation from feces, it was believed to be pri-
marily an animal pathogen causing abortion and enteritis in sheep and
cattle. Surveys have shown that C. jejuni is the leading cause of bacterial
diarrheal illness in the United States. It causes more disease than
Shigella spp. and Salmonella spp. combined.
Although C. jejuni is not carried by healthy individuals in the
United States or Europe, it is often isolated from healthy cattle, chick-
ens, birds, and even ﬂies. It is sometimes present in non-chlorinated
water sources such as streams and ponds.
Because the pathogenic mechanisms of C. jejuni are still being
studied, it is difﬁcult to differentiate pathogenic from nonpathogenic
strains. However, it appears that many of the chicken isolates are
pathogens.
Name of the Disease
Campylobacteriosis is the name of the illness caused by C. jejuni. It is
also often known as campylobacter enteritis or gastroenteritis.
Major Symptoms
C. jejuni infection causes diarrhea, which may be watery or sticky and
can contain blood (usually occult) and fecal leukocytes (white cells).
Other symptoms often present are fever, abdominal pain, nausea,
headache, and muscle pain. The illness usually occurs 2–5 days after in-
196
Data and Documents

gestion of the contaminated food or water. Illness generally lasts 7–10
days, but relapses are not uncommon (about 25% of cases). Most infec-
tions are self-limiting and are not treated with antibiotics. However,
treatment with erythromycin does reduce the length of time that in-
fected individuals shed the bacteria in their feces.
The infective dose of C. jejuni is considered to be small. Human
feeding studies suggest that about 400–500 bacteria may cause illness in
some individuals, while in others, greater numbers are required. A con-
ducted volunteer human feeding study suggests that host susceptibility
also dictates infectious dose to some degree. The pathogenic mecha-
nisms of C. jejuni are still not completely understood, but it does pro-
duce a heat-labile toxin that may cause diarrhea. C. jejuni may also be
an invasive organism.
Isolation Procedures
C. jejuni is usually present in high numbers in the diarrheal stools of in-
dividuals, but isolation requires special antibiotic-containing media and
a special microaerophilic atmosphere (5% oxygen). However, most clin-
ical laboratories are equipped to isolate Campylobacter spp. if requested.
Associated Foods
C. jejuni frequently contaminates raw chicken. Surveys show that 20 to
100% of retail chickens are contaminated. This is not overly surprising
since many healthy chickens carry these bacteria in their intestinal
tracts. Raw milk is also a source of infections. The bacteria are often car-
ried by healthy cattle and by ﬂies on farms. Non-chlorinated water may
also be a source of infections. However, properly cooking chicken, pas-
teurizing milk, and chlorinating drinking water will kill the bacteria.
Frequency of the Disease
C. jejuni is the leading cause of bacterial diarrhea in the U.S. There are
probably numbers of cases in excess of the estimated cases of salmonel-
losis (2 to 4,000,000/year).
Complications
Complications are relatively rare, but infections have been associated
with reactive arthritis, hemolytic uremic syndrome, and following sep-
ticemia, infections of nearly any organ. The estimated case/fatality ratio
for all C. jejuni infections is 0.1, meaning one death per 1,000 cases. Fa-
talities are rare in healthy individuals and usually occur in cancer pa-
tients or in the otherwise debilitated. Only 20 reported cases of septic
abortion induced by C. jejuni have been recorded in the literature.
Meningitis, recurrent colitis, acute cholecystitis and Guillain-Barré
syndrome are very rare complications.
Bad Bug Book
197

Target Populations
Although anyone can have a C. jejuni infection, children under 5 years
and young adults (15–29) are more frequently afﬂicted than other age
groups. Reactive arthritis, a rare complication of these infections, is
strongly associated with people who have the human lymphocyte anti-
gen B27 (HLA-B27).
Recovery from Foods
Isolation of C. jejuni from food is difﬁcult because the bacteria are usu-
ally present in very low numbers (unlike the case of diarrheal stools in
which 10/6 bacteria/gram is not unusual). The methods require an en-
richment broth containing antibiotics, special antibiotic-containing
plates, and a microaerophilic atmosphere generally with 5% oxygen
and an elevated concentration of carbon dioxide (10%). Isolation can
take several days to a week.
Selected Outbreaks
Usually outbreaks are small (less than 50 people), but in Bennington,
VT, a large outbreak involving about 2,000 people occurred while the
town was temporarily using a non-chlorinated water source as a water
supply. Several small outbreaks have been reported among children
who were taken on a class trip to a dairy and given raw milk to drink.
An outbreak was also associated with consumption of raw clams. How-
ever, a survey showed that about 50% of infections are associated with
either eating inadequately cooked or recontaminated chicken meat or
handling chickens. It is the leading bacterial cause of sporadic (non-
clustered cases) diarrheal disease in the United States.
In April, 1986, an elementary school child was cultured for bacter-
ial pathogens (due to bloody diarrhea), and C. jejuni was isolated. Food
consumption/gastrointestinal illness questionnaires were administered
to other students and faculty at the school. In all, 32 of 172 students re-
ported symptoms of diarrhea (100%), cramps (80%), nausea (51%),
fever (29%), vomiting (26%), and bloody stools (14%). The food ques-
tionnaire clearly implicated milk as the common source, and a dose/
response was evident (those drinking more milk were more likely to be
ill). Investigation of the dairy supplying the milk showed that they vat
pasteurized the milk at 135°F for 25 minutes rather than the required
145°F for 30 minutes. The dairy processed surplus raw milk for the
school, and this milk had a high somatic cell count. Cows from the herd
supplying the dairy had C. jejuni in their feces. This outbreak points out
the variation in symptoms which may occur with campylobacteriosis
and the absolute need to adhere to pasteurization time/temperature
standards.
198
Data and Documents

Although other Campylobacter spp. have been implicated in human
gastroenteritis (e.g., C. laridis, C. hyointestinalis), it is believed that 99%
of the cases are caused by C. jejuni.
Information regarding an outbreak of Campylobacter in New
Zealand is found in this MMWR 40(7):1991 Feb 22.
Education
The Food Safety Inspection Service of the U.S. Department of Agricul-
ture has produced a background document on Campylobacter.
Other Resources
A loci index for genome Campylobacter jejuni is available from GenBank.
References
Barry, John M. 2005. The Great Influenza: The Epic Story of the Deadliest
Plague in History. New York: Viking Penguin.
Burros, Marion. 2005. Stores Say Wild Salmon, But Tests Say Farm Bred.
New York Times, April 10, A1.
Burros, Marion. 2003. Farmed Salmon Said to Contain High PCB Levels.
Oakland Tribune, November 12, A1. 
Center for Science in the Public Interest. 2006a. The Facts about Olestra.
http://www.cspinet.org/olestra/ (accessed May 30, 2006).
Center for Science in the Public Interest. 2006b. Six Arguments for a
Greener Diet. http://www.cspinet.org/EatingGreen/ (accessed Octo-
ber 5, 2006).
Consumer Choice and ‘Frankenstein Foods.’ 2006. The Christian Science
Monitor, February 13, A8. 
Duyff, Roberta Larson. 2002. American Dietetic Association Complete Food
and Nutrition Guide. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons.
International Service for the Acquisition of Agri-Biotech Applications.
2006. ISAAA Brief 35-2006: Executive Summary Global Status of
Commercialized Biotech/GM Crops: 2006. http://www.isaaa.org/
resources/publications/briefs/35/executivesummary/default.html
(accessed January 27, 2007).
Jay, James M., Martin J. Loessner, and David A. Golden. 2005. Modern
Food Microbiology. 7th ed. New York: Springer Science.
Keep Antibiotics Working. 2006. Antibiotic Resistance—An Emerging
Public Health Crisis. http://www.keepantibioticsworking.com (ac-
cessed May 20, 2006).
References
199

Ketley, Julian M., and Michael E. Konkel, eds. 2005. Campylobacter: Mole-
cular and Cellular Biology. Norfolk, UK: Horizon Bioscience.
Swartz, Morton. 2002. Human Diseases Caused by Foodborne Pathogens
of Animal Origin. Clinical Infectious Diseases Supplement 3: 111–122.
Union of Concerned Scientists. 2001. Estimates of Antimicrobial Abuse in
Livestock. http://www.ucsusa.org/food_and_environment/antibiotics
_and_food/hogging-it-estimates-of-antimicrobial-abuse-in-livestock
.html (accessed April 12, 2006).
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food Safety and Inspection Service.
2004. Fulﬁlling the Vision: Updates and Initiatives in Protecting Public
Health. http://www.fsis.usda.gov/About_FSIS/Fulﬁlling_the_Vision/
index.asp (accessed March 2, 2006).
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 2005. Foodborne Pathogenic Mi-
croorganisms and Natural Toxins Handbook. http://vm.cfsan.fda.gov/
~mow/intro.html (accessed March 20, 2006).
200
Data and Documents

7
Directory of Organizations
M
any organizations around the world are working to im-
prove food safety at local, national, and international lev-
els. Most local, regional, and national governments have
agencies that speciﬁcally promote food safety by making and en-
forcing laws and regulations. Nonprofit organizations world-
wide are committed to food safety improvements, although they
don’t always agree about how improvements should be accom-
plished. For some of the organizations listed here, food safety is
their primary focus. For others, food safety ﬁts in with their gen-
eral focus on consumer, humanitarian, or environmental issues.
Besides the organizations listed here, there are many trade orga-
nizations established to promote a particular foodstuff that also
have food safety programs. Most of these organizations have
Websites that can be found by entering the name of the foodstuff
and the word “board” or “commission” in a search engine (for
example, “egg board”).
Nonproﬁt, Trade, and
Professional Organizations
Alliance for Bio-Integrity
2040 Pearl Lane, #2
Fairﬁeld, IA 52556
Phone: (206) 888-4852
Website: http://www.biointegrity.org
The Alliance is a nonproﬁt, nonpolitical organization working to
advance human and environmental health through sustainable
201

202
Directory of Organizations
and safe technologies. The organization is a coalition of both sci-
entists and religious leaders who believe that genetically engi-
neered food is harmful to the environment and contrary to many
religious beliefs. The Alliance filed suit against the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) in 1998 to require genetically altered
food to undergo the same testing procedures as new food addi-
tives and to require genetically altered foods for consumers be la-
beled. Although the Alliance lost its lawsuit, it continues to work
to educate the public about genetically modiﬁed food.
Information about the lawsuit and statements by scientists
and religious leaders about genetically engineered food are on
the organization’s Website.
Alliance for the Prudent Use of Antibiotics (APUA)
75 Kneeland Street
Boston, MA 02111
Phone: (617) 636-0966
Fax: (617) 636-3999
Website: http://www.tufts.edu/med/apua
The Alliance for the Prudent Use of Antibiotics (APUA) con-
ducts research and surveillance projects to deﬁne resistance pat-
terns and trends in antibiotic prescriptions, and develops
strategies to curb antibiotic resistance and improve antibiotic
use. Many of the Alliance’s projects are conducted in partner-
ship with universities and health agencies. Although much of
the organization’s efforts are directed toward overuse in hu-
mans, APUA also has a research and educational program about
animal agriculture. APUA has fifty international chapters; one
of its programs provides technical assistance and small research
grants to research teams in developing countries for work on an-
timicrobial resistance.
The Website has program information and links to research
reports and current events regarding antibiotic resistance.
American Council on Science and Health
1995 Broadway
Second Floor
New York, NY 10023
Phone: (212) 362-7044
Fax: (212) 362-4919
Website: http://www.acsh.org

The American Council on Science and Health is funded by pesti-
cide manufacturers, food companies, and trade associations to
provide information to consumers about food, nutrition, chemi-
cals, pharmaceuticals, lifestyle, the environment, and health. The
Council publishes a wide variety of pamphlets and reports on
food, health, and environmental topics.
All of the Council’s publications are available for download
at the Website.
American Dietetic Association (ADA)
120 S. Riverside Plaza, Suite 2000
Chicago, IL 60606
Phone: (800) 877-1600
Website: http://www.eatright.org
The American Dietetic Association (ADA) is the primary profes-
sional organization of U.S. dieticians. Although the emphasis is
on nutrition in general, food safety is an area of interest. The as-
sociation publishes The Journal of the American Dietetic Association.
The Website is quite extensive. There are many nutrition fact
sheets available online, including some on food safety.
American Public Health Association (APHA)
800 I Street, NW
Washington, DC 20001
Phone: (202) 777-2742
Fax: (202) 777-2533
Website: http://www.apha.org
The American Public Health Association (APHA) has more than
50,000 members in over ﬁfty occupations in public health. APHA
helps set public health standards, works with national and inter-
national health agencies to improve health worldwide, and pro-
vides public health professionals with resources for professional
exchange, study, and action. Two of these practice sections have
particular application to food safety: the Food and Nutrition Sec-
tion contributes to long-range planning in food, nutrition, and
health policy; and the Epidemiology Section works to dissemi-
nate new scientiﬁc information to improve development, imple-
mentation, and evaluation of policies impacting public health.
The APHA Website contains program information and links
to other epidemiology Websites.
Nonproﬁt, Trade, and Professional Organizations
203

Aspartame Consumer Safety Network and Pilot Hotline
P.O. Box 2001
Frisco, TX 75034
Phone: (214) 387-4001
Website: http://www.aspartamesafety.com
The Aspartame Consumer Safety Network and Pilot Hotline
supports people who have had adverse reactions to aspartame
(marketed under the names NutraSweet and Equal). The Net-
work disseminates information and pursues legislative efforts to
restrict the substance. The Pilot Hotline offers support to pilots
who have had seizures after consuming aspartame.
The Website has a questionnaire to determine aspartame
sensitivity, information about aspartame, and the activities of the
organization.
Association of Food and Drug Ofﬁcials (AFDO)
2550 Kingston Road, Suite 311
York, PA 17402
Phone: (717) 757-2888
Fax (717) 755-8089
Website: http://www.afdo.org
The Association of Food and Drug Ofﬁcials (AFDO) is an inter-
national industry organization devoted to streamlining regula-
tion and resolving public health and consumer protection issues
related to the regulation of foods, drugs, medical devices, and
consumer products. AFDO promotes uniform and rational regu-
lation. Members include local, state, and federal regulators, as
well as representatives from academia and industry. AFDO
works to bring together regulators, industry, trade, and con-
sumer organizations to design sensible regulations.
Position statements, Hazard Analysis and Critical Control
Point (HACCP) training programs, and program information are
provided on the Website.
Center for Food Safety
660 Pennsylvania Avenue, SE, #302
Washington, DC 20003
Phone: (202) 547-9359
Fax: (202) 547-9429
Website: http://www.centerforfoodsafety.org
204
Directory of Organizations

The Center for Food Safety works to ensure that technology re-
lated to food and agriculture is used in responsible ways. The
goals of CFS include promoting sustainable, organic agricultural
practices and ensuring testing and labeling of genetically engi-
neered food. The Center’s campaigns include working to main-
tain and enhance the integrity of the organic food standard,
eliminating the use of sewer sludge on croplands, making
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) a reportable disease and
strengthening cattle regulations to reduce risk from mad cow
disease, working to get aquaculture regulated and limit the use
of genetically engineered ﬁsh, limit the use of food irradiation,
and reduce use of recombinant bovine growth hormone (rBGH)
and other hormones.
Center for Science in the Public Interest (CSPI)
1875 Connecticut Avenue, NW, Suite 300
Washington, DC 20009
Phone: (202) 332-9110
Fax: (202) 265-4954
Website: http://cspinet.org
The Center for Science in the Public Interest (CSPI) is a nonproﬁt
education and advocacy organization that works to improve the
safety and nutritional quality of the food supply. Reducing dam-
age that results from consuming alcoholic beverages is another
important aspect of the Center’s work. Some of the organiza-
tion’s projects include working to reduce antibiotic use in ani-
mals, calling for stronger international food safety rules,
monitoring new additives, encouraging consumers to consider
the impact of their food choices on the environment, and work-
ing to reduce soda consumption in children. CSPI has more than
900,000 members and produces the Nutrition Action Letter, which
keeps its members abreast of food safety and nutrition issues.
The CSPI Website has information about campaigns, food
additives, food safety, and current projects.
Community Nutrition Institute (CNI)
419 W. Broad Street, Suite 204
Falls Church, VA 22046
Phone: (703) 532-0030
Fax: (703) 532-5780
Website: http://www.communitynutrition.org
Nonproﬁt, Trade, and Professional Organizations
205

Community Nutrition Institute (CNI) was founded in 1970 to
promote consumer protection, food program development and
management, and sound federal diet and health policies. CNI
developed the legislative basis for the Women, Infants, and Chil-
dren (WIC) nutrition program and successfully campaigned
Congress for funding the WIC program. CNI monitors nutrition
labeling, meat and poultry inspection, hunger programs, and the
use of chemicals in the U.S. food supply. CNI has sued federal
agencies to maintain quality food standards, has testiﬁed before
congressional, state legislative, and executive branch commit-
tees, and is a source of expertise and comment on food issues to
the media.
Consumer’s Union
1101 17th Street, NW, Suite 500
Washington, DC 20036
Phone: (202) 462-6262
Fax: (202) 265-9548
Website: http://www.consumersunion.org
Since its founding in 1936, Consumer’s Union has been a highly
regarded nonproﬁt testing and information organization serving
consumers only. Its mission is to test products, inform the public,
and protect consumers. It publishes Consumer Reports, testiﬁes on
behalf of consumers before state and federal legislative and regu-
latory bodies, petitions government agencies, and ﬁles lawsuits
on behalf of the consumer interest. Active areas of interest in-
clude organic standards, food contaminants, genetically modi-
ﬁed foods, pesticides, and labeling.
A variety of articles and position papers, from technical re-
ports to articles that have appeared in Consumer Reports, are
available on the Website.
Dairy Food Safety Laboratory (DFSL)
Veterinary Medicine Teaching and Research Center
18830 Road 112
Tulare, CA 93274
Phone: (559) 688-1731
Website: http://www.vmtrc.ucdavis.edu/dfsl/dfsl.html
The Dairy Food Safety Laboratory (DFSL) was established in
1992 by the University of California at Davis and the Veterinary
Medicine Teaching and Research Center to perform rapid
response, applied research on herd health, and on-farm food
206
Directory of Organizations

safety analysis. The DFSL provides educational opportunities for
students from high school through postdoctoral fellows; gives
talks to consumers, producers, veterinarians, regulators, and stu-
dents; and publishes research ﬁndings in scientiﬁc journals.
Environmental Defense
257 Park Avenue South
New York, NY 10010
Phone: (212) 505-2100
Fax: (212) 505-2375
Website: http://www.environmentaldefense.org
Established in 1967, Environmental Defense is a unique organi-
zation that brings together scientists, economists, and lawyers to
formulate policies that work to support environmental rights for
all people. The organization has the goal of bringing about policy
that nets clean air, clean water, flourishing ecosystems, and
healthy food worldwide. It is working on reforming food and
farm policies so that farmers and ranchers are rewarded for envi-
ronmental stewardship and consumers have healthy food
choices. Environmental Defense also is partnering with corpora-
tions to effect better environmental policy. For example, the orga-
nization’s partnership with McDonald’s Corporation aims to
improve the company’s packaging and eliminate its purchase of
chicken raised with antibiotics.
The Website has fact sheets and information about cam-
paigns.
Environmental Working Group (EWG)
1436 U Street, NW, Suite 100
Washington, DC 20009
Phone: (202) 667-6982
Website: http://www.ewg.org
Since its founding in 1993, the Environmental Working Group
(EWG) has produced reports, articles, and given technical assis-
tance to over 400 public interest groups. The EWG analyzes gov-
ernment and other data to produce hundreds of reports each
year, many of which make headlines. The organization works on
a variety of environmental projects, including food safety issues.
Within this area of interest are pesticides, farmed salmon, mer-
cury in seafood, and organic standards.
The Website has information, reports, and articles on issue
areas.
Nonproﬁt, Trade, and Professional Organizations
207

Food Allergy and Anaphylaxis Network (FAAN)
11781 Lee Jackson Highway, Suite 160
Fairfax, VA 22033
Phone: (800) 929-4040
Fax: (703) 691-2713
Website: http://www.foodallergy.org
Food Allergy and Anaphylaxis Network (FAAN) works to in-
crease food allergy and anaphylaxis  awareness by contacts with
media, education, advocacy, and research efforts. (Anaphylaxis
is a severe, life-threatening allergic reaction.) FAAN can help al-
lergic individuals with recipes, ingredients lists, strategies for
dealing with allergies including negotiating restaurants, and
techniques for administering lifesaving drugs.
The Website provides information about allergies, recipes,
tips, research, and resources that can be ordered.
Food and Water
P.O. Box 543
Montpelier, VT 05601
Phone: (802) 229-6222
Fax: (802) 563-3310
Website: http://www.broadsides.org/about.html
Food and Water is a nonprofit advocacy organization that was
founded by Walter Burnstein, a family physician who witnessed
an extraordinary increase in degenerative diseases in his twenty-
ﬁve years of practice. Food and Water’s mission is to reduce the
use of pesticides, hormones in animals, genetic engineering, and
food irradiation. In addition to lobbying at the state and national
levels, the organization produces a blog on food and other envi-
ronmental issues.
Food Animals Concerns Trust (FACT)
P.O. Box 14599
Chicago, IL 60614
Phone: (773) 525-4952
Fax: (773) 525-5226
Website: http://www.fact.cc
Food Animal Concerns Trust (FACT) was established in 1982 to
improve the welfare of farm animals; increase the safety of meat,
milk, and eggs; broaden economic opportunities for family farm-
208
Directory of Organizations

ers; and reduce environmental pollution. FACT lobbies the Food
and Drug Administration, the Department of Agriculture, and
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to implement
regulations to reduce pathogens at the farm level. It is a member
of the coalition Keep Antibiotics Working, helps farmers find
markets for humanely raised meat, and operates some demon-
stration farms to show how pathogens can be reduced.
Food Marketing Institute (FMI)
2345 Crystal Drive, Suite 800
Arlington, VA 22202
Phone: (202) 452-8444
Fax: (202) 429-4519
Website: http://www.fmi.org
The Food Marketing Institute (FMI) is a trade group representing
approximately 1,500 member food retailers and wholesalers,
with a combined sales volume of $340 billion, which is approxi-
mately three-quarters of the U.S. retail food market. FMI helps
the industry improve distribution of groceries while being sensi-
tive to consumer, economic, and governmental concerns. FMI
has many programs to improve food safety and security. Food
safety programs ensure that suppliers minimize contamination,
help retailers develop science-based controls at the store level,
create food safety training members can use with their employ-
ees, and develop consumer information such as the Fight Bac!
campaign, which teaches consumers to cook, clean, chill, and
separate. Food security programs include educating retailers
about protecting the food supply and leading the Food Industry
Information Sharing and Analysis Center, which works with the
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)-based National Infrastruc-
ture Protection Center to prevent and detect malicious acts that
might jeopardize the security of the food supply.
The Website has background information on food safety
topics, conferences, and events, as well as links to current food
safety topics and Websites on avian ﬂu, bovine spongiform en-
cephalopathy (BSE), food allergens and Food and Drug Adminis-
tration (FDA) labeling guidance, and other subjects.
Food Research Institute
University of Wisconsin–Madison
1925 Willow Drive
Nonproﬁt, Trade, and Professional Organizations
209

Madison, WI 53706
Phone: (608) 263-7777
Fax: (608) 263-1114
Website: http://www.wisc.edu/fri
The Food Research Institute is part of the University of Wiscon-
sin–Madison. The Institute works with industry regulators, acad-
emia, and consumers on food safety issues. The Institute
provides accurate and useful information and expertise as well
as education and training in food safety. Its microbiology divi-
sion conducts basic and applied research on food-associated ill-
nesses caused by bacteria, molds, and viruses. Research is
reported in journals; none of the research results are kept secret.
Food Safety Consortium
110 Agriculture Building
University of Arkansas
Fayetteville, AR 72701
Phone: (479) 575-5647
Fax: (479) 575-7531
Website: http://www.uark.edu/depts/fsc
The Food Safety Consortium is made up of researchers from the
University of Arkansas, Iowa State University, and Kansas State
University. It was established by the U.S. Congress in 1988 to
conduct extensive food safety investigations into all areas of
poultry, beef, and pork meat production, from the farm to the
consumer’s table. Each university supplies experts in its ﬁeld of
expertise. The University of Arkansas specializes in poultry,
Iowa State University specializes in pork, and Kansas State spe-
cializes in beef production. The Consortium sponsors confer-
ences and publishes food safety research.
Friends of the Earth (FOE)
1717 Massachusetts Avenue, NW, Suite 600
Washington, DC 20036
Phone: (877) 843-8687
Fax: (202) 783-0444
Website: http://www.foe.org
Friends of the Earth (FOE) is a national environmental organiza-
tion working to preserve the health and diversity of the planet
for future generations. FOE is the largest international environ-
210
Directory of Organizations

mental network in the world, with afﬁliates in sixty-three coun-
tries. FOE works on a variety of environmental issues. Its Safer
Food, Safer Farms campaign seeks to reduce or eliminate the use
of pesticides, eliminate genetically modiﬁed crops, and encour-
age raising free-range animals instead of factory farming.
The FOE Website offers detailed information about the cam-
paigns, fact sheets, links to other organizations, press releases,
and sample letters to write.
Global Resource Action Center for the Environment (GRACE)
215 Lexington Avenue, Suite 1001
New York, NY 10016
Factory Farm Project
Phone: (212) 726-9161
Fax: (212) 726-9160
Website: http://www.factoryfarm.org
Sustainable Table
Phone: (212) 991-1930
Fax: (212) 726-9160
Website: http://www.sustainabletable.org
Established in 1996, Global Resource Action Center for the Envi-
ronment (GRACE) works with research, policy, and grassroots
organizations to preserve the future of the planet and protect the
quality of the environment. One of GRACE’s main projects is
the Factory Farm Project, which works to eliminate factory
farms as a mode of production, replacing them with sustainable
food production systems that are healthful, economically viable,
environmentally sound, and humane. The Factory Farm Project
Website provides access to concerned organizations, articles re-
garding factory farms, and links to various state agencies and
organizations.
Sustainable Table is an education and resource project
geared toward consumers. On the project Website, consumers
can enter their zip codes to locate sources of foods raised in sus-
tainable ways, read the blog containing current information, and
view some ﬂash animations on factory farming.
Greenpeace USA
702 H Street, NW, Suite 300
Washington, DC 20001
Phone: (800) 326-0939
Nonproﬁt, Trade, and Professional Organizations
211

U.S. Website: http://www.greenpeaceusa.org
International Website: http://www.greenpeace.org
Greenpeace, a highly active environmental organization, op-
poses releasing genetically modiﬁed food into the environment.
The organization is lobbying governments to require segregation
and labeling of genetically engineered foods so that consumers
will be able to determine whether their foods have been geneti-
cally modiﬁed. Another area of concern for Greenpeace is persis-
tent organic pollutants (POPs) and mercury emissions. These
substances get into food through the consumption of animal fats,
pesticides, and packaging and processing material.
Policy statements and articles can be found on the Website. 
Institute of Food Science and Technology (IFST)
5 Cambridge Court
210 Shepherd’s Bush Road
London, W6 7NJ, United Kingdom
Website: http://www.ifst.org
The Institute of Food Science and Technology (IFST) is an inde-
pendent professional group of food scientists and technologists.
The Institute publishes position papers on a variety of food
safety issues and promotes the application of science and tech-
nology to all aspects of the supply of safe, wholesome, nutri-
tious, and attractive food.
Position papers as well as food safety frequently asked ques-
tions (FAQs) are available at the Website.
Institute of Food Technologists (IFT)
525 West Van Buren, Suite 1000
Chicago, IL 60607
Phone: (312) 782-8424
Toll Free: (800) 438-3663
Fax: (312) 782-8348
Website: http//www.ift.org
The Institute of Food Technologists (IFT) seeks to advance the
science and technology of food through the exchange of knowl-
edge and also to be recognized as an advocate for science of
food-related issues. A professional organization of food technol-
ogists, the Institute sponsors conferences and publishes four
212
Directory of Organizations

journals: Food Technology, The Journal of Food Science, The Journal of
Food Science Education, and Current Reviews in Food Science and
Food Safety.
International Association for Food Protection
6200 Aurora Avenue, Suite 200W
Des Moines, IA 50322
Phone: (800) 369-6337
Fax: (515) 276-8655
Website: http://www.foodprotection.org
The International Association for Food Protection works to
keep its members, food safety professionals, informed on the
latest scientific, technical, and practical developments in food
safety and sanitation. The Association produces two publica-
tions: Food Protection Trends is the membership magazine with
articles on applied research and current applications of technol-
ogy, and The Journal of Food Protection is a refereed journal of
food microbiology.
Program information and indexes and abstracts of the two
journals are offered on the Website.
International Commission on Microbial Speciﬁcations 
for Food
National Center for Food Safety and Technology (NCFST)
Illinois Institute of Technology
6502 S. Archer Road
Summit-Argo, IL 60501
Website: http://www.icmsf.iit.edu/main/home.html
The International Commission on Microbial Specifications for
Food is a nonprofit scientific advisory body established under
the auspices of the International Union of Microbiological Soci-
eties to address food microbiological concerns. It has developed
methods, sampling plans, microbiological criteria, and Hazard
Analysis and Critical Control Points (HACCP) plans. Several
books have been published in its series called Microorganisms in
Food. The Commission advises national governments as well as
international bodies such as Codex Alimentarius, World Health
Organization, and the International Atomic Energy Agency.
Program information and details about the Microorganisms
in Food series may be found on the Commission’s Website.
Nonproﬁt, Trade, and Professional Organizations
213

International Food Information Council (IFIC)
1100 Connecticut Ave., NW, Suite 430
Washington, DC 20036
Phone: (202) 296-6540
Fax: (202) 296-6547
Website: http://www.iﬁcinfo.health.org
The International Food Information Council (IFIC) was founded
in 1985 to provide information about food safety and nutrition to
consumers. It is funded by food, beverage, and agricultural com-
panies, but does not represent any product or company and does
not lobby for legislative or regulatory action. Recent campaigns
include dispelling myths about caffeine; dispelling myths about
the relationship between children, hyperactivity, and sugar con-
sumption; and providing facts on probiotics and prebiotics. The
Council also conducts research about consumer attitudes.
The Council’s Website provides information about food
safety issues from an industry point of view.
International Food Safety Council
Education Foundation of the National Restaurant Association
175 W. Jackson Boulevard, Suite 1500
Chicago, IL 60604
Phone: (800) 765-2122
Website: http://www.nraef.org
A coalition of restaurant and food service professionals who are
certified in safe food handling and preparation, the Interna-
tional Food Safety Council promotes food safety education
within the food service industry and works to convey the indus-
try’s commitment to serve safe food to the public. As part of this
commitment, the Council sponsors National Food Safety Educa-
tion Month each September. It is a founding partner of the Part-
nership for Food Safety Education, promoters of the Fight Bac!
campaign.
Joint Institute for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition
(JIFSAN)
University of Maryland
0220 Symons Hall 
College Park, MD 20742
Phone: (301) 405-8382
214
Directory of Organizations

Fax: (301) 405-8390
Website: http://www.jifsan.umd.edu
Food Safety Risk Analysis Clearinghouse Website:
http://www.foodrisk.org.index
The Joint Institute for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition 
(JIFSAN) was established as a joint project of the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration and the University of Maryland in 1996. A
multidisciplinary research and education project, its work aims
to provide a scientiﬁc basis for ensuring a safe, wholesome food
supply. JIFSAN activities include an academic and regulatory
sciences program, policy studies, and outreach and education
programs.  The Food Safety Analysis Clearinghouse offers a
wealth of information and serves as a clearinghouse for food
safety risk analysis data. Research programs include risk analy-
sis, microbial pathogens and toxins, food composition and ap-
plied nutrition, and animal health sciences as they affect food
safety.
The JIFSAN Website has program descriptions and informa-
tion on meetings, workshops, grants, and education and out-
reach programs. The Food Safety Risk Analysis Clearinghouse
Website is a gateway to information from several sources on
many food safety topics.
Keep Antibiotics Working
P.O. Box 14590
Chicago, IL 60614
Phone: (773) 525-4952
Website: http://www.keepantibioticsworking.org
Keep Antibiotics Working is a coalition of health, agricultural,
environmental, and humane advocacy groups that together have
more than nine million members. The coalition is working to end
the overuse of antibiotics in animal agriculture by phasing out
the use of antibiotics in animals which aren’t sick, restricting use
of antibiotics in sick animals to antibiotics that are not important
in the treatment of human medicine, and ensuring policy makers
and the public have adequate data to track antibiotic use and the
development of antibiotic resistance.
The Website has information about the campaign and links
to coalition members.
Nonproﬁt, Trade, and Professional Organizations
215

National Center for Food Safety and Technology (NCFST)
Illinois Institute of Technology
6502 S. Archer Road
Summit-Argo, IL 60501
Website: http://www.ncfst.iit.edu
The National Center for Food Safety and Technology (NCFST) is
a consortium of food companies, the U.S. Food and Drug Ad-
ministration, and university-based scientists working together to
ensure the safety of food processing and packaging technologies.
This objective is met through a combination of research and out-
reach within the food science community. NCFST conducts re-
search to find scientific bases to answer regulatory questions
related to food safety and to promote the safety and quality of
the U.S. food supply. It also conducts research on processing,
packaging, chemical contaminants and allergens, food defense,
and food microbiology. Outreach activities include publication of
findings in journals, presentations, workshops, training pro-
grams, degree and certiﬁcate programs, tours, and consultation
services.
The Website has program information.
National Environmental Health Association
720 S. Colorado Boulevard, Suite 1000-N
Denver, CO 80246
Phone: (303) 756-9090
Fax: (303) 691-9490
Website: http://www.neha.org
A national professional society for environmental health practi-
tioners, the National Environmental Health Association offers
credentialing programs including the Certiﬁed Food Safety Pro-
fessional. The certiﬁcation requires a combination of education,
experience, and passage of an exam. The association publishes
the Journal of Environmental Health.
In addition to program information, position papers on vari-
ous food safety issues are available on the Website.
National Restaurant Association
1200 17th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20036
Phone: (202) 331-5900
Website: http://www.restaurant.org
216
Directory of Organizations

The National Restaurant Association was established in 1923 to
educate and represent its members and to promote the restau-
rant industry. Although the Association has many activities, food
safety is a priority. The Association’s education foundation cre-
ated the ServSafe food safety training course in the 1970s. The
program is recognized and accepted by more federal, state, and
local jurisdictions than any other food safety education and
training program.
The Website provides program information, training materi-
als, and information on preventing foodborne illness at the
restaurant level (e.g., keeping salad bars safe).
Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC)
40 W. 20th St.
New York, NY 10011
Phone: (212) 727-2700
Fax: (212) 727-1773
Website: http://www.nrdc.org
The Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC) uses law, sci-
ence, and the efforts of its more than 1.2 million members to pro-
tect wildlife, open spaces, and ensure a safe and healthy
environment for all living things. As part of this effort, NRDC
lobbies against dangerous pesticides and supports organic farm-
ing methods, pesticide reduction, and reduction of wastes from
farms into water sources.
Detailed reports and information, as well as links to other
organizations, are available on the Website.
NSF International
P.O. Box 130140
789 N. Dixboro Road
Ann Arbor, MI 48105
Phone: (800) NSF-MARK
Fax: (724) 769-0109
Website: http://www.nsf.org
NSF International, formerly known as the National Sanitation
Foundation, was founded in 1944 as an independent nonproﬁt
organization to develop sanitation standards, provide educa-
tion, and perform third-party conformity audits. One of its
largest programs is the NSF certiﬁcation program. Manufactur-
ers can submit their products to NSF for testing. If the product
Nonproﬁt, Trade, and Professional Organizations
217

meets NSF standards, the NSF mark is placed on the product.
NSF enforces the standards of the mark and will take legal ac-
tion against companies if the products later fail to meet NSF
standards.
The Website offers information on program services, stan-
dards, accreditation, food safety topics and conferences, and a
feature for children called Scrub Club about proper handwash-
ing technique.
Organic Consumers Association
6771 South Silver Hill Drive
Finland, MN 55603
Phone: (218) 226-4164
Fax: (218) 353-7652
Website: http://www.organicconsumers.org
Formerly known as the Pure Food Campaign, the Organic Con-
sumers Association has 850,000 members including individuals
and several thousand organic food business members. The Asso-
ciation works to promote organic and sustainable farming
worldwide. Areas of particular concern for the organization are
genetically engineered food, bovine growth hormone, irradia-
tion, and fair trade. Goals include 30 percent organic agriculture
in the United States by 2015 and subsidies for organic farmers at
the same rates as conventional farmers. The campaign uses pub-
lic education, targeted boycotts, grassroots lobbying, litigation,
activist networking, direct-action protests, and media events.
The Association produces two electronic newsletters: Organic
Bytes and Organic Views.
The organization’s Website has information about various
food safety issues and a database of health food stores and sup-
pliers.
Partnership for Food Safety Education
655 15th Street, NW, 7th Floor
Washington, DC 20005
Phone: (202) 220-0651
Website: http://www.ﬁghtbac.org
The Partnership for Food Safety Education was created in 1997
as a coalition of ten industry, consumer, and government agen-
cies concerned about food safety; now it has twenty organiza-
tional members. The Partnership has created an educational
218
Directory of Organizations

campaign to teach children, the general public, and people at
high risk for foodborne illness about ways to improve food
safety. The campaign, called Fight Bac!, is divided into four ele-
ments, cook, clean, separate, and chill, with messages for differ-
ent age groups. 
The Website features food safety information and ordering
information for teaching materials.
Pesticide Action Network
North American Regional Center
49 Powell Street, Suite 500
San Francisco, CA 94102
Phone: (415) 981-1771
Fax: (415) 981-1991
Website: http://www.panna.org
Pesticide Website: http://www.pesticideinfo.org
The Pesticide Action Network works to replace pesticides with
ecologically sound alternatives worldwide. Pesticides are cur-
rently a $35 billion per year industry. The North American
branch was founded in 1982 to link over 130 affiliated health,
consumer, labor, environment, progressive agriculture, and pub-
lic interest groups in Canada, the United States, and Mexico with
more than 400 partners worldwide to promote healthier, more ef-
fective pest management. The Network uses education, media,
demonstration projects, and international advocacy campaigns
to promote pesticide alternatives.
The Website has program information and access to the pes-
ticide information database, which includes toxicity and regula-
tory information.
Physicians for Social Responsibility (PSR)
Environment and Health Program
1875 Connecticut Avenue, NW, Suite 1012
Washington, DC 20009
Phone: (202) 667-4260
Fax: (202) 667-4201
Website: http://www.psr.org
The Environment and Health Program of Physicians for Social
Responsibility (PSR) is designed to address the challenges to hu-
man health posed by contamination of the environment due to
human activities. The program is concerned with pesticides and
Nonproﬁt, Trade, and Professional Organizations
219

safe food and water as well as clean air and children’s environ-
mental health. PSR serves as secretariat for the International Per-
sistent Organic Pollutants Elimination Network (IPEN), a
coalition of organizations working to eliminate such carbon-
based industrial chemical compounds as PCBs, pesticides, and
dioxin. These substances bioaccumulate in the fatty tissues of liv-
ing organisms and have been documented to cause many health
problems for species at the top of the food chain, including
predator animals and humans. A national campaign PSR con-
ducted to reduce exposure to methylmercury in ﬁsh resulted in
the FDA’s strengthened warnings about fish and seafood con-
sumption for pregnant women and children.
Program information is available at the Website.
Public Citizen
1600 20th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20009
Phone: (202) 588-1000
Website: http://www.citizen.org
Ralph Nader founded Public Citizen in 1971 to be the con-
sumer’s eyes and ears in Washington. Public Citizen has broad
interests; however, two of its areas of concern are food safety and
food irradiation.
The Website offers program information and links to organi-
zations and articles about irradiation and food safety.
Safe Food for the Hungry
Purdue University
School of Consumer and Family Sciences
700 W. State Street
West Lafayette, IN 47907
Phone: (765) 494-8210
Fax: (765) 496-1168
Website: http://www.cfs.purdue.edu/safefood/sfhungry.html
The goal of the Safe Food for the Hungry program is to ensure
safe food in soup kitchens and food distribution centers for the
poor and to enable poor people to eat safely at home or wher-
ever they consume food. Primarily an information organization,
the program publishes nutrition education materials, including
how to modify the food pyramid for people of different cultural
220
Directory of Organizations

backgrounds who favor foods other than those in the typical
American diet and how to evaluate donated food items for food
safety.
Nutrition and program information is available on the
Website.
Safe Tables Our Priority (STOP)
914 Silver Spring Avenue, Suite 206
Silver Spring, MD 20910
Phone: (301) 585-STOP
Fax: (301) 588-3663
Website: http://www.safetables.org
Safe Tables Our Priority (STOP) was founded in 1993 as a sup-
port organization for victims of foodborne illnesses and their
families. It has three main goals: (1) provision of information
and services to those made ill by food; (2) prevention of food-
borne illnesses through consumer education; (3) reform of gov-
ernment and industry practices that allow pathogenic
contamination of food.
STOP is credited by the U.S. Department of Agriculture
(USDA) and President Clinton as being instrumental in effecting
the ﬁrst meat and poultry reform in over ninety years. Regula-
tions now require science-based government inspections, includ-
ing tests for salmonella, and require companies to conduct
microbial testing for bacteria. STOP projects include lobbying for
more stringent bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) testing
and lobbying against carbon monoxide in meat packaging.
The Website includes information for victims about illnesses
and treatment options, food safety facts, status of pertinent legis-
lation, and links to other organizations.
Society for Nutrition Education (SNE)
7150 Winton Drive, Suite 300
Indianapolis, IN 46268
Phone: (317) 328-4627
Fax: (317) 280-8527
Website: http://www.sne.org
A professional society, Society for Nutrition Education (SNE) 
is dedicated to promoting healthy, sustainable food choices. Its
members, nutrition educators, educate individuals, families,
Nonproﬁt, Trade, and Professional Organizations
221

fellow professionals, and students and inﬂuence policy makers
about nutrition, food, and health. The organization publishes the
Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior.
Program and contact information is provided on the
Website.
Truth in Labeling Campaign
850 DeWitt Place, Suite 20B
Chicago, IL 60611
Phone: (858) 481-9333
Website: http://www.truthinlabeling.org
The Truth in Labeling Campaign is a nonprofit organization
working to have all food containing monosodium glutamate
(MSG) clearly labeled. Currently MSG, a neurotoxin that affects
some people, can be included in such ingredients as yeast extract
and natural ﬂavoring without separate labeling. Since 1997, the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has approved MSG for
spraying on crops. 
The Website contains information about lobbying efforts,
how MSG is hidden in food ingredients, and how to determine
whether one is sensitive to MSG.
Union of Concerned Scientists (UCS)
2 Brattle Square
Cambridge, MA 02238-9105
Phone: (617) 547-5552
Fax: (617) 864-9405
Website: http://www.ucsusa.org
The Union of Concerned Scientists (UCS) is a nonproﬁt organiza-
tion that works to advance responsible public policy regarding
technology. UCS advocates sustainable agriculture policies and
practices to reduce agriculture’s impact on the environment and
to ensure economic stability and food security. The organiza-
tion’s main goals include promoting agricultural practices that
minimize pesticide, fertilizer, antibiotic, and energy use, and re-
searching and evaluating the risks and beneﬁts of biotechnology
in agriculture. The Union produces an electronic newsletter each
month, Food and Environment Electronic Digest (FEED), which is
available by e-mail or online on the Website. Information about
the Union’s activities also is available on the Website.
222
Directory of Organizations

International Agencies
Codex Alimentarius Commission
Executive Ofﬁcer for Codex
U.S. Codex Contact Point
Food Safety and Inspection Service
U.S. Department of Agriculture
Room 4861 South Building
1400 Independence Avenue, SW
Washington, DC 20250-3700
Phone: (202) 205-7760
Fax: (202) 720-3157
Website: http://www.codexalimentarius.net
The Codex Alimentarius Commission was established in 1963 by
the World Health Organization and the Food and Agriculture
Organization to set international food standards aimed at en-
abling trade and protecting consumers. The Commission has de-
veloped more than 200 standards for individual foods or groups
of foods. It has also produced general standards for labeling of
prepackaged foods, food hygiene, food additives, contaminants
and toxins in food, irradiated food, maximum residue limits for
pesticides and veterinary drugs, maximum limits for food addi-
tives and contaminants, and guidelines for nutrition labeling.
Members of the Codex Alimentarius Commission include gov-
ernment ofﬁcials, members of trade organizations, businesspeo-
ple, and representatives of consumer groups.
Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO)
United Nations
Liaison Ofﬁce
2175 K Street, NW, Suite 500
Washington, DC 20037
Phone: (202) 653-2400
Fax: (202) 653-5760
Website: http://www.fao.org
The Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO) assesses and
monitors the nutritional status of people all over the world and
provides assistance and advice to improve nutrition for all. FAO
devotes many of its resources to helping the poor and vulnera-
ble in developing countries. Food safety and standards, food
International Agencies
223

quality, and food science are active programs of FAO, and it
sponsors research, disseminates information, and sponsors con-
ferences in these areas. FAO cosponsors with the World Health
Organization the Codex Alimentarius Commission, the interna-
tional standards-setting body that regulates food sold interna-
tionally.
Information about FAO’s activities, including conferences,
as well as nutrition data, food composition, nutritional require-
ments, and food safety documents is available on the Website.
World Health Organization (WHO)
United Nations
Liaison Ofﬁce
1889 F Street, NW, Room 369
Washington, DC 20006
Phone: (202) 974-3299
Fax: (202) 974-3789
Website: http://www.who.int
The World Health Organization (WHO) was founded in 1948. A
specialized agency of the United Nations, WHO promotes tech-
nical cooperation for health among nations and carries out pro-
grams to control and eradicate disease. The Organization’s
safety program works to improve monitoring and control of
foodborne hazards to reduce the incidence of disease. WHO is
the lead agency working to control international pandemics,
and has the latest information on controlling pandemic flu on
its Website. WHO also cosponsors with FAO the Codex Alimen-
tarius Commission, the international food standards-setting
body.
The Website provides program and health information.
National Agencies 
(Canada and United States)
Canada
Canadian Food Inspection Agency
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada
59 Camelot Drive
Ottawa, Ontario K1A OY9
224
Directory of Organizations

Phone: (800) 442-2342 
Website: http://www.inspection.gc.ca
The Canadian Food Inspection Agency is responsible for inspec-
tion services related to food safety as well as animal and plant
health programs.
Food Directorate
Health Protection Branch
Health Canada
Brooke Claxon Building
Tunney’s Pasture
Ottawa, Ontario K1A O12
Phone: (613) 957-1821
Fax: (613) 957-1784
Website: http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/fn-on/securit/index_e.html
The Food Directorate is responsible for food safety policy, stan-
dard setting, risk assessment, analytic research, and auditing
food safety records.
Foodborne, Waterborne and Zoonotic Infections Division 
Bureau of Global Surveillance and Field Epidemiology
Environmental Health Directorate
Health Canada
Brooke Claxon Building
Tunney’s Pasture
Ottawa, Ontario K1A O12
Phone: (613) 957-4243
Fax: (613) 941-7708
Website: http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/efwd-emoha/index.html
The Division of Foodborne, Waterborne and Zoonotic Infections
works to assess and reduce the risk of foodborne, waterborne,
and enteric disease in Canadians through national surveillance
and targeted special studies.
United States
Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition
U.S. Food and Drug Administration
5100 Paint Branch Parkway
College Park, MD 20740
National Agencies
225

Phone: (888) SAFEFOOD
Website: http://www.cfsan.fda.gov/list.htm
The Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition is responsible
for regulating $240 billion of domestic food as well as $15 billion
of imported food. Regulations have the goal of ensuring that
food is safe, nutritious, and wholesome, and that foods are hon-
estly, accurately, and informatively labeled. Center projects in-
clude working to ensure food defense from bioterrorism, Listeria
monocytogenes control, strengthening Hazard Analysis and Criti-
cal Control Points (HACCP) plans, and improved guidelines for
the fresh-cut produce industry. The Center also works with the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and state health de-
partments to resolve food safety concerns, as well as with Codex
Alimentarius to help establish international food safety stan-
dards.
The Website provides information about Center programs
and links to related agencies.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
United States Department of Health and Human Services
1600 Clifton Road NE
Atlanta, GA 30333
Phone: (404) 639-3311
Toll free: (800) 311-3435
Website: http://www.cdc.gov
The mission of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) is to promote health and quality of life by preventing and
controlling disease, injury, and disability. As part of this mission,
the CDC studies, monitors, and researches diseases, and edu-
cates health practitioners and the public about foodborne illness.
The CDC is often called in by state health departments to help
trace and isolate the cause of foodborne illness outbreaks. In-
creasingly, the CDC is sending teams all over the world to assist
with disease prevention because food and people travel, bring-
ing disease across international boundaries.
In addition to background information about the CDC, a
traveler’s health link on the Website gives information about
health hazards and prevention in various parts of the world,
Health Topics A-Z has information about many illnesses includ-
ing foodborne ones, and a data and statistics link gives informa-
tion about particular diseases.
226
Directory of Organizations

Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
401 M Street, SW
Washington, DC 20460
Pesticide hotline: (800) 858-7378 
Website: http://www.epa.gov
The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) contributes to food
safety by regulating the use of chemicals that affect people and
the environment, including pesticides and methylmercury. It
also regulates water and air pollution from conﬁned animal feed-
ing operations (CAFOs).
The Website contains information about EPA activities and
links to related sites.
Food Safety and Inspection Service (FSIS)
U.S. Department of Agriculture
Washington, DC 20250-3700
Phone: (402) 344-5000
Meat and poultry hotline: (888) MPHotline
Fax: (402) 344-5005
Website: http://www.fsis.usda.gov
The Food Safety and Inspection Service (FSIS) is charged with
ensuring the safety of all meat and poultry products sold in in-
terstate and foreign commerce, including imported products.
The FSIS uses 7,600 inspectors in 6,500 plants to check animals
before and after slaughter, and performs microbiological tests to
ensure that products meet safety standards.
FSIS sets standards for all aspects of meat processing, in-
cluding evaluating food ingredients, additives, and compounds
used to prepare and package meat and poultry products, the
plants and equipment used, and processing techniques, such as
plant sanitation and thermal processing. It also regulates label-
ing of meat products. A research unit of FSIS develops and im-
proves analytical procedures for detecting microbial and
chemical adulterants and infectious and toxic agents in meat
and poultry. 
FSIS’s scope encompasses meat and poultry products from
farm to table. Its work includes examining farms, processing,
transportation, distribution, storage, and retail establishments. It
also has been working on food defense and emergency response
and has generated model food emergency plans which are avail-
able on the Website. The meat and poultry hotline, which offers
National Agencies
227

information about how to handle, prepare, and store meat and
poultry, is one of the ways FSIS is reaching out to consumers.
A comprehensive Website offers consumer information, in-
cluding Ask Karen where consumers can ask food safety ques-
tions, HACCP implementation procedures, and agency data.
State Organizations
State agencies address food safety issues within their respective
states. Web addresses of most of these agencies can be found by
using the following formula: http://www.state.[two-letter ab-
breviation of state].us. For example, Alaska’s Website is http://
www.state.ak.us.
Alabama
Epidemiology
State Department of Public Health
RSA Tower, 201 Monroe Street
Montgomery, AL 36104
Mailing address:
P.O. Box 303017
Montgomery, AL 36130
Phone: (334) 206-5971
Fax: (334) 206-5967
Food and Drug Section
State Department of Agriculture and Industries
1445 Federal Drive
Montgomery, AL 36107
Mailing address:
P.O. Box 3336
Montgomery, AL 36109
Phone: (334) 240-7202
Fax: (334) 240-7177
Alaska
Food Safety and Sanitation Program
Division of Environmental Health
228
Directory of Organizations

State Department of Environmental Conservation
555 Cordova Street
Anchorage, AK 99501
Phone: (907) 269-7644 
Toll free: 1-87-SAFEFOOD
Fax: (907) 269-7654
Section of Epidemiology
Division of Public Health
State Department of Health and Social Services
P.O. Box 240249
Anchorage, AK 99524
Phone: (907) 269-8000 
Fax: (907) 562-7802
Arizona
Bureau of Epidemiology and Disease Control
Arizona Department of Health Services
150 N. 18th Avenue
Phoenix, AZ 85007
Phone: (602) 364-3855
Fax: (602) 364-3266
Food Safety and Environmental Services
Ofﬁce of Environmental Health
Arizona Department of Health Services
150 N. 18th Avenue, Suite 430
Phoenix, AZ 85007
Phone: (602) 364-3118
Fax: (602) 364-3146
Arkansas
Epidemiology Branch
State Department of Health
State Health Building
4815  W. Markham
Little Rock, AR 72205-3867
Phone: (501) 661-2893
Fax: (501) 280-4090
State Organizations
229

Food Protection Services
Division of Environmental Health Protection
Bureau of Environmental Health Services
State Department of Health
State Health Building
4815 W.  Markham
Little Rock, AR 72205-3867
Phone: (501) 661-2171
Fax: (501) 661-2572
California
Environmental Health/Investigations Branch (Epidemiology)
1515 Clay Street, Suite 1700
Oakland, CA 94612
Phone: (510) 622-4500
Fax: (510) 622-4505
Food Safety Section
Food and Drug Branch
State Department of Health Services
1501 Capitol Avenue, Suite 6001 
P.O. Box 997413
Sacramento, CA 95899
Phone: (916) 650-6590
State Department of Food and Agriculture
1220 N Street
P.O. Box 942871
Sacramento, CA 94271
Phone: (916) 654-0433
Fax: (916) 654-0403
Includes the Division of Inspection Services, which monitors
feeds, fertilizers, and livestock drugs.
State Environmental Protection Agency
Department of Pesticide Regulation
1001 I Street
P.O. Box 2815
Sacramento, CA 95812
Phone: (916) 445-4000
Fax: (916) 324-1452
230
Directory of Organizations

Colorado
Disease Surveillance Section
Division of Disease Control and Environmental 
Epidemiology
Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment
4300 Cherry Creek Drive South
Denver, CO 80246
Phone: (303) 692-2663
Fax: (303) 782-0904
Food Protection Program
Division of Consumer Protection
Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment
4300 Cherry Creek Drive South
Denver, CO 80246
Phone: (303) 692-3620
Fax: (303) 753-6809
Connecticut
Food Division
State Department of Consumer Protection
State Ofﬁce Building
165 Capitol Avenue
Hartford, CT 06106
Phone: (860) 713-6050
Fax: (860) 713-7283
Food Protection Program
Environmental Health Division
State Department of Community Health
410 Capitol Avenue
P.O. Box 340308
Hartford, CT 06134-0308
Phone: (860) 509-7297
Fax: (860) 509-7295
Infectious Disease Division
Bureau of Community Health
State Department of Community Health
410 Capitol Avenue
P.O. Box 340308
Hartford, CT 06134-0308
State Organizations
231

Phone: (860) 509-7995
Fax: (860) 509-7910
Delaware
Epidemiology Branch
Delaware  Department of Health and Social Services
Public Health Division 
Administration Building
Herman Hollaway Sr. Campus
1901 North Du Pont Highway
New Castle, DE 19720
Phone: (302) 739-3033
Food Products Inspection and Pesticides
Department of Agriculture
2320 South Du Pont Highway
Dover, DE 19901
Phone: (302) 698-4500
Fax: (302) 697-4468
Ofﬁce of Food Protection
Delaware Public Health
Administration Building
Herman Hollaway Sr. Campus
1901 North Du Pont Highway
New Castle, DE 19720
Phone: (302) 744-4546
Fax: (302) 739-3839
District of Columbia
Epidemiology 
Primary Care and Prevention Administration
Department of Health
825 N. Capitol Street, NE
Washington, DC 20002
Phone: (202) 442-5899
Fax: (202) 442-4834
Food Protection Division
Department of Health
232
Directory of Organizations

825 N. Capitol Street, NE
Washington, DC 20002
Phone: (202) 535-2176
Fax: (202) 535-1359
Florida
Division of Food Safety
Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services
Laboratory Complex
3125 Conner Boulevard
Tallahassee, FL 32399-1650
Phone: (850) 488-0295
Fax: (850) 488-7946
Food and Waterborne Disease (Epidemiology)
State Department of Health
2585 Merchants Row Boulevard, Suite 140
Tallahassee, FL 32399
Mailing address:
4052 Bald Cypress Way
Bin A 08
Tallahassee, FL 32399
Phone: (850) 245-4116
Fax: (850) 922-8473
Georgia
Consumer Protection Field Forces Division
State Department of Agriculture
19 Martin Luther King Drive SW
Atlanta, GA 30334-2001
Phone: (404) 656-3627
Fax: (404) 463-6428
Epidemiology/Prevention Branch
Division of Public Health
Georgia Department of Human Resources
2 Peachtree Street NW, Suite 29–250
Atlanta, GA 30303
Phone: (404) 657-2588
Fax: (404) 657-7517
State Organizations
233

Hawaii
Disease Outbreak Control Division
State Department of Health
Kinau Hale Building
1250 Punchbowl Street
P.O. Box 3378
Honolulu, HI 96813
Phone: (808) 586-4586
Fax: (808) 580-4595
Quality Assurance Division
State Department of Agriculture
1851 Auiki Street
Honolulu, HI 96819
Phone: (808) 832-0705
Fax: (808) 832-0683
Idaho
Food Protection Program
Epidemiological Programs
Bureau of Environmental Health and Safety
Idaho Department of Health and Welfare
450 W. State Street
P.O. Box 83720
Boise, ID 83720-0036
Food Protection phone: (208) 334-5936
Epidemiology phone: (208) 334-5939
Fax (both programs): (208) 332-7307
Illinois
Division of Infectious Disease
State Department of Public Health
525 W. Jefferson
Springﬁeld, IL 62761
Phone: (217) 782-6562
Fax: (217) 524-7924
Food Section
Division of Food, Drugs, and Dairies
State Department of Public Health
234
Directory of Organizations

525 W. Jefferson
Springﬁeld, IL 62761
Phone: (217) 785-2439
Fax: (217) 782-0943
Indiana
Epidemiology Resources Center
Indiana State Department of Health
2 North Meridian Street
Indianapolis, IN 46204
Phone: (317) 233-7807
Fax: (317) 234-2814
Food Protection
Indiana State Department of Health
2 North Meridian Street
Indianapolis, IN 46204
Phone: (317) 233-7467
Fax: (317) 233-7334
Iowa
Epidemiology 
Department of Public Health
Lucas State Ofﬁce Building 
321 East 12th Street
Des Moines, IA 50319
Phone: (515) 281-4941
Fax: (515) 281-4958
Food and Consumer Safety Bureau
State Department of Inspections and Appeals
Lucas State Ofﬁce Building, Third Floor
321 East 12th Street
Des Moines, IA 50319
Phone: (515) 281-8587
Fax: (515) 281-3291
Kansas
Bureau of Epidemiology and Disease Prevention
Department of Health and Environment
State Organizations
235

Curtis Building
1000 SW Jackson Street
Topeka, KS 66612
Phone: (785) 296-6536
Fax: (785) 291-3775
Food Protection and Consumer Safety
Department of Health and Environment
Curtis Building
1000 SW Jackson Street
Topeka, KS 66612
Phone: (785) 296-1705
Fax: (785) 296-6532
Kentucky
Division of Epidemiology
Cabinet for Health and Family Services
275 E. Main Street
Frankfort, KY 40621
Phone: (502) 564-7243
Fax: (502) 569-4553
Food Safety Branch
Cabinet for Health and Family Services
275 E. Main Street
Frankfort, KY 40621
Phone: (502) 564-7181
Fax: (502) 564-6533
Louisiana
Infectious Disease/Epidemiology Section
Division of Laboratories
Ofﬁce of Public Health
Louisiana Department of Health and Hospitals
325 Loyola Avenue
P.O. Box 60630
New Orleans, LA 70160
Phone: (504) 568-5005
Fax: (504) 568-5006
236
Directory of Organizations

Retail Food Program
Division of Environmental Health Services
Louisiana Department of Health and Hospitals
6867 Bluebonnet Boulevard
Baton Rouge, LA 70810
Phone: (225) 763-5553
Fax: (225) 763-5552
Maine
Eating and Lodging Program
Bureau of Health
Maine Department of Health and Human Services
221 State Street
Augusta, ME
Mailing address:
11 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333
Phone: (207) 287-1978
Fax: (207) 287-3165
Epidemiology 
Bureau of Health
Maine Department of Health and Human Services
221 State Street
Augusta, ME
Mailing address:
11 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333
Phone: (207) 287-5183
Fax: (207) 287-8186
Food Program
Division of Quality Assurance
Department of Agriculture, Food and Rural Resources
Deering Building AMHI Complex
Augusta, ME
Mailing address:
28 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333
Phone: (207) 764-2100
Fax: (207) 287-5576
State Organizations
237

Maryland
Division of Food Control
State Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
6 St. Paul Street
Baltimore, MD 21202
Phone: (410) 767-8440
Fax: (410) 333-8931
Epidemiology 
State Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
201 W. Preston Street
Baltimore, MD 21201
Phone: (410) 767-6700
Fax: (410) 669-4215
Massachusetts
Communicable Disease Control
State Department of Public Health
305 South Street
Jamaica Plain, MA 02130
Phone: (617) 983-6550
Fax: (617) 983-6925
Food Protection Program
State Department of Public Health
305 South Street
Jamaica Plain, MA 02130
Phone: (617) 983-6712
Fax: (617) 983-6712
Michigan
Bureau of Epidemiology
State Department of Community Health
3423 N. Martin Luther King Boulevard
Lansing, MI 48909
Phone: (517) 335-8900
Fax: (517) 335-8121
238
Directory of Organizations

Food Division
State Department of Agriculture
525 W. Allegan
Lansing, MI 48933
Mailing address:
P.O. Box 30017
Lansing, MI 48909
Phone: (517) 373-1060
Fax: (517) 373-3333
Minnesota
Dairy,  Food, Feed and Meat Inspection Division 
State Department of Agriculture
Freeman Building
625 N. Robert Street
St. Paul, MN 55155 
Phone: (651) 201-6027
Fax: (651)-201-6119
Epidemiology 
State Department of Health 
Freeman Building
625 N. Robert Street
St. Paul, MN 55155
Mailing address:
P.O. Box 64975
St. Paul, MN 55164
Phone: (651) 201-5664
Fax: (651) 201-4986
Mississippi
Division of Epidemiology
State Board of Health
P.O. Box 1700
2423 N. State Street
Jackson, MS 39215
Phone: (601) 576-7725
Fax: (601) 576-7497
State Organizations
239

Division of Food Protection
State Board of Health
P.O. Box 1700
2423 N. State Street
Jackson, MS 39215
Phone: (601) 576-7689
Fax: (601) 576-7632
Missouri
Food Protection and Processing
State Department of Health and Senior Services
930 Wildwood Drive
P.O. Box 570
Jefferson City, MO 65102
Phone: (573) 751-6095
Fax: (573) 526-7377
Ofﬁce of Epidemiology Services
Division of Environmental Health and Communicable Disease
Prevention
State Department of Health and Senior Services
920 Wildwood Drive
P.O. Box 570
Jefferson City, MO 65102
Phone: (573) 751-6128
Fax: (573) 751-6128
Montana
Epidemiology 
Montana Department of Public Health and Human Services
111. N. Sanders
Helena, MT 59620
Mailing address:
P.O. Box 4210
Helena, MT 59604
Phone: (406) 444-3986
Fax: (406) 444-2920
Food and Consumer Safety
Health Policy and Services Division
240
Directory of Organizations

Montana Department of Public Health and Human Services
1400 Broadway, #C-214
Helena, MT 59620 
Phone: (406) 444-5309
Fax: (406) 444-4135
Nebraska
Bureau of Dairies and Food
State Department of Agriculture
301 Centennial Mall South
P.O. Box 95064
Lincoln, NE 68509
Phone: (402) 471-2536
Fax: (402) 471-2759
Epidemiology 
Regulation and Licensure
State Department of Regulation and Licensure, Health and
Human Services System 
301 Centennial Mall South
P.O. Box 95007
Lincoln, NE 68509
Phone: (402) 471-0550
Fax: (402) 471-3601
Nevada
Bureau of Health Protection Services
State Department of Human Resources
1179 Fairview Drive
Carson City, NV 89701
Phone: (775) 687-6353 x250
Fax: (775) 687-5197
Epidemiology
State Department of Human Resources
505 E. King Street, Room 600
Carson City, NV 89701
Phone: (775) 684-5911
Fax: (775) 684-5998
State Organizations
241

New Hampshire
Bureau of Disease Control (Epidemiology)
State Department of Health and Human Services
Health and Welfare Building
6 Hazen Drive
Concord, NH 03301
Phone: (603) 271-4476
Fax: (603) 271-0545
Food Protection Section
State Department of Health and Human Services
Health and Welfare Building
6 Hazen Drive
Concord, NH 03301
Phone: (603) 271-4858
Fax: (603) 271-4859
New Jersey
Division of Epidemiology/Environmental/
Occupational Health
State Department of Health and Senior Services
Health Agriculture Building
John Fitch Plaza
Trenton, NJ 08625
Mailing address:
P.O. Box 369
Trenton, NJ 08625
Phone: (609) 588-7463
Fax: (609) 588-7431
Food and Drug Safety Program
State Department of Health and Senior Services
3635 Quakerbridge Road
Hamilton, NJ 08619
Phone: (609) 588-3123
Fax: (609) 588-3135
New Mexico
Food Program
State Department of Environment
242
Directory of Organizations

525 Camino de Los Marquez, Suite 1
Santa Fe, NM 87505
Phone: (505) 476-8608
Fax: (505) 476-8654
Ofﬁce of Epidemiology
State Department of Health
1190 St. Francis Drive
Santa Fe, NM 87505
Phone: (505) 827-0006
Fax: (505) 827-0013
New York
Division of Epidemiology
State Department of Health
#503 Corning Tower Building
Empire State Plaza
Albany, NY 12237
Phone: (518) 474-1055
Fax: (518) 473-2301
Food Protection Section
State Department of Health
547 River Street, Room 515
Troy, NY 12180
Phone: (518) 402-7600
Fax: (518) 402-7609
North Carolina
Dairy and Food Protection Branch
Division of Environmental Health
North Carolina Department of Health and Human Services
1630 Mail Service Center
Raleigh, NC 27699
Phone: (919) 715-0926
Fax: (919) 715-4739
Epidemiology Section
State Department of Health and Human Services
1902 Mail Service Center
State Organizations
243

Raleigh, NC 27699
Phone: (919) 733-3421
Fax: (919) 733-0195
North Dakota
Division of Food and Lodging
State Department of Health
600 E. Boulevard Avenue
Bismarck, ND 58505
Phone: (701) 328-1292
Fax: (701) 328-1890
Epidemiology 
Division of Disease Control
State Department of Health
600 E. Boulevard Avenue
Bismarck, ND 58505
Phone: (701) 328-2378
Fax: (701) 328-1412
Ohio
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control
State Department of Health
246 N. High Street
P.O. Box 118
Columbus, OH 43216
Phone: (614) 466-0265
Fax: (614) 644-7740
Division of Food Safety
State Department of Agriculture
Broomﬁeld Administration Building
8995 E. Main Street
Reynoldsburg, OH 43068
Phone: (614) 728-6250
Fax: (614) 644-0720
Oklahoma
Disease Prevention Services (Epidemiology)
State Department of Health
244
Directory of Organizations

1000 NE 10th Street
Oklahoma City, OK 73117
Phone: (405) 271-4060
Fax: (405) 271-6680
Food Safety Division
2800 N. Lincoln Boulevard
Oklahoma City, OK 73105
P.O. Box 528804
Oklahoma City, OK 73152
Phone: (405) 521-3741
Fax: (405) 522-0756
Oregon
Center for Disease Prevention and Epidemiology
State Department of Human Services
500 Summer Street NE
Salem, OR 97310
Phone: (503) 731-4023
Fax: (503) 731-4082
Food Safety Division
State Department of Agriculture
Agriculture Building
635 Capitol Street NE
Salem, OR 97301
Phone: (503) 986-4720
Fax: (503) 986-4729
Pennsylvania
Bureau of Epidemiology
State Department of Health
Health and Welfare Building
7th & Forster Streets
P.O. Box 90
Harrisburg, PA 17108
Phone: (717) 783-4677
Bureau of Food Safety and Laboratory Services
State Department of Agriculture
2301 N. Cameron Street
State Organizations
245

Harrisburg, PA 17110
Phone: (717) 787-4315
Fax: (717) 787-1873
Rhode Island
Disease Control (Epidemiology)
State Department of Health
3 Capitol Hill
Providence, RI 02908
Phone: (401) 222-2577
Fax: (401) 222-2488
Ofﬁce of Food Protection
State Department of Health
3 Capitol Hill
Providence, RI 02908
Phone: (401) 222-2750
Fax: (401) 222-4775
South Carolina
Bureau of Disease Control (Epidemiology)
State Department of Health and Environmental Control
J. Marion Sims Building
2600 Bull Street
Columbia, SC 29201
Phone: (803) 898-0861
Fax: (803) 898-0897
Division of Food Protection
Bureau of Environmental Health
State Department of Health and Environmental Control
J. Marion Sims Building
2600 Bull Street
Columbia, SC 29201
Phone: (803) 896-0640
Fax: (803) 896-0645
South Dakota
Disease Prevention/Epidemiology
State Department of Health
246
Directory of Organizations

Health Building
600 E. Capitol Avenue
Pierre, SD 57501
Phone: (605) 773-3737
Fax: (605) 773-5509
Division of Health Systems Development/Regulation
State Department of Health
Health Building
600 E. Capitol Avenue
Pierre, SD 57501
Phone: (605) 773-3364
Fax: (605) 773-5904
Tennessee
Epidemiology 
State Department of Health
426 5th Avenue North
Nashville, TN 37247
Phone: (615) 741-7247
Fax: (615) 741-3857
Regulatory Services Division
State Department of Agriculture
Porter Building
440 Hogan Road
Nashville, TN 37220
Mailing Address:
Ellington Agricultural Center
P.O. Box 40627
Nashville, TN 37204
Phone: (615) 837-5152
Fax: (615) 837-5335
Texas
Disease Control and Prevention/Epidemiology
State Department of Health
1100 W. 49th Street
Austin, TX 78756
Phone: (512) 458-7268
Fax: (512) 458-7689
State Organizations
247

Foods Group
Bureau of Food and Drug Safety
Department of State Health Services
1100 W. 49th Street
Austin, TX 78756
Phone: (512) 834-6770 x 2276
Fax: (512) 834-6726
Utah
Bureau of Epidemiology
State Department of Health
46 N. Medical Drive
P.O. Box 142802
Salt Lake City, UT 84113
Phone: (801) 538-6191
Fax: (801) 538-9923
Food Safety and Environmental Services
288 N. 1460 West
P.O. Box 142104
Salt Lake City, UT 84114
Phone: (801) 538-6191
Fax: (801) 538-6036
Vermont
Division of Food Safety and Consumer Protection
State Department of Agriculture, Food, and Markets
116 State Street, Drawer #20
Montpelier, VT 05620
Phone: (802) 828-2426
Fax: (802) 828-5983
Epidemiology 
State Department of Health
108 Cherry Street
P.O. Box 70
Burlington, VT 05402
Phone: (802) 863-7240
Fax: (802) 863-7701
248
Directory of Organizations

Virginia
Division of Food/Environmental Services
State Department of Health
1500 E. Main Street, Room 214
P.O. Box 2448
Richmond, VA 23218
Phone: (804) 864-7473
Fax: (804) 864-7475
Ofﬁce of Epidemiology
State Department of Health
1500 E. Main Street, Room 214
P.O. Box 2448
Richmond, VA 23218
Phone: (804) 786-6029
Fax: (804) 786-1076
Washington
Communicable Disease Epidemiology Section
State Department of Health
1610 NE 150th Street
Shoreline, WA 98155
Phone: (206) 418-5500
Fax: (206) 418-5515
Ofﬁce of Food Safety and Shellﬁsh Programs
State Department of Health
101 Israel Road SE
P.O. Box 47890
Olympia, WA 98504
Phone: (360) 236-3525
Fax: (360) 236-2257
West Virginia
Division of Surveillance and Disease Control
State Department of Health and Human Resources
305 Capitol Street, Room 125
Charleston, WV 25301
Phone: (304) 558-5358
Fax: (304) 558-6335
State Organizations
249

Environmental Health Services
State Department of Health and Human Resources
Capitol and Washington Streets
1 Davis Square
Charleston, WV 25301
Phone: (304) 558-2981
Fax: (304) 558-1071
Wisconsin
Division of Food Safety
Department of Agriculture, Trade, and Consumer Protection
2811 Agriculture Drive
P.O. Box 8911
Madison, WI 53708
Phone: (608) 224-4701
Fax: (608) 224-4710
Epidemiology 
State Department of Health and Family Services
1  West Wilson Street
P.O. Box 7850
Madison, WI 53707
Phone: (608) 267-9003
Fax: (608) 266-9006
Wyoming
Division of Consumer Health Services (Food Safety)
State Department of Agriculture
2219 Carey Avenue
Cheyenne, WY 82002
Phone: (307) 777-6587
Fax: (307) 777-6593
Epidemiology 
State Department of Health
117 Hathaway Building
Cheyenne, WY 82002
Phone: (307) 777-7958
Fax: (307) 777-5226
250
Directory of Organizations

8
Resources
T
here are many helpful books and journals for studying food
safety issues. The books below were chosen based on cur-
rency, ideas, and accessibility to general readers. Older books
were included when the ideas they presented were unique and
their research was still pertinent. Books are divided into the top-
ics described after this paragraph to make it easier to ﬁnd appro-
priate materials. At the end of this chapter is a list of magazines
and journals that are speciﬁcally about food safety or which con-
sistently offer food safety articles. Many other magazines and
journals occasionally present food safety articles. The databases
listed in the nonprint resources section provide access to a range
of articles, from the general to the technical, and allow more fo-
cused research. 
Reference Works: Dictionaries, encyclopedias, indexes, and
manuals about food safety.
Animal Products: Hazards of animal products, including
foodborne disease and high levels of pesticide and drug
residues, and ways to keep animal products safe.
Bioterrorism: How food production and agriculture might
be targets for terrorist attacks, and how attacks might be
defended against.
Consumer Resources: Consumer information about safe food
handling, storing, cooking, and avoiding foodborne illness.
Epidemiology: Texts explaining the basics of epidemiology,
the study of how diseases spread among populations.
251

252
Resources
Farming: Discussions of modern farming methods and how
methods affect food safety.
Food Additives, Toxins, and Contaminants: The safety of
chemicals added intentionally or unintentionally to food.
Foodborne Diseases: Works speciﬁcally about foodborne
illness.
Food Safety in Commercial Applications: Practical methods
for food safety in restaurants, processing facilities, and
other food service industry establishments, including
course materials for those studying for food safety exams. 
Food Safety Law and Policy: Theoretical and practical
works about how food policy should be implemented.
Genetically Modiﬁed Foods: Discussions of the effects of
biotechnology on the way many foods are produced. 
History: Works describing how food safety legislation 
came about.
Inﬂuenza: Discussions of inﬂuenza and potential
pandemics.
Microbiology of Foods: The role microorganisms play in
food spoilage, food production, food preservation, and
foodborne disease.
Pesticides and Antibiotics: Antibiotic and pesticide use and
safety in food production and how to avoid foods with the
most pesticides.
Books
Reference Works
Hui, Y. H., J. Richard Gorham, K. D. Murrell, and Dean Cliver,
eds. 2001. Foodborne Disease Handbook. 2nd ed. 4 vols. New
York: Marcel Dekker, Inc. ISBN: Vol. 1: 0-824-70337-5; Vol. 2: 
0-824-70338-3; Vol. 3: 0-824-7034-3X; Vol. 4: 0-824-70344-8. Price
$195 per volume.

Volume 1, Bacterial Pathogens, has chapters on bacterial dis-
eases as well as surveillance of foodborne disease, indicator or-
ganisms in food, and investigating foodborne disease. Volume 2,
Viruses, Parasites, Pathogens and HACCP, has material on the role
of U.S. poison centers in viral exposures, environmental consider-
ations in preventing foodborne hepatitis A, as well as in-depth
coverage of the titled material. Volume 3, Plant Toxicants, covers
the toxicology of naturally occurring chemicals in such food as
mushrooms, aflatoxins, and the medical management of plant
poisoning. Volume 4, Seafood and Environmental Toxins, features
material on how pollutants in the ocean affect food, marine or-
ganisms that make their own toxins, irradiation, and food addi-
tives. Each article contains many references, and every volume
has an index.
Igoe, Robert S., and Y. H. Hui. 2001. Dictionary of Food Ingredi-
ents. 4th ed. New York: Springer. 234 pp. ISBN: 0-834-21952-2.
Price $55.
Each entry gives use, chemical structure, and chemical properties
of food ingredients. The dictionary also includes a bibliography,
list of food additives accepted by the European Union, additives
or substances approved for use in the United States, and de-
scribes ingredient categories (e.g., chelating and emulsifying
agents).
Roberts, Cynthia A. 2001. The Food Safety Information Hand-
book. Westport, CT: Oryx Press. 312 pp. ISBN: 157-356305-6.
Price $62.95.
This resource guide gives an overview of food safety and covers
food safety issues, chronology of events, regulation, statistics,
and careers. Its extensive annotated bibliography of resources
encompasses reports and brochures, books and newsletters,
Websites and electronic media, educational resources, and orga-
nizations.
Robinson, Richard, Carl Batt, and Pradip Patel, eds. 2000. Ency-
clopedia of Food Microbiology. 3 vols. San Diego, CA: Academic
Press. 2372 pp. ISBN: 0-12-227070-3. Price $925.
The 358 articles cover important groups of bacteria, fungi, para-
sites, and viruses, methods for their detection in foods, factors
Books
253

that govern the behavior of these organisms, and likely outcomes
of microbial growth or metabolism in terms of disease and/or
spoilage. This work also covers beneficial microorganisms for
industrial fermentation, including traditional food fermentations
from the Middle and Far East and production of fermented foods
like bread, cheese, and yogurt. References, illustrations, charts,
tables, and color plates.
Schmidt, Ronald H., and Gary E. Rodrick, eds. 2003. Food Safety
Handbook. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley and Sons. 850 pp. ISBN: 0-471-
21064-1. Price $175.
Although written for scientists and food technologists, accessible
writing makes this a useful work for intelligent lay readers. The
handbook deﬁnes and categorizes the real and perceived safety is-
sues surrounding food and offers scientiﬁc, unbiased perspectives.
Part I describes potential food safety hazards and provides in-
depth background on risk assessment and epidemiology. Part II
covers biological hazards, while Part III covers chemical and phys-
ical hazards, control systems and intervention strategies for reduc-
ing or preventing risks, regulatory surveillance including Hazard
Analysis and Critical Control Points (HACCP) system, food safety
intervention in the retail sector, worldwide food safety issues,
Codex Alimentarius, European Union perspectives on genetically
modiﬁed foods, and globally accepted food standards.
Sheftel, Victor O. 2000. Indirect Food Additives and Polymers:
Migration and Toxicology. Boca Raton, FL: Lewis Publishers.
1304 pp. ISBN: 156-670499-5. Price $169.95.
Materials that contact food include plastics (or polymeric materi-
als), rubber, cellulose, metal, glass, paper, and paperboard. This
work studies potential hazards of the materials and their ingredi-
ents to human health and provides recommendations for safe
use. Each entry includes molecular and structural formulas, Reg-
istry of Toxic Effects of Chemical Substance (RTEC) number, syn-
onyms, properties, applications, exposure, acute toxicity,
repeated exposure, long-term toxicity, reproductive toxicity, al-
lergenic toxicity, mutagenicity, carcinogenicity, chemobiokinet-
ics, and regulations for use.Talbot, Ross B. 1994. Historical
Dictionary of the International Food Agencies: FAO, WFP, WFC,
IFAD. Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press. 169 pp. ISBN: 0-810-
82847-2. Price $58.
254
Resources

This dictionary has detailed entries and chronologies of the ma-
jor international food agencies, as well as organizational charts
and tables. Although not limited to food safety issues, this dictio-
nary can help the reader identify the speciﬁc roles each agency
plays in international food safety.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2005. United
States Food Code 2005. Springﬁeld, VA: National Technical In-
formation Service. –102200. Price $59. Available free online at
http://www.cfsan.fda.gov/~dms/fc05-toc.html. 
The complete United States Food Code was updated jointly by the
Food and Drug Administration, Food Safety Inspection Service
of the U.S. Department of Agriculture, and the Centers for Dis-
ease Control in collaboration with the Conference for Food Pro-
tection, state and local officials, consumers, industry
representatives, and academics. The code explains precautions
that should be taken to prevent specific foodborne illnesses. It
also gives explanations for regulations.
Weidenborner, Martin. 2001. Encyclopedia of Food Mycotoxins.
New York: Springer. 296 pp. ISBN: 0-354-067556-6. Price $194.
Each entry in the mycotoxin section lists all naturally occurring
sources of the mycotoxin being discussed as well as chemical
data, fungal sources, toxicity, and chemical structure. Other sec-
tions feature a list of abbreviations, table of mycotoxin legislation
with maximum allowable limits by country, references, and rec-
ommended journals.
Animal Products
Committee on Drug Use in Food Animals; Panel on Animal
Health, Food Safety, and Public Health; Board on Agriculture,
National Research Council; Food and Nutrition Council, Insti-
tute of Medicine. 1999. Use of Drugs in Food Animals: Beneﬁts
and Risks. Washington, DC: National Academy Press. 253 pp.
ISBN: 0-309-054-3. Price $49.95. Available free online at http://
newton.nap.edu/catalog/5137.html#toc.
Based on a review of the use of drugs in food animals over the
course of thirty years, this work discusses production practices;
beneﬁts and hazards to human health from animal drug use; de-
velopment of new drugs including the approval process;
Books
255

description of current drug residue monitoring programs; an-
tibiotic resistance; economic implications of eliminating antibi-
otics in subtherapeutic doses; alternative strategies to reduce the
need for drug use; and promising areas of research. Recommen-
dations are offered for improving drug resistance monitoring,
drug residue monitoring, and developing alternative strategies
to drug use.
Gil, J. Infante, and J. Costa Durao. 1990. A Colour Atlas of Meat
Inspection. London: Wolfe Publishing Ltd. 453 pp. ISBN: 0-723-
40708-8. Price $159.95.
This atlas, intended for those working as meat inspectors or study-
ing animal pathology, features pictures that have been collected
over more than twenty years covering most pathological condi-
tions likely to occur in day-to-day meat inspection, both before
and after slaughter. A few of the pictures involve cases of natural
death. Each picture describes the carcass’s condition, gives other
conditions likely to be present, and makes recommendations
based on the International Code of Practice for Ante-Mortem and
Post-Mortem Judgment of Slaughter Animals and Meat.
Hubbert, William, Harry V. Hagstad, Elizabeth Spangler, Michael
H. Hinton, and Keith L. Hughes. 1996. Food Safety and Quality
Assurance: Foods of Animal Origin. 2nd ed. Ames, IA: Iowa
State University. 305 pp. ISBN: 0-813-8-0714-X. Price $49.95.
Designed for use as a textbook, this work prepares students en-
tering the veterinarian field to identify and prevent human
health hazards of animal origin from entering the food chain.
The book covers government and private sector organizations
and their role in improving food safety; principles of safe food
production, processing, and handling; and data collection and
analysis techniques for investigation of foodborne disease out-
breaks. It includes information about laws and processes around
the world.
Lyman, Howard, with Glen Merzer. 1998. Mad Cowboy: Plain
Truth from the Cattle Rancher Who Won’t Eat Meat. New York:
Scribner. 223 pp. ISBN: 0-684-84516-4. Price $23. 
Howard Lyman was a fourth-generation Montana dairy farmer
and cattle rancher when a serious illness prompted him to rethink
256
Resources

the chemical farming methods he was using. In this account, Ly-
man discusses mad cow disease; rBGH (the synthetic hormone
used to boost milk production); the effect of chemical agriculture
on the environment; and tells his own story of how he went from
cattle rancher to president of the International Vegetarian Union.
In 1996, he was sued for food disparagement after a guest appear-
ance on the Oprah Winfrey Show.
Lyman, Howard F., with Glen Merzer and Joanna Samorow
Merzer. 2005. No More Bull; The Mad Cowboy Targets America’s
Worst Enemy: Our Diet. New York: Scribner. 288 pp. ISBN: 0-
743-28698-7. Price $13.
This book updates Lyman’s previous work, Mad Cowboy, with a
critical look at bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) and ar-
gues that the U.S. Department of Agriculture has not properly
controlled the disease. Lyman advocates a vegan diet and in-
cludes seven principles for healthy eating. These recommenda-
tions are followed by a collection of recipes and sample menus.
Robbins, John. 2001. The Food Revolution: How Your Diet Can
Help Save Your Life and The World. Newburyport, MA: Conari
Press. 340 pp. ISBN: 0-157-324702-2. Price $17.95.
In this follow-up book to Diet for a New America, John Robbins, a
vegetarian activist, discusses the response to his ﬁrst book and
includes up-to-date statistics about the detrimental effects on hu-
man health of eating animal products, including higher rates of
cancer, heart disease, osteoporosis, and diabetes. The bioaccumu-
lation of pesticides in meat and dairy products, environmental
consequences of meat production, and humanitarian aspects of
factory farming are also discussed.
Bioterrorism
Chalk, Peter. 2004. Hitting America’s Soft Underbelly: The Po-
tential Threat of Deliberate Biological Attacks Against the U.S.
Agricultural and Food Industry. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Cor-
poration. 68 pp. ISBN: 0-833-03522-3. Price $18.
This thorough report assesses the vulnerabilities of the agricul-
tural sector and the food industry in general to biological terror
threats. It discusses the results of a RAND Corporation study
Books
257

with methods used for analysis, the state of research on threats to
agricultural livestock and produce, agriculture’s importance to
the U.S. economy, how the vulnerabilities in the general food in-
dustry might be exploited by terrorists, and likely outcomes of a
successful attack. It also considers why terrorists might not
choose to target agriculture and makes policy recommendations
for the future. References, bibliography, and index.
Rasco, Barbara, and Gleyn E. Bledsoe. 2005. Bioterrorism and
Food Safety. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. 432  pp. ISBN: 0-849-
32787-3. Price $139.95.
Barbara Rasco, a scientist and attorney, and Gleyn Bledsoe, a
certified public accountant specializing in management advi-
sory services to ﬁshery, agricultural, and food processing com-
panies, bring a business perspective to bioterrorism issues.
Besides terrorist threats from foreign organizations, the authors
consider ecoterrorism perpetrated on biotechnology targets.
They discuss the nature of bioterrorist threats, potential biologi-
cal and toxic chemical agents, bioterrorism regulations and their
impact on the safety of the food supply and trade, food security
strategies and plans for agricultural and food processing con-
cerns, security improvements by tracking food, operational risk
management approach to food safety, Food Safety and Inspec-
tion Service (FSIS) safety and security guidelines for distribu-
tion of meat, poultry, and eggs, emergency preparedness
competence, terrorist threats to food including guidelines for
prevention, and public health response to biological and chemi-
cal terror. Index and references.
World Health Organization. 2002. Terrorist Threats to Food:
Guidance for Establishing and Strengthening Prevention and Re-
sponse Systems. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organiza-
tion. 45 pp. ISBN: 9-215-4584-4. Price $16.20.
This document provides policy guidance to countries upgrading
their abilities to combat terrorist threats to food with better pre-
vention and response programs. It considers the comparative
risks of food and other media as vehicles for terrorist threats; po-
tential effects of food terrorism including illness, death, eco-
nomic, and trade effects; impact on public health services;
chemical and biological agents and radionuclear materials that
258
Resources

could be used in food terrorism; establishing and strengthening
national prevention and response systems; and consequences of
a food safety emergency. The appendix has speciﬁc measures for
consideration by the food industry, including risk awareness,
general security, mail handling, data security, emergency proce-
dures, hazardous materials handling, employee supervision, and
facility access.
Consumer Resources
Lehmann, Robert. 1997. Cooking for Life: A Guide to Nutrition
and Food Safety for the HIV Positive Community. New York:
Dell. 244 pp. ISBN: 0-440-50753-7. Price $10.95.
This practical guide addresses preventing wasting, the ideal diet
for health, cooking tips, and a food safety section that includes
tips on shopping, cooking, using a bleach solution to keep the
kitchen sanitized, and eating out safely away from home. Al-
though aimed at the HIV-positive, the food safety section would
be helpful for any high-risk individual.
Satin, Morton. 1999. Food Alert: The Ultimate Sourcebook for
Food Safety. New York: Facts on File. 306 pp. ISBN: 0-816-0-3935-6
(hardcover). Price $38.50. ISBN 0-816-03935-4 (paper). Price $14.95.
This food safety book includes numerous charts, tables, check-
lists, and quizzes. Historical background, antibiotic resistance,
and the twenty most common causes of foodborne illness in the
kitchen comprise the ﬁrst part of the book. Several chapters are
divided by food type: poultry, beef, dairy products, fish and
shellfish, and fruits and vegetables. These chapters tell what
kinds of hazards exist and how to avoid them. A helpful appen-
dix lists disease causes and symptoms, safe food storage proce-
dures, and information sources on foodborne diseases.
Scott, Elizabeth, and Paul Sockett. 1998. How to Prevent Food
Poisoning. New York: John Wiley and Sons. 207 pp. ISBN: 0-471-
19576-6. Price $14.95.
In this book, two scientists, Elizabeth Scott, a microbiologist
specializing in consumer hygiene issues, and Paul Sockett, a
microbiologist and epidemiologist, use their extensive training
Books
259

to explain how consumers can prevent food poisoning. Chap-
ters explain how food poisoning happens; how to shop safely
for food; how to prepare, cook, and store food in everyday
home situations; and how to ensure food safety for higher risk
individuals. The book also includes a glossary and descriptions
of various foodborne illnesses.
Shaw, Ian. 2005. Is it Safe to Eat: Enjoy Eating and Minimize
Food Risks. New York: Springer. 251 pp. ISBN: 0-354-021286-8.
Price $39.95.
Starting with a history, this account of food safety issues from a
consumer point of view puts food risk into perspective. The
book covers positive and negative aspects of bacteria in food,
viruses, mad cow disease and prions, natural toxins in food,
agrochemical residues in food such as pesticides, xenoestrogens
in food, and genetically modiﬁed foods. Index.
Epidemiology
Bhopal, Raj. 2002. Concepts of Epidemiology: An Integrated In-
troduction to the Ideas, Theories, Principles, and Methods of
Epidemiology. New York: Oxford University Press. 317 pp. ISBN:
0-192-63155-1. Price $49.95.
Written by a professor of epidemiology at the University of Edin-
burgh, this text assumes a basic understanding of biology, but is
not highly mathematical. Topics include how populations are de-
ﬁned; how diseases vary by time, place, and person; the role of
bias and error; confounding in measurement; cause and effect
from an epidemiological point of view; the natural history of dis-
ease; risk and measurement of disease frequency; as well as
study design and evaluation. Glossary and index.
Gertsman, B. Burt. 2003. Epidemiology Kept Simple: An Intro-
duction to Traditional and Modern Epidemiology. 2nd ed. Hobo-
ken, NJ: Wiley-Liss. 417 pp. ISBN: 0-471-40028-9. Price $74.95.
This introductory text on epidemiology designed for nonepi-
demiologists presents history, causation, incidence and preva-
lence of disease, outbreak investigation, and study design,
evaluation, and error analysis. Many mathematical methods of
260
Resources

analysis are included. Examples, charts, and exercises with an-
swers are included throughout the text. Index.
Rossingnol, Annette. 2007. Principles and Practice of Epidemiol-
ogy: An Engaged Approach. Boston: McGraw-Hill. 274 pp. ISBN:
0-072-86939-9 (paper). Price $62.19.
This textbook introduces the mathematics, ethics, and global na-
ture of epidemiology. Case studies are presented throughout as
the author covers the history of epidemiology, epidemics, how
disease frequency is measured, prevalence and application to
screening programs, risk, study design, causation, and analysis
of epidemiological data. Charts, ﬁgures, indexes, and references.
Farming
Beier, Ross C., Suresh D. Pillai, Timothy D. Phillips, and Richard
L. Ziprin, eds. 2004. Preharvest and Postharvest Food Safety:
Contemporary Issues and Future Directions. Ames, IA: Black-
well Publishing. 455 pp. ISBN: 0-813-80884-7. Price $169.99.
This book considers the state of research and also presents ideas
for further study on pathogen/host interactions, Salmonella, E.
coli, bacterial hazards in fresh and fresh-cut produce, Campylobac-
ter, paratuberculosis viruses in food, ecology, food distribution
and foodborne hazards, microbial ecology, poultry foodborne
pathogen distribution, antimicrobial resistance, veriﬁcation tests,
Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points (HACCP) system,
decontamination and prevention strategies, risk analysis and
food safety risk communication, and consumer food-handling
behavior.
Cooper, Ann, and Lisa M. Holmes. 2000. Bitter Harvest: A Chef’s
Perspective on the Hidden Dangers in the Foods We Eat and
What You Can Do About It. New York: Routledge. 278 pp. ISBN:
0-415-92227-5. Price $32.95.
Starting with a history of food and agriculture in America, the
authors look at how agriculture has changed and how changes
affect the quality and safety of food. They write about agribusi-
ness, genetically modified foods, government agency involve-
ment in food, food safety tips, irradiation, the American diet,
child nutrition, the increasingly processed nature of foods, and
Books
261

sustainable agriculture. Sidebars illustrate each chapter, includ-
ing ones on the history of corn, cod, the American supermarket,
DDT, and lobbyist spending. The book includes references, a
recommended reading list, an appendix of organizations and re-
sources, and an index.
Jongen, Wim, ed. 2005. Improving the Safety of Fresh Fruit and
Vegetables. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. 639 pp. ISBN: 0-849-
33438-1. Price $279.95.
This work provides an overview of human pathogens associ-
ated with vegetables, sources of human pathogens and their en-
vironmental persistence, pathogenesis in fruit and which
pathogens are associated with which types of fruit, measuring
microbial contamination in fruits and vegetables, pesticide
residues, detection of pesticide residues, risk management 
in the supply chain, good agricultural practice and Hazard
Analysis and Critical Control Points (HACCP) plans in fruit
and vegetable cultivation, implementation of farm food safety
programs, alternatives to pesticides, improving organic food
safety, preservation techniques (including discussion of hypo-
chlorite washing, ozone decontamination, irradiation, thermal
treatments), antimicrobial films and coatings, modified atmos-
pheric packaging, natural antimicrobials for preservation, con-
sumer risk in storage and shipping of raw produce, and
combined preservation techniques.
Pollan, Michael. 2006. The Omnivore’s Dilemma: A Natural His-
tory of Four Meals. New York: Penguin Press. 450 pp. ISBN: 0-
159-420082-3. Price $26.95.
In this account, Michael Pollan explores modern agricultural
methods, from growing feed-grade corn in Iowa to fattening cat-
tle on a feedlot, to a meal in a fast food chain, and then compares
the methods to organic farming techniques, starting with grass to
ﬁnding his own food as a forager and hunter. Index.
Strifﬂer, Steve. 2005. Chicken: The Dangerous Transformation of
America’s Favorite Food. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
195 pp. ISBN: 0-300-09529-5. Price $25.
Steve Strifﬂer worked in a processing plant before writing this
book about the chicken industry and how it is representative of
262
Resources

the American food industry in general. He includes a popular
history of chicken from a consumption perspective, development
of the poultry industry during and after World War II, how the
change to large processing plants affects rural areas, the loss of
family farms to corporation-run farms, the dependence on an im-
migrant labor force, and healthier ways chicken farming could
be conducted.
Torrence, Mary E., and Richard E. Isaacson, eds. 2003. Microbial
Food Safety in Animal Agriculture: Current Topics. Ames, IA:
Iowa State Press. 420 pp. ISBN: 0-813-81495-2. Price $99.99.
This collection of articles deals with preharvest aspects of food
safety and related microorganisms in food animals. It includes
an overview of food safety, antimicrobial resistance in foodborne
organisms, Salmonella, E. coli, Campylobacter, Listeria, bovine
spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), risk assessment, caliciviruses
and other potential foodborne viruses, paratuberculosis, and
Toxiplasma gondii. Index and references.
Food Additives, Toxins, and Contaminants
Altug, Tomris. 2003. Introduction to Toxicology and Food. Boca
Raton, FL: CRC Press. 152 pp. ISBN: 0-849-31456-9. Price $62.95.
This work discusses substances in food that have toxicological
significance, including natural sources of toxicants as well as
contaminants and food additives. It covers general principles
and concepts of toxicology in addition to toxic doses, stages of
toxication, effect mechanisms, toxicity tests, and chemopreven-
ters in diet. References and index.
Ash, Michael, and Irene Ash. 2002. Handbook of Food Addi-
tives., 2nd ed. Endicott, NY: Synapse Information Resources.
1079 pp. ISBN: 0-189-059536-5. Price $350.
Worldwide in scope, this handbook of food additives has entries
for more than 7,000 trade names and 3,500 generic chemicals.
Each entry contains a chemical description, analysis, uses, prop-
erties, storage, use level (percentage), regulatory information,
toxicology, precautions, hazardous decomposition products,
and manufacturers and distributors. The handbook also has a
directory of manufacturers, Chemical Abstracts Service (CAS)
Books
263

number index,  a name index, and function index (e.g., antioxi-
dants, fat replacers, anticaking agents, suspension agents, pro-
pellants).
Barug, D., H. P. van Egmond, R. Lopez-Garcia, W. A. van Osen-
bruggen, A. Visconti, eds. 2004. Meeting the Mycotoxin Menace.
Wageningen, The Netherlands: Wageningen Academic Publish-
ers. 320 pp. ISBN: 9-076-99828-0. Price $93.
This volume contains the peer-reviewed papers of the second
World Mycotoxin Forum held in 2003 in Noordwijk, the
Netherlands. Various aspects of the presence, prevention, con-
trol, sampling, and analysis of mycotoxins in agricultural com-
modities, foods, and feeds are discussed in the papers,
including regulatory limits, economic impacts of mycotoxins,
detection and screening methods, plant breeding as a tool 
for reducing mycotoxins, multimycotoxin determination
methodology, mycotoxins in animal products, and mycotoxin
research.
Dabrowski, Waldemar M., and Zdzislaw E. Sikorski, eds. 2005.
Toxins in Food. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. 355 pp. ISBN: 0-849-
31904-8. Price $169.95.
The book describes the content, chemical properties, modes of
action, and biological effects of toxins occurring in foods natu-
rally, introduced during processing, or due to environmental or
raw material contamination. Clinical issues, prevention and
treatment, epidemiology, public health impacts, economic im-
pacts, toxin detection and monitoring, the effect of processing on
the nutritional value and toxicity of food, and food packaging
are also discussed. Illustrations, references, and index.
D’Mello, J. P. F., ed. 2003. Food Safety: Contaminants and Toxins.
Cambridge, MA: CABI Publishing. 452 pp. ISBN: 0-851-99607-8.
Price $145.
Designed for undergraduates with some organic chemistry and
human biology courses, this comprehensive book features infor-
mation about a wide range of topics, including major toxins and
contaminants in dietary staples, food allergies, intolerances, poi-
soning, plant toxins and human health, bacterial pathogens and
264
Resources

toxins in foodborne disease, migration of compounds from food
contact materials, residues and resistant pathogens from veteri-
nary products, prion diseases, and genetically modiﬁed organ-
isms (GMOs). References and index.
Hill, M. J., ed. 1991. Nitrates and Nitrites in Food and Water.
New York: Ellis Horwood Limited. 196 pp. ISBN: 0-185-573282-3.
Price $155.
This work seeks to explain the environmental and health con-
cerns of nitrates and nitrites while showing their effectiveness as
preservatives. It describes analytical methods for determining
levels in food and water, how they are used as food additives,
pharmacology and metabolism of nitrates and nitrites, and how
they impact human disease. 
Reilly, Conor. 2006. Metal Contamination of Food: Its Signifi-
cance for Food Quality and Human Health. 3rd ed. Ames, IA:
Blackwell Publishing. 266 pp. ISBN: 0-632-05927-3. Price $179.99.
This book examines the signiﬁcance of the presence of metals in
foods from a manufacturing and scientiﬁc point of view. It con-
tains chemical and physical properties of metals, production and
use of metals, how metals get into foods and affect diets, and ab-
sorption and biological effects of metals. References and index.
Foodborne Diseases
Practical Food Microbiology Series:
Bell, Chris, and Alec Kyriakides. 2005. Listeria: A Practical Ap-
proach to the Organism and Its Control in Foods. 2nd ed. Ames,
IA: Blackwell Publishing. 296 pp. ISBN: 0-140-510618-2 (paper).
Price $84.99. 
Bell, Chris, and Alec Kyriakides. 2002. Salmonella: A Practical
Approach to the Organism and Its Control in Foods. Ames, IA:
Blackwell Publishing. 200 pp. ISBN: 0-632-05519-7. Price $116.99. 
Bell, Chris, and Alec Kyriakides. 2000. Clostridium Botulism: A
Practical Approach to the Organism and Its Control in Foods.
Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing. 316 pp. ISBN: 0-632-05521-9 (pa-
per). Price $44.95. 
Books
265

Bell, Chris, and Alec Kyriakides. 1998. E. Coli: A Practical Ap-
proach to the Organism and Its Control in Foods. New York:
Blackie Academic and Professional. 208 pp. ISBN: 0-751-40462-4
(paper). Out-of-print.
Written by two food microbiologists working in the United King-
dom, this series has background information about the bacteria,
sample outbreaks and what caused the outbreaks, how the bacte-
ria grows and survives, how industry can control the bacteria us-
ing process, temperature, or raw material controls, industry
standards, and test methods. Graphics, ﬂowcharts, glossary, ref-
erences, and indexes.
Cary, Jeffrey W., John E. Linz, and Deepak Bhatnagar, eds. 2000.
Microbial Foodborne Diseases: Mechanisms of Pathogenesis and
Toxin Synthesis. Lancaster, PA: Technomic. 550 pp. ISBN: 0-156-
676787-3. Price $199.95.
Although most accessible to those with some training in biology,
this comprehensive volume covers the molecular mechanisms of
pathogenicity and toxin production of Salmonella, Shigella, E. coli,
Yersinia enterocolitica, Vibrio, Campylobacter, Clostridium perfrin-
gens, botulism, Listeria monocytogenes, aﬂatoxins, fusarium toxins,
PSP toxins, parasitic protozoa, Toxiplasma gondii, Entamoeba his-
tolytica, Cryptosporidium parvum, Norwalk virus, and prion dis-
eases. Bibliography and index.
Ketley, Julian M., and Michael E. Konkel, eds. 2005. Campylobac-
ter: Molecular and Cellular Biology. Norfolk, UK: Horizon Bio-
science. 453 pp. ISBN: 1-904-93305-X. Price $184.95.
This collection of articles covers various aspects of Campylobacter
biology. Some of the articles require specialized knowledge, but
there are accessible chapters on the clinical context, population
genetics, prevalence of Campylobacter in the food and water sup-
ply, methods of epidemiological analysis, antibiotic resistance,
and how Campylobacter jejuni responds to the various environ-
mental stresses as it progresses through the food chain.
Ryser, Elliot T., and Elmer H. Marth, eds. 1999. Listeria, Listerio-
sis, and Food Safety. 2nd ed. New York: Marcel Dekker. 738 pp.
ISBN: 0-824-70235-2. Price $229.95.
266
Resources

This detailed work covers Listeria monocytogenes as the
causative agent of listeriosis, occurrence and survival of L.
monocytogenes in various natural environments, human and an-
imal listeriosis, characteristics of L. monocytogenes that are im-
portant to food processors, conventional and rapid methods for
isolating, detecting, and identifying the bacteria in food, recog-
nition of cases and outbreaks of listeriosis, incidence and be-
havior in fermented and unfermented dairy products, meat,
poultry, seafood, and plant foods, and incidence and control of
the pathogen within various types of food processing facilities.
Index and references.
Schwartz, Maxine. 2001; 2003 (translation). How the Cows
Turned Mad. Translated by Edward Schneider. Berkeley: Univer-
sity of California Press. 238 pp. ISBN: 0-520-23531-2 (case). Price
$35. ISBN: 0-502-4337-4 (paper). Price $15.95. 
This work traces the history of bovine spongiform encephalopa-
thy (BSE) from its roots as scrapie discovered in sheep in the
1730s. Short chapters cover the history of the belief in contagion,
Pasteur and microbes, kuru and the Fore people, factors that led
to human-to-human transmission of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
(CJD) from treatment with human growth hormone and during
neurosurgery, and prions. Chronology, notes, bibliography, and
index.
World Health Organization. 2004. Enterobacter Sakazakii and
Other Microorganisms in Powdered Infant Formula. Geneva,
Switzerland: World Health Organization. 59 pp. ISBN: 9-241-
56277-3. Price $27.
This short report summarizes a joint meeting convened by the
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and World Health Or-
ganization (WHO) to discuss the problem of bacterial contami-
nation of powdered infant formula. The experts concluded that
intrinsic contamination of powdered infant formula with Enter-
obacter sakazakii and Salmonella has been a cause of infection and
illness in infants, including severe disease which can lead to seri-
ous neurological defects and death. A range of control strategies
that could be implemented during manufacture and use to mini-
mize risk are described. Index.
Books
267

Food Safety in Commercial Applications
Arduser, Lora, and Douglas Robert Brown. 2005. HACCP and
Sanitation in Restaurants and Food Service Operations: Practi-
cal Guide Based on the FDA Food Code. Ocala, FL: Atlantic Pub-
lishing Group. 541 pp. ISBN: 0-910-62735-5. Price $79.95.
Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points (HACCP) plans can
prevent almost all foodborne illness. Created to teach food service
managers and employees every aspect of food safety, this book
covers HACCP and sanitation from purchasing and receiving
food to properly washing the dishes, including time and tempera-
ture abuse, cross-contamination, personal hygiene practices, bio-
logical, chemical, and physical hazards, proper cleaning and
sanitation, waste and pest management, and basic principles of
HACCP. The accompanying CD-ROM has forms and posters to
establish an HACCP and food safety program. Glossary, charts,
forms, index.
Chesworth, N., ed. 1997. Food Hygiene Auditing. New York:
Springer. 198 pp. ISBN: 0-834-21680-9. Price $165.
This work is designed to enable the reader to perform an audit of
a processing facility for compliance with Hazard Analysis and
Critical Control Points (HACCP) principles. It includes relevant
food laws in the United Kingdom and United States, how food
processing premises should be designed, how to audit raw mate-
rial, processing equipment and machinery hygiene standards,
preventative pest control, cleaning and disinfecting systems, and
management controls.
de Leon, Sonia Y., Susan L Meacham, and Virginia Claudio. 2003.
Global Handbook on Food and Water Safety for the Education
of Food Industry Management, Food Handlers, and Consumers.
Springﬁeld, IL: Charles C. Thomas. 318 pp. ISBN: 0-398-07403-8.
Price $55.95.
Designed as a reference for people working in the food industry,
this book has an international outlook. It covers international
food and water safety standards, effects of newer technology on
food and water safety, coping with food and water safety emer-
gencies, control of chemical, physical, and microbiological haz-
ards, food safety systems, food control, storage of refrigerated
268
Resources

foods, and dry storage. Appendices include the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) sanitation inspection form and food
safety Websites. Index and glossary.
Educational Foundation of the National Restaurant Association.
2004. Servsafe Serving Safe Food Certiﬁcation Coursebook., 3rd
ed. New York: John Wiley and Sons. 496 pp. ISBN: 0-471-77569-X.
Price $91.
The Servsafe course is the leading food safety course in the
United States. Starting with practical reasons to implement a
food safety program, like avoiding lawsuits and keeping cus-
tomers, this work outlines the elements of implementing a food
safety plan from hazards to Hazard Analysis and Critical Control
Points (HACCP) plans, purchasing, receiving, storing, cleaning,
sanitizing, and integrated pest management. Quizzes, bibliogra-
phy, glossary, and index.
McSwane, David, Nancy Rue, and Richard Linton. 2004. Essen-
tials of Safe Food Management and Sanitation. 4th ed. Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 464 pp. ISBN: 0-131-19659-6.
Price $60.
This work prepares readers for various food safety exams in
restaurants and other food service operations. Topics include
food safety and sanitation management, hazards to food safety,
types of foodborne illnesses, factors that affect foodborne illness
such as temperature abuse and improper handwashing, proper
procedures for receiving and storing food, Hazard Analysis and
Critical Control Points (HACCP) plans, facilities cleaning and
sanitizing, environmental sanitation and maintenance, food
safety regulations, accident prevention and crisis management,
and education and training. Quizzes, cartoons, and photographs
throughout.
Vasconcellos, J. Andres. 2003. Quality Assurance for the Food In-
dustry: A Practical Approach. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. 448
pp. ISBN: 0-849-31912-9. Price $139.95.
A comprehensive look at how a food products company can as-
sure food safety in production, the book covers administrative
issues, how tools and theories from the total quality manage-
ment process can be applied to food manufacturing, certiﬁcation
Books
269

programs for raw materials and ingredients, Hazard Analysis
and Critical Control Points (HACCP) and other quality audits,
statistical concepts as applied to food manufacturing, and
HACCP applications and concepts. References and index.
Food Safety Law and Policy
Ansel, Christopher, and David Vogel, eds. 2006. What’s the
Beef?: The Contested Governance of European Food Safety.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 400 pp. ISBN: 0-262-01225-1 (case).
Price $67. ISBN: 0-262-51192-4 (paper). Price $27.
Divergent food standards play a major role in trade barriers. The
authors look at the politics surrounding food safety regulation in
Europe, which is faced by all nations. Topics include multi-
leveled regulation (echoed by county, state, and federal regula-
tion in the United States), politics of European integration, trade
globalization, the politicization of science and risk assessment,
regulation of novel biological technologies, agricultural protec-
tionism, transatlantic disagreements on regulation, and distin-
guishing contested governance from policy conﬂict.
Curtis, Patricia A. 2005. Guide to Food Laws and Regulations.
Ames, IA: Blackwell. 229 pp. ISBN: 0-813-81946-6. Price $59.99.
This guide is designed for non-lawyers who need information on
food laws. Since the law changes constantly, the emphasis is on
providing tools for finding the most current information. The
book contains an introduction to laws and regulations with
search strategies and Website addresses, a history of food safety
legislation, major laws and regulations related to food safety and
quality and food labeling, environmental regulations and the
food industry, occupational safety and health administration reg-
ulations and the food industry, Federal Trade Commission regu-
lations, Kosher and Halal food laws, and biotechnology. Index.
Food and Agriculture Organization. 2005. Codex Alimentarius:
Food Import and Export Inspection and Certiﬁcation Systems:
Combined Texts. 2nd ed. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organiza-
tion. 80 pp. ISBN: 9-251-05321-9. Price $12.
Codex Alimentarius is the international food code designed to
facilitate trade. Directed at governments, regulatory authorities,
270
Resources

food industries, and all food handlers and consumers, these in-
ternationally adopted food standards are presented in a uniform
manner. Provisions are of an advisory nature in the form of codes
of practice, guidelines, and other recommended measures to as-
sist in achieving the purposes of the Codex. This booklet follows
the food chain from primary production to final consumption
with key hygiene controls. It also includes definitions, revised
guidelines for using Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points
(HACCP) plans, and basic principles of food hygiene.
Food and Agriculture Organization. 2005. Understanding the
Codex Alimentarius, Revised and Updated Edition. Rome: Food
and Agriculture Organization. 39 pp. ISBN: 9-251-05332-5. Price
$13.50.
The Codex Alimentarius is the global food code that governs in-
ternational trade. This booklet describes the food code in general
terms, and the procedures that the Codex Alimentarius Commis-
sion uses to compile standards, codes of practice, guidelines, and
recommendations.
Hoffman, Sandra A., and Michael R. Taylor, eds. 2005. Toward
Safer Food: Perspectives on Risk and Priority Setting. Washing-
ton, DC: Resources for the Future. 319 pp. ISBN: 0-189-185389-9
(case). Price $70. ISBN: 0-189-185390-2 (paper). Price $32.95. 
The articles in this book are written by food safety scientists,
risk analysts, economists, and policy analysts. Starting with an
overview of U.S. food safety law and administrative history
from the last hundred years, the authors present an overview of
risk-based food safety priority-setting, including the linkage
between illness and food, federal and state expenditures on
food safety, industry costs to make food safe, the value to con-
sumers of reducing foodborne risks, and developments in
chemical and microbial risk assessment. Both public health per-
spectives and economic perspectives are discussed. Index and
references.
Josling, Tim, Donna Roberts, and David Orden. 2004. Food Regu-
lation and Trade: Toward a Safe and Open Global System. Wash-
ington, DC: Institute for International Economics. 232 pp. ISBN:
0-881-32346-2. Price $29.95.
Books
271

The book covers the current state of regulation of the global food
system and prospects for improving trade. It distinguishes be-
tween food regulations that involve threats to animal, plant, and
human health versus nonhealth product quality concerns; dis-
cusses how food safety issues such as foot and mouth disease,
hormone and antibiotic use in livestock, labeling, genetically
modified foods, and bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE)
lead to trade disputes; and describes the roles of the World Trade
Organization and Codex Alimentarius in food regulation and
trade.
Nestle, Marion. 2003. Safe Food: Bacteria, Biotechnology, and
Bioterrorism. Berkeley: University of California Press. 356 pp.
ISBN: 0-520-23292-5 (case). Price $27.50. ISBN: 0-520-24223-8 (pa-
per). Price $16.95.
The book looks at the inner workings of food safety policymak-
ing, with strong scientiﬁc details and evaluations. It includes a
short section on bioterrorism. References and index.
Pence, Gregory, ed. 2002. The Ethics of Food: A Reader for the
21st Century. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littleﬁeld Publishers.
285 pp. ISBN: 0-742-51334-3. Price $34.95.
This collection covers a variety of topics, from animal liberation
and vegetarianism to the beneﬁts of eating meat to genetically en-
gineered foods. Each section contains at least two opposing view-
points about a particular issue. Topics include meaning of food,
eating meat, starvation and genetically modified foods, bene-
ﬁts/dangers of organic foods, environmental risks and beneﬁts of
genetically modiﬁed foods, food biotechnology and nature, and
global food politics and economics. Scientists, environmentalists,
food writers, journalists, and a researcher for the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) contributed to this volume. Index.
Pennington, T. Hugh. 2003. When Food Kills: BSE, E. coli, and
Disaster Science. New York: Oxford University Press. 226 pp.
ISBN: 0-198-52517-6 (case). Price $47.50. ISBN: 0-198-56921-1 (pa-
per). Price $24.95.
Using bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) and an E. coli
O157:H7 outbreak in Scotland as case studies, Pennington exam-
ines how society copes with foodborne illness from medical
272
Resources

treatment to policy making. He looks at the limitations of inspec-
tion and government regulation and how government can inter-
act with science to create effective strategies and policies for
combating foodborne illness. Indexed.
Powell, Douglas, and William Leiss. 2004. Mad Cows and
Mother’s Milk: The Perils of Poor Risk Communication. 2nd ed.
Ithaca, NY: McGill-Queens University Press. 452 pp. ISBN: 0-773-
52817-2 (paper). Price $29.95.
Using a case study approach, the authors discuss the problem of
communicating health risks without creating undue public fear.
Case studies include mad cow disease, E. coli O157:H7, recombi-
nant bovine growth hormone, and agricultural biotechnology.
Risk management strategies are presented for communicating
the nature and consequences of environmental and health risks
to the public.
Rowell, Andrew. 2003. Don’t Worry: It’s Safe to Eat: The True
Story of GM Food, BSE, and Foot and Mouth. Sterling, VA:
Earthscan Publications. 268 pp. ISBN: 0-185-383932-9. Price $35.
The book follows the individuals, scientists, and policy makers
who discovered threats to the food supply and how they reacted.
Index and notes.
Spriggs, John, and Grant Isaac. 2001. Food Safety and Interna-
tional Competitiveness: The Case of Beef. Cambridge, MA: CABI
Publishing. 196 pp. ISBN: 0-851-99518-7. Price $90.
The authors explore the link between food safety and interna-
tional competitiveness by looking at the issues surrounding
bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) in the United States,
United Kingdom, Canada, and Australia. Focusing on what
drives change, they compare international trends such as market
megatrends that encourage higher standards for food safety in
most developed countries with domestic forces for change like
consumer pressure. Index, list of abbreviations, bibliography,
and references.
Van Zwanenberg, Patrick, and Erik Millstone. 2005. BSE: Risk,
Science, and Governance. New York: Oxford University Press.
303 pp. ISBN: 0-198-52581-8. Price $69.50.
Books
273

The authors assess policy making in the United Kingdom in re-
sponse to the bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) crisis,
with analysis of the findings of the Phillips Inquiry, the com-
mission appointed to investigate the handling of the BSE crisis.
Their analysis focuses on the role of science in public policy
making and the evolution of the United Kingdom’s agricul-
tural and food policy regimes. The book includes comparisons
of U.S. and continental Europe policy making, and how food
policy making changed as a result of BSE. References, bibliog-
raphy, and index.
Velthius, A. G. J., L. J. Unnevehr, H. Hogeveen, and R. B. M.
Huirne, eds. 2003. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers. 134 pp.
ISBN: 1-402-01425-2. Price $72.95.
This volume is a collection of papers from the April 2002 work-
shop at Wageningen University and Research Centre at which
the state of economic research in the area of food safety was re-
viewed. Multiple perspectives are included on the themes of
consumer welfare, responsibility for food safety from farm to
table, use of risk analysis to design safety standards, prevention
of hazards through Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points
(HACCP) plans, implementation of traceability to ensure moni-
toring, and transparency of standards in international trade.
References.
Walters, Mark Jerome. 2003. Six Modern Plagues and How We
Are Causing Them. Washington, DC: Island Press. 212 pp. ISBN:
0-155-963992-X (case). Price $22. ISBN: 0-155-963714-5 (paper).
Price $14.
Using six modern examples—mad cow disease, HIV/AIDS, an-
tibiotic resistant Salmonella DT104, Lyme disease, hantavirus, and
West Nile virus (and in an epilogue, a seventh plague, severe acute
respiratory syndrome (SARS))—the author considers how envi-
ronmental change and human behavior fosters epidemics. Written
by a veterinarian, this book examines the impact of disease on
both humans and animals, and concludes that when a virus exists
in both humans and animals, there is almost no way to completely
eradicate it. References and index.
World Health Organization. 2003. Foodborne Disease in OECD
Countries: Present State and Economic Costs. Geneva: World
Health Organization. 90 pp. ISBN: 9-264-10536-0. Price $24.
274
Resources

This worldwide look at foodborne illness discusses the strengths
and weaknesses of using surveillance to get accurate statistics
about foodborne illness and the difficulties in getting accurate
statistics for chemical and toxin-related foodborne illnesses. The
book includes foodborne illness statistics for several developed
countries, globalization of foodborne diseases, and ways of mea-
suring economic costs including the cost of illness approach,
willingness to pay approach, and empirical estimates of eco-
nomic costs of foodborne illness. One table shows costs of some
recent animal disease outbreaks including litigation, product re-
call, and market impact on stock prices.
Genetically Modiﬁed Foods
Cummins, Ronnie, and Ben Lilliston. 2004. Genetically Engi-
neered Food: A Self-Defense Guide for Consumers. 2nd ed. New
York: Marlowe and Company. 237 pp. ISBN: 0-156-924469-3.
Price $14.95.
The authors explain the principles of genetic engineering, human
health risks of genetically engineered foods, environmental risks,
social and ethical hazards, the state of genetically engineered
food regulation worldwide, how to identify genetically engi-
neered foods, companies and stores that are free of genetically
engineered products, what brands and foods to support, and
how to shop and act with purpose. The authors note that organic
food demand has skyrocketed while genetically modified food
sales have leveled off, and that the ultimate arbiter of the geneti-
cally modiﬁed food debate is the consumer.
Elderidge, Sarah, ed. 2003. Food Biotechnology: Current Issues
and Perspectives. New York: Nova Science Publishers. 151 pp.
ISBN: 0-159-033848-0. Price $59.
Writers with different viewpoints present information on the ba-
sic science and regulation of food biotechnology, the Starlink
corn controversy, labeling of genetically modified foods, con-
sumer adoption of genetically modified agricultural products,
the terminator gene and other genetic use restriction technolo-
gies in crops, biosafety protocols for genetically modiﬁed foods,
acceptance and intellectual property rights and issues in South
America, and the introduction of U.S. agricultural biotechnology
products in global markets.
Books
275

Evanson, R. E., and V. Santaniello, eds. 2004. Consumer Accep-
tance of Genetically Modified Foods. Cambridge, MA: CABI
Publishing. 235 pp. ISBN: 0-851-99747-3. Out-of-print.
This book looks at how consumers react to genetically modiﬁed
foods, labeling in the United States, Europe, Japan, New
Zealand, and Colombia, and whether consumers make an effort
to avoid genetically modified foods. Some of the articles have
complex mathematical models.
Federoff, Nina V., and Nancy Marie Brown. 2004. Mendel in the
Kitchen: A Scientist’s View of Genetically Modified Foods.
Washington, DC: Joseph Henry Press. 370 pp. ISBN: 0-309-
09205-1 (case). Price $24.95. ISBN: 0-309-09738-X (paper). Price
$15.95.
This book explains the history of genetically modiﬁed foods; dis-
cusses Starlink, Roundup Ready Soybeans, and the European
corn borer; and looks at how genetically modified foods affect
butterﬂies, pollen, and sustainable agriculture. The authors be-
lieve that genetic engineering is an extension of hybridization
and that the beneﬁts outweigh the risks.
Haigh, Mariella. 1999. Labeling of Genetically Modiﬁed Foods,
Ingredients, and Additives. Surrey, UK: Leatherhead Food Inter-
national. ISBN: 0-905-74857-3. Out-of-print.
This guide gives a global perspective on genetically modified
(GM) foods from a labeling standpoint and explains what the reg-
ulations are in various countries and what labels the packaging
must contain. It includes legislative requirements for the labeling
of GM foods from the European Union and other European coun-
tries, North America, Latin America, and Australasia.
Miller, Norman, ed. 2002. Environmental Politics Casebook: Ge-
netically Modified Foods. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. 291 pp.
ISBN: 0-156-670551-7. Price $39.95.
This book is a collection of legislation, regulations, media stories,
op-ed pieces, speeches, Websites, international agreements, sci-
entiﬁc papers, environmental advocacy documents, and business
documents presenting views on genetically modiﬁed foods. 
276
Resources

Nottingham, Stephen. 2003. Eat Your Genes. 2nd ed. New York:
Zed Books. ISBN: 0-184-277346-1 (case). Price $70. ISBN: 0-184-
277347-X (paper). Price $19.95.
This book looks at the benefits and risks of genetically engi-
neered crops. Topics include a history of genetic improvement in
agriculture, scientiﬁc explanations of genetic engineering, animal
cloning, recombinant bovine growth hormone, herbicide-resis-
tant crops, designer food and engineered plants including bio-
engineered pharmaceuticals, ecological risks, risks to human
health; ethical and moral issues, patenting and regulation of ge-
netically modiﬁed organisms (GMOs) in the United States and
Europe, labeling issues, and impact of GMOs on the Third
World. Index, references, and detailed table of contents.
Ruse, Michael, and David Castle, eds. 2002. Genetically Modiﬁed
Foods: Debating Biotechnology. Amherst, NY: Prometheus
Books. 355 pp. ISBN: 0-157-392996-4. Price $21.
This title from the Contemporary Issues series provides a variety
of perspectives on ethics in agriculture; religious perspectives on
biotechnology; information on food labeling, law, food safety and
substantial equivalence, risk assessment and public perception,
precautionary principles for genetically modiﬁed foods and as-
sessing environmental impacts; and a case study on Golden Rice.
Smith, Jeffrey M. 2003. Seeds of Deception: Exposing Industry
and Government Lies about the Safety of Genetically Engineered
Foods You’re Eating. Fairfield, IA: Yes! Books. 289 pp. ISBN: 
0-972-96657-9 (case). Price $27.95. ISBN: 0-972-96658-7 (paper).
Price $17.95.
Arguing that industry influence and not sound science has al-
lowed genetically modiﬁed foods into the U.S. market, this work
points out what can go wrong with genetically modiﬁed crops,
including unpredictable effects on ecosystems and human
health, effects on the DNA of the host, waking sleeping viruses,
and allergies. The book discusses the role of industry in regulat-
ing itself, individuals affected by genetically engineered crops,
how individuals can avoid consuming genetically modified
crops, and recommendations for better testing of genetically
modiﬁed organisms (GMOs). It has an index and references.
Books
277

Smyth, Stuart, Peter W. B. Philips, William D. Kerr, and George
G. Khachatourians. 2004. Regulating the Liabilities of Agricul-
tural Biotech. Cambridge, MA: CABI Publishing. 210 pp. ISBN:
0-851-99815-1. Price $85.
Transgenic crop research and development and commingling of
transgenic crops with organic crops have resulted in liability for
makers of transgenic seeds. This book explores liability and
transformative technology, innovation and liability, social
amplification of risk, consumer responses to genetically modi-
fied foods, international governance of liabilities, supply chain
responses to liability, product differentiation strategies, liability
of plant-made pharmaceuticals, and how liabilities for transfor-
mative technologies can be managed. Bibliography and index.
Teitel, Martin, and Kimberly A. Wilson. 2001. Genetically Engi-
neered Food: Changing the Nature of Nature. Rochester, VT:
Park Street Press. 206 pp. ISBN: 0-892-81948-0 (paper). Price
$12.95.
Ralph Nader wrote the foreword to this book about the dangers
of genetically modiﬁed crops. It includes a look at the limits of
the regulatory environment to adequately protect consumers
and the environment, the impact of food disparagement laws on
environmental groups’ ability to protest genetically modified
foods, international impacts of genetically modified organisms
(GMOs), how GMO foods mesh with religious traditions, and
strategies for activism and for consumers who wish to exclude
GMOs from their diets. Bibliography, index, list of organizations,
and list of Websites against biotechnological farming.
History
Coppin, Clayton, and Jack High. 1999. Politics of Purity: Har-
vey Washington Wiley and the Origins of Federal Food Policy.
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. 219 pp. ISBN: 0-472-
10984-7 Price $65.
The authors examine the economics and politics behind the 1906
pure food law. They conclude that Harvey Wiley, the principal
regulator behind the pure food law, acted to nationalize regula-
tion in order to concentrate his own power, and his actions gave
competitive advantage to national brands over local ones.
278
Resources

Uniform national labels and regulations favored national brands
that could prepare food and label it to one standard rather than
having to make separate labels for each state. The authors argue
that the national food concerns supported national food legisla-
tion because it was a strategic use of public policy.
Ferrieres, Madeleine. 2005. Sacred Cow, Mad Cow: A History of
Food Fears. Translated by Jody Gladding. New York: Columbia
University Press. 416 pp. ISBN: 0-231-13192-5. Price $29.50.
The author argues that concern over food safety originated
when people shifted from a country lifestyle where they grew
their own food to a more urban lifestyle where the consumer no
longer personally knew the animals being eaten. From the mid-
dle ages to the twentieth century, perceived food safety risk was
sometimes scientiﬁc, but often was based on religion or super-
stition. Covers laws and trends over the last millennium and
tools that consumers used to determine the quality of food.
Despite the title, there is no coverage of bovine spongiform
encephalopathy.
Goodwin, Lorine. 1999. Pure Food and Drink Crusaders, 1879–
1914. Jefferson, NC: McFarland and Co. 352 pp. ISBN: 0-786-
42742-6. Price $35.
Lorine Goodwin discusses the women and women’s groups that
became concerned about the food, drink, and drugs affecting
their families and what they did about their concerns. The author
argues that the crusaders were instrumental in mobilizing gov-
ernment to enact pure food laws, and that without consumer
pressure, the laws would not have been enacted.
Whorton, James. 1974. Before Silent Spring: Pesticides and Pub-
lic Health in Pre-DDT America. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univer-
sity Press. 288 pp. ISBN: 0-691-08139-5. Out-of-print.
This book traces the use of chemical pesticides since their intro-
duction in the 1860s, identifying the origins of the residue prob-
lem and exploring the interest groups that formed around the
issue. It describes how economic necessities, technological limi-
tations, and pressures on regulatory agencies have brought
about the high level of pesticide use.
Books
279

Wiley, Harvey. 1907. Foods and Their Adulteration. Repr., Kila,
MT: Kessinger Publishing, 2005. 625 pp. Price $48.95.
This classic discusses the origin, manufacture, and composition
of foods. It contains descriptions of common adulterations, food
standards, and national food laws and regulations. Much of the
information is still useful.
Inﬂuenza
Barry, John M. 2005. The Great Inﬂuenza: The Epic Story of the
Deadliest Plague in History. New York: Viking Penguin. 560 pp.
ISBN: 0-143-03649-1 (case; pub. 2004). Price $29.95. ISBN: 0-670-
89473-7 (paper; pub. 2005). Price $16. Note: The paperback edi-
tion includes a 14-page afterword with information about
current pandemic risks.
Written for a lay audience, this book covers the 1918 inﬂuenza
epidemic that killed millions worldwide. A lack of scientiﬁc un-
derstanding and confinement of soldiers in small areas greatly
contributed to the severity of the pandemic. Starting with the ori-
gins and early weeks of the epidemic and continuing to the end
of the pandemic, Barry provides information about the science of
inﬂuenza including virology and immunology and shows how
lack of public health infrastructure and politics led to more
deaths. References and index.
Institute of Medicine, Stacey L. Knobler, Alison Mack, Adel Mah-
moud, and Stanley M. Lemon, eds. 2005. The Threat of Pandemic
Influenza: Are We Ready?; Workshop Summary. Washington,
DC: The National Academies Press. 411 pp. ISBN: 0-309-09504-2.
Price $49.
This work is the proceedings of the Forum on Microbial Threats
held in 2004. The Forum explored the likelihood of an inﬂuenza
pandemic and how to prepare and protect the global community.
Topics include pandemics and other threats to public health,
global preparations against pandemic influenza, preparing the
United States for pandemic inﬂuenza, state and local preparation
measures, strategies to prevent and control transmission in birds
and other animals, biomedical approaches to controlling a pan-
demic, legal issues in pandemic prevention and control, and im-
proving preparedness through surveillance, prediction, and
communication. References.
280
Resources

Microbiology of Foods
Downes, Frances Pouch, and Keith Ito, eds. 2001. Compendium
of Methods for the Microbiological Examination of Foods. 4th
ed. Washington, DC: American Public Health Association. 676
pp. ISBN: 0-875-53175-X. Price $125.
This book explains general lab procedures, quality assurance,
sampling plans, and sample collection. It covers microbiological
monitoring of the food processing environment, microorganisms
involved in the processing and spoilage of food, indicator mi-
croorganisms and pathogens including most bacteria that cause
foodborne illness, and rapid and/or automatic methods for micro-
bial examination, as well as how to investigate foodborne illness
outbreaks and dealing with viruses, parasites, and toxins. Index.
Doyle, Michael P., Larry R. Beuchat, and Thomas J. Montville,
eds. 2001. Food Microbiology: Fundamentals and Frontiers. 2nd
ed. Washington, DC: ASM Press. ISBN: 0-155-581208-2. Price
$129.95.
This work, which is simpliﬁed as Food Microbiology: An Introduc-
tion (see below under Montville, Thomas J., and Karl R.
Matthews), contains specialized vocabulary that may require a
companion text on microbiology. It includes molecular and
mechanistic aspects of food microbiology; description of the ba-
sic factors affecting growth, survival, and death of microbes; cov-
erage of spores and molds; principles of spoilage; spoilage
patterns for meats, dairy products, grains, fruits, and vegetables;
specific foodborne pathogens; epidemiology of foodborne dis-
eases; foodborne viruses; parasites; preservatives and preserva-
tion methods; food fermentation; and techniques in food
microbiology including conventional, rapid, automated, genetic,
and immunological methods, modeling, and Hazard Analysis
and Critical Control Points (HACCP) principles. Index.
Jay, James M., Martin J. Loessner, and David A. Golden. 2005.
Modern Food Microbiology. 7th ed. New York: Springer Science.
790 pp. ISBN: 0-387-23180-3. Price $69.95.
This book describes the general biology of microorganisms
found in foods as well as modern methods used to classify bacte-
ria. Coverage includes microorganisms in meats, poultry,
processed meats, seafood, vegetables and fruits, milk and other
Books
281

dairy products, nondairy fermented foods, and miscellaneous
food products; ways to identify microorganisms and/or their
products in food; and methods of food protection including
chemicals, biocontrol, antimicrobials, modified atmospheric
packaging, radiation, high and low temperatures, drying and
high pressure. Other topics include indicators of food safety and
quality, Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points (HACCP)
plans, and foodborne illnesses. Charts, illustrations, tables, and
index.
Joint FAO/WHO Secretariat on Risk Assessment of Microbiolog-
ical Hazards in Food. 2003. Hazard Characterization for
Pathogens in Food and Water: Guidelines. Geneva, Switzerland:
World Health Organization. 75 pp. ISBN: 9-215-6237-4. Price
$22.50.
This book is an overview of microbiological risk assessment in-
cluding hazard identiﬁcation of microbial toxins in food or wa-
ter. Topics include exposure assessment, hazard and risk
characterizations, limitations of using outbreak investigations for
data collection to make risk models, surveillance, voluntary
feeding studies, biomarkers, animal studies, in vitro studies, ex-
pert elicitation, descriptive characteristics of pathogens, factors
that inﬂuence susceptibility to disease, and probability models.
Glossary and detailed table of contents.
Montville, Thomas J., and Karl R. Matthews. 2005. Food Microbi-
ology: An Introduction. Washington, DC: ASM Press. 380 pp.
ISBN: 0-155-581308-9. Price $79.95.
Intended for undergraduates with one semester of microbiology
and limited exposure to biochemistry, this adaptation of Food Mi-
crobiology: Fundamentals and Frontiers (see above) is a primer for
the study of food microbiology. It includes methods of culturing
bacteria for study and for determining microbial contamination.
The book explains how food processing can inhibit or encourage
microbial growth, disease outbreaks, spoilage organisms, molds,
viruses, and prions. Chapters on specific foodborne microbes
cover the characteristics of the organism, proﬁle of the disease,
and describe how the microbe is affected by chemical and physi-
cal treatments. Glossary and index.
282
Resources

Ray, Bibek. 2004. Fundamental Food Microbiology. 3rd ed. Boca
Raton, FL: CRC Press. 608 pp. ISBN: 0-849-31610-3. Price $92.95.
This text is designed to accompany introductory food microbiol-
ogy courses. It covers the history of food microbiology, character-
istics of microorganisms important in food, significance of
microbial sublethal injury and bacterial sporulation in foods,
beneﬁcial uses of microorganisms (e.g., starter cultures), biopro-
cessing, biopreservation, and probiotics, spoilage of foods by mi-
croorganisms and their enzymes, methods of determining food
spoilage, and emerging spoilage bacteria in refrigerated foods.
Index.
Pesticides and Antibiotics
Center for Science and Environment. 2004. A Brieﬁng on Pesti-
cide Contamination and Food Safety: Poison Versus Nutrition.
New Delhi: Center for Science and Environment. 74 pp. No
ISBN. Price $8.
This illustrated book looks at how a developing country man-
ages pesticides and the tradeoffs between enhanced food pro-
duction and the introduction of poisons into the soil. India is
compared to the United States, Europe, and Australia. It also
considers the competing Indian problems of malnutrition and
obesity. 
Laxminarayan, Ramanan, ed. 2002. Battling Resistance to An-
tibiotics and Pesticides: An Economic Approach. Washington,
DC: Resources for the Future. 375 pp. ISBN: 0-189-18351-1.
Price $65.
Concentrating on the economic factors that affect resistance, this
collection of papers discusses the use of economic tools to char-
acterize the efﬁcient use of antibiotics and pesticides in the face
of resistance, the economic impact of resistance and how deci-
sion making occurs given uncertainty about future resistance, in-
centives that affect pesticide and antibiotic manufacturers and
how regulatory incentives might be structured for these indus-
tries, and infection control measures versus antibiotic use im-
provements. Index.
Books
283

Levy, Stuart B. 2002. The Antibiotics Paradox: How the Misuse
of Antibiotics Destroys Their Curative Powers. 2nd ed. New
York: Harper Collins. 296 pp. ISBN: 0-738-20440-4. Price $17.50.
With overuse, antibiotics lose their ability to cure. This book ex-
plains where and when antibiotics are useful and why they are
so valuable, and advocates change and/or discrimination in the
way they are used. It also discusses how bacteria evolve to be-
come antibiotic resistant; antibiotic use in agriculture and aqua-
culture, as well as among pets and small animal species; reliance
on medicines and self-medication; and anthrax, bioterrorism,
and antibiotic stockpiling. References, bibliography, and index.
Marer, Patrick J., and Susan Cohen. 2006. Pesticide Safety: A Ref-
erence Manual for Private Applicators. Davis: University of Cal-
ifornia, Statewide Integrated Pest Management Project, Division
of Agriculture and Natural Resources. No ISBN. Price $7.
Designed for individuals planning to apply pesticides, this
primer explains how pesticides can be applied safely, how to
read a material safety data sheet, how pesticides are mixed and
applied, pesticide hazards including routes of exposure, effects
of exposure, environmental contamination, and what to do in
pesticide emergencies. Contains sample forms and a glossary.
Watson, David H., ed. 2004. Pesticide, Veterinary, and Other
Residues in Food. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. 686 pp. ISBN: 0-
849-32558-7. Price $299.95.
This work covers the impact of pesticides and other natural and
synthetic compounds on human health. Specific topics include
an introduction to food toxicology, assessing and managing
risks, diet and cancer, pesticides, PCBs, targeted and rapid meth-
ods of analyzing residues in food, good agricultural practice and
Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points (HACCP) systems
in the management of pesticides and veterinary residues on the
farm, veterinary drug residues and their detection, rapid detec-
tion of growth promoters, surveillance for pesticide residues,
other chemical residues, xenoestrogens, dietary estrogen, poly-
cyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), dioxin, organic contami-
nants in ﬁsh and shellﬁsh, identifying allergenic proteins in food,
toxicological screening of paper and board packaging, and metal
and mycotoxin contaminants detection. Index and references.
284
Resources

Journals and Periodicals
Association of Food and Drug Ofﬁcials Journal
Association of Food and Drug Ofﬁcials
2550 Kingston Road, Suite 311
York, PA 17402
http://www.afdo.org
A refereed journal that promotes uniformity of laws affecting
foods, drugs, cosmetics, devices, and product safety.
Consumer Reports
Consumers Union
101 Truman Avenue
Yonkers, NY 10703
http://www.consumerreports.org
A magazine known for test reports on consumer goods, which
also provides regular coverage of food safety.
FDA Consumer
U.S. Food and Drug Administration
Superintendent of Documents
P.O. Box 371954
Pittsburgh, PA 15250
http://www.fda.gov/fdac/
Informs the public about the activities of the FDA; includes infor-
mation about food safety issues. Available free online.
Food and Chemical Toxicology
Elsevier Science
6277 Sea Harbor Drive
Orlando, FL 32827
http://www.elsevier.com
A refereed journal on the metabolic toxicology of foods and food
additives as well as carcinogens, mutagens, and drug-nutrient
information.
Food and Environmental Protection Newsletter
International Atomic Energy Agency
Wagramerstrasser 5 
Journals and Periodicals
285

P.O. Box 200 A–1400
Vienna, Austria
http://www.pub.iaea.org
Newsletter about food irradiation. Available free online.
Food Chemical News
Agra Informa Inc.
1725 K St., NW, Suite 506
Washington, DC 20006
http://www.foodchemicalnews.com
Trade publication providing current information about govern-
ment regulation of food and food additives.
Journal of Food Protection
International Association for Food Protection
6200 Aurora Avenue, Suite 200W
Des Moines, IA 50322
http://www.foodprotection.org
A refereed journal about food microbiology directed toward food
safety professionals.
Journal of Food Safety
Blackwell Publishing
350 Main Street
Malden, MA 02148
http://www.blackwellpublishing.com
Technical journal presenting chemical and microbiological cover-
age of food safety, including the toxicology, metabolism, and en-
vironmental conversion of materials entering the food supply.
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
Superintendent of Documents
U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce
Washington, DC 20402
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/
Periodical reporting current foodborne disease outbreaks,
pathogens, and studies about foodborne disease. Published by
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Available free
online. 
286
Resources

Nutrition Action Healthletter
Center for Science in the Public Interest
1875 Connecticut Ave., NW, Suite 300
Washington, DC 20009
http://www.cspi.org/nah/
Nutrition, food policy, and food safety issues information for
consumers.
Pesticide and Toxic Chemical News
Agra Informa Inc.
1725 K St., NW, Suite 506
Washington, DC 20006
http://www.ptcnonline.com
Covers tolerances, administrative guidelines, and exemptions for
pesticide residues in food and feed. Also covers toxic chemicals
and hazardous wastes.
World Food Regulation Review 
Research Information Ltd.
222 Maylands Avenue
Hemel Hempstead, Herts., UK HP2 7TD
http://www.researchinformation.co.uk
Publication for public health labs, hospitals, environmental
health officers, and food industry professionals covering legal
and regulatory developments affecting the food industry as well
as current international news on food pathogens and food safety.
Formerly International Food Safety News.
Nonprint Resources
Databases
Most libraries subscribe to computer-readable databases. Gen-
eral databases provide access to many articles on food safety that
are appropriate for a general audience, although they may also
provide access to more scientiﬁc articles. For more technical in-
formation, consult one of the specialized databases listed below.
In addition, a wide range of information can be found in the free
Nonprint Resources
287

Internet databases listed below, and on the Websites listed in
Chapter 7, Directory of Organizations.
General Databases
Academic Search
Ebsco
10 Estes Street
Ipswich, MA 01938
(800) 653-2726
http://www.ebsco.com
This database is available in many academic libraries. Full-text
articles including both popular and scholarly articles are avail-
able back to 1990; indexing and abstracting go back to 1984.
InfoTrac
Thomson Higher Learning
10 Davis Drive
Belmont, CA 94002
(800) 354-9706
http://www.infotrac.com
Many public libraries offer access to InfoTrac.  Depending on the
version, includes popular and scholarly journals. 
LexisNexis 
P.O. Box 933
Dayton, OH 45401
(800) 227-9597
http://www.lexisnexis.com
Although originally designed for legal and business applica-
tions, many food safety topics are included in its news coverage.
ProQuest Direct
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106
(800) 521-0600
http://www.proquest.com
This database of magazine and newspaper articles is available in
many academic libraries. It is possible to search in subject-spe-
ciﬁc areas, or the entire database can be searched.
288
Resources

Specialized Databases
Agricola
Dialog
11000 Regency Parkway, Suite 10
Cary, NC 27511
(800) 334-2564
http://www.dialog.com
The National Agricultural Library’s database has over 3.7 mil-
lion citations on a variety of agricultural subjects. Materials date
from 1970.
Food Science and Technology Abstracts
Dialog
11000 Regency Parkway, Suite 10
Cary, NC 27511
(800) 334-2564
http://www.dialog.com
Includes comprehensive coverage of research and new develop-
ment literature in food science and technology. Eighty percent of
the material comes from more than 1,800 journals in ninety coun-
tries. The remaining material comes from patents, reviews,
poster presentations, abstracts of theses, technical sessions, re-
ports, and books.
Foodline: Legal Sight
Dialog
11000 Regency Parkway, Suite 10
Cary, NC 27511
(800) 334-2564
http://www.dialog.com
Contains current food additive, composition, and labeling legis-
lation. Includes details of permitted uses for food additives
worldwide. Also includes standards documents regarding com-
position and labeling requirements for the United States and
countries around the world.
Foodline: Science Sight
Dialog
11000 Regency Parkway, Suite 10
Nonprint Resources
289

Cary, NC 27511
(800) 334-2564
http://www.dialog.com
Abstracts of journal articles covering all aspects of the food and
drink industry, including ingredients, process technology, micro-
biology, packaging, food chemistry, biotechnology, food safety,
and nutrition. Most abstracts appear within two weeks of the
journal’s publication.
Nutrition Abstracts and Reviews
CABI Publishing
875 Massachusetts Avenue, 7th Floor
Cambridge, MA 02139
(800) 528-4841
http://www.cabi-publishing.org
Covers food contamination and toxicology, pesticide and chemi-
cal residues, naturally occurring toxic substances, functional
foods, food policy, food legislation, and additives as well as
many other nutrition topics.
Pesticide Fact File
Dialog
11000 Regency Parkway, Suite 10
Cary, NC 27511
(800) 334-2564
http://www.dialog.com
Scientific data on component chemicals and biologically active
ingredients found in agrochemical formulations worldwide.
Free Internet Databases
Food Safety Website
Address: http://www.foodsafetysite.com
Maintained by the North Carolina State University Cooperative
Extension Service, this consumer information Website has spe-
cific information about foodborne illnesses, safely preserving
foods, and nutrition. Most of the page links are to government
agencies, extension services, and university food science depart-
290
Resources

ments that have detailed, practical information about food safety
topics. Many resources are available in Spanish.
Foodborne Pathogenic Microorganisms and Natural Toxins
Handbook (Bad Bug Book)
Address: http://www.vm.cfsan.fda.gov/~dms/fc-toc.html
Compiled and maintained by the U.S. Food and Drug Adminis-
tration’s Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, this Web-
site is a comprehensive resource on the causes of foodborne
illnesses. Each disease entry contains links to the Centers for Dis-
ease Control and Prevention’s Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Re-
port, which contains current outbreak information, and to the
National Institute of Health’s Medline database, which supplies
current abstracts about the disease from medical journals. Each
entry includes the nature of the disease, infective dose, associ-
ated foods, relative frequency of the disease, possible complica-
tions, target populations, and selected outbreaks. For a
simplified version of the Bad Bug Book, go to http://www.agr
.state.nc.us/cyber/kidswrld/foodsafe/badbug/badbug.htm.
National Food Safety Database
Address: http://www.foodsafety.gov
Supported by the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) and
the Food Research Institute, this database has comprehensive
information about a range of food safety topics, including links
for storing and handling food such as wild game; canning, dry-
ing, and freezing; people at high-risk for foodborne illness; how
foods can cause illness; microwave safety; product recalls;
seafood safety; food safety for children; and additives and
chemical residues. Includes a compilation of state experts and
agencies.
Videos and DVDs
All Hands on Deck! True Confessions of a Filthy, Rotten, 
Disgusting Germ
Date: 1996 to 2005 
Length: 10 minutes per segment
Price: $35
Source: Brevis
Nonprint Resources
291

225 West 2855 South
Salt Lake City, UT 84115
(800) 383-3377
A germ wearing a sweatshirt that says “SOAP KILLS” tells the
family secrets by explaining how and where germs linger in pub-
lic restrooms. Thorough handwashing technique is demon-
strated, including how to avoid reinfection while turning off the
water faucet and leaving the restroom. This material is presented
in three versions: healthcare, food service, and young people,
and in both English and Spanish. 
The Brain Eater
Date: 1998
Length: 60 minutes
Price: $19.95
Source: The Public Broadcasting System
WGBH
P.O. Box 2284
South Burlington, VT 05407
http://www.shop.WGBH.org
This Nova
presentation explores bovine spongiform en-
cephalopathy, otherwise known as mad cow disease, and its link
to Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in humans. The disease is compared
to kuru, the neurological disease caused by cannibalism. Prions,
the deformed protein molecule that some think causes the dis-
ease, are described. Scientists who agree with the prion theory,
and scientists who believe the disease is most likely viral, are in-
terviewed.
Dr. X and the Quest for Food Safety
Date: 2006
Length: 45 minutes
Price: Free to science teachers
Source: National Science Teachers Association
1840 Wilson Boulevard
Arlington, VA 22201
(703) 243-7100
This video is part of a curriculum package sponsored by the Na-
tional Science Teachers Association and the FDA. Designed for
middle and high school students, the video features Dr. X, a
292
Resources

food scientist, and Tracy, a student, who learns about how
emerging microbes live, grow, and spread. The video also talks
about how the latest food safety technologies affect the foods we
eat and features interviews with scientists working at food sci-
ence careers.
Food Safety, It’s Up to You
Date: 2005
Length: 30 minutes
Price: $35 (Can be viewed for free at the Web address below.)
Source: Seattle King County Department of Public Health
Attn: Food Safety
56 South Lucile Street
Seattle, WA 98134
(800) 325-6165
http://www.metrokc.gov/health/foodsfty/videos/index.htm
Recorded to train food service workers in Washington State, this
video’s commonsense approach makes it valuable to food ser-
vice workers everywhere. Covers handwashing, avoiding cross-
contamination, and proper food handling.
Food Safety Series
Designed for both consumers and food service workers, this se-
ries features quizzes after each section and a ﬁnal quiz for further
retention of knowledge. A food scientist from Texas Tech Univer-
sity collaborated with the video production company for accu-
rate information. Each video also includes a written supplement.
Source: CEV Multimedia
P.O. Box 65265
Lubbock, TX 79464
(800) 922-9965
http://www.cev-inc.com
Food Safety: Dairy Details
Date: 1999
Length: 18 minutes
Price: $115
Since dairy products have both high protein and high water
contents, they are prime targets for contamination. This presen-
tation shows how to maintain dairy foods including selection,
Nonprint Resources
293

handling, preparation, and storage, and which dairy products
are safe if the power fails to the refrigerator.
Food Safety: Eggciting Safety Facts
Date: 1999
Length: 20 minutes
Price: $115
Scientists once believed eggs were immune from bacterial conta-
mination. This video discusses the dangers of salmonella bacte-
ria and teaches how to select and store fresh eggs, and which
cooking techniques enhance food safety. Discusses egg substi-
tutes and how they can be used in products (such as cookie
dough) to allow raw consumption.
Food Safety: Fish and Shellﬁsh Safety
Date: 1999
Length: 21 minutes
Price: $115
Contamination of ﬁsh and seafood is one of the most common
causes of foodborne illness. Discusses safety of speciﬁc items like
oysters on the half shell, sushi, and seafood buffets, and teaches
proper selection, storage, and preparation of ﬁsh and seafood, as
well as ways to enjoy safer consumption of raw ﬁsh and shellﬁsh
products.
Food Safety: Fruit Facts and Veggie Vitals
Date: 1999
Length: 24 minutes
Price: $115
Since raw produce is not sterilized at any point in the production
process, it can be vulnerable to bacterial contamination. This
video teaches safe selection, handling, and preparation for the
top ten favorite fruits and vegetables. Safety concerns for fruit
and vegetable juices, as well as dried, frozen, and canned fruits
and vegetables, are also covered.
Food Safety: Protecting At-Risk Populations
Date: 2000
Length: 28 minutes
Price: $99
294
Resources

Experts explain the dangers of foodborne illness faced by at-risk
populations, including children, pregnant women, the elderly,
the undernourished, and immune-compromised individuals,
and tells which foods should never be eaten by these popula-
tions. Teaches prevention strategies when dining out and prepar-
ing food at home, including food selection, storage, thawing,
temperature control, work area and personal sanitation, cooking
and reheating, avoiding cross-contamination, and foods that
should never be eaten by these populations. Also touches on spe-
cial concerns for infant food.
Frontline: Modern Meat
Date: 2002
Length: 60 minutes
Price:  $19.99
Source: PBS Home Video
P.O. Box 609
Melbourne, FL 32902
(800) 531-4727
http://www.shoppbs.org
Examines how changes in the way meat is produced in the
United States may be compromising food safety. Considers the
pros and cons of the consolidation of the American meat indus-
try, the debate on the use of antibiotics, and whether the new reg-
ulations to improve meat safety are working. Interviews with
industry insiders, journalists, scientists, government officials,
and consumer advocates show a range of opinions. Includes con-
sumer safety tips.
The Future of Food
Date: 2004
Length: 88 minutes
Price: $25
Source: Lily Films
P.O. Box 895
Mill Valley, CA 94942
Shot on location in the United States, Canada, and Mexico, this
documentary looks at how unlabeled, patented, genetically engi-
neered foods have quietly ﬁlled U.S. grocery stores over the past
decade. Interviews with farmers show the impacts of this new
Nonprint Resources
295

technology, as well as how organic and sustainable agriculture
might offer a different future. Also discusses the health implica-
tions and the market and political forces that have created this
style of agriculture.
Hand Washing/Hand Sanitizing
Date: 2006
Length: 4 minutes
Price: Free online
Source: Grey Bruce Health Unit
920 1st Avenue West
Owen Sound, ON, Canada
N4K 4K 5
(800) 236-3456
http://www.publichealthgreybruce.on.ca/communicable/hand
washing/
This short video explains why handwashing is important to pre-
vent the spread of disease and demonstrates proper technique
for both washing with soap and water and using alcohol-based
hand-sanitizer products.
Last Clean Chance
Date: 2006
Length: 8 minutes
Price: $14.95 (Can also be previewed for free at the Web address
below.)
Source: Mecklenburg County Health Department
249 Billingsley Road
Charlotte, NC 28211
http://www.charmeck.org/Departments/Health+Department/
Communications/Last+Clean+Chance.htm
Although designed for middle and high school students, this
science ﬁction thriller is entertaining for all audiences. Set in a
biotechnology lab, the video is about two sisters who are work-
ing on a biological weapon based on a mystery animal ﬂu virus.
A doomsday scenario is set in motion, and one of the sisters
must save her sister and the planet by deactivating the security
system—something that can only take place with properly
cleaned hands.
296
Resources

Ripe For Change
Date: 2005
Length: 56 Minutes
Price: $250
Source: Berkeley Media LLC
Saul Zaentz Media Center
2600 Tenth Street, Suite 626
Berkeley, CA 94710
http://www.berkeleymedia.com
California is a place where many people are working to pro-
mote sustainable agriculture, yet it is also the place fast food
was born and a center for both biotechnology and agribusiness.
This documentary explores the intersection of food and politics
in California over the last thirty years. Includes commentary by
farmers, chefs, authors, and scientists.
Spoiled Rotten Food Safety
Date: 2005
Length: 15 minutes
Price: $49.95
Source: Nasco Nutrition
901 Janesville Avenue
P.O. Box 901
Fort Atkinson, WI 53538
(800) 558-9595
Targeted to 11- to 14-year-olds, this DVD features students as
germ detectives uncovering the mystery of keeping food safe in
the kitchen to prevent foodborne illnesses. Speciﬁc topics include
proper handwashing technique, cleaning food and surfaces,
cooking and storing food at the proper temperature, and pre-
venting cross-contamination.
Wash Your Hands
Date: 1995
Length: 5 1/2 minutes
Price: $65
Source: LWB Company
Nonprint Resources
297

298
Resources
13614 Fifty-Sixth Avenue, NE
Marysville, WA 98271
(360) 653-9122
In this short video geared toward consumers, food service work-
ers, and adolescents, proper handwashing technique is taught
through the use of humor. Robert starts to leave the restroom
when a mysterious voice reminds Robert to wash his hands.
When Robert does a cursory job, the voice shows him micro-
scopic evidence of the germs left on his hands and instructs him
in proper handwashing technique.

Glossary
active ingredient
Substance in a product that performs the function of
the product.
acute toxicity
A toxic reaction that occurs shortly after exposure to a
toxin (usually within a few hours or days).
adulterant
Contaminant to a product added either intentionally to
thin the product or unintentionally. Federal government prohibits adul-
terants in food.
aerobic
Process that requires oxygen.
aerobic bacteria
Bacteria that multiply in oxygenated environments.
anaerobic
Absence of oxygen.
anaerobic bacteria
Bacteria that multiply in an oxygen-free environ-
ment.
antibacterial cleanser
A product designed to kill bacteria as well as
clean.
assay
Laboratory test or analysis.
bacteremia
Blood disease caused when bacteria enters the blood-
stream.
bacteria
Single-celled organisms that multiply by dividing in two.
bioaccumulation
The process by which a pesticide or other contami-
nant concentrates in higher amounts as it makes its way up the food
chain.
BSE: bovine spongiform encephalopathy
A fatal neurological disease
of cows also known as mad cow disease.
CAFO: concentrated animal feeding operation
A livestock operation
in which the animals are conﬁned at least forty-ﬁve days in a given year
and are raised in larger numbers.
cancer
Unregulated cell growth, which causes malignant tumors.
299

300
Glossary
carbamates
A class of synthetic pesticides that work by disrupting
nerve function.
carcinogen
A substance that causes cancer.
CDC: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
The U.S. govern-
ment agency charged with investigating and preventing disease.
Codex Alimentarius International
Body that sets food standards to
facilitate international trade and promote food safety.
colonization
Proliferation of bacteria in the gut.
competitive exclusion
A system that introduces enough harmless bac-
teria into the gut of an animal to prevent bacteria harmful to humans
from thriving.
contaminant
Any substance, object, or germ that is in food and should
not be.
cross-contamination
Occurs when disease-causing organisms from
one food (usually uncooked animal product) get onto another food.
Usually occurs when foods are prepared on the same surface, or trans-
ferred by sponges, utensils, or aprons.
diarrhea
Loose or watery bowel movements often caused by food-
borne illness.
dose-response
Occurs when there is a correlation between the amount
of drug or toxin and its effect on health.
dysentery
A diarrheal infection.
enteric infections
Infections of the digestive system.
epidemiology
The study of the incidence and distribution of disease
or toxicity in human populations.
FAO: Food and Agriculture Organization
United Nations agency that
works to improve agricultural practices, facilitate trade between na-
tions, and improve the quality and quantity of the food supply.
FDA: Food and Drug Administration
U.S. agency responsible for reg-
ulating many foods and all drugs.
fecal-oral route
Transfer of microorganisms from infected fecal matter
to the digestive tract via the mouth. Usually occurs as a result of inade-
quate handwashing.
food poisoning
An illness that occurs from eating a harmful food. Ill-
ness can be caused by chemicals, germs, or naturally occurring sub-
stances in the food.
foodborne illness
An infectious disease caused by pathogens in food.
fungicide
Chemicals used to kill or suppress fungi.

gamma radiation
A type of radiation emitted from radioactive iso-
topes. Used to irradiate food.
gastroenteritis
An inflammation of the stomach and intestinal tract
that usually causes diarrhea.
genetically modiﬁed food
Food developed by manipulating DNA.
HACCP: Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points
A science-
based system for improving food safety. Potential trouble spots are iden-
tiﬁed and products tested at various production points to ensure safety.
This system is required for many food industries, and is widely used in
most others.
herbicide
Chemicals used to kill or suppress weeds.
HUS: hemolytic uremic syndrome
A serious complication of some
foodborne illnesses, including poisoning by E. coli O157:H7. The syn-
drome causes destruction of blood cells and then kidney damage when
the shredded blood cells clog the kidneys.
illegal residue
Presence of a pesticide or other substance at harvest in
excess of the tolerance level.
immune-compromised
Person with a weakened immune system.
in vitro
Literally, in glass. Studies or procedures carried out on cells or
tissues in a test tube.
in vivo
Literally, in life. Studies or procedures carried out on living an-
imals or plants.
incubation period
Length of time it takes to contract a disease after
exposure.
infectious dose
Number of bacteria, virus, or protozoa needed to
cause disease.
insecticide
Chemical used to kill insects.
IPM: integrated pest management
Use of two or more methods to
control or prevent damage from pests. May include cultural practices
(such as rotating crops), use of biological control agents (such as using
beneficial insects to eat undesirable ones), and selective use of pesti-
cides.
irradiation
Treatment of food with low doses of radiation to kill or in-
activate microorganisms.
kuru
A fatal form of dementia caused by cannibalism. Speciﬁcally, a
transmissible spongiform encephalopathy of the Fore people of New
Guinea.
metabolite
A compound derived by a chemical, biological, or physical
action on a pesticide within a living organism. Metabolites can be more
than, less than, or equally toxic as the original compound. Metabolites
Glossary
301

may also be produced by the action of environmental factors like sun-
light and changing temperatures.
microbe
Life-form only visible through a microscope; for example,
bacteria, viruses, and protozoa.
microbial contamination
In the case of food, food tainted with dis-
ease-carrying bacteria, parasites, or viruses.
microorganisms
Life-forms only visible through a microscope; for ex-
ample, bacteria, viruses, and protozoa.
mutagen
A substance that causes changes (mutations) in the genetic
traits passed from parent to offspring.
mycotoxins
Toxins produced by fungi.
nematodes
Wormlike organisms that inhabit the soil. They may also
be a parasite on ﬁsh.
neurotoxins
Chemicals that affect the nervous system. Severe reac-
tions can include visual problems, muscle-twitching, weakness, abnor-
malities of brain function, and behavioral changes.
offal
Internal organs and soft tissue that are removed from a carcass
when an animal is butchered.
oocyst
Egg of a protozoa.
organochlorines
Class of pesticides made by adding chlorine atoms to
hydrocarbons. Examples are DDT, dieldrin, and endrin. Used as insecti-
cides, these pesticides are persistent in the environment.
organophosphates
Class of pesticides containing phosphorus. Kills
insects by disrupting nerve function.
outbreak
Two or more people contracting the same disease after expo-
sure to the same microorganism.
parasite
An organism that lives off another.
pasteurization
Process for treating food by raising the temperature 
to a speciﬁc level and maintaining it for a set time to destroy microor-
ganisms.
pathogen
A microorganism that causes disease.
persistence
The ability to remain in the environment for months or
years without degrading into inert substances.
persistent pesticides
Pesticides that remain in the environment for
months or years without degrading into inert substances.
postmortem
After-death examination of a body: autopsy.
protozoa
Single-celled animals that live in soil or water.
302
Glossary

radiolytic products
Substances produced when food is irradiated.
rendered animal protein
Unused animal parts from slaughtering
plants and euthanized pets boiled (sometimes using vacuum technol-
ogy at low temperatures), dried, and used in animal feed.
residue
Substance remaining in or on the surface of a food.
rodenticide
Chemical used to kill rodents such as mice, rats, and
gophers.
ruminant-to-ruminant feeding
Process of feeding herbivores, like
cows, animal products from a rendering plant.
serotype
A group of closely related microorganisms.
shelf life
Length of time a product is safe to eat as determined by the
manufacturer and marked on the label.
shiga toxin
A poison released by certain types of bacteria, including 
E. coli O157:H7.
stool
Bowel movement. 
strain
A variant of a species member.
systemic pesticide
Pesticide that migrates to a different part of a plant
or animal from which it was applied.
tolerance
Maximum amount of a substance legally allowed to contam-
inate a food.
toxins
Poisons produced by pathogenic bacteria.
verotoxins
Powerful toxins produced by some types of E. coli.
virulence
Degree to which bacteria can cause illness.
virus
A microbe smaller than bacteria which needs a host cell to
replicate.
zoonosis
Disease communicable from animals to humans.
Glossary
303


Index
305
Acambis, 92
2-ACB (2-alkylcyclobutanone), 63
Acetic acid, 98
Acidosis, in cattle, 82
Acrylamides, 35, 39–40
Additives. See Food additives
Advanced meat recovery
systems, 29
Aﬂatoxins, 25–26, 170
Agriculture, sustainable, 100–104
AIDS patients
Cryptosporidium infections and,
23
elevated risk factors for, 5
listeriosis and, 14
Air pollution, farm animals and,
84, 99
Alabama state agencies, 228–229
Alaska state agencies, 228
Albacore tuna, 41
Alcohol-based hand sanitizers, 31
Alcohols, 98
Alfalfa sprouts, 15–16
Alkaloids, 171
2-Alkylcyclobutanone (2-ACB),
63
Allergens, food, 169–173
Allergies, food, 60, 169–173
Alliance for Bio-Integrity, 201–202
Alliance for the Prudent Use of
Antibiotics (APUA), 51,
202–203
Alum adjuvant, 91
American Council on Science and
Health, 202
American Dietetic Association
(ADA), 203
American Heart Association, 
59
American Medical Association,
50–51
American Pediatrics Association,
51
American Public Health
Association (APHA), 51, 
203
Aminoglycosides, 51
Ammonia, 79, 84
Ammonium nitrate, 79
Ammonium sulfate, 79
Amnesic shellﬁsh poisoning
(ASP), 171
Anaphylactic shock, 169
Animal feeding operations. See
Conﬁned animal feeding
operations
Animal feeds
antibiotics in, 47–48, 49
corn feeds, problems
associated with, 82
security of, 69–70
Animal protein, 29–30, 78,
100–101
rendered animal protein, 28

Animal waste
problems associated with,
82–84, 189–193
solutions for, 98–100, 194
Anisakis simplex, 168
Anthrax, 50, 145
Antibiotic resistance, 46–51, 157
of Campylobacter, 50, 157
of E. coli, 87
healthcare costs from, 159
mechanism of, 49–50
of Salmonella, 16
transfer through contaminated
groundwater, 86–87
of tuberculosis (TB), 46–47
WHO
strategy/recommendations
on, 50
Antibiotics, 46–51, 158
Alliance for the Prudent Use of
Antibiotics, 51, 202–203
in animal feeds, 47–48, 49
associated foods and control
measures for, 171
ciproﬂoxacin, 50
factory farming/CAFO use of,
81, 82, 87
ﬂuoroquinolones, 49–50, 157
Keep Antibiotics Working, 46,
51, 215
penicillin, 48, 51
rumensin, 82
tetracycline, 48, 49, 51
trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole (TMP-
SMZ), 87
tylosin, 82
See also Antibiotic resistance
Antibodies to viruses, 89–90
Antigens, viral, 89–90
Antimicrobial ﬁlms and coatings,
98
Antimicrobial resistance. See
Antibiotic resistance
Antioxidants, 103
Apple cider, 23
Apple juice, 19
Apples, 97
Arizona state agencies, 229
Arkansas state agencies, 229–230
Aroclor, 37
Arthritis
Campylobacter and, 13
Shigella and, 20
Yersinia and, 20
Asparagine, 39
Aspartame Consumer Safety
Network and Pilot Hotline,
204
Aspartame/NutraSweet, 37–38
Aspergillus ﬂavus, 25
Association of Food and Drug
Ofﬁcials (AFDO), 204
Asthma, 86
At-risk populations, 5, 41
Aurora Dairy, 102
Avian ﬂu, 88–95
current outbreak of, 88
H5N1 strain, 90, 91, 92, 93, 
95
how ﬂu virus works, 89–92
human mortality rate for, 88
livestock concentrations and,
88
pandemic, human mortality
estimate for, 93
pandemic potential of, 89,
93–94
person-to-person transmission
of, 92–94
precautions against, 95
strains of, 90–91
surveillance and planning for,
93–94
swine and, 89
symptoms in birds, 88
targeted antiviral prophylaxis
for, 93–94
vaccine development, 90–92
See also Inﬂuenza
306
Index

B-cells, 89–90
Bacillus cereus, 22, 97, 166, 167
Bacillus thuringiensis, 59
Bacteria, 11–22, 166, 167–168
antibiotic resistant, 46–51
Bacillus cereus, 22, 97, 166, 167
Bacillus thuringiensis, 59
Campylobacter, 12–13, 96, 167
Clostridium botulinum, 97, 166,
167
Clostridium perfringens, 21, 166,
167
cross contamination with, 12,
31
danger zone for proliferation
of, 29–30
DNA ﬁngerprinting of, 11–12,
87
doubling time of, 29, 48
E. coli, 17, 96
E. coli O157:H7, 17–19, 96, 97,
167
FightBac! four step program
for, 30–31
food consumer safety measures
for, 29–31
irradiation and, 61–62
Listeria, 13–15, 96, 97, 167
number needed to cause
illness, 11, 17, 20, 29–30, 66,
157
percentage of foodborne illness
caused by, 11, 157
Salmonella, 15–16, 71, 96, 166,
167
Salmonella typhimurium, 64–65
Shigella, 16, 20, 96, 167
Shigella dysenteriae, 65–66
spores of, 166
Staphylococcus, 20–21, 166, 
168
summary of characteristics
(Bad Bug Book), 195–199
survival in water and soil,
95–98
survival inside undamaged
plants, 97
toxins/endotoxins from, 17, 18,
86, 166
Vibrio, 16, 158
Yersinia, 20
Bad Bug Book, 195–199
Bat guano, 78
Baxter International, 91
Beef
advanced meat recovery
systems and, 29
color of packaged meat, 45
growth hormones and, 55–57
HACCP testing and, 6, 7, 19
mad cow disease (BSE), 26–29,
67
New World screwworm and,
67–68
regulation by USDA, 3
relative efﬁciency of protein
from, 101
See also Cows
Beef Inspection Act (1906), 2
Belly Washers drink, 39
Benzene, 35, 38–39
formed by irradiation, 63
Berries, 23–24, 97
Bioaccumulation
of mercury, 35, 40–41
of PCBs, 44
of pesticides, 52
Biocaps, 98
Biological hazards, 165–166,
167–168
BiondVax, Ltd., 92
Bioterrorism, 63–71
Bioterrorism Act of 2002,
178–185
economic impact of, 67–68
prevention, surveillance,
preparedness, and response,
69–71
record-keeping requirements
for, 69–70, 183–185
Index
307

Bioterrorism, (continued)
Salmonella typhimurium case,
64–65
Shigella dysenteriae case, 65–66
The Dalles, Oregon
(Rajneeshpuram) case, 
64–65
WHO strategies for security
from, 69
Bioterrorism Act of 2002, 178–185
Birds. See Avian ﬂu; Chickens;
Poultry
Bisphenol A (BPA), 35, 45–46
Bitter Harvest, 131
Blake, Paul, 10
Blast freezing, 24
Bloat, 82
Bon Appetit Management
Company, 51
Bosch, Carl, 79
Botulism, 68, 70–71
Bovine spongiform
encephalopathy (BSE),
26–29, 67
BPA (bisphenol A), 35, 45–46
Breast cancer, 56, 57–58
Bronchitis, 85
BSE (bovine spongiform
encephalopathy), 26–29, 67
Bureau of Dairies and Food
(Nebraska), 241
Bureau of Disease Control
(Epidemiology; New
Hampshire), 242
Bureau of Disease Control
(Epidemiology; South
Carolina), 246
Bureau of Epidemiology and
Disease Control (Arizona),
229
Bureau of Epidemiology and
Disease Prevention (Kansas),
235–236
Bureau of Epidemiology
(Michigan), 238
Bureau of Epidemiology
(Pennsylvania), 245
Bureau of Epidemiology (Utah),
248
Bureau of Food Safety and
Laboratory Services
(Pennsylvania), 245–246
Bureau of Health Protection
Services (Nevada), 241
Bureau of Infectious Disease
Control (Ohio), 244
Butz, Earl, 81
CAFOs. See Conﬁned animal
feeding operations
Calcium nitrate, 79
California state agencies, 230
Camphor, 52
Campylobacter (Campylobacter
jejuni), 12–13, 96, 157
in animal manure, 83
antibiotic resistant, 50, 157
associated foods and control
measures for, 167
Bad Bug Book entry on, 196–199
disease trends for (1996-2005),
158
percentage of chicken
contaminated with, 13, 157
post-cook recontamination
with, 166
risk assessment example, 4–5
Campylobacteriosis, 12
Canada
food safety surveillance in, 71
rBGH rejected in, 57
Canadian Food Inspection
Agency, 224–225
Cancer
aﬂatoxins and, 26
benzene and, 38
breast cancer, 56, 57–58
colon cancer, 57–58, 63
pesticides and xenoestrogens
and, 56
308
Index

prostate cancer, 56, 57–58
reproductive cancers, 56
testicular cancer, 56
Cancer patients
elevated risk factors for, 5
listeriosis and, 14
Cannibalism, 28
Cape Fear Estuary, 84
Captive bolt stunning, 29
Carbamates, 52
Carbon monoxide in meat
packaging, 44–45
Cardiovascular disease, 41–42, 44
Carson, Rachel, 129–130
Cattle. See Cows
CDC. See Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention
Center for Disease Prevention
and Epidemiology (Oregon),
245
Center for Food Safety, 204–205
Center for Food Safety and
Applied Nutrition (CFSAN),
39, 195, 225–226
Center for Food Security and
Public Health (Iowa State
University), 68
Center for Science in the Public
Interest (CSPI), 8, 37, 101,
205
Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC), 11, 226
Epidemic Intelligence Service,
71
ﬂuoroquinolones, advice on, 50
foodborne illness
reports/surveillance by,
70–71, 161
FoodNet, 70
irradiated food safety endorsed
by, 63
recommended handwashing
technique of, 30–31
salmonella outbreak detection
algorithm, 71
The Dalles, Oregon
(Rajneeshpuram), case,
64–65
Cereal grains. See Grains
Chemical hazards, 166–169,
170–172
Chemotherapy patients, 5
Chicago Climate Exchange, 100
Chickens
antibiotics and, 49–50, 51, 81
Campylobacter contamination
of, 4–5, 12–13
factory farming of, 81, 83
H5N1 virus contamination
and, 95
percent contaminated with
Campylobacter, 13, 157
percent contaminated with
Salmonella, 15
production industry for, 79–80,
81, 83
relative efﬁciency of protein
from, 101
See also Poultry
Children, risk factors for, 5
Chilling, recommendations for, 31
China, livestock operations in, 88
Chiron Corporation, 91
Chlorophyll, 78
Chlorpyrifos (CPF), 54
Cholera, 16
Ciguatoxin, 170
Ciproﬂoxacin, 50
Citrus fruits, 97
CJD. See Creutzfeldt-Jakob
disease
Clams, 25
Clean Water Act (1972), 98
Cleaning of hands and surfaces,
30–31. See also Handwashing
Clostridium botulinum, 97, 166, 167
Clostridium perfringens, 21, 166,
167
Coatings, antimicrobial, 98
Cobalt, radioactive, 61–62
Index
309

Cochliomyia hominivorax maggot
(New World screwworm),
67–68
Codex Alimentarius Commission,
8, 223
Cold Stone Creamery, 16
Colon cancer, 57–58, 63
Color
of packaged meat, 45
of salmon, 44
Colorado state agencies, 231
Communicable Disease Control
(Massachusetts), 238
Communicable Disease
Epidemiology Section
(Washington), 249
Community-acquired disease, 87
Community Nutrition Institute
(CNI), 205–206
Computer modeling, 5
Conﬁned animal feeding
operations (CAFOs), 77–88
air pollution from, 84, 99
antibiotic use in, 81, 82, 87
avian ﬂu and, 88–89
in developing countries, 87–88
efﬂuent guidelines for, 185–195
EPA regulation of, 85–86, 98,
185–195
human health
impacts/concerns associated
with, 85–88, 189–193
hydrogen sulﬁde as proxy
emission measure for, 86
manure from, 82–84, 159,
189–193
NPDES regulations for,
193–194
odor from, 85–86, 98
roles and responsibilities of,
194–195
run-off from, 84, 96, 98
size thresholds for, 195
voluntary alternative
performance standard for, 98
See also Factory farming
Connecticut state agencies,
231–232
Consumer food safety
recommendations, 30–31
Consumer Protection Field Forces
Division (Georgia), 233
Consumer’s Union, 206
Contaminants, 35, 38–44
acrylamides, 39–40
benzene, 38–39
bisphenol A (BPA), 45–46
carbon monoxide in meat
packaging, 44–45
mercury in ﬁsh, 40–43
PCBs/other contaminants in
salmon, 43–44
plastic containers and
packaging, 45–46
Cooper, Ann, 130–131
Copper, 84, 97, 172
Corn
in cattle feeds, 82
farm subsidies for, 81
genetically engineered corn, 59,
159
Cows
acidosis in, 82
advanced meat recovery
systems and, 29
aﬂatoxin levels in cattle feed,
26
air pollution generated by, 84
bloat in, 82
cannibalism through rendered
animal protein, 28
captive bolt stunning of, 29
corn-fed, 82
foot and mouth disease and, 
68
grass-fed, 82
growth hormone use in, 55–58
IGF-1 in, 57–58
mad cow disease (BSE) and,
26–29, 67
310
Index

New World screwworm and,
67–68
recombinant bovine growth
hormone use in, 57–58
CPF (chlorpyrifos), 54
Creutzfeldt, Hans Gerhard, 27
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD),
27, 146
new variant CJD (nvCJD), 27
Critical control points (CCPs),
174–175
Critical limits, 175
Crop yields, enhancement of,
78–79
Cross contamination, 12, 31
Cross-pollination, 60
Cruise ships
enterotoxigenic E. coli and, 17
noroviruses and, 25
Cryptosporidium parvum, 23, 83, 96
Crystal Light products, 39
Cummins, Ronnie, 132
Cyclospora cayentanensis, 23–24, 96
Dairies, organic, 58, 102
Dairy and Food Protection
Branch (North Carolina), 243
Dairy cows, rBGH treatment in,
57–58
Dairy, Food, Feed and Meat
Inspection Division
(Minnesota), 239
Dairy Food Safety Laboratory
(DFSL), 206–207
Dairy products. See Milk
Dam genes, 16
Danger zone for bacterial
proliferation, 29–30
Darwin, Charles, 89
Daszak, Peter, 88
DDT, 52, 55–56
DEHA (di(2-ethyl-hexyl)adipate),
46
Delaney Amendments, 2
Delaware state agencies, 232
Detergents, 98
DHA (docosahexaenoic acid), 42
Di(2-ethyl-hexyl)adipate (DEHA),
46
Diarrhea
annual episodes due to
foodborne diseases, 8
bloody diarrhea, 17, 18
traveler’s diarrhea, 17
Diarrhetic shellﬁsh poisoning
(DSP), 170
Dichlorodiphenyl-trichloroethane
(DDT), 52, 55–56
Dieldrin, 43
Diet sodas
aspartame and, 37–38
benzene and, 39
Dimethoate, 53
Dioxin
bound by olestra, 37
endocrine-disruptive effects of,
55–56
Disease. See Foodborne illness
Disease Control and Prevention
(Texas), 247
Disease Control (Epidemiology;
Rhode Island), 246
Disease Outbreak Control
Division (Hawaii), 234
Disease
Prevention/Epidemiology
(South Dakota), 246–247
Disease Prevention Services
(Epidemiology; Oklahoma),
244–245
Disease Surveillance Section
(Colorado), 231
District of Columbia agencies,
232–233
Division of Consumer Health
Services (Food Safety;
Wyoming), 250
Division of Epidemiology/
Environmental/Occupation
al Health (New Jersey), 242
Index
311

Division of Epidemiology
(Kentucky), 236
Division of Epidemiology
(Mississippi), 239
Division of Epidemiology (New
York), 243
Division of Food and Lodging
(North Dakota), 244
Division of Food Control
(Maryland), 238
Division of Food/Environmental
Services (Virginia), 249
Division of Food Protection
(Mississippi), 240
Division of Food Protection
(South Carolina), 246
Division of Food Safety and
Consumer Protection
(Vermont), 248
Division of Food Safety (Florida),
233
Division of Food Safety (Ohio),
244
Division of Food Safety
(Wisconsin), 250
Division of Health Systems
Development/Regulation
(South Dakota), 247
Division of Infectious Disease
(Illinois), 234
Division of Surveillance and
Disease Control (West
Virginia), 249
DNA ﬁngerprinting, 11–12, 71, 
87
DNA transfer, 59. See also
Genetically engineered food
Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), 
42
Dog food, aﬂatoxin
contamination of, 25
Donley, Nancy, 132–133
Dose-response assessment, 5
Drinking water
acrylamide limit for, 39
contamination from CAFOs,
86–87
See also Water
Ducks, 88
Dynavax Technologies, 92
E. coli (Escherichia coli), 17, 96
in animal manure, 83
antibiotic resistant, 49
disease clusters for, 87
trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole resistant,
87
E. coli O157:H7, 17–19, 96
antibiotic use, exacerbation of
infection by, 18
associated foods and control
measures for, 167
bioterrorism potential of, 
68
child deaths from, 9, 19, 62
corn in cattle diets and, 82
disease trends for (1996-2005),
158
in feedlot runoff water, 84, 96
HACCP plans and reduction
of, 7
hemolytic uremic syndrome
and, 18, 158
irradiation and, 62
Jack in the Box outbreak (1993),
6, 9, 62
number of cells required for
infection, 157
spinach contamination by, 96
survival in soil/rhizosphere, 97
Ear, nose, and throat symptoms,
86
Eating and Lodging Program
(Maine), 237
Eating habits, changing, 101–104
Eggs
relative efﬁciency of protein
from, 101
Salmonella and, 15, 16
312
Index

temperature and storage of,
29–30
Eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), 42
Elderly people
Bacillus cereus infections and,
22
elevated risk factors for, 5
listeriosis and, 14
Electricity generation from
methane, 99–100
Encephalitis, 14
Endocrine-disruptive effects,
45–46, 55–56
Endotoxins, 86
Enteroinvasive E. coli, 17
Enteropathogenic E. coli, 17
Enterotoxigenic E. coli, 17
Environmental Defense, 207
Environmental
Health/Investigations
Branch (Epidemiology;
California), 230
Environmental Health Services
(West Virginia), 250
Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA), 227
acrylamide limit set by, 39
benzene limit set by, 38
CAFO regulation by, 85–86, 98,
185–195
efﬂuent guidelines for CAFOs,
185–195
Lindane banned by, 8
manure-derived fertilizers,
speciﬁcations for, 95
mercury limits and warning,
40–41
PCB limits in ﬁsh, 43
pesticide safety levels and, 
53
pesticides in food, estimates of,
52
voluntary alternative
performance standard
(VAP), 98
Environmental Working Group
(EWG), 207
EPA. See Environmental
Protection Agency
EPA (eicosapentaenoic acid), 42
Epidemic Intelligence Service, 
71
Epidemiology, 10–11
Epidemiology (Alabama),
228–229
Epidemiology Branch (Arkansas),
229
Epidemiology Branch (Delaware),
232
Epidemiology (District of
Columbia), 232
Epidemiology (Iowa), 235
Epidemiology (Maine), 237
Epidemiology (Maryland), 238
Epidemiology (Minnesota), 239
Epidemiology (Montana), 240
Epidemiology (Nebraska), 241
Epidemiology (Nevada), 241
Epidemiology (North Dakota),
244
Epidemiology/Prevention
Branch (Georgia), 233
Epidemiology Resources Center
(Indiana), 235
Epidemiology Section (North
Carolina), 243–244
Epidemiology (Tennessee), 247
Epidemiology (Vermont), 248
Epidemiology (Wisconsin), 250
Epidemiology (Wyoming), 250
Escherichia coli. See E. coli
Estridiol, 55
European Food Safety Authority,
61
European Union
antimicrobial use in food
production in, 50
carbon monoxide in packaging
banned by, 45
food safety regulation in, 7–8
Index
313

European Union, (continued)
genetically modiﬁed organisms
banned by, 60–61
growth hormones in cattle
banned by, 55, 56
irradiated foods moratorium
in, 63
Eustrongylides sp., 24
Expiration dates, 44–45
Exposure assessment, 4–5
FAAN (Food Allergy and
Anaphylaxis Network), 208
FACT (Food Animals Concerns
Trust), 208–209
Factory farming, 77–84
air pollution from, 84
avian ﬂu and, 88–89
economic and political
developments leading to,
79–81
human health
impacts/concerns associated
with, 85–88, 189–193
scientiﬁc developments
leading to, 78–79
subsidies and price supports
and, 80–81
U.S. farm policy and, 80–81
waste problems of, 82–84, 159,
189–193
See also Conﬁned animal
feeding operations
Fair Packaging and Labeling Act
of 1966, 2
FAO. See Food and Agricultural
Organization
Far infrared radiation, 98
Fat substitutes. See Olestra
FBI (Federal Bureau of
Investigation), 64–65
FDA. See Food and Drug
Administration
Federal Bureau of Investigation
(FBI), 64–65
Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA), 71
Federal Insecticide, Fungicide,
and Rodenticide Act
(FIFRA), 51
FEMA (Federal Emergency
Management Agency), 71
FightBac!, 30–31
Films and coatings, antimicrobial,
98
Fish
beneﬁts of consumption of,
41–43, 44
mercury calculator for, 43
mercury contamination in, 35,
40–43, 171
parasites and, 24
raw ﬁsh/sushi, 24
recommended servings per
week/month, 43, 44, 59
relative efﬁciency of protein
from, 101
salmon, 43–44
Seafood Watch Guide, 43
temperature and storage of,
29–30
toxins associated with, 170
tuna, 24, 41
Flavor enhancer (MSG), 172
FlavrSavr tomato, 60
Florida state agencies, 233
Flu, avian. See Avian ﬂu
Fluoroquinolones, 49–50, 157
FOE (Friends of the Earth),
210–211
Food additives, 35–38
aspartame/NutraSweet, 37–38
associated foods and control
measures for, 172
olestra, 35, 36–37, 158
regulation of, 2, 35
See also Antibiotics;
Contaminants
Food Allergy and Anaphylaxis
Network (FAAN), 208
314
Index

Food and Agricultural
Organization (FAO), 8, 88,
223–224
Food and Consumer Safety
Bureau (Iowa), 235
Food and Consumer Safety
(Montana), 240–241
Food and Drug Administration
(FDA), 2–3
Bad Bug Book, 195–199
contaminant testing by, 38
creation of, 2
ﬂuoroquinolone banned by,
50–51
genetically engineered food
and, 60
irradiated food and, 62–63
mercury limits and warnings
of, 40–41, 42
Model Food Code of 2005,
160–178
olestra approval/warnings of,
36–37
organic food designation of, 60
pasteurization, deﬁnition of,
62–63
pesticide safety levels of, 52–53
rBGH approval by, 57
record-keeping requirements
of, 69–70
regulatory power of, 2–3
Food and Drug Safety Program
(New Jersey), 242
Food and Drug Section
(Alabama), 229
Food and Water, 208
Food and Waterborne Disease
(Epidemiology; Florida), 233
Food Animals Concerns Trust
(FACT), 208–209
Food chain security. See
Bioterrorism
Food Directorate, 225
Food Division (Connecticut), 231
Food Division (Michigan), 239
Food labeling. See Labeling
Food Marketing Institute (FMI),
209
Food Products Inspection and
Pesticides (Delaware), 
232
Food Program (Maine), 237
Food Program (New Mexico),
242–243
Food Protection and Consumer
Safety (Kansas), 236
Food Protection and Processing
(Missouri), 240
Food Protection Division (District
of Columbia), 232–233
Food Protection (Indiana), 235
Food Protection Program
(Colorado), 231
Food Protection Program
(Connecticut), 231
Food Protection Program (Idaho),
234
Food Protection Program
(Massachusetts), 238
Food Protection Section (New
Hampshire), 242
Food Protection Section (New
York), 243
Food Protection Services
(Arkansas), 230
Food Quality Protection Act
(1996), 3, 52
Food Research Institute, 209–210
Food safety
background and history, 1–31
bioterrorism and, 63–71
consumer precautions for,
29–31
HACCP and, 2–3, 5–7, 15,
97–98, 160–178
international food safety, 7–9
legislation concerning, 2–9,
98–99
sustainable agriculture and,
100–104
Index
315

Food safety, (continued)
Food Safety and Environmental
Services (Arizona), 229
Food Safety and Environmental
Services (Utah), 248
Food Safety and Inspection
Service (FSIS), 3, 227–228
advanced meat recovery
systems testing by, 29
BSE safeguards of, 28
HACCP plans and, 7
Food Safety and Sanitation
Program (Alaska), 228
Food Safety Branch (Kentucky),
236
Food Safety Consortium, 210
Food Safety Division (Oklahoma),
245
Food Safety Division (Oregon),
245
Food safety hazards, 165–174. See
also Hazard Analysis and
Critical Control Point
(HACCP)
Food Safety Section (California),
230
Food Section (Illinois), 234–235
Food security. See Bioterrorism
Food service industry, Model
Food Code of 2005, 160–178
Foodborne illness, 10–12, 157–160
aﬂatoxins and, 25–26, 170
Bacillus cereus and, 22, 97, 167
bacteria and, 11–22, 166,
167–168
Bad Bug Book, 195–199
bioterrorism and, 63–71
CAFOs and, 85–88
Campylobacter and, 12–13, 96,
157, 167
causes of, summary (Bad Bug
Book), 195–199
chilling temperatures and, 31
Clostridium perfringens and, 21,
166, 167
community-acquired disease
and, 87
cooking temperatures and, 18,
31
Cryptosporidium parvum and,
23, 83, 96
Cyclospora cayentanensis and,
23–24, 96
DNA ﬁngerprinting and,
11–12, 71
E. coli and, 17–19, 167
epidemiology and, 10–11
factory farming/CAFOs and,
82–88, 95–98
facts about, 157–160
fruits and vegetables, common
agents contaminating, 96
Giardia lamblia and, 23, 96
hepatitis A and, 25, 166, 168
Listeria and, 9, 13–15, 96, 167
manure/sewage and, 95–98
molecular subtyping and, 71
new, development of, 87–88
noroviruses and, 25, 96, 166,
168
number of people affected, 157
parasites and, 22–24, 166, 168
percentage caused by bacteria,
11, 157
pesticides and, 53–54, 171
risk factors for, 162–163
Salmonella and, 15–16, 96, 166,
167
Shigella and, 16, 20, 96, 167
spouted seeds and, 96–97
Staphylococcus and, 20–21, 166,
167
surveillance for, 70–71
Toxiplasma gondii and, 96
Trichinella spiralis and, 22–23,
168
viruses and, 24–25, 166, 168
worldwide impact of, 8
Yersinia and, 20
See also Hazards, food safety
316
Index

Foodborne, Waterborne and
Zoonotic Infections Division,
225
FoodNet, 70
Foods Group (Texas), 248
Foot and mouth disease, 68
Formaldehyde, 63
Foster Farms, 51
Fowl plague. See Avian ﬂu
Free radicals, 63
Freeze by date, 45
Freezing of ﬁsh, 24
French fries, 39–40
Friends of the Earth (FOE),
210–211
Frito-Lay, 36, 37
Fruits, acid content of, 97
Fruits and vegetables. See Raw
fruits and vegetables
FSIS. See Food Safety and
Inspection Service
Fungi, 25–26, 170
Fungicides, 171
Garlic, 96
Gastroenterisis, 17
GBS (Guillain-Barré syndrome),
12, 13
Genetic engineering of livestock,
101
Genetic ﬁngerprint. See DNA
ﬁngerprinting
Genetically engineered food,
58–61
allergies and, 60
beneﬁts of, 58–59
cross-pollination and, 60
percentage of worldwide
acreage planted with, 159
safety of, 60–61
superweeds and, 59–60
Genetically modiﬁed organisms
(GMOs), 60–61, 159
Georgia state agencies, 233
Giardia lamblia, 23, 83, 96
GlaxoSmithKline, 92
Global Resource Action Center
for the Environment
(GRACE), 211
GMOs (genetically modiﬁed
organisms), 60–61, 159
Gold Kist, 51
Good manufacturing practices
(GMPs), 6, 69
GRACE (Global Resource Action
Center for the Environment),
211
Grains
aﬂatoxins and, 25–26, 170
agricultural subsidies and,
80–81, 100
as animal feed, 78, 100
historical place in human diet
of, 77–78
sustainable agriculture and,
100–104
Green Revolution, 79, 102
Greenpeace USA, 211–212
Grifﬁn, Patricia, 133–134
Groundwater contamination,
86–87, 193. See also Water
Growth hormones, 55–58
associated foods and control
measures for, 171
cancers and, 56
endocrine-disruptive effects of,
55–56
Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS),
12, 13
H5N1 virus strain, 90, 91, 92, 93, 95
Haber, Fritz, 79, 134–135
Haber-Bosch process, 79
HACCP. See Hazard Analysis and
Critical Control Point
Haemophilus inﬂuenzae, 16
Halogenated hydrocarbons, 52
Hamburger
E. coli O157:H7 contamination
of, 9, 19
Index
317

Hamburger, (continued)
recommended internal cooked
temperature for, 18
See also Beef
Hand sanitizers, 31
Handwashing, 30–31, 95
hepatitis A prevention with, 25
inadequate, amount of
foodborne illness caused by,
158
inﬂuenza protection with, 95
proper technique for, 30–31
Hawaii state agencies, 234
Hazard Analysis and Critical
Control Point (HACCP), 2–3,
5–7, 15, 97–98, 160–178
bioterrorism security measures
and, 69
consulting ﬁrms for, 10, 152
corrective actions in, 177
critical control points (CCPs)
in, 174–175
critical limits in, 175
Model Food Code of 2005,
160–178
monitoring procedures in, 176
origin/development of, 5
prerequisite programs and, 
165
rationale and procedures for,
160–178
recordkeeping/documentation
in, 177–178
veriﬁcation procedures in, 177
Hazard evaluation, 174
Hazard identiﬁcation, 4, 173–174
Hazards, food safety, 165–174
biological hazards, 165–166,
167–168
chemical hazards, 166–169,
170–172
food allergens, 169–173
physical hazards, 173
Health Canada, 57
Health claims on food labels, 8
Health impacts of close proximity
to CAFOs, 85–88
Heat
acrylamide formation and, 35, 39
avian ﬂu virus killed by, 95
bacteria killed by, 166
E. coli O157:H7 killed by, 18
heat treatments, 98
Listeria killed by, 14
plastic containers/plastic wrap
and, 46
radiofrequency heating, 98
Heavy metals, 84
Heersink, Mary, 135–136
Hellbore, 52
Hemolytic uremic syndrome
(HUS), 17, 18, 20, 70, 158
Hepatitis A, 24–25, 166, 168
Hepatitis E, 166, 168
High pressure processing, 63
History of food safety, 1–3
Hog production, 82, 83
avian ﬂu and, 88, 89
Nipah virus outbreak and,
87–88
odor and, 85
property values near, 85
waste problems and, 82–84
waste treatment solutions for,
98–99
Horizon Dairy, 102
Hormones, 55–58
endocrine-disruptive effects of,
45–46, 55–56
growth hormones in beef
cattle, 55–57
recombinant bovine growth
hormone in dairy cattle,
57–58
xenoestrogens, 56
Howard, Albert, Sir, 136–137
Human waste, 83, 159, 189–190
HUS. See Hemolytic uremic
syndrome
Hydrogen sulﬁdes, 84, 86
318
Index

Ice cream, 16
Idaho state agencies, 234
IGF-1 (insulin growth factor),
57–58
Illinois state agencies, 234–235
Illness. See Foodborne illness
Immune-compromised
populations
Bacillus cereus infections and,
22
Cryptosporidium infections and,
23
lowered exposure levels of, 5
Immunity
speciﬁc immune response,
89–90
viruses and, 89–92
Indiana state agencies, 235
Industrial revolution, 1
Infectious Disease Division
(Connecticut), 231–232
Infectious Disease/Epidemiology
Section (Louisiana), 236
Inﬂuenza
avian ﬂu, 88–95
how ﬂu virus works, 89–92
mortality rate in U.S., annual,
159
neuraminidase inhibitors and,
94
pandemic, human mortality
estimate for, 93
pandemic of 1918, 90, 160
precautions against, 95
Relenza prophylaxis for, 94
spread to humans from swine
and birds, 89
strains of, 90–91, 93
Tamiﬂu prophylaxis for, 94
targeted antiviral prophylaxis
(TAP) for, 93–94
universal inﬂuenza vaccine, 92
vaccines against, 90–92
See also Avian ﬂu
Insecticides, 171
Inspection
meat (USDA), 3
restaurant, 9–10
retail food service (HACCP), 
7
Institute of Food Science and
Technology (IFST), 212
Institute of Food Technologists
(IFT), 212–213
Insulin growth factor (IGF-1),
57–58
International agencies, 223–224
International Association for
Food Protection, 213
International Commission on
Microbial Speciﬁcations for
Food, 213
International Food Information
Council (IFIC), 214
International food safety, 7–9
International Food Safety
Council, 214
Iowa state agencies, 235
Irradiation, 61–63
Irrigation water, 84, 96
Jack in the Box
E. coli O157:H7 outbreak at, 6,
9, 62
HACCP implementation at, 6,
9
Jakob, Alfons, 27
Joint Institute for Food Safety and
Applied Nutrition (JIFSAN),
214–215
Jukes, Thomas, 47
The Jungle, 149
Kansas state agencies, 235–236
Keep Antibiotics Working, 46, 51,
215
Kentucky state agencies, 236
Kirschenmann, Fred, 137–138
Kuru, 28
Kyoto Protocols, 100
Index
319

Labeling
Fair Packaging and Labeling
Act of 1966, 2
health claims and, 8
organic foods labeling, 60
organic milk labeling, 58
“pasteurized with irradiation”
label, 63
Radura symbol on, 62
Lactic acid, 98
Lakey, Alice, 138–139
Lead, 172
Lederle Pharmaceutical
Company, 47
Leeuwenhoek, Antoni van,
139–140
Leftovers, 31
Legal Sea Foods, 9
Legislation, 2–9, 98–99
Beef Inspection Act (1906), 2
Bioterrorism Act of 2002,
178–185
Clean Water Act (1972), 98
Delaney Amendments, 2
Fair Packaging and Labeling
Act of 1966, 2
Food Quality Protection Act, 3
Public Health Service Act of
1944, 2
Pure Food and Drug Act of
1906, 2
Pure Food, Drug and
Cosmetics Act (1938), 2
Legumes
nitrogen ﬁxation by, 78
phytohaemagglutinin in, 171
Lettuce, 96
Leukemia, 38
Levy, Stuart, 140–141
Liebig, Justus, 103
Lime, 52
Lincosamides, 51
Lindane, 8
Listeria (Listeria monocytogenes),
13–15, 96
associated foods and control
measures for, 167
disease trends for (1996-2005),
158
in manure, 83
recalls for, 9, 14, 15
survival in soil, 97
Listeriosis, 9, 14
Liver cancer, 26
Livestock feeds. See Animal feeds
Los Angeles restaurant grading
system, 9–10
Louisiana state agencies, 236–237
Lycopene, 103
Lyman, Howard, 141–142
M2 protein, 92
Macrolides, 51
Mad cow disease (BSE), 26–29, 67
Maine state agencies, 237
Major histocompatibility
complexes platform one
(MHC-1), 89
Malathion, 53
Malaysia, Nipah virus outbreak
in, 87–88
Manure, 78, 82–84
annual amount from CAFOs,
159
excess manure nutrients and,
190–191
food safety issues and, 95–98
health problems associated
with, 83–88
odor from, 85–86
pathogens in, 83–84, 193
as soil builder, 82
use as fertilizer, 83
waste problems associated
with, 82–84
waste treatment solutions for,
98–100
Maryland state agencies, 238
Massachusetts state agencies, 238
Max Yield Cooperative, 99
320
Index

McDonald’s
antibiotic use, stance on, 51
french fries, 39–40
Meat
consumption attitudes/habits
for, 77–78, 100–101
cooking temperature
recommendations for, 18, 31
Meat packing/processing
bioterrorism potential of, 68–69
HACCP plans and, 7, 19
historical condition of, 2
Meat thermometer, 31
Melengestrol acetate, 55
Meningitis, 14, 16
Mercury contamination, 35,
40–43, 171
Methane, 84, 99
Methane digester, 99–100
MHC-1 (major histocompatibility
complexes platform one), 89
Michigan state agencies, 238–239
Milk
E. coli O157:H7 and, 19
hepatitis A and, 25
IGF-1 in, 57–58
organic labeling of, 58, 102
recombinant bovine growth
hormone (rBGH) and, 57–58
relative efﬁciency of protein
from, 101
Shigella and, 20
temperature and storage of,
29–30
Yersinia and, 20
Miller, Helen McNab, 142–143
Minamata, Japan, 40
Minnesota state agencies, 239
Mississippi state agencies,
239–240
Missouri state agencies, 240
Model Food Code of 2005,
160–178
Modiﬁed atmospheric packaging,
44–45
Molecular subtyping, 71. See also
DNA ﬁngerprinting
Monarch butterﬂies, 59
Monocropping, 101, 102
Monosodium glutamate (MSG),
172
Monsanto Corporation, 57, 58, 
59
Montana state agencies, 240–241
MSG (monosodium glutamate),
172
Mushrooms, 78
toxic mushrooms, 170
Mycotoxins, 170
Naled, 53
National agencies (United States
and Canada), 224–228
National Center for Food Safety
and Technology (NCFST),
216
National Environmental Health
Association, 216
National Everclean, 10
National Restaurant Association,
9, 216–217
Natural Resources Defense
Council (NRDC), 217
Nebraska state agencies, 241
Nematodes, 24
Nestle, Marion, 143–144
Neuraminidase/neuraminidase
inhibitors, 94
Neurotoxin shellﬁsh poisoning
(NSP), 171
Nevada state agencies, 241
New Hampshire state agencies,
242
New Jersey state agencies, 242
New Mexico state agencies,
242–243
New River, North Carolina, 84
New variant CJD (nvCJD), 27
New World screwworm, 67–68
New York state agencies, 243
Index
321

NHL (non-Hodgkin’s
lymphoma), 86
Niacin, 172
Nicotine, 52
Nipah virus, 87–88
Nitrate, 78, 83, 86, 193
Nitrate fertilizers, 134–135
Nitrites/nitrates, 172
Nitrogen, 78–79, 103, 190–191
Nitrogen-based fertilizers, 78–79,
83, 134–135
Nitrogen ﬁxation, 78–79
Nitrogen oxides, 84
Nixon, Richard, 81
Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma
(NHL), 86
Noroviruses, 25, 96, 166, 168
North Carolina state agencies,
243–244
North Dakota state agencies, 244
Northeast Cape Fear River, 84
Norwalk virus, 25
Novavax, 91–92
NSF International, 217–218
Nurses Health Study, 58
NutraSweet (aspartame), 37–38
Nutrition Action Healthletter, 8
nvCJD (new variant CJD), 27
Odor from CAFOs, 85–86, 98
Ofﬁce of Epidemiology (New
Mexico), 243
Ofﬁce of Epidemiology Services
(Missouri), 240
Ofﬁce of Epidemiology (Virginia),
249
Ofﬁce of Food Protection
(Delaware), 232
Ofﬁce of Food Protection (Rhode
Island), 246
Ofﬁce of Food Safety and
Shellﬁsh Programs
(Washington), 249
Ohio state agencies, 244
Ohmic heating, 63
Oklahoma state agencies, 244–245
Olestra, 35, 36–37, 158
Omega-3 fatty acids, 41–42, 44, 
59
The Omnivore’s Dilemma, 102–103
Onions, 96
Oocysts, 24
Orange Dry drink, 39
Oregon state agencies, 245
Organic acids, 98
Organic Consumers Association,
218
Organic foods, 60, 102
Organic milk, 58, 102
Organophosphates, 52, 53–54
Osterholm, Michael, 89, 144
Oxydemetonmethyl, 53
Oysters, 25
Packaging
carbon monoxide in, 44–45
plastic packaging, 35, 45–46
Pandemic potential of avian ﬂu,
89, 93–94
Paralysis, 12
Paralytic shellﬁsh poisoning
(PSP), 170
Parasites, 22–24, 166, 168
Anisakis simplex, 168
Cochliomyia hominivorax (New
World screwworm), 67–68
Cryptosporidium parvum, 23
Cyclospora cayentanensis, 23–24
Eustrongylides sp., 24
Giardia lamblia, 23
Taenia spp., 168
Trichinella spiralis, 22–23, 168
Partnership for Food Safety
Education, 30, 218–219
Pasteur, Louis, 144–145
Pasteurization, 62–63, 145
Pathogens
in animal manure, 83, 193
frequently associated with
fruits and vegetables, 96
322
Index

survival in water and soil,
95–98
survival inside undamaged
plants, 97
Patulin, 170
PCBs (polychlorinated biphenyls)
associated foods and control
measures for, 171
bound by olestra, 37
in combination with
organophosphates, 54
endocrine-disruptive effects of,
55–56
in salmon, 43–44, 158
Peanuts, 25, 170
Penicillin, 48, 51
Pennsylvania state agencies,
245–246
Perdue Farms, 51
Pesticide Action Network, 219
Pesticide Action Network North
America (PANNA), 8
Pesticides, 51–55
Aroclor, 37
associated foods and control
measures for, 171
bioterrorism potential of, 69
combination of, 53, 54
concentration in fatty tissues,
52
DDT, 52, 55–56
dieldrin, 43
effects on humans, 53–54
FIFRA deﬁnition of, 51
Lindane, 8
naturally occurring, 42
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma
and, 86
organophosphates, 52, 53–54
prudent strategy for use of, 
55
regulation of, 2, 3, 8, 54–55
in salmon, 43
synthetically produced, 42
toxaphene, 43
Phenylketonuria (PKU), 38
Phosphorus, 83, 103, 190–191
Phyllosphere, 97
Physical hazards, 173
Physicians for Social
Responsibility (PSR),
219–220
Phytohaemagglutinin, 171
Phytonutrients, 103–104
Pig-bel disease, 21
Pigs. See Hog production
Pilgrim’s Pride, 14
Pillsbury, HACCP development
by, 5
Plague, 16
Plasmids, 49
Plastic containers and packaging,
35, 45–46
Plastic wrap, 46
Poison Squad, 2, 153–154
Pollan, Michael, 102–103
Polycarbonate plastics, 45–46
Polychlorinated biphenyls. See
PCBs
Polystyrene containers, 46
Population, world, 58–59, 79
Pork, Trichinella spiralis and, 22–23
Posilac, 57
Potassium, 103
Potassium bisulﬁte, 172
Potassium metabisulﬁte, 172
Potato chips
acrylamides and, 39–40
olestra and, 36–37
Potatoes, genetically engineered,
59
Poultry
avian ﬂu and, 88–89
Campylobacter and, 12, 13
ﬂuoroquinolones and, 49–50
HACCP plans for processing
facilities for, 7
raw/undercooked, 12, 13, 15
Salmonella and, 15
Shigella and, 20
Index
323

Poultry, (continued)
Staphylococcus and, 20
See also Chickens
Pregnant women
ﬁsh consumption, beneﬁts of,
42–43
ﬁsh consumption, mercury
warning for, 40–41, 42
Listeria and, 14
Premium Standard Farms, 98
Preservatives, 172
Price supports, 80–81
Prions, 27–28, 146
Processed meats, 15
Procter and Gamble, 36–37
Progesterone, 55
Prohibited substances, 171
Prostate cancer, 56, 57–58
Protein
animal, temperature danger
zone for, 29–30
consumption patterns for, 78,
100–101
rendered animal protein, 28
Prusiner, Stanley, 146
Public Citizen, 220
Public Health Service Act of 1944,
2
Pulsed electric ﬁelds, 63
Pulsed-ﬁeld gel electrophoresis,
71
Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906,
2
Pure Food, Drug and Cosmetics
Act (1938), 2
Pyrethrum, 52
Pyrrolizidine alkaloids, 171
Quality Assurance Division
(Hawaii), 234
Quality of life, 85
Radiofrequency heating, 98
Radura symbol, 62
Rajneesh, Bhag Wan Shree, 64
Rajneeshpuram bioterrorism case,
64–65
Rangeland management, HACCP
and, 6
Raspberries, 23–24
Raw eggs, Salmonella and, 15, 16
Raw ﬁsh, parasites and, 24
Raw fruits and vegetables
common agents contaminating,
96
Cyclospora cayentanensis and,
23–24
E. coli O157:H7 and, 19, 96
Giardia lamblia and, 23
HACCP plans and, 6
hepatitis A and, 25
increase in foodborne illnesses
attributable to, 95–98
irrigation water for, 84, 96
Listeria and, 15
Salmonella and, 15–16, 96
Shigella and, 20
washing recommendation for,
30–31
Raw oysters/clams, noroviruses
and, 25
Raw pork, Trichinella spiralis and,
22–23
Raw seafood
noroviruses and, 25
parasites and, 24
Raw/undercooked poultry
Campylobacter and, 12, 13
Salmonella and, 15
rBGH (recombinant bovine
growth hormone), 57–58
rBST (recombinant bovine
somatotropin). See rBGH
(recombinant bovine growth
hormone)
Re-assortment, 89
Ready-to-eat food
bacterial contamination of, 14,
166, 168
bioterrorism potential of, 68–69
324
Index

HACCP plans for processors
of, 7
Recalls, 9, 14, 15, 159
Recombinant bovine growth
hormone (rBGH), 57–58
Recombinant bovine
somatotropin (rBST). See
Recombinant bovine growth
hormone
Recordkeeping
bioterrorism-related, 69–70,
183–185
HACCP, 177–178
Regulation
history of, 2–9
international regulation, 7–9
within United States, 8, 228–250
See also Legislation; speciﬁc
agencies
Regulatory Services Division
(Tennessee), 247
Reiter’s syndrome, 13, 20
Relenza, 94
Rendered animal protein, 28
Reovirus, 168
Respiratory system symptoms,
85–86
Restaurants
consumer safety
recommendations for, 31
grading system in Los Angeles,
9–10
HACCP and, 6–7
inspection of, 2
Retail Food Code, USDA, 24
Retail food industry, Model Food
Code of 2005, 160–178
Retail Food Program (Louisiana),
237
Rhizosphere, 97
Rhode Island state agencies, 246
Risk assessment, 4–5, 66
Risk characterization, 5
Risk factors for foodborne illness,
162–163
Robbins, John, 146–147
Roosevelt, Theodore, 2
Rotavirus, 166, 168
Rotenone, 52
Roundup, 59
Rumen, 82
Rumensin, 82
Safe Food for the Hungry,
220–221
Safe Tables Our Priority (STOP),
221
Salad bars, 95
Salatin, Joel, 102–103, 147–148
Salinas Valley, California
pesticides in, 53–54
spinach contamination in, 96
Salmon, 43–44, 158
Salmonella, 15–16, 96, 166
in animal manure, 83
associated foods and control
measures for, 167
bioterrorism potential of,
64–65, 68
disease trends for (1996-2005),
158
salmonella outbreak detection
algorithm, 71
Salmonella typhimurium, 64–65
Salmonellosis, 15–16
San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution
District, 84
SARS (Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome), 94
Scombrotoxin, 170
Scrapie, 27
Screwworm myiasis, 68
Screwworm, New World, 67–68
Seafood, raw, 24, 25
Seafood Watch Guide, 43
Searle, aspartame discovery by,
37
Section of Epidemiology (Alaska),
228
Security, food. See Bioterrorism
Index
325

September 11, 2001, terrorist
attacks, 63, 67
Septicemia, 14, 21
Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome (SARS), 94
Shellﬁsh toxins, 170–171
Shiga toxin-producing E. coli. See
E. coli O157:H7
Shigella, 16, 20, 96, 167
Shigella dysenteriae, 65–66
Shigellosis, 20
Sierra Club, 85
Silent Spring, 130
Sinclair, Upton, 2, 148–149
Sinusitis, 86
Slaughterhouses
campylobacter and, 13
E. coli O157:H7 and, 18, 30
regulation/inspection of, 3
Salmonella and, 15
Slotkin, Theodore, 54
Smog, 84
Snow, John, 10, 149–151
Society for Nutrition Education
(SNE), 221–222
Sodas. See Diet sodas
Sodium benzoate, 38
Sodium bisulﬁte, 172
Sodium metabisulﬁte, 172
Soil characteristics, pathogen
survival and, 97
South Carolina state agencies, 
246
South Dakota state agencies,
246–247
Southeast Asia
avian ﬂu in, 88–89
surveillance in, 94
Soybeans
genetic engineering and, 59, 60,
159
Roundup-Ready soybeans, 59
Speciﬁc immune response, 89–90
Spinach, E. coli O157:H7
contamination of, 96
Spores, 166
Spouted seeds, 96–97
Staphylococcus, 20–21
Staphylococcus aureus, 166, 167
State agencies (United States),
228–250
State Department of Food and
Agriculture (California), 230
State Environmental Protection
Agency (California), 230
Steele, Cecile, 79–80
Sterilization, food, 62–63
STOP (Safe Tables Our Priority),
221
Streptogramins, 51
Subsidies, agricultural, 80–81, 100
Sugar substitutes. See
Aspartame/NutraSweet
Sulfa drugs, 24
Sulﬁting agents, 172
Sulfonamides, 51
Sulfur, 52
Sulfur dioxide, 172
Surveillance
ﬂu pandemic, 93–94
food/food safety, 69, 70–71
zoonotic disease, 185
Sushi, 24
Sustainable agriculture, 100–104
Sweeteners. See
Aspartame/NutraSweet
Swine. See Hog production
Syphilis, 16
Systemic plant inoculation, 98
T-cells, 89
Taenia spp., 168
Tamiﬂu, 94
TAP (targeted antiviral
prophylaxis), 93–94
Targeted antiviral prophylaxis
(TAP), 93–94
TB (tuberculosis), 46–47
Temper-resistant/tamper-evident
systems, 69
326
Index

Temperature
chilling recommendations, 31
danger zone for bacterial
proliferation, 29–30
recommended for cooking
meats, 18, 31
See also Heat
Tennessee state agencies, 247
Terrorism. See Bioterrorism
Testicular cancer, 56
Testosterone, 55
Tetracycline, 48, 49, 51
Tetracycline-resistant genes, 87
Tetrodoxin, 170
Texas state agencies, 247–248
Thailand, avian ﬂu and, 88
The Dalles, Oregon, 64–65
Theno, David, 151–152
Thiabendazole, 23
Thyroid, effect of pesticides on,
53
Tillamook, Oregon, 99
Time, safe, for food preparation
and storage, 30
TMP-SMZ (trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole)
resistance, 87
Tomato, FlavrSavr, 60
Topsoil depletion, 101–102
Toxaphene, 43
Toxic elements/compounds,
171–172
Toxic mushroom species, 170
Toxins
aﬂatoxins, 25–26, 170–171
bacterial toxins, 17, 18, 86, 166
ciguatoxin, 170
in genetically engineered corn,
59
mycotoxins, 170
scombrotoxin, 170
shellﬁsh toxins, 170–171
tetrodoxin, 170
Toxiplasma gondii, 96
Traveler’s diarrhea, 17
Trenbolone, 55
Trichinella spiralis, 22–23, 168
Trichinosis, 22–23
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
(TMP-SMZ) resistance, 87
Truth in Labeling Campaign, 222
Tuberculosis (TB), 46–47
Tuna, 24, 41
Tylosin, 82
Tyson, John, 80
Tyson Foods, 51, 80
Unidentiﬁed radiolytic particles,
63
Union of Concerned Scientists
(UCS), 222–223
United Kingdom
bovine spongiform
encephalopathy (BSE) in, 26,
28
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
(CJD) in, 27
United Nations. See Food and
Agricultural Organization
(FAO)
Universal inﬂuenza vaccine, 92
Urea, 79
Urinary tract infections (UTIs), 
87
U.S. Department of Agriculture.
See USDA
U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency. See Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA)
U.S. farm policy, 80–81
U.S. Federal Insecticide,
Fungicide, and Rodenticide
Act (FIFRA), 51
U.S. Food and Drug
Administration. See FDA
U.S. Food, Drug, and Insecticide
Administration, 2. See also
Food and Drug
Administration (FDA)
U.S. Geological Survey, 83
Index
327

USDA (U.S. Department of
Agriculture), 3
avian ﬂu education by, 88
Food Safety and Inspection
Service of, 3
irradiation approved by, 62
Use by date, 45
Utah state agencies, 248
UTIs (urinary tract infections), 87
Vaccines, 90–92
against E. coli O157:H7
(potential), 19
against Salmonella (potential),
16
cell-based technologies for, 91
production and supply of,
91–92, 94
universal inﬂuenza vaccine, 92
VAP (voluntary alternative
performance standard), 98
Vermont state agencies, 248
Vibrio cholerae, 16, 158
Vibrio spp., 168
Vietnam, avian ﬂu and, 88
Virginia state agencies, 249
Viruses, 24–25, 166, 168
hepatitis A, 24–25, 166, 168
hepatitis E, 168
irradiation not effective on, 63
mutation of, 90–91, 93
new, potential for, 89
Nipah virus, 87–88
noroviruses, 25, 96, 166, 168
reovirus, 168
rotavirus, 166, 168
structure and function of,
89–90, 94
targeted antiviral prophylaxis
(TAP), 93–94
vaccines against, 90–92
See also Avian ﬂu
Vitamins, 103–104
irradiation and, 63
olestra and, 36
Voluntary alternative
performance standard
(VAP), 98
Walkerton, Ontario, Canada, 84
Wampler Foods, 13–14
Washing
of fruits and vegetables, 30–31
handwashing, 25, 30–31, 95,
158
Washington state agencies, 249
Washington state salmon, 43
Waste
animal, problems associated
with, 82–84, 189–193
animal, solutions for, 98–100
human, 83, 159, 189–190
Wastewater, 191–193
Water
Clean Water Act (1972), 98
Cryptosporidium parvum and, 23
Cyclospora cayentanensis and,
23–24
drinking, acrylamide limit for,
39
drinking, contamination from
CAFOs, 86–87
E. coli O157:H7 and, 19
Giardia lamblia and, 23
groundwater contamination,
86–87, 193
hepatitis A and, 25
hormones in, 57
irrigation water, 84, 96
manure contamination of,
83–84, 95–96, 191–193
pesticides in, 52
wastewater, 191–193
well water contamination, 83,
86
Waterborne parasites, 23
Well water, 83, 86
West Bend, Iowa, 99
West Virginia state agencies,
249–250
328
Index

WHO. See World Health
Organization
Whole Foods, 102
Wiley, Harvey W., 1–2, 153–154
Wilson, Craig, 154–155
Wisconsin state agencies, 250
World Health Organization
(WHO), 224
on antibiotic resistance, 50
food safety and, 8
food security strategies of, 69
H5N1 antiviral prophylaxis by,
94
irradiated food safety endorsed
by, 63
vaccine/antiviral supply and,
94
World population, 58–59, 79
World Trade Organization
(WTO), 60–61
Worms
Anisakis simplex, 168
Eustrongylides sp., 24
nematodes, 24
New World screwworm, 67–68
Taenia spp., 168
Trichinella spiralis, 22–23, 168
Wow chips, 36, 37
Wyoming state agencies, 250
Xenoestrogens, 56
Yersinia, 20
Yersinia entercolitica, 20
Yersinia pestis, 16, 20
Yersinia pseudotuberculosis, 20
Yersiniosis, 20
Zeranol, 55, 56
Zinc, 84
Zoonotic diseases, 67, 185, 225
Index
329


331
About the Author
Nina E. Redman received her MLIS from San Jose State University. She
has worked as a librarian in academic, corporate, and public settings.
She is the author of the ﬁrst and second editions of Food Safety: A Refer-
ence Handbook and the second edition of Human Rights: A Reference Hand-
book, both titles in the Contemporary World Issues Series from
ABC-CLIO. She lives in San Diego with her husband and two sons.

