how
game thinking
can revolutionize
your business
FOR THE WIN
kevin werbach
dan hunter

FOR
THE 
WIN


Philadelphia
FOR
THE 
WIN
How 
GAME THINKING 
Can Revolutionize
Your Business
KEVIN WERBACH
DAN HUNTER

© 2012 by Kevin Werbach and Dan Hunter
Published by Wharton Digital Press
Te Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
2000 Steinberg Hall-Dietrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104
Email: whartondigitalpress@wharton.upenn.edu
Website: wdp.wharton.upenn.edu
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, in any form
or by any means, without written permission of the publisher. Company 
and product names mentioned herein are the trademarks or registered 
trademarks of their respective owners.
Ebook ISBN: 978-1-61363-022-8
Paperback ISBN: 978-1-61363-023-5

For Nate and Elena—DH
For Eli and Esther—KW


Contents
Introduction: Why Can’t Business Be Fun?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Level 1: Getting into the Game: An Introduction 
to Gamiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .17
Level 2: Game Thinking: Learning to Think Like 
a Game Designer  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .35
Level 3: Why Games Work: The Rules of Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .51
Level 4: The Gamiﬁcation Toolkit: Game Elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .69
Level 5: Game Changer: Six Steps to Gamiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .85
Level 6: Epic Fails: And How to Avoid Them . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
Endgame: In Conclusion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
Glossary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129
Additional Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135
About the Authors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143


Introduction
Why Can’t Business Be Fun?
7
A
n investment banker walks into his supervisor’s oﬃce to 
announce he’s jumping ship to a competitor. Sure, the ﬁrm paid 
him a hefy salary for the past ﬁve years, but one bank is the same as 
another, right? 
A call-center worker reads the script on her computer screen 
in a measured tone. Her mind wanders as she struggles to get the 
customer oﬀ the phone. She tries to decide if she’s too far behind 
on her daily call quota to take that next ﬁve-minute authorized 
bathroom break.
A mother wheels her shopping cart through the supermarket 
aisles, as her toddler becomes unruly in the child seat. She grabs 
products from the shelves, usually picking the cheapest one without 
much thought.
Disengaged, demotivated, disempowered, and disconnected. Isn’t 
that how employees and customers always are—and always will be? 
Now imagine a diﬀerent set of scenarios. Te banker basks 
in the status boost when his deal team tops the ﬁrm’s internal 
leaderboard. Te call-center worker feels rewarded—mentally and 
by her employer—when she helps a customer out of a jam. And the 
harried mother feels a jolt of pure joy when she realizes that next box 
of cereal means she has earned enough points to reach the next level 
on an online community site.
By at least some measures, the people in the ﬁrst vignettes are 
doing their jobs eﬀectively. Perhaps we want our leaders to be ruthless, 
our workers to be interchangeably eﬃcient, and our consumers to be 
buying unthinkingly. But an exclusive focus on short-term factors 
will produce short-term beneﬁts at best, while risking much larger 

8     INTRODUCTION
long-term costs. Tese individuals are not engaged: Tey are phoning 
it in. It’s hard to imagine any of the companies they interact with 
producing the next great innovation, viral hit product, or visionary 
CEO. And no one seems to be having much fun. But what’s fun got 
to do with business, anyway? 
A lot. For thousands of years, we’ve created things called games 
that tap the tremendous psychic power of fun. A well-designed game 
is a guided missile to the motivational heart of the human psyche. 
Applying the lessons that games can teach could revolutionize your 
business. Te premise of this book is that fun is an extraordinarily 
valuable tool to address serious business pursuits like marketing, 
productivity enhancement, innovation, customer engagement, 
human resources, and sustainability. We are not talking about fun 
in the sense of ﬂeeting enjoyment but the deep fun that comes from 
extended interaction with well-designed games. 
Tink about a time when you were engrossed in a game. For 
some of you it might have been golf; for others, chess or Scrabble; 
for others, FarmVille or World of Warcraf. Wouldn’t you like to 
feel that same sense of accomplishment and ﬂow in your work or 
to feel engaged and rewarded by your consumer interactions with 
companies? Organizations whose employees, communities, and 
customers are deeply engaged will outperform those that cannot 
engender authentic motivation. Tis is especially true in a world 
where competition is global and technology has radically lowered 
barriers to entry. Engagement is your competitive advantage. Game-
design techniques provide your means to achieve it. 
Games have been around as long as human civilization. Even 
videogames have a forty-year history and comprise a massive global 
industry that generates $70 billion per year. Hundreds of millions 
of people in every corner of the globe spend hundreds of billions 
of minutes every month playing console, PC, online, and mobile 
games. Games are popular in every demographic, gender, and age 
group, but they are especially pervasive among the generation now 
moving into the workforce. 

INTRODUCTION     9
Our starting question is this: What if you could reverse-engineer 
what makes games eﬀective and graf it into a business environ-
ment? Tat’s the premise of an emerging business practice called 
gamiﬁcation. Our goal is to show you exactly how gamiﬁcation can 
be used as a powerful asset for your organization.
One point to make clear at the outset: Tis isn’t a book about 
videogames. It’s not about the games industry, the gamer generation, 
the societal impact (good or bad) of game-playing, or how much 
the latest release of Madden Football cost to produce. It’s not about 
3D virtual worlds, advergames, or edutainment. It’s not even about 
the internet or digital business. Sure, we’ll talk about such things, 
but only as context. And because this is a business book, we haven’t 
even mentioned the burning academic debates in games scholarship, 
such as the ludologists vs. the narratologists. (Don’t ask.) No, this is a 
book about how you can use gamiﬁcation to improve your business 
practices. 
Gamiﬁcation does not mean turning all business into a game, 
any more than innovation turns it into an R&D lab or Six Sigma 
turns it into a factory production line. Gamiﬁcation is a powerful 
toolkit to apply to your existing business challenges, whatever the 
nature of your ﬁrm. Many of the best examples of game mechanics 
in business don’t even look like games to those involved. Te essence 
of games isn’t entertainment . . . it’s a fusion of human nature and 
skillful design. Te hundreds of millions of people who ﬂock to 
games on their computers, consoles, mobile phones, tablets, and 
social networks such as Facebook do so because those games were 
rigorously and skillfully designed, based on decades of real-world 
experience and research into human psychology. 
Successful gamiﬁcation involves two kinds of skills. It requires 
an understanding of game design, and it requires an understanding 
of business techniques. Few organizations are good at both. Knowing 
how to conduct a market segmentation or a minimum viable 
product analysis won’t show you how to create enduringly engaging 

10    INTRODUCTION 
experiences. Tat’s why most business managers ﬁnd gamiﬁcation so 
new and challenging. Te reverse, however, is equally true. Expertise 
in programming, game-level design, art direction, or playtesting 
won’t help you calculate the lifetime value of a customer, manage 
a team, or choose the right business strategy. In our research with 
companies and in teaching the world’s ﬁrst course on the business 
practice of gamiﬁcation at Wharton, we see both the confusions 
and the insights that emerge when business practices and game 
design meet. 
Underlying our eﬀort is the recognition that traditional incentive 
structures to motivate customers and employees ofen fall short. 
Te carrot and the stick don’t cut it anymore; and money, status, 
and the threat of punishment only work up to a point. In a world 
of near-inﬁnite choices, the old techniques are rapidly becoming 
less eﬀective. Economists have been forced to acknowledge that 
people sometimes act in predictably irrational ways that frustrate 
basic tenets of management and marketing. How can ﬁrms use this 
knowledge to positive eﬀect?
Research into human motivation gathered from scholarly 
literature demonstrates that people will feel motivated by well-
designed game features. Monetary rewards aren’t even necessary, 
because the game itself is the reward. Videogame players will, for 
example, invest enormous resources into acquiring virtual objects 
and achievements that have no tangible value. Tis is not to say that 
there isn’t real money involved. World of Warcraf alone brings in 
nearly $2 billion per year. Zynga, which makes free-to-play social 
games on Facebook, generated $1.1 billion in revenue and nearly 
$200 million in proﬁts in 2011, just four years afer it was founded, 
largely from monetization of virtual goods. 
Based on numbers such as these, a cottage industry is starting 
to trumpet the virtues of games and gamiﬁcation. Several venture-
funded startups now oﬀer gamiﬁcation toolkits to plug into 
your website or productivity tools such as customer relationship 
management systems. We’re encouraged by this development, but we 

INTRODUCTION     11
also want to sound a note of caution. It’s easy to focus on the surface 
attributes of games and miss the deeper aspects. If gamiﬁcation 
is just a gloss on existing marketing or management practices, or 
traditional rewards in shiny packages, it won’t produce any added 
value. It could well make things worse. Tere’s a reason most games 
fail: Game design is hard. 
Whether you’re an executive at a large corporation considering 
a gamiﬁcation project, a staﬀer at a nonproﬁt seeking new ways 
to make a diﬀerence with your community, a student trying to 
understand the skills you’ll need for job opportunities in a burgeoning 
ﬁeld, or anything in between, our goal is to provide you with a 
pragmatic guidebook that includes all the basics you need to begin 
experimenting with gamiﬁcation in your organization. Troughout, 
we attempt to provide you with a sophisticated understanding of 
the concepts around gamiﬁcation, and we provide frameworks and 
step-by-step instructions to implement your ideas. Drawing on our 
research and conversations with executives, we reveal in For the Win
how organizations of all types are putting gamiﬁcation into practice. 
Tere are also numerous concepts drawn from academic scholarship 
in management, marketing, industrial organization, psychology, and 
other business ﬁelds. When the faddish aspects of gamiﬁcation fade 
away, these well-grounded insights will remain valuable. 
In emphasizing the practical focus of this book, we don’t mean 
to give short shrif to the deeper implications of the techniques 
we describe. Gamiﬁcation done right points toward a radical 
transformation in the conduct of business. If fun matters, it’s because 
people matter. People matter as autonomous agents striving for 
fulﬁllment, not as black boxes or simplistic rational proﬁt maximizers. 
Even as more of life is mediated through remote networked sofware 
systems executing programmed algorithms—in fact, because of it—
the mysterious factors that make life meaningful should be a central 
concern of leaders. Recognizing the power of what we call “game 
thinking” is one step on that path.

12     INTRODUCTION
Why We Wrote Tis Book
We both play videogames and have done so for much of our lives. If 
you play games long enough, eventually you start to notice things, 
like how people can’t help but respond to game environments in 
playful and interesting ways. Even people who are smart, well-
educated, and “shouldn’t be wasting their time.” 
 
For years we were in a guild together in the multiplayer online 
game World of Warcraf. Te guild was comprised of games designers 
and games researchers. Te vast majority of them had PhDs or other 
advanced degrees, most had jobs at top universities or corporate 
research groups, and a high percentage had families. Not your typical 
bunch of teenagers seeking to escape reality. We watched with equal 
parts horror and amusement as these brilliant people got into ﬁghts 
over imaginary swords and worked together to defeat monsters  
that didn’t really exist. Tis was unexpected and interesting, to say  
the least. 
 
Ten we took a look at our workplaces. In our day jobs, we teach 
in business and law schools. We began to think about the ways that 
arbitrary points-based systems—what we call “grades”—have a 
huge eﬀect on students. Te points and the grades aren’t knowledge 
and learning; they are just the mechanisms that teachers create to 
assess and motivate students toward those important goals. Tere’s 
nothing derogatory in the observation that education and work are 
really just games. We began to ask ourselves, why not make them 
better games?
 
We started to research gamiﬁcation and taught the ﬁrst business 
school course ever oﬀered on the topic. We found that although there 
were great books on game design and on the speculative implication 
of games for society, there was nothing in print that gave a clear and 
rigorous explanation of how and why to build gamiﬁed systems. 
Most of what passed for “case studies” were anecdotal magazine 
articles or blog posts, and most of the “deep analysis” people pointed 
to was comprised of PowerPoint slides. We realized there was a real 

INTRODUCTION     13
need for a research-grounded yet pragmatic guide that explained 
how to do gamiﬁcation properly. 
All of these experiences motivated us to write this book. But the 
real reason we wrote it has nothing to do with these very practical 
factors. We decided to write this book because gamiﬁcation is 
fascinating, and it may turn out to be revolutionary. At its core, 
gamiﬁcation is about ﬁnding the fun in the things that we have to 
do. Making business processes compelling by making them fun is 
about the coolest thing that we can think of. And we’re only just 
starting to get a sense of how revolutionary this can be, in ﬁelds 
as wide-ranging as education, healthcare, marketing, relationship 
management, government, computer programming, and beyond.
Most of the concepts we’ll discuss in this book are relevant in 
all of these contexts. Obviously gamiﬁcation is going to be relevant 
for marketing departments that need to encourage consumer 
engagement with a product or to human resources teams that 
hope to motivate and engage employees. But it also applies in 
human resources management and in government and in social 
impact settings. Motivation is a magic ingredient in all these cases. 
A program funded by foundations to encourage low-income kids 
to read more at home isn’t structurally all that diﬀerent from one 
deployed by a consumer packaged goods manufacturer to sell more 
toothpaste. Both can become more eﬀective through game thinking.
Of course, if you’re the one managing the program, it makes a 
great deal of diﬀerence what you’re responsible for. Our task is to 
show you the theory and practice of gamiﬁcation and to demonstrate 
techniques and approaches that have been shown to work. From 
talking with the leading practitioners in the ﬁeld, from teaching it, 
and from studying a large number of examples, we’ve identiﬁed what 
we believe are the critical elements for eﬀective gamiﬁcation. Your 
task is to pull from the gamiﬁcation toolkits we’ll outline in this book 
and mold something appropriate for you and your organization’s 
speciﬁc needs. 

14     INTRODUCTION
A Map of the Territory
For the Win covers the concepts required to implement gamiﬁcation 
successfully in any kind of organization. Like many games, it 
progresses through a series of levels. As you master each concept, 
you’ll be prepared to take the next step.
At Level 1, you will gain a clear overview of gamiﬁcation. At 
Level 2, we show you how to determine if gamiﬁcation is going to 
work for your speciﬁc business problem. Here we teach you how to 
approach problems like a game designer. Tat means understanding 
exactly what a game is and the basics of game thinking. At Level 3, 
we get you to dig down into the motivations of the users of your 
gamiﬁcation system and ask how gamiﬁcation can better motivate 
them. Decades of research reveal surprising facts about the best 
ways to motivate behavior, which should inform any gamiﬁcation 
project. We take a look at speciﬁc gamiﬁcation techniques at Level 
4, including the hierarchy of game dynamics, mechanics, and 
components. 
At that point you will have the basics, but then it will be time to 
integrate them. At Level 5 we lay out how to put gamiﬁcation to work 
through a six-step design process. At Level 6, we examine important 
risks, such as legal and ethical problems, oversimplistic approaches 
to implementation, and what happens when your players turn the 
tables on you. 
If you’re reading this book to learn more about what gamiﬁcation 
is and how it works, you’ll have a comprehensive foundation. If 
you’re looking to implement gamiﬁcation in your organization, 
you will be ready to experiment on your own or with a partner or 
team. Gamiﬁcation isn’t something you can expect to get right and 
leave unchanged for an extended period, because your players will 
demand more. Our goal is to put you ahead of the game. Tis book 
has everything you need to start. Additional resources are available 
on our website, http://www.gamifyforthewin.com. 
Let the games begin.

INTRODUCTION     15
A Note on the Title
“For the win,” or FTW for short, is a gamer term believed to be 
derived from old-school TV game shows like Hollywood Squares, in 
which a player could win the game with a correct answer. It’s used 
as an endorsement of a tool or practice that will lead to success in 
any context. As in: “Daily exercise FTW!” We ﬁnd it an appropriate 
moniker. Gamiﬁcation is a technique that businesses can use to 
be more successful. We hope you will use this book to help your 
business win in whatever ways you choose.


Getting into the Game 
An Introduction to Gamiﬁcation
17
LEVEL 1
R
oss Smith had a problem. His testing group at Microsof plays 
a vitally important role for the sofware giant. Hundreds of 
millions of people use Microsof Windows and Oﬃce daily. Tese 
sofware systems were built by hundreds of developers, modiﬁed 
repeatedly over a period of years, and customized for every major 
world language. Bugs and other errors are inevitable for such 
complex sofware systems. Te testing group is responsible for 
ferreting them out. 
It’s a monumental task. Automated systems aren’t suﬃcient, and 
the only way to ensure quality is for a vast number of eyeballs to 
review every feature, every usage case, and every dialog box in every 
Everything in the future online is going to 
look like a multiplayer game.
—Google chairman Eric Schmidt
Congratulations! You’ve begun! You’re at Gamiﬁcation Level 1. 
At this initial level, we explain why you should care about gamiﬁcation, 
and we answer some basic questions:
 
• Why are games valuable in serious business contexts?
 
• What is gamification?
 
• How can game concepts be employed in your business?
 
• When is gamification most effective?

18     FOR THE WIN
language. It’s not just the scale of the problem: Rigorously testing 
sofware is, much of the time, mind-numbingly boring. Even for a 
company with the resources of Microsof, it’s no easy matter to ﬁnd 
enough people prepared to test products like Windows and Oﬃce. 
And the programs have to be tested in every language that Microsof 
ships in. It’s hard enough ﬁnding people to test in English, and 
ensuring that they do good work; imagine how hard it is confront 
the same problem in Polish, Urdu, and Tagalog.
 
If you were in Ross Smith’s situation, you probably wouldn’t 
think that fun was the answer to your problem. Sofware testing is 
serious business, with solemn ﬁnancial and even legal implications 
for the company, and it calls for repetition and constant attention 
to detail. You might be surprised to learn, then, how Smith solved 
his problem: through games. Smith’s group pioneered the concept 
of sofware-quality games that turned the testing process into an 
engaging, enjoyable experience for thousands of Microsof employees. 
 
For the Language Quality Game, Smith’s group recruited Microsof 
employees around the world to review Windows 7 dialog boxes in 
their spare time. Tey were awarded points for each suspicious bit 
of language they found and ranked on a leaderboard (a public “high 
score” list) based on their success. To ensure players didn’t just click 
through screens without reading them, the organizers sprinkled in 
deliberate errors and obvious mistranslations. Te game’s scoring 
system tracked the performance of individuals and regions. 
 
Te Language Quality Game created a competitive dynamic for 
the participating employees. Employees wanted to win, and they 
wanted their languages to win. Te Microsof oﬃces in Japan topped 
the regional leaderboard by taking a day oﬀ from other work to weed 
out localization errors. All told, 4,500 participants reviewed over 
half a million Windows 7 dialog boxes and logged 6,700 bug reports, 
resulting in hundreds of signiﬁcant ﬁxes. Not only did they do it 
above and beyond their work responsibilities, but a large number of 
them described the process as enjoyable and even addicting. 

GETTING INTO THE GAME: AN INTRODUCTION TO GAMIFICATION     19
Te Language Quality Game is not the only game developed 
at Microsof to improve the quality of the company’s products. 
PageHunt presents users with a webpage and challenges them to 
guess the queries that would produce that page. In playing the game, 
users generate large numbers of unusual connections—“JLo” for a 
page showing Jennifer Lopez, for example—that computers just can’t 
generate by themselves and which radically improves the quality of 
Microsof’s Web search. Te Code Review Game broke programmers 
into teams that competed against each other to win the most points 
for ﬁnding and ﬁxing bugs in Microsof products.
Te Microsof initiatives led by innovative managers like Smith 
are examples of a burgeoning set of new business techniques that 
leverage games for business beneﬁts and which go by the name 
Figure 1.1 
Screenshot of a User Playing the Microsof Language Quality 
Game in Hindi

20     FOR THE WIN
“gamiﬁcation.” Tese practices go beyond the game-based simulations 
that have crept into corporate training and related ﬁelds and instead 
involve the use of game techniques in all areas of business. Tey are 
coming soon to a business near you.
How Gamiﬁcation Solves Business Problems
Ross Smith and the other executives we describe in this book have 
realized that the power of games extends beyond the objectives of 
the games themselves. A ﬂight simulator can teach a pilot how to 
handle dangerous situations that might occur during landing. But 
if you’re running an airline, you also care about whether your ﬂight 
attendants exude a positive attitude, your baggage handlers do their 
best to get suitcases out on time, and your customers express loyalty. 
Gamiﬁcation techniques can help companies improve every one of 
these mission-critical aspects of their business. 
Tere are any number of settings in which this approach can 
work, but at this early stage three non-game contexts are particularly 
prominent: internal, external, and behavior change.  
Internal Gamiﬁcation
Ross Smith’s initiatives are examples of internal gamiﬁcation. In 
these scenarios, companies use gamiﬁcation to improve productivity 
within the organization in order to foster innovation, enhance 
camaraderie, or otherwise derive positive business results through 
their own employees. Internal gamiﬁcation is sometimes called 
enterprise gamiﬁcation, but you don’t have to be a large enterprise 
to use it. Even small companies and startups can apply game-design 
techniques to enhance productivity. 
Tere are two distinguishing attributes of internal gamiﬁcation. 
First, the players are already part of a deﬁned community: the 
company. Te company knows who they are, and they interact 
with each other on a regular basis. Tey may not have shared 

GETTING INTO THE GAME: AN INTRODUCTION TO GAMIFICATION     21
aﬃnities like the community of Harry Potter fans; in fact, they may 
be quite diverse in their perspectives and interests. However, they 
share reference points such as the corporate culture and desire for 
advancement and status within the organization. Te Microsof 
Language Quality Game worked because Microsof oﬃces around 
the world cared about besting their fellow Microsofies, and they 
had a shared commitment to shipping the best possible operating 
system.
Te other aspect of internal gamiﬁcation ﬂows from the ﬁrst. 
Te motivational dynamics of gamiﬁcation must interact with the 
ﬁrm’s existing management and reward structures. Te Language 
Quality Game was eﬀective because its players weren’t employed 
by Microsof as localization testers. Tey participated in what 
Smith calls organizational citizenship behavior, not because their 
salaries depended on it. Internal gamiﬁcation can work for core job 
requirements, but there must be some novel motivation. Tat could 
      Organizational Benefit
Internal 
External 
 
Employees/  
 
Individuals
Communities 
Behavior Change 
Behavior Change
(entreprise 
(individuals)
 programs)
  
      Personal Beneﬁt
Figure 1.2 
Relationship between Diﬀerent Gamiﬁcation Categories

22     FOR THE WIN
be the status of winning a coveted employee award or the opportunity 
to learn new skills.
External Gamiﬁcation
External gamiﬁcation involves your customers or prospective 
customers. Tese applications are generally driven by marketing 
objectives. Gamiﬁcation here is a way to improve the relationships 
between businesses and customers, producing increased engagement, 
identiﬁcation with the product, stronger loyalty, and ultimately 
higher revenues. 
A good example is the Record Searchlight, a daily newspaper 
in Redding, California. Virtually every newspaper faces a quandary 
as readers shif from print to digital. Te reporting, editorial, and 
investigative functions that newspapers provide depend on revenues 
from advertising and subscriptions, which largely evaporate when 
readers think they can get their news from blogs or wire service stories 
available online. Management at the Record Searchlight realized that 
it could combat this trend if it built a sustainable community on its 
advertising-supported website. Te challenge was to turn passive 
readers into engaged users who would spend time interacting with 
multiple articles on the site and recommend them to friends.
To solve this problem, the Record Searchlight implemented a 
badge system for comments on its online articles. Users were rewarded 
with badges for particular numbers of insightful comments. A badge 
is just a distinctive icon that shows up on a user’s proﬁle when he 
or she reaches a deﬁned set of requirements. Tat might not seem 
terribly important, but badges can be powerful motivators. Tey 
signify achievements and display them for all to see. Tink about the 
patches used by the Boy Scouts, the insignias on military uniforms, 
or the “Harvard graduate” line on a resume. Gamiﬁed badges serve 
the same function digitally.
Te paper’s primary goal was to increase engagement with its 
website. Afer three months, the Record Searchlight saw a 10% rise 

GETTING INTO THE GAME: AN INTRODUCTION TO GAMIFICATION     23
in comment volume, and the time spent on the site increased by 
about 25% per session. Another goal was to improve the quality of 
conversations on the site. By encouraging readers to reward good 
comments by other readers, the badges reduced the number of 
oﬀensive and problematic comments. Tat reduced editorial costs 
for the paper, and it made the online discussion area a more valuable 
tool for retaining readers.
As a form of marketing, external gamiﬁcation can take advantage 
of all the sophistication of modern data-driven marketing practices. 
Gamiﬁcation adds a richer toolkit to understand and stimulate 
customer motivation. 
Behavior-Change Gamiﬁcation
Finally, behavior-change gamiﬁcation seeks to form beneﬁcial 
new habits among a population. Tat can involve anything from 
encouraging people to make better health choices, such as eating 
better or working out more, to redesigning the classroom to make kids 
learn more while actually enjoying school, or building systems that 
help people save more money for retirement without lecturing them 
about how poor they’re going to be in a few years’ time. Generally, 
these new habits produce desirable societal outcomes: less obesity, 
lower medical expenses, a more eﬀective educational system, better 
ﬁnancial decisions. Behavior-change gamiﬁcation programs are 
ofen run or sponsored by nonproﬁts and governments. However, 
they can also create private beneﬁts.
Adam Bosworth is a long-time technology executive, having 
spent time at companies such as Microsof, BEA Systems, and Google. 
He headed up Google’s eﬀort to develop electronic health records, 
which foundered amid operational and regulatory complexities. 
Afer building the deep technical foundations of several major 
sofware platforms, Bosworth was looking to do something that 
aﬀected people more directly in a positive way. At the same time, like 
many technologists who spend a career sitting in cubicles, he wanted 

24     FOR THE WIN
to get into better shape. He decided to launch a startup company that 
was still in the healthcare space but focused on motivating people to 
improve their personal wellness.
Keas, Bosworth’s San Francisco-based startup, partners with 
enterprises to promote employee health and wellness. Te company 
initially focused on presenting users with clear and compelling data 
about their health. If people could only see just how their choices 
about diet and exercise aﬀected their bodies, they would be bound 
to respond. It didn’t work out that way. No matter how compelling 
the data Keas presented, people couldn’t get out of their established 
habits. 
So Keas pivoted. It had already converted pages of health 
information into quizzes that tested users’ health knowledge. Now, 
it incorporated those quizzes into a team-based game that included 
levels, strategy, and a leaderboard. Te company wasn’t sure users 
would go for this—who loves taking quizzes, afer all? To be safe, 
though, it created what it thought were more quizzes than its users 
would ever get through during a twelve-week program. 
Te users plowed through them in a week. 
Tat’s when Bosworth knew he was on to something. Turning 
health and wellness into a game-like experience was the key to 
successful behavior change. Keas participant teams compete for 
rewards based on a combination of sustained real-world eﬀort and 
learning how to be healthier. Te results have been dramatic. At one 
hospital, employees using Keas collectively lost over 1,200 pounds, 
with 73% saying they felt more positive toward their employers and 
64% saying they felt more productive at work. 
Keas is a for-proﬁt business, and its clients participate to cut 
down on their healthcare bills; but obviously there are major societal 
beneﬁts when people make better health and wellness choices. 
Nonproﬁts such as Hope Lab are using gamiﬁcation in similar ways 
to improve kids’ health, especially in low-income communities. A 
White House initiative led by the Oﬃce of the National Coordinator 

GETTING INTO THE GAME: AN INTRODUCTION TO GAMIFICATION     25
for Health Information Technology and the Oﬃce of Science and 
Technology Policy is exploring games for health as a major national 
program. All of these eﬀorts have in common the recognition that 
motivation is at the heart of sustained behavior change, and games 
are among the most powerful motivational tools. 
Te systems that Microsof, the Record Searchlight, and Keas built 
look very diﬀerent from one another, and they operate in diﬀerent 
internal, external, and behavior-change contexts. But they are all 
examples of gamiﬁcation and game thinking applied to particular 
business and social challenges. 
Gamifi-what?
So what exactly is gamiﬁcation? Companies have been applying 
game thinking to business challenges for some time without fully 
appreciating the scope of the concept. Tere are references to 
“gamifying” online systems as early as 1980. University of Essex 
professor Richard Bartle, a pioneer in multiplayer online games, says 
the word referred originally to “turning something not a game into 
a game.” 
Te ﬁrst use of gamiﬁcation in its current sense apparently 
occurred in 2003, when Nick Pelling, a British game developer, 
established a short-lived consultancy to create game-like interfaces 
for electronic devices. Te term fell into disuse, although during 
subsequent years, game designers like Amy Jo Kim, Nicole Lazzaro, 
Jane McGonigal, and Ben Sawyer, as well as researchers such as 
Ian Bogost, James Paul Gee, and Byron Reeves, began to talk about 
the serious potential of video games. It was only in 2010, however, 
that the term gamiﬁcation became widely adopted in the sense that 
people use it now.
Even afer major magazines have called it “the hot new business 
concept,” using the word “gamiﬁcation” ofen draws blank stares 
in conversations with executives. It’s easily confused with terms 
such as “serious games” and “game theory.” If you’re looking for the 

26     FOR THE WIN
mathematical models immortalized in the movie A Beautiful Mind, 
you’re in the wrong place. 
Gamiﬁcation is a cumbersome word, and it doesn’t capture 
the phenomenon in every respect. Many game developers and 
researchers worry—with good reason—that it trivializes the 
complexities of eﬀective game design. Regardless, it’s the term that 
has stuck. Eventually gamiﬁcation may be called something else, 
but for now, we follow the common usage. Te trouble is that there 
isn’t a universally accepted deﬁnition of gamiﬁcation. Our working 
deﬁnition is the following:
Gamiﬁcation: Te use of game elements and  
game-design techniques in non-game contexts.
Let’s break down this formulation and explain a little more about 
the three main aspects of the deﬁnition: game elements, game-design 
techniques, and non-game contexts. 
Game Elements
A game manifests itself as an integrated experience, but it’s built from 
many smaller pieces. We call those game elements. We’ll go into 
more detail at Level 4, but for now, think of elements as a toolkit for 
building a game. Game elements for checkers, for example, include 
the pieces, the notion of capturing pieces by jumping, and turning 
a piece that reaches the last row of the board into a king. Notice 
that some of these are objects (the pieces), some are relationships 
among them (jumping), and some are abstract concepts embedding 
rules (making a king). In the Microsof Language Quality Game, 
elements include the competition among international oﬃces and 
the leaderboard allowing participants to compare their performance. 
Just as you can assemble the same box of Legos into many kinds 
of objects, you can do diﬀerent things with game elements. Most 
obviously, you can make a game. Te game can be designed purely 
for fun (or associated revenue generation), or it can be designed 

GETTING INTO THE GAME: AN INTRODUCTION TO GAMIFICATION     27
to illustrate the complexities of the Israeli-Palestinian conﬂict. Or, 
you can assemble the elements into something that is not actually a 
game. When you’re taking pieces of games and embedding them in 
business practices—challenging programmers to ﬁnd bugs or having 
them guess search queries—then you’re engaged in gamiﬁcation, 
and the end product is, one hopes, a better and more compelling 
business practice. 
You shouldn’t forget that gamiﬁcation isn’t about building a 
full-ﬂedged game. It’s just about using some elements of games, and 
because it operates at the level of elements, using gamiﬁcation oﬀers 
more ﬂexibility than using a game. When you’re playing checkers, 
you can’t mess around with the game elements. If you did, the game 
wouldn’t be checkers, would it? With gamiﬁcation, though, bending 
the rules is exactly what you’re called upon to do. As the designer of a 
gamiﬁed system, you can and should tweak the elements to make the 
experience more engaging or to target certain business objectives. 
We’ll talk about how you do this in later levels.
Te key point is that game elements can be embedded into 
activities that are not themselves games. Tis radically expands 
the scope of opportunities. For example, the global consulting and 
auditing ﬁrm Deloitte realized that if it could only get more of its 
consultants to share information about their client meetings on 
the corporate intranet, it would promote more eﬃcient knowledge 
sharing and collaboration across the organization. Mere exhortations 
were unlikely to move these busy professionals to invest the time. 
A simulation game wouldn’t do the trick, either. Deloitte needed to 
motivate, not educate. 
Deloitte’s solution was to harness game elements by adding 
a feature called WhoWhatWhere to its internal social messaging 
platform. It encourages consultants to “check in” with details 
about their meetings. Leaderboards track who has checked in 
the most with a client or topic. Te leaders gain recognition and 
social currency in the organization as experts, and this recognition 
motivates participation. WhoWhatWhere is an example of applying 

28     FOR THE WIN
the best parts of games without actually creating one. Tat’s what 
gamiﬁcation is. 
Game-Design Techniques
Gamiﬁcation involves using game-design techniques, and this can 
be deceptively tricky. It’s easy to believe that it is no great challenge 
to take a game element such as a point system and stick it onto a 
website: Want your customers to visit your website more ofen? Give 
them 100 points every time they check in! All it takes is a tiny bit of 
sofware code. And why not add a leaderboard? It’s just a spreadsheet 
listing those points in rank order.
However, if you approach gamiﬁcation in this way, you’ll quickly 
run into trouble. What’s the point of the points? Some users may 
ﬁnd racking up a high score or topping the leaderboard inherently 
stimulating, at least for a while. But these users ofen get burnt out 
by the endless treadmill of points accumulation and abandon the 
system. And then there is the fact that most people don’t ﬁnd points 
particularly interesting. Many people look at the system and ask, 
“Why on earth should I care about this?” Even for the users who 
might care, the gamiﬁcation design can be oﬀ-putting. New users 
may arrive with high hopes, only to abandon the system when they 
see the top of the leaderboard immensely far above them. Tese are 
just a few of the challenges you might encounter. 
Even successful implementations can have missteps. As we 
mentioned, the Redding Record Searchlight is a good example of how 
external gamiﬁcation can generate customer engagement beneﬁts. At 
one point, though, the editors got carried away and implemented a 
“deal ﬁnder” badge for readers who signed up to receive promotional 
emails. It was a spectacular failure. Users of the gamiﬁed site found 
the emails so annoying that subscriptions to the promo list actually 
went down afer the badge system was implemented. 
How do you decide which game elements to put where, and 
how to you make the overall gamiﬁed experience greater than the 

GETTING INTO THE GAME: AN INTRODUCTION TO GAMIFICATION     29
sum of these parts? Tat’s where game-design techniques come in. 
Te aspects of games that make them fun, addicting, challenging, 
and emotionally resonant can’t be reduced to a list of components 
or step-by-step instructions. Game design is a bit of science, a bit of 
art, and a lot of hard-won experience . . . just like strategic leadership, 
managing a team, or creating a killer marketing campaign. 
Game design is hard. Even great game designers, like great 
ﬁlm directors, sometimes produce poor-quality works. Successful 
companies such as Electronic Arts and Sony have spent tens of 
millions of dollars on online games that ﬂopped. If you don’t 
appreciate the accumulated knowledge and time-tested techniques 
of good game design, though, your chances of failure are far greater. 
Tat’s why, in this book, we spend at least as much time on the “how” 
and “why” of gamiﬁcation as the “what.” 
Non-Game Contexts
Te ﬁnal aspect of our deﬁnition is that gamiﬁcation operates in non-
game contexts. As noted earlier, this can mean internal, external, 
or behavior-change situations. Te key element in each is that they 
involve real-world business or social impact goals. Your players are 
not storming a castle, they’re exploring the website of your TV show. 
Tey’re not killing dragons, they’re collecting achievements on the 
way to improving their ﬁnancial situation. Tis is important to keep 
in mind when designing a gamiﬁed system. Your players aren’t there 
to escape from your product into a fantasy world; they are there 
to engage more deeply with your product or business or objective. 
Ross Smith’s troops at Microsof weren’t hacking apart goblins; they 
were reading dialog boxes to ﬁnd translation errors. Yet somehow, 
magically, it still felt like a game. 
Te challenge of gamiﬁcation, therefore, is to take the elements 
that normally operate within the game universe and apply them 
eﬀectively in the real world. In an array of situations, organizations 

30     FOR THE WIN
are ﬁnding that gamiﬁcation produces measurable results. Ross 
Smith’s team at Microsof showed that it could turn even a boring 
but valuable task into an exciting challenge. 
Nike has done something similar with its Nike+ system, which 
uses wireless pedometers to feed data about their users’ runs into an 
online service. Runners can visually track their progress, compare 
themselves with others, receive real-time encouragement from 
friends, and challenge each other to go the farthest or fastest. Te 
system improves the experience of running and ties each pair of 
sneakers into an integrated environment that keeps customers 
returning to buy Nike shoes whenever their old ones wear out. 
Taking Games Seriously
As a ﬁnal point, we want to confront the question that’s likely in your 
head or in the heads of those you discuss the concept with: Why 
should a practice based on games be taken seriously in business?
Tere are several good answers to this question. If you’ve 
bought this book and read this far, chances are you’ve already got a 
reason. Perhaps the notion of applying something as fun as games 
to something as potentially dull as work is inherently appealing. 
Perhaps your boss read one of those business magazine articles 
proclaiming gamiﬁcation as an important trend. Perhaps you’ve 
seen a stimulating presentation from a gamiﬁcation advocate. Tese 
are all legitimate reasons, but they rarely get to the essence of why 
gamiﬁcation can be valuable.
We see three particularly compelling reasons why every business 
should at least consider gamiﬁcation:
 
•  Engagement
 
•  Experimentation
 
•  Results

GETTING INTO THE GAME: AN INTRODUCTION TO GAMIFICATION     31
Engagement
Te most basic answer is that gamiﬁcation is about engagement. Te 
same human needs that drive engagement with games are present in 
both the workplace and the marketplace. Tink of gamiﬁcation as a 
means to design systems that motivate people to do things. Anything 
that makes your customers and employees want to strengthen their 
relationship with your company, or to buy your product, or to engage 
with the goals of the company, is going to be good for your business. 
Te reason for this is simple. It turns out that our brains are wired 
to crave puzzle solving, feedback and reinforcement, and the many 
other experiences that games provide. Study afer study has shown 
that games activate the brain’s dopamine system, which is associated 
with pleasure. Neuroscientists have also found intriguing parallels 
between the brain’s response to games and the process of inquiry. As 
renowned game designer Raph Koster writes: “With games, learning 
is the drug.” What executive wouldn’t want to harness the natural 
high that motivates learning and higher levels of engagement? 
As we’ll discuss, there’s a danger in focusing too much on this 
pleasure-seeking reward dynamic as the basis for gamiﬁcation. 
Just as drugs can make you happy for a while but eventually 
become counterproductive, gamiﬁcation should draw on more 
than the brain’s most primitive systems. A well-designed, nuanced 
gamiﬁcation system can give you a powerful set of tools to develop 
challenges for your customers and employees that are meaningful 
and intrinsically engaging.
Engagement has business value in itself. Studies suggest roughly 
70% of American workers aren’t fully engaged in their jobs, and this 
undoubtedly aﬀects not only their performance but their happiness. 
People know they should exercise more, eat better, get regular 
health checkups, use less energy, and so forth; the hard part is being 
suﬃciently motivated to do so. And for consumers, engagement is 
what leads them to initiate a transaction. In some cases the beneﬁts 
are indirect. Perhaps you want to engender camaraderie among 

32     FOR THE WIN
your employees. Or maybe you want to convince a large number 
of strangers to tackle a collective problem, like studying NASA 
photographs to locate interesting new planets that automated 
systems can’t ﬁnd. Or identify your best customers, who have an 
outsized impact on your bottom line. 
Experimentation
A second powerful aspect of game-based motivation is to open up the 
space of possibility. Mastering a game is all about experimentation. 
You expect to experience some failure, but because you can always 
start over, failure doesn’t feel so daunting. In most videogames, 
you may win, but you can never permanently lose. If the game is 
eﬀective—not too diﬃcult, never too easy—players are continually 
motivated to strive for improvement. And they are encouraged to 
try new and diﬀerent approaches, even crazy ones, to ﬁnd better 
solutions. Tat ethos of constant innovation is perfectly suited for 
today’s fast-moving business environment. 
Table 1.1
Game Concepts in the Real World
Experimenting with the lessons in this book can pay dividends 
beyond gamiﬁcation. As table 1.1 shows, game elements are already 
present in the real world. We just don’t usually think about them in 
that way. News coverage of political campaigns and legislative battles 
Real-World Activity 
Game Concept
Monthly sales competition 
Challenge
Frequent ﬂyer program tiers 
Levels
Weight Watchers group 
Team
Free coﬀee after ten purchases at Starbucks 
Reward
American Express platinum card 
Badge

GETTING INTO THE GAME: AN INTRODUCTION TO GAMIFICATION     33
ofen uses game language and imagery. Ask young people today how 
they see school, their relationship with brands, and their jobs, and 
they are quite likely to describe them in terms that sounds eerily 
game-like. Te throwaway line that life, or work, is “just a game” 
rings strangely true. 
Te fact is that there’s signiﬁcant overlap between work, 
consumer interactions, and games. Sure, some people spend every 
moment of the workday waiting for it to end. Similarly, some coldly 
appraise their choice of products (such as cars) based on price, 
features, and gas mileage. Yet we’ve all heard of people who love their 
jobs and those who love their cars. If that doesn’t sound strange, why 
resist the notion that games oﬀer a pathway to improve experiences 
with business or social objectives? 
Related to this, you may have come across “serious games” in your 
business or personal life. Chances are that the surgeon who operated 
on you and the pilot of your last ﬂight trained with specialized 3D 
simulation games. Tere are substantial communities building 
games for health, military applications, environmental awareness, 
corporate training, and education, among other categories. Tere’s 
even a remarkable public school in New York City, Quest to Learn, 
built entirely around games. In a slightly diﬀerent vein, many games 
are designed to achieve marketing or advertising objectives, such as 
the annual Monopoly Game at McDonald’s or the branded interactive 
games you’ll ofen ﬁnd on customer-facing business websites. Such 
advergames are now standard operating procedure for advertising 
and interactive agencies. 
As we see things, serious games and their ilk are special cases of 
gamiﬁcation. Tey are examples of using game design in non-game 
contexts by assembling game elements into full-blown games. Tere 
are substantial communities today around these practices, with their 
own books, conferences, and so forth. Some of our examples, such 
as the Language Quality Game, qualify as serious games, but most of 

34     FOR THE WIN
them don’t. Our primary focus in this book is on embedding game 
elements into existing practices, from exercise regimens to corporate 
innovation programs.
Te rise of e-commerce, online communications tools in the 
workplace, mobile devices, and social media makes these experiences 
increasingly game-like. Te similarities between the interfaces of 
Wall Street trading terminals, enterprise collaboration sofware, and 
massively multiplayer online games such as World of Warcraf are 
too striking to ignore.
Results
Tere’s a ﬁnal reason you should be interested in gamiﬁcation: It 
works. Despite the novelty of the practice, a number of companies 
have seen signiﬁcant positive results from incorporating game 
elements into their business processes. And not just exotic startups. 
Companies employing gamiﬁcation include established giants such 
as Nike, American Express, Microsof, and Samsung. Tey aren’t 
doing so just because they think it’s cool.

35
Game Tinking  
Learning to Tink Like a Game Designer
LEVEL 2
T
he world’s deepest trashcan sits in a park in Sweden. It looks 
like any other trashcan, maybe four feet in height, painted blue 
like the bins around it. But when park visitors drop a piece of trash 
in it, they hear the whistling sound of an object falling for a very, 
very long distance, followed by a satisfying BONG as it hits the 
Someone says to me, “Show the children a game.” 
I teach them gambling with dice, and the other says, 
“I didn’t mean that sort of game.”
—Ludwig Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations 
At Level 1, we identiﬁed some situations in which gamiﬁcation can 
make a difference in business, and we gave you some important defini-
tions. Now, at Level 2, we explain the basic features of games and game 
thinking, so you can begin to recognize how to put game thinking to 
work in your projects and determine whether gamiﬁcation can deliver 
the results you need. 
We’ll answer the following questions:
 
• What is a game?
 
• How do I think like a game designer?
 
• Will gamification solve my business problem?
 
• How do I start?

36     FOR THE WIN
bottom. Candid videos of park visitors show them looking startled 
and confused initially, then smiling with delight at something so 
unexpected. Later videos show visitors ranging around the park 
grounds, looking for trash to drop into the can.
No enterprising Scandinavian elves dug a deep hole for the 
magical trashcan. Instead, a group of engineers created a simple 
motion detector and speaker system that they installed in the lid of a 
regular bin. Trash dropped in the bin actually falls about three feet, 
but the speakers mimic the sound of it falling hundreds of yards. Te 
idea of this experiment was to answer a question: Would people drop 
more trash into a bin if it were fun? Te answer is yes, indeed. Te 
amount of trash deposited in the gamiﬁed trashcan was almost twice 
that of a regular park bin sitting nearby.
Te trashcan was part of a Volkswagen initiative called Te 
Fun Teory, which seeks to use fun to change people’s behaviors. 
Te Fun Teory also created bottle bank recyclers that look like slot 
machines; a lottery for drivers who don’t speed, with a prize-pool 
from those who do; and most famously the Piano Staircase, featured 
in a YouTube video that has been seen over 17 million times. 
We all know that using the stairs is good exercise, but most 
people prefer the comfort of an escalator. Te Fun Teory turned the 
staircase at a Swedish subway station into a huge electronic piano, 
with each step corresponding to a key that made audible sounds. 
Result: 66% more people took the stairs. Tose stair-climbers did 
something good for themselves, and they had a bit of fun in the 
process.
It shouldn’t come as a surprise to see that fun motivates people. 
Gamiﬁcation is the process of manipulating fun to serve real-world 
objectives. Fun, though, is a slippery concept. And asking, “Can 
we get people to do more of something by making it fun?” is much 
harder than deﬁning fun in the abstract. Te mind-set required to 
deploy fun in a considered and directed way is called game thinking. 
When both of us were in law school, we were ofen told that the 

GAME THINKING: LEARNING TO THINK LIKE A GAME DESIGNER     37
objective of the program was to enable us to “think like a lawyer.” 
Sure, we learned the hearsay rules of evidence, but the enduring 
takeaway was an analytical approach that could be applied in 
virtually any situation. Similarly, to be eﬀective at gamiﬁcation, you 
need to think a little like a game designer. If you do, you’ll naturally 
focus on the topics we cover in this book. If you don’t, you might use 
the right tools, but you’ll probably generate poor results. Or you may 
not even know how to get from high-level concepts to real-world 
implementation. 
Figure 2.1
Te Fun Teory’s Piano Staircase
To help begin thinking like a game designer, we start by asking 
an essential question . . . 
What’s in a Game?
First things ﬁrst: we need to deﬁne what we mean by a game. You 
undoubtedly have an intuitive sense of the concept. Coming up with 
a precise deﬁnition, though, is surprisingly diﬃcult. What unites 
Monopoly, cricket, Draw Something, duck duck goose, bridge, and 
Pac-Man? 

38     FOR THE WIN
You might think at ﬁrst that fun is a necessary feature. But not all 
games seem like fun, nor is everything fun a game. So what about the 
typical features of games—teams, for instance? Well, not all games 
have teams. What about winning and losing? Well, not all games 
involve . . . you get the idea. It’s almost impossible to deﬁne any 
essential attribute of games. Te philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein, 
whom we quoted at the beginning of this level, actually used the 
diﬃculty of adequately deﬁning games to illustrate the indeterminacy 
of language. 
Have no fear, that’s the last you’ll hear of Wittgenstein in this 
book. For business applications, all we need is a good enough 
understanding of games to be useful in developing real-world 
systems. One important aspect is that games are voluntary. No one 
can force you to have fun. As NYU divinity scholar James P. Carse 
said, “Whoever must play, cannot play.” Second, games require those 
who play to make choices, and those choices have consequences 
that produce feedback. Te choices may involve picking a weapon 
in a ﬁrst-person shooter videogame or playing a particular word in 
Scrabble. Tose decisions aﬀect your experience playing the game. 
In fact, Sid Meier, legendary designer of the Civilization series of 
games, deﬁnes a game as simply “a series of meaningful choices.”
Contingent choices highlight the connection between games 
and autonomy. Players feel a sense of control in games that is deeply 
empowering. We’ll return to this concept in several places. Even more 
essential, though, is the fact that games seem somehow different from 
mundane reality. Even when the player is unambiguously sitting in 
an ordinary chair, in an ordinary oﬃce, doing an ordinary job, he 
or she can experience a pull that seems to originate somewhere else. 
Tat’s what can make a gamiﬁed customer engagement system more 
eﬀective than, say, a coupon, which doesn’t change the nature of the 
underlying transaction.
To account for the otherworldly dimension of games, we ask 
your indulgence as we introduce one more philosopher.

GAME THINKING: LEARNING TO THINK LIKE A GAME DESIGNER     39
Te early twentieth-century Dutch thinker Johan Huizinga, in 
his classic book Homo Ludens, introduced the concept of the magic 
circle. Te magic circle is a specially marked space that separates a 
game from the rest of the world. Players of a game step across this 
boundary into the magic circle, and by doing so voluntarily suspend 
the rules of the real world and accept the rules of the game. Te 
boundary can be physical or virtual; what matters is that players 
accept that the game is real to them in some way. A game has some 
rules, and some objectives, and some obstacles to overcome in order 
to achieve those objectives; but the crucial element is the players’ 
willingness to accept all those things and conform to them.
To state it brieﬂy: A game is what happens in the magic circle. 
Tink of walking onto a gridiron to play football: By doing so 
you accept the risks of injury of a (legal) tackle by a defensive player. 
If someone wrestled you to the ground like Green Bay Packers 
linebacker Clay Matthews while you were walking down the street, 
you would sue him for assault and battery. Or consider checkers, 
where the object is to capture all your opponent’s pieces. You could, 
of course, physically sweep all of your opponent’s pieces onto the 
ﬂoor with the back of your hand. If you’re playing checkers, you 
won’t do that, because it would be cheating. And pointless. Whether 
it’s checkers or football or Grand Tef Auto, the game is its own little 
immersive world. 
Tink of the power of the magic circle in a business context. You 
create a “world” to serve your strategic objectives . . . and it becomes 
meaningful to other people such as visitors to your website or staﬀ in 
your call center. Tey are pulled toward the goals you’ve deﬁned, not 
because you’ve forced them to be, but because they want to be. Doing 
this successfully is hard, and it comes with a set of responsibilities. 
Te rest of this book is about all the complexities involved in eﬀective 
gamiﬁcation. Te potential, though, is quite extraordinary. 
If you’re worried that building an eﬀective game is an unfamiliar 
challenge requiring specialized skills, don’t be. Gamiﬁcation uses 

40     FOR THE WIN
game thinking and elements but needn’t involve creating an actual 
game. Most of your eﬀorts are not going to involve a magic circle. 
Players may enjoy the challenge of a puzzle you create to encourage 
purchase of your product or collecting points on their way to better 
learning, but they won’t permanently leave the reality that they’re 
in. What you already know about your business and your customers 
will get you most of the way there. All you need are the tools and 
frameworks for more game-like experiences.
Game Tinking
Now that we’ve deﬁned games, let’s move on to game thinking. 
You need to learn to think like a game designer. Tis doesn’t 
necessarily mean being a game designer. We’re not asking you to 
build storyboards, 3D models, physics engines, or any of the things 
that go into modern videogames. And frankly, some examples of 
gamiﬁcation are only game-like in the vaguest sense. Game thinking 
is a way to approach your existing management challenges in the 
same tradition as total quality management, process reengineering, 
design thinking, or any other business technique. 
Compare game thinking to learning how to drive a car. You can 
read a book about what all the pedals and levers do, as well as the 
traﬃc rules in your jurisdiction. No matter how much studying you 
do, the ﬁrst time you sit behind the wheel and turn the key, you’ll 
feel uncomfortable and probably be a danger to those on the road 
around you. 
Tere’s a reason no one becomes a good driver without actually 
practicing driving, usually with an instructor in the car: Descriptions 
can never make you think like a driver. Knowing what appropriate 
acceleration feels like on the gas pedal, what to make of that car 
changing lanes in front of you, and whether to stop when the light 
turns yellow are bits of situated knowledge that experienced drivers 
internalize. In the same way, experienced game designers internalize 
a way of approaching problems that you may not be used to. 

GAME THINKING: LEARNING TO THINK LIKE A GAME DESIGNER     41
Game thinking means using all the resources you can muster 
to create an engaging experience that motivates desired behaviors. 
Some of the things that games do well include encouraging problem 
solving, sustaining interest from novice to expert to master, breaking 
down big challenges into manageable steps, promoting teamwork, 
giving players a sense of control, personalizing the experience to 
each participant, rewarding out-of-the-box thinking, reducing the 
fear of failure that inhibits innovative experimentation, supporting 
diverse interests and skillsets, and cultivating a conﬁdent, optimistic 
attitude. Game thinking takes advantage of such traits as a means to 
achieve business objectives.
Tink of an objective you are facing. Let’s say it’s improving 
the retention of customers in your business. Maybe you want more 
clients to renew their insurance policies or you want more repeat 
buyers on your online fashion site. Traditional approaches might 
be to review your marketing campaigns, pricing practices, value 
propositions, or customer metrics. Game thinking asks a diﬀerent 
question: Why do people buy your product or use your service 
in the ﬁrst place? And it asks it in a particular way: What is their 
motivation? What makes them want to do business with you? Can 
you make it more compelling, more interesting, or more fun? Don’t 
assume these factors aren’t relevant because your business involves a 
bloodless exchange of money for value provided. Tink back to our 
initial example of the world’s deepest trashcan. Te games designers 
of Te Fun Teory took something incredibly boring—getting rid 
of trash—and transformed it. You can do the same thing in your 
business. 
Notice that we’re not asking you to think like a gamer. We already 
think like gamers because we all play games. For some of us the games 
have names, like Angry Birds or Red Dead Redemption; for others 
they are golf, Scrabble, or Texas Hold ’Em; and for others they are 
“acquire more Facebook friends” or “close enough deals to get that 
trip to Bermuda” or “ace the GMAT exam.” When you’re engaged in 

42     FOR THE WIN
a game that you care about, you naturally try to succeed, whether 
that means vanquishing your rivals or earning the admiration of 
your friends. Evolution has wired our brains to be natural game-
playing machines. Tat’s very diﬀerent from understanding what it 
takes to create an eﬀective game experience. Applying gamiﬁcation 
to solve business or other non-game problems puts you in the role 
of the game designer, not the game player. And that’s not nearly as 
intuitive to most people.
In short, gamers try to win; game designers try to make gamers 
play. It’s a subtle but important distinction. If you build an eﬀective 
gamiﬁed system, your players—be they employees or customers or 
some other group—will attempt to hit the targets the game oﬀers 
them. You, on the other hand, care about those targets only as a 
proxy for other things. Maybe you want your community members 
to reduce their carbon footprint, or maybe you want your consultants 
to share more information about clients with co-workers. Your 
baseline goal is to get your players playing and keep them playing. 
Only then can they generate the desired business beneﬁts.
Tis is one reason why many videogames involve levels. Players 
start at Level 1 and pass through increasingly challenging stages 
as they progress. Reaching a new level is an accomplishment that 
gamers call “leveling up.” Leveling up signiﬁes progress and oﬀers 
opportunities for encouraging feedback. To crib a phrase from 
former Apple CEO John Scully, it turns the journey itself into the 
reward. 
Without levels, players may lose interest because they have no 
measurable sense of progress. Conversely, they may ﬁnish the game 
too quickly. Not all videogames have explicit levels, but they all have 
a sense of progression. Even “sandbox games,” such as Te Sims, that 
encourage players to explore a world with no predeﬁned objectives 
still need dynamism and growth, either in the world or the player’s 
mastery of the objectives. Otherwise they quickly become static, 
stagnant, and boring. Games are a process, not an outcome. 

GAME THINKING: LEARNING TO THINK LIKE A GAME DESIGNER     43
Notice here that we’re using the word “players.” We employ that 
term to refer to the participants in any gamiﬁed system, whether 
they happen to be your customers, your employees, your business 
partners, or your user community. Words matter. Just thinking 
about these groups as “players” can have salutary eﬀects, for the 
same reason the department store giant Target studiously calls its 
customers “guests” and its employees “team members.” Players are 
the center of a game, and they have a sense of being in control. 
Afer all, players pick the game; the game doesn’t pick them. Te 
excitement of the experience comes, as we’ve noted, partly from the 
players’ sense of autonomy. 
In a game, the sense of autonomy is always somewhat illusory. 
Te game designer makes the rules and the game enforces them, 
especially in digital games, where so much happens through the 
sofware code that players never see. You can’t build a condominium 
in Monopoly, even if you want to; you’re limited to houses and 
hotels. Tat’s true in business as well. Nike’s customers can’t design 
any shoe they want; they are limited to the choices Nike oﬀers them. 
By oﬀering more options for individual customization, though, Nike 
promotes a sense of empowerment. Tat’s the secret to its successful 
NIKEiD oﬀering, which lets buyers select personalized colors for 
every portion of the shoe. If you think of your customers, and even 
your employees, as players in a game you operate, you’re more likely 
to identify such opportunities to give them meaningful choices.
Is Gamiﬁcation Right for My Business Challenge?
Gamiﬁcation isn’t a solution to every business problem. Now that 
you’ve put yourself in the role of game designer, you should ask 
whether gamiﬁcation makes sense for the challenges you hope to 
address.
Some things just aren’t fun: A funeral parlor probably wouldn’t 
want to gamify the buying process for a loved one’s coﬃn. Equally 
important, though, some things are too much fun to gamify. You 

44     FOR THE WIN
might play games such as three-legged races at the company picnic, 
but you probably wouldn’t want to gamify the picnic itself. Te picnic 
is an example of undirected play. Turning it into a structured process 
would do more harm than good. In other words, gamiﬁcation works 
for contexts that are (or can be made) fun but which lend themselves 
to concrete business objectives. 
Imagine that your local supermarket chain wants to implement 
gamiﬁcation. It looks at its business and quickly concludes that some 
aspects are more amenable to gamiﬁcation than others. It doesn’t 
want the employees stocking produce to feel angry or dissatisﬁed 
with their jobs, but it’s not clear how much its business would proﬁt 
if those employees were super passionate. It may not be worth the 
investment to gamify this part of its business. On the other hand, 
engaged consumers are more likely to go out of their way to shop 
at their favorite store, producing direct ﬁnancial beneﬁts. Sales 
are one way of motivating customers, but they can be matched by 
competitors and cut into proﬁts. A gamiﬁed system to increase the 
engagement and loyalty of regular supermarket shoppers makes a 
great deal of sense. 
Let’s deﬁne the process more systematically. To ﬁgure out where 
gamiﬁcation might ﬁt your needs, consider the following four core 
questions:
1.  Motivation: Where would you derive value from 
encouraging behavior?
2.  Meaningful Choices: Are your target activities suﬃciently 
interesting?
3.  Structure: Can the desired behaviors be modeled through  
a set of algorithms?
4.  Potential Conﬂicts: Can the game avoid conﬂicts with 
existing motivational structures? 

GAME THINKING: LEARNING TO THINK LIKE A GAME DESIGNER     45
Motivation: Where Would You Derive Value from  
Encouraging Behavior?
Gamiﬁcation is a form of motivational design, as we’ll discuss in 
more detail later. It is fundamentally a means to get people interested 
in behaving a certain way. If your problem is a lack of qualiﬁed 
Java developers in your organization or that buyers consider your 
prices too high, gamiﬁcation is unlikely to oﬀer much in the way 
of solutions. Neither of these challenges can easily be solved with a 
more motivated population. 
Generally, more engaged customers will purchase more, and 
more engaged workers will perform better, but the impact varies. 
A commodity product is unlikely to beneﬁt signiﬁcantly from 
gamiﬁcation, because buyers typically choose these sorts of products 
on price alone. On the other hand, a company such as Apple, whose 
customers are already passionate, might ﬁnd that game mechanics 
distract from the product itself or generate activity that doesn’t 
produce additional revenue. 
Tere are three main kinds of activities for which motivation is 
particularly important: creative work, mundane tasks, and behavior 
change. Some tasks involve emotional connections, unique skills, 
creativity, and teamwork. Tese are the high-value-added activities 
or customer relationships that make an outsized contribution 
to competitive advantage. Tey are also great candidates for 
gamiﬁcation. Whether it’s designing a new product or nurturing 
high-proﬁle brand ambassadors, such tasks depend heavily on 
motivation. Tey work best when people are deeply engaged and 
focused, even passionate, about what they’re doing. Gamiﬁcation can 
give them a satisfying, individualized, ongoing rewarding experience 
unlike anything else.
At the other end of the spectrum are mundane tasks that involve 
adherence to deﬁned procedures and that are purely individual 
in nature. Creativity isn’t likely to be high on the list when one is 

46     FOR THE WIN
hiring waiters and waitresses, for example. Gamiﬁcation can also be 
eﬀective in these situations, but it needs to be done diﬀerently. Your 
goal is not to trick people into tolerating a boring job; it’s to help them 
ﬁnd a measure of meaning in the activity. Take restaurant servers. 
A startup called Objective Logistics gamiﬁes their work-scheduling 
process. Te servers gain visibility into their performance beyond 
the tips in their pocket at the end of the night and are motivated both 
by recognition and the reward of more desirable shifs. Restaurants 
see average check size increase enough to improve proﬁtability sig-
niﬁcantly.
Finally, there are behavior-change scenarios in which people 
understand something is good for them but have a hard time doing 
it. Te challenge is to make the activity habitual. Practically Green is 
a Boston-based startup that promotes environmentally sustainable 
behavior among individuals and employees. It gamiﬁes the process 
by assigning points, badges, and other game elements to speciﬁc 
activities, and by connecting participants to a supportive online 
community. Less than a year afer launching, it has reduced over 14 
million tons of carbon dioxide emissions, saved 25 million gallons of 
water, spurred recycling of 2 million pounds of garbage, and saved 6 
million kilowatt hours of electricity. 
Meaningful Choices: Are Your Target Activities Suﬃciently 
Interesting? 
Successful games require player autonomy, whether that’s consumers 
deciding to purchase or workers deciding to take actions beyond 
their job requirements. Players can’t just be following a predeﬁned 
track. When they realize there’s no inherent reason to care, any 
engagement bump they experience from game mechanics will be 
ﬂeeting. 
Meaningful choices simply mean options that give the player 
some freedom of choice, and noticeable consequences ﬂowing from 
those decisions. In World of Warcraf, for example, a player can 

GAME THINKING: LEARNING TO THINK LIKE A GAME DESIGNER     47
choose from several character classes, each of which has diﬀerent 
strengths and weaknesses. Similarly, a Keas participant can engage in 
a variety of diﬀerent health and wellness activities to earn points for 
her team. Even though all of these options serve the goals of the site, 
they give the user a sense of autonomy. A gamiﬁed system that oﬀers 
rewards but no choices will quickly feel disempowering and boring 
for most players.
Structure: Can the Desired Behaviors Be Modeled Trough  
a Set of Algorithms?
Games unleash the ineﬀable quality of fun, but gamiﬁcation requires 
algorithms to measure and respond to actions. Also, it must be easy 
to record or track user activities, so the relevant data can feed into 
online systems that manage the game.
Consumer electronics giant Samsung has gamiﬁed its website 
with a program called Samsung Nation. Players can earn badges 
and level up by reviewing products, watching videos, and providing 
responses for product Q&As. Samsung built a point system that 
assigns values to all these actions. Sharing an action on Twitter is 
worth 100 points, while registering a Samsung product you just 
bought is worth 500. Te 5-to-1 ratio is arbitrary, but it represents 
a rough estimate of the relative beneﬁts to the network of the two 
activities. Similarly, Practically Green developed a proprietary 
metric for green actions such as reducing exposure to toxins and 
energy usage, which it promotes as an individual analogue to the 
LEED certiﬁcation for environmentally sustainable buildings. Many 
gamiﬁed systems don’t need speciﬁc point values of this type, but all 
require some way to model options algorithmically. If you have no 
structured way to assess, say, the diﬀerence between a high-quality 
proposed innovation and a poor one, gamiﬁcation isn’t likely to be a 
good means of motivating submissions to your corporate innovation 
process. 

48     FOR THE WIN
Potential Conﬂicts: Can the Game Avoid Conﬂicts with  
Existing Motivational Structures?
Studies show that game mechanics such as leaderboards can actually 
demotivate workers when the mechanic is entangled with traditional 
rewards such as salary and bonuses. When they see how low on the 
totem pole they are, many workers will give up. Te climb up the 
ladder is too daunting. Others will internalize that the work is less 
important than the game and treat the work less seriously. Similarly, 
if your promise to customers is that you’ll save them time and help 
them become more eﬃcient, a gamiﬁed oﬀering that encourages 
them to waste time in a seemingly frivolous activity may generate 
cognitive dissonance. 
It’s important to identify all the existing ways you motivate your 
target population, and to think through how they would function 
alongside gamiﬁcation. Put yourself in the shoes of a player and ask 
what message your organization is sending. Tere isn’t necessarily a 
conﬂict. For example, a startup called Recyclebank oﬀers gamiﬁed 
rewards in many communities to encourage people to recycle. 
Te prospect of receiving coupons doesn’t automatically eliminate 
people’s desire to recycle as a way to beneﬁt the environment. 
However, Recyclebank has had to structure and position its game 
elements to avoid sending the message that recycling is purely a 
ﬁnancial transaction.
Pulling It Together
You can think of the previous four questions as design goals. Te 
ideal candidates for gamiﬁcation are processes that depend on 
motivation, oﬀer interesting challenges that are easily coded into 
rules, and reinforce existing reward systems. In reality, things don’t 
always fall into place so nicely. Te four questions are not either/
or. In other words, the more meaningful choices, the better, and so 
forth.

GAME THINKING: LEARNING TO THINK LIKE A GAME DESIGNER     49
Fill out table 2.2 for each business process or activity you are 
considering. Do this exercise before you think about what kinds of 
game elements or games you might use.
Table 2.2 
Basic Gamiﬁcation Checklist
For the hypothetical supermarket gamiﬁcation initiative, the 
chart would look something like table 2.3 at the end of this level.
Before moving forward with your gamiﬁcation project, you’ll 
want to resolve each block of the chart in a positive way. In other 
words, you need a strong answer about why you meet each require-
ment or your project will be lacking in some crucial way. As your 
thinking evolves, go back and modify your answers. Ten evaluate 
how changes in one box aﬀect the others. You should do this before 
you make any decisions about the speciﬁcs of your system. It’s much 
easier to make changes and avoid mistakes at this conceptual stage.
  
Players 
 
Frameworks
Activity 
1. Motivation 
2. Meaningful  
3. Structure 
4. Potential 
  
 
    Choices 
 
    Conﬂicts

50     FOR THE WIN
Table 2.3  
Completed Checklist for Supermarket Example
  
Players 
 
Frameworks
Activity 
1. Motivation 
2. Meaningful  3. Structure 
4. Potential 
  
 
    Choices 
 
    Conﬂicts
Check- 
Not clear that 
Largely 
Average time Perhaps 
out 
engagement  
noncreative 
of customer 
intrinsic
clerk 
would improve activity  
checkout 
enjoyment
performance customer  
 
easy to 
can be 
  
experience 
 
measure 
added to a
  
 
 
 
dull activity,
  
 
 
 
but
  
 
 
 
gamiﬁcation
  
 
 
 
might 
  
 
 
 
produce
  
 
 
 
resentment
Shopper  
Give customers Let customers 
Purchases  
Customer
loyalty 
a reason to  
choose how 
automatically and 
rewards 
choose us  
to qualify for 
tracked 
company
  
other than  
diﬀerent kinds through our 
interests
  
price and  
of rewards 
POS system 
aligned
  
in-store service,   
and loyalty
  
with direct  
 
cards
  
revenue 
  
beneﬁts
Squares with an X indicate that the criterion does not support use of 
gamiﬁcation for the activity. A partial X indicates that this criterion 
might support gamiﬁcation, but is unlikely to do so. 

51
Why Games Work  
Te Rules of Motivation
LEVEL 3
B
rian Wang and Richard Talens are in their midtwenties, usually 
dressed in t-shirts, and not very tan. In other words, they ﬁt the 
stereotypes of hardcore gamers and Internet entrepreneurs . . . both 
of which they are. Tey are also impressively toned, and it’s clear they 
spend a great deal of time at the gym. While at ﬁrst this may seem 
incongruous, their penchant for working out is at the heart of what 
they do as gamers and startup founders.
Wang and Talens founded Fitocracy.com, a gamiﬁed website that 
tackles one of the hardest motivational challenges anywhere: getting 
people to exercise. Exercising is something most of us want to do but 
A soldier will ﬁght long and hard 
for a bit of colored ribbon. 
—Napoleon Bonaparte 
You’ve seen how gamiﬁcation can work in general (Level 1), and 
how to assess whether your business issue is amenable to gamiﬁcation 
(Level 2). Now we get to talk about your users and what makes them 
tick. We’ll ask:
 
• What does research tell us about psychology and motivation?
 
• How can I make use of extrinsic and intrinsic motivators?
 
• How do I motivate behavior through gamification?

52     FOR THE WIN
few of us actually do. We understand the beneﬁts intellectually but 
have a hard time getting motivated. 
Using various features normally found in videogames—things 
like levels, quests, badges, and points—Talens and Wang set about 
ﬁnding ways to motivate people to get up oﬀ their lounge chairs and 
into the gym. Fitocracy users are encouraged to track their jogging 
and their gym sessions, they are rewarded when they progress to a 
harder workout, and they share information, tips, and success stories 
on a social site. 
Fitocracy knows its users. Some go for the feel-good stories alone, 
but there’s a strong subgroup that responds best when its competitive 
Figure 3.1 
A “Duel” in Fitocracy

WHY GAMES WORK: THE RULES OF MOTIVATION     53
juices ﬂow. So Fitocracy lets people challenge each other to virtual 
ﬁtness duels, in categories such as “heaviest bench press” or “most 
distance run.” Even there, though, it incorporates rooting sections 
that turn zero-sum battles into communal social experiences. 
Fitocracy must be doing something right: the site went from 
1,000 users to 200,000 in the space of a year, and Wang and Talens 
have collected numerous stories about users who have lost 100 
pounds and turned their lives around. For Fitocracy, gamiﬁcation is 
the key in moving users from merely wanting to exercise to actually 
doing it.
Whether it’s promoting ﬁtness, training employees to work more 
eﬀectively, or encouraging customers to purchase stuﬀ, managers 
regularly have to ﬁnd ways to motivate people. Here at Level 3, we 
explore what makes people motivated to do things, so that you can 
start to think about what your users will enjoy and why they might 
do the things that you’d like them to do.
What Makes People Tick
Te word “motivation” comes from the Latin motivus, meaning 
“serving to move.” To be motivated is to be moved to do something. 
People are like objects: they have a certain inertia that needs to be 
overcome for them to move. 
Let’s say that you don’t have any particular desire to see the latest 
Adam Sandler movie. Psychologists call that being “amotivated.” It’s 
not necessarily a comment on the movie; plenty of people pay $15 to 
go and watch it. So why do they go? Many reasons, of course, but a 
simple division is between those who want to see Adam Sandler clown 
around and those who feel like they have to go see him. Wanting to 
do something is called “intrinsic” motivation because, for the person 
involved, it lies inside the activity. On the other hand, feeling that 
you need to do something involves “extrinsic” motivation, because 
the motivation lies outside. 

54     FOR THE WIN
 
Tis may sound like an abstract distinction. Afer all, in both 
cases, you’re going to see the movie. Yet it’s critically important, 
and not just for gamiﬁcation. Hundreds of peer-reviewed academic 
articles and scores of real-world case studies demonstrate that it 
matters tremendously whether intrinsic or extrinsic motivation is 
the basis for an activity. If you understand the diﬀerence, then you’re 
halfway to understanding what types of mechanisms you can use to 
motivate your users. So what’s the diﬀerence?
 
Imagine that you don’t have any desire to go see Adam Sandler 
but your kids do, or your theater has a promotion oﬀering free 
popcorn, or you see all of the cool kids you hope to impress walking 
into that movie. Along the same lines, you may not want to prepare 
the annual budget at work but it’s your job, or you study for your 
statistics exam because you won’t graduate without passing the class. 
Tese are extrinsic motivators. You are motivated to do something by 
reasons that come from outside your enjoyment or engagement with 
the activity: for your kids’ beneﬁt, because the cool kids are doing it, 
because it’s a job requirement, or because you want to complete your 
degree. 
 
We’ve all experienced extrinsic motivation. It’s hard to overstate 
its importance in the business world and its literature. Many 
employees—perhaps most—turn up because they’re being paid 
to do so or will lose their jobs if they don’t. Tey may sometimes 
ﬁnd enjoyment in doing a good job or mastering a task, but it’s 
the exception rather than the rule. Cashiers at McDonald’s are 
probably not asking “Do you want fries with that?” because it’s fun. 
Salespeople work longer and harder because their end-of-year bonus 
is dependent on sales. Employees know if they get a bad performance 
review, they won’t get promoted. Carrots and sticks are so common 
in employment that we tend to assume they are the only way to 
motivate behavior. Yet that’s not the case.
 
Tink about activities that you really, really want to do. You 
would do them without any hope of payment or other external 

WHY GAMES WORK: THE RULES OF MOTIVATION     55
beneﬁts. Every person is diﬀerent, but typical lists include socializing 
with friends, quality time with your spouse or family, playing sports, 
doing a job you love, eating and sleeping, reading, walking along a 
beach at sunset, or playing videogames. 
Ask yourself why you want to do these things and you will ﬁnd 
that there are lots of diﬀerent reasons: being with and providing 
for your family is something that is part of your foundational 
sense of self as a person, eating and sleeping are needs you have as 
a human being, success in sports or work can promote feelings of 
competency and achievement, and walking along the beach and 
playing videogames are activities that are just plain fun. Tese are all 
intrinsically motivated activities.
Activities do not fall into these categories in and of themselves—
there is no such thing as an amotivated task or an intrinsically 
motivated task. Motivation involves an interaction between a person 
and a task, in a situation and at a time. Remember the Adam Sandler 
movie example? You might have no strong feelings one way or the 
other about it. (You’re amotivated.) Your neighbor, though, goes to 
see it because her husband promised her a fancy dinner aferward. 
(She’s extrinsically motivated.) Her husband wants to go because 
he’s a slapstick comedy aﬁcionado. (He’s intrinsically motivated.) Of 
course, some tasks are more likely to fall into one category or the 
other—taking out the trash is something that most people don’t ﬁnd 
intrinsically motivating—but in general motivation depends on how 
particular people relate to particular tasks.
What goes for Adam Sandler movies also goes for getting 
customers to buy, encouraging students, engaging workers, and any 
of the other objectives for a gamiﬁcation project. In the following 
sections we pull apart the various features of intrinsic and extrinsic 
motivation, show how gamiﬁcation can be used to motivate, and 
demonstrate some risks when gamiﬁcation practitioners don’t 
understand motivation. 

56     FOR THE WIN
Te Rules of Motivation
Psychologists have been studying how to get people to do things 
for quite some time. In the second half of the twentieth century, 
the dominant theory was known as behaviorism. Tis approach 
sought to explain behavior purely based on external responses to 
stimuli. Te best-known studies were done by Ivan Pavlov on his 
famous slavering dogs, and B. F. Skinner, who created the infamous 
“Skinner boxes” that gave food or electric shocks to pigeons and rats. 
Behaviorist studies like these examined the reinforcement eﬀects of 
reward and punishment on animals and extrapolated the lessons to 
humans. Te basic idea was that humans and animals responded to 
external stimuli in predictable ways. 
 
Behaviorist thinking suggested that extrinsic motivation was 
the way to encourage people to do things. A reward or punishment, 
systematically applied, would condition and reinforce responses 
in anticipation of further rewards or punishments. Indeed, this is 
reﬂected in the standard business motivation methods of the era: the 
rewards of salary and bonuses and the punishments of demotion or 
ﬁring. It was all very neat and industrial.
 
Against this behaviorist approach are a collection of “cognitivist” 
theories that ask what’s actually going on in people’s heads. Perhaps 
the most inﬂuential of these is the Self-Determination Teory (SDT) 
of Edward Deci, Richard Ryan, and their collaborators. Deci and 
Ryan suggest that human beings are inherently proactive, with a 
strong internal desire for growth, but that the external environment 
must support this; otherwise, these internal motivators will be 
thwarted. Rather than assuming, as the behaviorist approaches do, 
that people only respond to external reinforcements, SDT focuses 
on what human beings need to allow their innate growth and well-
being tendencies to ﬂourish. 
 
SDT suggests that these needs fall into three categories: com-
petence, relatedness, and autonomy. “Competence,” or mastery, means 
being eﬀective in dealing with the external environment: pulling oﬀ 

WHY GAMES WORK: THE RULES OF MOTIVATION     57
a diﬃcult deal, learning how to dance the tango, ﬁling a tax return. 
“Relatedness” involves social connection and the universal desire 
to interact with and be involved with family, friends, and others. It 
can also manifest itself as a desire for higher purpose, or “making 
a diﬀerence.” And ﬁnally, “autonomy” is the innate need to feel in 
command of one’s life and to be doing that which is meaningful 
and in harmony with one’s values. Contrast the unhappiness you 
experience when you are forced to do something you don’t want to do 
(or worse, that was contrary to your principles) against your feelings 
of joy when you are engaged in your favorite hobby or leading an 
important project at work.
Tasks that implicate one or more of these innate human needs 
will tend to be intrinsically motivated. In other words, people will 
do them for their own sake. Some examples are obvious: any hobby 
that you enjoy doing whenever you have a free moment, creative 
Autonomy
Relatedness
Competence
Figure 3.2  
Elements of Self-Determination Teory 

58     FOR THE WIN
activity like writing or drawing, attending a dinner party with 
friends, solving a diﬃcult crossword puzzle, taking a walk with no 
destination in mind, and so on. Others may not be: running a great 
meeting, giving a killer sales pitch, creatively helping a customer out 
of a jam, or performing a successful surgery. 
 
In other words, intrinsic motivation can come into play in the 
workplace, even though there is already an extrinsic reward system 
of salary and promotion. Te psychologist Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi 
found that people most commonly experienced the feeling of ultimate 
intrinsic motivation, which he labeled ﬂow, on the job. Activities that 
address people’s needs for competence, autonomy, and relatedness 
tend to be absorbing, interesting, and fun, regardless of the context. 
Tink back to the Fitocracy duels. Participants choose the objectives 
of the competition and their opponents (autonomy); the mano-
a-mano face-oﬀ creates a measuring stick (competence); and the 
rooting section loops in friends (relatedness). Players respond 
because Fitocracy activates all of the core SDT elements.
 
Tese motivators will manifest diﬀerently in each individual. 
Some players will be put oﬀ by the fear of losing a duel, which is 
why Fitocracy oﬀers other mechanisms without head-to-head 
competition. Smart game designers, of course, realized this long ago. 
Popular videogames typically oﬀer both player-vs.-player (PvP) and 
player-vs.-environment (PvE) challenges to address the two forms of 
competence. As one might expect, there are gender and age patterns 
here, but they aren’t absolute. One of the authors, when playing 
World of Warcraf, loved nothing more than to sit in a secluded spot 
outside a major city to ambush passing players. Te other put most 
of his energy into bloodlessly accumulating a huge fortune in the 
game’s auction house. To each his own. 
 
Daniel H. Pink’s book Drive popularized the psychological 
literature on intrinsic motivation and demonstrated its signiﬁcance 
to business. Create an environment in which your employees want 
to excel at their work, and you’ll be much better oﬀ than if you 

WHY GAMES WORK: THE RULES OF MOTIVATION     59
rely exclusively on traditional levers like compensation. Several 
others, including management scholar Teresa Amabile, education 
reformer Alﬁe Kohn, and learning scholars Sandra Aamodt and Sam 
Wang, have demonstrated similar results in a variety of settings.
Games are perfect illustrations of the lessons of SDT. Why do 
people play? As we’ve already said, no one forces them to. Even a 
simple game like Sudoku activates intrinsic needs for autonomy 
(which puzzle I solve and how I solve it is entirely up to me), 
competence (I ﬁgured it out!), and relatedness (I can share the 
achievement with my friends). In the same way, gamiﬁcation uses 
the three intrinsic motivators to generate powerful results. Levels 
and the accumulation of points can all be markers of competence 
or mastery. Giving players choices and a range of experiences as 
they progress feeds the desire for autonomy and agency. Social 
interactions such as Facebook sharing or badges you can display for 
friends respond to the human need for relatedness. 
Although games would seem to be fun in and of themselves, 
they’re not just about intrinsic motivation. Games may also involve 
extrinsic motivators. If you while away three blissful hours playing 
Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 3 on your Xbox 360, chances are 
you’ll describe the experience as rewarding in itself. If you did so 
to beat your best friend’s high score, or to win the cash prize in a 
tournament, or because your professor assigned it as homework, you 
might say something diﬀerent. Each of these latter examples involves 
extrinsic motivation; and each of them is really powerful. As the 
designer of a gamiﬁed system, you’ll have a series of choices about 
which motivational levers to pull, and how to do so. 
Te important distinction here is how the user feels about the 
experience, not the formulation of the reward. Consider three United 
Airlines Premier Executive frequent ﬂyers. Juan is proud of being 
in such an exclusive club; he loves the feeling of walking on a red 
carpet past the hoi polloi at the gate. Tat stuﬀ turns Alice oﬀ; she’s 
just happy to have no carry-on bag fees and the ability to redeem 

60     FOR THE WIN
miles for free trips. And all Esther cares about is access to the private 
airport lounges, where she can relax during those long layovers on 
business trips. Juan’s craving for status is real, but it doesn’t make that 
a good motivator for Alice or Esther. Each is motivated in diﬀerent 
ways to achieve the reward. 
 
Don’t oversimplify the ways that game elements or gamiﬁed 
systems can produce motivational responses. And don’t overgen-
eralize about how people respond to certain stimuli. Gamiﬁcation is 
not just reward design. Tat sort of thinking is what led programming 
book author and game developer Kathy Sierra to label gamiﬁcation 
“the high-fructose corn syrup of motivation.” And she has a point. 
Many gamiﬁed sites and gamiﬁcation platforms seem to assume that 
a virtual reward is inherently compelling. It’s not. It might be a pale 
substitute for what people really want. Or as we describe in the next 
section, it might actually kill intrinsic motivation. Always focus on 
building authentic engagement; there are no shortcuts.
Lessons for Gamiﬁcation
Now that we’ve described the basic framework for understanding 
motivation, what are the speciﬁc takeaways for successful gami-
ﬁcation? Te following lessons are sometimes counterintuitive, but 
they are well supported by studies and real-world examples.
Rewards Can Crowd Out Fun
Extrinsic rewards can be profoundly demotivating. Any gamiﬁcation 
design has to take this into account. Sometimes giving people a bigger 
beneﬁt to perform some activity will actually make them do it less, 
and worse. Alﬁe Kohn, the education reformer, published a book on 
this phenomenon in schools with the wonderful title Punished by 
Rewards. Psychologists generally refer to this as the “crowding-out” 
problem, because extrinsic motivators tend to crowd out intrinsic 
ones. For tasks that are interesting, intrinsic motivation dissipates 
when extrinsic rewards are tangible, expected, and contingent. 

WHY GAMES WORK: THE RULES OF MOTIVATION     61
Consider how we learn to read. Many people ﬁnd the pleasure 
of losing themselves in a book to be one of the true joys of life. It’s 
one of the best examples of an intrinsically rewarding activity, at 
least when you read for the experience itself, not to achieve some 
other goal. But teaching kids to read can be an onerous task. Parents 
and teachers employ all manner of tricks to get them over the initial 
comprehension gap. Ofen these tricks fall on the more extrinsic 
side of the motivation continuum. It turns out that if you give kids 
tangible rewards like gold stars for doing well at reading—or, worse, 
if you give them money—they will improve up to a certain point 
and then stop. Te tangible, expected, contingent reward initially 
motivates the kids, but its eﬀectiveness plateaus dramatically. Te 
eﬀect is so obvious that it’s become known by the grade level at 
which the extrinsic motivation loses its power: It’s called the Fourth 
Grade Slump.
Te crowding-out eﬀect may sound counterintuitive, but when 
you think about it, there are good reasons for it. Paying a person 
to do something implies it’s not inherently enjoyable, rewarding, or 
important. (Consider why we call salary “compensation.”) It suggests 
the task is only worth doing to the minimal extent necessary for the 
reward. Before long, people begin to take the reward for granted. 
When the reward is expected, our mental arithmetic sees it as a kind 
of sunk beneﬁt, providing increasingly little pleasure when it actually 
arrives. Te task no longer seems intrinsically worthwhile, and the 
extrinsic rewards become increasingly poor substitutes.
Many research studies conﬁrm that the crowding-out eﬀect is 
real. Whether it’s American children drawing pictures, Swiss citizens 
engaged in volunteer work, or Israeli parents showing up on time at 
day care, adding extrinsic rewards to intrinsically motivated tasks 
has been demonstrated to produce less eﬀort and poorer-quality 
work. Moreover, the nature of the reward doesn’t seem to matter. 
Virtually every type of expected reward (and punishment) that is 
contingent on performance will have the same eﬀect: prize rewards, 
threats as punishment, deadlines, and centrally issued directives. 

62     FOR THE WIN
Te lesson for gamiﬁcation is simple: Don’t mindlessly attach 
extrinsic motivators to activities that can be motivated using intrinsic 
regulators. Tink back the Microsof Language Quality Game. Te 
reason the company didn’t pay the participants for each dialogue 
box error they found, or even award a prize to the best individual or 
region, isn’t that it wanted to save money. Te fact that Ross Smith’s 
group substantially improved the quality of Windows 7 localization 
at minimal cost was a positive feature but not the rationale for their 
approach. Money would have gotten in the way. Te competition 
wasn’t work; it was a fun challenge and a way to help the company 
produce better products. Tat’s what made it so successful.
It’s easy to get caught up in the ways the cornucopia of game 
elements listed in Level 4 can operate as extrinsic rewards. In part, 
this reﬂects the legacy of the loyalty program industry, which has 
spent the past few decades hooking us on frequent ﬂyer miles and 
credit card reward points. Game thinking takes us beyond this 
limited view. 
Boring Can Be Engaging
Extrinsic motivation is not always bad. Studies have found that it 
has a positive outcome on performance where the user is engaged in 
an otherwise amotivated task. In other words, extrinsic motivation 
helps people enjoy boring activities. Unlike the situation in which 
the task is intrinsically motivated, extrinsic rewards can encourage 
positive behavior and outcomes when one is dealing with dull, 
repetitive, and/or tedious activities. And we all know that everyone 
runs into those sometimes.
So extrinsic motivation isn’t all bad. Let’s be honest: Tere 
are many tasks that are deeply dull and will never be intrinsically 
enjoyable. Imagine you are trying to gamify tax preparation, estate 
planning, trash collection work, or the experience of undergoing an 
unpleasant but medically advisable procedure such as a colonoscopy. 
None of these tasks is something that people are likely to do because 

WHY GAMES WORK: THE RULES OF MOTIVATION     63
it’s fun. You may have to use extrinsic rewards and punishments 
to change people’s behavior. What if you’re trying to do something 
like make math more fun for middle schoolers, nudge people to go 
to the gym, or encourage bank clients to understand the risks and 
rewards of ﬁnancial products? In such cases there is the chance that 
you can apply intrinsic motivators, but extrinsic mechanisms may be 
necessary as a fallback. 
LiveOps is a call-center outsourcing provider. Using a sofware 
platform, it has created a low-cost but high-quality virtual workforce 
of 20,000 Americans who answer or make calls part-time from 
home. It has successfully won business against oﬀshore call centers 
by oﬀering a better customer experience at comparable prices. A key 
asset for LiveOps is its ability to oﬀer unemployed and underemployed 
Americans, including those with signiﬁcant time limitations such 
as stay-at-home mothers, gainful employment and online skills 
development. Call-center work can be the epitome of drudgery, but 
many LiveOps agents describe their work in glowing terms. 
Given its focus on creating positive experiences for its agents, 
LiveOps is a natural candidate for gamiﬁcation. Indeed, the company 
has embraced gamiﬁcation as a way to improve motivation. By 
adding relatively simple game elements—such as leaderboards and 
points—LiveOps was able to generate signiﬁcant results. Service 
levels improved by about 10%, average time to handle a customer 
inquiry decreased by almost 15%, and sales performance improved 
signiﬁcantly. Te emphasis of LiveOps’s gamiﬁcation eﬀorts is on 
learning and development rather than competition. Agents who 
level up or earn badges get the message that they are moving upward 
toward mastery of valuable skills. 
Tere are numerous ways that you can use game mechanics to 
encourage certain types of behavior in tasks that can’t be intrinsically 
motivated. A good example is in the traditional arena of marketing. 
Here, the experience of doing relatively mundane tasks with the 
promise of recognition or rewards to follow has been shown to be well 

64     FOR THE WIN
received by consumers. Rewards programs give purchasers points, 
tiers, and other psychological rewards in exchange for behaviors 
desired by program creators—usually the purchase of more product, 
or engaging with it in some way—and this has been shown to be an 
eﬀective motivator of favorable activity.
Te lesson for gamiﬁcation: Extrinsic reward systems work for 
nonintrinsically engaging activities.
Tune Your Feedback 
Feedback is trendy these days. Businesses and governments can now 
collect and display data to users in real time, and they are ﬁnding 
signiﬁcant value in doing so. Police have shown a marked decrease 
in speeding when a driver is shown his or her speed on a display 
connected to a roadside radar detector. Drivers of hybrid vehicles 
use less gas when they’re shown how accelerating and braking 
aﬀects their mileage per gallon. Homeowners turn their thermostats 
down when given real-time feedback on what happens when they 
Figure 3.3 
A LiveOps User Proﬁle Page

WHY GAMES WORK: THE RULES OF MOTIVATION     65
turn it up. Designed well, feedback loops push users toward desired 
behaviors. 
Feedback in a gamiﬁed system can be the linchpin of eﬀective 
motivation. Rypple, a Canadian startup, developed a service called 
Loops to provide performance feedback to employees. Rypple’s ﬁrst 
major client was a small social network provider you may have heard 
of: Facebook. Facebook’s fast-growing workforce is overstocked with 
tech-savvy types who are highly attuned to social dynamics. Standard 
performance reviews, delivered top-down from a supervisor, didn’t 
ﬁt their mind-set. Tey wanted human resources to operate more 
like a game, in which players immediately see their score increase or 
their enemy’s body explode when they perform a successful action.
Loops manages performance feedback from a number of sources, 
including input from co-workers, deﬁned progress toward work 
goals, and coaching and validation from supervisors. Employees and 
teams can establish their own badges and “epic missions,” deﬁning 
the actions that mean something in the context of their workplace. 
Loops allows employees to monitor their performance constantly 
using this feedback. Rather than have one annual performance 
review, employees can see at any given time how they are doing 
against criteria that matter, and they can also see the recognition 
they’ve received. Afer several successful deployments, Rypple was 
acquired in 2011 by Salesforce.com, a large cloud services provider 
that is marketing its solution to a wider range of companies. 
In building successful gamiﬁed systems, immediate and frequent 
feedback is necessary but not suﬃcient. Here are three important 
lessons about feedback:
1. Unexpected, informational feedback increases autonomy and 
self-reported intrinsic motivation. Tis has some concrete payoﬀs. 
It means that people enjoy being surprised by achievements and 
rewards that they didn’t anticipate. Unlike the demotivating grind of 
contingent, expected rewards—for example, when you know that if 

66     FOR THE WIN
you tweet 100 times about a product then you will get a “You Tweeted 
100 Times About Our Product” badge—getting an unexpected 
badge or trophy stimulates positive feelings in the user. Players get a 
dopamine surge when it happens, a little like hitting a jackpot on a 
slot machine. Tis mechanism is called a variable reward schedule, 
and it’s a well-established design pattern in game development.
2. Users like to get reinforcement about how they are doing. 
Informational feedback about progress toward a goal—“You’ve 
completed three out of the ﬁve steps necessary to unlock the 
AWESOME JOB badge,” or providing some continuous graph of 
performance against speciﬁc metrics—will typically engage a player 
and may motivate him or her to complete the other steps necessary 
to complete the task. Tis is also something game designers have 
known for a long time. Videogames are veritable feedback fests, 
ﬁlled with scoreboards, ﬂashing colors, musical fanfare, and more, 
whenever something important happens.
3. Users will regulate their own behavior based on which metrics 
are provided to them. If you provide feedback loops about customer 
satisfaction but not about sales ﬁgures, employees will begin to care 
more about customer satisfaction than monthly sales, and vice versa. 
Used wisely, this is a powerful tool in any gamiﬁed system—but 
bear in mind that all of the lessons and rules previously discussed 
still apply. If you create a feedback loop that works as an extrinsic 
motivator, you should expect that this may over time crowd out any 
intrinsic sense of satisfaction that the user might otherwise have 
experienced.
Te lesson for gamiﬁcation: Feedback loops regulate behavior in 
the direction of the feedback, and providing metrics for success will 
motivate the user in that direction.

WHY GAMES WORK: THE RULES OF MOTIVATION     67
Work Across the Motivational Continuum
Not all extrinsic motivation is experienced as completely outside 
the person. Tere is a diﬀerence between a student who is doing her 
statistics homework because she knows she will be punished by her 
parents if she doesn’t do it and a student who is doing exactly the 
same homework because she wants to pass math so she can move on 
to the next grade, or because she’s decided that she wants to be an 
economist and she recognizes that to do this she needs to learn stats. 
Te ﬁrst student experiences the motivation as unhappily external 
to herself, whereas the latter ones will experience the motivation as 
extrinsic but important in some way. 
In other words, the latter students have begun to internalize the 
motivation within their set of values and sense of self. Deci and Ryan 
suggest that extrinsic motivation operates on a continuum between 
behavior regulators that are wholly external through what they call 
“introjected,” “identiﬁed,” and “integrated.” Any task that would 
not be done except for motivations like rewards or punishments is 
generally perceived as external to the person. Tasks that are motivated 
by ego needs and thus marginally internalized—“I must do well 
at school”—are considered introjected. Tasks seen as important to 
one’s future or values can be described as motivated by integration 
or identiﬁcation.
A perfect example can be seen in online role-playing games that 
encourage the formation of tight-knit groups called guilds, which 
provide a system of mutual support for players within the guild. When 
they are part of the group, individual players cheerfully perform tasks 
that are remarkably dull—collecting materials or killing low-level 
monsters repeatedly to reach reputation thresholds—which they’d 
never do without the group. It’s not that the task changes. It’s that the 
user’s need for relatedness dramatically changes the perceived nature 
of the motivation. Te motivation becomes internalized as the user 
recognizes the value of the task to his guild.

68     FOR THE WIN
Te lesson here for any gamiﬁcation design is signiﬁcant: 
It is possible to design extrinsic motivators that are introjected, 
internalized, or integrated and so are more compelling to the user. 
Points and leaderboards are a good example: Tese gamiﬁcation 
mechanisms can be seen as generating introjected behavior regulators 
because they appeal to a user’s ego by allowing her to brag about her 
standing. Another example: Social gaming mechanisms allow users 
to become part of a larger community. Tis is likely to make them 
care more about the motivational device—whether that motivator is 
game element points, quests, badges, or some other mechanism. Te 
motivator that was previously experienced as external to the user 
will begin to form part of the internal system of motivation, as the 
meaning of the community takes on greater value. 
Don’t Be Evil
Just because you can motivate someone to do something doesn’t mean 
you should. One of our colleagues was asked to advise a large call-
center operator on using game mechanics to increase productivity. 
He concluded that doing so would take an already awful work 
environment for the call-center agents and make it even worse. Te 
gamiﬁcation would be a tool for monitoring and dehumanizing the 
workers, not genuinely rewarding them. So he turned the job down.
Gamiﬁcation can motivate people to undertake activities that they 
otherwise wouldn’t do. If that means hitting the gym regularly or 
having a more enjoyable engagement with a brand, it’s a good thing. 
If it means your users are gambling away their paychecks at a casino 
or are being manipulated into taking valueless badges when they 
really wanted cash, it’s more troublesome. Of course, not all call 
centers belong in the latter category: We gave an example in this level 
of one company, LiveOps, which takes a more enlightened approach. 
In short, don’t look at gamiﬁcation as a covert tool to squeeze 
more out of customers, employees, or other groups. Look at it as a 
means to produce authentic happiness and to help people ﬂourish 
while achieving your own goals at the same time. 

69
Te Gamiﬁcation Toolkit  
Game Elements
LEVEL 4
C
lub Psych, launched in 2010, is a gamiﬁed website built around 
USA Network’s successful TV program Psych. It oﬀers users 
an array of challenges, such as watching a video, answering a 
trivia quiz, and joining the show’s fan club. A mystery game called 
Hashtag Killer allows players to simulate interactions with the show’s 
characters over Twitter and Facebook. Te mobile app Psych Vision 
[I asked my three-year-old daughter what she was made 
of.] She paused to consider. She looked down at her  
hands, turning them over, and studying them. And  
then, brightly, she announced: “I’m made of skin!” 
—Jesse Schell, Te Art of Game Design
Now that you have earned your way to Level 4, you know how to think 
about your problem in gamiﬁcation terms, you understand how to 
motivate your users, and you have seen how to implement a basic gam-
iﬁcation system. It’s time to level up to some more advanced features of 
game thinking so that you can deliver the most compelling implemen-
tation. We’ll ask:
 
•   What are points, badges, and leaderboards (PBLs), and  
why are they so common in gamification?
 
• How do games actually work?
 
•  What are game elements and how can we apply them?

70     FOR THE WIN
lets fans unlock prizes and chat with each other while watching the 
show on TV. All of these actions earn points that can be redeemed 
for virtual goods or physical merchandise, up to unique items such 
as posters signed by the show’s cast. Items are frequently added and 
occasionally removed to stimulate continued interest.
 
Te most obvious surface-level gamiﬁcation features of Club 
Psych are points, badges, and leaderboards (PBLs). Points are 
accumulated for undertaking challenges and can be redeemed for 
rewards; and they are shown in a leaderboard to compare how the 
player is doing to other players. Players pick up badges for all manner 
of achievements undertaken on the site. 
 
Club Psych employs PBLs eﬀectively: Afer the introduction of 
the gamiﬁed site, overall traﬃc on the USA Network site increased 
30%, online merchandise sales increased nearly 50%, and pageviews 
for the oﬃcial Psych website increased 130%. Club Psych’s users are 
undoubtedly more engaged than the average couch potato. And they 
have shared Psych content over 300,000 times on Facebook, reaching 
40 million Facebook users. Considering that Psych only has about 4.5 
million regular viewers, that’s a tremendous amount of publicity for 
the show. Hashtag Killer was even nominated for an Emmy Award.
 
Does this mean that eﬀective gamiﬁcation is about adding points, 
badges, and leaderboards to your business process and calling it a 
day? Well, not exactly. Although PBLs are incredibly common in 
gamiﬁcation, they’re not the whole story. And sometimes they can 
be damaging to what you want to do. Jesse Schell, the noted games 
designer and Carnegie Mellon University professor quoted in this 
level, tells the story about his daughter’s idea that she’s made of skin 
to make the point that a surface-level understanding of the human 
body is ﬁne for a three-year-old but not so great if you’re a physician. 
Te same is true of gamiﬁcation. In this level we’ll start with PBLs, 
the “skin-deep” gamiﬁcation features, and then we’ll work deeper 
into the body of gamiﬁcation to explain other approaches that you’ll 
want to consider using.

THE GAMIFICATION TOOLKIT: GAME ELEMENTS     71
Figure 4.1 
Club Psych
Te PBL Triad
In our research, we’ve examined well over 100 implementations 
of gamiﬁcation. Many of these systems—if not the vast majority 
of them—start with the same three elements: points, badges, and 
leaderboards. As we noted, Club Psych is no exception. PBLs are so 
common within gamiﬁcation that they are ofen described as though 
they are gamiﬁcation. Tey’re not, but they’re a good place to start. 
Used right, PBLs are powerful, practical, and relevant. Tey 
can also be used in signiﬁcantly more sophisticated ways than one 
might imagine. On the other hand, PBLs have important limitations. 

72     FOR THE WIN
So they’re the obvious place to start building your gamiﬁcation 
toolkit. You can’t build a successful gamiﬁcation system without 
understanding their up- and downsides. 
Points
We ofen see points used to encourage people to do things by 
collecting them. Te assumption is that people will buy more widgets 
or will work harder in exchange for points. Tis is a simple approach 
that occasionally works to motivate those people who like collecting 
things (“Look at how many points I just received!”) or for those who 
like competing against others (“No one else has 1,000,000 points!”) 
But points can be used in many other ways, and we need to 
understand how the humble point can serve many functions. We’ve 
identiﬁed six diﬀerent ways that points are used in gamiﬁcation:
1.  Points eﬀectively keep score. Tis is the typical way they are 
used in gamiﬁcation systems. Points tell the player how well 
he or she is doing. Someone who has earned 32,768 points has 
been playing longer or more successfully than someone with 
24,813 points. Points can also demarcate levels. For example, 
“You need 10,000 points to reach Level 5, at which point you 
unlock the ‘super player’ achievement and get access to new 
content.” In this case points represent the true “play space” of 
a game because they deﬁne progress from the beginning of 
the game to its objectives. 
2.  Points may determine the win state of a gamiﬁed process, 
assuming it has one. Sometimes you will want to use points 
to create a win condition: if you want to give away a prize, say.
3.  Points create a connection between progression in the game 
and extrinsic rewards. Many gamiﬁed systems oﬀer some 

THE GAMIFICATION TOOLKIT: GAME ELEMENTS     73
real-world prizes for reaching certain levels or for redeeming 
virtual points: 1,000 points gets you a set of steak knives and 
1,000,000 points gets you a round-trip ticket to Tahiti. Club 
Psych takes this approach, but it’s common in all manner of 
marketing and promotional devices that have been used for 
years.
4.  Points provide feedback. Explicit and frequent feedback is 
a key element in most good game design, and points provide 
feedback quickly and easily. Points are among the most 
granular of feedback mechanisms. Each point gives the user 
a tiny bit of feedback, saying that he or she is doing well and 
progressing in the game. 
5.  Points can be an external display of progress. In a 
multiplayer game, or in an environment in which members 
of the community or workplace can see each other’s scores, 
points show others how you are doing. Tat can be signiﬁcant 
as a marker of status. 
6.  Points provide data for the game designer. Te points that 
users earn can easily be tracked and stored. Tis allows the 
designer to analyze important metrics about the system. For 
example, how fast are users progressing through the content? 
Do they seem to be falling oﬀ or stalling out at certain 
junctures? 
By understanding the nature of points, you can use them in 
ways that meet the objectives of your gamiﬁed system. Do you want 
to encourage competition? Ten use points as scores. Do you want 
your users to be hooked by the dopamine drip of constant feedback? 
Ten use points to give them a sense of mastery and progression, 
without showing them how others are doing. And so on. 

74     FOR THE WIN
 
Bear in mind that points are very limited. Tey are uniform, 
abstract, interchangeable, and well, pointlike. To put it another way, 
a point is a point. Each additional point simply indicates a greater 
magnitude, and nothing more. Tis is one reason why badges are 
ofen found in conjunction with points systems.
Badges
Badges are a chunkier version of points. A badge is a visual repre-
sentation of some achievement within the gamiﬁed process. (Te 
terms “badges” and “achievements” are ofen used synonymously 
in gamiﬁcation.) Some badges simply demarcate a certain level of 
points. Fitbit is a gamiﬁed system that allows people to use a wireless 
pedometer to track the number of miles they walk or run. Te system 
displays a badge when the user exceeds certain point thresholds, 
such as 50 miles in a week or 10,000 steps in a day. 
 
Other badges signify diﬀerent kinds of activities. Foursquare, a 
service that engages users with local businesses by encouraging them 
to check in to a location with their cellphone, has numerous badges 
for all manner of achievements. Users unlock the “Adventurer” badge 
as soon as they check into ten places registered with the Foursquare 
system, and they receive the “Crunked” badge for checking into 
four bars in one night. (No one said that badges need to be socially 
responsible.) 
Figure 4.2 
Fitbit Badges

THE GAMIFICATION TOOLKIT: GAME ELEMENTS     75
Researchers Judd Antin and Elizabeth Churchill suggest that a 
well-designed badge system has ﬁve motivational characteristics: 
1.  Badges can provide a goal for users to strive toward, which has 
been shown to have positive eﬀects on motivation. 
2.  Badges provide guidance as to what is possible within the 
system and generate a kind of shorthand of what the system is 
supposed to do. Tis is an important feature for “onboarding,” 
or getting the user engaged with the system. 
3.  Badges are a signal of what a user cares about and what he or 
she has performed. Tey are a kind of visual marker of a user’s 
reputation, and users will ofen acquire badges to try to show 
others what they’re capable of.
4.  Badges operate as virtual status symbols and aﬃrmations of 
the personal journey of the user through the gamiﬁcation 
system.
5.  Badges function as tribal markers. A user who has some of the 
same badges as other users will feel a sense of identity with 
that group, and a clever gamiﬁcation design can connect the 
badges with a system of group identiﬁcation. 
One of the most important attributes of badges is their ﬂexi- 
bility. Many diﬀerent kinds of badges can be awarded for many 
diﬀerent kinds of activity, and the range of badges is limited only by 
the imagination of the gamiﬁcation designer and the needs of the 
business. Tis allows the gamiﬁed service to engage a more diverse 
group of users and to appeal to their interests in ways that a single 
points system cannot. Your friend may have a completely diﬀerent 
set of badges than you, even though you’re both playing the same 
game. Nonetheless, both you and your friend will, one hopes, ﬁnd 
the badges meaningful and interesting.

76     FOR THE WIN
Badges can serve a credentialing function. Remember the Good 
Housekeeping Seal? It tells consumers that the product in question 
passed tests by Good Housekeeping magazine. Tat means you didn’t 
have to trust the product; you just had to trust Good Housekeeping. 
One of the nice things about badges as credentials is that they are 
inﬁnitely ﬂexible. You can receive a badge for anything, from the silly 
to the serious. Some organizations are even looking to badges as a 
foundation for new forms of online education and training. Tis isn’t 
as crazy as it might ﬁrst sound: A diploma from an elite university is 
a kind of badge that holds out the promise of a certain level of skill 
and achievement on the part of the diploma holder. 
In internal gamiﬁcation contexts, credentialing badges can be 
a way for your employees to demonstrate certain skills. Every large 
enterprise has extensive corporate training programs, and employees 
participate in more training outside the ﬁrm. Badge systems are 
useful in this context. 
Leaderboards
Leaderboards are the ﬁnal leg of the PBL triad, and perhaps the 
most troublesome. On one hand, players ofen want to know where 
they stand relative to their peers. A leaderboard gives context to 
progression in a way the points or badges can’t. If performance in 
the game matters, the leaderboard makes that performance public 
for all to see. In the right situation, leaderboards can be powerful 
motivators. Knowing that it’s just a few more points to move up a slot 
or even to emerge on top can be a strong push for users. 
On the other hand, leaderboards can be powerfully demotivating. 
If you see exactly how far you are behind the top players, it can 
cause you to check out and stop trying. Leaderboards can also 
reduce the richness of a game to a zero-sum struggle for supremacy, 
which inherently turns oﬀ some people and makes others behave 
in less desirable ways. Several studies have shown that introducing 
a leaderboard alone in a business environment will usually reduce 
performance rather than enhance it.

THE GAMIFICATION TOOLKIT: GAME ELEMENTS     77
Tere are various ways to make leaderboards work for your 
gamiﬁed system. A leaderboard need not be a static scoreboard, and 
it need not only track one attribute. In gamiﬁcation, leaderboards can 
track any feature or features the designer wants to emphasize. Tere’s 
nothing wrong with multiple leaderboards measuring diﬀerent things 
or leaderboards that aren’t universal for all participants. Leaderboards 
can also be tied to social networks to provide more contextual, and 
less troubling, information about how players are faring. 
PBLs as a Starting Point 
Taken together, the PBL triad forms a useful starting point for 
gamiﬁcation eﬀorts. In our gamiﬁcation courses for Wharton MBA 
students, almost every student team incorporated PBLs into their 
gamiﬁcation design, despite our admonitions to consider alternatives. 
Tere’s just something comfortable about these components, and they 
make sense in lots of projects. Related to this, turnkey gamiﬁcation 
products from vendors such as Badgeville, BigDoor, and Bunchball 
almost always incorporate these three elements as standard features. 
It’s therefore easy to implement these three approaches using oﬀ-the-
shelf products. And PBLs link gamiﬁcation to well-known enterprise 
features like loyalty programs, reputation systems, and employee 
competitions. 
As valuable as they are, relying just on PBLs can get you into 
trouble. PBLs aren’t right for every project, and they’re not the only 
features that you can deploy in a gamiﬁed system. If you want to 
extract the maximum value from gamiﬁcation, you’ll want to move 
beyond PBLs. Tis is where we head next, where we start to think a 
little more about what makes a game and what makes a game work. 
Braving the Elements
We’ve already seen a number of gamiﬁcation features that are not 
PBLs, in examples like the teams in the Language Quality Game 
or the duels in Fitocracy. It turns out that PBLs are special cases of 

78     FOR THE WIN
what we will call “game elements”—that is, speciﬁc characteristics of 
games that you can apply in gamiﬁcation. 
To build a house, you need to understand small-scale compo-
nents such as hammers and nails and 2x4s; midlevel concepts such 
as framing, plumbing, and blueprints; and high-level abstractions 
such as master bathrooms, structural engineering, movement ﬂow, 
and aesthetics. Each of those is an element of house construction. 
Te sum total of the elements and the ways they are put together 
is the house itself. Designers and builders go from a vacant lot to 
a ﬁnished house using such elements. Executives in charge of 
gamiﬁcation design understand games in a similar way and can use 
this understanding to build, pull apart, and rebuild their projects.
Tere are three categories of game elements that are relevant 
to gamiﬁcation: dynamics, mechanics, and components. Tey are 
organized in decreasing order of abstraction. Each mechanic is tied 
to one or more dynamics, and each component is tied to one or more 
higher-level elements.
Dynamics
At the highest level of abstraction are dynamics. Te most important 
game dynamics are: 
1.  Constraints (limitations or forced trade-oﬀs)
2.  Emotions (curiosity, competitiveness, frustration,  
happiness)
3.  Narrative (a consistent, ongoing storyline)
4.  Progression (the player’s growth and development)
5.  Relationships (social interactions generating feelings  
of camaraderie, status, altruism)
Dynamics are the big-picture aspects of the gamiﬁed system that 
you have to consider and manage but which you can never directly 
enter into the game. Analogies in the management world would be 
employee development, creating an innovation culture, or pretty 

THE GAMIFICATION TOOLKIT: GAME ELEMENTS     79
much any other large-scale objective you’ll ﬁnd in an airport book 
on business. Te dynamics in Club Psych include high-level features 
like the way that the prizes relate to the narrative in the television 
series (for example, bobblehead dolls of the actors and the recurring 
appearance of a pineapple) or the relationships formed when users 
are able to comment on the latest episode.
Tere’s an important point here. Good business leaders and 
managers create desired dynamics in their organizations. Tey rarely, 
if ever, have the opportunity to sit outside the business and design 
it from scratch. Rather, they have to push an existing organization 
in the right direction through hiring and promotion, management 
practices, leading by example, and so forth. When creating a gamiﬁed 
system, on the other hand, you can play God. You’re the designer. Te 
way to think outside the box in gamiﬁcation is to build a better box. 
Mechanics 
Mechanics are the basic processes that drive the action forward and 
generate player engagement. We can identify ten important game 
mechanics: 
1.  Challenges (puzzles or other tasks that require eﬀort to solve)
2.  Chance (elements of randomness)
3.  Competition (one player or group wins, and the other loses)
4.  Cooperation (players must work together to achieve a  
shared goal)
5.  Feedback (information about how the player is doing)
6.  Resource Acquisition (obtaining useful or collectible items)
7.  Rewards (beneﬁts for some action or achievement)
8.  Transactions (trading between players, directly or through 
intermediaries)
9.  Turns (sequential participation by alternating players)
10.  Win States (objectives that makes one player or group the 
winner—draw and loss states are related concepts)

80     FOR THE WIN
 
Each mechanic is a way of achieving one or more of the dynamics 
described. A random event, such as an award that pops up without 
warning, may stimulate players’ sense of fun and curiosity. It might 
also be a way of getting new participants hooked (onboarding) or 
keeping experienced players involved (interest curves). In Club Psych 
there are mechanics that involve social challenges, like watching 
preview clips with your friends, and rewards that range from virtual 
goods to rare merchandise.
Components
Components are more-speciﬁc forms that mechanics or dynamics 
can take. Te ﬁfeen important game components are:
 
1.  Achievements (deﬁned objectives)
 
2.  Avatars (visual representations of a player’s character)
 
3.  Badges (visual representations of achievements)
 
4.  Boss Fights (especially hard challenges at the culmination  
of a level)
 
5.  Collections (sets of items or badges to accumulate)
 
6.  Combat (a deﬁned battle, typically short-lived) 
 
7.  Content Unlocking (aspects available only when players 
reach objectives)
 
8.  Gifing (opportunities to share resources with others)
 
9.  Leaderboards (visual displays of player progression and 
achievement)
 
10.  Levels (deﬁned steps in player progression)
 
11.  Points (numerical representations of game progression)
 
12.  Quests (predeﬁned challenges with objectives and rewards)
 
13.  Social Graphs (representation of players’ social network 
within the game)
 
14.  Teams (deﬁned groups of players working together for  
a common goal)
 
15.  Virtual Goods (game assets with perceived or real-money 
value)

THE GAMIFICATION TOOLKIT: GAME ELEMENTS     81
Just as each mechanic ties to one or more dynamics, each 
component ties to one or more higher-level elements. Services such 
as Club Psych use points and badges extensively to connect player 
actions to the higher level mechanics and dynamics. Tus, players 
working on puzzles that relate to the current episode may earn 100 
points, answering challenges, receiving feedback, moving closer to 
rewards, and connecting to the narrative context of the television 
series. Or if they reach high-enough levels, they can collect limited-
availability badges that are themed from the Psych series (resource 
acquisition, rewards, narrative, progression, constraints). 
Notice that our previous triad of points, badges, and leaderboards 
can be found in this grouping. PBLs are particular components that 
may be used in gamiﬁcation. As we’ve stressed, they are only a few of 
the possible components, which may not be the best for your context. 
One reason to review the pyramid of elements is to recognize the 
variety of options for a gamiﬁcation design.
Integration
We’ve given you a lot of information about game elements in fairly 
general terms. It may not all feel coherent right away. We’ve provided 
quick sketches of diﬀerent sorts of game elements so that you 
understand that there are lots of features you can use, and so that 
you have some ideas to try out. In the next level, we’ll show you how 
to use the design process to apply these elements. But you should 
now have a sense that all of the game elements exist in a hierarchy, 
as shown in ﬁgure 4.3.
Putting all these elements together is the central task of 
gamiﬁcation design, and having knowledge of these game elements 
will make your gamiﬁcation project compelling. Bear in mind, 
though, that no gamiﬁcation project will include all of these elements. 
In fact, it’s unlikely you would ever utilize all the items within any one 
category. However, if you haven’t considered a large set of possible 
options at some stage of your design process, your gamiﬁcation 

82     FOR THE WIN
project will suﬀer. As we move up to the next level, you’ll see how to 
integrate these elements into the gamiﬁcation design process. 
One ﬁnal caveat: Having a list of elements is necessary but by 
no means suﬃcient. Creating a successful new service is always 
harder than deconstructing an existing one. In particular, building 
an engaging gamiﬁed service takes more than checking oﬀ the right 
boxes. You need to ensure that the elements match the particular 
demands of your situation. And you need to implement them well. 
Facebook and MySpace are social networking sites with similar basic 
capabilities, but one made billions and the other cratered afer its 
acquisition. 
Figure 4.3 
Te Game Element Hierarchy
Dynamics
are the big-picture 
aspects of the gamiﬁed 
system that you have to 
consider and manage but 
which can never directly enter 
into the game.
Mechanics
are the basic processes that drive the 
action forward and generate player engagement.
Components
are the speciﬁc instantiations of mechanics and dynamics.

THE GAMIFICATION TOOLKIT: GAME ELEMENTS     83
Muscles and Bones
When we ﬁrst looked at the example of Club Psych, we saw the surface 
of the system but not the organs that lay underneath the skin. PBLs 
form the most obvious features of gamiﬁed systems such as Club 
Psych, but they may not be right for your task. And although you 
now have an understanding of the elements that constitute games—
the bones and the muscles, if you will—that you can apply to your 
process, it may be hard to understand how you can harness them in 
a meaningful way. How, then, do you go about putting everything 
together? We tackle this question in the next level.


Game Changer  
Six Steps to Gamiﬁcation
85
LEVEL 5
N
ow that you know the essential concepts of gamiﬁcation and 
game thinking, it’s time to use them. Tis has to be done in a 
thoughtful way. If your process boils down to brainstorming what 
might be fun for your players and picking the game elements that 
seem to work, there’s a good chance you’ll fail. Whether you are going 
to create, plan, execute, and assess a gamiﬁcation project yourself or 
leave the implementation to outside service providers, you’re going 
to need a process to make the project work. 
Gamiﬁcation requires a fusion of art and science. On one 
hand, it involves emotional concepts such as fun, play, and user 
experiences. On the other hand, it’s about engineering measureable 
and sustainable systems to serve concrete business objectives. 
Creative types tend to focus on the experience and give short shrif 
Games are the most elevated form of investigation. 
—Albert Einstein
Tis is where we bring all of our learning together. We now have all the 
building blocks to make gamiﬁcation work. At Level 5, we see how to 
make it happen, by looking at:
 
• Gamification as a design process
 
• Six steps to implement gamification effectively
 
• Techniques to apply high-level concepts to specific projects

86     FOR THE WIN
to metrics. Te quants and MBAs, on the other hand, can lose sight 
of the big picture amid their spreadsheets. 
Fortunately, there’s a discipline that bridges this gap: It’s called 
design. A good design process melds creativity and structure to 
match people’s needs with technical feasibility and business realities. 
Whole books have been written on design thinking in business. 
Here we oﬀer a design framework that is customized for developing 
gamiﬁed systems. 
Gamiﬁcation is best implemented in six steps, each of which 
starts—like the word “design”—with the letter D:
1. DEFINE business objectives
2. DELINEATE target behaviors
3. DESCRIBE your players
4. DEVISE activity cycles
5. DON’T forget the fun! 
6. DEPLOY the appropriate tools
You will see that only in the last step, do we talk about gamiﬁcation 
components like leaderboards and badges. Tat’s deliberate. Te 
mechanisms of gamiﬁcation look really easy, especially today with so 
many plug-and-play tools readily available. If anything, they are too 
easy. Te fact that you can add points to your website with a few lines 
of code and white-label sofware-as-a-service doesn’t mean that you 
should. Designing how to map the available techniques onto your 
particular situation is what’s diﬃcult, which is why we spend the ﬁrst 
ﬁve steps focusing on these issues.

GAME CHANGER: SIX STEPS TO GAMIFICATION     87
1. Deﬁne Your Business Objectives
You already started to do this in Level 1, but it’s time to make things 
absolutely concrete. For eﬀective gamiﬁcation, it’s critical to have 
a well-developed understanding of your goals. Tat might sound 
obvious, but it’s easily overlooked. We’re not talking here about 
your overall organizational mission, whether expressed in terms 
of proﬁtability, shareholder value, mission statement, or otherwise. 
We mean the speciﬁc performance goals for your gamiﬁed system, 
such as increasing customer retention, building brand loyalty, or 
improving employee productivity. If you don’t start with this step, 
your gamiﬁcation project may get oﬀ the ground, but it will probably 
fail eventually. 
DevHub is a small business website-building tool that looked 
to increase engagement using gamiﬁcation. Using Foursquare as 
a model, DevHub’s founders ﬁgured that game elements could 
overcome the fatigue that kept most users from implementing all the 
functions the site oﬀered. Tey added experience points, levels, and 
virtual currency that could be redeemed for additional content and 
features. Next, they relaunched DevHub’s website-building service 
as an empire-building game, complete with a stable of cartoon 
characters called Devatars that appeared on users’ sites when they 
completed tasks. Te percentage of users completing site-building 
activities increased eightfold. Even better, virtual goods became a 
new revenue stream, representing almost 30% of DevHub’s revenues 
afer the relaunch.
A great gamiﬁcation success story, right? Wrong. 
At that point, DevHub only attracted about 10,000 active users. 
Te numbers may have looked good on a percentage basis, but 
the reality was that the virtual goods brought in only about forty 
cents per user per month. Enticing users to complete tasks didn’t 
help with DevHub’s real problem: attracting large numbers of users 
and monetizing their actions. It may have even hurt, by alienating 
potential customers who found the space empire game silly. DevHub 

88     FOR THE WIN
had to lay oﬀ staﬀ and search for a new business model. (It eventually 
made a successful pivot into a white-label website-development tool 
for small-business directory services.) 
Te lesson from DevHub is that gamiﬁcation, even when 
eﬀective, can produce results that don’t necessarily help. To avoid this 
pitfall, your ﬁrst step is to make a list of all potential objectives. Make 
each goal as precise as possible, but the initial list can be expansive 
because you’ll winnow it down. Perhaps you want to attract high 
school dropouts from low-income communities to use your personal 
ﬁnance educational tool, or perhaps you want your employees to 
suggest out-of-the-box ideas for new business opportunities. Ten 
rank the list in terms of importance. You may need to trade oﬀ lesser 
goals for more signiﬁcant ones, at least initially. 
Now, go through your list and cross oﬀ anything that is a means 
rather than an end. In other words, it’s really only a stepping-stone 
to a more important goal. Getting users to accumulate points and 
badges isn’t a reason to implement a gamiﬁed system; it’s something 
that happens within one. Having large numbers of players visit your 
website is only an end if it’s directly valuable to you; otherwise it 
might generate support costs without concomitant revenues. A good 
test is whether—if something you list were the only result from your 
gamiﬁcation project—you’d be satisﬁed it was a success. As a ﬁnal 
check, add another column, and, next to each objective, explain how 
it would beneﬁt your organization. 
As you work through your design and development process, 
keep coming back to this goal list. Even if your priorities change, it 
will keep you grounded and focused on what really matters. 

GAME CHANGER: SIX STEPS TO GAMIFICATION     89
Figure 5.1 
Te Objective Deﬁnition Process
2. Delineate Your Target Behaviors 
Once you’ve identiﬁed why you’re gamifying, focus on what you 
want your players to do and how you’ll measure them. Behaviors 
and metrics are best considered together. Target behaviors should be 
concrete and speciﬁc, for example: 
 
• Sign up for an account on your website. 
 
• Post a comment on a discussion board. 
 
• Exercise for at least 30 minutes. 
 
• Share information about your service on Twitter. 
 
• Comment or vote on suggestions by others. 
 
• Visit your restaurant. 
 
• Buy Bounty paper towels. 
List objectives
Rank objectives
(and trade off goals)
Delete mechanics
(or the means to an end)
Justify objectives

90     FOR THE WIN
Te behaviors you are looking for should promote the ultimate 
business objectives you previously deﬁned, though the relationship 
may be indirect. 
For example, getting users to spend more time on your site or to 
talk about your products on Facebook doesn’t translate immediately 
to revenue, but it may still be desirable. Come up with as many 
possible behaviors as you can. You don’t want the system to be too 
complex or confusing, but you want to give users a range of options 
and activities to pursue based on their preferences. 
Once you’ve listed all the desired behaviors, develop your 
metrics for success. Tese are the ways you translate behaviors into 
quantiﬁable results. Gamiﬁcation runs on sofware algorithms. 
Behind the scenes, it translates activities into numbers and uses 
those numbers to generate feedback. Te numbers might or might 
not be transparent to the player. Tey might see a shower of sparks 
and an announcement they’ve reached the “grand poobah” level or 
unlocked the “hungry hippo” achievement. In designing the system, 
however, you need to decide precisely what those mean.
As we discussed earlier in Level 4, points are an easy way to 
quantify and measure any kind of progress. Whether or not your 
gamiﬁed system will present the user with points, you’ll probably use 
it internally to deﬁne the relative values of behaviors in your design 
process. Te value of the points should correspond to your best 
estimate to the relative value of the activities to your organization. 
For example, you might decide that reading a discussion post is 
worth 1 point, whereas commenting on it is worth 5 points, and 
posting is worth 10. You’ll quite likely ﬁnd that you need to tweak 
these point values once you start testing your system. Do the best 
you can at the outset, and be prepared to revise. 
“Win states” form a second kind of success metric. Of course, 
everyone likes to win, and so it seems like a no-brainer to include 
some kind of “win” for your users. However, from a design standpoint, 
winning is problematic. It means that some players haven’t won, and 

GAME CHANGER: SIX STEPS TO GAMIFICATION     91
this may turn them oﬀ. And for those who do win, it means that the 
game, or that part of the game, is over. Tat’s not good if your goal 
is to get them to keep coming back. Remember, your goal isn’t to 
sell a game, it’s to use game elements to achieve some organizational 
objective. You can get around these limitations to some degree by 
creating localized or temporal win states. Perhaps every week there’s 
a new contest, or “winning” just means an achievement. Foursquare 
added levels to many of its badges when it realized its single state 
badges created an all-or-nothing dynamic rather than encouraging 
continued progression.
Analytics are the algorithms and data used to measure key 
performance indicators for your gamiﬁed system. Every online activ-
ity generates an event that can be tracked and measured. E-commerce 
and social games companies have become adept at learning how to 
aggregate data from large numbers of user transactions to measure 
the success of their services. Common analytics include the ratio 
of daily to monthly active users (an indication of how ofen users 
return), “virality” (how likely users are to refer their friends to the 
service), and the total volume of points awarded or virtual goods 
purchased. Te right things to measure will depend on your context; 
an enterprise gamiﬁcation project will likely involve analytics that 
are diﬀerent from those of a marketing project, for example. Don’t 
forget to identify whether existing monitoring systems within your 
organization are tracking the same behaviors. 
3. Describe Your Players
Tere will be real people using your system. Who are they? What is 
their relationship to you? Employees, for example, aren’t in the same 
situation as customers. How much does their relationship with you 
involve others? 
What might motivate your players? Tat question probably won’t 
have an easy answer, but put yourself in their shoes and identify as 
many possible motivations as you can. Te discussion of intrinsic and 

92     FOR THE WIN
extrinsic motivation at Level 3 should give you a good foundation to 
decide which motivators can most eﬀectively be addressed through 
your gamiﬁed system. Don’t forget to think about what demotivates 
your players. In other words, what makes them less likely to complete 
a relevant task: Is it volition (a perceived lack of desire) or faculty (a 
perceived lack of capability)? Te former calls for an engagement-
oriented approach, while the latter calls for progression systems that 
gently walk the player up the diﬃculty curve.
Remember that not all users are the same. You’ll want to segment 
your players so that your system is appropriate for more than one 
subgroup. Segmentation is a common practice in marketing and 
human resources. It’s even more important here. Because games and 
gamiﬁed systems typically oﬀer choices to the player, you don’t need 
to choose a single segment to target. Tere are World of Warcraf 
players who do nothing but engage in player-to-player combat and 
others who spend all of their time exploring the world through solo 
quests. Similarly, gamiﬁed platforms can appeal in diﬀerent ways to 
diﬀerent groups. 
Game designers have several models of player types that they use 
as starting points for segmentation. Te best known was invented 
back in the late 1980s by games researcher Richard Bartle, who was 
studying early text-based multiplayer online games. It wasn’t intended 
as a generalization for all games, let alone all user populations, but it’s 
nonetheless a helpful heuristic for understanding why people play.
Bartle, whom we mentioned in our introduction, distinguished 
four player types: achievers, explorers, socializers, and killers. 
Achievers love the rush of leveling up or earning a badge; explorers 
want to ﬁnd new content; socializers want to engage with friends; 
and killers want to impose their will on others, typically by 
vanquishing them. We all have elements of each of these archetypes. 
Te proportions vary in diﬀerent settings, and a player’s primary 
motivation can shif over time. Te best games and gamiﬁed systems 

GAME CHANGER: SIX STEPS TO GAMIFICATION     93
have something to oﬀer each category. Even the killers may be your 
friends if they function as elite “power users” or if they galvanize 
everyone else in a positive way.
Player modeling is a way to ﬂesh out your segmentation to 
further guide your design process. Divide your player community 
into the categories that seem most appropriate. Perhaps you have a 
group of employees who are focused on proving their mettle to move 
up in the organization, a group that wants a sense of camaraderie, 
and a group that wants to feel that the work they do is producing 
something valuable. 
Now, give each group the avatar of a typical player, with a name 
and a story. An avatar is just a virtual representation of someone. For 
example, Lucy is a graduate from an Ivy League school who came 
to work at your ﬁrm straight out of college and plans to eventually 
go back and get her MBA. Bob is a baby boomer, recently retired, 
who likes to play golf four days a week, and so on. Write a paragraph 
about each avatar. Where do they ﬁt among the Bartle player types? 
What are their hopes and fears? Teir talents? Teir hobbies? 
Te more detailed the description of the avatars, the better. If 
the avatars don’t ring true, if they don’t reﬂect your likely audience, 
change them until they do. As you proceed in your gamiﬁcation 
process, these character models will ground your design activities. 
It’s easy to imagine how Lucy will respond to a particular quest 
mechanic. It’s less easy to imagine how a nebulous Player A will 
respond to the same mechanic. And having a small number of 
representative avatars means that you can understand more easily 
how your system will appeal to diﬀerent parts of your audience. It’s 
easy to design for four representative avatars—Lucy, Bob, Layla, and 
Faraz—but it’s hard to design for audience segments like “white, 
well-educated female players between 25 and 40,” “blue-collar male 
players who don’t like games,” and so on.
Te ﬁnal dimension to consider is the player lifecycle. Everyone 
starts as a novice, sometimes called a newbie or “noob” in game 

94     FOR THE WIN
circles. Novices need hand-holding to learn the ropes. Tey may 
need reinforcement so that they can succeed or so that their friends 
are also involved. Once the novice becomes a regular, he or she 
needs novelty in order to stick with the activity. What was at ﬁrst 
new and challenging is now eﬀortless. Finally, the player becomes 
an expert. Experts need challenges that are hard enough to keep 
them engaged. Tey also tend to want explicit reinforcement of their 
status. All your players won’t be at the same stage at the same time, 
although the longer your system runs, the more it will skew toward 
the experienced end. You must oﬀer opportunities for players at 
all stages.
4. Devise Your Activity Cycles
Games always have a beginning and sometimes have an end, but 
along the way they operate through a series of loops and branching 
trees. In other words, the game isn’t simply linear: Step 1 → Step 2 → 
Step 3 → Completion. Tere may be a leveling system that looks that 
way, but the overall gamiﬁcation system behind the scenes isn’t so 
simple. If it were, the system would just be a lockstep series of stages. 
Te most useful way to model the action in a gamiﬁed system is 
through activity cycles, a concept that has gained traction in 
describing social media and social networking services. User actions 
provoke some other activity, which in turn provokes other user 
actions, and so forth. Tink of a user tagging a friend in a photo she 
uploads to Facebook, the upload triggering a notiﬁcation message to 
the second user, the second user posting a comment on the photo, a 
new notiﬁcation going back to the ﬁrst user, and so forth. 
Tere are two kinds of cycles to develop: engagement loops 
and progression stairs. Engagement loops describe, at a micro level, 
what your players do, why they do it, and what the system does in 
response. Progression stairs give a macro perspective on the player’s 
journey. 

GAME CHANGER: SIX STEPS TO GAMIFICATION     95
Engagement Loops
Player actions result from motivation and in turn produce feedback 
in the form of responses from the system, like awarding points. Tat 
feedback in turn motivates the user to take further actions, and so 
on. Te key element here is feedback. Feedback is part of what makes 
games so eﬀective as motivators. Actions immediately produce 
visible responses. You see immediately where you stand, and when 
you do something good you always know it. 
Virtually all the game components can be seen as forms of 
feedback. Points, for example, are a way of displaying feedback 
about performance, as are leaderboards, levels, and achievements. 
Tinking in terms of feedback keeps you from overemphasizing the 
speciﬁc components or their reward aspects. A reward, afer all, is 
just a kind of feedback. Te feedback is what creates the motivation 
for further actions. 
Te engagement loop is the basic process of your gamiﬁed 
system. However, it doesn’t capture the ways that players advance. 
Game design consultant Amy Jo Kim points out that gamiﬁcation 
experts ofen come from the world of social media, where quick, 
temporary relationships are the norm, rather than from the games 
community, where deep sustained engagement is the goal. Tey, 
therefore, have a blind spot in recognizing the importance of the 
player journey. If the experience is exactly the same on Day 100 as 
it is on Day 1, most players will get bored. Tat’s where progression 
stairs come in.

96     FOR THE WIN
Figure 5.2 
Activity Cycle
Progression Stairs
Progression stairs reﬂect the fact that the game experience changes 
as players move through it. Tat usually means an escalating level of 
challenges. In a game such as World of Warcraf, moving from Level 
1 to Level 2 takes far less time and experience points than moving 
from Level 20 to Level 21, and in turn from Level 84 to Level 85. 
In a gamiﬁed system, that equivalent might be the spacing between 
reward tiers. Map out the player journey in your gamiﬁed system as 
a collection of short-term missions and long-term goals, which play 
out as a rolling series of progressions.
Tough escalating diﬃculty is the overall tenor of progression, the 
process shouldn’t be completely linear. Tat’s where the progression 
stair comes in. Te very ﬁrst stair—ofen called onboarding—needs 
to be so simple and guided that it draws players into the game. Once 
the player is over that hurdle, diﬃculty ideally should increase at 
variable rates, along what are called interest curves. 
Te model used in most games involves steadily increasing 
diﬃculty, followed by a period of relative ease, followed by a major 
challenge at the end of each segment. Te rest period allows players 
Motivation
Feedback
Action

GAME CHANGER: SIX STEPS TO GAMIFICATION     97
to catch their breath. It also lets them experience the satisfaction of 
mastery: the feeling that they’ve become an expert at some part of 
the game. Tere are ofen a series of small cycles of this sort. Te ﬁnal 
challenge of a level, known in games as the boss ﬁght, provides for a 
diﬀerent experience of mastery. Te greatest challenges, which play-
ers can just barely surmount, are the ones that produce the explosion 
of positive emotions that in game terms is called an epic win. 
In a gamiﬁed system, of course, there probably won’t be a “boss” 
villain waiting at the end of the line. Te equivalent is a major 
challenge that taxes players suﬃciently to feel a sense of pride when 
they reach the next plateau. 
Don’t neglect to incorporate some measure of randomness. As 
we noted at Level 4, people like surprises. Studies show that our 
brains prefer a small, random chance of a big reward to a certainty 
of a modest reward that over time averages out to a higher number. 
One only need look at the popularity of slot machines to conﬁrm 
this ﬁnding. Surprises, even small positive surprises, are the way to 
escape from what is known as the hedonic treadmill: the tendency 
to take each advance for granted and demand bigger and bigger 
Boss 
fight
Rest
Onboarding
Figure 5.3 
Progression Stairs
Boss 
fight
Boss 
fight
Rest
Levels

98     FOR THE WIN
rewards to stave oﬀ boredom. Games do this by sometimes giving 
you a totally unexpected bonus, or by having one treasure chest out 
of ten, say, stuﬀed with far more gold than the others. 
5. Don’t Forget the Fun!
Te last thing to do before you start implementing a gamiﬁed system 
is to take a step back and ask a simple question: Is it fun?
In piecing together game elements and attending to the com-
plexities of players, goals, rules, and motivation, it’s easy to lose sight 
of the fun aspect. We see this ofen with our students in their gamiﬁca-
tion projects: they get too wrapped up in the details. Gamiﬁcation 
done right is serious business, afer all. Yet fun should never be far 
from your mind. If users perceive the gamiﬁed system as fun, they are 
likely to come back. It behooves you to constantly assess the aesthetic 
appeal of your system and consider whether it’s fun to play.
Ask yourself the following question: Would players participate 
in your system voluntarily? If there weren’t any extrinsic rewards 
oﬀered, would they still be likely to play? If the answer is no, then 
you should think about what might make your system more fun.
Tere are many dimensions to fun. Nicole Lazzaro, a game 
designer and consultant who is an expert on the emotional aspects of 
games, found four distinct kinds of fun in studying a group of game 
players. “Hard fun” is a challenge or puzzle, which is fun because of 
the pleasure of overcoming it. “Easy fun” is casual enjoyment, a way of 
blowing oﬀ steam without overly taxing yourself. Te third category, 
which Lazzaro calls “altered states,” we’ll call experimental fun. It’s 
the enjoyment of trying out new personas and new experiences. 
Finally, what Lazzaro calls “the people factor” is essentially social 
fun: the kinds of fun that depend on interaction with others, even 
if competitive. Other game designers, notably Marc LeBlanc, oﬀer 
their own descriptions of the dimensions of fun, involving features 
like games as make-believe or games as a means of discovering new 
territory.

GAME CHANGER: SIX STEPS TO GAMIFICATION     99
What kinds of fun your gamiﬁed system should provide will 
depend on the context. As with player types, don’t assume that 
everyone will want the same type of fun or that participants won’t 
change. Te best games oﬀer a broad spectrum of fun. Maybe you’re 
normally attracted to hard-core challenges, but today you just want 
to blow oﬀ steam with your friends. Ideally, a gamiﬁed system should 
be ﬂexible in the same way. 
How do you know, though, if a system will actually be fun? For a 
never-fail answer to that question, you’ll need to buy our next book, 
available for a modest fee . . . 
Tat’s a joke. It’s intended to make a point: Fun isn’t always easy 
to predict. If it were, game publishers wouldn’t spend tens of millions 
of dollars building games that fail. Fun is an emergent, contingent 
property that can be ﬁendishly hard to pin down. Te best way to tell 
if your system is fun is to build it and test it and reﬁne it through a 
rigorous design process. 
6. Deploy the Appropriate Tools for the Job
Finally, we reach the implementation stage. Tis is where most 
descriptions of gamiﬁcation start: picking the appropriate mechanics 
and components and coding them into your systems. If you’ve 
been following us through the levels, you’ll see that there is a lot to 
understand before you start adopting points, badges, and the like. If 
you’ve gone through the design steps in this level, you’ll be working 
from a roadmap rather than merely picking elements out of a hat. 
You’ll know your purpose and your users. Te engagement loops 
you created in the previous step should give you the skeleton of your 
system. Te deployment stage is where you need to pull together the 
overall experience for your players. 
Tis shouldn’t be hard to do in practice, although it’s hard to 
describe the process for every case. As you build your system, you’ll 
see features that emerge from the ﬁve Ds that you’ve already analyzed, 
and the overall design will come clear. At each stage you’ll have 

100     FOR THE WIN
to make decisions about what to include and exclude. But that’s 
great. Te alternative is to try to build something shiny and cool and 
then ﬁnd yourself wondering why it never actually worked. So you’ll 
need to test, and iterate, and learn as you go. Find people playing 
at games like yours, and ask yourself why. Go back to your project 
and reﬁne it.
To do gamiﬁcation well, you’ll need a team with a variety of skills. 
Tis is not to say that a single person can’t implement an eﬀective 
system—in a startup, for example—but they will need expertise in 
more than one area. You will need:
 
•  People who understand the business goals of the project; the 
best game designers in the world may produce something 
useless if they aren’t tethered to the desired strategic 
objectives
 
•  An understanding of your target group of players and the 
basics of psychology, which were explained at Level 3
 
•  Game designers, or people who can function like them 
 
•  Analytics experts able to make sense of the data your  
gamiﬁed systems generates
 
•  Technologists able to implement your vision
Gamiﬁcation doesn’t require technology, any more than games 
do. However, it lends itself perfectly to online systems. Te details of 
sofware interfaces and development environments are well beyond 
the scope of this book, because they change so fast and because there 
are so many ways to implement a system. In broad brush, though, 
you’re going to need a way to track interactions with game elements 
and integrate those results with your existing business systems. 
Some or all of these functions may be delivered by an outside 
consulting ﬁrm or service provider. Tere are already companies 

GAME CHANGER: SIX STEPS TO GAMIFICATION     101
that have signiﬁcant experience and that specialize in implementing 
gamiﬁed systems for organizations. 
Tere are two basic options for the technical implementation of 
gamiﬁed systems. You can build custom implementations yourself 
or use one of the sofware-as-a-service oﬀerings. A growing number 
of startups, including Bunchball, Badgeville, BigDoor, Gigya, and 
iActionable, oﬀer white-label gamiﬁcation engines to generate 
and monitor your system. Tere are also providers such as Keas, 
Objective Logistics, Salesforce Rypple, and Practically Green, all 
mentioned earlier, that deliver packaged gamiﬁcation solutions 
for particular vertical markets. Te build vs. buy decision here 
is similar to others in web development and social media. If you 
choose to go with a service provider, look for one that understands 
the psychological nuances of gamiﬁcation. Te basic functionality 
isn’t that complicated; the value-add from these providers comes 
from the consulting, customization, and analytics that enable you to 
optimize your system. 
Conclusions (and Beginnings)
If you follow the design process, there is every chance that you will 
produce an interesting gamiﬁcation implementation. But there 
are no guarantees that it will work. Even thoughtful, smart, and 
experienced developers have to be ﬂexible. 
Lif is a startup incubated by Evan Williams and Biz Stone, 
founders of the popular social media tool Twitter, and led by 
Tony Stubblebine, who previously founded CrowdVine, a social 
networking tool for events. Lif allows users to group around personal 
goals—losing weight, learning a language, raising money for charity. 
When Stubblebine and his collaborators ﬁrst designed and coded 
Lif, they went through the design process and included a range of 
established gamiﬁcation techniques such as we saw in the last level. 
Tey thought that this approach would be perfect to encourage 
users to meet their highest potential. Lif is about helping users track 

102     FOR THE WIN
progress to any goal, afer all; you would think that adding points 
and badges would be perfect to motivate users toward their goals.
 
But they quickly discovered that these elements created all 
manner of problems: Tey straightjacketed users into a way of 
thinking that they didn’t like, they were unnecessarily complex, 
they caused tracking and programming problems, and so on. So 
Lif jettisoned these elements, went back to the drawing board, and 
came up with diﬀerent elements—including a simple “props” button 
to provide encouragement, and feedback loops based on nothing 
more complicated than a personal history showing how the user did 
on a weekly or monthly basis. Tough Lif is still in its early stages, 
it’s clear that these new design choices suit the overall aims of the 
business better than their initial reliance on established gamiﬁcation 
approaches.
 
Tis shouldn’t be seen as a failure of gamiﬁcation or of the 
design process. Design is an iterative process, and one that is learned 
by experience. Te trick, then, is to go out there and practice. Start 
building gamiﬁed processes and see how they work. Playtest the 
design to see what might work and then see what actually does work. 
Build analytics into your system, change a few things, and see what 
helps move the needle. Interview your players and see what they 
liked and didn’t like. Go back to the drawing board and start again. 
Tere’s no shortcut for testing and iteration if you really care about 
producing a successful gamiﬁed system.

103
Epic Fails  
And How to Avoid Tem
A
t our 2011 inaugural gamiﬁcation symposium, For the Win, at 
Wharton, we invited Ian Bogost to be the ﬁrst speaker. Bogost 
is a game designer and theorist at Georgia Tech, author of books 
such as Persuasive Games and How to Do Tings with Videogames 
as well as numerous published games. He’s also a leading critic of 
gamiﬁcation. 
Bogost’s talk was somewhat provocatively titled “Gamiﬁcation Is 
Bullshit.” He argued that the practice was “invented by consultants 
as a means to capture the wild, coveted beast that is videogames 
and to domesticate it.” In other words, gamiﬁcation is all marketing 
hype that even the marketers don’t believe. Even worse, he claimed, 
gamiﬁcation can be employed for purposes that are not in the best 
interests of players. 
Epic Fail: Complete and total failure when success 
should have been reasonably easy to attain.
—Te Urban Dictionary
You’ve successfully navigated all the basic levels, but there’s one more 
challenge that can’t be ignored. Tis level is about avoiding traps and 
dangers. Here we’ll level up by learning what not to do. We’ll talk about:
 
• Legal and ethical problems
 
• How to avoid the lure of “pointsification” 
 
• The dangers of gamification 
LEVEL 6

104     FOR THE WIN
Bogost had earlier created a social game called Cow Clicker, where 
players clicked endlessly on the image of a cow to accumulate virtual 
cash (called “mooney”), or paid real money in order to accumulate 
points and upgrade their cow. Tere was no objective other than to 
satirize gamiﬁcation. Bogost thought that people would play once or 
twice, get the point, and move on. Even he was surprised when Cow 
Clicker went viral and tens of thousands of people became obsessed 
with their cow clicking; even people who should “know better.” A 
computer science professor topped the leaderboard at one point 
with more than 100,000 mooney, the result of many hours of clicks. 
Tis is Kathy Sierra’s “high-fructose corn syrup of motivation” at 
work. Cow Clicker is (by design) gamiﬁcation at its worst: pointless 
yet addicting. It’s also a warning that serious businesspeople and 
other practitioners should take to heart. 
In this level, we give you a ﬁnal tier of advice and explain 
what not to do. Sometimes this will be about how to avoid making 
ineﬀective systems, but for the ﬁrst part of this level we’re going to ask 
whether you can make gamiﬁcation systems that are too eﬀective. If 
gamiﬁcation overemphasizes points and reward systems, as in Cow 
Clicker, it can replace the richness of games with shallow interactions 
that are ultimately self-defeating. Also, we’ll talk about how to avoid 
legal and regulatory problems. Ten we’ll discuss how, if you’re not 
truly acting in the interests of your players, your system can also 
raise ethical concerns. Finally, what happens when your players turn 
the tables on you and game your game?

EPIC FAILS: AND HOW TO AVOID THEM     105
Figure 6.1 
Cow Clicker
Pointsiﬁcation
Te easiest way to miss the potential of gamiﬁcation is to focus 
too heavily on the rewards and not enough on the appeal of the 
experience. Tis problem can be seen in the unthinking assumption 
that any business process can be gamiﬁed and improved simply by 
adding points to it, and motivating users to engage with the system 
just for the love of collecting points. Hence the name for the criticism: 
pointsiﬁcation.
As you learned at Level 4, there’s nothing wrong with using 
points, badges, and leaderboards, or PBLs, in gamiﬁcation. Tere’s 
nothing especially right about it, either. Tose three elements are the 
most common components of gamiﬁcation implementations, to the 
point where many people think that PBLs are all that gamiﬁcation is. 
If the description of your gamiﬁed system starts and ends with these 
three items, chances are you haven’t thought it through.
British game developer Margaret Robertson put it well in a 
much-discussed June 2010 post on her blog, Hide&Seek:

106     FOR THE WIN
What we’re currently terming gamiﬁcation is in fact the process of 
taking the thing that is least essential to games and representing 
it as the core of the experience. Points and badges have no closer 
a relationship to games than they do to websites and ﬁtness 
apps and loyalty cards. . . . Tey are the least important bit of a 
game, the bit that has the least to do with all of the rich cognitive, 
emotional and social drivers which gamiﬁers are intending to 
connect with. 
Pointsiﬁcation creates challenges that may require time and 
eﬀort, but these aren’t inherently interesting. Tey aren’t likely to 
hold most players’ interest for long. A small number of players will 
enjoy it, just as a small number obsessively clicked on Cow Clicker; 
but not many will. Adding rewards to the points can make the 
engagement more enduring, but as long as the rewards themselves 
are the motivating goal, they will be extrinsic motivators. We showed 
at Level 3 how limited and even counterproductive that approach 
can be. You can have extrinsic rewards in your gamiﬁed system, but 
understand what those rewards can and can’t do. Always look for 
ways to replace them with intrinsically enjoyable experiences. 
Recall that a high percentage of existing gamiﬁcation examples 
are gloriﬁed loyalty programs. Te loyalty industry is largely ignorant 
of the potential of fun. Tink about your frequent ﬂyer program for 
a minute. Does it feel game-like at all? Is there any social aspect of 
the process? Any competitive or cooperative game dynamic? Most 
loyalty programs are about extrinsic rewards: nothing more, nothing 
less. Tey aren’t designed to be enjoyable in and of themselves. And 
the obscurity of the exchange rate for rewards can ultimately be 
frustrating for users. Hence the massive ﬂoat of unused loyalty points.
To the extent loyalty programs activate intrinsic motivators, they 
generally focus on status. United Airlines’ 1K ﬂyers and owners of 
the American Express Black Card get special perks for their exalted 
loyalty program status, but the real beneﬁt is that exalted status itself. 
For customers who place high importance on status, that’s a big deal. 

EPIC FAILS: AND HOW TO AVOID THEM     107
Status as a motivator is self-limiting, however, because it doesn’t 
work on everybody, and it taps out as a motivator when too many 
people can reach the high echelons. And at the end of the day, if the 
actual value delivered isn’t suﬃcient, status will be a cold comfort. 
High-tier frequent ﬂyer members will no longer get excited about 
“automatic upgrades” when they realize ﬁrst class is always sold out. 
To take advantage of the full potential of gamiﬁcation, loyalty 
programs should be incorporated into more comprehensive designs. 
Jazzing up rewards with badges and leaderboards isn’t enough. 
Today’s consumers have seen so many point systems that they’re 
more likely to be weary than amused when they come across another 
one. Te way to avoid this fate is to create challenges that players ﬁnd 
intrinsically motivating. Imagine a loyalty program that allowed you 
to go on quests: collect miles from ﬂights to three diﬀerent countries 
and receive bonus miles or a token of achievement. Imagine one 
that allowed you to work toward a challenge with family members, 
friends, or colleagues and which was linked to a social media site 
that allowed you to coordinate your activities and brag about what 
you were doing. Or one that placed you on teams to compete against 
others to amass points for your favorite charity. And so on. 
Of course there are good reasons why frequent ﬂyer programs 
are only about points. Tey’re cheap and easy, and the executives 
involved may not want to encourage more engagement with their 
programs. (Although now that we put it that way, it does seem 
odd that loyalty programs are so ﬂat and uninteresting, doesn’t it?) 
We’re not criticizing loyalty programs. We want to show that even 
something as points-based as a loyalty program doesn’t have to fall 
into the trap of pointsiﬁcation.
Our observation here reinforces what we’ve said throughout 
the book: Don’t think of gamiﬁcation as a cheap marketing trick; 
think of it as a deep and subtle engagement technique. A substantial 
percentage of the gamiﬁcation examples in the wild today are just 
pointsiﬁcation. You can do better. 

108     FOR THE WIN
Legal Issues
Another way your gamiﬁed system may fail is by running afoul 
of legal or regulatory limits. You may not have considered this 
possibility because there is no body of “gamiﬁcation law” as such in 
any legal system in the world. Ignoring legal constraints, however, is 
a serious mistake.
Your gamiﬁcation project may run into a variety of legal 
problems. Some are common for social media and other Web 2.0 
services, such as the treatment of personally identiﬁable information 
about your users. A few, though, are unique to gamiﬁcation. No 
project will run into all these issues, because they depend heavily 
on the nature of the implementation. For example, labor law applies 
when the subjects of your system are your employees, while data 
privacy law applies primarily to customers. Tere is also signiﬁcant 
variation in the law depending on where you’re implementing the 
system. Intellectual property protection is generally tighter in the 
United States, for example, while labor and advertising rules are 
stricter in Europe. 
If you think your gamiﬁed service might raise legal concerns, 
talk to a lawyer. We’re not just saying that because both of the 
authors have law degrees. Legal experts can advise you on the 
speciﬁc considerations for your particular situation. If they do their 
job properly, they’ll help you understand how much risk you’re 
undertaking and how you could mitigate that risk. 
As a practical matter, the way you’ll deal with most of these 
concerns is through your terms of service. Te terms of service 
agreement is the digital contract between the operator and users of an 
online service. You’ve agreed to dozens of them, whether you realize 
it or not. Virtually every time you register for a web-based service  
or e-commerce site, there will be a link next to the conﬁrmation 
button for the terms of service. Behind that link is usually an 
exten-sive contract detailing the legal obligations that customers  
undertake. 

EPIC FAILS: AND HOW TO AVOID THEM     109
As a general rule, such “clickwrap” agreements are legally 
binding. Users only need to receive notiﬁcation that they are 
agreeing to a contract and a reasonable opportunity to access the 
full text, even if they don’t actually read it. Tere are some things 
the courts won’t allow you to put into a clickwrap terms of service 
agreement, but you have a great deal of leeway to anticipate potential 
legal complications.
Privacy
Privacy is one of the most controversial and uncertain areas of the 
law for online services. In many countries outside the United States, 
there are strong data privacy requirements on the books. Businesses 
ofen must receive aﬃrmative opt-in consent before collecting any 
personally identiﬁable information from users, in addition to other 
restrictions, such as providing the opportunity for users to review 
and edit information. Te United States tends to be more lenient 
than other countries, but that may be changing. 
Your gamiﬁed system can collect a great deal of information 
about players. As we’ve discussed, every activity can be tracked. 
Tat information can be cross-referenced with other data you have, 
such as the user’s prior transaction history, age, and address. Or you 
might use gamiﬁcation to incentivize users to ﬁll out a survey that 
provides more detailed information about themselves. Make sure 
you can articulate exactly what personally identiﬁable information 
you collect from users, why you collect it, and what you do with it. If 
you’re operating in or sending data to a jurisdiction such as Europe 
or Canada with more restrictive data privacy rules, you’ll need to 
ensure that your practices comply. Tis is also true in the United 
States if you’re dealing with sensitive categories of information, such 
as medical or ﬁnancial data, or data collected about children.
Aside from understanding speciﬁc laws regulating the collection 
and use of personally identifying information, any designer of a 
gamiﬁed service should produce a privacy policy for it. Your privacy 

110     FOR THE WIN
policy functions similarly to your terms of service agreement. It’s 
your representation to your users about what data you will collect, 
what you’ll do with it, and related practices. You’re legally obligated 
to adhere to your privacy policy, but under US law, the policy can 
be quite permissive. You should keep in mind, however, that public 
opinion may be more restrictive. Your goal is for your users to enjoy 
your service, afer all, not to anger them. Sometimes the court of 
public opinion is the strongest court of all.
Finally, good data protection practices also include data security. 
Te last thing you want is for personal data to leak or be stolen, 
outraging your users. 
Intellectual Property
Intellectual property is the body of law granting exclusive legal rights 
for intellectual assets. Your gamiﬁed system may well involve all four 
major forms of intellectual property: copyright, trademarks, patents, 
and trade secrets. You’ll want to make sure you’re taking suﬃcient 
steps to protect any unique assets you’re creating. Sometimes this will 
involve expense, such as ﬁling a patent application for your gamiﬁed 
invention. In the case of copyright and trade secrets, and to a lesser 
extent trademark, protection will usually happen automatically 
through your commercial activity and normal business practices. 
From a defensive standpoint, take care not to infringe on the 
intellectual property of others. In most cases that will be easy to 
avoid. For example, if you like the badge designs on another gamiﬁed 
site, you can’t simply copy them and use them yourself, unless the 
creator authorizes it. Te area that is likely to involve the greatest 
legal risk here is from patents. In the United States, both sofware 
and business methods are patentable. Tere have been a number of 
cases in which holders of questionable patents were able to recoup 
substantial damages from companies that independently developed 
similar ideas. Gamiﬁcation is too new to be the subject of signiﬁcant 

EPIC FAILS: AND HOW TO AVOID THEM     111
patent battles, but it’s only a matter of time. We would be very 
surprised if there haven’t been many patent applications already ﬁled 
over gamiﬁcation inventions; and the future will see many ﬁghts over 
their validity and use.
Property Rights in Virtual Assets
If the assets in your gamiﬁed system are valuable in some way, who 
owns them? You? Or the players who accumulate them? Tis question 
is separate from the intellectual property considerations about your 
creative activities. If users owned their points or achievement titles, 
they would have rights. Tey might be able to resell them or prohibit 
you from, for example, deciding that henceforth it will take 10,000 
points instead of 5,000 to reach the “guru” level. 
Tis issue emerged with virtual worlds such as Second Life, 
which allowed their users to create virtual assets like buildings and 
clothing. Generally, courts have found that such assets are merely 
contractual licenses from the game developers, which do not confer 
property rights on the users. Be sure your terms of service are clear 
on this point. 
Sweepstakes and Gambling
Tere are laws in many jurisdictions regulating sweepstakes, 
gambling, and related activities. Tese come into play when you 
are oﬀering prizes of some appreciable monetary value. Depending 
on the circumstances, your gamiﬁed service might be considered a 
sweepstakes, a lottery, gambling, or a contest. All are signiﬁcantly 
regulated but in diﬀerent ways. If the rewards you’re oﬀering are of 
no actual value, such as a badge or an achievement within the game 
itself, these rules don’t come into play. Similarly, if you’re oﬀering 
your own service as a reward, such as a free cup of coﬀee to the 
“mayor” of a Starbucks on Foursquare, the sweepstakes rules usually 
don’t apply. 

112     FOR THE WIN
Deceptive Practices
If your business model is based on fooling users, you’re going to 
run into the various legal rules prohibiting business fraud. Tis is 
as true if you’re giving out virtual badges as if you’re selling stock. 
Te question of deceptive practices can be more complicated for 
gamiﬁcation, though, because of the psychological aspects of 
motivation. What if players are engaged in something because it’s 
fun, but your company ﬁnancially beneﬁts from their actions? 
Te basic rule is that users should not be deceived. If they are 
aware that Procter & Gamble is providing the gamiﬁed system as a 
promotion for one of its products, there’s nothing wrong with the 
fact that they are voluntarily providing marketing beneﬁts for the 
company. Furthermore, users should not be made to do something 
against their interest. For example, a gamiﬁed system that led users to 
choose higher credit card interest rates solely to receive nonﬁnancial 
virtual rewards would be problematic. 
Advertising
If the gamiﬁed system functions as advertising, there are rules about 
what actions are going to cause problems. Tese include a baseline 
prohibition on deception, similar to the previous topic. Beyond that, 
though, the speciﬁcs vary a great deal among jurisdictions. As with 
privacy law, the United States is signiﬁcantly more lenient than the 
rest of the world. 
Labor 
Generally, businesses have more leeway dealing with employees 
than with consumers, but employers still cannot deliberately deceive 
employees or force them to act against their own interests. At the 
extreme, a gamiﬁed system that was so addictive it created a compulsion 
among employees might raise concerns about involuntary servitude, 

EPIC FAILS: AND HOW TO AVOID THEM     113
although this would probably be more of an ethical concern than a 
legal one.
An employee can be required to play a game as part of his or 
her job, just like any other mandatory job responsibilities. And the 
employer can generally use performance in a game-like system 
as a criterion for promotion or ﬁring. Tis may not be the case in 
work environments subject to collective bargaining agreements, or 
in countries such as Germany where work rules must be deﬁned 
through structured labor-management processes.
Paid Endorsements
In the United States, the Federal Trade Commission has adopted 
guidelines requiring disclosure of paid endorsements through social 
media. Te rules were designed to deal with personal blogs that hid 
the fact their views about products were sponsored by the creators of 
those products. However, these guidelines are broad enough to cover 
gamiﬁcation. For example, if your service gives users points or other 
rewards for recommending your product to their friends on Twitter 
or Facebook, you might need to consider some disclosure. 
Virtual Currency Regulation
Virtual currencies add a signiﬁcant new dimension of legal risk 
because they connect to real money. Real currencies are heavily 
regulated throughout the world to prevent fraud, money laundering, 
currency manipulation, thef, and other problems. Certain activities 
involving currencies can only be undertaken by banks, which are 
subject to a plethora of regulations and restrictions. Accounting and 
taxation also come into play. Tis is not to say that it’s impossible 
to oﬀer a virtual currency. Virtual worlds such as Second Life and 
online games such as Eve Online have done so successfully, but only 
with careful attention to the legal considerations. Foursquare has also 
engaged in partnerships with companies such as American Express.

114     FOR THE WIN
Future Legal Issues
As gamiﬁcation becomes more common, we expect to see regulators 
and legislators become more involved. Inevitably, some company 
will use gamiﬁcation in a careless or malevolent way, giving rise to 
a scandal that provokes calls for legal responses. Equally inevitably, 
some of the proposed responses will be overreactions crafed by 
people who don’t understand gamiﬁcation. Te best you can do is 
to keep your eyes open for such developments. And most important, 
make sure the subject of the scandal isn’t you. 
Te ﬁnal point to make about legal rules is that you should view 
them as a ﬂoor rather than as a ceiling. Tis is a fast-changing area, 
so a borderline practice that seems legally permissible today may 
be prohibited tomorrow. Moreover, compliance with the law isn’t 
always enough to keep you out of trouble. Ethical and reputational 
considerations extend above and beyond what law may require. We 
turn to them next.
Exploitationware
Laundry workers at Disneyland hotels in Anaheim, California, 
have a name for the leaderboard system the company installed in 
2011: “the electronic whip.” Large ﬂat-panel monitors in laundry 
rooms show employees how quickly they fulﬁll their tasks and how 
their speed compares to co-workers’. Te system has certainly had 
an eﬀect. Relationships between workers are increasingly tense as 
the work environment becomes more competitive. Some are even 
skipping bathroom breaks to bump up their numbers. Tose low in 
the rankings worry about their job security. 
Perhaps this is what Disney intended. Constant quantitative 
performance monitoring isn’t new, for these hotel laundry workers or 
for many employees in structured, routine jobs. Public leaderboards 
are just a logical next step. Te Disney system isn’t a full-blown 
gamiﬁcation implementation, since it only uses the rankings inherent 
in a leaderboard. But badges, avatars, and achievements can’t be far 

EPIC FAILS: AND HOW TO AVOID THEM     115
behind, can they? Whether the eﬃciency gains of the electronic whip 
exceed the costs in worker dissatisfaction is a question only Disney 
can answer. In evaluating your gamiﬁcation initiatives, it needs to be 
a consideration. 
Te Disney example isn’t atypical. Research has shown that 
leaderboards alone in the workplace are generally demotivating, 
especially for women. In some contexts, such as sales, contests may 
be so pervasive that the eﬀects are less signiﬁcant, but they still 
show up. Te problem isn’t leaderboards per se. Te real issue is any 
motivational techniques that operate through fear rather than fun. 
Any athlete who’s had butterﬂies before a big game knows that games 
can bring out unpleasant emotions along with the positive ones. 
At one level, this discussion is a microcosm of normal HR 
considerations. Tere has been plenty of analysis on the best ways 
to motivate employees, and there are many diﬀerent models that 
one could point to. However, because gamiﬁcation is a form of 
motivational design, it puts a ﬁner point on considerations of 
employee empowerment and enjoyment. You can use gamiﬁcation, 
as Disney did, to control employees more tightly and push them more 
aggressively. But that forgoes all the beneﬁts of intrinsic motivation. 
In the end it’s important to remember that gamiﬁcation works over 
the long run by making things more enjoyable rather than more 
stressful.
Back at Level 2, we explained that games are deﬁned, in part, 
by voluntariness. If your employer orders you to play ping-pong 
and declares that your salary will be directly proportional to your 
score, you’re not really playing a game. You may go through the same 
motions as your opponent, who plays by choice, but your experience 
is very diﬀerent. If employers force gamiﬁcation on their workers, it 
can undermine the motivational beneﬁts of the activity. When the 
system is designed well, compulsion shouldn’t be necessary. LiveOps, 
the call-center outsourcer we proﬁled in Level 3, makes its gamiﬁed 
tools voluntary for its agents. Eighty percent of them choose to use 
them, and of those, 95% remain active.

116     FOR THE WIN
For external (consumer-facing) gamiﬁcation, users can always 
stop playing. Tere’s no threat of cutting salary or ﬁring held over 
their head. However, gamiﬁcation done well creates powerful 
motivational impulses. If participants feel they can’t stop, is 
gamiﬁcation eﬀectively a form of compulsion? Should it be treated 
like gambling or smoking, which are regulated because of their 
addictive potential? Ian Bogost argues that gamiﬁcation should 
instead be called “exploitationware,” because it exploits people to do 
things against their interests or beliefs. 
We wouldn’t go that far, but Bogost raises a legitimate concern. 
We don’t know how gamiﬁcation is going to be used in the future, and 
it may be employed for evil rather than for good. But in general we 
think the worry is overblown. At the beginning of modern advertising 
practice we saw a range of critiques about how advertising, especially 
television advertising, was taking away people’s free will and turning 
them into zombies. Tis moral panic culminated in widespread 
antipathy toward subliminal advertising, which was supposed to 
be able to convince you to do things—buy cigarettes, drink Coke—
through images and messages that you weren’t even aware of. Te 
eﬃcacy of subliminal advertising is now discredited, but the concern 
and anger over it lingers to this day.
Concerns about the antilibertarian possibilities of gamiﬁcation 
are similar to concerns over subliminal advertising. It’s true that 
games can be compelling. Every now and again there are calls 
for restricting the number of hours that kids can play massively 
multiplayer online games, and apocryphal stories of Asian kids who 
played so long that they collapsed and died from exhaustion. Not 
only are these stories overblown, they’re never going to be an issue 
for gamiﬁcation. It turns out that individual game mechanics such 
as we ﬁnd in gamiﬁcation are not so addictive that they need to be 
regulated. Te problem with gamiﬁcation is almost always that it’s 
not fun enough; not that it’s too much fun.

EPIC FAILS: AND HOW TO AVOID THEM     117
If they’re not dangerous, then why do people still feel uncom-
fortable when they hear about game elements being used in marketing 
or enterprise or social impact settings? In part, there is discomfort 
over the fact that something people enjoy could be used to proﬁt 
others. We think that everyone should be able to exercise free will 
and choose what he or she wants to do. Another consideration is the 
shock of the new: We are uncertain how we should feel about these 
sorts of things because we’ve never seen them before.
As the world becomes more familiar with gamiﬁcation, we’ll see 
that the dystopian nightmares are found only in our imaginations. 
However, there are some scenarios where special caution should 
be taken. For example, it is possible to use gamiﬁcation to mask 
objectionable activities. Imagine that you created a game wherein 
people matched security photos with mugshots, which turned out 
to be a way of tracking people without their consent. Deceiving 
people about your purposes, even if they ﬁnd the game fun, is both 
an ethical breach and likely to cause ongoing problems. Eventually 
people will ﬁnd out, and the public relations blowback will be severe.
Outside such special cases, we think that gamiﬁcation will come to 
be seen as one of many methods of regulating people’s behavior and 
will be subject to the natural limit that we always ﬁnd with these 
sorts of regulators. In the end, people will be themselves. And there’s 
only so much that you can do to inﬂuence that.
Tis leads to our ﬁnal cautionary note. Because sometimes users 
act in ways you don’t expect. 
Gaming the Game
A system that incorporates intrinsic motivation will produce a 
sense of autonomy or agency. Your players need to feel that, in some 
meaningful way, they are in control. By far the best way to inculcate 
this feeling is to give them control. Tat, however, creates its own 
challenges.

118     FOR THE WIN
Game designer and consultant Nicole Lazzaro of XEODesign 
gives the example of the toll system for the Bay Bridge in San 
Francisco. To encourage drivers to avoid rush hour, the toll goes 
down signiﬁcantly at night. Te problem with this incentive system 
is that it encourages some users to play it as a game. Some cars 
approaching the bridge close to the cut-oﬀ time for the lower toll 
pull oﬀ to the shoulder in order to wait. When enough cars do so 
suddenly, it creates a dangerous traﬃc situation that the designers of 
the dynamic pricing system didn’t anticipate. 
Users may ﬁnd it more enjoyable to play a game of their own 
choosing than the one you’ve laid out for them. Ofen this takes the 
form of exploration. Among the most popular pursuits in “open 
world” videogames such as Grand Tef Auto is to go oﬀ the roads 
(literally) and see what you can ﬁnd. But in any gamiﬁed system 
you should expect users to test the edges of your system to see what 
is there.
Te other thing players are likely to do is game the system. If the 
goals in the gamiﬁed system are interesting to the players, some of 
them will look for ways to cut corners. Tere are ofen many ways 
to do so that don’t necessarily amount to cheating. Te more the 
gamiﬁed system gives players options, the more likely they will ﬁnd 
opportunities that the designers never anticipated. 
Lloyds TSB Bank implemented an internal market for innovation 
ideas. It gave its employees a virtual currency, called Beanz, and asked 
them to submit and rate ideas. Te highest-ranked ideas were placed 
into a virtual stock market, allowing employees to “buy” and “sell” 
using their Beanz. Te Beanz could be cashed out for real money. 
Te Lloyds system worked exactly as designed . . . except that 
users acted in unanticipated ways. First, the virtual economy took 
oﬀ, to the point where there was hyperinﬂation that was so serious 
that the supply of Beanz was restricted. Ten players realized there 
was a way to improve their performance on the virtual stock market: 
insider trading. By aﬃliating with groups developing ideas, they 

EPIC FAILS: AND HOW TO AVOID THEM     119
were able to obtain better information than ordinary “investors” and 
cash in. 
James Gardner, who created the system for Lloyds and went on to 
develop similar gamiﬁed innovation markets at other organizations, 
says that initially his instinct was to stamp out the insider trading. But 
he quickly realized that this emergent behavior was a feature rather 
than a bug. Te goal of the whole process, afer all, was to encourage 
Lloyds employees to work together more eﬃciently and develop 
creative ideas for innovation. In gaming the idea market, employees 
were doing just that. Working together with the top innovators was 
the best way to win the game but also the best way to achieve the 
company’s ultimate goals for the project. (If the aim of the project 
was to stamp out insider trading, presumably the company would 
have had a diﬀerent view of the unintended behavior.)
As the Lloyds example demonstrates, users gaming the system 
can be both beneﬁcial and detrimental. Hyperinﬂation of virtual 
currency threatened to destroy the virtual marketplace, but insider 
trading actually enhanced it. Te sense of autonomy that users 
experienced when ﬁnding unplanned ways to exploit a gamiﬁed 
system also reinforced their intrinsic engagement. You need to 
be careful in some settings, such as if you are exchanging virtual 
currency for valuable goods, since this can encourage criminal 
behavior. But otherwise gaming the system is something to anticipate 
and encourage, not discourage. 
Always remember that your players are people, too. Tey 
won’t always act in the ways you expect them to. If gamiﬁcation 
were just a simple algorithm where input A generated output B, 
it wouldn’t produce particularly interesting results. Te whole reason 
to incorporate elements of play into business situations is because 
fun has a powerful pull that logic can’t match. For all the analytics 
and technical manifestations, that makes gamiﬁcation fundamentally 
human. Te most successful practitioners recognize that people 
like them, with all their talents and foibles, are on the other side of 
the screen.


121
Endgame  
In Conclusion
C
onsider the experience of Rochester Institute of Technology’s 
School of Interactive Games and Media, one of America’s top-
ranked game-design programs. In 2011 Professors Elizabeth Lawley, 
Andy Phelps, and Elouise Oyzon resolved to gamify their entire 
student experience. Te project—called Just Press Play—aims to 
overhaul how we motivate students in higher education. (We’re both 
on the advisory board.) 
Rather than redesigning their courses, the project team took a 
hard look at the things that students really need and what improves 
their learning outcomes. Tey discovered that students perform 
better when they know at least one professor to call on for advice; they 
are happier when they know their way around campus and around 
town; they do better when they know how to work in teams; and 
they do much better when they are connected with the community 
of learning within the entire school. Most of these things you can’t 
build into a curriculum; but you can do it with a game. 
To encourage them to get to know their professors, the Just Press 
Play team printed up collectible cards that students receive in person 
I think work is the world’s greatest fun. 
—Tomas Edison
You’ve made it to the ﬁnal level. Here we look back on what we’ve 
covered and forward to the future of gamiﬁcation.

122     FOR THE WIN
from a professor when they undertake a quest that the professor 
designates. One professor, David Simkins, has hidden his collectible 
cards in his oﬃce, and students have to engage him in conversation 
as they hunt around his books trying to ﬁnd their prize. Tey don’t 
even notice that they’re getting to know the professor. Tey just want 
the card.
Just Press Play also has achievements that students must perform 
as a team, not just as individuals, so that they learn how to work 
together. For years the faculty struggled to raise the pass rate on the 
freshman programming exam. Nothing they did seemed to make a 
diﬀerence. Just Press Play included a collective achievement that every 
ﬁrst-year student would receive . . . but only if over 90% of them passed 
the exam. 
Te designers hoped this would motivate students to work hard, 
and perhaps a few of the more talented ﬁrst years might give a hand 
to the less capable ones. What they didn’t anticipate was a number 
of the juniors and seniors showing up in the computer lab, asking 
freshmen if they needed help. Tere was no achievement available 
to the upper-level students. Tey were doing it not for a reward but 
because they thought the whole game was deeply cool, and they 
wanted to be a part of it. 
Lo and behold, the pass rate on the exam was the highest ever. 
Te freshmen got their badges. Te real rewards went far beyond 
that. In fact, the juniors and seniors enjoyed the peer-to-peer study 
sessions so much that they asked for permission to run similar 
groups every quarter. 
Just Press Play shows how you can use a game-like system to 
motivate behavior that is important but usually ignored. It is hard to 
teach teamwork within a normal undergraduate class, so we usually 
don’t bother to try. And no class that we’re aware of ever assesses 
a student on whether he or she can ﬁnd the oﬃce of a professor. 
But these things turn out to be vitally important to learning, and 
they can be built into a gamiﬁed environment. Te ﬂexibility of 

ENDGAME: IN CONCLUSION     123
gamiﬁcation allowed the RIT professors to identify what they 
wanted their freshmen to do—“Deﬁne your Business Objective” in 
our six Ds from Level 5—even though it wasn’t within the standard 
curriculum. And then they worked through the other levels that 
we’ve discussed and built a gamiﬁed system around that objective.
Not all gamiﬁcation eﬀorts are as compelling. Sometimes a 
project swings for the fences but, for whatever reason, misses the 
ball. An example is the Attent system from Seriosity, one of the 
earliest thoughtful eﬀorts to engage in internal gamiﬁcation. Attent 
uses a form of virtual currency, called “serios,” to encourage people 
to use email more eﬀectively. Serios are used within subscribing 
enterprises to send and read email, and heavy users of email can buy 
and sell serios like any virtual currency. Te idea seems like a sound 
one, since the resource constraints in virtual currencies are fun and 
powerful behavior regulators. 
Seriosity is a pioneering company led by brilliant Stanford 
researchers and experienced entrepreneurs. Yet its attempt to gamify 
email never really caught on with users. Implementing the virtual 
economy in Attent was problematic. At one point, a member of 
Seriosity’s advisory board said that he would only read his outside 
emails if serios came attached to messages. When numerous friends 
and colleagues said that they would never buy serios just to email 
him, he was forced to retract the statement.
Te point here is not to single out Seriosity. Even successful 
gamiﬁcation adopters experience bumps in the road or false turns. 
Seriosity was ahead of its time and may yet strike gold in applying 
game mechanics to email. More recently, a startup called Baydin 
launched Te Email Game, which rewards users with levels and points 
based on the speed with which they process their email. It claims 
good results, but the jury is still out when it comes to widespread 
adoption. Tese examples demonstrate that we’re still at the birth of 
serious gamiﬁcation. For every successful implementation like RIT’s 
Just Press Play, we’ll see ﬁve or ten attempts that will fall ﬂat or have 

124     FOR THE WIN
limited impact. Tat’s exactly what happened with social media (there 
were many Jaikus for every Twitter); and it’s what happened with 
e-commerce (there were multiple Webvans for every Amazon.com). 
Tis book has been about trying to extract as many lessons as 
possible from the gamiﬁcation state of art, so that your eﬀorts will be 
counted among the successful few. In this ﬁnal level it’s worthwhile 
looking back at the lessons we’ve learned and casting our gaze 
forward to see what the future of gamiﬁcation may look like.
Looking Back
What have we learned? 
First, while points, badges, and leaderboards may be important 
elements of some projects, gamiﬁcation is more than just drizzling 
these element onto a business process like caramel syrup on a sundae. 
Gamiﬁcation requires a great deal of thought about the entire design 
of the system, including understanding the nature of your users, 
thinking about what you’d like them to do and how best to make 
them do it, considering the best technology platform to do that, and 
examining the speciﬁc game elements you’re going to employ to get 
them to do things—among many other considerations.
Along the way we’ve also learned some very speciﬁc lessons about 
how to implement gamiﬁcation design. We’ve developed lessons in 
motivation and behavior modiﬁcation that work. We’ve sketched 
out ways of thinking about your users. We’ve discussed methods 
of connecting diﬀerent game elements, and when you should 
and should not use them. And we’ve seen numerous examples of 
successful and unsuccessful gamiﬁcation in a range of disciplines—
including your own, one hopes.
One of the most important lessons, however, has gone largely 
unstated. Our view is that businesspeople need to learn from games, 
but at the same time, game designers need to learn from business 
experts. Juho Hamari and Vili Lehdonvirta, two Finnish researchers, 
studied the way popular massively multiplayer online games from 

ENDGAME: IN CONCLUSION     125
around the world handled virtual goods. Tey found that their 
practice mirrored established marketing concepts, including 
segmentation, product diﬀerentiation, lifecycle management, and 
exploitation of cognitive biases. What’s interesting is that the game 
designers weren’t getting these ideas by talking to marketers in 
non-game industries. Tey were reinventing them in response to 
the behavior of their players. Te same story is playing out in the 
gamiﬁcation world.
Tis is where you, the readers of this book, come in. Te most 
successful new gamiﬁcation eﬀorts will come from people schooled 
in “traditional” areas of business, philanthropy, and government 
who take the lessons from this book and apply them to ﬁelds that 
they understand and know. Gamiﬁcation may be the next new thing, 
but its future will depend on linkages to established ﬁelds.
Looking Forward
What, then, of the future?
To some extent, we can expect more of the same, only bigger. 
We’ll be amazed if in a couple of years’ time any executive can get away 
with a sales and marketing plan that doesn’t consider gamiﬁcation in 
some form, just like online and social media today. We’ll see more 
innovative examples like the one that gamiﬁcation startup SCVNGR 
produced for Buﬀalo Wild Wings during the March Madness college 
basketball tournament. Users won free stuﬀ at the restaurant chain 
by completing challenges like stacking multiple burgers on end or 
taking photos with a fan of an opposing team. We’ll see challengers 
to Foursquare and other providers in retail marketing, who provide 
turnkey gamiﬁcation solutions and access to huge audiences 
through social media. Companies like Facebook and Zynga will buy 
gamiﬁcation providers and systems and will tie gamiﬁcation more 
explicitly to social media platforms.
We think that it’s likely we’ll start to see internal gamiﬁcation in 
many more business arenas, and that it will become more important 

126     FOR THE WIN
in enterprise situations. Imaginative executives will build it out into 
ﬁelds that we haven’t seen before and use it to increase productivity 
in most parts of business. We’ll probably see this happen ﬁrst in 
human resources and sales, where motivating staﬀ is already a well-
known process and is ripe for overhaul. But we’ll also see it in areas 
that we haven’t witnessed before: Just as Ross Smith transformed 
language localization of dialog boxes at Microsof, some enterprising 
executives will ﬁnd a way to transform parts of accounting, strategy, 
product design, and the like. 
We think gamiﬁcation will have a huge impact in government 
and politics, as well as in charitable, philanthropic, and social impact 
arenas. Tese arenas are ripe for gamiﬁcation because these activities 
are not primarily about money. Tey have typically used mechanisms 
like altruism or guilt to motivate supporters. It’s clear than fun can 
ﬁt into this framework quite neatly and supplement those motiva-
tors. We’ve already discussed some examples of behavior-change 
gamiﬁcation in social impact settings, and we’ll see many more in the 
near future. Te 2012 American Presidential campaign represents 
the ﬁrst time that gamiﬁcation was used extensively in the political 
process. It won’t be the last.
Beyond these basic observations, we can’t predict the future of 
gamiﬁcation. We are convinced it will become more mainstream 
in the coming years. In time the hype will die, replaced by the 
recognition that gamiﬁcation can deliver results. As long as the 
design is thought through properly, gamiﬁcation will work and will 
just be seen as part of the modern executive’s toolkit.
Eventually gamiﬁcation will be important to every part of 
business, even if it doesn’t transform all of them. 
If nothing else, it may make business more fun.

127
Acknowledgments
Tis book would not have been possible without the support and 
assistance of many people. 
Kevin would like to thank Justin Dunham, Roz Duﬀy, Karl 
Ulrich, Ethan Mollick, and Adam Werbach for their contributions to 
the project. And to Johanna, thanks for being there.
Dan would like to thank Naomi Allen, Stephanie Chichetti, 
Jill Raines, and Jennifer Williams for their excellent assistance and 
feedback.
We both express our sincere gratitude to Philip Beauregard, 
Adam Bosworth, Sebastian Deterding, Caryn Eﬀron, David Johnson, 
Amy Jo Kim, Liz Lawley, Greg Lastowka, Nicole Lazzaro, Tomas 
Malaby, Andy Phelps, J. P. Rangaswami, Jesse Redniss, Ross Smith, 
Kurt Squire, Susan Hunt Stevens, and Tony Stubblebine for 
thoughtful comments on the manuscript or insights in conversation. 
Steve Kobrin and Shannon Berning of Wharton Digital Press 
provided excellent editorial support and an opportunity to explore 
an innovative new form of publishing. Te members of the Terror 
Nova World of Warcraf guild showed us just how much fun games 
can be. Te participants in the 2011 For the Win symposium proved 
that even the experts are still making sense of this emerging ﬁeld. 
And the students in our inaugural gamiﬁcation course at Wharton 
were the best teachers we could possibly have.


Glossary
129
Advergames. Games built to promote products or services. 
Commonly used to increase activity or brand engagement on 
consumer-facing websites.
Avatar. A virtual representation of a player’s character in a game. 
Common in role-playing games in which the player might take on 
the role of a magical creature or a medieval warrior. 
Badge. A visual token of an achievement. Usually designed to look 
like the real-world analogs, such as Boy Scout badges or the Good 
Housekeeping Seal. 
Boss ﬁght. A diﬃcult ﬁght against a high-level opponent, called a 
boss. Ofen marks the end of a level or a section of a game.
Daily/monthly active users (DAUs/MAUs). Te number of 
individuals who visit your website on an average day or during the 
course of a month. Common metrics for social games. Te ratio of 
these numbers indicates the intensity of user activity; a DAU/MAU 
ratio of 50% would mean that half the users visit every day.
Engagement loop. Te basic cycle of activity in a game, from 
motivation to activity to feedback, which in turn motivates further 
actions. 
Epic fail. A major screw-up in a game, such as dying quickly in 
combat or falling oﬀ a ledge by accident. 

130     GLOSSARY
Epic win. A glorious victory in a game, usually stretching players 
to the limits of their abilities. Ofen connected to a boss ﬁght or 
ﬁnishing a game.
Extrinsic motivation. Doing something for a reason other than 
for its own sake. Tis could be money, status, power, some other 
reward you value, direction by your boss, beneﬁts for someone else 
you care about, and so on. 
Foursquare. A mobile social location application for smartphones, 
which encourages users to check in at their current location to ﬁnd 
information about the venue and other users who have done so. 
Game. A voluntary activity that operates within a “magic circle,” in 
which players follow the rules of the game rather than those of the 
real world. 
Game component. A particular structure in a game, implementing 
the game’s mechanics and dynamics. Points and badges are 
examples of game components. 
Game design. Te overall process of creating engaging games, 
based on an understanding of player desires, technological 
feasibility, and business objectives. Distinguished from the 
narrower term “game development,” which is the technical 
implementation of a game. 
Game dynamic. Te conceptual structures underlying a game, such 
as the narrative and rules (constraints) that shape the game. Tese 
are the most abstract game elements. Players feel their eﬀects but 
do not engage with them directly.

GLOSSARY     131
Game element. A design pattern that can be incorporated into a 
game. Game elements are the pieces that a game designer assembles 
in creating an engaging experience.
Game mechanics. Te processes that drive forward the action 
in a game, such as feedback or turns. Game mechanics are the 
actions that implement higher-level game dynamics and manifest 
themselves in lower-level game components. 
Game thinking. Te process of addressing problems like a 
game designer, by looking at how to motivate players and create 
engaging, fun experiences. Sometimes called “gameful thinking,” 
in contrast to unstructured “playful thinking.”
Games for change. Serious games created for some social beneﬁt, 
ranging from improving health and wellness to educating kids 
about the US political process. 
Gamiﬁcation. Te use of game elements and game thinking in 
non-game contexts.
Interest curve. Te pattern of gradually increasing diﬃculty in a 
game, structured to keep users interested at every stage. Typically, 
initial levels are easy and quick, to get players hooked, while end-
game levels are diﬃcult and long to provide suﬃcient challenges  
for experienced players.
Intrinsic motivation. Doing something for its own sake. People  
are intrinsically motivated if they engage in activity without any 
hope of an external reward. According to Self-Determination 
Teory, such activities evoke feelings of competence, autonomy, 
and relatedness.

132     GLOSSARY
Leaderboard. A ranked list of participants in a game, with the 
highest scores on top.
Loyalty program. A program to reward regular customers with 
beneﬁts in proportion to their level of activity. Airline frequent ﬂyer 
programs are the classic example. 
Magic circle. Te virtual or physical space where the rules of the 
game hold sway over those of the real world. Te concept was 
introduced by early twentieth-century Dutch philosopher Johan 
Huizinga.
Massively multiplayer online game (MMOG). Games such as 
World of Warcraf, in which thousands or even millions of players 
interact in the same online virtual world. Many such games 
involve role-playing in fantasy or science ﬁction settings and are 
sometimes called massively multiplayer online role-playing games 
(MMORPGs). 
Operant conditioning. A theory and process developed by 
psychologist B. F. Skinner in which behavior is modiﬁed by rewards 
(and, in some approaches, by punishment also). 
Play. An essentially unconstrained experience of spontaneous fun, 
contrasted with the structured rule-based systems of games.
Playtesting. Trying out a game with actual players as a way of 
garnering feedback. Playtesting can occur with rough versions of a 
game or even through the use of paper descriptions of gameplay.
Progression stairs. Te cycle of advancement through the levels 
or other steps in a game. Essentially, a more detailed version of the 
game’s interest curve, in which challenges are ofen followed by rest 
or consolidation periods along a generally upward trajectory.

GLOSSARY     133
Quest. A speciﬁc mission or challenge for players of a game. Te 
quest will usually have a narrative and an objective (“collect six 
Delicious Toadstools from the cave guarded by the Old Troll”) and 
a reward for completion.
Self-Determination Teory. A psychological theory developed 
by Edward Deci and Richard Ryan of the University of Rochester, 
along with many collaborators, which deﬁnes and emphasizes the 
importance of intrinsic motivation. 
Serious games. Games created for a purpose other than enjoyment, 
typically some form of knowledge or skill development. 
Social games. Online games delivered through social networks, 
primarily Facebook, ofen with a signiﬁcant element of social 
interaction. Te most successful social games developer is Zynga, 
publisher of FarmVille, Words With Friends, Maﬁa Wars, and  
Draw Something.
Social graph. Te network of relationships among friends, such as 
the matrix of connections on Facebook or other social networking 
sites. 
Variable reward schedule. A prize or reward delivered on 
some nonpredictable basis, such as the payoﬀ of a slot machine. 
Contrasted with ﬁxed interval rewards (guaranteed at regular time 
periods) or ﬁxed-ratio rewards (guaranteed for a certain amount of 
activity).
Virtual currency. A medium of exchange in a game, allowing 
players to purchase virtual goods or other beneﬁts.

134     GLOSSARY
Virtual economy. A functional market system in a game, typically 
including virtual currency and virtual goods that are subject at least 
in part to economic forces.
Virtual goods. Virtual items that have value or uniqueness within 
a game environment. Players may be able to purchase virtual goods 
with virtual currency, real money, or through achievements within 
the game. Also called virtual assets.
Virtual world. A persistent online community that allows for 
virtual interactions between players. Typically virtual worlds 
involve immersive 3D environments, although this is not essential. 
Most are online role-playing games, but some virtual worlds, such 
as Second Life, have no gameplay objectives.
Win state. Te outcomes of a game that constitute “winning.” 
Typically deﬁned by the rules of the game and the game’s feedback 
or rewards mechanisms.
World of Warcraf. Te most successful massively multiplayer 
online game, a fantasy role-playing world introduced in 2005 by 
Activision Blizzard. Also known as WoW, it peaked at 12 million 
paying users worldwide.

135
Additional Resources
If you are looking to go beyond this book, our website, www.gamifyforthewin.com, 
has additional information on gamiﬁcation and related concepts. 
Here are some references that you may ﬁnd valuable. Tese works are 
generally not about gamiﬁcation per se; they expand on relevant concepts that  
we introduce in this book.
Bogost, Ian. Persuasive Games: Te Expressive Power of Videogames. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 2007.
Castronova, Edward. Synthetic Worlds: Te Business and Culture of Online Games. 
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2005.
Deterding, Sebastian, Dan Dixon, Rilla Khaled, and Lennart Nacke. “From Game 
Design Elements to Gamefulness: Deﬁning Gamiﬁcation,” Proceedings of the 
15th International Academic MindTrek Conference: Envisioning Future Media 
Environments. City New York, NY: ACM Press, 2011.
Edery, David, and Ethan Mollick. Changing the Game: How Video Games Are 
Transforming the Future of Business. Upper Saddle River, NJ: FT Press, 2009.
Gee, James Paul. What Video Games Have to Teach Us About Learning and Literacy. 
New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan, 2003.
Koster, Raph. A Teory of Fun for Game Design. Scottsdale, AZ: Paraglyph Press, 
2005.
Lazzaro, Nicole. “Why We Play Games: Four Keys to More Emotion Without 
Story.” 2004. http://www.xeodesign.com/xeodesign_whyweplaygames.pdf.
McGonigal, Jane. Reality Is Broken: Why Games Make Us Better and How They  
Can Change the World. New York, NY: Penguin, 2011.
Pink, Daniel. Drive: The Surprising Truth About What Motivates Us. New York, NY: 
Riverhead, 2009.
Radoﬀ, Jon. Game On: Energize Your Business with Social Media Games. 
Indianapolis, IN: Wiley, 2011.

136     ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
Reeves, Byron, and J. Leighton Read. Total Engagement: Using Games and Virtual 
Worlds to Change the Way People Work and Businesses Compete. Boston, MA: 
Harvard Business School Publishing, 2009.
Rigby, Scott, and Richard Ryan. Glued to Games: How Video Games Draw Us  
In and Hold Us Spellbound. Santa Barbara, CA: Praeger, 2011.
Robertson, Margaret, “Can’t Play, Won’t Play,” Hide&Seek, http://www.
hideandseek.net/2010/10/06/cant-play-wont-play/, October 6, 2010.
Salen, Katie, and Eric Zimmerman. Rules of Play: Game Design Fundamentals. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2004.
Schell, Jesse. Te Art of Game Design: A Book of Lenses. Burlington, MA: Morgan 
Kaufmann, 2008.
Sheldon, Lee. Te Multiplayer Classroom: Designing Coursework as a Game. 
Boston, MA: Cengage Learning, 2012.
Squire, Kurt. Video Games and Learning: Teaching and Participatory Culture in  
the Digital Age. New York: Teachers College Press, 2011.
Tomas, Douglas, and John Seely Brown. A New Culture of Learning: Cultivating 
the Imagination for a World of Constant Change. CreateSpace, 2011.

Index
137
A
Aamodt, Sandra, 59
advertising issues, 112, 116
algorithmic modeling, 47
Amabile, Teresa, 59
Amazon.com, 124
American Express, 34, 106, 113
Angry Birds, 41
Apple, 42
Te Art of Game Design (Schell), 69
Attent system, 123
autonomy
games and, 38, 43, 46–47
Self Determination Teory (SDT),  
56–60
B
Badgeville, 77, 101
Bartle, Richard, 25, 92
Baydin, 123
A Beautiful Mind (ﬁlm), 25
behaviorism, 56
BigDoor, 79, 101
Bogost, Ian, 25, 103–4, 116
Bonaparte, Napoleon, 51
Bosworth, Adam, 23–24
Buﬀalo Wild Wings, 125
Bunchball, 77, 101
business objectives, 87–88
C
call-center work, 63, 68
Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 3, 59
Carse, James P., 38
checkers, 39
Civilization series, 38
Club Psych, 69–71, 73, 79, 81, 82–83
cognitive dissonance, 48
cognitivist theories, 56–58
colonoscopy, 62
components of games
 list of, 80–81
 points, badges, and leaderboards  
  (PBLs), 69–77
Cow Clicker, 104, 105, 106
credit card interest rates, 112
CrowdVine, 101
Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly, 58
customer retention, 22–23, 28, 41
D
data security issues, 110
deceptive practices, 112
Deci, Edward, 56, 67
Deloitte, 27
DevHub, 87–88
Disney leaderboard system, 114–15
Drive (Pink), 58
dynamics of games, 78–79
dystopian fears, 114–17
E
Edison, Tomas, 121
Einstein, Albert, 85
Electronic Arts, 29
Te Email Game, 123
employee motivation, 17–19, 21, 26, 
29, 33. See also motivation
endorsements and disclosures, 113
engagement loops, 94, 95
epic fails
 deﬁned, 103
 exploitation and dystopian fears,  
 114–17
 gaming the game, 117–19
 legal problems (See legal issues)
 pointsiﬁcation problem, 105–7
Eve Online, 113
evil intentions, 68
exploitationware, 114–17

138     INDEX
F
Facebook, 59, 65, 70, 94, 113, 125
failures. See epic fails
Federal Trade Commission (FTC), 113
feedback loops, 64–66, 94, 95
points providing, 73
Fitbit, 74, 75
Fitocracy, 51–53, 58, 77
football, 39
Foursquare, 113
Fourth Grade Slump, 61
frequent ﬂyer programs, 107
Fun Teory, 36, 37, 41
G
gambling issues, 111
games. See also gamiﬁcation
autonomy and, 38, 43, 46–47
components of games, 69–77, 80–81
deﬁnition of game, 37–40
dynamics of games, 78–79
elements of, 26–27, 32–34, 77–83
fun and, 36, 38
leveling up, 42
magic circle concept, 38–40
mechanics of games, 79–80
otherworldly dimension of, 38–40
players, 43
Self Determination Teory and, 59
thinking like a game designer, 37,  
40–43
voluntary nature of, 38
game theory, 25
gamiﬁcation, 8–15. See also games
activity cycles, 94–97
algorithms, modeling through, 47
assessing value for business  
challenges, 43–49
behavior-change gamiﬁcation,  
23–25, 46, 89–91
business objectives, deﬁning, 87–88,  
124–25
 checklist for utility of, 49–50
 conﬂicts with existing motivational  
  structures, 48
 crowding out fun, 60–62
 deﬁnition of, 25–30
 deployment of tools, 99–101
 dystopian fears, 114–17
 engagement enhanced, 30–32
 evil intentions, 68
 experimentation encouraged, 32–33
 exploitation, fears of, 114–17
 external gamiﬁcation, 22–23
 fun, importance of, 98–99
 future of, 125–26
 game-design techniques, 28–29
 game elements, 26–27, 32–34, 77–83
 history of, 25–26
 internal gamiﬁcation, 17, 18–21
 legal issues (See legal issues)
 lessons regarding motivation, 60–68
 loops of engagement, 94, 95
 meaningful, interesting choices  
  oﬀered, 46–47
 motivational values, 44, 45–46 
  (See also motivation)
 non-game contexts, 29–30
 players, description of, 91–94
 points, badges, and leaderboards  
  (PBLs), 69–77
 pointsiﬁcation problem, 105–7
 progression stairs, 94, 96–97
 randomness, 97
 seriousness of games, 30–32, 33–34
 specialized skills, 39–40
 steps for implementation of, 86–102
 student experience, of, 121–23
 target behaviors, 89–91
 technical implementation of, 99–101
 thinking like a game designer 
  (game thinking), 37, 40–43
 tools, appropriate, 99–101
gaming the game, 117–19

INDEX     139
Gardner, James, 119
Gee, James Paul, 25
Gigya, 101
Good Housekeeping Seal, 75–76
Google, 23
Grand Tef Auto, 39, 118
H
Hamari, Juho, 124–25
health and wellness choices, 23–25
Hide&Seek (blog), 105–6
hobbies, 57–58
Hollywood Squares (TV show), 15
Huizinga, Johan, 38–39
I
iActionable, 101
intellectual property issues, 110–11
J
Jaiku, 124
Just Press Play, 121–23
K
Keas, 23–24, 47, 101
Kim, Amy Jo, 25
Kohn, Alﬁe, 59, 60
Koster, Raph, 29
L
labor matters, 112–13
Language Quality Game, 18–21, 
26, 29, 33, 62, 77, 126
Lawley, Elizabeth, 121
Lazzaro, Nicole, 25, 98, 118
LeBlanc, Marc, 98
legal issues, 108–9
advertising, 112
data security, 110
deceptive practices, 112
future legal issues, 114
intellectual property, 110–11
 labor matters, 112–13
 paid endorsements, 113
 privacy, 109–10
 property rights in virtual assets, 111
 sweepstakes and gambling, 111
 virtual currency regulation, 113
Lehdonvirta, Vili, 124–25
leveling up, 42
Lif, 101–2
LiveOps, 63, 64, 68
Lloyds TSB Bank, 118–19
Lopez, Jennifer, 19
loyalty programs, 106–7
M
McDonald’s Restaurants, 33
McGonigal, Jane, 25
Madden Football, 9
magic circle concept, 38–40
massively multiplayer online games  
 (MMOGs), 34
Matthews, Clay, 39
mechanics of games, 79–80
Meier, Sid, 38
Microsof, 17, 34
 Language Quality game, 17–19, 
  21, 26, 29, 33, 62, 77, 126
Monopoly, 33, 43
motivation
 activities engaging, 45–46
 amotivated, 53
 badge system, 74–76
 behaviorism, 56
 boring made engaging, 62–64
 competence, relatedness, and  
  autonomy, 56–60
 conﬂicts in gamiﬁcation, 48
 continuum of extrinsic motivation,  
  67–68
 crowding out fun, 60–62
 employee motivation generally,  
  17–19, 21, 26, 29, 33

140     INDEX
evil intentions, 68
feedback loops, tuning of, 64–66
ﬁtness site, 51–53
intrinsic and extrinsic explained,  
53–55
introjected, identiﬁed, and   
integrated continuum of, 67–68
leaderboards, use of, 76–77
points, use of, 72–74
rules of, 56–60
Self-Determination Teory (SDT),  
56–60
N
Nike, 30, 34, 43
O
Objective Logistics, 46, 101
Oﬃce of Science and Technology  
Policy, 24–25
Oﬃce of the National Coordinator  
for Health Information Technology,  
24–25
Oyzon, Elouise, 121
P
paid endorsements, 113
Pavlov, Ivan, 56
Pelling, Nick, 25
Phelps, Andy, 121
piano staircase, 36, 37
pilots, 33
Pink, Daniel H., 58
players, 43, 91–94
points, badges, and leaderboards  
(PBLs), 69–77
pointsiﬁcation, 105–7
Practically Green, 46, 47, 101
privacy issues, 109–10
progression stairs, 94, 96–97
property rights in virtual assets, 111
Psych (TV program), 69–71
Punished by Rewards (Kohn), 60
Q
Quest to Learn (NYC public school), 33
R
randomness, 97
Record Searchlight (Redding, CA),  
 22–23, 28
Recyclebank, 48
Red Dead Redemption, 41
Reeves, Byron, 25
restaurant servers, 45–46
Robertson, Margaret, 105–6
Rochester Institute of Technology,  
 121–23
Ryan, Richard, 56, 67
Rypple, 65
S
Salesforce.com, 65
Salesforce Rypple, 101
Samsung, 34, 47
Sandler, Adam, 53, 54, 55
San Francisco Bay Bridge, 118
Sawyer, Ben, 25
Schell, Jesse, 69, 70
Schmidt, Eric, 17
Scrabble, 38, 41
Scully, John, 42
SCVNGR, 125
Second Life, 113
Self-Determination Teory (SDT),  
 56–60
Seriosity, 123
short-term beneﬁts, 7–8
Sierra, Kathy, 60
Simkins, David, 122
Te Sims, 42
Six Sigma, 9
Skinner, B.F., 56
Smith, Ross, 17–21, 29, 62, 126
Sony, 29
Stanford University, 123
Stone, Biz, 101

INDEX     141
Stubblebine, Tony, 101
subliminal advertising, 116
Sudoku, 59
surgeons, 33
sweepstakes issues, 111
T
Talens, Richard, 51–53
Target, 43
Texas Hold ‘Em, 41
3D simulation games, 33
trashcan in Sweden, 35–36, 41
Twitter, 103, 115, 124
2012 American Presidential 
campaign, 126
U
United Airlines, 59–60, 106
University of Essex, 25
The Urban Dictionary, 103
USA Network, 69–70
V
virtual currency regulation, 113
Volkswagen, 36
W
Wang, Brian, 51–53
Wang, Sam, 59
Webvan, 124
WhoWhatWhere (Deloitte 
 game element), 27
Williams, Evan, 101
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 33, 38
World of Warcraf, 8, 10, 12, 34,  
 46–47, 58, 92, 96
X
XEODesign, 118
Y
YouTube, 36
Z
Zynga, 10, 125


About the Authors
143
Kevin Werbach is a leading expert on the legal, business, and public 
policy aspects of the Network Age. He is an associate professor of 
Legal Studies at Te Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, 
and the founder of Supernova Group, a technology consulting ﬁrm. 
He co-led the review of the Federal Communications Commission 
for the Obama Administration’s Presidential Transition Team and 
served as an expert adviser on broadband issues to the FCC and the 
National Telecommunications and Information Administration. For 
nine years he organized Supernova, a leading executive technology 
conference. Werbach was previously the editor of “Release 1.0: 
Esther Dyson’s Monthly Report,” and served as Counsel for New 
Technology Policy at the FCC in the Clinton administration, where 
he helped develop the U.S. government’s Internet and e-commerce 
policies. He has written numerous scholarly and popular articles on a 
wide range of technology topics and appears frequently as an expert 
in print, online, and broadcast media. A graduate of UC–Berkeley 
and Harvard Law School, he is a fellow of the Global Institute for 
Communications, a director of Public Knowledge, an advisory 
council member for the Institute for the Future, and an editorial 
board member of Wharton Digital Press, Info, I/S, and the Journal 
of Information Policy. He blogs at http://werblog.com and tweets at 
@kwerb.
Dan Hunter is an expert in Internet law, intellectual property, and the 
application of games to public policy arenas. He is a professor of law 
at New York Law School and the director of the school’s Institute for 
Information Law & Policy. He is also an adjunct associate professor of 
legal studies at Te Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania. He 
previously taught law at the University of Melbourne, was a tenured 

144     ABOUT THE AUTHORS
professor at Te Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, and 
taught on the law faculty at Cambridge University. He regularly 
publishes on issues dealing with the intersection of computers and 
law, including papers dealing with the regulation of virtual worlds 
and video games, as well as high-technology aspects of intellectual 
property. He was one of the ﬁrst scholars to examine the social 
signiﬁcance of massively multiplayer online games, and cofounded 
the scholarly blog Terra Nova (terranova.blogs.com). Tis is his 
fourth book.

Wharton Digital Press was established to inspire bold, insightful 
thinking within the global business community. In the tradition of 
Te Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania and its online 
business journal, Knowledge@Wharton, Wharton Digital Press uses 
innovative digital technologies to help managers meet the challenges 
of today and tomorrow.
As an entrepreneurial publisher, Wharton Digital Press delivers 
relevant, accessible, conceptually sound, and empirically based 
business knowledge to readers wherever and whenever they need it. 
Its format ranges from ebooks and enhanced ebooks to mobile apps 
and print books available through print-on-demand technology. 
Directed to a general business audience, the Press’s areas of interest 
include management and strategy, innovation and entrepreneurship, 
ﬁnance and investment, leadership, marketing, operations, human 
resources, social responsibility, business-government relations, and 
more.
wdp.wharton.upenn.edu
About Wharton Digital Press

Te Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania—founded in 
1881 as the ﬁrst collegiate business school—is recognized globally for 
intellectual leadership and ongoing innovation across every major 
discipline of business education. Te most comprehensive source 
of business knowledge in the world, Wharton bridges research and 
practice through its broad engagement with the global business 
community. Te School has more than 4,800 undergraduate, MBA, 
executive MBA, and doctoral students; more than 9,000 annual 
participants in executive education programs; and an alumni 
network of 86,000 graduates.
www.wharton.upenn.edu
About Te Wharton School

