www.allitebooks.com

Force.com Development 
Blueprints
Design and develop real-world, cutting-edge 
cloud applications using the powerful Force.com 
development framework
Stephen Moss
BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI
www.allitebooks.com

Force.com Development Blueprints
Copyright © 2014 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in 
critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy 
of the information presented. However, the information contained in this book is 
sold without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the author, nor Packt 
Publishing, and its dealers and distributors will be held liable for any damages 
caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the 
companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. 
However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
First Published: May 2014
Production reference: 1140514
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Livery Place
35 Livery Street
Birmingham B3 2PB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-78217-245-1
www.packtpub.com
Cover Image by Tony Shi (shihe99@hotmail.com)
www.allitebooks.com

Credits
Author
Stephen Moss
Reviewers
Naveen Gabrani
Srikanth Goati
Aruna A Lambat
Caleb Poitevien
Karanraj Sankaranarayanan
Michael Edward Vargas Jr.
Commissioning Editor
Akram Hussain
Acquisition Editor
Owen Roberts
Content Development Editor
Govindan K
Technical Editors
Mrunal Chavan
Gaurav Thingalaya
Copy Editors
Sarag Chari
Mradula Hegde
Adithi Shetty
Project Coordinator
Venitha Cutinho
Proofreaders
Simran Bhogal
Amy Johnson
Samantha Lyon
Indexer
Mariammal Chettiyar
Graphics
Sheetal Aute
Production Coordinator
Saiprasad Kadam
Cover Work
Saiprasad Kadam
www.allitebooks.com

About the Author
Stephen Moss is a Salesforce.com-certified administrator and Force.com developer.
After his first brush with computing on Apple II, he was hooked to it and started 
programming on a Commodore 64 computer, back in the 1980s, to automate his 
math homework.
He has over 20 years' experience in the IT industry in a multitude of roles, ranging 
across application domains as diverse as CRM, GIS, manufacturing, broadcast 
engineering, billing, field services, IVR speech recognition, and call center 
management systems.
In addition to cloud computing, he also has a keen interest in the SOA/BPM systems 
(he is an Oracle BPM Suite Certified Implementation Specialist) and mobile device 
development (he even has an original PalmPilot in his attic somewhere!).
He is currently consulting with a range of clients, helping them embrace cloud 
computing and digitizing their businesses for the 21st century.
I dedicate this book to my mother and father, whose love and 
understanding made me into the person I am today (they also 
bought me my Commodore 64). I only wish they were here today 
to share this achievement with me. Wherever you are, this book is 
for you.
Also, I want to thank my wife and children for their understanding 
and patience in having a husband/father who worked during the 
day and lived in his study for the months it took to write this book. 
Finally, I want to thank my two sisters, their partners, and my nieces 
and nephews, who also had to put up with an "invisible" brother and 
uncle. Thank you all from the bottom of my heart.
www.allitebooks.com

About the Reviewers
Naveen Gabrani is a Force.com architect and the founder/CEO of a 
Salesforce consulting company, Astrea IT Services. Astrea is a leader in providing 
Salesforce.com services. Astrea has seven apps on AppExchange, such as Smart 
vCard, Astrea Clone, Smart Calendar, Print It, Format Me, Chatrules, and Object 
Hierarchy that were envisioned by Naveen. He has 20 years' experience in the IT 
Industry in various technical and management positions. Naveen is passionate 
about providing high-quality software deliveries that exceed customers' 
expectations, and building teams of motivated and happy members.
Srikanth Goati is a Salesforce-certified professional and the cofounder of Salesforce 
Hyderabad User Group. Currently, he is working as a Salesforce Administrator with 
Birlasoft India Pvt. Ltd., Bangalore, India. He is an MCA graduate from Hyderabad 
and has certificates in DEV401 and ADM201. Overall, he has four years' experience 
in developing and administering Salesforce.com. Birlasoft is a global IT services 
provider and part of the 150 year old, multibillion dollar CK Birla Group. With a global 
workforce of over 4,000 employees, Birlasoft has global footprints and best-in-class 
delivery centers in China and India.
Srikanth has reviewed Force.com Tips and Tricks, Packt Publishing. He can be contacted 
via e-mail at srikanth.sfa@gmail.com and followed on Twitter at @srikanthsfdc. 
He can be searched on LinkedIn using the name Srikanth Goati and on Facebook 
with /srikanth.goti.
I wish to thank my parents and all my family members, friends, 
and colleagues for all the joy they bring into my life. Thanks to 
my Salesforce community friends. Thanks to the folks at Packt 
Publishing, the author of this book, and many others who have 
provided help and inspiration along the way.
www.allitebooks.com

Aruna A Lambat is an enthusiastic architect working on Salesforce.com technology 
with a profound understanding of software design and development. She is passionate 
about building better products and providing excellent services, thereby leading to 
healthier customer satisfaction. She has been working on the Salesforce.com platform 
since 2008. She entered IT acquaintance as a student in 2004. She has completed her 
master's degree in Computer Applications from Maharashtra, India. She is associated 
with the IT industry since 2007. Having started her career as a Java developer, she has 
shifted her focus to cloud computing, specifically in Salesforce.com.
She is a Salesforce-certified developer (DEV401), administrator (ADM201), and 
advanced administrator (ADM301/211) along with her regular contribution to the 
Salesforce developer community. Also, she is certified in Java as a Sun Certificated 
Java Programmer (SCJP) and Sun Certified Web Component Developer (SCWCD).
Before contributing to this book as a reviewer, she worked as a technical reviewer for 
Force.com Tips and Tricks, Visualforce Development Cookbook, Visualforce Developer's Guide, 
and Salesforce CRM: The Definitive Admin Handbook. All these books were published by 
Packt Publishing. She has also contributed for a technical example cited in Force.com 
Developer Certification Handbook (DEV401), Packt Publishing.
Aruna works with a reputed India-based IT MNC; it is primarily engaged in providing 
a range of outsourcing services, business process outsourcing, and infrastructure 
services. She works as a project manager on Salesforce.com technology-based 
customer services. She can be contacted via e-mail at Aruna.Lambat@gmail.com 
and on LinkedIn using the name Aruna Lambat. She can be contacted via Twitter 
at @arunalambat and on Facebook with /aruna.lambat.
Special thanks to my parents, Mrs. and Mr. Anandrao Lambat, 
for always being there with me, their immense help and support, 
and guiding me through each and every step of making the book 
reviewing process enlightened.
www.allitebooks.com

Caleb Poitevien is an analytic philosopher with a deep passion for continual 
improvement. He has grown due to diverse experiences ranging from eight years 
in financial operations to over 12 years in IT in enterprise application development 
based on Java and Salesforce. He has been consulting for XM Satellite Radio, Motorola, 
Level3 Communications, Quick Loans, MTS, NBTY, Apple, and currently Tata 
Consultancy Services. Caleb lives by Colin Powell's quote:
Excellence is not an exception, it is a prevailing attitude.
Karanraj Sankaranarayanan, who likes to go by Karan, is a certified 
Salesforce.com developer and works as a Salesforce consultant at HCL Technologies. 
Karan holds a bachelor's degree in Engineering from Anna University with a 
specialization in Computer Science. He has more than three years' experience 
in the Salesforce platform and IT industry. He is passionate about the Salesforce 
platform and is an active member/contributor of the Salesforce customer 
community/developer forum. He writes technical blogs too.
He is also the leader of Chennai Salesforce Platform Developer User Group 
based in Chennai, India. He is one of the reviewers of Force.com Tips and Tricks 
and Visualforce Development Cookbook, both by Packt Publishing. He can be 
reached via Twitter (@karanrajs) and through the Salesforce community 
at https://success.salesforce.com/profile?u=00530000004fXkCAAU.
www.allitebooks.com

Michael Edward Vargas Jr. is an American software engineer and entrepreneur 
who is best known for his ongoing involvement in the development of federal and 
private enterprise application systems using the best of breed technologies. He is 
currently a member of the Java User Group in Miami. In addition, he is a huge fan 
of Douglas Crockford and John Resig for their involvement with the JavaScript 
community. On his mornings, nights, and sometimes weekends, he is passionately 
devoted to the discipline of software engineering. Originally, he started out in the 
field working at Motorola and has gone on to contribute to organizations such as 
ADT Security Services, Interval International, and Engility Corporation.
I'd like to acknowledge all of the publishers, editors, authors, 
colleagues, friends, and family for the development of this book. I 
would particularly like to thank Teo Montoya, Russell Reynolds, and 
Michelle Reagin for all they have taught me along the way. Also, many 
thanks to my beautiful wife and gorgeous daughter, who inspire and 
motivate me to achieve great things.
www.allitebooks.com

www.PacktPub.com
Support files, eBooks, discount offers, and more
You might want to visit www.PacktPub.com for support files and downloads related to 
your book.
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF and ePub 
files available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at www.PacktPub.com and as a print 
book customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. Get in touch with us at 
service@packtpub.com for more details.
At www.PacktPub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign up for a 
range of free newsletters and receive exclusive discounts and offers on Packt books and eBooks.
TM
http://PacktLib.PacktPub.com
Do you need instant solutions to your IT questions? PacktLib is Packt's online digital book 
library. Here, you can access, read and search across Packt's entire library of books.
Why subscribe?
•	
Fully searchable across every book published by Packt
•	
Copy and paste, print and bookmark content
•	
On demand and accessible via web browser
Free access for Packt account holders
If you have an account with Packt at www.PacktPub.com, you can use this to access PacktLib 
today and view nine entirely free books. Simply use your login credentials for immediate access.
Instant updates on new Packt books
Get notified! Find out when new books are published by following @PacktEnterprise on 
Twitter, or the Packt Enterprise Facebook page.
www.allitebooks.com


Table of Contents
Preface	
1
Chapter 1: Building and Customizing Your Own Sites	
7
Determining the community requirements	
8
Building a community	
8
Enabling communities	
9
Creating the community	
11
Configuring custom objects and user profiles	
12
Customizing the Account object	
12
Creating a volunteering event custom object	
13
Creating volunteering event custom fields	
14
Connecting the Account and VolunteerEvent objects	
15
Configuring the community public user profile	
18
Creating authenticated community user profiles	
20
Configuring Force volunteers Salesforce user profiles	
22
Configuring Chatter	
23
Enabling Chatter feeds for VolunteerEvent	
23
Creating the VolunteerEvent custom object tab	
24
Creating a custom application	
25
Progress check – what have we achieved so far?	
25
Adding community members	
27
Branding the community	
29
Specifying Site.com for the community	
30
Creating a public community site	
32
A quick tour of the Site.com community	
32
Customizing the site header and footer	
35
Creating a data access page	
43
Securing the volunteers page	
51
Creating the Volunteer users	
53
Going live	
54
Summary	
56

Table of Contents
[ ii ]
Chapter 2: The E-Commerce Framework	
57
Building a basic Force.com fulfillment application	
58
Defining the data model	
58
Defining the Order object	
58
Defining the Order Line Item object	
62
Defining the Order Line object	
63
Defining the Order Line relationships	
65
Finishing the data model	
66
Defining application tabs and page layouts	
68
Creating the application	
69
A dash of workflow	
70
Loading in Order Line Items	
72
Importing with the Custom Object Import Wizard	
72
Building the e-commerce application	
77
Setting up the development environment	
78
Ruby on Rails	
78
Git	
80
Heroku	
80
Configuring the e-commerce application	
81
Configuring a Force.com remote access application	
84
Deploying to Heroku	
89
Placing an order	
92
Building the final Force.com Fulfillment application	
97
Building the Order Search custom controller	
97
The working of the Order Search custom controller	
98
Building the Order Search Visualforce page	
99
The working of the Order Search page	
100
Configuring the Visualforce Orders tab	
102
Building the Orders custom controller	
104
The working of the Orders custom controller	
105
Building the Orders Visualforce page	
111
The working of the Orders page	
112
Summary	
118
Chapter 3: Building a Full CRM System	
121
Student admissions system requirements analysis	
122
Functional requirements	
122
Data requirements	
123
Security requirements	
123
Building the student admissions system	
124
Defining the custom data objects	
124
Defining the Course object	
124
Defining the Applicant object	
127
Defining the Course Application object	
129

Table of Contents
[ iii ]
User profiles	
133
The Course Administration profile	
133
The Admissions Office profile	
134
The Selection Officer profile	
135
Organization-Wide Defaults	
136
The role hierarchy	
137
Configuring the top-level roles	
138
Configuring the admissions office hierarchy	
140
Configuring the business faculty hierarchy	
141
Configuring the science faculty hierarchy	
142
Chatter	
143
Enabling the Chatter feeds for Course	
143
Enabling the Chatter feeds for Applicant	
144
Enabling the Chatter feeds for Course Application	
146
Defining the custom object tabs	
147
Setting the tab permissions for profiles	
148
Creating the Force.com application	
149
The user interface	
149
Applicants	
149
Courses	
151
The Course Application page layout	
152
The Applicants tab	
154
The Courses tab	
155
The Course Applications tab	
156
Queues	
157
The system administrators public group	
157
The Business Faculty Course Applications queue	
157
The Science Faculty Course Applications queue	
158
The Course Application Exception queue	
158
Restricting access to the business faculty queue	
159
Restricting access to the science faculty queue	
163
Restricting access to the exceptions queue	
164
Custom settings	
166
The Course Application routing logic	
168
Building the faculty assignment Apex trigger	
168
How the faculty queue assignment trigger works	
170
Testing the faculty queue assignment trigger	
171
A decision entry publisher action	
172
Enabling the publisher actions	
172
Developing the publisher action	
172
Adding the publisher action to the Chatter feed	
174
Try out the publisher action	
175
Summary	
177

Table of Contents
[ iv ]
Chapter 4: Building a Reporting System	
179
Reporting system overview	
180
Reporting requirements	
180
Reporting system design	
181
The EIS Dashboard custom object	
182
KPI formulae	
182
The EIS Dashboard Visualforce page	
184
The EIS Dashboard custom controller	
184
Reporting system build	
184
Defining the EIS Dashboard custom object	
184
Creating the skeleton EIS Dashboard application	
185
Creating the initial Visualforce page	
186
Defining the application tabs	
186
Creating the EIS Dashboard application	
187
Importing EIS policy data	
187
Building the final reporting application	
188
The EIS Dashboard custom controller	
188
EIS Dashboard Visualforce page	
202
Summary	
211
Chapter 5: The Force.com Mobile SDK Application	
213
Mobile application overview	
214
Building a base AngularJS HTML5 application	
218
Downloading AngularJS	
219
Downloading Twitter Bootstrap	
220
Downloading jQuery	
221
Downloading the Salesforce AngularJS Mobile Pack	
221
Building a base HTML5 application structure	
222
Copying the base HTML5 application files	
222
Building a base HTML5 Heroku application	
223
Configuring a remote access application	
226
Deploying the HTML5 base application to Heroku	
227
How the base application works	
228
Building the final AngularJS HTML5 application	
230
Finalizing the application folder structure	
230
Finalizing the application landing page	
230
Initializing the AngularJS application	
233
The Salesforce authentication components	
237
Home controller	
237
The login controller	
238
The callback controller	
239
The logout controller	
240
The opportunity display components	
240
The opportunity factory	
240

Table of Contents
[ v ]
The opportunity list controller	
244
The opportunity detail view controller	
246
The opportunity map components	
247
Adding a geolocation trigger to the Account object	
248
Location service	
255
The map view controller	
256
JavaScript object reflection service	
261
Deploying an application to Heroku	
261
Summary	
262
Chapter 6: Cloud-connected Applications	
263
The development process overview	
264
Configuring the development environment	
264
Installing Node.js	
264
Installing Android Developer Tools	
265
Installing the Android SDK	
265
Configuring an Android virtual device	
266
Signing in to the Android virtual device	
268
Installing the Salesforce Android Native Mobile SDK	
272
Configuring a Salesforce-connected application	
273
Configuring Google Cloud Messaging	
274
Configuring the Azure Notification Hub	
275
Getting the Azure Service Bus credentials	
278
Downloading the Azure Android SDK	
280
Building an Android mobile application	
281
Creating the Salesforce Android Mobile SDK application	
281
Configuring an application using ADT	
282
Importing the Salesforce Mobile SDK and Salesforce Android application	
282
Updating the Android manifest file	
284
Updating the bootconfig.xml file	
286
Adding the Azure SDK and Android support libraries	
286
Importing the Google Play Services Library	
287
Enhancing the Android Mobile SDK application code	
288
Enhancing the MainActivity class	
289
Creating the Broadcast Receiver class	
292
Creating the Force.com broadcast application	
295
Configuring the remote site settings	
295
Creating the Notification Hub Interface class	
296
How the Notification Hub Interface class works	
297
Creating the broadcast application custom controller	
301
How the broadcast application custom controller works	
302
Creating the broadcast application Visualforce page	
304
How the broadcast application Visualforce page works	
305

Table of Contents
[ vi ]
Running the application	
306
Debugging the Azure Notification Hub	
309
Summary	
310
Appendix A: Importing Data with the Apex Data Loader	
311
Appendix B: Installing Ruby on Rails on Ubuntu	
315
Installing Ruby on Rails	
315
Index	
321

Preface
Welcome to Force.com Development Blueprints.
Since its unveiling in 2008, the Force.com platform has been used by developers 
all over the world to build a multitude of business applications running on 
Salesforce-powered cloud computing infrastructure.
The true strength of the Force.com platform is the ease with which developers can 
quickly acquire the application development skills required for today's modern 
cloud-based development, without the burden of configuring and managing 
infrastructure such as operating systems, application servers, and databases.
To their credit, Salesforce has invested heavily in the platform to ensure that it remains 
state of the art. Force.com provides out-of-the-box support for modern web browsers, 
mobile devices, and importantly, integration standards such as REST and SOAP. This 
ensures that Force.com applications can be easily integrated with other cloud-based 
and enterprise applications.
Throughout this book, we will see how the versatility of the Force.com platform can 
be leveraged to develop a range of cloud-based solutions across various application 
domains. I sincerely hope that by the time you have read this book, you will be 
confident enough to apply your Force.com development skills to build virtually 
any business application.

Preface
[ 2 ]
What this book covers
Chapter 1, Building and Customizing Your Own Sites, demonstrates how to build a 
Salesforce community using Site.com. We will also access the data of Force.com 
in the site and provide the ability to users to log in to the community.
Chapter 2, The E-commerce Framework, shows how to build an e-commerce application 
on Heroku, powered by data from Force.com. We will also be building a Force.com 
fulfillment application using Visualforce.
Chapter 3, Building a Full CRM System, covers how to build a traditional Salesforce 
CRM application to manage student admissions for a university, which features a 
custom Apex workflow engine to automatically route the course applications to 
a faculty.
Chapter 4, Building a Reporting System, provides guidance on how to build a custom 
reporting dashboard using Visualforce, Apex, and Visualforce charting.
Chapter 5, The Force.com Mobile SDK Application, leverages the Salesforce mobile 
SDK to build a mobile application to display the opportunity data of Salesforce. 
The technologies used with the mobile SDK in this chapter include HTML5, 
Heroku, AngularJS, Twitter Bootstrap, and Google Maps.
Chapter 6, Cloud-connected Applications, combines multiple techniques used throughout 
the previous chapters to build a Visualforce page that can send push notifications of 
Windows Azure Notification Hubs to an Android application that is running.
Appendix A, Importing Data with the Apex Data Loader, shows you how to import data 
with the Apex Data Loader.
Appendix B, Installing Ruby on Rails on Ubuntu, provides guidance on installing a 
Ruby on Rails development environment on the Ubuntu distribution of Linux.
What you need for this book
To build the applications in this book, you will need an Enterprise, Unlimited, or 
Developer (recommended) edition of Salesforce and system administrator access. You 
will also need a modern web browser such as the latest version of Google Chrome, 
Mozilla Firefox, Safari 5 or 6, or Internet Explorer 9 or 10.
The downloading and installation instructions for other technologies used throughout 
the book will be presented in the relevant chapters.

Preface
[ 3 ]
Who this book is for
This book is intended for intermediate Visualforce developers, who are familiar with 
the basics of Force.com, Visualforce, and Apex development. An understanding of 
HTML5, CSS, and JavaScript is also useful for some of the more advanced chapters.
Conventions
In this book, you will find a number of styles of text that distinguish between 
different kinds of information. Here are some examples of these styles, and an 
explanation of their meaning.
Code words in text are shown as follows: "The first step in creating a custom 
application is to create a custom object tab for the VolunteerEvent custom object."
A block of code is set as follows:
// results from the Order search
public List<Order__c> orderSearchResults {get; set;}
// textbox for search parameters
public string orderNumber {get; set;}
When we wish to draw your attention to a particular part of a code block, 
the relevant lines or items are set in bold:
<apex:column style="width:15%" headerValue="Actions" 
  rendered="{!line.id == editOrderLineId}">
  <apex:commandButton action="{!saveOrderLine}" 
    rerender="OrderInformation, OrderLines, messages" 
    value="Save" />
  <apex:commandButton action="{!cancelEditOrderLine}" 
    rerender="OrderInformation, OrderLines, messages" 
    value="Cancel" />
</apex:column>
Any command-line input or output is written as follows:
$ cd ~/rails_projects/ecommerce_app
$ git status
# On branch master
nothing to commit (working directory clean)
www.allitebooks.com

Preface
[ 4 ]
New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you see on the 
screen, in menus or dialog boxes for example, appear in the text like this: "Click on 
the Edit link in the Action column for the Force Volunteers Community option."
Warnings or important notes appear in a box like this.
Tips and tricks appear like this.
Reader feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you think about this 
book—what you liked or may have disliked. Reader feedback is important for us to 
develop titles that you really get the most out of.
To send us general feedback, simply send an e-mail to feedback@packtpub.com, 
and mention the book title via the subject of your message.
If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing 
or contributing to a book, see our author guide on www.packtpub.com/authors.
Customer support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things to 
help you to get the most from your purchase.
Downloading the example code
You can download the example code files for all Packt books you have purchased 
from your account at http://www.packtpub.com. If you purchased this book 
elsewhere, you can visit http://www.packtpub.com/support and register to 
have the files e-mailed directly to you.

Preface
[ 5 ]
Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes 
do happen. If you find a mistake in one of our books—maybe a mistake in the text or 
the code—we would be grateful if you would report this to us. By doing so, you can 
save other readers from frustration and help us improve subsequent versions of this 
book. If you find any errata, please report them by visiting http://www.packtpub.
com/submit-errata, selecting your book, clicking on the errata submission form link, 
and entering the details of your errata. Once your errata are verified, your submission 
will be accepted and the errata will be uploaded on our website, or added to any list of 
existing errata, under the Errata section of that title. Any existing errata can be viewed 
by selecting your title from http://www.packtpub.com/support.
Piracy
Piracy of copyright material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across all media. 
At Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very seriously. If you 
come across any illegal copies of our works, in any form, on the Internet, please 
provide us with the location address or website name immediately so that we can 
pursue a remedy.
Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected 
pirated material.
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors, and our ability to bring 
you valuable content.
Questions
You can contact us at questions@packtpub.com if you are having a problem 
with any aspect of the book, and we will do our best to address it.


Building and Customizing 
Your Own Sites
Communities were made generally available in the Salesforce Summer '13 release 
and are available in Performance, Unlimited, Developer, and Enterprise editions 
of Salesforce. The purpose of communities is to share information and support 
collaboration between companies, their customers, and their partners. A Salesforce 
organization can have multiple communities, each serving a distinct purpose or 
segment of customers/partners.
A community can be implemented using a Force.com site augmented by Visualforce 
where required, or by a more traditional HTML/CSS-based site using Site.com.
Communities share a lot in common with the customer and partner portals, which 
have been a mainstay to connect your Salesforce organization to external customers 
and partners. Although they are still available, and still supported by Salesforce, 
it is clear that the future direction of Salesforce is to use (or migrate to) communities 
in lieu of these portals.
In this chapter, we will be building a Volunteer Community for Force volunteers, 
a volunteer organization dedicated to providing support services for youth as they 
reach adolescence and approach adulthood. They already use Force.com to track 
sponsors, volunteer teams, and volunteer events, but would like to implement a 
community to connect to their growing network of volunteers.
I strongly encourage that you work through each chapter and build 
the examples. Feel free to use them as a springboard for your own 
Force.com application development projects.

Building and Customizing Your Own Sites
[ 8 ]
Determining the community requirements
Some key points to keep in mind when determining the requirements for a Salesforce 
community are as follows:
•	
Who is my target audience?
•	
What business processes am I trying to add value to?
•	
What Salesforce information do I need to expose to my community?
•	
What changes will be required to my organization's security model?
•	
Will the standard Salesforce styling and appearance suffice, or do I need 
the HTML/CSS capabilities of Site.com?
•	
Will I need to use Visualforce? In this case, you will probably need to use 
Force.com sites for your community.
•	
Do I need to purchase more Salesforce licenses for my community members?
Building a community
The community we are building will be provided by a Site.com site. Site.com is 
a cloud-based content management system of Salesforce used to build websites and 
social pages. The community that we are building will provide the following pages:
Community page
Description
Home
This is the welcome page for the community.
Services
This is the description of the support services offered by the Force 
volunteers.
Who We Are
This is the information about the Force volunteers' organization.
Events
This is the display of current events being volunteered.
Contact Us
This is the contact information and an online form to send a message 
to Force volunteers. This form will populate a custom object in 
Force.com.
Volunteers Online
This is an online area for volunteers to collaborate with the volunteer 
Force employees using Salesforce Chatter.

Chapter 1
[ 9 ]
An overview of the steps that we will follow to build a community is as follows:
1.	 Enable the communities.
2.	 Create a community.
3.	 Configure the custom objects and user profiles for the community.
4.	 Add members to the community.
5.	 Brand the community.
6.	 Create a public community site.
7.	 Publish the community.
This chapter assumes that you have enabled the improved setup user 
interface in Salesforce by going to Customize | User Interface and 
selecting the Enable Improved Setup User Interface checkbox.
Enabling communities
To use communities in Salesforce, we need to enable them first. To enable 
communities in Salesforce, log in to your Salesforce Developer edition and complete 
the following steps:
1.	 Go to Setup | Customize | Communities | Settings.
As a shortcut, you can use the Quick Find feature in Setup to search 
for communities.
2.	 Select Enable communities.
3.	 At this point, you will be asked for a domain prefix to use for your 
communities. Enter a domain name prefix that will uniquely identify 
your communities on Force.com, and click on the Check Availability 
button. If the domain prefix is already used, enter a different domain 
prefix and try again.

Building and Customizing Your Own Sites
[ 10 ]
It is worth noting at this stage the URL naming conventions that Force.
com uses for Developer, Sandbox, and Production instances of Force.com 
sites. Your unique subdomain is listed first, followed by the edition or 
environment type, then the instance name, and a Force.com suffix. Sandbox 
organizations also use the sandbox name as an extra identifier to distinguish 
them even further. In the following examples, the unique subdomain prefix 
is volunteerforce, and the sandbox name is vfsandbox. The instance name 
is na1, and the sandbox instance name is cs1. The URLs for different type of 
organizations are summarized as follows:
Type of organization
URL
Developer edition
https://volunteerforce-developer-edition.na1.
force.com
Sandbox
https://vfsandbox-volunteerforce.cs1.force.com
Production
https://volunteerforce.secure.force.com
4.	 Once your domain prefix has been accepted, your screen should resemble the 
following screenshot (except for the domain prefix):
5.	 Click on Save and then click on OK in the dialog window that will give you 
a warning that the changes cannot be undone.

Chapter 1
[ 11 ]
You will also notice a new item titled Manage Communities in the 
Customize | Communities section of the Setup menu.
Creating the community
To create the Volunteer Community, complete the following steps:
1.	 Go to Setup | Customize | Communities | Manage Communities.
2.	 Click on the New Community button.
3.	 Enter Force Volunteers for the community name.
4.	 Enter A Community to connect Force Volunteers with their growing 
network of volunteers for the Description field to describe the purpose of 
the community.
5.	 The next step is to enter a URL for the community. This will equate to a 
subdirectory name underneath the domain prefix entered by you, when you 
enabled the communities and the Salesforce instance that you are running on. 
For this example, enter volunteers.
6.	 Your screen should resemble the following screenshot:
7.	 Click on the Create button to create the community.
8.	 Click on Close. You will configure the community later.

Building and Customizing Your Own Sites
[ 12 ]
Configuring custom objects and user profiles
Now that we have created a community, there is some configuration required 
to ensure that the users can access your community and view data from your 
Salesforce organization.
The objects that we will be configuring and the relationships between them are 
depicted in the following diagram:
Volunteer Team
(Account)
Volunteer Team
Member
(contact)
Volunteer
Event
(new custom object)
Customizing the Account object
The Account object will be used to represent a team of volunteers. Each volunteer 
within a team will be stored as a contact on the volunteer team account.
To configure the Account object, complete the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Customize | Accounts | Fields.
2.	 In the Account Custom Fields and Relationships section, click on the 
New button.
3.	 For the Data Type section, select Lookup Relationship and click on Next.
4.	 Select User as the related object in the Related To drop-down list and then 
click on Next.
5.	 Enter Team Leader for the Field Label field.
6.	 Press Tab to automatically generate Field Name  as Team_Leader.
7.	 Enter A Volunteer Force Team Leader in the Description field and click 
on Next.
8.	 Accept the default values of the Field-Level Security for Profile section and 
click on Next.
9.	 Add the field to the Account Layout option only and click on Save, as shown 
in the following screenshot:

Chapter 1
[ 13 ]
Creating a volunteering event custom object
Your community will require a custom object to display the volunteering events for 
the community users and volunteers. The steps to create a custom object to display 
the volunteering events are as follows:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Objects.
2.	 Press the New Custom Object button.
3.	 Enter VolunteerEvent for the object's Label field.
4.	 Enter VolunteerEvents for the Plural Label field.
5.	 Enter Events for Volunteers to attend for the Description field to 
describe the purpose of the custom object.
6.	 Enter Event_Name for the Record Name field and leave the Data Type 
drop-down menu as Text.
7.	 Select the following checkboxes:
°°
Allow Reports (optional)
°°
Allow Activities (optional)
°°
Track Field History
°°
Add Notes and Attachments related list to default page layout
www.allitebooks.com

Building and Customizing Your Own Sites
[ 14 ]
8.	 Assuming that you are using a development environment, ensure that the 
Deployment Status section is set to Deployed.
9.	 Click on the Save button to create the custom object.
Creating volunteering event custom fields
You will now need to configure some custom fields for the VolunteerEvent object. 
The following steps will create the custom fields:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Objects.
2.	 Click on the VolunteerEvent label hyperlink.
3.	 Click on the New button in the Custom Fields & Relationships section.
4.	 For the Data Type section, select Date/Time and click on Next.
5.	 Enter Start/Date Time for the Field Label field.
6.	 Enter The date/time that the volunteering event starts for the 
Description field and click on Next.
7.	 Accept the defaults for the Field-Level Security for Profile section and click 
on Next.
8.	 Accept the defaults for the Page Layouts section and select Save & New.
9.	 Repeat the steps to create the remaining fields as described in the 
following table:
Field type
Field label description
Description
Date/Time
End Date/Time
The date/time that the 
volunteering event ends
Text Area
Location
The location of the 
volunteering event
Text Area
Description
A description of the 
volunteering event
Text Area
Special Skills
Any special skills required 
for the volunteering event; 
for example, driver's license 
and first aid

Chapter 1
[ 15 ]
Connecting the Account and VolunteerEvent 
objects
The final step in configuring our data model is to connect the Account and 
VolunteerEvent objects together. This will be a simple lookup relationship 
from the VolunteerEvent object to the Account object to record which team 
of volunteers will be the primary point of contact for the Volunteer event.
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Objects.
2.	 Click on the VolunteerEvent label hyperlink.
3.	 Click on the New button in the Custom Fields & Relationships section.
4.	 For the Data Type section, select Lookup Relationship and click on Next.
5.	 Select Account as the related object in the Related To drop-down list and 
click on Next.
6.	 Enter Volunteer Team for the Field Label field.
7.	 Enter The Volunteer Team attending the event for the Description field 
and click on Next.
8.	 Accept the defaults for the Field-Level Security for Profile section and click 
on Next.
9.	 Accept the defaults for the Page Layouts section of VolunteerEvent 
(there should only be one page layout) and click on Next.
10.	 Add the custom-related list only to the Account Layout option, as per the 
following screenshot:

Building and Customizing Your Own Sites
[ 16 ]
11.	 Click on Save. We will now need to add one more custom field to 
VolunteerEvent to display the volunteer team leader, using the 
following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Objects | VolunteerEvent.
2.	 Click on the New button in the Custom Fields & Relationships 
section.
3.	 For the Data Type section, select Formula and click on Next.
4.	 Enter Team Leader for the Field Label field.
5.	 Select Text for the Formula Return Type section and click on Next.
6.	 Click on the Advanced Formula tab in the formula editor.
7.	 Click on the Insert Field button; the Insert Field dialog will 
be displayed.
8.	 Navigate to Volunteer Event > | Volunteer Team > | 
Team Leader > | First Name and then click on Insert, 
as shown in the following screenshot:
9.	 From the Insert Operator drop-down menu in the formula editor, 
select the & Concatenate operator. Enter a space between two quotes: 
" ". Then, select another concatenation operator. Your formula should 
resemble the following screenshot:

Chapter 1
[ 17 ]
10.	 Click on the Insert Field button; the Insert Field dialog will 
be displayed.
11.	 Select Volunteer Event > | Volunteer Team > | Team Leader > | 
Last Name and click on Insert.
12.	 Your formula editor should now resemble the following screenshot:
13.	 Enter Team Leader of Volunteer Team in the Description field 
and click on Next.
14.	 Accept the default settings for the Field-Level Security for Profile 
section and click on Next.
15.	 Accept the default values for the Page Layouts section of 
VolunteerEvent and click on Next.

Building and Customizing Your Own Sites
[ 18 ]
16.	 Your VolunteerEvent custom fields should now resemble the 
following screenshot:
Configuring the community public user profile
When you create a community, a public user profile is automatically created for any 
guest (unauthenticated) users who access the community. This profile is cloned from 
the default guest user profile, but can be customized for your needs. The profile does 
not exist in the standard user profile maintenance screen, so to configure the profile 
you will need to complete the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Customize | Communities | Manage Communities.
2.	 Click on the Force.com hyperlink to access the underlying Force.com site for 
the community.
3.	 Click on the Public Access Settings button to access the Force Volunteers 
Community profile, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 1
[ 19 ]
4.	 Click on the Edit button.
5.	 Scroll down to the Standard Object Permissions section.
6.	 Select the Read permission option for the Account standard object.
7.	 Scroll down to the Custom Object Permissions section.
8.	 Select the Read permission option for the VolunteerEvent custom object.
9.	 Click on Save.
10.	 Scroll to the Custom Field-Level Security section.
11.	 Click on the View hyperlink next to VolunteerEvent.
12.	 Click on the Edit button.
13.	 Make sure that the Description, End Date/Time, Location, and Start Date/
Time fields are selected as Visible. There will be system-level fields selected 
as well and they can't be changed.
14.	 Click on the Save button.
15.	 Click on the Back to Profile button.
This ensures that any guest users accessing the community can see a list of the 
volunteering events that we will be constructing later in the chapter.

Building and Customizing Your Own Sites
[ 20 ]
Creating authenticated community user profiles
To allow volunteers to log into your community, they will need a Salesforce user 
account and an associated profile. When you enabled the communities in your 
Salesforce organization, a default set of communities-related profiles was created, 
as shown in the following screenshot:
Although you can use these default profiles and assign them to the users, it is 
recommended to clone one of the default profiles and customize it for your needs. 
This is the approach that we will be taking for the Volunteer Community.
To clone and customize a default community profile, complete the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Manage Users | Profiles.
2.	 Select the Clone link for the Customer Community User profile.
3.	 Enter Volunteer Community User for the Profile Name field.
4.	 Click on Save. We will now need to configure the Volunteer Community 
User profile to restrict access to only the objects that volunteers will need, 
using the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Manage Users | Profiles.
2.	 Select the Edit link for the Volunteer Community User profile.
3.	 Scroll down to the Standard Object Permissions section of the 
Volunteer Community User profile page and ensure that the profile 
has only a Read access to Accounts and Contacts (deselect all 
permissions for any other objects).

Chapter 1
[ 21 ]
4.	 In the Custom Object Permissions section, ensure that the profile has 
only a Read access to the VolunteerEvents custom object.
5.	 Your object permissions for the profile should resemble the 
following screenshot:
6.	 Click on Save.
7.	 Scroll to the custom Field-Level Security section.
8.	 Click on the View hyperlink next to VolunteerEvent.
9.	 Click on the Edit button.
10.	 Make sure that Description, End Date/Time, Location, Special 
Skills, Start Date/Time, Team Leader, and Volunteer Team are 
selected as Visible. There will also be system-level fields selected, 
which can't be changed.
11.	 Click on the Save button.
12.	 Click on the Back to Profile button.

Building and Customizing Your Own Sites
[ 22 ]
Configuring Force volunteers Salesforce user 
profiles
The final profile that we will need to configure is for the Force volunteers Salesforce 
users. For these users, you can clone almost any standard Salesforce user profile. 
However, to make the most efficient use of the limited number of licenses available in 
a development organization, we will use Force.com - App Subscription User as the 
base license (for full details of the licenses supplied with a Developer edition, refer to 
https://wiki.developerforce.com/page/Developer_Edition). This profile can 
be cloned and configured to give sufficient access without using one of the very limited 
full Salesforce licenses available in a development organization. To configuring Force 
volunteers Salesforce user profiles, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Manage Users | Profiles.
2.	 Select the Clone link for the Force.com – App Subscription User profile.
3.	 Enter Volunteer Force User for the Profile Name field.
4.	 Click on Save.
5.	 Assuming that you are at the Volunteer Force User profile screen after 
saving, click on Edit.
6.	 Scroll down to the Standard Object Permissions section and ensure that 
the profile has the Read, Create, Edit, and Delete access to Accounts and 
Contacts only (deselect all permissions for any other objects).
7.	 In the Custom Object Permissions section, ensure that the profile has the 
Read, Create, Edit, and Delete access to the VolunteerEvents custom object.
8.	 Your object permissions for the profile should resemble the following 
screenshot:

Chapter 1
[ 23 ]
9.	 Click on Save.
Configuring Chatter
Volunteer Force has decided to use Salesforce Chatter as a key component of their 
Volunteer Community. It is envisaged that the collaborative features of Chatter 
will form a natural fit with those volunteers who are naturally inclined to form 
self-organizing teams for volunteering events.
It is assumed in this section that you have already activated Chatter 
for your Salesforce organization. Note that Chatter is automatically 
enabled when a developer organization is created.
Enabling Chatter feeds for VolunteerEvent
To enable community users to subscribe to a volunteer event and to collaborate 
and receive notifications, we will need to activate Chatter feed tracking for the 
VolunteerEvent object.
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Customize | Chatter | Feed Tracking.
2.	 In the list of objects being tracked, select VolunteerEvent.
www.allitebooks.com

Building and Customizing Your Own Sites
[ 24 ]
3.	 Select the Enable Feed Tracking checkbox.
4.	 In the list of fields available to be tracked, select Description, Event Name, 
Start Date/Time, End Date/Time, Location, and Special Skills.
5.	 Click on Save.
6.	 Your Chatter feed tracking for VolunteerEvent should now resemble the 
following screenshot:
Creating a volunteer Force.com application
The final step to perform before working on the Volunteer Community site is to 
create a Force.com custom application to tie all of the components of the community 
together into a cohesive unit. This will provide a consistent interface and a set of 
Salesforce tabs for volunteer Force employees.
Creating the VolunteerEvent custom object tab
The first step in creating a custom application is to create a custom object tab for 
the VolunteerEvent custom object. The steps to do this are as follows:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Tabs.
2.	 Select the New button in the Custom Object Tabs section.
3.	 In the Object drop-down menu, select Volunteer Event.
4.	 Select the Tab Style lookup icon and select a style from the Tab Style dialog 
(if it is unused, a good match is the tab titled People).

Chapter 1
[ 25 ]
5.	 Enter Events for Volunteers to attend in the Description field to 
describe the purpose of the tab and click on Next.
6.	 Accept the default value to add the tab to the user profiles and click on Next.
7.	 Deselect all of the checkboxes (a shortcut is to use the Include Tab checkbox, 
which will deselect all checkboxes) in the next screen, so that the tab will not 
be included in any application, and click on Save.
Creating a custom application
Now that VolunteerEvent has a custom object tab, we can go ahead and create the 
custom application by performing the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Apps.
2.	 Select the New button to create a new application.
3.	 Ensure that Custom app is selected for the application type and click 
on Next.
4.	 Enter Volunteers for the App Label field.
5.	 Enter Collaborative Community for Volunteer Force Members 
in the Description field to describe the purpose of the community and click 
on Next.
6.	 Accept the default application logo and click on Next.
7.	 Move Chatter, Accounts, and VolunteerEvents from the Available 
Tabs list to the Selected Tabs list by highlighting the relevant tab and 
clicking on the Add button. Leave the option for Home as Default Landing 
Tab and click on Next.
8.	 Assign the application as Visible and Default for the Volunteer Community 
User and Volunteer Force User profiles, and Visible for the System 
Administrator profile. All other profiles should not have access to the 
application.
9.	 Click on Save.
Progress check – what have we achieved 
so far?
If you want to keep progressing with building the community, 
feel free to skip this section and continue to the Adding community 
members section.

Building and Customizing Your Own Sites
[ 26 ]
You might be questioning what you have been doing up to this point. Aren't we 
supposed to be working with communities? It is worth remembering that a community 
is really an extension of a Force.com application. You have actually successfully built a 
Force.com application that can now serve as the basis for your Volunteer Community.
To see your application in action, create and activate a user account with the Volunteer 
Force User profile.
When you log in as a volunteer Force user, you can see the application you have 
built, as shown in the following screenshot:
It is now possible to perform the following functions from within the application:
•	
Record the volunteer teams using the Accounts object
•	
Associate a team leader (via the User object) with a volunteer team
•	
Record the volunteers against a volunteer team (as Contacts)
•	
Record a volunteer event using the VolunteerEvent custom object
•	
Associate a volunteer event with a volunteer team
Congratulations! You are now in a position to build out the rest of the 
Volunteer Community.

Chapter 1
[ 27 ]
Adding community members
Now, we will add members to the Volunteer Community. This can be a set of 
profiles or permission sets. Adding members will enable them to log into the 
community and collaborate on the volunteer events together. The following steps 
will guide you to add members to the Volunteer Community:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Customize | Communities | Manage Communities.
2.	 Click on the Edit link in the Action column for the Force Volunteers 
Community option.
3.	 The Community Settings dialog is displayed, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
4.	 Click on the Members button.
5.	 In the Select Profiles section of the window, select Internal in the Search 
drop-down list.

Building and Customizing Your Own Sites
[ 28 ]
6.	 Move the Volunteer Force User profile from the Available Profiles list to 
the Selected Profiles list by highlighting it and clicking on the Add button, 
as shown in the following screenshot:
7.	 In the Select Profiles section of the window, select Portal in the Search 
drop-down list.
8.	 Move the Volunteer Community User profile from the Available 
Profiles list to the Selected Profiles list by highlighting it and clicking 
on the Add button.
9.	 The community members list should now resemble the following screenshot:
10.	 Click on Save.

Chapter 1
[ 29 ]
The addition of members to a community runs as a background 
process. You will receive an e-mail notification entitled Force 
Volunteers: Processing Complete when the processing is complete.
Branding the community
Communities provide a declarative interface to define the following elements:
Branding element
Description
Header
This specifies a default header for the pages in your 
community. For best results, it is recommended that 
the header be a publicly-accessible HTML document 
stored using the Documents tab.
Footer
This specifies a default footer for the pages in your 
community. For best results, it is recommended that 
the footer be a publicly-accessible HTML document 
stored using the Documents tab.
Color scheme
This selects a default color scheme for your 
community. This can be a predefined color palette 
from the Select color scheme drop-down list, or 
a custom color palette defined using HTML color 
notation for each color, for example, #FFFFFF for 
white color.
For the Volunteer Community, we do not need to specify a default header and footer 
as we will be building the community pages with Site.com. Make the following 
minor adjustments to the community branding:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Customize | Communities | Manage Communities.
2.	 Click on the Edit link in the Action column for the Force Volunteers 
Community.
3.	 The Community Settings dialog is displayed.
4.	 Click on the Branding button to display the Branding Settings for 
the community.
5.	 Set the background for each page to white by entering #FFFFFF into the Page 
Background field.

Building and Customizing Your Own Sites
[ 30 ]
6.	 Assuming that you are using the default color palette, the Colors section of 
the dialog should resemble the following screenshot:
7.	 Click on Save.
Any changes that you make to the community branding declaratively 
are automatically propagated to Site.com in the community site 
template and style sheet.
Specifying Site.com for the community
Force.com sites are a feature of Salesforce that allow you to create public websites 
and applications that are directly integrated with a Salesforce organization. As 
mentioned earlier, Site.com is designed as a content management system and 
provides more fine-grained control over the HTML and CSS of your site.
Force.com sites are available in Developer, Enterprise, Performance, and Unlimited 
editions of Salesforce. Visualforce is available in Contact Manager, Group, Professional, 
Enterprise, Unlimited, Performance, and Developer editions of Salesforce. However, 
if you wish to use Apex, you will need the Performance, Unlimited, Developer, or 
Enterprise edition of Salesforce (Apex is also available on Database.com).
Site.com is purchased as a separate license for Enterprise, Performance, 
and Unlimited Salesforce editions (a limited Site.com license for use only 
with communities is available in a Developer edition).

Chapter 1
[ 31 ]
For more information about Site.com and links to resources 
and recommended learning path, refer to https://wiki.
developerforce.com/page/Site.com.
By default, Salesforce will use a standard Force.com site for the community. This 
allows the website to be configured in a declarative fashion by specifying the 
Salesforce tabs that will be made available to the community users. This can then 
be customized or extended as required by using Visualforce and Apex.
The second option to define a community website is to use Site.com. This is 
better suited to build a more customized interface using HTML and CSS as the 
key components, with a limited set of data access functionality.
For the Volunteer Community, we will be using Site.com to provide a more 
customized interface for the community website. Our data access requirements 
can also be supported by Site.com out of the box, without the need to use 
Visualforce or Apex.
To define a Site.com website for the Volunteer Community, the following steps will 
need to be completed:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Customize | Communities | Manage Communities.
2.	 Click on the Edit link in the Action column for the Force Volunteers 
Community.
3.	 The Community Settings dialog is displayed.
4.	 Click on the Tabs & Pages button.
5.	 The drop-down list at the top of the Tabs & Pages dialog will be set to Use 
Salesforce.com tabs, by default.
6.	 Select Use Site.com to create custom community pages from the drop-down 
list to specify that you will be using Site.com.
7.	 The Tabs & Pages dialog should now resemble the following screenshot:
8.	 Click on Save and then on Close to dismiss the Community Settings dialog.

Building and Customizing Your Own Sites
[ 32 ]
Creating a public community site
Now, we get to the fun part! We are going to use Site.com to build the custom user 
interface for the Volunteer Community.
A quick tour of the Site.com community
When you selected Site.com to build the pages for the community, Salesforce 
automatically created a skeleton website with minimal content.
To open your Site.com community website, complete the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Customize | Communities | Manage Communities.
2.	 Click on the Site.com link in the Custom Pages column for the Force 
Volunteers Community option.
3.	 If this is the first time you are using Site.com, you will be presented 
with the Getting Started with Site.com Studio introduction window. Select 
the Don't show this again checkbox, and click on the x icon in the top-right 
corner of the window.
4.	 You will now be presented with the Site.com landing page for your 
community, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 1
[ 33 ]
As seen in the screenshot, the Site Pages section displays the pages for your site. 
Currently, this is empty as you haven't created any pages yet.
Clicking on the Page Templates section will display the current list of templates 
that can be used for the pages on your site. Your screen should look like the 
following screenshot:
Salesforce has automatically generated the Community Template page for you, 
based on your selections when branding the community.
www.allitebooks.com

Building and Customizing Your Own Sites
[ 34 ]
Clicking on the Style Sheets section will display the current list of style sheets 
associated with your site. Your screen should look like the following screenshot:
Salesforce has automatically generated the CommunityBranding style sheet for 
you, again based on your selections when branding the community. The default 
SiteStyleSheet is also generated by Salesforce, and supplies a base level of styling 
for site elements, such as menus, tables, and forms.
The Assets section is where you upload any images, scripts, videos, or documents 
that will be used by your site. Currently, this is empty as we haven't uploaded 
anything yet.
Clicking on the Widgets section will display the current list of reusable components 
that can be used for the pages on your site. Your screen should look like the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 1
[ 35 ]
Salesforce has automatically generated the Header and Footer widgets for you, 
also based on your selections when branding the community.
Customizing the site header and footer
The initial items that we will need to customize for the community site are the 
header and footer.
Customizing the header
The following sections detail the steps required to customize the community header.
Importing the community logo
The steps to import the community logo are as follows:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Customize | Communities | Manage Communities.
2.	 Click on the Site.com link in the Custom Pages column for the Force 
Volunteers Community option.
3.	 On the Overview tab, hover over Assets and click on Import.
4.	 In the Import an Asset dialog, click on the Browse... button.
5.	 In the file picker dialog, locate the image Force Volunteers Logo.png from 
the code download for this chapter and click on Open.
6.	 Leave the Overwrite existing files checkbox selected and click on Import.

Building and Customizing Your Own Sites
[ 36 ]
7.	 Once the file has been uploaded, you will see a success message. At this point, 
you can click on Browse... again to import another asset if required. We don't 
have any more assets to upload at this point, so click on the x sign in the
top-right corner of the window to close the dialog.
8.	 The ForceVolunteersLogo.png file will now appear in the Assets list for 
the site.
Adding the community logo to the header
The steps to add the community logo to the header are as follows:
1.	 On the Overview tab, click on Widgets.
2.	 In the list of widgets, click on Header.
3.	 Ensure that the Page Structure tab is selected, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
4.	 In the Page Structure tab, there will be a page element of type Custom Code 
underneath the Widget section. This contains any header information that 
has been saved as part of the community branding. You can leave this page 
element as it is since you didn't enter any header information when branding 
the community.
If you subsequently enter any header information into the community 
branding, it will appear in the Custom Code element. You may 
wish to delete the Custom Code page element to prevent this from 
happening. To restore the default header at a later stage, you will 
need to readd a Custom Code page element with the following code:
{!Network.header}

Chapter 1
[ 37 ]
5.	 Select Widget, click on the gear icon, and select Add Page Elements. From 
the list of page elements, select Image.
6.	 In the Add an Image dialog, select ForceVolunteersLogo.png. A preview of 
the logo will be displayed. Click on Apply.
Adding the site navigation menu
To add the site navigation menu, perform the following steps:
1.	 Select Widget, click on the gear icon, and select Add Page Elements. From 
the list of page elements, select Panel. Close the dialog.
2.	 Using the Properties pane on the right of the screen, type navigation in the 
Class Name field, and press Enter.
3.	 Select the div.navigation panel, click on the gear icon, and select Add Page 
Elements, as shown in the following screenshot. From the list 
of page elements, select Menu. Close the dialog.

Building and Customizing Your Own Sites
[ 38 ]
4.	 From the Properties pane, expand the THEME section and select Default for 
the menu Theme Name.
At this point the menu is blank. The menu will be built automatically 
from the pages in the site.
5.	 Your Header widget should now resemble the following screenshot:
6.	 Close the Header tab.
Customizing the footer
To customize the footer, perform the following steps:
1.	 Assuming that you are still in Site.com, in the list of widgets, click on Footer.
2.	 Ensure that the Page Structure tab is selected.
3.	 In the Page Structure window, there will be a page element of type Custom 
Code underneath the Widget section. This contains any footer information 
that has been saved as part of the community branding. You can leave this 
page element as it is since you didn't enter any footer information when 
branding the community.

Chapter 1
[ 39 ]
If you subsequently enter any footer information into the community 
branding, it will appear in the Custom Code element. You may wish to 
delete the Custom Code page element to prevent this from happening. To 
restore the default footer at a later stage, you will need to readd a Custom 
Code page element with the following code:
{!Network.footer}
4.	 Select Widget, click on the gear icon, and select Add Page Elements. 
From the list of page elements, select Content Block.
5.	 Select the content block, click on the gear icon, and select Edit.
6.	 Delete the existing text.
7.	 From the Insert Symbol drop-down menu (the drop-down menu on the 
right-hand side of the Add or Edit Media drop-down list in the top toolbar), 
select the copyright symbol.
8.	 In the content block, type Copyright 2014 Volunteer Force. All rights 
reserved. and click on Save, as shown in the following screenshot:
9.	 Close the Footer tab.
Adding some style to the community site
Currently, your community site is using a base collection of styling information 
determined by the CommunityBranding style sheet and the default SiteStyleSheet. 
You will now upload an additional style sheet to add some more CSS styling 
information using the following steps:
1.	
Navigate to Setup | Build | Customize | Communities | Manage Communities.
2.	 Click on the Site.com link in the Custom Pages column for the Force 
Volunteers Community option.

Building and Customizing Your Own Sites
[ 40 ]
3.	 Click on Style Sheets to display the list of style sheets currently available.
4.	 Click on the Import... button at the top of the page, underneath the 
Overview tab.
5.	 In the Import an Asset dialog, click on the Browse... button.
6.	 In the file picker dialog, locate the force.css style sheet from the code 
download for this chapter and click on Open.
7.	 Leave the Overwrite existing files and Convert CSS files into style 
sheets checkboxes selected and click on Import.
8.	 Once the file has been uploaded, you will see a success message. 
At this point, you can click on Browse... again to import another asset if 
required. We don't have any more assets to upload at this point, so click on 
the x in the top-right corner of the window to close the dialog.
9.	 Click on Page Templates to display the list of templates for 
community pages.
10.	 In the list of page templates, select Community Template, click on 
the gear icon, and select Edit.
11.	 In the Properties pane, expand the STYLE SHEETS section, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
12.	 Click on the + button underneath the Style Sheets list.
13.	 A drop-down list containing the style sheets loaded into the community is 
displayed. Select /force.css and click on the + button next to the drop-down 
list (the highlighted button in the following screenshot):

Chapter 1
[ 41 ]
14.	 The styles from force.css will now be applied to the Community Template.
15.	 Close the Community Template tab.
Creating the static site pages
The building of the site infrastructure for the community is now complete. We are 
now in a position to build the pages of the site itself. The following steps are to be 
completed to create the static site pages:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Customize | Communities | Manage Communities.
2.	 Click on the Site.com link in the Custom Pages column for the Force 
Volunteers Community option.
3.	 Click on Site Pages to display the list of pages for the community. 
At this stage, it should be blank.
4.	 Click on the New drop-down button at the top of the list and select 
Site Page.
5.	 In the Create a Site Page dialog, enter Page name as Home.
6.	 Ensure that Community Template is selected in the Page templates list.
7.	 Click on Create.
8.	 The Home page will be created and displayed in the Site.com editor.
9.	 Close the Home page.
10.	 Repeat steps 4 to 9 to create the following pages:
°°
Services
°°
Who We Are
°°
Events
°°
Contact Us
°°
Volunteers

Building and Customizing Your Own Sites
[ 42 ]
Adding text to static pages
To add text to static pages, perform the following steps:
1.	 Click on Site Pages to display the list of pages for the community.
2.	 Hover over Home, click on the gear icon, and select Edit.
3.	 Select the div#content.brandPrimaryBrd page element, click on the gear icon, 
and select Override Parent Content. Click on OK to confirm your wish to 
override inherited content.
4.	 Select the div#content.brandPrimaryBrd page element, click on the gear 
icon, and select Add Page Elements.
5.	 Click on Panel in the Add Page Elements dialog and close it.
6.	 Select the div page element you have just created, click on the gear icon, 
and select Add Page Elements.
7.	 Click on Content Block in the Add Page Elements dialog and close it.
8.	 Select the content block you have just created, click on the gear icon, 
and select Edit.
9.	 Delete the existing text.
10.	 Currently, Paragraph is the selected style for the text. Click on the 
style drop-down menu where Paragraph is selected and select Heading 1.
11.	 Type Welcome to Force Volunteers! and press Enter.
12.	 Click on the Style drop-down menu and select Paragraph.
13.	 Type We are an organization dedicated to supporting young 
people and helping them make positive life choices.
14.	 Click on Save.
15.	 Click on Preview Page and admire your home page, as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 1
[ 43 ]
16.	 Repeat steps 1 to 15 and add static text to the following pages as per the 
following table:
Page
Heading
Paragraph text
Services
Services We Offer
We offer a range of support 
services encompassing Schools, 
Universities, Festivals and 
Events.
Who We Are
Who We Are
Our founders recognized the need 
for an organization to support 
young people at a very vulnerable 
stage of their lives. We now 
offer a comprehensive range 
of programs aimed at helping 
young people make positive life 
choices.
Events
Events
A list of volunteer events we 
will be involved in.
Contact Us
Contact Us
For any enquiries, contact us at 
volunteers@forcevolunteers.com.
Volunteers
Volunteers Online
Welcome to our Volunteers Online 
Page.
The e-mail address link for the Contact Us page will be 
automatically generated by Site.com.
Creating a data access page
Before creating the volunteer events' data access page, take some 
time to create some sample volunteer teams, volunteers, and 
volunteer events in your Salesforce development organization.
It will be beneficial to display a list of volunteer events on the Events page. This 
will require us to utilize the Salesforce data access functionality built into Site.com. 
Fortunately, for us, Salesforce has gone to great lengths to make the process as 
painless as possible.
www.allitebooks.com

Building and Customizing Your Own Sites
[ 44 ]
To add a list of events to the Events page, complete the following steps:
1.	 Click on Site Pages to display the list of pages for the community.
2.	 Hover over Events, click on the gear icon, and select Edit.
3.	 Select the div#content.brandPrimaryBrd page element, click on the gear 
icon, and select Add Page Elements.
4.	 Click on Panel in the Add Page Elements dialog and close it.
5.	 In the Properties pane, give the div page element an ID of EventList.
6.	 Click on the div#EventList element, click on the gear icon, and select 
Add Page Elements.
7.	 From the DATA section of page elements, select Data Table. The Create Data 
Table wizard will open.
8.	 In the Choose a Salesforce object drop-down menu, choose VolunteerEvent. 
You will notice that the Connection Preview section is populated with data 
from VolunteerEvent.
9.	 We don't want to display events from the past, so we will need to filter the 
data to display events with a date on or after the current date. Expand the 
FILTERS section.
10.	 From the Field drop-down list, select Start Date/Time.
11.	 From the Operator drop-down list, select Greater than or equal to.
12.	 From the Source drop-down list, select Global Property.
13.	 From the Value drop-down list, select Current date.
14.	 We will be sorting the events by Start/Date Time in an ascending order. 
Expand the SORTING section.
15.	 In the Field drop-down list, select Start Date/Time.
16.	 In the Sort Order drop-down list, select Ascending.
17.	 Your filtering and sorting criteria should resemble the following screenshot:

Chapter 1
[ 45 ]
18.	 Click on Next.
19.	 You will now need to select the data fields to be displayed in the table. From 
the Available Fields list, select Start Date/Time and move it across to the 
Selected Fields list by clicking on the > button.
20.	 Move the End Date/Time, Event Name, Description, and Location 
fields across to the Selected Fields list by pressing the > button.
21.	 Click on the Reload Preview button to see a preview of your table.
22.	 When you are satisfied with the results, click on Save.
23.	 The events list will now appear on your Events page. At this point, you can 
select Preview Page to see your events list in action.
Customizing the events list
Congratulations! You now have a list of events on your site.
However, there are a few improvements that we can make to the events list, which 
are listed as follows:
•	
Fix the styling and placement of the events list to match the rest of the site
•	
Format the Start Date/Time and End Date/Time columns to display the 
dates and times correctly
•	
Add paging support to limit the number of events listed on a page and 
provide a mechanism to scroll through them
Styling the events list
To correct the styling and placement of the events list, complete the following steps:
1.	 Open the Events page from the Site Pages list.
2.	 Select the div#EventsList page element.
3.	 Select the Style pane (next to the Properties pane).
4.	 Expand the DIMENSIONS section.
5.	 Scroll down to the Padding section and enter 15 for the Top padding value.
6.	 From the drop-down menu, next to the Top textbox, select pixels.
7.	 Click on the Overview tab and select Style Sheets.
8.	 Click on SiteStyleSheet to open it.
9.	 From the list of CSS styles on the left-hand side, find the .Tabletheme thead 
th style and select it.

Building and Customizing Your Own Sites
[ 46 ]
10.	 In the CSS code box to the right-hand side of the style, add the following line 
of CSS code, as shown in the following screenshot:
font-size:12px;
11.	 Click on Save.
12.	 From the list of CSS styles, find the .Tabletheme tbody tr td style and 
select it.
13.	 In the CSS code box to the right-hand side of the style, change the 
border-color entry to black, so the line reads the following code:
border-color:black;
14.	 Finally, add the following line of CSS code, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
font-size:12px;

Chapter 1
[ 47 ]
15.	 Click on Save and close SiteStyleSheet.
Fixing the Date/Time columns
Now, we need to fix the formatting of the Start Date/Time and End Date/Time 
columns in the events list. To reformat the columns, complete the following steps:
1.	 Open the Events page from the Site Pages list.
2.	 Double-click on the Start_Date_Time__c table cell. The Edit Column dialog 
will be displayed.
3.	 From the Display the field value as: drop-down list, select Formatted Text.
4.	 From the Format drop-down list, select Short date and time.
5.	 Click on Save.
6.	 Perform the same steps for the End_Date_Time__c table cell.

Building and Customizing Your Own Sites
[ 48 ]
Add paging support to the events list
The final step in customizing the events list is to add paging support to the table. 
This will allow a user to step through the list of events. To add paging support, 
complete the following steps:
1.	 Select the Default View option of the Data Table.Tabletheme page element, 
click on the gear icon and select Edit, as shown in the following screenshot:
2.	 Expand the LIMITS section and enter 5 for the Results per page field.
3.	 Click on Next and then on Save.
4.	 Select the div#EventsList page element from the Page Structure tab, 
click on the gear icon, and select Add Page Elements.
5.	 Select Panel. In the Properties pane, give the panel an ID of ButtonRow.
6.	 Select the Style pane (next to the Properties pane).
7.	 Expand the DIMENSIONS section.
8.	 Scroll down to the Padding section and enter 15 for the Top padding value.
9.	 From the drop-down menu next to the Top textbox, select pixels.

Chapter 1
[ 49 ]
Adding the paging buttons
The steps to add the paging buttons are as follows:
1.	 Select the div#ButtonRow page element, click on the gear icon, select Add 
Row and Column Panels, and then select Add Row and Column Panels 
from the Inside the panel... section.
2.	 Select a 1 x 2 grid (two columns in the first row).
3.	 Select the first div page element underneath div#ButtonRow and 
give it an ID of PrevButton in the Properties pane.
4.	 In the Style pane, expand the DIMENSIONS section, and set the 
Width field to 100 pixels.
5.	 Select the second div page element underneath div#ButtonRow and 
give it an ID of NextButton in the Properties pane.
6.	 In the Style pane, expand the DIMENSIONS section, and set the 
Width field to 100 pixels.
7.	 Select the div#PrevButton page element, click on the gear icon, select 
Add Page Elements, and then select Button. Close the dialog.
8.	 In the Properties pane, change the name to Previous Page.
9.	 In the Events pane, select the click event.
10.	 Click on the + button underneath the Actions list.
11.	 In the Select an Action drop-down list, select Previous Page.
12.	 In the Target Element drop-down list, ensure that 
VolunteerEvent__c Data Table is selected (it should be the only element in 
the list).
13.	 Click on Save.
14.	 Select the div#NextButton page element, click on the gear icon, select 
Add Page Elements, and then select Button. Close the dialog.
15.	 In the Properties pane, change the name to Next Page.
16.	 In the Events pane, select the click event.
17.	 Click on the + button underneath the Actions list.
18.	 In the Select an Action drop-down list, select Next Page.
19.	 In the Target Element drop-down list, ensure that 
VolunteerEvent__c Data Table is selected (it should be the only element in 
the list).
20.	 Click on Save.

Building and Customizing Your Own Sites
[ 50 ]
Catering for the end of the event list
To cater for the end of the event list, perform the following steps:
1.	 Select the Content Block option underneath the No Data View page element 
of Data Table.Tabletheme, click on the gear icon, and then select Edit.
2.	 Replace the text No Data Found with No More Events....
3.	 Replace the text There is no data to display for this query with There are no 
more Events to display at this time. Please check back later., as 
shown in the following screenshot:
4.	 Click on Save.
5.	 Your Events page should now resemble the following screenshot:

Chapter 1
[ 51 ]
Securing the volunteers page
The build of the Volunteer Community is nearly complete. Our last task is to secure 
the volunteers page. This is achieved by activating Authorization for the site.
There are three options available when activating authorization in Site.com, 
as shown in the following screenshot:
We want all pages to be available for public access, except the volunteers page. 
In this case, the custom authorization setting suits our purpose.
Complete the following steps to activate authorization for the community site:
1.	 On the Overview tab of the site, expand the Site Configuration section, 
and select Authorization.
2.	 The default setting is No Authorization. To change this, select Custom from 
the Site Setting drop-down list.
By default, all site pages are still publicly available when enabling the Custom 
authorization. We will need to manually configure the authorization for the 
volunteers page by completing the following steps:
1.	 On the Overview tab of the site, select Site Pages.
2.	 Select the Volunteers page, click on the gear icon, and select the Requires 
Authorization checkbox.

Building and Customizing Your Own Sites
[ 52 ]
3.	 A padlock icon will now appear next to the Volunteers page name indicating 
that it is now secured. This is illustrated in the following screenshot:
To personalize the Volunteers page, we will now add a Chatter feed for the logged 
in user:
1.	 Double-click on the Volunteers page to open it for editing.
2.	 Select the div#content.brandPrimaryBrd page element, click on the gear 
icon, and then select Add Page Elements.
3.	 Click on Panel in the Add Page Elements dialog and close it.
4.	 In the Properties pane, give the div page element an ID of VolunteerChatter.
5.	 Select the Style pane (next to the Properties pane).
6.	 Expand the DIMENSIONS section.
7.	 Scroll down to the Padding section and enter 15 for the Top padding value.
8.	 From the drop-down list, next to the Top textbox, select pixels.
9.	 Click on the div#VolunteerChatter element, then on the gear icon, 
and select Add Page Elements.
10.	 From the WIDGETS section of the dialog, select the News Feed widget.
11.	 Click on x to close the Add Page Elements dialog.

Chapter 1
[ 53 ]
12.	 Click on Preview Page to see your Volunteers page with a personalized 
Chatter feed for the currently logged in user, as illustrated in the 
following screenshot:
The first time you display the Volunteers page after it has been 
secured, you may be prompted to log in. If so, make sure that you 
select the link to log in as Member Of your Salesforce Organization.
Congratulations! The build of the community is now complete!
Creating the Volunteer users
To create community users, they must first be added as contacts against a Salesforce 
account. To add a community user, complete the following steps:
1.	 Open the contact record for the community user in Salesforce.
2.	 Click on Manage External User and select Enable Customer User.
3.	 The New User screen will now be displayed.
4.	 Complete the user details for the user (you can use any data you 
like) and be sure that you select Volunteer Community User for the profile 
(assuming the profile has been created previously and is active).
5.	 Ensure that Customer Community is selected for the User License section.
6.	 Click on Save.
www.allitebooks.com

Building and Customizing Your Own Sites
[ 54 ]
In order to create community users, the logged in user must be 
assigned to any role, or else the Portal Account Owner Has No Role 
error will be displayed. Also, the community user will not receive an 
activation e-mail until the community is live.
Going live
Now, we are ready to publish the community on Salesforce. Once the community has 
been published, it will be available to all users with the correct access privileges. In 
our case, this will be public (anonymous) users, and users with a profile of Volunteer 
Force User or Volunteer Community User.
To publish the Volunteer Force community, complete the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Customize | Communities | Manage Communities.
2.	 Click on the Edit link in the Action column for the Force Volunteers 
Community option.
3.	 Click on the green button labeled Publish.
4.	 A dialog box will be displayed informing you that publishing the 
community will make it available to all members, and that all members will 
be sent a welcome e-mail. Click on OK.
5.	 A success message will be displayed and the community status will change 
to Published, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 1
[ 55 ]
6.	 The community users will also receive a welcome e-mail, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
Congratulations! Your community is now live!
To view the licensing options for Salesforce communities, visit 
https://help.salesforce.com/HTViewHelpDoc?id=users_
license_types_communities.htm&language=en_US.

Building and Customizing Your Own Sites
[ 56 ]
Summary
In this chapter, we built a fully functional Salesforce community that is powered 
by Site.com.
First, we enabled Salesforce communities for our development organization. 
We then proceeded to create a new community. From there, we configured the 
Force.com objects and user profiles required for the community, before adding some 
community members. With the building blocks in place, we branded the community 
and built the public-facing site with Site.com. Finally, we integrated the community 
site to our Force.com data, secured the community, and published it.
Some possible enhancements that you could make to the community are as follows:
•	
Add a status field to the VolunteerEvent object, with statuses such as Draft 
and Published. Use the data filtering capabilities of Site.com to only display 
the published events.
•	
Publish a form for prospective volunteers to register their interest and 
capture this as a lead in Salesforce.
•	
Customize the community login page that is displayed when a volunteer 
logs in.

The E-Commerce Framework
E-commerce was a major driving force behind the Internet in the late 1990s and early 
2000s and continues to be a major driver of Internet innovation and growth to this 
current day.
The ability to order goods and services via the Internet revolutionized how companies 
interacted with customers, and the addition of Web 2.0 technologies and the social 
media has allowed the development of some very sophisticated and personalized 
online shopping experiences. The ongoing success of companies such as Amazon, 
eBay, and PayPal has ensured that e-commerce will continue to be a major Internet 
force in the future.
In this chapter, we will be building an e-commerce solution for the fictional 
Force E-Commerce company. They specialize in the development and sales of 
high-performance and racing car engines for motoring enthusiasts and racing teams.
The company has decided to increase their digital footprint by offering online ordering 
of their high performance engines on the Internet. We have been engaged by them to 
develop a Force.com powered e-commerce solution to achieve this requirement.
In this chapter we will be:
•	
Building a Heroku-powered Ruby on Rails e-commerce application that will 
allow Force E-Commerce customers to sign up and place orders. Heroku has 
been chosen, because it is Salesforce's Platform as a Service (PaaS) offering, 
which makes integrating to Force.com extremely simple.
•	
Building a Visualforce Force.com fulfillment application to allow Force 
E-Commerce employees to manage and fulfill orders placed in the 
e-commerce application.
•	
Using the new Salesforce1 force.rb Ruby gem to integrate the Heroku 
e-commerce application to Force.com to allow it to query and update 
Force.com data.

The E-Commerce Framework
[ 58 ]
We have a lot to get through in this chapter, so let's get started!
Building a basic Force.com fulfillment 
application
The first step in building our e-commerce application is to develop a basic fulfillment 
application in Force.com. This will give us the base configuration and custom objects 
we need to allow us to integrate the e-commerce site on Heroku and ensure that the 
integration is working correctly.
You may be tempted at this stage to develop a full-blown fulfillment 
application in Force.com using Visualforce and Apex. Patience is a 
virtue! Experience has taught me (the hard way) that when integrating 
one or more applications, it is better in the early stages to have the 
bare minimum of application functionality required to prove that the 
integration(s) work. If integration issues do occur (and they will), it is a lot 
easier to debug a basic Force.com application with standard functionality 
rather than having to potentially wade through Visualforce pages, Apex, 
and, if you are particularly unlucky, Ajax and JavaScript as well.
Defining the data model
The first step in building the base fulfillment application is to define the Order, Order 
Line, and Order Line Item custom objects and the relationships between them.
Order
Order Line
Order Line
Item
Defining the Order object
Your application will require a custom object to store the orders placed on the 
e-commerce site:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Objects.
2.	 Click on the New Custom Object button.
3.	 Enter Order for Label.
4.	 Enter Orders for the Plural Label.

Chapter 2
[ 59 ]
5.	 Enter An Order Placed by a Customer for Description to describe the 
purpose of the custom object.
6.	 Enter Order No for the Record Name and change the Data Type to 
Auto Number.
7.	 Enter Order-{00000} in the Display Format field.
8.	 Enter 1 in the Starting Number field.
9.	 Select the following checkboxes:
°°
Allow Reports (optional feature)
°°
Allow Activities (optional feature)
°°
Track Field History (optional feature)
°°
Add Notes and Attachments related list to default page layout 
(object creation option)
10.	 Ensure that the Deployment Status is set to Deployed.
11.	 Press the Save button to create the custom object. 
You will now need to configure the custom fields for the Order object:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Objects.
2.	 Click on the Order hyperlink.
3.	 Click on the New button in the Custom Fields & Relationships section.
4.	 For the Data Type, select Picklist and click on Next.
5.	 Enter Channel for the Field Label.
6.	 Ensure that the Field Name equals Channel.
7.	 In the picklist values field enter Internal and External.
8.	 Select the checkbox titled Use first value as default value.

The E-Commerce Framework
[ 60 ]
9.	 If desired, enter a Description and Help Text. Your field definition should 
look similar to the following screenshot:
10.	 Click on Next.
11.	 Accept the defaults for field-level security and click on Next.
12.	 Accept the defaults for the Page Layout Name and click on Save & New.
13.	 Create the remaining fields described in the following table:
Field Type
Field Label
Field Name
Description
Text Area
Comments
Comments
Comments entered 
against the order 
on the e-commerce 
site.
Text Area
Customer Address
Customer_
Address
The delivery 
address of the 
customer placing 
the order. Ensure that 
the Required checkbox 
is selected.

Chapter 2
[ 61 ]
Field Type
Field Label
Field Name
Description
Email
Customer Email
Customer_
Email
The e-mail address 
of the customer 
placing the order. 
Ensure that the Required 
checkbox is selected.
Number
Customer ID
Customer_
ID
The unique 
identifier for the 
customer from the 
e-commerce site. 
Ensure that the External 
ID checkbox is selected.
Text
Customer Name
Customer_
Name
The name of the 
customer placing 
the order. Ensure that 
the Required checkbox 
is selected and the 
maximum length is 255 
characters.
Checkbox
Delivered
Delivered
Flag to indicate 
whether the order 
has been delivered 
to the customer.
Percent
Discount
Discount
A discretionary 
discount that can 
be applied to an 
order. Ensure that the 
Length is set to 3, and 
the Decimal Places are 
set to 2.
Date
Planned Delivery 
Date
Planned_
Delivery_
Date
The planned 
delivery date for 
the order.
It is imperative that the Field Type and Field Name for each field in 
this table is an exact match to your custom object to ensure that the 
e-commerce site will integrate correctly.

The E-Commerce Framework
[ 62 ]
Defining the Order Line Item object
Your application will require a custom object to store the Order Line Item objects 
that represent products in the product catalog on the e-commerce site. Perform the 
following steps to define the Order Line Item object:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Objects.
2.	 Click on the New Custom Object button.
3.	 Enter Order Line Item for Label.
4.	 Enter Order Line Items for the Plural Label.
5.	 Enter A product item ordered on an Order Line for Description to 
describe the purpose of the custom object.
6.	 Enter Order Item Number for the Record Name, and change the Data Type 
to Auto Number.
7.	 Enter OLI-{00000} in the Display Format field.
8.	 Enter 1 in the Starting Number field.
9.	 Select the following checkboxes:
°°
Allow Reports (optional feature)
°°
Allow Activities (optional feature)
°°
Track Field History (optional feature)
°°
Add Notes and Attachments related list to default page layout 
(object creation options)
10.	 Ensure that the Deployment Status is set to Deployed.
11.	 Press the Save button to create the Custom Object. 
You will now need to configure the custom fields for the Order object:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Objects.
2.	 Click on the Order Line Item hyperlink.
3.	 Click on the New button in the Custom Fields & Relationships section.
4.	 Create the fields described in the following table:
Field Type
Field Label
Field Name
Description
Number
Capacity
Capacity
The capacity of 
the engine in 
cubic inches

Chapter 2
[ 63 ]
Field Type
Field Label
Field Name
Description
Picklist
Induction
Induction
The induction 
method of the 
engine. Picklist 
values are Naturally 
Aspirated, 
Supercharged, and 
Turbocharged. Select 
the checkbox titled Use 
first value as default 
value.
Text
Item Name
Item_Name
The name of the 
item. The maximum 
length is 255 characters. 
Ensure that the Required 
checkbox is selected.
Number
Power 
Output
Power_
Output
The power output 
of the engine in 
horsepower.
Number
Torque
Torque
The pulling power 
of the engine in 
ft lb.
Currency
Unit Price
Unit_Price
The price of the 
engine. Ensure that the 
Required checkbox is 
selected.
It is imperative that the Field Type and Field Name for each field in 
this table is an exact match to your custom object to ensure that the 
e-commerce site will integrate correctly.
Defining the Order Line object
Your application will require a custom object to store the Order Line objects that 
represent products purchased in an order on the e-commerce site. Perform the 
following steps to do so:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Objects.
2.	 Click on the New Custom Object button.
3.	 Enter Order Line for Label.
4.	 Enter Order Lines for Plural Label.

The E-Commerce Framework
[ 64 ]
5.	 Enter An Order Line Item for an ordered item for the Description 
to describe the purpose of the custom object.
6.	 Enter Order Line No for the Record Name, and change the Data Type 
to Auto Number.
7.	 Enter OL-{00000} in the Display Format field.
8.	 Enter 1 in the Starting Number field.
9.	 Select the following checkboxes:
°°
Allow Reports (optional feature)
°°
Allow Activities (optional feature)
°°
Track Field History (optional feature)
°°
Add Notes and Attachments related list to default page layout 
(object creation option)
10.	 Ensure that the Deployment Status is set to Deployed.
11.	 Press the Save button to create the Custom Object. 
You will now need to configure the Custom Fields for the Order object:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Objects.
2.	 Click on the Order Line hyperlink.
3.	 Click on the New button in the Custom Fields & Relationships section.
4.	 Create the fields described in the following table:
Field Type
Field Label
Field Name
Comments
Currency
Line Item Price
Line_Item_Price
The price of the 
item in the order. 
Set the default value to 
0.
Number
Quantity
Quantity
The quantity of 
the item ordered. 
Ensure that this field is 
a Required field.
It is imperative that the Field Type and Field Name for each field 
in this table is an exact match to your custom object to ensure that 
the e-commerce site will integrate correctly.

Chapter 2
[ 65 ]
Defining the Order Line relationships
To complete our data model, we will need to establish the following relationships:
•	
A master-detail relationship from the Order object to the Order Line object.
•	
A lookup relationship from the Order Line object to the Order Line 
Item object
First, we will configure the lookup relationship for the Order Line Item object:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Objects.
2.	 Click on the Order Line hyperlink.
3.	 Click on the New button in the Custom Fields & Relationships section.
4.	 For the Data Type, select a Lookup Relationship. Click on Next.
5.	 In the Related To picklist, select Order Line Item. Click on Next.
6.	 For the Field Label, accept the default Order Line Item.
7.	 Ensure that the Field Name defaults to Order_Line_Item.
8.	 Accept the default Child Relationship Name of Order_Lines.
9.	 Ensure that the Required checkbox is selected.
10.	 Ensure that the Don't allow deletion of the lookup record that's part of a 
lookup relationship option is selected to preserve the referential integrity 
of orders. Click on Next.
11.	 Accept the defaults for field-level security and click on Next.
12.	 Accept the defaults to add the lookup field to the Order Line standard page 
layout. Click on Next.
13.	 Accept the defaults for the related lists and click on Save.
Finally, we will configure the master-detail relationship for the Order object:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Objects.
2.	 Click on the Order Line hyperlink.
3.	 Click on the New button in the Custom Fields & Relationships section.
4.	 For the Data Type, select a Master-Detail Relationship. Click on Next.
5.	 In the Related To picklist, select Order. Click on Next.
6.	 For the Field Label, accept the default of Order.
7.	 Ensure that the Field Name defaults to Order.
8.	 Accept the default Child Relationship Name of Order_Lines.

The E-Commerce Framework
[ 66 ]
9.	 Ensure that the Sharing Settings are set to Read/Write: Allows users with at 
least Read/Write access to the Master record to create, edit, or delete related 
Detail records. Click on Next.
10.	 Accept the defaults for the field-level security page and click on Next.
11.	 Accept the defaults to add the Order field to the Order Line page layout. 
Click on Next.
12.	 Accept the defaults to add the Order Lines related list to the Order page 
layout. Click on Save.
Finishing the data model
Now that the objects and relationships for the data model are complete, we can finish 
it off by adding the following fields:
•	
Add Order Line Total and Grand Total formula fields to the Order object to 
support discounting and displaying the overall amount of an order
•	
Adding a formula field to the Order Line object to lookup the Item Name for 
an Order Line
•	
Adding a formula field to the Order Line object to calculate the total amount 
for the Order Line
We will start by configuring the fields for the Order Line object:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Objects.
2.	 Click on the Order Line hyperlink.
3.	 Click on the New button in the Custom Fields & Relationships section.
4.	 For the Data Type, select Formula. Click on Next.
5.	 For the Field Label, enter Line Item Total.
6.	 Ensure that the Field Name defaults to Line_Item_Total.
7.	 Select Currency for the Formula Return Type. Click on Next.
8.	 Select List Item Price from the Insert Field drop-down list, Multiply from 
the Insert Operator drop-down list, and then Quantity from the Insert Field 
drop-down list. The Formula Editor looks as follows: Line_Item_Price__c * 
Quantity__c. At the beginning, we created a formulae field on Order Line in 
the Formula Editor. Click on Next.
9.	 Accept the defaults for the field-level security page. Click on Next.
10.	 Accept the defaults to add the field to the Order Line page layout. 
Click on Save & New.
11.	 For the Data Type, select Formula. Click on Next.

Chapter 2
[ 67 ]
12.	 For the Field Label, enter Item Name.
13.	 Ensure that the Field Name defaults to Item_Name.
14.	 Select Text for the Formula Return Type. Click on Next.
15.	 Enter Order_Line_Item__r.Item_Name__c in the Formula Editor. 
Click on Next.
16.	 Accept the defaults for the field-level security page. Click on Next.
17.	 Accept the defaults to add the field to the Order Line page layout. 
Click on Save.
Finally, we will configure the fields for the Order object:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Objects.
2.	 Click on the Order hyperlink.
3.	 Click on the New button in the Custom Fields & Relationships section.
4.	 For the Data Type, select a Roll-Up Summary. Click on Next.
5.	 For the Field Label, enter Order Lines Total.
6.	 Ensure that the Field Name defaults to Order_Lines_Total. Click on Next.
7.	 Select Order Lines in the Summarized Object drop-down list.
8.	 Select SUM for the Roll Up Type.
9.	 In the Field to Aggregate drop-down list, select Line Item Total. 
Click on Next.
10.	 Accept the defaults for the field-level security page. Click on Next.
11.	 Accept the defaults to add the Line Item Total to the Order page 
layout. Click on Save & New.
12.	 For the Data Type, select Formula. Click on Next.
13.	 For the Field Label, enter Grand Total.
14.	 Ensure that the Field Name defaults to Grand_Total.
15.	 Select Currency for the Formula Return Type. Click on Next.
16.	 Enter Order_Lines_Total__c - ( Order_Lines_Total__c * 
Discount__c ) in the Formula Editor. Click on Next.
17.	 Accept the defaults for the field-level security page. Click on Next.
18.	 Accept the defaults to add the field to the Order page layout. Click on Save.
Congratulations! The data model for the application is now complete.

The E-Commerce Framework
[ 68 ]
Defining application tabs and page layouts
Our next task is to define the tabs required for the Orders application and make 
some minor adjustments to some page layouts generated by Force.com.
To define the application tabs, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Tabs.
2.	 Click on New in the Custom Object Tabs section.
3.	 In the Object dropdown list select Order.
4.	 Select the Lookup icon to set a Tab Style (a suggestion is Stack of Cash). 
Click on Next.
5.	 Accept the defaults for the Add to Profiles page and click on Next.
6.	 Deselect all applications to ensure this tab is not added. Click on Save.
7.	 Click on New in the Custom Object Tabs section.
8.	 In the Object drop-down list, select Order Line Item.
9.	 Select the Lookup icon to set a Tab Style (a suggestion is Treasure Chest). 
Click on Next.
10.	 Accept the defaults for the Add to Profiles page and click on Next.
11.	 Deselect all applications to ensure this tab is not added. Click on Save.
We don't add a tab for Order Line as they will only ever be displayed 
as a related list on the Order tab in our application.
To adjust the dialog lookup for Order Line Item objects, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Objects.
2.	 Click on the Order Line Item hyperlink.
3.	 Scroll down to the Search Layouts section and select the Edit link next to 
Lookup Dialogs.
4.	 Add Item Name and Unit price to the Selected Fields list.
5.	 Click on Save.
6.	 Finally, we will adjust the Order Lines related list on the Orders page layout:
7.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Objects.
8.	 Click on the Order hyperlink.

Chapter 2
[ 69 ]
9.	 Scroll down to the Page Layouts section, and select the Edit link next to 
Order Layout.
10.	 Scroll down to the Order Lines related list and select the wrench icon 
to adjust the list properties.
11.	 Add the Order Line No, Item Name, Quantity, Line Item Price, and 
Line Item Total to the Selected Fields list.
12.	 Select Order Line No in the Sort By drop-down list. Ensure that Ascending 
is selected for the sort order:
13.	 Click on OK and then on Save in the page layout header to complete 
the changes.
Creating the application
To define the Orders application, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Apps.
2.	 Click on the New button.

The E-Commerce Framework
[ 70 ]
3.	 Select Custom app as the type of app to create. Click on Next.
4.	 For the App Label, enter Orders. The App Name should also be defaulted to 
Orders. Click on Next.
5.	 Click on Next to accept the default logo.
6.	 Move Orders and Order Line Items to the Selected Tabs list.
7.	 Leave Home as the Default Landing Tab. Click on Next.
8.	 Make the application visible to System Administrator and click on Save.
A dash of workflow
The next step in our base application is to configure a workflow rule to populate the 
Line Item Price of an Order Line when it is created. The price will be sourced from 
the Order Line Item object.
The workflow will check if the Line Item Price on an Order Line is blank at the 
time of creation, and if true, copy the price from the linked Order Line Item into 
the Line Item Price field of the Order Line. In our sample application, this will be 
true for orders created through the Salesforce interface. The e-commerce site will 
automatically populate the Unit Price on an Order Line.
In the sample application, we are using a workflow to populate the 
Order Line price to shield against a price change in the underlying 
Order Line Item object. If licensing allows it in a production 
application, it is recommended to use the standard products and price 
book functionality instead.
To configure the workflow, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Workflow & Approvals | Workflow Rules.
2.	 If an Understanding Workflow page is displayed, click on Continue.
3.	 Click on the New Rule button to create a new workflow rule.
4.	 Select the Order Line as the object to apply this workflow rule to. 
Click on Next.
5.	 For the Rule Name, enter Order Line Created.
6.	 In the Evaluation Criteria, select the Evaluate the rule when a record is 
created option.
7.	 In the Rule Criteria, select the drop-down list option to Run this rule if the 
following formula evaluates to true.

Chapter 2
[ 71 ]
8.	 In the Formula Editor, enter Line_Item_Price__c = 0. Click on Save & Next
9.	 In the Specify Workflow Actions screen, click on the Add Workflow Action 
dropdown, and select New Field Update.
10.	 Enter Insert Order Line Price for the Name of the action. The Unique 
Name should default to Insert_Order_Line_Price.
11.	 In the Fields to Update, select Order Line and Line Item Price.
12.	 In the Specify New Field Value section, select Use a formula to set 
the new value.
13.	 For the Formula Value, enter Order_Line_Item__r.Unit_Price__c. Click 
on Save. Your workflow rule should resemble the following screenshot:

The E-Commerce Framework
[ 72 ]
14.	 Your workflow action should resemble the following screenshot:
Loading in Order Line Items
In the code download for this chapter, you will find a file called Order Line Item.
csv in the sample_data directory. This file contains some sample Order Line Items 
to get you started. You can use the import wizard or apex data loader to load the 
sample data into your development organization.
Importing with the Custom Object Import Wizard
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Data Management | Import Custom Objects.
2.	 In the Custom Object Import Wizard introduction screen, select Start 
Import Wizard!:

Chapter 2
[ 73 ]
3.	 In Step 1 of the import wizard, choose to import Order Line Item objects and 
click on Next:

The E-Commerce Framework
[ 74 ]
4.	 In Step 2 of the import wizard, select No – insert all records in my import 
file and click on Next:
5.	 In Step 3 of the import wizard, select None so that no fields from the file are 
used to specify the record owner for the imported objects. The import process 
will then use your login ID as the record owner. Click on Next:
6.	 In Step 4 of the import wizard, select the Order Line Item.csv file from the 
code download for the chapter and click on Next:

Chapter 2
[ 75 ]
7.	 In Step 5 of the import wizard, set the Field Mapping as per the following 
screenshot and click on Next:

The E-Commerce Framework
[ 76 ]
8.	 Click on OK in the warning dialog that is displayed:
9.	 In Step 6 of the import wizard, click on Import Now! to submit the 
import request:
10.	 Click on Finish in Step 7 of the import wizard:

Chapter 2
[ 77 ]
11.	 When the import has completed, you will receive a confirmation e-mail:
Building the e-commerce application
We are now ready to build the e-commerce application. It will be written in Ruby on 
Rails and hosted on the Heroku platform (http://www.heroku.com).
In this chapter, we will be configuring and deploying a prebuilt Ruby 
on Rails e-commerce application to Heroku. We will only be examining 
in detail the aspects of the application that integrate to Force.com. If you 
are familiar with Ruby on Rails, I encourage you to explore the source 
code included in the code download for the chapter to understand the 
mechanics of the application. If you are unfamiliar with Ruby on Rails, 
a great place to start learning is http://rubyonrails.org before 
starting to familiarize yourself with the source code.
Heroku is a PaaS acquired by Salesforce in 2010 to provide a state-of-the-art cloud 
development platform to help organizations accelerate their adoption of cloud 
computing. Heroku is a polyglot platform and provides excellent support for Ruby 
on Rails applications as well as applications written in multiple languages, including 
the following:
•	
Java
•	
Node.js
•	
Python

The E-Commerce Framework
[ 78 ]
A book could easily be written about the Heroku platform in its own right. In this 
chapter, we will concentrate on the steps required to get our e-commerce application 
running on the platform. To find out more information about Heroku, refer 
to the following websites: http://developer.salesforce.com/ and 
http://www.heroku.com.
As part of the Salesforce1 development platform announcement, 
Heroku was rebranded as Heroku1, and a number of new features 
and APIs were announced (including the force.rb Ruby gem 
we will be using in this chapter). For the purposes of this chapter, 
the terms are interchangeable. Whenever we refer to Heroku, we 
are also referring to Heroku1.
Setting up the development environment
To configure a local development environment, you will need to install and 
configure the following software on your local machine:
•	
Ruby on Rails
•	
Git
•	
Heroku toolbelt
If you have any or all of these already installed, feel free to skip 
through the relevant section(s).
Ruby on Rails
Ruby is an object-oriented language released in 1995 by Yukihiro "Matz" Matsumoto. 
The language blended parts of Perl, Smalltalk, Eiffel, Ada, and Lisp to form a new 
language. The intent of Ruby is to strike a balance between functional programming 
and imperative programming styles.
Ruby has grown into a full-fledged programming language backed by a very active 
community of developers. However, it was the arrival of the Rails framework in 2003 
that fueled a massive amount of interest and growth in Ruby. Rails was developed 
by David Heinemeier Hansson as a better way of building web applications. Two 
standout features of Rails are its native support for both the model-view-controller 
(MVC) paradigm and the REST routing style.

Chapter 2
[ 79 ]
The installation of Ruby on Rails can be challenging, especially for Windows users 
where Ruby 2.0.0 support is still evolving. To ensure a consistent experience, I 
recommend that you use the instructions contained in Appendix B, Installing Ruby 
on Rails on Ubuntu, to install Ruby on Rails on an Ubuntu-based Linux system.
For Windows and Mac users, I recommend that you set up an Ubuntu 
virtual machine using applications such as VirtualBox (https://www.
virtualbox.org/) and install Ubuntu (http://www.wikihow.com/
Install-Ubuntu-on-VirtualBox). Be sure to download and use 
Ubuntu Desktop version 14.04 LTS as a minimum.
Once you have Ruby on Rails installed on your system, use a command window and 
issue the following command to check the version of Ruby you are running:
$ ruby -v
If Ruby 2.0.0 is installed correctly, you will see a response similar to the following 
(the version may differ):
ruby 2.0.0p247 (2013-06-27 revision 41674)
Issue the following command to check your Rails installation:
$ rails -v
If Rails is installed correctly, you will see a response similar to the following (again, 
the version may differ):
Rails 4.0.0
Note that a minimum of Rails 4.0.0 is required for the e-commerce application. If you 
have installed Ruby 2.0.0, Rails 4.0.0 will be installed by default.
If you have successfully run the previous commands and received the correct 
responses, Ruby on Rails is successfully installed on your system.
On some systems, particularly if there is an existing Ruby installation, 
there may be a conflict when attempting to check the Ruby 2.0.0 
installation. In this case, it will be necessary to run the following 
commands to explicitly use the Ruby 2.0.0 and Rails 4.0.0 environment 
installed with rvm:
$ rvm 2.0.0 do ruby -v
$ rvm 2.0.0 exec bundle install –-without production
$ rvm 2.0.0 rails -v

The E-Commerce Framework
[ 80 ]
Git
Git is a source code control system developed by Linus Torvalds in 2005 to manage 
builds of the Linux kernel. It was released in December 2005 and now enjoys a wide 
level of support among software developers. Online code repositories such as GitHub 
(https://github.com/) provide an extensive level of support for Git and host some 
of the most popular open source projects on the Internet (Twitter Bootstrap, Node.js, 
jQuery, and Ruby on Rails to name just a few).
If you are running on a Mac, and you have installed the Xcode 4 or Xcode 5 
command-line tooling, you should already have Git installed on your system.
If you don't have Git installed, go to http://git-scm.com/ to download and install 
it on to your system.
Once you have Git installed on your system (or to verify that it is already installed), 
open a command window and issue the following command:
$ git --version
If Git is installed correctly, you will see a response similar to the following (the version 
may differ):
git version 1.7.12.4
If you have successfully run the previous command and received the correct 
response, it means that Git has been successfully installed on your system.
Heroku
To begin working with Heroku, you will first need to sign up at 
https://www.heroku.com/. This is an easy process, and fortunately 
Heroku provides enough free processing capacity for us to develop 
and run the e-commerce application.
After you have established your Heroku account, you will need to install the Heroku 
toolbelt on your system. This is a command line utility that will allow you to deploy 
applications to Heroku and interact with the Heroku environment. To install the 
Heroku toolbelt for your system, go to https://toolbelt.heroku.com/.
Once the Heroku toolbelt is installed, you can log in to your Heroku account by 
issuing the following command:
$ heroku login
You will then be asked to enter your user credentials to log in to your account.

Chapter 2
[ 81 ]
The first time you log in to your Heroku account from the command 
line, you will be asked to generate a public key. This key is required 
to be able to deploy applications to Heroku. Windows users will be 
unable to generate a public key using the Windows command shell. 
A workaround is to login in to Heroku using the bash shell that is 
installed with Git.
Congratulations! You have now successfully configured your 
development environment.
Configuring the e-commerce application
The download for the chapter contains the source code for the Ruby on Rails 
e-commerce application. The download also comes with a preconfigured Git repository.
From the chapter download, copy the ecommerce_app folder to a working directory. 
From a command prompt, navigate to the working directory and check the status 
of the Git repository. For example, if you copy the application to a rails_projects 
subdirectory in your home directory, the commands and results would be as follows:
$ cd ~/rails_projects/ecommerce_app
$ git status
# On branch master
nothing to commit (working directory clean)
Downloading the example code
You can download the example code files for all Packt books you have 
purchased from your account at http://www.packtpub.com. If you 
purchased this book elsewhere, you can visit http://www.packtpub.
com/support and register to have the files e-mailed directly to you.
All of the remaining commands in this section assume you are using the 
application root directory.
The next step is to install the required Ruby gems contained in the application 
Gemfile. Issue the following command:
$ bundle install --without production

The E-Commerce Framework
[ 82 ]
The --without production flag ensures that gems that are specific 
to Heroku are not installed in our local environment.
The following commands will create a local development database and populate it 
with some sample data:
$ rake db:migrate
$ rake db:populate
You will now see a file named development.sqlite3 in the db subdirectory. The 
Rails console can be used to check that the database has been populated correctly:
$ rails console
The Rails console will start, and you will be presented with the console prompt. 
Issue the following command to check how many sample users have been loaded 
into the database:
2.0.0p247 :001 > User.count
The response should be similar to the following, indicating that there are 100 sample 
users in the database:
   (1.3ms)  SELECT COUNT(*) FROM "users"
 => 100 
To check the details of the first user in the database, issue the following command:
2.0.0p247 :001 > User.first
The response should be similar to the following displaying the details of the first user 
in the database:
  User Load (0.9ms)  SELECT "users".* FROM "users" ORDER BY "users"."id" 
ASC LIMIT 1
 => #<User id: 1, name: "Example User", email: "example@
forceblueprints.com", address: nil, created_at: "2013-12-03 10:42:17", 
updated_at: "2013-12-03 10:42:17", password_digest: "$2a$10$yHa/
zgmLzZS5W1VGIo7.GO0wnVm2NUsaMCbYGwnSeG3....", remember_token: 
"225f81230d98caef6074b145b25023e33833f70d", admin: true> 
A sample Rails console session is illustrated in the following screenshot:

Chapter 2
[ 83 ]
Type exit or press Ctrl + D to exit the Rails console.
Finally, we will create a target Heroku application. Assuming you have previously 
issued the heroku login command and are currently logged into your Heroku 
account, issue the following command:
$ heroku create
Heroku will create a new application against your account, and you should get a 
response similar to the following (the application name will differ):
Creating polar-cliffs-8870... done, stack is cedar
http://polar-cliffs-8870.herokuapp.com/ | git@heroku.com:
polar-cliffs-8870.git
Git remote heroku added
There is quite a bit happening behind the scenes when issuing the heroku create 
command, so let's examine it in a bit more detail:
•	
Heroku creates a blank application against your account and gives it a 
default name, in this case, polar-cliffs-8870. 
•	
Heroku assigns an application stack to your new application. In Heroku 
parlance, an application stack is a deployment environment that includes the 
operating system, language runtime, and associated libraries. In our case, 
we have been assigned the cedar application stack.
•	
Heroku assigns a default URL to your application. In our case, the default 
URL is http://polar-cliffs-8870.herokuapp.com/.
•	
Heroku creates a remote Git repository for our application. In our case, the 
remote repository is named git@heroku.com:polar-cliffs-8870.git.
•	
Finally, our local Git repository is updated to add the remote repository 
created by Heroku.

The E-Commerce Framework
[ 84 ]
To confirm that the Heroku remote Git repository has been added, issue the 
following command:
$ git remote
The response should list heroku and any other remote repositories that have been 
configured. (A local Git repository can be linked to more than one remote repository, 
which is very useful if you wish to also store your code at a repository such 
as GitHub.)
If you log in to your Heroku dashboard at www.heroku.com, you will also see that 
your new application has been added:
At this point, we now have a local development environment configured, our 
development database populated with some sample data, and a target application 
created on the Heroku platform. Our final task before deploying the application to 
Heroku is to configure the Force.com remote access connection that will allow us to 
view and modify the Force.com data.
Configuring a Force.com remote access 
application
To be able to access Force.com data from our Heroku e-commerce application, we 
need to configure a remote-access application in Force.com. This will give us the 
authentication and authorization information we need to be able to configure our 
e-commerce application. To configure a remote-access application, perform the 
following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Apps.
2.	 Scroll down to the Connected Apps section and click on New.

Chapter 2
[ 85 ]
3.	 Enter Heroku E_Commerce App for the Connected App Name.
4.	 The API Name will be autopopulated.
5.	 Enter your e-mail address in the Contact Email field.
6.	 Enter Test E-Commerce Heroku app to access Salesforce.com 
data for the Description. Your screen should now resemble the 
following screenshot:
7.	 Select the Enable OAuth Settings checkbox. A new set of fields will 
be displayed.
8.	 Enter https://<<your app name>>.herokuapp.com/_auth 
for the Callback URL. For example, using the application created in the 
previous section, the callback URL would be http://polar-cliffs-8870.
herokuapp.com/_auth.
9.	 From the Available OAuth Scopes list, move the Provide access to your data 
via the Web (web) option to the Selected OAuth Scopes list.

The E-Commerce Framework
[ 86 ]
10.	 Under Web App Settings enter https://<<your app name>>.herokuapp.
com/ for the Start URL. For example, using the application created in the 
previous section, the Start URL would be http://polar-cliffs-8870.
herokuapp.com/. Your screen should now resemble the following screenshot:
11.	 Click on Save.
Force.com will now configure the remote-access application and present you with a 
screen similar to the following:

Chapter 2
[ 87 ]
The key information that you will need from this screen to connect the Heroku 
e-commerce to Force.com consists of the consumer key and consumer secret. You 
will need them when we configure the e-commerce application in the next task.
The e-commerce application uses the force.rb Ruby gem to connect to Force.com. 
The gem provides a nice wrapper around the Force.com REST API and relieves us 
of writing a lot of boilerplate to make the REST API calls. More information on 
the force.rb gem is available at the project homepage hosted at GitHub: 
https://github.com/heroku/force.rb.
To configure local development environment access for the e-commerce application, 
we need to set some operating system environment variables with our Force.com 
OAuth credentials. To do this, perform the following steps (Windows users can use 
the Git bash shell):
1.	 Open a command prompt. Issue the following command and substitute 
<<username>> with your Force.com username:
$ export SALESFORCE_USERNAME="<<username>>"
2.	 Issue the following command and substitute <<password>> with your 
Force.com password:
$ export SALESFORCE_PASSWORD="<<password>>"
3.	 Issue the following command and substitute <<security token>> with 
your Force.com security token:
$ export SALESFORCE_SECURITY_TOKEN="<<security token>>"
4.	 Issue the following command and substitute <<client id>> with your 
Force.com remote application consumer key:
$ export SALESFORCE_CLIENT_ID="<<client id>>"
5.	 Issue the following command and substitute <<client secret>> with your 
Force.com remote application consumer secret:
$ export SALESFORCE_CLIENT_SECRET="<<client secret>>"
With the environment variables in place, you can now run the application on your 
local workstation. At the command prompt in the application root directory, issue 
the following command:
$ rails server

The E-Commerce Framework
[ 88 ]
On some systems, particularly if there is an existing Ruby installation, 
there may be a conflict when attempting to run the application. In this 
case, it will be necessary to run the following commands to explicitly 
use the Ruby 2.0.0 and Rails 4.0.0 environment installed with rvm:
$ rvm 2.0.0 exec bundle install –-without production
$ rvm 2.0.0 rails server
When the application has booted up, you will see the following, which indicates that 
it is now ready to be accessed locally:
=> Booting WEBrick
=> Rails 4.0.0 application starting in development on http://0.0.0.0:3000
=> Run `rails server -h` for more startup options
=> Ctrl-C to shutdown server
[2013-12-04 14:44:33] INFO  WEBrick 1.3.1
[2013-12-04 14:44:33] INFO  ruby 2.0.0 (2013-06-27) [x86_64-darwin11.4.2]
[2013-12-04 14:44:33] INFO  WEBrick::HTTPServer#start: pid=3178 port=3000
If you navigate to http://localhost:3000/products with your web browser, you 
will see the product catalog populated with data from Force.com:

Chapter 2
[ 89 ]
An extremely useful source of information about your running 
application is the log files in the log subdirectory. When running 
locally in the development mode, the log file will be named 
development.log.
Congratulations! We have now finished the configuration of the e-commerce 
application and can run it locally. The next step is to deploy the application to Heroku.
Deploying to Heroku
After all of the configuration so far, it might seem a bit of an anticlimax when you 
see how easy it is to deploy the e-commerce application to Heroku. For this, we can 
thank the folks at Heroku who have really turned this into a simple operation.
Assuming you are in the ecommerce_app application root directory and are logged 
in to your Heroku account, issue the following command:
$ git push heroku master
Similar to the heroku create command, there is quite a bit happening behind the 
scenes here, so let's examine it in a bit more detail:
1.	 The current contents of the master branch in your local Git repository are 
uploaded to the remote Git repository that was automatically created when 
you issued the heroku create command earlier.
2.	 Heroku detects that you are installing a Ruby on Rails application and starts 
compiling it into an executable format for the Heroku environment.
3.	 Heroku examines the Gemfile shipped with your application and 
links it to existing gems and installs any missing gems.
4.	 The database configuration is rewritten to point to a Heroku 
Postgres instance.
5.	 The Heroku compilation is completed, and the compiled application 
(a slug in Heroku parlance) is installed and accessible at your 
application URL; in the case of the example in this chapter, 
the URL is http://polar-cliffs-8870.herokuapp.com.

The E-Commerce Framework
[ 90 ]
If you are having issues deploying to Heroku, check that your Git 
repository is configured correctly by referring to the following blog at 
github.com: https://gist.github.com/bhousman/8713170. If 
you are having permission issues with the remote Git repository, refer to 
https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/keys for information 
on generating and managing the SSH keys required to deploy to Heroku. 
Finally, if you are behind a corporate firewall, you might need to check 
with your network administrator to confirm that you are able to access 
Heroku from the command line.
Now that our application has been deployed to Heroku, our next task is to initialize 
the application database and populate it with some sample data. To initialize the 
application database, issue the following command:
$ heroku run rake db:migrate
This will initialize the database and set up the table structure for the objects defined 
in the e-commerce application.
To populate the database with some sample users, issue the following command:
$ heroku run rake db:populate
In some corporate environments, you may have some problems 
using the heroku run command, because it can't connect to a 
terminal instance on Heroku. In this instance, you can use the heroku 
run:detached command. For example, heroku run:detached 
rake db:migrate will initialize the database. You can the check the 
result of the initialization using the heroku logs command.
Finally, we need to set up some Heroku configuration variables to hold our 
Force.com OAuth credentials:
1.	 Issue the following command and substitute <<username>> with your 
Force.com username:
$ heroku config:set SALESFORCE_USERNAME="<<username>>"
2.	 Issue the following command and substitute <<password>> with your 
Force.com password:
$ heroku config:set SALESFORCE_PASSWORD="<<password>>"
3.	 Issue the following command and substitute <<security token>> with 
your Force.com security token:
$ heroku config:set SALESFORCE_SECURITY_TOKEN="<<security token>>"

Chapter 2
[ 91 ]
4.	 Issue the following command and substitute <<client id>> with your 
Force.com remote application consumer key:
$ heroku config:set SALESFORCE_CLIENT_ID="<<client id>>"
5.	 Issue the following command and substitute <<client secret>> with your 
Force.com remote application consumer secret:
$ heroku config:set SALESFORCE_CLIENT_SECRET="<<client secret>>"
You only need to set the Heroku configuration variables once. They 
are retained by Heroku for all subsequent runs of your application 
even if it is shutdown and restarted. For more information, refer to 
http://docs.developer.salesforce.com/docs/atlas.en-
us.186.0.salesforce1api.meta/salesforce1api/heroku_
best_practices.htm.
At this stage, you can check the status of you application by checking the application 
log on your Heroku instance:
$ heroku logs
To see your application in action, issue the following command:
$ heroku open
You will now see your application running live on Heroku, similar to the 
following screenshot:

The E-Commerce Framework
[ 92 ]
From here, you can also select the Products link to see the product catalog populated 
with data from your Salesforce development organization.
You can also select the Sign in link to log in as a preconfigured user. To log in as an 
administrator, use the following credentials:
•	
Username: example@forceblueprints.com
•	
Password: foobar
To log in as a regular user, use the following credentials:
•	
Username: example-1@forceblueprints.com
•	
Password: password
You can use any regular user login ranging from example-1@
forceblueprints.com to example-99@forceblueprints.com.
Placing an order
Now that our Heroku site is up and running, we test that our integration is working 
by placing an order and verifying that it flows through to Force.com.
The e-commerce application supports orders being placed by anonymous or logged in 
users. For this example, we will use a logged in user and perform the following steps:
1.	 If you haven't already logged in, log in as an example user with the 
credentials specified in the previous section.
2.	 Select the Products link to display the product catalog.
3.	 For any product, select the Add link to add it to your cart.
4.	 When a product has been added successfully, you will see a success message 
displayed, which is similar to the following screenshot:

Chapter 2
[ 93 ]
5.	 You can add additional products to the cart by pressing their Add links.
6.	 When you have finished adding products, select the My Cart link to display 
your shopping cart. Your screen should look similar to the following 
screenshot (your products may differ):
7.	 Click on the Checkout button to navigate to the checkout screen.

The E-Commerce Framework
[ 94 ]
8.	 Enter an Address to ship the order to and any order Comments you might 
want to add. If you scroll to the bottom of the screen, you will also see a 
summary of the items in your order:
9.	 Click on the Create Order button to create the order in Force.com. You will 
then be directed to the Account Profile page, where you will see a success 
message and a summary of your orders:

Chapter 2
[ 95 ]
10.	 We can now verify that the order exists in Force.com. Leave the Account 
Profile page open in your browser, open a new tab / browser window, 
and log in to your development organization. Select the Orders tab, and 
the newly created order should appear in your Recent Orders list:
11.	 Click on the order name's link to display it in more detail:

The E-Commerce Framework
[ 96 ]
12.	 If you scroll down further to the related lists, you will also see the Order 
Lines for the order:
13.	 We can now edit the order in Force.com and see the update instantly in the 
e-commerce application. In the Force.com Order Detail screen, double-click 
on the Planned Delivery Date to edit it. Select a date and click on Save.
14.	 Navigate back to the Account Profile screen in the e-commerce application 
and refresh the browser window. You will now see the Planned Delivery 
Date populated in your Order Summary:
Congratulations! You now have a working e-commerce application deployed to 
Heroku and have successfully integrated it with Force.com.

Chapter 2
[ 97 ]
Building the final Force.com Fulfillment 
application
At this point, we have a working Force.com Fulfillment application that can receive 
and update orders from the Heroku-powered e-commerce application. Admittedly, 
it is very basic, but it has provided us with enough confidence to trust that the 
integration between the e-commerce site and Force.com is working correctly. We are 
now in a position to enhance it with Visualforce and Apex to provide a much more 
advanced interface.
We will be modifying the Orders tab to provide a Visualforce interface, where users 
will be able to choose to create a new order or search for a specific order by the order 
reference number and display matching orders.
A new Visualforce page will also be developed to create and maintain orders.
The steps in the following section can be performed using the Force.
com declarative interface or the Force.com IDE. I have chosen to show 
the steps using the declarative interface due to the fact that I will 
be using prebuilt code contained within the code download for the 
chapter. When developing your own code from scratch, I recommend 
that you use the Force.com IDE.
Building the Order Search custom controller
Our first task is to create the order search custom controller. This controller will be 
responsible for searching the Orders object for records that match criteria entered by 
the user and returning the results of the search.
To create the order search custom controller, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Develop | Apex Classes.
2.	 All of the apex classes for your organization will be displayed. Click on New.
3.	 In the code download for the chapter, locate the OrderSearchController.cls 
file in the force_com folder.
4.	 Copy and paste the contents of OrderSearchController.cls into the Apex 
Code Editor in your Force.com window.
5.	 Click on Save.

The E-Commerce Framework
[ 98 ]
The working of the Order Search custom controller
We start by declaring two controller properties:
// results from the Order search
public List<Order__c> orderSearchResults {get; set;}
// textbox for search parameters
public string orderNumber {get; set;}
The orderSearchResults property will contain a list of orders that match the search 
criteria entered by the user. The orderNumber property is used to store the criteria 
that will be used for the search.
Next, we implement the constructor for the custom controller:
public OrderSearchController() {
  // initialize Order No string
  orderNumber = 'Order-';
}
This constructor simply sets some initial text to aid the user in entering an order 
reference number provided on the e-commerce site.
Finally, we implement the controller method that performs the actual search and 
returns the results:
public PageReference searchOrders() {
  // initialize or clear order Search results
  if (orderSearchResults == null) {
    orderSearchResults = new List<Order__c>();
  } else {
    orderSearchResults.clear();
  }
  // Execute SOQL query
  orderSearchResults = [SELECT Id, Name, Customer_Name__c, 
    Customer_Email__c, Planned_Delivery_Date__c, Delivered__c, 
    Grand_Total__c FROM Order__c
     
      WHERE Name LIKE 
      :String.escapeSingleQuotes(orderNumber)
       + '%'
      ORDER BY Name
      LIMIT 100];
  return null;
}

Chapter 2
[ 99 ]
Initially, we check if we have an existing results list for an order search. If not, we 
create and initialize a new list of orders to hold the search results. If we do have an 
existing results list, we clear it out.
Next, we execute an SOQL query to search Force.com for any order(s) that match 
the search criteria. The key here is the WHERE clause, which uses the LIKE operator, 
substitutes the orderNumber controller property into the SOQL query, and appends 
the % character to perform a wildcard search (we escape the string to guard 
against SOQL injection attacks). The results of the search are then stored in the 
orderSearchResults controller property so that they can be accessed by the calling 
Visualforce page.
Finally, we return a null page reference to the calling Visualforce page to redisplay 
the order search page with the search results.
Building the Order Search Visualforce page
Now our custom controller for the order search is in place, we can build the 
Visualforce page that will be responsible for:
•	
Obtaining the order search criteria from the user
•	
Executing the search and passing the search criteria to the controller
•	
Receiving the results of the order search and presenting them to the user
•	
Allowing the user to select an existing order to edit it
•	
Allowing the user to create a new order if required
The Order Search page can be seen in the following screenshot:
To create the Order Search page, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Develop | Pages.
2.	 All of the Visualforce pages for your organization will be displayed. Click 
on New.

The E-Commerce Framework
[ 100 ]
3.	 In the Page Information section, enter Order Search Page in the Label field.
4.	 Enter OrderSearchPage in the Name field.
5.	 In the code download for the chapter, locate the OrderSearchPage.
page file in the force_com folder.
6.	 Clear the default markup in the Visualforce Page Editor.
7.	 Copy and paste the contents of OrderSearchPage.page into the Visualforce 
Page Editor in your Force.com window.
8.	 Click on Save.
The working of the Order Search page
The first line of the Visualforce page instructs it to use our custom 
OrderSearchController class, sets the tabStyle property to use the 
Order__c custom object tab, and finally hides the default Force.com sidebar 
to maximize the display area and to add a more customized feel to the interface:
<apex:page controller="OrderSearchController" tabStyle="Order__c"
  sidebar="false" >
The next item of interest is the PageBlockSection control that provides the interface 
to enter search criteria, execute the search, or create a new order:
<apex:pageBlockSection columns="1" >
  <apex:pageBlockSectionItem >
    <apex:outputLabel for="orderNumber" 
      value="Order Number" />
    <apex:panelGroup >
      <apex:inputText id="orderNumber" 
        value="{!orderNumber}" />
      <apex:commandButton value="Search Orders" 
        action="{!searchOrders}"
        rerender="orderSearchResults,
          messages" />
    </apex:panelGroup>
  </apex:pageBlockSectionItem>
  <apex:outputLink value="/apex/OrdersPage">
    <apex:outputLabel value="Create New Order" />
  </apex:outputLink>
</apex:pageBlockSection>

Chapter 2
[ 101 ]
The apex:outputLabel and apex:panelGroup controls provide the search criteria 
entry and execution interface. The apex:inputText control within the panelGroup 
control is linked to the orderNumber property on the controller through the value 
attribute. Thus, when the search is executed, the controller is automatically aware 
of the search criteria entered by the user.
The apex:commandButton control executes the search. The action attribute links 
the button to the searchOrders method on the controller. Recall that this method 
executes the SOQL query to find matching orders and returns the results to the 
Visualforce page.
The apex:outputLink control provides a link to the Visualforce OrdersPage.page 
file to allow the user to add a new order. We will be building this page shortly.
The next PageBlockSection control is responsible for displaying the results of an 
order search to the user:
<apex:pageBlockSection id="orderSearchResults" columns="1">
  <apex:pageBlockTable value="{!orderSearchResults}" 
    var="order"
    rendered="{!NOT(ISNULL(orderSearchResults))}">
    <apex:column headerValue="Order No"  
      style="text-align: center"
      headerClass="centerHeader">
      <apex:outputLink
      value="/apex/OrdersPage">
      <apex:param name="id" 
        value="{!order.Id}" />
        <apex:outputLabel 
        value="{!order.Name}" />
      </apex:outputLink>
    </apex:column>
    <apex:column headerValue="Customer Name" >
      <apex:outputLabel 
        value="{!order.Customer_Name__c}" />
    </apex:column>
...more column definitions...
    <apex:column headerValue="Grand Total" 
      style="text-align: center"
      headerClass="centerHeader">
      <apex:outputField 
      value="{!order.Grand_Total__c}" />
    </apex:column>
  </apex:pageBlockTable>
</apex:pageBlockSection>

The E-Commerce Framework
[ 102 ]
The apex:pageBlockTable control is used to present the list of orders found to the 
user. It is linked to the orderSearchResults property on the controller through the 
value attribute. The rendered attribute ensures that the pageBlockTable control is 
only displayed if matching orders have been found in Force.com.
The first apex:column control in the table is used to display the order number and 
provide a link to the Visualforce OrdersPage.page file to allow the order to be 
edited. This is achieved by embedding an apex:outputLink control inside the table 
column. Inside apex:outputLink, there is an apex:param control to supply the 
internal Force.com identifier to OrdersPage and an apex:outputField control to 
display the order number itself.
The final step is to configure the Orders tab in our Force.com application to use the 
custom Order Search page by default when it is clicked.
Configuring the Visualforce Orders tab
To finish the implementation of the custom order search functionality, we will 
now reconfigure the Orders tab in our Force.com application to use it when 
Orders is selected.
Your initial thought might be to override the List action in the buttons, 
links, and actions for the Order__c custom object. Unfortunately for 
us, this will not work because we are using a custom controller. You can 
only override the standard action(s) when your Visualforce page uses a 
standard controller or a standard controller with controller extensions.
The first step is to delete the existing custom object tab for Order__c:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Tabs.
2.	 In the Custom Object Tabs section, select the Del link in the Actions column 
for the Orders object.
3.	 Select OK in the confirmation dialog to delete the tab.
Next, we need to configure a new Visualforce tab to use the OrderSearchPage.page 
file we have just created:
1.	 Select Setup | Create | Tabs.
2.	 In the Visualforce Tabs section, click on New.
3.	 In the Visualforce Page drop-down list, select Order Search Page.
4.	 Enter Orders for the Tab Label.

Chapter 2
[ 103 ]
5.	 Enter VFOrders for the Tab Name.
6.	 Choose Stack of Cash for the Tab Style.
7.	 Enter Visualforce Order Search Page for the Description. Your screen 
should resemble the following screenshot:
8.	 Click on Next. Accept the defaults for profile tab settings. Click on Next again.
9.	 Deselect the Include Tab checkbox.
10.	 Select the Orders checkbox in the Include Tab column.
11.	 Click on Save.
If you click on the Orders tab now, you will see the Order Search page displayed. 
However, if you look closely, you will see that there is a slight issue with the page. 
If you haven't spotted it already, you should now notice that the Orders tab is not 
highlighted when we clicked on it. Let's fix that now:
1.	 Select Setup | Develop | Pages.
2.	 Click on the Edit link in the Action column for the Order Search Page.
3.	 Modify the apex:page declaration at the top of the page so that it 
uses VFOrders__tab for the tabStyle property:
<apex:page controller="OrderSearchController"
   tabStyle="VFOrders__tab" sidebar="false" >
4.	 Click on Save.

The E-Commerce Framework
[ 104 ]
If you click on the Orders tab now, you will see it highlighted and the custom Order 
Search page displayed:
If you subsequently click on the Search Orders button, you will see a list of matching 
orders displayed (just don't click on any of the links yet!):
We are nearly finished with our e-commerce fulfillment application. Our next and 
final task is to build the Order Maintenance page.
Building the Orders custom controller
This controller will be responsible for the creation and maintenance of order records 
in our fulfillment application.
To create the Orders custom controller, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Develop | Apex Classes.
2.	 All of the Apex classes for your organization will be displayed. Click 
on New.
3.	 In the code download for the chapter, locate the OrdersController.cls file 
in the force_com folder.

Chapter 2
[ 105 ]
4.	 Copy and paste the contents of OrdersController.cls into the Apex Code 
Editor in your Force.com window.
5.	 Click on Save.
The working of the Orders custom controller
We start by declaring the properties we need in the controller:
// Order for the current context
public Order__c CurrentOrder{get; set;}
// Order Lines for current Order
public List<Order_Line__c> OrderLines{get; set;}
// public property for inserting new Order Line record
public Order_Line__c NewOrderLine {get; set;}
// public property for the Order Line being edited
public Id editOrderLineId {get; set;}	
// public property for the Order Line being removed
public Id removeOrderLineId {get; set;}
// flag whether to render Order Header only
public boolean renderOrderDetails {get; set;}
// flag whether any changes have been made to order
public boolean isOrderDirty {get; set;}
The code comments explain the purpose of each controller property. We will see 
them used throughout the code for the controller.
The first method in our controller is the constructor that is responsible for 
establishing the current context and initializing controller properties as required:
public OrdersController()
{
  // initialize CurrentOrder property
  CurrentOrder = new Order__c();
  // initialize property in case we want to add a new order
    line
  NewOrderLine = new Order_Line__c();
  // initialize editOrderLineId to null
  editOrderLineId = null;
  

The E-Commerce Framework
[ 106 ]
  // get the Order Lines
  prepareFullOrder();
  // no changes to order at this point
  isOrderDirty = false;
}
The next method determines if we are editing an existing order. If so, it fetches the 
order and its linked order lines from the Force.com database:
public void prepareFullOrder()
{
  // get the Current Order using id page parameter
  String id =
    ApexPages.currentPage().getParameters().get('id');
  if (id <> null) {
    // attempt retrieve existing order
    try {
      // render all components by default
      renderOrderDetails = true;
  
      // attempt to retrieve order 
      CurrentOrder = [select Id, Name, 
        Delivered__c, Planned_Delivery_Date__c,
        Order_Lines_Total__c, Discount__c,
        Comments__c, Grand_Total__c,
        Customer_Name__c,
        Customer_Email__c,
        Channel__c,
        Customer_Address__c 
        from Order__c 
    where id = :id];
    
      // Get the Order Lines for the Order
      OrderLines = new List<Order_Line__c>();
      OrderLines = [Select Name, Order_Line_Item__c, 
        Line_Item_Price__c, Line_Item_Total__c, 
        Order_Line_Item__r.Item_Name__c,
        Order__c, Quantity__c
        FROM Order_Line__c 
        WHERE Order__c = :this.CurrentOrder.Id
        ORDER BY Name ASC];
    } catch (QueryException ex) {
      ApexPages.Message myMsg = new ApexPages.Message(
        ApexPages.Severity.ERROR,
        'Order ID does not exist or is not unique!');

Chapter 2
[ 107 ]
      ApexPages.addMessage(myMsg);
    } catch (Exception ex) {
      ApexPages.addMessages(ex);
    }
  } else {
    // we are adding a new Order
    renderOrderDetails = false;
  }	
}
First, we check if an id parameter has been passed to the page as part of the HTTP 
request. If an id parameter is found, we substitute it into an SOQL query to retrieve 
the order from the Force.com database (refer to the highlighted code).
Once we have retrieved the order, we execute another SOQL query to retrieve the 
order lines associated with the order. It is important to note that we substitute the 
Force.com unique identifier for the order into the SOQL query in the highlighted code.
We then use two catch statements to handle any errors encountered during the data 
access operations. The first catch statement handles a QueryException, which will 
be thrown if we can't uniquely identify an order using the ID passed into the page. 
The second catch statements acts as a "catch all" to handle any other errors we might 
encounter. If an error is encountered, we write a message to the Visualforce page.
Finally, if an ID is not passed into the page as part of the HTTP request, we assume 
we are adding a new order and only render the order header information.
The next method in the controller saves the order header information to Force.com:
public PageReference saveOrderHeader() {
  PageReference pageRef = null;
  try {
    if (CurrentOrder.Id == null) 
    {
      // add record and reset flags
      insert CurrentOrder;
      renderOrderDetails = true;
      // set up page reference to display newly 
      // added order
      pageRef = ApexPages.currentPage();
      pageRef.getParameters().put('id', CurrentOrder.Id);
      pageRef.setRedirect(true);
    } else {
      // update the current order
      update CurrentOrder;
    }

The E-Commerce Framework
[ 108 ]
    // reset flag and refresh order details in controller
    isOrderDirty = false;
    prepareFullOrder();
    successMessage('Order Successfully Saved!');
  } catch (DmlException ex) {
    ApexPages.addMessages(ex);
  }
  return pageRef;
}
We begin by entering a try-catch block and checking if the CurrentOrder controller 
property has a unique ID. If it doesn't, we are adding a new order to Force.com. We 
call the insert statement to create the new order. After the order is inserted, it will 
contain the unique Force.com identifier. We then use this unique identifier to set up 
a redirection to the Order Maintenance page for the newly created order and set the 
renderOrderDetails controller property to true to instruct the Visualforce page to 
display all order information.
If we do detect a unique identifier for the CurrentOrder property, we are updating 
an existing order. We call the update statement to save the order to Force.com.
Finally, we set the isOrderDirty controller property to false to indicate that there 
are no pending changes for the order and call the prepareFullOrder method to 
refresh the CurrentOrder and OrderLines controller properties with the latest 
information from the Force.com database.
The next controller method cancels an order, in effect deleting it, and its linked order 
lines, from the Force.com database:
public PageReference cancelOrder() {
  try {
    // Delete Order
    delete CurrentOrder; 
  } catch (DmlException ex) {
    ApexPages.addMessages(ex);
    return null;
  }
  // re-direct back to Orders tab
  return closeOrder();
}
The method begins by calling the delete statement against the CurrentOrder 
controller property. If the deletion is successful, the user is redirected to the Orders tab. 
If the deletion is unsuccessful, a message is displayed and the order is not deleted.
The next set of methods maintains the order lines that are linked to an order. The 
following method adds a new order line to an order:

Chapter 2
[ 109 ]
public PageReference insertOrderLine() {
  try {
    NewOrderLine.Order__c = this.CurrentOrder.Id;
    insert NewOrderLine;
    // re-display Order Line Items
    prepareFullOrder();
    // reset public property for new insert
    NewOrderLine = new Order_Line__c();
    successMessage('Order Line Successfully Added!');
  } catch (DmlException ex) {
    ApexPages.addMessages(ex);
  }
  return null;  // no page re-direct
}
The method begins by assigning the unique identifier from the CurrentOrder 
controller property to the new order line to establish the link between them. Next, 
the insert statement is called to create the order line in the Force.com database. The 
CurrentOrder controller property is refreshed by calling the prepareFullOrder 
method. Finally, the NewOrderLine controller property is reinitialized, ready to 
add another new order line.
Next, we add a method to delete an order line that is linked to an order:
public PageReference removeOrderLine() {
  try {
    Order_Line__c lineToDelete = [SELECT Id 
        FROM Order_Line__c 
        WHERE Id = :removeOrderLineId
        LIMIT 1];
    delete lineToDelete;
    prepareFullOrder();
    successMessage('Order Line Successfully Removed!');
    removeOrderLineId = null;
  } catch (DmlException ex) {
    ApexPages.addMessages(ex);
  }
  return null;
}
First, we execute an SOQL query to retrieve the order line to be deleted, based on 
the unique identifier in the removeOrderLineId controller property. When we have 
retrieved the order line, we remove it from the Force.com database using the delete 
statement. Finally, we refresh the CurrentOrder controller property by calling the 
prepareFullOrder method.

The E-Commerce Framework
[ 110 ]
The next method updates the order lines that are linked to an order:
public PageReference saveOrderLine()
{
  try {
    update OrderLines;
    successMessage('Order Line Successfully Saved!');
  } catch (DmlException ex) {
    System.debug(TAG + methodName  + ex);
    ApexPages.addMessages(ex);
    return null;
  }
  return cancelEditOrderLine();
}
In this method, we simply pass the order lines held in the OrderLines controller 
property to the update statement that will save them to the Force.com database.
The next method resets the controller in case the editing of an order line is cancelled:
public PageReference cancelEditOrderLine()
{
  editOrderLineId = null;
  prepareFullOrder();
  return null;
}
In this method, we simply reset the editOrderLineId controller property to null to 
indicate that no order line is being edited and refresh the CurrentOrder controller 
property by calling the prepareFullOrder method.
The last two utility methods set up a page redirection back to the Visualforce Orders 
tab and set up the display of messages in the Visualforce page:
public PageReference closeOrder()
{
  // Note this may differ for your org
  return new PageReference('/apex/OrderSearchPage');
}
private void successMessage(string messageToDisplay) {
  ApexPages.Message myMsg = new 
    ApexPages.Message(ApexPages.Severity.INFO, 	
messageToDisplay);
  ApexPages.addMessage(myMsg);
}

Chapter 2
[ 111 ]
Building the Orders Visualforce page
The final piece of the fulfillment application is the Order Maintenance page.
This page will be responsible for providing the following functionality to a user:
•	
Creating a new order
•	
Editing an existing order
•	
Adjusting the quantity of existing order lines on an order
•	
Deleting existing order lines from an order
•	
Adding new order lines to an order
To create the Orders page, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Develop | Pages.
2.	 All of the Visualforce pages for your organization will be displayed. 
Click on New.
3.	 In the Page Information section, enter Orders Page in the Label field.
4.	 Enter OrdersPage in the Name field.
5.	 In the code download for the chapter, locate the OrdersPage.page file in the 
force_com folder.
6.	 Clear the default markup in the Visualforce Page Editor.
7.	 Copy and paste the contents of OrdersPage.page onto the Visualforce Page 
Editor in your Force.com window.
8.	 Click on Save.

The E-Commerce Framework
[ 112 ]
The working of the Orders page
The first line of the Visualforce page instructs it to use our custom OrdersController 
control, sets the tabStyle property to use the VFOrder__tab Visualforce tab, and 
finally hides the default Force.com sidebar to maximize the display area and to add 
a more customized feel to the interface:
<apex:page controller="OrdersController" tabStyle="VFOrders__tab"
  sidebar="false">
The top of the file defines a few small JavaScript functions to stop the planned 
delivery date control from grabbing the focus when the page is loaded and a utility 
function to display a confirmation message when the user is about to perform a 
destructive action:
<!--  this small script stops date picker from grabbing focus -->
  <script>
    function setFocusOnLoad() {}
  </script>
<!-- this script allows user to confirm a destructive action -->
  <script type="text/javascript">
    function confirmAction(confirmMessage) {
      return confirm(confirmMessage);
    }
  </script>
Next, we define two apex:actionFunction controls:
<apex:actionFunction name="editOrderLine" rerender="OrderLines">
  <apex:param name="editOrderLineId" value="" 
    assignTo="{!editOrderLineId}" />
</apex:actionFunction>
<apex:actionFunction name="isOrderDirty" 
    rerender="OrderInformation"
    immediate="true">
  <apex:param name="isOrderDirtyFlag" value="" 
    assignTo="{!isOrderDirty}" />
</apex:actionFunction>
The editOrderLine action function is called when an order line is selected to be edited 
and sets the editOrderLineId controller property to the unique identifier of the order 
line. The isOrderDirty action function is called when the value of an Order field is 
changed. When this occurs, it sets the value of the isOrderDirty controller property 
to indicate that there are pending changes on the order.
The apex:pageBlockButtons control is defined next to provide a row of buttons for 
saving and canceling an order and returning to the order search page:

Chapter 2
[ 113 ]
<apex:pageBlockButtons location="bottom">
  <apex:commandButton value="Save Order" 
    action="{!saveOrderHeader}" />
  <apex:commandButton value="Cancel Order" 
    onClick="if (!confirmAction('Are your sure?')) return false;" 
    rendered="{!renderOrderDetails}"
    action="{!cancelOrder}" />
  <apex:commandButton value="Return to Search"
    onClick="if ({!isOrderDirty}) {if (!confirmAction('Abandon 
      Unsaved Changes?')) return false;}"
    immediate="true" 
    action="{!closeOrder}" />
</apex:pageBlockButtons>
When the Save Order button is pressed, the saveOrderHeader controller method will 
be invoked to save the current order header information to the Force.com database.
Pressing the Cancel Order button will first call the confirmAction JavaScript 
function, which will display a confirmation dialog with the message specified. If the 
user clicks on OK in the dialog, the cancelOrder controller method will be invoked 
and the order will be deleted. If the user clicks on Cancel, the deletion is aborted.
Clicking on the Return to Search button will first check if the isOrderDirty controller 
property is true. If so, it will call the confirmAction JavaScript function to confirm 
if the changes need to be saved. If the user confirms that they wish to abandon the 
changes by clicking on OK in the dialog, they will be redirected to the Order Search 
page and the changes will be lost. If they click on Cancel in the dialog, they will be 
returned to the Orders page where they can save their changes. If there are no 
pending changes on the order, the user will be instantly redirected back to the 
Order Search page.
The following pageBlockButtons is an apex:pageBlockSection control containing 
the order header information:
<apex:pageBlockSection title="Order Header" id="OrderHeader">
  <apex:outputField value="{!CurrentOrder.Name}" />
  <apex:inputField value="{!CurrentOrder.Channel__c}"
    onchange="isOrderDirty('true')" />
  <apex:inputField value="{!CurrentOrder.Customer_Name__c}"
    onchange="isOrderDirty('true')" />
  ...more control definitions for Order Header...
  <apex:outputField value="{!CurrentOrder.Grand_Total__c}" />	
</apex:pageBlockSection>

The E-Commerce Framework
[ 114 ]
The order header apex:pageBlockSection consists of the standard apex:inputField 
and apex:outputField control definitions. The only thing to note is the onchange 
attribute on fields that will invoke the isOrderDirty action function when the value 
in a field is changed. This will also set the isOrderDirty controller property to 
indicate that there are pending changes on the order.
An apex:pageBlockSection control containing the order lines is the next item of 
interest. There is quite a bit happening inside this pageBlockSection control, so 
we will examine it in small pieces.
Initially, pageBlockSection is declared with an apex:pageBlockTable control to 
render the order lines:
<apex:pageBlockSection title="Order Lines" columns="1" 
  id="OrderLines">
<apex:pageBlockTable value="{!OrderLines}" var="line" 
  style="width:90%">
The first apex:column control of interest in the table is the Item column. This displays 
the name of the order line item being ordered and provides a link to its detail page:
<apex:column headerValue="Item">
  <apex:outputLink value="/{!line.Order_Line_Item__c}"
    target="_blank">
   {!line.Order_Line_Item__r.Item_Name__c}
  </apex:outputLink>
</apex:column>
The quantity actually consists of two apex:column controls:
<!-- make Quantity editable if it is clicked on -->
<apex:column headerValue="Quantity" 
    value="{!line.Quantity__c}"
    title="click to edit Quantity"
    onclick="editOrderLine('{!line.id}')"
    rendered="{!line.id != editOrderLineId}" />
<apex:column rendered="{!line.id == editOrderLineId}"
    headerValue="Quantity" 
    style="text-align:center;width:5%" >
    <apex:inputField value="{!line.Quantity__c}" 
    style="text-align:center;width:80%" />
</apex:column>
The actual column to be rendered depends on whether the order line being rendered 
is currently being edited.

Chapter 2
[ 115 ]
When the current order line isn't being edited, the first apex:column control is used 
for Quantity because the rendered attribute expression evaluates to true.
When the Quantity Apex column for an order line is clicked on, the editOrderLine 
action function is invoked to set the editOrderLine controller property to the 
unique identifier for the order line that has been clicked on. The order lines are then 
rerendered, and if the unique identifier for the order line being rendered matches the 
editOrderLine controller property, the second apex:column control is rendered. This 
provides an apex:inputField control for the user to adjust the quantity of the item 
being ordered.
This provides a nice segue into the apex:column control, which provides a set of 
buttons for controlling the editing of an order line:
<apex:column style="width:15%" headerValue="Actions" 
  rendered="{!line.id == editOrderLineId}">
  <apex:commandButton action="{!saveOrderLine}" 
    rerender="OrderInformation, OrderLines, messages" 
    value="Save" />
  <apex:commandButton action="{!cancelEditOrderLine}" 
    rerender="OrderInformation, OrderLines, messages" 
    value="Cancel" />
</apex:column>
The rendered attribute for the apex:column control also defines that it is rendered 
only when the current order line is being edited. When this is the case, two 
apex:commandButton controls are displayed: one to save the changes and another 
to cancel the edit.
When the Save button is pressed, the saveOrderLine controller method is invoked 
to save the order line being edited to the Force.com database. The order lines are 
then rerendered to display the most current information.
When the Cancel button is pressed, the cancelEditOrderLine controller method 
is invoked to abort the editing of the order line. The editOrderLineId controller 
property is cleared, and the apex:inputField control for the quantity will 
be dismissed.
The final apex:column control of interest in the order lines pageBlockTable is the 
button to delete an order line:
<apex:column style="width:15%" headerValue="Actions" 
  rendered="{!line.id != editOrderLineId}">
<apex:commandButton onClick="if (!confirmAction()) return false;" 
    action="{!removeOrderLine}" 
    rerender="OrderInformation, OrderLines, messages" 

The E-Commerce Framework
[ 116 ]
    value="Delete">
    <apex:param name="removeOrderLineId"
    value="{!line.Id}"
    assignTo="{!removeOrderLineId}" />
  </apex:commandButton>
</apex:column>
When the current order line isn't being edited, this apex:column control is rendered 
instead of the Save and Cancel buttons. When the Delete button is clicked on, the 
confirmAction JavaScript function is called to confirm if the user wishes to proceed. 
If so, an apex:param control is used to set the value of the removeOrderLineId 
controller property to the unique identifier of the order line where the Delete button 
was clicked. Then, the removeOrderLine controller action is invoked to delete the 
order line.
The final item of interest in the Orders page is an additional apex:form control to 
allow an order line to be added to the order:
<apex:form>
  <apex:pageBlock rendered="{!renderOrderDetails}">
    <apex:pageBlockSection title="Add New Order Line"
      columns="3">
    <apex:inputField 
      value="{!NewOrderLine.Order_Line_Item__c}" />
    <apex:inputField 
      value="{!NewOrderLine.Quantity__c}" />
    <apex:commandButton action="{!insertOrderLine}" value="Create 
      Order Line" />
    </apex:pageBlockSection>
  </apex:pageBlock>
</apex:form>
This is a simple apex:form control that provides two apex:inputField controls 
to allow the order line item to be selected and a quantity entered. Clicking on the 
Create Order Line button invokes the insertOrderLine controller method to add a 
new order line to the order.

Chapter 2
[ 117 ]
You might be wondering why we added an additional form to the page 
for the adding of order lines. If we didn't, the validation rules for the 
order line item and quantity fields will be evaluated whenever the page 
is posted to the server and will fail if both fields don't contain a value. 
This is especially inconvenient when performing operations such as 
saving the order header or editing an order line—they will never work. 
Encapsulating the adding of order lines in its own form ensures that these 
validation rules are only evaluated when adding an order line, which is 
the behavior we want. Another way to achieve this is through the use of 
apex:actionRegion controls, but due to the complexity of the page, an 
additional apex:form control was a much simpler and cleaner option.
Congratulations! You should now have a fully functional Order Maintenance page 
added to your Force.com Fulfillment application. Clicking on the link to an order in 
the Order Search page will now display it in the Orders page:

The E-Commerce Framework
[ 118 ]
Clicking on the Quantity column of an order line will allow it to be edited:
Summary
In this chapter, we built a fully functional Heroku powered e-commerce application 
and integrated it to our Force.com Fulfillment application.
We started by building a basic Force.com application and loading some sample data. 
We then built a Ruby on Rails / Heroku development environment and deployed a 
Ruby on Rails application to Heroku.
From there, we successfully integrated the Heroku e-commerce application to our 
Force.com application, which allowed us to display a product catalog and place 
orders. Users could also view their order status and order history in real time.
Finally, we implemented a full-blown Force.com application to handle order 
fulfillment using Visualforce and Apex custom controllers.

Chapter 2
[ 119 ]
Some possible enhancements you could make are:
•	
Enhancing the product catalog in the Heroku e-commerce application 
to support the display of images from Force.com and display products 
in detail. (You will need to consult the force.rb gem documentation 
at https://github.com/heroku/force.rb to find out how to access 
attachments for a record.)
•	
Adding some Visualforce interface to the order line item detail page to add a 
more polished display.
•	
Adding some Ajax inline editing capabilities to the Heroku e-commerce 
application shopping cart. (Check out the bootstrap-editable-rails gem at 
https://github.com/tkawa/bootstrap-editable-rails.)
•	
Integrating the Salesforce product and price book functionality


Building a Full CRM System
In this chapter, we are going to build a more traditional CRM system to manage the 
student admissions process for the fictional Force University.
The student admissions system will allow the university staff to manage a catalog 
of courses, record the applicant details, and manage the course applications from 
applicants until a decision is made on whether the applicant is eligible or not.
In this process, we will be utilizing a great deal of the Force.com platform 
functionalities, which you will use to build your real-world applications, 
including the following:
•	
Custom data objects and relationships
•	
User profiles
•	
Organization-wide defaults and role hierarchy
•	
Chatter
•	
Custom object tabs
•	
Page layouts
•	
Lookup and search dialogs
We will also build a custom workflow to route the course applications to the relevant 
faculty within the university when they are created. The standard Force.com platform 
functionalities and workflows are not powerful enough for this, so we will construct a 
custom routing engine using queues, custom settings, and Apex.
Finally, we will implement a publisher action to allow a decision to be entered 
quickly against a course application.

Building a Full CRM System
[ 122 ]
Student admissions system requirements 
analysis
The first step in building a system is to analyze the business requirements that we 
intend to satisfy. The student admissions system will manage the overall process for 
admitting students into a university or higher education institution (for the rest of 
the chapter, I will be referring to a university).
The high-level business requirements of a system are as follows:
•	
The users of the system will be course administrators, the admissions office 
staff, and faculty selection officers
•	
The system will allow the course administrators to fully maintain the courses 
offered by the university
•	
The system will allow the admissions office staff to register applicants for a 
course and to register, manage, and allocate course applications to the faculty 
selection officers
•	
The system will allow the faculty selection officers to assess course 
applications and record their decisions
I've highlighted the keywords that are crucial in helping us identify 
the functional, data, and security requirements, which are described 
in the following sections.
Functional requirements
A further analysis into business requirements yields the following functional 
requirements:
•	
The system will allow the course administrators to create, update, and delete 
courses that are offered by the university.
•	
The system will allow the admissions office staff to create, update, and delete 
applicants who wish to apply for a course.
•	
The system will allow the admissions office staff to create, update, and delete 
course applications.
•	
The system will allow the admissions office staff to assign a course 
application to the relevant faculty; for example, a business degree course 
application will be referred to the business faculty.
•	
Once a course application has been assigned to a faculty, the system will 
allow the faculty selection officers to assess it and record their decision.

Chapter 3
[ 123 ]
•	
A successful course application will result in an admit, whereas an 
unsuccessful course application will result in denial.
Data requirements
Analyzing the business and functional requirements provides us with the following 
entities that we will need to record the information that we will be capturing in 
the system:
•	
The course entity will be used to record all of the individual courses offered 
by the university
•	
The applicant entity will be used to record the details of applicants who 
apply for a course
•	
The course application entity will be used to record an instance of an 
applicant applying for a course
The relationships between the entities are depicted in the following entity-relationship 
diagram:
Course
Course
Application
Applicant
The key cardinality rules for data requirements are as follows:
•	
An applicant may lodge one or more course applications
•	
A course application must have an applicant
•	
A course application must be linked to a course
•	
A course may have one or more course applications
In Salesforce parlance, the course application is referred to as a 
junction object.
Security requirements
On Further analysis with business stakeholders, the following security requirements 
have been uncovered:
•	
Only the course administration staff can add, update, or delete courses. All 
other users will have read-only access.

Building a Full CRM System
[ 124 ]
•	
Only the admissions office staff can add, update, or delete applicants. 
The faculty selection officers will have read-only access.
•	
All the admissions office staff will have full access to all the course 
applications and their applicants.
•	
The faculty selection officers will only have access to the course applications 
they are assigned to within their faculty.
•	
The faculty management will have an access to all the course applications 
within their faculty.
Building the student admissions system
Now that we have captured all of the requirements for this version of the student 
admissions system (always assume there will be more requirements in the future!), 
we are in a position to build the system. Fortunately for us, the Force.com 
platform provides a rich base of functionalities we can leverage to build a 
comprehensive solution.
You will find an unmanaged package that contains the application 
contents for this chapter at https://login.salesforce.com/
packaging/installPackage.apexp?p0=04t90000000ArFt.
Defining the custom data objects
Our first task is to define the custom data objects we will require to capture information 
about the courses, applicants, and course applications.
Defining the Course object
Perform the following steps to configure the Course custom object:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Objects.
2.	 Click on the New Custom Object button.
3.	 Enter Course for the object's Label field.
4.	 Enter Courses for the Plural Label field.
5.	 Enter A course offered by the University for the Description field to 
describe the purpose of the custom object.
6.	 Enter Course Code for the Record Name field and change the Data Type 
drop-down menu to Auto Number.

Chapter 3
[ 125 ]
7.	 Enter Course-{00000} in the Display Format field.
8.	 Enter 1 in the Starting Number field.
9.	 Select the following checkboxes:
°°
Allow Reports (an optional feature)
°°
Allow Activities (an optional feature)
°°
Track Field History (an optional feature)
°°
Add Notes and Attachments related list to default page layout 
(an object creation option)
10.	 Ensure that the Deployment Status section is set to Deployed.
11.	 Click on the Save button to create the custom object.
You will now need to configure the custom fields for the Course object.
1.	 If you aren't already on the Course object's detail page, navigate to 
Setup Create | Objects.
2.	 Click on the Course label hyperlink.
3.	 Click on the New button in the Custom Fields & Relationships section.
4.	 Create the fields described in the following table by accepting the Force.com 
default values for the field-level security and page layout assignments, unless 
otherwise specified, and clicking on Save & New after creating each field:
Field types
Field labels
Comments
Picklist
Faculty
This field indicates the faculty for 
the course. The Picklist values are 
Business and Science. Select the 
Use first value as default 
value checkbox.
Picklist
Faculty Course Area
This field indicates the courses 
offered by the faculty. The 
Picklist values are Accounting, 
Management, Marketing, 
Chemistry, Physics, and 
Biotechnology. Select both the 
Sort values alphabetically not in 
the order entered. Values will be 
displayed alphabetically everywhere 
and Use first value as default value 
checkboxes.

Building a Full CRM System
[ 126 ]
Field types
Field labels
Comments
Picklist
Achievement
This field indicates the academic 
achievement earned from the course 
The Picklist values are Diploma, 
Degree, and PhD. Select the Use first 
value as default value checkbox.
Text
Name
This field indicates the name of the 
course. Ensure that the Required and 
Unique checkboxes are selected, and 
set the maximum length to 
255 characters.
Text Area
Description
This field gives an optional 
description of the course.
Finally, we need to set up a field dependency between the Faculty and Faculty Course 
Area picklists. This will ensure that when a faculty is selected, only the relevant faculty 
course areas will be available for selection.
To set up a field dependency, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Objects.
2.	 Click on the Course label.
3.	 Click on the Field Dependencies button in the Custom Fields & 
Relationships section.
4.	 Click on New to create a new field dependency.
5.	 For the Controlling Field section, select Faculty.
6.	 For the Dependent Field section, select Faculty Course Area.
7.	 Click on Continue.
8.	 In the Business column, select Accounting, Management, and Marketing. 
Click on the Include Values button to include them in the Business 
column-dependent values.
9.	 In the Science column, select Biotechnology, Chemistry, and Physics. 
Click on the Include Values button to include them in the Science 
column-dependent values.
10.	 The output on your screen should resemble the following screenshot:

Chapter 3
[ 127 ]
11.	 Click on Preview to display a pop-up dialog, where you can test out your 
field dependency.
12.	 When you have finished testing, click on Close in the pop-up dialog.
13.	 Click on Save.
If you look at the Custom Fields & Relationships section for the 
Course object, you will now see that the Controlling Field section 
for Faculty Course Area fields has a value of Faculty.
Defining the Applicant object
Perform the following steps to configure the Applicant custom object:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Objects.
2.	 Click on the New Custom Object button.
3.	 Enter Applicant in the object's Label field.
4.	 Enter Applicants in the Plural Label field.
5.	 Enter A Person applying for a Course in the Description field to 
describe the purpose of the custom object.
6.	 Enter Applicant Code for the Record Name field and change the Data Type 
drop-down menu to Auto Number.
7.	 Enter Applicant-{00000} in the Display Format field.
8.	 Enter 1 in the Starting Number field.

Building a Full CRM System
[ 128 ]
9.	 Select the following checkboxes:
°°
Allow Reports (an optional feature)
°°
Allow Activities (an optional feature)
°°
Track Field History (an optional feature)
°°
Add Notes and Attachments related list to default page layout (an 
object creation option)
10.	 Ensure that the Deployment Status section is set to Deployed.
11.	 Click on the Save button to create the custom object.
You will now need to configure the custom fields for the Applicant object. For this, 
we will perform the following steps:
1.	 If you aren't already on the Applicant object's detail page, navigate to Setup 
Create | Objects.
2.	 Click on the Applicant label.
3.	 Click on the New button in the Custom Fields & Relationships section.
4.	 Create the fields described in the following table by accepting the default 
values of the Force.com functionalities for the field-level security and page 
layout assignments, unless otherwise specified, and clicking on Save & New 
after creating each field:
Field types
Field labels
Comments
Text
Salutation
This field lists the salutation for 
the applicant, for example, Mr. The 
maximum length is 50 characters.
Text
Given Names
The fields lists the name of the 
applicant. Ensure that the Required 
checkbox is selected and the 
maximum length is set to 255 
characters.
Text
Surname
This field lists the surname of 
the applicant. Ensure that the 
Required checkbox is selected and 
the maximum length is set to 255 
characters.
Picklist
Gender
The field lists the gender of the 
applicant. The Picklist values are 
Male and Female.

Chapter 3
[ 129 ]
Field types
Field labels
Comments
Date
Date of 
Birth
This field lists the applicant's date 
of birth. Ensure that the Required 
checkbox is selected.
Text Area
Address
This field lists the applicant's 
address. The maximum length of 
this field is 255 characters. Ensure 
that the Required checkbox is 
selected.
Phone
Phone
This field lists the applicant's phone 
number.
Phone
Cell
This field lists the applicant's cell 
number.
Email
Email
This field lists the applicant's e-mail 
address.
Defining the Course Application object
Perform the following steps to configure the Course Application custom object:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Objects.
2.	 Click on the New Custom Object button.
3.	 Enter Course Application in the object Label field.
4.	 Enter Course Applications in the Plural Label field.
5.	 Enter An application for a course in the Description field to describe 
the purpose of the custom object.
6.	 Enter Application Number in the Record Name field and change the Data 
Type drop-down menu to Auto Number.
7.	 Enter Application-{00000} in the Display Format field.
8.	 Enter 1 in the Starting Number field.
9.	 Select the following checkboxes:
°°
Allow Reports (an optional feature)
°°
Allow Activities (an optional feature)
°°
Track Field History (an optional feature)
°°
Add Notes and Attachments related list to default page layout 
(object creation options)
10.	 Ensure that the Deployment Status section is set to Deployed.
11.	 Click on the Save button to create the custom object.

Building a Full CRM System
[ 130 ]
You will now need to configure the custom fields for the Course Application object. 
For this, we will perform the following steps:
1.	 If you aren't already on the Course Application detail page, navigate to 
Setup | Create | Objects.
2.	 Click on the Course Application label.
3.	 Click on the New button in the Custom Fields & Relationships section.
4.	 Create the fields described in the following table by accepting default values 
for the field-level security and page layout assignments of the Force.com 
functionalities, unless otherwise specified, and clicking on Save & New after 
creating each field:
Field types
Field labels
Comments
Lookup Relationship
Applicant
This field indicates the applicant who 
is applying for a course. 
A lookup relationship to the 
Applicant object. Ensure that 
the Required checkbox is selected.
Formula
Applicant Name
For this field, the following formula is 
to used :
Applicant__r.Salutation__c 
& " " & Applicant__r.
Given_Names__c   & " " & 
Applicant__r.Surname__c
In the Blank Field Handling 
section, select Treat blank fields 
as blanks. 
Lookup Relationship
Course
This field indicates the course that 
is being applied for. A lookup 
relationship to the Course object. 
Ensure that the Required checkbox is 
selected. Do not add a related list to 
the Course Layout section in the last 
step of the wizard.
Formula
Course Faculty
For this field, the following formula is 
to be used:
TEXT(Course__r.Faculty__c)
In the Blank Field Handling section, 
select Treat blank fields as blanks.
Do not add the field to the Course 
Application page layout. 

Chapter 3
[ 131 ]
Field types
Field labels
Comments
Formula
Course Name
For this field, the following formula is 
to be used:
Course__r.Name__c
In the Blank Field Handling section, 
select Treat blank fields as blanks. 
Picklist
Application 
Status
This field indicates the status of 
the course application. The Picklist 
values are New, Queued For 
Assessment, Under Assessment, 
Under Conditional Approval, 
Closed – Admit Applicant, 
Closed – Application Denied, 
Withdrawn by Applicant, and 
Cancelled by Admissions. Select 
the Use first value as default value 
checkbox.
Text Area
Personal 
Qualifications
This field states any personal qualities 
that the applicant believes are 
relevant to the application.
Text Area
Academic 
Qualifications
This field states any academic 
qualifications that the applicant 
believes are relevant to the 
application.
Text Area
Employment 
Experience
This field states any employment 
experience that the applicant believes 
is relevant to the application.
Text Area
Professional 
Memberships
This field states any professional 
memberships that the applicant 
believes are relevant to the 
application.
Text Area
Decision Notes
This field states any notes relevant to 
the decision on the application.
Text Area
Decision 
Conditions
This field states any conditions on the 
application decision. This field will 
be mandatory when the status will be 
Under Conditional Approval.
Text Area
General 
Comments
This field states any general 
comments relevant to the application.

Building a Full CRM System
[ 132 ]
We need a validation rule to ensure that the decision conditions are mandatory when 
the application has a Under Conditional Approval status. To set up the validation 
rule, perform the following steps:
1.	 If you aren't already on the Course Application detail page, navigate to 
Setup | Create | Objects.
2.	 Click on the Course Application label.
3.	 Click on the New button in the Validation Rules section.
4.	 In the Rule Name field, enter Conditional_Approval_Decision_
Conditions.
5.	 In the Description field, enter Ensure that Decision Conditions are 
entered when the application is under conditional approval.
6.	 In the Error Condition Formula section, enter ISPICKVAL( Application_
Status__c , "Under Conditional Approval") &&  ISBLANK( 
Decision_Conditions__c ). Your formula on the screen should resemble 
the one given in the following screenshot:
7.	 For the Error Message section, enter You must enter Decision 
Conditions when a Course Application is under conditional 
approval.
8.	 Select Top of Page for the Error Location section.
9.	 Click on Save.

Chapter 3
[ 133 ]
User profiles
We will now configure the following three user profiles in our system:
•	
Course Administration (for the course administrators)
•	
Admissions Office (for the admissions office staff)
•	
Selection Officer (for the faculty selection officers)
This will ensure that only authorized users are able to access the student 
admissions' data.
The Course Administration profile
To create the Course Administration profile, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Manage Users | Profiles. A shortcut is to enter 
Profiles in the Search box.
2.	 Select the Clone link for the Standard Platform User profile.
If your developer organization doesn't have a Clone link for 
the profiles, select the New Profile button and select Standard 
Platform User in the existing profiles drop-down list.
3.	 Enter Course Administration for the Profile Name field.
4.	 Click on Save.
We will now need to configure the Course Administration profile to restrict access to 
only those objects that the course administrators will need in the student admissions 
system. To do this, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Manage Users | Profiles.
2.	 Select the Edit link for the Course Administration profile.
3.	 Leave the Standard Object Permissions section with the default settings.
4.	 In the Custom Object Permissions section, ensure that the profile has 
the Read, Create, Edit, Delete, View All, and Modify All access options 
available to the Courses custom object.

Building a Full CRM System
[ 134 ]
5.	 Your Custom Object Permissions section for the profile should resemble the 
one in the following screenshot:
6.	 Click on Save.
7.	 Click on the Back to Profile button.
The Admissions Office profile
To create the Admissions Office profile, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Manage Users | Profiles.
2.	 Select the Clone link for the Standard Platform User profile.
3.	 Enter Admissions Office in the Profile Name field.
4.	 Click on Save.
We will now need to configure the Admissions Office profile to restrict access to 
only those objects that the admissions office staff will need in the student admissions 
system. To do this, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Manage Users | Profiles.
2.	 Select the Edit link for the Admissions Office profile.
3.	 Leave the Standard Object Permissions section with the default settings.
4.	 In the Custom Object Permissions section, ensure that the profile has Read, 
Create, Edit, Delete, View All, and Modify All access options available to 
the Applicants and Course Applications custom objects.
5.	 Ensure that the profile has a Read access to the Courses custom object.

Chapter 3
[ 135 ]
6.	 Your Custom Object Permissions section for the profile should resemble the 
one in the following screenshot:
7.	 Click on Save.
8.	 Click on the Back to Profile button.
In a production application, you probably wouldn't allow anyone to 
have the Delete access option to the Course Applications object. It 
is likely that all Course Applications would need to be retained for 
auditing and reporting purposes, or if an applicant appeals against a 
decision. Instead of using the Modify All permission, you will need to 
use Sharing Rules to grant Edit access to all Course Applications for 
the Admissions Office profile.
The Selection Officer profile
To create the Selection Officer profile, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Manage Users | Profiles.
2.	 Select the Clone link for the Standard Platform User profile.
3.	 Enter Selection Officer in the Profile Name field.
4.	 Click on Save.

Building a Full CRM System
[ 136 ]
We will now need to configure the Selection Officer profile to restrict access to only 
those objects that the selection officers will need in the student admissions system. 
To do this, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Manage Users | Profiles.
2.	 Select the Edit link for the Selection Officer profile.
3.	 Leave the Standard Object Permissions section with the default settings.
4.	 In the Custom Object Permissions section, ensure that the profile has a Read 
and Edit access option to the Course Applications custom object.
5.	 Ensure that the profile has the Read access option to the Courses and 
Applicants custom objects.
6.	 Your Custom Object Permissions for the profile should resemble the one in 
the following screenshot:
7.	 Click on Save.
8.	 Click on the Back to Profile button.
Organization-Wide Defaults
Now that we have configured the user profiles, we need to configure the 
Organization-Wide Defaults settings for our custom objects. The Organization-Wide 
Defaults values will provide the base-level record-sharing rules that we will build 
upon in the role hierarchy, which we will be configuring in the next section.
We will be setting the default values for Applicants and Courses to give all users 
in the role hierarchy the ability to see the records in the system. The role hierarchy 
permissions will then determine who can edit the records.

Chapter 3
[ 137 ]
We will be setting the default values for Course Applications to the more restrictive 
private-sharing rule. This limits all record access to the owners of the course 
application records and users that we enable through the role hierarchy.
To configure the Organization-Wide Defaults section, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Administer | Security Controls | Sharing Settings.
2.	 In the Organization-Wide Defaults section, click on Edit.
3.	 For the Applicant object, set Default Internal Access to Public Read Only.
4.	 For the Course object, set Default Internal Access to Public Read Only.
5.	 For the Course Application object, set Default Internal Access to Private.
6.	 Ensure that Grant Access Using Hierarchies is checked for Applicant, 
Course, and Course Application.
7.	 Your configuration settings for Organization-Wide Defaults should 
resemble the one in the following screenshot:
8.	 Click on Save.
The role hierarchy
Our final task in configuring security of the users and data is to configure the 
following role hierarchy:
President of University
Dean of Admissions
Manager of Admissions
Admissions Officer
Dean of Business Faculty
Dean of Business Admissions
Business Faculty Selection Officer
Dean of Science Faculty
Dean of Science Admissions
Science Faculty Selection Officer

Building a Full CRM System
[ 138 ]
The role hierarchy will allow us to add permissions to the Organization-Wide Defaults 
values to give roles the extra permissions they need to perform their assigned tasks in 
the system.
Configuring the top-level roles
To configure the top-level role hierarchy, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Manage Users | Roles.
2.	 If a page titled Understanding Roles is displayed, click on Set Up Roles.
3.	 Click on the + symbol next to the CEO role to see a default role hierarchy 
generated by Force.com, as shown in the following screenshot:
For simplicity, this sample application we will be leaving the role of 
CEO and its subordinates intact. In a real production application, you 
would most likely edit the default role hierarchy to suit your needs.
4.	 Click on the Add Role link that is located directly underneath your 
organization name (in the current example, it is Force University).
5.	 Change the Label field to President of University.
6.	 Make sure that the Role Name field defaults to President_of_University.
7.	 Enter President in the Role Name as displayed on reports field.
8.	 Click on Save.
9.	 Return to the role hierarchy by navigating to Setup | Administer | Manage 
Users | Roles (you will need to perform this step after adding each role).
If the Understanding Roles page is redisplayed, it is a good idea to 
select Don't show this page again before selecting Set Up Roles.

Chapter 3
[ 139 ]
10.	 Click on the Add Role link located directly underneath the President of 
University role.
11.	 Change the Label field to Dean of Admissions. The Role Name 
field should automatically generate Dean_of_Admissions.
12.	 Make sure that the role reports to President of University.
13.	 Enter Dean of Admissions for Role Name as displayed on reports.
14.	 Click on Save.
15.	 Return to the role hierarchy and select the Add Role link located 
directly underneath the President of University role.
16.	 Change the Label field to Dean of Business Faculty. The Role 
Name field should automatically generate Dean_of_Business_Faculty.
17.	 Make sure that the role reports to President of University.
18.	 Enter Dean of Business in the Role Name as displayed on reports field.
19.	 Click on Save.
20.	 Return to the role hierarchy and select the Add Role link located 
directly underneath the President of University role.
21.	 Change the Label field to Dean of Science Faculty. The Role 
Name field should automatically generate Dean_of_Science_Faculty.
22.	 Make sure that the role reports to President of University.
23.	 Enter Dean of Science in the Role Name as displayed on reports field.
24.	 Click on Save.
25.	 Return to the role hierarchy. Click on the + button next to President of 
University to expand that branch. Your output on the screen should now 
resemble the following screenshot:

Building a Full CRM System
[ 140 ]
Configuring the admissions office hierarchy
To configure the admissions office hierarchy, perform the following steps:
1.	 Return to the role hierarchy and select the Add Role link located directly 
underneath the Dean of Admissions role.
2.	 Change the Label field to Manager of Admissions. The Role Name field 
should automatically generate Manager_of_Admissions.
3.	 Make sure that the role reports to Dean of Admissions.
4.	 Enter Admissions Manager in the Role Name as displayed on reports field.
5.	 Click on Save.
6.	 Return to the role hierarchy and expand the Dean of Admissions branch. 
Select the Add Role link located directly underneath the Manager of 
Admissions role.
7.	 Change the Label field to Admissions Officer. The Role Name field should 
automatically generate Admissions_Officer.
8.	 Make sure that the role reports to Manager of Admissions.
9.	 Enter Admissions Officer in the Role Name as displayed on reports field.
10.	 Click on Save.
11.	 Return to the role hierarchy. Click on the + button next to the President 
of University role, the Dean of Admissions role, and the Manager of 
Admissions role to expand those branches. Your output on the screen 
should now resemble the following screenshot:

Chapter 3
[ 141 ]
Configuring the business faculty hierarchy
To configure the business faculty hierarchy, perform the following steps:
1.	 Return to the role hierarchy and select the Add Role link located directly 
underneath the Dean of Business Faculty role.
2.	 Change the Label field to Dean of Business Admissions. The Role Name 
field should automatically generate Dean_of_Business_Admissions.
3.	 Make sure that the role reports to Dean of Business Faculty.
4.	 Enter Dean of Business Admissions in the Role Name as displayed 
on reports field.
5.	 Click on Save.
6.	 Return to the role hierarchy and expand the Dean of Business Faculty 
branch. Select the Add Role link located directly underneath 
the Dean of Business Admissions role.
7.	 Change the Label field to Business Faculty Selection Officer. 
The Role Name field should automatically generate Business_Faculty_
Selection_Officer.
8.	 Make sure that the role reports to Dean of Business Admissions.
9.	 Enter Business Selection Officer in the Role Name as displayed 
on reports field.
10.	 Click on Save.
11.	 Return to the role hierarchy. Click on the + button next to the President of 
University role, the Dean of Business Faculty role, and the Dean of Business 
Admissions role to expand those branches. Your output on the screen should 
now resemble the following screenshot:

Building a Full CRM System
[ 142 ]
Configuring the science faculty hierarchy
To configure the science faculty hierarchy, perform the following steps:
1.	 Return to the role hierarchy and select the Add Role link located directly 
underneath the Dean of Science Faculty role.
2.	 Change the Label field to Dean of Science Admissions. The Role Name 
field should automatically generate Dean_of_Science_Admissions.
3.	 Make sure that the role reports to Dean of Science Faculty.
4.	 Enter Dean of Science Admissions in the Role Name as displayed 
on reports field.
5.	 Click on Save.
6.	 Return to the role hierarchy and select the Add Role link located 
directly underneath the Dean of Science Admissions role.
7.	 Change the Label field to Science Faculty Selection Officer. 
The Role Name field should automatically generate Science_Faculty_
Selection_Officer.
8.	 Make sure the role reports to Dean of Science Admissions.
9.	 Enter Science Selection Officer for Role Name as displayed on reports.
10.	 Click on Save.
11.	 The university role hierarchy is complete and should now resemble the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 3
[ 143 ]
Chatter
Chatter is an integral part of the Force.com platform and the development of 
applications with social capabilities. The admissions process by its very nature 
requires collaboration across different areas of the university, so it makes perfect 
sense to use Chatter in our admissions system.
In this section, it is assumed that you have already activated Chatter 
for your Salesforce organization. Note that Chatter is automatically 
enabled when a developer organization is created.
Enabling the Chatter feeds for Course
To enable the Chatter feeds for the Course object, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Customize | Chatter | Feed Tracking.
2.	 In the list of objects being tracked, select Course.
3.	 Select the Enable Feed Tracking checkbox.
4.	 In the list of fields available to be tracked, select Description, Faculty, 
Faculty Course Area, and Name.
5.	 Click on Save.
6.	 Your Chatter feed tracking for Course should now resemble the 
following screenshot:

Building a Full CRM System
[ 144 ]
Enabling the Chatter feed for the Course object will add it at the top of the Course 
detail page, as shown in the following screenshot:
Enabling the Chatter feeds for Applicant
To enable the Chatter feed for the Applicant object, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Customize | Chatter | Feed Tracking.
2.	 In the list of objects being tracked, select Applicant.
3.	 Select the Enable Feed Tracking checkbox.
4.	 In the list of fields available to be tracked, select Address, Cell, Email, 
Given Names, Phone, and Surname.
5.	 Click on Save.
6.	 Your Chatter feed tracking for Applicant should now resemble the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 3
[ 145 ]
Enabling the Chatter feed for the Applicant object will add it at the top of the 
Applicant detail page:

Building a Full CRM System
[ 146 ]
Enabling the Chatter feeds for Course Application
To enable the Chatter feed for the Course Application object, perform the 
following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Customize | Chatter | Feed Tracking.
2.	 In the list of objects being tracked, select Course Application.
3.	 Select the Enable Feed Tracking checkbox.
4.	 In the list of fields available to be tracked, select Academic 
Qualifications, Applicant, Application Status, Course, Decision 
Conditions, Decision Notes, Employment Experience, General Comments, 
Personal Qualifications, and Professional Memberships.
5.	 Click on Save.
6.	 Your Chatter feed tracker for Course Application should now resemble the 
following screenshot:
Enabling the Chatter feed for the Course Application object will add it at the top of 
the Course Application detail page, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 3
[ 147 ]
Defining the custom object tabs
To configure the tabs for the custom objects, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Tabs.
2.	 Click on New in the Custom Object Tabs section.
3.	 In the Object drop-down list, select Course.
4.	 Select the lookup icon to set any unused tab style. Click on Next.
5.	 Select Tab Hidden as the default setting for all profiles. Click on Next.
6.	 Deselect all applications (a shortcut is to deselect the Include Tab checkbox) to 
ensure that this tab is not added. Leave Append tab to user's existing personal 
customizations checked.
7.	 Click on Save.
8.	 Click on New in the Custom Object Tabs section.
9.	 In the Object drop-down list, select Applicant.
10.	 Select the lookup icon to set any unused tab style. Click on Next.
11.	 Select Tab Hidden as the default setting for all profiles. Click on Next.
12.	 Deselect all applications (a shortcut is to deselect the Include Tab checkbox) 
to ensure that this tab is not added. Click on Save.
13.	 Click on New in the Custom Object Tabs section.
14.	 In the Object drop-down list, select Course Application.
15.	 Select Tab Hidden as the default setting for all profiles. Click on Next.
16.	 Accept the default settings for Add to Profiles and click on Next.

Building a Full CRM System
[ 148 ]
17.	 Deselect all applications to ensure that this tab is not added. Leave 
Append tab to user's existing personal customizations checked.
18.	 Click on Save.
Setting the tab permissions for profiles
We now need to set the correct tab visibility flags for each profile in the application, 
and this can be done by performing the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Manage Users | Profiles.
2.	 Select the Course Administrator profile.
3.	 Click on Edit.
4.	 In the Tab Settings section, set the Courses tab to Default On.
5.	 Click on Save.
6.	 Select the Selection Officer profile.
7.	 Click on Edit.
8.	 In the Tab Settings section, set the Course Applications tab to Default On 
and the Applicants tab to Default On.
9.	 Click on Save.
10.	 Select the Admissions Office profile.
11.	 Click on Edit.
12.	 In the Tab Settings section, set the Course Applications tab to Default On, 
the Courses tab to Default On, and the Applicants tab to Default On.
13.	 Click on Save.
14.	 Select the System Administrator profile.
15.	 Click on Edit.
16.	 In the Tab Settings section, set the Course Applications tab to Default On, 
the Courses tab to Default On, and the Applicants tab to Default On.
17.	 Click on Save.

Chapter 3
[ 149 ]
Creating the Force.com application
To define the admissions Force.com application, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Apps.
2.	 Click on the New button in the Apps section.
3.	 Select Custom app as the type of app to create. Click on Next.
4.	 In the App Label field, enter Admissions. The App Name field 
should also be defaulted to Admissions. Click on Next.
5.	 Click on Next to accept the default logo.
6.	 Move the Courses, Applicants, and Course Applications tabs to the 
Selected Tabs list.
7.	 Leave Home as the Default Landing Tab option. Click on Next.
8.	 Make the application visible to the System Administrators, 
Admissions Office, Course Administration, and Selection Officer profiles.
9.	 Set Admissions as the default application for the Admissions Office, 
Course Administration, and Selection Officer profiles.
10.	 Click on Save to create the Force.com application.
The user interface
Now that we have the base Force.com application in place, we can customize the 
default user interface to make it more intuitive for users.
Applicants
Firstly, we will adjust the Applicant page layout by performing the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Create | Objects.
2.	 Click on the Applicant label.
3.	 Scroll down to the Page Layouts section and select the Edit link next 
to the Applicant Layout option.
4.	 Scroll down to the Related Lists section.
5.	 Move the list related to Course Applications at the top of the Related 
Lists section.
6.	 Select the wrench icon for the list related to Course Applications.
7.	 Remove the Applicant Name option from the Selected Fields list.

Building a Full CRM System
[ 150 ]
8.	 In the Sort By: drop-down list, select Application Number and Descending 
as the sort order (this will show the most recent applications first in the 
related list). Click on OK to close the Related List Properties – Course 
Applications window, as shown in the following screenshot:
9.	 Click on Save.
The Lookup Dialog layout for Applicants will also need to be modified; this can be 
done by completing the following steps:
1.	 Scroll down to the Search Layouts section and select the Edit link next to the 
Lookup Dialogs layout.
2.	 Move the Salutation, Given Names, Surname, and Date of Birth fields 
(in this order) to the Selected Fields list.
3.	 Click on Save.

Chapter 3
[ 151 ]
Courses
The default page layout for Courses will suffice for our needs; however, we will adjust 
the Lookup Dialogs and Mini View layouts for Courses with the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Objects.
2.	 Click on the Course label hyperlink.
3.	 Scroll down to the Search Layouts section and select the Edit link 
next to the Lookup Dialogs layout.
4.	 Move the Name, Achievement, Faculty, and Faculty Course Area 
fields (in this order) to the Selected Fields list.
5.	 Click on Save.
The Mini View page layout is displayed when you move the cursor over the Course 
field in the Course Application Detail page, as shown in the following screenshot:
To adjust the Mini View page layout, perform the following steps:
1.	 Scroll down to the Page Layouts section and select the Edit link next to the 
Course Layout option.

Building a Full CRM System
[ 152 ]
2.	 Select Mini Page Layout from the top-right row of hyperlinks, as shown in 
the following screenshot:
3.	 Move the Name, Achievement, Faculty, and Faculty Course Area fields 
(in this order) to the Selected Fields list.
4.	 Click on Save.
5.	 Click on Save in the page layout editor.
The Course Application page layout
Next, we will adjust the Course Application page layout by completing the 
following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Objects.
2.	 Click on the Course Application label.
3.	 Scroll down to the Page Layouts section and select the Edit link next 
to Course Application Layout option.
4.	 Drag a new section from the palette. Place it underneath the existing 
Information section and name it Decision Information. Ensure that 
the new section has two columns. Click on OK.
5.	 Drag the Decision Notes field from its existing position on the screen 
to the Decision Information section.
6.	 Drag the Decision Conditions field from its existing position on the 
screen to the Decision Information section.
7.	 Drag the General Comments field from its existing position on the 
screen underneath the Decision Notes field.
8.	 Drag the Applicant Name field from its existing position on the 
screen next to the Applicant field.
9.	 Drag the Course Name field from its existing position on the screen next to 
the Course field.

Chapter 3
[ 153 ]
10.	 Add a blank space from the palette underneath the Course and Course 
Name fields.
11.	 Add a blank space from the palette next to the Application Status field.
12.	 Add two Blank Space components from the palette underneath the 
Application Status field (one in the left-hand side column and one 
in the right-hand side column).
13.	 Drag the Academic Qualifications field from its existing position on 
the screen next to the Personal Qualifications field.
14.	 Drag the Professional Memberships field from its existing position 
on the screen next to the Employment Experience field.
15.	 Your Course Application page layout should now resemble the 
following screenshot:
16.	 Click on Quick Save.
17.	 Select Mini Page Layout from the top-right row of hyperlinks.
18.	 Move the Application Number and Application Status fields to the Selected 
Fields list in this order (Applicant and Course should already be in the 
Selected Fields list).
19.	 Click on Save.
20.	 Click on Save in the page layout editor.

Building a Full CRM System
[ 154 ]
The Applicants tab
Similar to the Courses tab, we will adjust the Applicants tab by completing the 
following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Objects.
2.	 Click on the Applicant label.
3.	 Scroll down to the Search Layouts section and select the Edit link next to the 
Applicants Tab layout, as shown in the following screenshot:
4.	 Move the Salutation, Given Names, Surname, Phone, Cell, and Email fields 
(in this order) to the Selected Fields list.
5.	 Click on Save.
We will also need to adjust the Applicants tab listview columns while viewing all 
the Applicant records by performing the following steps:
1.	 Select the Applicants tab.
2.	 In the View: drop-down list, ensure that All is selected (it should be the only 
item in the list unless you have already created some custom views), and 
click on the Edit hyperlink, as displayed in the following screenshot:

Chapter 3
[ 155 ]
3.	 Scroll down to the Step 3. Select Fields to Display section.
4.	 Move the Applicant Code, Salutation, Given Names, Surname, Phone, Cell, 
and Email fields (in this order) to the Selected Fields list.
5.	 In the Step 4. Restrict Visibility section, ensure that Visible to all users 
(Includes partner and customer portal users) is selected.
6.	 Click on Save.
The Courses tab
Next, we will adjust the Courses tab by completing the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Objects.
2.	 Click on the Course label hyperlink.
3.	 Scroll down to the Search Layouts section and select the Edit link 
next to the Courses Tab layout.
4.	 Move the Name, Achievement, Faculty, and Faculty Course Area fields 
(in order) to the Selected Fields list (Course Code should already be selected).
5.	 Click on Save.
We will also need to adjust the Courses tab listview columns while viewing all the 
Course records with the following steps:
1.	 Select the Courses tab.
2.	 In the View: drop-down list, ensure that All is selected (it should be the only 
item in the list unless you have already created some custom views), and click 
on the Edit hyperlink, as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 Scroll down to the Step 3. Select Fields to Display section.
4.	 Move the Course Code, Name, Achievement, Faculty, and Faculty Course 
Area fields (in this order) to the Selected Fields list.

Building a Full CRM System
[ 156 ]
5.	 In the Step 4. Restrict Visibility section, ensure that Visible to all users 
(Includes partner and customer portal users) is selected.
6.	 Click on Save.
The Course Applications tab
We will also need to adjust the Course Applications tab by completing the 
following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Objects.
2.	 Click on the Course Application label.
3.	 Scroll down to the Search Layouts section and select the Edit link 
next to the Course Applications Tab layout.
4.	 Move the Applicant Name, Course Name, and Application Status 
fields (in this order) to the Selected Fields list.
5.	 Click on Save.
We will also need to adjust the Course Applications tab listview columns while 
viewing all the Course Application records:
1.	 Select the Course Applications tab.
2.	 In the View: drop-down list, ensure that All is selected (it should be the only 
item in the list unless you have already created some custom views), and 
click on the Edit hyperlink, as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 Scroll down to the Step 3. Select Fields to Display section.
4.	 Move the Application Number, Applicant Name, Course Name, and 
Application Status fields (in this order) to the Selected Fields list.
5.	 In the Step 4. Restrict Visibility section, ensure that Visible to all 
users (Includes partner and customer portal users) is selected.
6.	 Click on Save.

Chapter 3
[ 157 ]
Queues
In this section, we will create a set of queues that will be instrumental in developing 
a workflow capability to automatically route the course applications to the various 
faculties within the university when they are created.
The system administrators public group
The first task is to set up a public group for system administrator user(s). A public 
group is different from a profile as it contains roles, users, and other public groups. 
This will become necessary when we start to restrict access to the queues that 
we will be creating in the later sections. To set up a public group for the system 
administrators, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Manage Users | Public Groups.
2.	 Click on New.
3.	 In the Label field, enter System Administrators.
4.	 The Group Name field should default to System_Administrators.
5.	 Select Users in the Search: drop-down list.
6.	 In the Available Members list, select all system administrator users 
and move them to the Selected Members list.
7.	 Click on Save.
The Business Faculty Course Applications queue
To create a queue for the course applications to the business faculty, perform the 
following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Manage Users | Queues.
2.	 Click on New.
3.	 In the Label field, enter Business Faculty Course Applications.
4.	 The Queue Name field should default to Business_Faculty_Course_
Applications.
5.	 Enter business@forceuniversity.com for the Queue Email field.
6.	 In the Supported Objects section, move Course Application to the 
Selected Objects list.
7.	 In the Queue Members section, select Roles and Internal Subordinates 
in the Search: drop-down list.

Building a Full CRM System
[ 158 ]
8.	 In the Available Members list, select Role and Internal Subordinates: 
Dean of Business Faculty and move it to the Selected Members list.
9.	 In the Queue Members section, select Public Groups in the Search: 
drop-down list.
10.	 In the Available Members list, select Group: System Administrators 
and move it to the Selected Members list.
11.	 Click on Save.
The Science Faculty Course Applications queue
To create a queue for the course applications to the science faculty, perform the 
following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Manage Users | Queues.
2.	 Click on New.
3.	 In the Label field, enter Science Faculty Course Applications.
4.	 The Queue Name field should default to Science_Faculty_Course_
Applications.
5.	 Enter science@forceuniversity.com in the Queue Email field.
6.	 In the Supported Objects section, move Course Application to the 
Selected Objects list.
7.	 In the Queue Members section, select Roles and Internal 
Subordinates in the Search: drop-down list.
8.	 In the Available Members list, select Role and Internal 
Subordinates: Dean of Science Faculty and move it to the Selected 
Members list.
9.	 In the Queue Members section, select Public Groups in the Search: 
drop-down list.
10.	 In the Available Members list, select Group: System Administrators 
and move it to the Selected Members list.
11.	 Click on Save.
The Course Application Exception queue
In a real-world application, it is frequently necessary to capture exceptions when 
they occur so that the support and administrative staff can action them where 
appropriate. To support this, we will create an exceptions queue for the course 
applications that can't be routed automatically to a faculty.

Chapter 3
[ 159 ]
To create the exceptions queue, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Manage Users | Queues.
2.	 Click on New.
3.	 In the Label field, enter Course Application Exception Queue.
4.	 The Queue Name field should default to Course_Application_
Exception_Queue.
5.	 Enter administrator@forceuniversity.com for the Queue Email field.
6.	 In the Supported Objects section, move Course Application to the Selected 
Objects list.
7.	 In the Queue Members section, select Public Groups in the Search: 
drop-down list.
8.	 In the Available Members list, select Group: System Administrators 
and move it to the Selected Members list.
9.	 Click on Save.
Restricting access to the business faculty queue
We only want members of the business faculty to be able to view and access the 
course applications in their queue. This is achieved by creating a view on the 
Course Applications tab and adjusting the permissions on the view. It is also 
necessary to ensure that system administrators can access the queue to provide 
administrative support.
To restrict access to the business faculty queue, perform the following steps:
1.	 Select the Course Applications tab, as shown in the following screenshot:

Building a Full CRM System
[ 160 ]
2.	 In the View: drop-down list, click on the Create New View hyperlink, 
as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 The View Name field will be highlighted. Enter Business Faculty 
Course Applications.
4.	 The View Unique Name field should default to Business_Faculty_
Course_Applications, as shown in the following screenshot:
5.	 In the Step 2. Specify Filter Criteria section, select Queue and select 
Business Faculty Course Applications from the drop-down list, as 
shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 3
[ 161 ]
6.	 Scroll down to the Step 3. Select Fields to Display section.
7.	 Move the Application Number, Applicant Name, Course Name, and 
Application Status fields (in this order) to the Selected Fields list, as 
shown in the following screenshot:

Building a Full CRM System
[ 162 ]
8.	 In the Step 4. Restrict Visibility section, remove All Internal Users from the 
Shared To list.
9.	 Select Public Groups in the Search: drop-down list.
10.	 In the Available Members list, select Group: System Administrators 
and move it to the Selected Members list.
11.	 In the Queue Members section, select Roles and Internal 
Subordinates in the Search: drop-down list.
12.	 In the Available Members list, select Role and Internal Subordinates: 
Dean of Business Faculty and move it to the Shared To list, as shown 
in the following screenshot:
13.	 Click on Save.

Chapter 3
[ 163 ]
Restricting access to the science faculty queue
In a similar vein to the business faculty, we only want members of the science faculty 
to be able to view and access the course applications in their queue. This is achieved 
by creating a view on the Course Applications tab and adjusting the permissions on 
the view. Again, it is also necessary to ensure that system administrators can access 
the queue to provide administrative support.
To restrict access to the science faculty queue, perform the following steps:
1.	 Select the Course Applications tab.
2.	 In the View: drop-down list, click on the Create New View hyperlink.
3.	 The View Name field will be highlighted. Enter Science Faculty 
Course Applications.
4.	 The View Unique Name field should default to Science_Faculty_Course_
Applications, as shown in the following screenshot:
5.	 In the Specify Filter Criteria section, select Queue and select Science 
Faculty Course Applications from the drop-down list, as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Building a Full CRM System
[ 164 ]
6.	 Scroll down to the Step 3. Select Fields to Display section.
7.	 Move the Application Number, Applicant Name, Course Name, and 
Application Status fields (in this order) to the Selected Fields list.
8.	 In the Step 4. Restrict Visibility section; remove All Internal Users 
from the Shared To list.
9.	 Select Public Groups in the Search: drop-down list.
10.	 In the Available Members list, select Group: System Administrators 
and move it to the Selected Members list.
11.	 In the Queue Members section, select Roles and Internal Subordinates in the 
Search: drop-down list.
12.	 In the Available Members list, select Role and Internal Subordinates: 
Dean of Science Faculty and move it to the Shared To list, as shown 
in the following screenshot:
13.	 Click on Save.
Restricting access to the exceptions queue
Finally, it is necessary to ensure that only system administrators can access the 
exceptions queue. This is achieved by creating a view on the Course Applications 
tab and adjusting the permissions on the view.

Chapter 3
[ 165 ]
To restrict access to the exceptions queue, perform the following steps:
1.	 Select the Course Applications tab.
2.	 In the View: drop-down list, select Course Applications Exception Queue 
and click on the Create New View hyperlink.
3.	 The View Name field will be highlighted. Enter Course Application 
Exception Queue.
4.	 The View Unique Name field should default to Course_Application_
Exception_Queue.
5.	 In the Specify Filter Criteria section, select Queue and select Course 
Application Exception Queue from the drop-down list, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
6.	 Scroll down to the Step 3. Select Fields to Display section.
7.	 Move the Application Number, Applicant Name, Course Name, and 
Application Status fields (in this order) to the Selected Fields list.
8.	 In the Step 4. Restrict Visibility section, remove All Internal Users 
from the Shared To list.
9.	 Select Public Groups in the Search: drop-down list.

Building a Full CRM System
[ 166 ]
10.	 In the Available Members list, select Group: System Administrators and 
move it to the Selected Members list, as shown in the following screenshot:
11.	 Click on Save.
Custom settings
We will use the custom settings capability of Force.com to provide a mapping 
between a faculty and the Force.com queues we have created. This will allow us to 
simplify our Apex trigger logic that will do the actual assignment to a faculty queue 
in the next section.
To create the custom settings for the queue mappings, perform the following steps:
1.	 Go to Setup | Develop | Custom Settings.
2.	 Click on New.
3.	 In the Label field, enter Admissions Faculty Queues.
4.	 In the Object Name field, enter FacultyQueueMapping.
5.	 Select List from the Setting Type drop-down list.
6.	 Select Protected from the Visibility drop-down list.

Chapter 3
[ 167 ]
7.	 For the Description field, enter Mapping to a Course Application queue 
for a Faculty.
8.	 Click on Save.
You will need to add some custom fields to the custom settings, which can be done 
by completing the following steps:
1.	 Go to Setup | Develop | Custom Settings.
2.	 Click on Admissions Faculty Queues in the Label column.
3.	 Click on New in the Custom Fields section.
4.	 Select Text for the Data Type section. Click on Next.
5.	 In Field Label, enter Faculty.
6.	 Enter 50 in the Length field.
7.	 Ensure that the Required checkbox is selected.
8.	 Ensure that the Unique checkbox is selected, and that duplicate matches are 
set to case sensitive.
9.	 Click on Next, and in the final screen, click on Save & New.
10.	 Perform similar steps to create the remaining custom fields specified 
in the following table:
Field label
Type
Length
Comments
QueueCode
Text
100
Required: Yes
Unique: Yes (case sensitive)
Description
Text
255
Required: No
Unique: No
Finally, we will create the custom setting entries by completing the following steps:
1.	 Go to Setup | Build | Develop | Custom Settings.
2.	 Click on Admissions Faculty Queues in the Label column.
3.	 Click on Manage and then click on New.
4.	 Enter BusinessFacultyQueue in the Name field.
5.	 Enter Business in the Faculty field.
6.	 Enter Business_Faculty_Course_Applications in the QueueCode field.
7.	 Enter Queue Mapping for Business Faculty Course Applications in 
the Description field.
8.	 Click on Save & New.

Building a Full CRM System
[ 168 ]
9.	 Enter ScienceFacultyQueue in the Name field.
10.	 Enter Science in the Faculty field.
11.	 Enter Science_Faculty_Course_Applications in the QueueCode field.
12.	 Enter Queue Mapping for Science Faculty Course Applications in the 
Description field.
13.	 Click on Save & New.
14.	 Enter ExceptionQueue in the Name field.
15.	 Enter Exception in the Faculty field.
16.	 Enter Course_Application_Exception_Queue in the QueueCode field.
17.	 Enter Queue Mapping for exceptioned Course Applications in the 
Description field.
18.	 Click on Save.
The Course Application routing logic
Now that the queues are in place, we can complete the logic required to automatically 
route a course application to the relevant faculty within the university.
Building the faculty assignment Apex trigger
We will use an Apex trigger on the before insert event of a course application to 
route it to a faculty queue. The primary responsibilities of the trigger will be to 
determine the faculty to Force.com queue mappings and route the course application 
to the correct faculty queue. The faculty assignment will be determined by the course 
that the applicant is applying for.
To create the faculty assignment Apex trigger, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Develop | Apex Triggers.
2.	 All of the Apex triggers for your organization will be displayed. Click on 
Developer Console.
3.	 Go to File | New | Apex Trigger in the developer console.
4.	 Enter assignToFacultyQueue in the Name field.
5.	 Select Course_Application__c in the sObject drop-down list and click on 
Submit, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 3
[ 169 ]
6.	 In the code download for this chapter, locate the assignToFacultyQueue.
trigger file.
7.	 Clear the existing code, copy, and paste the contents of 
assignToFacultyQueue.trigger to the developer console code-editing 
window, as shown in the following screenshot:
8.	 Navigate to File | Save.

Building a Full CRM System
[ 170 ]
How the faculty queue assignment trigger works
For this, we will start by retrieving the Force.com queues that we configured earlier 
with the following code:
// retrieve the queue information
List<Group> queues = [SELECT Id, DeveloperName, Type
                              FROM Group
                              WHERE Type = 'Queue'];
        
We then load the queue information onto Map, keyed by DeveloperName for each 
queue (which corresponds to the queue name we used when we configured the 
queues) with the following code:
// Map to hold Queue information mapped to each queue code
Map<string, Group> facultyQueues = new Map<string, Group>();
        
// construct the map of Faculty Queues        
for (Group queue : queues) {
  facultyQueues.put(queue.DeveloperName, queue);
}
Next, we define Map which will hold the unique queue identifier for each faculty with 
the following code:
// Map to hold Queue Mappings
// string = the Faculty the queue is assigned to
// string = the Force.com unique Id for the queue
Map<string, string> facultyQueueMappings = new Map<string, 
  string>();
The final piece of information we need to complete the faculty to queue mappings are 
the custom settings we defined earlier, and this is done by using the following code:
// get the custom setting information
List<FacultyQueueMapping__c> facultyQueueMappingsList = 
  FacultyQueueMapping__c.getAll().values();
Now, we can map each faculty to a corresponding Force.com queue using the 
following code:
for (FacultyQueueMapping__c facultyQueueMapping :
             facultyQueueMappingsList) {
  Group facultyQueue =                 facultyQueues.
get(facultyQueueMapping.QueueCode__c);

Chapter 3
[ 171 ]
  // if the queue exists, map it to the Faculty
  if (facultyQueue != null) {
    facultyQueueMappings.put(
          facultyQueueMapping.Faculty__c,             facultyQueue.
Id);
  }
}
With the faculty to queue mappings in place, we can now assign the course 
application to the correct faculty by using the following code:
for (Course_Application__c courseApplication : trigger.new) {
  // assign Course Application to Faculty queue
  string queueId = facultyQueueMappings.get(
        courseApplication.Course_Faculty__c);
  if (queueId != null) {
    courseApplication.OwnerId = queueId;
  } else {
    // assign Course Application to Exception Queue
    string exceptionQueueId =               facultyQueueMappings.
get('Exception');
    courseApplication.OwnerId = exceptionQueueId;
  }
}
Even though currently we expect only a single course application to 
be processed at a time, we are still using a bulkified trigger, which 
is a Salesforce best practice. You should always write your triggers 
in this fashion.
Testing the faculty queue assignment trigger
As a bonus, I've included the testFacultyQueueAssignment.cls file in the 
code download for this chapter. This is the test class that I used to test the faculty 
assignment trigger while developing the application for this chapter.
To create the faculty assignment Apex trigger, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Develop | Apex Classes.
2.	 All of the Apex classes for your organization will be displayed. 
Click on New.
3.	 In the code download for this chapter, locate the 
testFacultyQueueAssignment.cls file.
4.	 Copy and paste the contents of testFacultyQueueAssignment.cls 
to the Apex code editor in your Force.com window.

Building a Full CRM System
[ 172 ]
5.	 Click on Save.
I highly recommend that you take time to study the code in 
testFacultyQueueAssignment.cls as there are quite a few 
things you need to take into account while writing the code to test 
the custom settings and assign records to a queue.
A decision entry publisher action
As a final touch, we will add a publisher action to the Course Application object. This 
will allow a selection officer to quickly enter a selection decision against an application.
Enabling the publisher actions
If the publisher actions are not enabled already, you will need to enable them in your 
organization. To enable the publisher actions, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Customize | Chatter | Settings.
2.	 Click on Edit.
3.	 Scroll down to Publisher Actions and select the Enable Publisher Actions 
checkbox, as shown in the following screenshot:
4.	 Click on Save.
Developing the publisher action
Now we can develop a publisher action for an entry of a decision. While developing 
a publisher action, you need to think about what the user is trying to achieve, and 
the bare minimum of information that needs to be added or updated. Also, to make 
life easier for users (especially on mobile devices), you can specify the default values 
that are independent of those defined for a Force.com object.

Chapter 3
[ 173 ]
To develop the publisher action, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Objects.
2.	 Click on the Course Application label.
3.	 Scroll down to the Buttons, Links, and Actions section.
4.	 Click on New Action.
5.	 Select Update a Record from the Action Type drop-down list.
6.	 Specify Enter Decision in the Label field.
7.	 Leave None selected in the Standard Label Type field.
8.	 In the Description field, enter Publisher Action to allow a Selection 
Officer to quickly enter a decision.
9.	 Your screen should now resemble the following screenshot:
10.	 Click on Save.

Building a Full CRM System
[ 174 ]
11.	 You will now be directed to the publisher layout editor. Add the Blank 
Space, Application Status, Decision Notes, and Decision Conditions fields 
and rearrange the fields in the layout so that your publisher layout editor 
resembles the following screenshot:
12.	 Click on Save.
13.	 You will now be returned to the Enter Decision detail page.
14.	 Click on New in the Predefined Field Values section.
15.	 Select Application Status in the Field Name drop-down list.
16.	 Select Closed – Admit Applicant in the A specific value drop-down list.
17.	 Click on Save.
Adding the publisher action to the Chatter feed
To add the Enter Decision action to the Chatter feed for the course application, 
perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Objects.
2.	 Click on the Course Application label.
3.	 Scroll down to the Page Layouts section and select the Edit link next 
to Course Application Layout.
4.	 In the Publisher Actions section, click on the override the global 
publisher layout link.
5.	 From the Actions section of the page layout editor, drag the Enter 
Decision action and place it between the Post and File actions.
6.	 Your Publisher Actions window should resemble the following screenshot:

Chapter 3
[ 175 ]
7.	 Click on Save.
Try out the publisher action
The Enter Decision action is now ready for us to try out. This can be done with the 
following steps:
Before using the publisher action, you will need some existing course 
applications in your organization. I have provided some sample data 
for Applicants and Courses in the code download for this chapter that 
you can import. You can then create some course applications to try 
out the publisher action.
1.	 Select the Course Applications tab.
2.	 Open an existing course application, as shown in the following screenshot:

Building a Full CRM System
[ 176 ]
3.	 Click on Enter Decision in the Chatter feed. The following layout will now 
be displayed:
4.	 Fill in the Decision Notes field with a comment and click on Update.
5.	 You will see a flash message that indicates the record has been 
successfully updated.
6.	 If you refresh the page or reopen the course application, you will see that it 
has been updated and a post is automatically added to the Chatter feed, as 
shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 3
[ 177 ]
You can also use a Visualforce page for a publisher action, which 
provides quite a powerful platform for development. Refer to 
the Salesforce1 App Developer Guide page for more details at 
https://developer.salesforce.com/docs/atlas.en-us.
salesforce1.meta/salesforce1/salesforce1_guide_
introduction.htm.
Congratulations! Our admissions application is now complete!
Summary
In this chapter, we have built a comprehensive CRM system using a major portion of 
the Force.com platform functionalities. I sincerely hope that the application we have 
built can be used as a starting blueprint for your real-world projects.
Hopefully, you can now appreciate the ease with which we can tap into the vast 
amount of power contained within the platform as well as extend it when required.
Even though the application is fairly complete, there are still a few improvements 
that you can make, and they are listed as follows:
•	
Add a custom logo to the application to refine it a bit
•	
Implement an approvals process for conditionally approved 
course applications
•	
Implement a workflow to send the result of a course application, when 
a decision is made, to the applicant (you may also need to use an Apex 
trigger for this)
•	
Implement a set of reports and dashboards to aid the university staff in 
tracking and managing the admissions process.


Building a Reporting System
Reporting is a crucial requirement for any business. The old adage, If you cannot 
measure it, you cannot improve it, is as true today as it was when Lord Kelvin coined 
the term.
Force.com provides extremely powerful analytics and reporting capabilities out 
of the box. The standard details, summary and matrix reports, and charts and 
dashboards should suffice for the majority of business reporting needs.
However, as powerful as the standard reporting capabilities are, there will be times 
when the standard reporting isn't enough. At this stage, a business usually has 
two choices:
1.	 Download a reporting system from AppExchange or export data from 
Salesforce to a more powerful data warehouse / operational reporting 
environment to build custom reports. Examples of this are the IBM Cognos 
or the Oracle Business Intelligence suite of tools.
2.	 Build a custom reporting capability in Force.com using Visualforce and Apex.
If you work in an enterprise environment and you have an existing data 
warehouse / operational reporting capability and the available budget, 
the first option could be a feasible option.
For smaller-or medium-sized businesses that don't have the luxury of a data 
warehouse, the second option becomes much more attractive. This will be the 
subject of this chapter.
Our customer will be Force Majeure Insurance Brokers, a fictional insurance 
brokerage firm, which negotiates insurance policies for clients in home and 
property, personal liability, motor vehicle, and marine.

Building a Reporting System
[ 180 ]
Force Majeure has recently adopted Salesforce to track their customer accounts and 
policy information. The management would now like an executive dashboard to 
allow them to track business performance. In this chapter, we will build the executive 
dashboard that they require.
Reporting system overview
The reporting system will be responsible for generating an on-demand Executive 
Information System (EIS) Dashboard for Force Majeure management to quickly 
assess the performance of their insurance broker operations.
This will allow Force Majeure executives to monitor business performance against a set 
of Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) and, if required, to make informed decisions to 
improve operational performance.
Reporting requirements
The following criteria will be used for the executive dashboard:
•	
Date from
•	
Date to
•	
Policy type
The following KPIs will be displayed for the policies being renewed:
KPIs
Description
Terminating renewals
The policy amount ($) and number of renewal 
policies in the selected date range for the selected 
policy type
Unsuccessful renewals
The policy amount ($) and number of policies 
that were not renewed in the selected date range 
for the selected policy type
Successful renewals
The policy amount ($) and number of renewal 
policies that were successfully renewed in the 
selected date range for the selected policy type
Renewal success rate
The success rate of renewals in the policy amount 
($) and number of renewal policies in the selected 
date range for the selected policy type
New policies won
The policy amount ($) and number of new 
policies that were won in the selected date range 
for the selected policy type

Chapter 4
[ 181 ]
KPIs
Description
Total policies won
The combined policy amount ($) and number of 
policies won (new and renewals) in the selected 
date range for the selected policy type
Policy growth percentage The percentage growth of the policy amount ($) 
and number of policies from the total due for 
renewal in the selected date range
The following KPIs will be displayed for the new policies:
KPIs
Description
New policy requests received
The policy amount ($) and number of new 
policies that were requested in the selected 
date range for the selected policy type
New policy requests quoted
The policy amount ($) and number of new 
policies that were quoted on in the selected 
date range for the selected policy type
New policy request quote rate
The percentage of new policy requests that 
were quoted on (the policy amount ($) and 
number of new policies) in the selected date 
range
New policy success rate
The success rate of new policies in the policy 
amount ($) and number of policies in the 
selected date range for the selected policy type
Reporting system design
In this section, we will examine the components that will be required to build the 
EIS Dashboard:
•	
The BrokerPolicy custom object
•	
KPIs' formulae
•	
The EIS Dashboard Visualforce page
•	
The EIS Dashboard custom controller

Building a Reporting System
[ 182 ]
The EIS Dashboard custom object
The EIS Dashboard custom object will contain summarized insurance policy 
information for new policies being sold and existing policies that are being renewed. 
The main information we will be interested in is whether a policy has won or lost, if 
it has been quoted on, and the policy amount.
In a real-life production environment, your customer will most 
probably be using Sales Cloud and Opportunities for this type 
of application. If this is the case, I recommend you use a monthly 
Analytical Snapshot to populate a custom object similar to the 
EIS Dashboard object we are using in this chapter for this type of 
application. For information on how to configure and use Analytical 
Snapshots, refer to http://help.salesforce.com/apex/
HTViewHelpDoc?id=data_about_analytic_snap.htm.
KPI formulae
Each KPI will require a specific set of data or formula. The following tables list each 
KPI and describe the set of data or formula required.
The following are the KPI formulae for the policies being renewed (all formulae 
assume the selected date range and a policy type):
KPIs
Formulae
Terminating renewals
•	 Sum of policy amount where policy renewal is 
True
•	 Count of policies where policy renewal is True
Unsuccessful renewals
•	 Sum of policy amount where policy renewal is 
True and status is Lost
•	 Count of policies where policy renewal is True 
and status is Lost
Successful renewals
•	 Sum of policy amount where policy renewal is 
True and status is Won
•	 Count of policies where policy renewal is True 
and status is Won
Renewal success rate
•	 (Successful renewals policy amount / Terminating 
renewals policy amount) * 100
•	 (Successful renewals number of policies / 
Terminating renewals number of policies) * 100

Chapter 4
[ 183 ]
KPIs
Formulae
New policies won
•	 Sum of policy amount where policy renewal is 
False and status is Won
•	 Count of policies where policy renewal is False 
and status is Won
Total policies won
•	 Policy amount: (Terminating renewals - 
unsuccessful renewals) + new policies won
•	 Number of policies: (Terminating renewals - 
unsuccessful renewals) + new policies won
Policy growth percentage
•	 Policy amount: ((Total policies won – terminating 
renewals) / terminating renewals) * 100
•	 Number of policies: ((Total policies won – 
terminating renewals) / terminating renewals) * 
100
The following are the KPI formulae for the new policies (all formulae assume the 
selected month/year):
KPIs
Formulae
New policy requests received
•	 Sum of policy amount where policy renewal is 
False
•	 Count of policies where policy renewal is False
New policy requests quoted
•	 Sum of policy amount where policy renewal is 
False and quoted is True
•	 Count of policies where policy renewal is False 
and quoted is True
New policy request quote rate
•	 Policy amount: (New policy requests quoted / 
new policy requests received) * 100
•	 Number of policies: (New policy requests quoted 
/ new policy requests received) * 100
New policy success rate
•	 Policy amount: (New policies won / new policy 
requests received) * 100
•	 Number of policies: (New policies won / new 
policy requests received) * 100

Building a Reporting System
[ 184 ]
The EIS Dashboard Visualforce page
The EIS Dashboard Visualforce page will be responsible for receiving report criteria 
from a user and then presenting the EIS Dashboard results. The Visualforce page will 
also present a range of Visualforce charts to present selected dashboard data in 
a graphical format.
The EIS Dashboard custom controller
We will use a custom controller for the EIS Dashboard Visualforce page. The main 
responsibility of the custom controller will be issuing the SOQL queries against the 
database and performing the calculations required to generate the report results for 
the EIS Dashboard.
Reporting system build
Now that our analysis and design is complete, we can start to build the EIS Dashboard.
This chapter assumes you are quite familiar with Apex programming. If 
you haven't done a lot of Apex programming, I advise you to complete 
the Apex Workbook from the developer Force site at http://wiki.
developerforce.com/page/Force.com_workbook.
Defining the EIS Dashboard custom object
To configure the custom object that we will be using for the EIS Dashboard, perform 
the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Objects.
2.	 Press the New Custom Object button.
3.	 Enter EIS Policy for Label.
4.	 Enter EIS Policies for the Plural Label.
5.	 Select the Starts with vowel sound checkbox.
6.	 Enter a Description to describe the purpose of the custom object.
7.	 Enter EIS Policy Code for the Record Name and change the Data Type to 
Auto Number.
8.	 Enter Policy-{00000} in the Display Format field.
9.	 Enter 1 in the Starting Number field.

Chapter 4
[ 185 ]
10.	 Select the Allow Reports checkbox only (we are assuming this object will be 
used for reporting purposes only).
11.	 Ensure that the Deployment Status is set to Deployed.
12.	 Click on the Save button to create the custom object.
You will now need to configure the custom fields for the object:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Objects.
2.	 Click on the EIS Policy hyperlink.
3.	 Click on the New button in the Custom Fields & Relationships section.
4.	 Create the fields described in the following table, accepting the Force.com 
defaults for field level security and page layouts unless otherwise specified:
Field Type
Field Label
Comments
Picklist
Status
This is the status of the policy. Picklist 
values are Won and Lost. Select 
the Use first value as default value 
checkbox.
Picklist
Policy Type
This is the type of policy. Picklist 
values are Home and Property, 
Personal Liability, Motor 
Vehicle, and Marine. Select the Use 
first value as default value checkbox.
Checkbox
Renewal
If true, the policy is a renewal. If the 
checkbox is not selected, the policy 
is a new business.
Checkbox
Quoted
If true, policy has been quoted on.
Currency
Policy Amount
This is the cost of the policy.
Date
Policy Date
This is the date of the policy.
Creating the skeleton EIS Dashboard 
application
Next, we will create a skeleton EIS Dashboard application. This will consist of an 
Application Tab, and a basic Visualforce page.

Building a Reporting System
[ 186 ]
Creating the initial Visualforce page
To create the initial version of the EIS Dashboard page, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Develop | Pages.
2.	 All of the Visualforce pages for your organization will be displayed. Click 
on New.
3.	 In the Page Information section, enter EIS Dashboard Page in the 
Label field.
4.	 Enter EIS_Dashboard_Page in the Name field.
5.	 Enter EIS Dashboard Visualforce Page in the Description.
6.	 Accept the default markup in the Visualforce Page Editor.
7.	 Click on Save.
Defining the application tabs
To define the application tabs, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Tabs.
2.	 Click on New in the Custom Object Tabs section.
3.	 In the Object drop-down list select EIS Policy.
4.	 Select the Lookup icon to set a Tab Style (a suggestion is Trophy). Click 
on Next.
5.	 Accept the defaults for Add to Profiles and click on Next.
6.	 Deselect all applications to ensure this tab is not added. Click on Save.
7.	 Click on New from the Visualforce Tabs section.
8.	 Select EIS Dashboard Page for the Visualforce Page.
9.	 Enter EIS Dashboard for the Tab Label.
10.	 Enter EIS_Dashboard for the Tab Name.
11.	 Select the Lookup icon to set a Tab Style (a suggestion is PDA). Click 
on Next.
12.	 Accept the defaults for Add to Profiles and click on Next.
13.	 Deselect all applications to ensure this tab is not added. Click on Save.

Chapter 4
[ 187 ]
Creating the EIS Dashboard application
To define the EIS Dashboard application, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Apps.
2.	 Click on the New button.
3.	 Select Custom app as the type of app to create. Click on Next.
4.	 For the App Label, enter EIS. The App Name should also be defaulted to 
EIS. Click on Next.
5.	 Click on Next to accept the default logo.
6.	 Move EIS Policies and EIS Dashboard to the Selected Tabs list.
7.	 Leave Home as Default Landing Tab. Click on Next.
8.	 Make the application visible to System Administrator and click on Save.
Importing EIS policy data
The code download for the chapter contains the eis_policy_sample_data.csv file 
in the sample_data folder. This contains some sample data you can use while you are 
developing and testing your reports. Refer to Chapter 2, The E-Commerce Framework, 
for details on loading data into your Force.com organization.
We have now completed the skeleton application. If you select EIS from the Force.
com application dropdown, your screen should resemble the following screenshot:

Building a Reporting System
[ 188 ]
Building the final reporting application
With the skeleton EIS application in place, we can commence the build of the 
final application.
The application will display a Visualforce page, accept the Date From and 
Date To inputs, and allow the user to select a Policy Type (or all policy types) 
from a drop-down list. When the user selects a Generate button, the EIS 
Dashboard will be generated and displayed on the Visualforce page.
To support this functionality, we will build the following components:
•	
EIS Dashboard custom controller
•	
EIS Dashboard Visualforce page
•	
EIS Dashboard charts
The EIS Dashboard custom controller
This custom controller will be responsible for generating the KPIs for the EIS 
Dashboard. To create the EIS Dashboard custom controller, perform the 
following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Develop | Apex Classes.
2.	 All of the Apex classes for your organization will be displayed. Click on New.
3.	 In the code download for the chapter, locate the EISDashboardController.
cls file in the force_com folder.
4.	 Copy and paste the contents of EISDashboardController.cls into 
the Apex Code Editor in your Force.com window, as shown in the 
following screenshot.
5.	 Click on Save.

Chapter 4
[ 189 ]
Working of the EIS Dashboard controller
The first step in the controller is to declare the properties that we will need to store 
the dashboard criteria entered by the user:
// Date From
public Date dateFrom {get; set;}
// Date To
public Date dateTo {get; set;}
// Policy Type picklist values
public List<selectOption> policyTypeOptions {get; set;}
// selected value in picklist
public string selectedPolicyType {get; set;}
The dateFrom and dateTo controller properties will hold the selected date range for 
the dashboard entered by the user on the EIS Dashboard Visualforce page. We will be 
populating the drop-down list for the policy type manually and adding an All option 
to support generating the dashboard for all policy types. The policyTypeOptions 
property will hold this list of values. Note the List<selectOption> property type that 
directly corresponds to a list of the <apex:selectOption> elements on a Visualforce 
page. Finally, we declare the string variable selectedPolicyType, which will store 
the policy type the user has actually selected in the drop-down list.

Building a Reporting System
[ 190 ]
The next set of properties we declare will hold the KPIs for policies being renewed:
// Terminating Renewal Totals
public decimal totalTerminatingRenewalsPolicyAmount {get; set;}
public decimal totalTerminatingRenewalsPolicyCount  {get; set;}
// Successful Renewal Totals
public decimal totalSuccessfulRenewalsPolicyAmount {get; set;}
public decimal totalSuccessfulRenewalsPolicyCount  {get; set;}
// Unsuccessful Renewal Totals
public decimal totalUnsuccessfulRenewalsPolicyAmount {get; set;}
public decimal totalUnsuccessfulRenewalsPolicyCount  {get; set;}
// Renewal Success Rate
public decimal renewalSuccessRatePolicyAmount { get; set;}    
public decimal renewalSuccessRatePolicyCount  { get; set;}
// Total Policies Won
public decimal totalPoliciesWonPolicyAmount { get; set;}    
public decimal totalPoliciesWonPolicyCount  { get; set;}
// Policy Growth Rate
public decimal policyGrowthRatePolicyAmount { get; set;}    
public decimal policyGrowthRatePolicyCount  { get; set;}
The next set of properties we declare will hold the KPIs for new policies:
// New Policy Request Totals
public decimal totalNewPolicyRequestAmount {get; set;}
public decimal totalNewPolicyRequestCount  {get; set;}
// New Policies Won Totals
public decimal totalNewPolicyRequestWonAmount {get; set;}
public decimal totalNewPolicyRequestWonCount  {get; set;}
// New Policy Request Quoted Totals
public decimal totalNewPolicyRequestQuotedAmount {get; set;}
public decimal totalNewPolicyRequestQuotedCount  {get; set;}
// New Policy Quote Rate
public decimal newPolicyQuoteRateAmount { get; set;}    
public decimal newPolicyQuoteRateCount  { get; set;}
// New Policy Success Rate
public decimal newPolicySuccessRateAmount { get; set;}    
public decimal newPolicySuccessRateCount  { get; set;}  

Chapter 4
[ 191 ]
Finally, we declare a set of properties that will hold the data series for the 
Visualforce charts:
// Chart Data Series for Renewals Charts
public List<ChartData> renewalPieData {get; set;}
public List<ChartData> renewalGaugeData {get; set;}  
// Chart Data for New Policy Charts
public List<ChartData> newPolicyGaugeData {get; set;}
public List<ChartData> newPolicyPieData {get; set;}
The ChartData type is a simple wrapper class to hold a series of data points for 
a chart and is also declared in the controller:
// Wrapper class for Chart Data
public class ChartData {
    public String name { get; set; }
    public Integer data { get; set; }
    public ChartData(String name, Integer data) {
        this.name = name;
        this.data = data;
    }
    public ChartData(String name, decimal data) {
        this.name = name;
        this.data = integer.valueOf(data);
    }
}
The EIS Dashboard controller constructor
The constructor method for the controller is used to initialize the controls displayed 
on the Visualforce page:
public EISDashboardController() {
    // initialize values for "Policy Type" picklist
    policyTypeOptions = new List<selectOption>();
    policyTypeOptions.add(new selectOption('All','All'));
    List<Schema.PicklistEntry> policyTypes =
    EIS_Policy__c.fields.Policy_Type__c
                              .getDescribe().getpicklistvalues();
    for (Schema.PicklistEntry a : policyTypes) {

Building a Reporting System
[ 192 ]
        policyTypeOptions.add(new selectOption(a.getValue(),
                                               a.getLabel()));
    }
    // set initial value for Policy Type to 'All'
    selectedPolicyType = 'All';
    
    // initialize dashboard values
    initializeEISDashboard();
}
We begin by initializing the policyTypeOptions list and then adding a new element 
for the All drop-down list option. The next line of code defines a list of the Schema.
PicklistEntry objects. The Schema.PicklistEntry class is defined in the Schema 
namespace in the Apex Developers Guide (Reference Section) (http://www.salesforce.
com/us/developer/docs/apexcode/index_Left.htm) and represents a picklist entry 
for a Force.com object picklist field. We then call the getDescribe() method 
on the Policy Type field of the EIS Policy object, which returns an instance of Schema.
SObjectType representing the field. A further call to the getpicklistvalues() 
method then returns the Policy Type picklist values.
Now that the list contains the picklist values for the policy type, we can iterate 
through it in the succeeding for loop and load them into the policyTypeOptions list.
Finally, we set the selectedPolicyType property to All as its default value and call 
the initializeEISDashboard() method to set all KPI-related properties to 0.
Generating the button click handler method
The next method we define is startGenerateEISDashboard(), which handles the 
click event for the Generate button on the EIS Dashboard Visualforce page:
// start EIS Dashboard generation
public PageReference startGenerateEISDashboard() {
  if (dateFrom != null && dateTo != null) {
    if (dateTo >= dateFrom) {
      generateEISDashboard();
    } else {
      // display custom page message
      ApexPages.Message myMsg = new ApexPages.Message(ApexPages.
Severity.ERROR,'Date To must be greater than or equal to Date From!');
        ApexPages.addMessage(myMsg);
    }
  } else {
    // display custom page message

Chapter 4
[ 193 ]
    ApexPages.Message myMsg = new ApexPages.Message(ApexPages.
Severity.ERROR,'You must select a Date From and a Date To!');
        ApexPages.addMessage(myMsg);
  }
  return null;
}
First, we check that values for Date From and Date To have been entered. If either of 
them contains a null value, we construct an appropriate error message and rerender 
the EIS Dashboard Visualforce page. If Date From and Date To have been entered, 
we then check that Date To occurs after Date From. If both validations are passed, 
we call the generateEISDashboard() method, which will commence generating the 
KPIs for the dashboard. If any of the validations fail, we construct an appropriate 
error message and rerender the EIS Dashboard Visualforce page.
Generating the EIS Dashboard
The generateEISDashboard() method itself calls a set of methods to generate the 
dashboard:
// generate the dashboard
private void generateEISDashboard() {
  initializeEISDashboard();
  generateRenewals();
  generateNewPolicies();
  generateSuccessIndicators();
  generateCharts();
}
As described earlier, initializeEISDashboard() sets all KPI values to 0. This is 
important, especially if the dashboard has previously been generated in the current 
session (we don't want to accidentally display any old values from a previous 
generation of the dashboard).
The generateRenewals() method generates renewal-policy-related KPIs. 
The generateNewPolicies() method generates new-policy-related KPIs. 
The generateSuccessIndicators() method then uses the KPIs generated 
by generateRenewals() and generateNewPolicies() to calculate success 
indicators such as success rates and growth rates of policies.

Building a Reporting System
[ 194 ]
Generating the renewal totals
The generateRenewals() method performs a set of SOQL queries and processes the 
results to generate the renewal-policy-related KPIs. First, we define a map we will 
use throughout the method to store the totals from a SOQL query:
Map<string, decimal> renewalQueryTotals = new Map<string, decimal>();
We then perform a SOQL query to retrieve the policy amount and policy count to 
terminate renewals:
// get amounts for Terminating Renewals
List<AggregateResult> renewalsAggregateResult =
   [SELECT SUM(Policy_Amount__c) totalRenewalsAmount,
    COUNT(Id) totalRenewalsCount, Policy_Type__c
    FROM EIS_Policy__c
    WHERE Renewal__c = true
    AND Policy_Date__c >= :dateFrom AND Policy_Date__c <= :dateTo
    GROUP BY Policy_Type__c];
There is quite a bit happening in this SOQL query, so we will examine it in 
greater detail:
1.	 In the SELECT statement, we are retrieving the SUM value of terminating 
renewals through the Policy Amount field and the number of terminating 
renewals by applying the COUNT aggregator to the Id field. We also retrieve 
the Policy Type field, as we will use it to group the results of the query.
2.	 In the WHERE statement, we are specifying that we are only interested in 
policies where the Renewal field is true, and the Policy Date occurs 
between the Date From and Date To values.
3.	 Finally, we specify the GROUP BY clause on the Policy Type field. This will 
return renewalsAggregateResult, which is a list of AggregateResult 
objects, with one AggregateResult object for each Policy Type. Each 
AggregateResult object will contain the total policy amount and number 
of policies for an individual policy type.
Now that we have the query results in the renewalsAggregateResult list, we can 
call the calculateAggregateTotals() generic method to calculate the dashboard 
values for us:
// get the Terminating Renewal totals
renewalQueryTotals =
  calculateAggregateTotals(renewalsAggregateResult,
    'totalRenewalsAmount',
    'totalRenewalsCount');

Chapter 4
[ 195 ]
We pass the renewalsAggregateResult list and the string identifiers for the total 
policy amount and policy count elements within the renewalsAggregateResult 
object. Note that the string identifiers are an exact match to the aliases we defined 
for the fields in the SOQL query.
The calculateAggregateTotals method is defined as follows:
// generic function to calculate totals from an AggregateResult
private Map<string, decimal>
  calculateAggregateTotals(List<AggregateResult> results,
    string amountString, string countString) {
    decimal policyAmount = 0;
    decimal policyCount = 0;
    // Loop through aggregate results returned and get totals
    for (AggregateResult a : results) {
        if (selectedPolicyType == 'All') {
           policyAmount =
             decimal.valueOf(String.valueOf(a.get(amountString)));
           policyCount =
             decimal.valueOf(String.valueOf(a.get(countString)));
        } else {
           if (String.valueOf(a.get('Policy_Type__c')) ==
                 selectedPolicyType) {
              policyAmount =
                 decimal.valueOf(String.valueOf(
                                     a.get(amountString)));
              policyCount =
                 decimal.valueOf(String.valueOf(
                                     a.get(countString)));
           }
        }
    }
        
    // construct Map and return it
    Map<string, decimal> resultMap = new Map<string, decimal>();
    resultMap.put(amountString, policyAmount);
    resultMap.put(countString, policyCount);
    return resultMap;
}
The method begins by declaring the policyAmount and policyCount variables, 
which will hold the total policy amount and policy count, respectively.
We then begin a for loop to iterate through the list of the AggregateResult objects 
passed into the method (one per policy type).

Building a Reporting System
[ 196 ]
Within the for loop, we check if the user has selected All in the Policy Type 
drop-down list on the Visualforce page. If so, we add the policy amount and 
policy count for the current policy type to the policyAmount and policyCount 
variables, respectively.
If the user hasn't selected All in the Policy Type drop-down list, we then check if the 
policy type for the current AggregateResult object matches the user-selected policy 
type. If the policy type values match, we add the policy amount and policy count for 
the policy type to the policyAmount and policyCount variables.
In a nutshell, the for loop provides the following behavior:
•	
If the user selects All in the Policy Type drop-down list, the policy amount 
and policy count values for every policy type returned by the SOQL query 
are added together to give a grand total for all policy types.
•	
If the users select a specific policy type from the drop-down list, only the 
policy amount and policy count for the selected policy type are included in 
the total.
Once the for loop is completed, we construct a map with an element for the total 
policy amount and total policy count keyed by the string identifiers we passed into 
the calculateAggregateTotals() method. The map is then passed back to the 
generateRenewals() method.
Back in the generateRenewals() method, we retrieve the values from the map and 
assign them to the EIS Dashboard values:
totalTerminatingRenewalsPolicyAmount = 
  renewalQueryTotals.get('totalRenewalsAmount');
  totalTerminatingRenewalsPolicyCount =
  renewalQueryTotals.get('totalRenewalsCount');
We then use similar logic to calculate the totals for successful renewals, using a 
different SOQL query and alias values:
////// get amounts for Successful Terminating Renewals
List<AggregateResult> successfulRenewalsAggregateResult =
  [SELECT SUM(Policy_Amount__c) successfulRenewalsAmount,
  COUNT(Id) successfulRenewalsCount, Policy_Type__c
  FROM EIS_Policy__c
  WHERE Renewal__c = true
  AND Status__c = 'Won'
  AND Policy_Date__c >= :dateFrom AND Policy_Date__c <= :dateTo
  GROUP BY Policy_Type__c];
// get the successful Terminating Renewals Totals

Chapter 4
[ 197 ]
renewalQueryTotals =
  calculateAggregateTotals(successfulRenewalsAggregateResult,
  'successfulRenewalsAmount',
  'successfulRenewalsCount');
  totalSuccessfulRenewalsPolicyAmount =
  renewalQueryTotals.get('successfulRenewalsAmount');
  totalSuccessfulRenewalsPolicyCount =
  renewalQueryTotals.get('successfulRenewalsCount');  
As we have the total and successful renewals' values, we can simply calculate the 
unsuccessful renewals:
totalUnsuccessfulRenewalsPolicyAmount =
  totalTerminatingRenewalsPolicyAmount -
  totalSuccessfulRenewalsPolicyAmount;
totalUnsuccessfulRenewalsPolicyCount =
  totalTerminatingRenewalsPolicyCount -
  totalSuccessfulRenewalsPolicyCount;
Generating the new policy totals
The generateNewPolicies() method uses very similar logic to the 
generateRenewals() method. First, we declare a map to hold the totals 
from an SOQL query:
Map<string, decimal> newPolicyQueryTotals = new Map<string, 
decimal>();
Then, we execute an SOQL query and process its results to get the totals of 
new policies:
// get amounts for New Policies
List<AggregateResult> newPolicyAggregateResult =
  [SELECT SUM(Policy_Amount__c) totalNewPolicyAmount,
  COUNT(Id) totalNewPolicyCount, Policy_Type__c
  FROM EIS_Policy__c
  WHERE Renewal__c = false
  AND Policy_Date__c >= :dateFrom AND Policy_Date__c <= :dateTo
  GROUP BY Policy_Type__c];
// get the New Policy Totals
newPolicyQueryTotals =
  calculateAggregateTotals(newPolicyAggregateResult,
  'totalNewPolicyAmount',
  'totalNewPolicyCount');
totalNewPolicyRequestAmount =

Building a Reporting System
[ 198 ]
  newPolicyQueryTotals.get('totalNewPolicyAmount');
totalNewPolicyRequestCount =
  newPolicyQueryTotals.get('totalNewPolicyCount');
We execute another SOQL query and process its results to get the totals of the new 
policies that won:
// get amounts for New Policies
List<AggregateResult> newPolicyAggregateResult =
  [SELECT SUM(Policy_Amount__c) totalNewPolicyAmount,
  COUNT(Id) totalNewPolicyCount, Policy_Type__c
  FROM EIS_Policy__c
  WHERE Renewal__c = false
  AND Policy_Date__c >= :dateFrom AND Policy_Date__c <= :dateTo
  GROUP BY Policy_Type__c];
// get the New Policy Totals
newPolicyQueryTotals = calculateAggregateTotals(newPolicyAggregateRes
ult,
  'totalNewPolicyAmount',
  'totalNewPolicyCount');
totalNewPolicyRequestAmount =
  newPolicyQueryTotals.get('totalNewPolicyAmount');
totalNewPolicyRequestCount =
  newPolicyQueryTotals.get('totalNewPolicyCount');
Our final task in generateNewPolicies() is to get the totals for new policies that 
have been quoted:
// get amounts for New Policies Quoted
List<AggregateResult> newPolicyQuotedAggregateResult =
  [SELECT SUM(Policy_Amount__c) totalNewPolicyQuotedAmt,
  COUNT(Id) totalNewPolicyQuotedCount, Policy_Type__c
  FROM EIS_Policy__c
  WHERE Renewal__c = false
  AND Quoted__c = true
  AND Policy_Date__c >= :dateFrom AND Policy_Date__c <= :dateTo
  GROUP BY Policy_Type__c];
// get the New Policy Totals
newPolicyQueryTotals =
  calculateAggregateTotals(newPolicyQuotedAggregateResult,
  'totalNewPolicyQuotedAmt',
  'totalNewPolicyQuotedCount');
  totalNewPolicyRequestQuotedAmount =
    newPolicyQueryTotals.get('totalNewPolicyQuotedAmt');

Chapter 4
[ 199 ]
  totalNewPolicyRequestQuotedCount =
    newPolicyQueryTotals.get('totalNewPolicyQuotedCount');
Generating KPIs
The generateSuccessIndicators() method uses the data generated in the 
generateRenewals() and generateNewPolicies() methods to calculate 
the KPIs related to success and growth rate.
First, we calculate the success rate for the renewal policies:
// Renewals Success Rate
if (totalTerminatingRenewalsPolicyAmount != 0 &&
  totalSuccessfulRenewalsPolicyAmount != 0) {
  renewalSuccessRatePolicyAmount =
    (totalSuccessfulRenewalsPolicyAmount /
    totalTerminatingRenewalsPolicyAmount) * 100;
  renewalSuccessRatePolicyCount =
    (totalSuccessfulRenewalsPolicyCount /
    totalTerminatingRenewalsPolicyCount) * 100;
}
Note that we check for zero values in the totalTerminatingRenewalsPolicyAmount 
and totalSuccessfulRenewalsPolicyAmount properties to guard against a division 
by zero runtime error.
Next, we calculate the total policies won, which takes into account the number of 
successful renewals, unsuccessful renewals, and new policies won:
// Total Policies Won
totalPoliciesWonPolicyAmount =
    totalTerminatingRenewalsPolicyAmount -
    totalUnsuccessfulRenewalsPolicyAmount +
    totalNewPolicyRequestWonAmount;
totalPoliciesWonPolicyCount =
    totalTerminatingRenewalsPolicyCount -
    totalUnsuccessfulRenewalsPolicyCount +
    totalNewPolicyRequestWonCount;
The overall policy growth rate calculates the overall rate in policy growth across 
both, renewals and new policies:
// Policy Growth Rate
if (totalTerminatingRenewalsPolicyAmount != 0 &&
             totalPoliciesWonPolicyAmount != 0) {
    policyGrowthRatePolicyAmount =

Building a Reporting System
[ 200 ]
      ((totalPoliciesWonPolicyAmount -
                   totalTerminatingRenewalsPolicyAmount) /
                   totalTerminatingRenewalsPolicyAmount) * 100;
    policyGrowthRatePolicyCount =
      ((totalPoliciesWonPolicyCount -
                   totalTerminatingRenewalsPolicyCount) /
                   totalTerminatingRenewalsPolicyCount) * 100;
}
The policy-quoted rate calculates the percentage of new policy requests that have 
been quoted:
// New Policy Quoted Rate
if (totalNewPolicyRequestQuotedAmount != 0 &&
                  totalNewPolicyRequestAmount != 0) {
    newPolicyQuoteRateAmount =
              (totalNewPolicyRequestQuotedAmount /
               totalNewPolicyRequestAmount) * 100;
    newPolicyQuoteRateCount =
              (totalNewPolicyRequestQuotedCount /
               totalNewPolicyRequestCount) * 100;
}
Finally, we calculate the success rate of new policies:
// New Policy Success Rate
if (totalNewPolicyRequestWonAmount !=0 &&
                    totalNewPolicyRequestAmount !=0) {
    newPolicySuccessRateAmount =
             (totalNewPolicyRequestWonAmount /
              totalNewPolicyRequestAmount) * 100;
    newPolicySuccessRateCount =
             (totalNewPolicyRequestWonCount /
              totalNewPolicyRequestCount) * 100;
}
Generating the Visualforce charts
The final method in the controller takes care of generating the data for the 
Visualforce charts, which will be displayed with the dashboard:
private void generateCharts() {
  // Renewals Pie Chart
  renewalPieData = new List<ChartData>();
  renewalPieData.add(new ChartData('Successful $',

Chapter 4
[ 201 ]
                         totalSuccessfulRenewalsPolicyAmount));
  renewalPieData.add(new ChartData('Unsuccessful $',
                       totalUnsuccessfulRenewalsPolicyAmount));
  // Renewals Success Rate Gauge
  renewalGaugeData = new List<ChartData>();
  renewalGaugeData.add(new ChartData('Success Rate %',
                              renewalSuccessRatePolicyAmount));
  // New Policy Success Rate Gauge
  newPolicyGaugeData = new List<ChartData>();
  newPolicyGaugeData.add(new ChartData('Success Rate %',
                                  newPolicySuccessRateAmount));
  // New Policy Quoted Amount Pie Chart
  newPolicyPieData = new List<ChartData>();
  newPolicyPieData.add(new ChartData('Quoted $',
                           totalNewPolicyRequestQuotedAmount));
  newPolicyPieData.add(new ChartData('Not Quoted $',
                    totalNewPolicyRequestAmount
                        - totalNewPolicyRequestQuotedAmount));
}
Testing the controller
I've included the testEISDashboardController.cls file in the code download for 
the chapter. This is the test class that I used to test the EIS Dashboard custom controller 
during the development of the application for this chapter.
To create the test class for the controller, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Develop | Apex Classes.
2.	 All of the Apex classes for your organization will be displayed. Click on New.
3.	 In the code download for the chapter, locate the 
testEISDashboardController.cls file.
4.	 Copy and paste the contents of testEISDashboardController.cls into 
the Apex Code Editor in your Force.com window.
5.	 Click on Save.

Building a Reporting System
[ 202 ]
EIS Dashboard Visualforce page
To create the final version of the EIS Dashboard page, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Develop | Pages.
2.	 All of the Visualforce pages for your organization will be displayed.
3.	 Click on EIS Dashboard Page in the Label column.
4.	 In the code download for the chapter, locate the EIS_Dashboard_Page.page 
file in the force_com folder.
5.	 Clear the default markup in the Visualforce Page Editor.
6.	 Copy and paste the contents of EIS_Dashboard_Page.page into the 
Visualforce Page Editor in your Force.com window.
7.	 Click on Save.
How the Dashboard Visualforce page works
We begin with the page declaration that introduces a few elements we haven't yet 
used in this book:
<apex:page readOnly="true" controller="EISDashboardController"
  docType="html-5.0" tabStyle="EIS_Dashboard__tab"
  sidebar="false" >
The readOnly attribute relaxes the following restrictions for our Visualforce page, 
and by extension, the custom controller we are using:
•	
Allows us to perform unrestricted queries against the Force.com database
•	
Removes the limit on the number of rows returned for a request (allows up 
to a million rows to be returned)
However, the following restrictions are introduced:
•	
Code cannot perform DML operations
•	
Calls to future methods are not allowed
•	
Sending of e-mails from code is not allowed
Fortunately for us, the restrictions introduced by using readOnly have no impact on 
our application while we can definitely take advantage of the relaxed restrictions for 
queries and number of returned rows.
Setting the docType attribute to html-5.0 allows us to take advantage of new features 
introduced as part of the HTML 5 specification (http://www.w3.org/TR/html5/). 
In particular, we will be using HTML 5 when we declare some date picker fields that 
aren't bound to a Force.com object field.

Chapter 4
[ 203 ]
We also declare a few inline CSS styles we will use throughout the page:
<style>
    .centerHeader { text-align:center;}
</style>
<style>
   .centerHeaderBold { text-align:center; font-weight:bold; }
</style>
Declaring the input criteria controls
We start the actual page structure by declaring form and pageBlock for the 
Visualforce page. We also declare a pageMessages component to display any errors:
<apex:form >
  <apex:pageBlock title="EIS Dashboard">
    <apex:pageMessages id="messages" ></apex:pageMessages>
The first pageBlock section we declare will hold the Visualforce controls to allow the 
user to enter criteria for the dashboard:
<apex:pageBlockSection title="Enter Criteria" columns="1">
Then, we declare the dashboard criteria controls themselves:
<apex:panelGroup >
    <apex:outputLabel value="Date From" />
    <apex:input label="Date From" value="{!dateFrom}"
         type="auto" />
    <apex:outputLabel value="Date To" />
    <apex:input label="Date To" value="{!dateTo}" type="auto" />
    <apex:outputLabel value="Policy Type" />
    <apex:selectList label="Policy Type"
                         value="{!selectedPolicyType}" size="1">
       <apex:selectOptions
           value="{!policyTypeOptions}">
       </apex:selectOptions>
    </apex:selectList>
    <apex:commandButton value="Generate"
                        action="{!startGenerateEISDashboard}" />
</apex:panelGroup>

Building a Reporting System
[ 204 ]
We use apex:panelGroup to present the controls on a single line. The Date From 
and Date To controls take advantage of the html-5.0 declaration for the docType 
attribute and will actually present a date picker control, because they are linked 
to the dateFrom and dateTo date type properties in the controller. The following 
screenshot shows a date picker in action using the Google Chrome browser:
The Policy Type picklist is linked to the selectedPolicyType property 
in the controller. Therefore, whenever a picklist item is selected, it will be 
stored in the controller property. The picklist items themselves are supplied 
by the policyTypeOptions controller property. Remember that this is a 
List<selectOption> type of property that we initialize in the constructor 
for the controller.
With all the controls in place, our dashboard criteria section resembles the 
following screenshot:
Displaying the renewal KPIs
Now, we close the current pageBlockSection for the dashboard criteria and start a 
new pageBlockSection for the textual dashboard results:
</apex:pageBlockSection>
<apex:pageBlockSection title="EIS Dashboard" columns="2">

Chapter 4
[ 205 ]
We have declared a two-column pageBlockSection. The first column will hold 
the renewal-related dashboard results and the second column will hold the 
new-policy-related dashboard results.
We begin declaring the first column using an apex:panelGrid control, using the 
inline CSS styles declared earlier to format the column headings:
<apex:panelGrid columns="3" width="100%"
              columnClasses=",centerHeaderBold,centerHeaderBold">
    <apex:outputText value="" />
    <apex:outputText value="Amount" />
    <apex:outputText value="# Policies" />
The apex:panelGrid control is rendered as an HTML table when the Visualforce page 
is generated. Therefore the apex:outputText controls declared above will be rendered 
as a table row <tr> element and a series of <td> elements for each table cell.
You might be wondering how apex:panelGrid knows when 
to render a new table row. If you look at the apex:panelGrid 
definition, you will see that the columns attribute has been set to a 
value of 3. This means that after every third control in panelGrid, 
Visualforce will render a new table row.
We then render the renewal KPIs required to calculate and display the success rate 
for renewals:
<apex:outputText value="Terminating Renewals" />
<apex:outputText value="{0,number,$###,###,##0}">
  <apex:param value="{!totalTerminatingRenewalsPolicyAmount}" />
</apex:outputText>
<apex:outputText value="{0,number,###,###,##0}">
  <apex:param value="{!totalTerminatingRenewalsPolicyCount}" />
</apex:outputText>
<apex:outputText value="Unsuccessful Renewals" />
<apex:outputText value="{0,number,$###,###,##0}">
  <apex:param value="{!totalUnsuccessfulRenewalsPolicyAmount}" />
</apex:outputText>
<apex:outputText value="{0,number,###,###,##0}">
  <apex:param value="{!totalUnsuccessfulRenewalsPolicyCount}" />
</apex:outputText>
<apex:outputText value="Successful Renewals" />
<apex:outputText value="{0,number,$###,###,##0}">
  <apex:param value="{!totalSuccessfulRenewalsPolicyAmount}" />
</apex:outputText>
<apex:outputText value="{0,number,###,###,##0}">

Building a Reporting System
[ 206 ]
  <apex:param value="{!totalSuccessfulRenewalsPolicyCount}" />
</apex:outputText>
<apex:outputText value="Renewal Success Rate %" />
<apex:outputText value="{0,number,##0.00}">
  <apex:param value="{!renewalSuccessRatePolicyAmount}" />
</apex:outputText>
<apex:outputText value="{0,number,##0.00}">
  <apex:param value="{!renewalSuccessRatePolicyCount}" />
</apex:outputText>
To make the code easier to read, I have highlighted every second row of the KPI 
values. For each row, we are displaying an apex:outputText control containing the 
description for the row, an apex:outputText control containing the KPI value for 
the policy amount, and finally an apex:outputText control containing the KPI value 
for the policy count.
You will notice that the currency values are formatted using a format mask in the 
value field for the apex:outputText control, which then passes the value from an 
apex:param control that contains the KPI value from the controller we are displaying 
and formatting.
We adopt a similar pattern for the remaining renewal KPI rows and add the closing 
tag for apex:panelGrid, as shown in the next code. This completes the first column.
  <apex:outputText value="New Policies Won" />
  <apex:outputText value="{0,number,$###,###,##0}">
    <apex:param value="{!totalNewPolicyRequestAmount}" />
  </apex:outputText>
  <apex:outputText value="{0,number,###,###,##0}">
    <apex:param value="{!totalNewPolicyRequestCount}" />
  </apex:outputText>
  <apex:outputText value="Total Policies Won" />
  <apex:outputText value="{0,number,$###,###,##0}">
    <apex:param value="{!totalPoliciesWonPolicyAmount}" />
  </apex:outputText>
  <apex:outputText value="{0,number,###,###,##0}">
    <apex:param value="{!totalPoliciesWonPolicyCount}" />
  </apex:outputText>
  <apex:outputText value="Policy Growth Rate %" />
  <apex:outputText value="{0,number,##0.00}">
    <apex:param value="{!policyGrowthRatePolicyAmount}" />
  </apex:outputText>
  <apex:outputText value="{0,number,##0.00}">
    <apex:param value="{!policyGrowthRatePolicyCount}" />
  </apex:outputText>
</apex:panelGrid>

Chapter 4
[ 207 ]
Displaying the new policy KPIs
The second column contains the KPI values for new policies. We declare another 
apex:panelGrid and display the values using the same pattern as the first column:
<apex:panelGrid columns="3" width="100%"
             columnClasses=",centerHeaderBold,centerHeaderBold">
  <apex:outputText value="" />
  <apex:outputText value="Amount" />
  <apex:outputText value="# Policies" />
  <apex:outputText value="New Policy Requests Received" />
  <apex:outputText value="{0,number,$###,###,##0}">
    <apex:param value="{!totalNewPolicyRequestAmount}" />
  </apex:outputText>
  <apex:outputText value="{0,number,###,###,##0}">
    <apex:param value="{!totalNewPolicyRequestCount}" />
  </apex:outputText>
  <apex:outputText value="New Policy Requests Quoted" />
  <apex:outputText value="{0,number,$###,###,##0}">
    <apex:param value="{!totalNewPolicyRequestQuotedAmount}" />
  </apex:outputText>
  <apex:outputText value="{0,number,###,###,##0}">
    <apex:param value="{!totalNewPolicyRequestQuotedCount}" />
  </apex:outputText>
  <apex:outputText value="New Policy Requests Quote Rate" />
  <apex:outputText value="{0,number,##0.00}">
    <apex:param value="{!newPolicyQuoteRateAmount}" />
  </apex:outputText>
  <apex:outputText value="{0,number,##0.00}">
    <apex:param value="{!newPolicyQuoteRateCount}" />
  </apex:outputText>
  <apex:outputText value="New Policy Success Rate %" />
  <apex:outputText value="{0,number,##0.00}">
    <apex:param value="{!newPolicySuccessRateAmount}" />
  </apex:outputText>
  <apex:outputText value="{0,number,##0.00}">
    <apex:param value="{!newPolicySuccessRateCount}" />
  </apex:outputText>
</apex:panelGrid>
Next, we close the apex:pageBlockSection for the dashboard textual values:
</apex:pageBlockSection>

Building a Reporting System
[ 208 ]
When the Visualforce page is first rendered, the EIS Dashboard's pageBlockSection 
will resemble the following screenshot:
When an EIS Dashboard is generated, the values will be displayed and formatted as 
per the defined format masks, as illustrated in the following screenshot:
Displaying the renewal dashboard charts
In the next apex:pageBlockSection, we will display the renewals-related 
Visualforce charts. We begin by declaring the beginning of pageBlockSection:
<apex:pageBlockSection title="Renewals Charts" columns="2">
Next, we declare pageBlockSectionItem to display the pie chart for the share 
between successful and unsuccessful renewals:
<apex:pageBlockSectionItem >
  <apex:panelGroup >
    <apex:chart height="350" width="400" data="{!renewalPieData}">
      <apex:pieSeries dataField="data" labelField="name"/>
      <apex:legend position="right"/>
    </apex:chart>
    <apex:outputText value="Share of Renewals" />
  </apex:panelGroup>
</apex:pageBlockSectionItem>
The key elements in the chart declaration are highlighted. The data attribute of the 
apex:chart control points to the renewalPieData controller property, which you will 
recall is a list of the ChartData elements. Subsequently, the dataField attribute of 
the apex:pieSeries control points to the data element in each ChartData instance, 
which contains the value for each occurrence of the renewalPieData data series. In a 
similar fashion, the labelField attribute holds the label for each occurrence 
of renewalPieData.

Chapter 4
[ 209 ]
Similarly, we declare another pageBlockSectionItem to display the gauge chart for 
the renewal success rate:
<apex:pageBlockSectionItem >
    <apex:chart height="350" width="650"
                      animate="true" data="{!renewalGaugeData}">
      <apex:axis type="Gauge" position="gauge"
                      title="Renewal Success Rate"
                      minimum="0" maximum="100" steps="10"/>
      <apex:gaugeSeries dataField="data" donut="50"
                                   colorSet="#78c953,#ddd"/>
    </apex:chart>
</apex:pageBlockSectionItem>
The only difference is that we don't require a labelField attribute for each data 
series value in a gauge chart.
With both pageBlockSectionItem controls declared, we can close the 
pageBlockSection for the renewal charts:
</apex:pageBlockSection>
The following screenshot shows some example renewal charts when an EIS 
Dashboard is generated:
Displaying the New Policy Dashboard Charts
The final apex:pageBlockSection we declare will display the new-policy-related 
Visualforce charts. We begin by declaring the beginning of the pageBlockSection:
<apex:pageBlockSection title="New Policy Charts" columns="2">

Building a Reporting System
[ 210 ]
We then declare pageBlockSectionItem to display a gauge chart for the new policy 
success rate:
<apex:pageBlockSectionItem >
  <apex:chart height="350" width="650" animate="true"
                           data="{!newPolicyGaugeData}">
    <apex:axis type="Gauge" position="gauge"
                            title="New Policy Success Rate"
                            minimum="0" maximum="100" steps="10"/>
    <apex:gaugeSeries dataField="data" donut="50"
                                    colorSet="#78c953,#ddd"/>
  </apex:chart>
</apex:pageBlockSectionItem>
The final pageBlockSectionItem will display a pie chart showing the share of 
quoted and unquoted new policies:
<apex:pageBlockSectionItem >
  <apex:panelGroup >
    <apex:chart height="350" width="400"
                             data="{!newPolicyPieData}">
      <apex:pieSeries dataField="data" labelField="name"/>
      <apex:legend position="right"/>
    </apex:chart>
    <apex:outputText value="Share of Quoted Policies" />
  </apex:panelGroup>
</apex:pageBlockSectionItem>
The following screenshot shows an example of new policy charts when an EIS 
Dashboard is generated:

Chapter 4
[ 211 ]
With all of the Visualforce elements in place, we declare all of the remaining closing 
tags for the page:
      </apex:pageBlockSection>
    </apex:pageBlock>
  </apex:form>
</apex:page>
Congratulations! The EIS Dashboard reporting system is now complete.
Summary
In this chapter, we have built a dashboard-style reporting system using Visualforce 
and Apex. Once again, we started by defining the application requirements and 
design and building a base application to serve as a starting point.
We then built out the remaining application functionality in a modular manner, 
implementing tests where appropriate. I hope you have noticed this development 
pattern used throughout the book. By following this pattern, you will greatly increase 
your chances of building high-quality applications that are easier to maintain.
Along the way, we have learnt how to build a Visualforce page and custom 
controller that are well suited to querying data (through the use of the readOnly 
attribute). We have also used some grouped SOQL queries and generic controller 
logic to calculate the dashboard results. Finally, we added some graphical 
representations of data using the Visualforce charting feature.
As always, there are a few improvements you can make to the application:
•	
Implement some Force.com Ajax functionality to generate the dashboard 
without requiring a total page refresh every time.
•	
Experiment with some different types of charts to include in the dashboard. I 
suggest you consult the Visualforce Developers Guide for some further examples.
•	
Attempt to implement an analytical snapshot to populate an object to serve 
as the data source for a report.


The Force.com 
Mobile SDK Application
The release of the iPhone in 2007 and the iPad in 2010 have fueled a mobile computing 
revolution. The market for smartphones and tablets has experienced an explosive 
period of growth, to the point that shipments of these devices are beginning to 
consistently outstrip the demand for traditional desktop PCs.
There has been a corresponding surge in the amount and breadth of mobile 
applications being built by developers around the world. Millions of mobile 
applications are available for mobile devices, with more being added every day.
Salesforce has recognized that mobile devices are here to stay and with the release 
of Salesforce1, has provided a huge level of support and toolkits for established and 
emerging mobile technologies. In Salesforce1, there are three main options available 
when developing Force.com mobile applications, as follows:
•	
HTML5
•	
Hybrid (iOS and Android, based on Apache Cordova)
•	
Native (iOS and Android software development kits)
Each option has its strengths and weaknesses, and the future dominant mobile 
development platform is yet to be defined. However, it is obvious that the demand for 
mobile applications will only increase in the future. If you haven't dipped your feet 
into mobile development with Salesforce yet, you better start now!
In this chapter, we will be building a Salesforce Mobile SDK HTML5 application using 
the AngularJS JavaScript Framework and Twitter Bootstrap, powered by Node.js 
running on Heroku.
The application will display the Salesforce opportunity information, and present 
nearby opportunities on a Google map. We have a lot to get through, so let's get started.

The Force.com Mobile SDK Application
[ 214 ]
Mobile application overview
To help put the chapter into context, we will take a quick tour of the mobile 
application. There is a fair bit of code to write in this chapter, and it is always easier 
to build something when we can visualize the end result. By performing the following 
steps, we can get an overview of the mobile application:
1.	 First, we will be presented with a screen to log into Salesforce, as shown in 
the following screenshot:
2.	 Clicking on the Login button will start the Salesforce Open Authorization 
(OAuth) authentication process, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 5
[ 215 ]
A good introduction to the Salesforce OAuth protocol is provided on 
the developer Force website at https://wiki.developerforce.
com/page/Digging_Deeper_into_OAuth_2.0_on_Force.com.
3.	 After a successful login, we will be asked to confirm the mobile application 
permissions, as illustrated in the following screenshot:

The Force.com Mobile SDK Application
[ 216 ]
4.	 After granting the mobile application permissions, we will be presented with 
a list of open Salesforce opportunities, as shown in the following screenshot:
5.	 Tapping on an opportunity will display a screen containing further 
information, as displayed in the following screenshot:

Chapter 5
[ 217 ]
6.	 We will also build a page to display the nearby opportunities on a Google 
map, as shown in the following screenshot:

The Force.com Mobile SDK Application
[ 218 ]
7.	 Finally, tapping on an opportunity on the map will display an information 
window, as shown in the following screenshot:
Building a base AngularJS HTML5 
application
Initially, we will be building a basic HTML5 application and deploying it to Heroku. 
The aim is to assemble the majority of required technical components for the 
application and ensure that they are successfully integrated before diving in to 
build the final, fully functional version.

Chapter 5
[ 219 ]
In the base application, we will be assembling the following technical components:
•	
Salesforce Mobile SDK JavaScript libraries
•	
AngularJS
•	
Twitter Bootstrap
•	
jQuery
•	
Salesforce AngularJS Mobile Pack
Downloading AngularJS
We will be using the AngularJS framework to build the bulk of the application. 
AngularJS is a JavaScript Framework, maintained by Google, which is well 
suited to build single-page web applications using the Model-View-Controller 
(MVC) paradigm.
To download AngularJS, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate your web browser to the AngularJS home page at 
http://angularjs.org.
2.	 Click on the Download button.
3.	 For the Branch option, select 1.2.x (legacy), as shown in the 
following screenshot:

The Force.com Mobile SDK Application
[ 220 ]
4.	 For the Build option, select Zip to download all AngularJS files.
5.	 Click on the Download button.
6.	 Expand the .zip file contents to a working folder for the chapter. 
The AngularJS version used for this chapter is v1.2.16.
For a great introduction to AngularJS, I highly recommend 
that you watch an introductory video by Dan Wahlin at 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i9MHigUZKEM.
Downloading Twitter Bootstrap
We will be using Twitter Bootstrap to provide a more attractive interface for our 
application (well, much more attractive than my HTML UI skills!). Twitter Bootstrap 
is a responsive web design framework developed by Mark Otto and Jacob Thornton 
to standardize the user interface development. In August 2011, Twitter released 
the framework as an open source project, and it is now used by a multitude of web 
developers across the world.
To download Twitter Bootstrap, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate your web browser to the Twitter Bootstrap home page 
at http://getbootstrap.com.
2.	 Click on the Download Bootstrap button.
3.	 From the available download choices, select Download source, as shown in 
the following screenshot:
4.	 Expand the .zip file contents to a working folder for the chapter. The Twitter 
Bootstrap version used for this chapter is v3.1.0.

Chapter 5
[ 221 ]
The Getting started section of the getbootstrap.com site contains 
a great introduction as well as some downloadable samples that 
you can also use to kick start your applications. It is well worth 
checking them out.
Downloading jQuery
The Salesforce Mobile SDK we will be using requires jQuery. To download it, 
perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate your web browser to the jQuery home page at http://jquery.com.
2.	 Click on the Download jQuery button.
3.	 Select the link to download the uncompressed, development version of jQuery 
2.x (at the time of writing, the version was 2.1.0) to a working directory.
If you haven't used jQuery before, there is a ton of information on 
the web. A great place to start is the jQuery Learning Center at 
http://learn.jquery.com/.
Downloading the Salesforce AngularJS 
Mobile Pack
As described earlier, we will be using AngularJS to build the user interface for the 
application. To make accessing Salesforce data easier, we will be using the AngularJS 
Mobile Pack for Salesforce.
To download the AngularJS Mobile Pack for Salesforce, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate your web browser to the AngularJS Mobile Pack GitHub repository 
at https://github.com/developerforce/MobilePack-AngularJS.
2.	 Select the Download ZIP button.
3.	 Expand the .zip file contents to a working folder for the chapter.

The Force.com Mobile SDK Application
[ 222 ]
Building a base HTML5 application structure
We will now build the folder structure required for the HTML5 application. In a base 
folder for the chapter, set up a folder structure as per the following screenshot:
In the js folder, set up two additional folders as per the following screenshot:
Copying the base HTML5 application files
We will now copy the base Salesforce Mobile SDK, JavaScript Framework, and 
Twitter Bootstrap files for the HTML5 application by completing the following steps.
For the rest of the chapter, I will be referring to the MyMobileApp 
folder created in the previous section as the application 
base folder.
1.	 Navigate to the folder where you unzipped the Salesforce AngularJS 
Mobile Pack.
2.	 Navigate to the samples/AngularHerokuBootstrapNode folder.
3.	 Copy the following files to the application base folder: app.js, package.
json, and Procfile.

Chapter 5
[ 223 ]
4.	 Navigate to the samples/AngularHerokuBootstrapNode/public/js
/sdk folder.
5.	 Copy the following files to the application base/public/js/sdk folder: 
angular-force.js, forcetk.mobilesdk.js, forcetk.ui.js, 
and smartsync.js.
6.	 Navigate to the samples/AngularHerokuBootstrapNode/public/js/
vendor folder.
7.	 Copy the following file to the application base/public/js/vendor folder: 
underscore-1.4.4.min.js.
8.	 Navigate to the folder where you have unzipped Twitter Bootstrap.
9.	 Navigate to the dist/css folder.
10.	 Copy the following files to the application base/public/css folder: 
bootstrap-theme.css and bootstrap.css.
11.	 Navigate to the dist/fonts folder.
12.	 Copy the following files to the application base/public/fonts folder: 
glyphicons-halflings-regular.eot, glyphicons-halflings-regular.
svg, glyphicons-halflings-regular.ttf, and glyphicons-halflings-
regular.woff.
13.	 Navigate to the folder where you unzipped jQuery.
14.	 Copy the jQuery 2.x file that you have downloaded earlier to the 
application base/public/js/vendor folder (at the time of writing, 
my filename was jquery-2.1.0.js).
15.	 Navigate to the folder where you unzipped AngularJS.
16.	 Copy the following files to the application base/public/js/vendor 
folder: angular.js and angular-route.js.
Building a base HTML5 Heroku application
At this point, we have all of the building blocks in place to build our HTML5 
application. As we will be using Heroku to host our application, now is a good 
time to verify if we can deploy to Heroku successfully.
I'm assuming that you have completed the e-commerce Heroku 
application in Chapter 2, The E-Commerce Framework, so I won't 
be going into detail about the commands used to initialize a git 
repository and deploy an application to Heroku.

The Force.com Mobile SDK Application
[ 224 ]
First, we will need a user interface for our base application. Create a file named 
index.ejs in the application base/views folder and add the following code:
<!doctype html>
<html>
<head>
  <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-
scale=1.0">
  <!-- set 60 pixel padding for top bar -->
  <style>
    body {
      padding-top: 60px;
    }
  
    .button {
      text-align: center;
    }
  </style>
  <link href="css/bootstrap.css" rel="stylesheet">
  <link href="css/bootstrap-theme.css">
</head>
<body>
  
  <div class="navbar navbar-inverse navbar-fixed-top">
    <div class="navbar-inner">
      <div class="container">
        <a class="navbar-brand" href="#">My Mobile App</a>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
        
  <div class="container">
    <div>        
      <h1>Hello from Twitter Bootstrap!</h1>
      <p>This is a Test Mobile Application powered by Heroku and Node.
js</p>
    </div>
  </div>
  
  <script type="text/javascript">
  

Chapter 5
[ 225 ]
  var configFromEnv = {
    client_id: '<%= client_id %>',
    app_url: '<%= app_url %>'
  };
  console.log('***client_id = ' + configFromEnv.client_id);
  console.log('***app_url = ' + configFromEnv.app_url);
  
  </script>
<!-- references for jquery and angularjs -->
<script src="js/vendor/jquery-2.1.0.js"></script>
<script src="js/vendor/underscore-1.4.4.min.js"></script>
<script src="js/vendor/angular.js"></script>
<script src="js/vendor/angular-route.js"></script>
<!-- references for the Force.com Libraries -->
<script src="js/sdk/forcetk.mobilesdk.js"></script>
<script src="js/sdk/smartsync.js"></script>
<script src="js/sdk/angular-force.js"></script>
<script src="js/sdk/forcetk.ui.js"></script>
</body>
</html>
You may need to adjust the version number of some script libraries if 
they are different to the code listing.
Now, we will need to initialize a local git repository for the application. Open 
a terminal window and issue the following commands from the application 
base folder:
$ git init
$ git add -A
$ git commit -m 'Base HTML5 application'
Now, you will need to create a new Heroku application by using the 
following commands:
$ heroku login
$ heroku apps:create

The Force.com Mobile SDK Application
[ 226 ]
Make a note of your Heroku application's name and ensure that 
you substitute your Heroku application's name when required.
Configuring a remote access application
To be able to access Force.com data from our mobile application, we need 
to configure a remote access application in Force.com. This will give us the 
authentication and authorization information, which we need to be able to configure 
our mobile application. To configure the remote access application, perform the 
following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Apps.
2.	 Scroll down to the Connected Apps section and click on New.
3.	 Enter My Mobile App for the Connected App Name field.
4.	 The API Name field will be autopopulated.
5.	 Enter your e-mail address in the Contact Email field.
6.	 Enter Mobile app to access Salesforce.com data for the 
Description field.
7.	 Select the Enable OAuth Settings checkbox. A new set of fields will 
be displayed.
8.	 Enter https://<<your Heroku App Name>>/#/callback for the Callback 
URL field. For example, https://limitless-sierra-9138.herokuapp.
com/#/callback.
9.	 From the Available OAuth Scopes list, move all the options to the Selected 
OAuth Scopes list.
10.	 Click on Save.
The key information that you will need from this screen to connect the mobile 
application to Force.com is the consumer key. This is the key that will connect your 
mobile application to the Salesforce remote access application, as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 5
[ 227 ]
Deploying the HTML5 base application to 
Heroku
Now, we are ready to deploy the HTML5 base application to Heroku. To do this, 
complete the following steps:
1.	 Set the Heroku environment variables for the HTML5 application client ID 
and URL by issuing the following commands:
$ heroku config:add app_url="https://[your Heroku Application 
URL]"
$ heroku config:add client_id="[your Connected Application 
Consumer Key]"
for example:
$ heroku config:add app_url="https://limitless-sierra-9138.
herokuapp.com"
$ heroku config:add client_id="3MVG9A....."

The Force.com Mobile SDK Application
[ 228 ]
Make sure that when copying your consumer key from the browser, 
you don't inadvertently include a newline character. If you start 
getting errors in your browser console regarding illegal or unexpected 
characters, this is likely the root cause for those errors.
2.	 Issue the following command to deploy the application to Heroku:
$ git push heroku master
3.	 Open the application in your browser by issuing the following command:
$ heroku open
4.	 You can also use a mobile device to navigate to the application and view the 
application, as shown in the following screenshot:
Congratulations! We now have a solid base to start building our final 
HTML5 application.
How the base application works
Even though the application is only in its basic form, it is worth examining 
how it works, especially if you are new to Node.js and are wondering how 
the page is rendered.

Chapter 5
[ 229 ]
The key is the three files that we copied to the application base folder earlier.
The package.json file tells Heroku which Node.js modules to load when we deploy 
the application to Heroku. In this case, the key modules that we are interested in are 
express, which provides web server support; and ejs, which provides a rendering 
engine for our web pages.
The Procfile mechanism is used by Heroku to start the application and consists of 
the following one line of code:
web: node app.js
This instructs Heroku to start up Node.js and use app.js as the startup script.
The app.js file is the bootstrap script for the Node.js application. It sets up the web 
server environment using the express module, and initializes the ejs module as 
the default page renderer. It then extracts the Heroku configuration variables for 
client_id and app_url so that they can be made available to our index.ejs page. 
Finally, the script sets up a route for the base application URL to render index.ejs, 
and passes through the app_url and client_id information.
The index.ejs page is a fairly straightforward Twitter Bootstrap HTML page, 
except for the following script block:
<script type="text/javascript">
  
  var configFromEnv = {
    client_id: '<%= client_id %>',
    app_url: '<%= app_url %>'
  };
  console.log('***client_id = ' + configFromEnv.client_id);
  console.log('***app_url = ' + configFromEnv.app_url);
  
</script>
The highlighted lines of code show where we are extracting the client_id and 
app_url parameters provided by app.js and making them available to our 
application through ejs substitution. These variables will be required when 
authenticating against Salesforce using OAuth in our final application.

The Force.com Mobile SDK Application
[ 230 ]
Building the final AngularJS HTML5 
application
Now that we have proven that our technical environment is functioning correctly, 
we can proceed to build the final, fully functional version of the application.
We will be adding the following features:
•	
Ability to authenticate and log in to Salesforce
•	
Adding a page to display a list of opportunities
•	
Adding a detail page to display information about a single opportunity
•	
Adding a page to display a Google map showing opportunities within a 5 
mile radius of your current location
I am assuming that you have at least a basic understanding of HTML5, 
JavaScript, AngularJS, jQuery, the Google Maps Geocoding API, 
and the Google Maps v3 API. If any of these areas are unfamiliar, 
I recommend that you take some time to familiarize yourself with 
the technology before attempting to build the final application. For 
information on AngularJS and jQuery learning resources, check 
their respective download sections in this chapter. For HTML5 and 
JavaScript tutorials, check out http://www.w3schools.com/. For 
learning resources for the Google Maps API, check out https://
developers.google.com/maps/documentation/javascript/, 
and for the Google Geocoding API check out https://developers.
google.com/maps/documentation/geocoding/.
Finalizing the application folder structure
To finalize the application folder structure, create the following folders: application 
base/public/js/controller, application base/public/js/model, 
application base/public/js/service, application base/public/partials, 
and application base/public/partials/opportunity.
Finalizing the application landing page
The first step in finalizing the application logic is to enhance application base/
views/index.ejs. We will add some AngularJS elements; import the required 
JavaScript files; and add some structural page elements for the AngularJS application, 
logout, and navigation.

Chapter 5
[ 231 ]
The inline CSS styles have been modified where necessary to ensure that all <div> 
containers use 100 percent of the available height. This ensures that our Google map 
will be rendered correctly. This process can be done using the following code:
<!doctype html>
<html>
<head>
  <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-
scale=1.0">
  <!-- set 60 pixel padding for top bar -->
  <style>
    html { height: 100%; }
    body {
      padding-top: 60px;
      height: 100%;
    }
    .button {
      text-align: center;
    }
    #map-canvas { height: 100%; }
  </style>
  <link href="css/bootstrap.css" rel="stylesheet">
  <link href="css/bootstrap-theme.css">
</head>
The ng-app directive declares our AngularJS application and informs the framework 
that we will be using an AngularJS module named MyMobileApp to provide the logic 
for the application.
The new navbar items provide links for the opportunity list, opportunity map, and 
application logout respectively. We have used the glyph icons of Twitter Bootstrap 
for the opportunity list and map links, with a button for the application logout. 
The ng-show='isLoggedIn()' directive ensures that these elements will only be 
displayed when a user is successfully authenticated against Salesforce. This process 
can be done by using the following code:
<!-- app reference for AngularJS -->
<body ng-app="MyMobileApp">
  <div class="navbar navbar-inverse navbar-fixed-top">
    <div class="navbar-inner">
      <div class="container">

The Force.com Mobile SDK Application
[ 232 ]
        <a class="navbar-brand" href="#">My Mobile App</a>
        <!-- Set up Logout Link -->
        <div ng-show='isLoggedIn()' class="pull-right">
          <a href="#/opportunities"><span class="glyphicon glyphicon-
list"></span></a>&nbsp;
          <a href="#/map"><span class="glyphicon glyphicon-globe"></
span></a>&nbsp;
          <button class="btn btn-xs btn-primary" ng-
click="logout()">Logout</button>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
The <div> element will be the main container for the application itself immediately 
after the navbar item. The ng-view directive instructs AngularJS to manage the 
content for the application. In effect, we have defined a Single Page Application 
(SPA), where AngularJS will manage the application data (model), display the 
correct HTML page fragments (view), and manage the application business logic 
(controller). Do you notice a familiar pattern here? The following code presents the 
<div> element immediately after the navbar item, which will be the main container 
for the application itself:
  <div class="container-fluid" style="height: 100%">
    <!-- Display Container for AngularJS application -->
    <div ng-view style="height: 100%"></div>
  </div>
</body>
<script type="text/javascript">
var configFromEnv = {
  client_id: '<%= client_id %>',
  app_url: '<%= app_url %>'
};
console.log('***client_id = ' + configFromEnv.client_id);
console.log('***app_url = ' + configFromEnv.app_url);
</script>
<!-- references for jquery and angularjs -->
<script src="js/vendor/jquery-2.1.0.js"></script>
<script src="js/vendor/underscore-1.4.4.min.js"></script>

Chapter 5
[ 233 ]
<script src="js/vendor/angular.js"></script>
<script src="js/vendor/angular-route.js"></script>
<!-- references for the Force.com Libraries -->
<script src="js/sdk/forcetk.mobilesdk.js"></script>
<script src="js/sdk/smartsync.js"></script>
<script src="js/sdk/angular-force.js"></script>
<script src="js/sdk/forcetk.ui.js"></script>
The final script declarations in the following code import the Google Maps v3 API 
and the AngularJS code that we will be creating as we work through the chapter:
<!-- Google Maps API -->
<script type="text/javascript"
  src="https://maps.googleapis.com/maps/api/js?key=[Your API key 
here]&sensor=false">
</script>
<!-- AngularJS files -->
<script src="js/MyMobileApp.js"></script>
<script src="js/model/Opportunity.js"></script>
<script src="js/service/ReflectionService.js"></script>
<script src="js/service/LocationService.js"></script>
<script src="js/controller/HomeController.js"></script>
<script src="js/controller/LoginController.js"></script>
<script src="js/controller/LogoutController.js"></script>
<script src="js/controller/CallbackController.js"></script>
<script src="js/controller/OppListController.js"></script>
<script src="js/controller/OppViewController.js"></script>
<script src="js/controller/MapViewController.js"></script>
</html>
For your convenience, I have highlighted the differences in the 
base application version of the file.
Initializing the AngularJS application
In the application base/public/js folder, create a file named MyMobileApp.js 
and enter the code from this section.

The Force.com Mobile SDK Application
[ 234 ]
The following line in application base/views/index.ejs initializes the 
AngularJS application:
<!-- app reference for AngularJS -->
<body ng-app="MyMobileApp">
Correspondingly, in MyMobileApp.js, we bootstrap the application by declaring 
the app variable, which will be the MyMobileApp application module for 
our application (as defined in the <body> tag). In AngularJS, an application 
module is a container for application logic artifacts such as controllers, services, 
and model-related code. We also use the context dependency injection to 
inject the dependencies that the application requires to run. In this instance, 
AngularForce, AngularForceObjectFactory, and ngRoute. AngularForce and 
AngularForceObjectFactory are AngularJS modules, which are defined in the 
Salesforce AngularJS Mobile Pack and provide a wrapper around the lower-level 
Salesforce Mobile SDK JavaScript libraries. This makes authenticating against 
Salesforce and retrieving Salesforce data a lot easier than if we had to code against 
the Salesforce Mobile SDK libraries directly. The ngRoute module provides support 
that will enable us to define the RESTful AngularJS routes for our application, as 
mentioned in the following code:
/* This file initializes the AngularJS app
   and includes the necessary Force.com
   SDK Libraries
*/
// initialize base AngularJS module
var app = angular.module('MyMobileApp', ['AngularForce', 
'AngularForceObjectFactory', 'ngRoute']);
We then proceed to define the SFConfig object, which is a key component of our 
application. This object will hold the OAuth session token and authentication 
information required by the application to retrieve data from Salesforce. To initialize 
SFConfig, a call is made to getSalesforceConfig(), which checks that we have 
defined the required environment configuration variables for the Heroku application 
URL and the Salesforce connected application consumer key. If the variables are 
defined, we store them in the SFConfig object. Finally, we populate SFConfig with 
the URL required to authenticate against Salesforce. The object is then stored as an 
application constant that can be used throughout the application. This is done with 
the following code:
// get Salesforce Configuration
var SFConfig = getSalesforceConfig();
// set maximum list size

Chapter 5
[ 235 ]
SFConfig.maxListSize = 25;
// define a constant for the AngularJS app
app.constant('SFConfig', SFConfig);
The next block of code defines the RESTful routing for our application. For each 
application route, we define the route pattern (for example, '/'), the AngularJS 
controller that will be used to handle the request (for example, 'HomeController'), 
and the HTML page fragment that will be displayed in the application container for 
the route (for example, 'partials/home.html'):
/***************************
 Configure AngularJS routes
****************************/
app.config(function ($routeProvider) {
$routeProvider
  .when('/', {controller: 'HomeController', templateUrl: 
                                           'partials/home.html'})
  .when('/login', {controller: 'LoginController', templateUrl: 
                                          'partials/login.html'})
  .when('/logout', {controller: 'LogoutController', 
                            templateUrl: 'partials/logout.html'})
  .when('/callback', {controller: 'CallbackController', 
                          templateUrl: 'partials/callback.html'})
  .when('/opportunities', {controller: 'OppListController', 
                  templateUrl: 'partials/opportunity/list.html'})
  .when('/view/:oppId', {controller: 'OppViewController', 
                  templateUrl: 'partials/opportunity/view.html'})
  .when('/map', {controller: 'MapViewController', templateUrl: 
                                            'partials/map.html'})
  .otherwise({redirectTo: '/'});
});
The initApp() method is called when the application user is successfully 
authenticated against Salesforce (as described later in the The Salesforce authentication 
components section). This method takes the information returned from the 
authentication process and uses it to initialize the Salesforce Mobile SDK Force 
toolkit. Once the Force.init method is called, the SFConfig object has all the 
information it needs to connect to Salesforce and retrieve data. This process is 
done with the following code:
/***********************************************
 initApp - called when authentication successful
***********************************************/
function initApp(options, forcetkClient) {
  // initialize options object to hold Salesforce

The Force.com Mobile SDK Application
[ 236 ]
  // access and configuration information
  options = options || {};
  options.loginUrl = SFConfig.sfLoginURL;
  options.clientId = SFConfig.consumerKey;
  options.apiVersion = 'v29.0';
  options.userAgent = 'SalesforceMobileUI/alpha';
  options.proxyUrl = options.proxyUrl || SFConfig.proxyUrl;
  // initialize forcetk toolkit
  Force.init(options, options.apiVersion, forcetkClient);
}
/************************************
 Salesforce Configuration Functions
************************************/
function getSalesforceConfig() {
  // first check if environment configuration variables are set
  if (!configFromEnv || configFromEnv.client_id == "" || 
       configFromEnv.client_id == "undefined" || 
       configFromEnv.app_url == "" || 
       configFromEnv.app_url == "undefined") {
        throw 'Environment variable client_id and/or app_url is 
missing. Please set them before you start the app';
  }
  // return config information for login URL, OAuth information and 
proxy URL
  return {
    sfLoginURL: 'https://login.salesforce.com/',
    consumerKey: configFromEnv.client_id,
    oAuthCallbackURL: removeTrailingSlash(configFromEnv.app_url) + 
'/#/callback',
    proxyUrl: removeTrailingSlash(configFromEnv.app_url) + '/proxy/'
  }
}
//Helper
function removeTrailingSlash(url) {
  return url.replace(/\/$/, "");
}

Chapter 5
[ 237 ]
Finally, by using the following code, we declare two functions that will be available 
globally to the application. The isLoggedIn() function will determine whether 
a user is successfully logged in, and logout() will be used to log a user out of 
Salesforce, and the application itself:
/*******************************
 Authentication Functions to
 check if user logged in, and
 log user out
*******************************/
// return authentication status
app.run(function (AngularForce, $rootScope) {
  $rootScope.isLoggedIn = function() {
    return AngularForce.authenticated();
  }
});
// logout user
app.run(function (AngularForce, $rootScope, $location) {
  $rootScope.logout = function() {
    AngularForce.logout();
    // Now go to logout page
    $location.path('/logout');
  }
});
The Salesforce authentication components
We will now build the AngularJS application components necessary to execute the 
OAuth process that will enable the application users to authenticate against Salesforce.
Home controller
In the application base/public/js/controller folder, create a file named 
HomeController.js and enter the following code:
// AngularJS Controller for Home Page
app.controller('HomeController', function($scope, AngularForce, 
$location, $routeParams) {
  // check if user authenticated
  var isAuthenticated = AngularForce.authenticated();
  if (AngularForce.refreshToken)

The Force.com Mobile SDK Application
[ 238 ]
  {
    // try to relogin using refresh token
    AngularForce.login(function() {
      $location.path('/opportunities');
    });
  } else {
    $location.path('/login');
  }
});
In the application base/public/partials folder, create a file named home.html. 
Leave this file blank as we will not be displaying any content for this HTML 
page fragment.
How the home controller works
The home controller commences by calling the AngularForce.refreshToken() 
method to check for a refresh token from a successful login. If a refresh token is 
found, the AngularForce.login() method is called to relogin to Salesforce and 
refresh the session token. Once the login is completed successfully, the application 
presents a list of opportunities using the /opportunities AngularJS route.
If the user isn't logged in, they are redirected to the /login AngularJS route to allow 
them to authenticate against Salesforce using the OAuth process.
The login controller
In the application base/public/js/controller folder, create a file named 
LoginController.js and enter the following code:
app.controller('LoginController', function($scope, AngularForce, 
$location) {
  // check if authenticated
  if (AngularForce.authenticated()) {
    return $location.path('/opportunities');
  }
  // login to Salesforce
  $scope.login = function() {
    AngularForce.login();
  };
});

Chapter 5
[ 239 ]
In the application base/public/partials folder, create a file named login.html 
and enter the following code:
<div class="span4 well">
  <p>Please log into Salesforce.</p>
  <p style='text-align: center;padding-bottom: 30px;'>
    <button class="btn btn-large btn-primary" ng-
click="login()">Login</button>
  </p>
</div>
How the login controller works
The login controller first checks if the user is logged in by calling the 
AngularForce.authenticated() method. If the user is logged in, 
they are redirected to the /opportunities AngularJS route.
If the user isn't logged in, the login.html page is displayed. The Login button 
is linked to the AngularJS $scope.login() event handler. When the button is 
clicked, the AngularForce.login() method is called to start the Salesforce OAuth 
authentication process.
The callback controller
In the application base/public/js/controller folder, create a file named 
CallbackController.js and enter the following code:
app.controller('CallbackController', function($scope, AngularForce, 
$location) {
  AngularForce.oauthCallback(document.location.href);
  // set hash to empty before setting path to /opportunities
  $location.hash('');
  $location.path('/opportunities');
});
In the application base/public/partials folder, create a file named callback.
html and enter the following code:
<p>You are successfully logged into Salesforce.</p>

The Force.com Mobile SDK Application
[ 240 ]
How the callback controller works
The callback controller is executed when the /callback route is invoked after a 
user is successfully authenticated against Salesforce (as defined in our Salesforce 
connected application). The authentication information (session token and Salesforce 
REST API endpoint) is included as parameters to the callback URL. The controller 
calls the AngularForce.oauthCallback() method and passes it in the URL 
information. Behind the scenes, this invokes the initApp() method defined in 
MyMobileApp.js.
The method then proceeds to remove the authentication information from the URL 
(by removing the hash) and redirect the user to the opportunities list page.
The logout controller
In the application base/public/js/controller folder, create a file named 
LogoutController.js and enter the following code:
app.controller('LogoutController', function($scope, AngularForce, 
$location, ReflectionService) {
  $location.path('/');
});
In the application base/public/partials folder, create a file named logout.html 
and enter the following code:
<p>You are now logged out of the application.</p>
How the logout controller works
When the user clicks on the Logout button in the application, the logout() method 
defined in MyMobileApp.js is invoked. This logs the users out of the application and 
redirects them to the /logout route. At this point, the message defined in logout.
html is displayed to the users and they are redirected to the application's home page.
The opportunity display components
We will now build the application components necessary to retrieve and display the 
Salesforce opportunities in our mobile application.
The opportunity factory
The opportunity AngularJS factory contains the following three methods that 
provide opportunities to the application:

Chapter 5
[ 241 ]
Method
Description
getOpportunityList
This method returns a list of open opportunities
getOpportunity
This method returns information about a single 
opportunity
getOpportunitiesWithinRadius
This method returns opportunities within a 5 
mile radius of the user's current location
Each method follows the AngularJS promise pattern. This is a pattern used to define 
methods that return results asynchronously. First, we declare the deferred variable 
to set up the AngularJS promise context. The method initially returns a deferred.
promise object to the calling method as a placeholder for the results when they 
arrive. When the results are ready, they are returned to the calling method through 
the deferred.resolve() method. If an error occurs, the deferred.reject() 
method is used to return the error details to the calling method. We will see how the 
calling method handles the AngularJS promise when we examine the The opportunity 
list controller section.
In the application base/public/js/model folder, create a file named 
Opportunity.js and enter the following code from this section:
app.factory('Opportunity', function($q, AngularForceObjectFactory, 
ReflectionService) {
  var factory = {};
  // get a list of opportunities
  factory.getOpportunityList = function() {
    var deferred = $q.defer();
The objQuery object is initialized through JSON and defines the Salesforce object 
to be queried, the fields to be returned, the Where filtering clause, the field(s) to sort 
by, and the maximum number of rows to be returned. This is done by using the 
following code:
    // Configure Opportunity Object Criteria
    var objQuery = {
      type: 'Opportunity',
      fields: ['Id', 'Name', 'Account.Name', 'StageName', 'Amount', 
        'CloseDate'],
      where: "StageName <> 'Closed Won' AND StageName <> 'Closed 
        Lost'",
      orderBy: 'Id',
      limit: 20
    };

The Force.com Mobile SDK Application
[ 242 ]
The Opportunity object is defined next, passing in the objQuery object into the 
constructor by using the following code. The query() method is then called. When 
the query results are returned, the success function returns the results to the calling 
method. If an error occurs, the error information is passed back to the calling method:
    var Opportunity = AngularForceObjectFactory(objQuery);
    Opportunity.query(function(data) {
      var opportunities = data.records;
      deferred.resolve(opportunities);
    }, function(error) {
      deferred.reject(error);
    });
    // return promise to controller to deliver deferred results
    return deferred.promise;
  };
The getOpportunity() method uses a similar pattern. The only difference is the 
Where clause, which uses the id parameter to extract a single opportunity. This is 
explained in the following code:
  // get a single opportunity
  factory.getOpportunity = function(id) {
    var deferred = $q.defer();
    // Configure Opportunity Object Criteria
    var objQuery = {
      type: 'Opportunity',
      fields: ['Id', 'Name', 'Account.Name', 'Account.Phone', 
        'StageName', 'Amount', 'CloseDate'],
      where: "Id = '" + id + "'",
      orderBy: 'Id',
      limit: 20
    };
    var Opportunity = AngularForceObjectFactory(objQuery);
    Opportunity.query(function(data) {
      var opportunity = data.records;
      deferred.resolve(opportunity);

Chapter 5
[ 243 ]
    }, function(error) {
      deferred.reject(error);
    });
    // return promise to controller to deliver deferred results
    return deferred.promise;
  };
The following code from the getOpportunitiesWithinRadius() method is of 
particular interest, which uses a geolocation SOQL query to find opportunities within 
the 5 mile radius. We will see how the location-related data is populated in Salesforce 
when we will examine the The opportunity map components section:
  // get a list of opportunities within a given map radius
  factory.getOpportunitiesWithinRadius = function(currLat, currLng) {
    var deferred = $q.defer();
    // Configure Opportunity Object Criteria
    var objQuery = {
      type: 'Opportunity',
      fields: ['Id', 'Name', 'Account.Name', 'Account.Phone', 
            'Account.BillingStreet',
            'Account.BillingCity', 'Account.BillingState', 
            'Account.BillingCountry',
            'Account.BillingPostalCode',
            'Account.Location__Latitude__s', 
            'Account.Location__Longitude__s'],
      where: "DISTANCE (Account.Location__c, GEOLOCATION(" + 
              currLat +
              "," + currLng + "),'mi') < 5",
      orderBy: 'Id',
      limit: 20
    };
    var Opportunity = AngularForceObjectFactory(objQuery);
    Opportunity.query(function(data) {
      var opportunity = data.records;
      deferred.resolve(opportunity);
    }, function(error) {
      deferred.reject(error);
    });

The Force.com Mobile SDK Application
[ 244 ]
    // return promise to controller to deliver deferred results
    return deferred.promise;
  };
  return factory;
});
The opportunity list controller
In the application base/public/js/controller folder, create a file named 
OppListController.js and enter the following code:
// AngularJS Controller for Opportunity List
'use-strict';
app.controller('OppListController', function($scope, $rootScope, 
AngularForce, $location, Opportunity, ReflectionService) {
  // set flag to display progress message
  $scope.isWorking = true;
  if ($rootScope.isLoggedIn()) {
    Opportunity.getOpportunityList().then(function(data) {
      // model for view
      $scope.isWorking = false;
      $scope.opportunityList = data;
    }, function(data) {
      console.log('***OppListController.js - Error Retrieving 
        Opportunity List...');
      console.log('readyState = ' + data.readyState);
      console.log('responseText = ' + data.responseText);
      console.log('responseJSON = ' + data.responseJSON);
      console.log('status = ' + data.status);
      console.log('statusText = ' + data.statusText);
    });
  } else {
    // re-direct to login page
    $location.path('/');
  }
});

Chapter 5
[ 245 ]
In the application base/public/partials/opportunity folder, create a file 
named list.html and enter the following code:
<div ng-show='isWorking'>
  <p>Retrieving Opportunities...</p>
</div>
<!-- responsive table (class="hidden-xs") -->
<div ng-show='!isWorking'>
  <table width="80%" class="table">
    <thead>
      <tr>
        <th>Name</th>
        <th class="hidden-xs">Account</th>
        <th>Amount</th>
        <th class="hidden-xs">Stage</th>
        <th>Closes</th>
      </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
      <tr ng-repeat='opportunity in opportunityList'>
        <td><a href="#/view/{{opportunity.Id}}">{{opportunity.Name}}</
a></td>
        <td class="hidden-xs">{{opportunity.Account.Name}}</td>
        <td>{{opportunity.Amount | currency:"USD$"}}</td>
        <td class="hidden-xs">{{opportunity.StageName}}</td>
        <td>{{opportunity.CloseDate | date:"shortDate"}}</td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</div>
How the opportunity list controller works
The opportunity list controller first ensures that the user is logged in. If so, the 
Opportunity.getOpportunityList() method is called. This illustrates the other 
half of the AngularJS promise pattern. The block of code contained in the .then() 
block is executed after the query results or error information is returned by the 
deferred.resolve() or deferred.reject() methods in the opportunity factory 
method. In the case of a successful query, the results are injected into the current 
AngularJS scope so that they can be accessed by the AngularJS view.
If the user isn't logged in, they are redirected back to the application home page.
The view consists of an HTML table, augmented with some Twitter Bootstrap 
responsive CSS classes and AngularJS directives. The hidden-xs class causes 
bootstrap to automatically hide columns on smaller displays.

The Force.com Mobile SDK Application
[ 246 ]
The ng-repeat directive is then used to render a table row for each opportunity 
that is returned. The opportunity values are inserted into HTML using AngularJS 
substitution. AngularJS filters are applied to the opportunity amount and close date 
to format them as US dollars and a short date, respectively.
The opportunity detail view controller
In the application base/public/js/controller folder, create a file named 
OppViewController.js and enter the following code:
// AngularJS Controller for Opportunity View
'use-strict';
app.controller('OppViewController', function($scope, $rootScope, 
AngularForce, $routeParams, $location, Opportunity, ReflectionService) 
{
  // set flag to display progress message
  $scope.isWorking = true;
  if ($rootScope.isLoggedIn()) {
    Opportunity.getOpportunity($routeParams.oppId).then(function(data) 
{
      // model for view
      $scope.isWorking = false;
      $scope.opportunity = data[0];
    }, function(data) {
      console.log('***OppListController.js - Error Retrieving 
        Opportunity...');
      console.log('readyState = ' + data.readyState);
      console.log('responseText = ' + data.responseText);
      console.log('responseJSON = ' + data.responseJSON);
      console.log('status = ' + data.status);
      console.log('statusText = ' + data.statusText);
    });
  } else {
    $location.path('/');
  }
});

Chapter 5
[ 247 ]
In the application base/public/partials/opportunity folder, create a file 
named view.html and enter the following code:
<style>
a[href^="tel:"]:before {
    content: "\260E";
    display: block;
    margin-right: 0.5em;
}
</style>
<div ng-show="isWorking">
  <p>Retrieving Opportunity...</p>
</div>
<div ng-show="!isWorking">
  <h3>{{opportunity.Name}}</h3>
  <p>for {{opportunity.Account.Name}}</p>
  <p><a href="tel:{{opportunity.Account.Phone}}">{{opportunity.
Account.Phone}}</a></p>
  <p>Value: {{opportunity.Amount  | currency:"USD$"}}</p>
  <p>Stage: {{opportunity.StageName}}</p>
  <p>Closes: {{opportunity.CloseDate | date:"shortDate"}}</p>
  <a href="#/opportunities">Back to List</a>
</div>
How the opportunity detail view controller works
The opportunity detail controller follows the same pattern as the opportunity list 
controller. The Opportunity.getOpportunity() method is called, passing in the 
opportunity id received in the route.
The view uses AngularJS substitution to inject the opportunity values into HTML. 
Again, filters are applied to the opportunity amount and close date. Note the inline 
CSS style, which is used to display a Unicode telephone character in the HTML output.
The opportunity map components
We will now build the application components necessary to retrieve and display 
Salesforce opportunities on a Google map.

The Force.com Mobile SDK Application
[ 248 ]
Adding a geolocation trigger to the Account object
We will need to add a trigger to the Account object to geolocate the account addresses. 
This will allow us to display the location of an opportunity for an account on a Google 
map in our mobile application.
The geolocation trigger functionality that is built in this section 
was inspired by a blog article located at http://blog.
internetcreations.com/2012/09/creating-a-geolocation-
trigger-in-salesforce-winter-13/.
First, you need to obtain an API key for Google Maps and a geolocation API by using 
the following steps:
1.	 Visit https://code.google.com/apis/console and sign in with your 
Google account (assuming that you already have one).
2.	 Click on the Create project… button.
3.	 Enter My Mobile Project in the Project name field.
4.	 Accept the default value for the Project ID field.
5.	 Click on Create.
6.	 Click on APIs & auth from the left-hand side navigation bar.
7.	 Set the Geocoding API field to ON, as shown in the following screenshot:
8.	 Also, set Google Maps Javascript API v3 to ON, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
9.	 Select Credentials and click on CREATE NEW KEY.
10.	 Click on the Browser Key button.
11.	 Click on Create new Server key… to generate the key. Make a note of the 
API key, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 5
[ 249 ]
Now, we need to add a Salesforce remote site for the Google Maps API by 
performing the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Security Controls | Remote Site Settings.
2.	 Click on the New Remote Site button.
3.	 Enter Google_Maps_API in the Remote Site Name field.
4.	 Enter https://maps.googleapis.com for the Remote Site URL field.
5.	 Ensure that the Active checkbox is checked
6.	 Click on Save.
7.	 Your Remote Site Detail screen should resemble the following screenshot:
Next, we need to add a Location field to the Account object:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Customize | Accounts | Fields.
2.	 Click on the New button in the Custom Fields & Relationships section.
3.	 Select Geolocation for the Data Type field. Click on Next.
4.	 Enter Location for Field Label. The Field Name should also default 
to Location.

The Force.com Mobile SDK Application
[ 250 ]
5.	 Select Decimal for the Latitude and Longitude Display Notation section.
6.	 Enter 7 for the Decimal Places field. Click on Next.
7.	 Click on Next to accept the default settings for Field-Level Security.
8.	 Click on Save to add the field to all account-related page layouts.
Next, we need an Apex utility class to geocode an address using the Google 
Geocoding API by completing the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Develop | Apex Classes.
2.	 All of the Apex classes for your organization will be displayed. 
Click on New.
3.	 In the code download for the chapter, locate the AccountGeocodeAddress.
cls file in the force_com folder.
4.	 Copy and paste the contents of AccountGeocodeAddress.cls into the Apex 
code editor in your Force.com window.
5.	 Insert your Google API key in the following line of code:
String geocodingKey = '[Your API Key here]';
6.	 Click on Save.
Finally, we need to implement an Apex trigger class to geocode the billing address 
when an account is added or updated. For this, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Develop | Apex Triggers.
2.	 All of the Apex triggers for your organization will be displayed. Click on 
Developer Console.
3.	 Navigate to File | New | Apex Trigger in the developer console.
4.	 Enter geocodeAccountAddress in the Name field.
5.	 Select Account in the sObject drop-down list and click on Submit, as shown 
in the following screenshot:

Chapter 5
[ 251 ]
6.	 In the code download for the chapter, locate the geocodeAccountAddress.
trigger file in the force_com folder.
7.	 Copy and paste the contents of geocodeAccountAddress.trigger into the 
Apex code editor in your developer console window. Go to File | Save.
How the geolocation trigger works
We begin by declaring the Apex class that will perform the geocoding by using the 
following code:
public with sharing class AccountGeocodeAddress {
A static variable is then declared to flag whether the geocoding has already been 
performed in the current execution context by using the following code:
private static Boolean geocodingCalled = false;
A problem can potentially occur when you geocode an address as a result of an 
update to an account. For example, account A is updated, which invokes the after 
update trigger, which in turn invokes a future method to perform the geocoding 
operation. The geocoding operation within the future method then updates account 
A by adding/updating the Location field coordinates. This in turn calls the after 
update trigger on account A again, which invokes another future method to perform 
the geocoding operation. This will trigger an error because you cannot invoke a 
future method from within a future method. 

The Force.com Mobile SDK Application
[ 252 ]
The following code prevents this from happening:
public static void DoAddressGeocode(id accountId) {
  if (geocodingCalled || System.isFuture()) {
    System.debug(LoggingLevel.WARN, '***Address Geocoding Future 
Method Already Called - Aborting...');
    return;
  }
  
  // if not being called from future context, geocode the address
  geocodingCalled = true;
  geocodeAddress(accountId);
}
Then, we will declare a future method using the following code that will accept an 
account ID as a parameter and geocode the billing address against the Google API:
// we need a future method to call Google Geocoding API
@future (callout=true)
static private void geocodeAddress(id accountId) {
We then declare some variables by using the following code to hold our Google 
Maps API key and the Account object we are geocoding:
// Key for Google Maps Geocoding API
String geocodingKey = '[Your API Key here]';
    
// get the passed in address
Account geoAccount = [SELECT BillingStreet, BillingCity, BillingState, 
BillingCountry, BillingPostalCode
        FROM Account
        WHERE id = :accountId];
A quick check is then performed by using the following code to ensure that we have 
enough information to geocode the address:
// check that we have enough information to geocode the address
if ((geoAccount.BillingStreet == null) ||
        (geoAccount.BillingCity == null)) {
  System.debug(LoggingLevel.WARN, 'Insufficient Data to Geocode 
Address');
  return;
}
The billing address for the Account object is then inspected to build a string 
representation of the address by using the following code:
// create a string for the address to pass to Google Geocoding API
String geoAddress = '';

Chapter 5
[ 253 ]
if (geoAccount.BillingStreet != null)
  geoAddress += geoAccount.BillingStreet + ', ';
if (geoAccount.BillingCity != null)
  geoAddress += geoAccount.BillingCity + ', ';
if (geoAccount.BillingState != null)
  geoAddress += geoAccount.BillingState + ', ';
if (geoAccount.BillingCountry != null)
  geoAddress += geoAccount.BillingCountry + ', ';
if (geoAccount.BillingPostalCode != null)
  geoAddress += geoAccount.BillingPostalCode;
The address string is then URL encoded by using the following code so that it can be 
included in the call to the Google Geocoding API:
// encode the string so we can pass it as part of URL
geoAddress = EncodingUtil.urlEncode(geoAddress, 'UTF-8');
We then declare an instance of the Apex Http class to initiate the HTTP request 
and response. We also declare and build an instance of the HttpRequest class to 
represent the GET request to the Google Maps API by using the following code:
Http http = new Http();
HttpRequest request = new HttpRequest();
request.setEndpoint('https://maps.googleapis.com/maps/api/geocode/
json?address='
    + geoAddress + '&key=' + geocodingKey
    '&sensor=false');
request.setMethod('GET');
request.setTimeout(60000);
With the HTTP request constructed, we then proceed to make the call from within a 
try-catch block by using the following code:
try {
  // make the http callout
  HttpResponse response = http.send(request);
We have requested a response from the Geocoding API in JSON format. Therefore, 
we create an Apex JSON parser to process the JSON format returned from the API. 
We also declare two variables to hold the latitude and longitude of the address by 
using the following code:
JSONParser responseParser = JSON.createParser(response.getBody());
// initialize co-ordinates
double latitude = null;
double longitude = null;

The Force.com Mobile SDK Application
[ 254 ]
With everything now in place, we can parse the response from the Geocoding API 
and extract the latitude and longitude of the address by using the following code:
while (responseParser.nextToken() != null) {
   if ((responseParser.getCurrentToken() == JSONToken.FIELD_NAME) && 
(responseParser.getText() == 'location')) {
  responseParser.nextToken();
  while (responseParser.nextToken() != JSONToken.END_OBJECT)   {
     String locationText = responseParser.getText();
     responseParser.nextToken();
     if (locationText == 'lat')
        latitude = responseParser.getDoubleValue();
     else if (locationText == 'lng')
    longitude = responseParser.getDoubleValue();
  }
   }
}
Finally, we check if we have received co-ordinates from the API. If so, we update the 
Account object and close the try-catch block, as shown in the following code:
  // update co-ordinates on address if we get them back
  if (latitude != null) {
    geoAccount.Location__Latitude__s = latitude;
    geoAccount.Location__Longitude__s = longitude;
    update geoAccount;
  }
} catch (Exception e) {
  System.debug(LoggingLevel.ERROR, 'Error Geocoding Address - ' + 
e.getMessage());
}
The Account after insert / Account after update trigger itself is relatively 
simple. If the Location field is blank or the billing address has been updated, a call is 
made to the AccountGeocodeAddress.DoAddressGeocode method to geocode the 
address against the Google Maps geocoding API with the following code:
trigger geocodeAccountAddress on Account (after insert, after update) 
{
    
  // bulkify trigger in case of multiple accounts
  for (Account account : trigger.new) {
  
    // check if Billing Address has been updated
    Boolean addressChangedFlag = false;
    if (Trigger.isUpdate) {

Chapter 5
[ 255 ]
      Account oldAccount = Trigger.oldMap.get(account.Id);
  if ((account.BillingStreet != oldAccount.BillingStreet) ||
    (account.BillingCity != oldAccount.BillingStreet) ||
    (account.BillingCountry != oldAccount.BillingCountry) ||
    (account.BillingPostalCode != oldAccount.BillingPostalCode)) {
    addressChangedFlag = true;
    System.debug(LoggingLevel.DEBUG, '***Address changed for - ' + 
      oldAccount.Name);
  }  
    }
        
    // if address is null or has been changed, geocode it
    if ((account.Location__Latitude__s == null) || (addressChangedFlag 
== true)) {
  System.debug(LoggingLevel.DEBUG, '***Geocoding Account - ' + 
account.Name);
      AccountGeocodeAddress.DoAddressGeocode(account.id);
    }
  }
}
Location service
In the application base/public/js/service folder, create a file named 
LocationService.js and enter the following code:
/*******************************
 Location Services for
 Application
*******************************/
console.log('***LocationService.js - Initializing 
LocationService...');
app.service('LocationService', function($q) {
  this.getCurrentLocation = function() {
    var deferred = $q.defer();
    // default co-ordinates are Sydney, Australia
    var defaultLatitude = -34.397;
    var defaultLongitude = 150.644;
    var success = function(position) {
      deferred.resolve(position);
    }

The Force.com Mobile SDK Application
[ 256 ]
    var error = function() {
      var defaultPosition = {
        latitude: defaultLatitude,
        longitude: defaultLongitude
      };
      deferred.reject(defaultPosition);
    }
    if (navigator.geolocation) {
      navigator.geolocation.getCurrentPosition(success, error);
    } else {
      error();
    }
    // return promise to controller to deliver deferred results
    return deferred.promise;
  }
});
How it works
Once again, we use the AngularJS promise pattern to determine the user's current 
location. We start by setting some default co-ordinates, in case the device can't 
determine the current location, or the user does not grant permission for us to use it.
We then set up a success function for a successful attempt to search for a location. 
This function returns the user's current position to the calling method using the 
deferred.resolve() method. Next, an error handler function is set up in case of an 
unsuccessful location find attempt. In this case, we return the default co-ordinates to 
the calling method using deferred.reject().
Finally, we check if the current device supports finding the user's location by 
checking the browser's navigator.geolocation property. If so, we call the 
navigator.geolocation.getCurrentPosition() method to find the user's current 
location. If the browser doesn't support geolocation, we invoke the error handler 
method to return the default co-ordinates.
The map view controller
The map view controller is the most complicated controller in the entire application, 
so we will take some time to examine it in a greater level of detail.

Chapter 5
[ 257 ]
In the application base/public/js/controller folder, create a file named 
MapViewController.js and enter the following code from this section.
app.controller('MapViewController', function($scope, $rootScope, 
  AngularForce, $location, $routeParams, LocationService,
Opportunity, ReflectionService) {
We begin with a check to ensure that the user is logged in, and initialize the map 
position and the map itself by using the following code:
  if ($rootScope.isLoggedIn()) {
    var mapLocation = {
      latitude: 0,
      longitude: 0
    };
    var map = null;
We then use an AngularJS promise to get the user's current location. If the location 
find attempt is successful, we store the co-ordinates in the mapLocation object. In the 
event that it is unsuccessful, we store the default co-ordinates in the mapLocation 
object. For this, we use the following code:
    // use LocationService to get current position or default
    // co-ordinates
LocationService.getCurrentLocation().then(function(position) {
      mapLocation.latitude = position.coords.latitude;
      mapLocation.longitude = position.coords.longitude;
    }, function(defaultPosition) {
      defaultPosition.latitude;
      mapLocation.longitude = defaultPosition.longitude;
    })
We then use another .then() block to execute the following code after the users' 
location has been determined. Here, we are also initializing the Google map and 
placing a marker on it to show the users' current location:
    .then(function() {
      var mapOptions = {
        center: new google.maps.LatLng(mapLocation.latitude, 
          mapLocation.longitude),
        zoom: 15,
        mapTypeId: google.maps.MapTypeId.ROADMAP
      };
      map = new google.maps.Map(document.getElementById("map-canvas"), 
        mapOptions);

The Force.com Mobile SDK Application
[ 258 ]
      // mark current position on map
      var marker = new google.maps.Marker({
        position: new google.maps.LatLng(mapLocation.latitude, 
          mapLocation.longitude),
        map: map
      });
    })
Now that we have the Google map initialized with the users' current location, we are 
ready to add markers for the opportunities within a 5 mile radius. We use another 
.then() block to execute the following code:
    .then(function() {
      // select any opportunities within a 5 mile radius and plot 
      // them on the map
      Opportunity.getOpportunitiesWithinRadius(
               mapLocation.latitude, mapLocation.longitude).then(
We make a call to the Opportunity.getOpportunitiesWithinRadius() method 
and pass in the user's current location. What is important to note here is that the 
getOpportunitiesWithinRadius() method is also asynchronous in nature, so we 
need to start another AngularJS promise within the current .then() block to ensure 
that we process the results in the correct sequence.
Next, we will process the getOpportunitiesWithinRadius() results when they are 
returned, by using the following code:
        function(data) {
          // LatLng Bounds Object to determine zoom level
          var bounds = new google.maps.LatLngBounds();
          // flag to determine whether to adjust default boundary
          var extendBounds = false;
          $.each(data, function(i, val) {
            // add marker to map
            var oppMarker = new google.maps.Marker({
              position: new 
            google.maps.LatLng(val.Account.Location__Latitude__s,
                             val.Account.Location__Longitude__s),
              map: map,
              icon: 'http://gmaps-samples.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/
                markers/green/blank.png'
            });

Chapter 5
[ 259 ]
First, we initialize the bounds object. This will help us to ensure that the zoom level 
of the Google map is set correctly to ensure that all opportunities are displayed. We 
also set up the extendBounds flag, which will tell us whether we need to trigger a 
map resizing once the opportunities have been processed. We give it an initial value 
of false because we haven't processed any opportunities yet.
A very cool feature of AngularJS is that it plays nicely with jQuery. We take advantage 
of this by using a jQuery for-each loop to place a marker on the map at the location 
of each opportunity using the Account.Location field. We use a green marker to 
differentiate them from the users' current location marker.
Still within the jQuery for-each loop, we set up an information window to be displayed 
when the user taps on an opportunity marker, by using the following code:
            // info window for the marker
            (function(i, oppMarker, val) {
              // Event listener has access to values of i and
              // marker as they were during marker creation
              google.maps.event.addListener(oppMarker, 'click', 
              function() {
                  var infoWindow = new google.maps.InfoWindow({
                    content: '<strong>' + val.Name + 
                       '</strong><br />'
                       + val.Account.Name + '<br />'
                      + val.Account.BillingStreet + '<br />'
                      + val.Account.BillingCity + '<br />'
                      + val.Account.BillingState + ' '
                      + val.Account.BillingPostalCode + '<br />'
                      + val.Account.BillingCountry + '<br />'
                      + '<a href="tel:' + val.Account.Phone + '">'
                      + val.Account.Phone + '</a><br />'
                });
                infoWindow.open(map, oppMarker);
              });
            })(i, oppMarker, val);
At this point, we have placed an opportunity marker and its associated information 
window on the map. In the following code, we will also adjust the bounds object 
to encapsulate the geographical area of the current marker by calling the bounds.
extend() method. We also set the extendBounds flag to true to indicate that we 
need to adjust the map viewport:
            // Extend bounds object with each opportunity
            bounds.extend(new 
             google.maps.LatLng(val.Account.Location__Latitude__s,
                             val.Account.Location__Longitude__s));
            extendBounds = true;
          });

The Force.com Mobile SDK Application
[ 260 ]
Now that the for-each loop has been completed, we have placed all of the markers 
on the map. At this point, we call the map.fitBounds() method to adjust the map 
viewport to ensure that all opportunity markers are displayed. This is done by using 
the following code:
          // if we have at least 1 opportunity adjust the boundary
          // to fit all opportunities
          if (extendBounds) {
            map.fitBounds(bounds);
          }
We then complete the AngularJS promise with the standard error handling function. 
Finally, if the user isn't logged in, we redirect them to the application home page, by 
using the following code:
      }, function(data) {
          console.log('***MapViewController.js - Error Retrieving 
            Opportunity List...');
          console.log('readyState = ' + data.readyState);
          console.log('responseText = ' + data.responseText);
          console.log('responseJSON = ' + data.responseJSON);
          console.log('status = ' + data.status);
          console.log('statusText = ' + data.statusText);
      });
    });
  } else {
    // re-direct to login page
    $location.path('/');	
	
  }
});
In the application base/public/partials/opportunity folder, create a file 
named map.html and enter the following code:
<!-- Google Map Canvas -->
<div id="map-canvas">
  
</div>

Chapter 5
[ 261 ]
JavaScript object reflection service
In the application base/public/js/service folder, create a file named 
ReflectionService.js and enter the following code:
/*******************************
 Reflection Services for
 Javascript objects
*******************************/
app.service('ReflectionService', function() {
  // This is some fantastic utility code to get properties of
  // a Javascript object using reflection
  this.Reflector = function(obj) {
    this.getProperties = function() {
      var properties = [];
      for (var prop in obj) {
        if (typeof obj[prop] != 'function') {
          properties.push(prop);
        }
      }
      return properties;
    };
 }
});
The reflection service is a utility that I use to display the properties of JavaScript 
objects such as SFConfig and the data returned by the opportunity factory. The 
purpose was mainly to debug JavaScript objects and log their property values to the 
JavaScript console during development. I have included it as part of the application 
as I think it will be a handy utility that you can use in your own AngularJS projects.
Deploying an application to Heroku
Now that the development of the final application is complete, we can update 
our local git repository and deploy the application to Heroku by issuing the 
following commands:
$ git add .
$ git commit -m "Final HTML5 Application for Chapter 5"
$ git push heroku master

The Force.com Mobile SDK Application
[ 262 ]
To see the application in action, navigate your web browser to your Heroku 
application URL or issue the following command:
$ heroku open
Congratulations! It has been quite a journey but you now have a fully functional 
HTML5-based mobile SDK application running on Heroku.
Summary
The aim of an effective mobile application is to present relevant information to a user 
based on their current context. Don't fall into the trap of trying to completely replicate 
the desktop functionality on a mobile device. We have achieved both of these aims 
by providing key opportunity data using the mobile application, and presented 
context-aware information by placing nearby opportunities on a Google map.
Along the way, we have combined an impressive array of technologies to form a 
fully working application.
Although, at the time of writing, AngularJS is a relatively new JavaScript Framework, 
I hope this chapter has convinced you that it is an extremely promising technology. 
In particular, its native support of context dependency injection and the AngularJS 
promise construct make life a lot easier for JavaScript developers. If you have ever had 
to debug nested JavaScript functions more than two levels deep, you should know 
what I mean!
The application itself should give you a good idea of the power of the Salesforce1 
mobile SDK, and how you can apply it to your real-world applications. The sheer 
breadth of the Salesforce1 mobile SDK is extremely impressive, and I encourage you 
to explore it in more detail.
As always, following are some suggestions on how you can extend the application:
•	
You can add some limited update functionality to the application, for 
example, to change the status of an opportunity.
•	
You could change the color of the opportunity map markers based on the 
value of an opportunity to give the user a visual cue.
•	
The HTML5 application forms a perfect base to migrate it to a hybrid app 
using the Apache Cordova mobile SDK. Try to implement the application 
in the platform of your choice (iOS or Android).

Cloud-connected Applications
In this chapter, we will connect a Force.com application to Microsoft Windows Azure. 
In a similar vein to mobile devices, cloud computing adoption has skyrocketed in 
recent years (with Salesforce leading the charge) and shows no signs of slowing down.
Windows Azure is Microsoft's cloud computing environment and provides an 
impressive array of cloud-based services. We will be connecting a Force.com 
application to the Azure Service Bus, which offers a feature called Notification Hubs.
Notification Hubs offer a service to send mobile device push notifications to iOS, 
Android, and Windows mobile devices. The service exposes this functionality 
through a REST API, which can be accessed from Force.com.
The real strength of this feature is that it abstracts the lower-level details of each 
platform's notification service, relieving us from complex details, such as load 
balancing, queuing, and in the case of Google Cloud messaging, exponential back 
off. All we need to do is supply the required credentials for the mobile platform(s) 
we wish to target, and use the REST API to start sending push notifications.
Fortunately for us, Force.com provides a robust toolkit to access cloud computing 
platforms such as Azure, and integrates their functionality into our applications.
In this chapter, we will be building the following two applications:
•	
The first application will be a Force.com application called Force Notify. 
This application will present a Visualforce page to a Salesforce administrator 
and allow the administrator to broadcast mobile push notification messages 
to registered Android mobile device users within their organization. The push 
notifications will be delivered through a Windows Azure Notification Hub.
•	
Secondly, we will build an accompanying Android application using the 
Salesforce Android Native Mobile SDK. This application will receive and 
process push notifications posted from the Windows Azure Notification 
Hub, and post them in the Android device notification area.

Cloud-connected Applications
[ 264 ]
It goes without saying that we have a lot to do in this chapter, so let's begin!
The development process overview
The application we will be building in this chapter will be quite complex, and 
involves extensive configuration and development. Taking this into account, it is 
prudent at this point to examine the following components in our development 
process at a high level:
•	
Development environment: We will begin by configuring the development 
tools we will require (in addition to Force.com). The toolset we will be using 
is Node.js, Android Developer Tools, and the Salesforce Android Native 
Mobile Software Development Kit (SDK).
•	
Salesforce-connected application: We are required to configure a 
Salesforce-connected application to allow our Android application 
to connect to Salesforce.
•	
Google Cloud Messaging: We need to configure Google Cloud Messaging 
to allow push notifications to be sent to our Android application.
•	
Azure Notification Hub: Next, we will configure a Notification Hub in 
Windows Azure, which we will be connecting to from our Force.com 
application. In addition, we will gather the credentials that we will need to 
connect to Azure from Force.com and Android, and download the Azure 
Android SDK.
•	
Android application: At this point, we are ready to begin developing the 
Android application that will be receiving our push notifications.
•	
Force.com application: Finally, we will build a Force.com application that 
will be used to send push notifications to our Android application through 
the Azure Notification Hub.
Configuring the development environment
The first step in building the application is to configure the development tools we 
will need. We will need to install Node.js, the Android Developer Tools, and the 
Salesforce Native Android Mobile SDK.
Installing Node.js
Node.js is a JavaScript platform well-suited to building fast, scalable network 
applications. The Native Android Mobile SDK requires Node.js. To download 
and install Node.js, perform the following steps:

Chapter 6
[ 265 ]
1.	 Navigate your web browser to the Node.js homepage at http://nodejs.org.
2.	 Click on the INSTALL link to download the installer for your platform.
3.	 Start the installer and install Node.js on your system.
4.	 Take note of the Node.js install locations and ensure that they are part of 
your system path. For example, the path to Node.js on my system is /usr/
local/bin/node.
5.	 Start a terminal window and issue the following commands to verify that 
Node.js was installed successfully:
$ node --version
$ npm --version
6.	 Each command should result in the version number of Node.js and the 
Node.js package manager being reported. At the time of writing, the Node.js 
version was v0.10.25 and the Node.js Package Manager version was 1.3.24.
Installing Android Developer Tools
Android Developer Tools (ADT) provides a development environment to build 
Android applications. To develop the Android application for this chapter, we will 
use the ADT Bundle, which provides a version of the Eclipse IDE with essential 
Android SDK components preinstalled.
To install ADT, navigate your web browser to http://developer.android.com/sdk/
index.html and download the ADT Bundle for your operating system. Once you have 
downloaded the ADT Bundle, follow the instructions at http://developer.android.
com/sdk/installing/bundle.html to install the ADT environment.
Installing the Android SDK
We need to ensure that we have the correct version of the Android SDK installed for 
our application. The steps to do this are as follows:
1.	 Click on the Android SDK Manager toolbar button from the ADT toolbar, 
as shown in the following screenshot:

Cloud-connected Applications
[ 266 ]
2.	 In the Android SDK Manager window, ensure that the items displayed in 
the following screenshot are selected for the Android 4.4.2 platform and click 
on Install:
3.	 When the installation is complete, close the Android SDK Manager window.
Configuring an Android virtual device
The next item of configuration for the ADT is to set up an Android virtual device to 
test our application. The steps to do this are as follows:
1.	 Click on the Android Virtual Device Manager toolbar button from the ADT 
toolbar, as shown in the following screenshot:
2.	 In the Android Virtual Device Manager window, click on the New… button, 
as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 6
[ 267 ]
3.	 Configure the Android virtual device settings, as per the following screenshot:

Cloud-connected Applications
[ 268 ]
4.	 Click on OK to create the Android virtual machine. The new virtual machine 
will now appear in the Android Virtual Device Manager window, as shown 
in the following screenshot:
Signing in to the Android virtual device
The final item of configuration is to sign in to the newly created Android virtual device 
with a Google account (assuming you already have one) so that we can register the 
virtual device to receive push notifications. The steps to do this are as follows:
1.	 Assuming that you still have the Android Virtual Device Manager window 
open, highlight your newly created virtual machine and click on the Start… 
button, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 6
[ 269 ]
2.	 From the Launch Options dialog window, click on Launch, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
3.	 The virtual device will be launched (this may take a while!). From the Home 
screen, select the Applications icon, as shown in the following screenshot:
4.	 From the list of applications, choose Settings, as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Cloud-connected Applications
[ 270 ]
5.	 Choose the Add account option, as shown in the following screenshot:
6.	 Select Google from the list of account types, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
7.	 Choose to add an existing Google account, as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 6
[ 271 ]
8.	 Follow the sign-in process with your Google e-mail and password, as shown 
in the following screenshot:

Cloud-connected Applications
[ 272 ]
9.	 Once you have signed in, the configuration of your Android environment 
is complete.
If you haven't developed an Android application before, I 
recommend that you complete the tutorial located at http://
developer.android.com/training/basics/firstapp/
index.html.
Installing the Salesforce Android Native 
Mobile SDK
The Salesforce Android Native Mobile SDK is a toolkit that enables developers to 
build Android applications that securely connect to the Force.com platform. To 
install the Salesforce Android Native Mobile SDK, perform the following steps:
1.	 Start a terminal window and issue the following command:
$ sudo npm install forcedroid –g
Windows users should omit sudo and use npm install 
forcedroid –g.
2.	 Issue the following command to verify that the SDK was installed successfully:
$ forcedroid
3.	 If the command runs and displays a list of options, the SDK has been 
installed successfully, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 6
[ 273 ]
If you are located on a corporate network, you may need to configure 
the proxy settings to enable npm to download the SDK. For example, 
npm config set proxy http://proxy.company.com:8080 
and npm config set-https-proxy http://proxy.company.
com:8080. You may need to contact a network administrator for the 
proxy server address and port number.
Configuring a Salesforce-connected 
application
We will also need a Salesforce-connected application to allow our Android 
application to access Salesforce data. A connected app is different to a traditional 
Force.com application as it is designed to allow external applications to securely 
access your Salesforce organization. To configure the remote access application, 
perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Create | Apps.
2.	 Scroll down to the Connected Apps section and click on New.
3.	 Enter MyNotificationApp in the Connected App Name field.
4.	 The API Name field will be autopopulated.
5.	 Enter your e-mail address in the Contact Email field.
6.	 Enter Mobile app to receive Salesforce.com Push Notifications in 
the Description field.
7.	 Select the Enable OAuth Settings checkbox from the API section. A new set 
of fields will be displayed.
8.	 Enter testsfdc:///mobilesdk/detect/oauth/done in the Callback 
URL field.
9.	 From the Available OAuth Scopes list, move all options to the Selected 
OAuth Scopes list.
10.	 Leave all of the other unspecified fields blank.
11.	 Click on Save.
12.	 Make a note of the consumer key and callback URL as you'll need these later.

Cloud-connected Applications
[ 274 ]
Configuring Google Cloud Messaging
Google Cloud Messaging is the Google API service used to deliver push notifications 
to Android devices. We will need to configure Google Cloud Messaging so that we 
can connect to it from Windows Azure and our Android application. To configure 
Google Cloud Messaging, perform the following steps:
1.	 Visit https://code.google.com/apis/console and sign in with your 
Google account (assuming you already have one).
2.	 If you aren't automatically redirected there, navigate to https://console.
developers.google.com/project.
3.	 Click on the Create Project… button.
4.	 Enter My Notification Project in the Project name field.
5.	 Accept the default value for the Project ID field.
6.	 Click on Create.
7.	 Click on APIs & auth from the left-hand side navigation bar.
8.	 Set the Google Cloud Messaging for Android option to ON, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
9.	 Select Credentials and click on CREATE NEW KEY.
10.	 Click on the Server Key button.
11.	 Click on Create to generate the key. Make a note of the API key, as shown in 
the following screenshot:

Chapter 6
[ 275 ]
Configuring the Azure Notification Hub
We will now need to configure the Azure Notification Hub we will be using to send 
the push notifications.
If you don't have one already, you must sign up for a Windows Azure 
account to complete the steps in this section.
To configure an Azure Notification Hub, perform the following steps:
1.	 If you don't have a Windows Azure account, sign up at http://www.
windowsazure.com/en-us/. Note that a 30-day free trial is available.
2.	 Log on to your Windows Azure Management Portal at https://manage.
windowsazure.com.
3.	 Click on the NEW button in the bottom-left corner of the screen.
4.	 Navigate to APP SERVICES | SERVICE BUS | NOTIFICATION HUB | 
QUICK CREATE, as shown in the following screenshot:
5.	 Enter a name for your Notification Hub and select the region closest to your 
location. Note that the name in the Namespace Name field is automatically 
generated and must be unique, as shown in the following screenshot:

Cloud-connected Applications
[ 276 ]
6.	 Click on CREATE A NEW NOTIFICATION HUB, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
7.	 Your Notification Hub will be created and your namespace name will appear 
in your service bus list, as shown in the following screenshot:
8.	 Click on the namespace name that you just created and click on 
NOTIFICATION HUBS, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 6
[ 277 ]
9.	 Click on the Notification Hub you just created, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
10.	 The Dashboard section for your Notification Hub will be displayed, as 
shown in the following screenshot:

Cloud-connected Applications
[ 278 ]
11.	 Click on Configure. Scroll down to the google cloud messaging settings 
section and enter the API key that you created in the Configuring Google Cloud 
Messaging section, as shown in the following screenshot:
12.	 Click on Save.
13.	 Select Dashboard and click on View Connection String. Make a note of the 
DefaultListenSharedAccessSignature connection string, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
Your Notification Hub has now been configured for Google Cloud Messaging!
Getting the Azure Service Bus credentials
When we build the Force.com and Android components of the application, we will 
require the Azure Service Bus credentials to connect to and send messages through 
the Notification Hub. To get the required credentials, perform the following steps:
1.	 In the Azure Control Panel, select the Service Bus icon, as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 6
[ 279 ]
2.	 In the service bus screen, select the Notification Hub namespace name you 
have created (by clicking on any cell but the first cell in a column), as shown 
in the following screenshot:
3.	 Click on CONNECTION INFORMATION, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
4.	 The connection information for the Notification Hub namespace will be 
displayed. Make a note of the endpoint (non-blurred string)in the ACS 
CONNECTION STRING window, as shown in the following screenshot:

Cloud-connected Applications
[ 280 ]
5.	 Also make a note of the DEFAULT ISSUER and DEFAULT KEY values, 
as shown in the following screenshot:
6.	 Click on the Open ACS Management Portal link.
7.	 Click on the Application integration link in the left-hand side menu.
8.	 In the list of Endpoint Reference, make a note of the OAuth WRAP and 
Management Portal endpoints, as shown in the following screenshot:
Downloading the Azure Android SDK
We will also need to download the Azure Android SDK. This will simplify 
development in our Android application when we need to interface with our 
Notification Hub.
To download the Azure Android SDK, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to http://www.windowsazure.com/en-us/.
2.	 Select the Downloads link.
3.	 In the list of SDKs, select Android Install from the Mobile list.
4.	 The SDK will be downloaded as a compressed ZIP archive.
5.	 Expand the contents of the SDK in a working folder and make a note of the 
location of the notification-hubs-0.1.jar file in the notificationhubs 
subfolder of where you unzipped the SDK.

Chapter 6
[ 281 ]
The version of the Azure Android SDK may have changed by the time 
you are reading this book.
Building an Android mobile application
We will now use the Salesforce Android Native Mobile SDK that we have 
downloaded earlier to build an application that will receive push notification 
messages from our Azure Notification Hub.
To run the Android application and receive push notifications, you 
will need to create an Android Virtual Device (AVD) or Android 
device running the Google APIs, and sign in to it using a Google 
account. Refer to the Installing the Android SDK section of this chapter 
for more details.
Creating the Salesforce Android Mobile SDK 
application
To create an Android native application, perform the following steps:
1.	 Open a terminal window.
2.	 Navigate to a working folder.
3.	 Issue the following command to create a Force.com Android project:
$ forcedroid create --apptype="native" --appname="forceNotify" 
--targetdir="forceNotifyApp" 
--packagename="com.packt.forcenotify"
4.	 Press Enter to accept the default setting of not using SmartStore.

Cloud-connected Applications
[ 282 ]
5.	 The following screenshot shows a sample session of creating the project:
Configuring an application using ADT
We will be using ADT that we have downloaded earlier to build the rest of the 
Android application.
Importing the Salesforce Mobile SDK and 
Salesforce Android application
The first step in building the rest of the application is to import the Salesforce Mobile 
SDK and forceNotify projects into the ADT environment. To import the projects, 
perform the following steps:
1.	 Start ADT.
2.	 Navigate to File | Import....

Chapter 6
[ 283 ]
3.	 In the first step of the import wizard, select Existing Android Code Into 
Workspace, as shown in the following screenshot:
4.	 Click on Next.
5.	 Click on Browse... and navigate to the folder where you created the 
forceNotify application.
6.	 Select the forcedroid/native/SalesforceSDK folder, as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Cloud-connected Applications
[ 284 ]
7.	 Click on Open. The wizard window will now be populated with the code 
that is to be imported, as shown in the following screenshot:
8.	 Click on Finish.
9.	 Perform the same steps to import the forceNotify project from the folder 
where you created the application.
10.	 Right-click on the forceNotifyApp project and select Properties.
11.	 Select Android in the list of property groups.
12.	 Select the latest version of the Google APIs for the Project Build Target 
option. At the time of writing, this was Google APIs Platform 4.4.2 Level 19.
13.	 Click on OK.
Updating the Android manifest file
The Android manifest file contains essential configuration information required for 
an Android application to run.
For a full explanation of the Android manifest file and its 
components, refer to http://developer.android.com/guide/
topics/manifest/manifest-intro.html.
To update the Android manifest file for the forceNotifyApp project, perform the 
following steps:
1.	 In the ADT, expand the forceNotifyApp project and open AndroidManifest.
xml, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 6
[ 285 ]
2.	 Open the source code view for the manifest file and update the <uses-sdk> 
tag to the following (your targetSdkVersion may differ if a higher level 
version is available) version:
    <uses-sdk android:minSdkVersion="9"
      android:targetSdkVersion="19" />
3.	 At the top of the file, before the <application> tag, add the following 
application permissions:
<uses-permission 
  android:name="android.permission.INTERNET"/>
<uses-permission 
  android:name="android.permission.GET_ACCOUNTS"/>
<uses-permission 
  android:name="android.permission.WAKE_LOCK"/>
<uses-permission 
  android:name="com.google.android.c2dm.permission.RECEIVE"/>
4.	 Inside the <application> tag, add the following <receiver> tag:
<receiver
   android:name=".MyBroadcastReceiver"
   android:permission="com.google.android.c2dm.permission.SEND">
   <intent-filter>
      <action android:name="com.google.android.c2dm.intent.
RECEIVE" />
      <category android:name="com.packt.forcenotify" />
   </intent-filter>
</receiver>

Cloud-connected Applications
[ 286 ]
Updating the bootconfig.xml file
We need to update the bootconfig.xml file with the consumer key from our 
Salesforce-connected application. To do this, perform the following steps:
1.	 In the forceNotifyApp project, open the bootconfig.xml file from 
the res/values folder.
2.	 Add the consumer key from your Salesforce-connected application to 
the <string name="remoteAccessConsumerKey"> tag, using the 
following format:
<string name="remoteAccessConsumerKey">[Your Consumer Key]</string>
Adding the Azure SDK and Android support 
libraries
We also need to add the Azure Notifications Hub SDK and Android v4 support 
libraries to the application. To do this, perform the following steps:
1.	 Add a new lib folder to the forceNotifyApp project by highlighting it and 
navigating to File | New | Folder.
2.	 Enter libs for the Folder name: field and click on Finish.
3.	 Open a folder explorer window in your operating system, and 
navigate to the folder where you installed the ADT. For example, on my 
system, I have installed the ADT in the /Users/stephenmoss/Documents/
adt-bundle-mac-x86_64-20130729 folder.
4.	 From the Android Developer Tools folder, navigate to the sdk/
extras/android/support/v4 folder.
5.	 Drag-and-drop the android-support-v4.jar file to the libs folder 
in ADT for the forceNotifyApp project.
6.	 Select Copy Files and click on OK.
7.	 Navigate to the folder where you installed the Azure Android SDK.
8.	 From the notificationhubs subfolder, drag-and-drop the 
notification-hubs-0.1.jar file to the libs folder in the 
forceNotifyApp project.
9.	 Select Copy Files and click on OK.
10.	 Your forceNotifyApp project should now resemble the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 6
[ 287 ]
Importing the Google Play Services Library
To work with Google Cloud Messaging in our Android application, we require the 
Google Play Services Library. The Google Play Services Library adds extra Google 
features to an application such as Maps and Google+. To import Google Play Services 
and reference it from inside our forceNotify project, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to File | Import.
2.	 Select to import using Existing Android Code into workspace. Click on Next.
3.	 Click on Browse... and navigate to the folder where you installed the ADT.
4.	 From the Android Developer Tools folder, navigate to the sdk/extras/
google/google_play_services/libproject/google-play-services_lib 
folder and click on Open.
5.	 Click on Finish to import the Google Play Services Library project.
6.	 Right-click on the forceNotifyApp project and select Properties.

Cloud-connected Applications
[ 288 ]
7.	 In the Library section of the Android properties group, click on Add... and 
select the google-play-services_lib library in the Project Selection window, 
as shown in the following screenshot:
8.	 Click on OK and then on Apply.
9.	 Click on OK to close the Project Properties window.
Enhancing the Android Mobile SDK 
application code
Now we are ready to make the required code enhancements to the Android 
application. This will enable it to receive and process push notifications from the 
Azure Notification Hub. Fortunately, the Salesforce SDK creates an application 
with a lot of default functionalities that we will be taking advantage of the 
following parameters:
•	
Salesforce login and authentication
•	
Fetching and listing contacts from your Salesforce organization
•	
Fetching and listing accounts from your Salesforce organization

Chapter 6
[ 289 ]
In this chapter, I will only be covering the specific modifications to the 
generated Mobile SDK application required to process the Notification 
Hub messages. I encourage that you further explore the default code 
generated by the SDK to see how to leverage it in your own mobile 
applications.
Enhancing the MainActivity class
The first file that we will be enhancing is MainActivity.java. This is the default 
activity for the Android application and is displayed when a user successfully logs 
in. To enhance the MainActivity class, perform the following steps.
The MainActivity class that we are modifying is a descendent 
of SalesforceActivity, which provides the methods we 
are modifying in this chapter. For more information, refer to 
the reference page at http://forcedotcom.github.io/
SalesforceMobileSDK-Android/index.html.
1.	 Add the following imports to MainActivity.java:
import android.util.Log;
import android.os.AsyncTask;
import com.salesforce.androidsdk.rest.RestClient.ClientInfo;
import com.google.android.gms.gcm.*;
import com.microsoft.windowsazure.messaging.*;
2.	 Add the following class members to the MainActivity class:
private String SENDER_ID = "[Your Google API Project #]";
private GoogleCloudMessaging gcm;
private NotificationHub hub;
private String TAG = "MainActivity.java";
private String sfUserId = null;
The SENDER_ID string is the Google API project number from 
the Configuring Google Cloud Messaging section.
3.	 Add the following highlighted code to the end of the onCreate method:
// Setup view
setContentView(R.layout.main);
// Set up Notification Hub
Log.d(TAG, "***Initializing Notification Hub...");

Cloud-connected Applications
[ 290 ]
gcm = GoogleCloudMessaging.getInstance(this);
String connectionString = "[Your Hub Connection String]";
hub = new NotificationHub("[Your Hub Name]", connectionString, 
this);
The Hub Connection String is the 
DefaultListenSharedAccessSignature connection you noted 
down earlier when creating the Azure Notification Hub. The 
hub name is the name of the hub and not the namespace the 
hub is created in. For example, if you have created the hub 
using the naming in the screenshots for this chapter, your hub 
name will be chapter6notificationhub.
For example, the Hub Connection String will look as 
follows:
String connectionString = "Endpoint=sb://
chapter6notificationhub-ns.servicebus.windows.
net/;SharedAccessKeyName=DefaultListenSharedAcc
essSignature;SharedAccessKey=DCTgXeBODcq6mwB1Do
7Q0yuEenBXDJLBoasK5frdpic=";
hub = new NotificationHub("chapter6notification
hub", connectionString, this);
4.	 Add the registerNotificationHubs method to MainActivity.java, 
using the following code:
@SuppressWarnings("unchecked")
private void registerNotificationHubs() {
  // register device with Notification Hub
  new AsyncTask() {
    @Override
    protected Object doInBackground(Object... params) {
      try {
        Log.d(TAG, "***Executing Asynchronous Hub 
Registration...");
        String regid = gcm.register(SENDER_ID);
        NativeRegistration hubRegistration = hub.register(regid, 
sfUserId);
        Log.d(TAG, "***Asynchronous Hub Registration 
Completed...");
      } catch (Exception e) {
        return e;
      }
      return null;
    }

Chapter 6
[ 291 ]
  }.execute(null, null, null);
}
5.	 Finally, add the following highlighted code to the onResume(RestClient 
client) method:
// Show everything
findViewById(R.id.root).setVisibility(View.VISIBLE);
Log.d(TAG, "***Getting Logged In User...");
ClientInfo ci = client.getClientInfo();
sfUserId = ci.userId.toString();
String username = ci.username.toString();
Log.d(TAG, "***Registering Notification Hub...");
registerNotificationHubs();
Make sure that you modify the correct overloaded onResume 
method in MainActivity.java.
How the MainActivity class works
We start by importing the libraries we require, and adding some class members to 
MainActivity. We then proceed to add the code required to initialize Google Cloud 
Messaging and connect to the Azure Notification Hub in the onCreate method, 
using the following code:
gcm = GoogleCloudMessaging.getInstance(this);
String connectionString = "[Your Hub Connection String]";
hub = new NotificationHub("[Your Hub Name]", connectionString, 
  this);
We also add the following code to the overloaded version of the onResume method 
to get the details of the logged in Salesforce user. We place the code here because this 
method is called after a user has logged in:
ClientInfo ci = client.getClientInfo();
sfUserId = ci.userId.toString();
String username = ci.username.toString();
Then we call the registerNotificationHubs method, using the following code:
registerNotificationHubs();
The registerNotificationHubs method runs asynchronously. It first registers the 
application with Google Cloud Messaging with the following line of code:
String regid = gcm.register(SENDER_ID);

Cloud-connected Applications
[ 292 ]
It then registers the Android application with the Azure Notification Hub, by using the 
following code, passing in the identifier received from Google Cloud Messaging and 
the Salesforce user ID as a registration tag. We will see how we use the registration tag 
to target a specific user with a message when we build the Force.com application.
NativeRegistration hubRegistration = hub.register(regid, sfUserId);
Creating the Broadcast Receiver class
We will now create the MyBroadcastReceiver class. This class will be responsible for 
receiving and processing push notifications received from the Azure Notification Hub.
To create the class, perform the following steps:
1.	 Select the com.packt.forcenotify package in the src folder.
2.	 Navigate to File | New | Class.
3.	 In the New Java Class window, enter MyBroadcastReceiver in the Name 
field of the class.
4.	 Enter android.content.BroadcastReceiver for the Superclass field.
5.	 Your window should now resemble the following screenshot:

Chapter 6
[ 293 ]
6.	 Click on Finish.
7.	 Add the following import statements to the MyBroadcastReceiver class:
import com.google.android.gms.gcm.GoogleCloudMessaging;
import android.app.Activity;
import android.app.NotificationManager;
import android.app.PendingIntent;
import android.support.v4.app.NotificationCompat;
import android.util.Log;
8.	 Add the following members to the MyBroadcastReceiver class:
public static final int NOTIFICATION_ID = 1;
private NotificationManager mNotificationManager;
NotificationCompat.Builder builder;
Context ctx;
private String TAG = "MyBroadcastReceiver.java";
9.	 Add the following code to the onReceive method:
// Set up Application Class to receive notification
// from Azure Notification Hub
GoogleCloudMessaging gcm =
                       GoogleCloudMessaging.getInstance(context);
ctx = context;
String messageType = gcm.getMessageType(intent);
if (GoogleCloudMessaging.MESSAGE_TYPE_SEND_ERROR.
equals(messageType)) {
  sendNotification("***Send error: " +
                                  intent.getExtras().toString());
} else if (GoogleCloudMessaging.MESSAGE_TYPE_DELETED.
equals(messageType)) {
   sendNotification("***Deleted messages on server: "
                                + intent.getExtras().toString());
} else {
  sendNotification("Received: " +
                        intent.getExtras().getString("message"));
}
setResultCode(Activity.RESULT_OK);
10.	 Finally, add the sendNotification method, using the following code:
private void sendNotification(String msg) {
  Log.d(TAG, "***Processing Notification from Hub...");

Cloud-connected Applications
[ 294 ]
  // Display Notification on Android Device
  mNotificationManager = (NotificationManager)ctx.
getSystemService(Context.NOTIFICATION_SERVICE);
  PendingIntent contentIntent = PendingIntent.getActivity(ctx, 0, 
new Intent(ctx, MainActivity.class), 0);
  NotificationCompat.Builder mBuilder =
      new NotificationCompat.Builder(ctx)
        .setSmallIcon(R.drawable.sf__icon)
        .setContentTitle("ForceNotify")
        .setStyle(new
                  NotificationCompat.BigTextStyle().bigText(msg))
        .setContentInfo(msg);
  mBuilder.setContentIntent(contentIntent);
  mNotificationManager.notify(NOTIFICATION_ID, mBuilder.build());
  Log.d(TAG, "***Successfully Processed Notification from 
Hub...");
}
How the Broadcast Receiver class works
We begin by importing the required libraries for the class and setting up the required 
class members.
The key code in the onReceive method is the if statement, which checks the type 
of notifications we receive. We first check for an error or a deleted message on the 
server, and route them to the sendNotification method with a suitable message. 
Finally, we route a valid push notification to the sendNotification method and 
extract the message received using the else statement, as follows:
 else {
  sendNotification("Received: " +
                        intent.getExtras().getString("message"));
}
The sendNotification method commences by getting a reference to the notification 
service on the Android device and setting up a pending intent to allow us to return 
control to MainActivity when we have finished processing the notification. This is 
done with the following code:
mNotificationManager = 
  (NotificationManager)ctx.getSystemService(Context.NOTIFICATION_
SERVICE);
PendingIntent contentIntent = 
  PendingIntent.getActivity(ctx, 0, new Intent(ctx, MainActivity.
class), 0);

Chapter 6
[ 295 ]
We then use a notification builder to build the message we wish to display in the 
Android device notification area, using the following code:
NotificationCompat.Builder mBuilder =
  new NotificationCompat.Builder(ctx)
    .setSmallIcon(R.drawable.sf__icon)
    .setContentTitle("ForceNotify")
    .setStyle(new NotificationCompat.BigTextStyle().bigText(msg))
    .setContentInfo(msg);
We are using the NotificationCompat.Builder class to 
enable our code to work on older Android devices.
Finally, we pass the control back to MainActivity by calling the mBuilder.
setContentIntent method and posting the notification to the Android device, 
using the following code:
mBuilder.setContentIntent(contentIntent);
mNotificationManager.notify(NOTIFICATION_ID, mBuilder.build());
Congratulations! The Android application is now complete.
Creating the Force.com broadcast 
application
With the Azure Notification Hub and Android Application now in place, it is time to 
build the Force.com application. This will consist of an Apex class, which acts as the 
interface between Force.com and Azure, a Visualforce page to provide an interface to 
the user, and a custom controller class for the Visualforce page.
Configuring the remote site settings
First, we need to add a Salesforce remote site for the Notification Hub authentication 
REST endpoint. This is done by performing the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Security Controls | Remote Site Settings.
2.	 Click on the New Remote Site button.
3.	 Enter AzureServiceBusAuthenticate for the Remote Site Name field.
4.	 Enter https://[Your Service Bus Management Portal] for the Remote 
Site URL field.

Cloud-connected Applications
[ 296 ]
5.	 Ensure that the Active checkbox is checked.
6.	 Click on Save.
The Azure Service Bus management portal is the 
management portal endpoint from the Getting the Azure 
Service Bus credentials section.
For example, https://chapter6notificationhub-
ns-sb.accesscontrol.windows.net.
Finally, we need to add a Salesforce remote site for the Notification Hub REST 
endpoint. This can be done by performing the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Security Controls | Remote Site Settings.
2.	 Click on the New Remote Site button.
3.	 Enter AzureServiceBusREST in the Remote Site Name field.
4.	 Enter https://[Your Notification Hub Namespace Endpoint] in the 
Remote Site URL field.
5.	 Ensure that the Active checkbox is checked.
6.	 Click on Save.
The Azure Service Notification Hub namespace endpoint 
is the endpoint contained in the ACS connection string 
from the Getting the Azure Service Bus credentials section. For 
example, https://chapter6notificationhub-ns.
servicebus.windows.net.
Creating the Notification Hub Interface class
To create the Notification Hub Interface class, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Develop | Apex Classes.
2.	 All of the Apex classes for your organization will be displayed. Click 
on New.
3.	 In the code download for the chapter, locate the 
azureNotificationHubInterface.cls file in the force_com folder.
4.	 Copy and paste the contents of azureNotificationHubInterface.
cls into the Apex code editor in your Force.com window.
5.	 Click on Save.

Chapter 6
[ 297 ]
How the Notification Hub Interface class works
The Notification Hub Interface class consists of the following three methods:
Method
Description
getAzureAccessToken
This method obtains a security access token for 
Azure
getHubRegistrations
This method gets a list of registrations for a 
Notification Hub
sendHubMessage
This method sends a message through a 
Notification Hub
The getAzureAccessToken method commences by declaring Http and HttpRequest 
objects, using the following code:
Http h = new Http();
HttpRequest req = new HttpRequest();
We then declare the objects we will need to use when authenticating against Azure 
by using the following code:
string Url = '[Your OAuth WRAP Endpoint]';
string encodedLogin = EncodingUtil.urlEncode('[Your Default Issuer]', 
'UTF-8');
string encodedPW = EncodingUtil.urlEncode('[Your Default Key]', 'UTF-
8');
The Azure endpoint and Service Bus credentials required are 
the OAuth WRAP endpoint, DEFAULT ISSUER, DEFAULT 
KEY, and the endpoint contained in the ACS connection 
string from the Getting the Azure Service Bus credentials section.
For example, the Azure endpoint and Service Bus credentials 
will look as follows:
string Url = 'https://chapter6notificationhub-
ns-sb.accesscontrol.windows.net/WRAPv0.9';
string encodedLogin = EncodingUtil.
urlEncode('owner', 'UTF-8');
string encodedPW = EncodingUtil.urlEncode('tM
reEBj2nMOwlgDA0HkkPcJ/CK8n5s2Ext12KtLFsI4=', 
'UTF-8');

Cloud-connected Applications
[ 298 ]
Next, we set up the Http request using the following code:
req.setEndpoint(Url);
req.setMethod('POST');
req.setBody('wrap_name=' + encodedLogin + '&wrap_password=' + 
encodedPW +
'&wrap_scope=[Your Notification Hub Namespace Endpoint]');
req.setHeader('Content-Type', 'application/x-www-form-urlencoded');
The Notification Hub namespace endpoint is the 
endpoint contained in the ACS connection string from 
the Getting the Azure Service Bus credentials section. For 
example, https://chapter6notificationhub-ns.
servicebus.windows.net.
We set the request endpoint to the OAuth WRAP endpoint obtained when we 
configured Azure, and also embed the DEFAULT ISSUER, DEFAULT KEY, and 
Hub Namespace endpoints in the request body. We also set the request method to 
POST, and set the Http header content type.
We then send the Http request to Azure and obtain the Http response in the result 
variable with the following code:
HttpResponse res = h.send(req);
string result = res.getBody();
Finally, we use some Apex string methods to manipulate the result to build a valid 
Azure security token and return it to the caller by using the following code:
// process result to create properly formatted token
string suffixRemoved = result.split('&')[0];
string prefixRemoved = suffixRemoved.split('=')[1];
string decodedToken = EncodingUtil.urlDecode(prefixRemoved, 'UTF-8');
string finalToken = 'WRAP access_token=\"' + decodedToken + '\"';
return finalToken;
The getHubRegistrations method takes a string argument containing an Azure 
security access token, and returns a list of strings containing the registration tags 
(in our case, the Salesforce user IDs) for registered mobile device users, using the 
following code:
public List<string> getHubRegistrations(String token)

Chapter 6
[ 299 ]
The method commences by declaring the endpoint for the Azure REST API request, 
as follows:
string readUrl = 'https://[Your Notification Hub Namespace 
  Endpoint]/[Your Notification Hub Name]/registrations/?api-
version=2013-08';
The Notification Hub namespace endpoint is the endpoint 
contained in the ACS Connection String connection from the 
Getting the Azure Service Bus credentials section. For example, 
https://chapter6notificationhub-ns.servicebus.
windows.net. The Notification Hub name in this instance is 
chapter6notificationhub.
For example, the Notification Hub namespace endpoint will look as 
follows:
string readUrl = 'https://chapter6notificationhub-
ns.servicebus.windows.net/chapter6notificationhub/
registrations/?api-version=2013-08';
We then set up the Http request, REST endpoint, and Http headers with the 
following code:
Http h = new Http();
HttpRequest readRequest = new HttpRequest();
readRequest.setEndpoint(readUrl);
readRequest.setMethod('GET');
readRequest.setHeader('Authorization', token);
readRequest.setHeader('x-ms-version', '2013-08');
The highlighted line of code shows where we are passing the Azure security token in 
the authorization Http header.
We then issue the request against Azure and capture the response in the readResult 
variable with the following code:
HttpResponse readRes = h.send(readRequest);
string readResult = readRes.getBody();
The response from Azure gives us all of the XML data elements for an Azure 
registration. We are only interested in extracting the <Tags> element where it exists 
for each registration. To achieve this, we use an XmlStreamReader object to parse the 
XML and extract the contents of each <Tags> element using the following code:
// parse XML and extract registration tags
XmlStreamReader reader = readRes.getXmlStreamReader();

Cloud-connected Applications
[ 300 ]
List<String> registrationTags = new List<String>();
// use XmlStreamReader to parse response and extract registration tags
boolean isSafeToGetNextXmlElement = true;
while (isSafeToGetNextXmlElement) {
  if (reader.getEventType() == XmlTag.START_ELEMENT) {
    if (reader.getLocalName() == 'Tags') {
      reader.next();
      registrationTags.add(reader.getText());
    }
  }
  // check if another node
  if (reader.hasNext()) {
    reader.next();
  } else {
    isSafeToGetNextXmlElement = false;
    break;
  }
}
Finally, we return the list of registration tags to the caller with the following code:
return registrationTags;
The final method in the following code is sendHubMessage, which triggers push 
notifications to be sent from the Azure Notification Hub:
public string sendHubMessage(String token, String message,
                                                  String userTag)
The sendHubMessage method accepts parameters for the Azure security token, the 
message to be sent, and a user registration tag if we are sending a message to an 
individual user.
Similar to the getHubRegistrations method, we declare the endpoint for the 
Azure REST API request and some standard Http header information with the 
following code:
string messageUrl = 'https://[Your Notification Hub Namespace 
Endpoint]/[Your Notification Hub Name]/messages/?api-version=2013-08';
Http h = new Http();
HttpRequest messageRequest = new HttpRequest();
messageRequest.setEndpoint(messageUrl);
messageRequest.setMethod('POST');
messageRequest.setHeader('Authorization', token);
messageRequest.setHeader('Content-Type', 'application/
json;charset=utf-8');

Chapter 6
[ 301 ]
The Notification Hub namespace endpoint is the endpoint 
contained in the ACS Connection String connection from the 
Getting the Azure Service Bus credentials section. For example, 
https://chapter6notificationhub-ns.servicebus.
windows.net. The Notification Hub name in this instance is 
chapter6notificationhub.
For example, the Notification Hub namespace endpoint will 
look as follows:
string readUrl = 'https://
chapter6notificationhub-ns.servicebus.windows.
net/chapter6notificationhub/messages/?api-
version=2013-08';
We then proceed to set up the specific Http header information and request the body 
to send a push notification through Azure using the following code:
messageRequest.setHeader('ServiceBusNotification-Format', 'gcm');
if (userTag != null) {
  messageRequest.setHeader('ServiceBusNotification-Tags',
                                                        userTag);
}
messageRequest.setBody('{ "collapse_key": "test_message", 
  "time_to_live": 108, "delay_while_idle": true, "data": 
    { "message": "' + message + '"}}');
Finally, we send the Http request and pass the Azure response back to the caller 
with the following code:
HttpResponse messageRes = h.send(messageRequest);
string messageResult = messageRes.getBody() + ' ' + messageRes.
getStatus() + ' ' + messageRes.getStatusCode();
return messageResult;    
Creating the broadcast application custom 
controller
To create the broadcast application custom controller, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Develop | Apex Classes.
2.	 All of the Apex classes for your organization will be displayed. Click on New.
3.	 In the code download for the chapter, locate the forceNotifyController.
cls file in the force_com folder.

Cloud-connected Applications
[ 302 ]
4.	 Copy and paste the contents of forceNotifyController.cls into the Apex 
code editor in your Force.com window.
5.	 Click on Save.
How the broadcast application custom controller 
works
We begin by declaring the controller properties we will be using, with the 
following code:
// Azure Interface Properties
private String azureSecurityToken { get; set; }
private azureNotificationHubInterface notificationHub = new 
azureNotificationHubInterface();
// User picklist values
public List<selectOption> registeredDeviceUsers {get; set;}
// selected value in picklist
public string selectedUser {get; set;}
// Azure Notification Hub Registration Tags
List<String> registrationTags = new List<String>();
// message to send
public string messageToSend {get; set;}
Next, the constructor is defined. The first task is to get an Azure security token, 
which we can use for future requests, with the following code:
azureSecurityToken = notificationHub.getAzureAccessToken();
We then start to build the data source for the user's drop-down list on the Visualforce 
page with the following code:
// build dropdown list of users registered with Azure  
registeredDeviceUsers = new List<selectOption>();
registeredDeviceUsers.add(new selectOption('All','All'));
registrationTags =
         notificationHub.getHubRegistrations(azureSecurityToken);
List<User> registeredUsers = [SELECT id, Name FROM User WHERE id 
  IN :registrationTags ORDER BY Name];

Chapter 6
[ 303 ]
We initialize the registeredDeviceUsers controller property and add a default 
item to represent all mobile device users. We then call the notificationhub.
getHubRegistrations method to get a list of registered mobile device users (recall 
from the Android application that the registration tags in the Notification Hub are 
Salesforce user IDs). We then use this list as the criteria for an SOQL query to extract 
the Salesforce user IDs and usernames for those registered users.
Because it is possible for a user to register for more than one device (for example, 
a Smartphone and a tablet), we need to remove any duplicate user records. This is 
done with the following code:
List<User> finalDeviceUserList = new List<User>();
Set<string> idSet = new Set<String>();
for (User u : registeredUsers) {
  if (idSet.contains(u.id) == false) {
    idSet.add(u.id);
    finalDeviceUserList.add(u);
  }
}
After we have removed the duplicates from the list, we populate the data source for 
the list and set the initial selected value, using the following code:
for (User finalUser : finalDeviceUserList) {
  registeredDeviceUsers.add(new selectOption(finalUser.id,
                                                finalUser.Name));
}
// set initial value for selected User to 'All'
selectedUser = 'All';
The final method in the controller handles the button click event to broadcast a 
message through the Notification Hub, using the following code:
public PageReference sendNotificationHubMessage() {
  //check message not blank and < 255 characters
  if ((messageToSend.length() == 0) || (messageToSend.length() > 255)) 
{
    ApexPages.addMessage(new
                ApexPages.Message(ApexPages.Severity.ERROR,
                'Message must not be blank or greater than 255
                characters'));
    return null;
  }

Cloud-connected Applications
[ 304 ]
  // broadcast message to all users
  if (selectedUser == 'All') {
    string sendResult = notificationHub.sendHubMessage(
                                      azureSecurityToken,
                                      messageToSend, null);
    ApexPages.addMessage(new ApexPages.Message(
                          ApexPages.Severity.INFO,
                         'Message Send Result - ' + sendResult));
  } else {
    // broadcast to selected user only
    string sendResult = notificationHub.sendHubMessage(
                             azureSecurityToken,
                             messageToSend, selectedUser);
                
    ApexPages.addMessage(new ApexPages.Message(
                         ApexPages.Severity.INFO,
                         'Message Send Result - ' + sendResult));
  }
  return null;
}
We first check if the message is between 1 and 255 characters. If the message fails this 
validation, we issue an error message and exit the method.
If the message is valid, we check if we are broadcasting it to all users. If so, we call 
the notificationHub.sendHubMessage method and set the user tag to null to 
indicate that we are broadcasting the message to all users. We then display the result 
of the Azure send request. If we are not broadcasting it to all users, we pass in the ID 
of the selected user.
Creating the broadcast application 
Visualforce page
The broadcast application Visualforce page will present an interface to allow us to 
send a push notification message to one or all users in our Salesforce organization 
who have a registered Android device.

Chapter 6
[ 305 ]
To create a broadcast application Visualforce page, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Develop | Pages.
2.	 All of the Visualforce pages for your organization will be displayed. 
Click on New.
3.	 In the Page Information section, enter ForceNotify in the Label field.
4.	 Enter ForceNotify in the Name field.
5.	 In the code download for the chapter, locate the ForceNotify.page 
file in the force_com folder.
6.	 Accept the default markup in the Visualforce page editor.
7.	 Click on Save.
How the broadcast application Visualforce 
page works
The following is the code for the Visualforce page and is fairly simple:
<apex:page controller="forceNotifyController" >
<apex:form >
  <apex:pageBlock title="Force Notify">
  <apex:pageBlockSection title="Notification Message" columns="1">
    <apex:pageMessages id="messages" ></apex:pageMessages>
    <apex:selectList label="Device Users" value="{!selectedUser}" 
size="1">
      <apex:selectOptions value="{!registeredDeviceUsers}">  
      </apex:selectOptions>
    </apex:selectList>
    <apex:inputTextarea label="Message" value="{!messageToSend}" 
rows="3"/>
  </apex:pageBlockSection>
  <apex:pageBlockButtons location="bottom">
    <apex:commandButton value="Send Message" 
      action="{!sendNotificationHubMessage}" />
  </apex:pageBlockButtons>   
  </apex:pageBlock>
</apex:form>
</apex:page>
The highlighted blocks of code show where we are linking the drop-down list to 
the controller properties, thus providing an input text control to enter a broadcast 
message and the command button to the event handler in the controller.
Congratulations! The application is now complete.

Cloud-connected Applications
[ 306 ]
Running the application
The first step in running the application is to start an Android emulator (or use 
your Android device) and run the forceNotify application. After you have logged 
into Salesforce, the main application screen will be displayed (I have selected Fetch 
Contacts), as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 6
[ 307 ]
When the Android application starts, access the Visualforce page in Salesforce, 
as shown in the following screenshot:
Type in a message and click on Send Message, as shown in the following screenshot:

Cloud-connected Applications
[ 308 ]
The message will be sent to the Azure Notification Hub and the result will displayed 
on the Visualforce page, as shown in the following screenshot:
In the Android application, access the notifications area. The notification sent from 
Force.com will appear, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 6
[ 309 ]
Debugging the Azure Notification Hub
The code download for the chapter contains extensive debug statements in the Force.
com and Android applications to help you with debugging and tracking application 
execution. An additional debugging facility exists in Azure to help you isolate the 
problem if push notifications aren't being received by your Android application, as 
shown in the following screenshot:
The preceding screen allows you to send push notifications directly from Azure to 
registered mobile devices. If your device is receiving notifications from this screen, 
and not Force.com, it is likely that there is an issue in your Force.com application. 
Conversely, if your device isn't receiving notifications from this screen, there is likely 
an issue with your Android application.

Cloud-connected Applications
[ 310 ]
Summary
In this chapter, we have successfully combined multiple techniques used throughout 
the entire book to build a cloud-connected Force.com application. We have seen that 
Force.com, the Azure Cloud, and Android can all be combined to build a compelling 
mobile application for your Force.com users.
A key learning from this chapter should be that as we move toward a more 
cloud-oriented computing paradigm, the configuration capabilities and metadata 
from working with cloud services goes hand-in-hand with traditional coding tools 
and SDKs. It is important to know the capabilities of both, and how to combine them 
into a working application.
As always, there are some improvements you can make to the application, 
as follows:
•	
Try sending messages through Azure to other mobile platforms (iOS and 
Windows). Even though we are only targeting Android devices in this 
chapter, it is extremely simple to configure a Notification Hub for other 
platforms. Refer to the Windows Azure documentation for more details. 
Microsoft has also developed a range of SDKs that simplify developing for 
Notification Hubs on each platform.
•	
You can implement a multiselect picklist instead of a drop-down list for user 
selection to target multiple users.
•	
You can add a dash of Ajax functionality to the Visualforce page to provide a 
more dynamic user interface.
Finally, if you have got this far and successfully built all of the example applications 
in the book, please accept my heartfelt congratulations and gratitude. I sincerely 
hope that you have learnt some new Force.com development techniques, and 
perhaps brushed up on a few existing ones. Ultimately, I hope that you can now use 
these techniques in your own Force.com applications, speed up your development 
cycles, and delight your customers!

Importing Data with 
the Apex Data Loader
You can load the sample data onto your development organization by using 
the LexiLoader (Apex Data Loader) in OS X by performing the following steps. 
Alternatively, for Chapter 2, The E-Commerce Framework, you can load the data as 
mentioned in the Importing with the Custom Object Import Wizard section. The steps 
to load the sample data onto your development organization for the Windows 
Apex Data Loader are identical to LexiLoader:
1.	 Start the Apex Data Loader on your computer.
2.	 Select Insert from the main window.
3.	 Enter your Salesforce Username and Password. Note that your password 
must be appended with your security token. Click on Log in.
4.	 When you have logged in successfully, click on Next.

Importing Data with the Apex Data Loader
[ 312 ]
5.	 In step 2 of the import wizard, select the Order Line Item (Order_Line_Item_c) 
option and the Order Line Item.csv file. Click on Next, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
6.	 Click on OK in the dialog when the initialization is successful.
7.	 In step 3 of the import wizard, click on Create or Edit a Map.
8.	 In the Mapping Dialog window, click on Auto-Match Fields to Columns. 
The Mapping Dialog window on your screen should resemble the following 
screenshot. Click on OK:

Appendix A
[ 313 ]
9.	 Upon doing this, you are returned to step 3 of the import wizard. 
Here, you need to click on Next.
10.	 In step 4 of the import wizard, select a folder for the success and error 
files and click on Finish.
11.	 Click on Yes in the dialog warning you have chosen to insert records.
12.	 The import process will begin importing records. When the import has 
completed, the Operation Finished dialog will be displayed, as shown 
in the following screenshot:
13.	 From this dialog, you can also view the audit reports for the import successes 
and failures by clicking on the View Successes or View Errors button.
14.	 Click on OK to complete the import.
15.	 Verify whether the import was successful by checking your development 
organization's order line items object.
16.	 Close the Data Loader.
Congratulations! You have now finished building the base application.


Installing Ruby on Rails 
on Ubuntu
I am assuming that you have a clean install of Ubuntu Desktop version 14.04 LTS, 
which was the version at the time of writing. You also need superuser (root) access to 
the system.
There are three main steps to install Ruby on Rails on Ubuntu:
•	
Install Ruby Version Manager (RVM)
•	
Install Ruby 2.0.0
•	
Install Rails 4.0.0
Installing Ruby on Rails
To install Ruby on Rails on your system, perform the following steps:
1.	 Open a terminal window in Ubuntu (I recommend Terminal):

Installing Ruby on Rails on Ubuntu
[ 316 ]
2.	 Install cURL (a tool to transfer data to and from servers) by issuing the 
following command:
$ sudo apt-get install curl
3.	 Install RVM by issuing the following command:
$ curl -sSL https://get.rvm.io | bash -s stable
4.	 Add rvm to your Ubuntu environment:
$ source ~/.rvm/scripts/rvm
5.	 Instruct rvm to install and update the prerequisite Ubuntu modules required 
for it to run Ruby:
$ rvm requirements

Appendix B
[ 317 ]
6.	 Install Ruby 2.0.0 by issuing the following command:
$ rvm install 2.0.0 –-with-openssl-dir=~/.rvm/usr

Installing Ruby on Rails on Ubuntu
[ 318 ]
7.	 When Ruby has been installed, your terminal should look similar to the 
following screenshot:
8.	 Once Ruby has been installed, you can install Rails 4.0.0 with the 
following command:
$ gem install rails –-version 4.0.0

Appendix B
[ 319 ]
9.	 The installation of Rails will take some time. When it has been installed, 
your terminal should look similar to the following screenshot:
10.	 To support the running of the e-commerce application locally in Chapter 2, 
The E-Commerce Framework, we need to install a few Ubuntu modules with 
the following command (don't worry if the command reports that the latest 
versions of some of the modules are already installed):
$ sudo apt-get install libxslt-dev libxml2-dev libsqlite3-dev

Installing Ruby on Rails on Ubuntu
[ 320 ]
11.	 Finally, the e-commerce application requires a JavaScript runtime, so we will 
install Node.js with the following command:
$ sudo apt-get install nodejs
12.	 Congratulations! Ruby on Rails is now installed.

Index
A
Account object
and VolunteerEvent object, 
connecting  15-17
customizing  12
ADT
about  265
Android SDK, installing  265, 266
Android virtual device, 
configuring  266, 268
Android virtual device, signing in  268-271
installing  265
used, for configuring Android mobile 
application  282
ADT Bundle
URL, for downloading  265
Analytical Snapshot
about  182
URL  182
Android Developer Tools. See  ADT
Android manifest file
updating  284, 285
Android mobile application
Android manifest file, updating  284, 285
Android support libraries, adding  286
Azure Notifications Hub SDK, adding  286
bootconfig.xml file, updating  286
building  281
code, enhancing  288, 289
configuring, ADT used  282
executing  306-308
Google Play Services Library, 
importing  287, 288
Notification Hubs, debugging  309
Salesforce Android application, 
importing  282-284
Salesforce Android Mobile SDK 
application, creating  281
Salesforce Mobile SDK, importing  282-284
Android Mobile SDK application code
Broadcast Receiver class, creating  292, 293
enhancing  288, 289
MainActivity class, enhancing  289-291
Android SDK
installing  265, 266
Android support libraries
adding  286
Android virtual device
configuring  266, 268
signing in  268-271
AngularJS
downloading  219, 220
URL, for downloading  219
AngularJS Mobile Pack
downloading  221
URL, for downloading  221
Apex  30
Apex Data Loader. See  LexiLoader
application stack  83
application tabs
defining, for skeleton EIS Dashboard 
application  186
defining , for basic Fulfilment 
application  68, 69
authenticated user profile
creating  20, 21
Azure Android SDK
downloading  280, 281

[ 322 ]
Azure Notification Hub. See  
Notification Hubs
Azure Notifications Hub SDK
adding  286
Azure Service Bus credentials
getting  278, 279
B
base AngularJS HTML5 application 
(base application)
about  218
building  218
building, AngularJS Mobile Pack used  221
building, AngularJS used  219, 220
building, jQuery used  221
building, Twitter Bootstrap used  220, 221
deploying, to Heroku  227, 228
files, copying  222, 223
Heroku application, building  223, 226
remote access application, configuring  226
structure, building  222
working  229
basic fulfillment application
application tabs, defining  68, 69
building  58
data model, defining  58
Order Line Item, loading  72
Orders application, defining  69
page layouts, defining  68, 69
workflow, configuring  70-72
bootconfig.xml file
updating  286
branding element, Volunteer Community
Color scheme  29
Footer  29
Header  29
broadcast application custom controller
creating  301, 302
working  302-304
broadcast application Visualforce page
creating  304, 305
working  305
Broadcast Receiver class
creating  292, 293
working  294, 295
bulkified trigger  171
business requirements, student admissions 
system
analyzing  122
C
callback controller
about  239
working  240
Chatter
Chatter feeds, enabling  23
configuring  23
custom application, creating  25
Force.com application, creating  24
VolunteerEvent custom object tab, 
creating  24
Chatter feed
enabling  23
Chatter, student admissions system
Chatter feeds, enabling for 
Applicant  144, 145
Chatter feeds, enabling for Course  143, 144
Chatter feeds, enabling for Course 
Application  146
enabling  143
community logo
adding, to Site.com header  36
importing  35, 36
community, Salesforce
building  8, 9
enabling  9, 10
components, EIS Dashboard
custom controller  184
custom object  182
KPI formulae  182, 183
Visualforce page  184
configuration, Android virtual 
device  266, 268
configuration, e-commerce application  81-84
configuration, Git  80
configuration, Google Cloud Messaging  274
configuration, Heroku  80
configuration, Notification Hubs  275-278
configuration, remote access 
application  84-89, 226
configuration, remote site settings  295, 296
configuration, Ruby on Rails  78, 79

[ 323 ]
configuration, Salesforce-connected 
application  273
Course Application routing logic
faculty assignment Apex trigger, 
building  168, 169
faculty assignment Apex trigger, 
testing  171
faculty assignment Apex trigger, 
working  170, 171
CRM system
building, for student admissions  121
custom application
creating  25
Custom Object Import Wizard
importing  72-76
custom object tabs, student 
admissions system
defining  147
permissions, setting for profiles  148
custom settings, student admissions system
creating  166-168
D
data
loading, LexiLoader used  311-313
data access page
creating  43, 44
Date/Time column, fixing  47
events list, catering  50
events list, customizing  45
events list, styling  45-47
paging buttons, adding  49
paging support, adding  48
data model, basic fulfillment application
fields, configuring for Order Line object  66
fields, configuring for Order object  67
Order Line Item object, defining  62, 63
Order Line object, defining  63, 64
Order Line relationships, defining  65, 66
Order object, defining  58-61
data objects, student admissions system
Applicant object, defining  127-129
Course Application object, defining  129-132
Course object, defining  124-126
defining  124
data requirements, student 
admissions system
analyzing  123
cardinality rules  123
development environment
ADT, installing  265
configuring  264
Node.js, installing  264, 265
Salesforce Android Native Mobile SDK, 
installing  272
development environment, 
e-commerce 
application
configuring  78
Git, configuring  80
Heroku, configuring  80, 81
Ruby on Rails, configuring  78, 79
E
e-commerce application
building  77, 78
configuring  81-84
deploying, to Heroku  89-92
development environment, configuring  78
order, placing  92-96
remote access application, 
configuring  84-89
EIS Dashboard
about  180
building  184
components  181
custom object, defining  184, 185
final EIS Dashboard application, 
building  188
overview  180
requirements  180, 181
skeleton EIS Dashboard application, 
creating  185
EIS Dashboard custom controller
about  184
button click handler method, 
generating  192, 193
constructor method, defining  191, 192
creating  188
EIS Dashboard method, generating  193
KPIs method, generating  199, 200

[ 324 ]
new policy totals method, 
generating  197, 198
properties, declaring  189-191
renewal totals method, generating  194-197
testing  201
Visualforce charts, generating  200
EIS Dashboard custom object
about  182
defining  184, 185
EIS Dashboard Visualforce page  184
EIS policy data
importing  187
events list, data access page
catering  50
customizing  45
paging support, adding  48
styling  45-47
Executive Information System Dashboard. 
See  EIS Dashboard
F
files
copying  222, 223
final AngularJS HTML5 application 
(final application)
about  230
application logic, finalizing  230-233
building  230
deploying, to Heroku  261, 262
folder structure, finalizing  230
initializing  233-237
JavaScript object reflection service  261
opportunity display components  240
opportunity map components  247
Salesforce authentication components  237
final EIS Dashboard application
building  188
custom controller, creating  188
final Visualforce page, creating  202
final EIS Dashboard Visualforce page
creating  202
declaring  202, 203
input criteria controls, declaring  203, 204
new policy dashboard charts, 
displaying  209, 210
new policy KPIs, displaying  207
renewal dashboard charts, 
displaying  208, 209
renewal KPIs, displaying  204, 206
final Fulfillment application
building  97
Orders custom controller, building  104
Orders custom controller, working  105-110
Order Search custom controller, 
building  97
Order Search custom controller, 
working  98, 99
Order Search Visualforce page, building  99
Order Search Visualforce page, working  
100, 102
Orders Visualforce page, building  111
Orders Visualforce page, working  112-118
Visualforce Orders tab, configuring  102, 
103, 104
folder structure
building, for base application  222
finalizing, for final application  230
footer, Site.com
customizing  38, 39
Force.com
using  7, 22
Force.com application
creating  24
creating, for student admissions system  149
Force.com broadcast application
broadcast application custom controller, 
creating  301, 302
broadcast application Visualforce page, 
creating  304, 305
creating  295
Notification Hub Interface class, 
creating  296
remote site settings, configuring  295, 296
Force.com Developer edition
URL  22
Force.com fulfillment application. See  
Fulfilment application
force majeure insurance brokers  179
Force volunteers user profile
configuring  22, 23
fulfillment application  58

[ 325 ]
functional requirements, student 
admissions system
analyzing  122, 123
G
geolocation trigger
adding  248-251
working  251-254
Git
about  80
configuring  80
URL, for downloading  80
GitHub
URL  80
Google APIs Platform 4.4.2 Level 19  284
Google Cloud Messaging
configuring  274
Google Geocoding API
URL  230
Google Maps API
URL  230
Google Play Services Library
importing  287, 288
H
header, Site.com
community logo, adding  36
community logo, importing  35, 36
navigation menu, adding  37, 38
Heroku
base application, deploying to  227, 228
configuring  80
e-commerce application, deploying to  89-92
final application, deploying to  261, 262
URL  77, 80
Heroku application
building  223, 226
Heroku toolbelt
installing  80
URL, for installing  80
home controller
about  237, 238
working  238
I
initial EIS Dashboard Visualforce page
creating  186
installation, ADT  265
installation, Android SDK  265, 266
installation, Node.js  264, 265
installation, Rails 4.0.0  318-320
installation, Ruby 2.0.0  317, 318
installation, Ruby on Rails  315 
installation, RVM  316
installation, Salesforce Android Native 
Mobile SDK  272
J
JavaScript object reflection service  261
jQuery
downloading  221
URL, for downloading  221
K
Key Performance Indicators. See  KPIs
KPI formulae
about  182
for new EIS Dashboard policy  183
for renewed EIS Dashboard policy  182
KPIs
about  180
for new EIS Dashboard policy  181
for renewed EIS Dashboard policy  180, 181
L
LexiLoader
about  311
used, for loading data  311-313
licensing options, Salesforce
URL  55
location service
about  255
working  256
login controller
about  238
working  239

[ 326 ]
logout controller
about  240
working  240
lookup relationship
configuring  65
M
MainActivity class
enhancing  289-291
working  291, 292
map view controller  256-260
members
adding, to Volunteer Community  27-29
mobile application
overview  214-218
Model-View-Controller (MVC)  78, 219
N
navigation menu
adding, to Site.com  37, 38
Node.js
installing  264, 265, 320
URL  265
Notification Hub Interface class
creating  296
getAzureAccessToken method  297
getHubRegistrations method  297
sendHubMessage method  297
working  297-301
Notification Hubs
about  263
Azure Android SDK, downloading  280, 281
Azure Service Bus credentials, 
getting  278, 279
configuring  275-278
debugging  309
O
Open Authorization (OAuth)  214
opportunity detail view controller
about  246
working  247
opportunity display components
opportunity detail view controller  246
opportunity factory  240-243
opportunity list controller  244
opportunity factory
about  240-243
getOpportunitiesWithinRadius method  241
getOpportunityList method  241
getOpportunity method  241
opportunity list controller
about  244
working  245
opportunity map components
about  247
geolocation trigger, adding  248-251
location service  255
map view controller  256-260
Order Line Item, basic fulfillment 
application
Custom Object Import Wizard, 
importing  72-76
loading  72
Organization-Wide Defaults, student 
admissions system
configuring  136, 137
P
page layouts, basic fulfillment application
defining  68, 69
paging buttons
adding, to data access page  49
Platform as a Service (PaaS)  57
public user profile
configuring  18, 19
publisher action, student admissions system
adding, to Chatter feed  174, 175
developing  172-174
enabling  172
implementing  175-177
Q
queues, student admissions system
business faculty course applications, 
creating  157
business faculty queue access, 
restricting  159-162

[ 327 ]
course application exception, creating  159
creating  157
exceptions queue access, 
restricting  164-166
science faculty course applications, 
creating  158
science faculty queue access, 
restricting  163, 164
system administrators public group, 
setting  157
R
Rails 4.0.0
installing  318-320
Rails console  82
remote access application
configuring, in Force.com  84-89, 226
remote site settings
configuring  295, 296
reporting system. See  EIS Dashboard
role hierarchy, student admissions system
admissions office, configuring  140
business faculty, configuring  141
configuring  137, 138
science faculty, configuring  142
top-level roles, configuring  138, 139
Ruby  78
Ruby 2.0.0
installing  317, 318
Ruby on Rails
configuring  78, 79
installing  315 
URL  77
Ruby on Rails installation
performing  315 
Rails 4.0.0, installing  318-320
Ruby 2.0.0, installing  317, 318
RVM, installing  316
Ruby Version Manager (RVM)
about  315
installing  316
S
Sales Cloud and Opportunities  182
Salesforce
about  7
community, building  8, 9
community, enabling  9, 10
community requirements, determining  8
Volunteer Community, creating  11
Volunteer Community, publishing  54, 55
Salesforce Android application
importing  282-284
Salesforce Android Mobile SDK application
creating  281
Salesforce Android Native Mobile SDK
installing  272
Salesforce authentication components
callback controller  239
home controller  237, 238
login controller  238
logout controller  240
Salesforce community page
Contact Us  8
Events  8
Home  8
Services  8
Volunteers Online  8
Who We Are  8
Salesforce-connected application
configuring  273
Salesforce Mobile SDK
importing  282-284
security requirements, student admissions 
system
analyzing  123
Single Page Application (SPA)  232
Site.com
about  7, 8
creating  32-35
data access page, creating  43, 44
designing, for Volunteer Community  30-31
footer, customizing  38, 39
header, customizing  35
static site page, creating  41
style, adding  39-41
text, adding to static site page  42, 43
skeleton EIS Dashboard application
application tabs, defining  186
creating  185
defining  187
EIS policy data, importing  187
initial Visualforce page, creating  186

[ 328 ]
Software Development Kit (SDK)  264
static site page
creating  41
text, adding to  42, 43
student admissions system
about  121
building  124
business requirements, analyzing  122
Chatter, enabling  143
Course Application routing logic  168
custom object tabs, defining  147
custom settings, creating  166, 167
data objects, defining  124
data requirements  123
Force.com application, creating  149
functional requirements, analyzing  122, 123
Organization-Wide Defaults, 
configuring  136, 137
publisher action  172
queues, creating  157
role hierarchy, configuring  137, 138
security requirements, analyzing  123
user interface, customizing  149
user profile, configuring  133
styles
adding, to Site.com  39-41
T
text
adding, to static site page  42, 43
Twitter Bootstrap
downloading  220, 221
URL, for downloading  220
U
Ubuntu
URL, for installation  79
user interface, student admissions system
Applicant  149, 150
Applicants tab  154, 155
Course Application page layout  152, 153
Course Applications tab  156
Courses  151, 152
Courses tab  155
customizing  149
user profile, student admissions system
Admissions Office profile, creating  134, 135
configuring  133
Course Administration profile, creating  133
Selection Officer profile, creating  135, 136
users
creating, for Volunteer Community  53
V
VirtualBox
URL  79
Visualforce  7, 30
Volunteer Community
Account and VolunteerEvent objects, 
connecting  15-17
Account object, customizing  12
authenticated user profile, creating  20, 21
branding element  29, 30
Chatter, configuring  23
creating  11
custom objects, configuring  12
Force volunteers user profile, 
configuring  22, 23
members, adding  27-29
progress check  26
public user profile, configuring  18, 19
publishing, on Salesforce  54, 55
Site.com, designing for  30-31
user profile, configuring  12
users, creating  53
volunteering event custom field, 
creating  14
volunteering event custom object, 
creating  13
volunteers page, securing  51-53
VolunteerEvent custom object tab
creating  24
volunteering event custom field
creating  14
Description  14
End Date/Time  14
Location  14
Special Skills  14
volunteering event custom object
and Account object, connecting  15-17
creating  13

[ 329 ]
W
Windows Azure
about  263
URL  280
Windows Azure Management
URL  275
workflow, basic fulfillment application
configuring  70-72



Thank you for buying 
Force.com Development Blueprints
About Packt Publishing
Packt, pronounced 'packed', published its first book "Mastering phpMyAdmin for Effective 
MySQL Management" in April 2004 and subsequently continued to specialize in publishing 
highly focused books on specific technologies and solutions.
Our books and publications share the experiences of your fellow IT professionals in adapting 
and customizing today's systems, applications, and frameworks. Our solution based books give 
you the knowledge and power to customize the software and technologies you're using to get 
the job done. Packt books are more specific and less general than the IT books you have seen in 
the past. Our unique business model allows us to bring you more focused information, giving 
you more of what you need to know, and less of what you don't.
Packt is a modern, yet unique publishing company, which focuses on producing quality, 
cutting-edge books for communities of developers, administrators, and newbies alike. 
For more information, please visit our website: www.packtpub.com.
About Packt Enterprise
In 2010, Packt launched two new brands, Packt Enterprise and Packt Open Source, in order to 
continue its focus on specialization. This book is part of the Packt Enterprise brand, home to 
books published on enterprise software – software created by major vendors, including (but 
not limited to) IBM, Microsoft and Oracle, often for use in other corporations. Its titles will offer 
information relevant to a range of users of this software, including administrators, developers, 
architects, and end users.
Writing for Packt
We welcome all inquiries from people who are interested in authoring. Book proposals should 
be sent to author@packtpub.com. If your book idea is still at an early stage and you would like 
to discuss it first before writing a formal book proposal, contact us; one of our commissioning 
editors will get in touch with you. 
We're not just looking for published authors; if you have strong technical skills but no writing 
experience, our experienced editors can help you develop a writing career, or simply get some 
additional reward for your expertise.

Salesforce CRM: The Definitive 
Admin Handbook
ISBN: 978-1-84968-306-7             Paperback: 376 pages
A comprehensive, power-packed guide for all 
Salesforce Administrators covering everything 
from setup and configuration, to the customization 
of Salesforce CRM
1.	
Get to grips with tips, tricks, best-practice 
administration principles, and critical design 
considerations for setting up and customizing 
Salesforce CRM with this book and e-book.
2.	
Master the mechanisms for controlling access to, 
and the quality of, data and information sharing.
3.	
Take advantage of the only guide 
with real-world business scenarios 
for Salesforce CRM. 
Force.com Developer 
Certification Handbook (DEV401)
ISBN: 978-1-84968-348-7             Paperback: 280 pages
A comprehensive handbook to guide Force.com 
developers through important fundamentals and 
prepare them for the DEV401 exam
1.	
Simple and to-the-point examples that can be 
tried out in your developer org.
2.	
A practical book for professionals who want 
to take the DEV401 Certification exam.
3.	
Sample questions for every topic in an exam 
pattern to help you prepare better, and tips 
to get things started.
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

Force.com Tips and Tricks
ISBN: 978-1-84968-474-3             Paperback: 224 pages
A quick reference guide for administrators and 
developers to get more productive with Force.com
1.	
Tips and tricks for topics ranging from 
point-and-click administration, to fine 
development techniques with Apex 
and Visualforce.
2.	
Avoids technical jargon, and expresses 
concepts in a clear and simple manner.
3.	
A pocket guide for experienced 
Force.com developers.
Salesforce CRM Admin Cookbook
ISBN: 978-1-84968-424-8            Paperback: 266  pages
Over 40 recipes to make effective use of Salesforce 
CRM with the use of hidden features, advanced 
user interface techniques, and real-world solutions
1.	
Implement advanced user interface techniques 
to improve the look and feel of Salesforce CRM.
2.	
Discover hidden features and hacks that extend 
standard configuration to provide enhanced 
functionality and customization.
3.	
Build real-world process automation, using 
the detailed recipes to harness the full power 
of Salesforce CRM.
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

