
FOREST FIRES
A Reference Handbook

Other Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Series
Antisemitism, Jerome A. Chanes
Counterterrorism, Graeme C. S. Steven and Rohan Gunaratna
Cybercrime, Bernadette H. Schell and Clemens Martin
Defendant Rights, Hamid R. Kusha
Drug Use, Richard Isralowitz
Environmental Activism, Jacqueline Vaughn Switzer
Global Aids Crisis, Richard G. Marlink and Alison G. Kotin
Hate Crimes, Donald Altschiller
Healthcare Reform in America, Jennie Jacobs Kronenfeld and
Michael R. Kronenfeld
Media and American Courts, S. L. Alexander
Nation-Building, Cynthia A. Watson
Profiling and Criminal Justice in America, Jeffrey B. Bumgarner
Racial and Ethnic Diversity in America, Adalberto Aguirre, Jr.
Racial Justice in America, David B. Mustard
USA Patriot Act, Howard Ball
Violence in the Media, Nancy Signorielli
Work and Family in America, Leslie Stebbins

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting
point for research by high school and college students, scholars,
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople,
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies,
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will
find the information they need in order to have a better
understanding of the social, political, environmental, and
economic issues facing the world today.

Copyright 2005 by Philip N. Omi
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, except for
the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior permission in
writing from the publishers.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Omi, Philip N.
Forest fires : a reference handbook / Philip N. Omi.
p. cm. —  (Contemporary world issues)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 1-85109-438-5 (hardback : alk. paper) — ISBN 1-85109-443-1
(ebook)  1.  Forest fires. 2.  Wildfires. 3.  Fire management.  I. Title. II.
Series. 
SD421.O64 2005
634.9’618—dc22
2005003599
09
08
07
06
05
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook. Visit abc-
clio.com for details.
ABC-CLIO, Inc.
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
Manufactured in the United States of America

FOREST FIRES
A Reference Handbook
Philip N. Omi
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Santa Barbara, California • Denver, Colorado • Oxford, England


Contents
Preface and Acknowledgements, xiii
Common Conversion Factors for Use in Interpreting Data, xvii
1
Forest Fires: In Context, 1
U.S. Fire Activity, 3
Wildfires that Strike Home, 6
Killer Fires, 7
Park and Wilderness Fires, 8
Friendly Fires, 10
Other Classic Forest Fires, 12
Fires of the Future, 13
2
Problems, Controversies, Solutions, 17
Wildfires that Strike Home, 21
Killer Fires: Understanding the Fatalities, 26
Park and Wilderness Fires, 29
Friendly Fires, 36
Other Significant Fire Problems, 44
Summary: Problems and Issues, 48
Urban Interface Issues, 48
Fatality Fires Issues, 48
Park and Wilderness Fire Management Issues, 49
Prescribed Fire and Thinning Issues, 49
Other Issues, 49
Solutions, 51
3
Chronology, 59
Firing of the Forest by Native Americans, 60
U.S. Wildland Fires and Their Impacts, 62
vii

Frontier Settlement Fires, 64
Early Years of Forest and Fire Management, 65
Institutionalization of Fire Exclusion, 67
Forest and Fire Policy Reflections, 68
Environmentalism Takes Off, 69
Increasing Safety Concerns, 71
4
People and Events, 77
Significant Individual Contributors, 77
Dr. James K. Agee (b. 1945), 77
Frank. A. Albini (b. 1936), 78
Martin E. Alexander (b. 1952), 78
Patricia L. Andrews (b. 1948), 78
Jack S. Barrows (1911–1989), 79
Professor Harold H. (Hubert) Biswell (aka Harry
the Torch) (1905–1992), 79
James K. Brown (b. 1942), 80
George M. Byram (1909–1996), 80
Craig C. Chandler (b. 1926), 80
A. Malcolm Gill (b. 1940), 81
Harry Thomas Gisborne (1893–1949), 81
Paul Gleason (1946–2003), 82
Johann Goldhammer (b. 1949), 82
Edwin Vaclay Komarek, Sr. (1909–1995), 82
Norman Maclean (1902–1990), 83
Edward Pulaski (1868–1931), 83
Stephen J. Pyne (b. 1949), 84
Richard C. Rothermel (b. 1929), 84
Mark J. Schroeder (b. 1915), 85
Ferdinand Augustus Silcox (1882–1939), 85
Herbert Stoddard (1889–1970), 86
Charles E. Van Wagner (b. 1924), 86
Domingos Xavier Viegas (b. 1950), 86
Historic Events, 87
Frontier Settlement Era (Table 4–1), 87
Early Years of Forest and Fire Management
(Table 4–2), 89
Institutionalization of Fire Exclusion (Table 4–3), 91
Policy Reflections (Table 4–4), 92
Environmentalism Takes Off (Table 4–5), 93
Fatalities and Houses Take Center Stage (Table 4–6), 95
Historical Events Summary, 97
viii
Contents

5
Facts and Data, 101
Fire Activity , 101
Forest Combustion, 114
Combustion Stages, 119
Fire Environment, 123
Fire Weather Observations, 133
Drought, 135
Wildfires and Drought, 137
Fire Danger and the Public, 139 
Fuels and Fire Behavior, 140
Fuel Profiles, 141
Standard Fuel Measurements, 145
Fire Behavior Prediction, 146
Extreme Fire Behavior,149
Historical Fire Regimes, 154
Fire Effects, 162
Fire Adaptations and Dependence, 168
Fire Severity, 168
Fuel Consumption, 171
Emissions and Air Quality, 172
Postfire Effects on Soils/Hydrology, 174
Fire Protection and Management, 176
Systematic Fire Management, 179
Fire Prevention, 180
Urban Interface Management, 182
Detection, 183
Dispatch, 186
Preparedness, 187
Fuels Management, 188
Fuel Treatment Effectiveness, 194
Commercial Logging and Wildfires, 199
Wildland Fire Use, 200
Fire Suppression, 202
Initial Attack, 204
Extended Attack, Project Fires, and Megafires, 205
Firefighting Tools, 207
Communications, 214
Safety, 215
Personal Protective Equipment (PPE), 217
Fire Rehabilitation, 218
Fire Salvage, 219
Contents
ix

Fire Restoration, 220
Fire Costs, 222
Optimizing Fire Management Expenditures, 226
Employment Opportunities in Fire Science, 228
Firefighter, 229
Fire Manager or Planner, 230
Fire Researcher, 231
Summary, 232
6
Directory of Agencies and Organizations, 243
Fire Policy and Administration, 244
USDI Agencies: National Park Service, Fish and
Wildlife Service, bureau of Land Management, and
Bureau of Indian Affairs, 248
State and Local Jurisdictions, 253
State Forestry Agencies, 253
Nongovernmental Organizations, 258
Forest Fire Research and Technology Centers, 266
Experiment Stations and Research Programs, 266
Technology and Development Centers, 270
Education and Training, 271
Community College Programs, 275
Training/Education Opportunities, 277
Global Agencies, 281
Agencies and Organizations around the World, 285
Australia, 285
Canada, 287
Europe, 289
7
Print and Nonprint Resources, 291
Print Resources, 291
Books, 292
Peer Reviewed Journals, 293
Technical Reports and Research Papers, 294
Fire Effects: The “Rainbow” Series, 295
Fire Effects on Fauna, 296
Fire Effects on Flora, 296
Fire Effects on Air, 296
Other: Fire Effects on Aquatic Ecosystems, 296
Popular Magazines (Not Peer-Reviewed), 297
Other Selected References, 298
Fire and Public Safety, 298
x
Contents

Fire Behavior, 298
Fire Ecology, 299
Fire Games, 299
Fire in the Tropics, 300
Fire Weather, 300
Fuels Treatment, 300
History of Fire on Earth, 301
Landscape Scale Studies Involving Consideration of
Fire, 301
Congressionally Commissioned Fire Studies, 301
Nonprint Resources, 302
Software, 311
Glossary, 319
Index, 327
About the Author, 347
Contents
xi


Preface and
Acknowledgments
T
he purpose of this book is to explore the many dimensions of
forest fires and their impacts, both in North America and else-
where. Readers will develop an appreciation for current prac-
tices as well as for historical precedents. Information will be pre-
sented on the contributions of pioneer leaders and current
practitioners in the study and management of fires.
An understanding of forest fires requires an inquisitive
mind, though clear-cut answers to questions are not always pos-
sible: fires are extremely complex phenomena and are often
tinged by human experiences. Although murky, the crystal ball
for the future will be discussed when speculation is possible.
Pathways to further study in print and electronic media are iden-
tified, along with fire management agencies that represent im-
portant information resources.
Forest fires do not respect geopolitical boundaries but affect
societies and land management practices worldwide. Basically, a
fire will burn anywhere that plants and aboveground biomass
will support combustion. A fire alters the distribution of ecosys-
tems, as well as their structure and processes. Readers will learn
of some of these consequences—although the major focus will be
on U.S. ecosystems and fire practices, especially by agencies with
fire management responsibilities. Even so, fire effects and man-
agement practices may be of interest to readers from other coun-
tries hoping to gain insight into the evolution of U.S. responses to
its fire problems.
This book is aimed primarily at those who seek an overview
reference to fire science and management, with focus on high-
xiii

lights yet without many of the extra details included in textbooks.
Thus public library users and journalists, as well as high school
and first-year college students, will find insight into problems
and challenges, chronologies, key players, facts and data, and
print and nonprint resources. Those seeking greater detail will
learn of primary source materials and websites that should guide
more detailed learning opportunities.
Seven chapters and a glossary are included, as per the Con-
temporary World Issues series format. This format provides read-
ers with a good starting point for understanding the scope of for-
est fire influences on our lives.
Chapter 1 (Forest Fires: In Context) provides a framework for
thinking about forest fires and their impacts in both traditional
and nontraditional ways. Traditionally, forest fires have been con-
sidered as universally destructive and undesirable—an under-
standable perspective given our preconceived ideas about fire and
news media depictions of blackened landscapes. Every fire season
we are bombarded with graphic images of wildfires that strike
homes and fires that invade parks and wildernesses. Yet fires can
be friendly; in fact, fires burned with less damaging consequences
prior to Euro-American settlement. Humans have complicated
matters by building their homes, grazing their animals, suppress-
ing fires, and allowing fuels to accumulate as a consequence. We
are beginning to realize that destructive fires may partially be the
result of our own mismanagement of the forest. Restoring forests
to presettlement conditions may provide a solution for some
ecosystems, but might not be possible or desirable everywhere.
Still, perhaps wildfires would not seem so destructive if our
forests were less choked with fuels—as in those halcyon early
days. Implications for fires of the future are also discussed.
Chapter 2 (Problems, Controversies, Solutions) focuses on
the predominant traditional and nontraditional views toward
fires. The traditional fires presented in Chapter 1 are given greater
scrutiny by probing into characteristic issues and questions. For
example, who is responsible when wildfires strike homes? Why
do killer fires continue to occur despite lessons learned from the
past? Can we allow fires to burn in park and wilderness areas
that, after all, were partially established to provide living labora-
tories for us to learn about natural processes? Is prescribed fire a
viable tool for managing landscapes? These and other probing
questions are examined from a variety of perspectives.
xiv
Preface and Acknowledgments

The history of North America is punctuated by fire episodes.
In Chapter 3 (Chronology) we examine a time stream of historical
fires, including Native American firings that were practiced be-
fore European settlement of the continent. Historical fires are clas-
sified according to their predominant effects, including on homes,
on humans, and on natural resources. Arranging historical fires
by discrete time periods in U.S. history provides insights into the
evolution of thinking about fires and forests.
The study and management of forest fires has attracted many
gifted thinkers and practitioners, some of the most noteworthy of
whom are described in Chapter 4 (People and Events). Linkage of
historical time frames with legislation and events provides us
with additional insights into our responses (as a society) to fires.
Chapter 5 (Facts and Data) presents trends and overviews as
to the status of our knowledge about wildland fires and their
many effects. Management strategies and tactics are also dis-
cussed, as well as brief insights into fire management costs. Much
of the material in this chapter is elaborated in greater detail in for-
mal textbooks on fire. Here, I have attempted to condense our
understanding into a single chapter, focusing on the highlights of
each topic.
The different perspectives on fire presented in Chapters 1
and 2 have influenced a wide range of public and private agen-
cies, organizations, and interest groups with a stake in better un-
derstanding the role of fire in forests. Chapter 6 (Directory of
Agencies and Organizations) presents the myriad of entities (in-
cluding contact information) that inform our thoughts about for-
est fires.
Chapter 7 (Print and Nonprint Resources) summarizes dif-
ferent sources for information about forest fires, including web-
sites. Here again, I have attempted to condense a significant pro-
portion of the countless sources that are available on this subject.
I make no claim to have captured every significant resource, but
the interested reader will be given numerous avenues for further
study.
The Glossary is intended to assist readers with some of the
terminology and jargon that is part of every professional and
technical field. In it I have picked and chosen definitions from a
variety of sources, as well as interjecting a few of my own.
The limited use of graphics or figures and tables is in confor-
mance with ABC-CLIO editorial policy for reference books. For
Preface and Acknowledgments
xv

the study and understanding of fire, this may seem an unreason-
able restriction. Nonetheless, I have done my best to conform to
the publisher’s policy.
I wish to thank Jeremiah Sisneros for assistance with graph-
ics, and biographical information, and Annie Brown for assis-
tance with biographical information. Also I wish to thank the
Joint Fire Science Program, USDA Forest Service Southern Forest
Experiment Station, McIntire-Stennis Cooperative Forestry Re-
search Program for support on research projects that provided re-
sults of use to this reference book; and ABC-CLIO for supporting
this effort. In particular, I wish to thank Alicia Merritt for help
during draft stages, Martin Hanft for helpful editorial sugges-
tions, and Carol Smith and Cisca Schreefel for guidance during
the revision process.
Last but not least, I thank Nik Omi and Mei Nakano, for pa-
tience and understanding throughout this whole project.
xvi
Preface and Acknowledgments

Common Conversion
Factors for Use in
Interpreting Data
Length
1 cm
0.39 in
1 m
3.3 ft
1 km
0.62 mi
Area
1 ha
0.405 ac; 10,000 m2 = 2.47 ha
1 km2
0.39 mi2 = 247 ha
Liquid Volume
1 liter
0.265 gal
Temperature
Let t = temperature (°C)
Temperature (°F) = t (9/5) + 32
Heat and Heat Content
1 cal
4.18 joules = 0.0039 Btu
1,000 Btu/lb
2.324 MJ/kg
Fuel Loading
1 metric ton (tonne)/ha 0.45  ton /ac
xvii

Power/Irradiance
1 kw/m2
5.3 Btu/ft2-min
Fireline Intensity
1 kw/m
0.29 Btu/ft-sec = 0.238 kcal/m-sec
xviii
Common Conversion Factors

1
Forest Fires: In Context
T
his chapter provides an overview and introduction to forest
fires. Fire has been a part of most terrestrial ecosystems for
millions of years. Prehistoric humans used fire extensively,
and societies later harnessed fire to fuel the Industrial Revolution.
So we know that fire can be of tremendous benefit to humankind
if properly used, even in forested landscapes. Yet fires in the for-
est often conflict with human values. To develop a better appreci-
ation for some of those conflicts, we examine case studies of
different types of fires that cause management dilemmas. We con-
clude this chapter by looking at fires in other parts of the world
and considering a prognosis for the future.
To most people, forest fires conjure up images of blackened
destruction, including dead trees, displaced wildlife, and devas-
tating loss of human life and property. Indeed, forest fires some-
times produce tragic and costly outcomes, and in the short term, a
burned area may not be visually pleasing. But a typical forest fire
produces a mosaic of fire effects, including some areas that burn
with low intensity with relatively little damage to the tree canopy.
Several of the many faces of fire include: benign to active surface
fires and raging crown fires; fire effects that range from little or no
effect to a gallery of dead trees (or snags); and postfire mosaics
that vary from large, uniform burn scars to small, irregular
patches. The well-intentioned Smokey Bear campaign of the U.S.
Forest Service has reinforced the negative stereotypes associated
with fire by advocating all-out elimination of fire in the forest. Fire
suppression is surely required where human developments are
threatened. But to focus solely on  fearful outcomes reveals only
part of the story about wildland fires. In fact, forests have burned
1

for millennia on earth, and natural ignition sources (such as light-
ning, volcanoes, or spontaneously ignited coal seams) play an im-
portant role in the structure and function of natural ecosystems.
Many of the trees, shrubs, and herbaceous vegetation in areas sub-
jected to repeated fires develop adaptations that make possible
survival and persistence despite periodic burning. In fact, some
plants and animals thrive in fire-prone environments.
Fires in the forest play an important role in decomposing or-
ganic biomass and cycling nutrients. Without fires, insects, and
fungi that decompose plant and animal material, most forests
would be choked with detritus and dead materials, largely im-
penetrable to wildlife and humans. Combustion of forest fuels
speeds the essential process of decomposition that is always on-
going in wildland areas by oxidizing flammable biomass into car-
bon dioxide, water, and numerous other chemical compounds—
some of which are essential for plant growth, others of which may
be detrimental to humans and other life forms. In a forest fire,
dead and live vegetation is converted to heat, light, and sound,
often in spectacular fashion.
Thus the story of forest fires is much more complex than that
usually conveyed in newspapers and television sound bites every
summer in the western United States. Fires receive a lot of press
coverage because they present spectacular photo opportunities
and because natural environments are cherished by society for
aesthetic and economic reasons. And fires touch us because they
affect human lives—not only home owners and recreationists in
fire-prone environments, but also the land managers charged
with stewardship of those areas and the fire crews who take their
orders from the managers. Furthermore, researchers from a vari-
ety of life, physical, and social sciences spend their entire profes-
sional careers studying fire and its effects.
Major themes in the study of fire include fire behavior, fire
ecology, and fire management. These fields have spawned a myr-
iad of subdisciplines that are simultaneously distinct and inter-
twined with one another. For example, fire behavior cannot be
understood without a thorough understanding of wildland com-
bustion and fire meteorology. Understanding fire ecology re-
quires knowledge of the historical role of fire in ecosystem dy-
namics, as well heat effects on specific organisms. Fire
management encompasses activities required to control a fire’s
spread as well as preparedness and mitigation strategies, which
might include the intentional use of fire to achieve land manage-
2
Forest Fires: In Context

ment objectives. After a wildfire is successfully suppressed, focus
shifts to rehabilitation efforts: revegetating denuded hillsides,
mitigating erosion on- and off-site, and reducing scars caused by
fire control activities.
From a broader perspective, fire can be considered among
several disturbances (for example, floods, grazing, windstorms,
insect epidemics) that affect landscapes and natural ecosystems.
Many plant communities are dependent on disturbances, espe-
cially for regeneration (Hobbs and Huenneke 1992), so land man-
agers must take these disruptions into consideration in their
plans for an area.
Throughout this book I will often interchange the term “for-
est fires” with more contemporary allusions to wildland fires. In
reality, a forest is a complex assemblage of vegetation types, such
as trees, grasses, shrubs, mosses, and lichens—all of which may
burn under the appropriate mix of temperature, wind, and mois-
ture. The mosaic of flammable vegetation types, commonly re-
ferred to as wildland in the United States and elsewhere, may be
known by other terms, such as bush (for example, in Australia
and Canada) or bosch/veld (South Africa). When wildlands burn,
people most commonly associate such fires with forest, perhaps
out of long-standing tradition and perceptions of dominant veg-
etation (that is, trees) aflame. To separate out burning forest from
other types of vegetation would be cumbersome and overly re-
strictive for most purposes. For example, most wildfire statistics
do not differentiate between vegetation types, either with respect
to point of origin or area burned.
The purpose of this book is to present the many dimensions
of forest fires and their effects, not only in North America but
elsewhere as well. Readers will develop a sense for historical
events and precedents to current practices, as well as learning of
pioneer leaders and practitioners in the study and management
of fires. Pathways to further study in print and electronic media
are identified along with fire management agencies. The book
concludes with a glossary of common terms in fire science and
management.
U.S. Fire Activity
Every year in the United States, hundreds of thousands of fires
burn in forests, shrubfields, and grasslands. Even peat bogs in the
U.S. Fire Activity
3

upper Great Lakes states or swamplands in the Southeast will
carry fire following a prolonged drought. Typically, most fires
burn and go out with little fanfare because of their limited extent
or impact, whereas relatively few (that is, fewer than 3 percent of
the total ignitions) may cause most of the burned area, costs, and
losses. Major fire activity is episodic over time, with some years
causing more damage and concern than others (see Figure 1–1).
For example, the year 2000 produced an extraordinary fire season
by most standards. More than 122,000 fires burned over 8.4 mil-
lion acres (3.4 million hectares) in the United States during the
year, destroying or damaging more than 850 homes and costing
over U.S.$2 billion. A greater number of fires in 1995 (130,000)
produced only 27 percent as much burned area as the year 2000;
thus in most years the number of ignitions is generally less im-
portant than the area burned. In fact, as a society we generally
pay little attention to most fires, tending to focus on the larger,
more spectacular ones.
Interestingly, most of the areas burned in major fire years,
such as 2000 and 2002, have burned and reburned for millennia,
through an endless cycle of biomass removal by fire, forest re-
generation and growth, and subsequent ignition. Lightning pro-
vided the primary ignition source for these historical fires, at least
prior to the time of the aboriginal humans, although other igni-
tions were started by volcanoes or spontaneous combustion (for
example, in subterranean coal seams). Prior to the arrival of Eu-
ropeans in North America, aboriginal burning was common. Na-
tive Americans burned vegetation for numerous reasons, includ-
ing herding of wildlife, warfare, and communications.
As colonists pushed westward in North America, they en-
countered Native American firing practices and also found fires
useful for a variety of settlement purposes, such as clearing land.
Thus human-caused ignitions more recently have augmented the
natural causes for forest fires. Some of these fires have left indeli-
ble imprints because of their size, loss of human life and property,
or natural resource impacts. Some of the most notable fires are
noted in Table 3–1 in Chapter 3 (Chronology).
Historical fires also have influenced the evolution of forestry
and natural resource policy, as laws and ordinances were passed,
sometimes in reaction to mounting losses caused by fire (Chapter
4). Concurrently, agencies charged with managing fires on public
and private lands were spawned and they developed policies to
contend with perceived threats to society from wildland fire.
4
Forest Fires: In Context

Thus the story of forest fires also involves people, those affected
by wildland combustion as well as those who attempt to manage
the effects of fires.
The fires that garner the most attention are those that affect
human life and property, or natural resources of value to society
(such as wildlife, timber, range, or water). Forest fire scientists
also study fires that may not be so spectacular or have little ap-
parent impact, thus acknowledging that fires can affect a full
range of human values. Although every fire is unique in its be-
havior and effects, we will start by describing case studies of fires
that have generated the most interest (and controversy) in the
United States. As individual incidents and as a group, these fires
exemplify society’s fears and hopes (for eventual management)
concerning forest fires, including both incidents that are consid-
ered highly undesirable and the lesser-known fires that illustrate
desirable effects. Undesirable fires destroy homes, kill firefight-
ers, and harm or destroy natural resources. Desirable fires reduce
fuel hazards or are otherwise beneficial in terms of ecosystem
U.S. Fire Activity
5
9.0
8.0
7.0
6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Number of fires (x 1000)
Area burned (million ac)
Year
Area burned                        Number of fires
Figure 1-1
U.S. Fire Frequency and Area Burned, 1991–2002
The number of fires and area burned will fluctuate from year
to year and decade to decade, depending on climatic variations
(e.g., prolonged drought) and fuel susceptibility.
Source: National Interagency Fire Center 2002.

structure and function. Not all fires fit uniformly into either cate-
gory (that is, desirable versus undesirable). Some fires may result
in a mosaic of desired and undesired results over a landscape. De-
sirable attributes may be found in even the most destructive fires
(for example, creation of desirable wildlife habitat for some
species). Also, some desired fires can be transformed into ugly
holocausts if fanned by extreme winds or if convective plumes
dominate the fire spread.
Wildfires that Strike Home
Perhaps the most spectacular (and tragic) fire is one that directly
destroys human life and valuable property, particularly houses.
The Tunnel fire of 1991 in the east Bay Area (Oakland and Berke-
ley) of California stands out as a classic example of a wildland fire
that burns homes. Many residents were unaware of the wildfire
risks in this area, despite historical precedents for fires starting in
flammable vegetation and spreading to nearby homes—such as
the 1923 Berkeley Hills fire that destroyed 584 homes north of the
University of California campus (Chapter 3). As a consequence of
their ignorance, most residents were unprepared for the events of
October 20, 1991.
The Tunnel fire started innocuously enough, with a small
brushfire in the East Oakland hills that was quickly attacked by
Oakland fire department employees on Saturday, October 20.
Firefighters from the Oakland fire department attacked the burn-
ing brush for about two hours and “mopped up” glowing embers
until dark, before leaving the area. The next morning, crews re-
turned to the fire to continue mop-up and retrieve hoses left be-
hind the day before, only to encounter high winds that had
caused the fire to flare up and escape control. By nightfall Sunday,
more than 1,600 acres (648 ha) of expensive real estate was in
ruins, destroying 3,354 homes and 456 apartments, leaving 5,000
residents homeless, injuring 150 people, and leaving twenty-five
dead (Adler 1992). The fire burned along four major fronts within
an area of 5.25 square miles, resulting in more than $1 billion in
fire damages (Ewell 1994).
The 1991 Tunnel fire is a classic example of a fire that starts
in a wildland area and then burns into an urban area. The south-
ern California fire complex of October 2003 provides another
vivid example, in which ten fires in five counties burned almost
6
Forest Fires: In Context

750,000 ac (304,000 ha), destroyed more than 3,650 structures, and
left 22 dead. The subsequent Christmas 2003 flood left fourteen
dead and several missing as intense rain storms pelted the burn
areas, causing massive sediment flows in Lytle Creek Canyon.
Other examples are noted in Chapter 3 (Chronology). Fires in the
so-called urban interface (also known as the urban-wildland in-
terface or exurban areas) present increasingly difficult challenges
for fire managers, especially as more people choose to live in for-
merly wild areas in pursuit of the American dream (for example,
a home in the woods).
Killer Fires
All the fatalities in the 1991 Tunnel fire were residents in the East
Oakland hills of the San Francisco Bay Area. Occasionally casual-
ties include firefighters attempting to control a fire. Firefighting is
hard work, yet certain individuals are drawn to this risky occupa-
tion. Whether for the excitement, the arduous challenge, or the
lure of wages inflated by overtime pay and hazardous duty, as
many as 20,000 women and men nationwide may join the firelines
annually. Both permanent and seasonal employees (primarily col-
lege students) recognize and accept the dangers inherent in fight-
ing fires, yet fatalities occur with some regularity—partly on ac-
count of failure to anticipate the awesome power and destruction
that a wildland fire can display. The usual causal factors, includ-
ing shifting winds, low moisture content of plants and dead fuels,
and firefighter fatigue or misjudgment, are well known and dis-
cussed in firefighting training courses. Furthermore, firefighters
are provided with guidelines for building a fire control line
safely—such as posting of lookouts, maintenance of communica-
tions, establishment of escape routes, and creation of safety zones,
after Gleason (1991). Yet a fire can blow up with little warning and
trap those who are unwary of the inherent dangers or who miss
the cues provided by the fire and its environment.
The 1994 South Canyon fire provides a classic case study of
fires that result in firefighter fatalities. The fire was started by
lightning on July 2 west of Glenwood Springs, Colorado. Initially
the fire attracted little attention, because thirty or forty other fires
had been ignited that day by lightning throughout the state
(Junger 2001); furthermore, the fire was burning in an area with
relatively low resource values, safely away from any residences.
Killer Fires
7

By noon on July 4 the fire size was approximately 3 acres in size,
spreading downslope in leaves, twigs, and dead grasses. By the
morning of July 6, the fire covered 127 acres and was considered
a growing threat. Elite smokejumpers and hot-shots were sent to
assist a Bureau of Land Management crew constructing firelines
along several flanks of the fire. Late in the afternoon high winds
(30 to 45 mph) hit the area and caused several uphill fire runs. As
the fire spread north and east, it formed a high-intensity, fast-
moving, continuous front in the live green Gambel oak (Quercus
gambellii) canopy (Butler et al. 1998). As the fire moved uphill, it
overran firefighters attempting to climb to safety along the fire-
line. Fourteen firefighters perished when they were unable to out-
race the wall of flames moving up the hillside.
Tragically, the fatalities occurred despite lessons provided by
previous tragedy fires, most notably the 1949 Mann Gulch fire in
which eleven smokejumpers perished under somewhat similar
circumstances. In 1976 four firefighters lost their lives in similar
vegetation and topographic conditions. In fact, fatalities persist
despite knowledge and experience. Firefighter fatalities cannot be
justified under any circumstances, no matter how valuable the
natural resources or homes being protected. In Chapter 3 we ex-
amine numerous other fires that resulted in firefighter death and
injury, and look at common denominators among fatality fires.
Park and Wilderness Fires
Many forest fires don’t kill people or damage homes but nonethe-
less are costly and of great public concern. The South Canyon fire
was largely ignored in its initial phases because houses were not
considered at risk; numerous other fires were assigned higher pri-
ority for suppression action. Fires that burn in parks and remote
wilderness areas similarly may not threaten homes, but they are
still important to society because people like to visit wild and his-
toric areas. Natural and human-caused ignitions have played an
important role in the evolution of these remote and wild ecosys-
tems for thousands of years. Such areas provide important labo-
ratories for studying fires and their effects, providing glimpses
into the historical role of fire in wildland ecosystems, including
plant communities that have burned recurrently over hundreds
of thousands of years. Furthermore, attempts at excluding fires
from these areas may be undesirable, since much of the vegeta-
8
Forest Fires: In Context

tion evolved with recurrent fire; studies have shown increased
fuel levels associated with fire exclusion. At the same time, fire
protection must be provided to park developments such as visi-
tor centers, administrative headquarters, and park concessions
(such as restaurants and hotels). Thus fire in parks and wilder-
nesses presents special management challenges and dilemmas.
The challenges include balancing the desire to restore fire as a
natural process in wildland ecosystems while protecting life and
property—say, in a national park. This dilemma was crystallized
in 1988, when Yellowstone National Park experienced an unusual
fire season—one generating more national and international at-
tention than any other event in the history of the area and in-
volving the largest firefighting operation in U.S. history (Greater
Yellowstone Coordinating Committee 1989). More than half a
million hectares (actually about 1.4 million acres) burned with
differential severities and effects during a four-month period
(June–September) in and around the “crown jewel” of U.S. na-
tional parks.
Starting in the middle of June 1988, a series of fires were ig-
nited by lightning and other causes in the Greater Yellowstone
Area (consisting of Yellowstone and Grand Teton national parks,
and adjacent national forests). Some of the lightning fires were al-
lowed to burn, so as to restore fire as a natural process in prede-
termined low-threat areas, as stipulated in Yellowstone’s fire
management plan. Furthermore, scientists have speculated for
years that natural fires might become self-regulating as burned
areas create buffers that would regulate the size and severity of
future fires. In fact, 235 lightning ignitions had been allowed to
burn an average 240 acres each since Yellowstone National Park
had implemented its natural fire policy in the early 1970s (Simp-
son 1989). Apparently, eleven of twenty fires that had been al-
lowed to burn in June 1988 under the auspices of the park’s nat-
ural fire policy had gone out on their own (Williams 1989),
despite coming on the heels of the driest spring on record. Unfor-
tunately, the moisture situation worsened considerably when ex-
pected June and July rains failed to materialize. By mid-July, Park
fire managers were confronted with more fire than desired on the
landscape; by the end of July, the natural fire policy for the park
had been rescinded, and all fires were being managed under full
suppression guidelines. Unfortunately, by that time the stage had
been set for one of the most calamitous and expensive fire cam-
paigns in U.S. history.
Park and Wilderness Fires
9

Some of the Yellowstone fires were allowed to burn in order
to allow a more natural role for lightning fires in the park. Others
(human-ignited fires) were fought as wildfires from their incep-
tion. Our next case study looks at fires that are intentionally set to
achieve management objectives.
Friendly Fires
Researchers have known for years that low-intensity surface fires
have regularly burned through low-elevation ponderosa pine
(Pinus ponderosa, Laws.) forests of the western United States
(Arno and Brown 1991; Agee 1993; Covington and Moore 1994;
Mutch 1994; et al.). Historically, these fires were caused by light-
ning and the firing practices of Native Americans. However,
twentieth-century fire suppression efforts restricted or eliminated
many  naturally ignited fires that might have grown larger and
covered wider areas of the forest. As a consequence, fuels have ac-
cumulated in the areas from which fire has been systematically
excluded, leading eventually to larger, more severe wildfires once
the inevitable ignition occurs. In essence, systematic fire exclusion
led to replacement of frequent, low-intensity fires (that is, friendly
fires) with infrequent, stand-replacing fires (Biswell 1989). Thus,
the notion of prescribed fire was developed to describe fires in-
tentionally ignited to achieve land management objectives, such
as fuel hazard reduction or habitat improvement for wildlife. Ac-
tually, the notion that fire could be useful has been around for
centuries, perhaps best embodied by our understanding that na-
tive peoples used fire extensively as a tool for rejuvenating grass-
lands used by favored wildlife species, such as bison, or for other
purposes, such as maintaining travel corridors or signaling (see
Chapter 3). As early as the 1930s, foresters in the southeastern
United States recognized the potential usefulness of periodic fire
for managing longleaf pine (Pinus palustris) stands or for manag-
ing wildlife habitat (Pyne 1982).
Public agencies with fire management responsibilities in the
United States have recognized the potential benefits and cost-
effectiveness of prescribed fire since the 1970s. The National Park
Service was among the first federal agencies to recognize the nat-
ural historical role of fire in ecosystems as diverse as the Florida
Everglades (Bancroft 1976) or the Giant Sequoia (Sequoiadendron
gigantea) groves of the southern Sierra Nevada (Hartesveldt et al.
10
Forest Fires: In Context

1975; Kilgore and Taylor 1979). Systematic fire exclusion as prac-
ticed for most of the twentieth century had led to excessive fuel
accumulations or changes in ecosystem structure and function.
Rather than attempting to exclude fire from these systems by sys-
tematic fire suppression, park managers thus began experiment-
ing with intentional firing operations under carefully prescribed
fuel, weather, and topographic conditions to achieve prespecified
management objectives.
As useful a tool as fire may be in manipulating vegetation, it
sometimes may have unintended consequences. The escaped
Cerro Grande prescribed fire provides a classic example of a pre-
scribed fire run amok. On May 4, 2000, fire management person-
nel in Bandelier National Monument near Los Alamos, New Mex-
ico, ignited a prescribed fire in the late evening. The objective was
to reduce fuel hazards in one corner of the National Monument,
which was bordered by adjacent private land and national forest.
Sporadic winds on May 5 caused embers to cross control lines,
and the fire was declared a wildfire. The wildfire was contained
on May 6, but by May 7 winds again breached control lines and
caused the fire to escape to the east into the Santa Fe National For-
est. By May 10, the towns of Los Alamos and White Rock were in
the path of a raging wildfire that eventually destroyed 235 homes
and numerous other buildings. The wildfire was not declared
controlled until July, by which time it had incinerated 47,640 acres
(19,287 hectares) and cost more than $1 billion in federal expen-
ditures (Los Alamos National Laboratory 2000–2001).
Ironically, much of the area that burned in the Cerro Grande
fire within the Santa Fe National Forest included vast areas of pon-
derosa pine, which had historically burned frequently with low-
severity surface fires. Researchers have long known that mature
ponderosa pine trees have thick bark and characteristically self-
prune the lower branches, thereby enabling them to survive low-
intensity surface fires. Forest managers had initiated preventive
fuel treatments (such as prescribed fire, mechanical thinning, or
both) in strategic areas prior to the occurrence of Cerro Grande
wildfire, in order to reduce the severity of future wildfires in the
area. In fact, mechanical thinning followed by prescribed fire re-
duced ponderosa pine tree mortality when compared with adja-
cent, untreated areas (Omi and Martinson 2002). Those treatments
had been implemented as part of a broader ecological restoration
plan to replicate forest conditions that had been prevalent prior to
the arrival of European settlers in the Southwest. At that early
Friendly Fires
11

time, the combination of periodic lightning ignitions and native
firings removed fuels in the understory, including susceptible veg-
etation and younger, fire-intolerant saplings. Fire-exclusionary
practices after the turn of the twentieth century, coupled with In-
dian displacement to reservations, essentially removed ignition
sources, resulting in a much more dense and flammable forest
than in the past. Today, fires that burn through present-day pon-
derosa pine areas often burn as stand-replacing crown fires. Thus,
managers in the Santa Fe National Forest had hoped eventually to
restore presettlement forest conditions, including a more open,
parklike forest structure predominated by larger trees with fewer
younger trees—a condition that would once again tolerate peri-
odic surface fires. Unfortunately, the Cerro Grande fire burned
through before those plans could be implemented, once again sug-
gesting that our forests cannot be sustained by fire exclusionary
practices. Even so, the Cerro Grande fire exhibited typical vari-
ability as it spread across the landscape, including pockets of
lightly burned areas within the fire mosaic.
Other Classic Forest Fires
The fires noted above are not the only incidents that captivate our
imagination. For a listing of the more significant incidents in U.S.
history, see the chronology in Chapter 3. Perhaps the most storied
forest fires in U.S. history occurred early in the twentieth century.
The great 1910 Idaho and Montana fires burned more than 3 mil-
lion acres, mostly during a single two-day period (August 20–21),
during which smaller fires coalesced under the influence of
winds and the burn area tripled in size. More important, the 1910
fires severely tested the fortitude of the fledgling U.S. Forest Ser-
vice, fueled debates about pending timber famine, and set the
stage for a concerted national effort to exclude fire from natural
ecosystems that would endure for the entire twentieth century
(Pyne 2001). This campaign of fire exclusion persists today, de-
spite ecological evidence suggesting the futility of such efforts
and the spiraling costs of suppression.
Other notable fires that generated considerable interest dur-
ing the twentieth century include the 1932 Tillamook fire in west-
ern Oregon, the 1956 Bel Air fire in southern California, and the
Mack Lake prescribed fire escape in 1971. The Tillamook fire
burned 236,000 acres of prime timbered land, including more
12
Forest Fires: In Context

than 200,000 acres in one major run occurring on August 25, 1933
(Morris 1935). The Bel Air fire signified the incursion of fire from
the forest into modern suburbia. The Mack Lake fire, set initially
to improve the habitat for the endangered Kirtland’s warbler, es-
caped control lines, burned up forty-four homes, killed one per-
son working on the fire (Simard et al. 1981), and almost ended the
prescribed burning program of the U.S. Forest Service.
Forest fires occur elsewhere on the planet. Notable recent fire
episodes occurred in South Africa (2000), Ethiopia (2000), Australia
(2001 and 1994), Malaysia (1999), Mexico (1998), and Indonesia
(1997–1998). Most areas burn annually, such as the Mediterranean
region in Europe, the tropical forests in South America, sub-Saha-
ran Africa, and southeastern Asia. Annual savanna burnings on
the African and Australian continents may be the largest of all
burns, yet they may be the least understood in terms of environ-
mental effect. Fire impacts and societal responses vary by locale,
though fires will burn wherever fuels, weather, and topography
will permit. Generally, the occurrence of forest fires is viewed
negatively by most nations, although scientific evidence in places
such as North America and Australia (collected from tree rings,
charcoal in lake sediments, and aboriginal oral histories) supports
the pervasive history of fire going back many years.
Fires of the Future
As evidence mounts for the likelihood that human activities are
partially responsible for global warming, concerns will continue
to grow regarding the role of fire in a warmer environment en-
riched with greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide (CO2),
methane (CH4), and nitrogen dioxide (NO2). Each of these gases
is a product of forest combustion, although CO2 is produced in
much greater quantities per ton of fuel consumed. From a global
perspective, though, much greater attention is placed on the out-
puts of methane and nitrogen dioxide, especially by industrial-
ized countries (for example, in the Kyoto Protocol). Despite the
considerable controversies over possible consequences and the
best approaches for managing global warming, the consensus be-
lief is that the higher temperatures will be conducive to wildland
fires. At the same time, to the best of our knowledge, global
warming will contribute to heavier precipitation in some areas as
well as prolonged drought elsewhere. Increased levels of CO2
Fires of the Future
13

with warming and moisture could also accelerate plant growth
and subsequent moisture levels. So fire activity could actually de-
crease in some areas but increase in others. Where the number of
fires increases, firefighting infrastructures could be strained and
smoke pollution might become more severe.
Even without global warming, the fires cited in this chapter
provide perspective on the future of fire in the United States and
elsewhere. Suffice to say that fires will continue to burn wherever
fuel, weather, and  topography permit. No amount of human in-
tervention will succeed in permanently excluding fire from the
forest, so the more realistic challenge is for humans to learn to co-
exist with fire, rather than to attempt to eliminate it. That will re-
quire a major shift in thinking on the part of forest managers,
local officials, and people who live in or use fire-prone environ-
ments. Forest managers are beginning to recognize that the fire-
exclusionary posture is not sustainable in the long term, and they
are beginning to implement fuel treatment and ecological restora-
tion programs aimed at reducing fire hazards while facilitating a
more natural role for fire in the forest. Local officials (including
those who regulate planning and zoning in forested areas) need
to recognize the high fire risks associated with suburban or exur-
ban development in fire-prone environments and manage popu-
lation growth in those areas accordingly.
The biggest challenge will be to manage the people who live
in and use the fire-prone forest. Humans sometimes appear re-
markably naive when it comes to living with fire in the forest.
Buildings are constructed with reckless abandon in vegetation
types that have repeatedly burned in the past. Forest dwellers de-
mand subsidies by the government (in the form of fire protection)
for their individual decisions to build in a fire environment, yet
they resist governmental efforts to legislate or mandate fire-safe
buildings or defensible spaces. Ultimately, people must realize
the risks of living with fire in the forest and bear the consequences
if they choose to ignore the warning signals. We will return to the
theme of people living in fire-prone environments in Chapter 2.
Literature Cited
Adler, P., ed. 1992. Fire in the Hills: A Collective Remembrance. Berkeley: Pa-
tricia Adler, Publisher.
Agee, J. K. 1993. Fire Ecology of Pacific Northwest Forests. Washington, DC:
Island Press, 493 p.
14
Forest Fires: In Context

Arno, S. F., and J. K. Brown. 1991. “Overcoming the Paradox in Manag-
ing Wildland Fire.” Western Wildlands 17(1): 40–46.
Bancroft, L. 1976. “Natural Fire in the Everglades.” Pp. 47–60 in Proceed-
ings Fire by Prescription Symposium. USDA For. Serv. Southern Region, At-
lanta, GA. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 127 p.
Biswell, H. H. 1989. Prescribed Burning in California Wildlands Vegetation
Management. Berkeley: University of California Press, 255 p.
Butler, B. W., R. A. Bartlette, L. S. Bradshaw, J. D. Cohen, P. L. Andrews,
T. Putnam, and R. J. Mangan. 1998. Fire Behavior associated with the 1994
South Canyon Fire on Storm King Mountain, Colorado. Research Paper
RMRS-RP-9. Ogden, UT: USDA Forest Service, Intermountain and Range
Experiment Station.
Covington, W. W., and M. M. Moore. 1994. “Southwestern Ponderosa
Pine Forest Structure: Changes since Euro-American Settlement.” Journal
of Forestry 92(1): 39–47.
Ewell, P. L. 1994. “The Oakland-Berkeley Hills Fire of 1991.” In The
Biswell Symposium: Fire Issues and Solutions in Urban Interface and Wildland
Ecosystems, February 15–17. Walnut Creek, CA: D. R. Weise and R. E.
Martin (technical coordinators). General Technical Report PSW-GTR-158;
Albany, CA: Pacific Southwest Research Station, Forest Service, U.S. De-
partment of Agriculture, 199 p.
Gleason, P. 1991. “LCES—A Key to Safety in the Wildland Fire Environ-
ment.” Fire Management Notes 52(4): 9.
Greater Yellowstone Coordinating Committee. 1989. “The Greater Yel-
lowstone Postfire Assessment.” J. D. Varley, S. E. Coleman, and B. C.
Kulesza, cochairs. S. M. Mills (ed). Prepared by Beaverhead, Gallatin,
Custer, Shoshone, Bridger-Teton, and Targhee national forests, and
Grand Teton and Yellowstone national parks. Unpublished document.
Hartesveldt, R. J., H. T. Harvey, H. S. Shellhammer, and R. E. Stecker.
1975. The Giant Sequoia of the Sierra Nevada. Washington, DC: USDI, Na-
tional Park Service, 180 p.
Hobbs, R. J., and L. F. Huenneke. 1992. “Disturbance, Diversity, and In-
vasion: Implications for Conservation.” Conservation Biology 6(3):
324–337.
Junger, S. 2001. Fire. New York: W. Norton and Co., 224 p.
Kilgore, B. M., and D. Taylor. 1979. “Fire History of a Sequoia-Mixed
Conifer Forest.” Ecology 60: 129–142.
Los Alamos National Laboratory. 2000–2001. Cerro Grande: Canyons of
Fire, Spirit of Community. Los Alamos, NM: Los Alamos National Bank.
Literature Cited
15

Morris, W. G. 1935. “The Details of the Tillamook Fire from Its Origin to
the Salvage of the Killed Timber.” USDA For. Serv. Pacific Northwest For-
est Experiment Station, Portland, OR, 23 p. plus app.
Mutch, R. W. 1994. “Fighting Fire with Prescribed Fire: A Return to
Ecosystem Health.” Journal of Forestry 92(11): 31–33.
National Interagency Fire Center. 2002. www.nifc.gov/stats.
Omi, P. N., and E. J. Martinson. 2002. “Effects of Fuels Treatment on Wild-
fire Severity.” Final Report to Joint Fire Science Governing Board, March
25, 2002. 40 p. (also accessible at www.cnr.colostate.edu/~fuel/westfire
/FinalReport.pdf).
Pyne, S. J. 1982. Fire in America. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 654 p.
———. 2001. Year of the Fires: The Story of the Great Fires of 1910. New York:
Viking, Penguin Group, 322 p.
Ryan, K. C. 2001. “Fire Severity: Concepts and Applications.” CD-ROM
version of presentation to Colorado State University, Department of For-
est Sciences, May 2001.
Simard, A. J., D. A. Haines, R. W. Blank, and J. S. Frost. 1981. “The Mack
Lake Fire.” USDA Forest Service General Technical Report NC-83, 36 p.
Simpson, R. W. 1989. “The Fires of ’88. Yellowstone Park and Montana in
Flames.” Helena: American Geographic Publishing.
Williams, T. 1989. “The Incineration of Yellowstone.” Audubon 91(1):
38–85.
16
Forest Fires: In Context

2
Problems, Controversies,
Solutions
W
ildfires pose serious problems worldwide, though timing
and circumstances vary. Episodic wildfires occur on every
continent (except Antarctica), causing loss of life and prop-
erty as well as disrupting normal commercial activities. Wildfire
episodes recur in locales as varied, for example, as Siberia, south-
east Asia, China, Ethiopia, South Africa, Australia, the Mediter-
ranean, and North and South America, costing the equivalent of
billions of dollars annually. Untold social displacement and psy-
chological damage commonly occur when incidents clash with
local values.
Uncontrolled firing of the forest has also been implicated as
an agent of deforestation in the tropics, a global concern from the
standpoint of the planet’s biological diversity and possible loss of
beneficial plant species as yet undiscovered. Often the tropical
forest is cleared by itinerant peasant farmers who set fires to clear
the land of unused tree stems, logs, branches, and leaves (other-
wise known as slash—that is, taking its name from the cutting ac-
tivity). The pattern of shifting cultivation, or “slash and burn”
agriculture associated with migrant farmers attempting to subsist
off the land, annually results in innumerable uncontrolled fires,
with thick smoke blanketing entire regions. The cumulative effect
of these practices is considered a significant social problem for
sustaining tropical forests.
Wildfire effects occur on-site (where the fire is burning or has
burned recently) as well as off-site (that is, downstream or down-
wind). Sometimes the downstream effects are delayed until the
17

onset of rainstorms. In steep terrain, rainstorms may trigger land-
slides after a fire removes plant cover and kills root systems that
formerly held the soil in place. Mudflows from unstable hillsides
move downhill, knocking houses off their foundations and clog-
ging water catchment facilities, such as reservoirs, with tons of
sediment and debris. Thus fire effects vary both spatially and
temporally. Smoke episodes from wild and prescribed fire also
can lead to increases in respiratory afflictions, especially among
susceptible infants and elderly persons with pulmonary sensitiv-
ities. Other off-site fire effects include the temporary closure of
airports or highways because of visibility reductions caused by
smoke, sometimes leading to traffic accidents.
In this chapter we explore some of the major global prob-
lems, as well as issues unique to North America. Solutions to
problems are presented where possible, or if known. In other in-
stances, the various sides to unresolved issues are discussed so
that you may be able to draw your own conclusions. Forest fire is-
sues are often complex and variable, so acceptable solutions can
sometimes be elusive. As with most complex issues, generaliza-
tions must be avoided under most circumstances.
A forest fire typically sets in motion a complex set of reac-
tions, depending on location, antecedent weather, and values at
risk. Lightning ignitions in remote wilderness areas far away from
human population centers may attract little attention; by contrast,
a wind-driven fire that threatens homes or communities in the
midst of a prolonged drought will require an immediate response.
In the latter case, initial attack crews from a variety of government,
volunteer, and even private and penal firefighters may converge
on the incident, depending on jurisdiction and dispatch priorities
(see Chapter 5, regarding fire suppression). If the fire exceeds ini-
tial capabilities, local officials may request assistance in the form
of firefighting resources from regional or national coordination
centers, which in extreme cases may involve branches of the mili-
tary (for example, the Yellowstone fires of 1988).
In addition to firefighter responses, a bevy of community re-
sources may be mobilized. For example, the Red Cross may set up
emergency evacuation centers for homeowners displaced by a
threatening fire. The Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) and insurance adjusters will become involved, especially
if the incident receives “disaster” designation. Hospital emergency
rooms may be pressed into action to respond to a wide variety of
symptoms: skin burns, ankle injuries, poison oak rashes, inflam-
18
Problems, Controversies, Solutions

mations suffered by firefighters, or reduced pulmonary function by
asthmatic residents who cannot tolerate exposure to smoke, among
others. Local animal shelters may be called upon to board animals
whose pens or stables are threatened by the approaching flames.
Road closures and transportation delays will disrupt local com-
mercial activities, including businesses relying on tourism rev-
enues or airports requiring clear visibility corridors. Municipal
water districts may plan and implement flood-control measures.
With all this activity, can we conclude that all forest fires are
bad? Believe it or not, that question cannot be answered simply.
Certainly, fires that cause excessive resource damage or any loss
of life are highly regrettable. However, forests have burned for
millennia, and many of the problems associated with wildland
fire have arisen only since human settlement of formerly wild
areas. Furthermore, a preponderance of scientific research into
the ecological effects of wildland fires supports the notion that
fires play an important and inevitable role in sustaining forests,
shrublands, and grasslands. This body of evidence suggests that
attempts to exclude fire from an area only postpone the in-
evitable. Eventually the area will burn, and perhaps more explo-
sively than before—especially if fuels have built up from the sup-
pression of low-intensity fires that previously would have
removed understory vegetation and accumulations of surface
fuel. Also, when appropriately harnessed, fires are a powerful
and important tool for manipulating landscapes to serve human
needs. Indeed, fire can be an extremely useful tool to the land
manager. The intentional use of fire to achieve management ob-
jectives, otherwise known as prescribed fire, involves reduction
of fuel hazards such as small trees and surface fuels accumulating
on the forest floor. Other land management objectives (among
many) for prescribed fire include improvement of wildlife habitat
and creation of a favorable seedbed for plants requiring a bare
mineral soil for seed regeneration (see Chapter 5). Thus many in
our society view fire as possessing a split personality; it can be
both a vexing enemy and a dutiful servant.
The disparity in views toward fire shows up as well with fire
stakeholders. Public agencies with fire management responsibili-
ties have different policies toward fire, and these may differ from
the views expressed by private interest groups (see Chapter 6) or
individuals. Although many public land agencies engage in fire-
fighting activities, policies differ among agencies. For example,
those agencies whose mission includes multiple use of natural
Problems, Controversies, Solutions 19

resources (for example, the U.S. Forest Service, Bureau of Land
Management, or some state jurisdictions) may have policies dif-
ferent from those of agencies charged with ecosystem preserva-
tion or wildlife habitat maintenance (for example, the National
Park Service and U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service). These differ-
ences show up in the ways in which fires are managed in respec-
tive jurisdictions—for example, because of differing agency mis-
sions and fire policies. If a fire burns, say, in an area designated
for multiple uses (for example, recreation, timber production, or
wildlife viewing), the responsible agency may attempt to keep
the fire size as small as possible, in order to minimize the effects
on natural resources and nearby human communities. 
By contrast, an agency charged with sustaining natural plant
communities may actually set or encourage some fires to burn, so
long as management objectives (that is, ecosystem restoration) are
met without threatening human values. Fires that cross multiple
jurisdictions can point out this conflict rather dramatically if
agency missions differ. For example, the use of fire suppression
equipment (such as bulldozers) might be restricted or even
banned on a wildfire that spreads from a multiple-use area onto
an adjacent national park concerned with preservation of ancient
archeological resources. In those latter areas, the possible loss of
irreplaceable artifacts or prehistoric treasures in the path of an on-
coming fire would need to be weighed against the physical scars
left by the heavy machinery used to fight fire. Often firefighters
are constrained to fight fires with a “light hand on the land”—or
using minimal-impact suppression techniques to reduce the pos-
sible disturbances caused by fire suppression operations.
To develop an appreciation for the problems, controversies,
and possible solutions confronting forest fire managers and soci-
ety in general, let’s analyze in greater detail the issues that arise
in the characteristic fires identified in Chapter 1 (wildfires that
strike homes, killer fires, park and wilderness fires, friendly fires,
and other classic fires). This classification scheme is my own con-
trivance and admittedly not standard; yet it suggests the variety
of fire problems encountered worldwide and the complexity of
potential solutions. Furthermore, this scheme should suggest that
different types of fire will require unique management responses
and that simplistic solutions are inappropriate. By discussing
these problem fires individually, readers should gain insight into
the full range of issues associated with managing wildfires and
their impacts.
20
Problems, Controversies, Solutions

Wildfires that Strike Home
As noted in Chapter 1, the 1991 Tunnel fire represents a classic ex-
ample of a type of problem fire that is bound to occur more fre-
quently in the future as homes proliferate in the so-called wild-
land urban interface (also known as urban interface, urban
intermix, or exurbia). The Tunnel fire (sometimes called the Oak-
land/Berkeley Hills fire) ranks as the worst single wildland fire in
California history. Although the 2003 southern California wild-
fires burned more total area, no single wildfire has caused more
damage than the Tunnel fire.
Fire is no stranger to the East Bay hills of northern Califor-
nia, where the native shrubs and eucalyptus trees (imported
from Australia during the early 1900s) can be highly flamma-
ble, especially when dry in late summer. In fact, in the fall of
1970, a fire deliberately set by a local park employee burned
thirty-nine homes close to the area eventually torched by the
Tunnel fire twenty-one years later. In 1923 a fire pushed by 60
mph east winds spread downhill and decimated fifty city
blocks and 624 homes north of the University of California
campus (Carle 2002). To this day, visitors to the north campus
area note that most of the houses have been constructed with
terra cotta (that is, nonflammable) roofs, an indirect legacy of
the 1923 fire.
Fires are even more legendary in southern California, where
the predominant shrubby fuels (chaparral) explode into flames
with rhythmic regularity. The native chaparral vegetation in-
cludes many plant species that resprout from burned root crowns
following fire; other plants regenerate from subterranean seeds
that germinate only in response to intense heat that penetrates the
soil profile from above the ground. These regenerative mecha-
nisms (resprouting and seed germination) are stimulated by the
explosive flammability of the plants, many of which possess oils,
waxes, and resins (also known as ether extractives). In fact, Mutch
(1970) speculates that high flammability is a unique fire adapta-
tion that, along with sprouting and seeding mechanisms, allows
the dominant vegetation to persist in fire-prone ecosystems, such
as southern California chaparral or some pine forests. Species
without these adaptations have little chance of surviving the pe-
riodic severe burning. Similar speculation has been posited re-
garding eucalypts in Australia and pines in the southeastern
United States (Whelan 1995).
Wildfires that Strike Home
21

Typically, autumn in southern California brings the ominous
Santa Ana winds, as air flows from areas of high atmospheric
pressure in the Great Basin to low pressure over the Pacific
Ocean, west of Los Angeles. Pushed by the Santa Anas (also
known as devil winds, or simply, Santanas), ten wildfires in
southern California burned some 304,000 hectares (750,000 acres),
an area roughly half the size of Rhode Island, during a two-week
burning period in 2003, with twenty-two fatalities and 3,500
homes or structures destroyed or damaged. The ABC Monday
Night Football program was moved from San Diego to Tempe,
Arizona, out of concern for the apparent absurdity of playing a
nationally televised game while the nearby hills burned.
Every western U.S. state has experienced the destructive mix
of rampant urban development commingled with wildland fuels
that explode in flames during a drought. Here the homes them-
selves can become the fuels that carry the wildfire, especially if
they were constructed with combustible building materials (for
example, roofs, siding, and decks). Even when the traditional
summer fire season ends in the West, houses may yet burn in other
U.S. locations, such as Florida, North Carolina, and Michigan. By
contrast, the number of houses lost in wildland fires is much lower
in southern Spain, Italy, and Greece, where building materials are
generally nonflammable. So, part of the problem with burned
homes in the United States may be related to our choice of home
construction materials. Significant U.S. wildland fires involving
loss of houses and structures are noted in Chapter 3.
The 2002 fire season destroyed hundreds of homes and out-
buildings while producing the largest fires ever recorded in Ari-
zona and Colorado, almost 500,000 acres (202,429 ha), and 137,000
acres (55,466 ha), respectively. Oregon recorded its largest fire in
more than a century (450,000 acres, or 182,186 ha), eclipsing the
burned area mark established by the Tillamook fire of 1933
(311,000 acres, or 125,911 ha). Ironically, federal employees with
questionable motives were implicated with setting the record
fires in Arizona and Colorado. Although employee-set fires are
not necessarily rooted in malicious intentions, motives are cer-
tainly suspicious when hundreds of homes are destroyed and
lives are threatened. Formerly wild areas have become so popu-
lated with private residences that housing losses are an inevitable
consequence of large fires in all but the most remote areas.
When first recognized as a burgeoning problem in the mid-
twentieth century, urban interface communities were viewed as a
22
Problems, Controversies, Solutions

double dilemma for fire managers: wildland fires could burn into
developed areas, and fire could spread from burning homes into
adjacent wild areas. Over time, fires originating in the forest have
destroyed far more homes and caused more damage than struc-
tural fires that escape onto adjoining wildlands. This situation
only worsens as more and more people escape metropolitan con-
gestion in favor of an idyllic life in the woods. Often these same
people possess poor knowledge of and lackadaisical attitudes
concerning the risks of living in a fire-prone environment. Resi-
dents may have few incentives for creating defensible spaces
around their homes (such as the use of flame-resistant construc-
tion materials, the removal of fuel, and installation of water
sources in the vicinity). Furthermore, mountain residents are re-
cipients of fire protection provided by the government, a possibly
gratuitous subsidy financed largely by all taxpayers. This subsidy
extends to homeowners who qualify for low-interest loans or
cash grants to cover uninsured (or underinsured) losses when an
area receives disaster designation following a wildfire.
Ironically, urban interface or exurban dwellers in the United
States tend to be more individualistic and less accepting of gov-
ernmental rule-making. Homeowners in these areas tend to pre-
fer to be left alone, to settle the wild as they please, and to con-
tend with the forces of nature on their own. The myth of frontier
self-reliance persists in these areas, only to be conveniently dis-
carded when fires, floods, or other natural disturbances rear their
ugly heads and set in motion governmental rescue efforts (such
as FEMA subsidies).
Urban interface areas present unique challenges to fire man-
agers. Wildland firefighters are not trained to put out structural
fires, which generally require a completely different set of tactics
and firefighting equipment than are usually needed when fires
burn forest fuels. The strategies and tactics for contending with a
free-burning fire within a wildland environment bear little re-
semblance to those needed to deal with a home engulfed in
flames, so forest firefighter knowledge and technologies are not
easily interchanged with their counterparts in the structural fire
sector. A firefighter is not trained to deal with a deadly flashover
in a home, any more than is a structural firefighter to contend
with a raging crown fire in the woods.
During a wildfire, homeowners may be chagrined to observe
a fire engine bypassing their residences in favor of a more defen-
sible, safer location. Most homeowners do not distinguish
Wildfires that Strike Home
23

between wildland and structural firefighters and expect some
sort of protection if their house is threatened in a forest fire.
What’s more, prior to a fire, many homeowners may not recog-
nize that their property is at risk, constructing their homes in
high-risk areas that have burned repeatedly in the past, using
combustible building materials on sites thick with flammable
vegetation. Others may not recognize that the roads to their se-
cluded hideaways are substandard or unsafe for fire engine travel
or mass evacuation.
When wildland firefighters are diverted to protect structures
during a wildfire, they are essentially not available to contain the
fire’s perimeter growth elsewhere, thus driving up the costs of
fire protection. Ironically, concerns for firefighter safety can lead
to controversial confrontations between fire agencies and private
landowners. If firefighters pull back from a burning area because
of safety concerns, homes or other resources may be burned or
damaged, essentially sacrificed in order to keep firefighters out of
harm’s way. The number of homeowner evacuations and home-
owner displacements may increase. On the other hand, homes or
resources can be lost when firefighters employ aggressive tactics
known as backfiring (or backburning), typically a last resort to
rob fuels from an oncoming flaming front using intentionally ig-
nited fires. Such an operation must be timed carefully so that the
intentionally ignited backfire will be drawn into the convection
column of the main fire, thereby blocking spread in the direction
of the backfire. However, backfiring can have unintended conse-
quences if applied incorrectly, increasing the burned area and
adding to the area of active flaming—thus complicating manage-
ment problems. In either case (that is, providing for firefighter
safety or aggressive backfiring), homeowners may take issue with
the decisions made to manage a wildfire, especially if private res-
idences and personal belongings are lost.
After the fire is out, homeowners may find that their FEMA
loans or property insurance policies are insufficient to cover the
actual losses sustained. In addition to losing everything and hav-
ing to start all over again, burned-out homeowners may suffer ad-
ditional disappointments if their insurance does not cover their re-
placement costs, or if existing coverage has not kept pace with
higher labor and construction costs—or if inflation protection is
inadequate to provide full protection. Additional disappointments
may be in store if building codes have changed, and insurance
coverage is insufficient to rebuild to the new or higher standards.
24
Problems, Controversies, Solutions

Partial Solutions: Safeguards from fire for communities at risk
include use of nonflammable building materials for individual
homes and vegetation clearances between homes and surround-
ing flammable vegetation prior to the occurrence of a wildfire. In
the Black Forest of eastern Colorado, residents have for years par-
ticipated in slash/mulch programs, whereby thinned, small-
diameter trees can be exchanged for chipped mulch at a central
processing location. Community partnerships, such as the Pikes
Peak Fire Prevention Authority, have formed or have incorpo-
rated with the intent of making residential developments fire-
safe. The appropriate pricing of insurance premiums is often
mentioned as one possible means for encouraging urban interface
dwellers to build and maintain defensible spaces around homes,
although insurance providers may have insufficient incentive to
participate. Homeowners need to pay attention to exact replace-
ment-cost limits in their insurance policies (different from fair
market value or sales price), and possibly increase those limits if
losses may not be fully covered. Owners of older homes may
want to procure building code upgrade coverage, in case home
rebuilding would require expensive compliance with recent code
changes. Local jurisdictions should discourage or restrict home
building in fire-prone areas (also known as fire-plains), using ap-
propriate zoning authorization. A similar approach has had some
success in dealing with development in U.S. flood plains. Ulti-
mately, these measures place more responsibility upon home-
owners and county planners to educate themselves about fire
risks and their mitigation. 
As an alternative to massive fire evacuations, which have be-
come commonplace in the United States, Australian homeowners
are encouraged to “prepare, stay, and survive” wildfire incur-
sions. Homeowners might look to the Australian example for
guidance on risk and hazard mitigation measures. Websites and
extension publications provide guidance for homeowners to con-
struct defensible space around their dwellings—for example,
Firewise (www.firewise.org/communities) and Dennis (1992). In-
terested homeowners can consult with local building commis-
sions or refer to the National Fire Protection Association guide-
lines (NFPA 299) for standards aimed at increasing the odds that
individual houses will survive a wildfire. Government employee
malfeasance in setting fires requires heightened accountability,
sensitivity to personnel dereliction, and enforcement of existing
laws.
Wildfires that Strike Home
25

Killer Fires: Understanding the Fatalities
Firefighting takes place in a high-risk environment involving ex-
posure to a variety of dangers. From the moment firefighters an-
swer a fire call, they are exposed to numerous potential dangers,
whether en route to the incident, on the actual fireline, or while
involved in support activities. Firefighters are killed or injured in
numerous ways, including burnovers, aerial and surface vehicle
accidents, and inattention to warning signals of health risks. Man-
gan (1999) lists six categories for the 133 firefighter fatalities oc-
curring in ninety-four separate events during the period
1990–1998 in the United States:
•
Heart attacks
•
Burnovers
•
Falling snags (that is, dead trees)
•
Vehicle accidents, including single- or multiple-
collisions, and individuals struck by a moving
transport
•
Aircraft accidents, including fixed- or rotary-wing craft,
as well as aircraft-related accidents occurring on the
ground
•
Miscellaneous, including training, medical, suicide, or
other causes.
A fatality on a wildland fire usually triggers a special inves-
tigation to ascertain the causes and possible lessons to be learned.
Investigative teams are usually convened as quickly as possible
after a tragedy fire in order to take advantage of evidence and
eyewitness accounts to the greatest extent possible. Even so,
every fire presents unique challenges to incident managers, and
firefighter fatalities persist despite lessons learned from the past.
Although we focused on the fourteen deaths in the South Canyon
fire in Chapter 1, firefighter fatalities have occurred in numerous
other fires (Chapter 3). For example, the South Canyon fire
prompted comparisons with the 1949 Mann Gulch fire (eleven
smokejumper fatalities) in terms of coincidental topographic fea-
tures (steep, mountainous terrain adjacent to a major river) and
the elite status and firefighting experience of those overrun by the
flames (Maclean 1999; Maclean 1992). Discussions about the
Mann Gulch fire evoke additional controversy because the crew
leader survived by diving into a burned area that he had inten-
26
Problems, Controversies, Solutions

tionally lit off to escape the oncoming flames, a strategy largely
ignored or apparently discounted by his own crewmembers,
most of whom eventually perished trying to outrun the fire.
As might be expected, fatalities occur also among those who
are not as well trained or prepared for demanding, on-the-ground
firefighting assignments. During the period 1990–1998, the largest
group of fatalities occurred among volunteer firefighters (forty-
one), including eighteen vehicle deaths, seventeen heart attacks,
five burns, and one electrocution (Mangan 1999). In the 2001
Thirty-mile fire, three of the four fatalities were U.S. Forest Ser-
vice seasonal employees in their first year of employment, with
minimal experience and training.
In the 1990 Dude fire, another classic example, six state em-
ployees perished in the fire shelters (portable, heat-reflecting tents
carried by all firefighters) they had deployed in a last-ditch at-
tempt to escape a sudden flare-up resulting from the collapse of
the massive convection column above the fire. Although all fire-
fighters on the fireline carry fire shelters, their use can be contro-
versial, because they do not withstand the highest temperatures or
the most perilous situations encountered on a raging fire. Also, an
individual deploying a shelter needs to make a quick decision re-
garding its necessity and then take the required time to find or cre-
ate a cleared area, remove the packaging, then climb inside and lie
prone to the ground. As a consequence, some individuals may use
the shelter incorrectly while others may eschew their use alto-
gether. Shelters were deployed by some but not all of those who
perished at South Canyon (1994); personal protective items may
not have been required at the time of the Mann Gulch fire (1949).
Entrapments occur when personnel encounter sudden in-
creases in fire intensity in which planned escape routes or safety
zones are cut off, unavailable, or compromised (Munson and
Mangan 2000). Entrapments may or may not result in shelter de-
ployment or injury, so some are considered near-miss situations.
During the period 1976–1999, a total of 1,692 firefighters were en-
trapped by fire on 240 separate incidents, including the largest
deployment of fire shelters on a single incident (107 during the
1988 Canyon Creek fire). Accordingly, an estimated 2,330 near-
misses and 23,300 unsafe acts/conditions were encountered in
the same time period (ibid.).
Firefighters are indoctrinated in early training to “fight fire
aggressively but provide for safety first” as part of their ten so-
called standard orders. In fact, firefighter safety has been the top
Killer Fires: Understanding the Fatalities
27

priority since the 1994 South Canyon fire review. New recruits re-
ceive forty hours of classroom and field training, including expo-
sure to fire tools, safety, and the contributors to wildfire spread.
Upon completion of the basic course, recruits receive a “red
card,” signifying competency to work on a suppression crew. Cer-
tification for supervisory positions requires additional experience
and training, as the firefighter progresses to squad boss, then
crew boss, and on to higher classifications. Yet fatalities and in-
juries continue to occur with disturbing regularity, even among
the elite and best trained. Fatalities occur in part because fires can
blow up without warning, undergoing a transformation from a
quiescent, low-intensity surface fire to a raging inferno that can
trap an unwary or weary firefighter.
Wilson (1977) indicates that the line between fatal and non-
fatal fires is thinly drawn and depends on numerous factors, in-
cluding human behavior. The common denominators among
tragedy fires include the following:
•
Relatively small fires or deceptively quiet sectors of
large fires;
•
Relatively light fuels, such as grass, herbs, and small
shrubs;
•
Unexpected shifts in wind direction or wind speed;
•
Uphill fire runs.
Surprisingly, most fatalities do not occur in heavily timbered
or shrub-covered areas that erupt suddenly into violent fire. Fa-
talities can occur there, but grass fires are also killers, especially
when fanned by sudden, unexpected winds or wind shifts. Thus
quiescent fires can prove more deadly if firefighters are caught
unaware or are lulled into complacency by fatigue or inattention.
Partial solutions: The best way to prevent fire fatalities is to
make sure that firefighters receive training in recognizing haz-
ardous situations, including fuel and weather contributors that
lead to sudden increases in fire intensity. Firefighters need to im-
plement such training while in the field, and further, recognize
when fatigue and stress may cloud their judgment. At such times,
they should be relieved of decision-making responsibilities. Im-
proved protective equipment would be helpful, though experi-
enced firefighters recognize the greater importance of improved
decision-making, including stronger oversight by overhead
teams regarding crew assignments on the fireline; no home or
28
Problems, Controversies, Solutions

natural resource is worth the loss of human life. Strict adherence
to the ten standard fire orders (see Chapter 5) and recognition of
the eighteen warning situations (Chapter 5) should, in theory, re-
duce casualties, although fatalities and accidents happen in spite
of the best training. Workers on the fireline need always to make
safety their highest priority, including the placement of lookouts,
improved communications, awareness of escape routes to safety
zones, and working always from secured, anchored positions. Im-
proved communications may imply questioning of orders from
superiors, not so much as a challenge to authority but to make
sure that all workers understand their assignments and their
right to work in a safe environment. Firefighters also need to be
physically and mentally fit to cope with stressful assignments in-
volving long and arduous hours.
Park and Wilderness Fires
Fires in park and wilderness areas will not always threaten
homes, but they still occupy a special place in the hearts and
minds of most people. People value parks and wildernesses for a
variety of reasons, including the spectacular scenery and relative
isolation from the crowds, pollution, and crime found in the city.
Parks and wilderness areas also provide visitors with inspiration
and scientists with insights into ecosystem processes that operate
across wild landscapes. Thus fires in parks and wildernesses pro-
vide natural laboratories for observing fires that both consume
and perpetuate the vegetation found in those areas.
As noted in Chapter 1, fire has been part of most landscapes
for thousands, if not millions, of years. Natural fire sources in-
clude lightning, volcanoes, and other spontaneous combustion
sources (such as coal seams or haystacks). Human activity is the
other major source of forest fires; it falls into numerous categories,
including arson, debris-burning, campfires, railroads, equipment,
smoking, and children. Thus many human-caused fires may not
be set with malicious intent, but may escape control on account of
an errant firebrand or a lapse in attention. Still other fires may re-
sult from a long tradition of woods-burning. For example, Native
Americans used fire extensively for a variety of purposes (see
Chapter 3). In some parts of the Southern United States the tradi-
tion of woods-burning has been practiced for generations and the
customs and procedures for firing the forest have been handed
Park and Wilderness Fires
29

down to the male family head and have been accepted socially.
More recently, human causes of fire have ranged from accidental
(for example, escaped clearing fires from industrial activities) to
malicious (for example, intentional arson). In fact, instances of
arson often increase with heightened fire danger in densely pop-
ulated areas such as southern California, New South Wales (Aus-
tralia), Capetown (South Africa), Vancouver (British Columbia),
or southern Italy.
The frequency and extent of historical fires have varied de-
pending on fuel, weather and climate, and topographic varia-
tions, as well as the scope and breadth of human interventions on
the land—that is, management activities. In some areas, such as
the Sierra Nevada Mountain Range of California, fire was so
prevalent before Euro-American settlement that many common
plants exhibit fire-adaptations, such as thick bark and fire-stimu-
lated flowering, sprouting, seed release or germination (McKelvey
et al. 1996). Additionally, fire affected the dynamics of nutrient cy-
cling and biomass accumulation and decomposition, working in
synchrony with climate to create vegetation mosaics at different
spatial scales, from the plant community or forest stand to entire
landscapes. Because fire affects so many important ecological
processes, twentieth-century fire-exclusionary practices have had
widespread impacts, most of which are not completely under-
stood (ibid.).
In the Sierra Nevada, median fire return intervals (length of
time between recurrent fires) vary with aspect, elevation, and
vegetation types, but fifty years or fewer is typical, based on fire
scar studies (ibid.). Some areas may have burned as often as once
a decade. In the lower-elevation foothills, the midelevation mixed
conifer zone, and throughout the eastern side slopes dominated
by Jeffrey pine (Pinus jeffreyi), median fire return intervals were
less than twenty years (ibid.).
A similar pattern emerges throughout most North American
forests. Prior to Euro-American settlement, fire played an impor-
tant, if not essential, role in determining forest structure and com-
position, as well as maintaining a shifting mosaic of vegetation
across the landscape. Fire frequency was generally greater in
areas of lower elevation (that is, foothills) that were exposed to
natural and human ignitions and where fuels were more often
susceptible to burning. In those areas, recurrent fires periodically
created patches of trees of differing sizes and ages, depending on
the severity and extent of fire growth. With settlement, fire fre-
30
Problems, Controversies, Solutions

quencies actually may have increased as timber was extracted
from accessible areas and cut-over lands, caught fire, or was ig-
nited intentionally. By the 1930s rampant timber extraction and
subsequent burning reinforced fears of a looming timber famine,
thus justifying governmental attempts to keep all fires as small as
possible, or better, to exclude fire from the forest (see, for exam-
ple, the 10 A.M. policy of the U.S. Forest Service, Chapter 3). Al-
though the policies were well-intended, the effects of fire exclu-
sionary efforts (that is, biomass accumulation, stand density, and
crown canopy closure), especially in ecosystems that burned
more frequently in presettlement times, have led to reconsidera-
tion of the 10 A.M. policy in these areas, particularly ponderosa
pine (P. ponderosa) ecosystems in the western United States. In
those systems, contemporary wildfires burn with greater severity
than observed in the past, largely because of fuel accumulations
that accompanied fire exclusionary practices during the twentieth
century (Arno and Brown 1991; Agee 1993; Covington and Moore
1994; Mutch 1970; Pollet and Omi 2002).
At higher elevations, fires were historically less frequent, but
periodic burning still left indelible imprints on the landscape in
terms of forest structure, ecological processes, and the landscape
mosaic. Many of these higher-elevation areas experienced reduc-
tions in fire ignitions and burn area during the twentieth century
as well, though, to date, the influence of fire exclusionary prac-
tices is more subtle than in lower-elevation areas that historically
burned more frequently. Fuels may not have accumulated on the
forest floor as in the lower elevations, although spacing between
tree crowns may have been lower.  High-elevation forests are gen-
erally cooler and wetter than those at lower elevations, resulting
in shorter growing seasons, less surface fuel accumulation, and
consequently less pronounced fire seasons. Even so, McKelvey et
al. (1996) suggest that higher-elevation forests in the Sierra
Nevada experienced less burning in the twentieth century, most
likely because of more efficient fire suppression efforts as crews
took advantage of the cooler, wetter conditions to limit the extent
of burning. Eventually, even high-elevation forests will burn and
regenerate, especially following a prolonged drought, as evi-
denced in the 1988 Yellowstone fires (Chapter 1).
Thus higher-elevation forests are fire-adapted landscapes, al-
beit with longer return intervals than found at lower elevations.
Some of these forests may not burn for centuries, yet the vegeta-
tion may exhibit unique fire adaptations, such as cone serotiny in
Park and Wilderness Fires
31

lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta) forests. Serotinous cones on a live
tree remain closed until opened by heat, such as that provided by
a forest fire. The opened cones release prolific amounts of seed
that take root in bare mineral soil, thus initiating the next genera-
tion forest. These forests may not have been subject to the fuel ac-
cumulations associated with fire exclusion in lower-elevation
forests, although tree density (number of stems per hectare) and
canopy cover (percentage) may have increased.
Throughout the first half of the twentieth century, the Na-
tional Park Service (NPS) and its sibling federal agencies at-
tempted strict fire control in most parks and wilderness areas.
However, as large fires continued to burn, the policy of fire ex-
clusion came under increased scrutiny. The NPS took the lead
among federal agencies in experimenting with fire reintroduction
in both low- and high-elevation wildlands, beginning with pre-
scribed fires in Everglades National Park during the 1950s. Nu-
merous high-visibility national parks in North America followed
suit, including Yosemite, Sequoia-Kings Canyon, Yellowstone,
Olympic, Rocky Mountain, Glacier, and Grand Canyon. Man-
agers turned to increased use of intentional prescribed fire to
manage a variety of lower-elevation habitats, and relied on natu-
ral fire ignition (lightning) in more remote, higher-elevation
areas. In fact, today 85 percent or more of Sequoia and Kings
Canyon national parks is designated as natural fire zones (Carle
2002)—primarily higher-elevation areas where lightning igni-
tions are allowed to burn until extinguished by rain, snow, or lack
of fuel—essentially a fire herding strategy with only occasional
intervention on a flank or as needed to ensure against escape.
The impetus for the change in NPS fire policy was a docu-
ment known as the Leopold Report, written to evaluate wildlife
management in parks (Leopold et al. 1963). Drawing on writings
of the forty-niners who flocked to the Sierra Nevada in search of
gold and other riches in the mid-nineteenth century, the Leopold
Report described the changes in vegetation that had occurred
during a century of land exploitation and fire exclusion. Accord-
ing to the report, open and parklike areas had been transformed
into “dog-hair thickets” as a result of overprotection from natural
fires. The report went on to suggest that national parks be man-
aged to re-create vignettes of primitive America by manipulating
vegetation with controlled fire, possibly preceded by other fuel-
reduction techniques (such as tree-cutting) in areas that were too
overgrown because of fire suppression.
32
Problems, Controversies, Solutions

Research into the fire regimes of high-elevation parks and
wilderness areas led to experiments during the latter twentieth
century that allowed fires to burn if ignited naturally—that is, by
lightning. Resource management plans were drawn up, specify-
ing the prescribed conditions under which such ignitions would
be allowed to run their natural course, so long as other values
were not threatened. By most accounts, this program of so-called
prescribed natural fires was quite successful in restoring fire to
park and wilderness landscapes (Carle 2002), although a few
costly escapes did occur. In general, the fires allowed to burn
were confined to predetermined areas before being extinguished
by season-ending precipitation. Occasionally, however, fires al-
lowed to burn have become monsters—especially if active flam-
ing zones become exposed to high winds, as often occurs with the
passage of dry cold fronts through an area. That possibility be-
came painfully clear during the Yellowstone fires of 1988, but
other, lesser-known fires have had similar notoriety. For example,
the 1978 Ouzel fire in Rocky Mountain National Park made a
spectacular run toward the town of Allenspark, Colorado, before
being extinguished by autumn snowfall. The escape of the Ouzel
prescribed natural fire led to a shut-down in prescribed natural
fire programs across the NPS, as happened following the Yellow-
stone fires in 1988. 
It is worth noting here that prescribed natural fires were for-
merly called “let burn fires” but were renamed for purposes of
public relations; essentially, the NPS became uneasy with the in-
ference that such fires were not being managed. The subsequent
terminology, “prescribed natural fires,” was dropped following
the 1994 federal policy review, largely for administrative nomen-
clature and financial tracking purposes. Today these fires are
called wildland fires used for resource benefit—a confusing ref-
erence aimed at reinforcing the notion that some fires may be al-
lowed to burn with prespecified objectives and under certain
weather conditions, although wildfires confer no resource bene-
fits. Other descriptors for this practice (essentially of herding
fires) include “natural prescribed fire” and “natural wildland
fires,” although the “let-burn” moniker is pretty tenacious and
still shows up occasionally in the press.
The rationale behind allowing fires to burn in the backcoun-
try is that they pose relatively little threat and provide an oppor-
tunity to allow fire to assume a more natural role, akin to that in
pre–European settlement times. Furthermore, this policy allows
Park and Wilderness Fires
33

for managers to use partial suppression strategies, say, to control
the unruly or threatening flank of a fire, without having to resort
to all-out extinguishment. If managed correctly, remote fires usu-
ally are of little concern until and unless human developments
become threatened. Unfortunately, once homes are threatened,
these fires typically have grown too large and are difficult to ex-
tinguish by any means. Thus, one of the challenges is to restore
fire to these ecosystems relying solely upon natural ignitions,
with sufficient safety margin to protect homes and valued natural
resources. Sometimes this safety margin evaporates as a result of
unanticipated winds or if expected rains fail to materialize.
Park and wilderness fires thus pose special challenges to de-
cision-makers attempting to manage fires across a complex land-
scape. A hypothetical landscape may consist of some or all of the
following features:
•
low- to mid-elevation forests that burned recurrently in
the past with low-intensity surface fires;
•
higher-elevation forests that burned with infrequent
high-severity fires or low-intensity surface fires;
•
alpine forests that rarely burn at all;
•
visitor centers, housing, or high-use recreation areas;
•
wild areas valued for recreation, wildlife, or
commercial enterprise.
Each of the above features requires different perspectives and
fire management strategies. For example, in the low- to mid-
elevation forest, managers may attempt to restore the historical
role of low-intensity surface fires that burned relatively frequently,
removing surface fuels and small-diameter trees. Prescribed fires
may be set intentionally in such areas to mimic the effects of his-
torical fires. In these areas the managers may aim to restore or re-
create forest structures that mimic those preceding European set-
tlement. In higher-elevation forests, management objectives might
reflect a desire to herd or contain fires to restricted areas using
natural barriers such as rivers, lakes, and rock outcrops. In other
instances fires may be permitted to burn based on historical analy-
ses showing that one or more season-ending precipitation events
will likely occur before the fire reaches a high-valued resource that
must be protected from fire. Total fire exclusion may be the goal in
alpine areas where fire damage could persist for centuries, or in
developed areas where visitor use is concentrated.
34
Problems, Controversies, Solutions

The variety of fire management strategies employed in parks
and wilderness areas has elicited much public concern and
scrutiny over the years, especially after the 1988 Yellowstone fires.
Less publicized activities still elicit outcries, whether such activi-
ties be prescribed burning of giant sequoia groves or fuelbreak
construction in Rocky Mountain National Park. Park and wilder-
ness managers currently attempt to restore fire as an ecosystem
process along with an assortment of other ambitious but some-
times contradictory missions, such as preservation of spectacular
views, scientific research, stewardship over natural resources,
public recreation, and financial stability for park concessions.
Thus fire presents special challenges to park and wilderness man-
agers, just as do crowds, pollution, and crime—except that fires
also may be encouraged in selected circumstances.
Partial solutions: Parks and wilderness areas represent unique
laboratories for understanding the historical role of fire in natural
ecosystems, improving knowledge about fire effects, and learning
how to restore fire as an ecological process in landscapes. Proper
planning is required to cost-effectively blend the appropriate mix
of fire suppression activities in developed and high-valued areas,
along with desires for ecological restoration using intentional pre-
scribed fire or natural fires in the backcountry. As a benchmark,
plans should aim to restore or re-create landscapes that will be
sustainable—that is, able to withstand extreme fire events, as did
ecosystems that predated European settlement. Currently, light-
ning fires may be allowed to burn in national parks and national
forests with approved fire management plans, although policies
require the suppression of all human-caused ignitions. Ultimately,
all fires (including the human-caused) should be judged on a case-
by-case basis—they could be suppressed if justified by the values
at risk, but allowed to burn if they meet management objectives.
This practice actually has a precedent in the so-called designated
controlled burn (DESCON) program applied in the southern
United States during the 1970s. Accordingly, managers would be
given flexibility to employ a range of alternatives for each fire,
from passive monitoring to all-out suppression, regardless of igni-
tion source. While that may be appealing from a theoretical stand-
point, implementation of such a program would require consum-
mate skill by managers and willing acceptance by the public—a
challenging combination under most circumstances.
Worldwide, isolated examples exist where land reserves and
natural areas are being managed to retain or sustain the integrity
Park and Wilderness Fires
35

of ecosystems where fire has had a historical and essential role.
Kakadu National Park in Australia and Kruger National Park in
South Africa are outstanding examples. These parks can be de-
scribed as managed for biodiversity objectives, where the inten-
tion is to retain the role of fire-sensitive organisms and sustain the
ecological integrity of ecosystems by maintaining a balance be-
tween too little and too much fire. Most often, these areas are set
aside with the recognition that our knowledge of fire effects on
plant and animal species is quite crude. Still, these areas are criti-
cal for increasing our knowledge base and also for testing hy-
potheses about the relationships between fire and affected organ-
isms. Extra care is required where rare, endangered, or
charismatic species are involved.
Friendly Fires
The 2000 Cerro Grande fire (Chapter 1) dramatically illustrated
the problems that can occur when a prescribed fire escapes con-
trol and burns into an urban interface area. Unfortunately, most
people are not aware of the many prescribed fires that are con-
ducted safely and that meet the objectives as intended. Mistakes
do occur—see, for example, BLM (1999) and Simard et al. (1971)
for reviews of two prescribed fire escapes. These, however, are
decidedly in the minority and should not overshadow the overall
need for reducing fuels and restoring ecosystems across a land-
scape. In fact, only 1 percent of the 3,784 NPS prescribed fires set
in the two decades prior to Cerro Grande resulted in escapes (Los
Angeles Times 2000, as noted in Carle 2002, p. 243). Although es-
caped prescribed fires pose difficult issues for all involved, from
homeowners to land managers, the fact remains that fires cannot
be excluded from the forest indefinitely.
Notwithstanding the posture of public and private agencies
that annually engage in firefighting operations, there are growing
numbers who see the inevitability of fire recurrence and the futil-
ity of repeated campaigns aimed at fire elimination. Schiff (1962),
Pyne (2001), Carle (2002), and other investigators have examined
historical battles between those who persist in believing that fires
can be excluded and those who would overturn this dogma by in-
stituting widespread prescribed fire programs. Such arguments
persisted throughout the twentieth century, starting with those
who favored “light burning” (a handful of scientists and an as-
36
Problems, Controversies, Solutions

sortment of timber and rancher interests) versus various public
agency heads (the best known being Gifford Pinchot of the U.S.
Forest Service), who generally felt that the public was not sophis-
ticated enough to distinguish between unwanted and desirable
fires. Early in the twentieth century, foresters in California debated
the merits of so-called light burning in the understory of mer-
chantable timber stands. Viewed as a perpetuation of Native
American burning practices by some, the practice found adherents
among industrial foresters from the Southern Pacific Company in
the central Sierra Nevada and the Red River Lumber Company in
Shasta County (Pyne 1982; Agee 1993). Arguments against light
burning included the killing of young trees and assertions that fire
control was required for efficient timber production.
Meanwhile, proponents for prescribed burning would peri-
odically raise questions about the effectiveness of fire suppression
efforts, whether in the southern United States (for example,
Chapman [1912]; Stoddard [1931]) or the western United States
(for example, Weaver [1943]; Biswell [1989]; et al.). Carle (2002)
describes the evolution of sentiments, noting in particular the
long tradition of woods-burning in the Southern states. These and
other studies critiqued public agency fire policies that attempted
to exclude fire from areas previously characterized by low-inten-
sity surface fires. Toward the latter half of the twentieth century,
evidence was mounting that high-severity, sometimes horrific,
crown fires were replacing the low-intensity fires in these sys-
tems.
Each successive “bad fire year” (such as the 1994, 2000, 2002,
and 2003 fire seasons) reinforces the notion that twentieth-
century fire exclusionary policies were misguided at best, and at
worst a monumental governmental mistake—at least in some
ecosystems. In each of those years firefighters watched helplessly
as thousands of homes were destroyed throughout the western
United States. Scientists and land managers generally agree that
attempts to exclude fire have led to unsustainable fuel levels in
some dry, temperate forest ecosystems. As a consequence, these
forests today are choked with younger, shade-tolerant trees that
provide a ladder for surface fires to climb into the tree crowns and
become destructive crown fires. The federal government has re-
sponded with ambitious plans for thinning the nation’s forests to
get rid of small diameter trees, which are the most flammable.
The two most viable approaches to thinning the forest are
prescribed fire and mechanical thinning with chainsaws or other
Friendly Fires
37

equipment. Other methods—including chemical application of
herbicides, biological agents (such as livestock grazers), and re-
liance on natural decomposition—are either too costly or politi-
cally inexpedient to be considered here. Prescribed fire, or the in-
tentional application of fire to achieve land management
objectives, is generally considered the lower cost and more natu-
ral alternative for thinning a forest. A well-executed prescribed
fire is confined to a predetermined area and burns under planned
environmental conditions (such as wind and fuel moisture,
among the several elements specified in the fire prescription); in
addition, it produces the desired effects. Typical prescribed burn
objectives include reducing fuel hazards, improving wildlife
habitat, and creating favorable seedbed conditions—for example,
for plant species that require bare mineral soil for establishing
seedlings.
As noted above, prescribed fire has a long and controversial
history in the United States. One of the biggest problems with
prescribed fire is the fear and risk of escape. Furthermore,
smoke—even from prescribed fires that are successfully con-
tained to predetermined boundaries—can create problems, not
the least of which are reduced visibility and public health effects.
Reduced visibility in nearby travel corridors (land and air) can re-
strict commerce and lead to vehicle collisions, as well as limiting
recreational opportunities. Smoke also can harm individuals with
respiratory problems such as asthma or emphysema. In fact, the
smoke from prescribed fires may provide the greatest deterrent to
widespread fire use, since airborne particulate concentrations are
of concern to state health departments and federal regulators
such as the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Research
has shown that smoke production is greatest during the smolder-
ing phases of combustion, after active flaming but prior to ex-
tinction. This smoldering phase generates the greatest particulate
loads, so managers strive to minimize its extent by comprehen-
sive mop-up or by burning only when moistures are highest.
Mechanical thinning of the forest provides more exact con-
trol over the trees killed and removed, without the risk of fire or
smoke, but it is generally more costly than prescribed fire. Thin-
ning operations may be precommercial or commercial, depend-
ing on the stand age and whether or not the cut trees have mar-
ketable value. Thinning methods and standards may vary,
depending on objectives. Thinning from below (or low thinning)
usually refers to removal of small-diameter trees or saplings, ei-
38
Problems, Controversies, Solutions

ther by hand-crews with chain saws or mechanized equipment
such as feller-bunchers. Overstory thinning (or thinning from
above) may remove larger trees that form part of the forest
canopy. In either case, the stems, branches, and limbs left in the
forest are known as thinning slash, or slash, which can create a
fuel hazard unless removed from the forest or piled and burned.
Forest fuels can be reduced either with thinning or pre-
scribed fire, although both treatments generate considerable con-
troversy. These treatments are not exact substitutes for each other,
even though both can reduce fuel loads. Thinning requires one or
more entries into a forest stand to cut out and dispose of the un-
wanted trees. Fuels lying on the forest floor may not be removed
during thinning, even though they may constitute a major fire
hazard, especially as a source for heat transfer from surface
flames into tree crowns. Prescribed fire can remove the litter and
small dead fuels from the forest floor surface and kill small trees,
but its effects will be patchy and perhaps less controllable than
those of thinning, whereby standards can be imposed for the re-
moval or retention of individual trees.
In addition, most trees thinned from the forest have little
commercial value—and milling and processing capacity for
small-diameter materials may not be available in some areas
(such as the Colorado Front Range, and other arid areas). Thus
the removal only of small-diameter materials (the primary carri-
ers of fire, and as a result the bulk of the fuel hazard in an area)
creates another problem—that is, disposal of the useless biomass
removed. Landfills are already at or near capacity in some areas,
and handling/transport costs can be prohibitive. Electric power
cogeneration with the biomass has been attempted in places such
as northeastern California and Washington, but it usually re-
quires a government subsidy or assurances of uninterrupted sup-
ply from public lands. Processing of forest biomass into livestock
feed or pellets that can be burned in wood stoves has been sug-
gested, but those are largely unproven at the large scales neces-
sary to reduce all fuel hazards on public and private lands.
The disposal problem is compounded if thinning operators
and contractors are unable to make enough profit to warrant bid-
ding on hazard reduction projects on public lands or stewardship
contracts on private lands. Thus incentives (such as permission to
cut larger trees) are required to encourage a private contractor to
bid on a thinning project, in order to generate the revenues nec-
essary to offset costs and improve profit margins. This is a key
Friendly Fires
39

provision in the Healthy Forests Restoration Act of 2003 (de-
scribed below), although it has been controversial inasmuch as it
is viewed as a veil for increased logging and road-building on
public lands. On the other hand, there is little evidence to suggest
that removal only of large trees will reduce fuel hazards or wild-
fire severity. To the contrary, wildfire hazard will not be abated if
small trees and logging slash are left on site after removal of only
the large trees.
Many question whether sufficient area can be treated by pre-
scribed fire or thinning to reduce the area burned by future wild-
fires. Thus recent government plans for reducing fuels in our na-
tion’s forests have generated a multitude of detractors. Vocal
critics maintain that the U.S. government moved too slowly in
recognizing and responding to the fuels crisis in the nation’s
forests, citing the increasing incidence of large, high-severity fires
during the latter part of the twentieth century. In response, some
officials maintain that the pace of fuels remediation is hindered
by pressure from environmental groups who protest thinning
projects or mistrust fuel treatments as a guise for cutting timber.
That type of thinking led to passage of the 2003 Healthy Forests
Restoration Act. As signed by President George W. Bush, the
Healthy Forests Restoration Act may restrict environmentalists
seeking legal recourse to stall or block agency management plans
that include thinning projects to reduce fire hazards (or even the
salvage of burned-over forests). Courts have been instructed to
limit judicial review of thinning projects where the possibility ex-
ists for unthinned forest to erupt into flames while these manage-
ment plans are being contested. As mentioned above, the act in-
cludes incentives for private operators to cut larger trees and
derive forest products from harvested trees on public lands to im-
prove their profit margins.
Prior to the passage of the Healthy Forests Restoration Act,
disputes had led to advocates for arbitrary tree diameter limits on
trees that could be removed during thinning. For example, in the
Southwest, an arbitrary 12-inch (30.5-cm) diameter upper limit
had been proposed for thinning projects, ostensibly to keep larger
trees from being removed. In the Sierra Nevada, an upper limit of
30 inches (76.2 cm) in diameter had been proposed as the upper
limit for removal in proximity to communities, with a limit of 20
inches (50.8 cm) elsewhere. These contrived limits were largely
artificial, since tree diameter may not reflect age or flammability,
or be an ecological indicator of forest health. Rather, the limits
40
Problems, Controversies, Solutions

usually represented compromises negotiated by public agencies
with antilogging environmentalists who are concerned about
commercial logging in public forests, or opposed to road building
in pristine areas, or against the liquidation of old-growth forests. 
It remains to be seen whether the 2003 Healthy Forests
Restoration Act will encourage or discourage lawsuits regarding
diameter limits and thinning projects. However, administration
guidelines issued in Fall 2004 suggest a looming battleground
over management of the nation’s forests, with logging and wild-
fire hazard reduction among several issues of contention. In the
interest of streamlining bureaucracy, the guidelines vest control
over management decisions to local forest supervisors, suspend
requirements for environmental review, and limit public com-
ment. Contentious bickering among government agencies and
environmental interest groups over the wildfire hazard reduction
and forest restoration seems inevitable.
Debates between government agencies and environmental
groups also will arise over postfire rehabilitation of burned
areas, including salvage logging and removal of coarse woody
debris (CWD) following a damaging wildfire. At issue here is the
pace and method of restoring the forest following a wildfire, but
the debate goes even deeper into the core philosophies govern-
ing the management of the national forests—including the suit-
ability of earning a profit from the sale and use of public natural
resources. Some environmentalists maintain that the profit mo-
tive should not apply to public forests; they would just as soon
allow natural processes—that is, plant succession—to govern
postfire vegetative recovery. Government foresters maintain that
salvage logging is required to pay for the restoration costs or to
provide incentive for private companies to bid on the salvaged
lumber (since agencies such as the U.S. Forest Service do not
maintain a workforce of loggers and must rely on the private sec-
tor to remove timber from public forest lands). In addition, gov-
ernmental managers favor a more active restoration of the prefire
forest, including tree removal and planting to regenerate the
burned-over area. Environmentalists mistrust government capa-
bilities to manage or restore old growth forests, alleging lack of
experience, decades of mismanagement, and collusion with pri-
vate industry. These differences spill over into debates about the
desirability of quickly removing dead and dying trees before
they become susceptible to insect attacks and rot, thereby limit-
ing their commercial value. Environmentalists would rather see
Friendly Fires
41

forest succession dictate conditions that will restore the forest,
but further, they distrust managers who may allow the cutting of
live as well as dead trees.
In truth, very little is known about the ecological role of
coarse woody debris, including fire-killed trees, and their dispo-
sition following disturbances such as fire. Superficially, we know
that more dead wood in the forest can contribute to increased
flammability, but recent evidence suggests also that CWD may be
important for the maintenance of nutrient and moisture pools, as
well as providing refugia for organisms important to ecosystem
processes. Controversies arise because large quantities of CWD
may be salvaged from public forests for economic returns follow-
ing a wildfire. Salvage advocates note that wood quality will de-
teriorate on account of decay, and that wood will lose commercial
value if removal is delayed inordinately (say, beyond one year).
Furthermore, standing dead trees may be breeding grounds for
future insect outbreaks or contribute to future wildfire hazard. So
salvage decisions involve numerous tradeoffs and disputes.
Other postfire rehabilitation concerns relate to the efficacy of
burned area emergency rehabilitation (BAER) treatments. After a
fire is extinguished, a team of specialists will map and assess the
severity of burned areas in order to prioritize areas in need of re-
covery and soil stabilization efforts. Typical measures include aer-
ial seeding, tree planting, tree felling (or straw wattle placement)
across contours, mulching, and fireline rehabilitation. These ac-
tivities are sometimes controversial, for several reasons. First,
seed mixes may contain exotic plant species that can outcompete
native vegetation for moisture and nutrients and eventually take
over the site. Second, weeds and exotic seeds can be introduced
to recent burns merely by increased vehicle traffic in the area.
Lastly, there is insufficient evidence to suggest that some treat-
ments, such as contour felling or mulching, actually stabilize soil
and overland water flows.
Despite these debates over thinning of the prefire forest, sal-
vage of the postfire stems, and BAER activities, there is little ar-
gument that the decades of fire exclusion have led to conditions
where many Western forests are now too overgrown and choked
with fuel. This unsustainable condition is especially prevalent in
areas previously characterized by frequent, low-severity fires.
The current fuel levels in these forests are too dangerous to allow
widespread use of prescribed fire to thin the forest without prior
thinning and removal of understory fuels. Without some type of
42
Problems, Controversies, Solutions

preparatory treatment, the risk is too great that a fire will climb
into tree crowns and escape control lines. Thus widespread ap-
plication of prescribed fire will require that many areas receive
one or two prior entries to make the forest safe for fire use. The
result will be forests that are safer for all fires, both wild and pre-
scribed. Otherwise, the overgrown forest is not sustainable, but
simply a catastrophe waiting to happen.
In the meantime, the areas in need of treatment far exceed the
capability of governments, private contractors, and volunteers to
reduce fuel loads. With so much of a backlog for areas in need of
treatment, a concerted effort is needed, involving cooperation be-
tween government and private entities, to reduce fuel hazards
and restore fire to ecosystems from which it has been denied in
the past century. Thus, rather than stifle prescribed fires, the
Cerro Grande fire (Chapter 1) and the ensuing massive 2000 and
2002 fire seasons actually reinforced the need to treat fuel loads.
The National Fire Plan (PL–06–291) was signed into law by Pres-
ident Clinton, initiating a long-term plan for improving fire man-
agement capabilities to reduce fuel hazards so as to protect com-
munities and natural resources while safeguarding firefighters
and the public.
The continuing Western drought and 2002/2003 fire seasons
helped to promote President Bush’s Healthy Forests Restoration
Act, which essentially supported the objectives of the National
Fire Plan while calling for accelerated thinning of the forest, in-
cluding measures to relieve the deadlock between environmen-
tal interest groups and government foresters. Concerns have
been raised that the Bush initiatives will bypass important envi-
ronmental safeguards and favor private industry interests. So it
remains to be seen if increases in fuel treatments and prescribed
fire will pay off with reductions in the frequency of catastrophic
wildfires.
Partial solutions: One of the biggest challenges facing land
managers is to achieve an appropriate balance between fire con-
trol and fire use across all ecosystems. Fire suppression will be
needed in high value areas, such as the urban interface. Proper
planning and execution of prescribed fires as part of an integrated
program for forest management is essential. Ultimately, the solu-
tion involves creation of forests where fire can be prescribed safely
as a management tool, including strategic placement of fuel-
breaks across the landscape. Fuelbreaks are areas where flamma-
ble vegetation is converted or restructured (that is, by thinning of
Friendly Fires
43

forest crowns) to provide safe access for firefighters and to pro-
vide anchor points for firing operations on wild and prescribed
fires. The effort to treat fuels and restore fire to ecosystems will
need to be sustained over the long haul. That will require finan-
cial commitment to cover multiple treatments and ongoing coop-
eration by federal, state, and local governments with private in-
terests, including reliance on the best available scientific
knowledge to arrive at management decisions. Managers also
need to recognize that fuel hazard reduction is not required in all
ecosystems, especially those where extreme fire behavior is re-
lated more to weather and climate than fuel structure. Patience
and willingness to tolerate occasional mistakes will be needed to
undo the harm caused by past fire exclusionary practices. Collab-
orative learning and partnerships between public and private
stakeholders may prove useful for reaching consensus about ap-
proaches for dealing with wildfire problems.
Other Significant Fire Problems 
The four fire types mentioned above are not the only problem
fires, although they capture a broad spectrum of concerns and is-
sues. Still other types of problem fires deserve mention, for they
strike at the heart of civilized societies around the globe—that is,
at their storehouse of natural and historical resources. In the
United States, as settlers moved westward during the nineteenth
century, they continually encountered and created burned land-
scapes. Settlers learned from observing Native American firing
practices that fire was a powerful tool for clearing lands; later, fire
followed the ax as lands were cleared for their timber stores and
burned to dispose of logging slash. As settlement progressed,
wildfires became feared as threats to developed communities, but
also because of the possible effects on natural resources, such as
water and timber. From the Peshtigo fire of 1871, through the fires
that ravaged the Pacific Northwest in 1902, to the Idaho-Montana
conflagrations of 1910, the United States grew increasingly con-
cerned about the threats to communities and a possible timber
famine.
Originally, U.S. national forests were reserved for their wa-
tershed, and later, their timberland values. Thus for most of the
twentieth century, timber/watershed fires were of primary con-
44
Problems, Controversies, Solutions

cern to foresters, while most of the public was located too far dis-
tant to care very much about forest fires. The 1910 fires in Idaho
and Montana occurred shortly after the national forest system
was created (1905), and the infant forest service needed to prove
its worthiness of the public trust to provide forest protection
(Pyne 2001). Even though the U.S. Forest Service did not extin-
guish the 1910 fires single handedly, the magnitude of the fires
and their aftermath essentially settled a controversy over whether
USFS could manage fires in the forest reserves and laid the
groundwork for attempts to exclude fire from the forest. Cooper-
ative fire protection with states became a reality in 1924 (Clarke-
McNary Act), and systematic fire protection was institutionalized
in 1935 with adoption of the so-called 10 A.M. policy (see Chapter
4). For further details on the evolution of fire policies in the
United States, see Pyne (1982) and Schiff (1962).
Today, public forestry no longer focuses solely on cost-
efficient timber removals. As an offshoot of the environmental
concerns expressed since the first Earth Day in 1970, today’s man-
agers cannot focus only on fire suppression to protect timber re-
sources. Now they must focus on long-term ecosystem health and
restoration. As timber harvest has declined from U.S. national
forests since 1960, so the emphasis has shifted away from re-
source extraction to ecosystem sustainability.
Currently, 161 million ha of public lands in the United States
are at risk of wildland fires that could compromise human safety
and ecosystem integrity (Williams 2003), including 73 million ha
(30 million acres) of national forest lands (Bosworth 2003). These
estimates are based in part on fuel conditions in ecosystems from
which fire has been excluded during the twentieth century (GAO
1999). Most of these lands are in ponderosa pine forests of the in-
terior West, from the Sierra Nevadas and eastside Cascades to the
Colorado Plateau, the Rockies, and Black Hills. Prior to European
settlement, most of these forests burned with frequent, low-
intensity surface fires that regulated fuel loadings while allowing
the survival of mature, fire-resistant trees. Fire exclusion, wetter
climate, and deferred management during the past several
decades have combined to leave many forests more dense with
younger, smaller, shade-tolerant trees. Historically these forests
were kept relatively open by periodic surface fires—however,
today these forests are overcrowded with trees and susceptible to
stress from competition, insect attacks, and catastrophic wildfires
Other Significant Fire Problems
45

(Bosworth 2003). These forests burn with high severity crown
fires that kill all the trees, even some that might have survived the
low-intensity fires of the past. Fire severity is exacerbated follow-
ing drought. So the problem becomes the excluded fire, the one
that perhaps was easily suppressed in the twentieth century but
eventually occurs following prolonged drought, burning with
greater severity than ever witnessed by Native Americans.
Restoration of ecosystems to accommodate pre-European
levels of fire has been proposed as one possible solution, espe-
cially for warm, dry, temperate forests. Successful programs have
been initiated in Northern Arizona and southwestern Colorado,
with expansion proposed to New Mexico and the Colorado Front
Range. In the long-term, these programs aim to restore the biodi-
versity and fuel levels that permitted ecosystems to survive his-
torical fires, in order to prevent the wildfire catastrophes that
have run rampant throughout the West in recent years. These pro-
grams involve collaborative partnerships between public agen-
cies, private landowners, academics, and the interested public to
develop creative plans for managing fuels, cutting trees, produc-
ing usable forest products, and reducing bureaucratic gridlock
while satisfying interest groups. Furthermore, coordination
among the numerous public and private entities at local, state,
and national levels can be challenging, especially since partici-
pants may not agree on implementation details or because of dif-
ferences in political agendas.
A different type of problem has developed in forests that are
valued for their historical or archeological treasures. For example,
Mesa Verde National Park and Bandelier National Monument
have instituted fire restoration programs with a special twist be-
cause of the archeological and historical features under protec-
tion. These parks were established to preserve insights to the way
of life of the Anazasi people, who occupied the Four Corners re-
gion of the southwestern United States and then vanished around
the twelfth century A.D. Recent fires in these areas have uncov-
ered additional evidence of ancient settlements. Over time some
of the settlements became overgrown with vegetation and were
largely forgotten until exposed by recent wildfires. Fires in these
parks have resulted in damage to some of the archeological re-
sources, including discoloration of artifacts and spalling of rock
art. At the same time, fires provide insights into Anasazi culture
by removing overgrown vegetation and exposing settlements and
46
Problems, Controversies, Solutions

tools previously undiscovered. Fires burning in areas valued for
their archeological resources pose challenges for firefighters try-
ing to avoid damage to artifacts or former dwellings. These sites
sometimes vividly display the scars that firefighting equipment
such as bulldozers can leave on the landscape. Furthermore,
some scientists question the suitability of fire restoration efforts in
the pinon-juniper forests at Mesa Verde and Bandelier, which typ-
ically burn with high severity. More important, fires that affect
tribal cultures (both past and present) symbolize a type of fire
from which we have much to learn.  American Indian use of fire
to manage their environment can teach us much about sustaining
the forests from which we derive useful products.
With the passage of time fires have become increasingly chal-
lenging, as might be expected with our changing societal values
and demographics. In a post-9/11 age, forest fire managers are in-
volved even in discussions about homeland security issues. That
is not surprising, as forest fires were identified as a security issue
during World War II, followed by the Cold War during the 1950s.
What may seem surprising is the entire range of national priori-
ties that can touch wildland fire managers. Forest fire incident
management teams are now called upon to assist in national
emergencies ranging from terrorist bombings to oil spills to Co-
lumbia shuttle salvage efforts. During a time when government
budgets are shrinking, the public fire manager is truly being
asked to do more with fewer resources.
Partial solutions: Land managers of necessity must form ef-
fective partnerships with public, private, and other interested en-
tities to carry out land stewardship responsibilities. Partnerships
are needed because of the sheer enormity of fire problems as well
as the growing recognition that no single entity is capable of ad-
dressing all of the issues satisfactorily. Effective partnerships have
been formed at the local level to develop community strategies
for contending with fire threats and their aftermaths between
public and private agencies—such as implemented thinning and
prescribed fire practices around Flagstaff, Arizona, and Durango,
Colorado. Internationally, the Nature Conservancy’s Fire Learn-
ing Network provides a useful model for restoring fire to ecosys-
tems. Partnerships seem to work best when all participants are in-
volved in defining the problem and developing a collective vision
for future solutions, when adequate time is allowed for building
trust, and when rewards and incentives are included.
Other Significant Fire Problems
47

Summary: Problems and Issues
The problem fires noted above suggest a litany of issues, chal-
lenges, and partial solutions, many of which are not unique but in
fact cross over between the various types of fire. Thus effective
management of fuels can be seen as part of reducing threats to
communities and homes, as well as improving fire safety. Simi-
larly, fuels management is essential for restoring the biodiversity
of ecosystems where fire has been excluded. Ultimately, pre-
scribed fire will be needed to maintain ecosystems that have been
restored. In summary, the issues involved with problems dis-
cussed above include:
Urban Interface Issues
•
In the urban interface, fires of increasing size and
severity destroy more homes, including houses built
with flammable materials (for example, shake roofs,
wood siding, and deck materials).
•
Housing developments will continue to expand into
natural fire alleys (or fire-plains).
•
Homeowners face increasing responsibility for their
own protection—that is, creation of defensible spaces
with cleared vegetation and water resources.
•
Property insurance premium rates alone do not seem to
provide sufficient incentives for homeowners to
become more active in ensuring their own fire safety.
•
Increasing conflicts may arise between land managers
who wish to use fire as a tool and homeowners who are
fearful of fire.
•
Wildland firefighters are not equipped or trained to put
out structural fires. By the same token, structural
firefighters are not equipped or trained for wildland
fires. 
Fatality Fires Issues
•
Fatalities mount as firefighters are placed in
increasingly hazardous fuel situations;
•
Failure to learn from the past regarding firefighter
death and injury;
48
Problems, Controversies, Solutions

•
Inadequacy of personal protective gear and firefighter
safety training;
•
Firefighters are entitled to work in a safe environment.
Park and Wilderness Fire Management
Issues
•
Park and wilderness management requires a landscape
management approach, unlike anything we’ve tried
before.
•
The advantages of letting natural forest fires burn
sometimes conflict with modern societal values (such
as clean air and the risk of escapes).
•
The feasibility and practicality of fire restoration across
an entire landscape has not been established.
Prescribed Fire and Thinning Issues
•
Prescribed fire escapes and smoke create unacceptable
risks to society, despite potential benefits in terms of
hazard reduction and ecological restoration.
•
Disposal of surface fuels and small-diameter thinnings
is problematic because of lack of milling and
processing capacity, and absence of markets for usable
products.
•
Public trust of land managers is low: Some groups
mistrust government thinning plans as being a guise
for timber harvest.
•
Agencies and environmentalists disagree about
thinning standards. 
Other Issues
•
Although most people know that fires are a problem,
solutions are complex and elusive.
•
Reversing the effects of nearly 100 years of attempted
fire exclusion will require time, money, and human
capital. In the meantime, some forests are choked with
fuels and will continue to burn catastrophically. Other
ecosystems have always burned with high severity and
fuel hazard reduction may not be required.
Summary: Problems and Issues
49

•
Realistic land management policies that include
thinning and periodic burning to restore ecosystems
will require commitments at the local, regional, and
national levels.
•
Allocation of fire management responsibilities among a
myriad of federal, state, and local agencies along with
private entities can be an enormous challenge.
•
The role of fire in managing archeological resources is
poorly defined.
These issues are inevitably complex and controversial, as
they involve human values and complex natural ecosystems. A
central question at the foundation of all the above issues is
whether humans can truly manage free-burning wildfires effec-
tively. Actually, that question is simplistic, since modern-day
fire suppression forces are largely successful in suppressing
most of the fires that occur in the forest. However, because of the
inordinate damage caused by the remainder of a few destructive
wildfires, the answer to this question has profound implications
for agencies with fire suppression responsibilities. Typically
these agencies spend billions of dollars per year attempting to
put out fires. While few would question the need for fire sup-
pression forces, the sheer magnitude and power of large, severe
conflagrations can be overwhelming, seemingly defying any
control efforts until the onset of favorable weather. Some would
suggest that humans don’t put fires out; rather, the argument
continues, most fires are extinguished by weather changes that
allow humans to “claim” the effectiveness of suppression activ-
ities. Actually, in any year, fire suppression forces are successful
in extinguishing 97 to 98 percent of the ignitions that occur in
wild areas, although the 2 or 3 percent that escape control may
cause most of the damage. A related question relates to whether
fires can actually be prevented. Here again, the issue is compli-
cated because we never can know with certainty that a fire has
been prevented from occurring. Furthermore, Smokey Bear pro-
motions for years have proclaimed that only humans can pre-
vent forest fires (which is largely incorrect, especially where
lightning ignitions predominate). What we do know is that
management activities can reduce the spread and intensity of
fires that do break out, for example by thinning out the forest
with mechanical or prescribed fire activities. (See Smokey Bear
program, Chapters 6 and 7.)
50
Problems, Controversies, Solutions

The issue of whether or not to suppress natural ignitions de-
pends entirely on location, available fuels, time, and values at
risk. For example, suppression activities are automatically initi-
ated against fires that occur near homes or that threaten high-
value resources (such as timber, wildlife habitat, water, range,
and so forth). On the other hand, fires that occur in a remote
wilderness area may be allowed to burn if such a decision is con-
sistent with an approved land management plan for the area.
Usually such plans are based on ecological research that demon-
strates the potential benefits to fire-adapted ecosystems in the
area, buttressed by manager analyses that support the low likeli-
hood of threats to high-value areas.
Solutions
The problem fires identified in this chapter share common roots
and to a partial extent, similar solutions. For example, fires would
not kill as many people or destroy nearly the number of homes
they do if fuels were managed appropriately and the public were
educated about the risks of living in fire-prone environments.
Ironically, wildfires would not be nearly so devastating to forest
and water resources if fires were allowed to assume a more natu-
ral role in ecosystems that were restored to some semblance of
their historical or presettlement condition, in which periodic fires
burned with low intensity and prevented excessive fuel buildup
over widespread areas. Alternatively, some ecosystems (such as
southern California chaparral) apparently burn more than ever
and may require less fire, not more. Thus restoring the biodiver-
sity of ecosystems, so that fire could resume a more natural role,
would be a major catalyst for ensuring the sustainability of some,
but not all forests.
Forest restoration alone is no panacea, and it is not needed
everywhere. For example, the exclusion of fire from cold, wet,
higher-elevation forests during the twentieth century has not cre-
ated a problem with fuel accumulation. Those forests may owe
their origin to fire, as the tree species are adapted to infrequent,
high-severity fires that destroy the standing biomass, thus initiat-
ing a new forest. Furthermore, many forest health problems do
not owe their origin to fire or its absence.  Other culprits may be
livestock grazing, overcutting, undercutting, and human popula-
tion growth, just to name a few.
Solutions
51

Fire seasons such as 1994, 2000, 2002, and 2003 in the western
United States point out that the battle against forest fires cannot
be won by continuing to pour money into fire suppression.
What’s more, our forests, people’s homes, and firefighter safety
are among the more obvious casualties of fire exclusion policies.
Although well intended, the war against fire declared in the
twentieth century is not winnable, at least in terms of its initial
objective, of permanently ridding the forest of fire. As it is, some
of our warm and dry temperate forests that previously were able
to withstand periodic, low-severity fires have become clogged
with fuel because of fire exclusion and have become susceptible
to devastating wildfires following a random lightning strike or
errant ignition. Firefighters are unable to put fires out in these
clogged forests without assistance from the weather. Fire prob-
lems are most acute in the lower-elevation, dry forests that are
also desirable living spaces for humans fleeing hectic cities. Fire
protection and fuel hazard reduction are required in the urban in-
terface, but away from populated areas, ecosystems may need
restoration. At the same time, even in the urban interface the con-
tinued suppression of fires will eventually lead to a massive nat-
ural retaliation unless fuels and people are managed.
Ironically, part of the solution to all the problem fires dis-
cussed above is to restore the biodiversity and resilience of ecosys-
tems so that they can once again tolerate fire, as they did before
humans arrived on the scene. Yes, we must ensure that when
forests burn (as they inevitably will), the fire will be of low enough
intensity to cleanse the forest floor without roaring into the tree
crowns and destroying everything in sight, as commonly occurs
now. Such a restoration effort will be a huge and expensive un-
dertaking, requiring massive amounts of patience and tolerance,
and it may not rid the forests of devastating fires forever. But in the
long run there is really no alternative if we want healthy, sustain-
able forests. A shift will be required in how we think about and
manage our forests, as well as the homes that we live in and the
air that we breathe. The public agencies that currently fight fires
will need to learn how better to use fire, instead of trying to extin-
guish it. And those people and public interest groups that want to
leave the woods alone will need to understand that some trees will
need to be manipulated (that is, cut and removed, followed by a
prescribed fire) in order to save and enjoy the forest.
The prevention of large, devastating wildfires will require a
combination of active management approaches—the thinning of
52
Problems, Controversies, Solutions

forests and ecological restoration, fuel reductions and mainte-
nance around homes and communities, and education programs
for homeowners and users of fire-prone areas. In other areas,
passive management activities, such as removal of active grazing
leases, may be appropriate in order to restore ecosystem
processes. Similarly, cooperation among myriad agencies,
groups of people, and tools will be required, some of which are
discussed in Chapters 6 (Agencies and Groups) and 7 (Print and
Nonprint Resources).
Eventually, the zoning of landscapes into discrete units typi-
fied by different fire management and land-use strategies may be
needed. Actually, some municipalities (such as Capetown, South
Africa, and Vancouver, British Columbia) use zoning to restrict
housing developments above certain elevations. Once zones have
been established for an area, different land-use priorities can be
implemented to develop management strategies for specific
zones. In some zones, aggressive initial attack might be employed
to protect houses, although development might be curtailed
there, or at least restricted, because of fire regime considerations,
the flammability of the vegetation, and historical spread patterns.
In other areas, forest restoration activities such as thinning and
prescribed burns might be employed. 
A hypothetical landscape might be laid out as in Figure 2–1.
For illustration purposes only, suppose that an interstate freeway
passes through the eastern side of the fire management area
(FMA), with convenient access to Emerald Lake and the casinos
in Greentown. A two-lane highway bypasses the only other fi-
nancial center, Bluetown, on the western side of the area. Several
tracts of commercial forest are located throughout the area. Un-
paved county roads (not shown) connect the two major roads, ex-
cept through the Lonesome Peak wilderness area (roadless).
A well-conceived fire management plan might divide the
area into seven discrete units for planning purposes, based pri-
marily on fire regime type  (for example: short-interval surface
fires; long-return-interval, high-severity fires; mixed severity
types), fine-tuned with available fire history records, fuel inven-
tory and computerized fire simulation runs, and local insurance
tables to rate the risks, hazards, and values in the seven units. Pri-
orities would be established for increased fire preparedness (for
example, fire prevention, fuels management, pre-positioned dis-
patch) in the developed and high-valued management units
within the FMA. Full suppression with prioritized fuel treatments
Solutions
53

might be planned for the urban interface units (1 and 7) to protect
homes and quality of life. Fuelbreaks might be planned in strate-
gic areas to protect developments in the urban interface areas.
Restoration of forest biodiversity, including thinning and pre-
scribed fire, might be planned for some of the commercial forest
units (2, 3, 5, and 6), especially where fire has been excluded from
areas characterized historically by low-intensity surface fires.
Recreation, hunting, and fishing might be promoted along with
timber harvests in those zones. A monitoring strategy might be
planned for the high-elevation wilderness area (unit 4).
Mere partitioning of the forest into fire restoration, fire use,
and urban interface zones alone will be important but insufficient
for assuring the best fire management practices. The remaining
challenge will be to ensure the appropriate mix between desired
54
Problems, Controversies, Solutions
Figure 2-1
Hypothetical Fire Management Area
A hypothetical fire management area is zoned into seven
management units, including two urban interface units (1 and
7), four commercial units (2, 3, 5, and 6), and one wilderness
area unit (4). Only major roads through and by financial
centers Greentown and Bluetown are shown.
Commercial
Forest
Lonesome Peak
Greentown
Emerald
Lake
Bluetown
Hypothetical Fire Management Area
1
3
2
4
5
6
7
N

fires (prescribed and perhaps natural ignitions) and undesired
fires (which will be aggressively attacked) in different zones of
the landscape. Special care will be required in managing fuels in
boundary areas between units, to make sure that fires can be con-
tained when desired. In management units where few people live
(such as Unit 4), perhaps all fires might be potentially allowed to
burn subject to prescribed guidelines, regardless of ignition
source. Fuel levels in commercial forest zones (Units 2, 3, 5, and
6) would be managed so that prescribed fires could be safely im-
plemented under all but the most extreme weather conditions, in
which case no fires would be intentionally lit or permitted. In the
urban interface zones (Units 1 and 7), homeowners would be ed-
ucated about defensible space and encouraged to participate in
community fuel management partnerships with fire management
agencies. Fires would be suppressed aggressively near develop-
ments, but thinning and prescribed fire would be relied upon to
manage fuels elsewhere in the urban interface zones. Although
simplistic by design, the intent of the zoning exercise would be to
make sure that the mix of prescribed and aggressively fought
fires was appropriate to each locality.
In some parts of the world, all fires are suppressed without
question—so all fires are considered harmful. However, in the
United States we have evolved a mixed or nuanced view toward
fire in the forest, one that calls for coexistence between fire sup-
pression (for undesired fires) and fire use (for desired fires). Thus
fire management options for a particular region or landscape can
range from aggressive fire suppression to protect homes and
high-valued natural resources, to the intentional use of fire (or al-
lowance of natural ignitions) in parks and wilderness areas. Ulti-
mately, in a strategically managed forest, every ignition will be
evaluated with regard to its potential for harm versus benefit, re-
gardless of ignition source. If deemed harmful, the ignition will
be suppressed consistent with traditional practices; if considered
useful, the ignition will be allowed to burn. A new set of princi-
ples and practices will be required. These include: (1)  revised rat-
ing systems for fire danger and stand condition that govern the
use of fire; (2) a national coordination system that mobilizes for
fire use opportunities; (3) improved contingency planning that
capitalizes on windows of opportunity in different geographic re-
gions; and (4) prioritized treatment areas based on current condi-
tion and partnership opportunities (Williams 2004). We are a long
way from having the sophistication and tools necessary to make
Solutions
55

such decisions, so in the meantime, we may need to content our-
selves with making sure that we effectively manage the forest,
fires, and people most of the time.
Ultimately, solutions to the wildfire problems identified in
this chapter will most likely require a collaborative approach in-
volving a mix of land managers, public interest groups, scientists,
and academicians, among others. Although most agree on the
need for science-based solutions, proposed activities also must
meet the test of public acceptance. Thus consensuses will need to
be built among all interested parties regarding: (1) the role of fire
in maintaining and sustaining ecosystems; (2) the desired condi-
tions of future fire-prone landscapes; (3) the mix of fire and other
tools to be used in achieving those desired conditions; and (4)
funding and willingness to pay for treatments. The complexity of
issues and solutions will require government-private partnerships
with healthy doses of accountability between participants. In the
long run, the most successful partnerships will be those that rec-
ognize the importance of adaptive management, or actions under-
taken with the understanding and desire to learn by doing—in-
cluding a willingness to tolerate and to learn from mistakes.
A final note relates to the role that mass media (television,
newspapers, the Internet) can play in public perceptions about fire
in the forests. During the summer, news media are filled with
powerful images of forests aflame, many of which images rein-
force typical negative stereotypes about fire and perpetuate a
Smokey Bear mentality about forest destruction. These images
may send an important message to forest residents and users, but
at the same time, this message may oversimplify the effects and
role of fire in our forests. Media messages in general focus only on
the harm, with relatively little attention paid to possible improve-
ments in ecosystem health and fire safety in well-managed forests.
This bias is not surprising, inasmuch as the public may relate only
to traditional messages about fire when they see spectacular
flames, aerial retardant drops, and devastation to the forest and
homes. In order to present more balance in media messages, new
ways may be needed for thinking, talking, and reporting about
fires. In short, we may need to develop a whole new vocabulary
for communicating about the role of fires in our forests.
Literature Cited
Agee, J. K. 1993. Fire Ecology of Pacific Northwest Forests. Washington, DC:
Island Press, 493 p.
56
Problems, Controversies, Solutions

Arno, S. F., and J. K. Brown. 1991. “Overcoming the Paradox in Manag-
ing Wildland Fire.” Western Wildlands 17(1): 40–46.
Biswell, H. H. 1989. Prescribed Burning in California Wildlands Vegetation
Management. Berkeley: University of California Press, 255 p.
BLM, 1999. Lowden Ranch Prescribed Fire Review. Final Report. USDI,
Bureau of Land Management (also available at www.fire.blm.gov.
/textdocuments/lowdenreview.pdf), 35 p.
Bosworth, D. 2003. “Fire and Forest Health: Our Future Is at Stake.” Fire
Management Today 63(2): 4–11.
Carle, D. 2002. Burning Questions: America’s Fight with Nature’s Fire. West-
port, CT: Praeger, 298 p.
Chapman, H. H. 1912. “Forest fires and forestry in the Southern States.”
American Forests 18:510-517. 
Covington, W. W., and M. M. Moore. 1994. “Southwestern Ponderosa
Pine Forest Structure: Changes since Euro-American Settlement.” Journal
of Forestry 92(1): 39–47.
Dennis, F. C. 1992. “Creating Fire Safe Zones around Your Forested
Homesite.” Colorado State University, Cooperative Extension Service in
Action, sheet no. 6.302.
GAO. 1999. “Western National Forests: A Cohesive Strategy Is Needed to
Address Catastrophic Wildfire Threats.” Washington, DC: US Govern-
ment Accounting Office, Report to Subcommittee on Forests and Forest
Health, Committee on Resources, House of Representatives. 60 p. 
Leopold, A. S., S. A. Cain, C. M. Cottam, I. N. Gabrielson, and T. L. Kim-
ball. 1963. “Study of Wildlife Problems in National Parks: Wildlife Man-
agement in the National Parks.” Pp 28–38 in Transactions, 28th North
American Wildlife and Natural Resources Conference. Washington, DC:
Wildlife Management Institute.
Maclean, J. 1999. Fire on the Mountain. New York: William Morrow and
Company.
Maclean, N. 1992. Young Men and Fire. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Mangan, R. 1999. “Wildland Firefighter Fatalities in the US, 1990–98.”
USDA Forest Service, Missoula Equipment Development Technology
Center. Publication No. 9951–2811 MTDC, Missoula, MT. Available on
MTDC Wildland Fire Safety Collection CD-ROM, Missoula Technology
and Development Center, Missoula, MT.
McKelvey, K. S., C. N. Skinner, C. Chang, D. C. Erman, S. J. Husari, D. J. Par-
sons, J. W. van Wagtendonk, and C. P. Weatherspoon. 1996. “Sierra Nevada
Ecosystem Project.” Chapter 37 Pp. 1033–1040 in Final Report to Congress,
Vol. II: Assessments and Scientific Basis for Management Options. Davis: Uni-
versity of California, Centers for Water and Wildland Resources.
Literature Cited
57

Munson, S., and D. Mangan. 2000. “Wildland Firefighter Entrapments,
1976–1999.” USDA Forest Service, Missoula Equipment Development
Technology Center. Publication No. 0051–2853 MTDC, Missoula, MT.
Available on MTDC Wildland Fire Safety Collection CD-ROM, Missoula
Technology and Development Center, Missoula, MT.
Mutch, R. W. 1970. “Wildland Fires and Ecosystems: A Hypothesis.” Ecol-
ogy 51:1046–1051.
Parsons, J. W. van Wagtendonk, and C. P. Weatherspoon. 1996. “Sierra
Nevada Ecosystem Project.” Chapter 37 Pp. 1033–1040 in Final Report to
Congress, Vol. II: Assessments and Scientific Basis for Management Options.
Davis: University of California, Centers for Water and Wildland Re-
sources.
Pollet, J. and P. N. Omi. 2002. Effect of thinning and prescribed burning
on crown fire severity in ponderosa pine forests. International Journal of
Wildland Fire 11(1):1-10.
———. 1994. “Fighting Fire with Prescribed Fire: A Return to Ecosystem
Health.” Journal of Forestry 92(11): 31–33.
Pyne, S. J. 1982. “Fire in America: A Cultural History of Wildland and Rural
Fire.” Princeton: Princeton University Press, 654 p.
————-. 2001. Year of the Fires: The Story of the Great Fires of 1910. New
York: Viking, 322 p.
Schiff, A. 1962. Fire and Water: Scientific Heresy in the Forest Service. Cam-
bridge: Harvard University Press, 255 p.
Simard, A. J., D. A. Haines, R. W. Blank, and J. S. Frost. 1971. “The Mack
Lake Fire.” USDA Forest Service General Technical Report NC –83, 36 p.
Stoddard, H. L. 1931. The Bobwhite Quail: Its Habits, Preservation and In-
crease. New York: Charles Scribner’s and Sons, 559 p.
Weaver, H. 1943. “Fire as an Ecological and Silvicultural Factor in the
Ponderosa Pine Region of the Pacific Slope.” Journal of Forestry 41: 7–15.
Whelan, R. J. 1995. The Ecology of Fire. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 346 p.
Williams, J. 2003. “Values, Tradeoffs, and Context: A Call for a Public
Lands Policy Debate on the Management of Fire-dependent Ecosys-
tems.” In Proc. of the 3rd International Wildland Fire Conference. October
3–6, 2003. Sydney, Australia, 7 p. (CD-ROM).
————-. 2004. “A Changing Fire Environment: The Task Ahead.” Fire
Management Today 64(4): 7–11. 
Wilson, C. C. 1977. “Fatal and Near-fatal Forest Fires: The Common De-
nominators.” International Fire Chief 43: 9–15.
58
Problems, Controversies, Solutions

3
Chronology
I
n this chapter we examine wildland fires and some of their
documented effects. In the past, both natural and anthro-
pogenic ignition sources contributed to forest fires. An increas-
ing body of knowledge, bolstered in part by oral histories and
anthropological inquiry, substantiates the use of fire by native
peoples on all continents but Antarctica. However, we know
that widespread fires burned on the planet even before anthro-
pogenic ignitions. Charcoal, whether on old-growth trees, in the
soil, or in cored-lake sediments, documents fire going back hun-
dreds, if not thousands, of years. Fossilized charcoal dates fires
back hundreds of millions of years, leading to speculation that
fires may have been associated with the extinction of dinosaurs
(Agee 1993).
We surmise that, more recently, native peoples fired the land-
scape repeatedly for a variety of reasons. The record of native fir-
ings is perhaps best documented in North America, Africa, and
Australia, but evidence has been collected elsewhere as well (for
example, Pyne 1997). In the United States, settlers encountered
these fires and those of natural origin in the expanding frontier.
Documentary records are more complete for more recent fires, so
I will summarize the growing evidence for native firings in the
forest, then trace documented large fires from pre-European
times through the present in the United States.
59

Firing of the Forest by
Native Americans
Martinson and Omi (2003) summarize findings from a meta-
analysis of forty-seven North American fire history studies,
documenting the widespread but clumped fire frequencies dur-
ing the century preceding European settlement in North America.
Each study was analyzed in terms of the average time span (in
years) between successive fires (or mean fire-free periods) in
forested ecosystems represented prior to settlement by Euro-
Americans, using standard fire history techniques such as cross-
dated tree rings, charcoal or pollen sediments, and stand recon-
structions. The mean fire-free period ranged from 8 to 825 years,
with a median of 33 years. No attempt was made in any of the
studies to separate natural from human ignitions, but we are
quite confident that Native American firings were substantial.
Other literature sources (for example, Williams 1994, 2000; Pyne
1982) document the widespread use of fire by natives. The litera-
ture on Indian burning is extensive (see, for example, Barrett
1980; Lewis 1983; Gruell 1985) and growing. Furthermore, our es-
timates are conservative, relying solely on fire events that burned
with sufficient intensity to be datable. Fires in grasslands and
shrub fields are not included, although Native Americans may
have ignited those vegetation types more than others.
Our knowledge that native firings were prevalent stems
from a variety of sources, including textbooks and technical pa-
pers, websites, early newspapers, journals of early explorers, and
oral accounts handed down through generations of American In-
dians. Naturally, the further back we go, the more we must rely
on indirect evidence. Even though the study of anthropogenic fire
has expanded in recent years, our ignorance always will be
greater than our accumulated knowledge, especially relating to
how flames first captivated the human imagination and then
aroused utilitarian instincts (Omi 1990).
What’s more, an abundant literature base documents the
many reasons that Native Americans used fire in all regions of the
United States after migrating from Asia 15,000 to 30,000 years ago
(Phillips 1985). Of course, the incidence of fire in North America
predates the Native American experience (Omi 1990). Lightning
has ignited vegetation for millions of years (Stewart 1956). Thus
60
Chronology

Native Americans discovered, but did not invent, wildland fires
(Pyne 1982).
First Nations (in Canada) and native peoples elsewhere used
fire for a variety of purposes. Documented reasons include the
following (after Williams 1994):
•
Hunting
•
Crop management
•
Improve growth/yield
•
Fireproof areas
•
Insect collection
•
Pest management
•
Warfare
•
Economic extortion
•
Clearing areas for travel
•
Felling trees
•
Clearing riparian areas
Still, the purposeful setting of fires by natives is difficult to
document precisely (Williams 2000). Our knowledge of human
firing practices prior to European settlement is thus based on in-
formed speculation, relying on fire history studies and knowl-
edge of how aborigines used fire in their daily lives. Also, this
knowledge is evolutionary; we now generally believe that Indi-
ans burned far more areas than previously thought (ibid.).
European settlement dramatically changed the native firing
patterns in North America (and by aboriginal peoples in Aus-
tralia and elsewhere). Moreover, the eventual displacement of na-
tives to reservations removed a powerful ignition source from
wildland settings. As settlements were established, surrounding
forests were seen as sources of necessary raw materials for con-
struction and other uses, such as ship building. As forests were
exploited and lands were cleared, massive fires in cutover areas
became more commonplace. The practice of slash and burn—that
is, clearing the forest and burning residuals (slash)—is practiced
in developing cultures worldwide. When the forests are viewed
as inexhaustible, these fires don’t cause much alarm. But as
forests are perceived to dwindle or go up in smoke, the greater
becomes the need for creation of timberland reserves and central-
ized fire protection (and agencies such as the U.S. Forest Service).
Efforts at fire protection soon follow, including overt attempts to
exclude fire from the forest.
Firing of the Forest by Native Americans
61

In the United States, continued settlement of formerly wild
areas resulted in fragmentation of landscapes as roads, railroads,
and waterways were developed. Forest vegetation was soon
transformed, as the number and size of urban areas increased.
Concurrently, higher populations increased the likelihood that
fires would be set, while increasing the probability of earlier de-
tection and subsequent suppression.
U.S. Wildland Fires and Their Impacts
Any listing of historical fires provides at best a crude snapshot of
fire imprints over time. Dendrochronology, or the study and dat-
ing of tree rings, can extend our knowledge of fire in an area to
several centuries before the present by relying on fire scarring of
the cambium beneath a tree’s bark. Techniques for dating fires
rely on the dating of scars that form at the base of trees during a
fire. Initially a triangular scar is formed when the heat from a fire
persists around the tree bole long enough to penetrate the bark
and kill the cambium, thereby creating a datable scar in the tree’s
growth rings (Agee 1993). Tree ring studies have been used to
date fire scars in a variety of ecosystems in the southwestern
United States (Swetnam and Betancourt 1990; et al.). Techniques
have been developed for dating the year of fire occurrence and, to
a lesser degree, for estimating the severity and extent of historic
fires as well, thereby extending considerably the fire history for
an area. By far, the overriding theme emerging from fire scar
studies affirms the drop-off in fire frequency that accompanied
Euro-American settlement of the North American continent, with
the biggest reductions in lower-elevation forests. Similar drop-
offs have been noted in Australia and elsewhere. Evidence for
prehistoric fires has all but disappeared from European land-
scapes, and we can imagine that much of the global history of fire
over the millennia remains undisclosed.
Although the historical record for fires becomes less certain
as we look further back in time, we can be reasonably certain that
the early white settlers in North America, Australia, and else-
where encountered lands of prevalent burning. In particular,
early European settlers in North America saw firsthand the im-
pacts of natural fires, but they also learned to embrace native fir-
ing practices, which could be adapted to serve a range of settle-
ment objectives, from pastoral pursuits of agrarian farmers to
62
Chronology

aggressive land clearing goals of the railroad, shipbuilding, and
timber industries. In some cases, settlers may have simply ex-
panded the firing practices from Europe (such as those invoked
by shepherds from the Mediterranean region, or slash and burn
cultures in Scandinavia); elsewhere, settlers adopted fire as a ma-
nipulative tool after observing the native use of fire.
Relatively little is known about the causes and extent of early
fires, except as chronicled by nineteenth-century newspaper and
travel accounts—or possibly, as can be inferred by the topo-
graphical location of fire scars on the landscape: lightning fires
are most likely in mountainous terrain, particularly near ridges,
just as human starts would be expected closer to human commu-
nities. These and other accounts, largely anecdotal but sometimes
official, lead us to know that some of the earliest fires in the set-
tlement of North America were large and devastating of life and
human property, wiping out entire communities and probably
underestimated in terms of their human casualties. For example,
the Miramichi fire complex of 1825, actually started in New
Brunswick, although its 3 million acres (1.2 million ha) included
burned area in Maine also. The official death toll of 160 is widely
considered an underestimate, omitting consideration of numer-
ous others who attempted to evade the fire by jumping into the
waters of the Miramichi River.
Tables 3-1 to 3-6 provide a historical perspective on fires that
have directly or indirectly influenced public perception about
fires occurring in U.S. wildland areas. Each fire is described gen-
erally by date (calendar year), name, location (state, with the ex-
ception of CA, which is divided into NCAL and SCAL), and sig-
nificant impacts (size, structural damage, and fatalities).
However, the impacts of each historical incident extend well be-
yond statistical description. By the time each fire was declared
controlled, untold numbers of human lives and natural ecosys-
tems may have been transformed, often dramatically if not tragi-
cally. Furthermore, many of the fires listed below led the way to
changes in policy and new directions in fire and forest manage-
ment (see Chapter 4). Thus the histories of forest fires in the
United States, and elsewhere, provide insights into the evolution
of societies in proximity to the incidents. At the same time, this
chronology does not include countless other fires that burned
prior to European settlement of wild areas in North America, that
affected native cultures and ecosystems prior to recorded history,
or that have simply escaped my scrutiny. Also, the significance of
U.S. Wildland Fires and Their Impacts
63

some of the fires represented here actually transcends the time
period in which they occurred.
Frontier Settlement Fires
Fire was an essential tool as settler migrations displaced natives
from their homelands, and as clearing the forest became impor-
tant for  agricultural and urban purposes. Inevitably, fires would
break out as pioneers logged the forest for building materials and
fuel. The Miramichi complex of fires (Table 3-1) followed a se-
quence typical for this time: logging and land-clearing leaving
massive amounts of residual slash; and prolonged drought into
autumn months, followed by intentional ignitions by settlers seiz-
ing opportunities to clear the slash (Pyne 1982). As demand for
lumber outstripped supplies in the Northeast by the middle of
the 19th century, a vast expansion of logging took place in the
Lake States (Williams 1994), facilitated by improvements in rail-
road and water transport (for example, the Erie Canal). The geo-
graphic shift in logging focus was followed by the same pattern
of igniting massive fires. The 1871 Peshtigo fire occurred at the
same time as the more famous conflagration initiated by Mrs.
O’Leary’s cow in Chicago, killing over 1,200 people. Both fires
were fueled by extreme weather conditions that stretched from
the Ohio Valley to the Lake States to the Central Plains during
October (Pyne 1982). High winds coalesced numerous logging
and camping fires in northeast Wisconsin into one of the most
damaging wildfires in U.S. history. The Hinckley fire (1894), like
its predecessor the Peshtigo fire, was part of a 50-year era in
which small logging towns were literally decimated by massive
64
Chronology
Table 3-1
Representative Fires Occurring during the North American Frontier
Settlement Period
Date
Fire Name
Location
Impact*
Fatalities
1825
Miramichi
ME, New Brunswick
3 million acres
160
1871
Peshtigo
WI/MI
1,000+ homes
~1,250
1894
Hinckley
MN
1,000+ homes
418
1902
Yacolt
WA
1 million acres
38
* Impact includes the size of the fire, the number of structures destroyed, and the untold financial loss.
Sources: Pyne 1982; Nobisso 2000.

fires. Nobisso (2000) recounts the heroics of an African American
porter aboard a train trapped in the inferno one day during the
Hinckley fire.
The Industrial Revolution led to a general feeling that human
ingenuity, applied science, engineering, and mechanization could
be used to overcome many societal problems, including forest
fires. Further, by this time natives had been relocated to reserva-
tion lands, thus removing a potent ignition source for forest fires.
The US Forest Service Organic Act was passed in 1897 to improve
and protect forestlands, or to secure favorable conditions of water
flows, and to furnish a continuous supply of timber from existing
public reserves. These reserves originally were created starting in
1891 under the Department of Interior, with the hope of protect-
ing watersheds and timberlands primarily from destruction by
fire but also to promote other uses. In 1905 these reserves were
transferred to the Department of Agriculture with its Bureau of
Forestry, then renamed Forest Service. In 1907, the forest reserves
were renamed as national forests (Steen 1992). Meanwhile, the
ongoing fire seasons, particularly 1903 and 1908, burned large
areas and thus posed continuing challenges for the infant forest
service. Although timber management techniques had precedents
in European forestry, there were few precedents for public agen-
cies to manage fires over a large land area. Eventually, the Forest
Service and public agencies would respond to this challenge by
institutionalizing fire exclusion across the nation, but first it
would need to confront those who favored a more natural and
historic role for fire.
Early Years of Forest and Fire
Management
Woods burning has a long tradition in the southern United States,
where forests were customarily fired as part of local folk prac-
tices. Burning was thought to rid the forest of snakes, ticks, and
boll weevils, while stimulating the green-up of grasses desired by
grazers. It also provided a low-cost alternative for controlling the
invasion of hardwoods and shrubs in timber stands. Whether su-
perstition or observed fact, generations of Southerners are said to
have burned the forest out of ritualistic tradition (Pyne 1982). So
it is not surprising that early advocates for using fire in the forest
Early Years of Forest and Fire Management
65

hailed from the South, expounding the virtues of “light burning”
as an alternative to the government’s fire exclusionary approach
to forest management. What’s more, evidence began accumulat-
ing about certain plant species—such as longleaf pine (Pinus
palustris)—and also animal species with adaptations for and even
dependence on fire, thus adding ecological justification for light
burning. However, the forces in favor of systematic fire control
proved much more persuasive, aided by the specter of fires yet to
burn in the backcountry.
In fact, the so-called light-burning controversy also had roots
in California, where advocates (settlers and timber-owners) as
early as 1880 saw the potential for periodic surface burning to re-
duce fuel hazards (ibid.). By contrast, government foresters saw
light burning as a political threat to their agenda of reducing con-
flagrations through systematic fire control. Timber companies in
northern California were also proponents of light surface burn-
ing, reasoning that fuel loads would otherwise build up in the
forest and eventually lead to uncontrollable conflagrations.
During the period 1910–1929, the debate between light burn-
ing and systematic fire protection came to a head on several
fronts, both scientific and cultural, even as major fires were burn-
ing up homes in the north-central and western United States
(Table 3-2). Frederick Clements (1916) developed his “monocli-
max” theory of plant succession, indicating that climate (and not
disturbances such as fire) determined the developmental trajec-
tory and endpoint of vegetation on a particular site over time
(Agee 1993). By not including fire in his model of plant develop-
ment, Clements indirectly contributed to support for the idea of
European foresters (on which U.S. forestry was initially based)
66
Chronology
Table 3-2
Representative Fires Occurring during the Early Years of Forest and Fire
Management in the United States, 1910–1930
Date
Fire Name
Location
Impact*
Fatalities
1910
Great Idaho/Montana fires
ID/MT
3 million acres
85
1918
Cloquet
MN
~4,000 homes
551
1923
Berkeley
NCAL
584 homes
0
1929
Mill Valley
NCAL
117 homes
0
* Impact includes the size of the fire, the number of structures destroyed, and the untold financial loss.
Sources: Pyne 1982; Foote 1984.

that fire was somehow inimical to development of the climax for-
est, and therefore could be excluded.
Institutionalization of Fire Exclusion
In the United States, the policy of fire exclusion reached fruition
in 1935 in the formulation of the 10 A.M. policy by the U.S. Forest
Service, which justified the use of suppression forces as needed to
extinguish all fires by 10 o’clock the following morning. The
Matilija and Tillamook fires (Table 3-3) only added to the growing
list of major fires providing rationale for instituting such a na-
tional policy. The fires that prompted this “experiment on a con-
tinental scale” (Pyne 1997, p. 195) included the numerous escapes
from slash and burn activities, but the policy extended to all wild-
lands under the protection jurisdiction of the U.S. Forest Service.
As a result of the policy, any fire that broke out essentially could
be fought with the same moral imperative as a war with a foreign
enemy.
The stock market crash of 1929 and vast pools of labor made
available during the Great Depression provided additional ra-
tionale for putting people to work while embarking on a grand
experiment to exclude fire from the forest. The massive construc-
tion efforts of the Civilian Conservation Corps included numer-
ous fire control facilities across the country, including fire lookout
towers, ranger stations, and firebreaks and fuelbreak systems.
Institutionalization of Fire Exclusion
67
Table 3-3
Representative Fires Occurring during the Time Period when Fire
Exclusion was Institutionalized in the United States, 1931–1950
Date
Fire Name
Location
Impact*
Fatalities
1932
Matilija  
SCAL
220,000 acres
0
1933
Tillamook  
OR
311,000 acres
0
1936
Bandon 
OR
386 buildings
13
1937
Blackwater 
WY
1,100 acres
15
1941
Marshfield  
MA
450 homes
0
1943
Southern California (incidents) 
SCAL
200 homes
11
1947
Maine Forest Fire Disaster (incidents) ME
1,200 buildings
16
1949
Mann Gulch 
MT
5,000 acres
13
* Impact includes the size of the fire, the number of structures destroyed, and the untold financial loss.
Sources: Pyne 1982; Foote 1984; Wilson 1977.

The institutionalization of fire exclusionary practices in the
United States did not occur without its detractors. In fact, the large,
damaging wildfires of the early twentieth century had earlier
spawned a spirited debate over the wisdom of attempting to keep
fires from the forest (Carle 2002). The light-burning controversy,
though officially discredited earlier, would continue to rear its head
as major fire events could be interpreted as justification for both
systematic fire protection and the need for fuel treatments such as
prescribed fire (the modern-day equivalent to light burning).
Forest and Fire Policy Reflections
As the United States recovered from World War II and transi-
tioned into its Cold War with the USSR, fire management became
increasingly mechanized, relying on machinery and equipment to
supplement labor-intensive fire operations for building firelines.
Federal transfers of excess property provided states with access to
vast stores of military surplus planes and trucks that could be
converted to firefighting purposes. Across the United States con-
cerns were expressed about real and perceived environmental
degradation, resulting in landmark legislation aimed at protect-
ing forests, creating wilderness, and maintaining roadless areas—
all aimed at sustaining a variety of natural resource values. Mean-
while, the federal agencies with fire management responsibilities
became increasingly concerned with environmental impacts asso-
ciated with forest management decisions and operations (for ad-
ditional details, see Chapter 4).
Increasing urbanization pushed city residents to seek solace
and individual pieces of the American dream in forested and other
formerly wild areas. Fires in the so-called urban-wildland (or exur-
ban) interface became increasingly commonplace, with attendant
damage to homes and commercial enterprises. The Bel-Air fire
(Table 3-4) in particular provided a harbinger of fires yet to come,
initiated in relatively remote wildland areas, then sweeping down
into communities and gobbling up homes by the hundreds. South-
ern California developed a well-deserved reputation for typifying
all that can go wrong when homes are built in the path of fires
pushed by Santa Ana and coastal winds (from the east and west,
respectively), while pulled by steep slopes covered with explosive
vegetation. In such environments firefighters would sometimes
lose the battle, as with eleven fatalities in the Loop fire in 1966.
68
Chronology

Environmentalism Takes Off
Earth Day 1970 ushered in an era of heightened environmental
awareness, including passage of landmark legislation such as
Clean Air, Clean Water, and Wilderness acts. In recognition of
possible shortcomings of the 10 A.M. policy, the National Park Ser-
vice experimented with its so-called Let Burn policy, whereby
lightning ignitions in high-elevation remote areas would be al-
lowed to burn until extinguished by natural causes—for example,
winter rainstorms. Such ignitions would later be renamed as
“prescribed natural fires” as a public relations strategy, but the
Let Burn name still stuck and persists to this date. All public
agencies started thinking about the increased use of prescribed
fires to achieve land management objectives, although imple-
mentation lagged. In the southern United States, the U.S. Forest
Service developed its designated controlled burn program (DE-
SCON) whereby even human ignitions might be allowed to burn
in certain areas if the benefits exceeded the cost of suppression.
This time period also saw several failures in implementing
prescribed fire or fire use policies. The 1980 Mack Lake fire (Table
3-5) was intentionally ignited as a prescribed burn in order to re-
move logging debris and ultimately create habitat for the endan-
gered Kirtland’s warbler (Dendroica kirtlandii), which nests in Jack
pine stands (Simard et al. 1983). Analogously, the 1978 Ouzel fire
in Rocky Mountain National Park and some of the 1988 Yellow-
Environmentalism Takes Off
69
Table 3-4
Representative Fires Occurring during the Time Period of Forest and Fire
Policy Reflection, 1951–1970
Date
Fire Name
Location
Impact*
Fatalities
1953
Rattlesnake
NCAL
15
1956
Inaja
SCAL
11
1961
Bel-Air
SCAL
505 homes
0
1961
Harlow
NCAL
106 homes
2
1963
Staten Island
NY
100 homes
0
1964
Coyote
SCAL
106 homes
2
1964
Hanley, Nuns Canyon Fires
NCAL
295 homes
0
1966
Loop 
SCAL
11
1967
Sundance
ID
50,000 acres
2
*Impact includes the size of the fire, the number of structures destroyed, and the untold financial loss.
Sources: Pyne 1982; Foote 1984; Wilson 1977; http://www.fire.ca.gov/FireEmergencyResponse
/HistoricalStatistics/HistoricalStatistics.asp.

stone fires (Table 3-6) were allowed to burn but eventually be-
came uncontrollable. Both those fires caused cessation of the Na-
tional Park Service prescribed fire policies in place at the time. At
various times public agencies have experimented with the idea of
restoring fire in certain remote locations, allowing certain igni-
tions to burn if they meet predetermined environmental condi-
tions (such as wind speed, fuel moisture, and drought indicators).
The 1988 Yellowstone fires (Chapters 1 and 2) included several
such ignitions, which started in adjacent national forests and
were allowed to burn into the boundaries of the national park.
These so-called prescribed natural fires, more recently called
wildland fires for resource benefit, can be inherently risky, espe-
cially if they are permitted to burn and subsequently escape their
maximum allowable burn area. The 1996 Oregon incidents illus-
trated some of these difficulties when five separate fires escaped
control on national forest lands.
Although it is difficult to pinpoint the time with certainty,
sometime around 1970 the arid western United States apparently
entered the end phase of a prolonged wet climatic period charac-
terized by unprecedented growth and density of forests during a
period of deferred management caused in part by environmen-
talist appeals to agency management plans (Bosworth 2003). As
70
Chronology
Table 3-5
Representative Fires and Their Effects during the Time Period of
Increasing Environmentalism, 1971–1990
Date
Fire Name
Location
Impact*
Fatalities
1970
Wright
SCAL
103 homes
0
1970
Laguna
SCAL
175,000 acres
382 homes
5 
1970
Wenatchee
WA
200,000 acres
1
1976
Battlement Creek
CO
4
1977
Kanan
SCAL
224 homes
1
1977
Sycamore
SCAL
234 homes
0
1980
Mack Lake †  
MI
24,000 acres
44 homes
1
1980
Panorama
SCAL
325 homes
4
1985
49er
NCAL
148 homes
0
1988
Yellowstone † 
WY/MT
2.4 million acres
1
*Impact includes the size of the fire, the number of structures destroyed, and the untold financial loss.
† Prescribed burn.
Sources: Pyne 1982; Foote 1984; Simard et al. 1983; Wilson 1977; http://www.fire.ca.gov
/FireEmergencyResponse/HistoricalStatistics/HistoricalStatistics.asp.

the Western region transitioned to a relatively dry period prior to
the turn of the twenty-first century, forests became ripe for the
large, catastrophic fires of the past few years.
Increasing Safety Concerns 
Wildfires became a greater national priority with the onset of the
twenty-first century, even as firefighting became a colossal multi-
national industry. Suppressing fires now meant the mobilization
of massive amounts of suppression resources to the site of a fire,
including sophisticated remote sensing and telecommunications
gear to assist crews and heavy equipment on the ground. Costs
and losses continue to mount, and it seems almost preordained
that fires should have gotten larger, killed more firefighters, and
destroyed more homes in response to the management mistakes
of past and present. In fact, fire management efforts have been
overwhelmed by unprecedented levels of available fuel, with a
big assist from episodes of prolonged drought in the southern
and western United States, following on the heels of two decades
of unprecedented moisture.
The four fatalities suffered in the 2001 Thirtymile fire (Table
3-6) were significant in that they occurred despite the substantial
revisions in fire policy (emphasizing firefighter safety) brought
about by the tragic 1994 South Canyon fire (Chapters 1 and 2).
The Cerro Grande and Valley Complex (2000) were among the
numerous incidents that led to the creation of the National Fire
Plan. This plan called for the expenditure of $1.6 billion allocated
to the following areas:
•
Firefighting capability: Ensuring adequate
preparedness for future fire seasons. Agencies funded
at 100 percent of their most efficient level (see Chapter
5), including 8,000 new hires
•
Rehabilitation of burned areas and landscape
restoration
•
Investment in projects to reduce fire risk (through fuel
hazard reduction)
•
Community assistance: Work directly with
communities to ensure adequate protection in the
urban interface
•
Accountability, plus adequate oversight and monitoring 
Increasing Safety Concerns
71

Several states suffered through record fire seasons during
this time period. Florida endured a record fire season in 1998,
with over 2,200 wildfires burning nearly half a million acres. At
one time all residents of an entire county were evacuated.
The Rodeo-Chediski fire of 2002 burned nearly 500,000 acres
(202,429 ha) in less than a month, the largest wildland fire in Ari-
zona’s history. Many factors contributed to this fire, most promi-
nently an extremely dry summer within a five-year-long drought in
72
Chronology
Table 3-6
Representative Fires Occurring during the Time Period of Increasing
Concern for Firefighter and Public Safety, 1991–present
Date
Fire Name
Location
Impact*
Fatalities
1990
Paint
SCAL
479 homes
1
1990
Bedford
SCAL
120+ homes
0
1990
Dude Creek
AZ
28,00 acres
6
Numerous homes
1991
Tunnel
NCAL
2,103 homes
25
1992
Fountain
NCAL
307 homes
0
1993
Old Topanga
SCAL
350 homes
3
1993
Laguna Beach
SCAL
366 homes
0
1993
Altadena
SCAL
118 homes
0
1994
South Canyon
CO
1,200 acres
14
1996
Oregon (incidents)
OR
5 escaped 
0
prescribed natural
fires
2000
Cerro Grande†
NM
47,000 acres
235 houses, 
0
(400+ residences)
2000
Valley Complex
MT 
100,000 acres 
100+ structures
2001
Thirtymile
WA
4
2002
Hayman 
CO
137,000 acres 
5
131 homes
466 outbuildings
1 commercial building
2002
Rodeo-Chediski
AZ
460,000 acres
423 homes
2002
Biscuit
OR
499,570 acres
$134 million
2003
Southern California
SCAL
750,000 acres 
22
3,500 homes,
$2B
* Impact indicates the size of the fire, the number of structures destroyed, and the estimated financial loss.
† Prescribed burn.
Note: The five fatalities in the Hayman fire occurred in a vehicle accident while driving home from the incident. 
Sources: www.nifc.gov; http://www.fire.ca.gov/FireEmergencyResponse/HistoricalStatistics/HistoricalStatistics.asp.

the Southwest that continues to date. Human carelessness and greed
also contributed, as the fire was intentionally set by a government
employee apparently lured by the prospect of the higher wages to
be garnered by participation in suppression activities. Other con-
tributors include a buildup of fuel loads in the forest and contentious
political issues such as thinning, logging, and road-building.
The 2002 Biscuit fire in the Siskiyou National Forest was the
largest in Oregon history, burning more than 499,000 acres
(202,024 ha), including limited spread into northern California.
The Oregon fire season was the worst in more than 140 years,
with costs of over $150 million for the Biscuit fire alone. Although
fire is a natural part of the Pacific Northwest environment, there
is broad interest in making it less destructive and less harmful to
people, their property, and forested landscapes.
The 2002 Hayman fire was the largest in Colorado history,
spreading over four counties (Park, Jefferson, Douglas, and Teller
counties). Following a prolonged drought, the fire was set by a
government employee apparently attempting to dispose of a let-
ter from an estranged spouse—despite a fire ban because of the
dry conditions. The fire burned 137,760 acres (55,773 ha) during
June and July, destroying or damaging 600 structures (including
133 residences, 1 commercial building, and 466 outbuildings),
with a total suppression cost of more than $39 million.
In 2003, the Cedar fire became the largest fire in California
history, burning east of San Diego as part of a complex of fires in
the southern part of the state during October. A lost hunter in the
Cleveland National Forest apparently set the fire, after he fired a
flare in an attempt to alert potential rescuers to his location. Air
tankers in the vicinity were not dispatched, because of the loom-
ing darkness and concerns for pilot safety amid the high Santa
Ana winds. That fire alone contributed to one firefighter and thir-
teen citizen deaths, more than 2,000 residences destroyed or dam-
aged, and over 280,000 acres (113,360 ha) burned.
As of this writing, the 2003 southern California fires may be
relatively fresh in the minds of most readers. But the record sum-
marized in Tables 3–1 through 3–6 shows that southern Califor-
nia has experienced numerous historical fires involving massive
destruction of lives, homes, and property. Fortunately, no recent
fires rival the extent or fatalities of fires of the frontier settlement
period (Table 3–1). However, today’s wildland fires are much
more damaging, given the concentration of high-valued re-
sources such as trophy homes in the urban interface. No single
Increasing Safety Concerns
73

wildland fire in modern times has been as destructive as the
Tunnel fire in northern California (see Chapters 1 and 2) and the
2003 southern California conflagrations. Fortunately for the
homeowners in those areas, most losses were insured or at least
insurable, even though coverage often falls short of actual
replacement cost. Compared with other California natural disas-
ters, no single wildland fire complex or event exceeds the unin-
sured losses of the 1906 San Francisco earthquake and subse-
quent fires.
Although the years 2000 and 2002 produced some of the
worst cumulative fire seasons in more than fifty years (in terms of
total acres burned), individual fire events such as the 2003 south-
ern California fires have punctuated the nation’s fire history. In
the short term there really is no plausible reason to expect that
such incidents will decrease in their frequency or severity.
In the long term, however, there is reason for guarded opti-
mism that measures such as the 2003 Healthy Forests Restoration
Act (see Chapter 4) will provide relief from the litany of recent
catastrophic fires, devastated communities, and damage to
forests and watersheds. Also, funded research and collaborative
endeavors under the National Fire Plan and Joint Fire Science
Program (Chapter 6) should improve our understanding of fire
and fuel dynamics as well as provide opportunities for creative
partnerships between all affected parties. Ultimately, though, all
of these programs will have been for naught unless the U.S. pub-
lic faces up to the realities of living in fire-prone environments.
We have to realize that if we value our forests, we also must value
the role that fire plays in sustaining their vitality.
Literature Cited
Agee, J. K. 1993. Fire Ecology of Pacific Northwest Forest. Washington, DC:
Island Press, 493 p.
Barrett, Stephen W. 1980. “Indians and Fire.” Western Wildlands 6(3):
17–21.
Bosworth, D. 2003. “Fires and Forest Health: our future is at stake.” Fire
Management Today 62(2):4–11.
Carle, D. 2002. Burning Questions: America’s Fight with Nature’s Fire. West-
port CT: Praeger Publishers, 298 p.
Clements, F. E. 1916. “Plant Succession: An Analysis of the Development
of Vegetation.” Washington, DC: Carnegie Institute Publication 242.
74
Chronology

Foote, E. I. D., 1984. “Structure Survival on the 1990 Santa Barbara ‘Paint’
Fire: A Retrospective Study of Urban-wildland Interface Fire Hazard Mit-
igation Factors.” M.S. thesis, University of California, Berkeley.
Gruell, G. E. 1985. “Indian Fires in the Interior West: A Widespread Influ-
ence.” Pp. 68–74 in Proceedings—Symposium and Workshop on Wilderness
Fire: Missoula, Montana, James E. Lotan et al., technical coordinators, No-
vember 15–18, 1983. General Technical Report INT-182. Ogden, UT: USDA
Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station.
Lewis, H. T. 1983. “Why Indians Burned: Specific versus General Rea-
sons.” Pp. 75–80 in Proceedings—Symposium and Workshop on Wilderness
Fire: Missoula, Montana, James E. Lotan et al., technical coordinators, No-
vember 15–18, 1983. General Technical Report INT-182. Ogden, UT: USDA
Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station.
Martinson, E. J., and P. N. Omi. 2003. “Pre-settlement Fire Regimes of
North America: A Geographic Model based on Quantitative Research
Synthesis.” Pp. 137–144 in Proceedings Fire Conference 2000: The First Na-
tional Congress on Fire Ecology, Prevention, and Management, Nov. 27–Dec.
1, 2000. San Diego, CA.
Nobisso, Josephine. 2000. John Blair and the Great Hinckley Fire. Boston:
Houghton-Mifflin Co.
Omi, P. N. 1990. “History of Wildland Burning in America from an Air
Quality Perspective.” Air and Waste Management Association, 83rd An-
nual Meeting, Pittsburgh, PA, June 24–29, 1990; reprint, 90–172.5, 7 p.
Phillips, C. B. 1985. “The Relevance of Past Indian Fires to Current Man-
agement Programs.” Pp. 87–92 in Proceedings Symposium and Workshop on
Wilderness Fires, General Technical Report INT-182, USDA Forest Service,
Ogden.
Pyne. S. J. 1982. Fire in America: A Cultural History of Wildland and Rural
Fire. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 654 p.
———. 1997. World Fire: The Culture of Fire on Earth. Seattle: University of
Washington Press, 384 p.
Simard, A. J., D. A. Haines, R. W. Blank, and J. S. Frost. 1983. “The Mack
Lake.” USDA Forest Service General Technical Report NC-83, 36 p.
Steen, H. K. 1992. “The Origins and Significance of the National Forest
System.” Pp. 3–9 in The Origins of the National Forests, edited by H. K.
Steen. Durham, NC: Forest History Society, 339 p.
Stewart, O.C. 1956. “Fire as the First Great Force Employed by Man.” In
Man’s Role in Changing the Face of the Earth, W. L. Thomas, Jr. (ed.).
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Pp. 115–133.
Swetnam, T. W., and J. L. Betancourt. 1990. “Fire-Southern Oscillation Re-
lations in the Southwestern United States.” Science 249:1017–1020.
Literature Cited
75

Williams, G. W. 1994. “References on the American Indian Use of Fire in
Ecosystems.” 1994. http://wings.buffalo.edu/anthropology/Documents/
firebib.txt.
———. 2000. “Introduction to Aboriginal Fire Use in North America.”
USDA Forest Service. Fire Management Today 60(3): 8–12.
Wilson, C. C. 1977. “Fatal and Near-fatal Forest Fires: The Common De-
nominators.” International Fire Chief 43(9): 9–15.
76
Chronology

4
People and Events
I
n this chapter we examine noteworthy contributors to the study
and understanding of forest and rangeland fires, including sci-
entists, managers, and academicians. Biographical sketches and
prominent events are presented, though, as in any subjective list,
prominent omissions may occur. Still, the individuals noted here
are considered by many to have made substantial contributions
to our knowledge about wildland fires or else stand out because
of their influence on the ways in which we manage forest fires
today. We also explore events and legislation that have informed
U.S. fire management practices.
Significant Individual Contributors
Dr. James K. Agee (b. 1945)
Fire ecologist.
Virginia and Prentice Bloedel Professor of Forest
Ecology, Jim Agee teaches fire ecology courses in the College of
Forest Resources, University of Washington, Seattle. He was for-
merly employed by the National Park Service after completing
his Ph.D. at the University of California, Berkeley. His book Fire
Ecology of Pacific Northwest Forests, published in 1993 (Island
Press), is widely cited in the fire ecology literature. He also
coedited Ecosystem Management for Parks and Wilderness (Univer-
sity of Washington Press).
77

Frank A. Albini (b. 1936)
Fire modeler.
Frank Albini is professor of mechanical engi-
neering at Montana State University, Bozeman, Montana. He for-
merly worked at the USDA Forest Service Fire Laboratory in
Missoula. He developed the first mainframe version of the
Rothermel fire spread model during the 1970s (FIREMOD),
which at the time represented a quantum leap in fire behavior
prediction and the appraisal of fuelbed flammability. He has pro-
vided intellectual leadership and developed models that have
greatly increased understanding of fire phenomena outside of
the fire’s flaming front, such as postflaming fuel consumption
and maximum spot-fire distances.
Martin E. Alexander (b. 1952)
Coordinator, International Crown Fire Experiment.
Martin
Alexander, Ph.D., RPF, is senior fire behavior research officer
with the Canadian Forest Service, based at the Northern
Forestry Center in Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. He also serves
as adjunct professor with the Department of Renewable Re-
sources, University of Alberta. Marty has been the driving force
behind the International Crown Fire Experiment, an interdisci-
plinary effort aimed at developing improved understanding of
crown fire mechanisms and impacts, based on a series of inten-
tionally set, experimental crown fires in the boreal forests of the
Northwest Territories of Canada. These experiments have pro-
vided valuable insights to a diverse variety of research concerns,
including fire propagation, fire danger rating, monitoring of se-
vere fires, durability of protective equipment, and structure ig-
nition mechanisms.
Patricia L. Andrews (b. 1948)
BEHAVE fire prediction system.
Patricia Andrews is a research
physical scientist with the USDA Forest Service Fire Sciences Lab-
oratory in Missoula, Montana. Hired initially as a mathematician,
she has been instrumental in developing and transferring fire be-
havior tools developed in the research laboratory to land man-
agers and fire practitioners, for use in predicting fire behavior,
planning prescribed fires, and writing fire management plans.
The BEHAVE fire prediction model and its successor, BehavePlus,
78
People and Events

have been adapted for use in a variety of personal computer and
hand-held applications.
Jack S. Barrows (1911–1989)
Fire researcher and education visionary.
Jack was instrumen-
tal in establishing the Northern Forest Fire Laboratory in Mis-
soula, Montana (now known as the Intermountain Fire Sciences
Laboratory of the USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Re-
search Station), one of the premier fire research facilities in the
world. After graduation from Colorado State University in 1937,
Jack worked as a ranger in Rocky Mountain National Park. He
later studied fire behavior in the northern Rockies and hypothe-
sized that aspen (Populus tremuloides) stands could function as
wildfire fuelbreaks. After his retirement, he helped establish the
Forest Fire Science program at Colorado State University, one of
the largest in the world. This program includes an undergradu-
ate concentration, the M.S. and Ph.D. in forest fire science, plus
extensive extramural research projects spanning numerous aca-
demic disciplines.
Professor Harold H. Biswell (aka Harry the
Torch) (1905–1992)
Teacher and authority on prescribed fire in California.
Known
affectionately as Doc to his students, Harold Biswell was the in-
spiration for the use of prescribed fire in California forests from
about the late 1950s. Originally from the southern United States,
he was active in the early meetings of the Tall Timbers Research
Center in Tallahassee, Florida, from 1962. While at the University
of California, Berkeley, Doc continuously knocked heads with
other faculty members and with the U.S. Forest Service over mis-
guided fire suppression policies on public lands. Ever the diplo-
mat and teacher, Doc officially retired from UC Berkeley in 1973,
but he continued to teach classes on fire ecology at UC Davis (for
two years), through university extension, and held field courses
in Yosemite National Park, Mt. Diablo State Park, Calaveras State
Park, and in San Diego county. His book Prescribed Burning in Cal-
ifornia Wildland Vegetation Management, published in 1989 (Uni-
versity of California Press), combined his homespun passion for
fire with his personal spin on the science of fire. His legacy in-
cludes numerous students active in fire programs at academic
Significant Individual Contributors
79

institutions throughout the United States, as well as the reformed
philosophy with which lands are managed in the West.
James K. Brown (b. 1942)
Fuel inventory, fire effects research.
Jim Brown, Ph.D., pio-
neered techniques for quantifying fuel attributes in the field. He
developed a planar intersect method for estimating fuel loadings
for dead, down woody fuels by size classes, later expanded to in-
clude grasses and herbs, litter, shrubs, small trees, and fuelbed
depth. These protocols are still widely followed by those seeking
site-specific biomass indicators for the amount of fuel per unit
area. His studies of tree crowns by fuel species provided an es-
sential link to predicting debris and fire hazard from cutting op-
erations. As a project leader at the Intermountain Fire Sciences
Laboratory, he also performed research related to fire effects, with
particular emphasis on lodgepole pine, aspen, and other plant
species in the northern Rocky Mountains. He remains active even
in retirement, as lead author on several key publications summa-
rizing knowledge of fire effects on flora and on the role of coarse
woody debris (CWD) in ecosystems.
George M. Byram (1909–1996)
Fire behavior researcher.
George Byram made contributions in
nearly every area of forest fire research. He also was a gifted
painter. Perhaps he is best known for the fireline intensity and
drought descriptors that still bear his name, although his biggest
contributions may have been his passion for precise definitions
and quantitative measures of fire behavior. He was one of the first
to study fire whirlwinds, and to recognize the scaling issues with
modeling of large fire behavior. His chapters 3 and 4 in the 1959
book Forest Fire: Control and Use, by Kenneth P. Davis, are still
classics for understanding the combustion of forest fuels and fire
behavior.
Craig C. Chandler (b. 1926)
Author, international textbook on fire ecology and manage-
ment.
Craig Chandler retired from the U.S. Forest Service as di-
rector of fire and atmospheric research after a distinguished ca-
reer in fire science. His two-volume textbook, coauthored with
80
People and Events

world-renowned experts in 1982, set a standard for fire textbooks
by incorporating information on fire behavior, effects, and man-
agement from an international perspective. Earlier in his career
he provided insights into subjects as diverse as fire prevention
and fire behavior.
A. Malcolm Gill (b. 1940)
Fire researcher, Australia.
Recently retired as senior principal
research scientist at the Centre for Plant Biodiversity Research,
CSIRO Plant Industry, in Canberra, Australia, Malcolm has writ-
ten extensively on fire ecology, fire behavior, and fire manage-
ment in a range of Australian ecosystems. He coedited Flammable
Australia, published in 2001 (Cambridge University Press); he also
was lead editor for the classic Fire in the Australian Biota. Through-
out his career, he has focused on a wide range of fire topics, in-
cluding adaptive characteristics of Australian plants to fires, such
as postfire flowering, woody-fruit opening, and fire resistance in
trees. He also drew together the numerous kernels of knowledge
necessary for understanding the ecological effects of fires, using
the fire regime concept and the adaptations of species to those
regimes. His main research interests lately have centered on
probability models of fire intervals (within the context of fire
regimes).
Harry Thomas Gisborne (1893–1949)
Fire researcher.
Gisborne is the father of fire danger rating in
the United States, a subject with a long and distinguished history.
His 1928 paper “Measuring Forest-fire Danger in Northern
Idaho” is one of the first writings on that complex subject, in
which he attempts to integrate the effects of weather and climate
on fire potential, based on his assignment at the USDA Forest
Service Priest River Experiment Station. He pioneered early at-
tempts in fire prevention and measurement of the effects of
weather on fire potential through a variety of devices (some
might call them contraptions), including the Asman aspiration
psychrometer, visibility meter, anemohygrograph, double tripod
heliograph, or blinkometer. He died in 1949 while personally in-
vestigating the site of the Mann Gulch fire fatalities in Montana
(source: http://www.lib.duke.edu/forest/usfscoll/people /Gis-
borne/Gisborne.html).
Significant Individual Contributors
81

Paul Gleason (1946–2003)
Hot-shot superintendent, fire ecologist.
Fire attracts many dif-
ferent practitioners. Some are drawn to the excitement of facing
off against a potent natural force; others are attracted by the op-
portunity of melding the art and science of managing fires as part
of forest stewardship. Still others see in fire the beauty of mathe-
matical truths, unfolded before their eyes as a fire makes a run up
a hillside. Then again, others are drawn by the fascination with
the dynamics of organized human resources united in a common
enterprise—such as with fire suppression crews. Paul Gleason
represented all of those different facets and much more, as a hot-
shot foreman, fire ecologist, mentor, and college instructor. Paul
brought the same zeal and emotion to the study of fire behavior
and ecology that characterized his penchant for rock climbing or
understanding mathematical theorems. His passion for firefighter
safety led him to develop the LCES (lookouts, communication, es-
cape routes, and safety zones) approach to fireline construction.
He was an inspiration to all whose lives he touched, both in the
field and in the classroom.
Johann Goldhammer (b. 1949)
Global fire leader.
Professor Dr. Johann G. Goldhammer is
head of the Fire Ecology and Biomass Burning Research Group
and the Global Fire Monitoring Center (GFMC) at the Max Planck
Institute for Chemistry, Biogeochemistry Department, located at
Freiburg University, Germany. The GFMC participates with the
UN International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UN-ISDR) and
a number of international programs and provides services in
global wildland fire monitoring, early warning, and strategic pol-
icy development, as well as in development of community-based
fire management systems. Johann has been active in numerous
international collaborations in fire management and fire science.
Edwin Vaclay Komarek, Sr. (1909–1995)
Creator, Tall Timbers Research Station and Fire Ecology confer-
ences.
Ed Komarek was the driving force behind the creation of
the Tall Timbers Research Station in Tallahassee, Florida, in 1958.
A visionary about the role of fire in Southern forests, he organized
the Tall Timbers Fire Ecology Conference series, starting in 1962.
82
People and Events

Initially focused on the ecological effects of fire on flora and fauna
in the United States and Canada, the series has branched out to
consider international fire concerns. The collection of conference
proceedings (several of which are out of print but available in
university libraries) represents a valuable contribution to the fire
ecology literature, and a logical starting point for novices inter-
ested in the evolution of science and attitudes about fire. Over his
lifetime he received numerous awards and recognitions, includ-
ing several organisms named in honor of his studies. These in-
clude Urotrema komareki (a liver fluke), Sigmodon h. komareki (sub-
species of cotton rat), Komarekionidaea and Komarekona (family and
genus of earthworms), Cercopeus komareki (weevil), and Amanita
komareki (fungus).
Norman Maclean (1902–1990)
Author, Young Men and Fire.
Retired from the University of
Chicago in 1973, Pulitzer Prize awardee Norman Maclean wrote
the classic Young Men and Fire, completed posthumously in 1992
(University of Chicago Press) with assistance by his son John,
documenting the eleven smokejumper fatalities that occurred in
the Mann Gulch fire in Montana in 1949. This incident is one
among several classics that come to mind when discussing his-
torical fires and has provided inspiration for several movies, such
as Red Skies over Montana (1952, 20th Century Fox) and Always
(1989, Universal Studios). In 1999, Maclean’s son John wrote Fire
on the Mountain: The True Story of the South Canyon Fire (William
Morrow), describing the circumstances surrounding the fourteen
fire fatalities on the South Canyon fire in Colorado. John
Maclean’s interest in the fifteen fatalities on the Rattlesnake fire
(1953) led to the publication in 2004 of Fire and Ashes: On the Front
Lines Battling Wildfires (Henry Holt and Company).
Edward Pulaski (1868–1931)
Hero of 1910 fires and eponym for firefighting tool.
Wildland
firefighters are familiar with the pulaski, a practical (if not er-
gonomic) tool whose two-sided head cleverly merges a cutting
edge (ax) with a grubbing device (hoe) for use on a fireline. This
tool was the brainchild of Ed Pulaski, a ranger for the U.S. Forest
Service out of Wallace, Idaho. Pulaski is remembered not only for
the tool bearing his name but also for his heroics during the 1910
Significant Individual Contributors
83

fires in Idaho and Montana. During the Big Blowup on August 20,
1910, Pulaski led forty-five firefighters to seek shelter from a
firestorm in a narrow mineshaft near Wallace, Idaho. At one
point, Pulaski reportedly stood with a pistol at the mineshaft en-
trance to discourage crew members from fleeing their hot, smoky
shelter.
Stephen J. Pyne (b. 1949)
Author and fire historian.
If there ever were a “fire laureate”
designation, the title would belong to Dr. Pyne, Regents’ Profes-
sor at Arizona State University West campus and author of sev-
enteen books, thirteeen of which are devoted to the subject of fire.
Worldwide, Steve is the best known contributor to the literature
on fire. Publications of note (from his web page http://www
.public.asu.edu/~spyne/Books.htm) include a suite of books that
survey the history of fire on earth (including the United States,
Europe, and Australia); see Chapter 7. He has also written many
other essays and works that provide unique perspectives on fire-
fighting, fire management, and fire science. His latest books in-
clude Smokechasing (2003, University of Arizona Press) and Tend-
ing Fire: Coping with America’s Wildland Fires (2004, Island Press).
Richard C. Rothermel (b. 1929)
Fire behavior predictor.
Dick Rothermel developed a set of
mathematical equations for predicting fire spread (1972) based on
first principles of the conservation of energy and laboratory ex-
periments. Prior to his efforts, fire spread rates were mostly de-
scribed in qualitative terms, such as low, medium, high, or ex-
treme. His revolutionary work laid the foundation for the
FIREMOD and BEHAVE fire prediction systems and subsequent
computerized fire spread models, such as FARSITE, BehavePlus,
and NEXUS, as well as contributing to the conceptual framework
for a U.S. fire danger rating system. In 1983 he wrote a handbook,
“How to Predict the Spread and Intensity of Forest and Range
Fires,” which has become a classic for fire managers in North
America. He also authored an analysis of the Mann Gulch fire
(the race that couldn’t be won), which provides a sobering per-
spective on the topographic fire effects and implications for fire-
fighter safety. After the Yellowstone fires of 1988, he synthesized
from previous research a model for predicting the spread of
84
People and Events

crown fires over forested landscapes. Over the span of his career,
Dick combined an understanding of fire behavior principles with
immense respect for the tremendous challenges faced by fire
practitioners. The tools he developed have aided greatly in help-
ing firefighters do their jobs more safely.
Mark J. Schroeder (b. 1915)
Fire meteorologist.
Mark Schroeder until his retirement was a
research meteorologist with the U.S. Forest Service and the Na-
tional Weather Service. He became a fire weather forecaster in
Chicago in the late 1940s. In 1955 he was assigned to the U.S. For-
est Service as research meteorologist in fire weather and fire dan-
ger rating. At the Forest Fire Laboratory in Riverside, California
(1963), he worked on many aspects of fire meteorology. Later he
spearheaded development of the fire danger rating system now
in use by all fire control agencies in the United States. His book
Fire Weather (Agricultural Handbook 360, coauthored with
Charles C. Buck), provides a classic primer on the role of meteor-
ology in driving fire occurrence and behavior. He also coauthored
a large study for the office of civil defense that identified surface
and upper-level weather patterns and types associated with large
fires in different U.S. regions. Part of the motivation for this latter
study was the fear that a foreign entity might set massive forest
fires as a weapon against the United States—a concern that has
been expressed periodically since World War II.
Ferdinand Augustus Silcox (1882–1939)
10 A.M. policy instigator.
Gus Silcox rose through the ranks to
eventually become the fifth chief, USDA Forest Service during
1933–1939. During his tenure as chief, the Forest Service insti-
tuted its infamous 10 o’clock policy, calling for the use of any
means necessary to control an ongoing wildfire by 10 A.M. the
next morning. Detractors point to this policy as creating the con-
text for costly fire exclusion policies that created unhealthy forest
conditions throughout the western United States by the end of the
twentieth century. In fairness, Chief Silcox was at the helm during
the Great Depression, when the Civilian Conservation Corps and
Works Projects Administration effectively helped millions of un-
employed workers find gainful employment working on con-
struction projects in the national forests. The massive workforce
Significant Individual Contributors
85

available may have prompted government administrators to be-
lieve that fires could actually be controlled with such dispatch—
with relatively little need to consider ecological impacts at that
time.
Herbert Stoddard (1889–1970)
Early research pioneer, bobwhite quail habitat.
Herbert Stod-
dard was an early pioneer in the use of fire in longleaf pine
ecosystems of the southern United States. An outdoorsman and
self-taught ecologist, forester, and naturalist, he was an early pro-
ponent for using fire as a management tool for use in improving
bobwhite quail (Colinus virginianus) habitat. In 1941 he formed a
forestry consulting business in Georgia to advise private
landowners on managing longleaf pine forests, a continuation of
quail research he had started earlier and for which he had re-
cruited the services of Ed Komarek. Both recognized that fire ex-
clusionary policies were leading to declines in local bird popula-
tions. He provided the inspirational vision for conception of the
Tall Timbers Research Station, many years before its eventual cre-
ation in 1958.
Charles E. Van Wagner (b. 1924)
Canadian fire specialist.
Charlie van Wagner helped pioneer
fire behavior research in Canada. His writings on crown fires and
crown scorch, even if based on limited samples, were considered
robust enough to be incorporated in recent U.S. fire behavior and
fire effects models. He was one of the first to write about the di-
vergent paths taken by North American fire behavior researchers,
with the United States adopting a laboratory model relying on
first principles of the conservation of energy, versus the Canadian
empirical approach. Since 1925, Canada has had a rich history of
fire research that parallels developments in the United States
(conducted by the likes of Herbert W. Beall and Jim Wright).
Domingos Xavier Viegas (b. 1950)
Coordinator, International Forest Fire Conferences.
Professor
Viegas, of the Mechanical Engineering Department at the Univer-
sity of Coimbra in Portugal, has coordinated numerous trans-
Europe research projects and hosted several international fire
86
People and Events

conferences, focusing on the latest scientific findings from around
the world. He also has written numerous articles on fire spread
and fire management that have helped to elevate the profile of
fire science among members of the European community.
Historic Events
A brief historical overview of forest management in the United
States provides a useful context for understanding the evolution
of fire management. The history of fire management in the United
States is rooted in forest policies, large fire events, legislative
precedents, influential personalities involved with management
of federal public lands, and more. In many ways, U.S. fire history
mirrors the structural and philosophical evolution of the agencies
that have managed fires on our behalf for almost a century. These
agencies in turn reflect the dominant social mores and political
undercurrents at work within both developed communities and
wildland ecosystems, as affected by science and human values.
In Chapter 3 we chronicled the eras characterized by large
fires. Here we describe the legislative acts and significant events
that accompanied some of those large fires. Several of the same
fires are included in Tables 4–1 through 4–6, for cross-referencing
with their descriptions in Chapter 3.
Frontier Settlement Era (Table 4–1) 
During the early twentieth century, settlers saw little organized
response to uncontrolled wildfires in forests and rangelands.
Many fires devastated forests and communities, such as the 1871
Peshtigo fire, which burned more than 3.5 million acres (1.4 mil-
lion ha) in Wisconsin and Michigan, leaving 1,500 dead. In 1902,
the Yacolt fire in southwestern Washington burned about a mil-
lion acres (405,000 ha) and cost thirty-eight lives. During that pe-
riod, Forest Service personnel and area residents fought fires pri-
marily on federal, state, and private lands. It was mostly
hand-to-hand combat with wildfire, using crude tools such as wet
burlap bags, axes, and water buckets.
The first forest reserve (Yellowstone National Park Timber-
land Reserve of Wyoming) was established in March 1891 by
proclamation following President Benjamin Harrison’s signing of
the so-called Forest Reserve Act of 1891 earlier that same month.
Historic Events
87

In October 1891, President Harrison proclaimed the creation of
the second reserve, the White River Plateau and Timberland Re-
serve of Colorado (Lynch and Larrabee 1992).
Creation of the forest reserves followed on the heels of a cen-
tury of perceived timber exploitation, wildlife slaughter, over-
grazing of grasslands, and rampant forest fires (Vance and Vance
n.d.). Reserves were to be protected from exploitation and man-
aged by the federal government in behalf of the national interest.
Actually, then as now, controversies reigned over the actual status
of natural resources on public lands, with detractors proposing
theories of pending or actual timber famines and other resource
despoliation. Pitted against the doomsayers were supposed vi-
sionaries and field practitioners who believed that the salvation
of the considerable natural resource wealth of the United States
could be found in wise use and management. This battleground
of viewpoints persists to the present regarding the status and op-
tions for managing public forest resources.
The first forest reserves were placed under the responsibility
of the Department of Interior’s General Land Office. At that time,
federal foresters worked for the Bureau of Forestry in the Depart-
ment of Agriculture. By 1892, fifteen reserves had been created,
encompassing 13 million acres. Most were created to protect the
88
People and Events
Table 4-1
Applicable Events, Pivotal Large Fires, and Laws Governing Federal Fire
Management during the Frontier Settlement Era
Year
Event/Fire/Law
1871
Peshtigo Fire
1872 
Yellowstone Park created
1891
Creative Act of 1891 (26 Stat. 1103, 16 USC 471), also known as the
Forest Reserve Act, allows President to set apart reserves from the 
public domain for purposes such as watershed, timberland, or 
wildlife protection. 
1897
Organic Act of 1897 (30 Stat. 35) creates national forests to protect 
water flows and timber supply. Authorizes Secretary of Interior to 
make provisions for the protection from fire and other depredations.
1905
Transfer Act of 1905 (33 Stat. 628, USC 472) gave responsibility for 
administration of national forests to the Department of Agriculture 
(from Interior).
1908
Emergency Firefighting Fund allowed the federal government to go 
into debt to fight forest fires.
Sources: Pyne 1982; San Juan National Forest 1993.

headwaters of important streams at the behest of irrigators and
real estate developers (Pisani 1992).
Early federal foresters were expected to participate in fire
suppression activities as one of their primary duties. However,
the purpose and administration of the forest reserves weren’t
clarified until passage of the 1897 Organic Act, which provided
for fire protection among the other supervisory and administra-
tive duties needed to manage the reserves. In 1905, President
Teddy Roosevelt transferred the forest reserves to the jurisdic-
tion of the Department of Agriculture, in the Bureau of Forestry,
at that time renamed the Forest Service. The forest reserves were
renamed national forests in 1907 (Steen 1992), today encom-
passing 191 million acres, many of which support flammable
ecosystems.
Early Years of Forest and Fire Management
(Table 4–2)
Wildfires and their control dominated the agenda of the youthful
federal agencies at the turn of the twentieth century, although the
crude tools available to the understaffed crews were no match for
large fires. As such fires occurred across the United States, state
and local governments became more involved and concerned
about costs and resource damage. After the severe wildfires (that
is, the “Big Blowup”) in Montana and Idaho in 1910, more em-
phasis could be placed on newer techniques, such as telephone
communications and fire patrols. State fire warden positions were
established, especially in the West, and legislation such as the
Weeks Act in 1911 and the Clarke-McNary Act in 1924 enhanced
the federal-state fire suppression partnership. Those programs
grew into the U.S. Forest Service’s State and Private Forestry Di-
vision, of which Fire and Aviation Management is a part today. In
1944, Congress increased the scope of the Clarke-McNary Act to
create an emphasis on fire prevention. (source: http://www.fs
.fed.us/fire/people/aboutus.html).
The great Idaho-Montana fires of 1910 attracted great atten-
tion, but elsewhere (such as in northern California and the South)
the use of low-intensity surface fires was being proposed as an al-
ternative to all-out fire suppression. Advocates of “light burning”
included a loose amalgam of scientists, magazine writers, and
private timber company owners who recognized that periodic
surface fires would help to keep fuel hazards more manageable.
Historic Events
89

Forest burning by Native Americans was recognized as a power-
ful influence on ecosystem structure that had been removed by
Euro-American settlement (see Chapter 3). At the same time, the
U.S. Forest Service viewed light burning as a threat to its mission
to protect public forests from fire. In essence, the agency felt that
the public would not be able to digest a mixed message about
fire’s destructiveness along with its potential benefits.
The National Park Service was created in 1916 to promote and
regulate the use of federal national parks, monuments, and reser-
vations. The enabling act provided for the secretary of interior to
appoint Stephen T. Mather as the first NPS director (with a salary
of $4,500 per year) to oversee the system of national parks, “whose
purpose (was) to conserve the scenery and the natural and historic
objects and the wildlife therein and to provide for the enjoyment
of the same in such manner and by such means as will leave them
unimpaired for the enjoyment of future generations” (source:
http://www.nps.gov/legacy/organic-act.htm). From sixteen parks
in 1916, the NPS has grown to 388 units today, encompassing units
as diverse as national parks, monuments, preserves, historic sites,
historical parks, memorials, battlefields, cemeteries, recreation
areas, seashores, lakeshores, rivers, park-ways, and trails.
90
People and Events
Table 4-2
Applicable Events, Pivotal Large Fires, and Laws Governing Federal Fire
Management during the Early Years of Forest and Fire Management in
the United States
Year
Event/Fire/Law
1910
Great Idaho Montana Fires burned over 3 million acres.
1911
Weeks Act (36 Stat. 961) The act allowed for 1) the purchase of land at 
the head of navigable streams as national forest; 2) cooperative 
agreements and matching funds between the USFS and state foresters 
for fire protection. (source: Pyne 1982, p. 61).
1916
National Park Service Organic Act of 1916 (39 Stat. 535 plus 
amendments) created the National Park Service.
1921
US Forest Service Chief Greeley convenes the agency’s first national 
conference, the Mather Field Conference of 1921.
1924
Clarke-McNary Act (43 Stat. 653-654), as amended; 16 U.S.C. 564, 565, 
566, 567) expanded provisions of the Weeks Act to include all 
watersheds, not just navigable waterways. (source: Pyne 1982) 
Enabled federal assistance on state and private lands.
Sources: Pyne 1982; San Juan National Forest 1993.

The U.S. Forest Service held its first national conference, the
Mather Field Conference of 1921, essentially setting the tone for
ending the debate about light burning in favor of systematic fire
protection of the nation’s forests (Pyne 1982). The proposed “light
burning” generated considerable controversy then, and it re-
mains controversial to the present day.
Institutionalization of Fire Exclusion
(Table 4–3) 
The Great Depression saw a continuation of large fires in the
United States, such as the Tillamook fire in western Oregon,
though the nation’s poor economic conditions created a vast un-
employed labor pool that could be put to work in the forests. In
1935 the Forest Service adopted its now infamous “10 A.M. pol-
icy,” an extension of the idea that fires could be systematically
suppressed across the country. Accordingly, the policy stipulated
that a fire was to be contained and controlled by 10 A.M. follow-
ing the report of a fire, or, failing that, by 10 A.M. the next day—
and so on. This policy thus provided rationale for the use of all
fire control resources required to suppress a fire as soon as possi-
ble—in the process, justifying large expenditures as well. The pol-
icy remains in effect today in certain areas where property in
harm’s way requires aggressive protection, although the policy
has been largely rejected for some forest types—such as pon-
derosa pine ecosystems in the southwestern United States.
Firefighting took to the air shortly after World War I as the
Forest Service used aircraft to patrol for wildfires. Smokejumpers
came onto the scene to fight their first fire in 1940. In 1956 the first
practical aerial delivery of water and chemicals onto wildfires
began, and helicopters began to assist with firefighting in the
1950s (source: http://www.fs.fed.us/fire/people/aboutus.html).
Today, airplanes are the most expensive means employed to fight
wildfires.
During World War II, firefighting was considered a patriotic
act, tantamount to waging war with the enemies of the United
States. Keep Green movements were spawned in the Pacific
Northwest to assist the U.S. government in wildfire prevention
efforts. Smokey Bear became a national symbol for rallying the
country against wasteful fires by preventing them from occurring
in the first place. The Federal Property and Administrative Ser-
vices Act of 1949 permitted the transfer of excess property (except
Historic Events
91

real estate) among federal agencies and to other entities, eventu-
ally enabling fire agencies to access property such as aircraft and
trucks that could be customized for firefighting.
Policy Reflections (Table 4–4)
The Cold War with the USSR and fears of communist conspiracies
brought along concerns that multiple fires set in the backcountry
could pose a serious threat to U.S. internal security. Hysteria
about wildfires as a possible weapon was heightened as the Bel
Air fire burned into suburban Los Angeles in 1956. At the same
time, the U.S. Forest Service sought to recodify its doctrines of
wise use of multiple resources, even as the National Park Service
was reconsidering its management philosophy as a result of the
1963 Leopold Report findings (see Chapter 3).
Passage of the 1964 Wilderness Act and the 1969 National En-
vironmental Policy Act laid important groundwork for positions
that would be adopted by environmentalists to ensure that man-
agement activities were properly conceived and implemented. The
1967 Clean Air Act (and subsequent amendments) likewise would
provide a regulatory context for ensuring that air quality would
not be harmed by federal land management activities within indi-
vidual states. Ironically, prescribed fires intended to stave off wild-
fire hazards are subject to emission controls, whereas wildfires are
considered a natural hazard and not subject to regulation.
92
People and Events
Table 4-3
Applicable Events, Large Fires, and Laws Governing Federal Fire
Management during the Time Period in which the Fire Exclusion Policy
Was Institutionalized in the United States
Year
Event/Law/Fire
1933
During August, 1933, the Tillamook Fire burned across 311,000 acres 
in Oregon. 1 life was lost; some of the same areas burned again 
in 1939.
1935
US Forest Service Chief Silcox instituted the 10 AM Policy. 
1940
Keep Oregon Green Association was founded.
1944
The US Forest Service in conjunction with the Advertising Council 
originated and authorized a poster by Albert Staehle of Smokey Bear 
as the symbol for fire prevention.
1945
Keep Montana Green Association was founded.
1946
Keep Idaho Green Association was founded.
Sources: Pyne 1982; San Juan National Forest 1993.

Environmentalism Takes Off (Table 4–5)
The environmental legislation of the 1960s spawned an outpour-
ing of related laws and agency mandates in the 1970s as well. The
1970 Clean Air Act is the comprehensive federal law that regulates
air emissions (including smoke) from area, stationary, and mobile
sources. This law authorizes the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency to establish National Ambient Air Quality Standards
(NAAQS) to protect public health and the environment. The goal
of the act was to set and achieve NAAQS in every state by 1975.
The setting of maximum pollutant standards was coupled with di-
rections that states should develop state implementation plans
(SIPs) applicable to appropriate industrial sources in the state. The
act was amended in 1977 primarily to set new goals (dates) for
achieving attainment of NAAQS, since many areas of the country
had failed to meet the deadlines. The 1990 amendments to the
Clean Air Act in large part were intended to meet unaddressed or
Historic Events
93
Table 4-4
Applicable Events, Large Fires, and Laws Governing Federal Fire
Management during 1950–1969
Year
Event/Fire/Law
1950
A bear cub discovered after a wildfire in NM is nicknamed Smokey 
Bear and adopted as a national symbol for fire prevention.
1956
Bel-Air fire burns over 500 homes in southern California.
1960
Multiple Use-Sustained Yield Act of 1960 (16 USC 528) authorizes and 
directs Secretary of Agriculture to develop and administer renewable
surface resources of national forests; authorizes cooperation with state 
and local governments.
1963
Leopold et al. (1963) Report calls for national parks to represent a 
vignette of primitive America, including habitats manipulated by 
prescribed fire. 
Federal Clean Air Act (PL 88-206) empowers the Secretary of Health, 
Education, and Welfare to define air quality criteria based on 
scientific studies.
1964 
Wilderness Act of 1964 (16USC 1131-1136 provides for establishment 
and administration of the national wilderness preservation system.
1967
Federal Air Quality Act (PL 90-148) establishes a framework for 
defining “air quality control regions” based on meteorological and 
topographical factors of air pollution.
1969
National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42USC 4321-4335) 
requires disclosure of the environmental consequences associated 
with implementation of a proposed action and alternatives.
Sources: Pyne 1982; San Juan National Forest 1993.

insufficiently addressed problems such as acid rain, ground-level
ozone, stratospheric ozone depletion, and air toxins.
The 10 A.M. policy for fire control (see Table 4–3) was modi-
fied slightly in 1971 when the U.S. Forest Service decided to aim
its presuppression efforts (for example, fuel treatments) at cur-
tailing fires of 10 acres (4 hectares) or less. The so-called 10-acre
policy for presuppression planning thus represented formal
recognition of the importance of managing fuels in conjunction
with overall preparedness planning. Equally significant, the 10-
acre planning standard represented a first formalized departure
from the agency’s 10 A.M. policy initiated in 1935. Even so, the 10
A.M. policy remained the de facto policy for managing fire in
wildland areas until recently. In most areas, wildfires are attacked
as soon as practicable in order to keep the fire as small as possi-
ble and to reduce damage to valued resources. Ironically, fuels in
some of these areas may have been regulated historically by re-
current, low-severity surface fires. Prescribed fire may be a viable
option for managing fuels in these areas, especially when ignited
under conditions that mimic past fires.
The enhanced federal commitment to fuels management in
the 1970s was stimulated in part by calamitous fire seasons in
southern California and the Pacific Northwest in 1970–1971. Mas-
sive infusions of funds for fire presuppression early in the 1970s
were later derailed by congressional concerns over the lack of vis-
ible returns for fuel treatment investments.
Congressional acts, such as the 1974 Resources Planning Act
and the 1976 National Forest Management Act, mandated forest
and fire planning as well as consideration of the environmental
impacts of management decisions. The 1976 Federal Land Man-
agement and Policy Act provided similar direction to the Bureau
of Land Management.
In 1978, the U.S. Forest Service revised its fire policy to call
for cost-effective fire management and reliance on fire use strate-
gies, primarily prescribed fire. From the 1970s onward, the eco-
nomics of fire management became increasingly important as
Congress, the Government Accounting Office, the Office of Man-
agement and Budget, and others expressed growing concerns
over the high cost of firefighting.
The 1980 Mack Lake fire (see also Table 3–5) nearly resulted
in permanent termination of all prescribed fire programs on na-
tional forests, so great was its perceived harm. The houses de-
stroyed and fatality were bad enough, but more critically, the fire
94
People and Events

had been set intentionally by U.S. Forest Service personnel as a
prescribed burn that then escaped control.
Fatalities and Houses Take Center Stage
(Table 4–6)
Recent fire episodes—for example, Florida (1998), Colorado
(2002, 1996, 1994, 1990, and 1989), Oregon and Arizona (2002),
Historic Events
95
Table 4-5
Applicable Events, Large Fires, and Laws Governing Federal Fire
Management during the Period of Increased Environmentalism
Year
Event/Fire/Law
1970
Clean Air Act of 1970 (42 U.S.C. s/s 7401 et seq.) (1970)
1971
USFS adopts a 10-ac standard for pre-suppression planning;
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) promulgates national 
ambient air quality standards for particulates, photochemical oxidants
(including ozone), hydrocarbons, carbon monoxide, nitrogen dioxide, 
and sulfur dioxide.
1974
Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974, as 
amended by the National Forest Management Act of 1976 (16 USC 
1600-1614) institutes land and resource management planning and 
planning regulations for the US Forest Service. Forest plans must 
comply with Acts of Congress enacted to protect air, water, threatened 
or endangered species, cultural, or historic resources.
1976
Federal Land Policy and Management of 1976 (90 Stat. 2743) mandates
planning for lands administered by Bureau of Land Management; 
original Smokey Bear dies at the National Zoo in Washington 
DC. (Burial at Capitan NM)
1977
Revised Fire Policy of USFS calls for cost-effective fire management, 
including fire use;
Clean Air Act Amendments (PL 95-95) set the goal for visibility 
protection and improvement in Class I areas and assigns federal land 
managers with the affirmative responsibilities to protect values related
to air quality.
1984
Rudolph Wendelin designed a 20-cent postage stamp depicting a bear 
cub clinging to a burnt tree with the famous Smokey Bear emblem as 
a background. This represented the first and only time the U.S. Postal 
Service issued a postage stamp honoring an individual animal.
1988
Greater Yellowstone fires burned nearly half of the national park.
1989
Federal Policy re-evaluated after Greater Yellowstone fires.
1990
Clean Air Act Amendments (PL 101-549) establish authority for 
regulating regional haze and acknowledge the complexity of the 
relation between prescribed and wildland fires.
Sources: Pyne 1982; San Juan National Forest 1993.

Washington and Idaho (1994, 1991), Montana (1994), southern
California (2003, 1996, and 1993), Oakland-Berkeley (1991), and
Yellowstone (1988)—illustrate problems of increasing severity,
complexity, and cost. These fires have destroyed life and prop-
erty, involved multiple agency and private jurisdictions, and cost
billions in suppression expenditures and resource damage. In
addition, these fires have provided evidence that land uses and
management practices (that is, fire exclusion) during the twenti-
eth century have unintentionally increased fuel hazards in some
areas.
Severe and tragic fire seasons have begotten numerous re-
views of fire policy and operational procedures, as agencies try to
learn from large fires and to cope with their effects. The fourteen
fatalities in Colorado in 1994 spawned the 1995 Federal Fire Pol-
icy review. The 2000 fire season resulted in the National Fire Plan
(during the administration of President Clinton) for restoring fire
to Western forests, especially those from which fire had been ex-
cluded during the twentieth century (see Chapter 6). In the midst
of the 2002 fire season, President Bush proposed his Healthy
Forests Initiative to accelerate thinning projects in Western
forests, including what some perceived as limitations on environ-
mental scrutiny and judicial review.
The Healthy Forests Restoration Act, passed by both houses
of Congress and signed by President Bush in 2003, provides for
the following (USDA Forest Service 2003):
•
Strengthening public participation in developing high-
priority forest health projects;
•
Reducing the complexity of environmental analysis;
•
Providing a more effective appeals process encouraging
early public participation in project planning;
•
Instructing courts when asked to halt projects to
balance the short-term effects of project implementation
against the harm from undue delay and the long-term
benefits of a restored forest.
A critical part of the initiative builds on congressional legislation
enacted in 2002 allowing federal agencies to enter into long-term
stewardship contracts (of up to ten years) with small businesses,
communities, and nonprofits. Accordingly, these entities can use
the proceeds from tree thinning and removal to defray the costs of
hazard reduction operations as well as to derive profits from cut-
96
People and Events

ting operations. Environmentalists have expressed fears that the
initiative will result in excessive tree removals, particularly in the
larger diameter trees that increase timber sale revenues, and will
increase road building in remote forest areas.
Historical Events Summary
As public fire management agencies have evolved, so have their
policies—often in the midst of considerable controversy. Early
fears of timber famine, floods, and droughts have in some sense
given way to environmental disputes over appropriate uses of the
nation’s public forests. However, then as now, the basic dispute
seems to pit those who believe that the forests have been abused
and overused against those who prefer to see no logging or roads
constructed in the woods. Fuels management, whether by me-
chanical thinning, prescribed fire, or other means, has spawned
its share of debate between those who view thinning as a hazard
reduction tool and those who suspect that thinning provides an
excuse for the logging of larger trees on public land.
For most of the twentieth century, federal fuels management
was mostly synonymous with wildfire hazard reduction. Fuel
treatments, such as prescribed fire and mechanical thinning,
were aimed largely at reducing the size and severity of eventual
Historical Events Summary
97
Table 4-6
Applicable Events, Large Fires, and Laws Governing Federal Fire
Management since 1990
Year
Event/Fire/Law
1994
South Canyon Fire—14 firefighter fatalities (35 nationwide)
1995
Federal policy review after the South Canyon fire result in changes to
firefighter and public safety priorities; Joint Fire Science Program 
initiated several years later.
1999
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) promulgates regional haze 
rules.
2000
2000 fire season worst in 50 years; National Fire Plan of the Clinton 
administration.
2001
Federal prescribed fire re-evaluated after Cerro Grande escaped 
prescribed fire near Los Alamos, NM.
2002
Largest fires on record occur in Colorado, Arizona, and Oregon.
2003
Healthy Forests Restoration Act; Southern California fire complex is 
the most expensive in state history.
Sources: Pyne 1982; San Juan National Forest 1993.

wildfires in the treated area. The passage of environmental legis-
lation in the 1960s and 1970s broadened considerably the con-
cerns associated with proposed fuel treatments, especially if and
where endangered species, cultural resources, or environmental
influences (that is, air, soil, and water) might be affected. In such
instances, justification for the proposed treatment must survive
scrutiny regarding its effects on the variety of resources in the
area as well as downwind and downstream.
The U.S. Forest Service (2003) estimates that 190 million acres
(77 million hectares) of public lands are at elevated risk of severe
wildfires, yet the magnitude of the problems and potential pitfalls
are poorly documented. For example, information is lacking on
the extent to which wildfire threats can be reduced through the
projected increases in fuel treatments. We don’t know the optimal
sizes and timing of areas to be treated (by prescribed fire or other
fire surrogates) in order to reduce wildfire costs and losses suc-
cessfully. With the current anticipated backlog of areas in need of
treatment, there is no guarantee that the projected increases will
mitigate future wildfire outbreaks. Furthermore, treatment re-
sponses will vary by fire regime, ecosystems affected, and treat-
ment method. Some fire regimes may not require hazard reduc-
tion treatments, as fuels have not accumulated abnormally
despite fire suppression efforts. Finally, in the absence of mainte-
nance efforts such as fire or mechanical thinning/removal, the ef-
fectiveness of treatment may decline over time, so that chance ig-
nitions may become wildfires even in treated landscapes. These
examples illustrate just a few of the problems associated with in-
complete understanding of hazardous fuel problems in the na-
tion’s forests and rangelands.
These and other information gaps could lead the U.S. Con-
gress and other policy makers to develop unreasonable expecta-
tions for the possible accomplishments for the interagency fire
science and management initiatives. For example, extreme wild-
fire years could occur while treatments are in progress or even
shortly after completion, depending on location and timing of
chance ignitions and climatic conditions, such as extreme
drought. Fires could occur in or adjacent to treated areas, de-
pending on the size and effectiveness of fuel modification. Ex-
pansions in prescribed fire programs could meet with resistance
in the absence of better information on the necessity and effects of
fuel treatment in an area, just as the program was sidetracked
during the 1970s.
98
People and Events

These considerations are especially important in ecosystems
of the western and southeastern United States that are susceptible
to large fire outbreaks on account of prolonged drought, haz-
ardous fuels, and lightning strikes. In the Southeast and West,
fuels treatment (for example, prescribed fire plus other cultural,
mechanical, biological, and chemical methods) has been practiced
for years, but knowledge is not widely available about the effects
on actual hazard reduction and other biological, social, and eco-
nomic consequences. In addition, little synthesis has been at-
tempted across ecosystems, agency jurisdictions, and land-use
patterns. Several studies have attempted to integrate findings
across agencies and ecosystems, but much work remains.
Today fire is recognized as an important part of healthy, di-
verse ecosystems, but a force that usually must be suppressed for
reasons of public safety. The policy of fire suppression on every
fire (adopted in the early twentieth century) has been reformed to
focus on fire suppression where needed, with fire use (prescribed
fire and natural ignitions) elsewhere to achieve resource objec-
tives as appropriate. However, applying this dual perspective to-
ward fire without error on public forests is more easily said than
done, and probably impossible given the total area of lands to be
managed by natural resource agencies. Even so, fires and their
management have provided high visibility to agencies with fire
responsibilities on public and private lands, with both amazing
success stories and wrenching failures. As the image of fire has
undergone numerous transformations over the past century, back
and forth between hated enemy and useful friend, the agencies
have had to contend with a public that seems unsure of what lies
ahead. Regardless, the story promises to continue as fascinating
and gripping as ever.
Literature Cited
Leopold, A. S., S. A. Cain, C. M. Cottam, I. N. Gabrielson, and T. L. Kim-
ball. 1963. “Study of Wildlife Problems in National Parks.” Pp. 28–45 in
Transactions 28th Conference on North American Wildlife and Natural
Resources.
Lynch, D. L., and S. Larrabee. 1992. “Private Lands within National
Forests.” Pp. 198–216 in The Origins of the National Forests, edited by H. K.
Steen. Durham, NC: Forest History Society, 334 p.
Pisani, D. J. 1992. “Forests and Reclamation, 1891–1911.” Pp. 237–258 in
The Origins of the National Forests, edited by H. K. Steen. Durham, NC:
Forest History Society, 334 p.
Historical Events Summary
99

Pyne, S. J. 1982. Fire in America. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 654
p.
San Juan National Forest. 1993. “Amended Land and Resource Manage-
ment Plan.” USDA Forest Service San Juan National Forest, Durango,
CO.
Steen, H. K. 1992. “The Origins and Significance of the National Forest
System.” Pp. 3–9 in The Origins of the National Forests, edited by H. K.
Steen. Durham, NC: Forest History Society, 334 p.
USDA Forest Service. 2003. “Implementation of the Healthy Forests Ini-
tiative.” Release No. fs0405.03. Available at http://www.usda.gov
/news/releases/2003/12/fs0405.htm.
Vance, M. R., and J. A. Vance. N.d. “The Story behind the Pike National
Forest.” http://www.fs.fed.us/r2/psicc/pp/history.htm.
100
People and Events

5
Facts and Data
Fire Activity
W
orldwide, an area larger than half the size of mainland
China may burn annually, with about 90 percent of the igni-
tions caused by humans (Nature Conservancy 2003). This
translates into about 1.9 million square miles (4.9 million square
kilometers) burned globally every year. Around the world, fires
occur in temperate ecosystems, boreal and tropical forests, and
savannas and grasslands—essentially wherever and whenever
flammable biomass and ignition sources interact to support com-
bustion. In any given year, wildfires may burn on all the world’s
continents, except Antarctica. By comparison, about 100,000 fires
burn about 2 to 8 million acres (0.81–3.24 million ha) annually in
the United States. Most of these fires receive scant attention
because of their limited extent, remoteness, and apparent lack of
impact. In fact, most fires burn with little fanfare and go out or are
controlled by firefighters with effects localized to the immediate
area of the burn. However, relatively few fires (that is, less than 3
to 5 percent of the total number of ignitions in the United States)
may result in most of the burned area, costs, and losses. Globally,
the impacts of burning on greenhouse gases, climate change, and
other atmospheric processes are poorly understood, although of
growing concern. In this chapter we examine some of the facts
and data about fires that are well understood, including sum-
maries of fire occurrence, combustion as physical and chemical
processes, interactions between fire and the environment, fuels
and fire behavior prediction, fire effects, and societal responses in
101

terms of management activities. We also look at employment
opportunities in forest fire science across North America.
Major fire activity is episodic over time (Figure 5–1), with
peaks and dips in fire occurrence and the area burned. Generally,
more damage and concerns are associated with the peak fire
years, although costly fires occur in all years. For example,
125,000 fires burned more than 8 million acres (3.24 million ha) in
2000, considered the most damaging fire season in nearly half a
century. In most years, relatively few fires account for most of the
burned area. In some years—for example, 1998—relatively few
fires (roughly 70,000) burn a small total area (less than 3 million
acres, or 1.2 million ha). In 1975, twice as many fires (some
140,000) burned less than 2 million acres (0.81 million ha). In fact,
the 1970s had a greater number of fire starts and relatively lower
area burned than the 1990s, when fewer ignitions were associated
with several peaks in burned area.
The usual causes for the variability in burned areas over time
include climate and fuels. In some years, the cumulative effects of
ongoing drought result in desiccated fuels early in spring—often
a harbinger of massive summer burns if no rains fall and ignitions
102
Facts and Data
1960 
1965 
1970 
1975 
1980 
1985 
1990 
1995 
2000
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
10
8
6
4
2
0
Acres Burned
(in millions)
Number of Fires
(in thousands)
Acres
Fires
Year
Figure 5-1
U.S. Fire Frequency and Area Burned, 1960–2000
Annual U.S. ignitions and area burned vary considerably from
year to year.
Source: http://www.nifc.gov/stats.
Note: 1 ac =.405 ha

occur during periods of high wind or prolonged heat. In reality
every fire season represents a cumulative expression of many in-
fluences, including the antecedent weather, vegetation dynamics
(plant growth and succession), and a variety of human activities.
A relatively wet year with few fires may beget an extreme fire sea-
son subsequently, as the excess moisture produces a lush plant
cover that becomes combustible when dried.
The relationship between fire frequency and area burned
changes constantly (Figure 5–1). In fact, the factors that explain
forest fire ignitions and burn patterns will change from year to
year, depending on a variety of influences—namely, weather and
climate, fuels, and human activities, to name a few. Other factors
that affect fire activity in an area include the onset of drought
(that is, El Niño/La Niña cycles), location of lightning storm
tracks and topographic position, and proximity of human popu-
lation centers. Figure 5–2 shows even greater fluctuations if we go
further back in time and examine the number of fires and average
area burned by decade. From a decadal perspective, the average
annual number of fires is fairly stable (roughly 100,000 to
150,000), although area burned has dropped dramatically since
the 1930s (about 40 million acres burned per year back then) to
less than 5 million annual acres during the 1990s. In fact, the av-
erage fire size (calculated by dividing the area burned by the
number of fires) decreased from 234 acres in the 1930s decade to
34 acres in the 1990s. Actually, since the 1930s the average size of
fires steadily dropped to a low of 21 acres in the 1970s and has in-
creased slightly since then to 34 acres in the 1990s. The drop-off in
area burned is most likely the result of technological improve-
ments in the way fires are fought, as well as the institutionaliza-
tion of fire suppression by public land management agencies. The
increase since the 1970s may be due to climatic warming, as well
as agency policies that permit fires to burn larger areas under cer-
tain prescribed circumstances. Some attribute the increase in area
burned to fuel accumulations resulting from twentieth-century
fire exclusion policies, although that assertion is difficult to prove
systematically for all ecosystems.
The dramatic drop-off in average area burned since the 1930s
(Figure 5–2) is a tribute to the effectiveness of fire suppression
policy and technology, but it also gives a crude idea of the amount
of fire that has been withheld from the national landscape during
the same time period. Although this is speculation, it is safe to say
that some, though certainly not all, of the fires that have been sup-
Fire Activity
103

pressed over the years might have performed important ecologi-
cal functions had they been allowed to burn. If allowed to burn,
those same fires might have maintained tree densities and fuel
loads at sustainable levels, while contributing to biological diver-
sity and healthy ecosystems. Obviously we don’t want to turn
back the clock to 1930, or even try to imagine how a manager
might attempt to select the time and place for selecting and shep-
herding just the “beneficial” ignitions while suppressing all oth-
ers. But it is precisely that balance between wanted and un-
wanted fires that is needed when managing the suppression and
use of fire over a large area.
Of course, decadal trends (for example, Figure 5–2) may be a
little misleading, since fires do not necessarily behave differently
just because of the passage of time. Also, averages depicted in
Figure 5–2 mask annual variability, although trends can emerge
by looking at fire occurrence and area burned at different time
scales. For example, climatic dryness in the Pacific Northwest,
known as the Pacific Decadal Oscillation, has been suggested as
the possible driving force behind fire cycles that run on a roughly
ten-year basis in the northern Intermountain West (Zhang et al.
104
Facts and Data
Figure 5-2
Average Number of Fires and Area Burned in the United States
by Decade Since 1930
The Average area burned has dropped dramatically since the 1930s,
though episodic years persist.
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
‘30–’39
‘40–49
‘50–’59
‘60–’69
‘70–’79
‘80–’89
‘90–’99
Year
Number of Fires (in thousands)
Average Acres Burned (in millions)
Average Number of Fires
Average Acres Burned
Source: http://www.nifc.gov/stats.
Note: 1 ac = .405 ha

1997). So analyses over multiyear time frames are instructive be-
cause they can suggest important trends that may be overlooked
in a year-to-year analysis. Furthermore, we need to remember
that forest fire trends may be driven by a multitude of causes, in-
cluding climatic as well as social drivers, some of which are either
poorly understood or perhaps have yet to be discovered.
Let’s look at another ten-year period to examine trends in
U.S. human- versus lightning-caused fires (Figure 5–3). For the
ten-year period 1988–1997, an average of 116,000 fires burned 4
million acres per year. During that ten-year period, in any given
year humans accounted for nearly 103,000 fire starts (about 87
percent of the total), burning about 1.9 million acres (770,000 ha)
per year. In the same period, lightning accounted for about 13,000
fires, which burned about 2.1 million acres (851,000 ha) annually.
The proportion of fires caused by humans or lightning will vary
by region. In the mountainous West or in the Southwest, lightning
may start 80 to 90 percent of the fires, thus reversing the propor-
tions observed nationwide. By contrast, in southern California, 95
percent of ignitions may be due to human causes. Thus humans
are the primary fire-starters in more populated areas, while light-
ning may predominate in isolated, mountainous areas.
Lightning provides a spectacular ignition source as thunder-
bolts crash to the ground. Yet the mechanisms that produce light-
ning and lightning fires are poorly understood. Lightning liter-
ally surrounds our world, with as many as 44,000 thunderstorms
and 8 million lightning flashes taking place daily. A typical light-
ning fire in the forest originates from electrical currents dis-
charged between the cloud and ground, with high temperatures
in the vicinity of the lightning strike apparently raising fuel tem-
perature to the point of ignition. The likelihood of a lightning ig-
nition producing a forest fire depends on fuel moisture and the
type and duration of discharge, among many factors. In the
United States, lightning fires are most prominent in the northern
and southern Rockies, the Cascades, and the Sierra Nevada
mountain ranges, where hundreds of fire starts may result from
the passage of a single storm system. More thunderstorms occur
in the Southeast, but they start fewer fires because of the accom-
panying rain (Schroeder and Buck 1970).
The data that were used to develop Figure 5–3 show that the
average size of lightning fires tends to be larger than that of
human-caused fires—152 acres (62 ha) versus 19 acres (8 ha) dur-
ing 1988–1997)—since lightning tends to occur in more remote
Fire Activity
105

areas where ignitions may be more difficult to detect. Such areas
also may be less accessible to initial attack crews. Thus more time
may elapse, and the fire will continue to grow, before fire control
forces arrive to initiate suppression activities. Also, a small pro-
portion of lightning ignitions in park and wilderness areas may
not be fought aggressively, but instead may be allowed to burn
into natural barriers (such as rocks or lakes) or be constrained in
size only by low-impact herding strategies until extinguished by
106
Facts and Data
Source: http://www.nifc.gov/stats
Note: 1 ac = .405 ha.
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
.05
0.0
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997 10 Yr.
Avg.
Number of Human-Caused Fires (in thousands)
Acres Burned (in millions)
Year
Fires
Acres
0
5
10
15
20
25
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997 10 Yr.
Avg.
umber of Lightning-Caused Fires (in thousands)
Acres Burned (in millions)
Year
Fires
Acres
Figure 5-3
Number and Size of Wildland Fires in the United States,
1988–1997

the autumn moisture. Such strategies are employed to allow a
more natural role for fire in designated areas. Specific manage-
ment plans are required if agencies are to allow natural ignitions
to spread under these conditions, but once the planning is com-
plete, some fires may burn for weeks or even months at a time,
growing until extinguished by rain or snow at the end of the fire
season. Although historically restricted to relatively few areas,
this practice is expanding as managers and the public accept a
more natural role for fire. These so-called “wildland fire use” in-
cidents (formerly called prescribed natural fires) will likely in-
crease in frequency and size in the future, as public agencies de-
velop greater competency and familiarity with strategies for
herding ignitions to achieve their resource management objec-
tives. Although the impact of lightning fires may not be so
strongly apparent in the data presented, their average size during
1988–1997 ranged from a low of 40 acres (16 ha) in 1991 to a high
of 267 acres (108 ha) in 1997. By contrast, during the same period
the average size of human-caused fires ranged from a low of 12
acres (5 ha) in 1995 and 1997 to a high of 34 acres (14 ha) in 1996.
Suffice to say that the number and size of fires vary consid-
erably from year to year in the United States on account of the
causative agents (that is, humans versus lightning), although
burned area caused by lightning fires is considerably more vari-
able than that of human-caused fires. We would expect the same
variability to characterize fire activities in regions both inside and
outside the United States, with episodic peaks and lulls in fire ac-
tivity, and with some years near average in ignitions and area
burned. Although global estimates of annual burning will vary,
1,300 billion acres (526 billion ha) is probably a reasonable esti-
mate for the extent of worldwide burning in wildland areas,
mostly all the result of human causes.
As might be expected, area burned is not a perfect indicator
for all the costs, damage to natural resources, and ecological ef-
fects of forest fires. Even so, area burned is easily measured and
sometimes becomes the best proxy for the economic and ecologi-
cal impacts of forest fires that are difficult to estimate. In the
United States, federal agencies of late have started to post wild-
fire suppression costs (www.nifc.gov/stats), especially as public
concerns have grown about the high expense of firefighting.
Generally larger fires are more expensive than small fires, al-
though the costs per unit (per acre or hectare burned) are higher
on small fires. Even so, suppression expenditures alone will be a
Fire Activity
107

poor reflection of all costs associated with wildfires and their man-
agement during any year. Figure 5–4 shows U.S. federal wildfire
suppression costs over time, in this case for the period 1994–2000.
Clearly, the USDA Forest Service expends more than other federal
agencies combined from year to year, followed by the Bureau of
Land Management (BLM). These agencies protect more public
land than the other federal agencies, so we would expect higher
total expenditures. In 1994, combined federal suppression expen-
ditures for the first time exceeded $1 billion. By the year 2000, a
single agency (USDA Forest Service) exceeded the $1 billion ex-
penditure benchmark. Since then, annual federal agency expendi-
tures routinely exceed $1 billion. However, those estimates may be
misleading, since suppression costs by and large reflect expendi-
tures on large fires—spending prior to a fire for staffing, equip-
ment, or other preparedness measures may not be included.
What’s more, spending by state, local, and private entities will not
108
Facts and Data
$0
$200
$400
$600
$800
$1,000
$1,200
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
Year
Dollars Spent (in millions)
Bureau of Land Management
Bureau of Indian Affairs
Fish and Wildlife Service
National Park Service
USDA Forest Service
98.42
56.60
96.85
62.47
63.18
85.72
180.57
49.20
36.22
40.78
30.92
27.37
42.18
93.04
3.28
1.68
0.00
0.00
3.80
4.50
9.42
16.36
21.26
19.83
6.84
19.18
30.06
53.34
678.00
224.30
521.70
1,026.00
155.77
215.00
361.00
Source: http://www.nifc.gov/stats
Note: Figures are unadjusted by inflation.
Figure 5-4
Suppression Expenditures by Federal Agency, 1994–2000

be reflected. Moreover, natural resource (that is, timber, recreation,
water, wildlife, and range) damage, ecosystem impacts, and busi-
ness losses are rarely included in cost-accounting schemes.
Variation in expenditures can be explained by differences in
agency missions, land base, fire loads, and recording standards,
as well as numerous other considerations. Table 5–1 provides a
sense for the differences in agency mission and land base, but dif-
ferential fire loads are difficult to assess because a large fire may
involve multiple jurisdictions and cross numerous property
boundaries as it spreads. Typically, expenditures will be assigned
to the responsible agency at the location of the fire’s origin, but
eventual costs may be shared with other organizations, depend-
ing upon how the fire spreads and cooperative arrangements
among participating entities. Sometimes cost assignments and re-
imbursements among agencies will require months and even
years to resolve, depending on fire complexity and spread pat-
terns. For example, if state and private lands are involved, the
process could drag on even longer. Thus cost estimates probably
need to be viewed with considerable caution. In fairness, the fed-
eral agencies protect vastly different pieces of real estate, and
costs would be expected to vary among timbered national forests
of the USDA Forest Service; the shrublands of the BLM; scenic
Fire Activity
109
Table 5-1
Agencies, Land Base, and Primary Management Units
Agency
Land area, in million ac
Primary management units
(million ha)
USDA Forest Service
191 (77.3) 
155 national forests and 20 
national grasslands
USDI Bureau of 
270 (109.3) 
Multiple use areas within 
Land Management
50 states
USDI National Park Service
80 (32.4)
166 national parks, 
monuments, preserves, 
and seashores 
USDI Fish and 
95 (38.5)
540 National wildlife 
Wildlife Service
refuges and thousands of 
small wetlands and special 
management areas.
USDI Bureau of 
56 (22.7) 
Tribal and Indian Trust 
Indian Affairs
lands
Note: Differences in land base and primary management units help explain some, but not all, variability in annual
expenditures by U.S. federal agencies.
Source: http://www.nifc.gov/stats

vistas in national parks and monuments; wetlands in wildlife
refuges; and native resources on Indian trust lands. In addition to
the differences in values protected, fire behavior and effects will
vary widely among the various fuel types found within each
agency’s jurisdiction. Differences in expenditures may also reflect
agency missions and management practices—and the extent to
which agencies have come to grips with managing fire problems
in the past.
Information on prescribed fire acreage and costs is hard to
come by, inasmuch as agency programs are relatively new and
good record keeping hasn’t always been standard practice. In the
United States, federal agencies have been under increasing pres-
sure to increase the use of prescribed fire and other fuel treat-
ments (such as mechanical thinning), especially after the bad fire
years in 2000 and 2002. Available information for the years
1995–2000 (www.nifc.gov/stats) reveals that federal agency use
of prescribed fire averaged about 1.4 million acres (567,000 ha).
Prescribed fire costs ranged from about $17 per acre ($42/ha)
for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service in 1998 to $81 per acre
($201/ha) for the National Park Service in the same period, with
expenditures for the other federal agencies falling between those
bounds (Omi 2004).
Compared with the agency land bases in Table 5–1, the an-
nual prescribed fire accomplishment is fairly low, considering the
total area under each agency’s jurisdiction. In fact, the annual
area burned by both wild and prescribed fire on federal lands
constitutes about 1 percent or less of total agency land bases. The
difference in prescribed fire costs between agencies reflects a va-
riety of factors, including type and size of land base, agency mis-
sion, and workforce expertise and experience. For example, much
of the Fish and Wildlife Service land base includes wildlife
refuges and wetlands in the Southeast, where fire use is ingrained
in the local culture. By contrast, the National Park Service’s pre-
scribed burning efforts are concentrated in high-visibility parks
such as Yosemite, Grand Canyon, and Sequoia–Kings Canyon;
costs are higher in such locales in part because of the high values
at risk and limited opportunities for burning as a result of fire
danger and air quality concerns. Furthermore, cost estimates for
prescribed fires reflect expenditures for execution but not neces-
sarily planning, preparation, and data collection—or the costs as-
sociated with escapes, which would show up as wildfire expen-
ditures. Rideout and Omi (1995) have described how numerous
110
Facts and Data

reasons can account for the variability in unit cost estimates for
prescribed burning, including the size of the burn project, objec-
tives, the complexity of the project, and fuel types. Generally
speaking, the larger the prescribed burn project area, the lower
the unit costs.
Fire suppression costs can range anywhere from five to a
hundred times those of prescribed fires. Prescribed fire and fire
suppression are not substitutes for each other, however, so the
comparison is not totally meaningful. On the other hand, the pat-
tern of recent wildfires throughout the arid West has left an im-
pression that wildfires are not manageable, especially under ex-
treme burning conditions. And in fact, wildfires have reduced
fuel loads in more areas in recent years than will likely ever be
achieved by intentional fuel hazard reduction. Within that con-
text, then, prescribed fires not only cost considerably less than fire
suppression but, overall, also cause less damage to organisms
and ecosystems; in fact, depending on burning conditions and
objectives, prescribed fires may be beneficial and perhaps re-
quired for restoring the health of some ecosystems. Since pre-
scribed fires can be used to reduce fuel hazards and the severity
of eventual wildfires, society has a fairly clear-cut choice to make
regarding fire management on public lands—that is, application
of fuel treatments such as prescribed fire at relatively low costs,
versus massive expenditures and damaging wildfires, especially
as witnessed in bad fire years such as 2000 and 2002. Those two
years were widely acknowledged as two of the worst to date in
terms of costs and losses resulting from U.S. wildfires.
Although most fires remain small and result in relatively in-
significant impacts, occasionally fires grow large and cause sig-
nificant damage, including loss of life (as discussed in Chapters 1
and 2). In some years, climate and fuel conditions will contribute
to numerous large fires regionally. Thus a plot of fire frequency
against size would have the shape conveyed in Figure 5–5, show-
ing a high fraction of fires in the small size classes, decreasing
proportions of midsized fires, and an even smaller ratio of large
fires (to the total number of fires). The relatively few large fires
(say in excess of 1,000 acres) cause the bulk of natural resource
damage and housing losses.
Thus relatively small fires occur frequently, while larger fires
are relatively infrequent. For example, small fires (say, less than
10 acres, or 4 ha) might result from 65 to 75 percent of all igni-
tions, while extremely large fires might constitute 2 to 3 percent
Fire Activity
111

of the total—depending on location and climate. The right-hand
tail of the curve in Figure 5–5 represents the low relative fre-
quency of large megafires—those that typically receive dispro-
portionate coverage in the news media during a fire season.
Some of the most notable large fires have been discussed pre-
viously in Chapter 3, in which we noted the better known fatality
fires. Even so, fatalities do not occur only in large fires, or only in
heavily timbered forests. In fact, Wilson (1977) found that most
fire fatalities have occurred in flashy fuels or on the periphery of
larger fires. Fires in light fuels can be deceptively dangerous,
since spread rates are high and fires in such fuel types can change
direction and accelerate quickly as the wind shifts. Fire fatalities
represent yet another cost (perhaps the highest) to society. Figure
5–6 plots firefighter fatalities by decade for the period 1900–2002
in the United States. Firefighter and public safety has become a
top priority for federal land managers, yet fatalities persist at
about 150 per decade.
Although fatalities occur in some large fires, smaller fires
burning in lighter, flashy fuels also can threaten firefighters. Most
fatalities occur when firefighters are surprised or caught un-
awares by sudden, shifting winds or increases in fire intensity
(sometimes called “blowup” conditions). Fire blowups can trap
112
Facts and Data
Figure 5-5
Hypothetical Fire Size versus Fire Frequency
Hypothetical fire size versus fire frequency distribution, showing
the high relative portion of small fires and low portion of
very large fires.
1.0
0
Relative Size
Relative Frequency

unsuspecting or weary firefighters, including seasoned veterans
with many years of experience. For example, the fourteen fatali-
ties on the 1994 South Canyon fire in Colorado included members
of elite smokejumper and hot-shot crews who were overrun by a
sudden and unexpected surge in fire intensity. Surprisingly anal-
ogous circumstances contributed to the deaths of thirteen Mon-
tana smokejumpers in the 1949 Mann Gulch fire. More com-
monly, firefighting crews with less training and experience may
experience fire entrapments or suffer fatalities. Inadequate crew
cohesion, poor communications, and lack of awareness of haz-
ardous situations are among the contributory causes (Alexander
2004). Thus fatalities and injuries can strike all firefighters, from
the most experienced to the least well trained. No amount of train-
ing or supervisory reminders about safety seems to matter when
firefighters become caught in a sudden blowup—sadly, the best
tactic is to avoid being in the wrong place at an inopportune time.
As noted in Chapters 3 and 4, the chronology of costs and
losses (including fatalities) from wildfires has influenced the evo-
lution of forestry and natural resource policy. For example, the
Fire Activity
113
Figure 5-6
Firefighter Fatalities, 1900–Present
The absence of fatalities during 1911–1920 may be due to poor
record-keeping (common during the early periods of
US fire management)
78
0
7
134
56
83
82
92
146
164
41
0
50
100
150
200
1900–1910
1911–1920
1921–1930
1931–1940
1941–1950
1951–1960
1961–1970
1971–1980
1981–1990
1991–2000
2001–present
Year
Fatalities
Source: http://www.nifc.gov/stats

policy review that followed the 1994 South Canyon fire estab-
lished priorities for firefighting (in decreasing order): firefighter
and public safety, private property, then natural resources. Typi-
cally, bad fire seasons and fatality fires spawn numerous reviews
and extensive soul searching, and they may result in new legisla-
tion, national initiatives, and new local laws and ordinances,
mostly in reaction to casualties and other losses. Concurrently,
agencies charged with managing fires on public and private lands
have developed sophisticated technologies and information sys-
tems to contend with perceived threats to society from wildland
fire. Not surprisingly, large forest fires have spawned a substan-
tial private industry that includes aircraft (both fixed and rotary
wing), fire suppression supplies and equipment, and an enor-
mous amount of support services (for example, kitchen and sani-
tation services, radio communications, and monitoring equip-
ment). At the same time, a growing body of scientific evidence
indicates that all-out suppression of wildfires may not be desir-
able or sustainable in some ecosystems (see Chapters 1 and 2).
Several caveats are necessary in the interpretation of histori-
cal fire records. Fire records have been collected by public agen-
cies for only a relatively short time—say, fifty years or less. By
contrast, fires have been burning for thousands of years, so the
available records provide only a brief statistical snapshot, the
clarity of which becomes fuzzier and more incomplete as you
venture further back in time. Recording standards change over
time, as well as geographical coverage and archive technologies.
In some cases, the length of record may be extended considerably
by reliance on other historical sources, such as datable fire scars
on trees or charcoal sediments in lakes, which may go back sev-
eral centuries or more. Although extremely useful for resurrect-
ing fire histories, including estimates for fire recurrence intervals,
these other techniques possess their own methodological difficul-
ties and can be quite time consuming. We will discuss these tech-
niques in more detail later, but first we will examine some of the
fundamental outcomes from fire in the forest.
Forest Combustion
Forests, shrublands, and grasslands have burned for millennia as
a result of natural causes and human firing practices. Aborigines
must have recognized fairly early that fire could be both a useful
114
Facts and Data

tool as well as a destructive environmental change agent. As civ-
ilizations developed, the recognition likewise must have devel-
oped that some ignitions provided useful benefits, such as creat-
ing clearings for agriculture, improving wildlife habitat, or
reducing fuel hazards, whereas other fires could not be allowed
to burn unimpeded. Over time the benefits of agricultural fire
were transformed for use in industrialized societies.
The mechanics of suppressing fire are well known to fire-
fighters. The classic fire triangle consists of fuel, oxygen, and heat
(Figure 5–7). In the forest, fuel refers to live and dead vegetation
that will burn. As we are taught in grade school, we can extin-
guish fires by breaking or removing one of the legs of the fire tri-
angle, removing the possibility of combustion. Similarly, fire-
fighters are taught that water and soil can be thrown at a fire to
remove heat and oxygen, while building a fireline will create a
barrier that essentially removes fuel ahead of the fire. What’s
more, a fire can be prevented if one of the legs of the triangle is
not permitted to mix with the other two. For example, oxygen
and fuel in the absence of heat is not a combustible situation.
Moreover, variations in fire behavior result from the changing
mix of fuel, oxygen, and heat within the combustion zone.
Forest Combustion
115
Fuel
Heat
Oxygen
Figure 5-7
Classic Fire Triangle
The classic fire triangle consists of fuel, oxygen, and heat

The physical and chemical properties of wildland fuels con-
tribute to their combustibility. Physical properties include attrib-
utes of the fuel particles, such as their size and density, as well as
the horizontal and vertical arrangement of particles throughout
the fuelbed. Fuelbeds that are too tightly or too loosely packed
with fuel particles may not burn efficiently, just as high particle
moisture content will dampen combustion. Terpenes, oils, and
other volatile chemicals (so-called ether extractives), evident in
pine or chaparral fuels by their distinctive aromas, will facilitate
active burning.
All vegetative biomass that will burn in the forest consists of
complicated arrangements of cellulose, hemicelluloses, and
lignin, incorporated within a matrix of extractives and mineral
constituents (Chandler et al. 1983a). One ton of wood consists of
50 to 75 percent cellulose and hemicellulose, with a heat content
of 10,500 Btu/lb (24.40 MJ/kg); 15 to 35 percent lignin (heat con-
tent 10,500 Btu/lb or 24.40 MJ/kg); 0.3 to 15 percent ether extrac-
tives (terpenes and resins, heat content 13,900 Btu/lb or 32.30
MJ/kg); and 2 to 4 percent ash (inorganic compounds that do not
burn) (Deeming 1988). The combustion process can be repre-
sented simplistically by equation (1), which shows the oxidation
of a glucose molecule (a basic chemical unit of cellulose, the pri-
mary constituent of wood).
C6H12O6 + 6O2 →6CO2 + 6H2O + heat
(1)
Woody fuels and plant material in the forest are more com-
plex chemically than glucose, but equation (1) represents concep-
tually the combustion process that we observe in the field. Thus
oxygen combines with woody fuels to produce carbon dioxide
(CO2), water (H2 O), and heat. The amount of heat given off in the
combustion reaction is of interest because many fire effects will be
related to the heat output from a fire. The heat of combustion by
various materials can be determined experimentally using a
bomb calorimeter in a laboratory. For example, Table 5–2 shows a
sampling from previous experiments, demonstrating little varia-
tion between types of wood with higher energy contents for pine
pitch and eucalyptus oil, as might be expected because of their
higher volatility.
Actually, combustion in the wild is not an especially efficient
process, so the proportions of carbon dioxide, water, and heat
116
Facts and Data

produced will vary considerably, as will the flame and gaseous
temperatures emitted from burning fuels. For example, the actual
heat yield per kg of various burning fuels will be considerably
less than that shown in Table 5–2, largely a consequence of the
heat required to drive off and vaporize moisture in the fuel parti-
cles and resultant incomplete combustion.
Furthermore, numerous other by-products may result from
incomplete combustion and chemical reactions with constituents
of burning fuel or in the air (for example, nitrogen in plant parts,
in soil litter, or in the atmosphere will react with oxygen and re-
sult in nitrogen oxides). Other by-products include carbon
monoxide (CO), particulates (a major air pollutant), and gaseous
hydrocarbons, some of which are toxic and carcinogenic. CO in
particular is a by-product of incomplete combustion and can be
lethal, except that its concentrations dissipate rather quickly with
increased distance from flaming and smoldering fuel sources. Ap-
proximate by-product proportions are portrayed in Figure 5–8, al-
though proportions would be expected to vary depending on fire
intensity and the completeness of combustion. Also, total sus-
pended particulates are probably under-represented in the figure,
and concentrations could be several orders of magnitude larger.
Woody fuels also produce sulfur oxides in small amounts, a major
constituent of urban-industrial pollution. Trace amounts of oxi-
dants that react with sunlight and are found in photochemical
smog have been found in wood smoke. The longevity of photo-
reactive substances found in smoke is poorly understood but
probably short-lived. Large amounts of ozone have been noted in
Forest Combustion
117
Table 5-2
Heat of Combustion from a Variety of North American and
Australian Fuels
Fuel 
Heat of combustion 
(MJ/kg)
Pine wood
21.28
Oak wood
19.33
Poplar wood
18.22
Eucalyptus (average of 9 species)
19.98
Pine sawdust
21.74
Spruce sawdust
19.65
Pine pitch
35.13
Eucalyptus oil
37.20
Source: After Whelan 1995.

smoke plumes aloft, but little data link fire emissions with in-
creased ground-level ozone concentrations (Sandberg et al. 2002).
At present, particulates are the major pollutant of concern
from wildland fires in the United States (ibid.), although globally
greenhouse gas emissions (for example, CO2) are also of concern.
Particulates include soots, tars, and condensed organic sub-
stances entrained in the smoke plume, which may range in size
from 0.01 to 15µ (µ = 1 micron, or 10–6 meter, roughly the width
of a fine human hair). The approximate proportions of particu-
lates of different size classes in smoke from wildland combustion
are shown in Figure 5–9. The larger particulates scatter light and
can reduce visibility. Smaller particulates may be suspended in
the air that we view and breathe. Two classes of fine particulate
matter have generated great concern from the standpoint of air
quality and human health: PM10 (particulate matter less than 10µ
diameter) and PM2.5 (particulate matter less than 2.5µ diameter).
118
Facts and Data
Figure 5-8
Emission or By-Product Proportions
Fractions may vary depending on combustion efficiency and fire
intensity. Total suspended particulate fractions are probably under-
represented. Also, trace proportions of sulfur oxides and other
oxidants are not shown.
Emission proportions (approximate)
Carbon monoxide 6%
Hydrocarbons
and organics 0.9%
Nitrogen
oxides 0.1%
1%
Carbon dioxide
67%
Water
25%
Total suspended particulates 1%
Source: After Deeming 1988.

Consistent with Figure 5–9, later studies (for example, Ward and
Hardy 1991) indicate that 90 percent of all smoke particles emit-
ted during burning are PM10, and 90 percent of PM10 are PM2.5
(ibid.). Thus the largest proportions of particulate diameters in
smoke are found in the smallest size classes. Prolonged exposure
to such by-products can affect human health, especially for
people with chronic pulmonary disorders.
Combustion Stages
The oxidation of woody biomass occurs all the time in the forest,
as fuels are naturally decomposed by microbial activity. Combus-
tion hastens natural decomposition of organic biomass into its
constituent parts, sometimes in spectacular displays of heat, light,
and sound. Burning produces relatively large amounts of energy
in two forms: convection (from the motion of air) and radiation
(infrared and visible light). Relatively smaller proportions of en-
ergy are transferred by conduction (heat transmission through a
Combustion Stages
119
Figure 5-9
Most particulates entrained in smoke are in the finer size
classes.
< 1 micron
82%
1–5
microns
10%
5–15
microns
8%
Particulate proportions
Source: After Deeming 1988.

solid material). The combustion process starts as an endothermic
reaction with heat provided by a spark or other ignition source,
then becomes a self-sustaining exothermic reaction (1) until ex-
tinction occurs, when fuels become unavailable because of
changes in environmental conditions or human suppression. In
between ignition and extinction, the fire will go through several
stages, including preheating of unburned fuels, followed by flam-
ing, glowing, and smoldering combustion (Table 5–3). During
preheating, heat is required to drive off moisture and convert
solid fuel to volatile gases, otherwise known as pyrolysis. During
flaming, the combustion reaction becomes exothermic, with the
burning of volatiles and flame temperatures in excess of 500–600°
C (Agee 1993). Glowing and smoldering involves the burning of
solid carbon. Extinction occurs after fuels are cooled or no longer
available for combustion. Particulate production is approxi-
mately 2.5 times higher during smoldering than during flaming,
because of the greater incompleteness of combustion during lat-
ter stages of the fire (Deeming 1988).
120
Facts and Data
Table 5-3
Fire Stages, Burning Characteristics, and Approximate
Temperature Ranges
Combustion stage
Description
Temperature range 
Preheating
Thermal dehydration and degradation < 300° C
of solid fuels ahead of the fire. Lignin 
and cellulose gasify at 150° C to 
produce combustible gases. 
Flaming
Gaseous volatiles ignite when 
300–600° C, 
sufficient oxygen is present and 
with spikes to
carry flame, preheating unburned 
1200° C in
fuels by radiation, convection, 
crown fires
conduction, and direct flame contact.
Glowing and  
Burning of solid charcoal (carbon), 
~500° C
smoldering
sporadic flaming due to insufficient 
oxygen to support flaming or when 
pyrolysis occurs too slowly to supply 
sufficient volatiles because of lower 
temperatures. 
Cooling and 
Decrease in heat emitted until 
20–500° C
extinction
residual fuels are at ambient 
temperature; ash layer persists where 
complete combustion has occurred.
Source: After Agee 1993 and Deeming 1988.

These stages exist at different points along the fire’s perime-
ter as the fire spreads through the forest and across a landscape.
The fire may develop a cohesive flaming head, emitting intense
temperatures (brief peak temperatures in excess of 1,000–1,200°C
in raging crown fires), bright and glowing light, and loud sonic
roars—or else grow in sporadic fits and spurts, in response to
changing fuel availability (as affected primarily by changing
winds and fuel moisture contents). Some of the most dramatic fire
effects may occur after passage of the flaming front, as glowing
and then smoldering combustion may last for hours or even days,
killing stems and roots and consuming ground cover. Eventually,
these portions of the fire become quiescent or cold as the fire dies
out or is extinguished. In general, the most active burning condi-
tions occur at the fire’s head (or front), with lesser activity along
the flanks and to the rear. If intensities are great enough at the ac-
tive flaming front, shrub or tree crowns may become engaged in
the combustion process.
At all stages prior to cooling and extinction, vulnerable houses
and structures exposed to heat may be at risk. Risks to houses may
seem greatest during flaming stages, especially when burning em-
bers may shower down on roofs or other combustible surfaces
ahead of a fire’s flaming front. Even so, some structures may be ig-
nited by creeping surface fires if enough heat is generated. Houses
may burst into flames after decks or other combustible attachments
are subjected to prolonged heating, or if a fire reburns an area be-
cause of shifting winds. In these respects, houses and adjoining
structures are just like other fuels in the forest.
We also can think of forest combustion as the rapid break-
down of plant biomass, accompanied by the release of the chem-
ical energy that the plant had originally converted from solar ra-
diation via photosynthesis (Agee 1993). Trollope (1984) compared
those two reverse processes as follows, using a simplified repre-
sentation for a carbohydrate to represent the cellulose molecule
(C6H10O5)n as a result of photosynthesis (equation 2) and an oxi-
dant in combustion (equation 3):
CO2 + H2O + solar energy →(C6H10O5)n + O2 
(2)
(C6H10O5)n + O2 + heat →CO2 + H2O + heat 
(3)
During a fire, the chemical energy stored in forest fuels is
converted to radiant, kinetic, and thermal energy (Byram 1959).
Combustion Stages
121

As a fire grows it develops an anatomy that reflects differential
rates of energy conversion along its perimeter. Fire effects will
vary at different segments of a fire’s perimeter, as the tempera-
tures emitted (and duration of heat exposure) can change dra-
matically, depending on the fire’s environment and anatomy.
Temperatures will likely be highest at the flaming front, while du-
rations may be longer in the back or flank of the fire. Eventually
even the hottest portions of a fire will cool. Fire effects will also
differ with anatomy, since the heat generated and resistance of af-
fected plants and organisms will produce a mosaic of patchy burn
patterns.
Similarly, mechanisms of heat transfer will vary depending
on fire spread in relation to terrain slope and wind. Thus a fire
burning on flat terrain with no wind will spread primarily by ra-
diation, while a fire burning with the wind or up a slope (head
fire) will spread by radiation, convection, and flame contact. By
contrast, a fire spreading into the wind or down a slope (backing
fire) spreads primarily by radiation (Rothermel 1972).
The amount and extent of flaming will depend on the rate of
decomposition from solid fuel into volatile gases, previously de-
scribed as pyrolysis. These gases burn during flaming when
mixed with oxygen. The fire’s intensity and flaming will depend
on the rate at which solid fuel is preheated and pyrolyzed, then
mixed with surrounding oxygen. Thus the rate of pyrolysis is
highest when large amounts of fuel are burning rapidly and is
lowest during the smoldering combustion preceding extinction.
Pulses in fire growth can be caused by environmental
changes (that is, higher or gusting wind speeds, differential solar
heating or shading of fuels) or by encounters with fuel jackpots
(for example, piles of flammable branches and twigs, or needles
draped over understory bushes). Fires usually slow down after
sundown on account of the cooler temperatures and higher rela-
tive humidities—but they may roar back to life the next day, as
the nighttime inversion (warm air over cold) dissipates in re-
sponse to solar heating. Passage of thunder clouds or convection
columns from a fire can create dangerous updrafts and down-
drafts that push and pull at a spreading fire, causing sudden
changes in the directional rate of growth.
Chemical properties that contribute to flammability include
cellulose/lignin proportions, ether extractives; mineral constitu-
ents (except silica), and moisture contents generally inhibit com-
bustion. Technically, the amount of oxygen available for combus-
122
Facts and Data

tion depends on the elevation and air pressure, though oxygen
availability rarely limits forest combustion. More important, the
speed and direction of winds (including those that are induced by
the fire itself) provide ample oxygen circulation within fuel arrays
to support the combustion process. Higher air and fuel tempera-
tures facilitate more active burning, while higher humidities at-
tendant with cooler temperatures will dampen combustibility of
finer fuels.
Firefighters use knowledge of fire growth processes to sup-
press an ongoing fire by building firelines around a fire’s perime-
ter to isolate fuels from heat. Spraying water or fire retardant on
the fire can reduce heat. Total immersion of the fire in water or soil
will rob it of oxygen, though total O2 deprivation is not practica-
ble for suppressing a large fire. Instead, firefighters are taught to
contain a fire by building a line completely around a fire’s perime-
ter, starting from an anchor point and eventually encircling the
fire, incorporating natural barriers where available, such as lakes,
rivers, or boulder fields. A fire surrounded by fireline is consid-
ered contained. While building fireline, firefighters may engage in
hotspotting, by throwing soil at the base of flames to remove heat
and oxygen; firefighters also may call in air support to drop water
or fire retardant on active fire edges. During the mop-up stages of
a fire, firefighters will remove oxygen and heat from burning areas
by mixing soil and water with embers or pockets of burning fuels.
Fire Environment
Fire managers recognize the importance of the fire triangle (Fig-
ure 5–7) in explaining the ignition (and control) of forest fires.
Firefighters also are trained to consider the various alternatives
for suppressing heat transfer to unburned fuels that lie in the path
of an oncoming wildland fire, using principles embodied in the
fire environment concept. The fire environment is the complex of
fuel, topographic, and air mass constituents that influence the in-
ception, growth, and behavior of a fire (Countryman 1972). The
fire environment dictates fire behavior through dynamic changes
over space and time in fuel, air mass, and topography. The ele-
ments of the fire environment interact with one another, often in
chain reaction sequences that can dramatically alter the course of
a fire. For example, air mass changes (such as wind speed and di-
rection) can induce dramatic changes in fire behavior, although
Fire Environment
123

those effects may be most pronounced in mountainous terrain
where broken topography and fuel type changes are likely.
Table 5–4 depicts important fuel, weather, and topographic
influences on fire behavior. Dramatic changes in fire behavior can
result from changes in any one of the elements in the fire envi-
ronment. Furthermore, most of these will vary simultaneously as
a fire moves through an area. Moreover, they may interact, in-
creasing or restricting fuel availability and the problems encoun-
tered by firefighters. For example, a high wind speed may enable
fires to spread in moist fuels. Or, in the Northern Hemisphere
similar fuels will burn more dramatically on south than on north
aspects, because of solar heating. Generally, self-sustaining com-
bustion occurring in the forest will create problems for firefight-
ers if the relative humidity falls below 25 percent, if the moisture
content of fine fuels (less than 1 inch, or 2.54 cm, in diameter) av-
erages around 5 percent, and wind speeds exceed 10 mph (16.7
km/hr). Extreme fire behavior may be observed if moisture lev-
els fall below (or winds exceed) these thresholds, although other
contributors to extreme fire behavior include continuous fuels
linking the surface and crown fuel strata (that is, ladder fuels), or
fuel jackpots (piles of flammable material).
Fire managers focus particular attention on fuels because
weather and topography are less easily manipulated. Of the ele-
ments of the fire environment triangle, only fuel can be manipu-
lated in advance to render future ignitions more manageable.
However, on an ongoing wildfire, experienced firefighters will
make mental notes of slope, aspect, and time of day because of
124
Facts and Data
Table 5-4
Indicators of a Fire’s Environment
Fuels
Air mass
Topography
Fuel moisture
Wind speed and direction
Slope steepness
Vertical arrangement 
Relative humidity
Slope position
Fuel loading 
Precipitation
Aspect
Compactness
Temperature
Elevation
Size (i.e., timelag) and shape
Atmospheric stability
Shape of country
Horizontal continuity
Canyon shape
Chemistry
Canyon width
Ridges
Flat terrain
A fire’s environment consists of fuels, air mass, and topography. Indicators may interact with one another (e.g., wind
and fuel moisture), thereby influencing the availability of fuels for combustion and creating different challenges for
firefighters.

their potential impacts on fire behavior and growth. Changes in
fire environment during a day can be just as important to a fire-
fighter as the more obvious signals, such as the jetlike roar of an
approaching crown fire. Subtle shifts in wind speed or direction
can portend imminent changes in burning conditions. In addi-
tion, the fire environment will dictate the ecological consequences
of fires by controlling the rate of spread, intensity, duration, and
severity of burning.
Few people realize that a fire seldom consumes all burnable
material or scorches every square meter of ground surface. Even
the most extreme fires will create a patchy mosaic of burned and
unburned areas, because of the variability of fire spread and flam-
ing, fuel discontinuities, weather changes, and natural barriers.
Combustion availability is determined by fuel, weather, and topo-
graphic factors included in Table 5–4. Thus fire scientists and man-
agers distinguish between fuel amount or quantity and fuel available
for combustion when discussing the fire potential for an area.
Fuel quantity is expressed in metric tons/ha or tons/acre, or
sometimes kg/m2 or lb/ft2, or units of mass per unit area. Fuel
availability refers to the portion of total fuel that actually burns in
a fire, and will depend on the above fuel descriptors (Table 5–4) as
well as weather and topographic gradients. Fuel availability
varies by plant community type, fire environment, and distur-
bance history for an area. Under low flammability conditions,
only surface fuels and low vegetation may actually combust.
Moderate burning conditions may ignite downed logs and stand-
ing dead snags and scorch the lower tree crowns. Under extreme
burning conditions, entire tree crowns may be enveloped in
flames. All the fuels within a grassland may be available for com-
bustion, whereas only a small portion of an old-growth forest may
actually catch fire, except under extreme drought conditions. Fuels
vary in their availability for combustion in response to changes in
the fire environment over space and time. Fuelbeds and their con-
stituent fuel particles will change throughout the day and season-
ally in terms of the ease with which they ignite and continue to
burn. Thus high winds and low relative humidities will augment
fuel availability, just as cold rain or snowstorms may knock the life
out of a fire by rendering all fuels unavailable. Prolonged drought
increases fuel availability, especially among the larger diameter
fuels whose moisture levels may stay uniformly low even as the
finer fuels are responding to diurnal humidity fluctuations.
During the summer, fuel moisture may change most quickly,
Fire Environment
125

especially in fine fuels such as dead grass; the moisture content of
larger fuel particles (such as logs) may change rather slowly with
time. Consequently, fuel moisture is a major determinant of varia-
tions in fire behavior and potential fire hazard.
Dead logs, branches, and twigs are hygroscopic, in that they
exchange moisture with the environment. The rate of moisture
change in a fuel depends on the relative humidity (amount of
moisture in the atmosphere compared with saturation condi-
tions) of the air immediately surrounding the particle and the
particle size. The common measure of fuel particle size is its sur-
face area to volume ratio, which can be likened to a comparative
measure of the fuel “skin” (surface area) and amount of space
within the skin (volume). Small diameter and thin fuels have a
relatively larger surface area to volume ratio and can respond
rapidly to changes in environmental moisture. By contrast, large
logs have a small surface area compared with volume, and inter-
nal moisture changes occur more slowly. A large log with high
moisture content, for example, may require months before its in-
terior becomes dry enough to burn.
If a desiccated piece of fuel (say a dead blade of grass) is
placed in a fixed, moist environment, its moisture will increase
rapidly, then slow, then cease changing. The moisture in the fuel
is then at equilibrium with the environment—or at its equilib-
rium moisture content (emc). A reverse trend would be observed
if a moist fuel were placed in a dry environment—that is, a rapid
decrease in moisture content, then a slowing in the rate of de-
crease, and eventual equilibrium (Figure 5–10). The rate of in-
crease (or decrease) and corresponding equilibrium point will de-
pend on ambient temperature and relative humidity.
The rate of moisture change in a fuel particle in response to
increases or decreases in relative humidity is called its timelag, a
convention adopted for fire danger rating and fire behavior pre-
diction purposes. Technically, one timelag is defined as the time
required for the particle to reach (1–1/e) percent, or roughly 63
percent, of the equilibrium moisture content, where e is the base
of the Naiperian logarithms. Dead grass, foliage, and twigs less
than 1⁄4 inch (0.64 cm) diameter are called 1-hour timelag fuels, an
indication of the approximate time required for a particle to ap-
proach equilibrium with its environment in response to a change
in relative humidity. Similarly, branches between 1⁄4 inch and 1
inch (0.64 cm and 2.54 cm) diameter are called 10-hour timelag
fuels; they tend to follow diurnal trends in relative humidity and
126
Facts and Data

temperatures, rather than short-term fluctuations (Countryman
n.d.). The 100-hour timelag fuels fall between 1 inch and 3 inches
(2.54 cm and 7.62 cm); 1,000-hour timelag fuels exceed 3 inches
(7.62 cm) in diameter.
The arrangement of fuel pieces within the fuelbed will also
influence flammability. A highly compact fuelbed with a dense
arrangement of fuel pieces may not allow sufficient oxygen circu-
lation to promote active burning. Similarly, a sparse fuelbed may
not have enough flammable biomass to support combustion.
Horizontal continuity is required for flames to preheat unburned
fuels ahead of a fire, just as fuels arrayed vertically will allow heat
and flames to reach into a forest canopy and burn as a crown fire.
Foliage and needles that contain oils and terpenes may enhance
combustion, especially on a hot summer day when such fuels will
emit gaseous volatiles because of solar heating.
The quantity of fuel (or loading), in tons/acre, metric
tonnes/ha, or kg/sq m, will be important to describing fuelbed
flammability. Fuel quantities can vary from very little to all the
standing trees and canopy foliage in a forest. Whether an igni-
tion spreads through the forest will depend on the size of fuel
particles, moisture content, and spatial arrangement. Although
Fire Environment
127
Figure 5-10
Pattern of Fuel Moisture Content
Hypothetical changes in a fuel moisture content over time in a drying
environment, under constant temperature and atmospheric pressure.
Initial
Moisture (%)
Equilibrium
Time (hr)

vegetation biomass increases predictably with time as a result of
ongoing photosynthesis, temporal fuel biomass changes can be
irregular because of tradeoffs between annual fuel increment
versus decay and environmental properties that affect fuel avail-
ability (Brown 2000).
Atmospheric stability, which measures the propensity of air
to move vertically in response to a lifting (or lowering) force, in-
directly influences fuel availability. For example, an unstable at-
mospheric environment (usually expected on a clear, hot summer
day) will allow greater convective lift, raising flame heights and
facilitating formation of a well-formed smoke plume or convec-
tion column above a fire—thereby supporting extreme burning
conditions as ladder and crown fuels become available for com-
bustion. By contrast, a stable environment (such as an early morn-
ing inversion created when a warm air layer overlies cold air) will
constrain burning by resisting the convective lift from a fire.
In the mountains topography can be rugged and broken,
with abrupt changes in aspect and slope angle. A fire reacts to
steeper slope with increases in spread rate, flame length, and
overall heat. As slopes increase, flames are bent closer to un-
burned fuel ahead of a fire, which promotes preheating of fuels
and faster spread rates. As a very rough guideline, managers ex-
pect that a slope increase by 20 percent may approximately dou-
ble the fire’s rate of spread, all other factors held constant. The ac-
tual increase in spread rate may depend on the fuel type and
whether the flames attach to the slope. Andrews and Chase (1989)
note that flame attachment causes convective gases and smoke to
flow up the slope, close to the surface, rather than rising vertically
as on shallower slopes. When flames rise vertically, spread rates
may be lower and overstory trees may experience higher scorch
heights, except upslope where the fire encounters a ridgeline.
Solar heating, temperature/relative humidity regimes, and
resultant fire behavior also will be influenced by slope position,
aspect, and elevation. For example, a fire burning at the base of
a south-facing slope in the early afternoon can create problems
for firefighters, especially if high air temperature and low rela-
tive humidity combine with increasing upslope winds to push a
fire uphill. Terrain shape interacts with environmental condi-
tions (such as gradient winds and solar heating) to promote or
retard fire behavior. Steeper, narrow canyons will promote dra-
matically different fire behaviors than will wider, flatter canyons
or valleys.
128
Facts and Data

As another example of fire environment interactions, consider
the effects of topographic aspect on burning conditions in a hypo-
thetical area in the Northern Hemisphere (Figure 5–11) during
early summer. Fuel temperatures depend partly on air tempera-
ture and aspect. A slope facing east warms first and reaches its
maximum early in the day. A south-facing slope reaches its maxi-
mum around four hours later, and that maximum is higher than
on the east aspect. A west-facing slope reaches its maximum tem-
perature even later, exceeding those of the east and south slopes.
The temperature maximum on the north-facing slope (early PM)
tends to be lower than the other aspects during the day.
As a slope is heated, air and fuel temperatures increase. In
turn, relative humidity decreases, affecting the moisture of
Fire Environment
129
Figure 5-11
Hypothetical Surface Fuel Temperature Profiles
Hypothetical surface fuel temperature profiles on a clear day in the
northern hemisphere (42° latitude), early July, slope 45 degrees.
Time-temperature Profiles
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0000
0200
0400
0600
0800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
2200
2400
Time
EAST
SOUTH
WEST
NORTH
Source: adapted from Countryman 1966.

smaller-size fuel particles. Differential temperatures on adjacent
slopes create pressure gradients, thus affecting local winds as air
flows from areas of relatively high pressure to low. These winds
will interact with the general winds in the area and be further
modified by topographic shape and slope position. Cloud cover,
slope percent, time of year, and latitude would change the pattern
of the idealized temperature profiles in Figure 5–11. But suffice to
say that fire initiation, growth, and extinction because of fire en-
vironmental influences would change considerably depending
on aspect, time of day, and slope of the time-temperature curve in
Figure 5–11—that is, whether temperatures had peaked or were
yet to peak in the hours ahead. For example, a fire starting on a
south-facing slope at 10 A.M. will confront favorable conditions
for combustion during the remaining hours of daylight (the so-
called burning period) than will a fire (also on a south-facing
slope) ignited by lightning later that same evening—say, 10 P.M.—
which will encounter a cooler, more humid environment. The
morning fire will encounter upslope winds because of surface
heating in the afternoon, which could lead to fairly dramatic
burning conditions by late afternoon. By contrast, the evening fire
would likely respond to cooling, downslope winds after sun-
down that might actually slow a fire’s growth. Similar contrasts
could be expected on west, east, and north aspects as well. These
influences show up, sometimes dramatically, when a fire spreads
from one topographic aspect to another, essentially coming under
the influence of a different microclimate. For example, firefighters
have been caught unawares when a benign surface fire burning
on an east aspect around noon spreads to a south aspect and roars
to life by mid to late afternoon.
Heating of the earth’s surface contributes to local instability
in the lower atmosphere, and the onrush of air to fill the vacuum
created by convective lifting creates a surface wind that pushes a
fire. As the lifted air is cooled it drops back to earth, only to be
heated again at the earth’s surface, perpetuating the convective
cycle. Thus vertical motions (such as convective lifting) can be as
important as horizontal surface winds in determining a fire’s be-
havior. The stability of the atmosphere, and the resultant propen-
sity of air to continue movement vertically, may either encourage
or dampen upward air movement—and the growth and explo-
siveness of a fire.
This phenomenon is especially important for understand-
ing variations in fire behavior in mountainous terrain. During
130
Facts and Data

the early morning, a fire may be discouraged from active burn-
ing by a surface inversion that persists in the mountains. Heat
from the fire will generate vertical air movement, but the stabil-
ity of the inversion will dampen the fire’s spread and intensity.
Later in the day, however, heating of the earth’s surface by the
sun will gradually increase atmospheric instability until the fire
is no longer burning in a stable environment (around midmorn-
ing). At that point, fire spread can increase dramatically as the
inversion is lifted or broken by convective currents arising from
surface heating.
Thus heating (from the sun and from the fire itself) and air
movements in the atmosphere are important drivers to a fire’s be-
havior. Winds tend to be more turbulent and gusty when the at-
mosphere is unstable, creating more erratic and unpredictable fire
behavior. Thunderstorms and well-formed convection columns
with strong updrafts and downdrafts are symptomatic of unsta-
ble environments. Subsiding warm, dry air brought in from high-
pressure areas to replace rising air in low-pressure areas can stim-
ulate active burning conditions at night—sometimes making
them the equal of daytime burning conditions.
Other air movements of importance are associated with gen-
eral circulation patterns, including varying patterns of pressure
systems and large air masses migrating across the earth’s surface.
Also, frontal winds (between two air masses) can be gusty and
shift direction. Mountain topography can channel winds, alter
wind patterns, and create eddies that alter fire behavior. Differen-
tial heating along coastlines and in mountain slopes and valleys
can alter and interact with general winds. These are just a few ex-
amples of the different types of winds that can affect fire behav-
ior and that fire managers must consider.
Overall, wind affects wildfire in numerous ways. Wind di-
rection will mostly determine the direction of fire spread. Dry air
movements can hasten the desiccation of forest fuels. Light winds
can carry embers and firebrands to unburned areas. Winds in-
crease oxygen flow into the fire and bend flames closer to un-
burned fuels ahead of the fire front. Winds also carry fire between
shrub or tree crowns to sustain active burning. One of the most
critical fire weather situations involves warm, dry winds (known
as foehns, or gravity winds) that descend the lee slopes of moun-
tain ranges in response to pressure gradients. These winds may
be known locally as chinooks (east of the Rockies), Santa Anas
(southern California), or east winds (Oregon), and they can be as-
Fire Environment
131

sociated with extreme burning conditions. For example, the 2003
southern California fires were pushed downslope by Santa Ana
winds (from the northeast), but additional problems were created
when the foehn subsided and coastal breezes (from the west)
pushed the fire back uphill in the San Bernardino Mountains. The
crucial zone where coastal and foehn winds collide can present
many problems for firefighters, depending on their relative
strengths at surface elevations and aloft. Numerous firefighters
have been killed in the turbulent wind zone where coalescing
foehn and coastal winds can toss firebrands and create spot fires
that entrap unsuspecting fire fighters.
Once ignited, a fire is continuously redefined and shaped by
changes in its environment (for example, fuel, weather, topo-
graphic variations), so that the rate of spread, flame length, and
growth indicators (such as perimeter increase and shape) can be
expected to vary considerably. A fire reacts to changes in its envi-
ronment by becoming more or less organized in its behavior. Gen-
erally, higher temperatures, lower moistures (in the air and in the
fuels), and higher winds will result in higher rates of spread with
visibly longer flame lengths. A well-formed convection column
will be visible as heat from the fire is coupled with instability in
the atmosphere (and a greater propensity for vertical motion). A
quiescent fire burning with little organization on a south or west
aspect at 10 A.M. may be transformed to a raging inferno by late
afternoon, as heating from the sun aligns with upslope winds and
terrain slope to contribute to a major fire run. Similarly, a benign
flank may suddenly awake and become a wall of flame because
of the passage of a cold front or sustained downdrafts from a
thundercloud. Management challenges become even more com-
plex when such major runs are spread over several drainages or
on multiple adjacent fires.
Ultimately, the local environment will determine the fre-
quency with which fire recurs in an area, as dead and live bio-
mass respond to moisture and temperature gradients resulting in
differential availability for combustion. The patterns of ignition
over time may exhibit regularity because of lightning storm cor-
ridors or particular topographic landforms (such as ridges) that
may be susceptible to fire starts. Human caused ignitions will
often align along roadsides, railroads, or in high-use corridors
around summer holiday dates. By the same token, fire effects can
be expected to vary considerably from place to place over time, as
will human perceptions of fire impacts and damage.
132
Facts and Data

Fire Weather Observations
Short-term weather and long-term climatic changes profoundly
affect a fire’s behavior. Fatality fires often are associated with
abrupt weather changes that surprise firefighters. Large wildfires
occur during prolonged droughts. So weather observation and
measurements are most important to the understanding and pre-
diction of fire behavior. Drought (or water deficit), on the other
hand, is more pernicious and sometimes difficult to identify until
well after its onset. In this section we discuss the different meas-
urements that can be used to estimate the short- and long-term in-
fluences of air mass on fire behavior. Short-term measurements
included in standard fire weather observations include the fol-
lowing quantitative and subjective assessments of relevance to
fire behavior forecasting on both wild and prescribed fires:
Temperature: A measure of the degree of hotness or
coldness of an object (not to be confused with heat, which
is a form of energy). Dry and wet bulb temperatures are
taken with a standard belt weather kit and are used to
estimate dewpoint temperature, or the temperature at
which the current environment becomes saturated.
Relative Humidity: The ratio of the water vapor in a
volume of air to the total amount of water vapor that the
volume would hold at saturation (constant temperature
and pressure). Relative humidity is computed from dry
and wet bulb temperatures.
Wind speed: A measure of the speed at which air is
flowing past the observation point. Wind speed is
commonly measured at different elevations above the
earth’s surface; fire behavior specialists pay particular
attention to midflame and 20-foot (above the plant canopy)
wind speeds, although winds aloft will also affect a fire’s
behavior. Estimates are derived from a variety of sources,
including hand-held anemometers, nearby weather
stations, or customized forecasts from weather service
providers.
Wind direction: The azimuth direction from which the
wind is originating. Direction and strength of prevailing
Fire Weather Observations
133

winds, as well as gusts, are important predictors of fire
spread and direction.
State of weather: Numerical descriptors of weather
conditions, as well as general observation notes. The
following codes are standard in fire weather observation:
0—Clear (cloud coverage less than 10 percent)
1–Scattered (coverage greater than 10 percent, but
less than 50 percent)
2–Broken (coverage greater than 50 percent but less
than 90 percent)
3–Overcast (coverage greater than 90 percent)
4–Foggy
5–Drizzle (precipitation consisting of numerous fine
droplets)
6–Rain
7–Snow or sleet
8–Showers (in sight or occurring at observation point)
9–Thunderstorm in progress (lightning seen or
thunder heard, less than 30 miles away)
Cloud formations: Clouds are classified according to
elevation and degree of vertical development. Clouds are
one indicator of atmospheric stability, or the tendency for a
hypothetical air parcel to return to its current position after
exertion of a vertical force. In general, layered (stratus)
clouds indicate a stable environment. Clouds with
considerable vertical development are generally indicative
of an unstable environment. Another (less obvious)
indicator of atmospheric instability is an air mass in which
temperatures rapidly decrease with increasing elevation.
By contrast, temperatures increasing with elevation
indicate an inversion (that is, a stable environment).
Other general observations: Conditions warranting special
attention are noted—for example, smoke dispersal, wind
shear, presence of dust-devils, and so forth.
134
Facts and Data

Weather observations are collected manually using a
portable belt weather kit or they can be sensed via a remote auto-
mated weather station (RAWS). RAWS units have sensors that
automatically collect, store, and forward weather information
hourly via a geostationary operational environmental satellite
(GOES), located 22,300 miles (37,167 km) above the equator, to a
computer at the National Interagency Fire Center in Boise, Idaho.
Weather observations collected at 1300 hours daily on approxi-
mately 1,150 RAWS strategically positioned throughout the
United States are archived at a federal computer center and can
be downloaded off the Internet.
Drought
Weather conditions that increase the threat of forest fires are well
known, such as low precipitation and relative humidity, coupled
with high temperatures and prolonged solar radiation. High
winds complicate matters further. However, the specific meteor-
ological factors are not always known for the climatic periods
preceding past fires. Drought, which results from a combination
of meteorological factors, is especially problematic (Haines and
Sando 1969). Unfortunately the exact role of drought is un-
known, probably because the term is used so informally and
vaguely.
Unlike discrete events like a wildfire, drought sneaks up qui-
etly, often under the guise of lovely, sunny weather. Meteorolo-
gists define drought as simply a shortage of water, usually asso-
ciated with a deficiency of rainfall, often unpredictable and
unanticipated until we are in its midst. We are never sure when a
drought begins until it is well under way, and we are often unsure
when it ends (McKee et al. 2000). Often in the wildfire community
we are made aware of the magnitude of an ongoing drought only
by looking backward and examining records for evidence of the
lack of moisture or precipitation.
Another problem with describing drought is that there are
few universal standards for describing and measuring the phe-
nomenon; that may sound surprising when you consider how
great of an impact we seem to attribute to droughts and wildfires.
However, drought may have a variety of other impacts—for ex-
ample, agricultural, meteorological, hydrological, or socioeco-
nomic—and drought will be described and measured differently
Drought
135

by each interest group. Furthermore, spatial location is important
in defining drought causes and effects. For example, in any given
year the 37 cm of average precipitation in northern Colorado may
seem bounteous to neighbors in Nevada and Arizona; residents
of the eastern United States, however, might view Colorado as
being under perpetual drought. So the concept of drought de-
pends on who is affected, the depth of consequences, location,
and other descriptors (ibid.).
Predicting drought is somewhat like guessing about the fi-
nancial markets. Both drought and market runs (to the upside
and down) are inevitable, yet no one knows when either
process begins, how it will unfold, or how long it will last. Like
a bull or bear market, both of which we know will occur in the
future, we can be certain that society will need to contend with
some form of drought, but we really can’t say much more with
any certainty.
Amid this confusion in describing drought, especially its im-
pacts on wildfires, numerous measurements have nonetheless
been developed to assess the effects of prolonged drying trends
on fuels and fire behavior. Some of the more prominent drought
measurements of relevance from a fire management standpoint
include the following:
Palmer Drought Severity Index (Palmer 1968)
A complicated soil moisture calculation used in the
agricultural community to gauge the need for federal
drought assistance. It measures the departure of the
moisture supply at specific locations from standardized
conditions. It has been reconstructed in fire history studies
to link fire occurrence with drought periods, including
links with El Niño and La Niña cycles.
Keetch-Byram (1968) Index
Assesses fire potential based on the net effect of
evapotranspiration and precipitation deficit in deep duff
and upper soil layers on a scale from 1 to 800 (Keetch and
Byram 1968). It was developed for use in the southern
United States but is now mapped nationally.
National Fire Danger Rating System (Deeming et al. 1977)
This system provides perhaps the best known drought
measures from a fire standpoint, based on ambient and
136
Facts and Data

recent trends in coarse-scale environmental conditions
(fuel, weather, topography). For example, the 1,000-hour
timelag fuel moisture content (TLFMC) and the Energy
Release Component (ERC) have been linked to the
occurrence of late-season fire outbreaks in the northern
Rocky Mountains.
Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) (Burgan
and Hartford 1993).
Vegetation Greenness Maps are derived weekly from
calculations based on AVHRR satellite observations. Maps
include greenness relative to a reference standard,
greenness relative to historical ranges for a specific pixel,
and departures from average greenness for a particular
point in time.
Standardized Precipitation Index (SPI) (McKee et al. 2000)
An index developed in Colorado based on current and
historical precipitation data for a particular location, SPI is
based on precipitation deviation from the average surplus
or deficit for a specific location. It can be used to identify
the start and end of drought episodes, if a long enough
record is available. 
The above list is not intended to be all-inclusive and could be
expanded to include other drought indicators in use generally,
but nevertheless it illustrates that there is no standard measure of
drought that is universally accepted and used by the fire man-
agement community—and perhaps there should not be: No sin-
gle indicator works best for all regions and intended applications,
although drought indicators generally may be pretty consistent
with one another.
Wildfires and Drought
Unlike a wildfire, drought isn’t viewed as a discrete event with a
clear beginning and end. Yet drought serves as a precursor to
wildfire and other natural disturbances, such as insect attacks on
moisture-stressed trees. In fact, some may view wildfire simply
as one among several manifestations of a prolonged drought.
Even so, drought is sometimes overlooked or underemphasized
Wildfires and Drought
137

in terms of causing wildfires, perhaps because of perceptual, def-
initional, or measurement problems, as noted above. For exam-
ple, the recent emphasis on fuels abatement in the United States
apparently underplays consideration of drought in worsening the
effects of recent fire seasons. Perhaps that oversight follows from
the difficulty of isolating the relative contributions of fuels versus
drought (or their interactions)—at least no one seems able to
quantify which is more influential in pushing fire seasons (such
as those observed in 2000 and 2002) to the extremes.
What seems clear is that drought does make more fuels
available for combustion, and it seems to propel fire behavior be-
yond thresholds of firefighter control. Drought effects also seem
to vary by elevational temperature/moisture gradients. Thus
high-elevation, moist-cold ecosystems burn more readily during
prolonged droughts than in nondrought years. These systems
support plenty of biomass but may not dry sufficiently to burn
except during the drought years. Once ignited during a drought,
however, these forests burn with characteristic high-severity,
stand-replacement fires. At such times firefighters can do little
more than attempt indirect attack, work the cooler sectors (for
example, flanks and smoldering areas), and wait for a change in
weather.
The same principles seem to apply during drought years in
lower-elevation, warm-dry forests as well, but for different rea-
sons. Historically, these ecosystems burned more frequently than
the high-elevation forests, but decades of fire exclusion also have
led to higher surface fuel loads, higher density of smaller diame-
ter trees and understory shrubs (which provide ladders into the
tree crowns), and a more continuous fuelbed across the land-
scape—all contributing to greater likelihood of crown fires. Dur-
ing drought years, these forests also burn uncontrollably.
Certainly the fires that burned in Colorado during the ongo-
ing 2002 drought seemed to follow this trend of uncontrollable
fires at both high and low elevations. Thus upper-elevation En-
gelmann spruce-subalpine fir (Picea engelmannii-Abies lasciocarpa)
and lower-elevation ponderosa pine–Douglas fir (Pinus pon-
derosa-Psuedotsuga menziesii) forests burned with high severity
during 2002. The higher fuel loads and structural changes (that is,
increased density of Douglas-fir) in the lower-elevation forests re-
sulting from the decades of fire exclusion may provide a major
distinction between the severe burning observed at the two ele-
vations during 2002 in Colorado.
138
Facts and Data

Fire Danger and the Public 
The term “fire danger” is used to describe the risk that a fire may
threaten the public or cause management problems over a fairly
large area, especially as related to antecedent weather and cli-
mate. Fire danger is distinguished from the actual or predicted
fire behavior resulting from site-specific fuel, weather, and topo-
graphic variations. The National Fire Danger Rating System
(Deeming et al. 1977) is a complex set of computer programs
based on algorithms developed to allow land management agen-
cies to estimate today’s or future fire danger for a given rating
area, (for example, a ranger district). Indices for the probability
of ignition, potential spread, or energy release are developed
from standardized (and cumulative) fire weather measurements
(such as temperature, relative humidity, precipitation, fuel mois-
ture by size class, wind speed, and direction). Managers rely on
archived weather and danger rating indices, along with past and
present satellite imagery of vegetation greeness, to assess depar-
tures from historical norms—especially useful for tracking the
progress of a developing drought. On any given day, the calcu-
lations and outputs from the fire danger rating system can be
used to develop staffing levels for fire management agencies—or
to communicate with the public about potential wildfire prob-
lems. Fire managers make use of many communication devices
to provide the public with information about fires and fire dan-
ger. Audio and visual media, Smokey Bear ads, and visits to local
grade-school classrooms are commonly used to inform different
audiences. Fire officials will integrate information from numer-
ous sources, such as Red Flag alerts from the National Weather
Service, drought indicators, and knowledge of historical trends
in fuel availability and fire behavior to increase public awareness
of local fire danger.
Perhaps one of the best known devices for communicating
with various audiences is the familiar fire danger meter, which
can be seen outside most ranger districts and fire stations in
forested areas during the summer. Typically, a pointer or different
color codes will identify current forest fire danger as low, moder-
ate, high, or extreme. An accompanying image of Smokey Bear
may urge forest users to be careful with fire in the forest. Al-
though simplistic in appearance, the rating on any given day may
reflect the complexities of fire danger and drought assessment as
effectively as any scientific metric.
Fire Danger and the Public
139

A complete treatment of fire weather and climate is beyond
the scope of this book. Further information on this subject can be
found in many references, including Schroeder and Buck (1970)
for the United States and Canada, Johnson (1992) for the North
American boreal forest, Bradstock et al. (2002) for Australia, and
UN Economic Commission for Europe (1982).
Fuels and Fire Behavior
As mentioned previously, the so-called fire environment consists
of fuel, weather, and topography (Countryman 1972). Fire man-
agers focus particular attention on fuels because weather and to-
pography are less easily manipulated. Thus fuels management
has become a very important fire management strategy for re-
ducing fire hazards in an area. Other management strategies in-
clude fire prevention, fire detection, fire presuppression, and fire
suppression activities. Each of these activities is discussed gener-
ally below (under Fire Protection and Management), although
not to the detail found in textbooks on fire (see, for example, Pyne
et al. 1996, Chandler et al. 1983a and b, Brown and Davis 1973).
Detailed discussion about these activities is beyond the scope of
this book, but each needs to be considered while developing fire
management plans for an area.
Wildland fuels can be classified into several broad layers or
vertical strata, including: (1) ground and litter fuels; (2) woody
fuel, lower vegetation, and shrubs; and (3) forest canopy fuels
(Ottmar et al. 2002). Each layer contributes uniquely to wildland
combustion, although the degree of involvement varies with
every fire. Ground and litter fuels include all burnable material
(duff, loose surface litter, lichens, and mosses) that accumulates in
the open and at the base of trees. Woody fuels include dead,
downed twigs and branches, rotten and sound logs, and stumps
that might be piled or accumulate in jackpots. Low vegetation in-
cludes grasses, sedges, forbs, low shrubs, and tree seedlings.
Shrub fuels include taller bushes and needles that might be draped
within bushes from overstory tree crowns. Forest canopy fuels in-
clude all burnable material in the tree crown (dominant, codomi-
nant, and suppressed trees) and dead snags, some of which may
form continuous fuel ladders. These layers are not always well
defined (as for example with tall shrubs in a forest), but fuel strata
provide a convenient framework for thinking about forest fuels.
140
Facts and Data

Ground fuels will burn only when relatively dry. In peat or
deep humus, ground fires may smolder for days, consuming
fuels in three dimensions at very low rates of spread, say 5
cm/hour. Consumption and mortality of seeds, bulbs, rhizomes,
and roots may occur. Local extinctions of species may occur if all
reproductive sources are destroyed. Above ground, surface fires
generally burn much more rapidly through litter, lower vegeta-
tion, and shrub strata. As flames increase in intensity, a litter fire
may spread to downed twigs and branches, grasses, and shrubs,
and eventually climb ladder fuels and involve tree crowns. Sur-
face fires and ground fires are often linked, though not necessar-
ily. Similarly, surface and crown strata may be linked or burn in-
dependently of each other. Thus fire behavior and effects will
depend on the characteristics of all affected fuel strata.
Fuel Profiles
A fuel profile describes the ground, surface, and crown attributes
that support combustion during a wildland fire. Fuel profiles
may reflect historical fire regimes and management practices in a
given area, including the characteristic frequency, behavior, and
effects of historical fires. The flammability of the area may be de-
scribed by fuel attributes, such as the loading (for example,
tons/acre, tonnes/ha), density, and depth of the fuelbed. Size,
moisture, and heat content of fuel particles are among the many
additional attributes that affect flammability. In any fire incident,
these fuelbed and fuel particle attributes help explain the inten-
sity and severity with which combustion occurs, as well as the ef-
fects upon organisms in the area. Even effects downwind or
downstream may be explained in part by fire behavior and sever-
ity at a particular location.
Geographical location also influences fuel flammability.
Some forests appear virtually primed to burn. For instance, euca-
lypt forests in Australia seem particularly fire prone. In addition
to the highly flammable volatiles in the foliage, stringy bark peels
off in long strips from individual trees, suspended between sur-
face and live crowns. Bark strips accumulate in curled heaps at
the base of trees, creating a porous fuelbed. In southern Califor-
nia, explosive fires periodically rip through the shrub crowns,
aided by the volatile chemicals in the foliage and the suspension
of dead branches and twigs within the living plant. The needles
in stands of eastern U.S. pine barrens literally glisten with volatile
Fuels and Fire Behavior
141

chemicals during prolonged heat episodes, indicating their po-
tential explosive fire behavior. Savannas of Africa, Australia, and
the Americas similarly burn with regularity because of the abun-
dance of fine, flammable fuels.
On any walk in the forest, you may note various fuel,
weather, and topographic features that contribute to fire poten-
tial. For example, the following features contribute to the vari-
ability of fire behavior in different wildland areas:
Coarse woody debris (including logging or thinning slash):
dead, downed woody material, standing snags (dead
trees), higher fuel loading in larger size classes, spatial
continuity, the presence of needles (that is, red slash) on
downed branches from recent management activities such
as cutting or thinning, or from wind throw.
Grassland: continuous horizontal and vertical arrangement
of the fuelbed, high fuel particle surface area to volume
ratios, and high fuelbed porosity.
Shrubland: intermediate fuelbed depth, flammability of
foliage, fine, dead fuels (distributed in the litter and within
the plant), higher fuel availability when exposed to winds.
Forest: flammable foliage, fuel jackpots in patches, litter layer
at the base of trees, compactness of litter layer depending on
needle length (for example, short- vs. long-needled pines),
forest canopy that moderates temperature and relative
humidity extremes, tree stems that reduce wind gusts.
Fires will burn with different signatures through these four fuel
groups. For example, grasslands will burn with rapid rate of spread,
especially when pushed by the winds. High surface-area-to-volume
ratios of fuel particles promote heat transfer and drying. Fire be-
havior in forests is most complex, with light surface burning when
low wind speeds accompany high moistures; yet those same stands
will support intense crown fires following a prolonged drought. A
fire may have difficulty sustaining itself in a shrub field under cool,
moist conditions in the early morning, yet roar to life and engulf the
shrub crowns later in the afternoon when pushed by winds created
by unequal temperature gradients. Fires burn through areas sup-
porting coarse woody debris with high flame lengths, but also with
prolonged soil heating effects because of extended residence times,
again subject to wind and moisture conditions.
142
Facts and Data

The basic differences in fire behavior among fuel groups are
related to the size and shape of fuel particles, the distribution of
fuel loads among the various size classes, horizontal and vertical
arrangement of fuel particles, and the depth of the fuelbed—as
well as wind, moisture, and topographic slope steepness and as-
pect. The fuelbed and fuel particle differences are represented in
standardized “fuel models,” after Anderson (1982). These thir-
teen fuel models essentially become tools for estimating fire be-
havior (for example, rate of spread and flame length) in different
fuel types, subject to environmental influences of wind, fuel
moisture, and slope. The thirteen models include:
Grass and Grass-dominated
1. Short grass—Western annual grasses, such as
cheatgrass, medusahead, ryegrass, and fescues; live oak
savannas; open pine-grasslands.
2. Timber (grass and understory)—Open ponderosa pine
stand with annual grass understory; scattered sage
within grasslands.
3. Tall grass—Fountaingrass; meadow foxtail in prairie
and meadowland; sawgrass prairie and strands.
Chaparral and Shrub Fields
4. Chaparral—Brushfields composed of manzanita and
chamise; pocosin shrub field with species like
fetterbush, gallberry, and bays; high shrub southern
rough with dead limb-wood.
5. Brush—Green, low shrub fields within timber stands or
without overstory; regeneration shrublands postfire or
other disturbance.
6. Dormant brush, hardwood slash—pinon-juniper with
sagebrush; understory mainly sage with some grass
intermixed; southern hardwood shrub with pine slash
residues; low pocosin shrub field; frost-killed Gambel
oak.
7. Southern rough—Southern rough with light to
moderate palmetto understory; southern rough with
moderate to heavy palmetto-gallberry and other
species; slash pine with gallberry, bay, and other species
of understory rough.
Fuels and Fire Behavior
143

Timber Litter
8. Closed timber litter—Surface litter fuels in Western
hemlock stands; understory of inland Douglas-fir with
little fuel; closed stand of birch-aspen with leaf litter
compacted.
9. Hardwood litter—White oak litter; loose hardwood
litter under stands of oak, hickory, maple and other
hardwood species; long-needle forest floor litter in
ponderosa pine.
10. Timber (litter and understory)—Old-growth Douglas-
fir with heavy ground fuels; mixed conifer stands with
dead-down woody fuels.
Slash
11. Light logging slash—Slash residues left after skyline
logging; mixed conifer partial cut slash residues
(similar to closed timber with down woody fuels); light
logging residues with patchy distribution.
12. Medium logging slash—East-side ponderosa pine
clearcut; cedar-hemlock partial cut; lodgepole pine
thinning slash.
13. Heavy logging slash—West Coast Douglas fir clearcut
with high quantity of cull; highly productive cedar-fir
stand with large quantities of slash.
The thirteen standard fuel models listed above do not cover
all fuel profiles encountered in the United States, but the models
actually cover a surprisingly large number of ecosystems and
wildland environments. Wise practitioners use the models to pro-
vide guidance in making management decisions, fully aware of
their limitations. In particular, they will not fixate on the names of
fuel models, but look instead at how well a particular model re-
flects local conditions. For example, a logging slash model
(#11–13) may adequately represent a forested area that has expe-
rienced an extreme wind storm event or a beetle infestation with
subsequent fall-down of dead trees—that is, conditions not the re-
sult of human activities such as logging or thinning.
With practice, custom fuel models can be constructed using
inventoried information for other areas not adequately repre-
sented by standard fuel models. In fact, practitioners with an ad-
144
Facts and Data

equate modeling background and good fuel inventory data can
build and use many more fuel models, especially when calibrated
with actual fire behavior observations.
Obviously, many factors contribute to fire spread and inten-
sity within a fuel complex. A trained eye is able to understand fire
behavior by focusing on vegetation as fuel, while melding the
local influences of weather and topography.
Standard Fuel Measurements
Because of their importance in influencing fire behavior and ef-
fects, several methods have been developed for estimating fuel
loading and depth in the field. The most accurate, but time-
consuming, methods involve measurement techniques such as
the planar intercept technique (see, for example, Brown 1974) for
coarse woody debris, or clipping and weighing of plant and litter
materials. Fuel inventory techniques (see, for example, Brown et
al. 1982) can be time consuming but provide the practitioner with
a sense for the distribution and variability of fuels in wildland
ecosystems.
As an alternative to actual fuel measurements, photo series
have been developed to provide managers with quick estimates
based on inventories paired with photographs. Photo series pro-
vide estimates for the following fuel attributes (Ottmar et al. 2002,
with units converted to metric):
Woody loading by size and rot class (tonnes/ha)
Litter/duff/moss/lichen depth (m) and bulk density
(kg/m3)
Mineral soil exposure/soil type (percent)
Fuel depth (m)
Herb and shrub loading (metric tons/ha)/height (m) by
dominant and codominant classes
Tree species/diameter (cm)/height (m) by dominant and
codominant classes
Live and dead stems per hectare by diameter class
Seedling density (#/ha)
Fuels and Fire Behavior
145

Canopy layers, canopy cover (percent), height to crown
base (m)
The thirteen standard fuel models most likely will underestimate
total fuel in an area, since they focus primarily on surface fuels
that are available to burn. Thus, fuel inventory information may
not be suitable for insertion in standard fire behavior models
without calibration and testing against fire behavior observations
in the field.
In the future, additional measurement schemes are likely to
arise. For example, fuel characteristic classes are under develop-
ment that more accurately capture the structural complexity and
geographical diversity of fuelbeds. More accurate fuel description
is required as more sophisticated models for predicting fire be-
havior and effects and for making large-scale landscape assess-
ments are developed. (http://www.fs.fed.us/pnw/fera/fccs
/index.html).
Fire Behavior Prediction
As noted in Table 5–3, stages in the life of a fire include preheat-
ing, flaming, glowing and smoldering, then cooling and extinc-
tion. From its onset, numerous fluctuations may occur in fire
growth, including periods of acceleration in rate of spread, and ir-
regular pulses in active flaming that precede eventual extinction
at various points along the fire perimeter. Similarly, gyrations in
fire activity can be expected as the fire responds to moisture,
wind, and topographic slope gradients. Rothermel (1983) details
methods for predicting fire behavior based on fuel, weather, and
topographic measurements, assuming a steady-state fire growth
rate. His model of fire spread, based on basic principles of ther-
modynamics and laboratory experiments, is briefly summarized
here because it has been widely accepted and applied by fire
managers.
The first law of thermodynamics states that energy is neither
lost nor gained in all energy processes, including combustion,
while the second law implies that energy conversion processes re-
sult in nonusable energy (Joesten et al. 1993). Rothermel (1972) re-
lied on these principles to develop a fire spread equation (4) that
suppression crews could use to predict the rate of spread (R) in
wildland fuels:
146
Facts and Data

IR ζ (1 + φw + φs)
R =
ρb ε Qig
(4)
where
ρb is fuelbed bulk density, the amount of fuel occupying a unit
volume of the fuel array (lb/ft3);
ε is the effective heating number, a measure of the fraction of the
potential fuel that must be raised to ignition (unitless);
Qig is the heat of preignition, the energy per unit mass required
for ignition (Btu/lb);
φs is the slope factor, accounts for improved radiation, convection,
and air flow because of slope increase (dimensionless);
φw is the wind factor, representing a dimensionless multiplier
that accounts for the increased rate of spread resulting from
improved radiant and convective heat transfer and oxygen flow
accompanying a wind-driven fire (dimensionless);
ζ, the propagating flux ratio, is a dimensionless number that
indicates the proportion of the reaction intensity that preheats
the adjacent fuel particles;
IR is the reaction intensity, a measure of the total energy release
rate per unit area of fire front (Btu/ft2/min).
Essentially, equation 4 expresses rate of spread as a ratio be-
tween two quantities: the heat generated to propagate a fire di-
vided by the heat required to ignite fuels ahead of the fire. The
bigger that ratio, the faster the fire will spread. Rothermel (ibid.)
developed relationships between fuel particle and fuelbed prop-
erties that could be measured in the field or represented by
standardized fuel models (Anderson 1982) to calculate the terms
in (4) and thereby produce fire behavior estimates, given esti-
mates for midflame wind speed, fuel moisture, and terrain
slope. This model is the foundation for fire behavior prediction
systems in the United States, including BEHAVE (Andrews
1986), BehavePlus (Bevins 2003), and FARSITE (Finney 1998).
The model also has been reformulated using metric equivalents
(Wilson 1980) and programmed for a handheld personal digital
assistant (PDA).
Once rate of spread (R) is calculated by equation (4), addi-
tional fire estimates can be calculated based on fuel particle and
fuelbed descriptors, specific to each fuel model. These include the
following calculations (from Andrews 1986):
Fuels and Fire Behavior
147

tr = 384/σ
(5)
D = R tr
(6)
HA = IR tr
(7)
IB = IR D/60
(8)
FL = 0.45 IB
0.46
(9)
where:
tr = flame residence time (min);
σ = characteristic surface-area-to-volume ratio (ft–1);
D = flame depth (ft);
R = rate of spread (ft/min), from (4);
HA = heat per unit (Btu/ft2);
IR = reaction intensity (Btu/ft2/min);
IB = Byram’s fireline intensity (Btu/ft/sec);
FL = flame length (ft).
Thus equations 4–9 make possible the calculation of fire char-
acteristics, such as surface fire rate of spread (ft/sec, ch/hr, or
m/sec), fireline intensity (Btu/ft-sec or kW/m), flame length (ft
or m), which can be used to provide guidance for fire suppression
activities. Residence time (sec) provides limited information for
predicting fire effects; additional crude inferences can be derived
regarding crown scorch and tree mortality, based on extant stud-
ies. Rate of spread estimates also are used to develop projections
for the fire’s area (acres or ha), and perimeter (ft, ch, or m) at user-
specified time intervals (hr). These size estimates presume that a
free-burning fire burns as an ellipse. It follows that fire shape can
be described roughly by the major and minor axes of an ellipse,
or the length-to-width ratio.
Most of these descriptors (that is, in equations 4–9) are read-
ily observable in the field, notably rate of spread and flame
length. Other descriptors may not be so easily observed—for ex-
ample, heat per unit area or reaction intensity. Even so, certain
types of fire can be characterized rather simply through tools
such as the fire characteristics chart (Figure 5–12). Note how sup-
pression difficulty can be inferred with an estimate for rate of
spread and one of the following: flame length, fireline intensity,
or heat per unit area. The chart also delineates thresholds for fire
148
Facts and Data

control efforts that can be used by firefighters. Thus hand crews
should be able to suppress a fire with flame lengths less than 4 ft
(1.2 m), whereas bulldozers might be required for fires with larger
flames. Suppression may be difficult if flame lengths exceed 8 ft
(2.4 m) because of tree torching, and impossible when flame
lengths exceed 12 ft (3.6 m).
Numerous computer programs (see Chapter 7) have been de-
veloped to aid decision-makers, based on Rothermel (1972) with
subsequent modifications. In addition to the computerized mod-
els (for example, BehavePlus and FARSITE) mentioned above,
other notable example tools include NEXUS (a spreadsheet link-
ing surface with crown fire behavior) and Flammap (a planning
tool for tracing historical burn patterns on the landscape). Equa-
tion 4 also serves as the basis for computing fire danger ratings
and a helpful tool known as a pocket card (from a useful program
called FireFamily Plus), which provides incoming firefighters
with general guidance regarding expected local fire behavior. A
different approach is used by a program called BURNUP to esti-
mate burning characteristics after the flaming front has passed—
that is, during glowing and smoldering combustion. Lastly, the
computer program FOFEM (for First Order Fire Effects) calculates
short-term fire effects (such as on plants and soils), using a fuel
modeling approach that differs considerably from the thirteen
fire behavior fuel models from Anderson (1982).
The U.S. fire behavior prediction system has been adapted for
use elsewhere, such as in Mexico and Europe. By contrast, other
countries such as Canada and Australia have taken different ap-
proaches, based in part on the different fuel complexes present
elsewhere but also the result of different modeling philosophies.
For example, the Canadian and Australian fire behavior prediction
systems rely heavily on empirical relationships developed from
fire observations in the field. Managers in Alaska sometimes use
the Canadian system because of similarity in fire environments.
Extreme Fire Behavior
Uncontrollable fires stem largely from conditions in the fire envi-
ronment that promote extreme fire behavior. Extreme burning
conditions promote crown fires and ember-spotting, both of
which can lead to major fire runs and threats to firefighter and
public safety. The comprehensive study of extreme fire behavior
is beyond the scope of this book, but we will focus here on two
Fuels and Fire Behavior
149

150
Facts and Data
Figure 5-12
Fire Characteristics Chart
The fire characteristics chart (Andrews 1982) allows firefighters to
relate fire behavior predictions and observations to the difficulty of
suppressing fires. For example, Fires A and B have the same flame
length and fireline intensity, but dramatically different spread rates
and heat per unit area. 
Fire A
Fire B
Fireline Intensity,
     Btu/ft/s
Flame Length,
ft
1000
500
100
11
8
4
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
500
0
1000
1500
2000
Heat Per Unit Area, Btu/ft2
Rate of Spread, ch/hr.
Source: Andrews 1986

particularly problematic types: crown fires and spot fires. Both
terms indicate erratic or severe burning conditions that dramati-
cally change the face and effects of a fire but can also create spec-
tacular threats to firefighters. Commonly there are many situa-
tions that lead to extreme fire behavior, but major fire runs are
generally triggered by the alignment of wind speed and direction,
topographic slope, and conducive fuel characteristics (such as
moisture and temperature). Under those circumstances crown
fires and spot fires become more likely.
There are three general crown fire phases: active, independ-
ent, and passive. Active crown fires occur where fire on the sur-
face is linked to fire spread in tree crowns over an extensive area.
Independent crown fires are characterized by fire spread through
the tree crowns, largely uncoupled from fire at the surface. Pas-
sive crown fires occur when individual trees torch because of ver-
tical heat transfer from surface to crown. Foliage on adjacent trees
is sparse or otherwise unavailable. Crown fires figure promi-
nently in most of the megafires listed in Chapter 3, whether in-
volving a forest or shrubland canopy. Plant and stand attributes
con- tributing to crown fire potential include the following:
1. Low height of tree crown bases (that is, the forest
canopy base starts low to the ground);
2. Presence of fuel “ladders” such as dead/live twigs and
leaves, dry bark, and dead shoots on tree trunks—or
understory trees that reach into the forest canopy;
3. Low live fuel moisture (less than, say, 80 to 100 percent);
4. Low mineral concentrations in fuels;
5. High concentration of volatile oils and resins in foliage
and leaves/needles;
6. High surface area to volume ratios of leaves, needles,
and twigs;
7. Abundant litter fall with low decomposition rates;
8. Relatively dense forest canopy;
9. Flammable understory strata, including shrubs, low
vegetation, tree seedlings, and coarse woody debris;
10. Presence of dwarf-mistletoe brooms, other insect/
pathogen infestations, or mosses or lichens suspended
within the tree that enhance crown flammability.
Spot fires can be started when live fire brands are ejected
above or ahead of the flaming front, are entrained in transport
Fuels and Fire Behavior
151

winds, and then start new fires as they land in receptive fuelbeds
in advance of the main body. Many natural fuels make suitable
firebrands: cone scales, grass clumps, bark flakes, twigs and other
branchwood parts, and moss. If midflame windspeeds exceed 10
mph and fine fuel moisture is less than 10 percent, spotting can
occur whenever fireline intensities exceed 700 Btu/ft/sec. How-
ever, if winds become stronger, the likelihood of spot fires can ac-
tually decrease, as embers can burn out during transport, landing
harmlessly downwind. Even so, spot fire distances of 20 km (12
mi) ahead of the main fire front have been documented in Aus-
tralian eucalypt forests.
Windborne embers that land in the tops of trees can spread a
crown fire. Embers that land in the tops of tall dead trees or snags
can be especially problematic for firefighters, as the fire may con-
tinue to burn and then smolder for days or weeks if left unat-
tended. Leaving the snag to burn out may be an option if it is lo-
cated well inside the fire perimeter. However, a snag burning
close to fire control lines may need to be felled, in order to reduce
the likelihood of future spot fires or of the burning snag’s falling
over and starting fires outside the burn perimeter. Moreover, a
snag is inherently hazardous to work around, especially if it must
be felled to squelch fire at the top. Trees and snags with rotted
wood in the bole or branches can be extremely hazardous to cut
down, with broken wood or falling branches (called “widow-
makers” by old timers) likely, or an unpredictable fall always a
possibility. What’s more, snags can be valuable habitat for cavity-
nesting birds and therefore desirable in areas being managed for
certain favored species. Similar problems arise if lightning causes
a fire in the top of a tall live tree, although live trees are inherently
easier to cut down because the wood is more solid and the felling
direction more predictable. Even so, keeping the felled tree or
snag within existing fire control lines may be problematic.
If a fire develops a major run or shows extreme convective
development, it is sometimes called a blowup fire. A rapid
blowup is sometimes called a firestorm. Very large fires of high
intensity are known as mass fires. The explanatory contributors to
blowup fires are poorly understood, although the “alignment” or
confluence of low fuel moisture, winds, intense preheating of
fuels from solar radiation, slope, and the fire itself are important
in organizing major fire runs (Campbell 1991). Fires with very
high rates of spread are known as conflagrations, or sometimes
simply as “wind-driven” fires.
152
Facts and Data

Large fires that burn under the influence of a massive con-
vection column are also called “plume dominated.” Generally, a
billowing plume indicates simultaneous ignition of fuels cover-
ing a fairly large area. Well-formed convection columns develop
under unstable atmospheric conditions, and they can dominate a
fire’s behavior with updrafts and downdrafts (much like a thun-
der cell). A particularly dangerous situation arises when the
plume collapses on account of gravity—the strong downdraft is
capable of pushing a fire in any direction. Fire behavior special-
ists in the 2002 Rodeo-Chediski fire noted several collapsed
plumes during major runs. A collapsed plume was implicated in
the six fatalities during the 1990 Dude fire.
Albini (1979, 1983) developed the theory behind calculations
for the maximum downwind spot fire distance that has been in-
corporated into most fire behavior prediction systems. His the-
ory predicts intermediate-range spotting, at a greater distance
downwind than debris blowing across a control line, for example.
Firebrands are assumed to be small enough to be lofted and car-
ried down wind, but large enough to start a fire when deposited
on the ground. The actual onset of a spot fire ignition depends on
the receptivity of fine fuels where embers are deposited—that is,
the probability of ignition, which depends on temperature and
humidity.
Rothermel (1991) used the notion of plume versus wind
driven large fires to develop his crown fire nomograms, or sequen-
tial charts, for developing large fire spread predictions. Originally
developed by Byram (1959), the theory relies on a calculation of the
power of the fire, or rate of energy released, calculated on a per area
basis, as a reflection of the energy source producing the convection
column. The heat energy produced by the fire produces the con-
vection column because of the temperature rise of the air, which
lowers its density, producing the buoyant vertical force. This force
is compared with the rate of flow of kinetic energy in the wind
field, expressed in the same units. Whichever is greater (power of
fire or power of wind) will dominate the fire’s spread.
The Haines Index (Werth and Werth 1998) provides useful
guidance for predicting large wildfire growth and extreme fire
behavior, based on atmospheric stability and moisture content of
the lower atmosphere. In particular, the index looks at tempera-
ture differences at two different elevations (approximately 3,050
m and 5,500 m), and the temperature-dewpoint difference at 3,050
m, to calculate an index from 2 to 6. Potential for extreme fire
Fuels and Fire Behavior
153

behavior is greatest with a Haines Index of 5 or 6, including high
spread rates, extensive spotting, active crowning, and the devel-
opment of large convection columns.
Fire managers thus have several tools, both automated and
not, for assessing extreme fire behavior. A fire behavior specialist
will likely rely on the index that seems to provide the most reli-
able predictions in the local area, combined with knowledge and
intuition informed from previous fire experiences.
Historical Fire Regimes
Recurrent fires have played an important, and sometimes critical,
role in the evolution and development of many wildland ecosys-
tems worldwide. Most ecosystems bear unmistakable imprints of
previous disturbances (fires, floods, windstorms, avalanches, and
so forth). The evidence for historical fires can be seen in the mo-
saic of vegetation covering a landscape, which may consist of
plants with various adaptations to fire, as well as the structure
(for example, size, age, stem diameter distribution, species com-
position) of patches within the landscape. Tree stems may bear
scars from fires that can be dated, especially in forests character-
ized by frequent, low-severity surface fires. In other areas—for
example, higher-elevation forests that support infrequent, crown
fires—the evidence for past fires may be evidenced from the
even-aged cohorts of trees that regenerate postfire. In savannas
(grasslands with intermittent trees and shrubs), tree density will
increase in the absence of fires and decrease where fires are al-
lowed to run their course.
Still other evidence has been extracted from pollen and char-
coal fragments from lake or swamp sediments or from peat bogs.
Other signatures may be more difficult to identify, such as
patches in the landscape that have experienced a mixture of high-
and low-severity fires. In some cases, indirect evidence for fire
frequency may be reflected in the characteristics of plants occu-
pying a particular site. Although speculative, the clumpiness of
patches or the age structures of individual patches may shed con-
siderable light on historical fire habitats. These various sources of
evidence have been used to establish the frequencies with which
fires have burned in various ecosystems in the past, especially
when formal (that is, public agency) records extend back only to
the mid-twentieth century. Fossilized charcoal, lake sediments,
154
Facts and Data

and tree fire scars are common indicators that can extend the fire
record several centuries previous to agency fire reports. Using
such evidence, the historical fire return interval (the number of
years between successive fire events) has been summarized for a
wide variety of environments (Table 5–5).
Historical Fire Regimes
155
Table 5-5
Representative Fire Return Intervals (in years) from a Variety of
Biomes/Ecosystems Worldwide, Illustrating the Wide Range of Fire
Recurrence in Different Vegetation Types
Biome/ecosystem
Location
Return interval (yr)
Tundra
Tundra
Canada, Alaska
500
Alpine tundra 
New England
1000+
Boreal forest
Open Picea forest and lichens
Alaska, Yukon
130
Picea glauca forest, flood plains
Alaska, Yukon
200+
Pinus banksiana forest
Northwest Territories
25-100
Pinus contorta forest
British Columbia
50
Subalpine forest
Pinus contorta forest
Montana
25-150
Sierra Nevada, California
100-300
Abies balsamea forest
New England
1000+
Moist temperate forest
Pinus palustris/Adropogon forest
SE United States
3
Nothofagus forest
Tasmania
300
Eucalyptus forest
Tasmania
100
Grasslands
Grasslands
Tasmania
10-25
Prairie
Missouri
1
Swamps and marshes
SE United States
30-100
Dry temperate forest
Mixed conifer forest
California
7-10
Mixed conifer/Sequoia forest
California
10-100
Mediterranean-climate vegetation
Evergreen chaparral
California
20-50
Deciduous chaparral
California
30-100
Semi-arid deserts
Desert-scrub 
Arizona
50-100
Pinus/Juniperous woodland
W United States
100-300
Tropical vegetation
Moist evergreen scrub
Florida
20-30
Tropical forest
Equatorial areas
Unknown
Source: After Whelan 1995 and Chandler et al. 1983a.

Although interesting in its own right, the fire recurrence in-
tervals in Table 5–5 indicate little about the types of fires or their
ecological effects. Generally speaking, longer intervals are found
in wet-cold or dry-hot environments, where ignitions are rare on
account of fuel unavailability. Thus long return intervals are
found in alpine and subalpine forest as well as in arid deserts.
The shortest fire return intervals are found in grasslands and dry
temperate forests, productive ecosystems that dry out sufficiently
to burn quite frequently.
The notion of a fire regime (discussed below) provides a use-
ful construct for organizing information about long-term fire
trends and prominent fire effects in specific ecosystems, at least at
a coarse scale of resolution. Although admittedly artificial, the
fire regime concept brings a degree of order to a complicated
body of fire behavior and fire ecology knowledge, including
recognition that fires produce unique effects in different ecosys-
tems. Fire regimes may be characterized by various descriptors,
but they usually include frequency, intensity, and seasonality of
historical fire events. Additional descriptors, such as areal extent
and patchiness of burning, also may be noted if data are available.
Fire frequency (# fires/time) or its useful analog, the mean
return interval (yrs) between successive fires, can be estimated
by dating fire scars on trees or analyzing age classes of current
vegetation. Fire intensity, or rate of energy release, is commonly
used to describe the type and heat output from the fire event.
The term “fire intensity” is often used interchangeably with the
term “fire severity” to describe the effects of fire on an ecosys-
tem, though severity more accurately reflects the influx of heat
received by aboveground vegetation and belowground soil re-
sources (Ryan and Noste 1985). Both descriptors have been
shown to influence the ability of different plant species to with-
stand or regenerate after a fire. For purposes of this discussion,
distinctive categories of fire intensity/severity include surface,
understory, and crown fire events.
Fires typically burn in characteristic time periods or seasons
of the year, when ignitions are likely to occur in fuels that will sup-
port combustion. This usually occurs during warm-dry periods
(such as the summer months). Summer lightning associated with
convective storms provides a common ignition source in North
America, occurring at a time when fuels are desiccated because of
prolonged solar radiation. Historically, fires ignited by lightning in
early summer may have burned for prolonged periods, sporadi-
156
Facts and Data

cally subsiding because of rainfall but reigniting following pro-
longed drying or in response to high winds (such as foehns). By
contrast, fire season peaks in southern California during Fall (be-
cause of foehn winds) and in Florida during January (dryness).
Arizona and New Mexico may experience a split fire season, with
peak activity in late Spring followed by a secondary increase in
fire activity in the Fall, with the moist monsoon reducing fire oc-
currence in between. In some places, such as Colorado, fuels are
dry enough to support combustion in January or February al-
though peak burning conditions may occur in late Spring and Fall.
Reconstruction of the areal extent of historical fires is diffi-
cult. The dating of stand ages across the landscape may provide
some insight, however, and cross-dated fire scars may provide
hints in areas frequented by low-intensity fires. The areal extent
of fires in ecosystems that evolved with rare, high-intensity fires
may be revealed through the pattern of regeneration following
the last fire event. This pattern usually can be observed on
forested hillsides, where abrupt changes in tree size classes or
species will create visible patchiness in the vegetation mosaic—
evidence that may persist for decades or centuries. Each of these
methods has shortcomings that affect the accuracy of estimates
and their usefulness for making management decisions. For ex-
ample, unburned patches will be found in even the most wide-
spread and severe fires. Thus the landscape provides a historical
tale for the attentive observer.
The evidence for past severity is most reliably estimated for
areas that burn frequently with insufficient severity to kill stand-
ing trees. Large trees in such areas develop adaptations to with-
stand the characteristically low-intensity fires, such as thick bark
that protects the live cambium. Fires that burn at the base of a tree
may kill the vascular cambium without killing the plant and may
leave distinctive lesions (or fire scars) that can be cross-dated
using dendrochronological methods for dating tree rings. Ac-
cordingly, tree rings and fire scars can be cross-dated with a
known master chronology for an area, usually constructed from
ten to twenty mature, undisturbed trees in the local area (Agee
1993). Such a comparison usually can help identify missing or
false rings in the sample trees. Thus repeated, low-severity burn-
ing of individual trees provides a historical record of fire recur-
rence (Brown and Shepperd 2001). When pooled, the fire scar
records from multiple trees can be used to develop a composite
fire interval for an area (Agee 1993; Stokes and Dieterich 1980).
Historical Fire Regimes
157

These techniques not only allow researchers to develop estimates
for the frequency with which fire historically has spread through
an area but also may suggest changes in fire regime because of cli-
mate fluctuations or management policies. Also, spring versus
late summer ignitions may be identifiable in the fire scar record,
based on a scar’s placement within the tree’s annual growth
ring—possibly indicating the severity of historical fires in ecosys-
tems where late summer fires follow prolonged drying and burn
more severely than fires occurring earlier in the year.
The extent or size of past fires can be roughly estimated if fire
scars are dated from multiple trees sampled from a large enough
area, though these areal estimates may be uncertain. The scar lo-
cation within a tree ring can also hint at the season of burn, al-
though intensity or severity of burning is more difficult to assess.
Fire-scar dating techniques also have been used to identify
changes in fire frequency associated with different land uses or
management policy changes. One of the most studied changes is
the precipitous drop-off in fire activity accompanying the institu-
tion of fire exclusionary practices in the twentieth century (see,
for example, Brown et al. 1999 for Colorado; Swetnam and Be-
tancourt 1990 for the U.S. Southwest; et al.). In fairness, a com-
prehensive analysis of past fires should focus on all human im-
pacts, including livestock grazing and timber harvesting, that
could impact fire frequency, size, and severity.
Heinselman (1978) was one of the first to formalize the idea
that historically characteristic fire frequencies and fire types could
be associated with different ecosystems. He identified seven
major fire regimes, ranging from areas with no, or little natural
fire occurrence to areas with frequent, low-intensity fires, as well
as areas with infrequent, high- and low-intensity fires. For exam-
ple, in the western United States, very warm systems (such as
deserts) or very cold systems (such as alpine tundra) may have no
or little natural fire occurrence. Sierra Nevada and Southwest
ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa); giant sequoia (Sequoiadendron
gigantea)–mixed conifer forests in California, and some native
grasslands burned with frequent low-intensity surface fires every
1 to 25 years. By contrast, high-elevation spruce-fir (Picea engel-
mannii–Abies lasiocarpa) forests in the central Rocky Mountains,
cedar-hemlock (Thuja plicata–Tsuga heterophylla) in the Cascades,
and grand-fir (Abies grandis) in the northern Rockies may burn as
high-severity stand replacement fires every 300 to 800 years or
more. In between those extremes, Rocky Mountain ponderosa
158
Facts and Data

pine burned with infrequent low-intensity surface fires every 25
years or more, while Coast redwood (Sequoia sempervirens)
burned with infrequent, high-intensity surface fires over a similar
period. Southern California chaparral, aspen (Populus tremu-
loides), pinon-juniper woodlands (Pinus edulis-Juniperous spp.),
and sagebrush (Artemesia tridentata) grasslands characteristically
experience relatively moderate return intervals (25 to 100 years),
with stand-destroying crown fires. Lodgepole pine (P. contorta);
Western white pine (Pinus monticola); Western larch (Larix occiden-
talis); and Douglas-fir (Psuedotsuga menziesii) are among the
ecosystems that experience variable fire regimes—that is, fre-
quent low-intensity surface fires as well as high-intensity crown
fires after a long return interval (100 to 300 yr).
Subsequent authors have taken issue with the number of
regimes classified above, usually opting for a lower number. Thus
Kilgore (1981) proposed six different fire regimes, while Hardy et
al. (1998) and Morgan et al. (1998) proposed five. Brown (2000, p.
5) synthesized the differences between those various classifica-
tion schemes and arrived at a suggested categorization based on
four regimes, with no mention of frequency of occurrence:
1.
Understory fire regime (applies to forests and
woodlands)—Fires are generally nonlethal to the
dominant vegetation and do not substantially change
the structure of the dominant vegetation.
Approximately 80 percent or more of the aboveground
dominant vegetation survives fires.
2.
Stand-replacement fire regime (applies to forests,
woodlands, shrublands, and grasslands)—Fires kill
aboveground parts of the dominant vegetation, changing
the aboveground structure substantially. Approximately
80 percent or more of the aboveground dominant
vegetation is either consumed or dies as a result of fires.
3.
Mixed severity fire regime (applies to forests and
woodlands)—Severity of fire either causes selective
mortality in dominant vegetation, depending on the
susceptibility to fire of different tree species, or varies
between understory and stand replacement.
4.
Nonfire regime—Little or no occurrence of natural fire.
Not surprisingly, opinions vary on the appropriate number
of fire regimes that should be used to characterize fire activity
Historical Fire Regimes
159

across continental scales. In reality, the differences between the
various schemes are inconsequential compared with the main
point that fire occupies different niches in various ecosystems.
This irrefutable point is more important than quibbling over arti-
ficial distinctions about the actual number of fire regimes. Thus
the above regimes and their descriptors should not be viewed as
rigorous classifications, but rather as a convenient (and artificial)
way of viewing fire in natural ecosystems. Furthermore, the ap-
propriate number of distinct fire regimes often depends on the in-
tended scope of a particular investigation.
For example, Schmidt et al. (2002) maps (on a coarse scale)
the continental United States into five fire regimes characterized
by different historical fire frequencies and severities, wherein fire
frequency is the number of years between successive fires and fire
severity is defined by the effect of fire on overstory vegetation
(grass, shrub, or tree); it is also available at http://www
.fs.fed.us/fire/fuelman/firereg2000/maps/fr2000.pdf. In low-
severity fires, more than 70 percent of the basal area (m2/ac) or
more than 90 percent of the canopy cover of the overstory vege-
tation survives (Morgan et al. 1996). Mixed-severity fires produce
moderate effects in the overstory, cause mixed mortality, and pro-
duce irregular spatial mosaics resulting from different fire sever-
ities (Smith and Fischer 1997). Stand replacement fires consume
or kill more that 80 percent of the basal area or more than 90 per-
cent of the overstory canopy cover (Morgan et al. 1996).
The frequency and severity of recurrent fires may reflect the
moisture and temperature gradients that characterize an area.
For example, in the Pacific Northwest, Agee (1993) differentiates
low-, moderate-, and high-severity fire regimes based on tem-
perature and moisture stress indices associated with dominant
vegetation types. For instance, mixed conifer ecosystems with
ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) in high temperature–high
moisture stress areas most likely were established in the pres-
ence of frequent (nonlethal) fires that burned at 5 to 15 year re-
currence intervals. Red fir (Abies magnifica) stands, found in low
temperature–low moisture stress environments, burned with
moderate severity every twenty-five to seventy-five years. West-
ern hemlock–Douglas-fir (Tsuga heterophylla-Psuedotsuga menziesii)
stands, growing mostly in high temperature–low moisture stress
areas, most likely were established following infrequent (that is,
greater than 100 year recurrence) lethal severity burning that re-
sulted in stand replacement.
160
Facts and Data

Understanding the historical role of fire provides insight into
long-term sustainability, plant adaptations and current patterns in
the vegetation mosaic, as well as guidance for future management
activities. For example, fire managers might choose to restore fire
in areas where fire has been excluded because of fire suppression
activities, using intentional prescribed ignitions. Furthermore,
characteristics such as tree resistance (the result of bark thickness
or branching habit), plant reproductive strategies (seed versus
sprouting from root crown), or even flammability may affect fire
recurrence. The distribution of even-aged clumps within a hetero-
geneous landscape may reflect historical fire patterns. Managers
use these and other clues to unravel stand and landscape fire his-
tories and to plan best strategies for meeting land-use objectives.
Unfortunately, our understanding of fire regime descriptors
for most North American ecosystems is limited and sometimes
subject to misinterpretation. Additionally, fire is but one distur-
bance agent with which ecosystems have evolved. Frequent low-
intensity surface burns may reduce bark beetle outbreaks by thin-
ning stands and reducing competition for available resources
among remaining trees. By contrast, fire-damaged trees may at-
tract beetles and other insects to a burned area. Smoke inhibits
some fungi and dwarf mistletoe, but it may lower air quality in
the short term. In addition, fire injuries to living tissue may en-
hance the onset of other decay mechanisms.
Human activities such as harvesting, grazing, and fire exclu-
sion have altered ecosystems to varying degrees, with conse-
quences most pronounced at lower elevations. Similarly, deci-
sions to withhold management from an area may lead to
unintended consequences. For example, an unthinned or uncut
forest may provide prime breeding grounds for bark beetles that
attack less vigorous, stagnating stands. Always present at en-
demic levels, a mountain pine beetle (Dendroctonous spp.) epi-
demic leads to increased levels of fire hazard as branches and
needles fall from dying and dead trees. A second pulse in fire haz-
ard may become evident within a decade as dead trees (snags) fall
over and accumulate on the forest floor. Fuel levels in such areas
may require restoration treatments in order to meet land man-
agement objectives and improve forest health. These treatments
may include mechanical, biological, and chemical options, or
other strategies, including prescribed fire.
In the past, disturbance impacts on ecosystem structure and
function were considered as external in origin. Only recently have
Historical Fire Regimes
161

the effects of fires and other disturbances been considered as orig-
inating from within, or being characteristic to, a particular plant
community. Like other disturbances, fires may vary in intensity
from benign to catastrophic, depending on a myriad of environ-
mental influences. Fuel buildups and insect/disease infestations
may also increase the severity of fire events. Although all distur-
bances can be disruptive, the effects of fire may be modified
through judicious management of the fuels complex. In fact, un-
like other disturbances, fire itself may be used to lessen or man-
age the effects of future events—that is, through careful applica-
tion of prescribed fire to achieve management objectives.
In summary, the notion of a fire regime is useful and syn-
thetic, but it must be interpreted with caution, especially inas-
much as estimates for fire return interval and historical severity
are constructed from indirect data sources and subject to high de-
grees of variability. The extension of inferences about fire fre-
quency to areas of similar vegetation type or plant species may
not be warranted—for example, ponderosa pine forests in the
Southwest have been subjected to dramatically different fire
regimes than have the same species growing in the Rocky Moun-
tains of Northern Colorado or in the Sierra Nevada of California.
Fire Effects
Fire effects are among the most fundamental considerations driv-
ing fire policy development and implementation. Besides intense
heat, a fire generates particulates, water vapor, and other gases—
all of which are added to the atmosphere, at least temporarily. Re-
moval of the soil organic layer can greatly reduce site productiv-
ity, as well as producing changes in soil temperature and
moisture profiles. Downstream or off-site consequences may re-
sult from flooding or soil erosion. The potential for fire to cause
resultant damage is the sole reason that we have fire suppression
policies. At the same time, fire’s beneficial effects are the basis for
fire use programs. Fire management involves the striking of a bal-
ance between fire control and use—that is, suppressing fire to
prevent damage versus using fire or allowing it to promote
ecosystem processes.
Most of fire’s direct effects on vegetation are the result of the
transmission of heat (see equations 1 and 3). Heat from open fires
passes into the atmosphere through convection (about 75 percent)
162
Facts and Data

and radiation (roughly 25 percent). Relatively small amounts of
heat pass into the soil substratum, through a combination of con-
vection, radiation, conduction, and direct flame contact. This
small fraction of heat pulse to the soil becomes increasingly im-
portant as fire duration increases. For example, roots, cambium,
and soil micro-organisms can be killed or damaged by prolonged
exposure to heat at the base of a tree.
The amount of heat received by vegetation and flammable
materials depends on the energy transmission processes in-
volved. Radiation barely penetrates the surface of an unburned
fuel particle. The depth of heat penetration into exposed plant
parts depends on the absorptivity of the receptor. Smoke reduces
energy transmission through the atmosphere. Convection sur-
rounds plant parts with heated air, which enters the receptor
through conduction. Plants respond to heat with desiccation and
heat injury. Wind reduces the effect of convective heating by dis-
persal. Heat injury results from the time/temperature profiles.
The protoplasm of most plants is killed by exposure to 50° C (122°
F) for longer than ten minutes. At 60° C (140° F), death can be in-
stantaneous. Thus plant death can occur via short exposures to
high temperatures or longer exposures to lower temperatures
(Miller 2000). Seeds, bacteria, fungi, and other organisms in the
soil may be shielded from initial injury, but they might succumb
from prolonged heat exposure.
Fire effects will depend on fire environment and the type of
fire behavior (Ryan 2001). A fire’s effects on plants may vary con-
siderably between different fires and even within the same fire,
just as a fire behaves differently depending on location (head,
rear, or flank) and interactions with its environment. Thus a sur-
face fire may scorch needles and kill individual trees, whereas a
crown fire may leave behind a stand of dead trees or snags. Fire
behavior, heat duration, the spatial pattern of fuel consumption,
and the distribution of heat below the soil surface all influence in-
jury and mortality of plants, as well as their subsequent recovery
(Miller 2000). Postfire responses of plants to fire also depend on
plant growth characteristics, susceptibility to heat, and recovery
mechanisms. Since fires may occur at any stage of a plant’s de-
velopment (growth, flowering, fruiting, or dormancy), a variety
of adaptive traits may allow an individual plant to persist in a fire
environment.
Sensitivity to heat is determined by the characteristics of
plants as well. Plant mass, thickness, density, and moisture content
Fire Effects
163

will affect heat sensitivity, as well as the location of heat-sensitive
tissues such as live buds or stems. These tissues are much more
sensitive to heat when actively growing and with high moisture
contents (Wright and Bailey 1982). Thicker bark provides better
insulation to cambium, the live growing tissue located just be-
neath a tree’s bark. Similar protection is afforded to sensitive tis-
sue by bud scales or insulating soil layers that protect roots. Also,
the lower a plant’s initial temperature, the longer or more intense
the heating required to produce lethal internal temperatures. Suc-
culent young shoots are more susceptible to damage than older
plants; seeds and dormant buds are more resistant. Different
species of tree thus exhibit varying degrees of resistance to fire in-
jury, based on bark thickness, branching habit, and the insulation
of vital growth parts (Table 5–6).
A large tree with low-density branching pattern and taller
height to live crown will likely have a better chance of surviving
a surface fire than will smaller plants with a dense crown extend-
ing to the surface; smaller plants are more likely to die or be in-
jured in a fire, as they will be closer to the flames and more sus-
ceptible to crown scorching, foliage consumption, and damage to
tree boles. Taller, larger diameter trees will likely sustain less
164
Facts and Data
Table 5-6
Relative Fire Resistance of Various Tree Species
Level of resistance
Common Name
Scientific name
Highest
Western larch
Larix occidentalis
Highest
Coast redwood
Sequoia sempervirens
Highest
Giant sequoia
Sequoia gigantea
High
Ponderosa pine
Pinus ponderosa
High
Douglas-fir
Psuedotsuga menziesii
Medium
Grand fir and white fir
Abies grandis and 
A. concolor
Medium
Lodgepole pine
Pinus contorta
Medium
Western white pine and 
Pinus monticola and 
sugar pine
P. lambertiana
Low
Western red cedar
Thuja plicata
Low
Western hemlock
Tsuga heterophylla
Low
Noble fir
Abies procera
Low
Engelmann spruce and 
Picea engelannii and 
Sitka spruce
P. sitchensis
Very low
Subalpine fir
Abies lasciocarpa
Very low
Pacific silver fir
Abies amabilis
Sources: Whelan 1995; Wright and Bailey 1982; and Starker 1934.

damage than smaller trees of the same species. Similarly, conifers
with thicker bark and longer needles that provide shielding to
large buds may suffer less damage (that is, crown scorch, crown
consumption, stem mortality) than thin-barked, short-needled
conifers with small buds (Miller 2000). For example, trees such as
coast redwood (Sequoia sempervirens), Western larch (Larix occiden-
talis), Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii), and ponderosa pine
(Pinus ponderosa) develop a thick layer of dead bark with age that
makes possible survival from most surface fires. Some conifers,
such as coast redwood and ponderosa pine, have protected buds
that permit replacement of foliage and branches consumed in a
crown fire (Kimmins 1987). Tree survival also will depend on
density and spacing between tree crowns, as dense, closed-
canopy stands may be more likely to support active crown fires
than open forests. Features of the tree crown and stand growth
patterns thus also need to be considered, along with rooting habit
and associated lichen growth (dangling from branches), as well as
management activities (or inactivity). All of these characteristics
will influence the likelihood of crowning and the severity of nee-
dle scorch or consumption. Even so, trees that survive a fire may
become susceptible in later years to insect attacks, pathogens, or
drought.
Plants that are killed by a fire may persist on the site if they
possess adaptive mechanisms that allow the species to persist
postfire. Sprouting is one such mechanism that allows plants to
recover after a fire. Live shoots can originate from aboveground
growing parts (stolons) or from various depths within the litter,
duff, and mineral soil layers (Figure 5–13). Fire and other distur-
bances can stimulate sprouting in some plant species through al-
teration of hormone balances that control the growth of different
plant parts. Also, the postfire environment may allow more light
to reach the forest floor, increase soil temperatures, and thereby
promote sprouting.
Fire has been shown to stimulate flowering and influence
seed dispersal in some species. The reproductive success of some
Xanthorrhoea species, an Australian shrub, is greatly enhanced by
fire. Flowering may be stimulated by ethylene in smoke (ibid.).
Lodgepole pine (P. contorta), jack pine (P. banksiana), and black
spruce (Picea mariana) have serotinous cones that open only in re-
sponse to heat. High temperatures melt the resinous bond that
keeps the cone scales from opening in the absence of fire (ibid.).
Fire Effects
165

Nonserotinous lodgepole pine trees are thought to occur in areas
that burn less frequently.
Some plant species produce seed that lie dormant in the duff
or soil until a fire occurs. If these seeds are not exposed to lethal
temperatures in a fire, they can germinate in response to the heat.
Shrubs such as Acacia, Arctostaphylos, Ceanothus, and Rhus pro-
duce large quantities of hard-coated seeds that germinate only
after heating (ibid.). Seeds close to the soil surface may be con-
sumed or killed in a severe fire; however, these same seeds may
be stimulated to germinate in a lower severity fire or if they are
heated but insulated from lethal temperatures (Figure 5–14).
In reality, the plant composition following fire in an area will
depend on a complicated set of factors, including the prefire
species present (and their capabilities for withstanding heat), the
fire’s severity, and the postfire environment (for example, rainfall,
solar insolation), as well as the time elapsed. Some authors (see,
for example, Rowe 1983, Whelan 1995) have explained the post-
166
Facts and Data
Figure 5-13
Location of Various Plant Parts that Can Regenerate New
Shoots Following Fire
Mineral Soil
Above ground
Litter
& Duff
Epicormic
Root Collar
Rbizome
Stoton
Root Crown
Candex
Bulb &
Corn
Buds that generate new shoots after fire
Source: Miller 2000.

fire vegetation changes by classifying plants’ responses according
to various survival and regeneration strategies:
Invaders: Well-dispersed weedy species with short-lived
seeds;
Evaders: Species with long-lived propagules stored in the
soil or canopy;
Avoiders: Shade-tolerant species with slow reinvasion;
Resisters: Adults can withstand low-intensity fires,
otherwise intolerant;
Endurers: Sprouting species.
Yet another strategy has been proposed by Mutch (1970),
involving enhanced flammability coupled with regeneration
Fire Effects
167
Figure 5-14
The Effect of Heat Exposure on Seeds
Seeds at or near the surface may be killed during flaming or by prolonged heat
exposure after passage of the flaming front. Seeds lower in the duff layer
may be insulated and even stimulated to germinate from the heat.
HEAT SOURCE
LITTER
HIGH HEAT
FLUX
NO HEAT
FLUX
MINERAL SOIL
DUFF
HEAT FLOW
BARRIER
Source: Ryan 2001.

strategies (seed or sprouting). Accordingly, plant species in fire
environments may burn more readily but then successfully reoc-
cupy the postburn site, as compared with competitive species
that are less fire-adapted. Some southern California chaparral
species may exhibit this tendency. Others include Jack pine (Pinus
banksiana), fireweed (Epilobium angustifolium), and bracken fern
(Pteridium acquilinum), as suggested by Kimmins (1987).
Fire Adaptations and Dependence
Other fire adaptations mentioned in the literature include very
rapid early growth, to elevate the terminal bud and foliage out of
reach of surface fires, coupled with rapid development of thick
bark (ibid.). The classic example is provided by longleaf pine
(Pinus palustris), found in the southern United States. Its terminal
bud remains close to the ground for up to five years after germi-
nation, while the seedling develops a large root system. During
this time, the bud is protected from the frequent surface fires char-
acteristic of the region by long, fire-resistant needles that form a
dense circle around the bud (the so-called grass stage of the tree).
The grass stage ends when the rooting system has developed suf-
ficiently to support rapid height growth by the seedling, carrying
the fire-sensitive bud above the reach of surface fires.
Kimmins (ibid.) adds that longleaf pine is not only resistant
but also dependent on fire. The tree is susceptible to a foliage fun-
gus that is eliminated or retarded by fire, so managers may apply
prescribed fires during the grass stage to control the pathogen.
Furthermore, fire will eliminate or reduce competition from less
fire resistant understory hardwood species that would invade the
site if fire were excluded.
Fire Severity
Fire severity is an important concept for understanding heat ef-
fects on organisms and natural resources, by categorizing the de-
gree to which fire alters vegetation and ecosystems. Although no
specific measurement units are implied, the concept is still ex-
tremely useful. We use the term “fire severity” in several contexts.
When speaking of fire regimes, we may use the term to describe
the characteristics of historical fires that burned a particular veg-
etation type, plant community, or biome in an area or geographic
region. We also use the term “fire severity” to describe the eco-
168
Facts and Data

logical impacts of a fire or set of fires in an area—for example,
with reference to flora and fauna, to soils and water, or the at-
mosphere and archeological resources.
In assessing fire effects, fire severity is more important than
fire intensity, since the latter is a measure of the rate of heat release
in the fire’s flaming zone—and can be used in calculations for
flame length (that is, equation 9). It may not, however, account ad-
equately for heat transmitted after passage of the flaming front or
downward into the soil profile. By contrast, “fire severity” encom-
passes the ecological effects of both fire intensity (aboveground)
and depth of burn (belowground). Severity thus better incorpo-
rates both short- and long-term aggregate effects of flaming and
glowing combustion—for example, differentiating the effects of
short flame lengths followed by lengthy glowing combustion ver-
sus taller flames followed by shorter glowing combustion. These
distinctions are important, since fire effects will be vastly different
in ecosystems experiencing contrasting time-temperature expo-
sures at different heights above and below ground. For example,
Ryan (2001) demonstrates that fire’s ecological effects will be quite
distinct because of time-temperature profiles above- and below-
ground in (a) savanna or grassland fire (with no duff consump-
tion); (b) crown fire with no duff consumption; (c) ground fire
with duff consumption; and (d) crown fire with duff consumption.
Dramatically different fire effects will be expected under these
contrasting conditions. Sensitive growing tissues and reproduc-
tive parts (buds and seeds) will react to these differential heat
pulses accordingly. Thus, savanna and crown fires (with no duff
consumption) might kill or damage aboveground vegetation, yet
provide an advantage to plants that reproduce vegetatively by
sprouting in juvenile or adult stages. Plants that reproduce by
seeds stored in the ground might also gain a foothold in the post-
fire stand. By contrast, ground fires with little flaming and crown
fires (that is, that burn the duff layer) may consume subterranean
seeds yet provide an opportunity for plants that reproduce by
seeds dispersed from outside the burn area to occupy the postfire
site. The ground fire may also favor plants that store seed in
crowns. Again, fire intensity describes only the heat pulse above-
ground that contributes to active flaming, so at best it permits in-
complete inferences about heat effects.
Postfire evaluation schemes attempt to systematize the col-
lection of quantitative and visual cues for measuring fire severity,
for possible linkage to observed fire effects. For example, Ryan
Fire Effects
169

and Noste’s (1985) methodology involves assignment of burn
conditions within a two-dimensional matrix for classifying the
heat pulse received by aboveground plants and the heat pulse
transmitted down into the soil. With modification, their approach
also has proven useful for the evaluation of fuel treatment effects
on wildfire severity (Omi and Kalabokidis 1991, Pollet and Omi
2002, and Omi and Martinson 2002).
Perception of fire as either harmful or beneficial depends on
your personal values, interests, or point of view. For example, a
timber manager, wildlife habitat specialist, hydrologist, and recre-
ationist may have drastically different opinions about the effects
from any single fire, each focusing on his or her own particular
point of interest. Thus a wildlife specialist may be pleased with in-
creases in postfire food sources for small mammals, while perhaps
not being so concerned about reductions in the density of trees in
the area. Or a hiker may be overjoyed about the improved hiking
when vegetation is cleared along stream crossings, perhaps over-
looking the increases in stream temperatures and fish dieback ac-
companying the removal of trees along the creek banks. Fire ecol-
ogists and managers thus must be aware of prevalent and
conflicting points of view as the forest recovers from a fire.
Out of long tradition, wildfires are commonly considered
“bad” and prescribed fire as “good.” Actually, some fires are de-
clared “wild” that may in fact benefit certain ecosystems in terms
of nutrient recycling, wildlife habitat improvement, or other
changes that occur within the burn perimeter. Conversely, pre-
scribed fire effects depend on the quality of execution. Appropri-
ate execution will likely mimic the more benign impacts of wild
fires; poor execution of prescribed fires results in damage. Fire
management and the public will have come a long way when they
can accept the beneficial aspects of wildfires and reject the dam-
aging results from “bad” prescribed fires. Generally, intentionally
set prescribed fires are preferable to random wildfires, because
managers exert control over the timing and location of burning to
meet prespecified objectives. Nevertheless, fire severity is the ap-
propriate criterion for judging the ecological effects of fires, re-
gardless of whether human-caused or the result of natural causes.
The discussion of fire effects is a huge field that goes far be-
yond the scope of the current discussion. Interested readers may
wish to pursue numerous literature sources available in local li-
braries or on the worldwide web. Fire effects on vegetation are
summarized in Brown and Smith (2000), including effects on in-
170
Facts and Data

dividual plants and fire regimes. Smith (2000) summarizes effects
on fauna, including wildlife and nongame species; Sandberg et al.
(2002) summarize the effects on air resources resulting from burn-
ing. Additional summaries are noted in Chapter 7, along with
valuable sources available on the Internet, such as the Fire Effects
Information System (listed under Nonprint Resources) and the
predictive First Order Fire Effects Model (see Software).
Fuel Consumption
The rate and degree of fuel consumption will determine the ef-
fects of a fire whether wild or prescribed. Fuel consumption af-
fects the soil substratum, the microenvironment, and the amount
of plant sprouting or seed regeneration that occurs in an area. If
consumption can be managed, so can a fire’s effects. On a wild-
fire, consumption is unmanaged until firefighters or weather con-
ditions remove heat, fuel, or oxygen from burning. Wildfires are
considered so damaging precisely because fuel consumption is
not managed (including houses in the area) but left to chance and
circumstance.
In reality, a fire only consumes a small portion of above-
ground biomass. For example, as little as 5 to 10 percent of stems
and branches may be consumed in a high-intensity fire in a Dou-
glas-fir forest in the Pacific Northwest, while nearly 75 to 100 per-
cent of foliage, forest floor, and understory may be consumed
(Agee 1993). Thirty percent of snags and downed logs may be
consumed, depending on the degree of rot, although all of these
figures may fluctuate considerably during drought or wet peri-
ods, in different vegetation types, or in other geographic regions.
Prescribed fire consumption can be managed in several
ways, including specification of allowable wind and fuel mois-
ture conditions under which ignition will occur (that is, in the
prescription). Higher fuel moistures, in particular, will retard
consumption by absorbing heat and lowering fire intensity.
Other options for regulating prescribed fire consumption include
selection of the appropriate ignition technique and pattern, and
restriction of the smoldering combustion stage. Possible ignition
techniques vary from the handheld drip torch, to truck-mounted
terra-torches, to aerial devices (for example, helicopter drip
torches and Ping-Pong balls filled with potassium perman-
ganate). Fires can be ignited in strips of varying width, and with
or against the wind and slope—all of which will alter the fire
Fire Effects
171

severity and consumption. Smoldering consumption can be ab-
breviated by mopping up smoldering fuels or by burning when
the large diameter fuels and duff have higher moistures—for ex-
ample, in the spring.
The greatest degree of fuel consumption occurs during the
smoldering combustion stages of a fire, after passage of the flam-
ing front, when heat is transferred mostly by conduction. Guide-
lines for regulating fuel consumption can be obtained by using
the CONSUME program (Ottmar et al. 2002). For example, in the
Alaskan boreal forest, forest floor consumption can be predicted
from the following equation:
y = 0.27501 – 0.04601 x1 + 0.08258 x2
(10)
where,
y = forest floor reduction (cm);
x1 = upper forest floor moisture (%); and
x2 = preburn forest floor depth (cm)
Equation 10 was developed from eleven experimental burn
units, explaining 82 percent of the observed variation in forest floor
reduction (ibid.). Similar relationships are embodied for different
fuel types and geographic regions in the CONSUME software.
A better understanding of fuel consumption principles al-
lows managers to fine tune and calibrate fire prescriptions for an
area. As experience is gained in understanding how fuel con-
sumption can be controlled, the manager becomes more skilled in
using fire to produce the desired changes in the ecosystems being
treated while minimizing risk.
Emissions and Air Quality
Fire emissions (particulates, gases, and other products of com-
bustion) are among the most critical of fire effects to be managed,
especially as smoke is associated with greenhouse gas formation
and global warming. Smoke also contributes to regional haze and
may present human health hazards to individuals with pul-
monary disorders (such as asthma) or allergies. Globally, as much
as a third of the total emissions from biomass burning may be as-
sociated with burning in savannas (grasslands with a scattered
cover of trees and shrubs) in Africa, South America, and Aus-
tralia. Haze associated with the 1997 fires in Indonesia, Malaysia,
172
Facts and Data

and Singapore caused billions of dollars’ worth of commercial
disruptions. In the United States, the federal Clean Air Act man-
dates protection of air quality, especially around class I (that is,
pristine) areas, though enforcement is left to individual states.
State jurisdiction for enforcing clean air standards extends to fed-
eral lands such as national forests and parks.
Key fire contaminants include particulate matter (PM 10 and
PM 2.5 refers to particle size, in microns (µ) or 10–6 meter), ele-
mental and organic carbon, volatile organic compounds, sulfur
oxides, nitrogen oxides, nitrates, and carbon monoxide. These
contaminants vary in terms of visibility impairment, contribu-
tions to regional haze, impact on human health, longevity in the
atmosphere, and nuisance effects—though particulates generate
the greatest concern from a fire standpoint. Individual states reg-
ulate air quality standards, while the Environmental Protection
Agency has developed national ambient air quality standards
(NAAQS) to regulate effects on human health.
Particulates suspended in the air produce the primary im-
pacts on air quality (aesthetics, health, and safety). Aesthetic im-
pacts include plume blight and haze resulting from light scatter-
ing by particulates. Recall that the greatest proportion of
particulate diameters produced in wood smoke (from Figure 5–9)
are in the smallest size classes, less than 1 micron (µ) in diameter.
In fact, as much as 80 percent of wood smoke particles are be-
tween 0.3 µ and 0.7 µ, making them very efficient “scatterers” of
visible light (Deeming 1988). These particles contribute to un-
sightly smoke in the air when the fire is burning, and they may
remain aloft for an average of ten days, causing haziness in the
sky. Essentially all particles of less than 10 microns can be
respired into the human body. Larger particles may be collected
by hair follicles and mucus in nasal passages, and cause coughing
and discomfort. Smaller particles, of less than 1 µ (82 percent of
the particles in wood smoke, Figure 5–9), may go deeper into the
lungs and become entrapped in the alveoli (air sacs), causing
bronchial discomfort, illness, or disease. Human health impacts
depend on a variety of risk factors, including age, general state of
health, and the toxicity of the gases and particles in wood smoke.
Adults with chronic respiratory disease or asthma and children
with bronchitis, asthma, or hay fever are especially susceptible,
although the general public also may suffer. Firefighters them-
selves are susceptible to risks associated with prolonged exposure
to smoke while working on the fireline.
Fire Effects
173

One particular risk to firefighters is carbon monoxide (CO)
poisoning. CO is produced in greatest quantities during the smol-
dering stage of a fire, when combustion is least efficient. CO at-
taches to hemoglobin in the bloodstream and displaces necessary
oxygen flow to the brain, causing dizziness, disorientation, or, in
the worst cases, suffocation. Even though the likelihood of CO
poisoning dissipates quickly with distance from the source and as
oxygen is replenished, at the end of a long shift with physically
arduous activity, any drop-off in mental acuity can be harmful to
a firefighter—especially when quick decisions are necessary.
Managers attempt to mitigate air quality risks by controlling
smoke production, transport, and dispersion. Excessive smoke
from wild and prescribed fires can threaten public safety by re-
ducing visibility along highways or air transport routes. Serious
chain-reaction automobile collisions involving hundreds of vehi-
cles have been documented when unwary drivers have at-
tempted to travel through smoke-filled highway corridors.
Posted warning signs may help, but drivers need to exercise com-
mon sense when smoke obscures the road ahead.
Postfire Effects on Soils/Hydrology
The effects of wild and prescribed fire on water runoff and soil
erosion vary greatly, depending in part on fire severity, but also
because both the vegetation canopy and the physical properties
of the soil can be affected, as well as protective duff and litter lay-
ers atop the soil (MacDonald and Stednick 2003). Wildfires can
increase the amount of water runoff and soil erosion by several
orders of magnitude (Wagenbrenner 2003). Erosion rates from
undisturbed forests are generally quite low, with estimates for the
western United States ranging from 20 to 1,200 kg/ha/yr. Wild-
fires increase the amount of runoff and erosion, because of vege-
tation cover disturbance and removal. The risks of heightened
erosion can last anywhere from one to five years following the
fire, depending in large part on the intensity and location of rain-
storms in relation to the burned area. In midelevation forests of
the Colorado Front Range, overland flow and surface erosion are
initiated after wildfires whenever rainfall intensities exceed 10
mm/hr (MacDonald 2004). The process is quite complex and
variable over an area, but it starts with plant death and damage
resulting from high-severity fires. As plants die, their stems and
root systems no longer are available to stabilize soil movements.
174
Facts and Data

The resultant reduction in plant cover will reduce canopy mois-
ture interception. Removal of plant and litter cover increases soil
evaporation rates, and allows more rainfall to land directly on
bare soil (Wagenbrenner 2003). This increases soil sealing and re-
duces infiltration (DeBano et al. 1998), making soils more erosive
and increasing overland flows. In coniferous and chaparral
forests, high-severity fires may cause a hydrophobic (or water-
repellent) layer to develop below the soil surface, further reduc-
ing infiltration and leading to soil layer movement (DeBano
1981). This water-repellent layer in the soil lasts one to two years
following both wild and prescribed fires, with erosion rates five
to twenty-five times greater following high-severity burning in
comparison to sites burned at moderate or low severity (Mac-
Donald 2004). If saturated by rainfall, the soil above the hy-
drophobic layer can move or slip downhill on account of gravity.
The surface soils on whole hillsides may literally liquefy and flow
downhill, threatening communities and downstream water stor-
age facilities. Such mass movement may even occur on dry slopes
in steep terrain following a wildfire.
Thus wildfires followed by intense rainstorms can be ex-
tremely damaging, resulting in massive flooding and overland
flows of sediment, as well as scouring of creek channels and depo-
sition of soil and debris in rivers and reservoirs. Large, high-sever-
ity wildfires pose a much greater threat to water quality than do
low-severity wild or prescribed fires (MacDonald and Stednick
2003). Such damage is especially acute if this so-called fire-flood se-
quence occurs in the vicinity of homes or structures, or if sediments
flow into reservoirs, reducing storage capacity and the quality of
drinking water. Such episodes have accentuated the short- and
long-term effects of severe burning, especially in the southwestern
United States. For example, intense Christmas day rainstorms fol-
lowing the southern California fires of 2003 contributed to massive
debris flows (mud, boulders, trees) into Waterman and Lytle Creek
canyons in the San Bernardino National Forest. Sadly, many fatali-
ties resulted when mudslides buried unsuspecting children and
adults camping downslope from a recently burned area. This dis-
aster might have been predicted, based on historical records indi-
cating dozens of previous wildfire-rainstorm-debris flows in
southern California. Perhaps the most infamous example occurred
just after New Year’s Day in 1934, when a wall of mud and rocks 6
m tall swept through the towns of La Crescenta and Montrose,
killing forty-nine people (Bustillo 2003).
Fire Effects
175

Some atmospheric scientists have suggested that large
burned areas may actually facilitate the development of intense
convective storms, thus triggering or contributing to increased
runoff and erosion. A possible explanation for this phenomenon
is that burned soils have lower albedo and absorb more heat,
thereby raising aboveground temperatures because of long-wave
radiation and convective heating. Although not systematically
studied to date, increases in summer storm runoff have been
documented following the 1994 South Canyon fire, the 1996 Buf-
falo Creek fire, and the 2000 Bobcat fire, all in Colorado. This ef-
fect may not be apparent in higher elevations or during droughts
(MacDonald and Stednick 2003), but it deserves further study.
Fire Protection and Management
All fires, from the smallest to the very large, go through roughly
the same basic phases, from initiation through growth and then
extinction. During the initiation phase, an idealized fire grows in
size as the fire spreads away from its point of ignition in response
to fuel, weather, and topographic variations. During the growth
phase, the fire accelerates relatively rapidly in size but eventually
reaches a point where growth increases, but at a decreasing rate.
Eventually growth slows and the fire size levels off and finalizes.
Individual sectors or pockets within the fire perimeter may con-
tinue to burn beyond this point, so firefighters need to mop up ac-
tively burning portions to prevent the fire from escaping control.
Although this pattern generally holds for all fires, eventual size
and growth rates vary considerably. Some fires may go through
several acceleration-deceleration growth phases. Blowups and
major fire runs accelerate fire growth, management activities may
slow the fire’s growth, or natural influences (such as winds and
fuel moisture) may increase or decrease growth rates.
Most fires are fought with suppression crews and equipment
with the intent of keeping fires as small as possible, but the same
trends prevail in terms of initiation, growth, and extinction. Even
intentionally ignited prescribed fires or fires that are allowed to
burn to meet management objectives will exhibit these same gen-
eral trends in fire growth and eventual size. When wildland fires
are used for resource benefit, the final size may be predetermined
by the maximum management area (MMA) set in advance by
planners. In fact, prescribed fires or those allowed to burn for re-
176
Facts and Data

source objectives may be encouraged to treat as large an area as
practical or as environmentally acceptable.
A fire that ignites in the forest must first be detected, then lo-
cated geographically and communicated to the local fire dis-
patcher. Depending on accessibility, available initial attack forces
are dispatched to the incident and begin suppression efforts, such
as digging a fireline or knocking flames down with water hoses.
Thus managers have several options for keeping fires small when
objectives call for aggressive fire control (Figure 5–15). For exam-
ple, managers can focus on minimizing the time until the fire is
detected (tD), reducing the time until initial attack forces arrive at
the fire (tI), or restricting the overall time required to extinguish
the fire (tE). Obviously, fire size can be reduced (along with asso-
ciated expenditures) if tD and tI are kept small. Detection times
can be reduced by investments in fire detection equipment, air-
craft, or in educating the public about reporting ignitions to re-
sponsible authorities. Reductions in time until initial attack may
be possible if more crews and suppression resources (for exam-
ple, aerial retardant planes) are hired and trained to respond to
Fire Protection and Management
177
Figure 5-15
Fire Growth over Time
Over time, fire growth exhibits a similar pattern for all fires, including initiation,
growth, then extinction. Options for reducing fire size include reductions in
detection time (tD), initial attack time (tI), and overall time until extinction (tE).
tD
tI
tE
size
time

fire dispatches. Investing more in suppression resources can re-
duce extinction times (tE), which also may be facilitated by fuel
treatment expenditures that reduce the likelihood that fires will
require costly extended attack—that is, after a failed initial attack.
Alternatively, investments in fire prevention efforts aim to reduce
the likelihood of damaging fire ignitions.
The prevention of large, catastrophic fires deserves special at-
tention, since those incidents involve unusually high costs and
cause massive damage to natural and human environments. The
mechanisms associated with large fires are conceptually straight-
forward (Deeming 1990): flammable materials (fuel) are exposed
to an intense heat source (firebrand) coincident with conducive
weather and fuel conditions (fire danger). Reduction of large fire
probability thus focuses on one or both of two strategies: (1) elim-
ination or reduction of firebrand sources (risk management); or (2)
removal or modification of the fuel to reduce its flammability dur-
ing high or extreme fire danger conditions (hazard management).
Risk and hazard are important terms to distinguish: Risk is a
wildfire causative agent, such as lightning, arson, or railroad
trains; it also refers to the likelihood or probability of ignition in
an area, again by a causative agent. Hazard describes the proper-
ties of a fuels complex related to ignition susceptibility, wildfire
behavior and severity, or suppression difficulty (Omi 1997). These
definitions are not universally acknowledged or used uniformly
by all in the fire management community, although most agree
that risk and hazard need to be distinguished. For example, in
some engineering applications risk is defined as the product of an
event probability times the value at risk.
Fire managers have long realized that risks cannot be elimi-
nated totally, but at best they should be acknowledged and man-
aged commensurate with fuel hazard levels and values-at-risk.
Thus some level of risk must be accepted under most circum-
stances. After all, forests have burned for millennia, with no end
in sight. Where values are high and risk cannot be reduced suffi-
ciently, the management focus on fuel hazard reduction may have
greater payoffs than all-out suppression.
In addition, community vulnerability or ecosystem susceptibil-
ity to fire may be of concern to fire managers. Developed commu-
nities may be vulnerable because of their location nearby to fire-
prone environments. Ecosystems may be susceptible when fuels
have accumulated because of fire exclusionary practices or as a re-
sult of vulnerability to other types of disturbance (Chapters 1 and 2).
178
Facts and Data

Systematic Fire Management
Back in the early twentieth century, the tasks confronting forest
managers were straightforward, even if sometimes overwhelm-
ing. Plain and simple, fire control was the first responsibility of
every forest ranger. With the passage of time, and as forest man-
agement became increasing complex, fire control became its own
specialty, although the major focus remained unchanged. Fast-
forward to the present, and today’s fire manager must focus not
only on controlling fire but also on using fire as a tool, with the
goal of ensuring ecosystem sustainability—almost as if the arch-
enemy has now become an essential ally. However, the balance
between fire control and fire use is not easily struck, as there is
still far too much unwanted fire in comparison to useful fire. And
the distinctions sometimes blur, as for example during the infa-
mous Cerro Grande prescribed fire escape near Los Alamos, New
Mexico, in 2000 (Chapter 1). Moreover, the responsibilities of fire
managers have grown more complex, with the need for greater
attention to environmental concerns and accountability, among
other demands placed on the job. So the modern fire manager re-
quires a completely different set of skills and competencies than
did the early forester or fire control officer. Some of these skills
may be apparent from the following list of activities that are part
of typical systematic fire management efforts for an area. How-
ever, as noted below, the required competencies go much beyond
the activities listed.
Fire prevention: Reduce unwanted ignitions, including
firebrand production (agents) and lower susceptibility of
fuelbeds to ignition (that is, risk).
Urban interface management: Manage communities,
dwellings, and structures near wildlands.
Fire detection: Detect a fire when small and report to
appropriate authorities.
Fire preparedness: Advanced preparation in anticipation of
future fire outbreaks.
Dispatch: Process as quickly as possible reports of fire
location, available forces, and sending of resources plus
support to a fire.
Fire Protection and Management
179

Fuels management: Reduce fuel hazards consistent with
land management objectives.
Wildland fire use: Employ or herd fire to achieve land
management objectives.
Fire suppression: Initial attack, extended attack, and mop-
up to extinguish a fire.
Communications: Make sure information and instructions
are communicated and understood, using best available
technologies.
Safety: Protect firefighter lives and the public, as well as
natural resources.
Fire rehabilitation: Restore plant cover, protect soil and
water resources.
Ecosystem restoration: Restore ecosystem structure and
function.
Time and space do not permit detailed discussion of each of
the activities in the above list. Highlights are summarized below,
however, mostly to provide a flavor for the scope of concerns and
interests confronting contemporary fire managers.
Fire Prevention 
An old fire-control adage proclaims that a fire prevented does not
need to be suppressed. By the same token, costly fire suppression
activities may be avoided. Smokey Bear became the poster child
of national fire prevention campaigns when, as a cub, he was
plucked from the ashes of a New Mexico wildfire in 1950. For
decades, his message, “Only YOU can prevent forest fires!” pro-
vided a motivation for keeping fire out of the forest. Of late,
Smokey’s message has had to be altered in light of scientific evi-
dence about the harmful effects of complete fire exclusion in
some forest types—for example, long-needled pine ecosystems
that historically experienced frequent, low-intensity surface fires.
In such forests, prescribed forest fires may represent a long-term
alternative to damaging catastrophic fires.
The more traditional view toward fire prevention relies on
the so-called three Es of Education, Enforcement, and Engineer-
ing as cornerstones of fire prevention efforts. Sample education
180
Facts and Data

efforts include public information spots in the news media, inter-
active websites (see, for example, http://www.fs.fed.us/
fire/links/links_education.html), or presentations in grade
schools. Enforcement efforts attempt to curb risky behavior by
implementing laws or regulations. For example, forests may be
closed, or heavy equipment may be shut down during periods of
high fire danger. Industrial logging operations may be prohibited
early in the afternoon on high fire danger days during the sum-
mer. Law enforcement agents may increase forest patrols in high-
risk areas on days when Red Flag warnings are issued by fire
weather forecasters. Engineering solutions include remote sur-
veillance of lightning or human fire starts, and efforts that remove
ignitable biomass. Alternatively, fire-safe environments may be
created, such as thinned forest buffers or defensible spaces
around homes and communities (Dennis 1992).
A more progressive view toward fire prevention examines
the psychological and sociocultural motivations for fire-setting
and may attempt to alter human behavior, using sociological
techniques (Doolittle and Lightsey 1980). For example, in the
South, woods-burning stems from long-standing traditions and
beliefs about firing the forest, whether for clearing undergrowth,
eliminating pests, or facilitating wildlife, cattle, or timber man-
agement. Community values clearly support burning, so fire pre-
vention campaigns need to be directed toward fire deviants with-
out alienating local opinion. In such settings, rules and laws may
be unenforceable and less effective than working with local opin-
ion leaders.
Modern practitioners also recognize that all ignitions may
not need to be excluded or prevented from some ecosystems; in
fact, complete prevention of fires may lead to undesirable conse-
quences, such as increased fuel loadings and undesired species
composition. Some fires might be beneficial under prescribed cir-
cumstances. This view presents several problems to managers, in
terms of screening to identify those ignitions that might be more
beneficial if allowed to burn. An even more intractable assess-
ment involves determining the extent to which fire prevention ac-
tivities, such as increased law enforcement efforts, actually re-
duce human ignition sources.
Another aspect of fire prevention includes fire forensics, or
systematic investigation into the point of origin and ignition cause.
Determination of fire origin and growth may be important for as-
signing ignition responsibility and for settling damage claims. For
Fire Protection and Management
181

that reason, firefighters are instructed to protect or isolate a fire’s
point of origin whenever possible, whether a lightning struck tree,
a cigarette butt, or other cause. Guidelines for carrying out a fire
forensic investigation are noted in DeHaan (2002), though the pro-
cedures for wildland fire are quite limited. Individuals interested in
fire cause investigation require specialized training in recognizing
fire growth patterns. For example, fire char will typically be higher
on the lee side of a tree trunk in the path of a spreading fire, much
as fire scar formation is more likely on the uphill side of the tree
bole. Also, a fire ignited at the bottom of a hill will typically spread
uphill with an inverted U- shape. These and other patterns, such as
needles frozen in the direction of fire spread, can sometimes be
used to track a fire’s growth backward to the point of origin.
Urban Interface Management
Fire prevention in the so-called urban-wildland interface is best
implemented in collaborative partnership among residents,
landowners, communities, county regulators, and fire agencies,
among others. Many wildland areas in the West, where fire is
both natural and common, have become interspersed with single
homes, residential areas, or entire municipalities. Often commu-
nities are developed and homes are built without regard for wild-
fire risks and hazards. In the absence of concerted partnership ef-
forts, insurance companies might boost premiums, reduce
coverage, cancel existing policies, or drop fire insurance alto-
gether—as reportedly occurred in certain areas of California fol-
lowing the 1991 Tunnel fire in the Oakland-Berkeley Hills.
Homeowners can protect themselves by clearing vegetation
around the house (creation of a so-called defensible space), using
fire resistant construction materials for roofs, siding, and decks,
and landscaping with greenbelts and drought-resistant native
plants. Communities and county regulators can adopt sensitive
and sensible subdivision design criteria. Fire agencies can work
with all concerned in developing community-based fire educa-
tion and inspection programs.
Creation of defensible space can reduce the risk of wildfire
while providing firefighters with extra margins of safety. Some
of the more common features of defensible space include the
following:
Noncombustible roofing materials;
182
Facts and Data

Creation of fuelbreaks (low-volume vegetation) and
firebreaks (vegetation-free zones);
Thinning or elimination of flammable plants around
structures (for example, pines, eucalypts);
Removal of woody fuel, leaf, and pine needle jackpots;
Removal of trees near to structures;
Pruning of branches or raising crown base heights that
overhang roofs and decks;
Reduction of fuel loads in zones surrounding the home;
Installation of irrigation systems or water storage facilities;
Maintenance of good access roads and turnaround areas. 
Additional guidelines for creating fire-safe communities can
be accessed at the FIREWISE website (Chapter 7) or by entering
“living with fire” into any Internet search engine.
The urban interface fire management problem is not re-
stricted to the United States. Housing losses occur as a result of
wildland fires, but they are not so numerous in Japan, Australia,
and Canada. Losses are less extensive in southern Europe in part
because of greater reliance on nonflammable building materials
for home construction. Still, fire losses do occur. In Australia,
homeowners are encouraged to “prepare, stay, and survive” as
an alternative to the massive fire evacuations (that is, involving
tens of thousands of people) ordered annually in the western
United States.
Displaced homeowners commonly express frustration with
evacuation procedures that are implemented unevenly or exe-
cuted poorly. This frustration can be ameliorated partially if
homeowners form partnerships with public officials to under-
stand fire risks, participate in hazard mitigation activities, and
plan evacuation procedures before a fire occurs.
Detection
A fire lookout tower rising above a prominent ridge or vantage
point provided an early fixture on the landscape as formerly wild
forests came under management in the United States during the
twentieth century. These towers also stood as symbolic sentinels
standing watch over the vast woodlands of the United States,
Fire Protection and Management
183

with public servants ever on the lookout against random light-
ning or human ignitions. These threats became especially pro-
nounced as forest resources were increasingly exploited, aided by
railroads extending general access to frontier communities while
facilitating the extraction and transport of raw materials (for ex-
ample, lumber and ores) at the end of the nineteenth century.
As development of the frontier proceeded, steam locomo-
tives would often eject burning cinders and sparks along the rail-
road right of ways, starting fires that extended into the forest
where loggers had previously left debris (treetops, limbs, and
other slash) from cutting operations. Thus railroad ignitions
under hot, dry conditions would transform the woods into blaz-
ing infernos. In particular, the 1903 and 1908 fire seasons in the
Northeast and the West spurred public outcries for the creation of
forest fire control systems.
The first fixed detection lookouts were primitive, being
staffed by observers perched atop makeshift log decks from some
open vantage point. Observers would remain vigilant during
daylight hours, watching for ignitions during the fire season, es-
pecially in “hotspots” such as lightning alleys or travel corridors.
Over the next several decades, those crude detection stations
evolved into the more familiar metal towers with enclosed cabins
rising above the forest floor, equipped with fire finders (cross-
haired sighting windows) that allowed the lookout observer to fix
the ignition azimuth and legal description. A sighting from a sec-
ond lookout with a different vantage point allowed triangulation
of the fire’s location precisely. Eventually, telephones or heli-
ographs (mirrors for signaling Morse code) gave way to short-
wave radios for communicating sightings to the dispatcher
(Fuller 1991). In addition to fire detection, some lookouts in
coastal forests were trained to provide early warning for antici-
pated enemy air attacks during World War II.
Today, aircraft flying systematic patrol routes over high-risk
locations have become standard in some remote locations, more
recently equipped with sophisticated heat-sensing detectors and
global positioning technologies. Satellites equipped with ra-
diometers to fix locations and send out automatic alerts to fire
dispatch centers are used in some countries, such as Finland,
Sweden, Norway, Estonia, Latvia, and Russia (Kelha et al. n.d.).
In less remote areas, rotating video and digital cameras with
wired or wireless connections to a central observation center may
be used instead of a human observer.
184
Facts and Data

The aim of lookouts and other detection systems (such as air-
craft) has always been to detect fires as soon as possible while fire
size is still small, so that suppression forces can be dispatched to
an incident as soon as possible. Advancing technologies have
spawned numerous innovations. For example, fixed-location sen-
sors that recognize the CO2 signature from an ignition can be
linked to a local dispatch center or else can trigger deployment of
heat shield curtains to protect nearby houses. Mobile sensors
aboard detection aircraft have become important for mapping fire
perimeters and identifying hotspots burning outside of control
lines. Aircraft also may be used to patrol areas in search of fires
after a rash of cloud-to-ground lightning strikes. Aircraft patrol
routes and flight lines are planned to prioritize coverage of light-
ning strike concentrations, perhaps detected by automated light-
ning detector sensors. Sometimes these ignitions might not be ap-
parent for a day or so, until heat, flame, or smoke becomes
detectable. These delayed fires are sometimes referred to as
sleeper fires, also known as holdover fires.
Satellites and aerial photos also provide useful information
for mapping fire perimeters and subsequent damage. After a fire
has burned over an area, satellite sensors and aerial photography
may be used for a variety of purposes. Conventional Landsat the-
matic mapper and multispectral imagery have proven useful for
a variety of applications, such as mapping vegetation mortality,
soil moisture, burn severity, and forest canopy damage (Williams
2003). Severely burned areas may be candidates for burned area
rehabilitation measures, such as seeding or mulching to reduce
soil erosion. Remotely sensed data also can be used for assessing
forest regeneration after a fire, or to detect changes in wildlife
habitat.
Satellite imagery generally makes use of different spectral
bands or electromagnetic reflectance, such as near- or mid-
infrared wavelengths that penetrate smoke but not forest
canopies equally readily. Laser altimetry, or lidar (light detection
and ranging) technologies, shows promise for remotely sensing
forest structures beneath tree canopies, but its fire detection capa-
bilities are unproven, especially over large areas.
In areas with high population densities, the lookout tower
has been decommissioned or replaced because of reduced air
quality, which hinders observations. Some towers have been shut
down because of the high upkeep cost, or the evolution of more
efficient alternatives for detecting and reporting fires, such as
Fire Protection and Management
185

satellites or hikers and motorists with cell phones. In essence,
more cost-efficient devices have replaced the human observer,
often viewed as the weak link in the system. Today many lookout
towers have been refurbished to become important destinations
open to the public for weekend sleepovers, day hikes, or recre-
ational drives. 
Dispatch
Dispatch facilities are like the nerve centers of the fire organiza-
tion, processing information from several sources and then
making sure that appropriate responses are undertaken. Forest
fire dispatch centers process reports on an ignition by lookouts
or other detection sources, then facilitate the movement of avail-
able forces. Dispatchers also communicate with respondents to
a fire, keeping track of time and resource transport as well as re-
sponding to requests for additional support. These requests
may be filled from other local resources, or the dispatcher may
need to pass the request up the organizational hierarchy—per-
haps to a geographic area command center. Requests that ex-
ceed available resources at this level may be forwarded to the
National Interagency Fire Center. In all cases, the dispatch office
will be at the center of the two-way communications between
the field and higher-ups. When multiple ignitions occur simul-
taneously (for example, because of lightning or arsonist out-
breaks), or when complex fires involve multiple jurisdictions,
the dispatch office may become a hub for control of ground and
air traffic.
Depending on the organization, the dispatch may be auto-
mated or rely on automatic responses. For example, preplanned
dispatch responses (of crews, engines, or air tankers) may be
keyed to specific thresholds of fire danger. During peak periods
of fire danger, resources such as crews or air tankers may be pre-
positioned or placed on standby status as a precaution against
fire outbreaks. These various schemes may be developed and re-
hearsed in the off season for implementation during the peak
season.
Dispatchers also may be responsible for communicating fire
alerts or Red Flag warnings to field crews, using standard or
emergency radio prompts. The dispatch office also may commu-
nicate with field crews about fire bans or closures affecting vari-
ous user groups.
186
Facts and Data

Preparedness
Fire managers may spend considerable time during the off season
becoming better prepared to contend with upcoming incidents.
Activities include training, equipping and pre-positioning of fire-
fighting resources, equipment maintenance and replacement, fire
planning (including budgeting), or writing fire management
plans. Cooperative agreements may need to be written or negoti-
ated with interagency or private cooperators. Fire specialists also
may be called upon to interact with specialists (for example, soils,
water, wildlife, timber, recreation, rangeland ecologists) in devel-
oping environmental assessments and forest plans.
An extensive slate of fire training opportunities are required
and offered to develop basic competencies and upgrade skills
within the fire workforce. Training opportunities run the gamut
from basic fire school for incoming seasonal firefighters offered at
the local level to advanced incident management techniques of-
fered only to seasoned veterans at a national academy (see Chap-
ter 7). Agency employees keep fire task books signed off by su-
pervisors that identify training and experience, which will allow
advancement within the fire management hierarchy.
Each fire station maintains a cache of firefighting tools and
supplies, for outfitting engines and crews with necessary equip-
ment. During the off season, tools and supplies are repaired, re-
placed, or refurbished. Preattack plans may be developed, laying
out the location of important fuelbreaks and firebreaks, access
roads, and water storage facilities within the area of protection ju-
risdiction. Plans may be developed for pre-positioning of sup-
pression resources during periods of high fire danger, or for com-
plying with protocols for requesting support from adjoining
districts or regions.
Fire planning takes place on several levels—for example,
building and justifying an annual budget request or making sure
that specific projects (for example, fuels treatment or prescribed
burn) are carried out as effectively as possible at least cost. The
standards used in planning will vary. For example, the minimiza-
tion of cost plus net value change (damages net of benefits) may
be the standard for fire planning. Individual projects may be sub-
jected to interdisciplinary review and effectiveness compared
(relative to costs) with alternative treatments. Extensive use of
computerized fire models (Chapter 7) and geographic informa-
tion systems may be required to develop fire plans, based on costs
Fire Protection and Management
187

and effects of simulated alternatives. On another level, monetary
resources (such as fire severity funds) may become available on
short notice, requiring submission of written plans for spending
the money to beef up forces for an unanticipated early fire season.
In any case, the best prepared managers are those who have in-
vested the time to anticipate or plan for upcoming activities.
Fuels Management
Fuels management consists of activities undertaken prior to the
onset of a fire to ameliorate subsequent fire effects so as to achieve
land management or fire protection objectives. Intentionally or
not, fuels are manipulated as a consequence of many manage-
ment activities, including timber harvests, wildlife habitat im-
provement, livestock grazing allotments, or ecosystem restora-
tions. By far, the best known and practiced applications are for
fuel hazard and risk reduction, which may involve the following
activities (after Brown and Davis 1973):
Remove all ignitable fuels within small, high-risk areas to
eliminate ignitions from known sources.
Remove all fuel in a strip surrounding high-risk areas to
isolate and limit the spread of fires starting inside those
areas.
Reduce all fuel in a strip surrounding high-value or high-
hazard areas to exclude fires starting outside those areas.
Reduce or remove fuels in strategically located blocks to
augment natural fire barriers.
Eliminate fine and intermediate fuels—less than 1 inch
(2.54 cm) diameter—from extensive areas to reduce
wildfire spread rates.
Eliminate fuels extending from the ground to the tree
crowns (ladder fuels), to reduce the danger of crown fires.
Remove standing dead trees (snags) that can produce
embers (firebrands) that can be readily carried across fire
control lines.
All of the above measures may be applied within or around
individual houses or communities to reduce fuel hazards. Techni-
188
Facts and Data

cally, fire behavior and effects can be changed by alterations to
any or all of the various fuel strata, including the duff and litter;
dead and downed woody, shrub, and low vegetation; and ladder
and forest canopy layers. Treatment alternatives include hand pil-
ing, tractor piling, mechanical crushing, mastication, burning,
chemical desiccation, and biological reduction using livestock an-
imals, to name just a few. Different techniques fall into the fol-
lowing general categories, with listed advantages and disadvan-
tages (from Omi 1997):
Disposal on site (for example, prescribed burning)
Advantage: Mimics natural processes such as fire and
decomposition
Disadvantage: Air quality concerns, risk of escape,
nonuniform fuel reduction
Redistribution on-site (for example, cut and scatter tree
limbs and branches)
Advantage: Reduces fuel jackpots, lowers fuel depth, and
facilitates natural decomposition
Disadvantage: Resulting fuelbed may be more continuous
Physical removal (for example, using crews or specialized
machinery)
Advantage: Removed material may be used (for example,
firewood, energy cogeneration)
Disadvantage: Possible site disturbance, nutrient depletion,
cost
Type conversion (for example, changing plant cover)
Advantage: Reduces flammability by changing fuel type
Disadvantage: Native species may be displaced, use of
chemical or biological methods may be questionable
Isolation (for example, by constructing fuelbreaks or
firebreaks)
Advantage: Protect high-value areas or provide anchor
points
Disadvantage: Landscape aesthetics may be compromised
Fire Protection and Management
189

In addition, different land management practices and poli-
cies will change fuel profiles in an area. Thus practices such as
livestock grazing, timber management, water/soil stabilization,
preservation, and management for ecosystem sustainability all
can imply different levels of fuel hazard. In fact, the policy of fire
exclusion may have had the greatest impact on fuel hazards in
Western forests during the last century.
Fuel treatment traditionally has focused on wildfire hazard
abatement, either by physically reducing, rearranging, or remov-
ing flammable biomass from the fuels complex. Primary contem-
porary methods include prescribed fire, mechanical thinning, or
both. Other alternatives include biological (for example, grazing),
chemical (desiccants and defoliants), or natural controls (such as
reliance on unaided decomposition or decay processes). Another
treatment strategy involves the use of fuelbreaks, or strategically
located wide blocks or strips on which a cover of dense, heavy, or
flammable vegetation has been permanently changed to one of
lower fuel volume and reduced flammability (Green 1977; Agee
et al. 2000). For example, the Civilian Conservation Corps con-
structed a massive network of fuelbreaks (100 to 300 m wide) in
southern California to facilitate wildfire control during the 1930s.
More recently emphasis has broadened to encompass fuel
manipulations, again primarily reduction, rearrangement, or re-
moval, required to facilitate ecological restoration of fire to
ecosystems from which fire was excluded during the twentieth
century. Implicit in this latter aim is the desire to restore the bio-
logical diversity of forests to conditions that predate European
settlement—that is, forests that are largely sustainable in the pres-
ence of periodic low-intensity fires.
It is important to distinguish fuel treatments for hazard re-
duction from ecological restoration, since fires have not been ex-
cluded from all ecosystems and because some forests possess a
fuel structure and fire environment that supports high-severity
fires. Although some Southwestern ponderosa pine areas have
missed one to several cycles of low-intensity fires because of fire
suppression policies, other fire regimes may not have been al-
tered during the same period. For example, fuels have not accu-
mulated in some shrublands, such as southern California chapar-
ral, Great Basin sagebrush, or southwestern pinon-juniper forests.
Furthermore, some forests (such as those at higher elevations in
the Sierra Nevada or Rocky Mountains) may have been subjected
to fire exclusionary practices, but not for a long enough time pe-
190
Facts and Data

riod to result in marked changes in anticipated fire severity. After
all, these forests may have much longer fire return intervals than
the period of fire exclusion to date, so fuel hazards may not be ab-
normally high.
Generally, the approaches taken for managing fuels depend
on many factors, including the historical fire regime, the pre-
dominant vegetation, and land management objectives. For ex-
ample, in low-severity fire regimes, such as Southwestern pon-
derosa pine, managers may aim to reduce the threat of crown
fires by reducing fireline intensities while concurrently improv-
ing the ability of stands to withstand recurrent fires. Here the
goal might be to create or restore fire-safe forests (Agee and Skin-
ner 2003) by focusing on reductions to surface fuels, ladder fuels,
and crown fuels.
Surface fuels (such as coarse woody debris, fuel jackpots, and
understory vegetation) are removed to reduce the heat sources
and flame lengths that carry a fire into tree crowns. Ladder fuels
include low-hanging branches, small trees, shrubs, and lichens
suspended from branches that bridge the surface and crown fuel
strata. Removal of ladder fuels by pruning or low-intensity pre-
scribed fires reduces the likelihood that flames from an eventual
wildfire will reach into tree crowns or torch individual trees. Sus-
ceptibility to crown fire depends on foliar moisture content, sur-
face fire intensity, and the height to the live crown base (Van Wag-
ner 1977). So removal of fuel ladders effectively creates a vertical
buffer to lessen the likelihood of a surface fire’s climb into the for-
est canopy. Large trees should be retained to provide important
diversity in stand structure, necessary for restoring forest stands
to mimic pre-European settlement conditions. Species such as
ponderosa pine generally have taller crown base heights and
thicker bark, facilitating survival from low-intensity surface fires.
Needle drop from large ponderosa pine trees also provides a
porous mat of litter fuels that can carry periodic prescribed sur-
face fires that maintain low fuel loads. Reducing tree crown den-
sity leaves a more open overstory, as overlapping tree crowns that
touch one another are removed; these might support active or in-
dependent crown fires.
Most thinning operations remove small-diameter trees from
the understory, otherwise known as “low thinning” or “thinning
from below.” Sometimes thinning removes overstory trees (that
is, “canopy thinning”), although this may have less of an impact
on reducing crown fire potential, especially if the heights to live
Fire Protection and Management
191

crown base on residual trees are not lessened and if surface fuels
are not reduced.
After thinning the untreated stand—for example, with ma-
chinery or chainsaws—the thinning slash and surface fuels are
usually removed by piling and burning, since the thinned mate-
rials left on the site can constitute a dangerous fire hazard. Or the
unwanted fuels can be removed physically, though often at great
expense. If markets exist for the small-diameter trees that were
cut as part of the thinning operation, those can be hauled away
and processed to defray costs. Otherwise the thinned stand may
be susceptible to a wildfire that sweeps through the area, wiping
out not only the forest but also the investment in the thinning op-
eration. The fire danger is highest when the needles dry out and
remain attached to the fallen branches and limbs of the trees that
were cut as part of the thinning operation. This so-called red slash
fuelbed usually persists for a year or two following the thinning
operation. During that time the stand’s flammability can exceed
that of the untreated stand because of higher surface fuel loads
and greater fuel availability. If an ignition should occur, the fire’s
severity will exceed that of the untreated stand. Once slash dis-
posal is performed, the area will require periodic maintenance,
perhaps by low-intensity prescribed fires, to keep fuel levels at ac-
ceptable levels as the residual trees continue to grow.
Prescribed fire has long been touted as a useful tool for
achieving a variety of resource management objectives. In fact,
few fuel treatment alternatives seem so versatile as prescribed
fire, especially considering the wide variety of possible uses, in-
cluding (Fischer 2003):
1. disposal of logging residues and other woody debris;
2. removal of physical barriers to tree planting and travel
by big game animals;
3. reduction of fire hazard by removal of or reducing fuel
buildups;
4. wildfire control by burning out and backfiring to
expand and strengthen firelines;
5. seedbed preparation for natural or artificial
regeneration (exposing bare mineral soil);
6. competition reduction for tree seedlings by eliminating
shrubs;
7. nutrient recycling in order to maintain site
productivity;
192
Facts and Data

8. site sanitation against insects and disease;
9. elimination of less desirable plant species;
10. maintenance of seral species on a site that would
otherwise be taken by late successional tolerant species;
11. mimicry of a natural fire regime;
12. killing of invading trees and shrubs in order to
maintain grasslands;
13. thinning of dense stands so that moisture and nutrients
may become available to residual stems;
14. increase in distribution and amount of palatable forages
for domestic and wild animals;
15. rejuvenation of decadent shrubs by top-killing, in order
to induce sprouting and thus improve deer and elk
forage;
16. maintenance or restoration of “natural” conditions,
such as in a national park or wilderness area.
Prescribed fire can be used for such a large variety of objec-
tives in part because effects can be varied depending on treatment
objectives and selection of the appropriate fire prescription win-
dow, the conditions under which the fire is ignited. Broadcast
burning is applied when the intent is to consume fuels with a rel-
atively intense fire applied over a large area. Understory burning
uses a low-severity fire applied with the intent of minimizing
damage to standing trees. Stand replacement burning may be
used to intentionally kill the overstory trees. Prescribed fire ef-
fects can be varied depending on type of fuel, moisture, wind
speed, and firing method (pattern and ignition device). For ex-
ample, a handheld drip torch or fusee will produce a lower sever-
ity fire over a more restricted area than is produced by mass igni-
tion by helicopter.
A variety of firing techniques have been developed for im-
plementing prescribed fire objectives. Head fires produce rapid,
high-intensity burning pushed by the wind or slope, desirable for
treating large areas, brush fields, or clear-cut areas (Martin 1976).
Initially backed against the wind or slope to create a safe buffer
strip, a head fire is then ignited and allowed to burn with the
wind until the buffer is encountered and the perimeter secured.
A backfire, by contrast, produces a slow, low-intensity burn,
most appropriate for burning under a tree canopy, in heavy fuels
near a fire control line, or downhill (ibid., p. 149). Ignition takes
place downwind, and the fire backs slowly into the wind. A strip
Fire Protection and Management
193

head fire may be appropriate as an alternative to the head fire.
After the safe buffer is created, successive strips are ignited with
fire intensity adjusted by the strip width (ibid., p. 149). If access
within the burn unit is a problem, a helicopter may be used to treat
the area with spot head fires, similar in effect to the strip head fire.
Alternatively, flank firing or center (or ring) firing may be
used, depending on the objectives and personnel. Multiple flank
fires are ignited against the wind and are allowed to spread later-
ally into each other, with fire intensity determined by the speed of
ignition and amount of fire laid down by igniters. After securing
the safe buffer, the several burners progress into the wind, each
adjusting ignition speed in order to produce desired flaming.This
technique might be appropriate for light fuels under a canopy.
With center firing, the unit center is ignited first, followed by suc-
cessive rings that are drawn into the draft created by the center
fire. This is a rapid technique with good air dispersal, but dan-
gerous convection columns may develop and require a large crew
(ibid., p. 149).
The biggest shortcomings of prescribed fire are the risks of es-
cape and smoke. Even so, when judiciously applied, prescribed fire
provides a low-cost method for treating fuels and meeting other re-
source objectives. Ultimately, forests that are safe for prescribed fire
should be able to withstand wildfires under most circumstances.
Fuel Treatment Effectiveness 
Treatments such as prescribed fire and mechanical thinning re-
duce, remove, or rearrange flammable biomass but still leave be-
hind materials that can burn—especially during a drought, when
fuels are generally more available. Prescribed fire techniques and
objectives were addressed in the previous section. Thinning is a
silvicultural technique for manipulating the density and compo-
sition of a forest stand to achieve management objectives. Thin-
ning with slash removal reduces flammable biomass that could
be available to fuel wildfire rate of spread and intensity.
Conventional wisdom might suggest that fuel treatments
would be less effective under drought conditions, since the resid-
ual fuels might become more flammable. Although fuel modifi-
cation will not lessen wildfire spread and severity in all circum-
stances, there are also many instances in which practitioners have
observed a raging crown fire dropping to the surface when it en-
counters an area where fuels have been treated (that is, at the
194
Facts and Data

edge of a fuelbreak). To date, much of the evidence for fuel treat-
ment effectiveness has been isolated and anecdotal—and often
controversial.
The progression of the 2002 Hayman fire, the largest fire in
Colorado history, is illustrative of some of the controversy. Oc-
curring in the midst of an unprecedented drought, high south-
west winds pushed the fire into a huge, two-pronged fire run on
June 9, racing through several areas in which fuels had previously
been modified by timber harvest. In fact, the June 9 run covered
an area (20,000 ha) almost half the total size of the Hayman fire
(55,500 ha)—all in just one afternoon of burning. Recent wildfire
and prescribed burn areas effectively pinched off one of the fire
prongs; other fuel modifications encountered after winds shifted
seemed to marginally affect burn patterns, until the time of even-
tual fire containment on June 18 (Graham 2003).
So the Hayman fire illustrated that some fuel modifications
may not stop or retard a fire’s spread, especially when inspired by
drought and high winds, although the fire perimeter had been
confined by fuel modification areas encountered later in the fire’s
life (that is, June 18–19). Also, the previous wildfire and pre-
scribed burn appear to have dampened fire spread. The timber
harvest areas overrun during the fire run on June 8 were not car-
ried out with the intent of reducing fuel hazards, which may par-
tially explain their minimal impact on the overall severity and
size of the major fire run—along with the drought and winds.
Generally fuel treatments are not designed to stop a fast-
moving fire in its tracks, especially if firefighters are unable to get
into the treated area and make a stand against the fire—say, with
the assistance of air tanker retardant drops. With the Hayman
fire, the explosive fire run occurred so quickly and conditions
were so hazardous that no firefighters were placed in harm’s way
during the major run on June 8. In fact, fires can be expected to
burn through areas where fuels have been treated, albeit with
lower spread rates and intensity. Furthermore, although treated
areas may not stop a fire, a well-designed system of fuel treat-
ments will allow safe access and egress for firefighters, as well as
provide an opportunity to assess whether other strategies, such
as lighting a backfire, might be warranted if justified by safety
and environmental considerations.
Fuel treatments in the United States have been studied since
the 1950s, although quantitative evidence for the performance of
fuel manipulated areas during wildfires is limited to relatively
Fire Protection and Management
195

few case studies (Omi and Martinson 2002, 2004). Even so, the
2000, 2002, and 2003 fire seasons have spurred interest in a na-
tional expansion of fuel treatments. In particular, the 2003
Healthy Forests Restoration Act of the G. W. Bush administration
provides for accelerated rates of commercial logging, mechanical
thinning, and prescribed fire in Western forests (Chapter 4). That
expansion is extremely controversial, not only because of the in-
creased cutting in national forests but also because treatments
may be carried out in ecosystems that are not in need of restora-
tion. Furthermore, road-building in remote areas also will be re-
quired and permitted. Environmentalists have traditionally been
extremely suspicious of both logging and road-building, espe-
cially in remote or pristine areas. In addition, the scale of the pro-
posed expansions in fuel treatments is unprecedented, even
though most experts acknowledge that reductions in the fre-
quency and severity of wildfires may be possible only through
landscape-scale treatments. Unfortunately, few studies have been
published on the effectiveness of fuel treatments carried out at
landscape scales, so little information is available for assessing
the likelihood of success for the scale of fuel modifications pro-
posed under the mandates of the 2003 Healthy Forests Restora-
tion Act. Adding to the controversy has been an apparent with-
holding of funding to carry out restoration projects.
To date, most fuel treatment projects have focused on rela-
tively isolated stands, mostly scattered with little connectivity
across a landscape—with the possible exception of fuelbreak and
firebreak systems such as those installed by Civilian Conserva-
tion Corps crews in southern California during the 1930s. Thus to
date most of the evidence for and against fuel treatment effec-
tiveness comes from relatively few studies that compare wildfire
severity in adjacent treated versus untreated stands. For example,
Omi and Martinson (2002) and Pollet and Omi (2002) have stud-
ied differences in three indicators of wildfire severity (crown
scorch, stand damage, and ground char) in untreated versus
treated stands in eight wildfires occurring between 1994 and
2000. Their results confirmed observed reductions in wildfire
severity from treatment in all burns studied (Omi and Martinson
2003).
While not providing conclusive proof on the efficacy of fuel
treatments, these studies suggest that wildfire severity can be re-
duced in treated areas, especially under the severe burning con-
ditions that characterized the fires studied. Furthermore, the ef-
196
Facts and Data

fectiveness of treatments will depend on many other factors, such
as treatment type, time elapsed since treatment, and the stan-
dards to which treatments are implemented. Nonetheless, such
wildfire studies represent an ongoing effort to fill the void of in-
formation on the effectiveness of fuel treatments.
Managers for years have attempted to reduce wildfire haz-
ards by treatments that produce structural changes in the forest,
such as reduction in tree density and surface fuels using silvicul-
tural treatments such as thinning and prescribed fire. As an alter-
native to studying the effects of various fuel treatments on actual
wildfires, an experimental approach known as the “fire and fire
surrogate study,” has established replicated treatment sites across
the United States, all in low-severity fire regimes. Investigators
are interested not only in possible effects on wildfire severity but
also in the possible effects on such ecological attributes as nutri-
ent cycling, seed scarification, plant diversity, disease and insect
abundance, and wildlife habitat (http://www.fs.fed.us/ffs/). Al-
though still in progress, this study will add greatly to our knowl-
edge about the effects of treatments that attempt to mimic the eco-
logical functions of low-intensity fires by thinning the understory
vegetation and fuels within a forest.
Judicious fuels management can mitigate wildfire severity in
a variety of ecosystems, but even treated areas may burn with
high severity under extreme environmental conditions. To be
most effective, treated areas need to be placed in strategic loca-
tions across a landscape, in areas where firefighters can take a
stand (Finney 2001). Furthermore, the treatment must fit the eco-
logical conditions in the area. Omi and Martinson (2004) note that
fuel treatments may be less effective in ecosystems characterized
historically by infrequent, high-severity fires—because of the ex-
treme environmental conditions necessary to permit fire spread
in the first place. Thus high elevation–high latitude forests may
have experienced little change in fuel profiles as a result of twen-
tieth-century fire exclusion, so fire severity was and remains high
to extreme during fire outbreaks. For example, Alexander et al.
(2001) suggest that fire intensity may increase in boreal forests of
the Canadian Northwest Territories after fuel treatment. In such
areas, openings in the forest canopy also may expose surface fuels
to increased solar radiation, thus lowering fuel moisture and pos-
sibly promoting production of fine herbaceous materials. Forest
openings thus created also may be exposed to intensified wind
vectors, accelerating both fuel desiccation and heat transfer.
Fire Protection and Management
197

Additional information is needed on the ecological differ-
ences between thinning versus prescribed fire, including the du-
ration of each treatment’s effectiveness. In particular, the case
studies noted above hint at the possibility of qualitative differ-
ences between the two treatments, suggesting that areas that have
been intentionally burned may possibly be safer than areas that
have only been thinned. Although thinning and prescribed fire
both remove small-diameter trees, prescribed fire may offer pos-
sible advantages in terms of the removal of fine fuels, albeit
patchily throughout a stand, both horizontally and vertically. It is
also possible that prescribed fire may “harden” a stand against
future wildfires in ways that thinning alone will not. This possi-
bility deserves attention in future research.
Fire specialists have long recognized that fuels are the only
part of the fire environment that can be managed effectively.
Managers treat fuels to alter the arrangement, size, and flam-
mability of fuel profiles, usually to reduce the area burned and
the severity of subsequent wildfires, to enhance firefighter
safety, or to reduce fire control costs. Other objectives may be
achieved, including wildlife habitat enhancement, removal of
exotic plants, or the achievement of a desired composition of
species in an area. So it will be extremely interesting to see if
initiatives (such as the National Fire Plan and Healthy Forests
Restoration Act) are successful in reducing wildfire costs and
losses over the long term. Only time will tell, especially since so
much area is in need of treatment in the western United States.
In the short term, large areas may continue to burn until exist-
ing backlogs of areas requiring treatment are brought under
management. However, based on the limited but growing body
of knowledge, it appears that increased emphasis on fuel mod-
ification should eventually provide a good alternative to the
costly, all-out suppression policies for managing fire on the
landscape.
Wildfires in the twentieth and early twenty-first centuries
have demonstrated clearly the futility of attempts to eliminate fire
from natural landscapes. Fuel treatments will possibly ease the ten-
sions created between our society and forest fires, but only if
people learn to live with the notion that our wild areas will burn.
In some respects, fuel treatments provide us with a choice between
coexisting with out-of-control conflagrations and with manageable
ignitions, although the choice is not always clearly defined.
198
Facts and Data

Commercial Logging and Wildfires
Increases in commercial timber harvest have been proposed as
another means for managing fuels and controlling wildfire out-
breaks, although no strong consensus exists on that possibility
(Omi and Martinson 2004). For example, Weatherspoon and Skin-
ner (1995) found fire severity to be greater in regenerated
clearcuts of northern California fir forests than in unharvested
stands. By contrast, Omi and Kalabokidis (1991) observed higher
fire severity in unmanaged lodgepole pine forests than in inten-
sively managed Targhee National Forest lands within the greater
Yellowstone area.
Commercial timber harvesting can reduce heavy fuels and
fuel ladders in an area but may also increase fire threats unless
the slash (residual tree tops, limbs, branches, and other coarse
woody debris) is properly removed or reduced. Also, ambiguities
about the relationship between timber harvest and wildfire are
understandable, especially since historical records on harvest lev-
els and wildfire burned area show little relationship (Gorte 2000).
Actually, the data in this study may be too coarse for the desired
comparison, since they do not represent the actual wildfire area
burned in areas that were harvested for timber during the period
1986–1999. Also, the data aren’t available to show which harvests,
if any, were carried out for the purpose of mitigating the size of
wildfire area burned. Even so, Gorte (ibid.) illustrates the dra-
matic drop-off in timber harvests since the 1980s, as well as show-
ing how burned area may fluctuate dramatically regardless of
harvest volumes, responding instead to fuel, weather, and topo-
graphic variations wherever the fires occurred.
In a subsequent report, Boxall (2002) notes that since 1945,
timber harvest levels had steadily increased approximately to the
1988 levels through the early to mid-1970s before dropping to the
1982 levels shown in Gorte (2000). During roughly the same time
period (that is, 1945–1980), national forest annual burned areas
stayed relatively low. One inference from this extended analysis
is that the severe fire seasons since 1988 may, in fact, be a legacy
of earlier accelerating timber harvests from 1945 to 1975, and not
the drop-off in logging during the 1990s.
In reality, the relationship between logging and wildfire is
not well defined, and may depend as well on harvest practices
employed, droughts and climate change, expansions in the urban
Fire Protection and Management
199

interface, and fuel accumulations from twentieth-century fire ex-
clusionary practices. What seems clear is that, like thinning, fire
hazards can be increased by harvest practices that increase sur-
face fuels, ladder fuels, and crown densities while removing all
large trees. In such areas, the risks and hazards caused by wild-
fire may increase after logging. On the other hand, logging prac-
tices that decrease surface fuels, ladder fuels, and crown densities
while leaving larger trees should result in forests that are more re-
silient to fire.
Relationships between timber harvest and wildfire area
burned will become increasingly important as the 2003 Healthy
Forests Restoration Act is implemented. It will be especially in-
structive to monitor those burned areas where harvests have been
conducted, as well as the severity with which fires spread
through the harvested (and unharvested) areas. Equally impor-
tant will be records on the stand structure in treated versus un-
treated areas, as well as the extent to which fuel hazards were
mitigated by the harvest and subsequent treatments. In the mean-
time, the relationships between commercial logging and fire will
remain ambiguous and controversial.
Wildland Fire Use
Although large fires receive a lot of attention because of their eco-
nomic consequences (costs and losses), we should not lose sight
of the fact that extensive burns also produce significant ecological
consequences that may drive important ecosystem processes, in-
cluding many of the benefits attributable to prescribed fires. In
fact, large wildfires may reduce or remove fuel hazards that may
be important in the next fire outbreak.
Wildland fire use is the current lexicon for natural ignitions
that are allowed to burn, with management intervention if
needed, in order to achieve resource benefits. The goal of the
wildland fire use program is to allow lightning ignitions to re-
sume a more natural role in ecosystems in which fire has been im-
portant. Earlier vestiges of this program included the so-called let
burn, natural fire management, or prescribed natural fire policies
of federal agencies.
The wildland fire use program and its earlier precursors
have survived several significant disastrous escapes that threat-
ened to end the program. Most notably, the 1988 Yellowstone fires
200
Facts and Data

prompted a thorough policy review but mostly re-enforced the
importance of programs that permit lightning ignitions to assume
a more natural role in ecosystem management and restoration.
Several improvements were made to implementation procedures,
mostly aimed at reducing the uncertainty of eventual fire size and
effects, mitigating risks of fire escape, and strengthening account-
ability.
Wildland fires managed for resource benefit are lightning-
caused fires that are allowed to burn, usually within an identified,
undeveloped management area that has undergone extensive
planning. These fires are monitored and evaluated according to a
predetermined schedule that is revalidated daily. Suppression ac-
tions are taken if these fires demonstrate behavior that is inconsis-
tent with resource management objectives or if the fire approaches
its predetermined boundary. Not all fires grow large—some may
be extinguished by rain or snow or otherwise confined to small
areas. However, the potential always exists that a fire may grow to
large size, especially if the ignition occurs early in the fire season.
Once the flaming area becomes large, fire managers may have few
alternatives if weather conditions shift toward the promotion of
extreme severity burning conditions. The passage of a series of
dry, cold-front systems in August during the 1988 Yellowstone
fires (Fuller 1991) provide an illustrative example of this type of
weather shift and the subsequent futility of fire control efforts.
USDA Forest Service fire planners assess risk and predicted
fire behavior and growth, plan for contingencies, and determine
the maximum limits of the fire area (also called the maximum
manageable area, or MMA). The RERAP (Rare Event Risk As-
sessment Process, see Chapter 7) provides a tool that is used to
decide on the wisdom of allowing a fire to burn, based on the
likelihood of season-ending precipitation before valued resources
(such as human communities) are threatened. Planners must also
define the thresholds or trigger points that may signal the need to
mitigate threats, including fireline construction, helicopter bucket
or air tanker retardant drops, or firing operations.
The National Park Service has been a leader in natural fire
management policies since 1968, with the most aggressive pro-
grams in Yosemite and Sequoia–Kings Canyon national parks.
More than 80 to 85 percent of the total area in Yosemite and Se-
quoia–Kings Canyon has been designated as Resource Benefit
zones, where natural fires will be permitted to burn. Yosemite has
been experimenting with prescribed natural fire in the Illilouette
Wildland Fire Use
201

Creek basin since 1974. During that time, fire scientists have
noted a pattern emerging on the landscape whereby the size and
intensity of new fires is limited by recent, nearby burns. New fires
run out of fuel and go out, or at least burn with reduced severity
(Van de Water n.d.).
The historical role of fire must be established and considered
before wildland fire use zones are established. Fuel loads and pre-
dicted fire behavior must be within prescribed ranges, and plans
must address risk of escape, safety, tactical suppression needs,
and smoke management concerns.
Van de Water (ibid.) shows that 523 fires in Yosemite burned
almost 25,000 ha (more than 60,000 acres) under wildland fire use
guidelines between 1972 and 1999. In some years few fires or no
fires were allowed under these guidelines, while the greatest
number (forty-seven) occurred in 1987. In 1988, slightly fewer fires
(forty-four) burned the largest annual area (5,109 ha). The overall
burned area in any given year may be small, but numerous con-
straints restrict the size of areas treated, not the least of which are
manager reluctance or fear of job loss (van Wagtendonk 1995).
More important, park scientists monitor and evaluate the ef-
fects from each fire and keep track of the area burned compared
with historical fire rotations in different vegetation types. These
measures provide insight into the biological effects of wildland
fires and also indicate the progress of fire restoration programs.
Overall, the annual area burned under wildland fire use pro-
grams tends to lag behind the total area required to ensure timely
restoration of fire-adapted ecosystems. However, the wildland
fire use program will continue to be an essential tool for manag-
ing fires, especially if complemented with strategic fuel modifica-
tion efforts in key locations and boundary zones.
Fire Suppression
Fire suppression activities draw the most attention and might be
the best-understood part of systematic fire management, at least
by the general public. News media coverage has made air tanker
retardant drops and firefighters adorned in yellow Nomex attire
a familiar staple of every fire season. Most people understand the
mechanics of dousing a flame, extinguishing embers in a camp-
fire, or blowing out a candle. The same general principles apply
202
Facts and Data

to firefighting. Firefighting can be tedious, hard work, yet dan-
gerous. But the feelings of accomplishment and camaraderie ap-
peal to many, including crewmembers and overhead teams that
deal with large fires.
A fire that is discovered or reported to a local jurisdiction will
set in motion a series of planned and organized responses. Typi-
cally, a fire dispatcher familiar with the local terrain and values-at-
risk will call upon appropriate suppression resources to respond
to the incident. If additional information is needed, a local official
may drive to or fly over the fire to size up the local vegetation,
burning conditions, and potential problem areas. Depending on
the present and projected levels of fire danger, dispatched re-
sources might include one or more hand-crews, fire engines, or
perhaps an air tanker on standby at a regional airfield. Particularly
challenging fires may dictate the need for skilled and experienced
hot-shot crews. In remote, mountainous terrain, smokejumpers
may parachute down to a fire, or a helicopter crew (also known as
a helitack crew) may be dispatched and rappel to the fire. As a fire
grows in size, or if other ignitions occur, additional regional or na-
tional resources may be mobilized, including an administrative or
supervisory team known as fire overhead. If the fire exceeds the
capabilities of the local agency with jurisdiction over the fire, that
agency can request additional resources through the regional Ge-
ographical Area Coordination Center (GACC) or from the Na-
tional Incident Coordination Center (NICC) in Boise, Idaho. As a
fire grows in size and complexity, increasingly sophisticated fire
organizations will be required. Thus a Type II overhead team may
be dispatched initially to assist local jurisdictions in managing an
incident. Eventually a Type I team may be dispatched if fire com-
plexity exceeds the capabilities and resources of the Type II team.
Not all suppressed fires are subjected to aggressive initial at-
tack. Fire management plans are written to distinguish areas in
which fires will be fought aggressively from sensitive zones (such
as wilderness areas) where fires will be managed under minimal
impact suppression guidelines—that is, nonmechanized equip-
ment and less reliance on tree cuttings or other activities that will
disturb the postfire landscape. Also, firefighter safety considera-
tions may sometimes dictate the need for less aggressive sup-
pression strategies. For example, instead of confronting a raging
inferno in a deeply dissected canyon, firefighters will back off and
take a stand on a safer ridge line.
Fire Suppression
203

Initial Attack
All fires to which firefighting forces respond undergo an initial at-
tack, or the first suppression activity on an incident. The first
forces on a fire (typically a fire engine or helitack crew) will per-
form the initial attack under supervision of the incident com-
mander (IC). The IC, usually the most experienced firefighter on
the scene with leadership capabilities, will size up the fire before
deciding upon strategy and tactics to be employed in managing
the fire safely. Strategies may include direct attack on the fire’s
edge, beginning on the flanks in order to minimize the fire perime-
ter, or indirect or parallel attack at a distance from the fire’s edge.
Tactics might include construction of a fireline along the flanks of
the fire, incorporating natural barriers as encountered.
The number and type of resources involved in initial attack
will depend on the fire danger, fuel types, values at risk, and land
management objectives, among other considerations. These same
considerations, along with the fire’s behavior, will dictate the
width of fireline constructed or type of hose lays used on the fire.
Generally, the resources involved will be small in number (as the
fire size is relatively small) and may vary from one to several sin-
gle resources (for example, an engine or several crews). However,
the IC may request additional support from the dispatcher, such
as crews equipped with hand tools or air tankers with retardant.
Usually, the fire will be contained within a single work period
(less than twenty-four hours), although mop-up may extend over
several days.
The mechanics of firefighting are fairly straightforward, in-
volving activities that essentially break a leg on the fire triangle,
as noted previously (see Forest Combustion, pp. 114–119). The
most common strategy for controlling a fire involves construction
of a fireline, cleared to bare mineral soil to remove fuel in the fire’s
path. The intention is to completely surround the fire and any iso-
lated spot fires apart from the main fire body. Once constructed,
the line must be held by burning out unburned fuel islands be-
tween the line and the fire’s edge, or by cooling off and mopping
up hotspots.
Close to 95 percent or more of all fires are successfully con-
trolled by initial attack crews, usually by construction of a fireline
around the fire perimeter followed by patrolling and mopping up
of hotspots. Some lightning ignitions may go undetected and
burn out on their own if the thunderstorm is accompanied with
204
Facts and Data

sufficient moisture or if the ignition has occurred in a remote area
with low values-at-risk. Firefighters enjoy greatest success when
fires are attacked during the initial phases, before the fire reaches
flashy fuels or encounters high winds that can produce high
spread rates and breach control lines. Early attack also may pre-
clude the formation of an organizing convection column that it-
self will spur fire growth through the creation of updrafts and
downdrafts that can propel fire spread beyond control lines. Even
so, constant vigilance is required even after a fire has been com-
pletely encircled with constructed firelines or isolated by natural
barriers, to ensure that an errant wind gust does not propel glow-
ing embers across the line. Holding a fireline is greatly facilitated
by the availability of water to douse flames and hotspots.
Extended Attack, Project Fires, and
Megafires 
Fires that are not contained or controlled by initial attack require
an extended attack, involving additional firefighting resources or-
dered and supervised by the IC in conjunction with the dispatch
office. A fire that is designated as an extended attack incident has
essentially exceeded the control capabilities of the initial attack
forces, an admission that the fire could transition to a much larger
and more costly incident. The IC might need to shift thinking
from keeping the fire as small as possible to a realization that the
fire behavior is simply too extreme to risk putting firefighters in
harm’s way. If the incident continues to grow in size and com-
plexity and still seems uncontrollable, the fire may be called a
project fire, or campaign fire, requiring perhaps a more complex
organization (Type II or Type I overhead team); a fire camp may
be necessary for feeding, lodging, and equipping firefighters
from a variety of locations for a time lasting anywhere from one
to several weeks. Megafires require even more people, more
equipment, and greater commitment of financial resources.
Williams (2003) suggests that the extended attack fire and the
megafire are the two most important and challenging fires to sup-
press—one because of safety and the other in terms of exorbitant
cost. Seventy percent of fatalities occur on extended attack fires,
usually as the fire transitions from an attackable fire to one that
should not be confronted. Extended attack fires typically occur
during periods of high fire danger, when suppression crews with
slim supervisory oversight are fatigued and overmatched by the
Fire Suppression
205

expanding fire. Although typically representing only 1 percent of
all ignitions, large project and megafires may account for as much
as 80 percent of suppression costs and 90 percent of annual
burned area. The best response to megafires may be to wait for fa-
vorable weather, rather than attempting an aggressive attack.
For the larger fires, firefighters may come from federal agen-
cies, native tribes, state forestry agencies, or low-security deten-
tion facilities; other labor sources include local volunteers, private
fire departments, or contractors. Seasonal employees with nonfire
job responsibilities may be assembled and organized into Type II
crews. The military (Army or National Guard) may be mobilized
on the largest or most complex incidents. Although the strategies
for fighting a fire may be similar as the incident grows in size and
complexity, the tactics may differ considerably, relying on bull-
dozers and interregional hot-shot crews for fireline construction
on “hot” sectors of large fires.
Large fire management requires a paramilitary organization.
The growing size and complexity of the fire will dictate that the
IC delegates some of the responsibilities attendant with manag-
ing the fire to other support staff. The Incident Command System
was developed in the 1970s to provide a standardized framework
(including terminology) that could be applied across multiple
agencies for managing any emergency of any size. Today, the ICS
has become a system that is admired and imitated by emergency
response organizations globally. In fact, the system used by fed-
eral agencies with fire management responsibilities has become a
model for responding to incidents as diverse as the Exxon Valdeez
oil spill, the Columbia shuttle recovery, and the 911 terrorist bomb-
ings. In fact, the USFS sent two Type I teams to assist with coor-
dination, rescue, and salvage operations for the World Trade Cen-
ter cleanup.
The ICS organization develops around five major functions
that are required for managing any incident: Command, Opera-
tions, Plans, Logistics, and Finance/Administration. On most inci-
dents the command function is handled by a single IC, who deter-
mines incident objectives and strategy, sets immediate priorities,
and establishes an appropriate organization. Tactical operations are
managed by the operations section chief. The planning section
chief supervises the collection, evaluation, processing, and dissem-
ination of incident action plans. The logistics section chief super-
vises all incident support needs. The finance/administration sec-
tion chief supervises all financial aspects of an incident.
206
Facts and Data

On a small incident, the IC may be able to perform all the
major functions—that is, overseeing operations, plans, logistics,
and finance. However, the ICS was designed to handle any type
of emergency incident, regardless of size or complexity, by
adding support positions to each major functional activity. Thus
each major function identified above may have a support staff
that expands with the complexity of the incident. For example,
Figure 5–16 shows a more complex organizational structure that
might be appropriate for a project fire with significant air and
ground resources serviced by a fire camp and off-site aerial bases.
The IC might use additional staff, such as an information officer,
liaison officer, and safety officer. The information officer would be
responsible to the IC for communicating with the news media, to
local publics, to incident personnel, and to other agencies or or-
ganizations. For multijurisdictional fires that involve several
agencies, a liaison officer might be required for keeping involved
agencies apprised of incident status, or possibly, for communicat-
ing with crews consisting of prison inmates or non-English
speakers. The safety officer would be responsible for recom-
mending to the IC measures involving personnel safety, for iden-
tifying potentially dangerous situations, and for investigating ac-
cidents that might occur.
Likewise, each staff position (operations, plans, logistics, and
finance/administration) may be supported by additional
branches and units necessary for managing the incident (Figure
5–16). This type of organizational structure also lends itself to the
many activities that go on “behind the scenes” in a project fire
camp. For example, the daily incident action plan detailing the
operations to be carried out on the day and night shifts may be
written as a collaborative effort between the operations and plan-
ning section chiefs. Also, the entire team may provide input to the
Wildland Fire Situation Analysis (WFSA), describing the com-
plexity of an incident and documenting the processes used to ar-
rive at suppression decisions. Alternatively, on some complex in-
cidents, the WFSA may be prepared by a team brought in from
the outside precisely for that purpose.
Firefighting Tools
Regardless of the organizational complexity of the incident, fire-
fighters on the ground are required to carry out and complete
suppression of any threatening fire. Even as technologies for
Fire Suppression
207

208
Figure 5-16
Fire Organization for a Large Incident
A complex incident will require support position for each major function, including the Incident Commander. 
Incident Commander
Safety
Information
Liaison
Operations Section
Branches
Divisions & Groups
Resources Unit
Situation Unit
Demobilization Unit
Documentation Unit
Technical Specialist
Air Operations Branch
Service Branch
Support Branch
Time Unit
Procurement Unit
Compensation/Claims Unit
Cost Unit
Planning Section
Logistics Section
Finance/Administration Section
Strike Teams
Task Forces
Single Resources
Air Support Group
Air Tactical Group
Supply Unit
Facilities Unit
Ground Support Unit
Communications Unit
Medical Unit
Food Unit
Source: www.nifc.gov/fireinfo/ics_disc.html.

detecting, mapping, and monitoring fires become increasingly so-
phisticated—for example, involving satellite or remote links to
computers in fire camp—the brunt of the firefighting effort still
relies on people on the ground chasing smokes and making sure
that the fire is out.
Early in the twentieth century, the primary tools of firefight-
ing included shovels, axes, and handsaws. By the mid-twentieth
century, chainsaws, motorized vehicles (including tractors and
bulldozers), and compressed-air water pumps had improved fire-
fighter capabilities. And today the efforts on the ground are aug-
mented by air tankers, helicopters, and sophisticated fire en-
gines—each taking advantage of increasingly advanced
technologies. Although the arsenal has expanded considerably
since the early days, the basic tools of the trade haven’t changed
much; firefighters still rely on shovels, axes, and saws to build
line and put the fire out. Basic tools employed on the fireline in-
clude the following:
Shovel: A combination tool (modified from the familiar
garden variety) with a cutting edge (for chopping down
small trees, and cutting limbs and roots) and angled for
scraping/digging. Useful for scraping away needles, duff,
and litter while constructing and clearing a fireline to bare
mineral soil. Shovels also are useful for throwing dirt at
hotspots.
Pulaski: A combination tool (ax and mattock, or grubbing
head). Used to cut trees and lop limbs (ax side) and to
dig/scrape (mattock side).
McLeod: A combination tool with heavy-duty rake and
sharpened hoe. Used to cut deep, matted litter (hoe) and
clear loose surface debris (rake).
Chainsaw: Straight or bow-bar for cutting trees and limbs.
Firefighters use smaller chainsaws for cutting trees, shrubs,
and downed logs to clear a fireline. Fellers use larger
chainsaws for cutting down large-diameter burning trees
and snags.
Backpack pump: Collapsible neoprene backpacks filled
with water (5 gallon or 18.9 liter capacity), connected to
small hose and nozzle. Useful for spraying water during
mop-up operations.
Fire Suppression
209

Drip torch: Canister with piloted ignition filled with gas-
diesel mixture. Used with fusees or other ignition devices
to burn out or backfire fuels between established control
lines and the main fire.
Brush hook: A tool for cutting limbs and branches,
primarily in shrub fuelbeds. Although it is primarily a
cutting tool, the back of the hook can be used for scraping
soils; used primarily in southern California.
Primacord: Blasting cord used for clearing fuels to mineral
soil for constructing fireline. Used in remote areas; requires
personnel qualified to work with explosives.
Fire engines and heavy equipment, such as bulldozers, aug-
ment crew line-building activities. Engines carry a supply of
water, tools, hoses, and pumping equipment for delivering water
to a fire. They also can draft water from nearby rivers or lakes for
replenishing water supply. Bulldozers push, scrape, and pile de-
bris as part of fireline construction and also create access routes
through heavy fuels for engines and crews working the fire. In
the South, tractor plows are used to furrow a line around a fire.
Numerous aircraft support fire operations on the ground, al-
though most fires do not require aerial assistance. Every year,
thousands of initial attack fires are suppressed without the need
of aerial support. Others may be suppressed without aircraft be-
cause of flight distance or unavailability. Even so, an airtanker
dropping retardant may provide the most familiar image of fire-
fighting to most people. The aircraft used in fire operations in-
clude the following types.
Helicopters: Provide support for firefighters working a fire
perimeter cooling hotspots; can slow a fire spread by
dropping water, foam, or retardant on burning trees,
shrubs, and structures. Large helicopters carry up to 2,000
gallons (7,571 liters), though medium and light helicopters
have correspondingly lower capacities, down to 300 gallons
(1,136 liters) or less. Helitack crews can rappel down to fires
in remote areas. Also indispensable for conducting large-
scale firing operations on wild and prescribed fires.
Air tankers: Large planes equipped with tanks for
transporting and dropping fire retardant (for example,
diammonium phosphate) or water in order to slow a fire
210
Facts and Data

down in support of fireline construction operations on the
ground; primarily for use in initial attack and structure
protection support. Typically, a red dye is added to
chemical retardants to provide pilots with visual markers
of drop accuracy. Capacities range from 2,000 to 3,000
gallons (approximately 7,571 to 11,356 liters). Single-engine
air tankers have less capacity but greater mobility.
Lead planes: Smaller, mobile airplanes used to provide
reconnaissance of burning areas from above and guide air
tankers to drop locations.
Infrared reconnaissance planes: Small airplanes equipped
with specialized infrared mapping systems for detecting
hotspots inside and outside a fire perimeter. Sensitive
scanners are able to detect heat with a high degree of
accuracy (that is, a 6-inch [15-cm] spot from 8,000 ft [2,438
m] elevation). Geographic referencing of hotspots via
global positioning systems provides useful reconnaissance
information.
In the United States, many aircraft are either surplus from the
military or date from World War II, including helicopters, air
tankers, modular airborne fire fighting systems (MAFFS), lead
planes, and infrared aircraft. Most airplanes are leased by gov-
ernmental agencies from private contractors who convert former
military aircraft to carry and deliver fire retardant. The aging U.S.
air tanker fleet (forty-four ships in 2002) has caused great alarm,
especially with two fatality accidents in 2002, involving planes
that broke apart in the air while delivering retardant to fires. The
planes involved in crashes that year included a World War II-era
PB4Y-2 that broke apart near Estes Park, Colorado, in July 2002
and a C-130A air tanker whose wings separated from the fuselage
in June 2002 near the town of Walker in eastern California. The
planes were fifty-seven and forty-six years old, respectively. Fa-
tigue cracks were found in the wings of both planes by investiga-
tors from the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB). At one
point, following the second crash, the entire USDA Forest Service
fleet was grounded; later, the government permanently banned
the use of the PB4Y-2 and C-130A aircraft for firefighting use.
In May 2004 the federal government decided to terminate the
contract for the thirty-three fixed-wing large air tankers still
operating within the firefighting fleet, after the NTSB released a
Fire Suppression
211

report of findings following the fatality accidents. The report
found no effective mechanism for ensuring the continuing airwor-
thiness and safety of these older ships, concluding that the older
aircraft posed an unacceptable risk to contract aviators, firefight-
ers, and the general public. The termination of the contract essen-
tially ended a colorful (and controversial) chapter in the history of
firefighting in the United States. Earlier the U.S. Forest Service had
discontinued use of eleven Beechcraft Baron aircraft owned by the
agency and used as lead planes. The May 2004 contract cancella-
tion did not apply to the eighty single-engine air tankers and eight
military C-130 E and H model aircraft equipped with MAFFs,
whose airworthiness is the responsibility of the military.
Air tankers seem to attract controversy because of their high
visibility and cost. Cynics speak of “political retardant” in refer-
ence to planes that are called into action when they are not
needed, appealing instead to influential politicians and a public
that wants to see agencies taking action against a fire. On the
other hand, some believe that the 2003 Cedar fire in southern Cal-
ifornia escaped control in early evening because of the unavail-
ability (the result of concerns for pilot safety) of air tankers sta-
tioned in the vicinity. The truth is that on some fires, air tankers
are extremely useful in helping firefighters on the ground to gain
the upper hand on a wildfire, while on others their excessive use
may be a waste of money.
In some locations (particularly near large bodies of water),
U.S. agencies have increasingly relied on the Canadair CL 215 and
the larger CL 415 aircraft. These planes offer advantages because
of their ability to scoop water from a lake or sea for subsequent
drops on land. Also, airworthiness is documented and supported
by Canadair, a company based in Canada.
In 2004, tests were carried out on a Boeing 747 jumbo jet,
retrofitted for firefighting by the Evergreen International Aviation
Company. The jet will likely have limited usefulness on small
fires and won’t be able to navigate close to fires in deep
canyons—but it can carry a 20,000-gallon (75,708-liter) payload,
which may be useful on large fires. As of this writing its potential
usefulness and cost are unknown, and it has yet to earn approval
by the Federal Aviation Administration.
The retardant dropped by air tankers and helicopters (some-
times called slurry) consists of water (85 percent), diammonium
phosphate or sulfates (10 percent), and minor ingredients (5 per-
cent). The mixture weighs about 9 pounds per gallon, or approx-
212
Facts and Data

imately 1 kg per liter. Diammonium phosphate is the active in-
gredient that inhibits combustion and fertilizes the soil after the
fire is out. Minor ingredients include iron oxide (a red dye, al-
lowing the pilot to check the accuracy of the drop), and gums and
clay thickeners.
Helicopters used on fires include the heavy-lift Erickson he-
litanker, military-style UH-1 Hueys, Kaman-built K-Maxes, Bell
Rangers, several Sikorski models, and Boeing-built Chinooks.
Payloads vary from 600- to 1000-gallon (2,271 to 3,785-liter) buck-
ets filled from tanker trucks or water springs to the 2,600-gallon
(9,842-liter) detachable tank on the helitanker that can be filled in
45 seconds from a lake or deep hole in a river (Enders 2001).
Fire engines on the ground make use of water and water en-
hancers such as fire retardants and foams. Water has the capacity
to absorb and carry away heat, even as it is converted into steam.
However, water’s strong surface tension causes it to bead up and
roll off most fuels too fast to be able to absorb its full heat capac-
ity (Astaris 1998). Retardants and foams make water more effi-
cient as a suppressant by spreading water out over a surface and
penetrating more deeply into porous fuels, much as a detergent
extends water’s usefulness for cleaning purposes.
In the United States, much of the equipment and many of the
services used on ongoing fire incidents are contracted by the fed-
eral government, including aircraft and aircraft support services,
but also commissary, retardant, showers/portable toilets, and en-
gines/crews, to name just a few. Other contracted services may
include bulldozers, water tenders, flatbed trucks, and chainsaws/
felling crews. In addition, the Federal Excess Personal Property
(FEPP) program allows a federal agency to acquire title to gov-
ernment property (that is, purchased for use by a federal agency
but no longer needed by the original purchaser) for loan to one of
the fifty states for use in wildland fire protection. This can include
trucks, aircraft, personal protective equipment, motor oil, nuts
and bolts, and fire hose (but not real estate).
Repeated heavy fire seasons have spawned a huge market
for support services, such as full-service kitchens, portable toilets,
tools, commercial retardants and foams, and contract crews. The
breadth of this market becomes evident especially on project and
megafires, for which all the equipment and supplies are shipped
to fire camp and employed to manage the incident. The service
market for wildland fire use or prescribed fire programs is much
less developed at this time.
Fire Suppression
213

Communications
Good communications are essential for carrying out fire manage-
ment activities, whether in conducting fire suppression opera-
tions or in establishing two-way dialogues with the public. Fire-
fighting is carried out with some of the trappings of a
paramilitary campaign, with a unified command and control
structure that requires a good communications infrastructure.
Orders given by supervisors must be clearly understood and car-
ried out—or else the system breaks down. Communication fail-
ures are often at the root of mistakes, and in the worst case, can
lead to fatalities. Fortunately, the Incident Command System
(ICS) adopted by the agencies has been developed to facilitate im-
proved communications by adoption of standard terminology
and chain of command.
Communications regarding a fire require skilled personnel
to manage a complex of dedicated and general-use radio fre-
quencies. Different radio bands may be used for internal com-
munications among crew members, between the supervisor and
overhead teams, and between ground and aerial operations.
Special care is needed that radio frequencies be compatible, es-
pecially if resources such as fire engines and airplanes are
brought in from other localities. Trained technicians ensure that
communications networks are set up and do not conflict with
local infrastructure.
Effective communications between supervisors and among
subordinates is especially important, because of the paramili-
tary organization structure and because crewmembers rely
upon each other for safety and support. Liaison positions are
also important with the increasing use of non-English speakers
on the firelines.
Specialized positions (such as fire information officer) are
created within the fire organization to provide news media up-
dates and to communicate with interested publics. Other posi-
tions may be established to interact with local communities in
contending with emergency evacuations, road closures, the
trauma of fatalities, and personal/property losses. Individuals
receive specialized training to hold these positions and must
have strong oral and written communication skills, as well as
general backgrounds in fire management, fire ecology, and re-
lated subject areas.
214
Facts and Data

Safety
Wildland firefighters are indoctrinated always to consider safety
first when combating a wildfire. Loss of life in fighting a wildfire
is simply unacceptable, no matter how valuable the resources at
risk. Rookie recruits receive early training to heed the ten stan-
dard firefighting orders and the eighteen “watch out” situations
while working on the fireline. Even seasoned veterans can bene-
fit from review and reinforcement of the principles underlying
the standards, especially when confronted with fires of increasing
complexity and risk.
The ten standard orders were developed in 1957 by a task
force established to prevent firefighter injuries and fatalities, fol-
lowing the Inaja fire in southern California in which eleven fire-
fighters were killed. The eighteen situations were identified
shortly afterward, and since then the orders have become non-ne-
gotiable requirements for conducting safe firefighting operations,
linked to the rights of fire crews to safe working conditions. Fur-
thermore, strict adherence to the orders should ensure public
safety as well.
Ten Standard Fire Orders required of wildland firefighters
are listed below (National Wildfire Coordinating Group 1993).
1. Fight fire aggressively but provide for safety first.
2. Initiate all action based on current and expected fire
behavior.
3. Recognize current weather conditions and obtain
forecasts.
4. Ensure that instructions are given and understood.
5. Obtain current information on fire status.
6. Remain in communication with crewmembers, your
supervisor, and adjoining forces.
7. Determine safety zones and escape routes.
8. Establish lookouts in potentially hazardous situations.
9. Retain control at all times.
10. Stay alert, keep calm, think clearly, and act decisively.
The ten orders are inter-related and reinforce one another.
For example, orders 2, 3, and 5 relate to fire behavior. Orders 4, 6,
and 9 relate to organizational control, in terms of understanding
orders and communicating effectively. Order 9 also could apply
Safety
215

to controlling one’s emotions or deflecting panic. Standards 7, 8,
and 10 identify key safety requirements, while the first order in
some respects provides an overarching mandate to firefighters.
Gleason (1991) condensed some of the above concerns into four
basic safety elements key to safe procedures for firefighters. His
LCES system (Lookouts, Communications, Escape Routes, and
Safety Zones) was developed to reinforce the essential elements
of the standard fire orders.
A safety zone is a location where threatened firefighters can
find adequate refuge from heat and rolling debris. Firefighters are
sometimes encouraged to “get to the black” if confronted by an
approaching fire front, meaning that a good safety zone may be
provided by a burned area with minimal reburnable vegetation.
As a general guideline, safety zones should be large enough to ac-
commodate all threatened firefighters with a minimum distance
of at least four times the maximum approaching flame length
(www.nifc.gov/sixminutes). The LCES system places emphasis
on firefighters having multiple routes for reaching a safety zone,
in order to provide an extra measure of protection in case a fire
blows up and cuts off access to a single route. Good communica-
tions are stressed, in terms of message clarity between lookouts
and crew members and understanding of safety zone locations.
Furthermore, subordinates are empowered to pose sensible ques-
tions about expectations and orders from higher authorities in the
incident organization.
Specific situations in which the standard orders should be es-
pecially heeded are noted in the eighteen “watch out” situations
(National Wildfire Coordinating Group 1993). These were devel-
oped after the fire orders were conceived in order to provide spe-
cific instances in which firefighters might encounter danger:
1. The fire is not scouted and sized up.
2. You are in country not seen in daylight.
3. Safety zones and escape routes are not identified.
4. You are unfamiliar with weather and local factors
influencing fire behavior.
5. You are not informed of tactics, strategy, and hazards.
6. Instructions and assignments are not clear.
7. No communications link has been established with
crewmembers or your supervisor.
8. You are constructing a fireline without a safe anchor
point.
216
Facts and Data

9. You are building fireline with fire below.
10. You are attempting a frontal assault on the fire.
11. There is unburned fuel between you and the fire.
12. You cannot see the main fire and are not in contact with
someone who can.
13. You are on a hillside where rolling material can ignite
fuel below you.
14. The weather is becoming hotter and drier.
15. The wind is increasing or changing direction.
16. You are getting frequent spot fires across the line.
17. The terrain and fuels make escape to safety zones
difficult.
18. You are taking a nap near the fireline.
Over time, the ten standard orders and eighteen “watch out”
situations have become widely acknowledged at all times for all
incidents. The orders are firm—not to be broken or relaxed under
any circumstances. In fact, the ten orders are invoked when inves-
tigators seek to assign causal factors for fatalities or accidents on
fires. The eighteen “watch out” situations point out circumstances
historically associated with firefighter fatalities and injuries. Sur-
prisingly, many mishaps occur on smaller fires or on isolated por-
tions of larger fires (Dear 1995). Tragedy fires commonly arise on
fires that are innocent in appearance prior to flare-ups or blowups,
even on the mop-up stages of some fires. Other common denomi-
nators previously identified include flare-ups in deceptively light
fuels, fire runs on steep slopes with chimney canyons, and fires
fanned by helicopter rotor washes or blasts of air associated with
air tankers (Wilson 1977). Sadly, deaths and injuries (as well as
near-misses) recur with disturbing regularity despite documenta-
tion of the dangers and the taking of necessary precautions.
Personal Protective Equipment (PPE)
As a precautionary measure, government firefighters commonly
wear shirts and pants made of Nomex, the brand name for a high-
strength, fire-resistant synthetic fabric generically known as
aramid. Standard firefighting clothing includes hard-hat, gloves,
and sturdy work-boots.
Every firefighter carries a personal fire shelter, made of alu-
minum foil glued to fiberglass cloth (Fuller 1991) fashioned into a
Personal Protective Equipment
217

pup-tent. Designed as a last resort to be deployed when all else
fails, fire shelters have endured considerable controversy since
their inception in 1960—including claims that they provide inade-
quate protection. Given sufficient warning, firefighters are ex-
pected to clear a 4 x 8 foot (1.2 x 2.4 m) area, remove the shelter
from its packaging, and then deploy and climb into the tent in
order to escape the heat and flames of an oncoming fire. The fire-
fighter is instructed to wear gloves and, while lying prone, use
arms and legs to hold the tent’s edges down in the face of oncom-
ing winds. Shelters are intended to protect the lungs and air pas-
sages by providing a cooler air pocket within the tent, although
firefighters will sometimes deploy shelters to deflect heat while at-
tempting to escape a fire. Multiple shelters draped end-to-end and
plastered together are also sometimes used to protect historic cab-
ins or buildings in the backcountry from oncoming fires.
Shelters are deployed in emergencies only and do not immu-
nize a firefighter from injury. In fact, some firefighters have per-
ished inside their shelters, resulting in calls for better materials.
Following the South Canyon fire (Chapter 1), many calls were is-
sued for improvements in shelter fabric and design; these im-
provements were eventually implemented in 2003. In the United
States, standards and technical specifications for clothing and
equipment are maintained through the USDA Forest Service Mis-
soula Equipment Development center (http://www.fs.fed.us/eng
/techdev/mtdc.htm). Tests of various materials are conducted in
laboratory and field burning trials designed to test conformance
to heat stress loads, portability, toxicity, and other standards.
Fire Rehabilitation
After a fire is declared out, attention switches to flood and erosion
control, land rehabilitation, and other activities aimed at remedi-
ation. The intention is to prevent another disaster—for example,
flooding and overland flow—following the wildfire, but also to
allow the land to heal from both natural and human disturbances.
The main culprit might be soil erosion from denuded hillsides,
but constructed firelines by hand crews and bulldozers also may
require rehabilitation. Soils can become hydrophobic or water-
repelling (see Postfire Effects on Soils/Hydrology, pp. 174–176).
As a consequence, interdisciplinary teams, including soil and
rangeland scientists, hydrologists, geologists, botanists, foresters,
218
Facts and Data

and archeologists, often are dispatched to large fires to assess the
effects and develop immediate plans for rehabilitating burned
areas. So-called Burned Area Emergency Rehabilitation (BAER)
teams evaluate burn severity maps and develop priorities for
postfire treatments. The process begins with an assessment of fire
severity, using aerial imagery to classify damage to native plants,
streams, wildlife habitat, archeological sites, and watersheds.
Strategies include mulching, aerial seeding, tree planting, and
felling dead snags or placing straw bales or wattles along the
slope contour or in gullies to stabilize soil movement. Increases in
ground cover seem especially important in stemming postfire
erosion, so mulching or hydro-mulch sprays can be an effective
tool for reducing overland soil movement (MacDonald 2004).
Firelines constructed by hand crews or bulldozers also may be re-
habilitated by installing water bars and trenching to slow down
or redirect water flows. Hydrophobic soils may be broken up
with raking or mulching charcoal into the soil to soak up excess
water.
The effectiveness of some of these activities can be quite con-
troversial, as in the case of the emergency seeding of watersheds.
BAER team activities in particular can be controversial, especially
if exotic weed species are introduced via seed mixes or vehicle
traffic into a burned area. Establishment of exotic grasses may in-
hibit recovery of native plant cover, especially if the invasive
plants are more effective in competing for water and nutrients.
Cheatgrass (Bromus tectorum), an exotic annual weed, is especially
problematic throughout the Great Basin region, having invaded
open rangelands and fostering an insidious weed-wildfire cycle
in some areas.
Fire Salvage
Another aftermath of a wildfire may be the thousands of dead
and dying trees left on hillsides across the landscape. Heat from a
fire can cause crown scorch/consumption or death to sensitive
growing tissues (bark cambium, branches, or roots), resulting in
death and injury to residual trees. Those trees not killed directly
by heat may still fall prey to insects and diseases. The prospects
of using fire-killed timber may seem obvious for a wood-
products industry ever on the lookout for a steady supply of tim-
ber. On the other hand, environmentalists may view salvage
Fire Salvage
219

efforts as yet another assault on the land by greedy loggers and
timber companies. The salvage of fire-killed trees from public
lands has thus emerged as yet another battle ground pitting com-
mercial versus environmental interests.
The rationale behind salvage efforts after a wildfire are simi-
lar in many respects to the arguments in favor of removal and san-
itation of trees killed by insect attacks, such as the mountain pine
beetle (Dendroctonous spp.), or any other disturbance. For example,
infrequent windstorms or mountain tornadoes can result in wide-
spread tree kill in the West, just as hurricanes level vast forested
areas along the East coast. In all such cases, the dead and dying
trees constitute a fire hazard with a relatively short window for re-
moval and transport to mills for processing. Besides, most people
don’t like to see a forest of dead and dying trees, whether killed by
wildfires, insects, or any other natural disturbance.
In reality, wildfires can leave behind considerable amounts of
dead, flammable biomass that may need removal. Future wildfire
potential should be of acute interest whenever large amounts of
woody material are allowed to accumulate over a widespread
area, but other factors need to be evaluated as well. Historical fire
regime, land management objectives, sustainability of excessive
fuel loads, accessibility, market value, and spatial distribution of
fuel hazards across the landscape all need to be considered, at
minimum. In particular, understanding of the historical fire
regime will provide insight into potential ignition sources, fre-
quencies, and anticipated severity/effects of future fires. In re-
mote and inaccessible areas the concentration of excess fuel may
be of little consequence. However, in or near the urban interface,
fuel accumulations should probably be reduced to lessen the
severity of future fires.
Fire Restoration
The ecological restoration of fire is a growing area of interest, es-
pecially when perceived as a plausible solution to the cata-
strophic wildfires of the late twentieth and early twenty-first cen-
turies. Accordingly, scientists suggest that ecosystems can and
should be restored structurally to resemble forests and wildlands
as they existed prior to European settlement in North America—
that is, with sustainable levels of surface fuels, reduced ladder
fuels, few large trees, and relatively open canopies. A forest thus
220
Facts and Data

restored should be less prone to devastating crown fires but also
able to withstand periodic surface fires and perhaps even prosper.
The rationale behind this goal relies on a combination of scientific
studies (mostly the dating of historical fire-scars using tree rings
and temporally paired photographs) and informed speculation
about the structure (size distribution and species composition) of
forests prior to European settlement. Scientific studies indicate
the unequivocal disparity between the low number of contempo-
rary ignitions versus the historical higher frequencies of lightning
and native firings that originally characterized the area but that
ceased with the institution of fire exclusion policies. The journals
of early explorers, news articles, and oral histories all reinforce
the findings from photo comparisons, suggesting that many of
today’s forests—in comparison with yesteryear’s open, parklike
stands—are choked with dense thickets of small-diameter, shade-
tolerant trees. Devastating wildfire episodes only reinforce the
comparisons and emphasize the need for forest restoration.
Differences in fire severity can profoundly affect the heat
pulses, fuel consumption, and subsequent fire effects in an area
that has undergone restoration. For example, the high-severity
2002 Hayman fire in Colorado burned as a crown fire through
ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) stands with excessive surface
fuels and overgrown understory resulting in part from fire ex-
clusion; the fire had an energy equivalent of 8 liters (roughly 2
gallons) of gasoline released per square meter burned. By con-
trast, stands with fuels reduced by mechanical thinning and pre-
scribed fire might release a sixteenth as much energy (personal
communication, Dr. Dan Binkley, professor of forest soils, Col-
orado State University).
Areas requiring ecological restoration may be most apparent
in lower-elevation, long-needled pine forests (such as ponderosa
pine), where photo evidence and fire scar analyses document the
changes in forest structure resulting from twentieth-century fire
exclusion. These areas have received the highest priority for treat-
ment by government plans for restoring the health of public
forests. Restoration efforts may not be needed in higher-elevation
forests where stands dominated by species such as lodgepole
pine (Pinus contorta) typically burn as severe, stand-replacing
crown fires every few centuries. Shrublands and boreal forests
also burn with characteristic high severity. Such forests may not
have changed as much during the same period. Similarly, coastal
Douglas fir (Psuedotsuga menziesii) forests in the Pacific Northwest
Fire Restoration
221

probably have not developed a fuels accumulation problem on
account of fire exclusion, since fires were relatively infrequent
historically, despite large amounts of biomass. Fires in cool, moist
forests may have been more easily suppressed while small in size,
but the ecological effects of fire exclusion are less well studied in
these higher-elevation or colder and wetter zones.
The typical tools for restoring ecosystem biodiversity include
mechanical thinning and prescribed fires, the same as for fuel
treatments to reduce wildfire hazards. Lightning ignitions also
may be allowed to burn with minimal intervention in higher-
elevation forests. However, restoration objectives imply a much
broader intent to rehabilitate or mimic the ecological functioning
of forests, including sustaining or restoring wildlife and insect
populations and soil and water resources, as well as perpetuating
endangered species—all of which may have been harmed or dis-
rupted by human management activities. These objectives may
be more complex and difficult to implement than hazard reduc-
tion alone.
Although scientifically and emotionally appealing, the idea
of forest health restoration is not without its detractors. In addi-
tion to those suspicious of increased logging activity on national
forests, some dispute whether the pre-European forest was truly
healthier or more desirable. Others correctly point out that large
fires occurred in prehistoric times, and that picking a specific pre-
1900 target year for emulation of forest conditions is problem-
atic—if not nonsensical. The desire to break the seemingly end-
less cycle of wildfire devastation and human tragedy seems to be
the only point of general consensus.
Large-scale restoration experiments and projects have been
implemented in several areas of the western United States. These
usually involve collaborative partnerships that reach consensus
on thorny issues such as commercial logging, or diameter limits
on thinned trees. Harvesting activities are likely to increase as a
result of the Healthy Forests Restoration Act of 2003. Monitoring,
evaluation, and adaptive management strategies will be crucial
for assessing the success of these expanded programs.
Fire Costs
Firefighting can be expensive, with recent federal expenditures
routinely exceeding $1 billion per year. Expenditures generally
222
Facts and Data

fall into two categories: budgeted and emergency. Budgeted ex-
penses cover preparedness (for example, personnel and equip-
ment), but agencies tap into a separate emergency fund once a
wildfire breaks out. The U.S. Forest Service budget for fire man-
agement preparedness in 2004 is around $1.7 billion, while De-
partment of Interior agencies spend $750 million in appropriated
funds. Emergency expenditures on wildfires may be much higher
and more difficult to track. Previous studies (for example, USDA
Forest Service 1995) illustrate the difficulties with tracking fire
costs for large fire incidents, especially when multiple agencies
are involved over a prolonged campaign—although record-
keeping seems to have improved in recent years along with the
need for increased accountability. Generally, costs increase as an
incident grows in complexity and organization. A simple fire, at-
tacked with local suppression resources, will be relatively inex-
pensive compared with an extended attack fire. The next level of
complexity might involve a Type II incident overhead team su-
pervising crews and resources called in from a variety of organi-
zations at the state or regional level. If the Type II team is unable
to control the fire, a national Type I overhead team may be re-
quested, consisting of around twenty-five to thirty individuals,
each with specialized assignments. The Type I team may provide
oversight to thousands of firefighters in the trenches and many
support activities in fire camp. The high cost of firefighting in-
cludes labor and expensive equipment used by the overhead
teams, but also support services required to transport, clothe,
feed, and process firefighter activities.
Individual firefighter costs are small in comparison with
other resources that may be called upon during a fire, such as air-
craft, but they add up quickly with the hundreds and thousands
necessary to fight a fire. Representative costs for outfitting an in-
dividual firefighter may run to about $500, exclusive of boots
(which are a personal responsibility). Expenses include those
listed in Table 5–7, which are based on estimates provided at
www.nifc.gov.
Aircraft are usually the most expensive equipment used to
fight fires. In the United States, the federal government contracts
with private companies to provide helicopters and airplanes. Ex-
clusive-use contracts ensure that aircraft are available when
needed but also carry costs for remaining available (that is, on
standby) while waiting a fire call. Additional costs per flight hour
pertain once aircraft become airborne en route to and from a fire.
Fire Costs
223

The costs listed in Table 5–8 are indicative of large air tanker ca-
pacity and lead plane costs, prior to the cancellation of the con-
tract in May 2004. Cancellation of the contract will lead to in-
creased reliance on smaller-capacity, lower-cost delivery planes.
Like air tanker costs, helicopter flight costs can also be quite
high on an hourly basis (Gonzalez-Caban 2002). The termination
of air tanker contracts did not affect helicopter services. Repre-
sentative helicopter costs (1 bid.) include:
224
Facts and Data
Table 5-7
Cost to Outfit one Firefighter
Item
Unit cost
Fire Resistant Pants
$59.37
Fire Resistant Shirt
$45.22
Helmet with Chin Strap
$13.54
Goggles
$10.81
Gloves
$11.93
Leather Boots
(personal cost)
Head Light with Batteries
$24.02
Rations (Meals Ready to Eat-MRE)
$6.76 (each)
Canteens with Cover (4)
$11.00
Web Gear
$19.56
Web Gear Belt
$11.03
Personal Gear Bag
$27.77
Red Pack
$45.18
Fire Shelter
$40.76
Sleeping Bag
$33.88
Pulaski (hand tool)
$48.55
Shovel (hand tool)
$20.57
McLeod (hand tool)
$48.68
Source: Gonzalez-Caban 2002.
Table 5-8
Representative Airtanker Costs
Airtanker 
Daily Standby Cost 
Flight cost 
(slurry capacity, gal)
($ US)
($ US/flight hour)
P3 Orion (3,000)
$1,333
$3,250–$3,262
DC-6 (2,450)
$2,979
$2,597
PB4Y (2,200)
$1,575
$2,044–$2,276
C-130 (3,000)
$1,476
$4,024
Air Tractor 802 (800)
$1,700
$1,300
DC-4 (2,000)
$2,583
$1,884
Lead plane
$380
Slurry costs $1.00 per gallon
Source: Gonzalez-Caban 2002

Puma Helicopter: $11,000 (per flight hour); $3,000 for
support.
Sky Crane: $29,500 (per flight hour); $7,000 for support.
Lama: $1,300 (per flight hour).
Bell 206: $900 (per flight hour).
Crew costs depend on base pay (that is, for an eight-hour
day), overtime, and hazardous duty differentials. On federal fires,
several different pay scales may be in effect: general service (GS),
administratively determined (AD), and special rates (for exam-
ple, for prison inmates). Only those on GS pay scales may be paid
overtime (time and a half) and hazardous duty differentials (25
percent) on top of normal base pay. In addition, government em-
ployees are entitled to lodging and meal reimbursement per diem
(approximately $154/day in 2002). Typical wildfire crew costs are
shown in Table 5–9.
The above sample expenses provide at best a partial esti-
mate for the range of suppression costs that might be incurred on
an incident, depending on the resources deployed to the fire. In
addition, a variety of support services may be mobilized, de-
pending on the incident size and complexity. Examples include
the following:
Transportation: for example, crew transport, maintenance,
water tenders, ambulances, and bulldozers;
Telecommunications, including radios and wireless
networked computers;
Food, including catering units and kitchen staffs;
Waste management and sanitation;
Fire Costs
225
Table 5-9
Typical Wildfire Crew Costs
Crew type
Cost
Type I Incident Management Team (35 persons)
$10,000
Hotshot (20 persons)
$6,000
Type II Crew
$3,500
Helitack (7 persons)
$1,700
Fire Engine (3 persons)
$1,000
Source: Gonzalez-Caban 2002.

Emergency medical facilities and personnel;
Reconnaissance, monitoring and surveillance, such as
aerial remote sensing platforms with global positioning
capabilities and remote automated weather services;
Miscellaneous supplies, such as order forms, clothing, and
tools.
In comparison with other societies, U.S. fire costs are high.
For example, Russia has the world’s first and largest aerial fire-
fighting force (with more than 4,000 smokejumpers and heli-
rapellers, down from the 8,000 employed by the Soviet Union),
spread across eleven time zones with an annual budget of $32
million—equivalent to a few days’ expenditures during a heavy
U.S. siege (Hodges 2002). The Russian aerial firefighting organi-
zation, Avialesookhrana, apparently cuts costs by using low-tech
tools and keeping payrolls low (for example, $100/mo per
smokejumper in 2002), and doing without fire shelters, Nomex,
or seat belts on their airships. Like their U.S. counterparts, Russ-
ian smokejumpers jump out of airplanes as much as anything for
the thrill.
Optimizing Fire Management
Expenditures
All of the above suppression activities come at a price that must
be accounted for in evaluating the cost of firefighting. Escalating
suppression costs have become a major issue for public agencies
with fire management responsibilities and for the taxpayers who
foot the bill. Even so, managing fire damages and benefits may be
as significant as suppression costs, from a policy or ecological
standpoint.
Costs such as those noted in the above tables are important
in ascertaining how much is spent in fighting fires, but in reality
the economic efficiency of aggressive suppression versus other
fire management alternatives is largely unknown. Many schemes
have been developed for assessing economic efficiency over time,
such as minimum cost plus loss (Sparhawk 1925) or minimum
cost plus net value change (Mills and Bratten 1982), but they may
only approximate the true costs and impacts to society. To show
226
Facts and Data

some of the theory involved with balancing costs and returns
from fire management, let’s look at a simplified example, using
the hypothetical area illustrated in Figure 2–1 on page 54.
Recall that the example area in Figure 2–1 was zoned into
seven management units, comprising two urban interface units,
four commercial forest units, and one wilderness unit. Further-
more, suppose that the current management situation calls for ag-
gressive suppression in the urban interface, fire restoration and
multiple uses in the commercial forest units, and fire use in the
wilderness unit—with current fire management expenditures of
$10 million and annual losses (net of any fire benefits) of $20 mil-
lion, or a total cost plus adjusted loss of $30 million.
Now suppose that in an upcoming election, voters will be
presented with three additional alternatives to the current situa-
tion. Alternative 1 calls for building and equipping another fire
station outside each financial center (at an additional cost of $2.5
million each), thereby increasing initial attack capabilities to re-
duce projected adjusted losses to $13 million from the current $20
million. Alternative 2 calls for building and equipping just one
additional fire station ($2.5 million), but investing an additional
$1.5 million in mechanical thinning and prescribed fire projects in
the commercial forest units. The projected adjusted loss from Al-
ternative 2 is $11 million. Alternative 3 will build no fire stations
but invest only the additional $1.5 million in fuels treatment, with
a projected adjusted loss of $15.5 million.
Hypothetical comparison of cost and losses (adjusted by
benefits) for the current situation and three proposed alternatives
for the hypothetical fire management area in Figure 2–1, in $mil-
lions, might resemble the listing in Table 5–10.
According to this simplified example, Alternative 2 is the
best choice for the electorate—that is, building and equipping one
Optimizing Fire Management Expenditures
227
Table 5-10
Fire Management Costs and Losses for a Hypothetical Fire Management
Area
Current
Alternative 1
Alternative 2 
Alternative 3 
(Two additional 
(additional fire 
(Fuels Management 
fire stations)
station, increased
only)
fuels management)
Costs
10.0
15.0
14.0
11.5
Adjusted loss 20.0
13.0
11.0
15.5
Total
30.0
28.0
25.0
27.0

additional fire station and investing in mechanical thinning and
prescribed fire projects, at a total cost plus adjusted loss of $25
million (minimum of the alternatives considered, also known as
the most efficient level, or MEL). The other alternatives reduce
total costs and losses from the current situation, but not as much
as Alternative 2.
Although the theory may seem simple enough from this hy-
pothetical example, several difficulties hinder application of this
approach to finding optimal expenditure levels for fire manage-
ment. First, determining all costs may seem straightforward but
can be complicated if multiple agencies provide fire management
services in an area (that is, federal, state, local, and volunteers).
Second, a determination of actual losses can be difficult to specify
in advance. No one really can predict with certainty the extent to
which investments in additional fire suppression forces or fuel
treatments (or both) will reduce either overall expenditures or
losses from future fires, subject to all the vagaries of fire weather,
fire behavior and effects, and uncertain fire outbreak probabili-
ties. Economists refer to this problem as one of determining the
production function linking costs to returns, and acknowledge
that its determination can be a thorny issue for fire analysts.
Lastly, the costs and adjusted loss approach may not adequately
reflect the important ecological, sociopolitical, and technological
concerns—for example, with sustaining natural ecosystems or
dealing with people who may resent being taxed for fire protec-
tion in the first place.
In spite of these problems, the analytical approach illustrated
above is useful in terms of illustrating the fact that economic prin-
ciples can be applied to fire management problems, although only
with approximations and perhaps as only one among several cri-
teria for making important decisions. Ecology, politics, and social
concerns also need to be considered. Ultimately, a collaborative
fire planning process that involves local interest groups in devel-
oping and implementing strategies across multiple jurisdictions
will likely enjoy the greatest success in managing fires.
Employment Opportunities in Fire Science 
To conclude this chapter on facts and data, we will look at em-
ployment opportunities in fire science and management, starting
with basic positions. High school or college students interested in
228
Facts and Data

future study or employment possibilities might review this sec-
tion with an eye toward future career paths, although all individ-
uals need to follow their own aspirations according to their own
personal circumstances. For many, seeing fire on the ground, or
from the end of a shovel, provides an important and invaluable
starting point—although rewarding careers are possible from
other starting points.
Firefighter
Most firefighting jobs are seasonal, being restricted to parts of the
year when temperature and moisture levels permit fires to burn.
Typically, U.S. government and state agencies recruit seasonal
employees to fill temporary jobs fighting fires across the country,
but especially in the Western states. Private contractors may pro-
vide heavy equipment, crew personnel, and support services
such as meals, showers, and portable toilets in fire camps. Many
temporary employees are college students and teachers, who join
the workforce during summer break. Native tribal organizations
may organize suppression teams that are available for dispatch to
fires or as fuels thinning crews. Some crews are made up of mi-
grant laborers for whom English is a second language. For some,
seasonal employment represents an opportunity to establish a
performance record that could become a stepping stone for future
permanent employment; for others, the summer fire season may
represent the only opportunity for earning decent wages
throughout the year. Pay for temporary firefighters ranges from
$8.64 an hour to $11.64 an hour (based on rates in effect in 2002).
A typical day for seasonal firefighters might include organ-
ized physical training and project work. Even during a hot sum-
mer, firefighters will encounter periods during a forty-hour work
week when fires are not burning. During such times, they will be
employed thinning forest stands or performing other hazard re-
duction or fire prevention activities. However, once fires break
out, government firefighters will typically work long shifts and
receive overtime and hazardous duty pay differentials. Non-
government firefighters may not receive the overtime and haz-
ardous duty pay.
Despite the long hours and arduous labor, many firefighters
love the work and look forward to repeating seasonal work year
after year, often at higher pay or in pursuit of a permanent work
appointment. After gaining experience on a fire crew (engine or
Employment Opportunities in Fire Science
229

hand-crew), seasonal employees can apply for more elite posi-
tions such as hot-shot crews or smokejumpers. Hot-shot crews
typically draw tough assignments and, like other crew organiza-
tions, develop strong camaraderie over a fire season. Smoke-
jumpers typically attack fires in remote locations by parachuting
out of airplanes and making use of firefighting equipment in-
cluded in a separate drop. Helitack crews rely on helicopters for
transport to remote locations. Crews often travel to other parts of
the country to support firefighting efforts in other regions. An ap-
plicant for federal appointment must be at least eighteen years
old, a U.S. citizen, in good physical condition, and able to pass a
physical exam (including drug test).
Full-time agency employees may be called away from their
normal duties (for example, as foresters, resource specialists, or
biologists) to assist with firefighting assignments, especially on
local incidents, but also as members of overhead teams available
nationwide. Participation on fire assignments is usually an ex-
pectation of full-time agency employees. Individuals with pri-
mary fire responsibilities may qualify eventually for early fire-
fighter retirement benefits, including full pension by age fifty
with thirty years’ experience.
Fire Manager or Planner
Individuals with extended seasonal firefighting experience may
eventually land a full-time permanent position that focuses on
fire, either year-round or mixed with collateral responsibilities in
a related natural resource specialty. Fire management officer
(FMO) duties include planning, preparation, and implementation
of management plans for an area or jurisdiction, including over-
all supervision of crews and suppression resources on local fires.
Of late, the FMO has been considered a professional position in
terms of civil service ratings—and in terms of job expectations.
Full-time assistant fire management officers (AFMO) tradition-
ally are hired out of the technician series. The professional-
technician distinction between employees is not hard and fast,
but professionals generally possess college educations or ad-
vanced schooling. Typically, advancement through the career
ranks depends on both on-the-ground experience and levels of
college education. Exceptions occur, as in any large bureaucratic
organization, but as in most fields, a college education generally
improves starting pay and advancement opportunities.
230
Facts and Data

Fuels specialists plan and participate on prescribed fire and
other fuel treatment projects, such as mechanical thinning. Fire
ecologists keep current with the latest developments in under-
standing fire effects and the role of fire in ecosystem processes in
order to contribute to the formulation of management plans or en-
vironmental assessments. Most fire specialists participate on over-
head teams and may provide input and feedback in the develop-
ment of agency environmental assessments and management plans.
Fire prevention technicians perform routine inspections and
patrols through the forest, with the aim of enforcing compliance
with regulations and reducing ignition sources or risky human
behavior. Some prevention specialists may be trained fire source
investigators. Engine and crew superintendents generally work
their way up the ranks from seasonal or full-time technician jobs.
Starting professional federal pay scales in 2003 ranged from
$23,442 to $61,251 (GS 5–13), with step increases based on time in
grade. Federal technician salaries range from $26,130 to $51,508
(GS6–12), also with step increases. Both professionals and techni-
cians are eligible for health and retirement benefits. Federal fire-
fighters qualify for early-retirement privileges based on age and
years in service. Pay scales for state, private, and urban firefight-
ers with wildland responsibilities may vary considerably from
their federal counterparts, depending in part on union and cost-
of-living differentials.
Fire Researcher
Full-time research positions involve the study of fire behavior,
fire effects, and fire management, along with a diverse variety of
other disciplines such as mathematics, engineering, or sociology.
Employees may have job titles such as research forester or re-
search scientist. Some positions stress basic science findings,
while others focus on research, development, and applications.
Technology transfer specialists apply the latest scientific findings
to field applications. Government scientists working at a research
laboratory or in the field usually hold a master’s degree, although
many begin as part-time employees while working their way
through college. A Ph.D. is required for research project leaders.
Fire experience, though desirable, is not required.
Starting federal pay scales in 2003 for fire researchers ranged
from $29,037 to $85,140 (GS7–15), with step increases based on time
in grade. Other fire research positions are found at universities and
Employment Opportunities in Fire Science
231

colleges, as well as in private industry. Salaries will depend on
market forces and institutional policies.
Summary
People with inquisitive minds and interests in studying fire may
find countless employment opportunities with the government
(as managers or researchers), on academic faculties (conducting
instruction and research) at universities and colleges, and in the
private sector as consultants or with nongovernmental organiza-
tions. A partial listing of the employment areas may be inferred
from the abbreviated list of issue or problem areas related to fires
and their management. Items in the list may be related to one an-
other or overlap, but at least they may be suggestive of the many
opportunities:
•
Fire management, prevention, dispatch, detection,
suppression, use, rehabilitation, and equipment
development and testing;
•
Fire ecology, fire history, the role of fire in sustaining
ecosystems;
•
Fuel dynamics, assessment, modeling, and description;
•
Fuel moisture, assessment, and analysis;
•
Fire physics, understanding of basic mechanisms of fire
spread and effects;
•
Fire behavior prediction, measurement, and evaluation;
•
Fuel consumption;
•
Smoke management and dispersion;
•
Remote sensing, cartography, and geographic
information systems related to fires;
•
First order fire effects, aboveground, belowground, on
atmospheric and water resources, from cultural and
social perspectives;
•
Longer term fire effects on landscapes;
•
Fire meteorology, climatology, lightning analysis,
assessment, and forecasting;
•
Prescribed fire implementation and effects;
•
Economics, policy, and planning;
•
Ecosystem engineering and forest health management;
•
Wildland urban interface, county planning, incident
management;
232
Facts and Data

•
Computer programming;
•
Educational programming, written and visual media,
development and distribution;
•
Journalism and creative writing;
•
Emergency management. 
Other employment possibilities exist in disciplines related to
the above list, especially for individuals with a fire science or man-
agement background. Furthermore, the age structure and demo-
graphics of the current workforce in fire and emergency manage-
ment suggest wholesale turnovers in personnel over the next five
years, as senior-level employees (ages fifty to fifty-five) retire or
leave. A vast storehouse of experience and knowledge about fires
and their management will exit with these senior employees, es-
pecially regarding the megafires—their behavior, their root causes,
and the futility of certain approaches to their management. As va-
cancies are filled behind the upcoming departures, fire workers
will become more youthful, more intellectually diverse, and more
representative of the multiple cultures within our society.
Employment in the fire community, whether in manage-
ment, research, academia, or some related area, can provide ex-
citement, intellectual stimulation, opportunities to work with
outstanding individuals and institutions, and much more. Fires
capture the human imagination like few other natural phenom-
ena, but they also can instill fear and frustration under certain cir-
cumstances. Often these fears and frustrations may seem to out-
weigh the benefits, although this response may be as much
cultural perception as reality. Through education, perhaps future
generations will enjoy greater success in learning to live with fires
and their consequences.
Literature Cited
Agee, J. K. 1993. Fire Ecology of Pacific Northwest Forests. Washington,
DC: Island Press, 493 p.
Agee, J. K., B. Bahro, M. A. Finney, P. N. Omi, D. B. Sapsis, C. N. Skinner,
J. W. van Wagtendonk, and C. P. Weatherspoon. 2000. “The Use of
Shaded Fuelbreaks in Landscape Fire Management.” Forest Ecology and
Management 127: 55–66.
Agee, J. K., and C. N. Skinner. 2003. “Ecological Principles of Forest Fuel
Reduction Treatments.” Presentation at Risk Assessment related to Deci-
sion-making related to Uncharacteristic Wildfire, Nov. 17–19, 2003. Port-
land: Oregon State University, Forestry Outreach Education.
Literature Cited
233

Albini, F. A. 1979. “Spot Fire Distance from Burning Trees—A Predictive
Model.” USDA Forest Service General Technical Report INT-56, 73 p.
———. 1983. “Potential Spotting Distances from Wind-driven Surface
Fires.” USDA Forest Service General Technical Report INT-309, 27 p.
Alexander, M. D. 2004. “Enhanced Crew Cohesion and a Methodology
for Evaluation.” M.S. professional paper, Colorado State University.
Alexander, M., C. Stefner, J. Beck, and R. Lanoville. 2001. New insights
into the effectiveness of fuel reduction treatments on crown fire potential
at the stand level. Page 318 in G. Pearce and L. Lester (technical coordi-
nators). Bushfire 2001 Conference Proceedings, 3–6 July 2001.
Christchurch: New Zealand Forest Research Institute.
Anderson, H. E. 1982. “Aids to Determining Fuel Models for Estimating
Fire Behavior.” USDA Forest Service General Technical Report INT-122,
22 p.
Andrews, P. L. 1986. “BEHAVE: Fire Behavior Prediction and Fuel Mod-
eling System—BURN Subsystem, Part 1.” USDA Forest Service General
Technical Report INT-194, 130 p.
Andrews, P. L., and C. H. Chase. 1989. “BEHAVE: Fire Behavior Predic-
tion and Fuel Modeling System—BURN Subsystem, Part 2.” USDA For-
est Service General Technical Report INT-260, 93 p.
Astaris Corporation 1998. “Phos-Chek Foam: Making Water a Better Fire-
fighter.” Astaris LLC, St. Louis. Nonpaginated promotional materials.
Bevins, C. 2003. BehavePlus Fire Modeling System. Missoula, MT: USDA
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station and Systems for Envi-
ronmental Management.
Boxall, B. 2002. “Intense Logging Blamed for Wildfires.” Los Angeles
Times, September 17, 2002, p. A8.
Bradstock, R. A., J. E. Williams, and A. M. Gill. 2002. Flammable Australia:
The Fire Regimes and Biodiversity of a Continent. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 462 p.
Brown, A. A., and K. P. Davis. 1973. Forest Fire: Control and Use. 2d ed.
New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co., 686 p.
Brown, J. K. 1974. “Handbook for Inventorying Downed Woody Mater-
ial.” USDA Forest Service General Technical Report INT-16, 24 p.
———. 2000. “Chapter 1: Introduction and Fire Regimes.” Pp. 1–6 in
Wildland Fire in Ecosystems: Effects of Fire on Flora, edited by J. K. Brown
and J. K. Smith. USDA Forest Service General Technical Report RMRS-
GTR-42, vol. 2, 257 p.
Brown, J. K., R. D. Oberheu, and C. M. Johnston. 1982. “Handbook for In-
ventorying Surface Fuels and Biomass in the Interior West.” USDA For-
est Service General Technical Report INT-129. 48 p.
234
Facts and Data

Brown, J. K., and J. K. Smith, eds. 2000. “Wildland Fire in Ecosystems: Ef-
fects of Fire on Flora.” USDA Forest Service General Technical Report
RMRS-GTR-42, vol. 2, 257 p.
Brown, P. M., M. R. Kaufmann, and W. D. Shepperd. 1999. “Long-term
Landscape Patterns of Past Fire Events in a Montane Ponderosa Pine
Forest of Central Colorado.” Landscape Ecology 14: 513–532.
Brown, P. M., and W. D. Shepperd. 2001 “Fire History and Fire Climatol-
ogy along a 5∞Gradient in Latitude in Colorado and Wyoming, USA.”
Paleobotanist 50: 133–140.
Burgan, R. E., and R. A. Hartford. 1993. “Monitoring Vegetation Green-
ness with Satellite Data.” USDA Forest Service General Technical Report
INT-297, 13 p.
Bustillo, M. 2003. “Scientists Predict Long-term Slide Risk.” Santa Rosa
Press Democrat, December 27, 2003, p. A10.
Byram, G. M. 1959. “Combustion of Forest Fuels.” Pp. 61–89 in Forest Fire
Control and Use, edited by K. P. Davis. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co.,
584 p.
Campbell, D. 1991. The Campbell Prediction System. Ojai, CA: Ojai Printing
and Publishing Co.
Chandler, C., P. Cheney, P. Thomas, L. Trabaud, and D. Williams. 1983a.
Fire in Forestry. Vol. I: Forest Fire Behavior and Effects. New York: John
Wiley and Sons, 450 p.
———. 1983b. Forestry. Vol. II: Fire Management. New York: John Wiley
and Sons, 298 p.
Countryman, C. n.d. “Fuel Moisture and Fire Danger—Some Elementary
Concepts.” USDA Forest Service Region 5, Aviation and Fire Manage-
ment handout, 4p.
———. 1966. “The Concept of Fire Environment.” USDA Forest Service,
Fire Control Notes 27(4): 8–10.
———. 1972. “The Fire Environment Concept.” USDA Forest Service Re-
search Paper. Berkeley: Pacific Southwest Research Station, 12 p.
Dear, J. A. 1995. Letter to Jack Ward Thomas, chief, USDA Forest Service.
February 8, 1995, 2p plus attachment.
DeBano, L. F. 1981. “Water Repellent Soils: A State of the Art.” USDA
Forest Service General Technical Report PSW-GTRR-46, 21 p.
DeBano, L. F., D. G. Neary, and P. F. Folliott. 1998. Fire Effects on Ecosys-
tems. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 333 p.
Deeming, J. D. 1988. “Effects of Fire on Air Quality.” Lesson plan, intro-
duction to Fire Effects course, Washington Institute, Redding CA.
Literature Cited
235

———. 1990. “Effects of Prescribed Fire on Wildfire Occurrence and
Severity.” Pp. 95–104 in Natural and Prescribed Fire in Pacific Northwest
Forests, edited by J. D. Walstad, S. R. Radosevich, and D. V. Sandberg.
Corvallis: Oregon State University Press, 317 p.
Deeming, J. E., R. E. Burgan, and J. D. Cohen. 1977. “The National Fire-
Danger Rating System, 1978.” USDA Forest Service General Technical
Report INT-39, 63 p.
DeHaan, J. D. 2002. Kirk’s Fire Investigation. 5th ed. Upper Saddle River,
NJ: Prentice-Hall. 638 p.
Dennis, F. C. 1992. “Creating Fire Safe Zones around Your Forested
Homesite.” Colorado State University Extension, Service in Action sheet
no. 6.302, 4 p.
Doolittle, M. L., and M. L. Lightsey. 1980. “Southern Woods-burners: A
Descriptive Analysis.” USDA Forest Service Research Paper S0–151, 6 p.
Enders, J. 2001. “Firefighting Effort Boosted by Helicopters.” Ft. Collins
Coloradoan, August 18, 2001, 2.
Finney, M. A. 1998. “FARSITE: Fire Area Simulator.” USDA Forest Ser-
vice Research Paper RMRS-RP-4. 47 p.
———. 2001. “Design of Regular Landscape Fuel Treatment Patterns for
Modifying Fire Growth and Behavior.” Forest Science 47: 219–228.
Fischer, W. C. 2003. “Fire Management.” Chapter 8 in Introduction to For-
est and Renewable Resources, 7th ed., edited by G. W. Sharpe, C. W.
Hendee, and W. F. Sharpe. Boston: McGraw Hill, 544 p.
Fuller, M. 1991. Forest Fires: An Introduction to Wildland Fire Behavior, Man-
agement, Firefighting, and Fire Prevention. Wiley Nature Editions. New
York: John Wiley and Sons, 239 p.
Gleason, P. 1991. “LCES—A Key to Safety in the Wildland Fire Environ-
ment.” Fire Management Notes 52(4): 9.
Gonzalez-Caban, Armando. 2002. “Costes de los medios aereos de com-
bate de incendios forestales en el servicio forestal del departamento de
Agricultura de los EEUU: Una primera aproximacion.” Pp. 65–72 in I
simposio internacional La Gestion de los Medios Aereos en la Defensa Contra
los Incendios Forestales, edited by Antonio J. Gonzalez Barrios and Ignacio
Ribas i Sole, coordinadores, Cordoba, Octobre 28–30, 2002. Cordoba, Es-
pana: Universidad de Cordoba, 367 p.
Gorte, R. 2000. “Forest Fire Protection.” Congressional Research Service
Report for Congress Order Code RL30755, the Library of Congress,
Washington, DC, 29 p.
236
Facts and Data

Graham, R. T., tech. ed. 2003. “Hayman Fire Case Study.” General Tech-
nical Report RMRS-GTR-114. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agricul-
ture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, 396 p. Also avail-
able at http://www.fs.fed.us/rm/pubs/rmrs_gtr114.html.
Green, L. R. 1977. “Fuelbreaks and Other Fuel Modification for Wildland
Fire Control.” USDA Ag. Handbook 499.
Haines, D. A., and R. W. Sando. 1969. “Climatic Conditions Preceding
Historically Great Fires in the North Central Region.” USDA Forest Ser-
vice Research Paper NC-34. 19 p.
Hardy, C. C., J. P. Menakis, D. G. Long, J. K. Brown, and D. L. Bunnell.
1998. “Mapping Historic Fire Regimes for the Western United States: In-
tegrating Remote Sensing and Biophysical Data.” Pp. 288–300 in Proceed-
ings of the 7th Biennial Forest Service Remote Sensing Applications Conference,
April 6–9, 1988, Nassau Bay, TX. Bethesda, MD: American Society for
Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing.
Heinselman, M. L. 1978. “Fire in Wilderness Ecosystems.” Pp. 249–278 in
Wilderness Management, edited by J. C. Hendee, G. H. Stankey, and R. C.
Lucas. Miscellaneous publication no. 1365. Washington, DC: USDA For-
est Service.
Hodges, G. 2002. “Smokejumpers.” National Geographic 204(8):82–99.
Joesten, M. D., J. T. Netterville, and J. L. Wood. 1993. World of Chemistry—
Essentials. Fort Worth, TX: Saunders College Publishing.
Johnson, E. A. 1992. Fire and Vegetation Dynamics: Studies from the North
American Boreal Forest. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 129 p.
Keetch, J. J., and G. Byram. 1968. “A Drought Index for Forest Fire Con-
trol.” USDA Forest Service Research Paper SE-38. Revised 1988.
Asheville, NC: USDA Forest Service Southeastern Forest Experiment Sta-
tion, 32 p.
Kelha, V., Y. Rauste, and A. Buongiorno. N.d. “Forest Fire Detection by
Satellites for Fire Control.” Available at http://www.vtt.fi/tte/research
/tte1/tte14/proj/FF-Operat/Forest_fire_detection.pdf.
Kilgore, B. M. 1981. “Fire in Ecosystem Distribution and Structure: West-
ern Forests and Scrublands.” Pp. 58–59 in Fire Regimes and Ecosystem
Properties: Proceedings of the Conference, edited by H. A. Mooney, T. M.
Bonnicksen, N. L. Christensen, J. E. Lotan, and R. A. Reiners, tech. co-
ords. December 11–15, 1978, Honolulu, HI. USDA Forest Service General
Technical Report WO-26.
Kimmins, J. P. 1987. Forest Ecology. New York: Macmillan Publishing,
531 p.
Literature Cited
237

MacDonald, L. H. 2004. “Post-fire Erosion in the Colorado Front Range.”
Abstract of seminar presentation February 27, 2004, at Colorado State
University.
MacDonald, L. H., and J. D. Stednick. 2003. “Forests and Water: A State-
of-the-Art Review for Colorado.” CWRRI Completion Report no. 196.
Colorado Water Resources Research Institute Colorado State University,
Ft. Collins, CO. 65 p.
Martin, R. E. 1976. “Prescribed Burning for Site Preparation in the Inland
Northwest.” Pp. 134–156 in Tree Planting in the Inland Northwest: Short-
course Proceedings held at Washington State University, edited by David M.
Baumgartner and Raymond J. Boyd. Pullman, February 17–19, 1976,
Washington State University, Cooperative Extension Service. Pullman,
311 p.
McKee, T. B., N. J. Doesken, J. Kleist, and C. J. Shrier. 2000. “What Is
Drought?” P. 5 in Water in the Balance, Colorado Water Resources Re-
search Institute Bulletin no. 9 (2d ed.). Colorado State University, 19 p.
Miller, M. 2000. “Fire Autoecology.” Pp. 9–50 in Wildland Fire in Ecosys-
tems: Effects of Fire on Flora, edited by J. K. Brown and J. K. Smith, eds.
USDA Forest Service General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-42, vol. 2,
257 p.
Mills, T. J., and F. W. Bratten. 1982. “FEES: Design of a Fire Economics
Evaluation System.” USDA Forest Service General Technical Report
PSW-65, 37 p.
Morgan, P., S. C. Bunting, A. Black, T. Merrill, and S. Barrett. 1996. “Fire
Regimes in the Interior Columbia River Basin: Past and Present.” Final
Report for RJVA-INT-94913. On file at USDA Forest Service, Rocky
Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory, Missoula, MT, 31 p.
———. 1998. “Past and Present Fire Regimes in the Interior Columbia
River Basin.” Pp. 77–82 in Fire Management under Fire (Adapting to
Change), edited by K. Close and R. A. Bartlette. Proceedings of the 1994
Interior West Fire Council meeting and program, November 1–4, 1994,
Coeur d’Alene, ID. Fairfield WA: International Association of Wildland
Fire.
Mutch, R. W. 1970. ”Wildland Fires and Ecosystems: A Hypothesis.” Ecology
51: 1046–1051.
National Wildfire Coordinating Group. 1993. Look Up, Look Down,
Look Around. Fireline Safety Reference NFES 2243, National Interagency
Fire Center. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, non-
paginated.
Nature Conservancy. 2003. “Fire Initiative.” Available at http://nature
.org/initiatives/fire/#.
238
Facts and Data

Omi, P. N. 1997. “Fuels Modification to Reduce Large Fire Probability.”
Final Report submitted to U.S. Dept. of Interior, Fire Research Commit-
tee. Western Forest Fire Research Center, Colorado State University, 51 p.
plus appendices.
———. 2004. “Evaluating Tradeoffs between Wildfires and Fuel Treat-
ments,” in Proceedings of the 2d Symposium on Fire Economics, Planning and
Policy: A Global View. April 19–22, 2004. Cordoba, Spain (CD-ROM). 10 p.
Omi, P. N., and K. D. Kalabokidis. 1991. “Fire Damage on Extensively
versus Intensively Managed Forest Stands within the North Fork Fire,
1988.” Northwest Science 65: 149–157.
Omi, P. N., and E. J. Martinson. 2002. “Effect of Fuels Treatment on Wild-
fire Severity.” Final report submitted to the Joint Fire Science Program
Governing Board. Western Forest Fire Research Center, Colorado State
University, 36 p.
———. 2003. “Drought, Fire, and Fuel Treatments.” In Proceedings of the
3d International Wildland Fire Conference and Exhibition. October 3–6, 2003.
Sydney, Australia (CD-ROM).
———. 2004. “Fuel Treatments and Fire Regimes.” Final report submit-
ted to the Joint Fire Science Program Governing Board. Western Forest
Fire Research Center, Colorado State University, 44 p.
Ottmar, R., D. Sandberg, C. Wright, and R. Vihanek. 2002. “Modification
and Validation of Fuel Consumption Modeling.” Joint Fire Science Pro-
gram Progress Review, March 11–14, 2002, San Antonio, TX. CD copy of
presentation.
Ottmar, R., R. Vihanek, and C. Wright. 2002. “Photo Series Phases II and
III.” Joint Fire Science Program Progress Review, March 11–14, 2002, San
Antonio, TX. CD copy of presentation.
Palmer, W. C. 1965. “Meteorological Drought.” Research Paper no. 45,
U.S. Dept. of Commerce Weather Bureau, Washington, DC.
Pollet, J., and P. N. Omi. 2002. “Effect of Thinning and Prescribed Burn-
ing on Wildfire Severity in Ponderosa Pine Forests.” International Journal
of Wildland Fire 11: 1–10.
Pyne, S. J., P. L. Andrews, and R. D. Laven. 1996. Introduction to Wildland
Fire: Fire Management in the United States. New York: John Wiley and Sons,
455 p.
Rideout, D. B., and P. N. Omi. 1995. “Estimating the Cost of Fuels Treat-
ment.” Forest Science 41: 664–674.
Rothermel, R. C. 1972. “A Mathematical Model for Predicting Fire Spread
in Wildland Fuels.” USDA Forest Service Research Paper INT-115, 40 p.
Literature Cited
239

———. 1983. “How to Predict the Spread and Intensity of Forest and
Range Fires.” USDA Forest Service General Technical Report INT-143,
161 p.
———. 1991. “Predicting Behavior and Size of Crown Fires in the North-
ern Rocky Mountains.” USDA Forest Service Research Paper INT-438,
46 p.
Rowe, J. S. 1983. “Concepts of Fire Effects on Plant Individuals and
Species.” Pp. 135–154 in The Role of Fire in Northern Circumpolar Ecosys-
tems, edited by R. Wein and D. A. Maclean. London: Wiley.
Ryan, K. C. 2001. “Fire Severity: Concepts and Applications.” CD-ROM
version of presentation to Colorado State University, Department of For-
est Sciences, May 2001.
Ryan, K. C., and N. Noste. 1985. “Evaluating Prescribed Fires.” Pp.
230–237 in Proceedings of the Symposium on Wilderness Fire, November
15–18, 1983, Missoula, MT.
Sandberg, David V., Roger D. Ottmar, Janice L. Peterson, and John Core.
2002. “Wildland Fire in Ecosystems: Effects of Fire on Air.” General Tech-
nical Report RMRS-GTR-42-vol. 5. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agri-
culture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, 79 p.
Schmidt, Kirsten M., James P. Menakis, Colin C. Hardy, Wendall J. Hann,
and David L. Bunnell. 2002. “Development of Coarse-scale Spatial Data
for Wildland Fire and Fuel Management.” General Technical Report
RMRS-GTR-87. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest
Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 41 p. plus CD.
Schroeder, M. J., and C. C. Buck. 1970. “Fire Weather.” USDA Handbook
360. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Washington, DC,
229 p.
Smith, J. K., ed. 2000. “Wildland Fire in Ecosystems: Effects of Fire on
Fauna.” USDA Forest Service General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-42,
vol. 1, 83 p.
Smith, J. K., and W. C. Fischer. 1997. “Fire Ecology of the Forest Habitat
Types of Northern Idaho.” USDA Forest Service General Technical Re-
port INT-363, 142 p.
Sparhawk, W. N., 1925. “The Use of Liability Ratings in Planning Forest
Fire Protection.” Journal of Agricultural Research 33(8): 693–762.
Starker, T. J. 1934. “Fire Resistance in the Forest.” Journal of Forestry 32:
462–467.
Stokes, M. A., and J. H. Dieterich, eds. 1980. “Proceedings of the Fire His-
tory Workshop.” USDA Forest Service General Technical Report RM-81.
Ft. Collins: USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain Research Station, Oc-
tober 20–24, 1980. Tucson, Arizona. 142 p.
240
Facts and Data

Swetnam, T. W., and J. L. Betancourt. 1990. “Fire-southern Oscillation Re-
lations in the Southwestern United States.” Science 249: 1017–1020.
Trollope, W. S. W. 1984. “Fire in Savanna.” Pp. 151–175 in Ecological Effects
of Fire in South African Ecosystems, edited by P. de V. Booysen and N. M.
Tainton. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
UN Economic Commission for Europe. 1982. “Forest Fires: Prevention
and Control.” In Proceedings of an International Seminar Organized by the
Timber Committee of the UN Economic Commission for Europe, edited by T.
van Nao Held at Warsaw, Poland, at the invitation of the government of
Poland, May 20–22, 1981. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff/Dr. W. Junk Pub-
lishers, 236 p.
USDA Forest Service. 1995. “Fire Suppression Costs on Large Fires.”
USDA Forest Service, Fire and Aviation Management, Washington, DC,
18 p. plus appendices.
Van de Water, R. n.d. “Wildland Fires for Resource Benefits in Wilderness
Areas: The Yosemite National Park Experience.” (available at http://wa-
tershed.org/news/win_00/13_yosemite.htm).
Van Wagner, C. E. 1977. “Conditions for the Start and Spread of Crown
Fires.” Canadian Journal of Forest Research 7: 23–24.
van Wagtendonk, J. W. 1995. “Large Fires in Wilderness Areas.” Pp.
113–120 in Proceedings of the Symposium on Fire in Wilderness and Park Man-
agement, edited by J. K. Brown, R. W. Mutch, C. W. Spoon, and R. H.
Wakimoto. March 30–April 1, 1993, Missoula, MT: USDA Forest Service
General Technical Report INT-GTR-320, 283 p.
Wagenbrenner, J. W. 2003. “Effectiveness of Burned Area Emergency Re-
habilitation Treatments, Colorado Front Range.” Master’s thesis, Col-
orado State University. 76 p.
Ward, D. E., and C. C. Hardy. 1991. “Smoke Emissions from Wildland
Fires.” Environment International 17: 117–134.
Weatherspoon, C. P., and C. N. Skinner. 1995. “An Assessment of Factors
associated with Damage to Tree Crowns from the 1987 Wildfires in
Northern California.” Forest Science 41: 430–451.
Werth, J., and P. Werth. 1998. “Haines Index Climatology for the Western
United States.” Fire Management Notes 58(3): 8–17.
Whelan, R. J. 1995. The Ecology of Fire. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 346 p.
Williams, J. 2003. “Values, Tradeoffs, and Context: A Call for a Public
Lands Policy Debate on the Management of Fire-dependent Ecosys-
tems.” In Proceedings of the 3d International Wildland Fire Conference. Octo-
ber 3–6, 2003. Sydney, Australia, 7 p. (CD-ROM).
Literature Cited
241

Williams, V. 2003. “Evaluation of Wildfire Burn Severity Classification,
Utilizing Ground and Remote Sensing Methodologies, Southern Col-
orado, USA.” MSc dissertation, University of Edinburgh, Scotland, 99 p.
(CD-ROM provided by author).
Wilson, C. C. 1977. “Fatal and Near-fatal Forest Fires: The Common De-
nominators.” International Fire Chief 43(9): 9–15.
Wilson, R. 1980. “Reformulation of Forest Fire Spread Equations in SI
Units.” USDA Forest Service Research Note INT-292, 5 p.
Wright, H., and A. Bailey. 1982. Fire Ecology: United States and Southern
Canada. New York: Wiley-Interscience, 501 p.
Zhang, Y., J. M. Wallace, and D. S. Battisti. 1997. “ENSO-like Interdecadal
Variability: 1900–93.” Journal of Climate 10: 1004–1020.
242
Facts and Data

6
Directory of Agencies and
Organizations
I
n this chapter we examine the myriad federal, state, and local
government agencies and private organizations that play a role
or have an interest in forest fire management. We focus again on
the United States, but also include mention of significant organi-
zations globally. Newcomers to the United States are often puz-
zled that so many different players have an active stake in fire
management, or that responsibilities could vary so greatly from
state to state. The reasons are rooted in the fact that states are
responsible for such activities as firefighting and police activities.
Despite their apparent complexity, fire management and research
in the United States often set an example to be emulated else-
where, or from which valuable lessons can be learned. In recog-
nition of the importance of fostering international understanding,
the United States has in recent years entered into reciprocal
exchanges of firefighters and overhead management teams with
nations such as Canada, Mexico, and Australia. As in the United
States, wildfire management in other countries often involves
cooperation between a complex set of land ownerships and
agency jurisdictions, as for example when private land is inter-
spersed within a national forest or park, or where city, county,
state, federal, and volunteer fire organizations all coexist close to
one another.
The need for interagency cooperation is accentuated by the va-
riety of management activities that may be undertaken on a tract of
land, such as fire prevention, preparedness, hazard mitigation,
suppression, reclamation/rehabilitation, and public relations (see
243

Chapter 5)—all of which may require detailed planning and
budgetary commitments. Furthermore, the set of activities will
possibly require a complex set of agreements and fiscal reciproci-
ties if multiple jurisdictions are involved. In addition, regulatory
activities—such as air or water quality control—may require that
agencies comply with standards or obtain permits for manage-
ment activities, such as prescribed burns. Although such arrange-
ments might seem cumbersome, over the years agencies have de-
veloped mutual aid compacts, delegated authority to one
another, and generally agreed to cooperate as needed to manage
the land as efficiently as possible while complying with regula-
tions (for example, air and water quality, endangered species
habitat protection). This interagency cooperation effort works
reasonably well most of the time and is absolutely essential, since
no agency is able to handle its fire workload independently. Still,
just the paperwork necessary to facilitate cooperation and cost-
sharing among agencies can be staggering—but somehow the
work gets accomplished. Even so, some arrangements, such as
cost reimbursement on a complex set of wildfires spreading over
multiple jurisdictions, can require literally years of negotiation
and compromise to settle all accounts.
Additional complications may arise where burned-over
areas receive disaster designation, opening the door to victim as-
sistance such as grants and loans, or where volunteer fire depart-
ments, metropolitan fire districts, and private contractors join the
mix of federal and state firefighting resources. Also, the settling of
private insurance claims for wildfire losses can be complex, espe-
cially if disputes arise over policy coverage. Some claims may end
up in court and may not be resolved for years. Even before a fire,
a variety of private interest groups may seek a voice in manage-
ment and policy decisions. In truth, the sociopolitical environ-
ment for fire management decisions can be as complicated as the
fuel and weather interactions that drive a fire across a landscape.
Fire Policy and Administration
National Wildfire Coordinating Group
Arizona State Forester
2901 W. Pinnacle Peak Road
Phoenix, AZ 85027–1002
http://www.nwcg.gov
244
Directory of Agencies and Organizations

The National Wildfire Coordinating Group (NWCG) is an intera-
gency body that aims to coordinate and unify efforts by the nu-
merous wildfire management agencies so as to facilitate coopera-
tion while avoiding wasteful duplication. Member agencies
include the USDA Forest Service, USDI (Bureau of Land Manage-
ment, National Park Service, Bureau of Indian Affairs, and the
Fish and Wildlife Service), U.S. Department of Homeland Secu-
rity (U.S. Fire Administration), the Intertribal Timber Council,
and state forestry agencies. Chair responsibilities rotate among
member agencies. Member agencies sit on various working teams
and advisory groups to provide federal guidance in different sub-
ject areas, such as the following:
•
fire danger working team advances the science and
application of fire danger rating;
•
fire equipment working team coordinates chemical and
fire equipment needs, development, and
implementation among federal and state agencies;
•
fire use working team coordinates and advocates the
use of wildland fire to achieve resource benefits;
•
fire weather working team identifies opportunities for
improving fire weather services;
•
incident business practices working team identifies
issues, develops acceptable solutions, and implements
the solutions within business practices for wildfire,
nonfire, and Federal Emergency Management Agency
responses among state and federal agencies;
•
incident operations working team addresses issues
regarding the National Wildfire Qualifications and
Certifications System and the National Interagency
Incident Management System.
•
information resource management working team
identifies policy-level information issues that may
affect interagency fire management and addresses
them through information and communication
systems;
•
wildland fire education working team provides
leadership for national-level wildland fire education
programs;
•
publication management system working team makes
all information sponsored by NWCG readily available,
including publications and visual materials;
Fire Policy and Administration
245

•
training working team develops and coordinates fire
management training programs;
•
wildland urban interface working team provides
leadership in addressing issues regarding fire activity
and firefighter/public safety in the wildland/urban
interface;
•
wildland fire investigation working team develops
policies, methods, procedures, and other actions for
systematic and science-based wildland fire
investigations to support criminal prosecution and cost
recovery;
•
radio narrowband advisory group identifies and
addresses policy-level and operational radio
narrowband issues that could affect interagency fire
management activities; and
•
fire social sciences task group addresses social science
needs related to wildland fire management
National Interagency Fire Center
3833 S. Development Avenue
Boise, ID 83705
http://www.nifc.gov
The National Interagency Fire Center (NIFC) in Boise, Idaho, pro-
vides nationwide coordination of fire activities, as well as main-
taining a cache of firefighting equipment and supplies, a smoke-
jumper base, publications, and other activities. Affectionately
called “Nif-see” by practitioners, the center implements mandates
from the NWCG and its member agencies related to the manage-
ment of specific programs and individual incidents. During ex-
tended wildfire sieges, NIFC sometimes becomes the national
focal point for fire operations and information dissemination. Re-
sembling a paramilitary nerve center, NIFC coordinates activities
of a vast network of member agencies to supply human resources,
transportation, supplies, and support services necessary for re-
sponding to wildfire incidents. Permanent NIFC members repre-
sent the same land management agencies as the NWCG, although
other agencies (for example, National Association of State
Foresters, U.S. Weather Bureau, and Office of Aircraft Services) are
added as necessary to implement policy set by NWCG.
Wildfire management is coordinated through the National
Interagency Coordination Center (NICC), which processes re-
246
Directory of Agencies and Organizations

quests from command centers established in different geographic
regions or geographic area coordination centers (GACCs). Thus
requests for firefighting resources for several incidents can be con-
sidered and forwarded upward if needs cannot be met regionally
by the GACC. The use of acronyms within the fire bureaucracy at
first may seem overwhelming to the uninitiated, although prac-
titioners rely on jargon and acronyms to communicate with one
another.
USDA Forest Service Fire and Aviation Management
Auditor’s Building
201 14th Street, SW at Independence Ave., SW
Washington, DC 20250
The best known federal public agency with fire management re-
sponsibilities in the United States (and possibly the world) is the
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) Forest Service. Also
known less formally as the U.S. Forest Service (USFS), it adminis-
ters 191 million acres (77.3 million hectares) of national forests
and national grasslands, with involvement in territories such as
Puerto Rico. Management directions are provided by numerous
legislative acts, such as the Forest Service’s Organic Act (1897)
and the National Forest Management Act (1976), as well as man-
dates from the executive office of the president. Fire management
concerns cross a myriad of fire control, fire use, ecosystem man-
agement, long-term sustainability, and fire research issues. Fire
management activities are administered through the office of Fire
and Aviation Management (State and Private Forestry); fire re-
search is housed within the Research branch. In addition, the U.S.
Forest Service and its federal partners are recognized as leaders in
mobilization and response to emergency incidents, whether wild-
fires, oil spills, Columbia shuttle parts recovery, or natural disas-
ters. No other civilian entity has had as much experience in gath-
ering incident management resources and transporting teams to
respond to the scene of emergency incidents. No other federal
agency has had such a long track record of land-use planning.
The chief of the U.S. Forest Service is a career civil servant
who oversees the entire agency, including more than 600 ranger
districts, 150 national forests and 20 grasslands, 9 regions, and 6
research stations. (source: http://www.fs.usda.gov/budget_2004/
organization.shtml). At one time or another, all employees may be
called upon to assist with and support fire operations, depending
on skills, physical fitness, and training qualifications.
Fire Policy and Administration
247

USDI Agencies: National Park Service, Fish
and Wildlife Service, Bureau of Land
Management, and Bureau of Indian Affairs 
USDI National Park Service
Fire and Aviation Management
3833 S. Development Avenue
Boise, ID 83705
The other federal agencies with fire management responsibilities
are housed in the U.S. Department of Interior, including the Na-
tional Park Service (NPS), Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS), Bu-
reau of Land Management (BLM), and Bureau of Indian Affairs
(BIA). The BLM has a multiple use mission, while the NPS man-
ages fire in national parks and monuments. The BIA provides li-
aison with tribal nations, while the FWS manages fire control and
use on federal wildlife refuges.
Interior fire agencies share common fire regimes and man-
agement practices with the USFS, and all the agencies attempt to
work together seamlessly—for example, on fire incident over-
head teams. Some distinctions between agencies are unavoidable
because of differences between Interior and Agriculture depart-
ments. For example, Interior agencies use a different fire report
form (DI 1202 versus USFS 5100–29). Fire programs in the NPS
are less structured generally than the USFS, perhaps out of tradi-
tion. Both the director of the NPS and the chief of the Forest Ser-
vice are political appointees, though for much of the twentieth
century the chief was insulated from presidential politics. More
recently, elected presidents will bring in their own new leaders
for both of these influential subcabinet positions.
The National Park Service (NPS) is perhaps the second most
visible federal agency with fire management responsibilities, be-
cause of its responsibility for the diverse system of more than 300
national parks, monuments, preserves, and other historic and
natural treasures. According to its Organic Act (1916), the NPS
mandate is to “conserve the scenery and the natural and historic
objects and the wild life therein and to provide for the enjoyment
of the same in such manner as will leave them unimpaired for the
enjoyment of future generations” (http://www.nps.gov/fire/).
According to NPS guidelines, wildland fire management activi-
248
Directory of Agencies and Organizations

ties are essential to the protection of human life, personal prop-
erty, and irreplaceable natural and cultural resources, as well as to
the accomplishment of the NPS mission; they include both fire
control and fire use activities. In fact, the National Park Service
has pioneered the use of prescribed fire and natural ignitions
among federal agencies since the mid-twentieth century. In the
NPS, prescribed fire is centrally budgeted and administered, un-
like other federal agencies.
USDI Fish and Wildlife Service
Fire and Aviation Management
3833 S. Development Avenue
Boise, ID 83705
The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (http://fire.r9.fws.gov/) ad-
ministers the nation’s wildlife refuge system, consisting of more
than 500 refuges sprinkled across the country. The FWS maintains
an active prescribed fire program (perhaps the largest of any fed-
eral agency in terms of total annual area treated), since refuges
provide habitat for many wildlife species that live in fire-adapted
ecosystems. The FWS also maintains an active suppression or-
ganization and cooperates with other federal agencies in manag-
ing complex wildfire incidents. The bulk of FWS prescribed fire
activity occurs on refuge lands in the southeastern United States,
although as with other federal agencies, prescribed fire treatment
areas are on the increase nationwide.
USDI Bureau of Land Management
Fire and Aviation Management
3833 S. Development Avenue
Boise, ID 83705
The Bureau of Land Management (http://www.fire.blm.gov
/index.htm) is the Department of Interior’s multiple use agency,
responsible primarily for public rangelands used for livestock
grazing and also forests. The agency manages 264 million acres
(109.3 million hectares) of public land across the United States
and provides fire protection on 388 million acres of public and
state land. However, no single federal or state fire organization is
designed to handle its entire fire workload, and the BLM is no ex-
ception. By using common practices, operating and physical fit-
ness standards, training, and closest forces concepts, the BLM is
Fire Policy and Administration
249

committed to interagency cooperation with its numerous part-
ners. The agency is also committed to exchanges of protection
that are a necessary and integral part of wildland fire manage-
ment in the United States. In the western United States alone, the
BLM has agreements with at least 1,500 wildland fire agencies.
The agency also operates smokejumper facilities at the National
Interagency Fire Center in Boise, Idaho, and the Alaska Fire Cen-
ter in Fairbanks.
USDI Bureau of Indian Affairs
Fire and Aviation Management
3833 S. Development Avenue
Boise, ID 83705
The Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) is unique among federal agen-
cies, with trust and government-to-government relationships be-
tween the United States and more than 560 tribal nations. With
roots reaching back to the Continental Congress, the BIA is almost
as old as the United States itself. For most of its existence, the BIA
has mirrored the public’s ambivalence toward the nation’s in-
digenous peoples by carrying out federal policies that have
helped or hurt native populations. But the BIA’s mission has
evolved, just as federal policy has changed from subjugation and
assimilation of American Indian and Alaska Native peoples, to re-
lationships based on partnership and service.
BIA administers lands held in trust for the benefit of Native
American tribes, including 55.7 million acres (22.7 million
hectares) of land held in trust by the United States for American
Indians, Indian tribes, and Alaska Natives. Some 78 percent of
lands are tribally owned and 18 percent individually owned, with
the rest held in trust by the federal government. Fire management
responsibilities include effective wildland fire protection, fire use
and hazardous fuels management, and timely emergency reha-
bilitation on Indian forest and range lands held in trust by the
United States, based on fire management plans approved by the
Indian landowner. Preparedness will be based on the most effi-
cient level of meeting tribal goals and objectives for the program,
using Indian resources, and a cooperative, interagency approach
to meeting local, regional, and national resource needs; addition-
ally, an effective fire prevention program focuses on human-
caused fires. Implementation of tribal management of the pro-
gram will be facilitated under Indian Self-Determination, as
250
Directory of Agencies and Organizations

requested by tribal government. Today BIA provides federal serv-
ices to approximately 1.5 million American Indians and Alaska
Natives who are members of more than 560 federally recognized
Indian tribes in the contiguous United States and in Alaska. The
past thirty years have seen the largest number of American Indian
and Alaskan Native people working for the BIA—constituting
about 90 percent of its 10,746 employees—more than at any other
time in the agency’s history (sources: http://www.bianifc.org/;
http://www.doiu.nbc.gov /orientation/bia2.cfm).
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
500 C Street SW
Washington, DC 20472
http://www.fema.gov
FEMA is a formerly independent agency that became part of the
new Department of Homeland Security in response to the 9–11
terrorist attacks. It is tasked with responding to, planning for, re-
covering from, and mitigating against disasters. FEMA can trace
its beginnings to the Congressional Act of 1803. That act, gener-
ally considered the first piece of disaster legislation, provided as-
sistance to a New Hampshire town following an extensive fire.
Since then the agency has undergone several reorganizations and
mission revisions, most recently with relation to the framing of
natural hazards and emergency management to encompass
homeland security issues. FEMA plays an instrumental role in
managing natural disasters, including wildfires, floods, torna-
does, earthquakes, and hurricanes. The U.S. Fire Administration,
within the Homeland Security Department and FEMA, maintains
a database of firefighter fatalities, including wildland but also
structural fire protection (source: http://www.fema.gov).
National Interagency Prescribed Fire Training Center
(NIPFTC)
3250 Capital Circle SW
Tallahassee, FL 32310
850–523–8630 or 866–840–3247 (toll free)
http://fire.r9.fws.gov/pftc
The mission of NIPFTC is to maintain a national interagency cen-
ter of excellence for prescribed fire, with an emphasis on actual
field experience. This center aims to increase skills and knowledge
Fire Policy and Administration
251

and to build confidence in the application of prescribed fire. Par-
ticipating trainees are able to advance careers while blending
field experience in prescribed burning with classroom instruc-
tion. NIPFTC coordinates prescribed fire training efforts with the
Southwest Fire Use Training Academy, based in Albuquerque,
New Mexico.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
Ariel Rios Building
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20460
202–272–0167
http://www.epa.gov/
Although the agency is not a formal fire management organi-
zation, the regulatory functions of EPA regarding clean air and
water play a significant role in determining the timing and ex-
tent of agency prescribed fires, largely through rules promul-
gated for enforcement by individual states. In particular, EPA
develops policies for implementing the current particulate mat-
ter standards related to national ambient air quality with re-
spect to prescribed fire and its impacts; wildfire emissions are
not regulated.
Government Accounting Office (GAO)
441 G Street NW, Room LM
Washington, DC 20548
202–512–6000
http://www.gao.gov/
With skyrocketing costs for wildfire management, the U.S. Con-
gress has taken an interest in agency plans for mitigating risks
and hazards through fuel treatments. The GAO is the audit, eval-
uation, and investigative arm of Congress. GAO exists to support
the Congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to
help improve the performance and ensure the accountability of
the U.S. federal government to the people. The GAO examines
the use of public funds, evaluates federal programs and activities,
and provides analyses, options, recommendations, and other as-
sistance to help the Congress make effective oversight, policy, and
funding decisions. In particular, two reports of interest are
GAO/RCED-99–65 Catastrophic Wildfire Threats (1999) and
GAO-03–805 Wildland Fire Fuels Reduction (2003).
252
Directory of Agencies and Organizations

State and Local Jurisdictions
State Forestry Agencies
In the United States, individual states have separate fire or-
ganizations that cooperate with federal, private, and local juris-
dictions. For example, all the Western states have active fire
management organizations, usually housed in respective state
forestry or related organizations. Although perhaps less visible
than federal agencies, the state organizations provide impor-
tant fire services to local jurisdictions, including private land-
owners. Some of the more active state agencies nationwide en-
gaged in wildland fire management activities include the
following:
Alaska Division of Forestry
State Forester’s Office
550 West 7th Avenue, Suite 1450
Anchorage, AK 99501
907–269–8474
Arizona State Land Department
2901 W. Pinnacle Peak Road
Phoenix, AZ 85027–1002
602–255–4059
California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection
P.O. Box 944246
1416 9th St., Rm. 1505
Sacramento, CA 94244–2460
916–653–7772
Colorado State Forest Service
Colorado State University
203 Forestry Building
Fort Collins, CO 80523–5060
970–491–6303
Florida Division of Forestry
3125 Conner Boulevard
Tallahassee, FL 32399–1650
850–488–4274
State and Local Jurisdictions
253

Kansas Forest Service
2610 Claflin Road
Manhattan, KS 66502–2798
785–552–3300
Maine Forest Service
22 State House Station
Harlow Building
Augusta, ME 04333
207–287–2791
Minnesota Division of Forestry
500 Lafayette Road
St. Paul, MN 55155–4044
651–296–5954
Mississippi Forestry Commission
301 N. Lamar St., Suite 300
Jackson, MS 39201
601–359–1386
Montana Department of Natural Resources and Conservation,
Forestry Division
2705 Spurgin Road
Missoula, MT 59804
406–542–4217
Nebraska Forest Service
Room 103, Plant Industry Bldg.
Lincoln, NE 68583–0815
402–472–2944
Nevada Division of Forestry
2525 S. Carson Street
Carson City, NV 89701
775–684–2512
New Mexico Forestry Division
P.O. Box 1948
Santa Fe, NM 87504–1948
505–476–3328
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation
625 Broadway
Albany, NY 12233–4250
518–402–9405
254
Directory of Agencies and Organizations

North Carolina Division of Forest Resources
1616 Mail Service Center
Raleigh, NC 27699
919–733–2162
Oklahoma Department of Agriculture—Forestry Services
P.O. Box 528804
Oklahoma City, OK 73152–3864
405–521–3864
Oregon Department of Forestry
2600 State Street
Salem, OR 97310
503–945–7211
Pennsylvania Bureau of Forestry
P.O. Box 8552
Harrisburg, PA 17105–8552
717–787–2703
South Carolina Forestry Commission
P.O. Box 21707
Columbia, SC 29221
803–896–8800
South Dakota Resource Conservation and Forestry
Foss Building
523 E. Capitol Avenue
Pierre, SD 57501
605–773–3623
Tennessee Department of Agriculture—Division of Forestry
P.O. Box 40627
Melrose Station
Nashville, TN 37204
615–837–5411
Texas Forest Service
301 Tarrow, Suite 364
College Station, TX 77840–7896
979–458–6600
Utah Department of Natural Resources
1594 W. North Temple, Suite 3520
Salt Lake City, UT 84114–5703
801–538–5530
State and Local Jurisdictions
255

Washington Department of Natural Resources
P.O. Box 47001
1111 Washington Street
Olympia, WA 98504–7001
360–902–1603
West Virginia Division of Forestry
1900 Kanawa Boulevard, East
P.O. Box 7921
Madison, WI 53707–7921
304–558–3446
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources—Division of
Natural Resources
P.O. Box 7921
Madison, WI 53707–7921
608–264–9224
Wyoming State Forestry Division
1100 West 22nd Street
Cheyenne, WY 82002
307–777–7586
Within states, local county and city jurisdictions may also support
active fire organizations—for example, Los Angeles County and
Los Angeles City fire departments in southern California. De-
pending on location, these local fire agencies may have firefight-
ing resources that in size and budget may rival or exceed their
federal partners. Also, in urban interface or rural areas, private
and volunteer fire departments often play a pivotal role in initial
attack operations. In fact, in some urban interface areas, volunteer
fire departments may arrive first at a fire, even before a public
agency with local jurisdiction. Volunteers may provide critical as-
sistance on large incidents given their knowledge of local weather
patterns and prevalent fuel characteristics. Private companies
may become even more important as governments cut back on
services in response to declining budgets.
National Association of State Foresters Washington Office
444 N. Capitol St, NW Suite 540
Washington, DC 20001
202–624–5415
http://www.stateforesters.org/
256
Directory of Agencies and Organizations

States are represented on the National Wildfire Coordinating
Group (NWCG) through affiliation with the National Association
of State Foresters (http://www.stateforesters.org/). The National
Association of State Foresters, the Forest Service, and the Ad
Council oversee the Smokey Bear program.
According to their website, the state foresters provide man-
agement assistance and protection services for more than two-
thirds of the nation’s forests, including assistance to nearly 10 mil-
lion nonindustrial private forest (NIPF) landowners who operate
under a wide variety of goals and circumstances. These private
forest lands provide more than 70 percent of the nation’s wood
supply, and contribute to many other public benefits such as
clean air, clean water, healthy wildlife habitat, and outdoor recre-
ation. In addition, state forestry agencies develop urban and com-
munity forestry programs as well as forest protection programs
(to deal with wildfires, destructive pests, and diseases).
Western Governors Association
1515 Cleveland Place
Suite 200
Denver, CO 80202–5114
303–623–9378
http://www.westgov.org/
The Western Governors Association (WGA) represents eighteen
Western states and three U.S. Flag Pacific islands on a variety of
issues, from energy policy to forest health. One Western governor
assumes leadership for a two-year term, with an executive direc-
tor based in Denver, Colorado.
Following the catastrophic wildfire season of 2000, Western
governors and the secretaries of the U.S. departments of Agricul-
ture and Interior agreed to form state, federal, and local teams to
develop solutions to recover forests devastated by that year’s
wildfires and to improve the overall health of forests to prevent
future fires.
Key points made by the governors were the following:
•
States should be fully represented in all prioritization,
implementation, and decision-making activities at the
national, state, and local levels.
•
All funds provided by the Congress should be made
available for expenditure across the landscape,
State and Local Jurisdictions
257

including federal and nonfederal ownerships for
highest priority projects.
•
After emergency response measures are underway,
work should begin on the collaborative development of
a ten-year state-federal plan for fuel reduction and
forest restoration on landscapes at risk from
catastrophic fire. 
Nongovernmental Organizations
To date, wildland fire has been dominated by government entities
such as those noted above, primarily because fire management
has traditionally been handled by public agencies. But times are
changing. Private sector interests in fire management grow con-
tinuously, especially with tighter budgets and personnel ceilings
restricting government growth—but also because so many fires
either start or spread onto private lands, requiring nongovern-
mental solutions. In addition, environmental interest groups con-
tinually press to make sure that their viewpoints are represented
in land management decisions. The largest interest group may be
the U.S. public, including people who are directly affected by
wildfires and management activities. All citizens foot the bills for
government fire and forest management programs. In return for
paying our taxes, we expect that government managers will use
the best available science and make wise decisions regarding our
valued forest resources.
Space does not permit a listing and description of all the
nongovernmental organizations involved in fire management.
Some of the most prominent nongovernmental participants in fire
management are noted in the following section, along with some
promising newcomers. Mention of private companies does not
imply endorsement of specific products.
Ambient Control Systems
1810 Gillespie Way, Suite 210
El Cajon, CA 92020–1094
877–840–5328
www.ambientalert.com
Ambient specializes in remote sensing technology solutions pow-
ered by light—that is, without batteries or AC power. Ambient’s
258
Directory of Agencies and Organizations

FireALERT will detect a wildfire ignition signature and communi-
cate the global positioning (GPS) coordinates to the control and
dispatch center, providing an early warning system. In the home-
owner model, in addition to detection and communication,
FireALERT can also activate a suppression system to coat a struc-
ture and its perimeter with a fire retardant for protection against
an oncoming wildfire. Ambient’s energy management technology
makes possible battery-free remote sensing, communications, and
activation systems that can operate for more than twenty years.
Astaris LLC
810 East Main Street
Ontario, CA 91761
909–983–0772/800–682–3626
http://www.astaris.com
Phos-Chek® brand fire retardants and foam suppressants are
used widely around the world by government agencies with
wildland fire management responsibilities. Since 1963, Astaris
LLC (formerly the chemical arm of Monsanto Company) has de-
veloped and supplied products, services, and equipment that in-
crease the firefighting efficiency of water. Recently Astaris has ex-
panded its product line to service municipal, rural, industrial,
and military firefighters.
Bombardier Aerospace
Amphibious Aircraft
P.O. Box 6087, Station Center-ville
Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3C 3G9
514–855–5000
http://www.canadair415.com
U.S. firefighting operations have been aided recently by interna-
tional assistance, including crews, overhead teams, and aircraft.
Part of this growing trend toward reliance on international re-
sources includes the use of Canadian amphibious aircraft that
can deliver foam and water payloads from lakes and seas to
knock down forest fire flames. Bombardier Aerospace’s specialty
aircraft (Canadair CL 215 and the larger Canadair CL 415) have
made inroads into the U.S. and European markets, especially
where fires burn forested areas close to large bodies of water.
Minnesota and North Carolina state agencies have acquired
these aircraft, while two Canadair 415 amphibians, owned by the
Nongovernmental Organizations
259

Province of Quebec, operate seasonally under a long-term lease
with Los Angeles County.
Erickson Air-Crane, Inc.
3100 Willow Springs Rd.
P.O. Box 3247
Central Point, OR 97502
541–664–7615
http://www.ericksonaircrane.com
Erickson Air-Crane specializes in heavy-lifting helicopters for use
in firefighting, logging, and precision placement of large con-
struction parts. Its S-64 Helitanker can carry a payload of 20,000
to 25,000 pounds (9,000 to 11,300 kg) and can scoop water from
lakes and make aerial drops of water or chemical-based retar-
dants. In addition, the corporation was a principal sponsor for the
3rd International Wildland Fire Conference and Exhibition, held
in October 2003 in Sydney, Australia.
Forest Service Employees for Environmental Ethics (FSEEE)
P.O. Box 11615
Eugene, OR 97440
541–484–2692
http://www.fseee.org/
FSEEE is a national organization aiming to hold the USDA Forest
Service accountable for responsible land stewardship, including
but not restricted to fire management practices on public lands.
Borrowing on ideas first conceptualized by Aldo Leopold, a pio-
neer in land conservation, FSEEE aims to forge a socially respon-
sible value system for the Forest Service based on a land ethic that
ensures ecologically and economically sustainable resource man-
agement. FSEEE is made up of thousands of concerned citizens;
present, former, and retired Forest Service employees; other gov-
ernment resource managers; and activists working to influence
the Forest Service’s basic land management philosophy.
International Association of Wildland Fire (IWAF)
4025 Fair Ridge Dr.
Fairfax, VA 22033
785–423–1818
The International Association of Wildland Fire (IAWF) is a non-
profit, professional association representing members of the
260
Directory of Agencies and Organizations

global wildland fire community. The purpose of this trade associ-
ation is to facilitate communication and provide leadership for
the wildland fire community. IAWF is involved regularly in con-
ferences and was a driving force for two publications still read
widely today: International Journal of Wildland Fire and Wildfire
magazine. The International Journal of Wildland Fire publishes orig-
inal research; Wildfire magazine publishes articles of interest to
field practitioners.
Keep Green Associations (Montana, Idaho, Oregon)
3802 Industrial Avenue
Coeur d’Alene, ID 83814
888–372–4042
http://www.keepidahogreen.org/
Keep Oregon Green
P.O. Box 12365
Salem, OR 97309–0365
503–945–7499
http://www.keeporegongreen.org/
Keep Montana Green Association
2705 Spurgin Road
Missoula, MT 59804–3199
406–542–4251
http://www.keepgreen.org/start.htm
Since the 1940s timber corporations in Idaho, Montana, and Ore-
gon have partnered with local, state, and federal agencies and pri-
vate citizens to prevent wildfires caused by human carelessness,
focusing on education programs aimed at adults and children.
The earliest association (Oregon Green Guard) was organized in
1940 with a membership of 5,000 youths, ages eight to sixteen
years. The Keep Montana Green Association was formed in 1945
and chartered as a tax-exempt nonprofit organization in 1961.
Keep Idaho Green started in 1946 to consolidate efforts of Jaycee
clubs, state and federal forestry agencies, and a variety of private
and public concerns. Each association has evolved uniquely,
sometimes forging alliances with organizations (such as Boy and
Girl Scouts, Junior Forest Rangers, and 4-H), or sponsoring dif-
ferent activities such as wildfire prevention poster competitions,
athletic tournaments, or sign paintings (for example, the world’s
largest sign on Lucky Peak Dam in Idaho).
Nongovernmental Organizations
261

National Fire Protection Association (NFPA)
1 Batterymarch Park
Quincy, MA 02169–7471
617–770–3000
http://www.nfpa.org/catalog/home/index.asp
The NFPA is a private company founded in 1896 whose mission
is to reduce the worldwide burden of fire and other hazards on
the quality of life by providing and advocating scientifically
based consensus codes and standards, research, training, and ed-
ucation. NFPA is concerned with reducing damage from both
wildfires and structural fires, and it is a principal sponsor of the
FIREWISE program and websites (along with USDA-Forest Ser-
vice, the Department of Interior, the National Association of State
Foresters, and the U.S. Fire Administration).
National Commission on Science for Sustainable Forestry
(NCSSF)
1707 H St, NW, Suite 200
Washington, DC 20006
202–207–0007
http://www.ncseonline.org/NCSSF/
NCSSF is a multisponsor commission convened by the National
Council for Science and the Environment (NCSE), a nonadvocacy
nonprofit organization committed to improving the scientific
basis for environmental decision-making. NCSSF’s mission is to
improve the scientific basis for the design, conduct, and evalua-
tion of sustainable forest practices in the United States, including
issues related to fires (wild and prescribed), forest health, and
biodiversity. NCSSF sponsors work of the highest technical qual-
ity (such as symposia and workshops) that is relevant to the ur-
gent needs of forest managers, practitioners, and policy-makers.
Sierra Club
National Headquarters
85 Second Street, 2nd Floor
San Francisco, CA 94105
415–977–5500
http://www.sierraclub.org/
The Sierra Club is one of the nation’s oldest conservation advo-
cacy groups, with roots stretching back to John Muir in 1892. Its
mission includes (1) exploration, enjoyment, and protection of
262
Directory of Agencies and Organizations

wild places on earth; (2) practice and promotion of responsible
use of earth’s ecosystems and resources; (3) education and enlist-
ment of human resources to protect and restore the quality of nat-
ural and human environments; and (4) use of all lawful means to
carry out club objectives. It is perhaps best known for its books
and calendars, Sierra magazine, and its legal filings in behalf of
environmental concerns, including nonrenewable energy sources,
farm pollution, and timber harvests on public lands.
Society of American Foresters
5400 Grosvenor Lane
Bethesda, MD 20814–2198
301–897–8720
301–897–3690 (Fax)
http://www.safnet.org
The Society of American Foresters (SAF) is the national scientific
and educational organization representing the forestry profession
in the United States. Founded in 1900 by Gifford Pinchot, it is the
largest professional society for foresters in the world. The mission
of the Society of American Foresters is to advance the science, ed-
ucation, technology, and practice of forestry; to enhance the com-
petency of its members; to establish professional excellence; and to
use the knowledge, skills, and conservation ethic of the profession
to ensure the continued health and use of forest ecosystems and
the present and future availability of forest resources to benefit so-
ciety. SAF is a nonprofit organization meeting the requirements of
501(c)(3). SAF members include natural resource professionals in
public and private settings, researchers, CEOs, administrators, ed-
ucators, and students (source: http://www.safnet.org).
Storm King Mountain Technologies
4725 Calle Alto
Camarillo, CA 93012
805–484–7267
http://www.stormkingmtn.com
Named after the mountain in Colorado where fourteen firefight-
ers died in 1994, Storm King Mountain™ Technologies provides
products using thermal insulating materials to protect firefighters
and fire equipment in a fast-moving flaming front. Founded by
Jim Roth, whose brother died in the 1994 burnover in Colorado,
the company aims to make the best protective equipment for
Nongovernmental Organizations
263

maximizing firefighter safety under circumstances in which train-
ing, tactics, and safety procedures might be insufficient to ensure
survival on a wildfire.
Tall Timbers Research Station
13093 Henry Beadel Drive
Tallahassee, FL 32312–0918
850–893–4153
http://www.talltimbers.org/
A privately funded organization devoted to fire, wildlife, and
conservation was the brainchild of Herbert Stoddard, a naturalist
in the 1920s who studied the decline of bobwhite quail popula-
tions in southern Georgia and northern Florida. Based in Talla-
hassee, Florida, the station became a reality in 1958 on land do-
nated by Henry Beadel, Tall Timbers Plantation owner. Originally
dedicated primarily to research on fire and bobwhite quail in the
Southeast, the research station rose to prominence with its annual
Tall Timbers Fire Ecology conference series—a good starting
point for budding fire ecologists to become familiar with the ex-
tant literature. The station’s fire ecology emphasis has broadened
considerably over the years to cover other fire regimes and geo-
graphic areas in North America, and an expanded set of activities
such as annual field days and a fire ecology database. Also, the
station has broadened its sponsorship of research topics to in-
clude other animal and plant species.
The Forest Trust
P.O. Box 519
Santa Fe, NM 87504
505–983–8992
http://www.theforesttrust.org/
The Forest Trust is dedicated to protecting the integrity of the for-
est ecosystem and improving the lives of people in rural commu-
nities. Founded in 1986, the trust attempts to represent a middle
ground between public forest management agencies, such as the
U.S. Forest Service, and environmental groups with preservation
or “hands-off” interests. The trust challenges conventional forest
management philosophies and provides resource protection
strategies to environmental organizations, rural communities,
and public agencies. The trust also provides land stewardship
264
Directory of Agencies and Organizations

services to owners of private forest and range lands of significant
conservation value.
The Nature Conservancy
4245 N. Fairfax Dr., Ste. 100
Arlington, VA 22203–1606
703–841–5300
800–628–6860
http://tnc.org
The Nature Conservancy’s (nonprofit) informal goal is to save the
last great natural places on earth. To that end, TNC has procured
more than 92 million acres (37 million hectares) around the world,
including 12 million acres (4.9 million ha) in the United States, for
purposes of preserving plant and animal habitat, using a system-
atic, science-based approach to identifying candidate sites for
protection—that is, its “Conservation by Design.” As a private,
not-for-profit company, TNC has flexibility to procure lands re-
gardless of the owner’s ideological beliefs. Two initiatives of note
include its Fire Management Initiative and Fire Learning Net-
work. The Fire Management Initiative (http://nature.org/
initiatives/fire/) strives to mitigate problems caused by disrup-
tion of natural fire cycles globally. The North American Fire
Learning Network (http://tnc-ecomanagement.org/Fire/) pro-
motes development and testing of adaptive, multiarea fire man-
agement strategies in four demonstration landscapes. A similar
network is developed for Latin America and the Caribbean.
The Wilderness Society
1615 M Street, NW
Washington, DC 20036
202–833–2300
http://www.wilderness.org
Founded in 1935, the Wilderness Society works to protect the
wilderness lands of the United States and to develop a nation-
wide network of wildlands, through public education, scientific
analysis, and advocacy. Staff members develop positions on a
wide variety of wildland issues, including wild and prescribed
fire on public lands (see, for example, Wilderness Society 2003).
Regional offices include Anchorage, Seattle, San Francisco,
Boise, Bozeman, Denver, Atlanta, and Boston.
Nongovernmental Organizations
265

Forest Fire Research and
Technology Centers
Fire research has played an important role in improving under-
standing of fire’s role in wildlands and improving agency fire
management capabilities. Long the domain of USDA Forest Ser-
vice Experiment stations, universities, and isolated national parks
with research staff, the quest for knowledge and understanding
has expanded significantly following recent disastrous wildfire
seasons (1994, 2000, 2002, and 2003). In particular, the Joint Fire
Science Program and National Fire Plan have sponsored dramatic
boosts in funding support for wildland fire research. In addition,
several federal technology and development centers routinely de-
velop products and provide services to the wildland fire manage-
ment community.
Experiment Stations and
Research Programs
USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain Research Station
Fire Sciences Laboratory
5775 W. Hwy. 10
Missoula, MT 59802
406–329–4866
http://www.firelab.org
The federal government maintains an active research program in
wildland fire sciences through its experiment stations (in particu-
lar, the Missoula, Pacific Northwest, and Riverside fire laborato-
ries). The Missoula Fire Sciences Laboratory in Missoula, Mon-
tana, has active projects in fire behavior, fire effects, and fire
chemistry. Facilities include combustion chambers and wind tun-
nels for conducting experimental fires.
USDA Forest Service Pacific Northwest Research Station
Pacific Wildland Fire Sciences Laboratory
3200 SW Jefferson Way
Corvallis, Oregon 97331
266
Directory of Agencies and Organizations

541–750–7265
http://www.fs.fed.us/pnw/fera/
In 2003, the Pacific Wildland Fire Sciences laboratory was reborn
from the previous Seattle Forestry Sciences Laboratory. Head-
quartered in Portland, Oregon, the new lab continues its long-
standing emphasis on the impacts of fire on air quality and visi-
bility, wildfire and ecology research, the effects of fire on air, the
impacts of smoke on human health, and social research (rural and
urban wildland interface).
USDA-Forest Service, Pacific Southwest Research Station
Riverside Forest Fire Laboratory
4955 Canyon Crest Drive
Riverside, California 92507
909–680–1500
http://www.rfl.psw.fs.fed.us/
The Riverside Fire Laboratory in southern California maintains
active research projects dealing with air pollution and climate
impacts on Western forest ecosystems, meteorology for fire
severity forecasting, wildland recreation and urban cultures, pre-
scribed fire and fire effects, and fire management in the wild-
land/urban interface. The facility has traditionally provided a
focal point for researching the role of fire, fire behavior, and fire
management (including economics) in southern California chap-
arral ecosystems.
USDA-Forest Service, Southern Research Station
P.O. Box 2680
Asheville, NC 28802
828–257–4832
http://www.srs.fs.usda.gov/
The world’s first laboratory devoted exclusively to the study of
forest fires was established in Macon, Georgia in 1958, in recogni-
tion of the South’s unique fire problems. The lab was a coopera-
tive venture between the USDA Forest Service and the Georgia
Forestry Commission, a unique example of state and federal col-
laboration. Although the original fire laboratory was later closed
for budgetary reasons, the research station remains active with
projects investigating prescribed fire, the urban-wildland inter-
face, and the economics of forest protection.
Experiment Stations and Research Programs
267

USGS National Center
12201 Sunrise Valley Drive
Reston, VA 20192
703–648–400
http://www.usgs.gov/themes/Wildfire/fire.html
The U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) conducts fire-related research
to meet the varied needs of the fire management community and
to understand the role of fire in the landscape. This research in-
cludes fire management support, studies of postfire effects, and a
wide range of studies on fire history and ecology. The USGS
maintains science centers and three regional office headquarters
(East, Central, and West) across the country.
Joint Fire Science Program
National Interagency Fire Center
3833 S. Development Ave.
Boise, ID 83705
208–387–5349
http://jfsp.nifc.gov/
The Joint Fire Science Research Program began after the 1994 fire
season review revealed the need for basic information on fuels
management that could be applied by field practitioners. The Na-
tional Fire Plan was developed in response to perceived priorities
in the areas of firefighting, rehabilitation, community assistance,
fuels reduction, and accountability, all of which surfaced after the
2000 fire season. Both programs involve cooperation between the
USDI, USDA, and the National Association of State Foresters to
fund important fire research projects.
Although managers and researchers may work for the same
or sibling government agencies, communication gaps often sepa-
rate different branches working toward the same end. For exam-
ple, the U.S. Forest Service employs both public land managers
(in the national forest system) and scientists (in research stations),
but those two branches may be separated by cultural and politi-
cal differences, lack of a common language or vocabulary, and ob-
stacles or barriers to the formation of effective partnerships. Pro-
grams such as the Joint Fire Science Program and National Fire
Plan attempt to bridge those gaps, especially by soliciting man-
ager feedback to establish research priorities; sometimes, how-
ever, they have limited effectiveness. One of the reasons for the
gap may be the large disparity in funding between fire manage-
268
Directory of Agencies and Organizations

ment and fire research (for example, USFS fire research was
funded at approximately 1.6 percent of expenditures for fire man-
agement during fiscal year 2002).
The Joint Fire Science Program was established in 1998 as a
partnership with six federal agencies to identify and encourage
new research projects to fill in the gaps in knowledge about wild-
land fire and fuels. In the 1998 appropriation, Congress and the
administration provided a more flexible funding authority to
support efforts (primarily fuel treatments), with the goals of re-
ducing the occurrence of uncharacteristically severe wildland
fires and improving ecosystem health. In granting that funding
authority, Congress expressed concern that “both the Forest Ser-
vice and the Department of Interior lack consistent and credible
information about the fuels management situation and workload,
including information on fuel loads, conditions, risk, flammabil-
ity potential, fire regimes, locations, effects on other resources,
and priorities for treatment in the context of values to be pro-
tected.” In response, the joint Fire Science Initiative identified
four principal purposes:
•
Fuels inventory and Mapping
•
Evaluation of Fuels Treatments
•
Scheduling of Fuels Treatments
•
Monitoring and Evaluation
Starting with $4 million annually to fund competitive re-
search proposals, the JFSP was expanded to $8 million annually
following the year 2000 fire season. More than two hundred re-
search projects have been funded since inception of the JFSP.
National Fire Plan
C/o USDA Forest Service
Auditor’s Building
201 14th Street, SW at Independence Ave., SW
Washington, DC 20250
http://www.fireplan.gov/
The U.S. Congress adopted the National Fire Plan following the
2000 wildfire season, to be implemented by the U.S. Forest Ser-
vice, Department of Interior, and their many cooperators. Em-
phasis areas include firefighting, rehabilitation and restoration,
hazardous fuels reduction, community assistance and research, as
well as improvements in accountability. Congress continues to
Experiment Stations and Research Programs
269

demonstrate support, as evidenced by funding provided for the
National Fire Plan in the FY2002 Interior and Related Agencies
Appropriations Act for fiscal year 2002. More than $2.26 billion is
allocated for National Fire Plan and base program funding. Allo-
cations include $1,590,712,000 for the Forest Service and
$678,421,000 for the Department of the Interior.
Technology and Development Centers
USDA Forest Service Missoula Technology and Development
Center (MTDC)
5785 Hwy 10 W
Missoula, MT 59808
406–329–3900
http://www.fs.fed.us/eng/techdev/mtdc.htm
The Missoula Technology and Development Center (MTDC)
began as the support facility for Forest Service fire management
in the late 1940s, when a small group started developing tech-
niques for parachuting men and cargo. In the early 1960s the cen-
ter’s role was expanded to a servicewide technical center with a
nationwide program that now encompasses all Forest Service
equipment needs. Today, MTDC works with federal and state
agencies, universities, private firms, and research groups to meet
its responsibilities to resource managers.
USDA Forest Service San Dimas Technology and
Development Center (SDTDC)
444 E. Bonita Ave.
San Dimas, CA 91773
909–599–1267
http://www.fs.fed.us/eng/techdev/sdtdc.htm
The San Dimas Technology and Development Center (SDTDC)
was established in 1945 (in Arcadia, California) to standardize fire
equipment and to address fire control requirements in the West.
The southern California location was selected because of the fire
activity in the area, its evolving industrial and academic centers,
and the availability of space in an existing Los Angeles County
Forest Service facility. In 1965 a new facility, thirteen miles east of
Arcadia, was designed and constructed to house the center, close
270
Directory of Agencies and Organizations

to the San Dimas Experimental Forest, a natural laboratory for
fire research on chaparral ecosystems.
USDA Forest Service Remote Sensing Application Center
(RSAC)
222 West 2300 South
Salt Lake City, UT 84119
801–975–3750
http://www.fs.fed.us/eng/rsac
http://fsweb.rsac.fs.fed.us
Remote sensing gathers data about an object or event (such as a
wildfire) from a distance—that is, airborne and satellite imagery.
RSAC is colocated in Salt Lake City, Utah, with the USDA Forest
Service Geospatial Service and Technology Center to provide na-
tional assistance to agency field units in applying the most ad-
vanced technology available toward monitoring and mapping of
natural resources.
Education and Training
High school graduates have several options for obtaining training
in wildfire management or fire science. The most direct option is
to apply for employment with a public agency and receive on-
the-job training. For some individuals, that path may fulfill career
aspirations for the short term but may fall short in terms of ad-
vancement possibilities over the course of a career. Higher edu-
cation may make more sense for those seeking the rewards of a
professional career in fire management, including more challeng-
ing work and a higher starting salary. Alternatively, some may
opt to attend institutions (including two-year colleges) that offer
fire science programs which focus on wildland fire as well as
structural fire protection, law enforcement, and emergency med-
ical technician training. Examples in Colorado include Aims, Au-
rora, Front Range, and Red Rocks community colleges.
The diversity of university programs that include the study
of forest fires mirrors the large variety of higher education insti-
tutions in the United States. Thus there are many ways for inter-
ested university students to broaden their understanding of fire
science. By and large, most of the accredited university forestry
programs (accredited, that is, by the Society of American
Foresters) include one or more courses dealing with fire ecology
Education and Training
271

or fire management—although many will immerse the study of
fire within team-taught, multidisciplinary courses. Only a hand-
ful of university programs may offer a specific set of fire courses,
and even fewer will offer a concentration or allow students to
specialize in fire studies.
Faculty members at many universities and colleges nation-
wide carry out active programs in wildland fire research, which
can be incorporated into courses that allow students to keep up
with the latest knowledge and enhance learning opportunities.
Thus, even if specific programs or courses are not offered in fire
science, a student may be able to study fire through independent
study with a faculty member who shares that interest. A list of
four-year and two-year instructional programs is available at
http://www.wildlandfire.com/docs/firesci_edu.htm. Below is a
sampling of universities and colleges with forestry programs in
the western United States where students may learn about wild-
land fire science:
California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo
College of Agriculture
San Luis Obispo CA 93407
805–756–2968
http://www.calpoly.edu/
Cal Poly offers an undergraduate student major in forestry and
natural resources that includes emphasis areas in watershed,
chaparral, and fire management, and fire and fuels management,
along with several other study options. A master’s degree in a re-
lated field can be earned through the College of Agriculture.
Colorado State University
College of Natural Resources
Fort Collins, CO 80523
970–491–6675
http://www.cnr.colostate.edu
Colorado State University offers a forest fire science concentra-
tion under the undergraduate forestry major. Other undergradu-
ate options within the forestry major include forest management,
forest biology, and forestry business. Students majoring in the less
structured natural resource management degree may take fire
courses as electives. Graduate degrees include the master of
forestry (M.F.), M.S., and Ph.D. in forest fire science.
272
Directory of Agencies and Organizations

Humboldt State University
Department of Forestry and Watershed Management
1 Harpst Street
Arcata, CA 95521–8299
707- 826–3935
http://www.humboldt.edu/~for/index.shtml
One of the most recent additions to wildland fire science instruc-
tional programs is at Humboldt State University. Undergraduates
earn the forestry degree, in preparation for a professional career.
Graduate students can earn the master’s in Natural Resources.
Northern Arizona University
School of Forestry
P.O. Box 15018
110 E Pine Knoll Drive
Flagstaff, AZ 86011–5018
928–523–3031
http://www.for.nau.edu/
NAU offers a unique program in forestry that involves a holistic
approach to the environment in the junior and senior years,
rather than specialty courses. Graduate degrees include a master
of science in forestry (M.S.F.) and Ph.D. in forest science.
Oklahoma State University
College of Agricultural Sciences and Natural Resources
Stillwater, OK 74078
405–744–5000
http://dasnr.okstate.edu/casnr/NewCASNR/home.htm
Four undergraduate degree options are offered: forest manage-
ment, natural resources conservation and management, forest
ecosystem science, and urban and community forestry. For grad-
uate students interested in advanced fire or forestry studies, the
university offers a master’s degree in forest resources (or envi-
ronmental sciences) and Ph.D. (environmental sciences or plant
sciences).
Oregon State University
College of Forestry
Corvallis, OR 97331
541–737–2004
http://www.cof.orst.edu/
Education and Training
273

The College of Forestry at Oregon State offers several undergrad-
uate degrees including forest management and natural resources.
Graduate programs leading to the master of forestry (M.F.), mas-
ter of science (M.S.), or Ph.D. degrees are offered in four depart-
ments of the College of Forestry.
University of California (Berkeley)
College of Natural Resources
Department of Environmental Sciences, Policy, and Management
145 Mulford Hall # 3114
Berkeley, CA 94720–3114
510–642–6410
http://espm.berkeley.edu/
The Department of Environmental Sciences, Policy and Manage-
ment offers undergraduate degrees in forestry, conservation and
resource studies, and resource management. Ph.D. and master’s
degrees in environmental science, policy, and management; the
M.F. in forestry; and the M.S. in range management are available.
University of Idaho
College of Natural Resources
Moscow, ID 83844
208–835–2397
http://www.cnr.uidaho.edu/forres/
The Department of Forest Resources offers programs leading to
the following degrees: bachelor of science in forest resources,
with options in administration, forest ecosystem management,
and science; bachelor of science in natural resources ecology and
conservation; master of science (thesis and nonthesis options);
and Ph.D. with a major in natural resources (administered at the
college level for all departments).
The University of Montana
College of Forestry and Conservation
Missoula, MT 59812
406–243–5521
http://www.forestry.umt.edu/academics/default.htm
The College of Forestry and Conservation offers undergraduate
degrees in forest resources and resource conservation, among
others. Graduate degrees include the master of science and Ph.D.
in forest science.
274
Directory of Agencies and Organizations

University of Washington
College of Forest Resources
Box 352100
Seattle, WA 98195–2100
206–543–2730
http://www.forestry.umt.edu/academics/default.htm
The College of Forest Resources offers undergraduate degree pro-
grams in forest management and conservation of wildland re-
sources. Graduate degree programs include the master of forest
resources, master of science, and Ph.D.
Utah State University
College of Natural Resources
5200 Old Main Hill, Logan UT 84322
435–797–2445
http://www.cnr.usu.edu/frws
The Department of Forest, Range, and Wildlife Resources offers
undergraduate degrees in forestry, and M.S. and Ph.D. degrees.
Community College Programs
The above list focuses on four-year university resident instruction
programs, although universities are increasingly making use of
web-based instruction and may offer distance-learning options as
well. Other options for obtaining applicable knowledge and skills
include community colleges, agency training institutes, and pri-
vate organizations.
Many community colleges across the United States offer as-
sociates degrees or certification programs in fire science, includ-
ing wildland and structural fire protection programs, also linked
to fields such as hazardous materials management, law enforce-
ment or emergency medical technician or paramedical training.
The list of available options is constantly changing, but it may be
accessed at http://www.wildlandfire.com/docs/firesci_edu
.htm. Specific details are available at each community college, but
a sampling of just a few offerings is provided below. Your local
community college can be contacted to provide information on
specific opportunities.
Community College Programs
275

Aims Community College
Fire Science Technology
Trades and Industry Building, Room 105
5401 W. 20th Street
P.O. Box 69
Greeley, CO 80632
970–330–8008, Ext. 6485
http://www.aims.edu/academics/fire_science/index.htm
Casper College
125 College Drive
Casper, WY 82601
307–268–2110
1–800–442–2963
http://www.caspercollege.edu/trades/fire/ 
Lassen Community College
Fire Science
P.O. Box 3000
Susanville, CA 96130
530–257–6181
http://www.lassencollege.edu/coursesfirescience.html
Red Rocks Community College
Fire Science Technology
13300 West Sixth Ave
Lakewood, CO 80228–1255
303–914–6600
http://www.rrcc.cccoes.edu/fire/FireAcademyp.htm
Sierra College
Fire Technology Vocational Education
5000 Rocklin Rd
Rocklin, CA 95677
916–624–3333
http://www.sierracollege.edu/ed_programs/voc_edu/firetech.
html
Utah Valley State College
Utah Fire and Rescue Academy
800 West University Parkway
Orem, UT 84058
801–863-INFO
http://www.uvsc.edu/ufra/training.html
276
Directory of Agencies and Organizations

Training/Education Opportunities 
Government employees generally seek advanced training to stay
abreast with the latest developments in fire management as well
as to obtain certification to perform certain tasks within the fire
management organization. Some agencies track fire qualifications
to make sure that employees stay current and are able to perform
tasks with required levels of competency. In other agencies, em-
ployees may keep a “task book” that identifies training needs req-
uisite to performing future tasks on the job. Some of these train-
ing needs can be met by courses offered at colleges and
universities, although most academic institutions are not in a po-
sition to offer the knowledge and skills necessary to manage, for
example, a large fire organization.
Fire-related knowledge and skills can be obtained from
agency “wildfire training institutes,” or sometimes from formal
apprenticeship opportunities offered in some states. For example,
Colorado offers an annual wildfire training institute in which par-
ticipants can sign up for a variety of courses, from the most ele-
mentary “S190: Basic Firefighter” course to fire engine pump op-
eration or incident command system. Larimer County in
Colorado offers the “basic firefighter” course as part of its annual
recruitment of personnel for its stand-by firefighting crews. Cali-
fornia is developing a Fire Studies Institute, to be offered at a for-
mer military base that has been renovated to provide advanced
fire study opportunities.
Washington Institute, Inc.
P.O. Box 1108
Duvall, WA 98109
425–788–5161
http://www.washingtoninstitute.net/
Rather than providing training for specific job assignments, the
mission of the Washington Institute (WI) is to provide an edu-
cational enhancement experience to midcareer fire and fuels
managers with public agencies. In cooperation with Colorado
State University, WI offers the highly regarded Technical Fire
Management (TFM) series of instructional modules for practi-
tioners. TFM has been offered for three decades, beginning in
1981, providing managers and technicians from federal and
Training/Education Opportunities
277

state agencies nationwide with knowledge and tools to apply
the most current fire-related technology to the management of
different fire regimes. The modules include (1) Math fundamen-
tals; (2) Statistics; (3) Economics; (4) Fuels Management; (5) Fire
Effects; (6) Fire and Land Management; and (7) TFM project. The
final project allows participants to apply concepts from all of
the previous instructional modules to the solution of a manage-
ment problem on their home unit. Periodically WI also offers
stand-alone educational offerings in fuels management and fire
ecology.
National Advanced Fire and Resource Institute
3265 East Universal Way
Tucson, AZ 85706
520–779–8787
http://www.nafri.gov/
Formal courses are offered for higher-level fire management deci-
sion-makers who work on extremely complex incidents. Although
these training opportunities may not be open to the general pub-
lic, a quick scan of the courses offered may be instructive because
the listing indicates some of the skills and aptitudes required to do
various jobs within the fire management organization. For exam-
ple, the National Advanced Fire and Resource Institute (NAFRI)
in Tucson, Arizona, offers courses in the following subject areas
(source: http://nartc.net/2002/index.htm):
ARAU Aerial Retardant Application and Use: Designed
primarily for incident personnel on the ground, who are
making the aerial retardant application decisions and
managing the results. Safe, efficient, and cost-effective use
of aerial retardants is stressed.
L-480/L580 Interagency Management Team Leadership: (In
development)
D-510 Supervisory Dispatcher: Designed to train individuals
in the function and responsibilities of a supervisory
dispatcher within an incident support organization. The
course will provide trainees with a working knowledge of
the necessary management skills and operational
procedures to perform the job successfully.
278
Directory of Agencies and Organizations

M-580 Fire in Ecosystem Management: This course (1)
provides a conceptual framework for understanding
ecosystem management; (2) explores the role of fire and
fire management; (3) examines social, political, legal,
economic, and environmental factors; (4) presents real-
world examples of fire management applications; (5)
presents the perspective of land managers on ecosystem
management and the participant roles; and (6) provides
participants with the tools, ideas, concepts, techniques, and
methodologies for addressing fire and ecosystem
management issues at their home unit.
FML Fire Management Leadership: A comprehensive look at
the agency administrator’s leadership role within the fire
management program, including the new Federal
Wildland Fire Management Policy. The complex fire
situation is highlighted with the intent to provide a
comprehensive understanding of processes necessary to
effectively manage the situation. Included are the agency
administrator’s briefing, wildland fire situation analysis,
risk and cost analysis, and other critical items. Policy,
authority, and responsibility are clarified, discussed, and
reinforced using case examples.
NAFA National Aerial Firefighting Academy: The National
Aerial Fire Fighting Academy (NAFA) is a training effort
by and for personnel directly involved in aerial retardant
delivery.
Advanced National Fire Danger Rating System: This advanced
course focuses on the role of fire danger rating in resource
decision-making, through development of a fire danger
rating operating plan. It provides skills for analyzing and
troubleshooting fire danger rating from multiple scales. It
also provides individuals with the technical skills to serve
as instructors for regional courses for all wildland fire
agencies using NFDRS.
NFMAS National Fire Management Analysis System: Links
resource management and budget actions and fire
management analytical techniques, describing how the
analytical process works and how to use its outputs. An
Training/Education Opportunities
279

overview of the National Fire Management Analysis is
covered, along with a review of programs available, the
data needed, the analysis process, links with fire planning,
unit resource planning, and budgeting.
Rx540 Applied Fire Effects: A science-based course designed
to support the integration of fire effects knowledge into a
wildland fire use program. Emphasizes the importance of
fire effects in the design, implementation, and monitoring
of fire treatments over multiple spatial and temporal
scales. Recognizes that planning and implementing fire use
are interdependent activities, and provides opportunities
for burn boss and planner to work together.
S-520 Advanced Incident Management: Using classroom
lecture and simulated incidents, the student will understand
the role and function of a Type I Incident Management
Team, the applicability of management principles to the
incident management job, and the special considerations of
incident management within geographic areas of the nation.
S-580 Advanced Fire Use Applications: Provides participants
with an understanding of the implementation process for
appropriate management response to accomplishing
resource benefits over a wide range of management
situations.
S-590 Advanced Fire Behavior Interpretation: Through the use
of lecture, demonstrations, and exercises, the students will
learn the job of the fire behavior analyst. Units covered
include Fire Behavior Documentation Package, Legal
Considerations, Safety, Briefings, Forecasts, Decision
Support, Plan Development, and Fire Operations.
Knowledge gained includes organizational,
communication, and computer skills.
S-620 Area Command: Using classroom lecture and
simulated incidents, the student will understand principles
and concepts of Area Command and other incident
organizations, agencies, and political entities.
SLAM Senior Level Aviation Management: Provides senior
managers that direct or support natural resource programs
with an overview of successful aviation program
characteristics, with an emphasis on laws, regulations, and
280
Directory of Agencies and Organizations

policies governing public and civil aviation operations.
Concepts, philosophies, and theories of safety management
and the leadership role in policy implementation are also
addressed.
M-581 Fire Program Management: This course is designed to
provide participants with the ability to apply fire
management principles in assuming the duties and
responsibilities of fire program management using sound
decision-making, personal accountability, identifying
reference resources, and applying state-of-the-art tools and
methods.
Global Agencies
Forest and grassland fire effects extend to continental and inter-
continental scales, as for example when smoke plumes from large
wildfires contribute to reduced visibility and haze throughout a
global region, as experienced in southeast Asia during 1997–1998
and the Russian Federation in 1998 and 2002. In addition, nations
may call on one another for assistance when large, complex fires
exceed the management capabilities of a single government. In
fact, as of October 2003, twenty-one different forest fire alerts had
been issued during the year by the Food and Agriculture Organi-
zation (FAO) of the United Nations, indicating threats to people
and property with serious land degradation and food security.
The twenty-one national fire alerts covered fire situations on
every continent except Antarctica, including seven alerts in Eu-
rope, five in North America, four in Asia, three in South America,
and one each in Africa and Australia.
The level of international cooperation in managing wildland
fires is in its infancy, though it is growing through the efforts of
organizations such as the UN. In fact the first inventory of fire ac-
tivity worldwide, including savanna and agriculture burning,
was only recently completed (FAO 2001). Major conclusions from
the assessment included the following:
•
Drought years in the 1990s caused widespread burning
in tropical rain forests with significant impacts on
natural resources, public health, transportation,
navigation, and air quality.
Global Agencies
281

•
Many countries and regions have well-developed
systems for documenting, reporting, and evaluating
wildfire statistics in a systematic manner, but they may
lack information on the effects of these fires. Many
other countries do not yet have such a system, largely
because of more pressing social issues. Satellite systems
have been used effectively to map active fires and
burned areas, especially in remote areas where other
damage assessment capabilities are not available.
•
Even those countries supporting highly financed fire
management organizations are not exempt from the
ravages of wildfires in drought years. When wildland
fuels have accumulated to high levels, no amount of
firefighting resources can make much of a difference
until the weather moderates (as observed in the United
States in the 2000 fire season).
•
Uncontrolled use of fire for forest conversion,
agricultural, and pastoral purposes continues to cause a
serious loss of forest resources, especially in tropical
areas. Some countries are beginning to realize that
intersectoral coordination of land use policies and
practices is an essential element in reducing wildfire
losses. There were numerous examples in the 1990s of
unprecedented levels of intersectoral and international
cooperation in helping to lessen the impact of wildfires
on people, property, and natural resources.
•
Examples exist in which sustainable land use practices
and the participation of local communities in integrated
forest fire management systems are being employed to
reduce resource losses from wildfires.
•
In some countries, volunteer rural fire brigades are
successful in responding quickly and efficiently to
wildfires within their home range, and residents are
taking more responsibility to ensure that homes will
survive wildfires.
•
Although prescribed burning is being used in many
countries to reduce wildfire hazards and achieve
resource benefits, other countries have prohibitions
against the use of prescribed fire.
•
Fire ecology principles and fire regime classification
systems are being used effectively as an integral part of
resource management and fire management planning.
282
Directory of Agencies and Organizations

•
Fire research scientists have been conducting
cooperative research projects on a global scale to
improve understanding of fire behavior, fire effects, fire
emissions, climate change, and public health.
•
Institutions like the Global Fire Monitoring Center
have been instrumental in bringing the world’s fire
situation to the attention of a global audience via the
Internet (source: International Wildland Fire Summit
2003).
A global framework has been adopted for developing re-
gional networks to link managers, policy-makers, technical ex-
perts, and scientists for purposes of early warning, fire monitor-
ing and impact assessment, and other cooperative efforts (Mutch
2003). The extent to which regional networks have been imple-
mented varies, but each has unique fire problems and infrastruc-
ture for attempting solutions. Regional Wildland Fire Networks
(facilitated through the United Nations), after Mutch (ibid.), in-
clude the following:
•
South East Asia (ASEAN)
•
Australasia
•
Baltic
•
Central Asia
•
Mediterranean
•
Balkan
•
Sub-Saharan Africa
•
North America
•
Meso-America
•
South America
In principle, the vision of global or regional cooperation makes
good sense, inasmuch as fire effects can transcend national bound-
aries, as for example between the United States and Canada. This
recognition gave rise to the first International Wildland Fire Sum-
mit held in Sydney in 2003 and attended by representatives from
thirty-four countries and ten international organizations. In reality,
global cooperation within and among networks and nations will
require many years to implement because of cultural and structural
differences between nations, even within the same global region.
Even so, examples of international cooperation in fire management
have been in existence for some time and appear to be on the
Global Agencies
283

increase. For example, the Fire Management Working Group of the
North American Forestry Commission was established in 1962 and
has allowed exchange of firefighting resources, knowledge, and
technology among Canada, the United States, and Mexico. Similar
exchanges have been arranged between Australia and the United
States and throughout Australasia (ibid.).
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
(FAO)
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy
+39 06 5705 1
http://www.fao.org/
FAO supports international cooperation related to large wildfire
incidents that threaten life and property. Alerts are issued to in-
form the international community about significant fire events
occurring worldwide with summary reports and links to satellite
imagery via the Global Fire Monitoring Center (http://www
.fire.uni-freiburg.de/).
The International Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO)
International Organizations Center, 5th Floor, Pacifico-Yokohama
1–1–1 Minato-Mirai, Nishi-ku
Yokohama, 220–0012 Japan
81–45–223–1110
http://www.itto.or.jp
ITTO brings together fifty-seven member states, including thirty-
one from the tropics, to cooperate on forestry and fire problems.
For example, the 1997–1998 fires in Borneo and Sumatra that
burned 5 million hectares mobilized ITTO missions to Indonesia
and Malaysia. Other efforts have focused on fire problems in
Ghana and Côte d’Ivoire.
ATSR World Fire Atlas
European Space Agency—ESA/ESRIN
via Galileo Galilei, CP 64,
00044 Frascati, Italy.
http://shark1.esrin.esa.it/ionia/FIRE/AF/ATSR/
Maps showing monthly areas burned globally since 1995 are
being compiled experimentally, of special interest to researchers
interested in the possible impacts of biomass burning on atmos-
pheric processes, chemistry, or other coarse-scale assessments.
284
Directory of Agencies and Organizations

Agencies and Organizations
around the World
This chapter concludes with a few examples of agencies and or-
ganizations with fire-related interests in various parts of the
globe, with focus on areas with fire problems similar to those of
the United States. In reality, each country on the globe confronts
a unique set of fires, fire problems, and attempted solutions. The
agencies indicated below represent just a sampling of the myriad
organizations attempting to cope with fire globally.
Australia
Bushfire Cooperative Research Centre (CRC)
Chief Executive Officer, Bushfire CRC
5th Floor, 340 Albert St.
East Melbourne, Victoria, AUSTRALIA 3002
61–3–9412 9600
http://www.bushfirecrc.com
The Bushfire CRC was formed in 2003 following the disastrous
fires in eastern Australia in 2001–2002. The organization aims to
better manage bushfire risk in Australia, relying on a multidisci-
plinary collaboration among expert fire authorities from Aus-
tralia and New Zealand, the Commonwealth Scientific and In-
dustrial Research Organization (CSIRO) of Australia, universities,
the Commonwealth Bureau of Meteorology, and others—some
thirty partners in all.
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research
Organization (CSIRO)
CSIRO Forestry and Forest Products
P.O. Box E4008
Kingston ACT 2604
02 6281 8341
http://www.ffp.csiro.au/fap/fire.html
The Forestry and Forest Products Division at CSIRO carries out
fire behavior and management research in Australia. CSIRO is a
large, multidisciplinary, and diverse research organization de-
voted to developing innovative solutions to problems of industry,
Agencies and Organizations around the World
285

society, and the environment in Australia and on the globe. The
efforts of the fire behavior and management team are aimed at
reducing loss of life and property during bushfires through a bet-
ter understanding of how bushfires spread and react to changes
in the environment, with special focus on fire behavior in dry-
eucalypt forests. CSIRO publishes The International Journal of
Wildland Fire.
Fire Protection Association Australia (FPA Australia)
FPA Australia National Office
13 Ellingworth Parade, Box Hill, Victoria (Australia)
P.O. Box 1049, Box Hill, VIC, 3128, Australia
+61 (0)3 9890–1544
http://www.fpaa.com.au/
Fire Protection Association Australia is the country’s largest or-
ganization (with 1,600 members) seeking to promote fire aware-
ness and efforts of the fire protection industry. Aims are met
through publications, conferences, exhibitions, seminars, work-
shops, sales of promotional materials, and coordination of Fire
Awareness Week between states, among other activities.
New South Wales Rural Fire Service (RFS)
Unit 3, 175–179 James Ruse Drive, Rosehill
Locked Mail Bag 17
Granville, NSW 2142 Australia
02–9684–4411
http://www.rfs.nsw.gov.au
The New South Wales Rural Fire Service comprises about 2,200
rural fire brigades with almost 70,000 volunteer firefighters; it is
responsible for fire management over approximately 95 percent
of the area of New South Wales, Australia. The RFS is the world’s
largest fire service, protecting some of the most fire-prone areas
on the planet while providing services in fire control, operations,
strategic development, and risk management.
Nature Conservation Council of New South Wales
Bush Fire Management Program
Level 5, 362 Kent Street, Sydney NSW 2000
02 9279 2120 Fax: 02 9279 2499
http://www.nccnsw.org.au/bushfire/
286
Directory of Agencies and Organizations

The Bushfire Program carries out management programs aimed
at sustaining natural resources and protection of life and prop-
erty, within the auspices of the Nature Conservation Council
(NCC) of New South Wales. Since its inception, the NCC has held
conferences, seminars, and workshops and produced a number of
publications such as newsletters, proceedings, and guidelines to
communicate with the public.
Canada
Canadian Forest Service
Pacific Forestry Centre
506 West Burnside Road
Victoria, British Columbia
V8Z 1M5 CANADA
250–363–0600
http://www.pfc.cfs.nrcan.gc.ca/fires/
Northern Forestry Centre
5320—122nd Street
Edmonton, Alberta
T6H 3S5 CANADA
780–435–7210
780–435–7359 (Fax)
http://nofc.cfs.nrcan.gc.ca/index_e.html
Great Lakes Forestry Centre
1219 Queen Street East
Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario
P6A 2E5 CANADA
705–949–9461
http://www.glfc.cfs.nrcan.gc.ca/index_e.html
The Canadian Forest Service promotes the sustainable develop-
ment of Canada’s forests and the competitiveness of the Cana-
dian forest sector. Fire research is carried out at several centers
within CFS, including the Pacific Forestry Centre (British Colum-
bia), Northern Forestry Center (Alberta), and Great Lakes
Forestry Center in Ontario (source: http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/
cfs-scf /science/resrch/forestfire_e.html). The Northern Forestry
Center (NOFC) has spearheaded the International Crown Fire
Agencies and Organizations around the World
287

Experiment, one of the most important examples of interdiscipli-
nary forest fire research in recent times. NOFC also oversees the
Wildland Fire Information Centre (http://cwfis.cfs.nrcan.gc.ca
/en/index_e.php), which provides users with access to The
Canadian Wildland Fire Information System (CWFIS), a com-
puter-based system that monitors fire danger conditions across
Canada.
Parks Canada National Office
25 Eddy Street
Hull, Quebec
Canada
K1A 0M5
888–773–8888
http://www.pc.gc.ca/progs/np-pn/ecosystem/ecosystem5_E.asp
Just as in other countries of the world, fires play an important
role in the national parks of Canada. National parks are located
on the Atlantic, Pacific, and Arctic coasts, and across the interior
mountains, plains, and Great Lakes, reaching as far north and
south as Canada extends. They range in size from just under 9
square kilometers (St. Lawrence Islands National Park of
Canada) to almost 45,000 square kilometers (Wood Buffalo Na-
tional Park of Canada). And they include world-renowned
names such as Banff and Jasper, as well as the more recently es-
tablished Ivvavik and Vuntut.
Canadian Interagency Forest Fire Centre
210–301 Weston Street
Winnipeg MB Canada
R3E 3H4
204–784–2030
http://www.ciffc.ca/
The Canadian Interagency Forest Fire Centre (CIFFC) provides
operational fire-control services, as well as management and in-
formation services to its member agencies. In addition to coordi-
nating services for all of the provinces and territories, CIFFC
often coordinates the sharing of resources with the United States
and other countries.
288
Directory of Agencies and Organizations

New Zealand
Forest Research
Sala Street
Private Bag 3020
Rotorua
New Zealand
+64 7 343 5899
http://www.forestresearch.co.nz/fire
(Other offices in Christchurch and in Australia)
Every year in New Zealand, approximately 2,000 wildfires burn
through some 7,000 hectares of rural lands. Predicting where
wildfires are most likely to break out, what fuels them and helps
them burn, and how rural fire managers can be best prepared to
fight them is the aim of the Forest and Rural Fire Research pro-
gram. The program has two broad objectives: (1) To reduce the
number and consequences of wildfires; and (2) To promote the ef-
fective use of fire as a management tool.
Europe
ISDR Interagency Task Force Working Group on Wildland
Fire
Global Fire Monitoring Center (GFMC)
Fire Ecology Research Group
Max Planck Institute for Chemistry
C/o Freiburg University
79085 Freiburg, Germany
49–761–808011
http://www.fire.uni-freiburg.de/
Although Europe’s fire problems are generally concentrated in
the Mediterranean region (that is, Spain, Portugal, France, Italy,
and Greece), much of the interest in transnational fire concerns
has been stimulated through efforts of the Global Fire Monitor-
ing Center, based in Freiburg, Germany. The GFMC has been a
focal point and clearinghouse for global fire information as part
of the UN’s International Strategy for Disaster Reduction
(ISDR). The GFMC maintains active links to fire programs
within the European Commission as well as to the rest of the
global fire community.
Agencies and Organizations around the World
289

Literature Cited
FAO. 2001. “FRA Global Forest Fire Assessment 1990–2000.” Forest Re-
source Assessment Programme, Working Paper 55, pp. 189–191. Rome:
FAO, 495 p.
International Wildland Fire Summit. 2003. “An Overview of Vegetation
Fires Globally.” Background paper (http://www.fire.uni-freiburg.de/
summit–2003/Summit%20Background%20Paper%20Global%20Situa-
tion.pdf).
Mutch, R. W. 2003. “Key for Successful International Cooperation: A
Dream, a Team, and a Theme.” In Proceedings of the 3rd International Wild-
land Fire Conference and Exhibition, October 3–6, 2003, Sydney, Australia.
CD published by 3rd International Wildland Conference and Exhibition.
Wilderness Society. 2003. “Restoring Balance to Wildland Fire Policy.” A
Backgrounder Pamphlet from The Wilderness Society. Washington, DC:
The Wilderness Society. 10 p.
290
Directory of Agencies and Organizations

7
Print and Nonprint
Resources
I
nterest in wildland fire science and management has expanded
tremendously in recent years, perhaps reflecting high-profile
wildfires, increased coverage in the news media, and growth of
the worldwide web, among other causes. Numerous print and
nonprint resources are now available, covering the gamut from
scientific books and journal articles, to informal “war” story arti-
cles that glorify firefighting, to fire photos and interactive educa-
tional tools and games. The drama of firefighters and their
personal lives provide good subject matter for novels and movies
as well. In this chapter we examine the major information
resources available for interested students, lay publics, and fire
groupies. I have tried to capture the highlights that might be most
useful for writing reports or getting a quick overview from
resources available on the web.
Print Resources
Print resources include books, peer-reviewed scientific journals,
theses/dissertations, government documents (including confer-
ence proceedings), and popular magazines and mass media
sources. Newspapers often cover major fire events with technical
articles on fire equipment, firefighting, or human-interest pieces.
Scientific journal articles report results from original research,
where new knowledge is generated or synthesized about subjects
291

as diverse as fire ecology, fire effects on organisms, fire behavior,
fuels management, air tanker payload deliveries, or fire econom-
ics, to name just a few. Scientific studies generally include syn-
thesis of existing or antecedent studies, objectives, description of
methods used, results, discussion, and conclusions, followed by
literature citations. Data and information from peer-reviewed
journals are most reliable in terms of scientific accuracy, having
been conducted with the scientific method and subjected to
anonymous review by subject matter experts. Theses and disser-
tations developed by graduate students supervised by faculty ad-
visers at colleges and universities also provide results from origi-
nal research. However, much of the information of interest to lay
publics may not be addressed in the scientific literature, which to
the uninitiated may appear laden with technical detail and unfa-
miliar nomenclature. Conversely, sometimes the popular litera-
ture must be filtered for bias and unsubstantiated claims.
Books
For an excellent introduction to the study of fire, Steve Pyne’s
classic Fire in America is a logical starting point. He provides a his-
torical primer on the evolution of thought and action regarding
wildland fire, while chronicling important events, personalities,
and institutions that have influenced fire attitudes, including pre-
settlement use of fire by Native Americans. This book established
Steve as a premier writer on U.S. fire policy and management.
Pyne, S. J. 1982. Fire in America: A Cultural History of Wildland
and Rural Fire. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 654 p.; pa-
perback edition, University of Washington Press, 1997.
For a narrower focus on fire, particularly on wildland firefighting,
Norman Maclean’s “Young Men and Fire” provides insight into
life and death struggles of the smokejumpers who battled the
1949 Mann Gulch fire in Montana. Maclean explores the motiva-
tions of people who choose to jump out of perfectly good air-
planes as a vocation or avocation, but also provides perspective
on the U.S. Forest Service as a public agency that manages fire as
part of its overall mission. This book (also available on audio
tape) was completed posthumously by Maclean’s son, John. John
Maclean later explored the circumstances surrounding the deaths
of fourteen firefighters on the South Canyon fire near Glenwood
292
Print and Nonprint Resources

Springs, Colorado, during 1994. Both books illustrate how indi-
vidual wildfires present interesting case studies, without the tech-
nical details of more formal investigations.
Maclean, N. 1992. Young Men and Fire. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 301 p.
Maclean, J. N. 1999. Fire on the Mountain: The True Story of the
South Canyon Fire. New York: William Morrow, 275 p.
Numerous textbooks have been written on the subjects of fire
management and fire ecology. Most are quite technical and aimed
primarily at university students or practicing professionals.
Fuller’s paperback is the least technical and most easily under-
stood by lay readers.
Fuller, M. 1991. Forest fires. New York: John Wiley and Sons,
238 p.
Agee, J. K. 1993. Fire Ecology of Pacific Northwest Forests. Wash-
ington, DC: Island Press, 493 p.
Pyne, S. J., P. L. Andrews, and R. D. Laven. 1996. Introduction to
Wildland Fire: Fire Management in the United States. New York:
John Wiley and Sons, 455 p.
Whelan, R. J. 1995. The Ecology of Fire. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 346 p.
Scientific journals (nearly all of which are accessible on-line,
at least for most recent volumes) keep pace with the latest devel-
opments in fire science and management. Journals noted below
include one serial devoted completely to wildland fire and nu-
merous others in which fire papers may be found. Peer reviewed
journal articles are generally most objective and less apt to in-
clude biased viewpoints.
Peer Reviewed Journals
(General focus is on forest science, forest ecology, or management,
with occasional fire papers, unless otherwise noted.)
Canadian Journal of Forest Research, published in English and
French by the National Research Council Canada (since 1971).
Peer Reviewed Journals
293

Conservation Biology, published by Blackwell Scientific Publica-
tions (since 1987).
Ecology, the official publication of the Ecological Society of Amer-
ica (since 1920). The society also publishes Ecological Applica-
tions (since 1991).
Environmental Management, published by Springer-Verlag
(since 1976).
Forest Ecology and Management, published by Elsevier Scientific
Publishing Company (since 1976/1977).
Forest Ecology and Management, published by Springer-Verlag
(since 1976).
Forest Science, published by the Society of American Foresters
(SAF) (since 1955). SAF also publishes the Journal of Forestry
(since 1902), and regional journals: Western Journal of Applied
Forestry (since 1986), Southern Journal of Applied Forestry (since
1977), and Northern Journal of Applied Forestry (since 1984).
International Journal of Wildland Fire, published by CSIRO Pub-
lishing (since 1991, exclusive focus on wildland fire).
Journal of Environmental Management, published by Academic
Press (since 1973).
National Geographic, official journal of the National Geographic
Society (since 1888).
Science, published by the American Association for the Advance-
ment of Science (since 1883).
Technical Reports and Research Papers
In addition to the above serial publications, the USDA Forest Ser-
vice publishes numerous scientific manuscripts related to fire
through its experiment stations, primarily disseminated as gen-
eral technical reports or research papers. The Rocky Mountain
Research Station, Pacific Southwest Research Station, and Pacific
Northwest Research Station most often publish fire-related pa-
pers, or often will list documents published by station scientists
that are available elsewhere. Additional fire-related sources may
be found (though less frequently) through the Northcentral and
Southern Experiment Stations. An interested reader may contact
294
Print and Nonprint Resources

individual research stations and request to be included on quar-
terly mailing lists for alerts on latest publications. The following
list describes several exemplary papers from the extant literature.
Rothermel, R. C. 1983. How to Predict the Behavior of Forest and
Rangeland Fires. USDA Forest Service General Technical Report
INT-143. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Ser-
vice, Intermountain Research Station. 161 p. Most fire behavior pre-
diction systems in the United States rely on a mathematical model
developed in 1972 by Richard C. Rothermel. The model predicts
with reasonable precision the spread rate of a fire that has reached
a sustained growth rate in uniform fuels in flat or mountainous ter-
rain. In 1983, Rothermel summarized techniques for estimating the
behavior of free-spreading wildland fires under one cover.
Butler, Bret W., Roberta A. Bartlette, Larry S. Bradshaw, Jack D.
Cohen, Patricia L. Andrews, Ted Putnam, and Richard J. Mangan,
1998. Fire Behavior associated with the 1994 South Canyon Fire
on Storm King Mountain, Colorado. Research Paper RMRS-RP-9.
Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service,
Rocky Mountain Research Station, 82 p. HTML Version: http://
www.fs.fed.us/rm/pubs/SouthCanyon/index.html. PDF Ver-
sion: http://www.fs.fed.us/rm/pubs/rmrs_rp09.pdf.
Actual fire behavior in the field sometimes bears little resem-
blance to computerized fire behavior predictions. After the four-
teen firefighter fatalities during the South Canyon fire in July
1994, fire scientists assessed circumstances and suggested guide-
lines that could help firefighters avert such a tragedy in the fu-
ture. Essentially, firefighters were caught off guard by a fire that
transitioned from a relatively slow-spreading, low-intensity sur-
face fire to a high-intensity, fast-spreading fire burning through
the entire fuel complex, surface to crown. The analysis includes a
detailed chronology of fire and firefighter movements, changes in
the environmental factors affecting the fire behavior, and crew
travel rates and fire spread rates.
Fire Effects: The “Rainbow” Series
In the 1970s the USDA Forest Service research stations sponsored
a massive effort to summarize the status of knowledge on fire
effects on flora, fauna, air, soils, water, and fuels. Dubbed the
Fire Effects: The “Rainbow” Series
295

“rainbow series” because of the different cover colors chosen for
each volume, the collection represented an important summary
of fire effects knowledge at that time. Following its establishment
in 1998, the Joint Fire Science Program commissioned an effort to
update knowledge of fire effects. Three updates have been pub-
lished so far, with the rest scheduled for future release.
Fire Effects on Fauna
Smith, J. K., ed. 2000. Wildland Fire in Ecosystems: Effects of Fire
on Fauna. USDA Forest Service General Technical Report RMRS-
GTR-42, vol. 1, 83 p. (Also available at http://www.fs.fed.us/rm
/pubs/rmrs_gtr42_1.html).
Fire Effects on Flora
Brown, J. K., and J. K. Smith, eds. 2000. Wildland Fire in Ecosys-
tems: Effects of Fire on Flora. USDA Forest Service General Tech-
nical Report RMRS-GTR-42, vol. 2. 257 p. (Also available at http:
//www.fs.fed.us/rm/pubs/rmrs_gtr42_2.html).
Fire Effects on Air
Sandberg, D. V., R. D. Ottmar, J. L. Peterson, and John Core. 2002.
Wildland Fire in Ecosystems: Effects of Fire on Air. General Tech-
nical Report RMRSGTR-42-Vol. 5. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 75
p. (Also available at http://www.fs.fed.us/rm/pubs/rmrs_gtr
42_5.html).
Other: Fire Effects on Aquatic Ecosystems
The journal Forest Ecology and Management devoted an entire issue
in 2003 to present a compendium of fire effects on aquatic ecosys-
tems—an area not covered in either the old or updated rainbow
series.
Forest Ecology and Management (June 3, 2003) 178(1–2): 1–229.
“The Effect of Wildland Fire on Aquatic Ecosystems in the
Western USA.” Edited by M. K. Young, R. E. Gresswell, and C.
Luce.
296
Print and Nonprint Resources

Popular Magazines (Not Peer-Reviewed)
In contrast to scientific articles, contributions to popular maga-
zines and mass media (such as newspapers, television coverage,
and websites) may tend to editorialize or glamorize certain as-
pects of fire fighting or fire behavior with as much gloss as tech-
nical content. Some may be littered with biased views and un-
substantiated claims. In all cases, readers would do well to check
data sources or to question assertions that are not supported by
the materials presented. Similar cautions may pertain to websites.
Informative articles may be found in the following:
American Forests, published by the American Forestry Association.
Fire Management Today: Earlier editions were released as Fire
Control Notes, then Fire Management Notes, published by the
USDA Forest Service, Washington Office, State and Private
Forestry. In summer 2003, the magazine released the first of three
volumes devoted to case studies of fire behavior. The entire three-
volume set likely will become a collector’s item for fire behavior
specialists. Vol. 63(3), summer 2003, “Fire Behavior Case Studies
and Analyses: Part 1” includes case study reprints of fires from
1937 to 1967. Vol. 63 (4), fall 2003, “Wildland Fire Behavior Case
Studies and Analyses: Part 2” includes additional case studies,
reporting standards, and advice for preparing future case study
analyses. This volume also includes winning submissions from
the 2003 photo contest. The third volume, Vol. 64(1), winter 2004,
“Forecasting Wildland Fire Behavior: Aids and Guides” is de-
voted to knowledge-based protocols to assist analysts in forecast-
ing fire behavior for safe and effective suppression strategies and
tactics.
High Country News, published by the nonprofit High Country
Association.
International Forest Fire News, published by the UN Food and
Agriculture Organization/Economic Commission for Europe,
Agriculture and Timber Division.
Sunset Magazine, published by the Sunset Publishing Corporation.
Wildfire, published by the International Association of Wildland
Fire.
Fire Effects: The “Rainbow” Series
297

Other Selected References
Additional references for learning about fire include public serv-
ice circulars, written articles, and educational tools such as fire
games. Many videos, too numerous to summarize here, have
been produced to describe fires and their management—includ-
ing documentaries aired by commercial and public television sta-
tions, and educational footage made available by government
agencies. These devices provide technical information (for exam-
ple, on fire behavior prediction) and important tools for commu-
nicating with the public about safety and fire ecology. If discussed
appropriately and in the right environment, wildland fire pro-
vides a rich context for general education. Fire education pro-
motes understanding and integration of numerous concepts from
many fields, including basic chemistry, physics, and biology,
properties of matter and energy, ecosystem disturbances and cy-
cles, plant and animal habitat and survival, and human interac-
tions with natural ecosystems.
Fire and Public Safety
Davis, K. D., and R. W. Mutch. 1987. Wildland Fire Hazards:
Safety and Survival Guidelines for Recreationists and Home-
owners. USDA Forest Service, Fire Management Notes 48(2):
18–20.
U.S. Fire Administration. N.d. Wildfire: Are You Prepared? U.S.
Fire Administration Publications Center (free pamphlet covering
tips for protecting the home from wildfire, including creation of a
safety zone, planning escape routes, and having a supply of ne-
cessities in the event of a wildfire). Available from http://usfa
.fema.gov/applications/publications/.
Fire Behavior
Andrews, P. L. 1986. BEHAVE: Fire Behavior Prediction and Fuel
Modeling System—BURN Subsystem, Part 1. USDA Forest Ser-
vice General Technical Report INT-194, 130 p.
Byram, G. M. 1959. “Combustion of Forest Fuels.” Pp. 61–89 in
Forest Fire: Control and Use, edited by K. P. Davis. New York:
McGraw-Hill Book Co.; 584 p.
298
Print and Nonprint Resources

Finney, M. A. 1998. Farsite: Fire Area Simulator—Model Devel-
opment and Evaluation. USDA Forest Service Research Paper
RMRS-RP-4, 47 p.
Johnson, E. A., and K. Miyanishi, eds. 2001. Forest Fires: Behav-
ior and Ecological Effects. London: Academic Press, 600 p.
Rothermel, R. C. 1991. Predicting the Behavior and Size of Crown
Fires in the Northern Rocky Mountains. USDA Forest Service Re-
search Paper INT-438, 46 p.
Scott, J. H. and E. D. Rhinehardt. 2001. Assessing Crownfire Po-
tential by Linking Models of Surface and Crown Fire Behavior.
USDA Forest Servicce Res. Pap. RMRS-RP-29, 59 p.
Fire Ecology
Bradstock, R. A., J. E. Williams, and M. A. Gill, eds. 2002. Flam-
mable Australia: The Fire Regimes and Biodiversity of a Conti-
nent. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 472 p.
Johnson, E. A. 1992. Fire and Vegetation Dynamics: Studies from
the North American Boreal Forest. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 129 p.
Tall Timbers Fire Ecology Conference Proceedings, Vols. 1–15
through 1974, then intermittently. Available (free, if still in print)
from the Tall Timbers Research Station in Tallahassee, Florida (see
Chapter 6 for contact information).
Walstad, J. D., S. R. Radosevich, and D. V. Sandberg. 1990. Nat-
ural and Prescribed Fire in Pacific Northwest Forests. Corvallis:
Oregon State University Press, 317 p.
Fire Games
Smith, Jane Kapler, and Nancy E. McMurray. 2000. Fireworks
Curriculum Featuring Ponderosa, Lodgepole, and Whitebark
Pine Forests. General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-65. Fort
Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service,
Rocky Mountain Research Station, 270 p.
Note: FireWorks is an educational program for students in grades
one through ten. The program consists of the curriculum in this
report and a trunk of laboratory materials, specimens, and refer-
ence materials. It provides interactive, hands-on activities for
Other Selected References
299

studying fire ecology, fire behavior, and the influences of people
on three fire-dependent forest types—Pinus ponderosa (ponderosa
pine), Pinus contorta var. latifolia (interior lodgepole pine), and
Pinus albicaulis (whitebark pine). The publication is download-
able at http://www.fs.fed.us/rm/pubs/rmrs_gtr65.pdf (approx-
imately 4MB).
Living with Fire (http://www.fs.fed.us/rm/fire_game/).
Note: Living with Fire is an educational Internet game that puts
you in the place of a fire manager, based on research and tools de-
veloped for real-world fire management. Recommended for ages
ten and up. Last updated November 1, 2000.
Fire in the Tropics
Andersen, A. N., G. D. Cook, and R. J. Williams. 2003. Fire in
Tropical Savannas: The Kapalga Experiment. New York:
Springer-Verlag, 216 p.
Fire Weather
Schroeder, M. J., and C. C. Buck. 1970. Fire Weather. Agriculture
Handbook 360. USDA Forest Service, 229 p.
Fuels Treatment
Graham, R. T., S. McCaffrey, T. B. Jain (technical editors). 2004.
Science Basis for Changing Forest Structure to Modify Wildfire
Behavior and Severity. General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-120.
Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service,
Rocky Mountain Research Station. 43 p.
Pollet, J., and P. N. Omi. 2002. Effect of Thinning and Prescribed
Burning on Crown Fire Severity in Ponderosa Pine Forest. Inter-
national Journal of Wildland Fire 11(1): 1–10.
Omi, P. N., and E. J. Martinson. 2002. Effects of Fuels Treatment
on Wildfire Severity. Final Report to the Joint Fire Science Pro-
gram Governing Board. Western Forest Fire Research Center, Col-
orado State University, 40 p. Also available at http://www.
colostate.edu./frws/research/westfire/FinalReport.pdf
300
Print and Nonprint Resources

History of Fire on Earth
Pyne, S. J. 1991. Burning Bush: A Fire History of Australia. 1991.
Seattle: University of Washington Press.
———. 1995. World Fire: The Culture of Fire on Earth. New York:
Henry Holt and Co.; paperback edition, University of Washing-
ton Press, 1997; Japanese edition, Hosei University Press, 2001.
———. 1997. Vestal Fire: An Environmental History, Told
through Fire, of Europe and Europe’s Encounter with the World.
Seattle: University of Washington Press.
———. 2001. Fire: A Brief History. Seattle: University of Wash-
ington Press and British Museum, 2001.
———. 2003. Smokechasing. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
Landscape Scale Studies Involving
Consideration of Fire 
Quigley, T. M., R. A. Gravenmier, S. J. Arbelbide, H. B. Cole, R. T.
Graham, and R. W. Haynes. 1999. The Interior Columbia Basin
Ecosystem Management Project: Scientific Assessment. CD-
ROM available from:
Publications Distribution
Pacific Northwest Research Station
333 S.W. First Avenue
P.O. Box 3890
Portland, OR 97208–3890
503–808–2125 
Sierra Nevada Ecosystem Project. 1996. By the Regents of the
University of California (available at http://ceres.ca.gov/snep/).
Congressionally Commissioned Fire Studies
Government Accounting Office. 1999. Western National Forests:
A Cohesive Strategy Is Needed to Address Catastrophic Wild-
fires. Report to the Subcommittee on Forests and Forest Health,
Committee on Resources, House of Representatives. GAO Report
99–65, Washington DC, 64 p.
Other Selected References
301

———. 2003. Wildland Fire Management: Additional Actions Re-
quired to Better Identify and Prioritize Lands Needing Fuels Re-
duction. Report to congressional requesters. GAO Report 03–805,
Washington, DC, 67 p.
Nonprint Resources
Nonprint (tools and information) resources include models, web-
sites, information clearinghouses, demonstration areas, and di-
rect communications through workshops and conferences, or di-
rect contacts with fire managers and scientists. Software and
models available to fire managers are noted below, although
some software requires advanced training and a few may not be
accessible publicly. Much information is available on the world-
wide web, accessible simply by typing the item of interest into a
search engine. Useful representative websites are noted below.
Governments, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), and uni-
versities with fire academic/research programs also may main-
tain websites or extension programs for disseminating fire-
related information. Public demonstration areas may be set up in
local fuel treatment or recently burned areas to interpret and en-
gage interest in fire and forest management. The Nature Conser-
vancy has set up five demonstration areas: Long Island Pine Bar-
rens, Jemez Mountains, Middle Niobrara-Nebraska Sandhills,
Bighorns Landscape, and Upper Deschutes Basin.
In any given year, numerous workshops and conferences are
devoted to fire management and fire ecology, covering regional,
national, and international topics of interest. Geographic area fire
council meetings provide important forums for managers, scien-
tists, and academicians to meet and communicate new ideas. For
example, the Interior West Fire Council convenes practitioners
and researchers biannually from the U.S. and Canada. Some meet-
ings are intentionally interdisciplinary, involving foresters, meteo-
rologists, and fire ecologists, for example. Important information
exchanges occur in formal presentations as well as informal con-
versations during break periods. Published proceedings add to
the knowledge base, although considerable learning occurs by at-
tendance and networking. Important nonprint resources, such as
community partnerships, websites, conferences/workshops, and
resource specialists; have become increasingly important to indi-
viduals and communities hoping to learn about wildland fire.
302
Print and Nonprint Resources

In general, websites produced and maintained by govern-
mental entities are quite reliable and useful, but the proliferation
of undocumented information on the web requires caution. The
following are some of the best websites for keeping up with the
latest information from a fire management standpoint, with em-
phasis on the United States. Several websites link to the same
homepages, indicating the popularity and relevance of certain
available reference sites. Two of the most useful websites for
those getting started in fire studies are the National Interagency
Fire Center (www.nifc.gov) and the USDA Forest Service Fire and
Aviation Management (http://www.fs.fed.us/fire/) pages. Both
pages contain useful information about national fire programs,
insights into fire management and fire ecology, and numerous
useful links. Other useful sites (arranged alphabetically) include
the following:
Association for Fire Ecology (http://www.ice.ucdavis.edu/afe/)
The association is a national professional society for fire ecolo-
gists, providing an opportunity for managers, researchers, and
educators to exchange ideas through national and regional con-
ferences, an electronic newsletter and journal, and courses. Orig-
inally formed as the California Association for Fire Ecology, the
association broadened its audience in 2000, with the first national
congress on fire ecology. Student chapters promote the applica-
tion of fire ecology through science and education at colleges and
universities with active fire ecology programs.
California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection
(http://www.fire.ca.gov/)
The men and women of the California Department of Forestry
and Fire Protection (CDF) have fire protection and stewardship
jurisdiction over 31 million acres of California’s privately owned
wildlands. In addition, the department provides varied emer-
gency services in thirty-five of the state’s fifty-eight counties via
contracts with local governments. In a unique arrangement, CDF
assumes protection responsibilities for some lower-elevation fed-
eral areas in exchange for the federal government’s assuming
lead responsibility on some of CDF’s high-elevation properties.
The department’s firefighters, fire engines, and aircraft respond
to an average 6,300 wildland fires each year. Those fires burn an
average of nearly 144,000 acres annually.
Nonprint Resources
303

Colorado Climate Center (http://climate.atmos.colostate.edu/)
The Colorado Climate Center assists the state of Colorado in
monitoring climate over time scales of weeks to years, thereby
contributing to a reduction in the state’s vulnerability to climate
variability and natural disasters, such as wildfires and floods. The
center’s web page provides links to regional climate centers and
to the National Climate Data Center, where detailed climate in-
formation is provided. Other valuable climate links are listed as
additional data resources.
Ecological Restoration Institute, Northern Arizona University
(http://eri.nau.edu)
The Ecological Restoration Institute in the School of Forestry at
Northern Arizona University supports ecological restoration activ-
ities such as education, research, and a forum for consideration of
related issues. ERI develops comparative information on passive
versus active management (thinning and prescribed fire), particu-
larly in the dry ponderosa pine forest type of northern Arizona.
Fire and Fire Surrogate Research Study (http://www.fs.fed
.us/ffs/)
This landmark study has established replicated treatment sites
across the United States, all in low-severity fire regimes. Investi-
gators are interested not only in the possible effects of silvicul-
tural treatment (that is, mechanical thinning and prescribed fire)
on wildfire severity but also in the treatment impact on such eco-
logical attributes as nutrient cycling, seed scarification, plant di-
versity, disease and insect abundance, and wildlife habitat. Al-
though still in progress, this study will add greatly to existing
knowledge about the effects of treatments that attempt to mimic
the ecological functions of low-intensity fires.
Fire Emissions Joint Forum (http://www.wrapair.org/forums
/fejf/)
The Fire Emissions Joint Forum (FEJF) was formed to assist the
Western Regional Air Partnership in addressing the Grand
Canyon Visibility Transport Commission’s (GCVTC) recommen-
dations regarding wildfire, prescribed natural fire/wildland fire
managed for resource benefits, prescribed fire, and agricultural
fire. The forum addresses a broad definition of smoke effects that
304
Print and Nonprint Resources

include consideration of public nuisance, public health, and visi-
bility/regional haze.
Fire Effects Information System (http://www.fs.fed.us/database
/feis/index.html)
The Fire Effects Information System (FEIS) provides up-to-date,
online information about fire effects on plants and animals. It was
developed at the USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain Research
Station’s Fire Sciences Laboratory in Missoula, Montana. The
FEIS database contains synoptic descriptions, taken from current
English-language literature, of almost 900 plant species, about
100 animal species, and 16 Kuchler plant communities found on
the North American continent. The emphasis of each synopsis is
on fire and how it affects each species. Background information
on taxonomy, distribution, basic biology, and ecology of each
species is also included. Synopses are thoroughly documented,
and each contains a complete bibliography.
Firebeaters (http://homepages.ed.ac.uk/ebfr89/firebeat/home
.htm)
Firebeaters is a small group of ecologists, land managers,
foresters, and conservationists interested in the history, ecology,
control, and behavior of vegetation fires in the British Isles and
North-West Europe. Objectives include to provide a forum for
discussion of fire-related issues; to raise awareness of the impor-
tance of vegetation fires in land management and conservation; to
promote the study of vegetation fires and help to identify re-
search priorities; and to provide access to data and published in-
formation on the use and control of fire.
FireNet (http://sres.anu.edu.au/associated/fire/index.html)
An international fire information network established in 1993 and
based at Charles Sturt University, Australia. Subscribers to FireNet
are also able to participate in an electronic dialogue on topical and
worldwide issues related to fires and their management.
Fire software downloads (http://fire.org)
The latest fire public access software is described and can be
downloaded from the site maintained by Systems for Environ-
mental Management (SEM), a private company with close ties to
Nonprint Resources
305

the Intermountain Fire Sciences laboratory in Missoula, Montana.
SEM provides a valuable service to the fire management commu-
nity by making the latest versions of fire software available for
use and analysis, capitalizing on a strong working relationship
with the Fire Sciences Laboratory where many of the computer
programs are formulated and developed.
Firewise (http://www.firewise.org/)
The Firewise Home Page was created for people who live or va-
cation in fire-prone areas of North America; it is sponsored by the
National Fire Protection Association (see Chapter 6), the Ameri-
can Red Cross, and the USDA Forest Service. Its intent is to allow
residents and recreationists to make sensible choices about living
in or using wild environments, otherwise known as the wild-
land/urban interface, urban interface, or exurban areas. Links
from the home page include current information on regional
workshops held annually throughout the United States.
Forest Fire Lookouts (http://www.firelookout.net/firelookout
/firelookout.asp)
A complete listing is provided of nearly 500 lookouts in the
United States and around the world, including listings on the Na-
tional Historic Register, pictures, descriptions, map locations, and
travel instructions. Partnership opportunities are described for
lookout towers in need of maintenance and restoration. Link to
Forest Fire Lookout Association website (http://www.firelookout
.org/ffla/ffla.htm) to find out about rentals, job/volunteer list-
ings, and general information on chapters in twenty-five states.
Information on current operating lookouts may not be listed.
Four Corners Sustainable Forestry Partnership (http://www
.fourcornersforests.org/)
In recent years, partnerships have proven essential to enabling
communities to plan for eventual wildfire occurrence, to cope
with recovery after a fire, to develop plans for defending com-
munities and individual homes, for ensuring effective incident
management during fires, and for implementing applied fire re-
search. The Four Corners Partnership began in 1997 with the
recognition throughout the Four Corners region (Colorado, New
Mexico, Arizona, Utah) of increasing risks for catastrophic fire
and insect outbreaks in forest ecosystems, as well as a declining
306
Print and Nonprint Resources

capacity in communities to deal with forest restoration and main-
tenance needs. For another example of community partnerships,
see the Quincy Library Group website noted below.
Global 
Fire 
Monitoring 
Center 
(http://www.fire.uni-
freiburg.de/)
The GFMC provides the best information on global fire concerns,
with important links to sources for international fire news. See
additional descriptive information about the center in Chapter 6,
including contact information.
Hayman Fire (2002) Case Study (http://www.fs.fed.us/rm/
hayman_fire/)
In 2002, the western United States experienced an agonizingly
long and protracted fire season because of unwanted ignitions
following the prolonged drought. At the suggestion of Congress-
man Mark Udall (D-CO), the U.S. Forest Service commissioned a
thorough review of causal factors that contributed to fire spread
and effects. This report examines a range of issues raised by the
Hayman fire, including the effectiveness of prefire fuel treat-
ments, effects of weather, and socioeconomic impacts.
National Interagency Fire Center (http://www.nifc.gov)
The National Interagency Fire Center is the nation’s nerve center
when large fires are burning. It also maintains one of the most in-
formative websites about fire, including a treasure trove of sum-
mary statistics, fire photos, fire situation updates, and related in-
formation. See http://www.nifc.gov/fireinfo/nfn.html for the
latest information on ongoing fire incidents. Fire qualifications
and firefighter safety are covered at http://www.nifc.gov
/safety_study/quals-intro.html. Additional descriptive and con-
tact information is included in Chapter 6.
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (http:
//www.noaa.gov/)
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA) within the Department of Commerce provides numer-
ous weather-related products of use to fire managers. For exam-
ple, the Local Analysis and Prediction System (LAPS) integrates
data from meteorological observation sites to produce gridded,
Nonprint Resources
307

three-dimensional profiles of weather phenomena that could
alter fire behavior (http://laps.fsl.noaa.gov/cgi/laps_prod-
ucts.cgi). The Fire Consortia for Advanced Modeling of Meteo-
rology and Smoke (FireCAMMs) relies on data and models from
NOAA and other cooperators to produce fire weather analysis
and forecasting tools (http://www.fs.fed.us/fcamms).
Operational Fire Maps (http://geomac.usgs.gov/#)
The Geospatial Multi-Agency Coordination Group, or GeoMAC, is
an Internet-based mapping tool originally designed for fire man-
agers to access online maps of current fire locations and perimeters
in the conterminous forty-eight states and Alaska. Using a stan-
dard web browser, fire personnel can download this information to
pinpoint the affected areas. With the growing concern over West-
ern wildland fires in the summer of 2000, this application also be-
came available to the public. GEOMAC is sponsored jointly by the
U.S. departments of Interior and Agriculture (source: http://geo-
mac.usgs.gov/AboutGeoMAC/WhatIs .html). Data layers include
roads, cities, recent fire perimeters, thermal imagery (AVHRR,
Modis), and nearby weather stations. In order to give fire managers
near real-time information, fire perimeter data is updated daily
based upon input from incident intelligence sources, GPS data, and
infrared (IR) imagery from fixed-wing and satellite platforms.
Program for Climate, Ecosystem, and Fire Applications
(http://www.cefa.dri.edu/)
CEFA is an abbreviation for the Program for Climate, Ecosystem,
and Fire Applications. The program was formed on October 1,
1998, through an assistance agreement between the Bureau of
Land Management Nevada State Office and the Desert Research
Institute (DRI). As of November 2000, a new five-year assistance
agreement was signed with the BLM national Office of Fire and
Aviation to continue basic climate studies and product develop-
ment for fire management at the national level. CEFA resides
within the Division of Atmospheric Sciences of DRI and works
closely with the Western Regional Climate Center (WRCC).
Quincy Library Group (http://www.qlg.org/pub/contents
/overview.htm).
Founded in 1992 by a timber industry forester, a county supervi-
sor, and an environmental attorney, this private-public coalition
308
Print and Nonprint Resources

addresses a variety of common environmental concerns (for ex-
ample, the California spotted owl, water, logging, fire and fuels
management) in northeastern California, encompassing Lassen,
Sierra, and Plumas counties. Since then the QLG’s area of interest
has grown to encompass parts of eight counties and three na-
tional forests with funding provided by its inclusion in the
FY1999 Omnibus Spending Bill by the U.S. Congress. For another
example of private and public partnerships, see the Four Corners
Sustainable Forestry Partnership website (see page 306–307).
Smokey Bear (http://www.smokeybear.org, also http://www
.smokeybear.com)
In 1950 a bear cub was rescued from a charred tree within a wild-
fire in New Mexico. Originally dubbed “Hotfoot Teddy” by his
caretakers, he soon was renamed “Smokey Bear,” after a poster
produced in 1945 by Albert Staehle (originated and authorized by
the USDA Forest Service and the Advertising Council). Smokey
Bear has become a national symbol of fire prevention, recognized
worldwide as an important tool for public education.
Synoptic Weather Patterns Associated with Critical Fire
Weather (http://climate.usfs.msu.edu/climatology)
Atmospheric conditions play a critical role in affecting the behav-
ior and severity of wildland fires, as well as the probability of
their occurrence. Fire managers rely heavily on current observa-
tions and forecasts of local, regional, and synoptic atmospheric
conditions to prepare for and carry out fire suppression and pre-
scribed fire activities. Synoptic weather maps are critical for un-
derstanding the relationships between large-scale upper and
middle atmospheric processes to regional-scale fire-weather sys-
tems. These maps help establish reliable forecasts of fire-weather
and for understanding how potential large-scale changes result-
ing from a globally changed climate might influence fire occur-
rence and severity in the United States.
USDA Forest Service Fire and Aviation Management (http:
//www.fs.fed.us/fire)
The USDA Forest Service Fire and Aviation Management website
provides recent fire information, forest management, and a
forests/people page (including links to wildland fire assessment,
fire effects information, tools, and numerous other useful sites).
Nonprint Resources
309

Interesting national coarse-scale maps of fire regimes and fuel
conditions are available at http://www.fs.fed.us/fire/fuelman/.
The Wildland Fire Assessment System (www.fs.fed.us/land
/wfas/) provides national fire danger rating maps, including
“greenness,” available from satellite imagery. Additional infor-
mation on fire systems and tools, fire news and publications, fire
centers and research, and links is available at http://www
.fs.fed.us/land/#fire (accessed January 2, 2002).
U.S. Large Fire Maps (http://activefiremaps.fs.fed.us/)
National maps of large fires (that is, fires larger than 10,000 acres)
are provided from the USFS Remote Sensing Application Center,
using the Moderate Imaging Spectralradiometer (MODIS) sen-
sors aboard NASA’s Earth Observing System satellites (Terra and
Aqua). The MODIS instrument maps the entire surface of the
earth once every other day (daily in the Northern Hemisphere) at
moderate spatial resolutions (250, 500, and 1000 m). See also
http://activefiremaps.fs.fed.us/fire_imagery.php, for MODIS ac-
tive fire imagery.
Western Forest Fire Research Center (WESTFIRE), Colorado
State University (http://www.cnr.colostate.edu/frws/research
/westfire/index.htm)
Colorado State University has one of the largest university pro-
grams (undergraduate and graduate teaching plus active re-
search programs) in forest fire science in the nation, if not the
world. WESTFIRE provides an organizational umbrella to the nu-
merous fire-related research and instructional programs available
at the university.
Western Regional Climate Center (http://www.wrcc.dri.edu/)
The Western Regional Climate Center (WRCC) is a repository for
data and information on climate in the western United States.
WRCC programs provide information for better understanding
of fire weather and climatic variations in the West, including, for
example, past El Niño and La Niña occurrences that can be linked
to wildfire outbreaks.
The Wildfire Automated Biomass Burning Algorithm (http:
//cimss.ssec.wisc.edu/goes/burn/wfabba.html)
310
Print and Nonprint Resources

This is an experimental program to spot and map fires in the
Western Hemisphere using satellites located more than 20,000
miles above the earth. The geostationary NOAA weather satellite
GOES-12 provides coverage for North and South America, while
GOES-10 covers North America only. Links from the homepage
lead to the most recent image and provides the option to go to
higher-resolution images of different regions, as well as loops of
the images covering the last several hours (or days, depending on
the region).
Wildfire News (http://www.wildfirenews.com/)
The Wildfire News website includes recent news and articles of
interest to laypersons, as well as pages primarily for wildland
firefighters, including hot-shots and smokejumpers. This page is
also a good source for fire photos, job listings, current controver-
sies, and links to other information.
Note: Other useful websites are included with agency and
organization contact information in Chapter 6.
Software
The software described below is generally public-accessible and
available by consulting FRAMES, the home for Fire Management
Tools Online (http://www.frames.gov/tools/). Software pro-
grams are generally designed for use on an IBM PC-compatible
computer. To take full advantage of the interactive interface, the
PC must be running Windows 95/98 or Windows NT 4.0, or
higher. The use of the interactive interface also requires an Inter-
net web browser such as Microsoft Internet Explorer or Netscape
Navigator (version 3.04 or greater for both browsers—version 4.0
or greater is recommended). No recommendations are intended
regarding compatibility issues, nor is endorsement implied for
private party or government software.
BAER. Last updated: February 16, 2000.
Research publication synthesizing thirty years of USDA Forest
Service Burn Area Emergency Rehabilitation (BAER) projects.
Software
311

BEHAVE. Last updated: August 21, 2003.
The BEHAVE Fire Behavior Prediction and Fuel Modeling System
gathers available fire models into a system that is driven by direct
user input. The fire modeling capabilities have been significantly
expanded and the user interface vastly improved with the up-
dated BehavePlus Fire Modeling System.
CONSUME. Last updated: October 27, 2003.
Consume 2.1 is a PC-based, interactive fuel consumption model
that predicts total and smoldering fuel/biomass consumption dur-
ing prescribed fires and wildland fires. Predictions are based on
weather data, the amount and fuel moisture of fuels, and a number
of other factors, with primary focus on the Pacific Northwest.
CPS. Last updated: September 01, 2001.
The focus of the Campbell Prediction System (CPS) is to predict
changes in fire behavior so that firefighters can get out of harm’s
way before the fire makes its move. The book has maps that dis-
play the trigger points, tracks, and time tags that aid in tactic se-
lection. Shaded terrain maps and solid terrain models make for
better understanding of the terrain and why some tactics work
and others don’t.
EPM. Last updated: February 14, 2000.
The Emissions Production Model (EPM) predicts air pollutant
emissions source strength, heat release rate, and plume buoyancy
consistently for all fire environments and fuel types. It requires an
estimate of flaming and smoldering consumption, and a stylized
description of ignition pattern. EPM then calculates timed emis-
sion rates for gases, particles, and heat.
FARSITE. Last updated: February 14, 2000.
FARSITE is a fire growth simulation model. It uses spatial infor-
mation on topography and fuels along with weather and wind
files. FARSITE incorporates the existing models for surface fire,
crown fire, spotting, and fire acceleration into a two-dimensional
fire growth model. FARSITE runs under Microsoft Windows op-
erating systems (Windows 3.1x, 95, NT) and features a graphical
interface. Users must have the support of a geographic informa-
312
Print and Nonprint Resources

tion system (GIS) to use FARSITE, because it requires spatial land-
scape information.
FDRPC. Last updated: March 05, 2002.
Fire Danger Rating Pocket Card for Firefighter Safety (FDRPC) al-
lows local or regional fire managers to prepare cards that describe
historical fire weather and incidents for distribution to firefight-
ers, especially those who may be unfamiliar with local conditions.
FEIS. Last updated: May 14, 2003.
The Fire Effects Information System (FEIS) is a computerized en-
cyclopedia of information describing the fire ecology of more
than 1,000 plant and animal species and plant communities. FEIS
summarizes current information about fire effects on plants and
animals.
FEMHB: Fire Effects Monitoring Handbook (available on the NPS
Wildland Fire Analysis Software CD, 1999).
FFE-FVS. Last updated: June 14, 2002.
The Fire and Fuels Extension to the Forest Vegetation Simulator
(FVS) incorporates models of fuel dynamics, fire behavior, and
fire effects into a base model of forest stand development. Ef-
fects of timber harvest, fuel treatment, and fire on subsequent
fuel dynamics, stand development, and potential fire intensity
can be simulated and displayed graphically for a period of
decades.
FireAway. Last updated: November 13, 2000.
A subset of the Behave software, plus some additional tools and
calculations from the Fireline Handbook, that runs on a handheld
Palm computer.
FireDirect. Last updated: April 15, 2002.
FireDirect from RedZone Software is mapping software providing
innovative GIS capabilities for agencies fighting fires in the Wild-
land/ Urban Interface. See the website at www.redzonesoftware
.com.
Software
313

Firefamily+. Last updated: December 02, 2002.
Provides historical analysis programs that operate against the fire
weather and fire occurrence databases in the National Integrated
Fire Management Interagency Database (NIFMID). The programs
whose functionality are incorporated (and expanded) in Firefam-
ily Plus include PCFIRDAT: A non-Y2K compliant PC-DOS pro-
gram that processes historical fire weather data. It can produce
daily lists, frequency distributions of weather, and fire danger in-
dexes. It also produces a “passing file,” which is a flat file of the
daily list information in a fixed field format. PCSEASON: A non-
Y2K compliant PC-DOS program that reads passing files and
does primitive graphics, conditional climatology, seasonal sever-
ity, and RERAP reports. FIRES: A non-Y2K compliant PC-DOS
program that reads passing files and fire occurrence files and
does analysis of index or weather variable performance in terms
of the relationships between seasonal index traces and fire occur-
rence potential. CLIMATOLOGY: A set of non-Y2K compliant PC-
DOS programs that provide detailed climate information by ten-
day and monthly periods.
fireLib. Last updated: April 12, 1999.
fireLib is a C function library for predicting the spread rate and
intensity of free-burning wildfires. While fireLib is a direct de-
scendant of the BEHAVE fire behavior algorithms for predicting
fire spread, it is optimized for highly iterative applications such
as cell- or wave-based fire growth simulation.
FIRES. Last updated: April 12, 1999.
Fire Information Retrieval and Evaluation System (FIRES) pro-
vides methods for evaluating the performance of fire danger rat-
ing indexes. The relationship between fire danger indexes and
historical fire occurrence and size is examined through logistic re-
gression and percentiles. Historical seasonal trends of fire danger
and fire occurrence can be plotted and compared. Methods for
defining critical levels of fire danger are provided.
FireTower. Last updated: July 11, 2000.
An Interactive Software Tool for Simulating the Movement of Fire
Through Landscapes.
314
Print and Nonprint Resources

FIREWORKS. Last updated: March 11, 2001.
A portable trunk that contains educational materials for hands-on
learning about how forests change over time, especially in rela-
tionship to fire. Provides curricula for all grade levels. For use by
classroom teachers and agency staff.
FMAPlus. Last updated: February 24, 2003.
A software package designed to make life a lot easier for
calculating planar intercept and photo series inventories
(DDWoodyPC), using digital photo series (PSExplorer), and cal-
culating canopy weights, canopy base height, and canopy bulk
density (CrownMass) for fire behavior predictions. The fuel
model manager program (FMMgr) allows the user to create cus-
tom fuel models to fit the local area.
FOFEM. Last updated: May 24, 2002.
First Order Fire Effects Model (FOFEM) is an easy-to-use com-
puter program for predicting effects of prescribed fire and wild-
fire. FOFEM predicts fuel consumption, smoke production, and
tree mortality. Area of applicability is nationwide on forest and
nonforest vegetation types. FOFEM also contains a planning
mode for prescription development.
I-SUITE. Last updated: September 9, 2002.
A group of applications for automating incident operation, using
a centralized database of resources assigned to the incident.
IIAA. Last updated: April 12, 1999.
Interagency Initial Attack Assessment (IIAA) is a tool used to de-
velop budget requests as part of the National Fire Management
Analysis System (NFMAS) process.
KCFAST. Last updated: April 12, 1999.
KCFast is a menu-based computer application that simplifies
data retrieval from the National Interagency Fire Management
Integrated Database (NIFMID) for fire weather and fire
occurrence.
Software
315

MfFSF. Last updated: July 20, 2001.
Meteorology for Fire Severity Forecasting includes monthly fire
weather forecasts that can provide fire managers with a quick and
easy planning tool. It is based on the monthly forecast of 700
millibar heights issued by the NWS Climate Analysis Center in
Washington, DC.
NEXUS. Last updated: March 26, 2001.
NEXUS is an EXCEL spreadsheet that links surface and crown fire
prediction models for assessing fire behavior, including possible
links to stand structural characteristics such as crown base height.
NFSPUFF. Last updated: April 12, 1999.
NFSPUFF is a screening/planning level, three-dimensional, grid-
ded wind field smoke emissions and trajectories puff model. It is
designed to predict ground level concentrations of particulate
matter and gaseous pollutants from multiple sources in complex
terrain in the western United States. The model incorporates an
emission production module (EPM) with National Weather Ser-
vice predictions for upper-air winds, extrapolated to the surface,
to predict potential pollutant transport. Tabular, 2-D and 3-D
graphics are displayed.
PCDANGER. Last updated: April 12, 1999.
PCDANGER is a Personal Computer (PC) application of the Na-
tional Fire Danger Rating System (NFDRS) that calculates both
1978 and 1988 version fire danger indexes from daily weather ob-
servations and forecasts.
PCHA. Last updated: April 12, 1999.
Personal Computer Historical Analysis (PCHA) is a personal
computer (PC) program developed to complete the Historical
Analysis required for the National Fire Management Analysis
System (NFMAS). PCHA is a tool designed to help analyze his-
torical wildland fire occurrence for fire planning purposes.
PLUMP. Last updated: February 14, 2000.
Plump calculates plume rise from large fires, including pyrocu-
mulus and cumulus growth without fire, based on a unidimen-
316
Print and Nonprint Resources

sional time-dependent model including principles of cloud
physics and entrainment.
PWA99 Prevention Workload Analysis (available on the NPS
Wildland Fire Analysis Software CD 1999).
RAfFS. Last updated: February 14, 2000.
Articles and information discussing recent fire research and its
application to firefighter safety.
RERAP. Last updated: January 27, 2000.
Rare Event Risk Assessment Process (RERAP) is a Windows-
based program that helps calculate the information needed to
manage prescribed fire and wildfires, based on projections of
long-term fire spread and the occurrence of a season-ending pre-
cipitation event.
SASEM. Last updated: December 3, 2002.
SASEM is a Gaussian dispersion model designed to predict
ground level particulate matter and visibility impacts from single
sources in relative flat terrain in the western United States.
SIAM. Last updated: November 10, 1999.
Structure Ignition Assessment Model. SIAM assesses potential
residential ignitions during wildland/urban interface (WUI) fires
given a structure’s materials and design and its exposure to
flames and firebrands to produce an index of WUI ignition risk.
TAC-PAK. Last updated: December 31, 2002.
Emergency Operations Center in a Briefcase. Complete incident
command and worldwide communications from a battery-
powered briefcase package
VALBOX. Last updated: April 12, 1999.
Ventilated Valley Box Model (VALBOX) is a screening model de-
signed to predict ground level concentrations of particulate mat-
ter and gaseous pollutants under stagnation conditions in moun-
tain valleys.
Software
317

Ventura_Tools. Last updated: May 20, 2002.
A complete set of ArcView 3.2 extensions to create and edit criti-
cal incident data. After the data have been developed, a quick
map layout tool is employed to create IAP, Planning and Public
Display Maps.
WFAS. Last updated: April 10, 2000.
WFAS: Wildland Fire Assessment System is an Internet-based
system that provides national fire potential and weather maps.
WFSA_Plus03. Last updated: August 7, 2003.
WFSA Plus03 is a decision support software package designed to
assist managers in developing strategies for a particular fire inci-
dent, including documentation for the Wildland Fire Situation
Analysis and Wildland Fire Use assessments and plans.
318
Print and Nonprint Resources

Glossary
Active crown fire
A crown fire whose spread is linked to surface fire
intensity.
Air mass
An extensive body of air having the same properties of tem-
perature and moisture. 
Airtanker
Planes fitted with tanks for transporting fire retardant or
water to a fire. Capacities range from 2,000 to 3,000 gallons per aircraft. 
Anchor point
A secure starting point for building and holding a fire-
line. 
Area ignition
Simultaneous ignition of a large area because of accu-
mulation of combustible gases or wind shifts. 
Atmosphere
The envelope of air surrounding the earth. 
Atmospheric stability
The propensity of the atmosphere to move ver-
tically in response to a lifting (or lowering) force. An unstable environ-
ment will augment formation of a well-formed convection column above
a fire and support extreme burning conditions. A stable environment
may actually constrain burning activity. 
Available fuel
The amount of fuel that actually burns in a fire, subject
to burning and fuel conditions. 
Backfire
An aggressive suppression tactic usually employed as a last
resort to stop, delay, or split an oncoming wildfire front. Unburned fuel
between the oncoming fire and secured fire line is ignited precisely at the
time when the backfire will be drawn by the convection column of the
wildfire, thereby removing fuel and changing spread direction and ef-
fects. Backfiring is executed as a command decision. 
Backing fire
A fire, or that part of a fire, that is spreading against the
wind or down a slope. 
319

Bladder bag
A portable rubberized bag of water (5 gal.), equipped with
hose and nozzle and fashioned with backpack straps, for use in the
mopup stages of a fire. 
Blowup
A sudden change in fire intensity or rate of spread that can
catch firefighters unaware. 
Brush hook
A cutting tool with a hooked cutting edge, adapted pri-
marily for cutting brush or chaparral. 
Burning out
Fires intentionally set to remove fuels inside the control
line, usually done by the crew boss. 
Burning period
That part of each 24-hour day when fires will spread
most rapidly, typically from about midmorning to sundown. 
Cambium
The active growth tissue just beneath the tree bark. 
Canopy
The stratum of fuels containing the crowns of the tallest vege-
tation. 
Cellulose
Glucose units that constitute the chief part of plant cell walls
and provide structure to vegetative materials, such as forest fuels. 
Chinook, or Chinook wind
A foehn or gravity wind, blowing down
the eastern slopes of the Rocky Mountains. 
Combustion
The rapid oxidation of material to produce heat energy. 
Conduction
Heat transfer through a solid—i.e., by molecular activity. 
Cone serotiny
An attribute of trees, such as lodgepole pine, whereby
the cones remain closed until opened by heat. 
Contained fire
A fire that is surrounded by constructed fire lines and
natural barriers. 
Convection
Heat transfer through a gas or liquid, resulting from verti-
cal motion. 
Convection column
The thermally-produced, billowing, vertical col-
umn of smoke, ash, and debris that forms above a fire. 
Crown fire
A fire that involves the live crown of trees or shrubs,
spreading through the forest canopy more or less independently of the
surface.
Dendrochronology
Methods for dating tree rings for cross-dating with
fire scars.  
Direct attack
A suppression method that involves work along the
burning edge, using wetting, cooling, smothering, chemical quenching,
or mechanical separation of unburned fuels. 
Duff
A mat of partially decomposed organic matter from fallen foliage,
herbaceous vegetation, and decaying wood, located immediately above
the mineral soil. 
320
Glossary

Equilibrium moisture content
A threshold of moisture wherein dead
fuels neither gain nor lose additional moisture with time, under constant
atmospheric pressure, relative humidity, and temperature. 
Ether extractives
Volatile chemicals (soluble in ether solutions) that en-
hance combustion; extractives usually impart an oiliness (or terpene fra-
grance) that can be detected in the field. 
Extended attack
Strategy and tactics employed on a fire that is not con-
tained or controlled by initial attack forces. 
Fire behavior
The manner in which a fire reacts to fuel, air mass, and
topography, resulting in spread, intensity, and other fire characteristics. 
Firebrand
An ember or particle of fuel ignited by an intense heat
source that can ignite unburned fuel, often emitted ahead of the fire front
and causing spot fires. 
Firebreak A preconstructed or natural break in fuel continuity, initially
cleared and maintained to bare mineral soil. 
Fire characteristics chart
A two-dimensional graphic for rating fire be-
havior and suppression difficulty, based on rate of spread and heat per
unit area (or fire intensity).
Fire containment
Encircling a fire perimeter with fireline constructed
by firefighters.
Fire danger
Potential for an initiating fire to cause management prob-
lems. 
Fire danger rating
A quantitative assessment of fire potential, mostly
related to weather and climatic influences over a broad area. 
Fire entrapment
A situation in which personnel are unexpectedly
caught in a fire behavior–related, life-threatening position where planned
escape routes or safety zones are absent, inadequate, or compromised. An
entrapment may or may not include deployment of a fire shelter. These
situations may or may not result in injury; they include “near misses.” 
Fire environment
The surrounding conditions (fuel, air mass, topogra-
phy) that influence the behavior of fires. 
Fire intensity
Rate of energy release from a fire’s flaming front, useful
for gauging the suppression difficulty and above-ground fire effects.
Fireline or fire line
A barrier to fire growth constructed by firefighters
using tools to remove flammable fuels. 
Fireline intensity
The rate of energy release during combustion per
unit length of fire front; also called Byram’s intensity.
Fire regime
A concept for understanding the role of fire in an ecosys-
tem, including descriptors for historical fire frequency, intensity, size,
and seasonality. 
Glossary
321

Fire return interval
The average number of years elapsing between re-
current fires in an area. 
Fire season
The period(s) of the year during which wildfires are likely
to occur, spread, and produce sufficient damage to warrant organized
fire control. 
Fire severity An indicator of the ecological impact of a fire or set of fires,
indicating effects on vegetation or degree of fuel consumption, or inte-
grating above-ground and below-ground heat effects. 
Fire shelter An aluminized pup-tent offering protection by means of re-
flecting radiant heat and providing a volume of breathable air in a fire
entrapment situation. Fire shelters should be used only in life-threaten-
ing situations, as a last resort. 
Fire storm Violent convection caused by a large continuous area of in-
tense fire. Often characterized by destructively violent surface indrafts,
near and beyond the perimeter, and sometimes by tornadolike whirls. 
Fire triangle
An instructional device using the legs of a triangle to de-
pict the role of oxygen, heat, and fuel in combustion.  
Flame height The height above ground of the flame tip (not to be con-
fused with flame length). 
Flame length The distance measured from the tip of the flame to the
middle of the flaming zone at the flame base; typically measured in me-
ters or feet. 
Flaming front The zone of a moving fire within which the primary com-
bustion mechanism is active flaming. Behind this zone, combustion is
primarily smoldering and glowing. 
Flank fire
A fire set parallel to the wind and allowed to spread at right
angles to control lines. 
Flanks of a fire Portions of the fire perimeter that are roughly parallel to
the main direction of fire spread; also called the sides of the fire. 
Fuel
Live and dead vegetation that will burn, including coarse woody
debris, understory vegetation, tall shrubs, tree crowns, duff, and litter.
Fuel availability
See available fuel. 
Fuelbreak
A preconstructed area in which fuels have been converted to
lower volume, less flammable fuel types in order to facilitate fire control
or prescribed burning operations. 
Fuel moisture
The amount of water in a fuel particle, expressed as a
percentage of the particle’s oven-dried weight.
Fuel profile
Describes the ground, surface, and crown attributes that
support combustion.
322
Glossary

Hazard
Properties of a fuels complex related to ignition wildfire be-
havior and severity, or suppression difficulty.
Head fire
A fire spreading with the wind or up a slope.
Heat transfer
Mechanisms by which heat is transferred: typically radi-
ation, convection, and conduction. 
Helibase
The main location within the general incident area for park-
ing, fueling, maintaining, and loading helicopters. The helibase is usu-
ally located at or near the incident base. 
Helispot
A temporary landing spot for helicopters, often natural open-
ings or constructed by helitack crews. 
Helitack, Helitack crew
Specially trained firefighters who are trans-
ported to fires via helicopters. Crew members are familiar with the tactical
and logistical advantages of using a helicopter to transport personnel and
equipment to an ongoing incident. Crewmembers may be trained to rap-
pel from a hovering helicopter in terrain that does not permit a landing. 
Holdover fire
Fire that lies dormant for a considerable time after igni-
tion (also called a sleeper fire). 
Hotshot crew
Highly trained and experienced crews of firefighters
(usually twenty persons) typically given the more challenging assign-
ments on fires, including fireline construction, firing operations, and
mopping up. Crew members usually use a wide variety of specialized
tools, including shovels, McLeods, pulaskis, brush hooks,  chainsaws,
and possibly fireline explosives. 
Hotspotting A firefighter’s tactic for cooling down a fire by using water
or digging and throwing soil at the base of a flame in one smooth motion
to rapidly remove available fuel feeding the flame. 
Hygroscopic
Property of dead fuels that result in moisture exchange
(increase, decrease) with changes in environmental moisture. 
Incident action plan
A document containing general suppression ob-
jectives that reflect overall strategy for an incident; details specific sup-
pression plans for the next operational period.
Incident command system (ICS)
The combination of facilities, equip-
ment, personnel, procedure, and communications operating within a
common organizational structure, with responsibility for the manage-
ment of assigned resources to effectively accomplish stated objectives
pertaining to an incident. 
Independent crown fire
A crown fire that spread indepently of surface
fire intensity.
Indirect attack
A method of suppression in which the control line is es-
tablished mostly along natural firebreaks, water bodies, or at considerable
distance from the fire, and all intervening fuel is backfired or burned out. 
Glossary
323

Initial attack
Activities undertaken by the first suppression resources
that arrive at a fire. 
Inversion, in the atmosphere
Warm air lying above cold air, a situation
often encountered above mountainous terrain during early morning hours. 
Ladder fuels
Continuous flammable fuels (e.g., branches, needles,
lichen, and the like) linking surface and crown strata. The presence of
fuel ladders during peak burning conditions increases the likelihood of
crown fire initiation and spread. 
Line ignition
Simultaneous ignition by a continuous front of fire, as
opposed to a single point. 
Mass fire
A large fire or fires burning with high intensity.
McLeod
A combination tool with heavy-duty rake and sharpened hoe. 
Megafire
Large project fires that require more people, more equip-
ment, and greater commitment of financial resources.
Mopup
A latter stage of fire suppression operations in which fuels are
not actively burning and managers consider the fire to be approaching
controlled status or extinction. 
MREs
Meals ready to eat, a staple of firefighters when centralized food
preparation facilities have not been established on a fire. 
Nomex
Heat-resistant material used to fabricate firefighter protective
clothing (e.g., shirts, pants, gloves, hood).
Overhead
A team that administers an incident. 
Passive crown fire
A fire that torches in individual trees. (See active
crown fire and independent crown fire).
Plume dominated fire
A fire burning with well-formed convection col-
umn, spreading in response to updrafts and downdrafts created by
buoyancy in an unstable atmosphere, possibly including collapses of the
column caused by gravity. Contrast with a wind-dominated fire. 
Point ignition
Ignition of an individual point; the result of human or
natural causes, as compared with line ignition. 
Prescribed fire The intentional use of fire to achieve specific objective(s).
Fire behavior and desired size and effects of treatment are controlled
through ignitions under prespecified fuel, weather, and topographic con-
ditions (fuel moisture, windspeed), along with appropriate ignition tech-
niques. 
Prescription window
Specified conditions under which a prescribed
fire is ignited.
Probability of ignition
The likelihood that a firebrand (glowing or flam-
ing) will cause a fire once it encounters receptive fuels; usually calculated
from temperature, relative humidity, and fine fuel moisture content.
324
Glossary

Project fire
An extended attack fire that requires a more complex or-
ganization including a fire camp (also called a campaign fire).
Pulaski
A combination tool (ax and mattock, or grubbing head). 
Pyrolysis
The process by which solid fuel is preheated and decom-
posed to volatile gases as a precursor to ignition and flaming. 
Radiation
Heat transfer by electromagnetic waves moving at the speed
of light, such as from the sun to the earth’s atmosphere. 
Radiosonde
A meteorologist’s device carried aloft and by a balloon
equipped with measuring devices for transmitting temperature, pres-
sure, and humidity derivative information to a ground recorder. 
Red card
Certification of firefighter qualifications to perform specific
tasks during a wildfire. Training and prior experience requirements vary
by position, being lowest for basic firefighting and higher for skill posi-
tions within a large fire organization. 
Red flag warning
A term used by forecasters to draw attention to
weather conditions of limited duration that may result in extreme burn-
ing conditions. 
Relative humidity
A measure of the moisture or water vapor pressure
in the atmosphere compared with conditions at saturation. 
Retardant
Chemical solution used in fire suppression activities, typi-
cally diammonimum phosphate (a soil fertilizer) colored with a
biodegradable marker dye (pink) when dropped from an aircraft. Chem-
ical retardants are occasionally used in ground-based fire engines. 
Risk
A causative agent, such as lightning or humans; also refers to the
likelihood of a fire ignition in an area. 
Savanna
Grassland with intermittent trees and shrubs.
Shovel
A combination tool with a cutting edge (for chopping down
small trees, and cutting limbs and roots); also used for scraping/digging. 
Slash, logging slash, thinning slash
Residual branches, twigs, needles,
and other fuels from a logging or thinning activity. 
Smokejumpers Airborne firefighters who parachute from planes to at-
tack fires in remote or otherwise inaccessible areas. 
Spike camp
A makeshift camp for temporary lodging and feeding of
firefighters, prior to establishment of a fire camp. 
Spot fire
A fire that starts apart from the main body, for example by
windborne embers. 
Thermal belt
A local region in mountainous terrain that typically has
the least variation in diurnal temperatures, the highest nighttime tem-
peratures, and the lowest relative humidities. 
Glossary
325

Timelag
An indication of the rate at which dead fuel gains or loses
moisture because of environmental changes. The time (in hours) neces-
sary for a fuel particle to gain or lose approximately 63 percent of the dif-
ference between its initial content and the equilibrium moisture content. 
Torching
Intermittent ignition of tree and shrub crowns from an ad-
vancing surface fire. 
Wildfire
An unplanned wildland fire requiring suppression action,
one that may or may not be affected by suppression activities.
Wildland fire use, Wildland fire managed (used) for resource benefit
Lightning fires that are allowed to burn in order to achieve resource ben-
efit; may require herding or partial suppression.  
Wildland fire situation analysis A required document describing the
complexity of an incident, management alternatives, and a selected
course of action for managing an incident. 
Wind dominated fire
A fire whose spread is dominated by the wind,
as opposed to a plume dominated fire. 
326
Glossary

10 A.M. policy, 31, 45, 67, 85,
91–92, 94
10-acre policy, 94, 95 (table)
Acacia, 166
Acid rain, 94
Agee, James K., 77
Aims Community College, 276
Air quality, 172–174
pollutants, 93–94, 118–119
standards, 93, 173
Air Quality Act, 93 (table)
Air tankers, 210–213
Aircraft, 210–213, 223–224, 224
(table)
Alaska Division of Forestry,
253
Albini, Frank A., 78
Alexander, Martin E., 78
Altadena fire (1993), 72 (table)
Ambient Control Systems,
258–259
Anasazi culture, 46–47
Andrews, Patricia L., 78–79
Antarctica, 101
Archaeological sites/resources,
20, 46–47, 50
Arctostaphylos, 166
Arizona State Land
Department, 253
Arson, 30, 73
Aspen (Populus tremuloides), 79,
159
Astaris LLC, 259
Asthma, 173
Atmospheric stability, 134
ATSR World Fire Atlas, 284
Australia, 13, 62, 81, 141
global organizations,
285–287
Kakadu National Park, 36
Backfire, 24, 193–194
Backpack pump, 209
BAER. See Burned area
emergency rehabilitation
Bandelier National Monument,
11, 46–47
Bandon fire (1936), 67 (table)
Barrows, Jack S., 79
Battlement Creek fire (1976),
70 (table)
Bedford fire (1990), 72 (table)
BEHAVE fire prediction system,
78–79, 84, 147, 312
Bel Air fire
of 1956, 12, 13, 93 (table)
of 1961, 68, 69 (table)
Berkeley fire (1923), 66 (table).
See also Tunnel fire of 1991
327
Index

Biodiversity, 46, 48, 51, 52, 54,
222
Biscuit fire (2002), 72 (table), 73
Bison, 10
Biswell, Harold H. (aka Harry
the Torch), 79–80
Black spruce (Picea mariana),
165
Blackwater fire (1937), 67
(table)
Bobwhite quail (Colinus
virginianus), 86
Bombardier Aerospace, 259–260
Boreal forest, 101, 155 (table),
197
Bosch (veld), 3
Bracken fern (Pteridium
acquilinum), 168
Bronchitis, 173
Brown, James K., 80
Brush hook, 210
Building codes, 24–25
Bulldozers, 20, 210
Bureau of Indian Affairs,
250–251
area managed, 109 (table),
110
costs of wildfire
suppression, 108
Bureau of Land Management,
20, 94, 249–250
area managed, 109–110, 109
(table)
costs of wildfire
suppression, 108
Burned area emergency
rehabilitation (BAER), 42,
219
Burnovers, 26
Bush, 3
Bush, George W., 40, 196
Bushfire Cooperative Research
Centre (CRC), 285
Byram, George M., 80
California Department of
Forestry and Fire
Protection, 253
California Polytechnic State
University, San Luis
Obispo, 272
Cambium, 157, 164
Campaign fires. See Project
fires
Canada, 53, 61, 86, 197
Canadian Forest Service, 287
Canadian Interagency Forest
Fire Centre, 288
Capetown, South Africa, 53
Carbon dioxide (CO2), 13–14,
116, 118
Carbon monoxide (CO), 117,
174
Casper College, 276
Ceanothus, 166
Cedar fire (2003), 73
Cedar trees, 158, 164 (table)
Cerro Grande fire (2000),
11–12, 36, 43, 71, 72
(table), 97 (table)
Chainsaw, 209
Chandler, Craig C., 80–81
Chaparral vegetation, 21, 51,
143, 159, 168
Charcoal, 59, 154–155
Cheatgrass (Bromus tectorum),
143, 219
Chinooks, 131
Civilian Conservation Corps,
67, 85–86, 196
Clarke-McNary Act (1924), 45,
89, 90 (table)
Clean Air Act
of 1967, 69, 92, 93 (table)
of 1970, 93–94, 95 (table)
1977 amendments, 95 (table)
1990 amendments, 95
(table)
Clean Water Act, 69
328
Index

Clements, Frederick, 66
Clinton, William, 43, 96
Cloquet fire (1918), 66 (table)
Cloud formations, 134
Coal seams, 4
Coarse woody debris (CWD),
41–42, 80, 142, 191
Coast redwood (Sequoia
sempervirens), 159, 164
(table), 165
Codes, building, 24–25
Cold War, 68, 92
Colonial settlements. See
Frontier settlement fires
Colorado State Forest Service,
253
Colorado State University, 272
Combustion, 114–123
fuel consumption, 171–172
fuel quantity and, 125–128
spontaneous combustion, 4,
29
stages of, 119–123
wildland fuels, 116–117, 117
(table)
Commonwealth Scientific and
Industrial Research
Organization (CSIRO),
CSIRO Forestry and
Forest Products, 285–286
Communications, 214
Community College Programs,
275–276
Community resources, 18–19
Congressional fire studies,
301–302
CONSUME, 172
Contingency planning, 55
Contour felling, 42
Conversion factors, xvii–xviii
Coordination system, 55, 208
Costs of fires, 71, 94, 107–111,
222–228
Cerro Grande fire, 11
emergency expenditures,
223
fire preparedness, 223
fire suppression, 73, 111–114
hazard reduction, 96–97
individual firefighter, 223,
224 (table)
most efficient level (MEL),
228
optimizing, 226–228
Tunnel fire of 1991, 6
in U.S. year 2000, 4
Coyote fire (1964), 69 (table)
Crown fires, 46, 78, 86, 151–152
hazard reduction, 191
nomograms, 153
CSIRO, 285–286
CWD. See Coarse woody
debris
Dating of fires, 62, 157–158
Decomposition of biomass, 2
Defoliants, 190
Deforestation, tropical, 17–18
Dendrochronology, 62, 157
Department of Agriculture. See
USDA (Department of
Agriculture)
Department of the Interior, 65
Depression of 1929, 67, 92
DESCON. See Designated
controlled burn program
Designated controlled burn
program (DESCON), 35,
69
Detection, 183–186
Diammonium phosphate,
212–213
“Disaster” designation, 18
Dispatch, 186
Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga
menziesii), 138, 159, 160,
164 (table), 165, 221–222
Drip torch, 210
Index
329

Drought, 43, 135–137, 281
measurement indexes,
136–137
wildfires and, 46, 71, 72,
137–138
Dude Creek fire (1990), 72
(table)
Dude fire (1990), 27
Earth Day, 69
Ecology
effect of wildfires, 19–20,
30–32
forest rehabilitation, 41–42
role of fire, 56, 74
succession, 42, 66–67
See also Fire ecology
Ecosystems, 155 (table)
biodiversity and, 51, 52, 54,
222
restoration, 20, 45–47, 190,
220–222, 304
See also Forest restoration
Education opportunities,
228–233, 271–281
Emergency Firefighting Fund,
88 (table)
Emissions, 117–119, 118 (table),
172–174
Emissions controls, 92
Employment opportunities in
fire science, 228–233
Endangered species, 13, 69, 98
Engelmann spruce (Picea
engelmannii), 138, 158,
164 (table)
Entrapments, 27
Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA), 38, 94, 95
(table), 97 (table), 173, 252
Environmentalism, 69–71, 93–95
EPA. See Environmental
Protection Agency
Erickson Air-Crane, Inc., 260
Erosion, 174–176, 218
Ethiopia, 13
Eucalyptus trees, 21, 117
(table), 141
European agencies and
organizations, 289
Evacuations, 24, 25
Everglades National Park, 10,
32
Exotic plants, 198, 219
Experimental stations and
research programs,
266–270
Exurban areas. See Urban
interface
FARSITE, 84, 147, 149, 312
Fatalities, 71–74, 95–97, 97
(table)
firefighter, 7–8, 26–29,
48–49, 71, 112–114
Federal Emergency
Management Agency
(FEMA), 17, 24, 251
Federal Excess Personal
Property program
(FEPP), 213
Federal Land Management
and Policy Act (1976), 94
Federal Property and
Administrative Services
Act of 1947, 91–92
FEMA. See Federal Emergency
Management Agency
FEPP. See Federal Excess
Personal Property
program
Fir trees (Abies spp.), 138, 158,
160, 164 (table), 221–222
Fire activity, 101–114
U.S. fire activity, 3–6, 12–13
Fire behavior, 128–132, 298–299
extreme fire behavior,
149–154
330
Index

fuel groups and, 143–145
prediction, 78–79, 84–85,
146–149, 150 (figure)
Fire control lines, 7, 8
Fire danger, 139–140
Fire detection, 183–186
Fire ecology, 2–3, 10–11, 293,
299, 303
Fire effects, 1–2, 17–18, 162–176,
295–296, 304–305
Fire environment, 123–132
air movements, 130–132,
153, 163
fuel quantity, 125–128
indicators, 124 (table)
time-temperature profiles,
128–130
Fire exclusion, 52
acceptability in some
climates/ecosystems, 51
and fuel accumulation, 9,
10–12, 31, 37
future policies and, 14, 49
institutionalization of, 67–68
Fire forensics, 181–182
Fire frequency, 103–105,
154–156, 155 (table)
Fire games, 299–300
Fire intensity, 156. See also Fire
severity
Fire management, 2–3, 44–47,
87–99, 176–200
communications, 214
detection, 183–186
dispatch, 186
education opportunities,
271–281
employment opportunities,
230–231
fatalities and houses, 95–97
fire rehabilitation, 218–219
fire suppression, 202–213
fuels management, 188–199
historical summary, 97–98
homeland security issues, 47
in national parks, 31–36, 49
optimizing costs, 226–228
plans, 53–55
preparedness, 187–188
prevention, 180–182
problems and issues, 48–51
public agencies, 19–20, 47,
50, 56
systematic, 179–180
wildland fire use, 200–202
See also Prescribed fire;
Safety; Urban interface
Fire management area (FMA),
53–54
Fire management eras
Native American firings,
60–62
frontier settlement era,
64–65, 87–89
early years (1910–1930),
65–67, 89–91
institutionalization of fire
exclusion (1931-1950),
67–68, 91–92
policy reflections
(1951–1970), 68–69,
92–93, 95 (table), 113–114
environmentalism
(1971–1990), 69–71, 93–95
increasing safety concerns
(1991–present), 71–74,
95–97
historical summary, 97–98
Fire meteorology, 85, 300,
303–304, 309, 315
atmospheric stability, 134
weather observations,
133–135
Fire modeling, 78–79, 80,
84–85, 146–149, 311–318
Fire planning, 187–188, 201
employment opportunities,
230–231
Index
331

Fire policy and administration
organizations, 244–253
Fire prediction, 78–79, 84–85,
146–149, 150 (figure)
Fire prevention, 180–182, 231
Fire Protection Association
(FPA) Australia, National
Office, 286
Fire records, 114, 156–157
Fire regimes, 154–162
dating techniques, 157–158
four regime categorization,
159
historical return intervals,
154–156, 155 (table)
Fire restoration. See
Ecosystems restoration;
Forest restoration
Fire salvage, 219–220
Fire scars (on trees), 154, 155,
157–158
Fire severity, 168–171,
196–197, 221
Fire shelters, 27, 217–218
Fire stages, 120–121, 120
(table)
Fire suppression, 19, 43,
50–51, 55, 202–213
chain of command, 208
cost, 73
extended attack/project
fires/megafires, 205–207
firefighting tools, 207–213
initial attack, 204–205
in twenty-first century, 71
See also 10 A.M. policy
Fire triangle, 115
Fire weather observations,
133–135. See also Fire
meteorology
Fire whirlwinds, 80
Firebeaters, 305
Firebreaks, 67
Firefighters, 7–8, 48, 206
costs of crews, 225–226, 225
(table)
costs of individual, 223, 224
(table)
employment opportunities,
229–230
entrapments, 27
fatalities, 7–8, 26–27, 48–49,
71, 112–114
personal protective
equipment, 27, 28, 49,
217–218
safety, 24, 27–29, 49, 71–74,
82, 215–217
training, 27–28, 216–217
volunteer, 27
wildland, 23, 48
Firefighting tools, 207–213
FIREMOD, 78, 84
Fire-plains, 25, 48
Firestorm, 152
Fireweed (Epilobium
angustifolium), 168
Firewise, 25, 183, 306
First Order Fire Effects
(FOFEM), 149
Fish and Wildlife Service, 108,
109–110, 249
Flammability, 122–123
Flooding (post-fire), 7, 175, 218
Florida Division of Forestry, 253
Florida Everglades, 10, 32
FMA. See Fire management
area
Foehn winds, 131–132
FOFEM. See First Order Fire
Effects
Food and Agriculture
Oranization of the
United Nations (FAO),
284
Forest and fire management.
See Fire management;
Fire management eras
332
Index

Forest and Rangelands
Renewable Resources
Planning Act of 1974, 95
(table)
Forest combustion. See
Combustion
Forest fire research and
technology centers,
266–271
Forest fires, 1–14
coexistence with, 14, 50–51,
183
desirable versus
undesirable, 5–6, 54–55,
170
effects of, 1–2, 17–19,
162–176, 295–296,
304–305
employment opportunities,
232–233
episodic nature of, 4, 5
(table), 103–105
extreme fire behavior,
149–154
frequency/return intervals,
30–31, 103–105, 154–156
future outlook, 13–14, 198
global occurrence of, 13,
101, 155 (table)
history on Earth, 301
impact of, 62–64
megafires, 205–207
problem fires, 44–47
problems and issues
summary, 48–51
size versus frequency,
111–112
stages of, 120–121, 120
(table), 176–177
term use, 3
types of, 7–13
U.S. fire activity, 3–6, 12–13
See also Friendly fires;
Historical fires; Killer
fires; Park and
wilderness fires;
Prescribed fire; Wildfires
that strike homes
Forest Reserve Act of 1891,
87–88, 88 (table)
Forest reserves, 65, 87–89
Forest restoration, 40–44,
45–47, 54–55, 220–222
archaeological sites and,
20, 46–47
See also Healthy Forests
Restoration Act of 2003
Forest Service. See U.S. Forest
Service; USDA
(Department of
Agriculture)
Forest Service Employees for
Environmental Ethics
(FSEEE), 260
The Forest Trust, 264–265
Fountain fire (1992), 72
(table)
49er fire (1985), 70 (table)
Frequency of fires, 30–31,
103–105, 154–156, 155
(table)
Friendly fires, 11–12, 36–44.
See also Prescribed fire
Frontier settlement fires, 4, 44,
64–65, 87–89
FSEE. See Forest Service
Employees for
Environmental Ethics
Fuel accumulation, 9, 10–12,
37, 49, 52
forest thinning and, 37–41
future policies concerning,
14
prescribed fire and, 19, 39,
43–44
Fuelbreaks, 35, 43–44, 54, 67,
190, 196
aspen trees as, 79
Index
333

Fuels, 140–154
amount/quantity, 125–128
available for combustion,
125–128
consumption (by fire),
171–172
fuel inventory, 80, 140,
145–146
fuel measurements, 145–146
fuel models, 143–145
fuel profiles, 141–145, 190
ladder fuels, 191
surface fuels, 191
Fuels management, 52–55,
97–98, 140, 188–194
employment opportunities,
231
prescribed fire for, 48–49,
94, 192–194
Fuels treatment, 189–191, 300
effectiveness of, 194–199
GACC. See Geographical Area
Coordination Center
Gambel oak (Quercus
gambellii), 8
GAO. See Government
Accounting Office
Geographical Area
Coordination Center
(GACC), 203
Geostationary operational
environmental satellite
(GOES), 135
GFMC. See Global Fire
Monitoring Center
Giant Sequoia (Sequoiadendron
gigantea), 10–11, 35, 158,
164 (table)
Gill, A. Malcolm, 81
Gisborne, Harry Thomas, 81
Glacier National Park, 32
Gleason, Paul, 82
Glenwood Springs, Colorado.
See South Canyon fire
(1994)
Global Fire Monitoring Center
(GFMC), 82, 289, 306–307
Global organizations and
agencies, 283–289
Global warming, 13–14
GOES. See Geostationary
operational
environmental satellite
Goldhammer, Johann, 82
Government Accounting
Office (GAO), 252
Grand Canyon National Park,
32
Grand fir (Abies grandis), 158,
164 (table)
Grassland, 142, 143, 155 (table)
fires, 10, 60, 142, 155 (table)
Grazing leases, 53
Great Depression, 67, 91
Great Lakes Forestry Centre,
287–288
Greenhouse gases, 13–14, 101,
118
Haines Index, 153–154
Hanley fire (1964), 69 (table)
Harlow fire (1961), 69 (table)
Harrison, Benjamin, 87–88
Hayman fire (2002), 72 (table),
73, 195, 307
Hazard
defined, 178
reduction, 190–194
Haze, 172–173
Healthy Forests Restoration
Act of 2003, 40–41, 43, 74,
96–97, 196, 200
Heat transfer, 122
Helicopters, 210–213, 225
Hemlock trees (Tsuga
heteropylla), 158, 160
Herbicides, 38
334
Index

Hinckley fire (1894), 64–65, 64
(table)
Historical fire eras
Native American firings,
60–62
frontier settlement fires,
64–65, 87–89
early years of fire
management
(1910–1930), 65–67, 89–91
institutionalization of fire
exclusion (1931–1950),
67–68, 91–92
policy reflections
(1951–1970), 68–69,
92–93, 95 (table), 113–114
environmentalism
(1971–1990), 69–71, 93–95
increasing safety concerns
(1991–present), 71–74,
95–97
Historical fire regimes, 154–162
Historical fires, 12–13
1825 Miramichi fire
complex, 63, 64, 64
(table)
1871 Peshtigo fire, 44, 64, 64
(table), 87, 88 (table)
1894 Hinckley fire, 64–65, 64
(table)
1902 Pacific Northwest fires,
44
1902 Yacolt fire, 64 (table), 87
1906 San Francisco
earthquake and fires, 74
1910 Idaho/Montana fires,
12, 44–45, 66 (table),
83–84, 89, 90 (table)
1918 Cloquet fire, 66 (table)
1923 Berkeley fire, 66 (table)
1923 East Bay fire, 21
1929 Mill Valley fire, 66
(table)
1932 Matilija fire, 67 (table)
1932 Tillamook fire, 12–13,
67 (table), 92 (table)
1936 Bandon fire, 67 (table)
1937 Blackwater fire, 67
(table)
1941 Marshfield fire, 67
(table)
1943 Southern California
fires, 67 (table)
1947 Maine Forest Fire
Disaster, 67 (table)
1949 Mann Gulch fire, 8, 67
(table), 113, 292
1953 Rattlesnake fire, 69
(table)
1956 Bel Air fire, 12, 13, 93
(table)
1956 Inaja fire, 69 (table)
1961 Bel Air fire, 68, 69
(table)
1961 Harlow fire, 69 (table)
1963 Staten Island fire, 69
(table)
1964 Coyote fire, 69 (table)
1964 Hanley, Nuns Canyon
fires, 69 (table)
1966 Loop fire, 68, 69 (table)
1967 Sundance fire, 69
(table)
1970 Laguna fire, 70 (table)
1970 Wenatchee fire, 70
(table)
1970 Wright fire, 70 (table)
1971 Mack Lake fire, 12, 13
1976 Battlement Creek fire,
70 (table)
1977 Kanan fire, 70 (table)
1977 Sycamore fire, 70
(table)
1978 Ouzel fire, 33, 69
1980 Mack Lake fire, 69, 70
(table), 94–95
1980 Panorama fire, 70
(table)
Index
335

Historical fires (cont.)
1985 49er fire, 70 (table)
1988 Yellowstone fires, 31,
33, 69–70, 70 (table), 95
(table), 200–201
1990 Bedford fire, 72 (table)
1990 Dude Creek fire, 72
(table)
1990 Dude fire, 27
1990 Paint fire, 72 (table)
1991 Tunnel fire, 6, 7, 21, 72
(table)
1992 Fountain fire, 72 (table)
1993 Altadena fire, 72
(table)
1993 Laguna Beach fire, 72
(table)
1993 Old Topanga fire, 72
(table)
1994 South Canyon fire,
7–8, 27, 71, 72 (table), 97
(table), 113
1996 Oregon fires, 72 (table)
2000 Cerro Grande fire,
11–12, 36, 43, 71, 72
(table), 97 (table)
2000 Valley Complex fire,
71, 72 (table)
2001 Thirtymile fire, 71, 72
(table)
2002 Biscuit fire, 72 (table),
73
2002 Hayman fire, 72
(table), 73, 195, 307
2002 Rodeo-Chediski fire,
72–73, 72 (table), 153
2003 Cedar fire, 73
2003 Southern California
fire complex, 6–7, 22, 72
(table), 73–74
Home destruction. See
Wildfires that strike
homes
Homeland security, 47
Homes in forested lands, 14,
23. See also Urban
interface
Hot shots, 8, 206
Humboldt State University,
273
Humidity, relative, 133
IC. See Incident commander
ICS. See Incident Command
System
Idaho/Montana fires of 1910,
12, 44–45, 66 (table),
83–84, 89, 90 (table)
Inaja fire (1956), 69 (table)
Incident Command System
(ICS), 206–208, 214
Incident commander (IC),
204–208
Indonesia, 13
Industrial Revolution, 65
Infrared reconnaissance
planes, 211
Insurance, 18, 24, 25, 48, 182
replacement-cost, 25, 74
International agencies. See
Global organizations and
agencies
International Association of
Wildland Fire (IWAF),
260–261
International Crown Fire
Experiment, 78
The International Tropical
Timber Organizaton
(ITTO), 284
ISDR Interagency Task Force
Working Group on
Wildland Fire, Global
Fire Monitoring Center
(GFMC), 289
IWAF. See International
Association of Wildland
Fire
336
Index

Jack pine (Pinus banksiana), 69,
165, 168
Jeffrey pine (Pinus jeffreyi),
30–31
Joint Fire Science Program, 74,
97 (table), 268–269
Kakadu National Park,
Australia, 36
Kanan fire (1977), 70 (table)
Kansas Forest Service, 254
Keep Green Associations, 91,
92 (table), 261
Keep Idaho Green Association,
92 (table)
Keep Montana Green
Association, 92 (table),
261
Keep Oregon Green, 92 (table),
261
Keetch-Byram Index, 136
Killer fires, 7–8, 26–29
issues concerning, 48–49
weather changes and, 133
See also Fatalities
Kirtland’s warbler (Dendroica
kirtlandii), 13, 69
Komarek, Edwin Vaclay, Sr.,
82–83
Kruger National Park, South
Africa, 36
Ladder fuels, 191
Laguna Beach fire (1993), 72
(table)
Laguna fire (1970), 70 (table)
Land management, 50–56
passive management, 53
role of fire in, 2–3, 69–70,
74
Landscape scale studies, 301
Landslides, 18
Lassen Community College,
276
LCES (lookouts,
communication, escape
routes, safety zones), 82,
216
Lead planes, 211
Leopold Report, 31, 92, 93
(table)
Let burn fires, 33, 69
Light burning, 36–37, 66, 68,
89–90
Lightning, 4, 9, 10, 29, 63, 105
Lightning fires, 105–107,
156–157, 200–201
Lodgepole pine (Pinus
contorta), 32, 159, 164
(table), 165–166, 221
Logging, 40–41, 199–200
Longleaf pine (Pinus palustris),
10, 66, 168
Lookout towers, 67, 183–186,
216, 306
Loop fire (1966), 68, 69 (table)
Los Alamos, New Mexico, 11
Low-intensity fires. See
Friendly fires
Mack Lake fire
of 1971, 12, 13
of 1980, 69, 70 (table),
94–95
Maclean, Norman, 83
MAFFS. See Modular airborne
fire fighting systems
Maine Forest Fire Disaster
(1947), 67 (table)
Maine Forest Service, 254
Malaysia, 13
Mann Gulch fire (1949), 8,
26–27, 67 (table), 113, 292
Maps, 160, 307, 310
Marshfield fire (1941), 67
(table)
Mather, Stephen T., 90
Matilija fire (1932), 67 (table)
Index
337

Maximum management area
(MMA), 176, 201
McLeod, 209
Measurement conversion
factors, xvii–xviii
Mediterranean-climate
vegetation, 155 (table)
Megafires, 205–207
Mesa Verde National Park,
46–47
Methane (CH4), 13
Mexico, 13
Mill Valley fire (1929), 66
(table)
Minnesota Division of
Forestry, 254
Miramichi fire complex of
1825, 63, 64, 64 (table)
Mississippi Forestry
Commission, 254
Mixed-severity fire regime, 159
MMA. See Maximum
management area
Modeling. See Fire modeling
Modular airborne fire fighting
systems (MAFFS), 211
Montana Department of
Natural Resources and
Conservation, Forestry
Division, 254
Morse code, 184
Mountain pine beetle
(Dendroctonous spp.), 161,
220
Mudflows, 18, 175
Mulching, 42, 219
Multiple Use-Sustained Yield
Act of 1960, 93 (table)
NAAQS. See National Ambient
Air Quality Standards
National Ambient Air Quality
Standards (NAAQS), 93,
173
National Association of State
Foresters Washington
Office, 256–257
National Commission on
Science for Sustainable
Forestry (NCSSF), 262
National coordination system,
55
National emergencies, 47
National Environmental Policy
Act, 92, 93 (table)
National Fire Danger Rating
System, 136–137, 139
National Fire Plan, 43, 71, 74, 96,
97 (table), 198, 269–270
National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA), 25,
262
National Forest Management
Act (1976), 94, 95 (table)
National Guard, 206
National Incident
Coordination Center
(NICC), 203
National Interagency Fire
Center, 135, 186, 246–247,
307
National Interagency
Prescribed Fire Training
Center (NIPFTC),
251–252
National Oceanic and
Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA),
308
National Park Service, 10–11,
20, 248–249
area managed, 109 (table),
110
costs of wildfire
suppression, 108
creation, 90, 90 (table)
fire policy, 31–35, 92–93,
201–202
338
Index

National parks, 31–36, 49
prescribed fire in, 32–34,
110, 201–202
See also Park and wilderness
fires; specific national
parks
National Transportation Safety
Board (NTSB), 211–212
National Wildfire
Coordinating Group,
244–246
Native American firings of
forest, 4, 10, 29–30, 60–62
The Nature Conservancy, 265
Nature Conservation Council
of New South Wales,
Bush Fire Management
Program, 286–287
NCSSF. See National
Commission on Science
for Sustainable Forestry
NDVI. See Normalized
Difference Vegetation
Index
Nebraska Forest Service, 254
Nevada Division of Forestry,
254
New Mexico Forestry Division,
254
New South Wales Rural Fire
Service (RFS), 286
New York State Department of
Environmental
Conservation, 254
New Zealand, Forest Research,
289
News media, 56, 202
NEXUS, 84, 149, 315
NFPA. See National Fire
Protection Association
NGOs. See Nongovernmental
organizations
NICC. See National Incident
Coordination Center
Nitrogen dioxide (NO2), 13
Noble fir (Abies procera), 164
(table)
Nomex, 217
Nongovernmental
organizations, 258–265
Normalized Difference
Vegetation Index (NDVI),
137
North Carolina Division of
Forest Resources, 255
Northern Arizona University,
273
Northern Forestry Centre, 287
NTSB. See National
Transportation Safety
Board
Nuns Canyon fire (1964), 69
(table)
Nutrient cycling, 2
Oakland/Berkeley Hills fire.
See Tunnel fire of 1991
Oklahoma Department of
Agriculture—Forestry
Services, 255
Oklahoma State University,
273
Old Topanga fire (1993), 72
(table)
Olympic National Park, 32
Oregon Department of
Forestry, 255
Oregon fires (1996), 72 (table)
Oregon State University,
273–274
Organic Act of 1897, 65, 88
(table), 89, 90 (table)
Ouzel fire (1978), 33, 69
Ozone, 94, 117–118
Pacific Forestry Centre, 287
Pacific silver fir (Abies
amabilis), 164 (table)
Index
339

Pacific Wildland Fire Sciences
Laboratory, 266–267
Paint fire (1990), 72 (table)
Palmer Drought Severity
Index, 136
Panorama fire (1980), 70 (table)
Park and wilderness fires,
8–10, 29–36
management issues, 49
National Park Service fire
policy, 31–35, 92–93,
201–202
prescribed fire in national
parks, 32–34, 110, 201–202
Parks Canada National Office,
288
Particulates, 118–119, 173
Passive management, 53
Pennsylvania Bureau of
Forestry, 255
Personal protective equipment,
27, 28, 49, 217–218
Peshtigo fire of 1871, 44, 64, 64
(table), 87, 88 (table)
Phases/stages of fires,
120–121, 120 (table)
Pikes Peak Fire Prevention
Authority, 25
Pine beetle (Dendroctonous
spp.), 161, 220
Pinon-juniper forests, 47, 159
Plants
fire adaptations, 3, 30–32,
66, 165–168
fire dependence, 168
fire effects, 162–168
fire resistance of tree
species, 164 (table)
recovery after fires, 10–11, 21
succession, 42, 66–67
See also Ecosystems
restoration; Forest
restoration
Plume dominated fires, 153
Pollen, 154
Pollutants, 93–94, 118–119
Ponderosa pine (Pinus
Ponderosa), 11, 31, 45, 138,
158–159, 160
fire resistance of, 164 (table),
165
Portable toilets, 213
Prediction. See Fire prediction
Prescribed fire, 10–11, 47, 50,
192–194
costs, 110–111
designated controlled burn
program (DESCON), 35,
69
and emissions controls, 92
escape and escalation of,
11–12, 13, 36, 69–70,
94–95, 97 (table)
firing techniques, 193–194
fuel accumulation and, 19,
39, 43–44
fuel consumption, 171–172
ignition techniques, 171–172
issues concerning, 49
National Interagency
Prescribed Fire Training
Center, 251–252
in national parks, 32–34,
110, 201–202
prescribed natural fires, 69,
70, 201
See also Friendly fires; Fuel
accumulation; Let burn
fires; Light burning
Primacord, 210
Prioritized treatment, 55
Program for Climate,
Ecosystem, and Fire
Adpplications, 308
Project fires, 205–207
Pulaski, Edward, 83–84
Pulaski (firefighting tool), 209
Pyne, Stephen J., 84
340
Index

Ranger stations, 67
Rare Event Risk Assessment
Process (RERAP), 201,
316–317
RASW. See Remote automated
weather station
Rating systems, 55, 84,
136–137, 139
Rattlesnake fire (1953), 69 (table)
Records, 114, 156–157
Red Cross, 18
Red fir (Abies magnifica), 160
Red Flag alerts, 139, 186
Red Rocks Community
College, 276
Redwood trees. See Sequoia
trees
Rehabilitation, postfire, 41–42,
218–219. See also
Ecosystems restoration;
Forest restoration
Relative humidity, 133
Remote automated weather
station (RAWS), 134
RERAP. See Rare Event Risk
Assessment Process
Research programs, 266–270
employment opportunities,
231–232
fire and fire surrogate study,
197
Resource Benefit zones, 201
Resources Planning Act (1974),
94
Restoration. See Ecosystems
restoration; Forest
restoration
Retardant, 212–213
Return intervals, 30–31,
154–155, 155 (table)
Rhus, 166
Risk
defined, 178
and fire stages, 121
Road-building, 41, 196
Rocky Mountain National
Park, 32, 35
1978 Ouzel fire, 33, 69
Rodeo-Chediski fire (2002),
72–73, 72 (table), 153
Roosevelt, Theodore, 89
Rothermel, Richard C., 84–85
Safety, 215–217, 298
eighteen “watch out”
situations, 216–217
firefighter, 24, 27–29, 49,
71–74, 82
increasing concerns for
(1991-present), 71–74
LCES (lookouts,
communication, escape
routes, safety zones), 82,
216
public, 298
Ten Standard Fire Orders,
215–216
zones, 216
Sagebrush (Artemesia
tridentata), 159
Salvage of timber, 219–220
San Francisco earthquake and
fires (1906), 74
Santa Ana winds, 22, 68, 73,
131–132
Santa Fe National Forest, 11, 12
Satellites, 135, 184–186
Savanna burnings, 13, 101, 143,
300
Schroeder, Mark J., 85
Seed germination, 21, 166–167
Seeding (after fires), 42, 219
Semi-arid deserts, 155 (table)
Sequoia-Kings Canyon
National Park, 32, 110,
201
Sequoia trees, 10–11, 35,
158–159, 164 (table), 165
Index
341

Serotinous pinecones, 31–32,
165–166
Settlement fires. See Frontier
settlement fires
Severity of fires, 168–171,
196–197, 221
Shelters, 27, 217–218
Shovel, 209
Shrubland, 142, 143
Sierra Club National
Headquarters, 262–263
Sierra College, 276
Silcox, Ferdinand Augustus,
85–86, 92 (table)
Siskiyou National Forest, 73
Sitka spruce (Picea sitchensis),
164 (table)
Slash, 144, 192
Slash and burn, 17, 61, 63, 67
Smoke, 18, 38, 49, 163, 172–174
particulates in, 119
stimulation of plant
flowering, 165
Smokejumpers, 8, 91
Smokey Bear, 50, 91, 92 (table),
93 (table), 180, 309
death and postage stamp,
95 (table)
negative stereotypes about
fires, 1, 56
Society of American Foresters,
263
Software, 305, 311–318
Soils
erosion, 218
hydrophobic, 175, 218–219
postfire effects, 174–176
stabilization, 42, 175–176
South Africa, 13, 53
Kruger National Park, 36
South America, 13
South Canyon fire (1994), 7–8,
27, 71, 72 (table), 97
(table), 113
South Carolina Forestry
Commission, 255
South Dakota Resource
Conservation and
Forestry, 255
Southern California fires
of 1943, 67 (table)
of 2003, 6–7, 22, 72 (table),
73–74
Spontaneous combustion, 4,
29. See also
Combustion
Spot fires, 151–152, 153
Spruce trees, 138, 158, 164
(table), 165
Stages of fires, 120–121, 120
(table)
Stand-replacement fire regime,
159
Stand-replacement prescribed
fire, 193
State and local jurisdictions,
253–258
Staten Island fire (1963), 69
(table)
Stoddard, Herbert, 86
Storm King Mountain
Technologies, 263–264
Subalpine fir (Abies lasciocarpa),
138, 158, 164 (table)
Subalpine forest, 155 (table)
Succession, 42, 66–67
Sugar pine (Pinus lambertiana),
164 (table)
Sundance fire (1967), 69
(table)
Sycamore fire (1977), 70
(table)
Tall grass, 143
Tall Timbers Fire Ecology
Conferences, 82–83
Tall Timbers Research Station,
264
342
Index

Targhee National Forest, 199
Technical fire management,
277–281
Technology and development
centers, 270–271
Television, 56
Temperate forests, 101, 155
(table)
Temperature
of fires, 120–122, 120 (table)
time-temperature profiles,
129–130
Ten Standard Fire Orders,
215–216
Tennessee Department of
Agriculture—Division of
Forestry, 255
Terrorism, 47
Texas Forest Service, 255
Thermodynamics, laws of,
146–147
Thinning of forests, 37–41, 47,
50, 96–97, 191–192
effectiveness of, 194–195,
198
issues concerning, 49
tree-diameter limits, 40–41
Thirtymile fire (2001), 71, 72
(table)
Tillamook fire (1932), 12–13, 67
(table), 92 (table)
Timber litter, 144
Timelag, 126–127
Toilets, portable, 213
Training, 27–28, 187, 216–217,
277–281
Transfer Act of 1905, 88 (table)
Tree fire scars, 154, 155,
157–158
Tree planting (after fires), 42,
219
Tree rings, 60, 62, 157
Tree-diameter limits (for
thinning), 40–41
Triangulation, 184
Tropical fires, 13, 17–18, 101,
155 (table), 300
Tundra, 155 (table)
Tunnel fire of 1991, 6, 7, 21, 72
(table)
Understory fire regime, 159
Understory prescribed fire, 193
University of California
(Berkeley), 274
University of Idaho, 274
The University of Montana,
274
University of Washington, 275
Urban interface, 6–7, 14, 22–24,
68
fire management plan,
53–55
fire prevention in, 182–183
fire suppression and, 43, 52
issues concerning, 48
prescribed fire and, 36
U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, 93
U.S. fire activity, 3–6, 12–13
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service,
20
U.S. Forest Service, 12, 45, 94
10 A.M. policy, 31, 45, 67,
85, 91–92, 94
10-acre policy, 94, 95 (table)
area managed, 109–110, 109
(table)
costs of wildfire
suppression, 108
creation, 65
Let Burn policy, 69
prescribed burning
program, 13, 19–20
See also USDA (Department
of Agriculture)
U.S. Forest Service Organic
Act, 65, 88 (table), 89
Index
343

USDA (Department of
Agriculture), 65, 89
Forest Service Fire and
Aviation Management, 247
Forest Service Missoula
Technology and
Development Center
(MTDC), 270
Forest Service National
Advanced Resource
Technology Center,
278–281
Forest Service Pacific
Northwest Research
Station, Pacific Wildland
Fire Sciences Laboratory,
266–267
Forest Service Pacific
Southwest Research
Station, Riverside Forest
Fire Laboratory, 267
Forest Service Remote
Sensing Application
Center (RSAC), 271
Forest Service Rocky
Mountain Research
Station, Fire Sciences
Laboratory, 266
Forest Service San Dimas
Technology and
Development Center
(SDTDC), 270–271
Forest Service Southern
Research Station, 267
USDI Agencies, 248–252
USGS National Center, 268
Utah Department of Natural
Resources, 255
Utah State University, 275
Utah Valley State College, 276
Valley Complex fire (2000), 71,
72 (table)
Van Wagner, Charles E., 86
Vancouver, British Columbia,
53
Vegetation. See Ecosystems
restoration; Fire ecology;
Forest restoration; Plants
Veld, 3
Viegas, Domingos Xavier,
86–87
Volcanoes, 4, 29
Volunteer firefighters, 27
Washington Department of
Natural Resources, 256
Washington Institute, Inc.,
277–278
“Watch out” situations, 216–217
Weather. See Fire meteorology
Weeks Act (1911), 89, 90 (table)
Wenatchee fire (1970), 70
(table)
Wendelin, Rudolph, 95 (table)
West Virginia Division of
Forestry, 256
Western Governors
Association, 257–258
Western hemlock (Tsuga
heteropylla), 158, 160, 164
(table)
Western larch (Larix
occidentalis), 159, 164
(table), 165
Western red cedar (Thuja
plicata), 158, 164 (table)
Western white pine (Pinus
monticola), 159, 164
(table)
WFSA. See Wildland Fire
Situation Analysis
White fir (Abies concolor), 164
(table)
Wilderness Act (1964), 69, 92,
93 (table)
Wilderness fires. See Park and
wilderness fires
344
Index

The Wilderness Society, 265
Wildfires that strike homes,
6–7, 21–25, 71–74
Wildland Fire Situation
Analysis (WFSA), 207
Wildland fire use, 200–202
Wildland fires. See Forest fires
Wind, 131–132
direction, 133–134
Santa Ana winds, 22, 68, 73,
131–132
speed, 133
Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources—
Division of Natural
Resources, 256
Works Projects Administration,
85–86
Wright fire (1970), 70 (table)
Wyoming State Forestry
Division, 256
Xanthorrhea spp., 165
Yacolt fire (1902), 64 (table),
87
Yellowstone National Park,
9–10, 88
1988 fires, 31, 33, 69–70, 70
(table), 95 (table),
200–201
prescribed fire in, 32
Yosemite National Park, 32,
110, 201–202
Zoning, 14, 25, 53–55
Index
345


About the Author
Philip N. Omi is professor of forest fire science and director of the
Western Forest Fire Research Center at the Colorado State Uni-
versity, Fort Collins, Colorado. Dr. Omi has taught undergradu-
ate and graduate courses related to wildland fires since 1977,
while overseeing one of the largest instructional and research ac-
ademic programs in the United States. During 1987–1988, he
served as visiting professor of wildland fire management at the
University of Washington, Seattle. He has been studying forest
fires for thirty years, including forty-three research projects cov-
ering a variety of topics related to fire science and management.
Prior to earning his Ph.D. (in wildland resource science) at the
University of California, Berkeley, he worked as a seasonal fire-
fighter in northern and southern California for four years, in-
cluding assignments throughout the western United States. He
has authored or coauthored more than 100 journal articles and
technical papers related to fire science during his career.
347

